PRE-PRINT PAPER, SUBMITTED NOVEMBER 2018
1
Human-robot co-manipulation of extended objects:
Data-driven models and control from analysis of
human-human dyads
Erich Mielke1, Eric Townsend1, David Wingate2, and Marc D. Killpack1
Abstract—Human teams are able to easily perform collabo-
rative manipulation tasks. However, for a robot and human to
simultaneously manipulate an extended object is a difﬁcult task
using existing methods from the literature. Our approach in this
paper is to use data from human-human dyad experiments to
determine motion intent which we use for a physical human-
robot co-manipulation task. We ﬁrst present and analyze data
from human-human dyads performing co-manipulation tasks. We
show that our human-human dyad data has interesting trends
including that interaction forces are non-negligible compared to
the force required to accelerate an object and that the beginning
of a lateral movement is characterized by distinct torque triggers
from the leader of the dyad. We also examine different metrics
to quantify performance of different dyads. We also develop a
deep neural network based on motion data from human-human
trials to predict human intent based on past motion. We then
show how force and motion data can be used as a basis for
robot control in a human-robot dyad. Finally, we compare the
performance of two controllers for human-robot co-manipulation
to human-human dyad performance.
Index Terms—Physical Human-Robot Interaction, Cognitive
Human-Robot Interaction, Learning and Adaptive Systems, Co-
operative Manipulators, Force Control
I. INTRODUCTION
In the future, robots will work alongside humans in many
applications including logistics, health-care, agriculture, disaster
response, and others. The advantage of human-robot collabo-
ration in these areas is that humans provide intelligence and
dexterity while robots may provide strength, stability, and even
redundancy [1]. Physical Human-Robot Interaction (pHRI) for
collaborative manipulation (or co-manipulation) is an area
of robotics that can especially beneﬁt from the combined
strengths of a human-robot team: strength and execution from
the robot and intelligence and planning from the human. This is
particularly true of co-manipulation tasks where a human and a
robot physically manipulate the same object simultaneously. Co-
manipulation can include complex translational and rotational
tasks, such as moving a table, couch, or other extended, rigid
objects. These objects may be heavy or unwieldy, which could
necessitate two or more people to carry them. A robot capable
of replacing a human in these teams would help in situations
like search and rescue where current high-payload robots are
too heavy and dangerous to relocate and operate. Robots that
can physically interact with a human could help lift and remove
rubble from disaster areas or take a victim on a stretcher to
Authors are afﬁliated with the Mechanical Engineering (1) and Computer
Science (2) departments at Brigham Young University, Provo, UT, 84602 USA
safety. These robots would allow fewer people to complete
the same amount of work, or for more teams to operate and
reach more people in need of help. Other applications include
using robots to help load and unload moving vans, using
robots to help move objects around warehouses, and any other
co-manipulation applications where human-human teams are
currently needed.
In these situations, robots will need to work safely and
intuitively, in order to be an asset when interacting with people.
Speciﬁcally, they will need to be able to predict and respond
to human intent in an effective manner. However, an important
characteristic of these situations is uncertainty in the task. Often
a task is poorly deﬁned for one or both partners of a dyad,
and a controller needs to be able to adapt to disturbances and
trajectory changes. Uncertainty and ambiguity can especially
exist when tasks include manipulating an extended object
that may need to be translated, rotated, or both. When an
extended object is included in co-manipulation tasks, forces
applied in a lateral direction could indicate either intent to
translate laterally, or intent to rotate the object in the plane,
which will be referred to as the rotation-translation problem.
In order to be effective, a pHRI controller for co-manipulation
of extended objects must be able to distinguish between an
intent to rotate and translate. One method of assessing human
intent is to study human-human interactions (HHI). By studying
HHI data, we can deﬁne patterns or characteristics that will
help to create a safe and intuitive co-manipulation controller.
Therefore, this paper proposes a method for predicting human
intent in a co-manipulation task based on HHI. For clarity, we
have designated human intent as the intent to move an object
in a particular direction with a particular velocity.
In order to understand human-human co-manipulation of
rigid, extended objects, we ran an exploratory study with 21
human dyads. Each dyad moved a long board representing a
table as we measured their motion and forces on the board
as in Fig. 1. Although other studies have been completed
analyzing human movement, many of these are done in haptic
simulations or with limited degrees of freedom in order to
isolate speciﬁc behaviors. These studies have given signiﬁcant
insight on things like minimum jerk motion, negotiation of
roles, and task-speciﬁc movements. Due to the nature of these
past studies, which have mostly examined a limited number of
degrees of freedom, there are limitations to how those results
can be extrapolated for general purpose six dimensional co-
manipulation tasks. The HHI study described in detail in this
paper (and as ﬁrst described in [2]) is necessary to study how
arXiv:2001.00991v1  [cs.RO]  3 Jan 2020

PRE-PRINT PAPER, SUBMITTED NOVEMBER 2018
2
Fig. 1: A leader and a blindfolded follower performing a table
carrying task.
motion is affected without these limitations, and allows us to
validate what has been learned in other studies and allows for
further insight and direction for human-robot co-manipulation
controller development.
There are many sources of information that a robot could
use to predict human intent, including motion, force, partner
posture, and verbal communication among others. In our study,
we chose to focus on motion and force, since we believed
that these variables were the most fundamental and easiest
for a robot to interpret in order to predict what the person
intends to do. This does not mean that other information
sources could not be used to improve upon our results, but
rather that this data is sufﬁcient to characterize human intent
in co-manipulation tasks. Other studies have conﬁrmed that
haptic-channel communication is sufﬁcient to indicate motion
intent [3]. However, while the past work on co-manipulation
outlined in Section II shows that collaboration through force
is applicable to some tasks, it is not clear that previously
developed algorithms and intent-estimators will work in less-
deﬁned scenarios. This is especially true since co-manipulation
is likely to include whole-body motion, bi-manual manipulation
by the participants, six degree of freedom motion of the
object, rather than planar arm movements only. By basing our
human-intent model on data from human-human dyads, we are
increasing the likelihood that our controller will be intuitive for
human users. The initial goal of our co-manipulation controllers
is to know how the robot should move, based on sensory inputs,
in order to manipulate the object being carried in the manner
desired by the human partner.
The speciﬁc contributions of this paper include the following:
1) Unique co-manipulation data from human-human dyads
moving a rigid table (see Section III)
2) Observations on planar movements from human-human
co-manipulation study (see Section IV), which include
the following:
• Interaction forces are not minimized
• Trajectories resemble minimum-jerk trajectories
• Correlation between dyads that minimized comple-
tion time and dyads that minimized deviation from
a minimum-jerk trajectory
• Lateral movements are triggered by a speciﬁc torque
sequence
• Planar rotation movements can be distinguished
from lateral movements by differing torque sequence
triggers
3) Development of a neural network to predict human intent
based on past motion of the human dyad (see Section
VII).
4) Application of neural network and trigger based predic-
tions to a human-robot dyad, comparing performance
of human-robot dyads with human-human dyads (see
Section IX).
The organization of the remainder of this paper is outlined
next. Section II describes related work on physical human-robot
interaction and intent modeling. Next, the human-human dyad
experiment is explained in Section III, including a description
of the equipment, the tasks performed, and the participants.
Section IV then explores the main observations of the study. In
Section VI we discuss the formulation and preliminary testing
of our Extended Variable-Impedance Controller for human-
robot co-manipulation. We then describe the structure, training,
and validation of the neural network, as well as the formulation
of a neural-network based controller in Section VII. In Section
VIII we describe a physical human-robot co-manipulation
experimental study with both human-robot controllers. Finally
we discuss the results of the human-robot study in Section IX
with conclusions in Section X.
II. RELATED WORK
Researchers have been studying aspects of pHRI co-
manipulation for many years. We have grouped the efforts of
these researchers into a few different categories: studies about
co-manipulation or human behaviors, force-based and motion-
based co-manipulation methods, determining performance
of human-robot dyads through metrics, and human intent
estimation.
A. Co-Manipulation and Human Behavior Studies
One of the most widely used studies that explores human-
arm reaching movement was performed by Flash and Hogan [4].
It illustrates the tendency of upper-arm reaching movements to
resemble minimum-jerk trajectories. Another fundamental study
was performed by Rahman et al. [5] where they performed a
1 DOF translation co-manipulation experiment between two
human users. They showed showed that the stiffness and
damping parameters changed over the course of the task, which
is known as variable impedance. They also showed that for
1 DOF translation tasks, the achieved trajectory corresponded
well with the minimum-jerk trajectory.
There were also a number of studies investigating how
humans cooperate through forces and haptic channels. Reed
et al. [6] performed an experiment testing their hypothesis
that humans can cooperate by specializing their forces. They
found that human-human dyads were able to perform simple
tasks signiﬁcantly faster than they did when working alone.
Ganesh et al.’s study [7] also showed that a physical connection

PRE-PRINT PAPER, SUBMITTED NOVEMBER 2018
3
between two individuals improved the dyad’s performance. In
a different study by Wel et al. [8], this result was conﬁrmed
as subjects performing a 1 DOF task beneﬁted from the added
haptic channel communication. However, when Reed et al.
included a robot, this advantage disappeared.
Other studies show that not only does a haptic channel
improve performance of a human-human dyad under normal
conditions, but that a haptic channel can be used as the only
source of information exchange between partners. Sawers et al.
[3] performed an experiment where participants performed a
series of dance steps with a partner. Another study by Mojtahedi
et al. [9] also showed that interaction forces may communicate
movement goals between human-human dyads in cooperative
physical interactions.
One of the only studies performed with a human-human
dyad carrying an extended object was done by Bussy et al.
[10]. In this experiment, they had dyads move a beam in 1
DOF, forward and backward and used object velocity to trigger
state transitions in a state machine model.
B. Control Methods for Co-Manipulation
1) Force-Based Co-Manipulation Methods: A large portion
of the approach for intent estimation and robot control presented
in this paper is based on different methods presented for human-
robot co-manipulation over the last 20 years. However, it is
not clear how many of these past control methods apply to
large-scale, extended objects, or to movements requiring more
than 1 or 2 DOF. One of the ﬁrst controllers for cooperative
manipulation of an object by robots and humans was an
impedance controller developed by Ikeura et al. [11], [12].
They also developed strategies for situations that required
using direction of force and change in magnitude of force.
This type of control technique is known as variable-impedance
control [13], [14]. The deﬁning characteristic of this method
is measuring Cartesian-coordinate forces at the end effector
to determine motion intent in certain Cartesian directions.
Tsumugiwa et al. [15] showed that varying the impedance
allows for increased performance of human-robot interaction
in calligraphy. This variable impedance approach was also
very successful in predicting Cartesian movements, as was
shown in other studies as well, [16], [17]. However, it does
not generalize to include rotational movements. It also is
heavily dependent on human force input, meaning the robot
does not proactively contribute to moving the object being
manipulated, and the human partner must exert more force
than may be required in a human-human dyad. HERE The
initial work in variable impedance control (VIC), however,
provided a basis for using haptic information in future pHRI
controllers. One such controller was implemented by Ranatuga
et al. [18]. They were able to perform 1 DOF point-to-point
motion tasks without previous knowledge of the trajectory,
which is necessary for situations such as search and rescue.
However, the work assumed direct contact between human
and robot, i.e. no extended object co-manipulation, and was
limited in DOF. In fact, there is an inherent problem with VIC,
and other methods, such as Leica et al.’s method for moving
extended objects [19], that limits how many DOF are viable.
This is known as the translation versus rotation (TvR) problem.
In a simple planar task, the leader has the option of moving
the extended object by either translating forward/backward,
translating laterally, or rotating the board. The problem arises
when the leader wishes to move laterally, and so applies a force
in that direction. The follower, who lies some distance away
from the applied force, perceives the force as a torque, and
begins to rotate the board. This shows that there is information
missing in VIC to deal with the TvR problem.
Two approaches to solve this problem were made by
Karayiannidis et al. and Nguyen [20], [21]. Karayiannidis
et al. used the direction and magnitude of the applied force to
an extended object to create a state machine which switches
between translation and rotation modes. The state machine,
however, fails to transition between states correctly when
moving at different speeds than described in their experiment.
Nguyen improved upon this by using Hidden Markov Models
and showed that it is possible to predict human behavior in
co-manipulation tasks. The algorithm allowed for different
speeds of rotation and translation, but ultimately performed
worse than Karayiannidis et al.’s method. Neither compared
their controller performance to any of the metrics established
by other researchers.
Other work has been done by Peternel et al. [22] where they
incorporated EMG sensor feedback with the control law to
provide more information about the stiffness the human was
applying in a 1 DOF sawing task. Additionally, Peternel et
al., in a different work [23], showed how robots can adapt to
human fatigue in pHRI.
One of the only attempts at bi-manual, planar human-robot
co-manipulation was developed by Bussy et al. [24]. Their
method relied on force inputs to a trajectory-based control
law, where the trajectories are then decomposed into a ﬁnite
state machine to determine the desired velocities. This research
was successful in at least anterior translation coupled with
planar rotation, and theoretically generalizes to include lateral
translation. However, they do not mention attempts to move
in lateral translation, and a video of the controller shows only
anterior translation with planar rotation. It is therefore unclear
how they deal with the TvR problem
2) Motion-Based Co-Manipulation Methods: In addition
to force-based methods, many insights into human-robot
interaction have been gained from studying motion-based intent.
One of the common methods of motion-based co-manipulation
is using a minimum-jerk basis. Corteville et al. [25], did so for
a 1 DOF point-to-point experiment. Also, Maeda et al. used
minimum-jerk trajectories to predict human intent for proactive
robot behavior [26]. This strategy reduced the amount of effort
a human partner needed to exert in co-manipulation tasks,
which is one of the problems with variable impedance control.
However, there are restrictions on using minimum-jerk as
a controller basis. The trajectory start and end points must
be known beforehand, minimum-jerk based methods are not
robust to disturbances, and they do not take into consideration
the haptic channels, which have been shown to increase
performance. Additionally, Thobbi et al. [27] showed that
there are some human movements that are not minimum-jerk
movements. They approached solving the TvR problem by

PRE-PRINT PAPER, SUBMITTED NOVEMBER 2018
4
learning a model that allowed the robot to account for a
larger variation in trajectory. However, they do not consider
higher DOF, nor do they incorporate haptic inputs. Miossec
and Kheddar [28] also explored non-minimum jerk-based
trajectories. They continued the work done by Bussy et al.
[10], where dyad motions are longer and include walking and
not just arm movement. Their experiment indicated that the
interaction forces are too difﬁcult to use as a basis for control,
and instead they use velocity thresholds [24]. However, because
their experiment only looked at 1 DOF, it is not clear how
their method would extend to higher DOF.
Ge et al. [29] showed that machine learning can be a useful
tool in pHRI. Their research used supervised learning to predict
the motion of the human limb. While their work, along with that
shown by Thobbi et al. [27], shows that human performance can
be learned and applied to pHRI controllers, they did not account
for co-manipulation of an extended object. Additionally, they
indicated that the interaction force between a human-robot dyad
should be minimized, which may not be an ideal objective for
some co-manipulation tasks (see Section IV). Another use of
machine learning was demonstrated by Berger et al. [30] where
they used accelerometer and pressure sensor information to
learn a statistical model to guide the robot’s behavior. However,
they did not explore the TvR problem, and it is not clear how
well this method performed in comparison to human-human
dyads. More recently, Lanini et al. [31] used a multi-class
classiﬁer to determine if a robot should start/stop-walking,
accelerate, or decelerate for a seemingly one DoF task with a
single arm.
A different approach was taken by Medina et al., who
demonstrated an anticipatory model that took into account
expected human trajectory as well as human force variability
[32]. They showed that incorporating uncertainty led to a
higher perceived helpfulness in the robot partner of a human-
robot dyad. However, the cost function used in this research
incorporated a term for human force minimization, which may
not necessarily be a goal in co-manipulation (see Section IV).
It also was implemented in 2 DOF with a single-arm virtual
haptic interface, so it is unclear whether it would extend to
bi-manual co-manipulation with an extended object in higher
DOF.
C. Performance Metrics
An issue in co-manipulation studies and methods is deter-
mining what constitutes a successful dyad. One dyad might
take longer than the other, or a dyad might also have more
variability in motion than another dyad. Therefore, there needs
to be performance metrics that allow for comparison between
dyads.
Haptic information has been shown to be a viable commu-
nication method, and some researchers have suggested this
information is used by dyads to minimize certain criteria.
Groten [33] described a number of these metrics, including
minimizing interaction forces and root-mean-square error, and
maximizing time on target. A reference trajectory that is
commonly used, such as in Corteville et al. [25] and other
previously mentioned studies, is the minimum-jerk trajectory.
However, there are also tasks that do not ﬁt well with
the minimum-jerk trajectories [28], [27]. Therefore, some
alternative trajectories may need to be used if using a root-
mean-square error on trajectory.
Ivaldi et al. [34] also described a few other metrics, such as
minimizing jerk, torque change, geodesic trajectories, energy,
and effort. These are all fairly well explained by their titles,
and the objective of minimizing these metrics is to achieve
human-like behavior. More metrics not mentioned by Ivaldi
et al., but commonly used in other works are minimizing task
completion time [16], [28] and position error in trajectory
following tasks such as tracing a path through a maze [27],
[13]. In reviewing the literature, it is not clear which of these
metrics is most important. For example, completion time can
capture how quickly a dyad is able to complete a task, but this
may not be the most important measure of the dyad. Perhaps
their task involves moving as close to the desired trajectory as
possible, and moving faster causes more errors. In this paper we
propose a few additional metrics and we use this list of metrics
as a basis for characterizing performance of co-manipulation
methods. Determining what behavior dyads display is essential
not only for comparing one dyad to another, but also for
comparing one co-manipulation controller to another.
D. Human Intent Estimation
One of the main hurdles remaining in human-robot co-
manipulation is effective human intent estimation. Many papers
have suggested that haptic channels are an appropriate method
of communication for human intent [35], [36], [6], [37]. This
makes sense, as we have seen that human teams can move
objects by interacting only through forces applied to the objects,
rather than by communicating verbally or otherwise [3], [9].
Many studies have been done to conclude that robots can be
controlled by human force input in this manner, but these
studies often involve the human acting directly on the robot,
and not through any extended object [25], [38], [12], [15].
Some past research involved shared virtual-environment
loads [39], [40], and others involved upper-arm movements
of individuals and dyads [8], [6], [31]. These experiments
clariﬁed many aspects of pHRI, including verifying that
haptic information aids in co-manipulation tasks, noting some
interaction patterns, and combining planning and learning to
complete goal-oriented tasks. However, only exploring virtual
environments or upper-arm movements may oversimplify the
problem of general six degree of freedom co-manipulation.
Another method of intent estimation that has been used is
programming by demonstration, as in Rozo et al. [41]. Here,
intent is compressed into a section of possible motions the
human-robot dyad could take. The disadvantage is that it is
not robust to disturbances, or trajectories that have not been
previously modeled.
Our deﬁnition of intent is appropriate for co-manipulation
of extended objects because it allows us to capture intent
for motion that does not have deﬁnite start of end points (as
observed by the robot), or motion that involves unforeseen
obstacles.

PRE-PRINT PAPER, SUBMITTED NOVEMBER 2018
5
Fig. 2: Setup for table and during trials
E. Related Work Summary
The works cited here describe most of the current research
being performed in pHRI co-manipulation. As has been shown,
there are very few studies that look at co-manipulation of
extended objects, and even fewer that look at high DOF bi-
manual co-manipulation. Approaches for control methods are
varied between force-based and motion-based, but almost all are
limited in applicability due to low DOF, or lack of generality
(requiring previous knowlege about a desired trajectory). We
also have not seen a working bi-manual co-manipulation
controller for a human-robot dyad, with at least 3 DOF that
can be used in undeﬁned situations or respond to disturbances,
in any of the related literature.
III. HUMAN DYAD EXPERIMENT
Our human-human co-manipulation experiment involved
tasks ranging from 1 DOF up to 6 DOF. The purpose of this
study was two-fold: ﬁrst, to provide a baseline for how humans
perform a general collaboration task with extended objects, and
second, to provide useful haptic information to use for creation
of a human intent estimator. Our study provides insights for
collaborative motion of dyads not seen in other work, and
forms the basis for developing a controller capable of handling
complex tasks.
A. Experimental Setup
After obtaining IRB approval, we set up trials involving
2-person teams or dyads in a leader-follower setup. These
teams were to work together to perform a series of 6 object-
manipulation tasks. For half the experiment, the follower was
blindfolded, so all communication had to occur haptically.
1) Table: The object the teams moved was a 59x122x2 cm
wooden board – meant to simulate an object (like a table) that
is difﬁcult for one person to maneuver. Attached to the leader
end of the board were a pair of ABS 3D-printed handles, to
which two ATI Mini45 force/torque sensors were fastened. The
sensors transmitted data via ATI NET F/T Net Boxes, which
passed data over Ethernet to the computer at a rate of 100 Hz.
The position of the board was tracked via Cortex Motion
Capture software with a Motion Analysis Kestrel Digital
Realtime System. A total of 8 Kestrel cameras were used
to track 8 infrared markers placed on the board. Using a static
Fig. 3: Anatomical direction reference with corresponding table
axis: X is anterior, Y is Lateral, and Z is Superior
(a) Starting position for all tasks
(b) Ending position for all tasks
Fig. 4: Tablet views of all task instructions for experiment
global frame established by the motion capture system, the
position and orientation of the board could be tracked over
time, and the force and torque data could be transformed into
the board’s frame, located at the geometric center of the table
(see Fig. 3), as well as the static global frame. The motion
capture data was collected at a rate of 200 Hz.
Along with the infrared markers and force/torque sensors, the
board also held an Ethernet switch, a power strip, and all cables
necessary for power and communication. One experimenter was
tasked with making sure no obstacles would trip the subjects,
including moving these cables as necessary without exerting
forces on the table. During the trials, a tablet was mounted
on the board to display instructions to the leader. In total, the
board weighed 10.3 kg. An annotated visual of the board can

PRE-PRINT PAPER, SUBMITTED NOVEMBER 2018
6
Fig. 5: Colored tape used for task delineation
be seen in Fig. 2.
2) Subjects: The trial participants were outﬁtted with
polyester arm sleeves for both arms. Two groups of four infrared
markers were placed on rigid plates, and then attached to the
sleeve, one on the upper arm and one on the lower arm. A
blindfold was also used for the tasks where no verbal or visual
communication was allowed.
3) Arena:
The test arena was a volume measuring
490x510x250 cm. A series of colored tape lines (see Fig. 5)
were placed on the ﬂoor of the volume, indicating key positions
for each of the 6 object-manipulation tasks. On 3 of the walls
surrounding the arena, we placed green, orange, and purple
poster boards to help orient the leader when looking at the
tablet. As seen in Fig. 4a and Fig. 4b, there are colored bars
on the edges of each task ﬁgure representing the walls with the
corresponding color. This way, the leader could more easily
determine the frame of reference for the instructions on the
tablet mounted to the table.
The arena was also equipped with a video capturing device.
The device we used was a Microsoft Kinect 2, which allowed
us to capture 3D point cloud data, as well as color video of
each trial. Although we did not use the point cloud data for
analysis in this paper, the data may be useful in future work.
B. Experimental Procedure
First, the participants were oriented on the purpose of
the research and signed release forms. Second, a leader was
chosen at random (by coin ﬂip). Third, each participant put
on the sleeves and the participant designated as the follower
placed the blindfold on their head, but not covering their eyes
until they were about to perform a blindfolded task. Fourth,
two preliminary test runs were performed by the participants
with the researchers supervising. These test runs walked the
participants through each motion required by the tests – that
is translation in x,y, and z axes and rotation in x,y, and z axes
(see Fig. 3 for directions). The ﬁrst run was done without the
follower blindfolded, and the second was with the follower
blindfolded. Fifth, the leader then was oriented on following
the task instructions via the tablet on the table (see Fig. 4a
and Fig. 4b). The researchers displayed the task with visual
instructions on the tablet, which corresponded to the colored
tape on the ground. The leader then followed the instructions
as outlined. Sixth, each group ran through the tasks for 1 hour,
which allowed each group to run all 6 tasks approximately 6
times each. The tasks were split evenly between blindfolded
and non-blindfolded, and were randomized in order for each
group of participants. For instance, a group might perform task
1 non-blindfolded, followed by task 4 blindfolded, followed by
3 blindfolded, and so on. We recognized that learning of tasks
would occur, but decided the randomization of task order would
help to reduce the amount of guessing of the follower, and
would encourage a reactive, rather than anticipatory, response.
A researcher changed the setup between tasks, and two other
researchers ran data collection for motion capture, force/torque,
and video. Finally, the participants were debriefed, they ﬁlled
out a questionnaire about the trials, and were paid.
The tasks were designed in order to mimic standard motions
that humans use when collaborating on moving an object (see
Fig. 4a and Fig. 4b for reference), and are outlined as follows:
1) Pick and Place
• Translation and rotation, but emphasizing the loca-
tion and orientation of object placement
2) Rotation and Translation – Leader facing backwards
• Rotation and translation as needed to navigate trial,
meant to simulate a narrow hallway, requires rotation
about 2 axes
3) Pure Translation
• Translation in the lateral direction
4) Pure Rotation
• Rotation about the superior axis
5) 3D Complex Task – Translation and Rotation in multiple
axes
• Translation in all three axes while avoiding certain
3D obstacles
6) Rotation and Translation – Leader facing forwards
• Rotation and translation as needed to navigate trial,
meant to simulate a narrow hallway, requires rotation
about 2 axes
The physical execution of the task started with each par-
ticipant grasping an end of the board, the leader by the end
with sensors and the follower by the end without sensors.
They would then lift the table. After which the follower
tried to follow the leader as the leader performed the task
indicated on the tablet. Once they reached the position, they
set the board back on the ground and released. This constituted
a single trial. During sighted trials the participants were
allowed any method of communication desired. Whereas
during blind trials the participants were only allowed to
communicate via forces applied to the board. A sample of
task 5 being performed blindfolded and not blindfolded can
be seen at https://youtu.be/i-s1pIs17oY. This task is shown as
it encapsulates a majority of the motions seen in all the tasks
as they were performed.
C. Data Collection
A total of 21 groups participated, and subjects for the trials
were recruited using ﬂiers, social media, and word-of-mouth.
Trials occurred during February and March of 2016. The
participants were comprised of 26 men and 16 women of

PRE-PRINT PAPER, SUBMITTED NOVEMBER 2018
7
ages 18-38, and the average age was 22. There were 38 right-
handed and 4 left-handed. A scheduling website was used
to facilitate trial sessions, and participants signed up for an
available hour-long slot.
If, during a task, any error occurred – such as participants
performing a task incorrectly or a failure in data collection –
the task was to be stopped and repeated.
D. Data Analysis
As previously stated, the data acquired for each trial was
the force and torque data from the sensors on each handle,
the position and orientation of the table, the position and
orientation of the participant’s arms, as well as the point
cloud data from the Kinect 2. The data we were most
interested in initially was the force and torque data in relation
to the position and orientation of the table. Data from the
blind trials was captured with the objective of characterizing
force patterns in human-human dyads that could be used
1) as a baseline for when human-human dyads only use
haptic information for co-manipulation and 2) to eventually
create a co-manipulation controller that incorporates the force
patterns discovered in analysis. Sighted data was captured
with the objective of comparing the performance of future
co-manipulation controllers with an unrestricted human-human
dyad.
IV. OBSERVATIONS
Although the experiment involved 6 different tasks with up
to 6 DOF, this paper focuses on determining a control strategy
for 3 DOF planar motion. Since nearly all previous methods
involve 1 or 2 DOF, 3 DOF planar motion is a natural step
toward 6 DOF control. Because we are focusing on 3 DOF
planar motion, our evaluation of the human-human dyad study
focuses mainly on the blind versions of tasks 3 and 4, which
involved aspects of planar 3 DOF motion. The emphasis was
placed on these tasks for a few of reasons. First, as discussed
in Section II, most research done in this area of pHRI co-
manipulation involved either lateral movement with no extended
object, or only anterior direction movements (see Fig. 3 for
directions reference). When co-manipulating an extended object,
the intent of the leader is complicated by the rotation-translation
problem described in Section II. Therefore, characterizing how
humans are able to recognize a desired lateral movement
with an extended object and distinguish it from a desired
rotational movement is key for successful co-manipulation of
extended objects. Second, other tasks–such as task 4 and task 5–
include components of lateral translation. Therefore knowing
the deﬁning characteristics of only lateral motion helps to
recognize it in more complex tasks. We also only analyzed the
tasks where users were blindfolded to simplify the analysis,
since these tasks involved only haptic communication. The
sighted tasks will be used as an upper bound of performance.
A. Interaction Forces
Interaction forces are the forces that do not directly relate
to motion, i.e. the forces applied by each participant that do
not accelerate the object. As suggested by Noohi et al. [36],
interaction forces could be used as a source of communication.
In our study, the force/torque sensors measured the total force
applied to the object. From the measurements alone, we cannot
discern between external forces – forces that accelerate the
object – and interaction forces. Therefore, we could only
calculate the interaction force after the experiment ended.
Eq. 1 shows the combined forces that contribute to the total
force, or the force measured by the sensors. Ft is the total force
on the object, Fi is the interaction force, and Fe is the external
force causing the object to accelerate. The motion capture data
we recorded described the pose of the table over time, and
was differentiated twice to acquire the acceleration data. With
a known mass of the table and acceleration, the external force
was estimated (Eq. 2), and removed from the total force to
give us the interaction force for each task.
Ft = Fi +Fe
(1)
Fe = ma
(2)
For the anterior, X, and lateral, Y, directions, the only
external force being applied is the force applied from the
participants, whereas in the vertical Z direction, gravity also
caused a force. For all calculations and analysis in this paper,
the forces were low-pass ﬁltered near 20 Hz to represent human
response ranges. The muscle response of humans can reach up
to 100 Hz for brief, forceful efforts, but often lies within the
10-30 Hz range [42].
Additionally, we calculated the resultant torque on the object
at the center of mass. We assumed the table was a rectangular
prism with width w, length l, and depth d. We then calculated
the torques using Eq. 3, assuming the coordinate frame shown
in Fig. 3. For this calculation, the torques measured by the
sensors were neglected since they signiﬁcantly smaller than the
torque due to the reaction forces. Ftl and Ftr are the total forces
measured by the left and right force/torque sensors. Using Eq.
4 and again getting angular acceleration and velocity from the
motion capture data, we calculated the torque causing angular
acceleration, getting moments of inertia for a rectangular
prism, and assuming planar motion. Finally, we calculated
the interaction torque with Eq. 5.
τt,x = (Ftl,z −Ftr,z)w
2 +(Ftr,y +Ftl,y)d
τt,y = (Ftr,z +Ftl,z) l
2 −(Ftr,x +Ftr,y)d
τt,z = (Ftr,x −Ftl,x)w
2 −(Ftr,y +Ftl,y) l
2
(3)
τe,x = Ixxαx −(Iyy −Izz)ωyωz
τe,y = Iyyαy −(Izz −Ixx)ωxωz
τe,z = Izzαz −(Ixx −Iyy)ωxωy
(4)
τt = τi +τe
(5)
As mentioned in Section II, some prior work in pHRI has
presented an objective of pHRI controllers as minimizing
interaction forces by driving them to zero magnitude [37]. In
fact, this is also a characteristic of variable-impedance control

PRE-PRINT PAPER, SUBMITTED NOVEMBER 2018
8
Fig. 6: Histogram showing average force along anterior axis
for rotation and translation tasks
[16], [13]. Our study, however, showed that this may not always
be the case. For both lateral and rotational movements, we
calculated the average interaction force in the anterior direction.
Histograms showing the distribution of average force over the
duration of trial, for all translation and rotation trials, are shown
in Fig. 6. This plot shows a histogram of average interaction
force. As can be seen, the interaction force was almost
always non-zero for both lateral and rotational movements
in the anterior direction (see Fig. 3 for clarity on directions).
Additionally, we considered the ratio of average interaction to
external forces, Fi,avg/Fe,avg, which–when averaged over all the
trials–gave a magnitude of 20, indicating the forces used for
acceleration of the object were 20 times smaller than those not
used for acceleration. It is not clear why the average interaction
force was so substantial, but our hypotheses include:
1) These forces were used for object and human stability
2) These forces were used to better communicate intent
We will conduct future studies to explore the hypothesis
on stability, but the hypothesis on communicating intent is
discussed to some extent in Sections IV-D and VI. This
result is important because it implies that lateral collaborative
movements may rely on interaction forces along the anterior
direction, which is not seen in many state-of-the-art pHRI
controllers. Additionally, minimizing interaction forces may
not yield results easily understood by human partners in co-
manipulation tasks, since it is now evident that humans are not
necessarily minimizing these forces. We also ran a Wilcoxon
rank-sum test on the distributions in Fig. 6 to determine if the
tasks were statistically different. The test returned a p value
of 0.043, indicating that the different task types were likely
to have come from different populations. This indicates that
there is some fundamental difference in the forces applied
during these two tasks, and could show how human-human
dyads solve the rotation-translation ambiguity problem. This
is discussed further in Sections IV-D and VI.
B. Minimum-Jerk
The minimum-jerk (MJ) movement is well-documented as a
basis for human arm movements, especially in point-to-point
(a) Lateral task, Pearson correlation coefﬁcient is 0.59
(b) Rotation task, Pearson correlation coefﬁcient is 0.83
Fig. 7: Comparison of completion time to deviation from MJ
trajectory with trend line
movements. However, we did not expect to see MJ trajectories
in these trials, since one participant was blindfolded and
unaware of the task speciﬁcations, and the dyads used whole-
body motion rather than arm-only motion. However, another
interesting ﬁnding from our study was that both the lateral
movement tasks and the planar rotation tasks resembled a MJ
movement in lateral position and angular position respectively.
This was especially true for the dyads that completed the task
more quickly. Figs. 7a and 7b show a positive correlation
between deviation from MJ trajectories and time to complete
the task. The Pearson correlation coefﬁcient for Figs. 7a and 7b
was 0.59 and 0.83 respectively. Deviation from MJ trajectories,
or MJ Error, is simply the sum of the residuals between the
actual trajectory and ideal MJ trajectory. When considering
task completion time, the slower dyads often had a larger error
between their position, and the ideal MJ position, whereas the
quicker dyads generally had a smaller error with respect to
a MJ trajectory. This could be due to the follower becoming
confused, and taking more time to determine the intent of the
leader. Therefore, completion time or deviation from a MJ
trajectory could be an indication of how much confusion was
present in the dyad.

PRE-PRINT PAPER, SUBMITTED NOVEMBER 2018
9
(a) Lateral task trajectories
(b) Rotational task trajectories
Fig. 8: Individual trial trajectories, ideal MJ trajectory, and
average trial trajectory, all scaled to normalized time
Overall, the lateral position and angular position stayed close
to the MJ trajectory, and adhering to a similar trajectory over all
trials corroborates the results of similar 1-dimensional studies
[10]. Figs. 8a and 8b show the position of the tasks over a
normalized time, since each trial took a different amount of
time. The gray dotted lines show each individual task, the
black dotted line is the average position of all the tasks, and
the blue line is the ideal MJ trajectory given an average start
and stop position. As we can see, even though the follower
did not know the end position, they managed to remain fairly
close to the MJ trajectory both for translation and rotation
tasks. The ideal MJ trajectory is calculated using Eq. 6, where
ˆt = t/(tf −t0), and t0 is the starting time and tf is the ending
time.
x(t) = x0 +(xf −x0)(10ˆt3 −15ˆt4 +6ˆt5)
(6)
Despite the evidence presented for planar co-manipulation
tasks, it is not clear at this point if MJ trajectories encompass
general co-manipulation for 6D tasks. Dyads may have con-
fusion about intent, may encounter obstacles, or may move
for indeﬁnite amounts of time. These situations can lead to
non-MJ trajectories, as we have seen in our study (see Section
IV-D), and we agree with previous research that a MJ basis for
control may be too restrictive [27]. However, we also conclude
that MJ trajectories can be useful for describing task metrics
(discussed more in Section IV-C), as was proposed in other
work [34].
C. Metric Observations
Our objective for the future is to develop control algorithms
for a human-robot dyad to successfully co-manipulate extended
objects in 6 DOF tasks. We have begun some initial work on
human-intent estimation from the data we collected and a
demonstration of simple pHRI [43]. However, to compare a
co-manipulation controller with human-human dyads, we need
to ﬁrst be able to quantify the performance of human-human
dyads. Therefore, we needed to identify and deﬁne which
metrics characterize human-human performance. There are a
few difﬁculties in determining performance metrics from our
experiment. First, the dyads were given no speciﬁc directions
other than for the leader to complete the on-screen tasks, and
the follower to follow the leader. Therefore, we cannot say a
speciﬁc dyad was intending to complete the task quickly, or
precisely, rather, we can only say that the dyads performed
the task in whatever way they preferred. Second, metrics may
not be universal across all tasks. For instance, following a
minimum-jerk trajectory could be a potentially good metric
for translation tasks, but not necessarily for the complex 3D
task in our human-human trials.
Given these difﬁculties, we sought to ﬁnd behaviors and
trends among the dyads, such as those in Section IV-B,
that could be used to indicate default or nominal human
performance. These metrics indicate the average behavior of
human-human dyads, such as how humans have been shown
to innately fall into MJ patterns in reaching movements [4].
We also desired to look into classical metrics that indicate
the effective performance of a dyad, such as completion time,
power, wasted energy, etc. Our reasoning in looking at these
two types of metrics is that we can quantify what people do
on average. Although useful in making a robot intuitive, those
nominal human-human metrics may actually contradict other
effective performance metrics for improving things like energy
expended or completion time.
With this information in mind, we analyzed our data for
metrics to classify both the nominal and effective performance
of the dyads. Some of the metrics considered were:
• Task completion time
• Average/max force and torque on table
• Average/max velocity of table
• Average/max angular velocity of table
• Deviation from MJ trajectory of table
• Average/total torque change
We evaluated more than just these metrics, but chose a
representative set for our analysis here. The chosen set was
compared using the Pearson correlation coefﬁcient, and the
results are summarized in Table I for the translation task and
in Table II for the rotation task. The metrics used in these
tables are MJ error, deﬁned in Section IV-B, completion time,

PRE-PRINT PAPER, SUBMITTED NOVEMBER 2018
10
TABLE I: Metric correlation for translation task.
MJ Err
tc
vy,avg
ωz,avg
∆˙τz
MJ Err
-
0.63
-0.42
0.05
-0.02
tc
-
-
-0.66
-0.40
0.02
vy,avg
-
-
-
0.30
-0.07
ωz,avg
-
-
-
-
0.04
TABLE II: Metric correlation for rotation task.
MJ Err
tc
vy,avg
ωz,avg
∆˙τz
MJ Err
-
0.83
-0.50
-0.56
0.71
tc
-
-
-0.51
-0.78
0.52
vy,avg
-
-
-
0.81
-0.36
ωz,avg
-
-
-
-
-0.42
average lateral velocity, average angular velocity, and torque
change. Torque change, was deﬁned in [34], and is calculated
using ∆˙τ =
R T
0 ˙τ12 + ˙τ22dt.
We expected there to be some correlation between most of
these measurements since most of the metrics were proposed
in previous research [27], [28], [33], [34]. Surprisingly, some
intuitively related metrics offered very little correlation. The
most relevant expected metrics–for the lateral translation task–
were average/max angular velocity and deviation from the
MJ trajectory. We expected dyads performing these tasks to
minimize the average angular velocity about the z axis, and
stay relatively close to the MJ trajectory, but the correlation
coefﬁcient between these two metrics was 0.05. In fact, there
was a much stronger correlation between deviation from MJ
trajectory and completion time and average lateral velocity
– being 0.63 and -0.42 respectively. Intuitively, minimizing
angular velocity would be an ideal metric for this task, since a
perfect lateral translation would involve no angular velocity at
all. This supports our hypothesis that some metrics may be ideal
from an energy or time efﬁciency point of view, but may not be
nominal behavior for human users in a dyad, and we need to
consider these non-intuitive relationships between metrics if we
want to make intuitive robot controllers for co-manipulation.
Another noteworthy observation is the lack of correlation
between total torque change and the other metrics. We would
expect that torque change would indicate some measure of
performance, but it appears to be more related, at least in
the translation case, to some other aspect of the movement.
This may be related to our ﬁndings from Section IV-A, where
there were interaction forces in the anterior direction for lateral
movements, and may indicate that the non-correlated metrics
may affect stability, communication, or something related to
preference which we did not measure.
For rotational tasks, the same metric set was applied as can
be seen in Table II. However, we were again surprised by the
results. We expected task completion time and MJ error to
be related, since we had seen that previously. What we did
(a) z-axis torque patterns
(b) x-axis torque patterns
Fig. 9: First 4 seconds of trials showing torque trends for
rotation and translation tasks for both directions of motion:
dashed lines are individual trials, bold lines are average over
all types of trials
not expect was torque change to be so heavily correlated to
the other metrics, where it was not in the translation case.
This ﬁnding was signiﬁcant to us, and indicated that there is
some fundamental difference between τz in these two tasks.
We explore this phenomenon further in Section IV-D.
Some additional information on the metrics can be found in
Table III. This table includes the mean and standard deviation
for all the metrics we considered here. Some values here will
be used to compare human-robot dyads (see Section VI). As
can be seen the standard of both MJ error and torque change
are quite large compared to their mean, whereas the standard
deviation of completion time, average velocity, and average
angular velocity are not. This indicates that there are multiple
different approaches that the human-human dyads used to
achieve similar results. In other words, although each dyad
may have applied their own force patterns–or taken a different
trajectory–the overall behavior, especially average velocity and
angular velocity, was similar.
The surprising correlations between metrics shows we do
not fully understand how human-human dyads operate. We

PRE-PRINT PAPER, SUBMITTED NOVEMBER 2018
11
TABLE III: Average and standard deviation of metrics for blind
rotation and translation tasks.
µ (mean)
σ (std. dev.)
Rot
Trans
Rot
Trans
MJ Err
392.71
149.91
391.7
87.65
tc
7.08
7.18
2.9
1.62
vy,avg
0.17
0.18
0.06
0.04
ωz,avg
0.26
0.004
0.09
0.003
∆˙τz
488454.4
387937.6
560601.9
281393.2
may be able to conclude that in some instances, humans may
lower or raise performance on an effective metric in order to
raise or lower performance on an nominal metric, such as how
the dyads appeared to raise the energy-increasing interaction
forces on lateral translation trials. While these observations
provide some insight to this topic, our work on metrics is still
an open question that is necessary to explore in order to better
design, characterize, and evaluate performance of human-robot
co-manipulation controllers.
D. Lateral and Rotation Movement Characteristics
In the case of lateral movements, we recognized some
patterns in how the dyads behaved. Studying the videos of the
lateral motion task, we saw that the follower often guessed the
leader’s intent incorrectly, and began to rotate when the leader
started their movement. When this happened, the leader would
ﬂex their arm on one side of the table, causing a torque on the
table, and the follower would then commence moving in the
correct manner. With this video evidence, as well as the torque
change information from Tables I and II, we began looking
for in-task patterns of applied torques which could indicate the
leader’s intent to start either a translation or rotation task.
In order to see in-task relationships, we decided to take each
task and look at the time-series torque for the beginning of
the tasks. As we looked at the torque data, we noticed two
groups beginning to appear. These two groups represented the
torque values for the direction of the rotation task, since the
dyads were assigned to randomly rotate either clockwise or
counterclockwise for each rotation task performed. We then
tried looking at the same z-torque time-series data for the
translation tasks, and noticed that two more groups appeared,
indicating that there was some pattern showing the difference
between translation and rotation tasks, as well as a difference
depending on which direction the table was travelling. We then
took an average of z-torque for each of the 4 distinct groups:
translation left, translation right, rotation clockwise (left), and
rotation counterclockwise (right). We noticed there appeared 4
groupings of average z-torque for the entire time series. These
ﬁndings are summarized in Fig. 9a.
As can be seen, translation tasks tend to increase in z-torque
more quickly, whereas the rotation tasks hover around the same
value for over 1 second before diverging. It is evident from this
plot that there is a clear difference in torque patterns between
Fig. 10: Plot showing lateral velocity proﬁle for beginning of
Task 5, a 3D Complex Task avoiding obstacles: this portion of
the task is a lateral translation for over 2 meters
the translation and rotation trials, and also the direction of
travel. The intent can be classiﬁed as either translation left,
or translation right, depending on the z-torque value achieved.
However, there is not a difference between z-torque patterns
for the ﬁrst second of left and right rotations. Both directions
have an approximately constant torque value for this time
segment. This is an important time segment, since it is during
this interval that decisions about whether to rotate or translate
are made by the follower, and there needs to be some indication
given by the leader to signal which direction to go.
For this reason, we also looked into what other signals might
be given by the leader to indicate which direction to travel, and
to clarify whether to rotate or translate. In watching video of
the trial, we also noticed some dyads tended to rotate the board
about the anterior (x) axis while performing the tasks. So we
did a similar analysis with x-torque values to what humans did
with the z-torque values. The results can be seen in Fig. 9b.
As can be seen, similar to Fig. 9a, there is a divide between
left translation and right translation. Additionally, a divide
appears between left rotation and right rotation around the 0.75
second mark. In order to determine whether the division was
signiﬁcant, we ran a t-test comparing the left rotation and right
rotation x-torque patterns. We found that during the 0.75−1.75
second range the p values ranged from 0.1 −0.2. Although
this isn’t signiﬁcant on a 95% conﬁdence interval, we believe
it is enough of a distinction for use in control. Additionally,
we compared left translation and left rotation with a t-test, and
found that during the 0.75−1.75 second time range, p < 0.05,
indicating that the x-torque values can be used to distinguish
between rotation and translation going one direction. Similar
results were found comparing right translation and right rotation.
This means we can use the z-torque to determine direction of
travel, and x-torque to determine type of motion.
With the analysis on torque triggers providing background
for a control method for extended object co-manipulation, we
determined what the velocity proﬁle should look like for these
tasks. For the translation tasks, we assumed it would follow the
bell-shaped velocity proﬁle from a MJ trajectory, however, we

PRE-PRINT PAPER, SUBMITTED NOVEMBER 2018
12
(a) Control loop for BMVIC
(b) Control loop for EVIC
Fig. 11: Control loops for co-manipulation of extended object
showing human (left box) communicating intent haptically
through force sensor, then desired velocity is calculated using
speciﬁed control law and sent to velocity controller.
wanted to see how the velocity proﬁle looked when translating
over a large distance. Bussy et al. [10] showed that humans
often accelerate an object to a steady velocity while translating
an object. We wanted to verify this, and also determine what
velocity most dyads chose as the steady state velocity. To
do this, we looked at our 3D Complex Task data. This task
involved a large translation portion, followed by changes in
direction and rotation of the board to avoid obstacles. Fig. 10
shows the ﬁrst portion of a typical complex task, which is a
translation for over 2 meters. We notice from this data that the
results seen in Bussy et al. can be veriﬁed, and also that the
steady velocity achieved is around -0.35 m/s. It is important to
note that this velocity value is for a 10.3 kg board, and may
differ depending on the mass of the object. Since we want our
robot controller to work in an undeﬁned situation, we would
expect it to be able to perform a translation task indeﬁnitely, if
needed. This observation helps inform us that a dyad’s desired
velocity is some steady state value.
This new information provides a unique perspective on how
force can be used to solve the problem of co-manipulation
of extend objects. Using the tendencies of humans in applied
torque patterns from the leader, we can distinguish between
task type and task direction intent for the follower to use.
Fig. 12: Rethink Robotics Baxter robot mounted on HStar
Technologies AMP-1 holonomic base carrying the table with
a person.
V. ROBOT HARDWARE PLATFORM DESCRIPTION
The purpose of our human-human study and the purpose of
creating the physical human-robot interaction methods for co-
manipulation deﬁned in Sections VI and VII was to use them for
actual co-manipulation. Therefore, we designed an experimental
study to determine the capabilities of our controllers for co-
manipulation on a real robot platform. Our robot platform
for this research is a Rethink Robotics Baxter robot mounted
on an AMP-I holonomic base from HStar Technologies as
seen in Fig. 12. There are force/torque sensors on Baxter’s
wrists, and the base is equipped with mecanum wheels. For our
initial work, we chose to use a holonomic base with mecanum
wheels instead of a bipedal robot in order to validate that the
human intent prediction works at the appropriate speeds without
having to incorporate the complexities of bipedal robots. This
is important to ensure that our methods work in real world
applications as limiting speed due to limited locomotion may
affect the dynamics of the interaction.
For all human-robot experiments described throughout the
rest of this paper, the Baxter arms ran an impedance controller
with a commanded joint angle calculated for acceptable posi-
tioning of the table. The impedance controller was run along
with Baxter’s built in gravity compensation. The impedance
control law, given in Eq. 7, used Kp and Kd gains of [40, 120,
40, 16, 8, 10, 12] and [7, 8, 4, 7, 1.5, 1.5, 1] respectively. The
same gains were used for both arms. The desired angles, qcmd,
used were [0, -0.84, -1.27, 2.26, -0.34, -1.22, -2.25] radians
and [0, -0.84, 1.27, 2.26, 0.34, -1.22, 2.25] radians for left and
right arms respectively. We ran the controller at a rate of 500
Hz.
τcmd = Kp(qcmd −q)−Kd ˙q
(7)
As described in other literature, [42], the impedance con-
troller allows the robot to react in a more human-like manner,
making the human-robot interaction more intuitive and natural
for a human user. This means that for both EVIC and NNPC,
the desired velocities are commanded directly to the holonomic
base, whereas the arms are not providing any desired motion
toward the goal, except through motion due to low impedance.
While humans typically use their arms in co-manipulation tasks,
especially when doing precise placement, using the impedance

PRE-PRINT PAPER, SUBMITTED NOVEMBER 2018
13
control law allows us to run initial studies to determine if
our co-manipulation controllers are good approximations for
human behavior in co-manipulation.
VI. PLANAR EXTENSION OF VARIABLE IMPEDANCE
CONTROL
A. Motivation and Formulation
In order to verify that the torque patterns we saw in
Section IV-D would be applicable in an extended object co-
manipulation scenario, and also to show that current variable
impedance co-manipulation techniques in the literature are
not adequate for extended objects, we built an extension onto
a variable impedance controller. Variable impedance control
(VIC) is a possible solution to undeﬁned or indeﬁnite scenarios,
since it is not based on a trajectory, but rather on force inputs
which determine robot velocity. What we noticed in practice
is that VIC has issues when dealing with bi-manual control
and extended object control. We implemented a VIC based on
Duchaine and Gosselin’s work, [16], on our robot platform.
Our implementation of VIC, which we called Bi-Manual
VIC (BMVIC), involves the control loop seen in Fig. 11a. The
human communicates their intent to the robot through force
sensors, and the VIC model determines a desired velocity based
on the applied force, and how the force is changing in relation
to the robot’s velocity. The general model is shown in Eq. 8,
as well as in the ﬁgure. Here, F and ˙F are applied force and
time derivative of force, respectively, ˙p and ¨p are velocity and
acceleration, and m, c, and α serve as virtual mass, damping and
weighting parameters to deﬁne the impedance. These virtual
parameters do not correspond to the actual parameters of the
system, and have values of 1.2, 0.6, and 0.2 respectively, and
were determined by trial and error. The model can be discretized
and implemented as a discrete LTI system, solving for the
desired velocity at each time step. We applied the resulting
desired velocity that would give a model impedance directly
to the base, and controlled the robot arms to have very low-
impedance (see Section VI-B.) This method was developed for
single arm manipulation, so we implemented a VIC for each
arm independently in order to achieve bi-manual manipulation.
However, this is not an ideal method for bi-manual control.
Pushing one arm forward and one arm backward would apply
zero net force, causing the robot to remain stationary, rather
than rotate, as we hoped. To deal with this, we added a torque
model to their VIC model, as seen in Eq. 9. Here, τ and ˙τ
are applied torque and time derivative of torque, respectively,
with ˙θ and ¨θ as angular velocity and acceleration, while I,
b, and β serve as virtual inertia, damping, and weighting
parameters, with values of 0.12, 0.6, and 0.2. All forces and
torques referenced here and used for variable impedance control
are with respect to the center of the table. The bi-manual
torque-based model theoretically allows VIC to be extended to
planar motion, where pushing one arm forward and one arm
backward will provide a net torque, indicating a desired angular
velocity (in the plane only), in addition to any desired Cartesian
velocities calculated by the original model. In summary, at each
time step, Eqs. 8 and 9 are solved to determine desired velocity
and angular velocity to send to the velocity controller. We will
Algorithm 1 Extended Variable Impedance Control
Require: τz,τx
if τz ≤−τz,thresh and τx ≥τx,thresh then
Left Translation
else if |τz| ≤τz,thresh and τx ≥τx,thresh then
Right Rotation
else if |τz| ≤τz,thresh and τx ≤−τx,thresh then
Left Rotation
else if τz ≥τz,thresh and τx ≤−τx,thresh then
Right Translation
else
Stop
refer to the bi-manual torque-based model as bi-manual VIC
or BMVIC.
F = m ¨p+c ˙p−α ˙F ˙p
(8)
τ = I ¨θ +b ˙θ −β ˙τ ˙θ
(9)
We also extended VIC in a different and new way, using
our results from Section IV-D. We used Eq. 8 as a base
controller for anterior/posterior translation, and added torque-
based triggers for lateral translation and planar rotation. The
logic of this extended variable impedance control (EVIC) is
shown in Algorithm 1. Torque thresholds are calculated, based
on Figs. 9a and 9b, and are implemented as shown. We centered
the thresholds around zero for ease of implementation. The
threshold values are 3.0 Nm for z torque and 1.5 Nm for x
torque. If none of the torque threshold conditions are met, the
algorithm commands no lateral translation or rotation about the
superior axis. As mentioned previously, if the torque threshold
conditions are met, the robot accelerates until it reaches a
speciﬁed steady state velocity. The lateral velocity value, 0.35
m/s, was determined from the logic described in Section IV-D
and Fig. 10, and the rotation velocity value, 0.4 rad/s, was
determined similarly. The robot acceleration was limited to the
capabilities of our robot mobile base. A control loop showing
how this algorithm is implemented is shown in Fig. 11b. The
main difference between EVIC and BMVIC is that EVIC
uses Algorithm 1 to determine the desired lateral and angular
velocities, whereas BMVIC relies on Eqs. 8 and 9 to calculate
the desired lateral and angular velocities.
This EVIC algorithm represents the average behavior of
human-human dyads manipulating a speciﬁc object. It is not
evident that the thresholds would work for objects of different
size or mass. However, in our initial testing of the controller, we
used a table of about half the length and mass of the table used
in the experiment, and achieved similar general performance
of the controller. This generalized behavior, however, was not
tested thoroughly. As a general rule, different torque thresholds
may need to be set for speciﬁc robot platforms as well as
different objects. In order to set thresholds for torque, as well as
the target velocity, one may consider using a learned approach–
or an optimization–where a user would manipulate the object
for a certain period of time, and the algorithm would adjust to
the preferences of the user and the characteristics of the object,
based on the applied forces and achieved velocities. This is

PRE-PRINT PAPER, SUBMITTED NOVEMBER 2018
14
beyond the scope of this paper, and may be added in future
work.
Also, it is not certain that the force/torque pattern seen in
these tasks, nor the torque thresholds used, would be applicable
to tasks involving higher DOF. This is something that must be
explored in future work as we extend our methods to 6 DOF
tasks.
B. Extended Object Co-manipulation Implementation
We implemented both BMVIC, as well as the EVIC on
our robot platform, shown in Fig. 12. A video showing
EVIC running can be seen at https://youtu.be/5vicqv788dI. Our
purpose in implementing these controllers was to determine
feasibility of the controllers, and also to get initial data
quantifying performance of a human-robot dyad against the
blindfolded human-human dyads. As a reminder, BMVIC is a
bi-manual implementation of the most relevant pHRI controller
found in related literature (see Section II) for co-manipulation
of an extended object. We ran both controllers testing the
capability of planar co-manipulation of an extended object on
the following criteria: lateral translation and planar rotation, or
rotation about the superior axis. We ran the controller at a rate
of 500 Hz, manipulating or carrying the same table from our
human-human dyad experiment (see Fig. 2.) For determining
performance of the controllers, we compared the completion
time and MJ error for both lateral and rotational tasks. We also
had a qualitative metric: whether BMVIC, EVIC, or neither
controller was preferred.
1) Pilot Study Testing: During feasibility testing, we dis-
covered major issues with BMVIC. As stated previously, the
issue VIC faces is a problem related to rotation-translation.
This problem arises when forces are applied laterally on a long
object being manipulated by two partners, and the follower does
not know whether the leader wants to rotate or translate. We
had hoped that applying Eq. 9 would allow us to overcome the
rotation-translation problem. In practice, however, the controller
was unable to correctly predict the direction and type of motion
desired. Additionally, the robot often became unstable with the
human in the loop, and ended up shearing internal components
within the arm during two different trials. When running EVIC,
these problems were not as prevalent. Incorrect predictions
occurred, but only when the user did not move as the algorithm
anticipated and this movement did not cause instability. We
recognize this does not allow for a detailed comparison between
BMVIC and EVIC. But due to the resulting damage on our
robot platforms, we instead decided to compare EVIC to
human-human data from our study and to the neural-net based
controller described in Section VII.
VII. NEURAL NETWORK CONTROL
As an approach to developing a nonlinear estimator of
human intention, we formulated a neural network using the
Google TensorFlow API. As we stated previously, in creating
an estimator for co-manipulation control, the objective is to
determine how the robot should respond to human intent, i.e.
how it should move to achieve the human partner’s goal. The
Fig. 13: Basic control loop structure of intent estimation in
co-manipulation. The human moves the co-manipulated object,
and the motion of the object, x, is fed into an intent estimator,
which determines a desired motion of the robot, xd. The robot’s
motion, xr then inﬂuences the object motion, as well as the
human’s.
intent estimator should allow us to control the object with a
control loop similar to that seen in Fig. 13.
Because our data considered the interaction between a human
leader and a human follower, the input x, could be considered
what the leader did–applied forces or moved the object–to indi-
cate their intent to the follower. The follower then deciphered
the intent, xd, and moved as they believed appropriate, xr. The
leader then reacted to this motion. Essentially, the leader put
in a stream of data that indicated intent to move the object in a
certain manner, which the follower then deciphered and acted
on the intent. The estimator should follow this basic input data
to velocity command outline.
There are a variety of neural network structures that could
be considered for this purpose. Martens et al. showed how
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) are used in predicting text.
A sequence of characters can be fed into the RNN as an input,
and the RNN will predict the next character in the sequence
[44]. In considering what form our neural network should take,
this model proved to be the most applicable to our work. From
our exploratory study, we had sequences of forces applied to
and motion of a table that could be used as inputs to an RNN.
We determined that we could feed the force and motion data,
as a substitute for characters in other RNNs, and receive a
motion prediction as an output, similar to how RNNs are used
for predicting text. This prediction encapsulates the human
intent, encoded in the desired velocity, and provides a goal for
the robot to achieve.
A. Architecture
Once we decided on using the RNN structure, we determined
that we would use a number of previous time steps of motion
data (velocity and angular velocity) of the table as inputs.
While we had both force and motion data at our disposal
from the experiment, only motion data was included in our
neural network. Our reasoning for not including force data is
that including it caused our neural network solution to have
poor convergence. We believe that including a dynamic model,
changing the RNN structure, or using a different structure of

PRE-PRINT PAPER, SUBMITTED NOVEMBER 2018
15
Fig. 14: Basic neural network structure, time-series motion
data inputs (left) enter the network, are sent through a fully
connected layer, a ReLU layer, through an LSTM Cell RNN,
and another fully connected layer before predicted velocities
are given as outputs (right).
neural network could help to solve this problem, but we have
left this for future work, as we obtained an accurate prediction
using our current network with motion data inputs. The basic
structure of the neural network is shown in Fig. 14.
Our ﬁnal network consists of 3 LSTM layers each with
100 hidden states. The process of choosing a neural network
structure and other parameters was not exhaustive and it is
possible that better structure and parameters could be obtained.
However, the process for choosing neural net parameters and
training took over 10 hours. With more experience and more
efﬁcient computation, we may have been able to ﬁnd better
structures, but this is also left to future work. Methods other
than neural networks may exist, but our purpose in this paper
is to show that human intent estimation is possible based on
the data collected from our user study, and neural networks
allowed us to achieve this goal.
Additionally, it was shown by Chipalkatty et al. that more
complex predictions of future movement can actually decrease
performance if they do not agree with what the human is
trying to do. This is because humans cannot be completely
modelled due to their unpredictability. They found that it was
more important that the human understand what the robot will
do next, meaning that our controller should be intuitive for a
human partner in a human-robot dyad. [45] In addition to being
intuitive, the prediction should also be accurate and repeatable.
The inputs to the neural network, as seen in Fig. 14, are 150
past steps of velocity and angular velocity of the table in the
x, y, and z directions, {xt−149,xt−148...,xt−1,xt}. The outputs
are the predicted velocity and angular velocity of the table in
the x, y, and z directions for 1 time step into the future, ˆxt+1,
where ˆx indicates a predicted value.
Our neural net formulation also uses what Engel et al. de-
scribe as iterated prediction [46]. The neural network itself only
predicts 1 time step into the future. Then, the prediction, ˆxt+1,
is appended to the input to give {xt−149,xt−148...,xt−1,xt, ˆxt+1}.
The ﬁrst step of the input is dropped to obtain a new input of
past motions for the neural net, {xt−148,xt−147...,xt, ˆxt+1}. The
new data is input into the neural net which outputs a prediction
Fig. 15: Neural network prediction explanation. Previous time
steps are used to obtain one future prediction of states. This
state is then appended to previous time steps, the ﬁrst time step
is removed, and the network is run again in order to achieve
multiple future predictions.
1 step forward, but 2 total steps into the future, ˆxt+2. This is
then appended to the input. The process is repeated 50 times
to obtain a prediction of 50 steps, {ˆxt+1, ˆxt+2..., ˆxt+49, ˆxt+50}.
This process is represented by Fig. 15. Because the outputs of
each prediction step become the inputs for the next, the inputs
and outputs must be the same variables.
B. Training
We pre-processed the data for the neural net to improve the
results. The velocity and acceleration data were scaled to have
0 mean and standard deviation of 1 over the entire set of data.
This was then inverted on the output to show the results in
their proper units. This same scaling can be used on new data
as long as the mean and standard deviation are similar to the
training data. This is the case in our experiment, as velocity
values fall into the average adult human range. The entire set
of data consists of 2.5 million time steps for each variable.
Data was split into to training and validation sets. 75% of the
data was assigned to the training set and the other 25% to the
validation set.
The neural net has to be trained in a special way in order to
make the iterated prediction ˆxt+1 stable beyond the ﬁrst step.
This process, described here, comes from [46]. Batches of data
were created that randomly pulled in 32 sets of 150 steps of
data from the entire training set. Sets of 150 steps were also
created from the validation set. The neural net was trained on
new training batches for a number of iterations, until the cost
function was below a threshold we chose. We used the mean
squared error (MSE) for the cost function, as shown in Eq. 10.
MSE =
32
∑
n=1
(ˆxn,t+1 −xn,t+1)2
(10)
Once this threshold was reached, each training batch took in
the original data, created a prediction, appended the prediction
to the end of the time-series, and removed the ﬁrst step,
following the pattern shown in Fig. 15. This process was
repeated until the desired number of future predictions was
reached. In other words, the original set of 150 steps was

PRE-PRINT PAPER, SUBMITTED NOVEMBER 2018
16
trained to determine a single future step. After this, a new
data set was created that used 149 steps of real data and the
prediction appended to the end, {xt−148,xt−147...,xt−1,xt, ˆxt+1}.
The neural network was then trained on a combined data set that
included the original data and the new data set that included the
prediction. Once this training was complete, a new data set was
created with 148 steps of real data and two predictions after it,
{xt−147,xt−146...,xt−1,xt, ˆxt+1, ˆxt+2}. The same neural net was
then trained again, continuing until the neural net has predicted
the desired number of future time steps. By training the neural
network on data that includes predictions, the stability of the
prediction is improved.
The length of the prediction is limited by our computational
resources as we train the neural network, as well as a
degradation of prediction after a certain number of steps. Our
neural net predicts for 50 steps, or .25 seconds into the future,
because predictions beyond this point did not produce accurate
predictions. We speculate this occurs due to a limit on the
predictability of human intent after a certain amount of time.
Humans are inherently unpredictable by nature, and we would
not expect that an intent estimator could predict an entire
trajectory given only a few data points. We also believe that
the number of future steps we can predict is dependent on
each individual dyad, which we will study more in-depth in
the future. Improvements to the neural network architecture
may also provide longer prediction times.
The neural net was trained several times randomizing which
data was used for training and validation. This ensured that
the neural net would generalize to an entirely new dyad, and
avoid overﬁtting. Another beneﬁt of iterated prediction is the
inclusion of predicted velocities each training step reduces
the amount of overﬁtting, since new data is essentially being
introduced each iteration. By training this neural network, we
have created an intent estimator to be used in a human-robot
dyad performing co-manipulation of an extended object. The
object’s motion data can be fed as an input at each time
step, and the trained neural network will output a predicted
velocity for the object. The robot must then use this estimation
to calculate its own trajectory to make the object follow the
desired behavior.
C. Validation
Fig. 16 shows the neural network predictions of velocity in
the x and y directions for a single sequence of the validation
set. The actual velocity is shown for the whole task in blue.
The predicted velocity is shown in red. Although 50 time
steps of prediction were calculated at each time step, the plot
only shows the predictions once every second. As seen, the
predictions are reasonably accurate for that time scale. Here
we only show velocity, but the angular velocity data must
also be predicted because each velocity prediction depends on
the prediction of angular velocity for the time step before it.
Acceleration and angular acceleration data can also be included
when training, but is not necessary for accurate predictions.
D. Neural Network Prediction Control
As discussed previously, and displayed visually in Fig. 13,
predicting human intent is only one portion of the puzzle. We
(a) X velocity.
(b) Y velocity.
Fig. 16: Comparison of velocity prediction in x-direction (a)
and y-direction (b) to actual future data while a human dyad
moves a table. Each red line is a separate 50 step prediction
using the 150 steps before it.
also need to tell the robot what to do with the prediction with
a motion controller. The neural network outputs a predicted
velocity and angular velocity of the center of mass of the table.
Along with the prediction of the velocity of the center of mass,
we can know the velocity of other known points on the table,
such as the velocity of the leader’s edge and the follower’s
edge, using kinematic relationships. For our motion controller,
however, we simply used the predicted velocity of the center of
mass, again in the object’s reference frame. The robot controller
then needs to account for the distance from its center of mass
to the table’s, which can be done using the transport theorem,
shown in Eq. 11. Here, ⃗vr is the robot’s calculated velocity
in its reference frame, with ⃗p as the distance from the table
frame to the robot frame, and ⃗ω as the table’s angular velocity
in the table frame. Also, ⃗vrel is the table’s velocity in its frame.
We assumed the table frame and robot frame do not rotate
independently, allowing us to rotate the predicted velocities in

PRE-PRINT PAPER, SUBMITTED NOVEMBER 2018
17
Fig. 17: Neural Network Prediction Control loop.
the table frame to the robot frame.
⃗vr =⃗vrel +(⃗ω ×⃗p)
(11)
We now have the tools to complete the control loop shown
in Fig. 13. The intent estimator is replaced with the neural
network model. The motion controller is replaced with Eq. 11,
and is subsequently fed into the low level control of the robot,
which sends voltages down to the wheels to match the desired
velocity. The achieved velocity, xa, is then what the human
interacts with, completing the loop. Also, xa is estimated using
numerical differentiation and a 2nd order low-pass ﬁlter of the
pose information coming from the motion capture. This loop is
shown in Fig: 17. We call this control method Neural Network
Prediction Control (NNPC). A notable feature of this method
is that the commanded velocity, xr, is a continuous variable on
[−vmax,vmax], where vmax is determined empirically for each
DOF. This means the human user has control of the speed
of the interaction, so if the response xa is not suitable to the
human, they can adjust their inputs to move faster or slower.
VIII. PHRI CO-MANIPULATION STUDY
As mentioned in Section, EVIC works only for 3 DOF
planar control–anterior and lateral translation and rotation in
the plane–so we developed an experiment to compare a planar
implementation of NNPC and EVIC. We believe that since
NNPC can provide predictions for all 6 DOF, it can be expanded
to control in 6 DOF. However, we have left that for future
work as it would also require integration with better robot arm
control and is beyond the scope of this paper. This experiment
was designed to be as close as possible to the lateral translation
and planar rotation tasks from our 6 DOF HHI experiment [2].
A. Experiment Description
1) Tasks:
Because
both
controllers
are
planar
co-
manipulation methods, we used only planar tasks from the
previous HHI experiment in [2]. As can be seen in Fig. 18,
each participant performed two tasks: translation and rotation.
In this diagram, the human is represented by the bottom person.
The translation task consisted of the subject moving from one
orange arrow to the next, with tape lines extending on the
ground to help the user align the board correctly. Rotation
tasks were similar, except with the participant moving from
one green x to the next. Tasks could be run starting at either
(a) Translation task.
(b) Rotation task.
Fig. 18: Visual representation of a translation task (a) and a
rotation task (b), where the top person represents a robot, and
lower person represents a human; tape was used to delineate
tasks for user ease with arrows indicating start and stop points
for translation task and Xs indicating start and stop points for
rotation task
arrow or x, and the direction was randomized throughout the
trial.
2) Equipment: The position of the board was tracked via
Cortex Motion Capture software with a Motion Analysis Kestrel
Digital Realtime System. A total of 8 Kestrel cameras were
used to track 8 infrared markers placed on the board. Using a
static global frame established by the motion capture system,

PRE-PRINT PAPER, SUBMITTED NOVEMBER 2018
18
the position and orientation of the board could be tracked
over time, and we transformed the data into the robot’s frame
for use in the neural network. The motion capture data was
collected at a rate of 200 Hz. In order to run NNPC, we
need a method of telling the controller the object velocity. We
used a 2nd order low-pass ﬁlter and numerical differentiation
on position and orientation data to get the object velocity.
Additionally, participants wore sleeves with infrared markers to
track the position of their arms during the trial. This data was
not used during analysis, but was collected to match similar
data collected during the experiment in [2].
The object the teams moved was a 59x122x2 cm wooden
board – meant to simulate an object (like a table) that is difﬁcult
for one person to maneuver, which weighs 10.3 kg. Attached
to the robot end of the board were a pair of ABS 3D-printed
handles, to which two ATI Mini45 force/torque sensors were
fastened. The sensors transmitted data via ATI NET F/T Net
Boxes, which passed data over Ethernet to the computer at a
rate of 100 Hz. The sensor is attached to wrist adapters on the
other side, which fasten to Baxter’s wrists.
The test arena was a volume measuring 490x510x250 cm.
The arena was also equipped with a video capturing device.
The device we used was a Microsoft Kinect 2, which allowed
us to capture 3D point cloud data, as well as color video of
each trial. Although we did not use the point cloud data for
analysis in this paper, the data may be useful in future work.
3) Subjects and Procedure: Subjects for this study were
male and female students from Brigham Young University in
Provo, UT. There were a total of 16 students–4 female and 12
male–ranging from 18-23 years of age, with an average age
of 20. Students were from a variety of majors, with STEM
majors making up a majority. Participants were asked to rate
their familiarity with robots on a scale from 1-5, with 5 being
the most familiar, and the average rating was 2. IRB approval
was obtained for this experimental study.
Participants entered the Robotics and Dynamics Lab, and
provided written informed consent in accordance with IRB.
They were then briefed on the purpose of the research and
given an introduction to what data would be collected, and
what would be expected of them. Sleeves were then placed on
the participants arms in order to track their arm motion during
the trial. Subjects were then given basic operating instructions
for both EVIC and NNPC controllers. This instruction included
how to translate in the anterior and lateral directions, and how to
rotate the board for each controller. A controller was randomly
selected, and each participant practiced with that controller until
they were able to complete a competency task, they moved on
to the other controller, and repeated the competency training.
The competency task consisted of aligning the board with the
tape lines on the ground, starting from a translated and rotated
position. The practice assured us that each participant would
have at least enough familiarity to complete the translation and
rotation tasks.
Once competency training was completed, a controller was
selected at random to be the ﬁrst controller for data collection.
The randomization of controllers was counterbalanced. Partici-
pants knew the controllers only as A (NNPC) and B (EVIC).
They were not given any speciﬁc details about the formulation
of the controllers, other than the basic operating instructions
in the competency task. The subjects then ran a series of
translation and rotation tasks with the selected controller. Tasks
were randomized (counterbalanced) in order between translation
and rotation. Once a type of task, either rotation or translation,
was selected, the participant ran that task type one direction,
and then ran the same task type, but in the other direction. The
direction order was not randomized, and the ﬁrst direction is
indicated in Fig. 18. Due to the nature of the controller, the
robot was not able to lift the table from the ground, so the table
was laid on a rest stand between trials. A single trial consisted
of the subject lifting the table off of the rest, then a researcher
would remove the rest from below the table. Once the rest
was completely out of the way, the subject then performed
the speciﬁed task. Participants indicated they were ﬁnished
by verbally communicating completion. Once they indicated
they had completed the task, a researcher would replace the
rest underneath the table, and the participant would lower the
table back onto the rest. Each task was repeated 6 times, 3
one direction and 3 the other direction, for each controller.
Once trials were completed for one controller, the participants
were given a survey, and asked to rate the controller on certain
qualitative characteristics. Once completed, they moved on to
the other controller.
A video showing a representation of tasks can be seen online
at https://youtu.be/4b-wxn9_gFQ. This video was taken after
the participant had completed all trials, so we could use a
higher deﬁnition camera to record video, and what is seen is a
good representation of the skill level of the human-robot dyad
post-experiment.
IX. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Metrics
There are a number of metrics that can be used to quantify
performance of the controllers. A good summary of these
metrics is found in [34]. Among these metrics are a few that are
especially applicable to the tasks and control methods we have
developed. These are: minimum jerk, minimum torque change,
and completion time. While none of these metrics alone can
completely store all the information of each controller, together
they give us a fairly good indication of how each controller
was performing in relation to HHI data from [2].
Minimum jerk error (MJE), or deviation from a minimum-
jerk trajectory, is a measure of how close the actual trajectory
was to a minimum-jerk trajectory in meters, and is calculated
using Eq. 12. This measure accounts for human tendency to
match these trajectories. Completion time is simply the time
from the start of the task to the end of the task. The start of
the task is calculated by determining when the object has ﬁrst
moved beyond 5% of the distance between the starting and
ending y or θz positions, for translation and rotation respectively.
The end of the task is calculated by determining when the
object settles into 95% of the distance between starting and
ending y or θz positions. A buffer of 0.5 s is added to the
total time to account for the missed motion. This measure
accounts for how quickly a dyad performed the task. Although
quick task completion is not always a direct objective of dyads,

PRE-PRINT PAPER, SUBMITTED NOVEMBER 2018
19
this measure can help compare the capabilities of two dyads.
Minimum-torque measure (MTM) is a measure of how much
the time-derivative of torque changes over the course of the
task. In instances where the follower predicted incorrectly,
there was an unforeseen obstacle, or some other disturbance,
MTM can account for human tendency to reduce the amount
of force or torque required to move. It is calculated using Eq.
13.
MJE =
T
∑
t=0
xm j,t −xa,t
(12)
MTM =
T−1
∑
t=0
˙τ2
t + ˙τ2
t+1
(13)
B. Quantitative Results
While each task type was performed 6 times for each
controller, we only consider the data from the last 2 trials
performed for each task type. Our reasoning behind this is that
each participant learned throughout the experiment, so we want
to take the best representation of the control method. This is
acceptable to us, because if a human-robot team were to be
deployed in real life, the human would undoubtedly be trained
on working with the robot. If we consider the practice time
and time taken to perform the ﬁrst 4 trials of each type, the
total training time for our participants was approximately 30
minutes.
The results from the experiment based on the metrics in the
previous section can be seen in Table IV. This table compares
EVIC and NNPC to each other, as well as to the lower (blind
HHI) and upper (sighted HHI) bounds of human performance.
As can be seen, NNPC performed best in most of the metrics. It
was able to get closer to blind HHI performance in completion
time, and outperformed EVIC, as well as both blind and
sighted HHI performance in both MJE and MTM, where
lower numbers indicate more efﬁcient performance in that
task. EVIC, while not quite as good, still outperformed blind
and sighted HHI in most of the metrics, except for completion
time. It is notable that the blind HHI performance captured
here is for a human-human leader-follower dyad, where the
follower was blindfolded, and communication was limited to
haptic communication only, whereas sighted HHI allowed for
communication in any form desired by the dyad.
We also determined the statistical signiﬁcance of these
quantitative results. The mean values of the metrics for both
the EVIC and NNPC controllers were compared with each
other, and also with the blind and sighted human-human dyads,
based on the 3 metrics used in this section. We ran an unpaired
t-test to determine p values, and also determined Cohen’s d to
calculate an effect size. From the p values, we were able to see
which groups were statistically likely to have the same mean,
and therefore see whether there was a statistical difference
between the groups, based on a standard p < 0.05 criteria.
With the effect size, we were able to determine the strength
of each comparison. Effect sizes were calculated, and then
categorized into very small, small, medium, large, very large,
or huge categories, based on Sawilowsky’s work [47]. These
statistics are summarized in Table V.
Fig. 19: Undershooting behavior of a human robot dyad for
a translation task, where bold, vertical lines indicate start and
stop points, and dashed vertical line indicates 90% completion
point–movement after this point is considered a ﬁne motor
adjustment
There are a few results which are important to recognize
from this analysis. First, EVIC and NNPC are not statistically
different in terms of completion time or MJE, but do seem to
differ in MTM, which additionally has a fairly large effect size.
Second, both EVIC and NNPC are not statistically different
from the blind human-human dyads in terms of completion
time. Last, EVIC and NNPC are statistically different from both
blind and sighted human-human dyads in terms of minimum-
jerk error and MTM, and these comparisons are all categorized
as large or higher. A more in-depth discussion of these results
is found in Section IX-D, but as a short summary, the statistics
show that these controllers have approached a level comparable
to blind human-human dyads with respect to the completion
time metric, but are still quite distinguishable in terms of MJE
and MTM metrics.
Another noteworthy observation is that both EVIC and
NNPC, while capable, have difﬁculties with ﬁne-motor adjust-
ments. Throughout the trials, participants occasionally overshot
or undershot their desired position, and had to make ﬁne motor
adjustments to achieve the desired position. An example of
undershooting is shown in Fig. 19. The dyad is able to complete
90% of the task, represented by the dashed vertical line, in just
under 6 seconds, but spends approximately 3 seconds trying
to complete the remaining 10%, which amounts to about 10
cm of movement, with more ﬁne adjustments.
On average, the remaining time at 90% completion was 2.40s
for EVIC and 2.55s for NNPC. We also compared the achieved
trajectories with an ideal minimum-jerk trajectory. The time
to 90% task completion on a minimum-jerk trajectory was,
on average, 2.20s for EVIC and 2.12s for NNPC. From this
data, it would appear that EVIC is slightly better at ﬁne-motor
adjustments than NNPC, since EVIC had a smaller discrepancy
between achieved and minimum-jerk 90% completion time.
To determine if a few under-performing dyads skewed the
average, we also took the median 90% completion time. For

PRE-PRINT PAPER, SUBMITTED NOVEMBER 2018
20
TABLE IV: Metrics of EVIC and NNPC for rotation and
translation tasks, also compared with blindfolded HHI and
sighted HHI data from [2]
Metric and Task Type
Blind HHI
EVIC
NNPC
Sighted HHI
Completion Time (s)–Rotation
7.08
8.25
8.26
6.58
Completion Time (s)–Translation
7.18
7.91
7.75
4.93
MJE (rads)–Rotation
392.71
96.44
87.38
344.70
MJE (m)–Translation
149.91
50.24
48.51
98.92
MTM (N2·m2/s2)–Rotation
488454.38
65602.60
12770.75
341253.43
MTM (N2·m2/s2)–Translation
387937.56
48191.90
15220.89
151758.83
TABLE V: Statistical signiﬁcance of quantitative metrics.
p
Cohen’s d Effect Size
Comparison Groups
Comp. Time
MJE
MTM
Comp. Time
MJE
MTM
EVIC vs NNPC Trans.
0.73
0.89
0.017
Small
Medium
Large
EVIC vs NNPC Rot.
0.98
0.70
0.14
Very Small
Small
Medium
EVIC vs Blind Trans.
0.07
0.00
0.00
Medium
Huge
Huge
EVIC vs Blind Rot.
0.06
0.00
0.00
Medium
Very Large
Very Large
NNPC vs Blind Trans.
0.16
0.00
0.00
Medium
Huge
Huge
NNPC vs Blind Rot.
0.05
0.00
0.00
Medium
Very Large
Very Large
EVIC vs Sighted Trans.
0.00
0.00
0.00
Huge
Large
Very Large
EVIC vs Sighted Rot.
0.01
0.00
0.00
Large
Large
Large
NNPC vs Sighted Trans.
0.00
0.00
0.00
Huge
Large
Huge
NNPC vs Sighted Rot.
0.01
0.00
0.00
Large
Large
Very Large
achieved and minimum-jerk trajectories, respectively, with
EVIC, this gave values of 1.98s and 2.11s. Similarly for NNPC,
it gave values of 1.97s and 2.02s. From these results, we
conclude that this data is positive skewed, and only a small
number of dyads had trouble with ﬁne-motor adjustments,
causing the higher mean values. Therefore, we can conclude the
lack of ﬁne motor skills in the controllers did not signiﬁcantly
hamper their ability to complete the tasks, but should be
addressed in future work to help improve the performance of
those dyads who struggled with undershooting or overshooting.
C. Qualitative Results
In addition to the metric performance, we also wanted to
know what each person thought of the controllers subjectively.
As mentioned in Section VIII, we gave each participant a survey
after they had performed all the tasks with one controller, and
then the same survey after they ﬁnished the other controller.
The questions we asked dealt with how they thought their
partner, a robot in this case, performed. They were asked to
rate the categories from 1–Strongly Disagree–to 5–Strongly
Agree. The questions were:
• My partner was helpful
• My partner moved quick enough
• My partner moved too slow
• There was confusion between me and my partner
• I trusted my partner to perform the task correctly
• I felt safe completing the task
• I trusted my partner to move at correct speeds
• I trusted my partner to move in the correct direction
• My partner did not push or pull too hard
• My partner moved predictably
• My partner helped me to do task better than I could alone
• My partner shared the task equally
The average for each controller rating is given in the ﬁrst 2
columns of Table VI. The controller that performed better in
each category is in bold. For some categories, like Too Slow, a
lower number is desired, whereas for others, like Safe, a higher
number is desired. The same survey, except for the Correct
Direction question, was given after the HHI study, and the
results are shown in the third column of Table VI. We have
included only the responses of the human designated as the
leader from the human-human dyads.
Similar to our analysis of the quantitative results, we
determined the statistical signiﬁcance of the survey results, in
order to determine if there was a statistical difference between
the responses about the EVIC and NNPC controllers. For each
question, we ran an unpaired t-test to calculate a p value and
determined Cohen’s d to ﬁnd the effect size. These statistics are
found in Table VII. What we found is that only the Good Force

PRE-PRINT PAPER, SUBMITTED NOVEMBER 2018
21
TABLE VI: Ratings of survey questions, with 5 as strongly
agree and 1 as strongly disagree. Bold numbers indicate
preference between EVIC and NNPC for the speciﬁed category
EVIC
NNPC
Helpful
3.88
3.88
Fast Enough
3.38
3.63
Too Slow
3.31
2.94
Confusing
3.38
3.5
Correct Task
3.94
3.75
Safe
4.5
4.44
Correct Speed
3.44
3.56
Correct Direction
3.5
3.56
Good Force Amount
3.44
2.81
Predictable
3.63
3.5
Better than Alone
3.5
3.56
Equal Share
3.75
3.5
TABLE VII: Statistical signiﬁcance of qualitative metrics.
EVIC vs NNPC
Survey Question
p
Cohen’s d Effect Size
Helpful
0.5
Very Small
Fast Enough
0.19
Medium
Too Slow
0.15
Medium
Confusing
0.34
Small
Correct Task
0.28
Medium
Safe
0.36
Small
Correct Speed
0.37
Small
Correct Direction
0.41
Small
Good Force Amount
0.04
Medium
Predictable
0.35
Small
Better than Alone
0.38
Small
Equal Share
0.15
Medium
Amount question obtained a p value of less than 0.05, indicating
it was the lone statistically signiﬁcant answer. However, this
question, as well as a number of others, had a medium effect
size.
D. Discussion
The ﬁrst thing we noticed from Table VI is that people
still clearly prefer working with a human partner over a robot
partner. One reason for this may be that humans do not trust
robots entirely, as is evidenced by the 5th, 7th, and 8th questions
in the survey, which all ask about trust in the partner. Perhaps
the same pHRI experiment, done instead with a blindfold and
earmuffs on the human would have returned more favorable
ratings for the robot controllers. This is something that needs
to be explored further, as our experiments do not deﬁnitely
prove that humans do not trust robots.
As was mentioned above, NNPC was the more capable
controller in terms of the performance metrics. It also was
preferred in the survey questions that dealt with these metrics.
NNPC was superior in rating for the Fast Enough, Too Slow,
Correct Speed, Correct Direction, and Better than Alone metrics.
The superior rating in these metrics corroborates what we
saw quantitatively, indicating that NNPC was a more efﬁcient
controller, at least according to the metrics we have seen.
However, participants also indicated they preferred using
EVIC. They thought it was more helpful, applied more
appropriate levels of force, and saw it as the more predictable
controller. While NNPC outperformed EVIC in the TMT metric,
this may not be a good thing. From our observations in this
paper, haptic communication is a large part of how humans
perform co-manipulation tasks. NNPC users experienced less
force overall, based on the TMT metric, but the survey indicated
that EVIC applied more appropriate forces. Additionally, EVIC
and NNPC were only statistically different in terms of the MTM
metric and the Good Force Amount question. From these results,
we can conclude that NNPC is not applying appropriate forces,
and is therefore considered more difﬁcult and less intuitive
to use by the participants. In fact, our results here agree with
what was said by Chipalkatty et al. [45], who indicated that
training a controller to be the most efﬁcient or best performing
controller may cause it to be a less preferable controller to
humans. Because EVIC and NNPC were statistically different
from both blind and sighted human-human dyads in terms
of MJE and MTM, we can say that minimizing forces and
torques, and also deviation from a minimum-jerk trajectory,
may not be a satisfactory goal of co-manipulation controllers.
So while NNPC is the better performing controller, EVIC might
be a more intuitive and appropriate controller for real-world
applications, since it applies more appropriate forces.
Looking at completion time in Table V, we can see that
both EVIC and NNPC were not statistically distinguishable
from the blind human-human dyads. This means that according
to this metric, both controllers perform up to the standard of
the blind dyads. While this is an encouraging result, We know
that there is some missing information in our model. Although
similar in completion time, our controllers performed much
different than both types of human-human teams in the TMT
and MJE metrics. Perhaps there is a complex cost function
that humans are using to determine how much weight to put
on adhering to minimum-jerk trajectories, minimizing torque
change, and moving in a timely manner. These considerations
should be made in future controller development.
We have also seen (see Fig. 19) that these controllers are
not well suited for ﬁne-motor adjustments. We believe that
because our robot arms were not helping to reach position,
but were simply holding an equilibrium position, the dyad
was not able to account for small errors in the position of the
board. An algorithm that is able to coordinate arm and base
motion would be more suited to ﬁx these small errors, and
could possibly bring our pHRI controllers for co-manipulation
closer to human-human sighted performance.

PRE-PRINT PAPER, SUBMITTED NOVEMBER 2018
22
X. CONCLUSION
Despite the progress we have made related to the problem
of human-robot co-manipulation, there remains signﬁcant
future work. Future work involves incorporating force into
NNPC, either through a more capable neural network, through
combining NNPC and EVIC, or through a different approach,
such as ARMAX. We also want to test NNPC in higher DOF,
to see how capable it is in tasks that require more DOF than the
human-robot experiment designed here. Many real world tasks
will involve at least lifting and object up off the ground into
the plane, before switching to a relatively planar motion. We
also want to see how NNPC performs in other tasks described
in Section III, to see if it is capable of performing those tasks.
This will involve creating a more sophisticated arm controller
for Baxter, which may involve studying the arm movements of
human-human dyads from our exisiting data sets to characterize
their movement.
In this paper, we have discussed the problems and limitations
of many current co-manipulation pHRI controllers, especially
as their limitations relate to co-manipulation of extended
objects. We discussed the advantages of creating control
methods based on human-human dyad behavior to increase
the ability of human-robot dyads to adapt to less-deﬁned
situations. We also described our experiment gathering the
force and motion data for several simple and complex tasks
involving human dyads. The main results from analyzing this
data include that interaction forces play an important role in
communicating intent between dyads in co-manipulation and
that they are likely not minimized as previously supposed.
Planar movements display characteristics of minimum-jerk
movements, and deviation from MJ trajectories could be used
as a metric for extended object co-manipulation.
We also discussed our implementation of Extended Variable
Impedance Control, a novel method for planar 3 DOF co-
manipulation of extended objects, and its advantages over
standard Variable Impedance Control, as well as Bi-Manual
Variable Impedance Control, an extension of a controller from
related work.
Finally, we have also shown that human intent can be
estimated accurately from previous motion of the object that is
being co-manipulated. We have shown that a RNN with velocity
inputs is capable of capturing human intent in the form of
velocity estimation. We have implemented a neural-network
based controller on a Baxter Research Robot mounted onto
a AMP-I Mobile Base, running the neural network control to
command the wheels, and using a simple impedance controller
to maintain arm position. We described an experiment to
compare our neural network controller, NNPC, to a previous
method, EVIC, and also to blind HHI, or human-human dyads
with a blindfolded follower and only haptic communication,
performance, as well as sighted HHI performance. We found
that NNPC outperformed EVIC in all metrics considered, and
that both NNPC and EVIC were comparable to blind human-
human dyads in completion time. We also found that although
NNPC was the superior controller based on performance,
participants preferred EVIC, claiming they felt it was safer,
less confusing, and more predictable. We believe that NNPC
sacriﬁces some intuition for performance, and the added
performance capabilities are unfamiliar to human users, and
they feel less comfortable than with the force-based EVIC.
COMPLIANCE WITH ETHICAL STANDARDS
Funding: This work was supported by the Army RCTA
program. All results and conclusions are the responsibility of
the authors and do not necessarily reﬂect the opinions of the
funding source.
Ethical approval: All procedures performed in studies involv-
ing human participants were in accordance with the ethical
standards of the institutional and/or national research committee
and with the 1964 Helsinki declaration and its later amendments
or comparable ethical standards.
Informed consent: Informed consent was obtained from all
individual participants included in the study.
