1 
Winograd Schema - Knowledge Extraction 
Using Narrative Chains 
Vatsal Mahajan 
Department of Computer Science 
Arizona State University 

Abstract— The Winograd Schema Challenge (WSC) is a test of machine intelligence, designed to be an improvement on 
the Turing test. A Winograd Schema consists of a sentence and a corresponding question. To successfully answer these 
questions, one requires the use of commonsense knowledge and reasoning. This work focuses on extracting common sense 
knowledge which can be used to generate answers for the Winograd schema challenge. Common sense knowledge is 
extracted based on events (or actions) and their participants; called Event-Based Conditional Commonsense (ECC). I propose 
an approach using Narrative Event Chains [Chambers et al., 2008] to extract ECC knowledge. These are stored in templates, to 
be later used for answering the WSC questions. This approach works well with respect to a subset of WSC tasks. 
——————————   u   —————————— 
1 INTRODUCTION
HE Winograd Schema Challenge (WSC) poses a set of 
multiple-choice questions that have a particular form 
for example: 
 
Sentence: The trophy would not fit in the brown suitcase 
because it was too big (small). 
Question: What was too big (small)? 
Answer0: the trophy 
Answer1: the suitcase  
 
    To answer the above question, one requires to have the 
knowledge that an object being big would have a higher 
chance of not fitting a in suitcase, as compared to a small 
object. Here some external knowledge is required to help 
with this spatial reasoning. The primary focus is to extract 
common sense knowledge based on events (or actions) and 
their participants; called Event-Based Conditional Com-
monsense (ECC) [Sharma et al., 2016]. Extracted 
knowledge is stored in the following format:  
X.PROP = true/false, may cause execution of A [ARG*: X; 
ARG*: Y] 
where PROP denotes the property causing the action A. 
ARG*: X and ARG*: Y denote the agent and recipient for 
the action A.  
For example, consider the following sentence: “Jim 
yelled at Kevin because Kevin was so upset”. Where the 
event/action is “yelled” and the property is “upset” with 
the agent as “Jim” and recipient as “Kevin”. The extracted 
knowledge is stored as the following template:  
Jim.upset = true, may cause execution of yelled [ARG0: Jim; 
ARG1: Kevin] 
    This knowledge can be used to resolve ambiguity in a 
task like: 
 
Sentence: Jim yelled at Kevin because he was so upset. 
Question: Who was upset? 
Answer0: Jim 
Answer1: Kevin 
 
by concluding that “he” refers to “Kevin”.  
    Narrative Event Chains [Chambers et al., 2008] are used 
to extract ECC from documents in the corpus. Narrative 
chains are partially ordered sets of events centered around 
a common protagonist. For example, consider a sequence 
of sentences as follows:  
“Kevin wanted the ball. Kevin gets the ball from John.”  
where the common protagonist is “Kevin” and the 
events are “wanted” and “gets”. In above example “wanted” 
event is causing “gets” event. So, the causal knowledge is 
extracted from sequence of sentences as  
“Kevin.wanted = true, may cause execution of gets [ARG0: 
Kevin, ARG1: Ball]” 
Another common protagonist in this sentence is ‘ball’. 
This approach extracts a set of event pairs that share a 
common protagonist. Then labeled Timebank Corpus is 
used to create a supervised learning method to classify 
temporal relation between two events as before or after. 
Using this model, the unordered event set is ordered into a 
narration. Rather than creating a chain I simply extract the 
causal relations to create knowledge templates. The result 
of the extraction is used to answer WSC questions. 
 2 RELATED WORK 
There are various approaches for recognizing causal rela-
tions which can be used to extract common sense 
knowledge. One approach recognizes these causal rela-
tions by using framenets [Aharon et al., 2010]. FrameNet is 
a manually constructed database based on Frame Seman-
tics. It models the semantic argument structure of predi-
cates in terms of prototypical situations called frames. This 
approach utilizes FrameNet’s annotated sentences and re-
T 

2 
 
lations between frames to extract both the entailment rela-
tions and their argument mappings.  
    Another approach that uses event based commonsense 
knowledge extraction is "Automatic Extraction of Events-
Based Conditional Commonsense Knowledge” [Sharma et 
al., 2016]. It takes OANC corpus and performs semantic 
parsing on sentences to extract entities, events and their 
causal relations. Then uses Answer set programming to 
represent common sense knowledge. 
3 APPROACH 
This approach extracts knowledge of the form “A.x causes 
B.y”, where x and y are events that share a participant and 
A & B are actors. I assume that although a narrative has 
several participants, there is a central actor who character-
izes a narrative chain: the protagonist. For example, “The 
policeman searched the suspect and then arrested the suspect”. 
In this example, there are two actors: policeman and suspect, 
and there are two events: search and arrest, where search and 
arrest share the same participant policeman. This sentence 
can be used to generate knowledge as follows:  
    suspect.search = true, may cause execution of arrest (po-
liceman, suspect) 
The system developed in this paper creates a chain of 
two events with a common protagonist and later uses this 
chain to create knowledge base using the template format 
described above. Learning these prototypical schematic se-
quences of events is important for rich understanding of 
text. 
 
3.1 Events and their Participants 
To generate a set of events and their participants, I extract 
a series of event tuples from the corpus. A tuple is of the 
form:     
    < (subject1 event1 object1), (subject2 event2 object2) >    
    where event1 and event2 share a common protagonist 
and subjectX, objectX refer to the participants of the 
eventX. After the completion of this step, a set of these tu-
ples is generated. An important point to consider is that, 
the events in a tuple may or may not be ordered. The or-
dering is performed in the next step; temporal ordering is 
discussed in details in the section 3.3.  
    The corpus used here is the English Gigaword corpus, 
LDC Catalog No. LDC2003T05. The corpus file is an XML 
file with multiple <DOC> elements. Each <DOC> element 
represents a document and content of this document is en-
capsulated inside a <TEXT> element. Each of these text el-
ements have multiple paragraphs contained inside <P> 
tags. The foremost task was to extract documents and sen-
tences for each document.  
    Once the sentences are extracted, the next step is to ex-
tract a set of event tuples for each document, finding 
events across sentences in the documents. In this step, I 
find the relationship between different predicates or events 
in subsequent sentences of a paragraph. An event tuple is 
extracted in the following form:  
    <Subject, Verb, Object, Typed_dependency> 
    where verb represents the event and the typed_depend-
ency can take two values {subject, object}. The typed de-
pendency is a way to represent the propagonist. For two 
events, the protagonist can be a subject for an event and an 
object for another. The system also collects the pair of 
verbs/events which are connected through the same co-re-
ferring entity. This information is used to build a verb/de-
pendency graph between various events and calculate 
how pairs of events are occurring together. Subject and Ob-
ject are the actors involved in this event. The system only 
extracts knowledge where exactly two actors are involved 
in each event. Given this graph, verbs can be clustered to 
create narrative chains with multiple narrative events. For 
a document, the following steps are used:  
1. 
Create Dependency Graph and generate POS: Sen-
tences are parsed using the Stanford parser and the 
dependency graph is generated. Items will be punc-
tuated as sentences where it is appropriate. 
2. 
Co-reference Resolution: The system uses the 
openNLP libraries to find how many entities exist 
and to get the co-referring entities. After resolving 
coreference, a data structure is maintained to store 
the entity and the co-referring entities together. 
3. 
Storing Event-Dependency Pair: In this step, the de-
pendency graph is used to get events which are re-
lating the co-referring entities. For each verb/event 
the type of relationship with entities (either “nsubj” 
or “dobj”) is stored, which would be used for creat-
ing knowledge later.  
4. 
Verb/dependency graph: In this step, the system 
creates a verb/dependency graph from the infor-
mation collected above which can be used for 
pointwise mutual information(pmi) calculation. 
The value of pmi is calculated using the following 
formulae:  
𝑝𝑚𝑖𝑒𝑤, 𝑑, 𝑒𝑣, 𝑔
= log ( 𝑃(𝑒𝑤, 𝑑, 𝑒(𝑣, 𝑔))
𝑃𝑒𝑤, 𝑑
. 𝑃(𝑒(𝑣, 𝑔))) 
where e(w, d) is the verb/dependency pair w and d 
(hit/subj). 
𝑃𝑒𝑤, 𝑑, 𝑒𝑣, 𝑔
=
𝐶(𝑒𝑤, 𝑑, 𝑒(𝑣, 𝑔))
𝐶(𝑒𝑥, 𝑑, 𝑒(𝑦, 𝑓))
7,8
9,:
 
 
where C(e(x,d),e(y,f)) is the number of times the two 
events e(x,d) and e(y,f) had a co-referring entity 
with typed dependencies d and f. In the verb/de-
pendency graph, each independent <event, typed 
dependency> tuple represents a node. Two nodes 
are connected if they have a common protagonist 
and the edge cost is the pmi score calculated per the 
above formula.  
3.2 Event Chain 
Currently, the system creates a graph which has all the de-
tected verbs as nodes. A verb could have occurred multiple 
times with different typed dependencies (Subject or Ob-
ject). Here event pairs with shared referring entity are used 
to create the knowledge base. Fig. 1 shows a sample unor-
dered event chain with 2 events in it. 
    The output of this step creates an array of unordered 
event chains. The next section focuses on ordering these 

MAHAJAN, VATSAL:  WINOGRAD SCHEMA - KNOWLEDGE EXTRACTION USING NARRATIVE CHAINS 
3 
narrative chains. 
3.3 Temporal Relations 
Here I will discuss the temporal classification of 
verb/event pairs. The Timebank Corpus labels events and 
binary relations between events representing temporal or-
der. I used classifiers that follow standard feature-based 
machine learning approaches as described in [Mani et al., 
2006; Chambers et al., 2007] with training data from Time-
bank Corpus. 
ClearTK (a framework for developing machine learning 
and natural language processing) was used to get the tem-
poral relations between events. The algorithm is described 
below:  
1. 
Stage1: Learning Event Attributes: The system 
learns temporal attributes for events in the NYT 
Corpus using the labeled Timebank Corpus as 
training-data. Here it learns the five temporal at-
tributes associated with these events as tagged in 
the Timebank Corpus. 1) Tense and; 2) grammatical 
aspect are necessary in any approach to temporal 
ordering as they Timebank Corpus define both tem-
poral location and structure of the event; 3) event 
class is the type of event. Table 1 lists the features 
used [Chambers et al., 2007]. Naive Bayes with La-
place smoothing is used to predict the value all 3 
attributes. Three classifiers were used one for each 
of the attributes. 
2. 
Stage2: Learning Event-Event Features: Here the 
system learns the temporal relation between events 
(before/after). Again, the TimeBank Corpus is used 
as training-data. The features [Chambers et al., 
2007] used are: 1) Event Specific: The five temporal 
attributes from Stage 1 are used for each event in 
the pair, as well as the event strings, lemmas, and 
WordNet synsets; 2) POS tags; 3) Event-Event Syn-
tactic Properties: A phrase P is said to dominate an-
other phrase Q if Q is a daughter node of P in the 
syntactic parse tree. Dominance is taken as a feature 
which takes values on/off; 4) Prepositional Phrase: 
A feature indicating when an event is part of a prep-
ositional phrase. The feature’s values range over 34 
English prepositions; 5) Temporal Discourse: I train 
two models during learning, one for events in the 
same sentence, and the other for events crossing 
sentence boundaries. It essentially splits the data on 
the same sentence feature. SVM is used to classify 
the event pairs form NYT Corpus with labels ‘BE-
FORE’ or ‘AFTER’ denoting temporal relation be-
tween them. 
  
The algorithm further counts the number of times two 
events are classified as before or after. If the number of one 
kind of the relation is more than the other over the com-
plete corpus, then the pair is assigned the relation accord-
ingly. 
3.4 Creating Knowledge Templates 
Now I use the unordered event chains and verb pairs with 
temporal relations to create knowledge templates. Tem-
plates are created of the form;  
    X.PROP = true/false may cause execution of A [ARG*: X; 
ARG*: Y]  
    Intuitively, a statement of the above category means that, 
the execution of an action A may be triggered if property 
PROP is true or false for an entity X. Here, A has X as an 
argument i.e. X participates in the action A. Also, the sys-
tem annotates the arguments with their role as subject or 
object. The Fig.2 shows a sample of the extracted 
knowledge. 
4 EVALUATIONS 
The system was able to use 33.5% of the unordered event 
chains extracted from the Corpus to create a knowledge 
base. 5200 unordered event sets were extracted from the 
corpus.  
For qualitative evaluation, I manually filtered the 
knowledge templates to get 1742 out of 5200 instances that 
have relevant Event-Based Conditional Commonsense.  
5 RESULTS 
The WSC corpus consists of 282 sentence and question 
pairs. I focus on a subset of the WSC tasks that requires two 
specific types of ECC (1) Direct Causal Events – event-
event causality and (2) causal attribute [Sharma et al., 2015]. 
This subcategory contains a total of 71 WSC corpus ques-
tions. Out these 71 question the system was able to cor-
 
Fig. 1. Sample unordered event chain with 2 events.  
TABLE 1 
FEATURES USED FOR LEARNING EVENT ATTRIBUTES 
 

4 
 
rectly answer 22, wrongly answer 8, and did not find rele-
vant knowledge templates for remaining 41 tasks. 
The experiment shows that the extracted knowledge from 
the corpus was useful to tackle 22 questions correctly. The 
system was not able to attempt 41 questions as it did not 
have the required knowledge templates for the task. So, 
given a larger corpus the system can extract more quality 
knowledge.
