Transformers as Policies for Variable Action Environments
Niklas Zwingenberger
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095

Abstract
In this project we demonstrate the effectiveness of the trans-
former encoder as a viable architecture for policies in variable
action environments. Using it, we train an agent using Prox-
imal Policy Optimisation (PPO) on multiple maps against
scripted opponents in the Gym-µRTS environment. The ﬁnal
agent is able to achieve a higher return using half the computa-
tional resources of the next-best RL agent (Huang et al. 2021)
which used the GridNet architecture (Han et al. 2019).
1
Introduction
In the past years signiﬁcant progress has been made in vari-
able action environments, particularly in Real Time Strategy
games (RTS). For example the agent AlphaStar(Vinyals et al.
2019) has achieved a grand-master level in Starcraft II, consis-
tently defeating human professional players. However, such
state-of-the-art agents require months of training on power-
ful machines equipped with hundreds of CPUs and TPUs,
which makes them impractical for research. In response to
this, Huang et al. have developed a more accessible environ-
ment known as Gym-µRTS(Huang et al. 2021), suitable for
training on a single commercial machine.
Huang et al. also demonstrated 2 state-of-the-art methods
to train in the environment Gym-µRTS. These are Unit Acton
Simulation (UAS) (Huang et al. 2021) and GridNet (Han et al.
2019) respectively. However, we found that both methods
suffer from limitations, namely that UAS requires access to
the environment’s model and that GridNet does not computa-
tionally scale well with the size of the environment. Our new
approach using a feature map and transformer architecture
mitigates these issues.
In this report, we begin by discussing the relevant back-
ground in section 2, with the description of the architecture in
section 3 and relevant results in section 4. The agent’s imple-
mentation, trained model and recordings are made available
in Appendix A.
2
Background
2.1
Variable Action Environments
We can deﬁne a variable action environment as a tuple
(S, A, P, ρ0, γ, r, T) where S is the state-space, A is a dis-
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
crete action space, P : S × A × S →[0, 1] is the transition
probability, ρ0 : S →[0, 1] is the initial state distribution,
γ ∈[0, 1] is the discount factor, r : S × A →R is the re-
ward function and T is the maximum episode length. The
variable aspect can be introduced by letting our action space
A = U1 × U2... × Uk be expressed as a Cartesian product of
sub-actions Ui, i ∈1...k where k : S →N+ is the number of
sub-actions that needs to be taken, dependent on the current
state.
It should noted that while k can in theory be arbitrarily
large, it in most practical cases is bounded by some maximum
number of sub-actions N. For example, in Starcraft II, if
we consider each unit i to take some sub-action from the
space Ui, then N must be equal to the maximum number of
units the game can support (accounts suggest that this ranges
from 1700-6400, depending on machine specs)(sta 2007).
For our project, we can show that Gym-µRTS also has a clear
upper bound N, which in practice is never reached and our
architecture takes advantage of this fact.
2.2
Transformers
The transformer architecture is a neural network that uses
self-attention, originally introduced for the task of machine
translation (Vaswani et al. 2017). Since then it has seen a
wide range of applications in NLP tasks (Devlin et al. 2018),
vision tasks (Park and Kim 2022), reinforcement learning
tasks (Bramlage and Cortese 2022) and multi-modal tasks
(Lu et al. 2019). In reinforcement learning in particular, de-
cision transformers (Chen et al. 2021) have been used for
their sequence modelling properties to predict actions across
entire trajectories, which is useful for Non-Markovian envi-
ronments.
In the context of this project it is sufﬁcient to understand
the transformer layer and multi-head self-attention as pre-
sented by (Vaswani et al. 2017):
Attention(Q, K, V) = softmax
QKT
√dk
V

,
MultiHead(Q, K, V) = Concat (head1, ..., headh) WO,
headi = Attention(QWQ
i , KWK
i , VWV
i )
2.3
Proximal Policy Optimisation
Policy gradient methods are a popular choice when training
agents with large action spaces as they optimise the policy πθ
arXiv:2301.03679v1  [cs.AI]  9 Jan 2023

directly, which usually allows for a more targeted exploration
of promising actions. The optimisation works by performing
a gradient ascent on an objective function J(θ), where θ are
the model parameters that we optimise. We commonly deﬁne
J to be the expected discounted return of a trajectory:
J(θ) = Eτ∼πθ,ρ0[G0] = Eτ∼πθ,ρ0
"T −1
X
t=0
γtrt
#
,
τ = (s0, a0, r0, ...sT −1, aT −1, rT −1)
Where τ is the trajectory obtained from sampling the initial
distribution ρ0 and parameterised policy πθ. We maximise
the expectation by taking the policy gradient ∇θJ(θ) and
updating the parameters using θ := θ + α∇θJ(θ), where
α ∈(0, 1] is the learning rate. The gradient itself is given by
(Sutton and Barto 2020):
∇θJ(θ) = Eτ∼πθ,ρ0
"T −1
X
t=0
∇θ log πθ(at|st)Gt
#
As we are sampling entire trajectories, this gradient is
subject to high variance(Sutton and Barto 2020) and over
the past years, many efforts have been made to reduce it
(Schulman et al. 2015). A particular enhancement of the
above is Proximal Policy Optimisation (PPO)(Schulman et al.
2017), with the following objective function:
J(θ) = E
h
min(rt(θ) ˆAt, clip(rt(θ), 1 −ϵ, 1 + ϵ) ˆAt
i
,
rt(θ) =
πθ(a|s)
πθold(a|s),
ˆAt =
T −1
X
l=0
(γλ)l(rt + γVθ(st+l+1) −γVθ(st+l))
PPO is an actor-critic algorithm, meaning it seeks to op-
timise both a parameterised policy πθ(a|s) and a value esti-
mate Vθ(s). The objective function limits the scope of gra-
dient updates based on the advantage ˆAt. In this case, it is
the Generalised Advantage Estimate (GAE) (Schulman et al.
2018).
We have re-used Huang et al.’s implementation of PPO
(PPO 2022)(Engstrom et al. 2020)(Andrychowicz et al. 2020)
as we would like to draw comparisons between our results,
focusing on the neural network implementations underlying
πθ(a|s) and Vθ(s).
2.4
µRTS Environment
The environment is a grid-world that supports 1-4 play-
ers, where each one controls units which must gather re-
sources and build structures and more units to defeat each
other in combat. An episode begins with each player’s
units starting in a mirrored section of a map and ends
when only one player’s units remain or some step limit is
reached. This environment can be conﬁgured to use differ-
ent map sizes, layouts, partial observability, stochasticity
and more. In our project we will be using 1 agent to in-
teract with scripted AIs in the basesWorkers8x8.xml
Figure 1: Example of elements of a µRTS environment. In
the above, there is a blue player based in the top-left corner
of the map and a red player based in the bottom right. Both
players are using workers to harvest resources from mines
and are currently ﬁghting using combat units. Every unit can
only move to free horizontally or vertically adjacent cells and
every action (including moving) takes several time steps to
complete.
and basesWorkers16x16.xml maps. Both maps are 2
player and fully observable, differing only in size (8 × 8 vs
16 × 16) and available resources (50 vs. 100). Please see
Figure 1 for an example state of the 16 × 16 map.
Observation Space
During every step t in an episode we
receive an observation tensor st of shape (height × width ×
features). The ﬁrst two dimensions describe a particular
cell in the grid-world and the features dimension describes
its state. For example, using the 8 × 8 map, it has the shape
(8 × 8 × 27), where the 27 features describe 5 pieces of
information: hit points (HP), resources, the owning player,
unit type and current action. Each piece of information is
expressed using a one-hot encoding, where for example we
can express a cell having 2 HP as [0, 0, 1, 0, 0] or having ≥4
resources as [0, 0, 0, 0, 1]. For a full description see the upper
section of Table 2 with further examples in Appendix B.

Figure 2: Description observation and action space in µRTS environment (Huang et al. 2021). ar is the maximum attack range
and is usually set to 7.
Action Space
From the above we know that the observa-
tion restricts each cell to have at most 1 unit on it, which
limits how many units can be on the map at any time. Each
cell (x, y) with a unit can take some sub-action Ux,y, al-
lowing at most N = height × width sub-actions to be
taken per time step. The components and possible values
of an action are shown in the lower section of Table 2. Us-
ing them we can show that for some cell (x, y) there are
6×4×4×4×4×7×72 = 526848 possible discrete values
that a sub-action can assume. This is quite large number and
having a policy network generate half a million logits for
every grid cell is too expensive, especially when taking the
gradient afterwards.
Instead we make an independence assumption between
each action component (Huang et al. 2021) and deﬁne the
probability of our policy πθ,x,y(ut|st) choosing a sub-action
ut ∈Ux,y given some st ∈S as:
πθ(at|st) =
Y
x∈height
Y
y∈width
πθ,x,y(ut|st),
πθ,x,y(ut|st) =
Y
ud
t ∈D
πθ(ud
t |st),
D = {uSource Unit
t
, uAction Type
t
, uMove Parameter
t
, uHarvest Parameter
t
,
uReturn Parameter
t
, uProduce Direction Parameter
t
, uProduce Type Parameter
t
,
uRelative Attack Position
t
}
where πθ is the joint policy of each individual policy πθ,x,y
per grid cell and D is the set of action components. This way
only 6 + 4 + 4 + 4 + 4 + 7 + 72 = 78 logits are needed per
sub-action.
Additionally, the Gym-µRTS also provides built-in invalid
action masking (Huang and Ontañón 2022), which replaces
the logits for nonsensical actions with high negative values.
Then when we take the softmax over a distribution param-
eterised by these logits, the probability of such actions is 0.
As an example, light, heavy and ranged combat units can-
not produce any buildings or units, so the masking sets the
probability of the "Action Type Parameter" action component
assuming value "produce" to 0.
2.5
GridNet
The GridNet approach is a policy that πθ,x,y(at|st) yields
a sub-action ui for every grid cell i ∈{1, 2, ..., height ×
width}. This approach is convenient as it is quite easy to
implement a policy that takes a ﬁxed-size input (e.g the grid
world) and yields a ﬁxed-size output (action logits for ev-
ery cell). The GridNet itself uses a convolutional neural net
(CNN) for this. A problem is that in practice for Gym-µRTS
and most other RTS games, controllable units do not exist on
every cell, so a large chunk of the sub-actions are computed
only to be thrown away. This computational burden also hin-
ders the approach from being easily scalable to larger grid
sizes.
2.6
Unit Action Simulation
UAS works by iterating over unit i ∈{1, 2, ...N} controlled
by the agent, obtain a sub-action ui, simulate how ui will
play out in the environment and get a new simulated state s(i)
t
that is then used to get the action for unit i + 1. The key here
is that only a policy πθ,x,y(ut|s(i)
t ) for sub-action space is
needed rather than the action space. This results in no wasted
logits being generated for empty grid cells as opposed to
GridNet. The problem is that to acquire the simulated state
we need access to the environment’s transition probability
function P to give us this next state. This effectively makes
this approach model-based and it also only reasonable works
for deterministic environments, as in a stochastic one, there
would be several possible simulated states from each sub-
action.
3
Method
Given an observation st of shape (height × width × 27) we
have developed a scalable policy network that can convert it
into kt logits of shape (kt × 78) where kt is the number units

Algorithm 1: Feature Map φ(st)
Input: st with shape (h × w × 27)
Output: xt with shape (et × (hw + 27))
1: Let vt = reshape(st) with shape (hw × 27)
2: Let xt ←0
3: for each entity index i ∈{1, 2, ..., et} do
4:
p = position(vt, i)
{gets index position on grid}
5:
xt[i, :hw] = onehot(p)
6:
xt[i, hw:] = vt[p, :]
7: end for
8: return xt
the agent controls. Additionally, we yield a corresponding
value estimate ˆVθ(st). A visual overview of the architecture
is provided in Appendix C and with an explanation of each
component being in the following sections. Further, all used
hyper-parameters are referenced in Appendix E.
3.1
Feature Map
The ﬁrst step is to use a feature map φ(st) that converts st
into et = kt +lt +mt individual representations, where et is
the number of entities, kt is the number of agent-controlled
units, lt is the number of enemy-controlled units and mt is
the number of neutral units (e.g resource mines). Our imple-
mentation of φ(st) is shown in Algorithm 1 and expresses
each representation as a one-hot vector of the position (length
hw) concatenated with the feature vector of the entity (length
27).
For example, this means that for the 8 × 8 map, φ(st)
yields an (et × (64 + 27)) = (et × 91) matrix. Similarly, for
the 16 × 16 map, we obtain a (et × (256 + 27) = (et × 283)
matrix. We can observe that for the larger map, the size of
our representation grows signiﬁcantly. This does not scale
well, but fortunately a one-hot encoding can be represented
much more densely by using a trainable embedding:
pembed = onehot(p)Wembed
pembed ∈Rd,
Wembed ∈R(hw×d)
This can mitigate the size increase caused by larger maps
and in our implementation, we set our embedding weights
to be Wembed ∈R(256×64). As a result, the φ(st) generates
the same size output of (et × 91) for both the 8 × 8 and
16 × 16 map. We should note here, that this size reduction
is obviously not inﬁnitely possible and that in particular the
representation size should be as least as large as the number
of sub-action logits (e.g 91 > 78). Otherwise it becomes
more difﬁcult to obtain meaningful logits.
3.2
Transformer Net
With an xt = φ(st) we can now input this into a transformer
encoder. The encoder is composed of 5 stacked, identical
transformer layers each of which has 7 attention heads and
uses 512 neurons in the dense layer with a ReLU activa-
tion (Agarap 2018) (other hyper-parameters detailed in Ap-
pendix). In our implementation the entity representations in
xt are ordered as follows by player: player 1 (agent), player
2 (opponent) and neutral units. As we do not use a positional
embedding, this does not affect the encoder, but it makes the
encoder’s output yt ∈Ret×91 easier to process by the actor
and critic.
3.3
Actor & Critic
Both the actor and critic networks share this encoder and
use yt. The actor takes in all kt outputs related to the agent’s
units and then applies a shared single feed-forward layer
(with 91×78+78 = 7176 parameters) to each of them. This
way the actor is invariant to the number of inputs it receives
and manages to yield variable sub-action logits z1, ...zkt.
The critic is a little more complex. As before, we can ap-
ply another single feed-forward layer (with 91 × 1 + 1 = 92
parameters), but this leaves us with et different value esti-
mates ˆVθ,1(st)... ˆVθ,et(st) that must somehow be combined
into one value ˆVθ(st). A sum naturally comes to mind:
ˆVθ(st) =
et
X
i=1
ˆVθ,i(st)
However, this creates some variance issues. We know that
ˆVθ,1(st)... ˆVθ,et are the values of player units, enemy units
and neutral resources. Intuitively, we would expect that a
large number of player units means the agent is doing well
(kt > lt), yielding a higher value estimate, whereas a large
number of enemy units would yield a lower estimate (kt < lt).
Higher and lower is difﬁcult to model without knowing which
value estimate belongs to which player. We could rely on the
transformer to provide this information for our critic, but this
is an unnecessary burden. Instead, we should try to obtain
some more meaningful metrics that the critic can learn to
weight on its own:
ˆVθ(st) =
X
i∈{p1,p2,p3}
wi,1Σi + bi,1 + wi,2µi + bi,2
Σi =
X
unit j of player i
ˆVθ,j(st),
µi =
Σi
unit count of player i
Here we calculate 6 metrics: the sum Σi and mean µi of
each player’s (∈{p1, p2, p3}) value estimates (here p3 refers
to the neutral units). We then apply another feed-forward
layer (with weights wp1,1...wp3,2 and biases bp1,1...bp3,2) so
the critic can choose how to weight each. This allows for the
critic to make the value estimates invariant of unit counts and
weight units differently based on their owner.
3.4
Training
In order to train this model the agent conducts exploratory
episodes of up to 2000 steps in 24 parallel instances. The
opposing player in these instances is one of 4 scripted AIs:
• randomBiasedAI - chooses random moves for each unit,
but is 5 times likelier to harvest resources or attack.

• workerRushAI - implements a simple rush strategy where
it constantly trains workers to attack the closest enemy
unit.
• lightRushAI - implements a simple rush strategy where it
builds a barracks and constantly sends light military units
to attack.
• coacAI - a mixed AI that won the 2020 µRTS contest.
These AIs and their rankings are publicly avail-
able(Santiontanon 2018)(mic 2020) and there are 9 more
available in the Gym-µRTS environment, which will be used
for evaluation in Section 4.
As an episode can be quite long, we opted to use shaped
rewards in order to ensure a more stable and reproducible
training (Schrittwieser et al. 2019). The agent receives a
reward whenever it completes any of the following:
• −10/0/+10 for losing/drawing/winning, where drawing
occurs when the episode step limit is reached with both
players still having units.
• +1 for harvesting a resource from a mine.
• +1 for attacking an enemy unit.
• +0.2 for constructing a building.
• +1 for creating a worker.
• +4 for producing a combat unit.
After collecting (24 × 256) steps, we then run the PPO
gradient ascent and loss calculation for 4 epochs. Each par-
ticular update is conducted in mini-batches of 4. Generally,
the opponent selection, reward structure and major training
hyper-parameters are kept as similar as possible to (Huang
et al. 2021), so a more meaningful comparison can be made
in the results.
4
Results
We trained 2 models for evaluation: one for the 8 × 8 and
one for 16 × 16 map. Both models used the same training
hyper-parameters with the exception of the 16 × 16 model
additionally using the embedding. Accordingly, their train-
able parameter counts are very similar: 645470 and 661854
respectively. They were each trained on 2 CPUs and 1 GPU
(Tesla V100-SXM2-16GB) with 16GB of RAM for 100 mil-
lion steps.
The models were each evaluated for 100 games against
each of the 13 scripted AIs available in the Gym-µRTS en-
vironment, with a summary of their performance in Table
1 and a more detailed breakdown in Appendix D. Addition-
ally, we benchmark against Huang et al.’s results, comparing
shaped rewards and also training duration given that similar
computational resources were used.
Analysing the results on the 8 × 8 map, the Transformer
Net has achieved a high win-rate of 91% within a reasonable
training time, although not much lower than any of the models
used for the 16 × 16 map. Its shaped reward is signiﬁcantly
lower, but this is to be expected as the 8 × 8 only has half of
the harvestable resources of the 16 × 16 map. The proximity
to the opponent’s base also does not encourage the slow
process of building military buildings followed by training
high reward military units. Instead, the agent adopts a more
reﬁned "worker rush" strategy where it attacks early and
quickly only using workers.
More curious are the results of Transformer Net w. Em-
bedding on the 16 × 16 map. It appears to have achieved the
highest shaped return of 189.7, but the lowest win-rate of
76%. The likely cause here is an over-ﬁtting of the shaped
rewards. A win/loss reward difference of 20 is simply not
signiﬁcant enough (see Figure 4). An inspection of the evalu-
ation recordings of the agent supports this theory. The agent
appears to have learned to cripple the opposing player by
defeating all units save for a single survivor. Then it pro-
ceeds to artiﬁcially prolong the episode by continuing to
harvest its own resources and even starts harvesting the op-
ponent’s resources. Eventually it ﬁnishes off the remaining
unit and ends the episode. Unfortunately, this strategy does
not always succeed and does not correlate strongly with con-
sistently winning episodes. However, we would argue that
this is ultimately an issue of reward design, not the model.
Achieving the highest return in a comparatively short training
time shows a lot of promise.
5
Evaluation & Future Work
Overall, we believe this transformer-based policy to be a
viable approach for variable action environments such as
Gym-µRTS. It has managed to demonstrate a better reward
maximisation than UAS and faster training time than GridNet.
There are of course, a number of open problems. It is
not yet known how this transformer policy will work with
sparse rewards nor how well it will generalise from self-play.
Further, it has yet to be determined how far this can be scaled.
Recall that a forward pass through a self-attention layer has a
computational complexity of O(n2d) (Vaswani et al. 2017),
where n is the number of inputs and d, their length. In Gym-
µRTS we recorded a maximum of n = 40 entities being
present on a 16 × 16 map at any one time (see Appendix
F). Making 402 comparisons is quite reasonable, but is this
feasible for n = 1000 or more? This remains to be seen.
6
