arXiv:1004.4942v2  [cs.DM]  23 Mar 2011
Discrete geometric analysis of message
passing algorithm on graphs
Yusuke Watanabe
DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY
Department of Statistical Science
School of Multidisciplinary Science
The Graduate University for Advanced Studies
March, 2010

Abstract
We often encounter probability distributions given as unnormalized products of non-negative
functions. The factorization structures of the probability distributions are represented by
hypergraphs called factor graphs.
Such distributions appear in various ﬁelds, including
statistics, artiﬁcial intelligence, statistical physics, error correcting codes, etc.
Given such a distribution, computations of marginal distributions and the normalization
constant are often required. However, they are computationally intractable because of their
computational costs. One, empirically successful and tractable, approximation method is
the Loopy Belief Propagation (LBP) algorithm.
The focus of this thesis is an analysis of the LBP algorithm. If the factor graph is a
tree, i.e. having no cycle, the algorithm gives the exact quantities, not approximations. If
the factor graph has cycles, however, the LBP algorithm does not give exact results and
possibly exhibits oscillatory and non convergent behaviors. The thematic question of this
thesis is “How do the behaviors of the LBP algorithm are aﬀected by the discrete geometry
of the factor graph?” Here, the word “discrete geometry” means the geometry of the factor
graph as a space.
The primary contribution of this thesis is the discovery of a formula called the Bethe-
zeta formula, which establishes the relation between the LBP, the Bethe free energy and
the graph zeta function. This formula provides new techniques for analysis of the LBP
algorithm, connecting properties of the graph and of the LBP and the Bethe free energy.
We demonstrate applications of the techniques to several problems including (non) convexity
of the Bethe free energy, the uniqueness and stability of the LBP ﬁxed point.
We also discuss the loop series initiated by Chertkov and Chernyak (2006). The loop
series is a subgraph expansion of the normalization constant, or partition function, and
reﬂects the graph geometry. We investigate theoretical natures of the series. Moreover, we
show a partial connection between the loop series and the graph zeta function.
2
