Interaction Information for Causal Inference:
The Case of Directed Triangle
AmirEmad Ghassami
Department of ECE
Coordinated Science Laboratory
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

Negar Kiyavash
Departments of ECE and ISE
Coordinated Science Laboratory
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

Abstract—To be considered for the 2017 IEEE Jack Keil
Wolf ISIT Student Paper Award. - Interaction information is
one of the multivariate generalizations of mutual information,
which expresses the amount information shared among a set of
variables, beyond the information, which is shared in any proper
subset of those variables. Unlike (conditional) mutual informa-
tion, which is always non-negative, interaction information can be
negative. We utilize this property to ﬁnd the direction of causal
inﬂuences among variables in a triangle topology under some
mild assumptions.
Index Terms—Mutual information generalization, Interaction
information, Causal inference
I. INTRODUCTION
Mutual information is one of the fundamental information-
theoretic quantities which measures the co-dependence be-
tween two random variables. Mutual information could be
generalized to the multivariate case in different ways. The
most well known generalizations are total correlation [1] (also
known as multi-information [2]), and interaction information
[3], [4]. In this work, we focus on interaction information,
another information theoretic quantity intimately related to
mutual information. This quantity has been studied from
different view points and under different names in the literature
[3]–[7]. In the case of three random variables, interaction
information is the gain (or loss) in information transmitted be-
tween any two of the variables, due to additional knowledge of
the third random variable [3]. That is, interaction information
is the difference between the conditional and unconditional
mutual information between two of the variables, where the
conditioning is on the third variable. It is important to note
that unlike (conditional) mutual information which is always
non-negative, interaction information can be negative. In fact,
this is the property we take advantage of in this study. We
will show that the sign of interaction information may be
used to identify the direction of inﬂuence among variables,
a fundamental problem of interest in causal inference. Other
information-theoretic quantities such as entropy and directed
information have also been proposed to infer causality in
appropriate settings [8]–[12].
Learning causal relations among variables is a canonical
problem in several ﬁelds of science such as economics, biol-
ogy, computer science, etc. In an observational setup, where
performing interventions is not possible, the main approach
to identify direction of inﬂuences is to perform some sort of
statistical dependency tests on data [13]. The triangle structure
comprised of three variables on a cycle of length three is one
of the most problematic structures. This is because of the fact
that dependency tests, which are typically performed to ﬁnd
the directions, all fail in this setting. In Pearl’s language [13],
this is because all triangles are in the same Markov equivalent
class. We will show that under certain conditions, using the
sign of interaction information, we can uniquely identify the
underlying causal inﬂuences in a triangle structure.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section II
we provide the formal deﬁnition of interaction information, as
well as some of its properties. In Section III, after introducing
the problem of our interest, a discussion regarding the sign
of interaction information is provided. In the same section
we outline our approach for identifying causal relationships
among three variable structures, which could not be identiﬁed
using merely conventional dependency tests. Our concluding
remarks are stated in Section IV.
II. INTERACTION INFORMATION
The general formula for interaction information for a set of
variables V is deﬁned as [6]
I(V ) :=
X
U⊆V
(−1)|U|+1H(U),
where |U| denotes the cardinality of the subset U and H(·) is
Shannon’s entropy function (note that H(∅) = 0). Intuitively,
interaction information is the amount of information shared
by all the variables together.
For the case of three variables, X, Y and Z:
I(X; Y ; Z) = + [H(X) + H(Y ) + H(Z)]
−[H(X, Y ) + H(X, Z) + H(Y, Z)]
+ H(X, Y, Z).
Here, interaction information could be represented in terms of
mutual information as follows [3]:
arXiv:1701.08868v1  [cs.AI]  30 Jan 2017

𝐼(𝑋; 𝑌; 𝑍)
𝐼(𝑋; 𝑌)
𝐻(𝑋)
𝐻(𝑌)
𝐻(𝑍)
Fig. 1: Graphical representation of information theoretic quan-
tities.
Proposition 1. For the case of three variables, the interaction
information could be written as
I(X; Y ; Z) = I(X; Y ) −I(X; Y |Z)
= I(X; Z) −I(X; Z|Y )
= I(Y ; Z) −I(Y ; Z|X).
Using this formulation, one can see that in the case of
three variables, interaction information quantiﬁes how much
the information shared between two variables defers from what
they share if the third variable was known. Figure 1 depicts a
graphical representation of the information-theoretic quantities
of our interest.
Several properties of interaction information in the case of
three variables has been studied in the literature. Speciﬁcally,
Yeung [5] showed that
−min{I(X; Y |Z), I(X; Z|Y ), I(Y ; Z|X)}
≤I(X; Y ; Z) ≤min{I(X; Y ), I(X; Z), I(Y ; Z)}.
We refer readers to [14], where Tsujishita has provided a
more in depth mathematical study of the bounds on interaction
information as well as some other properties for this quantity.
We present another property of the interaction information
in the following Lemma, which could be proven using the
chain rule for mutual information.
Lemma 1. For the case of three variables, the interaction
information could be written as
I(X; Y ; Z) = I(X, Y ; Z) −I(X; Z|Y ) −I(Y ; Z|X)
= I(X, Z; Y ) −I(X; Y |Z) −I(Z; Y |X)
= I(Y, Z; X) −I(Y ; X|Z) −I(Z; X|Y ).
Lemma 1 may be interpreted as follows. Interaction
information is the amount of information variables X and Y
share with Z, minus the information that is shared between
X and Z alone and the information shared between Y and Z
alone. We will revisit this property in Section III.
III. APPLICATION TO CAUSAL INFERENCE
A. preliminaries
In this subsection we introduce some deﬁnitions and con-
cepts that we require later. Most of the deﬁnitions are adopted
from [15].
Deﬁnition 1. a directed acyclic graph (DAG) is a ﬁnite
directed graph with no directed cycles.
Deﬁnition 2. A Bayesian network structure G is a DAG whose
nodes represent random variables X1, ..., Xn. Let PAXi de-
note the parents of Xi in G, and NDXi denote the variables
in the graph that are not descendants of Xi. Then G encodes
the following set of conditional independence assumptions:
For each variable Xi : (Xi ⊥NDXi|PAXi).
Bayesian networks are commonly used to represent causal
relationships among the set of variables [13], [16]. In such
a representation, a directed edge from variable X to variable
Y indicates that variable X is a direct cause of variable Y .
Therefore, a DAG summarizes the causal relationships among
the variables.
Deﬁnition 3. The skeleton of a Bayesian network graph G
over the set of variables V is an undirected graph over V that
contains an edge xy for every directed edge
→
xy in G.
We will focus on two skeletons in this work: P2 and triangle,
which are paths of length two and cycles of length 3, both on
three variables, respectively.
Deﬁnition 4. A distribution P is faithful to G if G represents
all the independency relations contained in P.
Throughout the rest of the paper, we assume the faithfulness
assumption on the probability distribution.
Deﬁnition 5. Two graph structures G1 and G2 over V are
Markov equivalent if every probability distribution that is
compatible with one of the graphs is also compatible with
the other. The set of all graphs over V is partitioned into a
set of mutually exclusive and exhaustive Markov equivalence
classes, which are the set of equivalence classes induced by
the Markov equivalence relation.
In Subsection III-C, we need to be able to quantify the
strength of a causal effect, which is an important topic of
research on its own in the ﬁeld of causal inference. For this
purpose, we use the results from [17].
Let
G
be
a
DAG
on
a
set
of
variables
V
=
{X1, X2, ..., Xn}. Following [17], we deﬁne the strength of
the causal inﬂuence of a set of arrows S as
CS := D(P∥PS),
where, D(·∥·) denotes the Kullback-Leibler divergence, P is
the joint distribution, and PS is the interventional distribution
deﬁned as follows. Set PAS
j as the set of those parents Xi

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
Y 
Z 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
Y 
Z 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
Y 
Z 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
Y 
Z 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
Fig. 2: (a), (b): chain structure, (c): fork structure, (d): v-
structure.
of Xj for which (i, j) ∈S and PAS
j as those for which
(i, j) /∈S. Set
PS(xj|paS
j ) =
X
paS
j
P(xj|paS
j , paS
j )PΠ(paS
j ),
where PΠ(paS
j ) for a given j denotes the product of marginal
distributions of all variables in PAS
j . The interventional dis-
tribution is hence deﬁned as
PS(x1, ..., xn) :=
Y
j
PS(xj|paS
j ).
As an example, in the ﬁrst DAG in Figure 4, we have
CX→Y =
X
x,y,z
P(x, y, z) log
P(y|z, x)
P
x′ P(y|z, x′)P(x′).
B. P2 DAG
There are 4 possible DAGs on the P2 skeleton for any
ordered set of 3 variables (X, Y, Z), where in the skeleton,
Y is connected to X and Z (see Figure 2). The structures in
parts (a) and (b) are called a chain, (c) is called a fork, and
(d) is called a v-structure. In a v-structure, the middle variable
is called a collider.
It is known that in the observational setup, we can identify
a DAG at most up to its Markov equivalent class [13]. Having
the information about the skeleton of the DAG (which could be
obtained from the correlations), using only dependency tests
one can distinguish a v-structure from other three: If variables
X and Z are dependent given Y , but independent when Y is
not observed the true structure is a v-structure; otherwise, it
will be one of the other three. Therefore, for the skeleton P2,
the chain structure and the fork structure are in one Markov
equivalence class, while the v-structure is in a different class.
In the following, we show that determining the correct
Markov equivalent class in Figure 2, could also be performed
by calculating the sign of the interaction information, which
could be useful from algorithm design point of view. In
general, as evident from Proposition 1, positive interaction
information indicates that each one of the variables partially
or completely constitutes the dependency between the other
two variables. In Figure 2 parts (a) to (c), given Y , variables
X and Z are independent. Hence we have
I(X; Z) ≥0 and I(X; Z|Y ) = 0,
Difficulty
Intelligence
Grade
Fig. 3: Example of a structure with non-positive interaction
information.
which implies that I(X; Y ; Z) ≥0. On the other hand,
negative interaction information indicates that observation of
each one of the variables increases the correlation between the
other two. In the v-structure (Figure 2 part (d)), variables X
and Z are independent, but can be dependent conditioned on
Y . Hence we have
I(X; Z) = 0 and I(X; Z|Y ) ≥0,
which implies that I(X; Y ; Z) ≤0. Therefore, knowing that
the interaction information is positive or negative we can
distinguish between the two Markov equivalent classes.
Note that again in light of Proposition 1, in the v-structure
in Figure 2(d), when X and Z are the common causes of
a third variable Y , knowing X can increase the correlation
between Z and Y , a result which may not be intuitive in the
ﬁrst glance.
We use an example from [15] to illustrate the case of
negative interaction information. Suppose an exam is given
to a student. The difﬁculty of the exam and the intelligence
of the student are two independent variables. But, when the
student’s grade is observed, this new variable correlates the
difﬁculty of the exam and the student’s intelligence (see Figure
3). Consider the expression for interaction information repre-
sented in Lemma 1, with X =Difﬁculty, Y =Intelligence, and
Z =Grade. From Proposition 1, since I(X; Y ) = 0, it is easy
to see that the interaction information is negative. Therefore,
the correlation between Difﬁculty and Grade when Intelligence
is observed, and the correlation between Intelligence and
Grade when Difﬁculty is observed are both high and their sum,
over calculates the correlation between the pair (Difﬁculty,
Intelligence) and Grade.
C. Triangle DAG
Unlike the structure in Figure 2, the triangle DAGs, which
are DAGs on three variables whose skeleton is a cycle
of length 3, are all in the same Markov equivalent class.
Therefore, the dependency tests cannot distinguish between
graphs with this structure. Nevertheless, triangle DAGs appear
in many real-life problems and the ability to reconstruct this
structure is of great interest in many ﬁelds. Figure 4 shows all
the 6 possible triangle DAGs on the set of variables {X, Y, Z}.
Note that the edge directions must not form a cycle, otherwise
the structure will not be a DAG.

X
Z
Y
X
Z
Y
X
Z
Y
X
Z
Y
X
Z
Y
X
Z
Y
Fig. 4: all six possible triangle DAGs on the set of variables
{X, Y, Z}. In the ﬁrst, second and the third column, variables
Y , Z and X is the sink variable, respectively.
In this subsection we will show that under certain condi-
tions, one can still categorize, or in some cases, even uniquely
identify a triangle DAG using interaction information. We ﬁrst
observe the following property regarding the triangle DAGs:
Lemma 2. Any triangle DAG contains
• Root Variable: Denoted by R, the variable which is the
cause of the other two variables.
• Sink Variable: Denoted by S, the variable which is the
effect of the other two variables.
• Bridge Variable: Denoted by B, the variable which is
the effect of the root variable and the cause of the sink
variables.
Proof: Consider ﬁxed labeling on the vertices. Since
the graph is acyclic, either two of the arrows are oriented
clockwise and the third one is oriented counter clockwise, or
vice versa.
In either case, two consecutive arrows will have the same
direction. The vertex at the tail of the ﬁrst arrow will be the
root variable, the vertex at the head of the ﬁrst arrow will be
the bridge variable, and the vertex at the head of the second
arrow will be the sink variable.
Our extra requirement for distinguishing triangle DAGs is
for the causal inﬂuence with the least strength to be weak.
Weak here means the causal strength is less than the absolute
value of the interaction information among the three variables.
Denoting the strength of a causal inﬂuence by C, we require
that Cmin < |I(R; B; S)|. Here, as mentioned in Subsection
III-A, we need to be able to quantify the strength of a causal
effect, for which we use the results from [17], which was
described in Subsection III-A. The postulated quantity in [17]
for causal inﬂuence strength implies that
CR→B = I(R; B)
CR→S ≥I(R; S|B)
CB→S ≥I(B; S|R)
(1)
X
Z
Y
X
Z
Y
Fig. 5: Solid arrows indicate strong causal inﬂuence and
dashed arrows indicate weak causal inﬂuence. This ﬁgure
shows possible triangle DAGs for the case that the interaction
information among the variables is negative, and the causal
inﬂuence between variables X and Z is weak.
Theorem 1. If in a triangle DAG the interaction information
among the variables is negative, and Cmin < |I(R; B; S)|,
then only the causal inﬂuence between the Root variable and
the Bridge variable is weak.
Proof: From (1), and Proposition 1, we have
CR→B = I(R; B) < I(R; B|S)
I(R; S) < I(R; S|B) ≤CR→S
I(B; S) < I(B; S|R) ≤CB→S.
Therefore by non-negativity of the mutual information, we
have
CR→S ≥|I(R; B; S)|
and
CB→S ≥|I(R; B; S)|.
Therefore, since Cmin < |I(R; B; S)|, we must have
CR→B < |I(R; B; S)|.
Theorem 1 can be utilized in application using the following
corollary:
Corollary 1. If in a triangle DAG on variables X, Y and Z
the interaction information among the variables is negative,
and the causal inﬂuence between variables X and Z is weak,
then
1) the other two causal inﬂuences are not weak,
2) and the only possible triangle DAGs on {X, Y, Z} are
the ones depicted in Figure 5.
In some applications, due to prior knowledge about the
system or temporal knowledge, the root variable is known.
For instance, there is an attribute that the experimenter is
randomizing as the root variable in a triangle structure; or
by observing sample paths similar to the one shown in Figure
6 on a triangle structure, due to temporal information, the
root variable could be recognized. That is, the experimenter
observes that changing in the value of variable X causes
variation in the value of variables Y and Z from the delay,
while changing in the values of variables Y and Z do not vary
the value of X.
In this case, the following corollary of Theorem 1 can be
used to uniquely identify the true underlying causal DAG.

Fig. 6: Sample paths of the values of three variables in a
triangle structure. Here the temporal information in the sample
paths, can help the experimenter to distinguish the cause from
the effect.
Corollary 2. If in a triangle DAG on variables {X, Y, Z}, the
interaction information among the variables is negative, and
the causal inﬂuence between variables X and Z is weak and
X is the root variable, then Z is the bridge variable and Y is
the sink variable, and the only correct causal network among
the variables is the DAG on the left side in Figure 5.
An example of the application of Corollary 2, would be
in a medical examination, in which the clinician is aware of
two side-effects of the medicine which is being tested, say,
headache and insomnia, but the side effects themselves have
inﬂuence on each other, and the direction of this inﬂuence is
of interest.
IV. CONCLUSION
We studied interaction information, which is a multivari-
ate generalization of mutual information and indicates the
amount of information shared in a set of variables, beyond
the information which is shared in any proper subset of those
variables. Unlike other conventional measures of information,
interaction information can have a negative value. We used
this property to discover causal relationships among a triplet
of random variables. We provided a discussion regarding
the sign of interaction information and proposed a strategy
for classifying causal relationships, which could have not
been identiﬁed using merely conventional dependency tests.
Interaction information is not as thoroughly studied as its
bivariate counterpart. A more comprehensive study of the
advantages of this quantity in the ﬁeld of causal inference,
especially in the case of having more than three variables is
considered as our future work.
