Towards an automated query modiﬁcation assistant
Vera Hollink
Centre for Mathematics and Computer Science
Interactive Information Access Group
Amsterdam, The Netherlands

Arjen de Vries
Centre for Mathematics and Computer Science
Interactive Information Access Group
Amsterdam, The Netherlands

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]: Query formu-
lation; H3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]: Search
process
General Terms
Experimentation, Algorithms
Keywords
Query modiﬁcation, Semantic query log analysis, Search as-
sistance
ABSTRACT
Users who need several queries before ﬁnding what they need
can beneﬁt from an automatic search assistant that provides
feedback on their query modiﬁcation strategies. We present
a method to learn from a search log which types of query
modiﬁcations have and have not been eﬀective in the past.
The method analyses query modiﬁcations along two dimen-
sions: a traditional term-based dimension and a semantic di-
mension, for which queries are enriches with linked data en-
tities. Applying the method to the search logs of two search
engines, we identify six opportunities for a query modiﬁ-
cation assistant to improve search: modiﬁcation strategies
that are commonly used, but that often do not lead to sat-
isfactory results.
1.
INTRODUCTION
Users of search engines often enter a number of queries
in succession before they ﬁnd everything they need or be-
fore they are convinced that the collection in which they
search does not contain answers to their information needs.
Query suggestions can help users in the formulation of their
queries (e.g. [7, 17]). In addition to query suggestions, users
can potentially be helped by higher level feedback on their
search strategy.
Such feedback can warn users earlier on
when the current line of search is not going to be eﬀective
and help them to formulate a more eﬀective strategy. For
instance, suppose a users is looking for pictures of impres-
sionist paintings. She successively enters the queries Monet
and impressionism, but none of the search results are of
her liking. Query suggestions may include the names of con-
temporaries of Monet and the titles of paintings by Monet.
This can be useful suggestions, but do not tell the user why
her own modiﬁed query (impressionism) was unsuccessful.
Feedback on her modiﬁcation strategy can provide the an-
swer:
‘When the name of an artist does not yield
any relevant results, then entering the name of
the style used by the artist usually does not yield
relevant results either.
Instead you could try
searching on the names of other artists using this
style or titles of paintings in this style.’
This type of feedback oﬀers two advantages over query sug-
gestions alone:
1. It provides directions for formulating queries even when
the oﬀered query suggestions do not appeal to the user.
2. The suggested search strategies can be reused for com-
parable information needs (e.g. ﬁnding cubist paint-
ings), preventing the user from making the same ‘mis-
take’ twice.
In this paper we explore the potential of an automatic
search assistant that provides feedback on the ways users
modify their queries.
We present a methodology to use
search interactions of previous users collected in search logs
to determine which types of query modiﬁcation have and
have not been eﬀective in the past. These observations can
form the basis for the assistant’s feedback. In addition, we
identify opportunities where the assistant may improve the
search:
query modiﬁcation strategies that are commonly
used, but do not usually lead to results that users ﬁnd rele-
vant.
We analyze query modiﬁcations in two ways: by a tradi-
tional term-based approach (e.g. [5, 8, 10, 12, 13, 16, 18,
25]) and by a semantic approach that we developed for this
purpose [11]. Both approaches are applied to query logs of
the search engines of two image repositories.
The remainder of this paper is organized as followes. In
Section 2 we discuss related studies on query modiﬁcations.
The analysis method is presented in Section 3. Section 4
introduces the data sets that are used in the experiments
in Section 5. The last section contains conclusions and dis-
cussed our results.
2.
RELATED WORK
Research on query modiﬁcations studies pairs of queries
that are successively submitted in a search session (e.g. [5,
8, 10, 12, 13, 15, 16, 18, 20, 25].) Successive query pairs are
classiﬁed into a number of modiﬁcation classes and the use
of these classes is analyzed.
arXiv:1104.0128v1  [cs.IR]  1 Apr 2011

DBpedia:
Andre_Agassi
DBpedia:
Boris_Becker
WordNet:
tennis_player
DBpedia:wordnet_type
DBpedia:wordnet_type
Andre Agassi
Boris Becker
rdfs:label
rdfs:label
 query: 'Andre Agassi'
 query: 'Boris Becker'
Figure 1:
Example application of our method for ﬁnding semantic relations between queries:
a relation
between queries Andre Agassi and Boris Becker is that they both match DBpedia entities that are of WordNet
type tennis_player.
Query modiﬁcations are classiﬁed either manually [15, 16,
20] or automatically [5, 8, 10, 12, 13, 18, 25]. Studies that
employ automatic methods usually classify query modiﬁca-
tions solely on the basis of terms in the queries. These stud-
ies examine whether terms have been added, eliminated or
substituted compared to the user’s previous query. When
terms are added, the modiﬁcation is classiﬁed as speciﬁca-
tion (e.g., from query Beckham to query Beckham Milan),
when terms are eliminated it is classiﬁed as generalization
(from Beckham Milan to Beckham), and when terms are sub-
stituted it is classiﬁed as reformulation (from Beckham Mi-
lan to Beckham Madrid). Finally, lexical variations include,
for instance, modiﬁcations from singular to plural forms or
vice versa.
In some of the manual studies not only term
overlap, but also the meaning of the queries is taken into
account [20, 16, 15]. In these studies the same modiﬁcation
classes are used, for instance, a modiﬁcation from dog to
labrador is classiﬁed as a speciﬁcation.
The large majority of the studies ﬁnd that the most fre-
quently used modiﬁcation is reformulation, followed by spec-
iﬁcation, generalization and lexical variations. [16, 20, 25,
13, 5, 8, 18]. Only in [10] and [15] almost equal numbers of
reformulations and speciﬁcations are found.
The study that is most closely related to our work is the
work of Huang and Efthimiadis [12], who investigate the
relation between modiﬁcation types and clicks on search re-
sults. They found that generalization and reformulation of-
ten occur when the previous query has led to at least one
click on a search result, which indicates that these modiﬁ-
cations are mainly used after successful queries. Some types
of lexical variations mainly occur when the previous query
has not led to a click, suggesting a second attempt to ﬁnd
the same information. Speciﬁcations and reformulations ap-
peared to be most successful: these modiﬁcations most of-
ten resulted in a click. We extend this work in three ways:
1) besides a term-based analysis, we also provide a semantic
analysis of query modiﬁcations, 2) we provide a validation of
our results by comparing the results of two data sets, where
Huang and Efthimiadis use only one data set, 3) we explore
how the results of the analysis can be used for providing
feedback on users’ modiﬁcation strategies.
3.
METHOD
In line with previous research, we study query modiﬁ-
cations by listing all pairs of queries that are successively
entered in a search session. We will refer to the ﬁrst query
in a pair as the original query and to the second query as
the modiﬁed query. Note that in sessions with more than
two queries, the modiﬁed query in the one pair becomes the
original query in the next pair.
We classify the relation between the queries in each pair
and count the number of pairs in each class. Two classiﬁca-
tions are used: a traditional term-based classiﬁcation and a
novel semantic classiﬁcation.
3.1
Term-based classiﬁcation of query modiﬁ-
cations
For the term-based approach the queries are ﬁrst stemmed
using the Porter stemmer [19]. For each pair we determine
whether, compared to the ﬁrst query, in the second query
terms are added (speciﬁcation), removed (generalization) or
replaced (reformulation). In addition, we count how many
times stemming made the query identical to the previous
query (lexical variation)1. Query pairs without overlapping
terms are classiﬁed as ‘no relation’.
3.2
Semantic classiﬁcation of query modiﬁca-
tions
For the semantic classiﬁcation, the queries are mapped
onto linked data entities (see [4] for an overview on linked
data).
We make use of the rdfs:label property of the
entities, which provides a human readable description for
the entities [6]. Queries are mapped on entities that have
an rdfs:label that exactly matches the query.
For in-
stance, the query Andre Agassi is matched onto the entity
http://dbpedia.org/resource/Andre_Agassi, as this en-
tity has the label ‘Andre Agassi’ (see Figure 1, left-hand
side).
If no exact match can be found, the queries are
stemmed and mapped onto entities with labels that contain
all stemmed query terms.
For some queries no matching
entities are found. Query pairs containing queries without
matching entities are not considered in the semantic analy-
sis.
For each pair of consecutive queries we determine the se-
mantic relation between the queries, as illustrated in Fig-
ure 1. A graph search algorithm is used for traversing links
in the linked data to ﬁnd the shortest series of links that
connect the entities matching the two queries (their rela-
tions). When multiple entities match the queries, we keep
only the ones for which a shortest relation is found. This
often disambiguates the queries.
In cases where multiple
shortest relations are found, these relations are all used and
the occurrence of each relation is counted as
1
n, where n is
the number relations found.
In the next step we abstract away from relations between
speciﬁc instances and infer semantic modiﬁcation types by
removing the instances and keeping just the links. For in-
1Consecutive queries that were identical before stemming
are conﬂated.

stance, we may ﬁnd that the relation from query David
Beckham to query Joe Cole is that both refer to players in
the English national football team:
David Beckham –DBpedia:nationalteam→
England_national_football_team
←DBpedia:nationalteam– Joe Cole
The arrows denote the directions of the predicates. This re-
lation is abstracted to the modiﬁcation type:
Q1 –DBpedia:nationalteam→X
←DBpedia:nationalteam– Q2
With this method for each query pair zero, one, or mul-
tiple modiﬁcation types are identiﬁed. In the last step the
most likely modiﬁcation types for each pair are selected by
comparing the types that are found to the types of query
pairs formed by randomly drawing queries from diﬀerent
sessions. A complete description of the method for ﬁnding
semantic modiﬁcation types can be found in [11].
3.3
Quantifying modiﬁcation success
To quantify the average eﬀectiveness of a type of query
modiﬁcation, we measure the success of the queries resulting
from modiﬁcations of this type. Similar to [12], we deﬁne
a successful query as a query that is followed by at least
one click on a search result.
Unsuccessful queries do not
result in a click and are followed directly by another query
or end the search session. The motivation of this deﬁnition
is that a successful query at least partially answers a user’s
information need.
We deﬁne the success rate (srm) of a modiﬁcation m as the
proportion of cases in which the modiﬁcation was successful.
In other words, srm is the proportion of the query pairs with
modiﬁcation type m, where the modiﬁed query was followed
by a click:
srm =
cm
cm + nm
Here cm is the number of times m was followed by a click
and nm the number of times m was not followed by a click.
To compare the success rates of various modiﬁcation types,
we compute for each type how much using this type increases
the success rate compared to using any modiﬁcation type.
Formally, the increase of success rate, isrm, of a modiﬁca-
tion m is deﬁned as the diﬀerence between the overall success
rate and the success rate of the modiﬁcation:
isrm =
P
m′∈M cm′
P
m′∈M(cm′ + nm′) −srm
Here M is the set of all modiﬁcation types.
isr values are between -1 and 1. Negative values corre-
spond to modiﬁcations with low probabilities of leading to a
click (compared to other modiﬁcation types), while positive
values correspond to modiﬁcations with high probabilities of
leading to a click.
4.
DATA SETS
We analyze query modiﬁcations in the logs of two image
search engines. In image search query modiﬁcation plays a
larger role in than in other types of search, as users searching
for images on average need more queries to ﬁnd what they
need [14].
However, our analysis methods are not in any
way restricted to image search.
The ﬁrst data set consists of the search logs of the commer-
cial picture portal of a European news agency. The portal
provides access to more than 2 million photographic images
covering a broad domain. The log ﬁles record the search in-
teractions of professional users (mainly journalists) accessing
the picture portal. We use 10 months of search logs, contain-
ing 1,094,620 queries in 520,507 sessions. Search sessions are
identiﬁed using a log-in and a browser cookie and a time-
out of 15 minutes. The linked data consists of various inter-
linked sources: the DBpedia Ontology [3], WordNet [9, 23],
the Cornetto Lexical Knowledge Base [24] (which contains
both Dutch and English terms), the Getty Thesaurus of Ge-
ographical Names [22], and the Getty Art and Architecture
Thesaurus (aat) [21]. Together these collections comprise 22
million RDF triples.
The second search engine is the search facility of the Rijks-
museum web site [1], a Dutch art museum.
The log ﬁles
cover 5.5 months and consist of 106,341 queries in 46,165
sessions, where sessions are identiﬁed using IP addresses and
agent ﬁelds. As linked data, we use WordNet, Cornetto, the
Dutch version of the Getty thesauri, and also various Dutch
art-speciﬁc ontologies that were collected and interlinked in
the E-Culture project [2].
5.
RESULTS
We ﬁrst analyze the use of query modiﬁcations in gen-
eral and determine the average success of modiﬁcations. In
Section 5.2 we examine the use and successfulness of speciﬁc
term-based modiﬁcation types and in Section 5.3 of semantic
modiﬁcation types.
5.1
Overall analysis
Table 1 (column 2) shows the overall success rate of query
modiﬁcations in the two data sets. As shown, 34% of the
News photo and 40% of the Rijksmuseum modiﬁcations led
to a click. When the original query was successful (third col-
umn), the success rate is higher than when the original query
was unsuccessful (fourth column). Possibly, this diﬀerence
is the result of diﬀerences between users in their ability to
formulate eﬀective queries or in their tendency to click on
marginally interesting results.
Another explanation could
be that the successful queries stem from easier information
needs.
In any case, these results indicate that providing
feedback on a user’s search strategy is most urgent when
none of the search results are clicked.
Table 1: The overall success rate of query modiﬁ-
cations, proportion successive query pairs for which
no relation could be found (topic switches), for all
query pairs (total), when the original query was suc-
cessful (succ), and when the original query was un-
successful (unsucc).
Total
Succ
Unsucc
News photo
success rate
0.34
0.48
0.27
proportion no term-based relation
0.75
0.81
0.71
proportion no semantic relation
0.55
0.58
0.54
Rijksmuseum
success rate
0.40
0.50
0.35
proportion no term-based relation
0.67
0.77
0.63
proportion no semantic relation
0.39
0.39
0.39

Table 2: Relative frequencies (freq.) and increase of success rate (isr) of term-based modiﬁcations, for all
query pairs (total), when the original query was successful, and when the original query was unsuccessful.
Modiﬁcation
Total
After successful
After unsuccessful
freq.
isr
freq.
isr
freq.
isr
News photo
reformulation
0.48
+0.00
0.55
–0.00
0.47
–0.00
speciﬁcation
0.32
+0.01
0.30
–0.01
0.32
+0.02
generalization
0.17
–0.02
0.12
+0.04
0.18
–0.01
lexical variation
0.03
–0.03
0.03
–0.00
0.03
–0.03
Rijksmuseum
reformulation
0.29
+0.03
0.31
+0.05
0.30
+0.01
speciﬁcation
0.40
–0.02
0.43
–0.05
0.38
–0.02
generalization
0.22
+0.01
0.17
+0.03
0.24
+0.02
lexical variation
0.08
–0.01
0.09
–0.02
0.07
–0.02
Table 1 shows the proportion of modiﬁcations for which
no term-based type and semantic type could be found (other
than ‘no relation’). Following previous research (e.g. [25]),
we interpret the absence of a relation between queries as a
shift to a new search topic.
This interpretation may not
always be correct as two queries for which no relation was
found can still be part of the same information need and,
vice versa, two queries from diﬀerent information needs may
accidentally be related. As expected, after successful queries
more topic shifts occur than after unsuccessful queries. This
conﬁrms our assumption that the presence of a click can be
interpreted as an indication that a user was satisﬁed with the
result and the query was successful. Moreover, it is another
indication that feedback is needed most after unsuccessful
queries.
5.2
Term-based modiﬁcations
Figure 2 shows that in the News photo data the relative
frequency of the four term-based modiﬁcations is in line with
the majority of existing research: reformulations are used
most often, followed by speciﬁcations, followed by general-
izations and lexical variations [16, 20, 25, 13, 5, 8, 18]. In
the Rijksmuseum dataset more speciﬁcations are used than
reformulations, which is also found in [10, 15]. Table 2 shows
the relative frequencies of the modiﬁcations as well as their
isr scores when the orginal query was successful and when
the orginal query was unsuccessful.
From these data, we
identify three cases where feedback on the users’ modiﬁca-
tion strategies may improve search:
Feedback opportunity 1. Generalizations are used pre-
dominantly after unsuccessful queries. Apparently, users
often believe that their queries are unsuccessful be-
cause they retrieve too few interesting results (low re-
call) rather than because too many uninteresting re-
sults are retrieved (low precision). Even though gen-
eralizations are used mostly after unsuccessful queries,
we found that they are most eﬀective after success-
ful queries. This reveals an opportunity for feedback:
after a successful query we can advise a user that gen-
eralizing his query may lead to even more interesting
results.
Feedback opportunity 2. In contrast to generalizations,
speciﬁcations are most eﬀective after unsuccessful queries.
However, on the Rijksmuseum site, where speciﬁca-
tions play are relatively large role, they are used mainly
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
reform.
spec.
gen.
lex. var.
News photo
Rijksmuseum
Figure 2: Relative frequencies of term-based query
modiﬁcations.
after successful queries. Thus, after unsuccessful queries,
it may be helpful to suggest a user to specify his query.
Feedback opportunity 3. Lexical variations are less use-
ful than average, especially after unsuccessful queries2.
This suggests that an assistant can help users by check-
ing whether the collection contains any not yet pre-
sented items that match queries that are after stem-
ming identical to the users’ current query.
If such
items are found, they can be shown directly or the cor-
responding lexical variations can be suggested. If no
matching items are found, the assistant can inform the
user that lexical variations are not going to be eﬀective,
saving the user the eﬀort of trying these queries.
5.3
Semantic modiﬁcations
Many diﬀerent modiﬁcation types emerged from the se-
mantic query modiﬁcation analysis. The ten types that were
found most frequently in the News photo data are given in
Table 3. The most common type was the same-entity re-
lation ([ ]): two diﬀerent queries that are mapped to the
same entity, usually variant names for the same entity, such
as Gent and Gand (the Dutch and French name of a Belgian
city). Types 2, 6, and 10 indicate that many users searched
2As the search engine itself does not use stemming, lexical
variations yield diﬀerent search results.

Table 3: The ten most frequently occurring semantic modiﬁcation types in the News photo data set and their
increase of success rate (isr)
isr
Modiﬁcation type
1.
+0.02
[ ]
2.
–0.18
Q1 –DBpedia:spouse→Q2
3.
+0.14
Q1 –DBpedia:nationalteam→X ←DBpedia:nationalteam– Q2
4.
–0.07
Q1 ←DBpedia:starring– X
–DBpedia:starring→
Q2
5.
+0.08
Q1 –rdf:type→X ←rdf:type– Q2
6.
–0.20
Q1 –DBpedia:partner→Q2
7.
–0.21
Q1 ←aat:distinguished_from– Q2
8.
+0.04
Q1 –DBpedia:wordnet_type→X ←DBpedia:wordnet_type– Q2
9.
+0.14
Q1 –DBpedia:clubs→X ←DBpedia:clubs– Q2
10.
–0.14
Q1 ←DBpedia:spouse– Q2
Table 4: Relative frequencies (freq.) and increase of success rate (isr) of classes of semantic modiﬁcations, for
all query pairs (total), when the original query was successful, and when the original query was unsuccessful.
Modiﬁcation
Total
After successful
After unsuccessful
freq.
isr
freq.
isr
freq.
isr
News photo
sibling
0.19
+0.04
0.23
+0.04
0.18
+0.01
few-to-few
0.10
–0.16
0.07
–0.13
0.11
–0.12
same entity ([ ])
0.05
+0.02
0.04
–0.00
0.06
+0.06
other
0.65
+0.01
0.67
–0.00
0.65
+0.01
Rijksmuseum
sibling
0.09
+0.01
0.09
+0.05
0.08
–0.04
few-to-few
0.02
–0.05
0.02
–0.02
0.02
–0.06
same entity ([ ])
0.19
–0.07
0.15
–0.10
0.24
–0.03
other
0.70
+0.02
0.74
+0.01
0.66
+0.02
ﬁrst on the name of a person and then on the name of his
or her spouse or partner. Types 3, 9, and 4 respectively tell
us that many users searched for related people: people who
play for the same national team, who belong to the same
sports club, or who star in the same movie. Types 5 and 8
both say that users searched on two entities from the same
type, such as tennis players or townships. Type 7 uses the
AAT:distinguished_from relation from the Getty Art and
Architecture Thesaurus which links closely related terms,
such as prince and princess.
Inspection of the modiﬁcation types revealed two impor-
tant classes of modiﬁcations. Sibling relations are modiﬁ-
cations of the form Q1–R→X←R–Q2 or Q1←R–X–R→Q2. Ex-
amples include types 3, 4, 5, 8, and 9 in Table 3.
This
shows that many people searched for two entities with some
common property, such as two actors starring in the same
movie or two hyponyms of a WordNet concept. The second
frequently occurring class of modiﬁcations are direct few-
to-few relations, which are deﬁned as a relaxed version of
one-to-one relations, where ‘few’ means on average less than
2. Examples of direct few-to-few relations are ‘spouse’ and
‘has-capital’.
Table 4 shows the relative frequency and isr of the classes
of semantic modiﬁcations. The isr scores of the most fre-
quent individual modiﬁcation types are given in Table 3. We
identify three more opportunities for feedback:
Feedback opportunity 4. Sibling modiﬁcations are on av-
erage relatively successful (see Table 4 and types 3, 5,
and 9 in Table 3).
Some siblings, however, are not
very successful, such as type 4. Few-to-few relations
are often unsuccessful (e.g. types 2, 6 and 10). The
success of these individual modiﬁcation types can be
used for giving detailed feedback. An assistant could,
for instance, advise a user searching for a soccer player
to try the name of another player from the same team.
Feedback opportunity 5. Sibling relations are most ef-
fective after successful queries. This ﬁndings can be
used to make recommendations dependent on the suc-
cess of the previous query, i.e. to recommend sibling
relations only when a click is made. Note, however,
that many users are already able to use sibling modiﬁ-
cations strategically, as these modiﬁcations are found
predominantly after successful queries.
Feedback opportunity 6. Like lexical variations, same-
entity modiﬁcations are not very eﬀective after success-
ful queries. Same-entity modiﬁcations can be used to
provide feedback in the same manner as lexical varia-
tions by checking whether the collection contains items
that match the same entity as the user has searched
for, but that are described by diﬀerent terms.
6.
CONCLUSIONS
Our analyses revealed that users are not always able to
make eﬀective query modiﬁcations. We identiﬁed six situa-
tions in which feedback on a user’s query modiﬁcation strat-
egy may improve the search. Using our ﬁndings a feedback
assistant can advise a user in some situation to use or not to
use particular term-based or semantic query modiﬁcations.
Comparing the semantic and the term-based analyses, we
found that the insights that they provide are complementary.

Both approaches yielded unique opportunities for feedback.
As far as the ﬁndings of the two analysis overlap, their re-
sults are consistent.
In this paper we studied the relation between clicks on
search results and the ways users modify their queries. So
far, we did not take into account why a set of search re-
sults was (un)satisfactory for a user. Did it contain too few
results? Did it contain results not related to the user’s in-
formation need? In the next step of our research we will
explore the inﬂuence of the ambiguity, speciﬁcity, and size
of the result set on query modiﬁcations.
7.
