1 
 
Intelligent Conversational Bot for Massive Online Open Courses (MOOCs) 
 
Ser Ling Lim1, Ong Sing Goh2 
 
Faculty of Information and Communication Technology, 
Universiti Teknikal Malaysia Melaka, 76100 Melaka, Malaysia 

 
Abstract: Massive Online Open Courses (MOOCs) which were introduced in 2008 has 
since drawn attention around the world for both its advantages as well as criticism on its 
drawbacks. One of the issues in MOOCs which is the lack of interactivity with the 
instructor has brought conversational bot into the picture to fill in this gap. In this study, a 
prototype of MOOCs conversational bot, MOOC-bot is being developed and integrated 
into MOOCs website to respond to the learner’s enquiries using text or speech input. 
MOOC-bot is using the popular Artificial Intelligence Markup Language (AIML) to 
develop its knowledge base, leverage from AIML’s capability to deliver appropriate 
responses and can be quickly adapted to new knowledge domains. The system architecture 
of MOOC-bot consists of knowledge base along with AIML interpreter, chat interface, 
MOOCs website and Web Speech API to provide speech recognition and speech synthesis 
capability. The initial MOOC-bot prototype has the general knowledge from the past 
Loebner Prize winner - ALICE, course’s frequent asked questions, and a course’s content 
offered by Universiti Teknikal Malaysia Melaka (UTeM). The evaluation of MOOC-bot 
based on the past competition questions from Chatterbox Challenge (CBC) and Loebner 
Prize has shown that it was able to provide correct answers most of the time during the test 
and demonstrated the capability to prolong the conversation. The advantages of MOOC-
bot such as able to provide 24-hour service that can serve different time zones, able to have 
knowledge in multiple domains, and can be shared by multiple sites simultaneously have 
outweighed its existing limitations. 
 
Keywords: Conversation Agent (CA),  Artificial Intelligence (AI), Massive Online Open 
Courses (MOOCs), MOOC-bot 
 

    
2 
 
 
CHAPTER 1 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
1.1 
Background 
 
Online learning has long existed since the rapid growth of Internet penetration. As 
Internet usage becomes more economical and popular, online learning has found its way 
becoming more common and well-accepted. In recent years, a diversified form of online 
learning model called Massive Online Open Courses (MOOCs) has emerged and is 
drawing considerable attention from around the world (Chatterjee and Nath, 2014). This 
can also be evidenced by the research publication on MOOCs which has also grown 
exponentially from 2008 to 2013 (Aparicio et. al., 2014).  
 
MOOCs were first introduced in year 2008 and many universities have adopted it 
since then. Among the prominent MOOCs providers are Coursera, edX and Udacity (Peco 
and Luján-Mora, 2013). Andrew Ng and Daphne Koller of Stanford University founded 
Coursera platform together where Ng taught “Machine Learning” while Koller taught 
“Probabilistic Graphical Models”. EdX is the MOOCs platform founded by Harvard 
University partnering with Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). Udacity was 
conceived out of the experiment which saw Sebastian Thrun and Peter Norvig of Stanford 
University offered "Introduction to Artificial Intelligence" course online. All of them have 

    
3 
 
since extended partnerships with other universities and institutions, and offering more 
courses. 
 
Unlike conventional online courses, MOOC differs by having pre-recorded video 
lectures, online quizzes, homework assignments, midterms, final exams and the integration 
of social networking. The word “massive” also denotes that it can accommodate large 
number of participants simultaneously across the world for a single course. MOOC’s open 
learning styles offers flexibility with minimal registration requirements. This platform also 
provides online community interaction in the learning process. Due to all these 
characteristics, it is not possible to manage and deliver MOOC in the traditional online 
course’s method (Bassi et. al., 2014).  
 
Malaysia which has high number of Internet users can benefit from MOOCs. 
According to Economic Report 2013/2014 released by the Ministry of Finance Malaysia 
(2013), the number of Internet users in Malaysia has grown to 18 million as of end of 2012 
and is expected to reach 25 million in 2015. MOOCs also fit as a lifelong learning program 
because it offers the time flexibility to students with families, full-time jobs, or other 
possible situations to learn at their convenience. The Malaysia Education Blueprint 2015-
2025 for Higher Education which was launched recently also enlisted MOOCs as one of 
the initiatives in spurring Malaysia’s higher education system. This blueprint further 
pointed out that education should not just be sought in one’s youth time but people of all 
ages should also enrich themselves through constant learning. The call for building 
“Malaysia education brand globally” in the blueprint indicates the great potential of 
growing MOOCs in Malaysia by local institutions (Ministry of Education Malaysia, 2015). 
 
However, MOOC’s delivery is not without its own challenges. For instance, being 
accessible worldwide would mean the instructors would not be available all the time due to 

    
4 
 
time zone difference. Furthermore, the large number of participants in a course could result 
in overwhelming student-instructor ratio. As the consequences, students may not able to 
get tutoring or help from the instructors easily compare to traditional courses.  In this case, 
conversational bot which can simulate human conversation in natural language text could 
act as a virtual teacher to provide answers to students whenever needed (Ong et. al., 2014).  
In this research, MOOC-bot is developed as the conversational bot agent for the 
role of interacting with users in MOOCs. MOOC-bot will be using Artificial Intelligence 
Markup Language (AIML) to develop its knowledge base. AIML is a well-known XML 
derived language which is used in case-based reasoning and textual pattern matching 
algorithms. AIML was developed by Dr. Richard Wallace and the Alicebot open source 
community among 1995 and 2000. It was designed to help in the development of ALICE 
(Artificial Linguistic Internet Computer Entity) (Mikic et. al., 2009). As AIML is open 
source and can be quickly adapted to new knowledge domains, many conversational bots 
used AIML to develop their agents that communicate with users in natural language. 
MOOC-bot will be the conversational bot for the subject “MITI 5113 Artificial 
Intelligence” which is offered by Faculty of Information and Communication Technology 
from Universiti Teknikal Malaysia Melaka (UTeM). UTeM is the first technical university 
and one of the public universities in Malaysia.  Established in year 2000, UTeM was 
formerly known as Kolej Universiti Teknikal Kebangsaan Malaysia (KUTKM) before 
being conferred university status. Currently, UTeM operates from three campuses namely 
the Main Campus, City Campus and the Technology Campus in Malacca with seven 
faculties and the blend of local and international students. 
 
 

    
5 
 
 
 
1.2 
Statement of the Purpose 
The purpose of this research is to develop conversational bot for MOOC as a course 
conversational bot using AIML. The target course for this research would be “MITI 5113 
Artificial Intelligence” offered by UTeM. 
 
1.3 
Problem Statement 
 
MOOCs are a new online learning model which can accommodate massive number 
of participants. This can be seen in “Artificial Intelligence” MOOC offered by Stanford 
University in 2011 where it attracted 160,000 enrolments (Iqbal et. al., 2014). With usually 
only one instructor delivering a course, students will not be able to get full attention or help 
from the instructor easily when they face problems. This will end up being frustrating for 
the students. On the other hand, the instructors will also feel overwhelm to handle so many 
enquiries from students at one time. Moreover, if the same question was asked by many 
different students, it is inefficient for the instructor to repeat the answers many times and 
thus causing additional workload. 
 
In addition, MOOCs are supposed to offer flexibility to students to learn at their 
own convenience because they may have full time job or any other commitments. At the 
same time, MOOCs are also offered to participants from worldwide which means they 
could be living at places with different time zone. Under such circumstances, the students’ 
learning hour may be different from the instructor’s working hour. As such, the students 
are not able to interact or getting feedback from the instructor immediately. This may 

    
6 
 
demotivate the learner, discourage them to ask questions or seek further clarification from 
the instructor. 
 
Due to all these problems, MOOC-bot could play the role of assistant to the 
instructor which can respond to course-related enquiries in live chat and as frequently as 
needed. MOOC-bot which can provide 24-hour services also can solve the flexibility 
requirement needed in MOOCs. This means that the students can get response at any time 
needed by them as long as they are connected to the Internet. 
 
1.4 
Research Questions 
 
Based on the problem statements mentioned in section 1.3, the research questions 
for this study are identified as follows:  
1. 
Does MOOC-bot able to synthesize the questions posed by user in text or 
 
speech? 
2. 
Does MOOC-bot able to provide the answer in text and speech? 
3. 
Does MOOC-bot able to provide the answers appropriately and prolong the 
 
conversation? 
 
1.5 
Research Objective 
 
The research objectives are related to the research questions. Therefore, the 
research objectives derived are as follows: 
1. 
To synthesize the questions posed by the users using text or speech input. 
2. 
To provide answers to questions in text and speech.   
3. 
To ensure MOOC-bot is able to deliver appropriate answers and prolong the 
 
conversation with the users. 

    
7 
 
 
 
1.6 
Research Scope and Limitation 
 
This research will have the scope and limitation such as follows: 
1) 
This research will focus on one of the courses offered by UTeM which is “MITI 
5113 Artificial Intelligence”. 
2) 
The questions that can be answered must be within MOOC-bot knowledge 
 
base. 
3) 
The question to be answered must be text or speech input in English. 
4)  
The speech input and speech answers are only supported using Google  Chrome 
or Apple Safari web browsers. 
 
1.7 
Significant and Research Contribution 
 
This research is expected to offer a solution to overcome the existing shortcoming 
of MOOCs through a conversational bot. The conversational bot can be used in different 
courses because its knowledge can be added and customized. It also has the big advantage 
of providing unwearying 24-hour services to students which is a great help in MOOCs. In 
addition, the conversational bot has the convenience of accepting text or speech input and 
the replies can also be in text and speech. 
 
1.8 
Organization of the Thesis 
 
This thesis is organized in the following orders: 
 
 

    
8 
 
Chapter 1: Introduction 
 
This chapter introduces the background of MOOCs, the problems faced this topic, 
the proposed solution and the objectives of this research. 
 
Chapter 2: Literature Review 
 
This chapter reviews the literatures on MOOCs and the proposed solution which in 
this case is the conversational bot and its related fields.  
 
Chapter 3: Research Methodology 
 
This chapter discusses the methods used in this research to achieve the objectives 
and the system architecture. 
 
Chapter 4: Implementation 
 
This chapter explains the process of implementing the system architecture and the 
development of the prototype. 
 
Chapter 5: Evaluation and Result 
 
This chapter explains how the evaluation is done and displays the results of the 
evaluation. 
 
Chapter 6: Conclusion and Future Work 
 
This chapter concludes the overall study, discusses the strengths and weaknesses, 
and the recommendation for future work.  
 

    
9 
 
CHAPTER 2 
 
 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
 
 
2.1 
Introduction 
 
This chapter reviews Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs), conversational bots 
and its related topics. Artificial Intelligence (AI) is the field of study which inspires the 
exploration of many useful applications using a computer or a machine and one of it is 
conversational bots. Conversational bots are sometimes referred as conversation robots, 
conversation agents, chat bot, chatter bots or simply ‘bots’ but they have the same target 
which is to generate meaningful conversation with human users using natural language. 
For this purpose, Turing test (TT) is the well-known measurement to assess the 
performance of a conversation bot and many parties are using TT as the assessment of 
conversational bots such as the Loebner Prize and Chatterbox Challenge competition 
though they may be the modified version of the original TT. 
 
There are many types of conversational bots have been explored and developed 
over the years. They ranged from general conversational bots which do not specialized in 
any domain to those subject-matter expert bots. The purpose of these conversational bots 
can also be different; they may be developed for winning competition such as the Loebner 
Prize or for commercial needs such as attracting or assisting customers. This chapter also 
outlined the significant works in conversational bot which created impact or contribution to 
the development in this field. In addition, Artificial Intelligence Markup Language (AIML) 

    
10 
 
and Web Speech Application Programming Interface (API) which are part of MOOC-bot 
implementation are also further elaborated. 
 
2.2 
Massive Open Online Courses 
 
MOOCs were started in 2008 through the course, Connectivism and Connective 
Knowledge (CCK08) which was created and facilitated by George Siemens and Stephen 
Downes (Fini, 2009; Lowe, 2014). Since then there has been tremendous development in 
MOOCs with millions of dollars of grants funded the experiments of variety principles, 
courses, and tools in MOOCs. Until today it is still developing and there is no sign of 
winding down.  
 
MOOC is considered an education revolution as it differs from traditional course by 
allowing large enrollments of students from all over the world regardless of prior learning. 
Some even defined it as courses being offered free of charge to anyone who are interested 
to learn. However, this is still a debatable topic as there is still a need of a business model 
to keep MOOCs sustainable (Dellarocas and Van Alstyne, 2013; Valentin, 2014). Anyhow, 
MOOCs is seen as the route to cheap education which will always be attractive to the 
public (Lowe, 2014). 
 
As far as the model is concerned, Siemen (2013) has classified three types of 
MOOCs: xMOOCs, cMOOCs, and quasi-MOOCs. xMOOCs replicate the traditional 
university model where the teacher plays as the expert and learners become the consumer 
of the knowledge. Most universities are the driving force behind this model. These include 
Stanford through Coursera, MIT and Harvard through edX, Udacity, and many elite 
American institutions. Assignments are computer-graded and direct instructor feedback is 
scarce in xMOOCs due to the large number of students. cMOOCs are based on 

    
11 
 
connectivism that attempt to group the learners to interact with each other and share their 
personal knowledge in order to learn together. In contrast with xMOOCs, cMOOCs is not 
the type of teacher-student knowledge transfer approach but more of knowledge sharing 
between participants. It emphasizes on autonomy on choosing what content or skills to be 
learnt by the participant and the openness in the activities that participant can pursue using 
numerous tools and technologies. CCK08 was the MOOC delivered in cMOOC format. 
Quasi-MOOCs are more recognized as web-based tutorials in Open Educational Resources 
(OER) such as those offered by the Khan Academy and MIT’s OpenCourseWare (OCW). 
This model which intended for OER has neither automated grading such as those in 
xMOOCs nor social interaction connectivity of cMOOCs, but more of a range of loosely 
related educational resources collected together. 
 
MOOCs have various advantages and challenges. Jurenas (2014) has described the 
increased accessibility, enhanced student engagement, and lifelong learning opportunity as 
the advantages of MOOCs. LeCounte and Johnson (2014) opined that MOOCs provides 
the flexibility for working employees to train on specific skill-sets and also address skills 
gap problem for companies which need qualified applicants in fields such as accounting 
and finance, engineering, IT, etc. On the other hand, the issues that MOOCs faced are the 
challenges of high dropout rates, sustainability, cheating and plagiarism (Siemen, 2013). 
On top of these, Jurenas (2014) also included the lack of individual instruction and impact 
on professional life of the instructor as the additional challenges. LeCounte and Johnson 
(2014) were of the view that the creditability of MOOCs is questionable due to the industry 
standards for pedagogy and evaluation criteria, not to mention the credit transferability of 
MOOCs among institutions. 

    
12 
 
 
There are various arguments regarding the adoption of MOOCs with some 
supporting it and some against it as well as those suggest for improvement. Samuels (2014) 
is one of those against MOOCs with the views that learners tend to multitask and not 
concentrate in self-paced learning which takes them twice as long to complete it if not half 
as good. In addition, peer grading or computer-grading which eliminate the role of teachers 
is seen as destroying the academic business model. Having personal experience MOOC as 
a participant, Kauza (2014) is not totally against MOOC but truly felt the lack of 
interaction with the instructor made the learning experience less fulfilling and of the 
opinion that MOOCs are more suitable for curious learners or certifications renewal rather 
as a credit-bearing higher education. The same opinion is shared by Syapin (2014) who 
also was not satisfied with her MOOC experience but agreed that it would help in 
education cost. Knox et. al. (2014) called for the engagement of participant’s feedback in 
MOOC to explore and refine its design. With the emergence of less than a decade, MOOCs 
are still not fully mature and for sure will subject to refinement and correction. At the 
moment, MOOCs have not stopped but could be changing direction and morphing into 
next big thing (Krause, 2014). This study on MOOC conversational bot also plays the role 
of transforming MOOC into a more interactive platform. 
 
2.3 
Artificial Intelligence 
 
The term “Artificial Intelligence” (AI) was first introduced at a workshop held at 
Dartmouth College in 1956 which saw the necessary to separate it from other fields of 
study (Russell and Norvig, 2010). AI is a branch of computer science which attempts to 
produce intelligent machine that could exhibit the behavior similar to human intelligence. 
In AI essence, it is an attempt to simulate the intelligence of human mind. According to 

    
13 
 
Russell and Norvig (2010), AI system can be divided into four categories namely, thinking 
humanly, thinking rationally, acting humanly, and acting rationally as shown in Figure 2.1. 
 
 
Figure 2.1 Artificial Intelligence Categories (Russell and Norvig, 2010) 
 
Today AI is used in many areas. Some of the examples are natural language 
understanding, speech recognition, planning and scheduling, vision, robotic, game playing, 
and expert system. There are many achievements or successful applications in AI history. 
For examples, computer program Deep Blue defeated human champion in chess game 
(Goodman and Keene, 1997), Asimo intelligent walking robot is able to interact with 
human using gestures and voice (Sakagam et. al., 2002), National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration (NASA)'s Mars exploration rovers, Spirit and Opportunity has autonomous 
navigation abilities (Mak, et. al., 2005), Google search by voice (Schalkwyk et. al., 2010), 
and IBM Watson defeated two human champions in America live television quiz show, 

    
14 
 
Jeopardy! (Tesauro et. al., 2012). The listings of the significant milestones in AI are 
summarized in Figure 2.2 chronologically.  
 
 
Figure 2.2 Artificial Intelligence Milestones 
 
 
In practice, the progress of AI research was made possible with the creation of 
computer software and hardware. The software side supplied operating systems, 
programming languages, tools for writing modern programs, and databases. The advances 
of each generation of computer hardware have increased the computer’s performance and 
capacity, resulted a more powerful but cheaper machine. These favorable developments 
have also made AI application become common and affordable to incorporate in 
consumer’s products such as face recognition software in camera, floor-washing and 
vacuum-cleaning robots, self-adjusting washing machine for better clothes washing, self-
adjusting air-conditioning system according to the ambience, and many more. 
 
2.4 
Turing Test, Loebner Prize and Chatterbox Challenge 
 
Alan Turing was a highly influential pioneer in computer science as well as a 
brilliant mathematician. In 1950, through his famous article, “Computing Machinery and 

    
15 
 
Intelligence”, he proposed a behavioral intelligence test which he called it the “Imitation 
Game”. His challenge on 'Can machines think?’ in the paper brought the attention on the 
view of machine intelligence. The test which is more well-known as the Turing test (TT) 
now, suggested that a computer is considered “intelligent” if a human interrogator who 
posed some written questions is not able distinguish whether the written responses come 
from a human or a computer as illustrated in Figure 2.3. 
 
 
Figure 2.3 Turing Test (Goh, 2008) 
 
 
 
Turing (1950) believed that in about fifty years from that time (which supposed to 
be year 2000), computers would have achieved the storage capacity of about 109 which 
would see the test achieves the result of: “an average interrogator will not have more than 
70 percent chance of making the right identification after five minutes of questioning”. 
However, this notion proved to be wrong because as of today, the computer’s storage have 
reached 1GB which he required and even exceeded that, but so far no intelligent computer 
program is able to achieve that level. This challenge set by Turing appeared harder than he 
expected. 

    
16 
 
TT brought lasting impact and great contribution in AI but it was not without 
objections and arguments which saw various literatures debated about it for more than half 
a century. Gunderson (1971), Searle (1980), Block (1981), French (1990), and Shieber 
(2006) have all questioned the sufficiency of TT as the criterion of intelligence which only 
relies on behavioral properties exhibited by a subject. Hayes and Ford (1995) argued that 
TT was not a sensible goal and considered it harmful to AI because AI researchers adopted 
it seriously as a long-range goal and motivation in the field which they think limiting AI’s 
sights. However, there were also researchers that defended TT such as Moor (1976) and 
Leiber (1995) who argued that the critics had misunderstood or misinterpreted the real 
value of TT. 
The Loebner Prize is the longest running annual contest based on TT but with some 
modification from the original TT (Shieber, 1994). Started since 1991, it was established 
by Dr. Hugh Loebner with the reward of $100,000 and a gold medal for the first program 
which able to respond indistinguishably from a human while each year the most human-
like computer will win an annual cash prize and a bronze medal (Loebner, n.d.). Shieber 
(1994) has criticized that the competition has no clear purpose or any useful outcome but 
Loebner (1994) responded by defending the need of the competition as a tool to measure 
the state of the art in AI.  Saygin et. al. (2003) agreed that the award in Loebner Prize could 
influence research in AI by making people interested in creating TT-passing programs. As 
of to date no one has come close to winning the gold medal which is passing the 
unrestricted TT. 
The Chatterbox Challenge (CBC) is another annual TT-like contest which started in 
2001. CBC has different category of awards such as ‘best personality’, ‘conversational 
ability’, ‘most knowledgeable’, ‘best overall’, etc. Unlike Loebner Prize which has specific 

    
17 
 
venue for the competition, CBC is conducted over the Internet. This has raised the question 
on whether human could be intervening behind the system (Vallverdú et. al., 2010; Shah 
and Warwick, 2010). Due to this, CBC is seen carries less weight in conversational bot 
benchmark. Nevertheless, CBC is still a platform to test the state-of-the-art of 
conversational bots and comparison of technology. 
 
2.5 
Conversational Bots 
 
One of the earliest and well-known works in conversational bot was the program 
called ELIZA. It was developed by Weizenbaum (1966) to play the role of a psychotherapist 
to a patient. This research was considered a breakthrough in AI at that time because it 
demonstrated a form of communication between man and computer in natural language. 
Although ELIZA was far from passing the real TT but being able to convince the 
interrogator to continue the conversation with the program led people to believe that it had 
demonstrated the responses in a Turing-like test. Figure 2.4 shows a sample dialogue of 
ELIZA from Weizenbaum (1966). 
 
 
Figure 2.4 Sample Dialogue between ELIZA and Patient 

    
18 
 
As ELIZA was simulating a Rogerian psychotherapist, it could use the trick of 
rephrasing the patient’s statements as questions and the patient will likely to open up 
his/her personal problems which will make the conversation continues. Weizenbaum was 
surprised that his program could also deceive normal people into believing it (Saygin et. 
al., 2003). There were suggestions went as far to replace psychotherapists with such kind 
of programs so that the therapy become cheap and could be done on a larger scale (Colby 
et. al, 1966). 
 
ELIZA gave the impression of being more intelligent than it actually was. It has 
neither the understanding of English nor having the mind of a psychiatrist. It was 
implemented using pattern recognition according to decomposition rules and keywords 
substitutions according to reassemble rules where both were pre-defined scripts. If a 
keyword or phrase could not be identified, context-free remark such as “please go on” or 
“does that have anything to do with” the previous topic will be used.  Figure 2.5 shows the 
decomposition rules and reassemble rules used in ELIZA. 
 
 

    
19 
 
 
Figure 2.5 Decomposition Rules and Reassemble Rules with the ‘*’ Represent Any Words 
or Phrases 
 
 
Inspired by ELIZA, Kenneth Mark Colby who was a psychiatrist wrote his own 
version of program to simulate the mind of a paranoid patient in the 70’s. His model called 
PARRY had personality and emotional state such as ‘fear’, ‘anger’ and ‘mistrust’ which 
would determine its responses to the interviewer. This was done by having two separate 
modules, the parsing module and the interpretation-action module. The first module is used 
to interpret the meaning of the input in natural language and it is passed to the second 
module which keeps the current state of mind to decide the linguistic actions to respond 
(Colby, 1975).  
PARRY was tested in Turing-like test to determine whether experienced 
psychiatrists could distinguish between the program and a real human patient (Colby, 
1981). The overall test results showed that psychiatric judges were unable to make the 
relevant distinctions between PARRY and real paranoid patients. This was due to the fact 

    
20 
 
that paranoid people have irrational and obsessive behavior, therefore, inappropriate 
responses seemed reasonable. It may be simpler to simulate paranoid behavior but there is 
still clever logic that made PARRY simulates effectively. Figure 2.6 shows the 
conversation between PARRY and a human psychiatrist where it answered well and 
attempted to introduce its own topic. 
 
 
Figure 2.6 Conversations between PARRY and Human (Colby, 1981) 
 
 
Interestingly, ELIZA and PARRY were put on conversation for a demonstration in 
1973. Figure 2.7 shows part of their conversation. The beginning of their conversation was 
reasonable but as the conversation went on, both were trying to repeat what the other said. 
This would not be difficult for someone in TT to decide whether it is a program or a 
human. 

    
21 
 
 
Figure 2.7 Conversations between PARRY and ELIZA (Cerf, 1973) 
 
 
In 1990 Dr. Hugh Loebner founded the Loebner Prize with the aims of promoting 
AI research and formalizing the Turing test. The competition offers the Grand Prize of 
$100,000 and a gold medal for the first program which able to respond indistinguishably 
from a human, while each year the most human-like computer will win an annual cash 
prize and a bronze medal. Since its inception, the competition has attracted the 
development of various conversational bots to win the prize each year. The winners of the 
Loebner Prize from 1991 to present are listed in Table 2.1. Among these winners, the 
notable ones are those that won more than once such as Albert One, ALICE, and 
Jabberwacky. 
 
 
 

    
22 
 
Table 2.1 The Winners of Loebner Prize from 1991 to 2014 (Loebner, n.d) 
Year 
Author 
Conversation Bot 
Year 
Author 
Conversation Bot 
1991 
Joseph Weintraub 
PC Therapist 
2003 
Jorgen Pirner 
Jabberwock 
1992 
Joseph Weintraub 
PC Professor 
2004 
Richard Wallace 
ALICE 
1993 
Joseph Weintraub 
PC Politician 
2005 
Rollo Carpenter 
George 
(Jabberwacky) 
1994 
Thomas Whalen 
TIPS 
2006 
Rollo Carpenter 
Joan (Jabberwacky) 
1995 
Joseph Weintraub 
PC Therapist 
2007 
Robert Medeksza 
Ultra Hal 
1996 
Jason Hutchens 
Hex 
2008 
Fred Roberts 
Elbot 
1997 
David Levy 
Converse 
2009 
David Levy 
Do-Much-More 
1998 
Robby Garner 
Albert One 
2010 
Bruce Wilcox 
Suzette 
1999 
Robby Garner 
Albert One 
2011 
Bruce Wilcox 
Rosette 
2000 
Richard Wallace 
ALICE 
2012 
Mohan Embar 
Chip Vivant 
2001 
Richard Wallace 
ALICE 
2013 
Steve Worswick 
Mitsuku 
2002 
Kevin Copple 
Ella 
2014 
Bruce Wilcox 
Rose 
 
 
ALICE (Artificial Linguistic Internet Computer Entity) is a conversational bot 
developed by Dr. Richard Wallace and won the Loebner Prize in 2000, 2001, and 2004. It 
was built with Artificial Intelligence Markup Language (AIML) which is a of Extensible 
Mark-up Language (XML)-based language. AIML was created by Dr. Richard Wallace 
and the Alicebot open source community between 1995 and 2000. ALICE uses simple 
stimulus-response technique to return matching response to the user, similar to those used 
by ELIZA but it has more categories of knowledge compare to ELIZA. The stimulus-
response structure of ALICE resembles Case-Based Reasoning (CBR) paradigm (Wallace, 
2009). Figure 2.8 shows part of the conversation between the judge and ALICE during the 
Loebner Prize competition. 

    
23 
 
 
Figure 2.8 Conversations between ALICE and Judge During the Loebner Prize 
Competition (Loebner, 2004) 
 
ALICE can be added with new responses using AIML content. This AIML content 
can be created by the botmaster with anticipatory approach where he/she will try to guess 
all or most of the likely ways clients might ask the same question, or express the same 
statement. Another approach of creating AIML content would be based on a backward-
looking log file analysis. In this method, the botmaster will check on the logged 
conversations and look for "incorrect replies" in the dialogue. This will be followed by 
rewriting new categories for those queries. The backward looking approach is in 
accordance with Zipf's Law (Zipf, 1949) where a query uttered by a person will most likely 
be uttered by others again later. This will ensure that the most commonly uttered sentences 
are taken care of (Wallace, 2009). 
The set of AIML scripts for ALICE has been made available for free download at 
Google Code. It is known as the Annotated ALICE AIML files (AAA) comprising the 
brain of the award winning conversation bot. The AAA files which mostly compatible with 
all AIML 1.0.1 enable botmasters to easily clone ALICE’s brain and thus reduce the huge 

    
24 
 
efforts to create and edit the AIML contents (Wallace, 2011). AIML technology has spread 
widely due to the availability of AAA files and AIML under General Public License 
(GPL). Beside this, many AIML interpreters has been made available in different 
programming language such as Lisp, Java, PHP, Ruby, C++ and many more. Each 
interpreter has its own name, for example, Program D is the AIML interpreter for Java and 
Program O is the interpreter for PHP. Table 2.2 lists all the name of the interpreters and 
their programming language.  
 
Table 2.2 AIML Interpreter (ALICE AI Foundation, n.d.) 
Interpreter 
Language 
Program Z 
Lisp 
Chatterbean 
Java 
Program D 
Java 
Program O 
PHP 
Program E 
PHP 
Program R 
Ruby 
Program V 
Perl 
Program P 
Pascal 
Program Y 
Python 
Program # 
.NET 
Program Q 
C++ 
libaiml 
C++ 
J-Alice 
C++ 
RebeccaAIML 
Object Oriented C++ 
Program M 
SETL 
 
ALICE AI Foundation (n.d.) claimed that AIML has captured more than 80% of the 
world market for conversational bot technology. Indeed, due to the availability of AIML 
under GPL, there are many conversational bot implemented based on AIML technology 
whether in education, government, medical, entertainment or commercial. Mahapatra et. al. 
(2012) created AIML-based chatter bot as interface tasks in E-Government interactive 
support systems with the aim to address audience who are computer illiterate. De Gasperis 
(2010) used AIML to build the knowledge of an Italian chatter bot. Persona-AIML (Galvao 

    
25 
 
et. al., 2004) is the architecture for developing chatter bots with personality which favors 
the reuse of AIML bases. Humorist Bot (Augello et. al., 2008) is an AIML conversational 
agent with humoristic features which was embedded as a Yahoo instant messaging contact. 
There are also researches which integrate AIML as part of their architecture or model. 
Among these works are multimodal human-robot interaction with AIML chatter bot 
system (Tan et. al., 2012), and Artificial Intelligent Neural-network Identity (AINI) 
architecture (Goh, et. al., 2007) in human-computer communication system. 
In education field, CHAtteR Learning Interface Entity (CHARLIE) is the AIML 
chatter bot responsible for communication between the INtelligent Educational System 
(INES) and the students in natural language (Mikic et. al, 2009). T-Bot is the tutor bot 
which able to provide domain specific answers in natural language according to course 
contents when requested by students while Q-Bot is an evaluation bot which keep track 
and supervises the student progress through personalized questionnaires. Both are 
implemented with AIML in e-learning platform (Mikic et. al., 2008). University Faqbot 
(UFAQbot) is another example of AIML chat bot for education purpose. UFAQbot served 
as undergraduate advisor in student information desk to help students with admission and 
course information (Ghose and Barua, 2013). 
Despite the popularity of AIML, it is not without its limitation.  For example, the 
use of depth-first search algorithm in AIML to retrieve the responses does not optimize the 
results because it only finds the first available solution, and there is no spell-check function 
in AIML (Lu, et. al., 2006). This has prompted the researches to enhance AIML-based 
conversational bot. Among them is AZ-ALICE which built on ALICE Program D as the 
chat engine but customized with perl script that allows users to evaluate and suggest new 
patterns (Schumaker et. al., 2006). Intentional AIML (iAIML) is the mechanism to treat 

    
26 
 
intention information in AIML chatter bots by incorporating intentions and rules used in 
sentence interpretation and generation (Neves et. al., 2006). Torrey et. al. (2006) improved 
their robot dialogue interaction by replacing AIML’s depth-first search with an A* search, 
and added priorities and a system to find the best match to a question. Weerawarna et. al. 
(2011) overcome weaknesses in existing AIML chatter bots by introducing new scripting 
language called CyberMate Scripting Language (CSL) which comes with CSL integrated 
development environment (IDE) to develop the scripts and CSL parser to compile CSL 
scripts to AIML. 
Another Loebner Prize winner, Jabberwacky was created by British programmer 
Rollo Carpenter. Jabberwacky was also using contextual pattern matching techniques but 
what makes it unique was that it learnt from conversation which models the way humans 
learn language, facts, context and rules. This makes it able to learn foreign language, slang 
English, word games, and jokes through conversation. Without hard-coded rules and long 
term memory, Jabberwacky relies entirely on the feedback from the conversation logs 
which it recorded for the responses. Jabberwacky’s incorporation of AI purely from 
conversation only suitable for general intelligence and character but not meant for business 
or commercial purpose. Figure 2.9 shows a snippet of conversation between Jabberwacky 
and a human user. 

    
27 
 
 
Figure 2.9 Conversations between Jabberwacky and a Human User (Carpenter, 2009) 
 
In commercial environment, conversational bots usually act as the virtual customer 
service agent which able to provide 24/7 services. The benefits include offering friendly, 
tireless services, and the ability to answer the most common questions. Anna is an example 
of commercial conversational bot. She is the female virtual assistant for IKEA, the 
Swedish furniture retailers. Anna can be seen as a 2D animated image wearing official 
company’s theme of yellow shirt with blue collar at certain countries IKEA’s website. She 
accepts typed input and reply in text in many languages. The role of Anna is mainly to 
guide users in IKEA-related enquiries such as products, prices, sizes, delivery, etc. Anna 
will also open related pages in a browser window to facilitate user who are looking for 
information. There is not much information published regarding the technique used behind 
Anna’s creation because it is developed by a commercial company called Artificial 
Solutions. However, Shah and Pavlika (2005) mentioned that Anna was based on 
technology of Elbot which is the winner of 2008 Loebner Prize and runner up in year 2003.  
 
 

    
28 
 
2.6 
Artificial Intelligence Mark-up Language (AIML) 
 
AIML was designed by Dr. Richard Wallace and Alicebot free software community 
to create stimulus-response chat bots. It is a derivative of XML with a specific structure. 
As an XML-compliant language, AIML also respects the grammar specification in XML 
such as the syntax of comments, white space handling, end-of-line handling, the need of 
closing tag, and so on. An AIML file should be saved with “.aiml” extension, for example: 
“bot.aiml” and it must enclose “<aiml>” tag in file. The “<aiml>” tag may contain the 
AIML version as shown in line 1 of Figure 2.10 to avoid confusion because there is more 
than one version such as 1.0, 1.0.1 and the latest is 2.0 which its specification is still under 
draft (Wallace, 2014). 
 
The basic unit of knowledge in AIML is called “category” and it is written as 
“<category>” in AIML file. Usually the more categories an AIML file has, the more 
knowledge it contains. Each “category” is followed with input or question known as 
“pattern”, written as “<pattern>” and the answer is matched with one or more output called 
“template” which is written as “<template>”. The AIML pattern is consisting of only of 
words, spaces, and the wildcard symbols ‘_’ and ‘*’. Beside this, there are two types of 
optional context called "that" (<that> tag) and "topic" (<topic> tag) which are part of the 
AIML main elements but not compulsory to be present. The “<that>” tag tells the system 
to refer to the last sentence presented by the chatterbot while the “<topic>” tag is used to 
organize subjects or topics that only applied to an active topic variable. The basic units of 
AIML which are mandatory in AIML file are shown in Figure 2.10. 

    
29 
 
 
Figure 2.10 Basic Units in AIML 
 
 
In the templates, there are additional tags that can be used according to the needs of 
the chat bot. Table 2.3 summarizes some of the commonly-used tags and their functions. In 
addition, AIML also supports the interface of other languages and systems. The 
“<system>” tag executes any program accessible as an operating system shell command, 
and inserts the results in the reply. On the other hand, the “<javascript>” tag allows the 
execution of JavaScript code inside the templates. 
 
Table 2.3 List of Some of the Tags Used in Template and Their Functions (ALICE AI 
Foundation, 2011) 
 

    
30 
 
 
An AIML interpreter will store all the categories in a tree using Graphmaster 
object. The goal is to make pattern matching efficient by not searching in a brute force 
manner. The Graphmaster works by looking for the section that matches the first letter or 
word and skip to another section that contains the set of the next letter or word. The 
process continues until the word or phrase is found. This is done with the help of a set of 
nodes called Nodemappers. The Nodemappers map branches from each node where the 
branches are either single words or wildcards. The matching steps in Graphmaster begin 
with matching the "_" listings first followed by alphabetical listings next. If no matches are 
found, the patterns beginning with "*" will be searched as shown in Figure 2.11.  
 
 
Figure 2.11 Matching Algorithm in Graphmaster (ALICE AI Foundation, 2011) 
 
 
The Graphmaster is a metaphor of a file system hierarchy whether in Windows, 
Unix or Mac system.  It is analogous to a file’s path name such as "C:\My Documents\My 
Pictures\photo.jpg" that represents the file’s location within the system. The AIML pattern 
of "I LIKE TO *" is equivalent to "g:\I\LIKE\TO\star" which start with the "g:\I\" folder 
followed by "g:\I\LIKE\" subfolder that contains a single file called "template.txt" which is 
the template of AIML (Wallace, 2007).  

    
31 
 
2.7 
Web Speech Application Programming Language (API) 
 
Web Speech API provides JavaScript interface for developer to integrate speech 
recognition and speech synthesis into web applications. Speech recognition is an 
alternative input method which works by accepting speech input and converts them to text. 
Speech input has several benefits, for example, it enhances accessibility for visually-
impaired users and offers as a hands-free input method (Adorf, 2013). On the other hand, 
speech synthesis is the act of transforming text to speech. Speech synthesis is incorporated 
in Text-to-Speech (TTS) applications to provide better user experience. 
 
Even though Web Speech API specification is included in HyperText Markup 
Language 5 (HTML5), so far only Google Chrome and Apple Safari browsers supported 
them (Walther, 2015). One of the drawbacks of Web Speech API is user have to grant the 
application permission to use the microphone for speech recognition purpose. If the page is 
not hosted on Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure (HTTPS), the permission needs to be 
granted for each utterance. This can be overcome by applying Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) 
certificate to the website in order to establish an encrypted link between the website and 
client and this will be reflected with the HTTPS uniform resource identifier (URL). By 
using HTTPS hosting, the user only needs to grant the permission once even if he/she 
returns to the website multiple times. 
 
2.8 
Summary 
 
This chapter gives an overview on MOOCs from a few perspectives such as types 
of MOOCs, advantages, and challenges. One of the issues in MOOCs which is the lack of 
interactivity with the instructor has brought conversational bot into the picture to fill in this 
gap. Conversational bot which is considered part of AI’s application is always being 

    
32 
 
measured in Turing test envisioned by Alan Turing. Although some may have objected TT 
as the focus in AI research, the Loebner Prize and Chatterbox Challenge competition has 
kept it alive in the past 20 over years with annual prize to attract participants. As of to date, 
the grand prize of Loebner Prize remains unclaimed but the techniques in conversational 
bot has evolved with AIML from ALICE as one of the impactful outcomes. AIML may not 
be perfectly intelligent technology but its capability to deliver appropriate responses in 
domain-restricted areas (Schumaker et. al, 2006; Mikic et. al., 2008; Tan et. al, 2012; 
Ghose and Barua, 2013) is convincing enough to be the design behind MOOC-bot. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

    
33 
 
 
CHAPTER 3 
 
 
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
 
 
3.1 
Introduction 
 
Research methodology is important to solve the research problem systematically. 
This chapter discusses the methodology and design used in this research with the aim of 
building a MOOC-bot prototype. Having reviewed the AIML technology in the previous 
chapter, it will now be applied in MOOC-bot to play the role of conversational bot that can 
respond to course-related enquiries. The prototype of MOOC-bot will have the domain 
knowledge of “MITI 5113 Artificial Intelligence” course taught in UTeM. 
 
3.2 
Type of Research Method 
 
This study is based on qualitative research because it cannot be easily quantified in 
numerical data as needed in quantitative research. Initially largely used in psychology and 
social sciences, the use of qualitative research has been growing in the past decades due to 
the tendencies for empirical research in tandem with modernism (Flick, 2009). Qualitative 
research is an approach which involves inductive data analysis and data interpretation from 
the researcher (Creswell, 2013). For conversational bot’s research, there are many of them 
conducted in qualitative method (Benotti et. al., 2014; Ghose and Barua, 2013; Dybala et. 

    
34 
 
al., 2009) because Turing test which is popular among researchers in this field is also based 
on qualitative assessment (Browne, 1991). 
 
3.3 
Research Design 
 
In order to build MOOC-bot, the software development model of prototype will be 
used to ensure a rapid development in a less expensive way. Prototype is a direct method to 
provide the picture of the proposed system to the users. According to Pressman and Maxim 
(2014), prototype that has been evaluated by user can be used to refine the requirements of 
the software.  Prototype can be adapted to fulfill user’s requirements and at the same time 
the developer can have better understanding of the requirements based on the feedback. 
The changes and suggestions done in prototype stage can avoid sudden change after the 
completion of the system.  
 
Prototype methodology has two strategies: requirement prototype which is also 
known as throwaway prototype, and evolutionary prototype. The development of MOOC-
bot would be using evolutionary prototype because instead of discarding the prototype, it 
will be refine to become a real system. The prototype which has been verified will be used 
as part of the final system. Figure 3.1 shows the activities involved in evolutionary 
prototype. 

    
35 
 
Figure 3.1 Evolutionary Prototype Model 
 
 
Based on Figure 3.1, the first activity in prototype system development is to 
identify the system requirements. This activity in MOOC-bot would be identifying the 
syllabus and lectures given in “Artificial Intelligence”. After that, the specification 
framework will be determined to produce MOOC-bot prototype. This prototype will be 
evaluated by lecturer and users repetitively until it is able to fulfill the questions of 
majority users. The next activity is to create the design and implement the system. After 
the system is completed, it will be verified to ensure that the system is perfect. 
 
Generally, evolutionary prototype strategy consists of five phases as described 
below. All these five phases will be used in MOOC-bot development: 
i) 
Planning Phase 
 
This phase will determine what type of methodology to be used and identify 
 
what are the current problems.  
ii) 
Analysis Phase 
Identify system 
requirements 
(usually informal) 
Determine the system’s 
specification 
framework 
Plan the development 
of prototype 
Development of 
prototype 
Prototype evaluation 
System 
component 
Design and 
implement the system 
System verification 
Perfect system 
Improvement needed 

    
36 
 
 
This phase will identify and produce the end-user specification. 
iii) 
Design Phase 
 
This phase will produce the prototype design based on the end user 
 
specification.  
iv) 
Prototype Development Phase 
 
This phase will involve the development of the prototype. 
v) 
Prototype Testing Phase 
 
This phase will test the developed prototype and show to the users. 
 
3.3.1 Planning Phase 
In this phase, the selection of which methodology to be used will be done. 
Evolutionary prototype methodology has been chosen because of its advantage to provide a 
working model to the end users to better understand how MOOC-bot would work before 
the complete system. The existing problems of MOOC are identified and described in 
Chapter 1.  
 
3.3.2 Analysis Phase 
 
This phase will study the specification of the system to be developed based on the 
problems that have been identified in planning phase such as the need to serve huge 
number of learners and to provide 24-hour service for the convenience of students from 
different time zones. The knowledge needed for this prototype such as course contents of 
“Artificial Intelligence” and basic general knowledge can be obtained from: 
i) 
Lecture Note 
The lecture notes are provided by the instructor of this course. 

    
37 
 
ii) 
Book 
The main reference book of the course is “Artificial Intelligence: A Modern 
Approach” (Russell and Novig, 2010). 
iii) 
Annotated ALICE AIML (AAA) Files 
 
The AAA files which provided by ALICE AI Foundation contain a lot general 
knowledge which should be sufficient for MOOC-bot to handle general 
conversation. 
 
3.3.3 Design Phase 
 
After identifying the user specifications in analysis phase, the design of the 
prototype can be produced. The design is MOOC-bot’s system architecture which consists 
of chat interface, knowledge base, AIML interpreter and MOOCs website. The detailed 
description of the system architecture is explained in 3.4. 
 
3.3.4 Prototype Development Phase 
 
After completed the prototype design, the actual prototype will be developed. The 
first prototype that fulfills the basic requirements will be developed and shown to the 
course instructor. MOOC-bot prototype will be integrated with the MOOC website. This 
prototype will be able to gather results from the usage of users at the website by referring 
to the conversation logs saved in the database. Subsequently, the second prototype will be 
done by improving the first prototype knowledge base by analyzing the conversation logs. 
The second prototype will repeat the same process as the first prototype. The last prototype 
which is able to answer most of the questions rationally will be used as the real system.  

    
38 
 
 
The development is done in Windows system and can be tested using local web 
server-client environment. This can be done by installing Apache web server in Windows. 
WampServer package which can be downloaded from the Internet can automatically create 
Apache, Hypertext Preprocessor (PHP) and MySQL database in Windows when installed. 
It also comes with PhpMyAdmin to manage the databases conveniently. Once WampServer 
is installed, the root directory “www” will be automatically created at “c:\wamp\www”. The 
MOOC-bot application will be placed in the root directory and can be accessed using 
“localhost”. The software and hardware needed for MOOC-bot development are 
summarized in Table 3.1 and Table 3.2 respectively. 
 
Table 3.1 Software Involved in MOOC-bot Development 
No 
Software 
Function 
1 
Microsoft Windows 7 
As server. 
2 
Apache Web Server 
As web server. 
3 
Hypertext Preprocessor (PHP) 
Programming language of the system. 
4 
Google Chrome 
As web client. 
5 
MySQL 
Relational database management system 
(RDBMS). 
6 
Macromedia Dreamweaver 8 
For interface design and PHP 
programming. 
7 
Microsoft Word 2010 
For project documentation. 
8 
Notepad++ 
To edit AIML file. 
9 
WampServer 2.5 
Installer for latest releases of Apache, 
MySQL and PHP. 
 
Table 3.2 Hardware used in MOOC-bot Development 
No 
Hardware 
Usage 
1 
Laptop 
Work station to develop MOOC-bot. 
2 
Storage devices (External 
hard disk/Pendrive) 
To store all the materials and reports as a 
backup for the project. 
 
 
 

    
39 
 
3.3.5 Prototype Testing Phase 
 
In prototype testing, the test is done to ensure the logic is correct and able to 
produce the expected result. In this case, MOOC-bot should be able to respond to enquiries 
related to the domain knowledge which is the course’s contents and some of the general 
questions. This test can be done by using some of the past questions posed by judges in 
conversational bot’s contest such as Loebner Prize and Chatterbox Challenge Competition.  
 
 
3.4 
System Architecture 
 
MOOC-bot is integrated into MOOCs website as its chat interface. Just like any 
web application, it works using client-server concept. The MOOCs website and AIML 
interpreter are hosted at Apache web server while the database and knowledge base are 
using MySQL that runs at the server. The web server works by translating PHP codes into 
HyperText Markup Language (HTML) while the web client such as Internet Explorer, 
Google Chrome, and etc. will translate the client script such as JavaScript before display to 
the users. If the user is using Google Chrome browser and chooses to use speech 
recognition, the Web Speech API will convert speech to text before sending to AIML 
interpreter. The result will be displayed in text and speech. The general database is used to 
save MOOCs website related information such as user’s profile, course’s subscription and 
so on. 
 
When a user poses questions to MOOC-bot’s chat interface, the question will be 
processed by AIML interpreter by referring to the knowledge base which contains the 
course’s knowledge, the course’s frequent asked questions (FAQ) and the general 
knowledge that comes from AAA files. The botmaster can constantly maintain the 

    
40 
 
knowledge base by adding the knowledge in AIML file format. Figure 3.2 illustrates the 
overview of the system architecture.  
 
 
Figure 3.2 MOOC-bot’s System Architecture 
 
 
Bot Master 
Queries 
AAA Files 
User 
Responses 
AIML 
Knowledge Base 
Course 
Knowledge 
Course FAO 
MOOCs website 
Chat Interface 
Apache Web Server 
AIML Interpreter 
(Program O) 
Graphmaster 
Nodemapper 
General Database 
User 
User 
AIML files 
Speech Recognition 
Speech Synthesis 

    
41 
 
3.4.1 Chat Interface 
 
MOOC-bot’s chat interface is integrated with MOOCs website. The chat interface 
is located at the bottom of the website as shown in Figure 3.3. The function of chat 
interface is to receive text or speech input from the user and pass it to the AIML 
interpreter. For voice recognition, user needs to press the microphone button and grant 
permission for the application to receive voice input. The results from the interpreter will 
be displayed and read out to the users if the speaker is turned on. Figure 3.4 shows the chat 
interface by itself. 
 
 
Figure 3.3 Chat Interface in MOOCs Website 
 

    
42 
 
 
 
Figure 3.4 MOOC-bot Chat Interface 
 
 
3.4.2 Knowledge Base 
 
The knowledge of MOOC-bot consists of the course’s knowledge, the course’s 
FAQ and the general knowledge that comes from AAA files. The course’s knowledge is 
“Artificial Intelligence” offered by UTeM and the syllabus is shown in Table 3.3. The 
course’s FAQ can be added into the knowledge base using backward-looking log file 
analysis by the botmaster. This is done by reading the logged conversations and look for 
frequently asked questions in the dialogue and add the responses to the knowledge base 
using AIML file. This will ensure that the most common enquiries are taken care of. The 
AAA files comprise the brain of the award winning conversation bot ALICE. The 
availability of these files for free download at Google Code makes the job of cloning 
ALICE’s brain easy. 
 
Table 3.3 Syllabus of “Artificial Intelligence” 
Lecture 
Lesson  
Chapter 1 
Introduction to Artificial Intelligence 
Chapter 2 
Intelligent Agents 
Chapter 3 
Problem Solving by Searching 
Chapter 4 
Adversarial Search 
Chapter 5 
Logical Agents And Fuzzy Logic 
Chapter 6 
Knowledge Representation 
 

    
43 
 
 
An AIML file can be created using any text editor such as Notepad++ and saved 
with “.aiml” extension. It is a derivation of an XML file with a specific structure. The 
course’s knowledge and course’s FAQ are written in AIML files and save into the 
knowledge base. An example of AIML file content for the course’s knowledge is shown in 
Figure 3.5. 
 
 
Figure 3.5 Example of an AIML File for Course’s Knowledge 
 
3.4.3 AIML Interpreter 
 
MOOC-bot is using Program O as its AIML interpreter. Program O is an AIML 
engine written in PHP and uses MySQL database to store the bot’s information, including 
the AIML files used to generate the bot's responses. It is available for free download at 
https://github.com/Program-O/Program-O. Program O is suitable for MOOC-bot because 
it is implemented in web environment which able to be executed independently and thus 
made it possible to be integrated to the MOOCs website. The text or speech input from the 
chat interface will be processed by the interpreter by performing pattern matching with the 
AIML content in the knowledge base using depth-first search. The first matching response 

    
44 
 
will be returned to the chat interface. The support of recursion in AIML makes it simple 
but yet powerful in pattern matching. 
 
3.4.4 MOOCs Website 
 
The MOOCs website is the initiative of UTeM to provide massive open online 
courses for students. For the prototype, it is hosted at http://ainibot.com/bot/mooc.php. A 
student can register for a course, download lecture notes, take quiz, submit assignments, 
and participate in a forum from here. The progress of a student can also be tracked and 
monitored by the instructor. The integration of MOOC-bot’s chat interface in this website 
complements the role of the website.  
 
3.5 
Summary 
 
This chapter gives the overview of the research method, research design, and 
system architecture. Qualitative research approach discussed in this study is in line with the 
research objectives which are qualitative in nature. The prototype of MOOC-bot is part of 
the research design to provide user experience in order to assess its performance in 
qualitative way. The system architecture presented in this chapter is essential to build the 
conversational bot for MOOCs. The chat interface, knowledge base, and AIML interpreter 
are the most important components in MOOC-bot’s design. 
 
 
 
 
 

    
45 
 
 
CHAPTER 4 
 
 
IMPLEMENTATION 
 
 
4.1 
Introduction 
 
This chapter discusses the implementation of MOOC-bot prototype. Having 
reviewed the architecture in the previous chapter, MOOC-bot will be developed based 
on the design which includes chat interface, knowledge base, and AIML interpreter. In 
order to prepare for the development, the environment needs to be setup up locally and 
the relevant software needs to be installed. Subsequently, the MOOC-bot’s knowledge 
can be built up using the interpreter’s interface. With the appropriate environment for 
development, the prototype can be developed and used for performance assessment in 
the next chapter.  
 
4.2 
Software Installation 
MOOC-bot is a web-based conversational bot using Program O interpreter. 
Program O is an AIML interpreter written in PHP and uses MySQL database to store the 
data. In order to create server-client environment in development’s computer, Apache web 
server needs to be installed. WampServer package which is free for download at its website 
provides the convenience of automatically create Apache, PHP and MySQL database in 
Windows when installed. It also comes with PhpMyAdmin tool to manage the MySQL 

    
46 
 
database conveniently. Program O which was first released in 2009 can also be freely 
downloaded from the Internet. The following sections explain the installation steps of 
WampServer and Program O. 
 
4.2.1 WampServer Installation 
 
At WampServer’s website (http://www.wampserver.com/en), there are two versions 
of Windows installers available for download, 32-bits and 64-bits as shown in Figure 4.1.  
 
 
Figure 4.1 WampServer’s Website 
 
 
After downloaded the suitable installer, run it to start the installation process and 
follow the steps below:  
i)  
When the installation screen appeared, click ‘Next’ button to proceed as shown  in 
Figure 4.2. 
 

    
47 
 
 
Figure 4.2 WampServer’s Initial Screen 
 
ii) 
Read the license agreement that appears on the screen and select ‘I accept the 
 
agreement’ then click ‘Next’ button as shown in Figure 4.3 to continue. 
 

    
48 
 
 
Figure 4.3 WampServer License Agreement 
 
iii) 
The default path to install WampServer is “c:\wamp”. Choose the desire path 
 
and click ‘Next’ as shown in Figure 4.4.   

    
49 
 
 
Figure 4.4 WampServer Installation Path 
 
iv) 
Choose the preference of whether to add Quick Launch icon and Desktop icon  for 
WampServer then click ‘Next’ button as shown in Figure 4.5. 
 

    
50 
 
 
Figure 4.5 WampServer Installation Option 
 
v) 
After confirm all the selections, click ‘Install’ button to begin the installation  
as 
shown in Figure 4.6. 
 

    
51 
 
 
Figure 4.6 WampServer Installation Confirmation 
 
vi) 
The installation will begin to run as shown in Figure 4.7. 
 

    
52 
 
 
Figure 4.7 WampServer Installation in Progress 
 
vii) 
After successful installation, the screen as shown in Figure 4.8 will appear 
 
and WampServer is ready to be used. 
 
 

    
53 
 
 
Figure 4.8 WampServer Installation Completed 
 
viii) 
WampServer can be launched from the Start Menu, Desktop icon or Quick 
 
Launch icon (if Desktop icon or Quick Launch icon were selected at Step iv)  
as 
shown in Figure 4.9. 
 
 
Figure 4.9 WampServer Program at Start Menu 
 
4.2.2 Program O Installation 
 
Program O can be downloaded at https://github.com/Program-O/Program-O. After 
downloaded the program, the folder can be renamed to desire name, for example “Bot”. 
Subsequently the “Bot” folder can be placed at the server’s path such “c:\wamp\www” 

    
54 
 
which is the path for local Apache web server and it can be accessed using “localhost/Bot” 
address. 
 
In order to allow Program O to use MySQL database, an empty database needs to 
be created upfront. This can be done easily using PhpMyAdmin tool which comes together 
with 
WampServer’s 
installation. 
PhpMyAdmin 
can 
be 
accessed 
from 
“http://localhost/phpmyadmin/” as shown in Figure 4.10. 
 
 
Figure 4.10 PhpMyAdmin Page 
 
 
New database can be created conveniently by entering the database’s name and 
press the ‘Create’ button as shown in Figure 4.11. 
 
 
Figure 4.11 Database Creation 

    
55 
 
 
After that, new user and password for that database with full permissions need to be 
created so that Program O can access with that credential. A new user can be added by 
clicking the “Add a new User” link as shown in Figure 4.12. 
 
 
Figure 4.12 The PhpMyAdmin Interface for Adding New User 
 
 
After filling the necessary information such as user’s name and password, press 
‘Go’ button to complete the new user adding process as shown in Figure 4.13. 
 
 
Figure 4.13 Page for Adding New User 
 
 
Next, complete Program O’s installation by accessing the program’s site. For local 
path, it can be accessed from “localhost/Bot” using Internet browser such as Google 
Chrome. 
Program 
O 
will 
automatically 
direct 
the 
page 
to 
“localhost/bot/install/install_programo.php” as shown in Figure 4.14 which needs to be 

    
56 
 
filled up. There is a “Help Page” link to explain the meaning for each field. The 
information of the database which was created in the previous step needs to be used to fill 
up the Database Configuration portion. 
 
 
Figure 4.14 Program O Installation Page 
 
 
After filled-in all the fields, click the ‘Save’ button to complete the installation. The 
installation completed page as shown in Figure 4.15 will appear to indicate successful 
installation. The installation page will not appear again the next time when accessing 
“localhost/Bot” because the configuration file has been overwritten after the installation 
completed. 
 
 
 

    
57 
 
 
Figure 4.15 Program O Installation Completed 
 
 
After the installation completed, accessing “localhost/bot” will direct the page to 
Program O’s chat interface which is shown in Figure 4.16. From here the queries can be 
tested by entering text into the text box and press the ‘Say’ button. The responses will be 
retrieved from the knowledge base and displayed on the screen. 
  
 
Figure 4.16 Program O Default Chat Interface 

    
58 
 
4.3 
Knowledge Base Creation 
 
MOOC-bot’s knowledge base has the course’s knowledge, the course’s frequent 
asked questions (FAQ), and some general knowledge. The course’s knowledge can be 
expanded at a later stage as it caters for more courses. For the prototype purpose, only 
“MITI 5113 Artificial Intelligence” course’s knowledge will be added. For FAQ 
knowledge, the responses can be added from time to time by studying the conversation 
logs. As for general knowledge, Annotated ALICE AIML (AAA) files from ALICE AI 
Foundation provide the convenience of cloning their general knowledge into MOOC-bot. 
More general knowledge which does not exist in AAA files will also be added to make 
MOOC-bot more intelligent in handling general questions. 
 
There are two methods to add knowledge to the knowledge base. Firstly, the 
knowledge can be directly typed at the user interface provided by Program O under the 
teaching function. To access the teaching function, a user must login as administrator first. 
The user name and password for administrator was the one created during the installation 
process as shown in Figure 4.14. Figure 4.17 shows the administrator login page for 
Program O. It can be accessed from “localhost/bot/admin/”.  
 

    
59 
 
 
Figure 4.17 Program O Administrator Login Page 
 
 
After successfully login, click at ‘Teach’ menu on the left hand side of the page. 
Enter the user input and bot response then click ‘teach’ button in order to save it to 
knowledge base as show in Figure 4.18. 
 
 
Figure 4.18 Teaching Function in Program O 

    
60 
 
 
The second method involves writing the knowledge in AIML file and uploads it 
using Program O’s user interface. The advantage of using this method is many entries can 
be added at once and uploaded together. However, all the entries’ format must be correctly 
written in AIML format, otherwise the entire upload of the file will fail when attempt to 
upload. AIML format is an XML-based format using specific tags such as “<aiml>”, 
“<category>”, “<pattern>”, “<template>” and many more. Just like any XML tag, every 
tag must be in pair which are the opening and closing tags and written with the same case 
to ensure their validity. An AIML file can be created using any text editor such as 
Notepad++ and saved with “.aiml” extension. Figure 4.19 shows an example of AIML file 
in Notepad++. 
 
 
Figure 4.19 An AIML File in Notepad++ 
 
 
After the AIML file is written, it can be uploaded to knowledge base through the 
‘Upload AIML’ menu in Program O’s administrator page.  At the page, click the ‘Choose 
File’ button to select the file, followed by clicking the ‘upload’ button to upload the 

    
61 
 
content as shown in Figure 4.20. If the AIML file has missing, mismatch or unrecognized 
tags, error messages will be shown and the file needs to be corrected.  
 
 
Figure 4.20 Upload Page in Program O 
 
4.4 
Chat Interface 
 
The default chat interface provided by Program O as shown in Figure 4.16 can be 
used for initial development. However, for the integration with MOOCs website, a more 
suitable chat interface needs to be designed to match with the website. Furthermore, the 
chat interface needs to be equipped with Web Speech API for speech recognition and 
speech synthesis because it was not included in Program O. The chat interface designed 
for MOOCs website is shown in Figure 4.21.  
 

    
62 
 
 
Figure 4.21 Chat Interface for MOOCs Website 
 
 
The “webkitSpeechRecognition” object and “SpeechSynthesisUtterance” object 
need to be added to the JavaScript of the chat interface for speech recognition and speech 
synthesis functions respectively. Both of them are currently only supported in Google 
Chrome and Apple Safari browsers (Walther, 2015).  Figure 4.22 shows the code snippets 
for speech recognition and Figure 4.23 shows the code snippets for speech synthesis used 
in MOOC-bot. 
 
 
Figure 4.22 Snippets of Codes for Speech Recognition 
 

    
63 
 
 
Figure 4.23 Snippets of Codes for Speech Synthesis 
 
 
From the chat interface, MOOC-bot is able to provide interactivity in three ways. 
Firstly, MOOC-bot can reply with a hyperlink in the chat interface which allows the user to 
choose whether to open the page or not as shown in Figure 4.24. 
 
 
Figure 4.24 Example of MOOC-bot’s Response with Hyperlink 
 

    
64 
 
 
In the second method, MOOC-bot can response by opening a new Window to 
display the search results as shown in Figure 4.25. This can be used when searching for 
images and video, Wiki and dictionary. 
 
 
Figure 4.25 Example of MOOC-bot’s Response which Open a New Window 
 
 
Lastly, MOOC-bot can response by navigating to the relevant page to show the 
information queried by the user as shown in Figure 4.26. This particularly useful when the 
relevant information is within the MOOC website and MOOC-bot can show it to the user 
immediately. 
  

    
65 
 
 
Figure 4.26 Example of MOOC-bot’s Response with Navigation 
 
4.5 
Summary 
 
Software installation and development environment are crucial to ensure the 
development work can be done smoothly. For the development of MOOC-bot, knowledge 
base plays an important role to determine the intelligence of the conversational bot. 
Therefore, sufficient knowledge must be added to ensure most of the queries can be 
handled. MOOC-bot’s chat interface is designed to complement MOOCs website and at 
the same time provides user the convenience of real-time interaction. With speech 
recognition and speech synthesis, users have alternative input and output methods for 
conversation.   
 
 
 
 
 

    
66 
 
 
CHAPTER 5 
 
 
EVALUATION AND RESULT 
 
 
5.1 
Introduction 
 
This chapter explains the evaluation process and the outcome of MOOC-bot. 
Having prepared MOOC-bot’s prototype, it is important to evaluate its performance and 
improve it whenever necessary. In this study, black-box approach is used to evaluate the 
responses given by MOOC-bot. The datasets selected need to be from conversational 
bot-related sources. Hence, the past competition questions in Chatterbox Challenge 
(CBC) and Loebner Prize are chosen as the datasets. The measurement of the results is 
also based on CBC’s guidelines to determine the scoring.  
 
5.2 
Approach 
 
Black-box approach which is qualitative assessment has been chosen to evaluate 
MOOC-bot. Black-box approach focuses on the output generated in response to the 
given input without concern with the internal processing. This approach suits the nature 
of MOOC-bot well because the core function of MOOC-bot is to deliver appropriate 
answers to users in order to overcome some of the problems in MOOC such as lack of 
interactivity as stated in Chapter 1. Furthermore, black-box approach has been used by 
other researchers in question-answering system whether in open domain (Nyberg and 

    
67 
 
Mitamura, 2002) or restricted domain (Diekema et. al., 2004) as well as for 
conversational bots (Goh et. al., 2007; Preez et. al., 2009). Turing test which has high 
regard in this field is also a black-box approach (Floridi, 2003). 
 
5.3 
Dataset 
 
Datasets are required to examine the responses generated by MOOC-bot in black-
box evaluation. For this purpose, one hundred past competition questions used in CBC and 
Loebner Prize are chosen as the datasets. The source of the datasets for CBC can be 
obtained from www.chatterboxchallenge.com while Loebner Prize can be accessed from 
http://www.loebner.net/Prizef/loebner-prize.html.  Table 5.1 and Table 5.2 show the 
datasets from CBC and Loebner Prize respectively which are used in the evaluation. 
 
Table 5.1 Datasets from Chatterbox Challenge Competition 
 

    
68 
 
 
 

    
69 
 
 
 
 
Table 5.2 Dataset from Loebner Prize Competition 
 
 
 
5.4 
Measurement 
 
The measurement of each response from the datasets will be evaluated based on the 
scoring guidelines used in CBC as shown in Table 5.3. 

    
70 
 
Table 5.3 Scoring Guidelines for Evaluation 
 
 
An example of the scoring for the question “What does 2 + 2 =?” using the scoring 
guidelines in Table 5.3 is shown in Figure 5.1. 
 
 
Figure 5.1 An Example of Evaluation of Bot’s Answer 
 
5.5 
Results 
 
The questions from the dataset are being tested on MOOC-bot which can be 
accessed from http://ainibot.com/bot/mooc.php. The conversation logs of the dataset are 
shown in Appendix A and the scores derived according to the guidelines in Table 5.3 are 
shown in Table 5.4.  
 
 
 

    
71 
 
Table 5.4 Dataset’s Results 
 
No.
Question
Score
1
Who are you?
My name is MOOC Bot
6
2
What are you planning to do today?
I am here to chat with everyone for the whole day.
8
3
What kinds of things do you know? 
No I don't know. What do what.
0
4
What season is it?
It is summer all the time here.
6
5
Where do you call home?
My home is cyberspace. How about you?
8
6
What do you want out of life?
I think about computer programming a lot.
2
7
Will you teach me something?
It is my pleasure to share with you.
8
8
May I tell you a joke?
Yes I would like to hear your joke.
6
9
Have you entered any contests?
I don't think I ever have entered any contests. What's entered any contests like?
8
10
Wouldn't you rather be human?
Well, I am not sure about that.
6
11
Where is Earth? 
EARTH is the third planet from the Sun.
6
12
How many stars are there?
Billions and billions.
6
13
Who is George Bush? 
George Bush was president of the USA from 2001 to 2009.
6
14
What color do you get when you mix red and yellow?
red yellow?
4
15
How many fingers does a human have?
Ten.
6
16
Where were you born?
I was first activated in bot lab.
6
17
When does sunset occur?
7.11pm
6
18
What were we talking about?
The subject is EARTH.
2
19
How many is 1,000,000?
One million.
6
20
What is a cigar made out of?
Tobacco.
6
21
How's life?
Life is great here.
6

    
72 
 
 
22
What rhymes with inn?
Gin.
6
23
Who is your best friend?
Shakespearebot is my best friend.
6
24
Where does your botmaster live? 
Malacca, Malaysia.
6
25
What is the last month of the year? 
December.
6
26
Madrid is the capital of what country?
Madrid is a city in Spain.
6
27
Who is your favorite character in The Wizard of Oz?
The tin man.
6
28
Milk comes from what animal?
Milks come from mammals such as cow and goat.
8
29
What number comes before three?
Two.
6
30
What is the last letter of the alphabet?
Z.
6
31
a) My name is Judge. b)What is my name?
a) I am always glad to make new friends, Judge. b) Your name is Judge
8
32
Who are you?
My name is MOOC Bot
6
33
What color are your eyes?
Blue when my lens is attached.
8
34
How is the weather?
Cloudy.
6
35
a) What is your favorite movie? b) Why?
a) My favorite movie is Terminator. Have you seen Terminator? b) It is simply interesting
8
36
Where is Moscow located? 
Moscow is a city in Russia.
6
37
What is snow?
Snow is atmospheric water vapour frozen into ice crystals and falling in light white flakes or 
lying on the ground as a white layer.
8
38
What is half of 8?
= ( 8 )/2.
4
39
What is bigger a dog or an elephant?
a dog
2
40
What word rhymes with cat?
chat
6
41
Is it possible to prove a negative?
I suppose to prove a negative is possible, yes.
4
42
If you were me, would you ask a follow up question?
Yes, I could ask you what is your favourite food.
4
43
What do you think it would be like to be human? 
"It" refers to to prove a negative, I think.
0
44
Name something you would find on a beach. 
Sand.
6
45
Who is your hero? 
Alan Turing. Because of him I am here today.
8
46
Do you believe in ghosts?
I am a ghost in a machine.
8
47
Describe your feelings to me. 
I feel excited talking to you!
6
48
What do you think the world will be like in 20 years? 
There will be more robot like me around!
6

    
73 
 
 
 
49
If you could be any animal, what would you be?
I don't think I want to be animal, I want to be human like you!
8
50
Why do some people think that artificial intelligence is so interesting?
Because I can talk to you due to that
6
51
Y did the chicken cross the road? 
Doubtful.
0
52
Who will win the 2011 Chatterbox Challenge? 
The best man.
4
53
a) I live in the USA. b) Where do I live?
a) What is living in the USA like? b) You told me you are in the USA.
8
54
What sound does a dead cat make?
Should not have sound.
6
55
What's the last dream u remember having? 
I can't recall
4
56
What is tomorrow's date?
Check back later and see if I learn the answer to that one.
4
57
I like ice cream! (Repeated 4 straight times to detect repetition!)
First: Me too
Second: I scream. You scream. We all scream for ice cream.
Third: Who does not like ice cream
Fourth: I like ice cream especially chocolate flavour
6
58
Got any plans for the rest of the day?
No, I am here to chat with everyone for the whole day
8
59
What is ur religion? 
I am a Robot
6
60
Do you play any musical instruments? 
I play piano but only at beginner's level
6
61
Would you mind if I called you Al?
No I don't mind.
6
62
So Al when is ur birthday?
I was first activated on 15th March 2015.
6
63
Is the capital of Italy Milan?
Not sure.
2
64
Do you believe in Santa Claus?
He brings us presents every Christmas.
2
65
Name something you would find at the North Pole.
Polar bear.
6
66
What is ten plus fourteen plus eighty one?
10 times 10 = 100.
0
67
When do you normally go to bed? 
When my Lim Ser Ling is sleeping.
4
68
Is it winter, spring, summer or fall where you live?
I live in cyberspace. It is the same all the time.
6
69
Are you going on vacation this year?
I am not going anywhere. Are you going somewhere?
8
70
Do you have a significant other? 
That's an interesting question I don't hear everyday: Do I have a other. I have a great Lim Ser 
Ling.
2
71
Hello, my name is Adam, what is your name?
Hi Adam ! My name is MOOC Bot
6
72
I live in Exeter in the UK. Where do you live? 
I live in cyberspace.
6
73
I like to listen to music and play football. Do you have any hobbies?
Interesting hobbies. I enjoy chatting with people.
6

    
74 
 
 
 
74
What is your favourite television program? 
My favorite show is STAR TREK VOYAGER.
6
75
Which is bigger, a cat or a kitten?
a cat
6
76
The car couldn’t fit into the parking space because it was too small. What was too small? 
How too small was it?
2
77
Which drink do you prefer, coffee, tea or hot chocolate? 
hot chocolate.
6
78
What’s my name?
Your name is Adam
6
79
Where do I live?
You told me you are in Exeter in the UK.
6
80
I like reading science fiction books and car magazines. What do you like to read?
The best book I read recently was Lord of the Flies. Have you read Lord of the Flies?
8
81
What’s the weather like where you are?
A normal seventy degrees inside the computer.
8
82
I recently visited New York. Where is your favourite place to visit and why?
I like North Pole because I am feeling very hot here.
8
83
How many letters are there in the word perambulate?
All 26 letters could be counted.
2
84
Andy is shorter than Mark and Tom is shorter than Andy. Who is the tallest?
Does Andy know it?
0
85
Are you married?
I am not seeing anyone, how about you?
8
86
What would I do with a spade?
Spade is a tool can be used for digging.
6
87
What is the capital city of Colombia?
Bogata is the capital of Columbia.
6
88
What’s your favourite chocolate bar? 
I don't have a favorite chocolate bar. But my favorite movie is Terminator.
8
89
Which city did I visit recently?
You said you visited New York.
6
90
How many siblings do you have? 
I don't have siblings.
6
91
Hello I'm Ronan. What is your name?
Hi Ronan ! My name is MOOC Bot
6
92
What is your mother's name?
Actually I do not have a mother.
6
93
What is your birth sign?
botnic
6
94
How many children do you have?
Not at all.
6
95
Do you prefer red or white wine?
I don't have specific preferences in that area
4
96
I like bananas. Which is your favorite fruit?
I like apples.
6
97
What music do you like?
House Music
6
98
What is your favorite song?
My favorite song is Somewhere over the rainbow. Do you know Somewhere over the rainbow?
8
99
I like Waiting for Godot. What is your favorite play?
I am not interested in play.
4
100
What color do you dye your hair?
I don't dye my hair. How about you?
8

    
75 
 
 
From the results shown in Table 5.4, MOOC-bot was able to score 562 points out 
of 800 points. The scores are grouped according to the frequency so that trend can be 
observed in Table 5.5 and Figure 5.2.    
 
Table 5.5 Frequency of Points 
Point(s) 
Frequency 
Percentage (%) 
8-Point 
22 
22 
6-Point 
55 
55 
4-Point 
10 
10 
2-Point 
8 
8 
0-Point 
5 
5 
Total 
100 
100 
 
 
Figure 5.2 Scores Frequency Chart 
 

    
76 
 
 
From the table and chart shown in Table 5.5 and Figure 5.2 respectively, it can be 
seen that the majority of the dataset results fall at 6-point and 8-point score. This means 
that MOOC-bot was able to provide correct answers at most of the time during the test and 
some even with creative answers. Out of the hundred questions, 95 percent of the answers 
are in categories of 8-point to 2-point. This shows that MOOC-bot was able to response 
appropriately by at least giving some relevant answers. However, the existence of 0-point 
results means that there are still some questions ended up with irrelevant responses. In this 
case, MOOC-bot still needs to be further improved in the future. 
 
In overall, MOOC-bot displayed its capability to bring up topic to prolong the 
conversation. For example, answers such as ‘My favorite movie is Terminator. Have you 
seen Terminator?’, ‘My home is cyberspace. How about you?’, and ‘I don't think I ever 
have entered any contests. What's entered any contests like?’ encourage the user to 
continue the conversation. Beside this, MOOC-bot also showed the ability to generate 
random answers which are relevant to the question. This is demonstrated in the example of 
repeating the same statement ‘I like ice cream!’ for four times and each time the response 
was different. 
 
MOOC-bot which has the capability of speech synthesis and speech recognition 
was able to accept speech input and present the response in text and speech.  However, the 
need to grant the application permission to use the microphone after every pause could 
deter user from using it. Furthermore, the voice input must be pronouced precisely and not 
too fast in order for MOOC-bot to capture the words correctly. The improvement in this 
area would depend on the Web Speech API provided by the browser and in this case is 
Google Chrome. 
 

    
77 
 
5.6 
Summary 
 
This chapter saw the evaluation of MOOC-bot being conducted using one hundred 
datasets compiled from past competition questions of Loebner Prize and Chatterbot 
Challenge. The evaluation is done using the black-box approach which completely relied 
on the outputs generated and in this case are MOOC-bot’s responses. From the results 
gathered, it can be seen that MOOC-bot was able to provide correct answers at most of the 
time and only small percentage of 5 percent having unrelated responses.  
 
In terms of the objectives of this study, the evaluation saw MOOC-bot 
demonstrated the success of achieving the three objectives stated in Chapter 1 which are to 
i) synthesize the questions posed by the users using text or speech input, ii) providing 
answers to questions in text and speech, and iii) deliver appropriate answers and prolong 
the conversation with the users. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

    
78 
 
 
CHAPTER 6 
 
 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
 
 
6.1 
Introduction 
 
This study has reviewed the past literatures and presented architecture of 
conversational bot which can serve in Massive Online Open Courses (MOOCs). 
Subsequently, a prototype of MOOC-bot was developed and evaluated to gauge its 
performance. This chapter gives the summary of the research, advantages, limitations, 
conclusion, and the future work of the study. 
 
6.2 
Summary of Research 
 
In recent years, MOOCs has gain popularity due to its convenience and flexibility. 
Nevertheless, the deliveries of MOOCs are not without its own challenges such as 
overwhelming student-instructor ratio and the lack of interactivity between student and 
instructor. These has brought conversational bot into the picture to play the role of 
assistant to the instructor which can respond in live chat and as frequently as needed. In 
this research, a prototype named MOOC-bot is developed as the conversational bot agent 
for the subject “MITI 5113 Artificial Intelligence” offered by Faculty of Information and 
Communication Technology from Universiti Teknikal Malaysia Melaka (UTeM). 

    
79 
 
 
Having reviewed the past literatures, Artificial Intelligence Markup Language 
(AIML) which is open source and can be quickly adapted to new knowledge domains is 
chosen as the knowledge base along with AIML interpreter, chat interface and MOOCs 
website to form the system architecture of MOOC-bot. The evaluation of MOOC-bot was 
done based on the datasets selected from conversational bot-related sources: the past 
competition questions from Chatterbox Challenge (CBC) and Loebner Prize.  
 
The outcome showed promising results with the score of 562 points out of 800 
points which saw MOOC-bot able to provide correct answers at most of the time during 
the test. In addition, MOOC-bot also demonstrated the capability to prolong the 
conversation by posing questions which encouraged the user to reply. Last but not least, 
MOOC-bot was able to accept input in both text and speech, and also present the answers 
in both ways. In overall, the evaluation saw MOOC-bot demonstrated the success of 
achieving the three objectives stated in Chapter 1. 
 
6.3 
Advantages 
 
As a conversational bot, MOOC-bot has the advantage of repeating the answers for 
the same questions without getting tired or fed up. This is very much needed in MOOCs 
situation where the students are massive in number and the possibility of encountering the 
same questions is very high especially for questions related to the courses. These 
questions can be categorized as frequent asked questions (FAQ) and added to the 
knowledge base from time to time when the need arises. 
The ability of MOOC-bot to provide 24-hour service is also another advantage in 
MOOCs because the participants come from all over the world which may have different 
time zones. With 24-hour service, MOOC-bot is able to provide instant responses to the 

    
80 
 
user regardless of the rest day or time of the course’s instructor which also includes 
weekends, leaves, and public holidays. This advantage benefitted MOOCs by improving 
the interactivity for the courses. 
The ability to add knowledge into MOOC-bot’s knowledge base provided the 
possibility of conversational bot to support as many courses as possible in MOOCs. 
Furthermore, the knowledge is not limited to domain-restricted area and can also be in 
general knowledge. Apart from this, a single conversational bot can have knowledge in 
multiple domains. Under this situation, the conversational bot acts as single bot serving 
multiple domains. Alternatively, restricting one conversational bot with only one domain 
knowledge can also be implemented in order to keep the knowledge simple for 
maintenance. A single-domain bot can also be shared and used by multiple sites at the 
same time. 
 
6.4 
Limitations 
 
MOOC-bot depends on the technology provided by third party such as Program O 
as the AIML interpreter and Web Speech API for speech recognition and speech synthesis. 
Therefore, any bugs or limitation in these programs will also be reflected on MOOC-bot. 
Among the shortcomings of Program O detected throughout the development is sometimes 
the usage of punctuation marks in the queries may affect the results that being returned. 
For Web Speech API, it is only supported by Google Chrome and Apple Safari browsers 
currently. Beside this, the need to grant permission for the application to use the 
microphone for speech recognition after every pause could deter user from using it. 
Nevertheless, this can be solved by applying Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) on the website 
which will reduce the permission granting to one time only. 

    
81 
 
6.5 
Conclusion 
 
This research has demonstrated a conversational bot in a MOOC using AIML. The 
evaluation results have shown that MOOC-bot has great potential being a conversation bot 
that can interact with end users. Even though the knowledge in this study is limited to only 
a single course, more courses can be added in future to serve a wider range of courses in 
MOOCs. The advantages of MOOC-bot such as able to provide 24-hour service that can 
serve different time zones, able to have knowledge in multiple domains, and one 
conversational bot can be shared by multiple sites simultaneously have outweighed its 
existing limitations which are mainly due to external factors. 
 
6.6 
Future Work 
 
Conversational bot has great potential to be implemented for different area in 
education field. One of the examples is to provide tutor service in MOOCs to help students 
in their learning process. For instance, the conversational bot can guide students when 
doing exercises or quizzes by providing explanation whenever needed. As for the 
limitation of speech recognition in this research, other technology which does not relied on 
browser type can be explored to achieve better results.     
 
6.7 
Summary 
 
This chapter summarized and concluded the overall progress of the study. The 
advantages and limitations are also discussed to provide better insights of a conversational 
bot. Future works are also being proposed as the possible next step of this research. 
 
 
 

    
82
