Rapid Feature Learning with Stacked Linear
Denoisers
Zhixiang Eddie Xu
Department of Computer Science
Washington University in St. Louis
Saint Louis, MO 63108

Kilian Q. Weinberger
Department of Computer Science
Washington University in St. Louis
Saint Louis, MO 63108

Fei Sha
Computer Science Department
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90089

Abstract
We investigate unsupervised pre-training of deep architectures as feature genera-
tors for “shallow” classiﬁers. Stacked Denoising Autoencoders (SdA) [23], when
used as feature pre-processing tools for SVM classiﬁcation, can lead to signiﬁ-
cant improvements in accuracy – however, at the price of a substantial increase
in computational cost. In this paper we create a simple algorithm which mimics
the layer by layer training of SdAs. However, in contrast to SdAs, our algorithm
requires no training through gradient descent as the parameters can be computed
in closed-form. It can be implemented in less than 20 lines of MATLABTMand
reduces the computation time from several hours to mere seconds. We show that
our feature transformation reliably improves the results of SVM classiﬁcation sig-
niﬁcantly on all our data sets – often outperforming SdAs and even deep neural
networks in three out of four deep learning benchmarks.
1
Introduction
Recently, there has been a great deal of attention on “deep-learning” architectures [3, 10]. Such
architectures have consistently achieved state-of-the-art results on many challenging learning tasks,
including object recognition [19], natural language processing [7], dimensionality reduction [10]. A
typical paradigm of deep-learning is to ﬁrst perform unsupervised pre-training on the neural network
to initialize the weights and then use back-propagation for supervised training.
[17] showed that the second phase, the supervised back-propagation, can be replaced with “shallow”
classiﬁers, such as support vector machines (SVM) [8]. Concretely, the outputs of the hidden units
of pre-trained deep neural networks are used as input features to those classiﬁers. Besides achieving
superior performance in recognition tasks, the substituting classiﬁers offer appealing computational
properties. In particular, their parameters are adjusted with convex optimization, free of local optima
that often plague back-propagation based techniques. Further, these classiﬁers tend to be more ready
to be used out-of-the-box and can often be parallelized very effectively.
How can we replace the pre-training phase with an equally attractive learning model? Note that
the pre-training phrase – now merely used for unsupervised feature generation – is a major bottle-
neck in applying deep learning architectures. One needs to adjust several parameters of network
architectures (the number of hidden layers, units in each hidden layer), optimization (learning rates
1
arXiv:1105.0972v1  [cs.LG]  5 May 2011

and momentum), etc. Compounded by these factors, the pre-training phase takes up a large portion
of the overall training time (anecdotally 50-90%) – even with the use of multi-core processors and
graphical processing units (GPUs) [1].
We propose such a method for pre-training, thus for feature generation, and investigate its effective-
ness in this paper. We show how one-layer linear denoising autoencoders can be used as the basic
building blocks of the pre-training phases. The autoencoders are ordinary linear regression models
for reconstructing data from corrupted features. They have closed-form solutions and thus are easy
to implement. In particular, the parameters can be identiﬁed with matrix inversion and nonlinear
optimization is not needed. We use the outputs of linear denoising autoencoders in two ways: i)
as input features to support vector machines; ii) as inputs (to be denoised) to successively stacked
linear autoencoders.
The proposed method, which we refer to as Stacked Linear Denoiser (SLIDE), is similar in spirit to
stacked (nonlinear) denoising autoencoders (SdA) [23]. However, there are important differences.
First, in SdA, hidden layers are used to extract new representations from inputs which makes their
training a nonconvex optimization. In contrast, SLIDE does not have hidden layers and is convex.
Second, SdA requires the setting of several crucial meta-parameters, including noise level, learn-
ing rates, number of training epochs and network architecture speciﬁcs, which are typically set by
cross-validation. In comparison, SLIDE only has two free meta-parameters, controlling the amount
of noise to be added to data as well as the number of autoencoders we would like to stack. Finally,
leveraging on the analytic tractability of linear regression, we train the parameters of our autoen-
coders to optimally denoise all possible corrupted training inputs — arguably “inﬁnitely many”.
This is practically feasible for SdA, whose parameters are adjusted on only a subset of corrupted
data.
In this paper, we make several contributions. SLIDE can be implemented easily (less than 20 lines of
Matlab codes). The learning algorithm runs very fast. In fact, our 19-lines implementation is three
orders of magnitudes faster than a highly optimized parallel implementation of SdA on a state-of-
the-art GPU. Even for large data sets with tens of thousands of samples the computation takes only
a few seconds – achieving thousand-fold speed-up over the pre-training phase with SdA or similar
approaches. Finally, in addition to the vastly reduced computation time, we demonstrate on several
deep-learning benchmark data sets that SVM classiﬁcation with SLIDE features tends to be even
more accurate than with SdA features or pre-trained deep neural networks with back-propagation.
2
Notation and Background
In the following, we introduce notation and algorithms which are used in the rest of the paper. Our
training data consist of n input vectors {x1, . . . , xn} ∈Rd with corresponding discrete class labels
{y1, . . . , yn} drawn from an unknown joint distribution D.
Deep Architecture. Deep learning algorithms learn hierarchies of hidden layers, where the output
of the lower level layer becomes the input of the higher level. “Deep learning” algorithms differ from
traditional neural networks in two ways: i) they tend to have more hidden layers (i.e. are deeper); ii)
the supervised training through back-propagation is preceded by an unsupervised pre-training step
in which the weights are initialized in a generative manner. The additional layers are believed to
provide more powerful learning models. The pre-training makes the training more efﬁcient (it is
often performed greedily – layer by layer) and regularizes the optimization so that back-propagation
starts near a “good” local minima [9].
Support Vector Machines are one of the most popular and reliable out-of-the-box supervised clas-
siﬁcation algorithms. SVMs [22] are linear classiﬁers that involve a quadratic minimization prob-
lem, which is convex and not plagued by local optima. The maximum margin separation promotes
reliably good generalization, and the kernel-trick [22] allows SVMs to generate highly non-linear
decisions boundaries with low computational overhead. The kernel-trick maps the input vectors
xi implicitly into a higher (possibly inﬁnite) dimensional feature space using the kernel function
k(xi, xj). Among various such functions, the Radial Basis Function (RBF)-Kernel, is one of the
most commonly used kernels. When used with Euclidean distances (also typically referred to as the
2

Gaussian kernel) it is deﬁned as follows:
k(xi, xj) = exp

−∥xi −xj∥2
2
σ2

,
(1)
where σ2 denotes the RBF-kernel-width.
Stacked Denoising Autoencoder. One particular method to pre-train the weights of a deep neural
network is Stacked Denoising Autoencoders (SdA) [23, 13]. A traditional autoencoder described
in [12] maps the input data, or visible features {x1, . . . , xn} ∈Rd into hidden representations
{h1, . . . , hn} ∈Rm. The hidden representations are then mapped back to reconstructions of the
original input {x′
1, . . . , x′
n} ∈Rd. For both mappings they use the sigmoid function
hi =
1
1 + e−(Wxi+b)
and x′
i =
1
1 + e−(W⊤hi+b′) ,
(2)
where the parameters consist of a weight matrix W ∈Rm×d and two bias vectors b, b′ ∈Rm.
The optimal parameters are learned by minimizing the reconstruction error, which is measured in
the squared loss
Lsq(W, b, b′) = 1
2
n
X
i=1
∥xi −x′
i∥2.
(3)
The denoising autoencoder (DA) incorporates a slight modiﬁcation from the traditional autoen-
coders. For each input xi, it picks a ﬁxed percentage of the features uniformly at random and sets
them to zero (effectively removing the features), while keeping others untouched. It then maps this
corrupted input ˜xi into the hidden representations ˜hi, which is then mapped back as ˜x′
i to reconstruct
the original uncorrupted input, minimizing
Lsq(W, b, b′) = 1
2
n
X
i=1
∥xi −˜x′
i∥2.
(4)
The stacked denoising autoencoder [23] stacks several DAs together by feeding the hidden repre-
sentations of the ith DA as input into the (i + 1)th DA. The training is performed greedily layer by
layer: When the (i + 1)th layer is trained, all layers 1...i are ﬁxed and noise is only added to the
hidden nodes of the ith layer.
Intuitively, by forcing removed features to be reconstructed from the remaining data, the DA learns
to convolute features that tend to be correlated. This increases robustness against noise and local
transformations, e.g. small translation or rotation. A similar approach has been successfully used for
many years in Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) [15], which leverage the fact that in natural
images local pixels are highly correlated with each other — which is hard-coded into the network
structure. DAs are more general as they learn the convolution patterns, and can be applied to data
sets where the feature correlation is unknown (for example in contrast to CNNs, DAs are invariant
to arbitrary permutations of the input pixels). However, SdAs suffer from two inherent down-sides:
their long training time and sensitivity to several hyper-parameters such as network architecture,
learning rates, etc. Carefully tuning these parameters on validation datasets is often very time con-
suming.
Pre-training as Feature Generator. Many researchers have noticed that the pre-training phase
in deep learning networks can be seen as some kind of nonlinear feature mappings. For example,
[17] showed that the hidden representations computed by either all or partial layers of stacked de-
noising autoencoders make excellent features for classiﬁcation with support vector machines. [6]
introduced recursively deﬁned kernels which mimic the pre-training of deep feature extractors for
the use with support vector machines. Our work follows this line of thinking and shows simpler and
more computationally tractable models can also be used for similar purposes.
3
Single Layer Construction
Instead of using an autoencoder for pre-training, we propose to reconstruct randomly corrupted data
with a linear mapping W : Rd →Rd. To lower the variance, we perform multiple passes over
3

Algorithm 1 A single layer construction in MATLABTM.
function [W,h]=lide(X,p);
X=[X;ones(1,size(X,2))];
d=size(X,1);
q=ones(d,1).*p;
q(end)=1;
S=X*X’;
Q=S.*(q*q’);
Q(1:d+1:end)=q.*diag(S);
P=S.*repmat(q,1,d);
W=((Q+1e-5*eye(d))\P(:,1:end-1))’;
the training set, essentially corrupting m copies of the original data, and solving for the W that
minimizes the overall squared loss
Lsq(W) = 1
2
m
X
j=1
n
X
i=1
∥xi −W˜xij∥2,
(5)
where ˜xij represents the jth corrupted version of the original input xi. An input is corrupted by
setting each feature randomly to zero with probability (1 −p). To simplify notation we assume
that a constant feature is added to the input, xi = [x⊤
i , 1]⊤, and an appropriate bias is incorporated
within the mapping W = [W, 1]. The constant feature is never corrupted. For notational simplicity,
let us deﬁne the m-times repetitions of the design matrices X = [x1, . . . , xn] as ¯X = [X, . . . , X] ∈
Rd×nm. Let ˜X be the corrupted equivalent of ¯X, i.e. ˜X = [˜x1,1, . . . , ˜xn,1, ˜x1,2, . . . , ˜xn,m]. We can
then deﬁne two (scaled) outer-product matrices as:
Q = 1
m
˜X ˜X⊤and P = 1
m
¯X ˜X⊤.
(6)
Note that only P is deﬁned over the corrupted and uncorrupted data. We can then express eq. (5) as
the well-known closed-form solution for ordinary least squares [4]:
W = PQ−1.
(7)
Virtual Denoising. The larger m, the more different corruptions we average over. Ideally we
would like m→∞, effectively using inﬁnitely many copies of noisy data to compute the denoising
transformation W.
By the weak law of large numbers, the matrices P and Q, as deﬁned in eq. (6), converge to their
expected values as m becomes very large. If we are interested in the limit case, where m →∞, we
can derive a closed-form for these expectations and express the corresponding mapping W as
W = E[P]E[Q]−1.
(8)
In the remainder of this section, we compute the expectations of Q and P. For now let us focus on
Q, whose expectation is deﬁned as
E[Q] =
nm
X
i=1
E
˜xi˜x⊤
i

.
(9)
The off-diagonal entries of ˜xi˜x⊤
i are uncorrupted if the two features both “survived” the corruption,
which happens with probability p2. For the diagonal entries this holds with probability p. Let us
deﬁne a vector q = [p, . . . , p, 1]⊤∈Rd+1, where qα represents the probability of a feature α
“surviving” the corruption. As the constant feature is never corrupted, we have qd+1 = 1. If we
further deﬁne the scatter matrix of the original uncorrupted input as S = XX⊤, we can express the
expectation of the matrix Q as
E[Q]α,β =

Sαβqαqβ
if
α ̸= β
Sαβqα
if
α = β .
(10)
By analogous reasoning, we obtain the expectation of P in closed-form as E[P]αβ = Sαβqβ.
We refer to this linear transformation as Linear Denoiser (LIDE). Algorithm 1 shows a 10-lines
MATLABTMimplementation.
4

Corrupted
First Layer
Second Layer
Third Layer
Corrupted
˜h1
i
T(h1
i )
h1
i
h2
i
T(h2
i )
T(h0
i )
˜h0
i
˜h2
i
h3
i
h0
i = xi
Corrupted
Input
Thresholded
Thresholded
Thresholded
Virtual
Figure 1: A schematic description of SLIDE. The Corruption is “virtual” in a sense that images are
never actually corrupted, as the matrices Wk can be computed directly in closed-form.
Algorithm 2 SLIDE in MATLABTM.
function [Ws,hs]=slide(X,p,t,l);
[d,n]=size(X);
hs=X;
Ws=zeros(d,d+1);
for s=1:l
Ws(:,:,s)=lide(hs(:,:,s),p);
hst=double([hs(:,:,s)>t;ones(1,n)]);
hs(:,:,s+1)=Ws(:,:,s)*hst;
end;
4
Stacked Feature Generation
Some of the success of SdAs can be attributed to the fact that they learn deep internal representation.
So far, LIDE consists of a linear transformation and therefore cannot compete in terms of feature
expressiveness. Inspired by the layer-wise stacking of DAs and DBNs, we stack several LIDE layers
together by feeding the representations of the kth denoising layer as the input to the (k + 1)th layer.
The training is performed greedily layer by layer: When the (i + 1)th layer is trained, all layers
1...l are ﬁxed, which means we only learn the (k + 1)th denoising matrix Wk+1. For a given input
xi, let hk
i denote the output of the kth LIDE transformation. For notational simplicity let us denote
h0
i = xi.
To be able to move beyond a linear transformation, we need to apply a non-linear “squashing”-
function between the layers. Several choices might be possible, including sigmoid, or tanh. How-
ever in our experiments we simply use a threshold function T(a) = δa>t ∈{0, 1} for some t, which
we apply element-wise on vectors.
We obtain each layer’s representation from the previous layer through the transformation
hk = WkT(hk−1), i.e. we threshold the input before the denoising transformation. Analogously
to eq. (5), each transformation Wk+1 is learned by minimizing the denoising reconstruction error
of the previous LIDE output hk,
Wk+1 = argmin
W
m
X
j=1
n
X
i=1
∥hk
i −W˜hk
ij∥2.
(11)
We solve eq. (11) with the closed form solution for eq. (8) as m→∞. Figure 1 depicts a schematic
layout of the work-ﬂow of SLIDE. Algorithm 2 shows a 9-lines MATLABTMimplementation.
5
SVM Training
When the layers of SLIDE are computed, we regard them as features for SVM classiﬁcation. For
simplicity, we use the RBF kernel throughout this paper. The RBF kernel, described in (1), accesses
individual inputs only through pairwise distances. However, in each representation, the average
distance between data points may vary signiﬁcantly. Concatenating all the hidden layers and using a
single kernel width σ across all input features would over-emphasize the impact of some layers over
5

others. We overcome this problem by introducing a speciﬁc kernel width for each layer σ0, . . . , σl >
0. The kernel function, for the case where the ﬁrst l hidden layers (and the raw input data) are used,
then becomes
k(xi, xj) = exp −
 
1
σ2
l
X
t=0
∥ht
i −ht
j∥2
2
σ2
t
!
.
(12)
For our setup we set σ = 1 and learn the individual σt with the method described in the following
subsection.
Kernel Parameters Learning. The features from the different layers h0, . . . , ht might be of vary-
ing utility [18] for the ﬁnal discrimination task. We suspect that the exact values of σt might have
a noticeable inﬂuence on the classiﬁcation accuracy. As the computation time of cross-validation
grows exponentially with the number of parameters, we investigate the beneﬁts of learning the best
values for σ0, . . . , σl automatically from the data. [5] propose a straight-forward but effective algo-
rithm to learn multiple kernel parameters for support vector machines with gradient descent. We use
Chapelle’s publicly available code1 after a trivial modiﬁcation2 to learn all σt in (12). We would like
to emphasize that the whole time required for training the SVM and optimizing for the individual
kernel widths took on the order of minutes even for the larger data sets. As the code by [5] is only
implemented for binary settings, we did not apply this technique to the multi-class dataset (MNIST).
We also did not use kernel parameter learning for RBFs on raw input, as in this setting cross valida-
tion yielded better results. It is important to note that the kernel parameter learning equally applies
to both SdA and SLIDE.
6
Results
We evaluate our algorithm on several data sets from the deep-learning benchmark collection3, in-
cluding: The MNIST handwriting digits recognition dataset4, the Rectangles-images, the Rectangles
and the Convex data set.
Datasets. The MNIST data consists of 60,000 training and 10,000 testing images of handwritten
digits 0 −9, where each image is of size 28 × 28 pixels. The learning task is to predict the digit
identity from the image. The Rectangles dataset has 1, 200 training and 50, 000 testing images, also
of size 28 × 28. Each image contains a rectangle, whose border has a pixel value of 1 (white), while
all other pixels are 0 (black). The learning task is to determine whether the rectangle has larger
width or length. The Rectangles-Images dataset is motivated by the same learning task, except
that the background and the rectangle are created of two noisy image patches. Also, it has 12, 000
training and 50, 000 testing images. The last dataset in our evaluation is the Convex dataset. It
consists of 8, 000 training and 50, 000 testing images, of size 28 × 28. The images are made of
binary pixels (where 0 is black and 1 white). The task is to determine whether all white pixels in a
given image form a single convex region.
Weight Matrices. Figure 2 visualizes the reconstruction weights for four example pixels on Rect-
angles, Rectangles-Images, Convex and the MNIST data set at various layers of SLIDE. Each image
shows one row of Wk (without bias weight), where the color reﬂects the weight value. The ﬁgure
shows a clear trend towards “fuzzier” reconstruction as the depth increases. In both rectangles data
sets (top row) each pixel is reconstructed from neighboring pixels with a tendency towards verti-
cal or horizontal offset, thus incorporating the inherent structure from the rectangles in the data.
The clarity of this trend is particularly impressive for the Rectangles-Images data set, where the
rectangles consist of very noisy image patches. In the convex and MNIST data sets, the pixel is re-
constructed from a small circular patch of surrounding pixels. In the case of MNIST, small non-zero
weights also exist in distant corner locations, originating from the fact that some pixels may only be
non-zero in one or two images in the training data set.
Experiments Settings. For all data sets, the training and testing splits are pre-deﬁned. We create an
additional random 80/20 split on the training set for the purpose of parameter tuning.
1http://olivier.chapelle.cc/ams/
2Each iteration we take a gradient-step with respect to all kernel widths instead of just the one global σ.
3http://tinyurl.com/64fgmzv
4http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/mnist/
6

 
 
0
0.06
0.12
0.18
0.24
 
 
0
0.09
0.18
0.27
0.36
 
 
0
0.05
0.09
0.14
0.18
Rectangles
Rectangle-images
Convex
 
 
0
0.1
0.19
0.29
0.38
MNIST
Figure 2: Reconstruction weights at different layers for the Rectangles, Rectangles-Images, Convex
and MNIST data set. The reconstructed pixel itself is most correlated and therefore marked dark red.
The cruciform lines in the top row illustrate that the de-noising weights have adapted to the shape of
the rectangles. The convex and MNIST data set (bottom row) show a more spherical neighborhood
structure, as no obvious neighborhood pattern is inherent in the data.
0 0.05 0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
1ïP
Error Rates
 
 
data1
data2
data3
data4
data5
￿= 0
￿= 1
￿= 2
￿= 3
￿= 4
1 −p
Figure 3: The Rectangles test error as a function of the noise level (1−p) and number of layers ℓ.
The graph shows clearly that deep layers provide a noticeable improvement up to ℓ= 2 layers.
To ﬁnd the best combination of noise level p and de-noising layers ℓ, we run cross-validation on the
validation set. As the features across all data sets are naturally within the interval [0, 1], we set the
threshold parameter to t = 0.5 for all experiments.5 As described in the previous section, we used
kernel parameter learning and SVMs with a RBF kernel [8] for our classiﬁcation, which we refer to
as (SLIDE-SVM). For comparison, we evaluate against three other methods: We use SVMs with a
RBF kernel on the raw input (Raw-SVM), where we use cross-validation to select the kernel width
σ2 and the regularization trade-off C, as mentioned in the previous section. Further, we use deep
neural networks (SdA), which were pre-trained with SdA [23] and ﬁne-tuned with back-propagation.
We use the network architecture, noise level, and learning rates recommended by the authors of [14]
through personal communication. We also use the hidden representations of the SdA as input for the
SVM, (SdA-SVM), in the exact same fashion as SLIDE-SVM. Finally, other linear transformation
are also evaluated, such as PCA, Whitening and random projection (PCA-SVM, White-SVM, Rand
Proj-SVM). For PCA and Whitening, we reduce the feature dimension by only keeping p percent of
variance, and the p is selected by cross-validation.
Parameter sensitivity. Figure 3 displays the classiﬁcation error on the Rectangles data set as a
function of the noise level p. The four colored lines correspond to different depths ℓ= 0, . . . , 4,
where ℓ= 0 or p = 1 correspond the original raw input6 not processed with SLIDE. In general,
5This choice can be further justiﬁed as the squared loss predictor approximates the probability that a binary
target has value 1 [4] making 0.5 the ideal cutoff to minimize the prediction error.
6The results for p = 1 do not match table 1 because for this graph the kernel parameters were learned,
which is sub-optimal for scenarios with few parameters.
7

Error in %
Raw-SVM
SdA
SdA-SVM
SLIDE-SVM
Rand Proj-SVM
PCA-SVM
White-SVM
MNIST
1.49
1.31
1.41
1.36
1.47
1.40
1.59
Rect
2.45
2.43
1.10
1.38
2.94
1.54
0.96
Rect-imgs
23.29
23.07
22.70
22.39
23.27
22.55
22.58
Convex
18.72
17.51
17.59
12.18
18.13
11.93
18.41
Table 1: Error rates (in percent) of deep neural networks with stacked auto-encoder (SdA) pre-
training, Support Vector Machines without pre-training (Raw-SVM) and SVMs with SLIDE features
(SLIDE SVM).
SLIDE appears to be somewhat sensitive to the exact choice of p and ℓ, and we choose it by cross
validation for all experiments. There is a clear trend that deep layers ℓ> 1 improve over a single
layered transformation ℓ= 1.
Experiments Results. All classiﬁcation results are shown in table 1. A few general trends can be
observed. First, using SLIDE feature pre-processing yields considerable improvements over results
with original features (Raw-SVM) on all data sets. In fact, transforming the features with SLIDE
makes SVM outperform even Deep Neural Nets (SdA) in all but one (MNIST) learning tasks. Finally
SLIDE even outperforms the much more complex SdA features on two data sets (Rect-imgs,Convex)
and obtains equivalent results (up to signiﬁcance) on MNIST. Especially on Convex and the Rect-
Images data sets, SLIDE clearly outperforms all other algorithms. Results from PCA (PCA-SVM)
are also signiﬁcantly better than original features (Raw-SVM), and is the best in the Convex dataset,
but worse than SLIDE on all others. Whitening (White-SVM) tops the Rectangle dataset, but does
not yield signiﬁcant improvements on other datasets. These results are very encouraging as SLIDE
is trivial to implement and orders of magnitudes faster than SdA.
Running Time. Table 2 compares the running times for feature generation with SdA and SLIDE. All
timings are performed on a desktop with dual IntelTMSix Core Xeon X5650 2.66GHz processors.
To train the SdA we use the highly optimized Theano open-source package7 which is carefully
parallelized and in our experiments utilizes a state-of-the-art GPU8 with additional 64 cores. No
explicit parallelization was used for SLIDE. The results show a three orders of magnitude speed-up
across all data sets, reducing the pre-training time from several hours to a few seconds.
Time
MNIST
Rect
Rect-imgs
Convex
SdA
8h 24m
1h 30m
2h 40m
6h 50m
SLIDE
22s
5s
8s
6s
× speedup
1377
1080
1207
4100
Table 2: Running time required for feature generation with SdA and SLIDE.
7
Related Work
Related work can be categorized into three lightly correlated dimensions: layer-wised unsupervised
pre-training, learning from partially corrupted data, and linking SVMs with neural networks. In
the area of layer-wised unsupervised pre-training, [11], [17], [2], [16] and [21] provide various
successful approaches. They all propose to pre-train the neural network by some unsupervised
training criterion as an initialization for back-propagation or as features for other algorithms (e.g.
SVM). In contrast, our method does not require any training through gradient descent and is orders
of magnitudes faster.
7http://deeplearning.net/software/theano/
8NVIDIA Quadro FX 1800 768MB GDDR3
8

[20] use carefully constructed random projections to create features that approximate kernelization
for linear SVMs. In the area of learning from partially corrupted data, [23] proposes using Stacked
Denoising Auto-encoder(SdA) to reconstruct the corrupted data, and demonstrates that the learnt
representations are robuster. Our method is heavily inspired by their work and can be viewed as a
convex closed-form transformation that mimics their feature generator.
[6] also investigate linking neural networks with SVMs through deep kernels. In their work, they
construct new recursively composed positive semi-deﬁnite kernel functions which can be viewed as
mimicking the layer by layer training of neural networks. Different from our work, their method is
not based on feature de-noising and still requires computationally expensive “ﬁne-tuning” through
distance metric learning [24].
8
Conclusion
We introduced SLIDE, a novel algorithm based on stacked linear denoising autoencoders for ex-
tremely fast layer-wise deep pre-training for feature generation. We derived a simple closed-form
solution that can be implemented in a few lines of MATLABTM. We demonstrated that SLIDE for
SVM classiﬁcation can match (or out-perform) the classiﬁcation results of SdA features – on three
out of four data set even beyond the low error rates of deep neural networks. Most notably, the
running time of SLIDE is reliably in the order of seconds even on data sets with tens of thousands
of data points.
As future directions we plan to investigate other classiﬁers and different learning settings. As SLIDE
is entirely unsupervised, it lends itself naturally towards semi-supervised and transfer learning tasks.
Because SLIDE is so straightforward to implement, only takes seconds to compute and improves
results for SVM classiﬁcation with surprising consistency, we have great hopes that it will ﬁnd use
as a general pre-processing algorithm across many areas of machine learning.
