arXiv:1002.1480v1  [cs.AI]  7 Feb 2010
A Minimum Relative Entropy Controller for Undiscounted Markov
Decision Processes
Pedro A. Ortega

Daniel A. Braun

Dept. of Engineering, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1PZ, UK
Abstract
Adaptive control problems are notoriously
diﬃcult to solve even in the presence of plant-
speciﬁc controllers. One way to by-pass the
intractable computation of the optimal pol-
icy is to restate the adaptive control as the
minimization of the relative entropy of a con-
troller that ignores the true plant dynam-
ics from an informed controller.
The solu-
tion is given by the Bayesian control rule—
a set of equations characterizing a stochas-
tic adaptive controller for the class of possi-
ble plant dynamics. Here, the Bayesian con-
trol rule is applied to derive BCR-MDP, a
controller to solve undiscounted Markov de-
cision processes with ﬁnite state and action
spaces and unknown dynamics.
In partic-
ular, we derive a non-parametric conjugate
prior distribution over the policy space that
encapsulates the agent’s whole relevant his-
tory and we present a Gibbs sampler to draw
random policies from this distribution. Pre-
liminary results show that BCR-MDP suc-
cessfully avoids sub-optimal limit cycles due
to its built-in mechanism to balance explo-
ration versus exploitation.
1. Introduction
Adaptive control problems, i.e.
the design of con-
trollers for plants with unknown dynamics, are no-
toriously diﬃcult. Even when the plant dynamics is
known to belong to a particular class for which optimal
controllers are available, constructing the correspond-
ing optimal adaptive controller is in general intractable
(Duﬀ, 2002). Thus, virtually all of the eﬀort of the re-
Copyright 2010 by the authors.
search community is centered around the development
of tractable approximations.
Recently, new formulations of the adaptive control
problem that are based on the minimization of a rel-
ative entropy criterion have attracted the interest of
the reinforcement learning (RL) community. For ex-
ample, it has been shown that a large class of opti-
mal control problems can be solved very eﬃciently if
the problem statement is reformulated as the mini-
mization of the deviation of the dynamics of a con-
trolled system from the uncontrolled system (Todorov,
2006; 2009; Kappen et al., 2009). A similar approach
minimizes the deviation of the causal input/output-
relationship of a Bayesian mixture of controllers from
the true controller, obtaining an explicit solution called
the Bayesian control rule (Ortega & Braun, 2010).
This control rule is particularly interesting because it
leads to stochastic controllers that infer the optimal
controller on-line by combining the plant-speciﬁc con-
trollers, implicitly using the uncertainty of the dynam-
ics to trade-oﬀexploration versus exploitation.
Markov
decision
processes
(MDPs)
with
undis-
counted/averaged rewards constitute an important
problem class in RL that has been far less studied
than their discounted counterpart. While discounted
rewards are suitable in many applications, a wide va-
riety of tasks—such as those found in control tasks
where the optimal trajectory is a limit cycle, e.g. net-
work load balancing, automatic assembly, queue man-
agement and control of embedded systems—are more
naturally stated in terms of optimizing the average
reward.
However, ﬁnding an optimal policy for the
average reward function is signiﬁcantly more diﬃcult
than the discounted reward.
Unlike the discounted
case, in undiscounted MDPs the Bellman optimality
equations are strongly coupled and the eﬀective hori-
zon is unbounded. A systematic study in Mahadevan
(1996) has shown that exploration plays a crucial role
in undiscounted MDP algorithms, as insuﬃcient explo-
ration may lead to the convergence to a sub-optimal

A Minimum Relative Entropy Controller for Undiscounted Markov Decision Processes
limit cycle. Several algorithms have been proposed for
undiscounted MDPs, most notably R-learning and its
variants (Schwartz, 1993; Singh, 1994), which are in-
spired by Watkins’ Q-learning (Watkins, 1989) and are
simple to implement; and E3 (Kearns & Singh, 1998)
and R-max (Brafman & Tennenholtz, 2001), which are
advanced algorithms that attain near-optimal average
reward in polynomial time.
The aim of this paper is to demonstrate how the
Bayesian control rule can be used to solve adaptive
control problems, illustrating its generality and con-
ceptual simplicity. In particular, undiscounted MDPs
with ﬁnite state and action space and unknown dy-
namics. We derive an adaptive controller, which we
call BCR-MDP, that employs a conjugate prior dis-
tribution over the policy space to concisely encapsu-
late the agent’s history and to infer the optimal pol-
icy. Furthermore, we introduce a Gibbs sampler im-
plementing the controller.
2. Background
2.1. Bayesian control rule
Let O and A be two ﬁnite sets of symbols, where
the former is the set of inputs (observations) and
the second the set of outputs (actions). Actions and
observations at time t are denoted as at ∈A and
ot ∈O respectively, and we use the shorthand a≤t :=
a1, a2, . . . , at and the like to simplify the notation of
strings. We assume that the interaction between the
controller and the plant proceeds in cycles t = 1, 2, . . .
where in cycle t the controller issues action at and the
plant responds with an observation ot. A controller
is deﬁned as a probability distribution P over the in-
put/output (I/O) stream, and it is fully characterized
by the conditional probabilities
P(at|a<t, o<t)
and
P(ot|a≤t, o<t)
representing the probabilities of emitting action at and
collecting observation ot given the respective I/O his-
tory. Similarly, a plant is deﬁned as a probability dis-
tribution Q characterized by the conditional probabil-
ities
Q(ot|a≤t, o<t)
representing the probabilities of emitting observation
ot given the I/O history.
If the plant is known, i.e. if the conditional probabil-
ities Q(ot|a≤t, o<t) are known, then the designer can
build a suitable controller by equating the observa-
tion streams as P(ot|a≤t, o<t) = Q(ot|a≤t, o<t) and by
deﬁning action probabilities P(at|a<t, o<t) such that
the resulting distribution P maximizes a desired util-
ity criterion.
We say that P is tailored to Q.
In
many cases the conditional probabilities P(at|a<t, o<t)
will be deterministic, but there are situations (e.g.
in repeated games) where the designer might prefer
stochastic policies instead.
If the plant is unknown then one faces an adaptive con-
trol problem. Assume we know that the plant Qθ is
going to be drawn randomly from a set Q := {Qθ}θ∈Θ
of possible plants indexed by Θ. Assume further we
have available a set of controllers P := {Pθ}θ∈Θ, where
each Pθ is tailored to Qθ. How can we now construct a
controller P such that its behavior is as close as possi-
ble to the tailored controller Pθ under any realization
of Qθ ∈Q?
A na¨ıve approach would be to minimize the relative
entropy of the controller P with respect to the true
controller Pθ, averaged over all possible values of θ.
However, this is syntactically incorrect. The impor-
tant observation made in Ortega & Braun (2010) is
that we do not want to minimize the deviation of P
from Pθ, but the deviation of the causal I/O depen-
dencies in P from the causal I/O dependencies in Pθ.
Intuitively speaking, we do not want to predict actions
and observations, but to predict the observations (ef-
fect) given actions (causes).
More speciﬁcally, they
propose to minimize a set of (causal) divergences C
deﬁned by
C := lim sup
t→∞
X
θ
P(θ)
t
X
τ=1
Cτ
Cτ :=
X
o<τ
Pθ(ˆa<τ, o<τ)Cτ(ˆa<τ, o<τ)
Cτ(h) :=
X
aτ
X
oτ
Pθ(aτ, oτ|h) log Pθ(aτ, oτ|h)
P(aτ, oτ|h) ,
(1)
where P(θ) is the prior probability of θ ∈Θ, ˆaτ de-
notes an intervened (not observed) action at time τ,
and ˆa1, ˆa2, ˆa3, . . . is an arbitrary sequence of intervened
actions.
In Ortega & Braun (2010), it is shown that the con-
troller P that minimizes C in Equation (1) for any
sequence of intervened actions is given by the condi-
tional probabilities
P(at|ˆa<t, o<t) :=
X
θ
Pθ(at|a<t, o<t)P(θ|ˆa<t, o<t)
P(ot|ˆa≤t, o<t) :=
X
θ
Pθ(ot|a≤t, o<t)P(θ|ˆa<t, o<t)
(2)

A Minimum Relative Entropy Controller for Undiscounted Markov Decision Processes
where
P(θ|ˆa≤t, o≤t) :=
Pθ(ot|a≤t, o<t)P(θ|ˆa<t, o<t)
P
θ′ Pθ′(ot|a≤t, o<t)P(θ′|ˆa<t, o<t).
(3)
Equations (2) and (3) constitute the Bayesian control
rule.
This result is obtained by using properties of
interventions using causal calculus (Pearl, 2000). It is
worth to point out that the resulting controller is fully
deﬁned in terms of its constituent controllers in P. It
is customary to use the notation
P(at|θ, a<t, o<t) := Pθ(at|a<t, o<t)
P(ot|θ, a≤t, o<t) := Pθ(ot|a≤t, o<t),
that is, treating the diﬀerent controllers as hypothe-
ses of a Bayesian model.
The resulting control law
is in general stochastic. Also, note that by construc-
tion, an adaptive code for the I/O stream based on the
Bayesian control rule is optimal for the class of plants
considered (MacKay, 2003).
2.2. MDPs
Deﬁnitions.
An
MDP
is
deﬁned
as
a
tuple
(X, A, T, r):
X is the state space; A is the action
space; Ta(x; x′) = Pr(x′|a, x) is the probability that
an action a ∈A taken in state x ∈X will lead to state
x′ ∈X; and r(x, a) ∈R := R is the immediate re-
ward obtained in state x ∈X and action a ∈A. The
interaction proceeds in time steps t = 1, 2, . . . where
at time t, action at ∈A is issued in state xt−1 ∈X,
leading to a reward rt = r(xt−1, at) and a new state
xt that starts the next time step t+1. Hence, starting
from an initial state x0 ∈X, an I/O sequence has the
form
x0 →a1 →(r1, x1) →a2 →(r2, x2) →· · ·
· · · →at−1 →(rt−1, xt−1) →at →(rt, xt) →· · ·
A stationary closed-loop control policy π : X →A
assigns an action to each state. For MDPs there al-
ways exists an optimal stationary deterministic pol-
icy and thus one only needs to consider such policies.
For undiscounted MDPs, the goal is to ﬁnd a policy
that maximizes the time-averaged reward 1
t
Pt
τ=1 rτ
as t →∞.
Bellman optimality equations.
In undiscounted
MDPs the average reward per time step for a ﬁxed
policy π with initial state x is deﬁned as follows:
ρπ(x) = limt→∞Eπ[ 1
t
Pt
τ=0 rτ].
It can be shown
(Bertsekas, 1987) that ρπ(x) = ρπ(x′) for all x, x′ ∈X
under the assumption that the Markov chain for pol-
icy π is ergodic. Here, we assume that the MDPs are
ergodic for all stationary policies.
Following the Q-
notation of Watkins (1989), the optimal policy π∗can
be characterized in terms of the optimal average re-
ward ρ and the optimal relative Q-values Q(x, a) for
each state-action pair (x, a) that are solutions to the
following system of non-linear equations (Singh, 1994):
for any state x ∈X and action a ∈A,
Q(x, a) + ρ = r(x, a) +
X
y∈X
Pr(x′|x, a)
h
max
a′ Q(x′, a′)
i
= r(x, a) + Ex′
h
max
a′ Q(x′, a′)
x, a
i
.
(4)
For this setup, the optimal policy is deﬁned as π∗(x) :=
arg maxa Q(x, a) for any state x ∈X.
3. Derivation of the Controller
One can exploit the Bellman optimality equations
in (4) to deﬁne a space of optimal controllers.
In
particular, any ρ ∈R and collection of Q-values
Q(x, a) ∈R where x ∈N and a ∈A characterize
an optimal controller.
Hence, one can parameterize
the space of controllers with a vector θ ∈Θ := R∞
containing the average reward and all the Q-values.
To apply the Bayesian control rule, we need to derive
probabilistic models for actions and observations.
Noting that in cycle t the controller issues an action
at ∈A and receives a reward rt ∈R and a state xt ∈
X, one can deﬁne the space of actions and observations
for the Bayesian control rule as A and O := R × X
respectively.
Let x = xt−1, a = at, r = rt and x′ = xt. Given the
controller’s parameter vector θ, the only additional in-
formation needed to apply the optimal policy is given
by the last state x. Hence, we impose the indepen-
dence property
P(at, ot|θ, a<t, o<t) = P(a, r, x′|θ, x).
Furthermore, this can be decomposed as a product of
three conditional probabilities:
P(a, r, x′|θ, x) = P(a|θ, x)P(x′|θ, x, a)P(r|θ, x, a, x′).
(5)
The ﬁrst term, i.e. the probability of action a given
θ, x and a, is given by:
P(a|θ,x) = P(a|{Q(x, a′)}a′∈A)
=
(
1
if a = arg maxa′ Q(x, a′)
0
else,
(6)
which is just the action taken by the optimal policy π∗
in state x.

A Minimum Relative Entropy Controller for Undiscounted Markov Decision Processes
For the second term in (5), i.e. the state transition
probabilities given the past interactions, we observe
that the average reward ρ and the Q-values Q(x, a)
encoded in θ do not provide enough information to
encode the transition probabilities. Thus we conclude
that they are independent of the parameter, that is:
for any θ, θ′ ∈Θ,
P(x′|θ, x, a) = P(x′|θ′, x, a). (7)
Finally we derive P(r|θ, x, a, x′), i.e. the probabilities
of rewards given the past interactions and the next
state x. Note that the reward function r(x, a) is not
parameterized by θ, thus we cannot know the exact
value of r from (θ, x, a, x′).
Let ξ(x, a, x′) be the mean instantaneous reward de-
ﬁned by
ξ(x, a, x′) := Q(x, a) + ρ −max
a′ Q(x′, a′).
(8)
This quantity represents the mean of the instanta-
neous reward r(x, a) as estimated indirectly using the
pre- and post-action Q-values. Indeed, it is seen from
Equation (4) that
r(x, a) = ξ(x, a, x′) + ν,
(9)
where
ν := max
a′
Q(x′, a′) −E[max
a′ Q(x′, a′)|x, a].
Here, the term ν is a deviation from r(x, a) that can
be interpreted as random observation noise. Assuming
that ν can be reasonably approximated by a normal
distribution N(0, 1/p) with precision p, then we can
write down a likelihood model for the immediate re-
ward r using the Q-values and the average reward, i.e.
P(r|θ, x, a, x′) =
r p
2π exp
n
−p
2(r −ξ(x, a, x′))2o
.
(10)
This completes our model of the controller with pa-
rameter vector θ.
To apply the Bayesian control rule over the con-
trollers in Θ, the intervened posterior distribution
P(θ|ˆa≤t, o≤t) deﬁned in Equation (3) needs to be com-
puted. Fortunately, due to the simplicity of the like-
lihood model, one can easily devise a conjugate prior
distribution.
Inserting the likelihood into Equation (3), one obtains
P(θ|ˆa≤t, o≤t)
=
P(x′|θ, x, a)P(r|θ, x, a, x′)P(θ|ˆa<t, o<t)
R
˜Θ P(x′|θ′, x, a)P(r|θ′, x, a, x′)P(θ′|ˆa<t, o<t) dθ′
=
P(r|θ, x, a, x′)P(θ|ˆa<t, o<t)
R
˜Θ P(r|θ′, x, a, x′)P(θ′|ˆa<t, o<t) dθ′ ,
(11)
where we have replaced the sum by an integration
over ˜Θ, the ﬁnite-dimensional real space containing
only the average reward and the Q-values of the ob-
served states, and where we have simpliﬁed the term
P(x′|θ, x, a) because it is constant for all θ′ ∈˜Θ.
By inspection of Equation (11), one sees that θ en-
codes a set of independent normal distributions over
the immediate reward having means ξ(x, a, x′) indexed
by triples (x, a, x′) ∈X × A × X.
In other words,
given (x, a, x′), the rewards are drawn from a nor-
mal distribution with unknown mean ξ(x, a, x′) and
known variance σ2. The suﬃcient statistics are given
by n(x, a, x′), the number of times that the transition
x →x′ under action a, and ¯r(x, a, x′), the mean of the
rewards obtained in the same transition. The conju-
gate prior distribution is well known and given by a
normal distribution with hyperparameters µ0 and λ0:
P(ξ(x, a, x′)) = N(µ0, 1/λ0)
=
r
λ0
2π exp
n
−λ0
2
 ξ(x, a, x′) −µ0
2o
.
(12)
The posterior distribution is given by
P(ξ(x, a, x′)|ˆa≤t, o≤t) = N(µ(x, a, x′), 1/λ(x, a, x′))
where the posterior hyperparameters are computed as
µ(x, a, x′) = λ0 µ0 + p n(x, a, x′) ¯r(x, a, x′)
λ0 + p n(x, a, x′)
λ(x, a, x′) = λ0 + p n(x, a, x′).
(13)
Finally, the conjugate distribution of the parameter
vector θ is simply the product
P(θ|ˆa≤t, o≤t) =
Y
x,a,x′
P(ξ(x, a, x′)|ˆa≤t, o≤t)
∝exp
n
−1
2
X
x,a,x′
λ(x, a, x′)
 ξ(x, a, x′)−µ(x, a, x′)
2o
(14)
because the ξ(x, a, x′) are independent but at the same
time functions of θ (Equation 8). Thus, the BCR-MDP
controller is fully speciﬁed by the actions probabilities
in Equation (6), the likelihood models in Equations (7)
and (10), and the prior distribution (12).
4. Inference and Acting
Inference can be carried out by sampling θ from the
posterior distribution in Equation (14). The actions
issued by BCR-MDP are by-products of the inference
process. Here we derive an approximate Gibbs sampler
for θ. We introduce the following symbols: θ−ρ and

A Minimum Relative Entropy Controller for Undiscounted Markov Decision Processes
θ−Q(x,a) stand for the parameter set removing ρ and
Q(x, a) respectively; µ and λ are matrices collecting
the values of the posterior hyperparameters µ(x, a, x′)
and λ(x, a, x′) respectively; and M(x) := maxa Q(x, a)
is a shorthand.
Substituting ξ(x, a, x′) in Equation (14) by its deﬁni-
tion (Equation 8) and conditioning on the Q-values,
we obtain the conditional distribution of ρ:
P(ρ|θ−ρ, µ, λ) = N(¯ρ, 1/S)
(15)
where
¯ρ = 1
S
X
x,a,x′
λ(x, a, x′)(µ(x, a, x′) −Q(x, a) + M(x′)),
S =
X
x,a,x′
λ(x, a, x′).
The conditional distribution over the Q-values is more
diﬃcult to obtain, because each Q(x, a) enters the
posterior distribution both linearly and non-linearly
through µ. However, if we ﬁx Q(x, a) within the max
operations, which amounts to treating each M(x) as
a constant within a single Gibbs step, then the condi-
tional distribution can be approximated by
P(Q(x, a)|θ−Q(x,a), λ, µ) ≈N

¯Q(x, a), 1/S(x, a)

(16)
where
¯Q(x, a) =
1
S(x, a)
X
x′
λ(x, a, x′)(µ(x, a, x′) −ρ + M(x′)),
S(x, a) =
X
x′
λ(x, a, x′).
We expect this approximation to hold because the re-
sulting update rule constitutes a contraction operation
that forms the basis of most stochastic approximation
algorithms (Mahadevan, 1996). As a result, the Gibbs
sampler draws all the values from normal distributions.
In each cycle of the adaptive controller, one can carry
out several Gibbs sweeps to obtain a sample of θ to im-
prove the mixing of the Markov chain. However, our
experimental results have shown that a single Gibbs
sweep per state transition performs reasonably well.
Once a new parameter vector θ is drawn, BCR-MDP
proceeds by taking the optimal action given by Equa-
tion (6).
The resulting algorithm is listed in Algo-
rithm 4. Note that only the µ and λ entries of the
transitions that have occurred need to be represented
explicitly; similarly, only the Q-values of visited states
need to be represented explicitly.
Algorithm 1 BCR-MDP Gibbs sampler.
Initialize entries of θ, λ and µ to zero.
Set initial state to x ←x0.
for t = 1, 2, 3, . . . do
{ Interaction }
Set a ←arg maxa′ Q(x, a′) and issue a.
Obtain o = (r, x′) from plant.
{Update hyperparameters}
µ(x, a, x′) ←λ(x,a,x′)µ(x,a,x′)+p r
λ(x,a,x′)+p
λ(x, a, x′) ←λ(x, a, x′) + p
{Gibbs sweep}
Sample ρ using (15).
for all Q(y, b) of visited states do
Sample Q(y, b) using (16).
end for
Set x →x′.
end for
5. Preliminary Empirical Results
We have tested BCR-MDP in two toy examples: a
grid-world domain, and on a suite of randomly gen-
erated MDPs.
To give an intuition of the achieved
performance, the results are contrasted with those
achieved by R-learning. We have used the R-learning
variant presented in Singh (1994, Algorithm 3) to-
gether with the uncertainty exploration strategy (Ma-
hadevan, 1996). The corresponding update equations
are
Q(x, a) ←(1 −α)Q(x, a) + α
 r −ρ + max
a′ Q(x′, a′)

ρ ←(1 −β)ρ + β
 r + max
a′
Q(x′, a′) −Q(x, a)

,
(17)
where α, β > 0 are learning rates.
The exploration
strategy chooses with ﬁxed probability pexp > 0 the
action a that maximizes Q(x, a)+
C
F (x,a), where C is a
constant, and F(x, a) represents the number of times
that action a has been tried in state x. Thus, higher
values of C enforce increased exploration.
Grid-world domain.
In Mahadevan (1996), a grid-
world is described that is especially useful as a test bed
for the analysis of RL algorithms. For our purposes,
it is of particular interest because it is easy to design
experiments containing suboptimal limit-cycles.
Figure 1, panel (a), illustrates the 7 × 7 grid-world.
A controller has to learn a policy that leads it from
any initial location to the goal state. At each step,
the agent can move to any adjacent space (up, down,
left or right). If the agent reaches the goal state then

A Minimum Relative Entropy Controller for Undiscounted Markov Decision Processes
125
0
250
375
500
x1000 time steps
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
e) Average Reward
R-learning, C=5
R-learning, C=30
BCR-MDP
c) R-learning, C=5
d) R-learning, C=30
b) BCR-MDP
initial 5,000 steps
last 5,000 steps
a) 7x7 Maze
goal
membranes
high
probability
low
probability
Figure 1. Results for the 7×7 grid-world domain. Panel (a) illustrates the setup. Columns (b)-(d) illustrate the behavioral
statistics of the algorithms. The upper and lower row have been calculated over the ﬁrst and last 5,000 time steps of
randomly chosen runs. The probability of being in a state is color-encoded, and the arrows represent the most frequent
actions taken by the agents. Panel (e) presents the curves obtained by averaging ten runs.
its next position is randomly set to any square of the
grid (with uniform probability) to start another trial.
There are also “one-way membranes” that allow the
agent to move into one direction but not into the other.
In these experiments, these membranes form “inverted
cups” that the agent can enter from any side but can
only leave through the bottom, playing the role of a
local maximum. Transitions are stochastic: the agent
moves to the correct square with probability p =
9
10
and to any of the free adjacent spaces (uniform dis-
tribution) with probability 1 −p =
1
10. Rewards are
assigned as follows. The default reward is r = 0. If
the agent traverses a membrane it obtains a reward of
r = 1. Reaching the goal state assigns r = 2.5.
The parameters chosen for this simulation were the
following. For BCR-MDP, we have chosen hyperpa-
rameters µ0 = 1 and λ0 = 1 and precision p = 1. For
R-learning, we have chosen learning rates α = 0.5 and
β = 0.001, and the exploration constant has been set
to C = 5 and to C = 30.
A total of 10 runs were carried out for each algorithm.
The results are presented in Figure 1 and Table 1. R-
learning only learns the optimal policy given suﬃcient
exploration (panels c & d, bottom row), whereas BCR-
MDP learns the policy successfully. In Figure 1e, the
learning curve of R-learning is initially steeper than
the Bayesian controller. However, the latter attains a
higher average reward around time step 125,000 on-
wards. We attribute this shallow initial transient to
the phase where the distribution over the operation
modes is ﬂat, which is also reﬂected by the initially
random exploratory behavior.
To test wether the performance of BCR-MDP scales
up with a larger problem, we have conducted a sec-
Table 1. Average reward attained by the diﬀerent algo-
rithms at the end of the run. The mean and the standard
deviation has been calculated based on 10 runs.
Average Reward
BCR-MDP
0.3582 ± 0.0038
R-learning, C = 30
0.3056 ± 0.0063
R-learning, C = 5
0.2049 ± 0.0012
ond grid-world experiment with where the number of
states has roughly been doubled. The results for this
10×10 maze are illustrated in Figure 2. The reward for
reaching the goal state has been set to r = 10 in this
case. The precision for this experiment has been set to
p = 1/3 to reﬂect higher uncertainty. This is still very
low given that the range of possible rewards is [0; 10].
We have simulated one run of one million time steps.
Again, one can see that the algorithm moves from a
highly exploratory phase to an exploitative phase (Fig-
ure 2, left panels), eventually converging towards the
optimal policy.
The learning curve shows a steady
increase in performance (Figure 2, right panel). Inter-
estingly, around time step 300,000 the curve shows an
abrupt change in slope. Presumably this is due to a
change of the belief state: the algorithm was exploiting
one of the two suboptimal limit cycles when it discov-
ered the optimal limit cycle. This conﬁrms our intu-
ition, because the inference process cannot converge as
long as there is still uncertainty over the policy space.
Randomly generated MDPs.
The purpose of this
experiment is to test the robustness of the algorithm
under diﬀerent environments. In this second test bed,
random ergodic MDPs have been generated: a) with

A Minimum Relative Entropy Controller for Undiscounted Markov Decision Processes
250
0
500
750
1000
x1000 time steps
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.7
Average Reward
initial 1000 time steps
last 1000 time steps
high
probability
low
probability
Figure 2. 10x10 maze task.
Policy iteration
Average Reward
(10-state 5-action MDPs)
BCR-MDP
R-learning, C=20
10
0
x1000 time steps
0.50
0.55
0.60
0.65
0.70
20
30
40
50
60
0.75
Policy iteration
Average Reward
(20-state 5-action MDPs)
BCR-MDP
R-learning, C=20
10
0
x1000 time steps
0.50
0.55
0.60
0.65
0.70
20
30
40
50
60
0.75
Figure 3. Comparison of the average reward for BCR-MDP, policy iteration and R-learning. A total of 60 diﬀerent MDPs
where randomly generated, one half having 10 states and 5 actions (left panel), and the other half having 20 states and
5 actions (right panel). The three algorithms where tested on these MDPs and their learning curves averaged.
Table 2. Average reward attained by the diﬀerent algo-
rithms at the end of the run. The mean and the standard
deviation has been calculated based on 30 runs.
Average Reward :
10-state, 5-actions
20-state, 5-actions
Policy iteration
0.7114 ± 0.0207
0.6906 ± 0.0101
BCR-MDP
0.6998 ± 0.0211
0.6743 ± 0.0102
R-learning, C = 20
0.6061 ± 0.0216
0.5677 ± 0.0104
10 states and 5 actions and b) with 20 states and 5 ac-
tions. The transition and payoﬀmatrices have been
constructed randomly:
all transitions had non-zero
probabilities and all rewards took on values in [0; 1]. In
each run, a new MDP is generated and the three agents
are tested on it: BCR-MDP with precision p = 1; R-
learning with α = 0.5, β = 0.001 and C = 20; and
policy iteration. The latter has been used to estimate
the maximum performance, i.e. the performance of an
informed agent. We have simulated a total of 30 runs
with 60,000 time steps for both cases and averaged the
curves. The results, presented in Figure 3 and Table 2,
show that BCR-MDP quickly approximates the opti-
mal average reward, in both cases signiﬁcantly faster
than R-learning.
6. Summary and Conclusion
The reformulation of the adaptive control problem
as the minimization of the relative entropy over the
causal dependencies stated in Equation (1) leads to
an explicit solution given by the Bayesian control rule.
This rule constitutes a general method to construct
adaptive controllers from plant-speciﬁc controllers. Its
main advantage is that it allows replacing the in-
tractable calculation of the optimal policy for the class
of plants by an on-line inference procedure, where ac-
tions are simply by-products of the inference process.
Conceptually, the Bayesian control rule instantiates
several well-known ideas: the action selection strat-
egy is a probability matching method (Wyatt, 1997);
mixing task-optimal controllers is a mixture of experts
technique (Jacobs et al., 1991); and minimizing the
relative entropy to design a controller is equivalent
to maximizing the compression of the controller’s I/O
stream (MacKay, 2003).
To illustrate the potential of the Bayesian control rule,
we have derived BCR-MDP, an adaptive controller to
solve undiscounted MDPs with ﬁnite state and ac-
tion spaces and unknown dynamics.
BCR-MDP is
very simple to understand and to implement using the
Gibbs sampler proposed in Section 4. Empirical re-
sults show that the built-in exploration-exploitation
strategy avoids getting trapped in local minima.

A Minimum Relative Entropy Controller for Undiscounted Markov Decision Processes
Using Bayesian techniques in RL has a long history
and has shown to be useful because they provide a sys-
tematic way of incorporating prior knowledge and do-
main assumptions into the problem and updating them
as more data are observed. This allows quantifying the
uncertainty of the quantity of interest, e.g. the value
function, action-value function, etc. The idea of re-
stating RL as an inference problem has also been pro-
posed in Toussaint et al. (2006). This approach uses
the expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm to infer
the optimal policy, and special pruning techniques to
reduce the computational complexity. It is interesting
to point out that in the case of undiscounted MDPs,
Bayesian Q-learning (Dearden et al., 1998) resembles
closely BCR-MDP. Our contribution is to show that
such an algorithm can be derived from a more gen-
eral relative entropy minimization principle, including
some features like the implicit exploration-exploitation
trade-oﬀ.
We expect similar simpliﬁcations to hold for the de-
sign of adaptive controllers for other classes of plant
dynamics. In particular, potential applications of the
Bayesian control rule include extensions to continu-
ous state and action spaces and to partially observable
Markov processes.
