Heatmap-based Object Detection and Tracking
with a Fully Convolutional Neural Network
Fabian Amherd
Elias Rodriguez

Advisors:
Michael Bucher
Christopher Latkoczy
Kantonsschule Stadelhofen
Schanzengasse 17
8001 Z¨urich, Switzerland
External Advisors:
Prof. Dr. Tobias Delbr¨uck
Yuhuang Hu
Shasha Guo
Institute of Neuroinformatics
Winterthurerstrasse 190
8057 Z¨urich, Switzerland
2021
arXiv:2101.03541v1  [cs.CV]  10 Jan 2021

Per Aspera Ad Astra
i

Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
What is Artiﬁcial Intelligence?
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.1
Deﬁnition of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.2
Diﬀerent types of AI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.3
A closer look at the ﬁeld of AI
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
History
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2.1
Earlier Epochs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2.2
AI today
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Practical Part
5
2.1
Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Materials and Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.2
Network Architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.3
Loss Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.4
Training the Network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Discussion
17
3.1
Applications of AI
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Challenges regarding AI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2.1
Reliability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2.2
Interpretability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.3
Moral Dilemma . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.4
Energy and Computing Power Demand
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3
Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Appendix
22
4.1
Reasons for the choice of topic
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
ii

Abstract
The main topic of this paper is a brief overview
of the ﬁeld of Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
The core
of this paper is a practical implementation of an
algorithm for object detection and tracking. The
ability to detect and track fast-moving objects
is crucial for various applications of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence like autonomous driving, ball tracking
in sports, robotics or object counting.
As part
of this paper the Fully Convolutional Neural
Network ”CueNet” was developed. It detects and
tracks the cueball on a labyrinth game robustly
and reliably.
While CueNet V1 has a single
input image, the approach with CueNet V2 was
to take three consecutive 240 x 180-pixel images
as an input and transform them into a probability
heatmap for the cueball’s location. The network
was tested with a separate video that contained all
sorts of distractions to test its robustness. When
confronted with our testing data,
CueNet V1
predicted the correct cueball location in 99.6% of
all frames, while CueNet V2 had 99.8% accuracy.
To get access to the source code of the project,
scan the QR-code at the beginning of chapter
2.
1
Introduction
1.1
What is Artiﬁcial Intelligence?
1.1.1
Deﬁnition of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI)
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) is the simulation of
intelligence in a non-biological structure.
As in many ﬁelds,
there does not exist one single
agreed-upon deﬁnition of Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
A
deﬁnition often used is ”Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) would
be the possession of intelligence, or the exercise of
thought, by machines such as computers.” [1].
So
the only diﬀerence to Human Intelligence would be,
that the intelligence is possessed by a machine on a
semiconductor-basis, not by a human in a biological
structure.
The question ”Can machines think?” is very interesting
to consider here.
One can also have the opinion that
a machine cannot possess real Intelligence, that it can
only simulate intelligent behaviour.
Therefore, another
deﬁnition that is around, reads as follows: ”AI [can be
looked at] as an engineering discipline in which researchers
focus on developing useful programs and tools that
perform in domains that normally require intelligence.”
[2].
So we can also deﬁne Artiﬁcial Intelligence as
algorithms able to solve tasks, that normally require
intelligence to be solved, although these algorithms do
not possess ”Intelligence” in a traditional sense.
1.1.2
Diﬀerent types of AI
Some people may ﬁnd it useful to put diﬀerent algorithms
or ”AI systems” into categories, as a criterion for which
can be used the comparison to a human. The following
categorization is based on the capability of an AI. There
is another popular categorization based on functionality,
which won’t be considered here though.
The least sophisticated type of AI is called Artiﬁcial
Narrow Intelligence (ANI) or ”weak AI”.
This
is where we would place all of the AI systems we
have encountered up to this point.
As Forbes puts it:
”Artiﬁcial narrow intelligence refers to AI systems that
can only perform a speciﬁc task autonomously using
human-like capabilities.” [3]. Important to consider here
is that these systems can be operating at a superhuman
level of performance, but only in one speciﬁc area they
were programmed for.
One step up the ladder we have Artiﬁcial General
Intelligence (AGI) or ”strong AI”. These AI systems
have human-level intelligence across all domains, they are
as multi-functional as humans.
They can understand,
discuss and generalize like human beings. ”AGI can think,
understand, and act in a way that is indistinguishable
from that of a human in any given situation.” [4]
An Artiﬁcial Superintelligence (ASI) would surpass
the capabilities of humans in every aspect. It would be
able to come up with ideas that are impossible to grasp for
humans. Whether it is in science, sports, understanding
emotions, creative thinking, ASI will outperform humans.
The potential of such a machine is tremendous and comes
with unknown consequences.
It has been proposed that the emergence of ASI is almost
inevitable when AGI has been achieved. To justify this,
one only has to look at the advantages of a digital
implementation over a biological one.
In the digital
implementation of a brain, the simulation can be copied
1

and accelerated multiple times.
Thus, when we create
AGI with a whole brain emulation, we can, with suﬃcient
computational resources, create a collection of such AIs
that work together at superhuman speeds. [5]
1.1.3
A closer look at the ﬁeld of AI
Machine Learning (ML)
Machine Learning (ML) is the process that
an Artiﬁcial Intelligence goes through when
learning.
Another term for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, although less
used, is ”Machine Intelligence”. ”Machine Learning” is
what leads to it.
Machine Learning is the process that an algorithm goes
through when trying to search for patterns in a massive
amount of data.
The term refers to a subﬁeld of AI
(see ﬁgure 1), but still contains numerous other subﬁelds
(one of which is Deep Learning). The big advantage of
Machine Learning is that the algorithm tries to ﬁnd the
patterns automatically, it learns through the experience it
gets from the data that gets fed into it. Mathematically,
the program tries to ﬁnd the best possible function to
map a certain input to a certain output. This is also why
neural networks are sometimes called ”universal function
approximators”.
There are diﬀerent approaches to how a programmer can
set up the environment for an algorithm to learn. One
approach is called Supervised Learning, its principle
is to present the algorithm with the input, let it output
something, and then give feedback on how close the actual
output was to the desired output, also called the ”Loss”,
by calculating the diﬀerence between the actual output
and the label. There are diﬀerent ways to calculate this
diﬀerence, which will be discussed in more detail in 2.2.3
of this paper.
A second approach often used is called Unsupervised
Learning.
The goal here is to let the algorithm
automatically ﬁnd the underlying structure of the data
fed into it. This may help to discover connections that
are not recognizable by humans alone because we can’t
take as much data into respect as computers can.
A third popular approach is Reinforcement Learning.
Here the algorithm becomes an ”agent” in a simulated or
real environment in which it can take actions that lead
to a diﬀerent state of the environment.
The algorithm
constantly tries to change its ”policy” of taking actions
to maximize the reward it gets. [6]
Figure 1: AI, Machine Learning and Deep Learning in a
hierarchical order.
Deep Learning (DL)
If we perform Machine Learning (ML) with a
Deep Neural Network (a form of an AI), it is
called Deep Learning (DL).
One of the biggest subﬁelds of Machine Learning is named
”Deep Learning”. This ﬁeld addresses the development of
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANNs), whose structure
is strongly inspired by the human brain. ANNs will be
discussed in more detail in the ﬁrst part of 2.2.2 . More
complex tasks often require bigger networks with more
subsequent layers. If an ANN consists of more than three
layers, we call it a Deep Neural Network.[7]
There are dozens of diﬀerent architectures of ANNs that
excel at speciﬁc types of problems.
The architectures
we will have a closer look at in this paper are the most
simple form, the Dense Neural Network (DNN), as well as
the Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), which is being
used in the practical part of this work.
Deep Learning is already being applied in all kinds of
diﬀerent industries all over the world, most widely known
are recommendation systems as on Youtube or Amazon.
Although already used so much, it is said to still have
enormous potential to transform our lives completely. The
2

realised and potential applications of AI (and with it Deep
Learning) will be discussed more closely in 3.1 of this
paper.
1.2
History
The history of AI dates way back several thousand
years where myths and stories of artiﬁcial beings with
intelligence were being told. Amongst the old greeks there
existed the myth of Talos, a guardian of the island of
Crete, which was artiﬁcially forged by Hephaestus with
the aid of a cyclops.
His task was to throw boulders
at ships of invaders and walk three times around the
island’s perimeter daily [8].
From 380 BC to 1900
there have been numerous mathematicians, theologians,
philosophers, professors and authors who mused about
calculating machines, mechanical techniques and other
systems that eventually led to the concept of artiﬁcial
human-like thought in non-human beings.
1.2.1
Earlier Epochs
The ﬁrst real implementation of an AI was proposed
by Warren McCulloch and Walter Pitts in 1943 with a
mathematical model, combined with a computer model
of the biological neuron.
[9] At the beginning of
1950, Alan Turing and John von Neumann became
the founding fathers of the technology behind AI, as
they made the transition from analogue and hard-wired
digital computers to computers with a stored program
in a separate memory (the so-called ”von Neumann”
architecture). Turing and Neumann thus formalized the
architecture of the computers from today. Turing raised
the question of the possible intelligence of a machine in his
famous article ”Computing Machinery and Intelligence”
from 1950.
In this article, he described a ”game of
imitation” which later was called the ”Turing test”, where
the machine can pass it if a human moderator can not tell
if he is talking to a human or a machine. [8] The ﬁeld
was in its golden years, people were extremely optimistic,
claiming that within ten years a digital computer will be
the world’s ﬁrst chess champion and within ten more years
a digital computer will discover and prove an important
new mathematical theorem. [10]
The ﬁrst AI winter 1974-1980
AI remained fascinating but the popularity of the
technology fell back in the early 1970s.
AI would
become subject to critiques and ﬁnancial setbacks. The
tremendous optimism had raised expectation impossibly
high, which lead to the unfulﬁllment of the promises. [11]
Combined with the limitations of the hardware at that
time, on top of which came the cutting oﬀfrom almost all
funding for undirected research into AI, the technology
was lead into its ﬁrst winter. During the same period,
Marvin Misky harshly criticised perceptrons and therefore
shut down the ﬁeld of neural nets almost completely for
the next 10 years. [12]
Boom 1980-1987
In the 1980s, a form of AI called expert systems was
adopted by corporations around the world. These expert
systems are programs that can answer questions or
solve problems about a speciﬁc domain of knowledge.
An expert system tries to emulate the decision-making
ability of a human expert, hence the name, by going
through many ”if–then” rules.
The earliest examples
were developed by Edward Feigenbaum and his students
[13][14]. Expert systems only function in a speciﬁc ﬁeld
of knowledge and all in all were useful, which AI had not
been able to achieve up to this point. [15][16]
During the same years in Japan, the government started
to fund AI with its ﬁfth-generation computer project. The
Japanese Ministry set aside $850 million for the project.
The goal was to create programs and machines that could
do things like translate language and reason like humans.
[17] As a reaction, other countries started to fund new
projects in the ﬁeld of AI too. In the USA a few companies
came together to form the Microelectronics and Computer
Technology Corporation for funding large projects in the
ﬁeld of AI. The Alvey project started in the UK which
cost £350 million. [18]
The second AI winter 1987–1993
In a similar pattern as the ﬁrst winter, the second one
occurred.
Expectations were again set much too high
and AI was exposed to ﬁnancial setbacks.
One could
compare it to an economic bubble. Systems for vision and
speech worked very poorly with expert systems because
they contained too many edge cases, which couldn’t be
manually designed around. [19]
AI 1993–2011
Now some of the initial goals of AI could ﬁnally be
achieved.
May 11th 1997, Deep Blue, a chess-playing
3

computer won a game against the world chess champion
Garry Kasparov [20].
AI’s success started to spread
throughout the technology industry. The overall success
of AI was not due to some revolutionary discovery, but
mostly due to the tremendous increase in the speed and
capacity of computers in the 90s [21].
This dramatic
increase is described by Moore’s law, which states that
the density of transistors on an Integrated Circuit (IC) of
new computers doubles about every two years.
1.2.2
AI today
2011-present
Since the beginning of the 2010s, the computer science
branch of AI has experienced a boom (again). The reason
is mainly the availability of three key resources in AI:
Computing power, the internet and data.
The latter
is available in such quantities that it has even gotten a
name: ”Big Data”.
These circumstances also led to signiﬁcantly increased
budgets for AI R&D in the industry, the results of which
we could observe in the last few years: In 2011, IBMs
Watson won the TV-Show ”Jeopardy”, in 2016, AlphaGO
beat the best human players, in 2020, Agent 57 beat the
human benchmark in all 57 Atari games [22] and the list
of new achievements goes on. [8]
”Who is Who” in the ﬁeld of AI?
The point of this section is to give a quick overview of the
most important players in the AI Industry regarding the
big technology companies.
Nvidia is a company based in California, USA, that,
among other things, develops Graphics Processing Units
(GPUs). GPUs allow for massively parallel computation,
and therefore, accelerated training of neural networks.
As of Q4 in 2019, Nvidia has a GPU-shipment market
share of ∼70% [23]. [24] Nvidia is mostly fueled by the
video game industry as heavy parallel computing power
is required to run the latest video games.
Google is one of the major players in the AI industry.
Google launched a separate department called ”Google
AI”,
that
does
R&D.
Waymo,
a
company
owned
by Google, currently has one of the most advanced
autonomous driving systems. In 2016, Google introduced
the Tensor Processing Unit (TPU) (See chapter 2.2.1).
TPUs are integrated circuits speciﬁcally designed for
machine learning with neural networks [25]. Of course,
there is also the ”Google Assistant”, which is a virtual
assistant that can take your language or keyboard input,
and search the internet for answers (amongst other
things).
Google has even launched a machine learning
platform called ”Tensorﬂow”.
At IBM, after breakthroughs like DeepBlue in 1996/1997
and Watson in 2011, ”Project Debater” has been in
development since 2012 and has already debated against
the debating world-champion Harish Natarajan in 2019,
though it has lost that discussion. IBM also has an R&D
department called ”IBM Research” that, amongst other
things, does research at the cutting edge of AI. [26]
Just like Google and Amazon, Microsoft has its own
Cloud Computing platform.
It is called ”Microsoft
Azure” and is partly devoted to run heavy AI workloads.
Microsoft is building AI into their existing products such
as Oﬃce 365 to make smart recommendations. One of
Microsoft’s initiatives is called ”AI for Good”, with which
it tries to have a positive impact on the present and future
development of AI.
At Amazon, AI is not located in a single department or
oﬃce. Instead, AI is distributed and applied throughout
the whole company. The most apparent application is the
recommendation engine on the company’s online shop.
Similar to Google, Amazon developed a virtual assistant
called ”Alexa”. One major advantage for Amazon is its
access to a huge data source from tracking the purchase
behaviour of their clients. [27]
Like
Google,
Facebook
has
developed
a
Machine
Learning library called ”Pytorch”,
which is popular
amongst researchers.
Facebook also has a research
department called ”Facebook AI Research (FAIR)”,
that does research as well as publish useful tools
like ”Detectron 2”, a platform that includes several
implementations or diﬀerent computer vision algorithm,
including object detectors like the one of our study. [28]
4

2
Practical Part
This paper includes a practical project with a real-life
application of an AI. This following chapter is devoted
to the documentation of the experiment, as well as some
theoretical explanations on the side to better illustrate
the mathematics behind neural networks.
The code is
available under the following GitHub repository: https:
//github.com/FabianAmherd/CNN_ER_FA (see QR-code
below).
2.1
Experiment
The challenge of the labyrinth game in ﬁgure 2 is to
roll the ball to a destination without it falling into
one of the holes on the board.
The ball is moved
by tilting the labyrinth with two knobs (one on each
axis). Our given task was to develop a neural network
to detect the ball on this labyrinth game for tracking
it. Speciﬁcally, we developed a fully convolutional neural
network. With that, the ﬁrst step for a fully automated
labyrinth game was developed. The data was collected
and labelled by ourselves with a camera and suitable
labelling software.
Figure 2: Setup: Brio labyrinth with RC servo motors,
DAVIS camera and the labelling software.
2.2
Materials and Methods
The
following
section
contains
explanations
and
documentation to how the task described in 2.1 was
solved.
Also, it will cover the theoretical background
of some popular Deep Learning methods or tools.
Equipment
• Camera: The DAVIS camera used is a dual-frame
and event camera [29].
It outputs conventional
frames and a stream of dynamic vision sensor (DVS)
brightness change events [30].
The events can be
collected to variable duration frames to drive a
conventional CNN with sparse frame input, allowing
tracking of fast-moving objects.
• Camera/Labelling Software:
To record and
label our data, the project has used jAER software
[31] as well as the program ”After Eﬀects”.
• Labyrinth:
The labyrinth used was a ”Brio
Labyrinth Game” [32]. It is ﬁtted with a camera
stand as well as two RC servo motors to control
the
table
tilt.
These
servo
motors
can
be
computer-controlled from a computer using the
jAER software.
• Machine Learning tools: The project has used
the open-source machine learning library Pytorch
for developing, training and testing the CNN.
• GPUs:
The project has used a CUDA-enabled
NVIDIA GTX 1080 GPU to accelerate the training
of the CNN.
2.2.1
Data
Machine Learning and hence Deep Learning are both
strongly connected to the ﬁeld of data science.
That’s
probably why you don’t hear too little about Al being all
about (Big) Data.
Tensors
All the data that is being processed, passed
in and out of a neural network is represented
using an n-dimensional array of numbers,
called a tensor.
In Machine Learning, a tensor is used as a way to represent
5

data that researchers and programmers use when dealing
with neural networks. A tensor is the generalization of
vectors and matrices and can be n-dimensional. A vector
is just a one-dimensional or rank one tensor and a matrix
a two-dimensional or rank two tensor.
Figure 3:
Graphical representation of a tensor with
diﬀerent ranks and dimensions.
A tensor can be represented by an n-dimensional array
of numbers.
Its rank is determined by the number of
basis vectors needed to ﬁnd a speciﬁc component. So if
we had a two-dimensional array, we needed the row and
the column of the component, so that tensor would have
rank 2. The dimension of a tensor is in the case of our
array-representation simply determined by the number of
rows or columns the array has.
Figure 4:
Graphical representation of a tensor with
dimension three and rank two (Also called the ”Cauchy
Stress Tensor”).
The same observation (i.e.
a ball rolling in a certain
direction) can be represented by diﬀerent coordinate
systems.
Diﬀerent coordinate systems rely on diﬀerent
basis vectors, so the components in the mathematical
objects used (i.e.
a vector with a magnitude and a
direction to represent the velocity of the ball) also have
to be diﬀerent to compensate for the change of the basis
vectors to still represent the same observation [33].
The power of Tensors lies in the fact that they ensure
that the observation they represent (in the form of a
combination of a set of basis vectors and components)
stays the same for every observer using any coordinate
system [34]. This means that if you rotate your coordinate
system, the ball keeps rolling ”in the same direction” seen
from an absolute standpoint because our way to represent
an observation does not aﬀect the actual physics going on.
To conclude for our work, Tensors have served as a way
to represent the data that is passed through our neural
network. That is when we ﬁrst input the images from the
camera, as well when the images are manipulated by the
neural network when processing the data. It was always
a Tensor, as you can see in ﬁgure 3.
Dataset Creation
When developing an AI algorithm, a substantial part of
the work goes into preprocessing the data, so the neural
network can learn properly. To create the training set for
the CNN, we needed to go through a couple of steps.
6

After recording videos of the ball rolling around on the
labyrinth (table tilted by hand), we had to label the
video. We could do that by importing and activating the
”DvsSliceAviWriter” ﬁlter in the jAER software. Once it
is activated, there is a submenu called ”TargetLabeler”,
which lets you use your mouse to set the labels while
watching the recorded video. Having done that, we used
the jAER software to output a .avi video ﬁle with the
recorded video, plus a .txt text ﬁle that contained the
corresponding label locations/coordinates for every frame
of the video that we had applied a label to using the mouse
on the beforehand. To accelerate this process we made use
of the program ”After Eﬀects”, which already contains a
tracker for diﬀerent kinds of objects. With that, we could
label our data faster and more accurately. In total, our
dataset reached a size of about 30’000 frames.
Since the video output of the DAVIS camera had the
classical frames (APS frames) on the red channel and
the event frames (DVS frames) on the green channel
(blue is empty), the next step was to write a python
script that could both extract all the frames from the
.avi-formatted video plus separate the APS and DVS
frames and save them into separate folders as .png images.
With that, we have prepared the input to our CNN
properly.
Since our project uses a ”Supervised Learning” approach
(see 1.1.3), we have rate the output of the neural network
automatically for the CNN to be able to continually
improve its performance.
This is where the labels
come into play.
The task now was to use the location
information of the previously described .txt ﬁle to create
so-called heatmaps which represent the ideal output we
want from our neural network for each picture. By taking
the coordinates of the .txt ﬁles and putting a Gaussian
distribution around them, we could create the desired
heatmaps. The purpose of these heatmaps is to help us
tell the CNN how good or bad it is currently doing at
telling us the location of the ball on the labyrinth, by
providing the perfect solution. How we solved the task of
rating the CNN as well as an example of a label is covered
in 2.2.3 .
Once we had this collection of examples and their
corresponding
solutions
prepared,
we
could
start
developing the architecture of the neural network itself.
Data Augmentation
Data Augmentation is a technique used in
Deep Learning to artiﬁcially increase the
amount of data in the dataset, as well as to
increase the performance and robustness of the
neural network.
The technique’s trick is to artiﬁcially increase the number
of learning examples in the dataset by slightly modifying
existing samples. With images you could, for example,
rotate it, adjust the brightness, change the virtual lighting
by shading the image, add fake highlight reﬂections,
translate it, crop it, etc. as you can see below in ﬁgure 5.
The three square images below have all been augmented.
They can now all be used as a separate training example
apart from the original image, thus multiplying the size of
the dataset! You could of course implement more diﬀerent
forms of image augmentation, but transformations other
than rotating, as well as adjusting the brightness and
contrast were suﬃcient for good results of our study.
Figure 5: Examples of image augmentation used in our
project.
Our project used the technique of Data Augmentation
with the intent to make the neural network more robust
against diﬀerent lighting conditions, slight rotations of
the labyrinth etc. but also improve the CNNs accuracy
by letting it train on a larger dataset.
It also helped
to increase the performance of the CNN under real-life
conditions, because they have been simulated and trained
on before.
2.2.2
Network Architecture
How does an ANN work?
An Artiﬁcial Neural Network (ANN) is a form
of AI, whose structure is strongly inspired by
the human brain.
7

In this chapter, we will have a closer look at how a neural
network works. After that, we present the architecture of
the CNN we have developed for the practical project.
The ﬁrst type of a neural network we will look at
is the most simple form.
It is called a ”Dense
Neural Network (DNN)” or ”Fully-connected Neural
Network”.
It consists of thousands to millions of
nodes, that are organized into diﬀerent layers.
Each
node is connected to all nodes in the previous layer
as well as in the following layer.
So there are even
many more connections than there are nodes.
This is
why the individual layers are called ”Dense Layers” or
”Fully Connected Layers”, the latter of which is often
abbreviated with ”FC” [35].
Figure 6 shows a simpliﬁed DNN with fewer nodes and
connections.
The ﬁrst layer of a neural network, in
general, is called the ”input layer” because this is where
we feed in our data.
The following layers are called
”hidden layers” because we rarely access them directly
and in most cases also don’t exactly know what these
layers represent logically. The last layer is the ”output
layer”, this is what we receive back as a result of our
neural network.
Figure 6: Dense Neural Network.
Let’s have a look at the mathematics behind it.
A single neuron has the following structure (see ﬁgure 7):
It takes a set of inputs {x1, · · · , xi, · · · , xn}, where n is
the number of neurons it is connected to in the previous
layer. In ﬁgure 7, n = 2. Each connection between two
neurons has a weight wi associated with it. So before
the inputs enter the neuron, they are multiplied by the
weight that’s associated with them.
xi →xi ∗wi
In the next step, we sum all of the weighted inputs and
add a bias b to it. The bias is a real number that helps
to control how hard it is for a neuron to get excited (i.e.
to output a large number to the next layer).
n
X
i=1
(xi ∗wi) + b
Figure 7: The structure of a neuron.
Figure 8: A Graph of the sigmoid
activation function.
As the last step, an activation function is used to bring
our weighted sum into a predictable form. One function
that is often used is called the ”sigmoid function”, denoted
with the symbol σ. It compresses every input in the range
between 0 and 1.
σ(z) =
1
1 + e−z
lim
z→+∞σ(z) = 1
lim
z→−∞σ(z) = 0
So ﬁnally, we can write the output y of our neuron
as:
y =
1
1 + exp (−Pn
i=1(xi ∗wi) −b)
8

For our network, the ReLU (Rectiﬁed Linear Unit)
activation function was used, as this is a commonly used
activation function for CNNs which was ﬁrst inspired by
observations of real cortical neurons in the laboratory of
the Institute of Neuroinformatics at UZH/ETH Zurich
[36]. The ReLU activation function is easy to compute
and helps against the ”vanishing gradient” problem, in
which the gradient of the loss becomes extremely small
and thus the learning progress starts to stall (more on that
in chapter 2.2.4). The ReLU activation function sets every
negative input to zero and leaves every positive input as
it is. It is mathematically expressed as:
ReLU(x) = max(0, x)
Figure 9: Graph of ReLU Activation function.
We now know how data gets fed through forward to
produce our result.
But how does a neural network
learn?
After outputting the result, the neural network
gets feedback from a ”Loss Function” which we will look
at in chapter 2.2.3 .
Once it knows how good or bad
the produced result was, it uses two techniques called
”Backpropagation” and ”Gradient Descent” (See chapter
2.2.4) to do better next time.
Convolutional Neural Networks
A relatively newer form of a neural network, whose
structure is inspired by the visual cortex of the human
brain, is called a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
or ”ConvNet”.
As a consequence of their structural
origin, the individual ”neurons” in this type of neural net
correspond to certain areas of the input image, known
as the ”Receptive Field” when talking about the visual
system of humans. One of many diﬀerences to a DNN is
that a CNN can capture the spatial information contained
in an image fed into it. This fact makes CNNs excel at
visual tasks such as object recognition/localization, which
is why a CNN has also been used in the practical part of
this paper.
A typical CNN consists of two parts: First, we have a
few ”Convolutional Layers”, whose job it is to extract
the features of the input image and bring them into a
form that is easier to process without losing the critical
features. This information is then passed through a few
”Fully Connected Layers”, whose job it is to classify the
received information into a category (See ﬁgure 10) [37].
A single ”Convolutional Layer (ConvLayer)” consists of
a set of ﬁlters or kernels, matrices that contain the
”learnable” weights (The weights are what gets adjusted
when the feature extractor learns).
These ﬁlters are
much smaller than the input image (See square on the
image on the left side in ﬁgure 10), so they propagate
over the whole image, step by step, starting at the top
left, ending at the bottom right of the image.
After
each step, the weights are multiplied with the underlying
pixel-activations in that part of the image (See ﬁgure 11).
The results of each step are then put together to form
a new image. This output image is then used as input
to the next ConvLayer. Depending on the ﬁlter weights,
diﬀerent aspects of the image are enhanced. In ﬁgure 12,
the patterns the individual ﬁlters of a CNN look for were
visualized. In the left rectangle of ﬁgure 12, we can see
that edges at diﬀerent angles and certain colors are being
enhanced. Moving to the right, we can see the learned
ﬁlters from following ConvLayers, which are a little more
complex patterns, formed out of the simple edges and
colours to the left. This goes on for the rest of the layers.
The patterns the ﬁlters look for will change depending on
what type of images the CNN was trained on.
Figure 11: Example of a kernel.
9

Figure 10: Example of a CNN.
Figure 12: Diﬀerent ﬁlter patterns.
In ﬁgure 10, besides the ConvLayers and the Fully
Connected Layers, we can also see so-called ”Pooling
Layers”.
Two
types
of
pooling
operations
often
used are called ”average-pooling” and ”max-pooling”.
Average-pooling outputs the average pixel-activation of
the current set of pixels it is applied to. The max-pooling
operation outputs the maximum pixel-activation out of
the patch it is applied to. These layers help to reduce
the size of the input, as well as the amount of redundant
information.
2.2.3
Loss Function
When training a neural network, you generally need to
tell it in some way how it is doing in terms of delivering
the output that you want it to. Here we can use a ”Loss
Function” (or also ”Cost Function”). It is a function that
takes two inputs: one is the output of the ANN, the other
is a label that shows the desired output. It then in some
way computes a ”diﬀerence” between the two and outputs
a number, that gets fed back into the ANN and is the
origin for the learning process. The higher the number,
the more diﬀerent the output is from the desired output.
This means that the lower this number (called ”Loss” or
”Cost”), the better the ANN is performing.
The heatmaps we are using to represent our labels and
network output are, again, just a 2D-matrix of numbers,
in which every number stands for the activation of a pixel.
In ﬁgure 14, there is a typical input image (that we got
by extracting the red channel of the DAVIS video feed
and converting it to black and white frames). In ﬁgure
15, you can see a typical label picked out of the training
dataset. These two ﬁgures are a input/label pair, which
means that at the same coordinates of the white blob on
the label, the cueball is at on the input image.
Figure 14: Example of a frame used for training.
Figure 15: Example of a label used for training.
Now, at the beginning of training, the CNN has no clue
what it should do and all the weights are initialised
randomly. The output heatmap looks something like what
you can see in ﬁgure 16. Remember, the desired output
10

would be something like in ﬁgure 15. Also note that the
activations are very small, as you can see on the scale to
the right side of the heatmap. The reason for that is the
architecture of our CNN, speciﬁcally the last layer, as you
can see in the last part of ﬁgure 21 . The whole heatmap
can be looked at as a sort of ”probability distribution” on
where the CNN thinks the ball is.
Figure 16: Output of our CNN at an early training stage.
Now we need a way to tell the network that this is not
what we want. We do it by feeding back a big number
to the neural network that stands for a big diﬀerence
to our desired output.
When dealing with images, the
most simple and obvious way to calculate the diﬀerence
between two pictures is to iterate over every pixel-position
of the images and calculate the diﬀerence between the two
pixel-values that are at the same location. You can then
add up all those numbers or take the mean and you have
the diﬀerence between those two pictures expressed in the
form of a number.
The way just described is often used (also in this project)
and it is called ”L1-Loss”. It can be expressed as the
sum of absolute diﬀerences or mathematically as
Loss =
n
X
i=0
|aL −aO|
where the activation of a pixel in the label image
is
denoted
by
aL,
aO
for
the
output
image,
respectively.
Modiﬁed versions of L1-Loss were put to the test during
the development of CueNet (the CNN developed in this
project), hoping it would learn faster, but none of the
approaches was superior to the classical L1-Loss.
2.2.4
Training the Network
Gradient Descent
After preprocessing the data, choosing the architecture of
the network and declaring the loss function it is time to
train it. In the beginning, all the weights and biases are
randomly initialised. The network thus creates random
outputs. With the loss function, you can measure how
well the network is performing on a given input which
alone doesn’t get us anywhere. We have to ﬁnd a way
to tell the network how it should change its weights
and biases so it can increase its performance and thus
”learn”.
To illustrate how this can be done, we will look at a
simple Loss Function with just two inputs and one output
expressed as:
Loss = L(x, y)
If we plot the input on the x- and y-axis and the output
on the z-axis we could get the following graph:
Figure 17: 3D Plot of an example Loss Function
Our goal is to ﬁnd the direction in this input space which
decreases the loss most quickly, because the lower the
loss, the better our network performs. The gradient of
a function gives you a gradient vector whose direction
points in the direction of steepest ascent. If we take the
negative of the gradient vector, we get the direction of
quickest descent. The gradient is calculated by packing
all the partial derivative information of our loss function
together.
∇L(x, y) =


∂f
∂x
∂f
∂y


To ﬁnd a local minimum we have to compute the gradient
over and over while taking small steps in the inversed
11

direction of the gradient vector.
This process is called
Gradient Descent and also applies to neural networks,
many of which create input spaces with millions of
dimensions. There are many ways to improve this process,
such as ”Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD)”, which we
won’t discuss here in detail.
Figure 18: Gradient Descent
For us to take small steps on the plane the loss function
needs to have a continuous output. This is the reason why
artiﬁcial neurons have continuous ranging activations,
unlike biological neurons which activations behave in a
binary way.
Now that we know how to descend the valley of our
loss function if we know the perfect direction,
we
need to ﬁgure out how to ﬁnd that ”direction” in the
multi-million-dimensional input space of our loss function
each step. This is where the Backpropagation algorithm
comes into play.
Backpropagation
Calculating the gradient of a neural network is a lot
harder as there are many more parameters we can
change and their impact on the ﬁnal loss function is
dependent on changes to other parameters. The core of
Backpropagation is an expression for the partial derivative
∂L/∂w of the loss function L with respect to any weight
w or bias b in the network. This expression tells us how
fast the loss changes when we shift the weights and biases.
Going further we will rely on understanding the following
notation which lets us refer to weights and biases in the
network in an easy way. wl
jk will be used to denote the
weight for the connection from the kth neuron in the
(l −1)th layer to the jth neuron in the lth layer.
As
an example, we will look at the indicated weight w in
ﬁgure 19. The weight w is the connection between the
ﬁrst neuron in the second layer to the second neuron in
the third layer of the network. Therefore the weight w is
notated as w3
21.
Figure 19: Example network to illustrate notation.
To refer to the network’s biases and activations we use a
similar notation. For the bias of the jth neuron in the lth
layer, we use bl
j. And for the activation of the jth neuron
in the lth layer, we use al
j. With that the indicated bias b
and activation a in the ﬁgure below are notated as b1
2 and
a3
2.
Figure 20: Example network to illustrate notation.
With these notations, the activation al
j is related to
the activations in the (l −1)th layer by the following
equation:
al
j = σ
 X
k
wl
jkal−1
k
+ bl
j

where the sum is above all neurons k in the (l−1)th layer.
The sigmoid activation function is just used as an example
and can be exchanged with any activation function.
We will now rewrite this expression in a matrix form
to make our expression more readable and intuitively
understandable. We deﬁne a weight matrix wl for each
layer l where the entries of the weight matrix are the
weights connecting to the lth layer of neurons, that is,
the entry in the jth row kth column is wl
jk. Analogously
12

the bias vector is deﬁned for each layer l by bl and the
activation vector by al.
The components of the bias
and activation vectors are the values bl
j or al
j for each
neuron in the lth layer. Finally, we must vectorize our
activation function σ. We do this by applying the function
to every element in a vector v and use the notation σ(v)
to denote this elementwise application of a function. We
can now rewrite our last equation in a compact vectorized
form
al = σ(wlal−1 + bl).
Below is the written out activation vector of the 3rd layer
of the example network in ﬁgure 20.
"
a3
1
a3
2
#
= σ
 "
w3
11
w3
12
w3
13
w3
21
w3
22
w3
23
#
×


a2
1
a2
2
a2
3

+
"
b3
1
b3
2
# !
When we compute al with our equation above we compute
the intermediate quantity zl = wlal−1 + bl, which is the
weighted input to the neurons in layer l, this zl will
be useful later.
With this, our equation above can be
rewritten as al = σ(zl).
To
use
Backpropagation
we
must
make
two
main
assumptions about the shape of our loss function.
To
state these assumptions we will look at the quadratic lost
function as an example, which has the form
L = 1
2n
X
x
∥y(x) −aL(x)∥2.
where n is the total amount of training samples.
The
sum is over all the samples in the training set, y(x) is
the corresponding desired output.
L is the number of
layers in the network and aL(x) is the vector of the output
activations from the network for the given input x.
The ﬁrst assumption we have to make about our loss
function L is that the loss function can be written as
an average L =
1
n
P
x Lx over loss functions Lx for the
individual training examples x. For our loss function, this
is the case, as the loss for a single training example equals
Lx = 1
2∥y −aL∥2.
The reason for this is that we try to approximate the
partial derivatives δL/δw and δL/δb by calculating the
partial derivatives δLx/δw and δLx/δb for each training
example x and average it. With that in mind, we will
remove the subscript x and write the loss Lx as L.
The second assumption about our loss function is that it
can be rewritten as a function that takes the output of our
network as the input. This applies to our loss function
L as it can be written for a single training example x
as
L = 1
2∥y −aL∥2= 1
2
X
j
(yj −aL
j )2
and by that is a function of the output activations of
our network.
One may wonder why we do not take
the loss L as a function of the desired output y or the
training example x.
This is because x and y are ﬁxed
parameters.
We will now introduce the intermediate quantity δl
j,
which we will call the error in the jth neuron in the
lth layer to ultimately compute δL/δwl
jk and δL/δbl
jk.
Backpropagation will enable us to compute this error
δl
j and then will relate δl
j to δL/δwl
jk and δL/δbl
jk.
To elucidate this, imagine an error which lies in the
jth neuron in the layer l.
When the input enters the
neuron, the error adds a little change ∆zl
j to the neuron’s
weighted input, which changes the neuron’s output σ(zl
j)
to σ(zl
j + ∆zl
j). We must now ﬁnd a ∆zl
j that minimizes
the loss.
If
δL
δzl
j is large then we can lower the loss a
lot by choosing ∆zl
j to have the opposite sign to
δL
δzl
j .
Reciprocally if δL
δzl
j is small making changes to ∆zl
j won’t
alter the loss by much. As a consequence, we can already
tell which neuron is near the desired state. We deﬁne this
error δl
j in the jth neuron and lth layer by
δl
j = δL
δzl
j
.
As before we will use δl as the vector of errors in layer l
and equals
δL
j = δL
δaL
j
σ′(zL
j ).
(1)
for the output layer.
This intuitively makes sense as the ﬁrst term δL/δaL
j
shows us how fast the loss is changing as a function of
the jth output activation. If L doesn’t depend much on
the given output by the jth neuron then δL
j will be small.
The second term σ′(zL
j ) shows us how fast the activation
function σ changes at zL
j .
Equation 1 is easily computed as zL
j
will already be
computed when passing the training data through the
13

network and it’s only a small addition to compute σ′(zL
j ).
The form of δL/δaL
j will be dependent on the form of our
loss function. For example, when using the already known
quadratic loss function L = 1
2
P
j(yj −aL
j )2 it would be
δL/δaL
j = (aL
j −yj) which isn’t hard to compute.
While equation 1 is a componentwise expression for δL we
want a matrix-based form which we get by rewriting the
equation as
δL = ∇aL ⊙σ′(zL).
(2)
∇aL is a vector whose components are the partial
derivatives δL/δaL
j and thus the rate of change of L with
respect to the output neurons. We will use these equations
interchangeably.
Our example quadratic loss function
equals ∇aL = (aL −y) and the fully matrix-based form
can be written as
δL = (aL −y) ⊙σ′(zL).
The next equation we will look at will be
δl = ((wl+1)T δl+1) ⊙σ′(zl).
(3)
With this equation, we can calculate the error δl in
relation to the error of the next layer δl+1. By applying
the transpose weight matrix (wl+1)T we are moving the
error back through the network. By taking the Hadamard
product ⊙σ′(zl) we move the error backwards through
the activation function, leaving behind the error δl in the
weighted input in layer l. We are propagating backwards
through the network which is the reason it is called
Backpropagation.
Now with the combination of equation 2 and 3, we can
compute the error δl for any layer in the network. We
start by calculating δL with the 2nd equation, then use
the 3rd equation to compute δl−1 over and over for all
remaining layers of the network.
The next equation we will introduce lets us calculate the
rate of change of the loss with respect to any bias in the
network as we know how to calculate δl
j.
∂L
∂bl
j
= δl
j.
(4)
Equation 5 will enable us to calculate the rate of change of
the loss with respect to any weight in the network.
∂L
∂wl
jk
= al−1
k
δl
j.
(5)
As we know how we can calculate the terms of the
quantities δl and al−1 we can now compute equation
5.
The Backpropagation algorithm will go through ﬁve steps,
the ﬁrst being setting the corresponding activation a1 for
the input layer. The next step is to feedforward the input
activation. For each l −L we compute zl = wlal−1 + bl
and al = σ(zl). The third step is to compute the error
vector for the last layer L with δL = ∇aL ⊙σ′(zL). The
fourth step is to backpropagate the error back through
the network by computing δl = ((wl+1)T δl+1)⊙σ′(zl) for
all the layers. The last step is to calculate the gradient of
the loss function with
∂L
∂wl
jk = al−1
k
δl
j, ∂L
∂bl
j = δl
j and change
the weights and biases accordingly.
As we have already discussed we calculate the gradient
for one single training example a time.
This is
because calculating the gradient for all the examples
would take too much memory and therefore increase the
computational cost. We combine Backpropagation with a
learning algorithm such as Stochastic Gradient Descent,
in which we compute the gradient for a chosen batch-size
m and take a learning step based on the gradient of this
batch, by doing this we decrease the accuracy but can
learn a lot faster. [38][39]
Training phases
In our code, we deﬁne two sections: the training loop and
the validation loop. In the ﬁrst step, we go through the
training loop where we calculate the partial derivatives
for each training example and update the weights and
biases according to the calculated gradient which gets
multiplied by a learning rate α which lets us adjust the
steps the network takes so that we don’t jump over local
minima. After we went through all the training data we
jump to the validation loop in which we calculate the
loss for each example in the validation set and average
it. This time we won’t change the weights and biases as
we want to check if the network can generalize what it
has learned from the training set. These two phases will
be repeated multiple times in so-called epochs, which is a
pass over all the training data. The loop won’t stop until
the validation loss does not decrease anymore.
At this
point, the network starts to overﬁt, which means that it
has started to simply memorize the data in the training
14

set and doesn’t generalize well. In ﬁgure 23 you can see
how both the training loss and validation loss behaved
when going through 20 epochs in our experiment.
2.3
Analysis
CueNet
consists
of
an
abridged
version
of
the
VGG16 convolutional neural network with a subsequent
deconvolutional neural network.
The 240 x 180-pixel
input with a depth of 3 is passed through the VGG16
part, which reaches a depth of 256 and a resolution of 60
x 45 in the middle of the CueNet. In the DeconvNet part,
upscaling layers are used to recover the dimensionality
loss from the max-pooling layers.
Due to the Softmax
layer as the last layer of the network, the output produces
a probability heatmap for the ball’s location where each
pixel carries a probability for the ball being there. All
these probabilities sum up to 1, as the ball has to
be somewhere on the board.
The coordinates of the
cueball equal the coordinates of the activation-peak on the
heatmap. Our input has a depth of 3 channels because we
want to give 3 consecutive images to CueNet, hoping that
it can learn something about the behaviour of a ball, e.g.
a ball cannot jump from one side of the labyrinth to the
other in consecutive images.
For comparison purposes,
we have created an identical version of the CueNet, which
can only use one image as an input. [40]
Our testing set is used to evaluate the performance of
the CueNet, distinguishing between CueNet V1, which
takes one image as an input and CueNet V2, which takes
three consecutive images as an input.
The rest of the
dataset is separated into a training set and a validation
set, depending on the true position of the ball (see ﬁgure
22).
Layer
Filter Size
Depth
Padding
Stride
Activation Fn
Conv1
3 x 3
64
1 x 1
1
ReLU + BN
Conv2
3 x 3
64
1 x 1
1
ReLU + BN
Pool1
2 x 2 max pooling, Stride = 2, Padding = 0
Conv3
3 x 3
128
1 x 1
1
ReLU + BN
Conv4
3 x 3
128
1 x 1
1
ReLU + BN
Pool2
2 x 2 max pooling, Stride = 2, Padding = 0
Conv5
3 x 3
256
1 x 1
1
ReLU + BN
Conv6
3 x 3
256
1 x 1
1
ReLU + BN
Conv7
3 x 3
256
1 x 1
1
ReLU + BN
UpS1
2 x 2 upsampling
Conv8
3 x 3
128
1 x 1
1
ReLU + BN
Conv9
3 x 3
128
1 x 1
1
ReLU + BN
Conv10
3 x 3
128
1 x 1
1
ReLU + BN
UpS2
2 x 2 upsampling
Conv11
3 x 3
64
1 x 1
1
ReLU + BN
Conv12
3 x 3
64
1 x 1
1
ReLU + BN
Conv13
3 x 3
64
1 x 1
1
ReLU + BN
Softmax
Table 1: Parameters of CueNet.
Figure 22:
Training Set,
Validation Set.
This is to ensure that CueNet generalizes and does not
overﬁt. By separating the training data and validation
data by the true location of the ball we make sure that
there are not any nearly identical images in the training
and validation set.
If you were to split your sets by
randomly shuﬄing your data or by time, there could
be frames in the training and validation that are almost
identical, which leads to the network not generalizing but
rather memorizing the frames.
To optimize the weight
and biases, the Adam optimizer was used.
We set the
number of epochs to 20 to ensure that we ﬁnd the least
validation loss. The entire training using a batch size of
1 took about 8 hours.
15

Figure 21: CueNet V2:
Conv Layer,
ReLU,
MaxPooling Layer,
Upsampling Layer,
Softmax Layer
Figure 23: Training Loss vs Validation Loss.
CueNet is trained to produce the ”correct” heatmap
output.
But to allow us to quantify the accuracy of
CueNet, we deﬁne a tolerance range in which the output
can lie and still be classiﬁed as correct. Since the ball is
about 8 pixels wide, the tolerance range is 4 pixels around
the center of the real position of the ball. The peak of the
heatmap from the output of CueNet has to be in this area
to be counted as a correct classiﬁcation. The Positioning
Error (PE) is the distance between both centers in pixels.
The distribution of the PE is shown in ﬁgure 25.
Figure 24: PE distribution of the two versions of CueNet.
The x-axis of the plot shows us the PE and the y-axis the
fraction of the occurrences for this PE. This distribution
shows that 99.6% of the classiﬁcations of CueNet V1 are
in our set tolerance range of PE <= 4 and 99.8% of the
classiﬁcations of CueNet V2 respectively.
Apart from the standard testing set, we have created a
special dataset called ”Heavy Test” to push CueNet to its
limits. The recordings of ”Heavy Test” were made in very
poor lighting conditions, as a lamp was rotated around the
labyrinth at a steep angle. This resulted in very strong
and long shadows on the labyrinth, which should lead to
a more diﬃcult classiﬁcation task.
In addition to this,
the view of the board was alternately covered with hands
without covering the ball, which should show that CueNet
can ignore distractions.
16

Figure 25: PE distribution of the two versions of CueNet
on a more diﬃcult testing set.
In this benchmark CueNet V1 achieved 92.9% accuracy
with our given tolerance range of PE <= 4 and CueNet
V2 achieved an accuracy of 96.4%. When comparing the
mistakes both networks made you can see that CueNet V1
often loses track of the ball completely and thus labels the
ball as somewhere completely else. By contrast, CueNet
V2 locates the ball just barely outside of the tolerance
range. We think that CueNet V2 is more robust because
it can rely on the two older images and can therefore
approximate the position of the ball with the learned
trajectory patterns. In addition, it can compare changes
between the consecutive images, making it easier to locate
the ball since the ball is the fastest moving object. The
potential tradeoﬀfor CueNetV2’s higher accuracy and
robustness is higher computational cost, which could be
important for the robotics control.
As the last test, we combined some of the footage of
our ”Heavy Test” set to test the multi-object tracking
capabilities of our network. Despite never having trained
this, both versions of CueNet can track two objects
simultaneously with suﬃcient result. If we had trained
this we are conﬁdent that simultaneous tracking would
not have been a problem since the last layer is a softmax
layer and can easily split the probability distribution and
thus track multiple objects.
Figure 26:
Output of CueNet tracking two balls
simultaneously, where the heatmap output in red is
overlaid over the APS image.
Conclusion
In the context of this work, we developed a Fully
Convolutional Neural Network named CueNet that can
eﬀectively detect and track the cueball on the used
labyrinth. We also found that CueNet V2 outperforms
CueNet V1, which indicates that using consecutive images
as an input to the CNN increases its accuracy overall
and especially in diﬃcult situations. Additionally, both
versions of CueNet could generalize well and thus were
able to track multiple objects simultaneously, despite
never having been trained on tracking more than one
object.
By extensively testing CueNet in diﬃcult
conditions, we could conﬁrm the robustness/reliability of
the algorithm under real-life conditions.
3
Discussion
3.1
Applications of AI
In recent years, AI has found many new applications in
a wide range of disciplines. In this section, we will cover
some in which AI has made signiﬁcant advances.
Medicine
Through the vast amount of generated and stored data
in healthcare, AI today has found use in diagnosis,
drug development and the creation of personalized
treatments.
Deep Learning algorithms assist doctors in the evaluation
of CT scans, MRI images, skin images etc.
for the
diagnosis of all kinds of diseases. Some of the algorithms
17

can achieve accuracy of up to 99% which is almost as
good as a professional doctor [41]. The immense beneﬁt
of these algorithms is their low cost and speed. They can
draw conclusions in seconds and the results can be shared
across the world at the speed of light. This means that
even people in poorer regions can receive a professional
diagnosis for less money. [42]
When designing the treatment for a patient there are
many variables one has to take into account.
Small
diﬀerences in drug doses and treatment schedules can lead
to diﬀerent reactions from diﬀerent patients. With the
help of machine learning, doctors can ﬁnd correlations
between the patient’s characteristics and the patient’s
response to a particular treatment.
This helps with
choosing the right treatment and thus maximizing the
chance of the patient’s survival. [42]
Finance
The use of AI in banking dates back to 1987 where the
Security Paciﬁc National Bank in the US started using
an expert system for the detection of unauthorized use
of debit cards [43].
Today machine learning is used
to reduce the chance of fraud and ﬁnancial crimes by
monitoring behavioural patterns for anomalies and ﬂag
them for human review [44].
In the world of trading,
there is the never-ending
competition of coming up with the best mathematical
model
to
predict
the
future
of
the
stock
market.
High-frequency
trading
represents
one
of
the
fastest-growing sectors in ﬁnancial trading and of course,
AI was found to be useful with this kind of problem. By
2010, 60% of all trades were executed by computers of
which most work with ”simple” algorithms (Algorithmic
Trading). Those algorithms can make tens of thousands of
trades per second. Machine Learning, on the other hand,
working a lot slower, can learn sophisticated patterns from
past data that could indicate the next ﬁnancial crisis, a
bullish/bearish trend etc. Many banks, funds and trading
ﬁrms have their entire portfolios managed purely by AI
systems [45]. There are ETFs (Exchange Traded Funds)
whose portfolios are built with the help AI like ARK’s
Industrial Innovation ETF. Starting this year it gained
69.60% compared to the average yearly 10% that the S&P
500 gains, which is quite an accomplishment. [46].
Transportation
We are on the verge of a revolution in the automotive
industry, there are currently over 40 companies developing
self-driving cars using AI. Tesla and even tech giants like
Apple and Google are all developing their own systems
[47], of which Tesla’s is the most advanced so far. The
advantage of Tesla lies in its possession of a huge amount
of real-life data.
Their entire ﬂeet collects data while
driving and sends it back to Tesla, where they can train
their neural network with it.
Driving automation is
subdivided into six levels (See ﬁgure 27), of which we have
only reached level 2 on commercial products up to this
day.
Tesla has already demonstrated a level 5 system, but
mainstream production of anything higher than level 2
has yet to come.
The reason for this is partially the
lack of technological capability but also the ethical and
political questions that go along with autonomous driving.
Another problem of autonomous systems is that they can
be exploited and thus serious accidents could occur. In
chapter 3.2.1 we will talk more about the reliability and
potential safety exploits of AI.
Computer Vision
Image restoration, object recognition, video tracking,
scene
reconstruction,
motion
estimation
are
all
sub-domains of computer vision [48]. The practical part of
this paper goes into object recognition and video tracking,
as we are trying to track a cueball from a continuous
stream of frames.
Object tracking and recognition are
crucial for autonomous systems because they are built
upon them. For them to be able to make decisions, they
ﬁrst have to see. In ﬁgure 28, an algorithm tracks and
recognizes diﬀerent kinds of vehicles.
Figure 28: Tracking of vehicle movement using Artiﬁcial
Intelligence.
18

Figure 27: Levels of Vehicle Autonomy.
In image restoration, the goal is to remove unwanted noise
from pictures or add missing details.
This is typically
done by feeding the network with millions of images until
it can ﬁll the missing content considering the other content
of the image. [49]
Figure 29: Image restoration using Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
When does applying AI make sense?
Implementing an AI system makes sense when working
with large amounts of data.
In this large amount of
data, the algorithm can approximate a generalization
for a problem that can handle data which it has never
seen before. Getting clean, balanced and unbiased data
can sometimes be very diﬃcult, though.
The Return
on Investment (ROI) is a value that is crucial when
deciding over the implementation of an AI system. This
means weighing up the cost and complexity of the
implementation versus the beneﬁt the AI can give while
operating. Simpler tasks like for example regulating the
heating of a house can simply be done autonomously
without an AI operating in the background - the ROI of
the AI solution might not be worthwhile here. Regarding
more complex tasks, such as autonomous driving, the ROI
gets dramatically better. Solving this task without the
help of AI would seem infeasible.
Most tasks that can be completed with a data-deﬁned
pattern can be done with AI. Depending on the diﬃculty
of the pattern it tries to approximate, it may be more
eﬃcient to manually program in all the rules for each case.
As AI continues to advance, gathering suﬃcient data and
implementing the algorithm is going to become simpler
and simpler from a business perspective.
The ROI for
AI solutions will continue to ascent and AI will make its
entrance into more and more sectors.
3.2
Challenges regarding AI
3.2.1
Reliability
The
further
AI
advances,
the
more
complex
and
important tasks it will be able to take on. More important
tasks also mean greater responsibility,
especially as
an increasing number of humans rely on that system.
Therefore, technical AI safety becomes increasingly
more important. While being able to empirically prove
the accuracy or performance of an AI system in the lab,
real-world scenarios always hold an unforeseen situation.
This eﬀect is called ”data shift” and is an important
problem to regard when trying to build a reliable AI
system.
The technical safety of an AI can be divided into three
areas: speciﬁcation, robustness and assurance. Deﬁning
the right purpose of the system and trying hard to avoid
ambiguities and side-eﬀects caused by the way the system
is designed is what falls into the area of speciﬁcation.
The robustness of a system is measured by its ability to
withstand unwanted interference. This can either be done
19

by proper training (see practical part of this work) or
by error-correction and fallback mechanisms for recovery.
The last area, assurance, is mainly about monitoring (see
next section) and checking the system activity while in
production. [50]
3.2.2
Interpretability
To be able to use the power of AI for important decisions
without blindly relying on it, we need to know based on
what factors the AI decides.
Today, we mostly don’t know how to interpret/explain
the reasoning behind complex AI systems.
That is
why one of the problems we will probably have to
work on is the interpretability of the algorithms.
The
term ”Explainable AI (XAI)” refers to AI systems
that possess some amount of ”transparency”, which
means that humans can understand in at least some
detail, why the algorithm came to the solution it did
[51].
The challenge of creating XAI is to improve the
”transparency” of the model to a level where it can prove
useful to humans without compromising the performance
of the model too much. Also, an ”eﬀective explanation”
of the model can vary between diﬀerent industries and
users of the AI system. A developer, for example, would
rather like to know possible areas of improvements, while
a judge would rather want to know if the AI is making
fair decisions [52].
3.2.3
Moral Dilemma
”Moral
dilemmas
are
situations
in
which
the
decision-maker must consider two or more moral values
or duties but can only honour one of them; thus, the
individual will violate at least one important moral
concern, regardless of the decision.” [53].
In moral
dilemmas, because all choices are bad, deciding is diﬃcult
and relies heavily on personal biases.
The question
regarding AI is the following: Should we give AI systems
the responsibility of making ethical decisions?
How do
we determine in which way an AI system reacts to moral
dilemmas?
To feel how diﬃcult deciding becomes in
dilemma situations, visit https://www.moralmachine.
net/ (see QR-code below).
As you’ve probably seen, it can sometimes be very
diﬃcult, and as self-driving cars or other AI systems
carry more responsibility, how we solve such situations
becomes more important.
Another stage where moral questions have to be answered
is when AI becomes sentient or even self-aware. When
AI starts to be conscious, is it correct to just unplug it
or delete it? Or even further, should the AI system have
human or civil rights?
There are still a lot more questions regarding morality.
For example, should AI be banned for war purposes
like chemical and biological weapons since the Geneva
Protocol? Is it morally reprehensible to further develop AI
systems regarding all the future threats? We cannot and
don’t want to try to give any answers to these questions,
but draw attention to the fact that they exist.
3.2.4
Energy and Computing Power Demand
In 2016, when AlphaGo defeated Lee Sedol in the game
of Go, it used 1202 CPUs and 176 GPUs to compute its
next move. To operate, it consumed about 1 megawatt,
which, compared to Lee Sedol, is about 50’000 times more
power [54].
Using such big amounts of energy is impractical, expensive
and environmentally harmful. There is a general rule that
the more complex the patterns to ﬁnd or the task to solve,
the more complex and deep your network should be. But
this also comes at the cost of more computations and
energy needed.
There
have
already
been
developed
techniques
to
20

drastically reduce the size/”weight” of neural networks
while keeping up the good performance.
One of the
techniques is called ”Pruning”, in which the researcher
iteratively removes connections between neurons and
retrains the network afterwards to achieve a minimum
level of redundant connections in the network [55].
Eﬃciency gains can also be achieved through tailored
hardware, such as Google’s TPUs (as explained in 1.2.2
under paragraph ”Google”), as well as in the specialized
hardware architectures developed all around the world,
including at ETH Zurich and UZH.
3.3
Outlook
There are still many unresolved questions regarding the
technology of AI. This is where we would like to leave
the ﬂoor to the experts in the ﬁeld, which is why we have
conducted an interview with Prof. Dr. Martin Vechev,
who leads the Secure, Reliable, and Intelligent Systems
Lab (SRI) at ETH Zurich.
Q: Should AI be regulated more/less or is it just right and
why? Are we on the way to losing control over AI? What
are possible disadvantages of AI?
A: I believe we are far away from losing control over AI.
While a scenario where an Artiﬁcial General Intelligence
starts to improve itself in a runaway fashion is a popular
topic for Science Fiction novels and might become a
concern in the far future, we are still very far away
from such a form of AI. Therefore, I think the time to
regulate AI more strictly has not yet come, as we simply
do not yet know what the AI systems of the future will
look like and should avoid stiﬂing innovation by overly
strict regulations.
When talking about individual tasks
where AI is now used instead of other systems, it might
make sense to generally regulate how decisions are made.
I don’t see a reason to apply such regulations only to
AI Systems and not the decision making system used
before.
AI is like any tool, in that it has to be used
correctly to produce good results.
A danger might be
that it is harder to assess whether it is working well.
The performance might vary signiﬁcantly depending on
the circumstances.
For example, if the dataset used to
train and evaluate a model is heavily biased in the same
way, this will go undetected during testing but might
have unforeseen consequences once it gets applied in a
real-world environment.
Therefore it is important to
be careful and diligent when implementing AI solutions
starting with the gathering of data.
Q: In what ways are AI systems exploitable and what can
we do against it? (Adversarial attacks etc.)
A: AI systems are exploitable in several ways.
The
training data might be biased,
intentionally or not,
manipulated
data
can
be
injected
into
the
training
procedure and the resulting behaviours later exploited,
or the data evaluated by an AI system could be engineered
to mislead the system.
These maliciously manipulated
data points can fool AI systems that are not trained to
be robust to such attacks, while looking unchanged to
human eyes.
These weaknesses each require diﬀerent
countermeasures. Methods to analyse the vulnerability of
an AI system to these adversarial examples and training
algorithms to defend against them are an active research
topic that we are also working on. Many methods exist
to generate empirical or even deterministic robustness
guarantees, although those come at the cost of increased
computational cost and reduced accuracy.
Q:
Who
is
responsible
for
AI
systems
when
they
fail?
A: Who will be responsible for a failing AI system is
certainly an interesting question that will most likely have
to be decided by regulators.
In general, I believe it is
unreasonable to expect that an AI system will be 100under
all (potentially unforeseen or maliciously engineered)
circumstances, therefore deﬁning what a failure is, is
critical to answer this question. If you are referring to
cases such as autonomous driving systems confusing a
bright side panel of a trailer or car with the sky and
failing to detect an obstacle, the entity providing the
system is probably responsible for the failure of the AI
system. However, this is not the same as responsibility
for a potentially resulting accident. An observant driver
who could have intervened, society in general exaggerating
the ability of such a system or a regulator not deﬁning
appropriate certiﬁcation requirements might also all be
partially responsible.
Q: What’s the outlook on the optimization of the power
consumption of AI algorithms?
Is there a lot of room
for optimization? AlphaGo consumed about 1 megawatt,
which, compared to Lee Sedol, is about 50’000 times more
power.
21

A: Energy eﬃciency is an important question in AI
research and there are signiﬁcant eﬀorts to reduce the
energy and hardware requirements to enable the use of
these systems for example on mobile phones. While there
probably is still signiﬁcant room for optimization, a factor
of 50,000 seems unlikely. The AlphaGo example is also an
extreme case demonstrating what is possible if eﬃciency
constraints are ignored.
Considering that the successor
to AlphaGo, AlphaGo Zero, is estimated to have an Elo
of over 5000, corresponding approximately to losing only
1 out of 1000 games against the best human go players,
using more power might also be acceptable.
Q: Is the brain eﬃcient? (in the sense that it only can
be simulated by a thing bigger and more complicated than
itself)
A: It is almost universally true that it requires a more
complex system to fully simulate the behaviour of a
system, this is called computational irreducibility, while
there are some exceptions to this behaviour, none have
yet been found for the brain.
The question is, whether
you want to actually simulate a human brain, or solve
the same tasks. The latter seems like the more interesting
problem and makes the question harder to answer. If you
think about complex mathematical operations the human
brain is orders of magnitudes slower and less eﬃcient
than even a simple calculator, while AI systems can not
replicate other feats. Therefore, I will go with: The brain
is probably eﬃcient for some tasks but not for others.
Q: Try to estimate the impact of AI in the workplace in the
short term (5-10 years) and in the long term (50+ years).
Will humans become obsolete in the workplace?
A:
I
predict
the
biggest
short
term
impact
of
AI
on the workplace to be in the transportation ﬁeld.
Autonomous driving in combination with electriﬁcation
has the potential to revolutionize both cargo and personal
transportation. To make predictions about the far future
would only be guessing.
Everything from regulators
clamping down on AI so heavily as to make it unattractive
up to true Artiﬁcial General Intelligence is possible. While
I don’t believe that humans will become obsolete in the
workplace, their work might shift to tasks focused more
around human interaction.
Q: Is the creation of Artiﬁcial Intelligence the most
important event in human history so far?
A: Achieving Artiﬁcial General Intelligence could become
the most important event in human history, but until then
I don’t believe so.
Q: How far are we from Artiﬁcial General Intelligence and
a Superintelligence?
A: It does not look like the development of an AGI or
Superintelligence is imminent, but whether it will take 20
or 200 years, if it ever happens, is diﬃcult to say.
4
Appendix
4.1
Reasons for the choice of topic
AI could unravel to be the most important invention of
humankind of our time or even of all time. Because of
this and the rapid development during this decade it was
an easy decision for us to choose AI as the subject of our
Matura Thesis. We believe that the future lies in AI and
therefore it is worthwhile to have engaged with it.
As
potential computer science students we could imagine a
specialization towards AI in the later course of our studies
and thus a job in this ﬁeld. So far only the tip of the
iceberg has been scratched, the ﬁeld of AI will take a big
step in the direction of progress during our lifetimes and
we strive to contribute to this development.
4.2
