Adversarial Machine Learning-Enabled 
Anonymization of OpenWiFi Data 
Samhita Kuili 1, Kareem Dabbour 1, Irtiza Hasan 1, Andrea Herscovich 1, 
Burak Kantarci 1, Marcel Chenier 2, and Melike Erol-Kantarci 1 
1School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada 
2NetExperience Inc., Ottawa, Canada 

 
Abstract—Data privacy and protection through anonymization 
is a critical issue for network operators or data owners before it 
is forwarded for other possible use of data. With the adoption 
of Artificial Intelligence (AI), data anonymization augments the 
likelihood of covering up necessary sensitive information; pre- 
venting data leakage and information loss. OpenWiFi networks 
are vulnerable to any adversary who is trying to gain access or 
knowledge on traffic regardless of the knowledge possessed by 
data owners. The odds for discovery of actual traffic information 
is addressed by applied conditional tabular generative adver- 
sarial network (CTGAN). CTGAN yields synthetic data; which 
disguises as actual data but fostering hidden acute information of 
actual data. In this paper, the similarity assessment of synthetic 
with actual data is showcased in terms of clustering algorithms 
followed by a comparison of performance for unsupervised 
cluster validation metrics. A well-known algorithm, K-means 
outperforms other algorithms in terms of similarity assessment of 
synthetic data over real data while achieving nearest scores 0.634, 
23714.57, and 0.598 as Silhouette, Calinski and Harabasz and 
Davies Bouldin metric respectively. On exploiting a comparative 
analysis in validation scores among several algorithms, K-means 
forms the epitome of unsupervised clustering algorithms ensuring 
explicit usage of synthetic data at the same time a replacement 
for real data. Hence, the experimental results aim to show the 
viability of using CTGAN-generated synthetic data in lieu of 
publishing anonymized data to be utilized in various applications. 
 
Index Terms—Anonymization, clustering techniques, cluster 
validation, generative CTGAN 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
WiFi-enabled services have been booming with the advent 
of widespread adoption of wirelessly connected devices. Si- 
multaneously, a potential vulnerability persists in ensuring the 
privacy of usage information. Previous studies employed data 
privacy techniques such as k-anonymity [1], l-diversity [2], 
t-closeness [3] and differential privacy [4]. However, those 
techniques can be complemented by considering data corre- 
lation, which possesses utmost significance while exploiting 
big data [5]. The heterogeneous characteristics underlying in 
OpenWiFi data possess identical traits of Big Data. Hence, 
adoption of novel machine learning techniques can eventually 
enable data privacy through anonymization. 
Data anonymization is an essential task prior to making 
the data public for numerous domain applications. Apart from 
assuring privacy, it is also challenging to develop anonymized 
traces, which will resemble the original data. Therefore, 
retaining the resemblance of original in anonymized data 
by incorporating abundant noise alters the variance among 
features of data. This in turn raises issue on usability of 
data; which is where a trade-off exists while ensuring both 
data privacy and utility simultaneously on published data [6]. 
Previously, anonymization has been carried out mostly on 
healthcare-related domain pertaining to privacy for medical 
records of patients [7]. To the best of our knowledge, this 
paper paves the way for anonymization of WiFi usage streams 
for the first time. 
A collaboration of unsupervised and generative adversarial 
network (GAN) is considered a holistic approach to initiate 
privacy preservation. Several clustering algorithms, namely K- 
means, Density Based Spatial Clustering of Application with 
Noise (DBSCAN) [8], Gaussian Hidden Markov Model [9] 
and Agglomerative are employed to analyze the actual pattern 
distribution of the usage traffic. While examining real-time 
data, there are no prior information on labels corresponding 
to each stream of data per timestamps. Therefore, employing 
clustering techniques provides useful insights to comprehend 
the behavioural patterns among samples in a multivariate data 
set. On the other hand, adopting a deep neural generative 
model GAN [10], [11] harbors generation of synthetic sam- 
ples. 
Commonly GAN is quite well-known in computer vision 
[12], [13]. There are other robust architectures for GANs 
which can yield remarkable performance on tabular data sets 
or non-image data sets. In light of these, this work aims to 
generate synthetic samples by leveraging a conditional tabular 
GAN (CTGAN) [14]; which is a modified version of architec- 
ture to traditional tabular GAN (TGAN) [15]. Hence, leverag- 
ing both clustering algorithms and computational power of 
CTGAN, we narrow down our work to anonymization by 
testing and validating in terms of quality of clusters. Therefore 
with support of cluster metrics it becomes easier to validate 
the performance of CTGAN; which aids us in assessing the 
quality of generated synthetic samples. At the same time, it 
is crucial to test the amount of distortion being carried out 
in original samples. Simultaneously, we want to ensure that 
the synthetic samples resembles statistical properties of the 
original data. Fig. 1 showcases topology for demonstration of 

data anonymization. 
Key contributions of this paper are listed below with the 
ultimate goal to successfully build data anonymization while 
maintaining data utility and data privacy: 
• The initiation of anonymization is being undergone by 
leveraging heuristic clustering algorithms: K-means, DB- 
SCAN, Gaussian Hidden Markov Model (GHMM) and 
Agglomerative on a normalized data to showcase the 
potential cluster labels from the standpoint of distance, 
density and probability function. 
• Leveraging unsupervised algorithms to present the for- 
mation of cluster labels and considering clustering mem- 
bership information as a discrete variable and one of the 
pivotal parameters to train CTGAN. 
• In addition, production of synthetic samples by training 
CTGAN on the real normalized samples and adopting 
effective measures to validate similarity performance of 
synthetic over real samples in terms of cluster metrics, 
for instance, Silhouette, Calinski and Harabasz (CH) and 
Davies-Bouldin (DB) scores. 
The aforementioned state-of-the-art aligns to aim for high- 
quality data anonymization technique while advocating for 
the reliability and trustworthiness of using synthetic data 
from the standpoint of best-unsupervised algorithm and a 
number of cluster validation scores regardless of the distorted 
distribution of data. Over the course of this study, meticulous 
background information is provided in Section II highlighting 
the importance of data privacy algorithms and details of use- 
cases for generative adversarial networks (GANs) in terms 
of the generation of synthetic data. Moreover, Section III 
discusses the coherency of the data anonymization undertaken 
gradually on a multivariate time series OpenWiFi data. Fur- 
thermore, an intensive evaluation showcases the significant 
performance comparison of adopted unsupervised clustering 
algorithms with regard to several validation metrics in Section 
IV, evaluating the quality of anonymized data in comparison to 
that of the real data. Finally, Section V provides the concluding 
remarks summarizing the research undergone in this study. 
 
II. RELATED WORK 
 
Data anonymization is defined as the strategy of encrypting 
sensitive information specifically personally identifiable data 
in a dataset. In addition, the goal is to assure privacy protection 
of any information belonging to an attribute in the data by 
preventing information leakage when being exploited by others 
performing numerous use-cases. Among various methods of 
anonymization, for instance, generalization, masking, suppres- 
sion, perturbation, and usage of synthetic data, the latter is 
given the major importance by advocating a machine learning 
model such as a Conditional Tabular Generative Adversarial 
Network (CTGAN). Consequently, prominent divergence in- 
fused on the real data reveals statistical alteration of the data 
while ensuring commonalities between synthetic and real data. 
A. Data Privacy Algorithms 
Previously data privacy preserving methods such as k- 
anonymity, l-diversity, t-closeness and δ-disclosure are lever- 
aged to initiate privacy by compromising certain amendments 
to the attributes present in data set. Before exploring the 
process of those methods, it is crucial to understand following 
key terminologies identifiers, quasi-identifiers (QIDs) and sen- 
sitive attributes [16]. Generally, key identifiers signify those 
attributes with a unique code or number; which are lacking 
by default in our data. However, quasi-identifier signifies 
attributes with discrete value denoting multiple parameters; 
such as MAC address, location IDs, equipment IDs, and 
timestamps in our work. Lastly, sensitive attributes are those 
consisting of other attributes which can neither be termed as 
identifiers or quasi-identifiers (QIDs). Sweeney [17] proposed 
an algorithm k-anonymity by elaborating on data; associated 
with person specific information to ensure privacy of identity 
and simultaneously considering the issue of re-identification 
attack into account. In fact, this algorithm works suitably well 
for selective attributes. Therefore, there is always a way for 
launching an adversarial attack using other attributes which 
are not being anonymized using k-anonymity. k-anonymity 
performs poorly in term of guaranteeing privacy due to pres- 
ence of unequivocal homogeneity and background knowledge 
attacks. This is exactly when l-diversity plays a humongous 
role in ensuring privacy. On the contrary, the adversary seems 
to develop a thorough knowledge of background distribution 
of data even after relying on l-diversity algorithm. In order 
to avoid this consequence, Li et al. [2] introduced a novel 
algorithm t-closeness, which aligns the distribution of sensitive 
attributes with other attributes and therefore diminishing plau- 
sible background knowledge. Differential privacy is another 
well-known technique which shows improvement while incor- 
porating privacy measures related to health care domains. Jain 
et al. [4] discusses on the amount of distortion incorporated 
by database into the data; which is determined in maintaining 
privacy and consequently can be found useful by data analysts. 
B. Conditional Tabular Generative Adversarial Network 
The above mentioned techniques still lack non trivial knowl- 
edge to convince data privacy for big data. As discussed 
earlier, OpenWiFi follows 5’Vs of big data and continual 
deployment of diverse data streams in high volume, therefore, 
those techniques are not sufficient to ensure data anonymiza- 
tion. Generative adversarial networks [11] are receiving no- 
tability lately for creation of fake synthetic samples and 
are employed for anonymization application by researchers. 
The architecture of this generative model comprises of two 
components: generator and discriminator. Those components 
can be designed by adopting different types of neural networks 
based on the applicability. Due to the complex architecture 
of GANs, classifying a sample into fake or original simply 
eases the entire process. This is the adversarial minmax game 
where the terminology of GANs turns up. The idea behind 
minmax game demonstrates that generator will minimize its 
performance of generating new synthetic training samples, 

 
 
Fig. 1: Anonymization of OpenWiFi network traffic data. 
 
on the contrary, discriminator will aim for maximizing its 
performance in classifying the generated and original samples 
into accurate scalar label. 
        (1) 
tion is being previously explored on the factors of security 
and protection with the assistance of deep neural networks and 
PrivacyNet [19]. Further insights on systemic solutions can be 
referred on [18] since those are not related with this work. As
 
Xu and Veeramachaneni [15] propose the novel architecture of 
conditional tabular GAN emphasizing on the marginal analysis 
of data with an adoption of recurrent neural network, their 
work also shares other ways to obtaining synthetic data. 
pz(z) is input noise distribution variable representing gen- 
erator’s distribution pg over data samples x. A data mapping 
G(z;θ g) denotes differential function G with parameters θg. 
Similarly, there is another differential function D with θd as 
parameters, which represents a mapping space for discrim- 
inator D(x;θd). In addition, D(x) signifies likelihood of x 
coming from real samples and not from distribution pg. While 
training GANs, the motive is to train discriminator in assigning 
accurate labels for samples coming from each distribution 
mapping space. At the same time, train the generator to 
minimize the variable log(1-D(G(z))). More clarification about 
the variables referred to (1) can be understood in [11]. 
There are other variant of generative models which are 
exploited for use case of generation of synthetic samples. Park 
et al. [16] introduce the adoption of tableGAN; which includes 
the architecture of deep convolutional generative adversarial 
networks (DCGAN) [12]. The main focus is being shown on 
generating relational synthetic tables based on existence of 
data attributes associated with convolutional neural networks 
[16]. 
Another interesting study undergone by Hajihassani et al. 
[18] which highlights their major contribution on anonymizing 
time series sensor data obtained from IoT devices with the help 
of Variational Autoencoder (VAE). Additionally, their work 
shares knowledge on understanding the anonymization into 
two aspects: algorithmic and systemic solutions. Considering 
algorithmic solutions involving machine learning, anonymiza- 
Adoption of other GANs, for instance, RGAN and RCGAN 
[20] are popular for generation of time series data. McCoy in 
[21] share the importance of CTGAN while training recom- 
mender systems which are useful to preserve user’s privacy. 
Furthermore, this work also focuses on the reduction of actual 
raw training samples and in fact, expect an augmentation of 
actual samples in disguise of synthetic samples. Therefore, 
reliance on large retrieval of raw data is significantly reduced 
while still ensuring user privacy. 
III. METHODOLOGY 
Prior to the experiment on anonymization, processing the 
raw data forms primary step of pipeline. This dataset 
comprises of 20,000 service records collected from a small 
network operated over 4 weeks. Moreover, this network is 
composed of 2 access points averaging 2 connected clients 
a day. Furthermore, these access points are up and running 
efficiently, with clients in ON/OFF mode. By setting the 
desired duration and timestamps, 20K records are collected 
via REST APIs Cloud Service Portal for OpenWiFi until 
sufficient information on the active access points and 
clients connected to them is retrieved. 
In 
terms 
of 
processing and setting raw data ready for CTGAN, removal 
of any specific quasi-identifiers; including but not limited to 
any equipment IDs, location IDs, or customer IDs are 
implemented. In addition, scaling raw data samples address 
concerns with mode-specific normalization of CTGAN. 
Thus, 
modelling 
a 
CTGAN 
builds 
on 
existing

numerical or sensitive attributes that contain at most 15,000 
traffic records forming a multivariate time series data set. 
Moreover, collected data does not contain any prior infor- 
mation on labels. Therefore, adoption of unsupervised learning 
blends perfectly to comprehend underlying behavioural distri- 
bution of sensitive attributes. Those distributions are analyzed 
over clustering techniques such as K-means, Density Based 
Spatial Clustering of Application with Noise (DBSCAN) [22], 
Gaussian Hidden Markov Model (GHMM) [9]; establishing 
three different outlooks with respect to distance, density and 
probability factors. Moreover, an aggregation of clusters is 
visualized by selecting Agglomerative clustering algorithm. 
Quality of cluster validation for each unsupervised algorithm 
is assessed via Silhouette, CH and DB scores. At each stage 
of execution, potential clusters are demonstrated via Principal 
Component Analysis (PCA)-based dimensional reduction for 
more coherent understanding of original observable samples 
as well as synthetic samples. 
Our processed multivariate data set consists of 15 feature 
variables with (11,900+) instances. While selection of optimal 
number of clusters for k-means clustering is challenging, 
setting a range from 2 to 10 is chosen. A trial and error 
execution is implemented to determine a best optimal number 
of cluster out of the arbitrary selection the aforementioned 
range. To obtain the optimal value k, a cluster validation metric 
Silhouette score is determined for each value k. Consequently, 
the value k for k-means turns out to be 2 with the highest 
Silhouette score ensuring grouping of observations based on 
distance heuristic with the focus on statistical similarity in 
data distribution of a multivariate dataset. Furthermore, the 
Silhouette score is an unsupervised clustering metric which 
quantifies the quality of the clustering of samples into the 
chosen optimal number of clusters i.e. k. The higher the 
Silhouette score (with a maximum score of 1) indicates a 
higher quality of grouping within each cluster and sufficient 
separability between them.. On the other hand, estimating 
optimal parametric values for DBSCAN (eps and minPts) 
undergoes an exhaustive search approach highlighting highest 
Silhouette score [22] The parameters eps and minPts are data 
dependant where eps stands for the radius to be followed with 
neighboring points from a particular data point in a cluster. 
In addition, minPts signifies the minimum neighboring data 
points required to be at a distance eps forming a dense 
distribution of data in a cluster. DBSCAN further identifies 
some samples as outliers which is bound to occur on high 
dimensional heterogeneous real data. 
Therefore, minimum neighbouring points (minPts) 5 and 
a distance threshold epsilon (eps) 0.038 are selected. The 
number of states obtained for GHMM is domain-dependent. 
Kullback Leibler (KL) divergence has been used to obtain 
empirical probability distribution functions on HMM models 
with states 2, 3, and 4 on 1000 real RSSI WiFi signal 
samples [23]. Since there is a small difference between the 
KL divergence when using 2, 3, or 4 hidden states [24], a 
GHMM with 3 states is used to model this time series data. 
Additionally, in order to obtain a more cohesive view of the 
data, using agglomerative clustering with Ward linkage is also 
carried out in this work. Generally, agglomerative clustering 
follows an iterative hierarchical process starting from a single 
data point as a cluster and eventually merges into another 
cluster by identifying the closest pair of clusters. 
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
Tuning of parameters to achieve the highest Silhouette 
score enables analysis of the points exhibiting similar sta- 
tistical property grouped into clusters. Initially, the original 
behaviour of real data set right after preprocessing is learnt 
through clustering techniques as demonstrated in Fig. 2 (a-d); 
representing K-means, DBSCAN, GHMM and agglomerative 
algorithms respectively. On examining the Silhouette scores 
obtained for each technique, it is observed K-means acquires 
the highest Silhouette score with optimal cluster value 2 
(k). Similarly, optimal cluster values for DBSCAN, GHMM 
and agglomerative obtains k = 3 respectively. At the same 
time, training a complex deep neural network architecture like 
CTGAN takes longer than expected while searching for best 
parameters suited for trained model. It is also challenging to 
validate the performance of synthetic samples generated by 
CTGAN. A well trained CTGAN is analyzed by understanding 
the performance loss convergence corresponding to two neural 
networks: generator and discriminator respectively as shown 
in Fig. 3. 
Most common problems which thrive while training GANs 
are mode collapse and loss convergence. This incorporates 
adversarial game between two neural networks where either 
there is a decrement in performance of generator loss and 
simultaneously an increment on discriminator loss. In addition, 
initial performance on acquiring the cluster validation scores 
for real data is analyzed as in Table I. Furthermore, CTGAN 
is being trained to generate synthetic samples on being condi- 
tioned to discrete column of a data set; which contains cluster 
labels from each clustering algorithms at a time. The main 
motive is not limited to simply generate synthetic samples by 
exploiting generative model; but to check whether synthetic 
data can be relied upon as compared to real data. In order 
to assess the quality of synthetic data, clustering algorithms 
are employed which reflect the performance score for each 
synthetic and real data. As a result, more similarity or close 
the value for each metric, higher is the indication of replacing 
real with synthetic data. The initial real data (D) in Fig. 4 
is set with target attribute; which consists of labels obtained 
from K-means. 
Moreover, we retain dimensionality reduction of real data 
(D) through PCA obtaining low dimensional data (d); which 
also mitigates the problem collinearity among features. The 
core task for training generator of CTGAN requires condi- 
tional vectors. However, target attribute with labels 0 and 1 of 
K-means is considered as discrete variable while continuous 
variables as rest of the attributes or features existing on real 
data. Therefore, labels in discrete variable are utilized as 
conditional vectors to generate synthetic samples. A synthetic 
data (D′) is obtained after training CTGAN while tuning for 

 
 
(a) 
(b) 
 
(c) 
(d) 
 
 
(e) 
(f) 
 
(g) 
(h) 
Fig. 2: Clustering visualization of real: (a-d) and synthetic data: (e-h). 
 
convergence with specific hyper-parameters demonstrated in 
the form of a loss curve in Fig. 3 (a). 
This synthetic data (D′)) is further visualized with the help 
of PCA; forming another low dimensional data set (d′). Ac- 
cordingly, evaluation of cluster metrics on (d′) are computed. 
This exact method is carried out followed by altering the 
target variable subsequently with labels of DBSCAN, GHMM 
and agglomerative clustering algorithms, and correspondingly 
scores are calculated. Consequently, loss curves demonstrated 
in Fig. 3 (b), (c) and (d) are also checked for convergence 
after setting the labels for DBSCAN, GHMM and agglom- 
erative algorithms as conditional vectors for generator. The 
cluster validation scores computed on synthetic data can be 
understood from Table II. 
While comparing the validation scores of K-means on both 
Table I and Table II, there is decent clarity which shows 
resemblance in scores for all three metrices. However, there is 
significant amount of deviation in scores for DBSCAN with 
respect to Silhouette, CH and DB. Similar to the Silhouette 
score, CH and DB scores aim to quantify quality of cluster 
formation. For instance, a higher CH score signifies better 
quality of clustering from the perspective of factors inclusive 
of within-cluster variance and between-cluster variance. More- 
over, DB is quite the opposite of Silhouette and CH scores as 

 
 
(a) 
(b) 
 
(c) 
(d) 
Fig. 3: Convergence of loss curves for CTGAN. 
 
it measures the average computation of inter-cluster distance 
and within-cluster dispersion of a cluster. More importantly, 
a lower DB score denotes greater cluster formation quality. 
While comparing scores for GHMM, CH score reflects high 
TABLE I: Cluster validation scores of unsupervised algorithms 
on real data 
 
Unsupervised algorithms  
Real data 
 
Silhouette 
Calinski Harabasz 
Davies Bouldin 
 
 
 
 
both real and synthetic data. In this study, we intend to look 
for similarity between the scores for both real and synthetic 
data. For instance, K-Means preserves the statistical properties 
in synthetic data even after incorporating noise or conditional 
vectors by CTGAN into real data. 
K-means is compatible while analyzing the performance 
of cluster validation scores from the perspective of data 
anonymization [25]. Additionally, a baseline algorithm K- 
Means on real data is selected to compare the cluster vali- 
dation scores with each algorithm from synthetic data. It is 
observed that K-means exhibits resemblance in scores while 
comparing cluster validation metrics of real and synthetic data 
as shown in Table I and Table II, respectively. This coherently 
indicates that there is no significant statistical implication 
in the application context of data anonymization. However, 
DBSCAN, GHMM, and agglomerative algorithms result in 
the variation of both low Silhouette and Calinski Harabasz 
scores, and higher Davies Bouldin scores. In the context 
of application data anonymization and deviation in scores, 
it is understandable that DBSCAN is sensitive to outliers 
which results in performance downgrade under synthetic data 
when compared with the baseline algorithm. Similarly, the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
poor performance of GHMM and agglomerative algorithms 
highlights presence of noise in the synthetic data and in- 
volvement of model complexity with parameter initialization 
based on the data distribution. To comprehend deviation, we 
establish a visual analysis forming clusters of synthetic data 
for each algorithm shown in Fig. 2 (e-h); denoting K-means, 
DBSCAN, GHMM and agglomerative algorithms. On examine 
those figures, we encounter a skewed distribution of cluster 
labels as compared to Fig. 2 (a-d); which is rational to occur 
on a synthetic data. The reason of such distortion depends 
on the conditional vectors provided to train the generator 
ofs CTGAN. The resemblances in validation scores as seen 
on both real and synthetic data also provide assurance of 
preserving statistical properties similar to samples of real data; 
which is an essential factor as discussed in the earlier sections. 
Furthermore, this ensures that the synthetic data can be relied 
upon and effectively utilized for numerous applications. 
deviation as compared to Silhouette and DB. On the contrary, 
K-means 
DBSCAN 
0.642 
0.552 
23342.92 
11659.34 
0.599 
5.559 
agglomerative achieves reasonable scores for all metrices of 
GHMM 
Agglomerative 
0.629 
0.635 
24788.87 
26109.21 
0.529 
0.501 

 
 
 
Fig. 4: Initiation of data anonymization leveraging clustering algorithms. 
 
TABLE II: Cluster validation scores of unsupervised algo- 
rithms on synthetic data 
 
Unsupervised algorithms  
Synthetic data 
 
Silhouette 
Calinski Harabasz 
Davies Bouldin 
K-means 
0.634 
23714.57 
0.598 
DBSCAN 
0.171 
3742.45 
1.836 
GHMM 
0.409 
8865.44 
0.770 
Agglomerative 
0.507 
12188.80 
0.769 
 
 
V. OPEN ISSUES, CHALLENGES, AND OPPORTUNITIES 
The usage of multivariate time series OpenWiFi data where 
this study aims to adopt data anonymization and forecast the 
generation of the skewed distribution of synthetic samples 
already lack prior information of ground truth. Simultaneously, 
the analysis focuses on mimicking cluster labels / ground truth 
based on the data distribution present in real and synthetic data 
setting an example to comprehend the problem only from the 
standpoint of the statistical context. However, other ways to 
augment the trustworthiness of synthetic data include privacy 
risk assessment, evaluating downstream tasks, and incorpo- 
rating the review by domain experts who are knowledgeable 
about real data and will provide valuable feedback on synthetic 
data. 
Every new data anonymization technique needs to cope with 
several challenges. Re-identifying instances of anonymized 
data, and safeguarding data utility is just one to mention. 
The latter can be understood if there is a loss of pivotal 
information in the real data, which can pave the way for an 
effective decision capability while exploiting the anonymized 
data. In addition, the dynamicity of multivariate time series 
data needs to be taken into account since it consists of temporal 
dependency and may impact anonymized data. Moreover, the 
scalability of the proposed framework is also of paramount 
importance which needs to be addressed while dealing with 
large volume of data. However, consistent performance of data 
anonymization is expected while safeguarding the data utility 
regardless of exploiting big data. Furthermore, scalability may 
also be studied from the use of CTGAN, which expects a 
large volume of data to train itself, therefore would ensure 
better prediction ability by studying the distinctions between 
synthetic and real data. 
The 
idea 
of 
adversarial 
machine 
learning-enabled 
anonymization imparts the efficacy of data sharing across 
different domains such as ethical use of data by adopting a 
measure of privacy protection of sensitive information in the 
data. 
VI. CONCLUSION 
Data anonymization is a crucial task for operators to 
augment privacy of information; which furthermore meets 
required user demands. This work summarizes the generation 
of synthetic samples by deploying conditional tabular GAN 
to replace real data instances with synthetic samples. Incor- 
poration of clustering mechanism highlighted heterogeneous 
distribution of OpenWiFi traffic on the grounds of underlying 
factors such as distance, density and probability of samples 
existing in both real and synthetic data. In addition, compu- 
tation of cluster validation metrics by well-known Silhouette, 
Calinski and Harabasz and Davies-Bouldin scores have been 
undergone to comprehend reliability of synthetic data. A wise 
similarity comparison of those scores has been checked while 
assessing synthetic with real data. Moreover, two dimensional 
visualization at every stage of implementation enables us 
to understand the original and the skewed distribution of 

synthetic data. This work has particularly focused on resem- 
blance in the unsupervised validation metrics, which invokes 
the preservation of statistically correlated properties among 
samples. By leveraging this knowledge, extension of this work 
includes incorporation of other machine learning and privacy- 
based metrics to improve data anonymization. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported in part by Mathematics of Infor- 
mation Technology and Complex Systems (MITACS) Accel- 
erate Program under Project Number IT24702.
