Aske Plaat
Deep Reinforcement Learning
April 25, 2023
Springer Nature
arXiv:2201.02135v5  [cs.AI]  23 Apr 2023

v
This is a preprint of the following work:
Aske Plaat,
Deep Reinforcement Learning,
2022,
Springer Nature,
reproduced with permission of Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd.
The ﬁnal authenticated version is available online at: https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-981-19-0638-1

Preface
Deep reinforcement learning has gathered much attention recently. Impressive
results were achieved in activities as diverse as autonomous driving, game playing,
molecular recombination, and robotics. In all these ﬁelds, computer programs have
learned to solve diﬃcult problems. They have learned to ﬂy model helicopters and
perform aerobatic manoeuvers such as loops and rolls. In some applications they
have even become better than the best humans, such as in Atari, Go, poker and
StarCraft.
The way in which deep reinforcement learning explores complex environments
reminds us how children learn, by playfully trying out things, getting feedback,
and trying again. The computer seems to truly possess aspects of human learning;
deep reinforcement learning touches the dream of artiﬁcial intelligence.
The successes in research have not gone unnoticed by educators, and universities
have started to oﬀer courses on the subject. The aim of this book is to provide a
comprehensive overview of the ﬁeld of deep reinforcement learning. The book is
written for graduate students of artiﬁcial intelligence, and for researchers and prac-
titioners who wish to better understand deep reinforcement learning methods and
their challenges. We assume an undergraduate-level of understanding of computer
science and artiﬁcial intelligence; the programming language of this book is Python.
We describe the foundations, the algorithms and the applications of deep rein-
forcement learning. We cover the established model-free and model-based methods
that form the basis of the ﬁeld. Developments go quickly, and we also cover more
advanced topics: deep multi-agent reinforcement learning, deep hierarchical rein-
forcement learning, and deep meta learning.
We hope that learning about deep reinforcement learning will give you as much
joy as the many researchers experienced when they developed their algorithms,
ﬁnally got them to work, and saw them learn!
vii

viii
