IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING
1
Get your Foes Fooled: Proximal Gradient Split
Learning for Defense against Model Inversion
Attacks on IoMT data
Sunder Ali Khowaja, Senior Member IEEE, Ik Hyun Lee*, Kapal Dev, Senior Member IEEE, Muhammad Aslam
Jarwar, Senior Member IEEE, and Nawab Muhammad Faseeh Qureshi*, Senior Member IEEE
Abstract—The past decade has seen a rapid adoption of Ar-
tiﬁcial Intelligence (AI), speciﬁcally the deep learning networks,
in Internet of Medical Things (IoMT) ecosystem. However, it
has been shown recently that the deep learning networks can
be exploited by adversarial attacks that not only make IoMT
vulnerable to the data theft but also to the manipulation of
medical diagnosis. The existing studies consider adding noise
to the raw IoMT data or model parameters which not only
reduces the overall performance concerning medical inferences
but also is ineffective to the likes of deep leakage from gradients
method. In this work, we propose proximal gradient split learning
(PSGL) method for defense against the model inversion attacks.
The proposed method intentionally attacks the IoMT data when
undergoing the deep neural network training process at client
side. We propose the use of proximal gradient method to recover
gradient maps and a decision-level fusion strategy to improve the
recognition performance. Extensive analysis show that the PGSL
not only provides effective defense mechanism against the model
inversion attacks but also helps in improving the recognition
performance on publicly available datasets. We report 14.0%,
17.9%, and 36.9% gains in accuracy over reconstructed and
adversarial attacked images, respectively.
Index Terms—Model inversion attacks, IoMT data, Adversar-
ial attacks, Deep Learning, and Split Learning
I. INTRODUCTION
Modish growth in information, communication, and com-
puting technologies have given rise to Deep learning (DL)
and Internet of Things (IoT). Both computing paradigms,
when combined, cater to a vast array of business require-
ments, technological beneﬁts, and critical domain applications
including industry, energy, transport, and healthcare sectors.
The IoT covers the spectrum of data generation and collection
from ubiquitous devices, while underlying intelligence and
automation lies on the shoulders of DL techniques. Over
the years, the use of DL in IoT ecosystem has recorded
*Corresponding authors
Sunder Ali Khowaja is with Department of Mechatronics Engineer-
ing, Tech University of Korea, Republic of Korea, and Department of

Ik Hyun Lee is with Department of Mechatronics Engineering, Tech

Kapal Dev is with the Departmet of Computer Science, Munster Techno-
logical University, Ireland and Department of institute of intelligent systems,

Muhammad Aslam Jarwar is with Department of Computing, Shefﬁeld

Nawab Muhammad Faseeh Qureshi is with Department of Computer Educa-

unprecedented achievements by deriving automated inferences
that were too complicated for the conventional paradigms [1].
The amalgamation of DL and IoT has been gaining a lot of
interest in healthcare ﬁeld lately, speciﬁcally by associated
practitioners and researchers. Medical data comprise various
modalities such as pathology test results, COVID-19 results,
biomedical images, and electronic health records. The cor-
responding medical data acquired from IoT devices is often
referred to as Internet of Medical Things (IoMT) data. Some
systems that are popular and being used in the medical ﬁeld are
but not limited to: 1) DL based breast cancer risk prediction
from mammograms [2]; 2) Detection of macular edema and
diabetic retinopathy using DL and retinal fundus images [3];
3) Pattern detection from electronic health records using DL
to determine risk factors and health trends [4].
Although the analytical results show drastic improvements,
the issues concerning privacy of IoMT data remains at large.
Medical institutions and IoMT data intrinsically hold a lot
of individual’s private information sch as age, gender, home
address, drug usage patterns, medical history, medical test
results, and so forth. The huge amount of sensitive information
has attracted lots of black hats for scoring monetary, com-
mercial, and political gains through the exploitation of IoMT
data. Such information can be either leaked or intercepted
when passed to the DL model for training or inferencing,
respectively [5]. Last couple of years have witnessed a drastic
increase in attacks concerning IoMT data or DL networks. The
two most common attacks that exploit personal information
from IoMT data are attribute inference and model inversion
attacks, respectively. The former uses partial data and a trained
DL model to infer the missing piece of information, while the
latter attacks intermediate layers of the trained DL models
and uses the feature maps to recover the data itself [5], [6].
The arousal of such attacks has hindered the hospitals’ and
patients’ willingness to share the IoMT data and to use the
DL for automated healthcare services. The lack of trust and
data availability has slowed the research progress, accordingly.
Therefore, it is essential to mitigate the attacks on IoMT data
and develop necessary defenses for model inversion attacks.
An example of adversarial attacks performed in the context
of DL based IoMT data at different layers is shown in
Figure 1. The data can face adversarial attacks at edge device
layer, aggregation layer, cloud storage or cloud analytics layer,
accordingly. However, each of the attack impart different
characteristics on the raw data or the derived inference.
arXiv:2201.04569v3  [cs.CR]  9 Aug 2022

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING
2
Existing works have developed defense mechanisms by
adding label perturbations, model perturbations, or adding
noise at the data input level. The label perturbations manipu-
late the class probabilities that not only affects the performance
of decision analysis but also compromises the protection to raw
data itself. Model perturbations adds noise to the model param-
eters which does not provide a reasonable defense mechanism
against the inversion attacks, thus, raw data can be created by
employing simple pre-processing techniques. Split networks
[7] were proposed to preserve the raw data privacy, but it is still
susceptible to model inversion and attribute inference attacks.
The work in [8] also proposes split networks but with a random
noise addition layer to combat with model inversion attacks.
The aforementioned works provide a basis of using split
networks to mitigate the model inversion attacks, but does not
achieve desired results in terms of recognition performance.
Furthermore, as revealed in our analysis, the aforementioned
works do not provide a suitable defense mechanism against the
model inversion attacks. In this work, we propose the proximal
gradient split learning (PGSL) for prevention against model
inversion attacks. We adopt the proximal gradient method and
modify it as per the proposed network’s requirement. The
proximal gradient method is opted in this study due to its
characteristics that include bounded perturbation resilience,
strong convergence, and ability to handle non-smooth convex
optimization problems. The network initiates an intentional
one- and few- pixel attack to the input data, followed by a
split deep neural network. We employ proximal gradients to
reconstruct the data into its original form at the server side
of the split networks. To the best of our knowledge, proximal
gradients has not been explored for preserving data privacy
within the training process. The contributions of this work are
summarized below:
• Initiation of adversarial attack on IoMT data for improv-
ing resilience.
• Proximal Gradient Split Learning for training the network
with adversarial samples.
• Late fusion strategy for improving the predictive perfor-
mance on adversarial samples.
• Experimental analysis for validating the effectiveness of
PGSL network.
The rest of the paper is structured is follows: Section II
provides a brief literature review of the existing works. Section
III presents the threat model. Section IV provides the details
regarding the proposed PGSL. Section V presents the exper-
imental setup and analysis. Section VI presents the insights,
discuss the implications and limitations of the proposed work.
Section VII concludes the study along with potential future
works.
II. RELATED WORKS
Over the years, the adoption of DL techniques for IoMT
based critical and real-world services have been increased
manifold. However, in recent years, research studies have ex-
ploited several vulnerabilities associated with DL in the form
of adversarial perturbations. The adversarial attack was ﬁrst
pioneered in [9], that used limited-memory Broyden-Fletcher-
Goldfarb-Shanno (L-BGFS) method by searching minimal
distorted space to generate adversarial samples. Similarly,
Goodfellow et al. [10] generated adversarial examples by
using fast gradient sign method to perform one-step update
for each pixel in the direction of gradients. Several other
studies including DeepFool [11] and universal adversarial
perturbations (UAP) [12] have exploited the DL techniques
for its susceptibility to adversarial perturbations.
The domain of IoMT is mainly threatened by the data leakage
and privacy attacks that target inference and training data,
accordingly. The most common types of attack on IoMT
data include adversarial noise attack, model encoding attack,
attribute inference attack, and model inversion attack [5].
Adversarial noise attack can be performed on a single pixel
or multiple pixels, accordingly. Su et al. [13] proposed the
adversarial noise attack by corrupting a single pixel within
the speciﬁc window size to degrade the DL performance. The
aforementioned study shows that 16.04% of CIFAR10 and
67.97% of ImageNet dataset can be attacked by manipulating
a single pixel value, thus causing DL to infer the wrong
label. Existing studies have tried to counter this attack through
patch selection denoiser [14], image reconstruction [15], and
adversarial detection networks [16] but either they are too
computationally complex or add blur artifacts to the original
image. It is apparent by the studies that when corrupted by
one/few pixel attacks, it is difﬁcult to not only recover the
image but also the information concerning the inference.
Attribute inference attack refers to the attacking of sensitive
or prominent attributes that could either help in reconstructing
the raw data or downgrade the predictive performance of the
DL model. Attribute inference attack and adversarial noise
attack can be similar in the case of medical images, as they
both strive to corrupt the raw data itself. The study [17]
propose the use of attribute inference attacks to increase the
risk of data theft and privacy concerning convolutional neural
network (CNN) models.
Model inversion attacks are mostly focused on reconstruct-
ing the input data from compromised model parameters or
intermediary outputs of DL methods. The studies concerning
model inversion attacks can be classiﬁed into two categories.
The ﬁrst category refers to the set of studies that propose the
use of model inversion attack to highlight the vulnerability of
data using trained models, and the second category refers to
the set of studies that propose defense against such attacks.
The proposed method resides in the latter category. The
study [18] proposed the model inversion attack for recov-
ering input images from intermediate outputs using softmax
model’s conﬁdence scores. The study in [19] proposed the use
of generative adversarial networks (GANs) and collaborative
training system to recover the input image from intermediary
DL architecture layers. It has also been suggested by the
studies [5], [20] that the reconstruction of intermediary outputs
from DL architectures works better when extracted from initial
layers, as they tend to have a structural similarity with the
input data. Chen et al. [21], proposed the use of knowledge-
enriched distributional model inversion attacks to improve the
attack’s success rate and add generalization across multiple
datasets. Subbanna et al. [22] performs an analytical review
for the effect of model inversion attacks on medical image

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING
3
Fig. 1. Wide array of attacks in DL based IoMT Ecosystem
segmentation task using U-Net and SegNet, respectively. The
study in [23] proposed the method deep leakage from gradi-
ents that proposed a differentiable model which matches the
weight gradients with that of the trained model in order to
reconstruct the data. The study proposed by [24] improved the
weight matching algorithm for deep leakage from gradients to
enhance the reconstruction performance. Similarly, the study
in [25] also proposed the reconstruction of data while matching
the gradient information. In addition, the study also uses
auxiliary information in order to improve the reconstruction
performance.
In this regard, NoPeekNN [26] limited the distance correlation
between the intermediate tensors and the input data during
the training process of splitNN. The method was speciﬁcally
designed for autoencoders to limit the reconstruction of the
input data, but has not been applied or tested concerning
model inversion attacks. The works [5], [7], [8] proposed
the use of noise addition to the intermediate tensors, which
eventually helps to cope with model inversion attacks but
fails to achieve the model’s accuracy. The study does not
provide any defense against the model, rather improves its
ability to distill knowledge from the trained model. Titcombe
et al. [8] used noise to corrupt the intermediate data and
used NoPeekNN for defense against model inversion attacks.
However, the work ignores the attacks that could be initiated at
the input part of the client side concerning SplitNN. Wang et
al. [27], proposed the use of mutual information regularization
to cope with the model inversion attacks. The method has
been validated using different shallow learning methods and
face dataset. Furthermore, the method uses end-to-end learning
that does not deal with the information availability constraint
in contrast to split networks. In this work, we propose the
defense against model inversion attacks on IoMT data while
dealing with split network constraints of having the network
trained and inferred on server and client sides, respectively.
The proposed method intentionally initiates the one/few pixel
attacks in order to keep the input data safe on the client side,
the intermediate output from the attacked image is then sent to
the server side. We use proximal gradient method to recover
the image on the client side and use late fusion technique to
not only deal with model inversion attack but also with the
improvement of model’s accuracy.
III. THREAT MODEL
As depicted in Figure 1, the attacks on the medical data can
yield severe implications for not only the inference system,
but for the user/patient as well. The threat model in this work
considers an arbitrary number of clients that are responsible
for training a part of the network and a computation server
that carries on the training process on the server side. We
presume that one party intends to fetch the data from other
clients using model inversion attack.The process of attack is
deﬁned as follows: 1) The attackers gets their hands on data
sent from database to the DL network and the intermediate
feature maps from the model segment at client side; and 2)
A model is trained by the attacker to reconstruct the raw
data from intermediary feature maps from the client side.
The aforementioned process is mainly categorized as a black-
box attack [8]. This study also assumes that there is only a
single computation server and that a third party orchestrates
the model training process.
This study only considers the intermediate data fetched from
the client side or from the server’s input side for model
inversion attacks. This study does not take into account

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING
4
the data collection during the training and susceptibility of
split neural networks towards Sybil attacks or membership
inference attacks. Furthermore, this study also not covers the
spectrum of white-box model inversion attacks, accordingly.
Due to the wide spectrum of threat models, we have limited
our study to black-box attack, as it helps in performing a fair
comparison with existing studies.
IV. PROPOSED METHODOLOGY
The workﬂow of PGSL method is illustrated in Figure
2. An example from MNIST dataset is used to illustrate
the process due to visual clarity, however, the same process
is applied to the IoMT when used with publicly available
medical dataset in this study. An intentional pixel attack is
initiated towards the IoMT data, which then undergoes a sub-
sampling layer that divides the medical image into patches.
These patches in the form of a tensor are sent to the CNN for
partially training the network at the client side. The network
is segmented at the split/cut layer along with the extraction
of outputs. These outputs are then sent to server side and
processed through the proximal gradient method to remove
the pixel attacks. We branch out three streams from this point,
the ﬁrst one retains the up-sampled pixel-attacked data, the
second performs a convolution sum between the pixel-attacked
and proximal gradient data, and the third uses only proximal
gradient data. The streams are trained at the server side using
forward propagation. The gradients from the last layer of
the second stream (combining both the pixel-attacked and
proximal gradient data) at the server side are backpropagated
to the last split layer. Only these gradients are sent back to
the client side to ﬁne-tune the training process. Once the
network is trained, we employ a weighted-averaging decision-
level fusion method to derive the desired label. The details
for each of the PGSL building blocks are provided in the
subsequent subsections. In the above scenario, the client and
server side can be considered analogous to patient and hospital,
clinic and laboratories, university labs and medical research
institutes, respectively.
A. Pixel-attack on IoMT data
In this study, we mainly consider the image data for
designing the privacy-preserving machine learning (PPML)
method. For this study, we use jacobian-based saliency map
attack (JSMA) pixel method [28] to initiate the attack. The
rationale for choosing JSMA method is two-fold. The ﬁrst
is the convenience to implement such an attack as it mostly
performs correlation and the second is the effectiveness of
JSMA approach. It has been revealed later in the experimental
results (see Table II) that the data attacked using JSMA method
is more difﬁcult to recover from activation maps in comparison
to other attack methods, respectively. Let us consider that an
image label pair is represented as (x, y). The saliency map
observes the inﬂuence of each pixel in image x for predicting
the class y. The assumption is that the pixel correlates to the
corresponding class positively Corrp = ∂f(x)y
∂xi
> 0 and to the
contradicting class negatively Corrn = P
y′̸=y
∂f(x)y′
∂xi
< 0,
where f(x) refers to the softmax probabilities and y′ corre-
sponds to contradicting classes. Based on the aforementioned
assumptions, the map can be formulated as shown in equation
1.
Map =
(
−∂f(x)y
∂xi
· P
y′̸=y
∂f(x)y′
∂xi
,
if True
0,
otherwise
(1)
The condition (True) in equation 1 refers to the satisfaction
of Corrp and Corrn conditions. The attacker can target the
saliency map such that the pixels are modiﬁed to increase
the correlation of contradictory label. One simple way is to
inverse the correlation conditions, i.e. Corr′
p = ∂f(x)y
∂xi
< 0
and Corr′
n = P
y′̸=y
∂f(x)y′
∂xi
> 0. The process of generating
adversarial sample in the aforementioned way is best suited
to this study as we do not intent to initiate a targeted attack
but rather a non-targeted one. Let us denote the adversarial
saliency map as Map′, therefore the resultant attacked image
can be given by ˆx = x + Map′
B. Reversible Up-sampling and Down-sampling Layer
Post the initialized attack, we employ a reversible down-
sampling and up-sampling layer [29], accordingly. The down-
sampling is applied at the client side, while the up-sampling
is performed at the server side. The reason for using this layer
is three-fold. Firstly, the attacker needs a prior information
for design of sub-pixel convolution to up-sample the image.
Secondly, the increasing the receptive ﬁeld while retaining the
depth, and thirdly, the reduction of artifacts that could affect
the visual quality [29]. Suggesting that the size of adversarial
image ˆx is represented by i × j, it will be down-sampled into
four images along with the concatenation of corresponding
saliency map Map to form an input tensor having size
i
2 ×
j
2 ×(4ch+1) where ch corresponds to the number of channels,
i.e. 1 for grayscale and 3 for color. Let us denote the tensor
as ˘x.
C. Proximal Gradient for IoMT data
Let us represent the feature maps with ``x that are driven
from ˘x, i.e. ˘x
h→``x, where h represents the convolution
function used to extract the activation. These activations are
passed as an input to the proximal gradient method to recover
the attacked IoMT data, accordingly. Although we adopt
the proximal gradient method (which is a broad family of
functions that optimizes convex gradient methods), it is not
the same. The method has been modiﬁed in terms of the
modalities, i.e. we use corrupted data with maps instead of
actual and modiﬁed images, and in terms of equality constraint
to comply with the proposed network architecture.
Recalling the initiated attack, the IoMT data can be recovered
by x =
ˆx −Map′, however, the information regarding
the Map′ is not available in the activations. Therefore, we
approximate the recovery using the inverted saliency map
concatenated in the tensor activation, i.e. x ≈ˆx −
¯
Map and
represent it as an optimization function shown in equation 2.
min
ˆx,
¯
Map ∥ˆx∥∗−λ∥
¯
Map∥∗
(2)

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING
5
Fig. 2. Workﬂow of Proximal Gradient Split Learning network
Equation 2 is considered to be a convex optimization problem
[30]. The notation ∥∥∗refer to the nuclear norm of the
matrix and λ represents the weighting parameter, accordingly.
The said equation is also referred to as robust principle
component analysis [31], [32] which is commonly used for
image recovery. Equation 2 is also considered to be a special
case of a general optimization problem that can be represented
in the form shown in equation 3.
min
χ∈H g(χ), s.t. A(χ) −b = 0
(3)
The notation g, H, A and b refer to the convex function, real
Hilbert space, linear map, and an observation, respectively.
An efﬁcient way to solve equation 3 is to relax the equality
constraint and represent it into the following form.
min
χ∈H F(χ) .= µg(χ) + f(χ)
(4)
In the context of this study,
f(χ) .= 1
2∥ˆx −
¯
Map∥2
(5)
that is responsible for penalizing in case of equality constraint
violation, g is the convex function subject to ˆx →Map, and
the µ corresponds to the relaxation parameter subject to µ > 0.
The assumption is that the solution of equation 3 approaches
to that of equation 2 as the µ approaches 0. The function in
equation 5 is assumed to be smooth and convex, thus, it can be
solved by using Lipschitz continuous gradient function [31],
[32] shown in equation 6.
∥∇f(χ1) −∇f(
¯
Map1)∥≤L∥χ1 −
¯
Map1∥
(6)
The Fr´echet derivate is represented by ∇f that is represented
as an element in the Hilbert space. The use of Lipschitz
function has proven to make the solution more efﬁcient in
terms of computational complexity. The optimization function
shown in equation 4, correspond to the family of proximal
gradient function that is used to recover the attacked image in
this study.
D. Fusion of Activation Maps
As illustrated in Figure 2, we perform the fusion of output
activation maps from the split layer and the proximal gra-
dient method. There are various ways to fuse the activation
maps, but the most common ones are sum, convolution, and
convolution-sum fusion strategies. It has been proven in exist-
ing studies that the convolution-sum fusion yields better results
in comparison to the former ones. In this regard, we adopt the
convolution-sum fusion strategy proposed in [33] to fuse the
activation maps, accordingly. The fusion comprises the orderly
steps such as concatenation, convolution, dimension reduction,
and summation. For simplicity, we represent the feature map
with ˆf, the two feature maps that needs to be fused are denoted
as ˆfu and ˆfv, respectively. The steps for performing the fusion
are given below.
• The ﬁrst step concatenates the activation maps at some
spatial locations across the channels.
• A bank of ﬁlters and biases are used to perform the
convolution in the second step.
• The third step performs the dimensionality reduction
within the convolution process by generating a weighted
combination of the activation maps.
• The last step performs a linear summation of the corre-
sponding maps that needs to be fused.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING
6
We represent the mathematical formulation for the fusion of
feature maps as shown in equation 7 and 8.
ˆfout = sum(conv( ˆfu, ˆfv), ˆfu)
(7)
ˆfout = (concat ∗filt + bias) + ˆfu
(8)
The ﬁrst and second steps corresponds to conv operation that
employs a bank of ﬁlters filt and biases bias, as represented
in equation 7 and 8. The conv operation further reduces the
dimension so that the summation operation can be performed,
accordingly. The last step performs a linear summation sum
between the output of convolution operation and ˆfu.
From this point forward, three streams are trained using the
attacked image, fused image, and the recovered image.
E. Decision-Level fusion
Existing studies have proven that defense measures for
adversarial and model inversion attacks heavily affect the
recognition performance of the system. In this regard, PGSL
employs a decision-level fusion strategy that combines the
classiﬁcation results from the three streams. Generally, three
kinds of fusion strategies, i.e. Weighted-Averaging, Adaptive-
Weighted-averaging, and meta-learning, are employed to im-
prove the recognition performance [33]. On one hand, meta-
learning is considered to be more effective while being com-
putationally complex and on the opposite spectrum, weighted-
averaging is simple and has the least computational con-
straints. Adaptive-weighted-averaging provides an efﬁcient
trade-off between the effectiveness and computational com-
plexity [33], thus in this work, we use adaptive-weighted-
averaging for decision-level fusion. Let us denote the clas-
siﬁcation scores from attacked image stream, fused activation
maps stream, and recovered image stream as Sa, Sf, and Sr,
respectively. The adaptive-weighted-average for combining the
scores from aforementioned three streams can be deﬁned as
shown in equation 9.
Sawa = γ ∗Sr + ρ ∗Sf + (1 −γ −ρ) ∗Sa
(9)
where γ and ρ represent the weights for scores from recovered
and fused activation maps, respectively. Let us denote the
corresponding weights for the three streams as Wγ, Wρ,
and Wβ. We ﬁrst initialize the ﬁxed weights as describe in
experiments section and compute the values of γ and ρ as
shown in equation 10 and 11.
γ =
Wγ ∗Smax
r
Wγ ∗Smax
r
+ Wρ ∗Smax
f
+ Wβ ∗Smax
a
(10)
ρ =
Wρ ∗Smax
f
Wγ ∗Smax
r
+ Wρ ∗Smax
f
+ Wβ ∗Smax
a
(11)
where Smax represent the maximum average score of a
particular class label and can be deﬁned for the corresponding
streams as Smax
r
= maxL[Sr(L)], Smax
f
= maxL[Sf(L)], and
Smax
a
= maxL[Sa(L)]. The notation L represents the class
label.
F. Network Conﬁguration
As the scope of this work is to demonstrate the effectiveness
of defense against model inversion attack and data recovery
to improve the recognition performance, we adopt a simple
convolutional neural network (CNN) with 7 conv and 2 fully
connected (FC) layers that can be used for the employed
datasets. Each of the convolutional layer comprises conv,
ReLU, and batch normalization (BN) layer with 3x3 kernel
size and 64 channels. The drop-out layer is used after every
three conv layers. We employ the split layer after 2nd conv
layer, accordingly. The reason for choosing 2nd conv layer for
the split is driven by the research ﬁndings from [5], [20] that
the reconstruction of intermediary outputs work better when
performed at initial layers as the structural similarity of the
feature maps is high with the input data. Furthermore, we
also tried splitting the network at other layers but achieved the
best results with the proposed settings, therefore, we assume
that our empirical ﬁnding is compliant with the existing works
for performing split at initial layers, respectively. The details
regarding the hyperparameters and distribution of datasets is
given in experiment section.
V. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP AND ANALYSIS
This section provides the experimental setup, results, and
analysis to show the effectiveness on two fronts. The ﬁrst
is the defense mechanism for reconstruction of images from
activation maps and its recovery, and the second is the
recognition performance. We present extensive experimental
analysis to show the effectiveness of the proposed approach.
The corresponding results for each of the component is shown
in subsequent subsections.
A. Experimental Setup
As the study is centered around IoMT data, we employ two
datasets to prove the efﬁcacy of PGSL. The ﬁrst is a publicly
available Mammogram dataset MIAS [34] and the second is
the MNIST dataset [35]. The rationale for choosing MNIST
dataset is the fairness of comparison with existing approaches
and clarity of visual results. There are a total of 330 images
in MIAS dataset. We clip the images to 1024x1024 and divide
them into training and testing sets. The training set comprises
42, 57, and 181 while the testing set contains 12, 12, and
26 malignant, benign, and normal images, respectively. For
MNIST, the training and testing set comprises 60,000 and
10,000 images. The network for both the datasets employ
same set of parameters. We use the learning rate of 0.001
with a decay rate of 0.0003, the drop out ratio is 0.25, and the
optimizer is set to ADAM. All the experiments are performed
on Python, Intel Core i9 PC clocked at 3.5 GHz with 64GB
of RAM and NVIDIA GeForce RTX3090.
B. Experiments with varying µ
The proximal gradient method in this study relies on a
hyperparameter, i.e. µ, for the optimal recovery of the attacked
image. The mean squared error (MSE) is computed between
the recovered and the original image (before attack initiation)

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING
7
to select the optimal µ value. Since the value of µ = 0 will
yield the same result as of equation 2, we start the selection of
value from 0.05 to 1.0 with the step size of 0.1. We conducted
these experiments on the attacked image before giving it as
an input to downsampling layer or CNN. The reason for
not conducting on the activation maps is that the input is
an attacked image therefore, comparing the corresponding
activation maps would not be meaningful. We measure the
MSE against the µ values on both the datasets. The results
for this experiment are shown in Figure 3. For the sake of
generality, we choose a single value of µ for both the datasets.
The analysis indicate that µ = 0.55 yields the lowest MSE for
both the datasets, therefore, we will use this value for our next
set of experiments, accordingly.
Fig. 3. Sensitivity analysis for parameter µ on MNIST and MIAS datasets
C. Comparative Analysis for Reconstruction of Attacked Data
To show the effectiveness of the proposed approach in terms
of the reconstruction of attacked data, we use state-of-the-art
methods to recover images from activation maps, i.e. deep
leakage for gradient (DLG) [23], improved deep leakage from
gradient (iDLG) [24], and DCGAN [19] method to reconstruct
the images from their gradients. The DLG and iDLG method
already provides a pre-trained network for MNIST dataset,
but we trained the DLG network for MIAS dataset in order
to obtain the recovered images from random initialization.
Similarly, DCGAN was also trained from random initialization
in order to recover the images from gradients. We ﬁrst consider
the gradients from the split layer and then the gradients from
proximal gradient method to recover the images to prove the
efﬁcacy of the proposed approach. We evaluate the method
using MSE, as the comparison with existing approaches would
be fair enough. The visual results for DLG and DCGAN
on MNIST without and with proximal gradient is shown in
Figure 4. We also present the quantitative results for DLG,
iDLG, and DCGAN in terms of MSE on both the datasets in
Table 1. It can be deduced from the results that the JSMA
TABLE I
COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF EXISTING WORKS USING MSE ON MIAS
AND MNIST WITH PROPOSED ATTACK AND RECOVERY METHODS
Attack Method
MIAS
MNIST
DLG [23]
3.14
0.12
iDLG [24]
2.63
0.048
DCGAN [19]
2.96
0.056
MIA [5]
2.925
0.08
JSMA + DLG
4.362
0.24
JSMA + iDLG
3.924
0.22
JSMA + DCGAN
5.947
0.29
Recovery Method
MIAS
MNIST
[8] + DLG
2.543
0.097
[8] + iDLG
1.349
0.04
[8] + DGCAN
7.86
2.34
Ours (DLG)
1.854
0.046
Ours (iDLG)
1.126
0.026
Ours (DGCAN)
2.372
0.078
attack method used in this study is more difﬁcult to recover
from gradient/activation maps, thus, we assume that the PGSL
framework has a better defense concerning model inversion
attacks. For recovery method, we corrupted the images with
laplacian noise [8] and used DLG, iDLG, and DGCAN to
recover the images. The results show that the proposed PGSL
method is able to improve the MSE concerning recovered
images.
Fig. 4. Qualitative results on MNIST dataset (a) Original image, (b) Attacked
image, (c) Recovered image using DCGAN, (d) Recovered image using DLG,
(e) Recovered image using DCGAN+Proximal Gradient, and (f) Recovered
image using DLG+Proximal Gradient
D. Experimental Results on Recognition Performance
We present an experimental analysis to show the effective-
ness of PGSL in terms of recognition performance. For this
experiment, we test the recognition accuracy on the images if
attacked using the adopted jacobian method [28], carlini and
wagner (C&W) method [36], basic iterative method (BIM)

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING
8
[37], and fast gradient sign method (FGSM) [10], respectively.
The attacked images using the respective methods are shown in
Figure 5. These attacks have proven to be effective for making
the end predictions completely or partially wrong, as illustrated
in the visual results. We report the results when trained
directly with the attacked images, the images constructed
using DLG, iDLG, and DCGAN from maps acquired using
split layer, and the proposed PGSL method in Table 2. The
results indicate that the JSMA is a highly effective attack
method when it comes to MIAS while C&W attack yields
the lowest accuracy on MNIST. The BIM and FGSM method
are weaker attacks relative to the JSMA and C&W, however,
they do affect the overall accuracy of the recognition system.
iDLG relatively performs better than DLG and DGCAN. The
stream computed on images recovered from proximal gradient
yields the best accuracy, better than iDLG, while the other
two streams yield lower results. Considering that the attack
is incorporated in the other two streams directly or indirectly,
the degradation of performance makes sense. In this regard,
we used the decision-level fusion strategy using adaptive-
weighted-averaging method. We initialized the weights for
all the streams with 0.5, 0.3, and 0.2, respectively, based on
the results from individual streams and applied the fusion
to derive the ﬁnal label. The purpose of using the fusion
of decisions from multiple streams is not only to improve
the recognition performance but also to make the recognition
network attack resilient, which is supported by the highest
recognition accuracy achieved on both the datasets. It should
be noted that the accuracies may vary from the existing works,
as we trained and tested the images using the proposed CNN
network.
Fig. 5. Visual results of different attacks on images
VI. DISCUSSION AND LIMITATIONS
Referring to Figure 1, we illustrated different types of
attacks that can applied to IoMT data that can result in severe
consequences such as data theft, wrong diagnosis, ﬁnancial
losses, and more. The ﬁrst attack refers to the raw IoMT data
which is attacked while being sent to a hospital in a use-case
scenario. The results in Table 2 clearly indicates that any of
TABLE II
COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS ON ACCURACIES FOR MIAS AND MNIST
DATASETS
Method
MIAS
MNIST
JSMA [28]
46.3%
65.4%
C&W [36]
51.2%
58.6%
BIM [37]
56.8%
81.2%
FGSM [10]
61.9%
83.8%
DLG [23]
65.7%
88.3%
iDLG [24]
69.2%
95.4%
DCGAN [19]
62.2%
84.8%
Sr
78.5%
99.2%
Sf
67.3%
86.6%
Sa
46.3%
65.4%
PGSL
83.2%
99.8%
the attack is capable of reducing the accuracy to almost a level
where it’s a little better than taking a random decision. Model
inversion attacks are also severe as they are able to reconstruct
the raw data from gradient/activation maps, which violates
the privacy of a patient/user. The PGSL framework shows
that it can provide some defense concerning the information
associated with the raw data. iDLG is considered to be a state-
of-the-art method for reconstruction of images from gradient
maps, but the results show that the proposed work helps
in reducing recognition performance from the reconstructed
images, thus, by extension, reduces the degree of recovery
from gradients maps. The strength of the proposed work
lies within its adoption in several emerging domains such
as Spatial Computing, Virtual Medicine, Digital Twins, and
Metaverse. All the aforementioned domains are concerned
with simulating humans in the digital world. The proposed
work could be greatly helpful for preserving the users’ data if
any of the aforementioned technologies is realized for IoMT
ecosystem.
Although the PGSL method serve its purpose, it assumes the
Map to be available from the data aggregator stage, however,
with current progress in GANs, it has the capability to evolve
for such defense mechanism. Furthermore, considering that
the IoMT data is highly sensitive, and a slight perturbation
can cause the wrong diagnosis, the achieved accuracy still
has the room for improvement when it comes to IoMT data.
Nevertheless, PGSL reports approximately, 36.9%, 17.5%, and
14% gains in comparison to the JSMA, DLG, and iDLG meth-
ods, accordingly. Moreover, this study considers mammogram
images as IoMT data, but there are other homogeneous and
heterogeneous medical modalities that can be explored for
such adversarial affects such as X-Ray images, Fundus images,
CT-scans, medical reports, electronic health records, and so
forth.
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
In this study, we have proposed PGSL framework for
defense against the impact of data theft and model inversion
attacks within an IoMT ecosystem. The underlying idea of
PGSL shows that it not only helps in manipulating attacker
for having the wrong or partial information from the IoMT
data, but also helps in defending the information against model
inversion attacks. We also show through our analysis that the

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING
9
PGSL method can be used with other techniques to improve
both the recovery and recognition performance, accordingly.
The method has been tested on MIAS and MNIST dataset
that proves the effectiveness of the proposed approach. The
implication of PGSL can easily be realized in any IoMT
ecosystem, ranging from e-health to spatial computing do-
mains. Furthermore, the PGSL can be applied to multiple
datasets, in general, provided that the hyperparameters are
ﬁne-tuned for that particular dataset (speciﬁcally the data
modality), accordingly.
There are several directions in which the current work can be
extended. One of the possible directions is its use in Private
AI framework that can help in securing both data and model
security. Another future work is to observe the effect of data
privacy preservation when it comes to the adoption of virtual
worlds such as Metaverse, Spatial computing, and Digital
Twins. Lastly, the proposed work can be extended to observe
its effect on multiple client nodes or server nodes with split
learning concerning the domain adaptation strategy.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This
research
was
supported
by
Basic
Science
Re-
search Program through the National Research Founda-
tion of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education
(2017R1A6A1A03015562).
