Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research 40 (2011) 1-24
Submitted 09/10; published 01/11
Non-Deterministic Policies in
Markovian Decision Processes
Mahdi Milani Fard

Joelle Pineau

Reasoning and Learning Laboratory
School of Computer Science, McGill University
Montreal, QC, Canada
Abstract
Markovian processes have long been used to model stochastic environments. Reinforce-
ment learning has emerged as a framework to solve sequential planning and decision-making
problems in such environments. In recent years, attempts were made to apply methods
from reinforcement learning to construct decision support systems for action selection in
Markovian environments. Although conventional methods in reinforcement learning have
proved to be useful in problems concerning sequential decision-making, they cannot be ap-
plied in their current form to decision support systems, such as those in medical domains,
as they suggest policies that are often highly prescriptive and leave little room for the user’s
input. Without the ability to provide ﬂexible guidelines, it is unlikely that these methods
can gain ground with users of such systems.
This paper introduces the new concept of non-deterministic policies to allow more ﬂexi-
bility in the user’s decision-making process, while constraining decisions to remain near
optimal solutions. We provide two algorithms to compute non-deterministic policies in
discrete domains. We study the output and running time of these method on a set of
synthetic and real-world problems. In an experiment with human subjects, we show that
humans assisted by hints based on non-deterministic policies outperform both human-only
and computer-only agents in a web navigation task.
1. Introduction
Planning and decision-making have been well studied in the AI community.
Intelligent
agents have been designed and developed to act in, and interact with, a variety of envi-
ronments. This usually involves sensing the environment, making a decision using some
intelligent inference mechanism, and then performing an action on the environment (Rus-
sell & Norvig, 2003). Often times, this process involves some level of learning, along with
the decision-making process, to make the agent more eﬃcient in performing the intended
goal.
Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a branch of AI that tries to develop a computational
approach to solving the problem of learning through interaction.
RL is the process of
learning what to do—how to map situations to actions—so as to maximize a numerical
reward signal (Sutton & Barto, 1998). Many methods have been developed to solve the
RL problem with diﬀerent types of environments and diﬀerent types of agents. However,
most of the work in RL has focused on autonomous agents such as robots or software
agents. The RL controllers are thus designed to issue a single action at each time-step
c⃝2011 AI Access Foundation. All rights reserved.

Milani Fard & Pineau
which will be executed by the acting agent. In the past few years, methods developed by
the RL community have started to be used in sequential decision support systems (Murphy,
2005; Pineau, Bellemare, Rush, Ghizaru, & Murphy, 2007; Thapa, Jung, & Wang, 2005;
Hauskrecht & Fraser, 2000). In many of these systems, a human being makes the ﬁnal
decision.
Usability and acceptance issues thus become important in these cases.
Most
RL methods therefore require some level of adaptation to be used with decision support
systems. Such adaptations are the main contribution of this paper.
Medical domains are among the cases for which RL needs further adaptation. Although
the RL framework correctly models sequential decision-making in complex medical sce-
narios, including long-term treatment design, standard RL methods cannot be applied to
medical settings in their current form as they lack ﬂexibility in their suggestions. Such
requirements are, of course, not speciﬁc to medical domains and, for instance, might be
needed in an aircraft controller that provides suggestions to a pilot.
The important diﬀerence between decision support system and the classical RL problem
stems from the fact that in the decision support system, the acting agent is often a human
being, which of course has his/her own decision process. Therefore, the assumption that
the controller should only send one clear commanding signal to the acting agent is not
appropriate. It is more accurate to assume that some aspect of the decision-making process
will be inﬂuenced by the user of the system.
This view of the decision process is particularly relevant in two diﬀerent situations.
First, in many practical cases, we do not have an exact model of the system. Instead, we
may have a noisy model built from a ﬁnite number of interactions with the environment.
This leads to a type of uncertainty that is usually referred to as extrinsic uncertainty. Most
RL algorithms ignore this uncertainty and assume that the model is perfect. However if we
look closely, the performance of the optimal action based on an imperfect model might not
be statistically diﬀerent from the next best action. Bayesian approaches have looked at this
problem by providing conﬁdence measure over the agent’s performance (Mannor, Simester,
Sun, & Tsitsiklis, 2007). In cases where the acting agent is a human being, we can use these
conﬁdence measures to provide the user with a complete set of actions, each of which might
be the optimal and for which we do not have enough evidence to diﬀerentiate. The user
can then use his/her expertise to make the ﬁnal decision. Such methods should guarantee
that the suggestions provided by the system are statistically meaningful and plausible.
On the other hand, even when we do have complete knowledge of the system and we can
identify the optimal action, there might still be other actions which are “roughly equal” in
performance. At this point, the decision between these near-optimal options could be left to
the acting agent—namely the human being that is using the decision support system. This
could have many advantages, ranging from better user experience, to increased robustness
and ﬂexibly. Among the near-optimal solutions, the user can select based on further domain
knowledge, or any other preferences, that are not captured by the system. For instance, in
a medical diagnosis system that suggests treatments, providing the physician with several
options might be useful as the ﬁnal decision could be made based on further knowledge of
the patient’s medical status, or preferences regarding side eﬀects.
Throughout this paper we address the latter issue through a combination of theoretical
and empirical investigations. We introduce the new concept of non-deterministic policies
to capture a decision-making process intended for decision support systems. Such policies
2

Non-Deterministic Policies in Markovian Decision Processes
involve suggesting a set of actions, from which a non-deterministic choice is made by the
user. We apply this formulation to solve the problem of ﬁnding near-optimal policies to
provide ﬂexible suggestions to the user.
In particular, we investigate how we can suggest several actions to the acting agent,
while providing performance guarantees with a worst-case analysis. Section 2 introduces the
necessary technical background material. Section 3 deﬁnes the concept of non-deterministic
policies and related concepts. Section 4 addresses the problem of providing choice to the
acting agent while keeping near-optimality guarantees on the performance of the worst-case
scenario. We propose two algorithms to solve these problems and provide approximation
techniques to speed up the computation for larger domains.
Methods introduced in this paper are general enough to apply to any decision sup-
port system in an observable Markovian environment. Our empirical investigations focus
primarily on sequential decision-making problems in clinical domains, where the system
should provide suggestions on the best treatment options for patients. These decisions are
provided over a sequence of treatment phases. These systems are speciﬁcally interesting
because often times, diﬀerent treatment options seem to provide only slightly diﬀerent re-
sults. Therefore, providing the physician with several suggestions would be beneﬁcial in
improving the usability of the system and the performance of the ﬁnal decision.
2. Deﬁnitions and Notations
This section introduces the main notions behind sequential decision-making and the math-
ematical formulations used in RL.
2.1 Markov Decision Processes
A Markov Decision Process (MDP) is a model of system dynamics in sequential decision
problems that involves probabilistic uncertainty about future states of the system (Bellman,
1957).
MDPs are used to model the interactions between an agent and an observable
Markovian environment. The system is assumed to be in a state at any given time. The
agent observes the state and performs an action accordingly. The system then makes a
transition to the next state and the agent receives some reward.
Formally, an MDP is deﬁned by the 5-tuple (S, A, T, R, γ):
• States: S is the set of states. The state usually captures the complete conﬁguration
of the system. Once the state of the system is known, the future of the system is
independent from all previous system transitions. This means that the state of the
system is a suﬃcient statistic of the history of the system.
• Actions: A : S →2A is the set of actions allowed in each state where A is the set
of all actions. A(s) is the set of actions the agent can choose from, while interacting
with the system in state s.
• Transition Probabilities: T : S ×A×S →[0, 1] deﬁnes the transition probabilities
of the system. This function speciﬁes how likely it is to end up at any state, given the
current state and a speciﬁc action performed by the agent. Transition probabilities
3

Milani Fard & Pineau
are speciﬁed based on the Markovian assumption. That is, if the state of the system
at time t is denoted by st and the action at that time is at, then we have:
Pr(st+1|at, st, at−1, at−1, . . . , a0, s0) = Pr(st+1|at, st).
(1)
We focus on homogeneous processes in which the system dynamics are independent
of the time. Thus the transition function is stationary with respect to time:
T(s, a, s′) def
= Pr(st+1 = s′|at = a, st = s).
(2)
• Rewards: R : S × A × R →[0, 1] is the probabilistic reward model. Depending on
the current state of the system and the action taken, the agent will receive a reward
drawn from this model. We focus on homogeneous processes in which, again, the
reward distribution does not change over time. If the reward at time t is denoted by
rt, then we have:
rt ∼R(st, at).
(3)
Depending on the domain, the reward could be deterministic or stochastic. We use
the general stochastic model throughout this paper. The mean of this distribution is
denoted by ¯R(s, a).
• Discount Factor: γ ∈[0, 1) is the discount rate used to calculate the long-term
return.
The agent starts in an initial state s0 ∈S. At each time step t, an action at ∈A(st) is
taken by the agent. The system then makes a transition to st+1 ∼T(st, at) and the agent
receives an immediate reward rt ∼R(st, at).
The goal of the agent is to maximize the discounted sum of rewards over the planning
horizon h (could be inﬁnite). This is usually referred to as the return (denoted by D):
D =
h
X
t=0
γtrt.
(4)
In the ﬁnite horizon case, this sum is taken up to the horizon limit and the discount factor
can be set to 1. However, in the inﬁnite horizon case the discount factor should be less
than 1 so that the return has ﬁnite value. The return on the process depends on both the
stochastic transitions and rewards, as well as the actions taken by the agent.
Often times the transition structure of the MDP contains no loop with non-zero prob-
ability. Such a transition graph can be modeled by a directed acyclic graph (DAG). This
class of MDPs is interesting as it includes multi-step decision-making in ﬁnite horizons, such
as those found in medical domains.
2.2 Policy and Value Function
A policy is a way of deﬁning the agent’s action selection with respect to the changes in the
environment. A (probabilistic) policy on an MDP is a mapping from the state space to a
distribution over the action space:
π : S × A →[0, 1].
(5)
4

Non-Deterministic Policies in Markovian Decision Processes
A deterministic policy is a policy that deﬁnes a single action per state. That is, π(s) ∈
A(s). We will later introduce the notion of non-deterministic policies on MDPs to deal with
sets of actions.
The agent interacts with the environment and takes actions according to the policy. The
value function of the policy is deﬁned to be the expectation of the return given that the
agent acts according to that policy:
V π(s) def
= E[Dπ(s)] = E
" ∞
X
t=0
γtrt|s0 = s, at = π(st)
#
.
(6)
Using the linearity of the expectation, we can write the above expression in a recursive
form, known as the Bellman equation (Bellman, 1957):
V π(s) =
X
a∈A
π(s, a)
"
¯R(s, a) +
X
s′∈S
T(s, a, s′)V π(s′)
#
.
(7)
The value function has been used as the primary measure of performance in much of
the RL literature. There are, however, some ideas that take the risk or the variance of the
return into account as a measure of optimality (Heger, 1994; Sato & Kobayashi, 2000). The
more common criteria, though, is to assume that the agent is trying to ﬁnd a policy that
maximizes the value function. Such a policy is referred to as the optimal policy.
We can also deﬁne the value function over the state-action pairs. This is usually referred
to as the Q-function, or the Q-value, of that pair. By deﬁnition:
Qπ(s, a) def
= E[Dπ(s, a)] = E
" ∞
X
t=0
γtrt|s0 = s, a0 = a, t ≥1 : at = π(st)
#
.
(8)
That is, the Q-value is the expectation of the return, given that the agent starts in state
s, takes action a, and then follows policy π. The Q-function also satisﬁes the Bellman
equation:
Qπ(s, a) = ¯R(s, a) +
X
s′∈S
T(s, a, s′)
X
a′∈A
π(s′, a′)Qπ(s′, a′),
(9)
which can be rewritten as:
Qπ(s, a) = ¯R(s, a) +
X
s′∈S
T(s, a, s′)V π(s′).
(10)
The Q-function is often used to compare the optimality of diﬀerent actions given a ﬁxed
subsequent policy.
2.3 Planning Algorithms and Optimality
The optimal policy, denoted by π∗, is deﬁned to be the policy that maximizes the value
function at the initial state:
π∗= argmax
π∈Π
V π(s0).
(11)
5

Milani Fard & Pineau
It has been shown (Bellman, 1957) that for any MDP, there exists an optimal determin-
istic policy that is no worse than any other policy for that MDP. The value of the optimal
policy V ∗satisﬁes the Bellman optimality equation:
V ∗(s) = max
a∈A
"
¯R(s, a) +
X
s′∈S
T(s, a, s′)V ∗(s′)
#
.
(12)
The deterministic optimal policy follows from this:
π∗(s) = argmax
a∈A
"
¯R(s, a) +
X
s′∈S
T(s, a, s′)V ∗(s′)
#
.
(13)
Alternatively we can write these equations with the Q-function:
Q∗(s, a) = ¯R(s, a) +
X
s′∈S
T(s, a, s′)V ∗(s′).
(14)
Thus V ∗(s) = maxa Q∗(s, a) and π∗(s) = argmaxa Q∗(s, a).
Much of the literature in RL has focused on ﬁnding the optimal policy. There are many
methods developed for policy optimization. One way to ﬁnd the optimal policy is to solve
the Bellman optimality equation and then use Eqn 13 to choose the actions. The Bellman
optimality equation can be formulated as a simple linear program (Bertsekas, 1995):
minV µT V, subject to
V (s) ≥¯R(s, a) + γ P
s′ T(s, a, s′)V (s′)
∀s, a,
(15)
where µ represents an initial distribution over the states. The solution to the above prob-
lem is the optimal value function.
Notice that V is represented in matrix form in this
equation. It is known that linear programs can be solved in polynomial time (Karmarkar,
1984). However, solving them might become impractical in large (or inﬁnite) state spaces.
Therefore often times methods based on dynamic programming are preferred to the linear
programming solution.
3. Non-Deterministic Policies: Deﬁnition and Motivation
We begin this section by considering the problem of decision-making in sequential decision
support systems. Recently, MDPs have emerged as useful frameworks for optimizing action
choices in the context of medical decision support systems (Schaefer, Bailey, Shechter, &
Roberts, 2004; Hauskrecht & Fraser, 2000; Magni, Quaglini, Marchetti, & Barosi, 2000;
Ernst, Stan, Concalves, & Wehenkel, 2006).
Given an adequate MDP model (or data
source), many methods can be used to ﬁnd a good action-selection policy. This policy is
usually a deterministic or stochastic function. But policies of these types face a substantial
barrier in terms of gaining acceptance from the medical community, because they are highly
prescriptive and leave little room for the doctor’s input. These problems are, of course, not
speciﬁc to the medical domain and are present in any application where the actions are
executed by a human. In such cases, it may be preferable to provide several equivalently
6

Non-Deterministic Policies in Markovian Decision Processes
good action choices, so that the agent can pick among those according to his or her own
heuristics and preferences.
To address this problem, this work introduces the notion of a non-deterministic policy,
which is a function mapping each state to a set of actions, from which the acting agent can
choose.
Deﬁnition 1. A non-deterministic policy Π on an MDP (S, A, T, R, γ) is a function
that maps each state s ∈S to a non-empty set of actions denoted by Π(s) ⊆A(s). The
agent can choose to do any action a ∈Π(s) whenever the MDP is in state s.
Deﬁnition 2. The size of a non-deterministic policy Π, denoted by |Π|, is the sum of the
cardinality of the action sets in Π: |Π| = P
s |Π(s)|.
In the following sections we discuss two scenarios in which non-deterministic policies
can be useful. We show how they can be used to implement more robust decision support
systems with statistical guarantees of performance.
3.1 Providing Choice to the Acting Agent
Even in cases where we have complete knowledge of the dynamics of the planning problem
at hand, and when we can accurately calculate actions’ utilities, it might not be desirable to
provide the user with only the optimal choice of action at each time step. In some domains,
the diﬀerence between the utility of the top few actions may not be substantial. In medical
decision-making, for instance, this diﬀerence may not be medically signiﬁcant based on the
given state variables.
In such cases, it seems natural to let the user decide between the top few actions,
using his/her own expertise in the domain. This results in a further injection of domain
knowledge in the decision-making process, thus making it more robust and practical. Such
decisions can be based on facts known to the user that are not incorporated in the automated
planning system. It can also be based on preferences that might change from case to case.
For instance, a doctor can get several recommendations as to how to treat a patient to
maximize the chance of remission, but then decide what medication to apply considering
also the patient’s medical record, preferences regarding side eﬀects, or medical expenses.
This idea of providing choice to the user should be accompanied by reasonable guaran-
tees on the performance of the ﬁnal decision, regardless of the choice made by the user. A
notion of near-optimality should be enforced to make sure the actions are never far from
the best possible option. Such guarantees are enforced by providing a worst-case analysis
on the decision process.
3.2 Handling Model Uncertainty
In many practical cases we do not have complete knowledge of the system at hand. Instead,
we may get a set of trajectories collected from the system according to some speciﬁc policy.
In some cases, we may be given the chance to choose this policy (in on-line and active RL),
and in other cases we may have access only to data from some ﬁxed policy. In medical
trials, in particular, data is usually collected according to a randomized policy, ﬁxed ahead
of time through consultation with the clinical researchers.
7

Milani Fard & Pineau
Given a set of sample trajectories, we can either build a model of the domain (in model-
based approaches) or directly estimate the utility of diﬀerent actions (with model-free ap-
proaches).
However these models and estimates are not always accurate when we only
observe a ﬁnite amount of data. In many cases, the data may be too sparse and incomplete
to uniquely identify the best option. That is, the diﬀerence in the performance measure of
diﬀerent actions is not statistically signiﬁcant.
There are other cases where it might be useful to let the user decide on the ﬁnal choice
between those actions for which we do not have enough evidence to diﬀerentiate.
This
comes with the assumption that the user can identify the best choice among those that are
recommended. The task is therefore to provide the user with a small set of actions that will
almost surely include the optimal one.
In this paper we only focus on the problem of providing ﬂexible policies with near-
optimal performance. Using non-deterministic policies for handling model uncertainty re-
mains an interesting future work.
4. Near-Optimal Non-Deterministic Policies
Often times, it is beneﬁcial to provide the user of a decision support system with a set of
near-optimal solutions. With MDPs, this would be to suggest a set of near-optimal actions
to the user and let the user make a decision among the proposed actions. The notion of
near-optimality should therefore be on the set of all possible policies that are consistent
with the proposed actions. That is, no matter which action is chosen among the proposed
options at each state, the ﬁnal performance should be close to that of the optimal policy.
Such constraint suggests a worst-case analysis of the decision-making process. Therefore, we
opt to guarantee the performance of any action selection consistent with a non-deterministic
policy by putting the near-optimality constraint on the worst-case selection of actions by
the user.
Deﬁnition 3. The (worst-case) value of a state-action pair (s, a) according to a non-
deterministic policy Π on an MDP M = (S, A, T, R, γ) is given by the recursive deﬁnition:
QΠ
M(s, a) = ¯R(s, a) + γ
X
s′∈S

T(s, a, s′)
min
a′∈Π(s′) QΠ
M(s′, a′)

,
(16)
which is the worst-case expected return under the allowed set of actions.
Deﬁnition 4. We deﬁne the (worst-case) value of a state s according to a non-
deterministic policy Π, denoted by V Π
M(s), to be:
min
a∈Π(s) QΠ
M(s, a).
(17)
To calculate the value of a non-deterministic policy, we construct an evaluation MDP,
M′ = (S, A′, R′, T, γ), where A′ = Π and R′ = −R.
Theorem 1. The negated value of the non-deterministic policy Π is equal to that of the
optimal policy on the evaluation MDP:
QΠ
M(s, a) = −Q∗
M′(s, a).
(18)
8

Non-Deterministic Policies in Markovian Decision Processes
Proof. We show that if Q∗
M′ satisﬁes the Bellman optimality equation on M′, then the
negated values satisfy Eqn 16 on M:
Q∗
M′(s, a)
=
¯R′(s, a) + γ
X
s′∈S
T(s, a, s′) max
a′∈A′ Q∗
M′(s′, a′)
(19)
⇒−Q∗
M′(s, a)
=
−¯R′(s, a) −γ
X
s′∈S
T(s, a, s′) max
a′∈A′ Q∗
M′(s′, a′)
(20)
⇒−Q∗
M′(s, a)
=
¯R(s, a) + γ
X
s′∈S
T(s, a, s′)
min
a′∈Π(s′) −Q∗
M′(s′, a′),
(21)
which is equivalent to Eqn 16 for QΠ
M(s, a) = −Q∗
M′(s, a).
This means that policy evaluation for a non-deterministic policy can be achieved by any
method that ﬁnds the optimal policy on an MDP.
Deﬁnition 5. A non-deterministic policy Π is said to be augmented with state-action pair
(s, a), denoted by Π′ = Π + (s, a), if it satisﬁes:
Π′(s′) =
(
Π(s′),
s′ ̸= s
Π(s′) ∪{a},
s′ = s.
(22)
If a policy Π can be achieved by a number of augmentations from a policy Π′, we say
that Π includes Π′.
Deﬁnition 6. A non-deterministic policy Π is said to be non-augmentable according to
a constraint Ψ if and only if Π satisﬁes Ψ, and for any state-action pair (s, a), Π + (s, a)
does not satisfy Ψ.
In this paper we will be working with constraints that have this particular property:
if a policy Π does not satisfy Ψ, any policy that includes Π does not satisfy Ψ. We will
refer to such constraints as being monotonic. One such constraint is ϵ-optimality, which is
discussed in the next section.
4.1 ϵ-Optimal Non-Deterministic Policies
Deﬁnition 7. A non-deterministic policy Π on an MDP M is said to be ϵ-optimal, with
ϵ ∈[0, 1], if we have1:
V Π
M(s) ≥(1 −ϵ)V ∗
M(s),
∀s ∈S.
(23)
This can be thought of as a constraint Ψ on the space of non-deterministic policies, set
to ensure that the worst-case expected return is within some range of the optimal value.
Theorem 2. The ϵ-optimality constraint is monotonic.
1. In some of the MDP literature, ϵ-optimality is deﬁned as an additive constraint (QΠ
M ≥Q∗
M −ϵ) (Kearns
& Singh, 2002). The derivations will be analogous in that case. We chose the multiplicative constraint
as it has cleaner derivations.
9

Milani Fard & Pineau
Proof. Suppose Π is not ϵ-optimal. Then for any augmentation Π′ = Π + (s, a), we have:
QΠ′
M(s, a)
=
¯R(s, a) + γ
X
s′∈S

T(s, a, s′)
min
a′∈Π′(s′) QΠ′
M(s′, a′)

≤
¯R(s, a) + γ
X
s′∈S

T(s, a, s′)
min
a′∈Π(s′) QΠ′
M(s′, a′)

≤
QΠ
M(s, a),
which implies:
V Π′
M (s) ≤V Π
M(s).
As Π was not ϵ-optimal, this means that Π′ will not be ϵ-optimal either as the value function
can only decrease with the policy augmentation.
More intuitively, it follows from the fact that adding more options cannot increase the
minimum utility as the former worst case choice is still available after the augmentation.
Deﬁnition 8. A conservative ϵ-optimal non-deterministic policy Π on an MDP M is a
policy that is non-augmentable according to the following constraint:
¯R(s, a) + γ
X
s′
 T(s, a, s′)(1 −ϵ)V ∗
M(s′)

≥(1 −ϵ)V ∗
M(s),
∀a ∈Π(s).
(24)
This constraint indicates that we only add those actions to the policy whose reward plus
(1−ϵ) of the future optimal return is within the sub-optimal margin. This ensures that the
non-deterministic policy is ϵ-optimal by using the inequality:
QΠ
M(s, a) ≥¯R(s, a) + γ
X
s′
 T(s, a, s′)(1 −ϵ)V ∗
M(s′)

,
(25)
instead of solving Eqn 16 and using the inequality constraint in Eqn 23. Applying Eqn 24
guarantees that the non-deterministic policy is ϵ-optimal while it may still be augmentable
according to Eqn 23, hence the name conservative.
It can also be shown that the conservative policy is unique. This is because if there were
two diﬀerent conservative policies, then the union of them would be conservative, which
violates the assumption that they are non-augmentable according to Eqn 24.
Deﬁnition 9. A non-augmentable ϵ-optimal non-deterministic policy Π on an MDP
M is a policy that is non-augmentable according to the constraint in Eqn 23.
This is a non-deterministic policy for which adding more actions violates the near-
optimality constraint of the worst-case performance.
In a search for ϵ-optimal policies,
a non-augmentable one has a locally maximal size. This means that although the policy
might not be the largest among the ϵ-optimal policies, we cannot add any more actions to
it without removing other actions, hence the locally maximal reference.
Any non-augmentable ϵ-optimal policy includes the conservative policy. This is because
we can always add the conservative policy to any policy and remain within the ϵ bound.
10

Non-Deterministic Policies in Markovian Decision Processes
However, non-augmentable ϵ-optimal policies are not necessarily unique, as they have only
locally maximal size.
In the remainder of this section, we focus on the problem of searching over the space
of non-augmentable ϵ-optimal policies, such as to maximize some criteria. Speciﬁcally, we
aim to ﬁnd non-deterministic policies that give the acting agent more options while staying
within an acceptable sub-optimal margin.
We now present an example that clariﬁes the concepts introduced so far. To simplify the
presentation of the example, we assume deterministic transitions. However, the concepts
apply as well to any probabilistic MDP. Figure 1 shows an example MDP. The labels on
the arcs show action names and the corresponding rewards are shown in the parentheses.
We assume γ ≃1 and ϵ = 0.05. Figure 2 shows the optimal policy of this MDP. The
conservative ϵ-optimal non-deterministic policy of this MDP is shown in Figure 3.
Figure 1: Example MDP
Figure 2: Optimal policy
Figure 3: Conservative ϵ-optimal policy
Figure 4: Two non-augmentable ϵ-optimal policies
Figure 4 includes two possible non-augmentable ϵ-optimal policies. Although both poli-
cies in Figure 4 are ϵ-optimal, the union of these is not ϵ-optimal. This is due to the fact
that adding an option to one of the states removes the possibility of adding options to other
11

Milani Fard & Pineau
states, which illustrates why local changes to the policy are not always appropriate when
searching in the space of ϵ-optimal policies.
4.2 Optimization Criteria
We formalize the problem of ﬁnding an ϵ-optimal non-deterministic policy in terms of an
optimization problem. There are several optimization criteria that can be formulated, while
still complying with the ϵ-optimality constraint.
• Maximizing the size of the policy: According to this criterion, we seek non-
augmentable ϵ-optimal policies that have the biggest overall size (Def 2). This provides
more options to the agent while still keeping the ϵ-optimal guarantees. The algorithms
proposed in later sections use this optimization criterion. Notice that the solution to
this optimization problem is non-augmentable according to the ϵ-optimal constraint,
because it maximizes the overall size of the policy.
As a variant of this, we can try to maximize the sum of the log of the size of the action
sets:
X
s∈S
log |Π(s)|.
(26)
This enforces a more even distribution of choice on the action set. However, we will be
using the basic case of maximizing the overall size as it will be an easier optimization
problem.
• Maximizing the margin: We can aim to maximize the margin of a non-deterministic
policy Π:
max
Π
ΦM(Π),
(27)
where:
ΦM(Π) = min
s∈S

min
a∈Π(s),a′ /∈Π(s)
 Q(s, a) −Q(s, a′)

.
(28)
This optimization criterion is useful when one wants to ﬁnd a clear separation between
the good and bad actions in each state.
• Minimizing the uncertainty: If we learn the models from data we will have some
uncertainty about the optimal action in each state. We can use some variance esti-
mation on the value function (Mannor, Simester, Sun, & Tsitsiklis, 2004) along with
a Z-Test to get some conﬁdence level on our comparisons and ﬁnd the probability of
having the wrong order when comparing actions according to their values. Let Q be
the value of the true model and ˆQ be our empirical estimate based on some dataset
D. We aim to minimize the uncertainty of a non-deterministic policy Π:
min
Π ΦM(Π),
(29)
where:
ΦM(Π) = max
s∈S

max
a∈Π(s),a′ /∈Π(s) Pr

Q(s, a) < Q(s, a′)|D
	
.
(30)
12

Non-Deterministic Policies in Markovian Decision Processes
Notice that the last two criteria can be deﬁned both in the space of all ϵ-optimal policies,
or only the non-augmentable ones.
In the following sections we provide algorithms to solve the ﬁrst optimization problem
mentioned above, which aims to maximize the size of the policy. We focus on this criterion
as it seems most appropriate for medical decision support systems, where it is desirable
for the acceptability of the system to ﬁnd policies that provide as much choice as possible
for the acting agent. Developing algorithms to address the other two optimization criteria
remains an interesting open problem.
4.3 Maximal ϵ-Optimal Policy
The exact computational complexity of ﬁnding a maximal ϵ-optimal policy is not yet known.
The problem is certainly NP, as one can ﬁnd the value of the non-deterministic policy in
polynomial time by solving the evaluation MDP with a linear program. We suspect that the
problem is NP-complete, but we have yet to ﬁnd a reduction from a known NP-complete
problem.
In order to ﬁnd the largest ϵ-optimal policy, we present two algorithms. We ﬁrst present
a Mixed Integer Program (MIP) formulation of the problem, and then present a search algo-
rithm that uses the monotonic property of the ϵ-optimal constraint. While the MIP method
is useful as a general and theoretical formulation of the problem, the search algorithm has
potential for further extensions with heuristics.
4.3.1 Mixed Integer Programming Solution
Recall that we can formulate the problem of ﬁnding the optimal deterministic policy of an
MDP as a simple linear program (Bertsekas, 1995):
minV µT V, subject to
V (s) ≥¯R(s, a) + γ P
s′ T(s, a, s′)V (s′)
∀s, a,
(31)
where µ can be thought of as the initial distribution over states.
The solution to the
above problem is the optimal value function (V ∗). Similarly, having computed V ∗using
Eqn 31, the problem of searching for an optimal non-deterministic policy according to the
size criterion can be rewritten as a Mixed Integer Program:2
maxV,Π(µT V + (Vmax −Vmin)eT
s Πea), subject to
V (s) ≥(1 −ϵ)V ∗(s)
∀s
P
a Π(s, a) > 0
∀s
V (s) ≤¯R(s, a) + γ P
s′ T(s, a, s′)V (s′) + Vmax(1 −Π(s, a))
∀s, a.
(32)
Here we are overloading the notation Π to deﬁne a binary matrix representing the policy,
where Π(s, a) is 1 if a ∈Π(s), and 0 otherwise.
We deﬁne Vmax = Rmax/(1 −γ) and
Vmin = Rmin/(1 −γ). The e’s are column vectors of 1 with the appropriate dimensions.
The ﬁrst set of constraints makes sure that we stay within ϵ of the optimal return. The
2. Note that in this MIP, unlike the standard LP for MDPs, the choice of µ can aﬀect the solution in cases
where there is a tie in the size of Π.
13

Milani Fard & Pineau
second set of constraints ensures that at least one action is selected per state. The third
set ensures that for those state-action pairs that are chosen in any policy, the Bellman
constraint holds, and otherwise, the constant Vmax makes the constraint trivial. Notice
that the solution to the above problem maximizes |Π| and the result is non-augmentable.
Theorem 3. The solution to the mixed integer program of Eqn 32 is non-augmentable
according to ϵ-optimality constraint.
Proof. First, notice that the solution is ϵ-optimal, due to the ﬁrst set of constraints on the
(worst-case) value function. To show that it is non-augmentable, as a counter argument,
suppose that we could add a state-action pair to the solution Π, while still staying in ϵ sub-
optimal margin. By adding that pair, the objective function is increased by (Vmax −Vmin),
which is bigger than any possible decrease in the µT V term, and thus the objective is
improved, which conﬂicts with Π being the solution.
We can use any MIP solver to solve the above problem. Note however that we do not
make use of the monotonic nature of the constraints. A general purpose MIP solver could
end up searching in the space of all the possible non-deterministic policies, which would
require a running time exponential in the number of state-action pairs (O(2|S||A|+δ)).
4.3.2 Heuristic Search
Alternatively, we develop a heuristic search algorithm to ﬁnd a maximal ϵ-optimal policy.
We can make use of the monotonic property of the ϵ-optimal policies to narrow down the
search. We start by computing the conservative policy. We then augment it until we arrive
at a non-augmentable policy. We also make use of the fact that if a policy is not ϵ-optimal,
neither is any other policy that includes it, and thus we can cut the search tree at this
point.
Table 1: Heuristic search algorithm to ﬁnd ϵ-optimal policies with maximum size
Function getOptimal(Π, startIndex, ϵ)
Πo ←Π
for i ←startIndex to |S||A| do
(s, a) ←pi
if a /∈Π(s) & V (Π + (s, a)) ≥(1 −ϵ)V ∗then
Π′ ←getOptimal (Π + (s, a), i + 1, ϵ)
if g(Π′) > g(Πo) then
Πo ←Π′
end
end
end
return Πo
The algorithm presented in Table 1 is a one-sided recursive depth-ﬁrst-search algorithm
that searches in the space of plausible non-deterministic policies to maximize a function
g(Π). Here we assume that there is an ordering on the set of state-action pairs {pi} =
14

Non-Deterministic Policies in Markovian Decision Processes
{(sj, ak)}. This ordering can be chosen according to some heuristic along with a mechanism
to cut down some parts of the search space. V ∗is the optimal value function and the function
V returns the value of the non-deterministic policy that can be calculated by solving the
corresponding evaluation MDP.
We should make a call to the above function passing in the conservative policy Πm and
starting from the ﬁrst state-action pair: getOptimal(Πm, 0, ϵ).
The asymptotic running time of the above algorithm is O((|S||A|)d(tm +tg)), where d is
the maximum size of an ϵ-optimal policy minus the size of the conservative policy, tm is the
time to solve the original MDP (polynomial in the relevant parameters), and tg is the time
to calculate the function g. Although the worst-case running time is still exponential in the
number of state-action pairs, the run-time is much less when the search space is suﬃciently
small. The |A| term is due to the fact that we check all possible augmentations for each
state. Note that this algorithm searches in the space of all ϵ-optimal policies rather than
only the non-augmentable ones. If we set the function g(Π) = |Π|, then the algorithm will
return the biggest non-augmentable ϵ-optimal policy.
This search can be further improved by using heuristics to order the state-action pairs
and prune the search. One can also start the search from any other policy rather than the
conservative policy. This can be potentially useful if we have further constraints on the
problem.
4.3.3 Directed Acyclic Transition Graphs
One way to narrow down the search is to only add the action that has the maximum value
for any state s, and ignore the rest of actions if adding the top action will result in values
out of the ϵ-optimality bound:
Π′ = Π +
 
s, argmax
a/∈Π(s)
QΠ(s, a)
!
.
(33)
The modiﬁed algorithm will be as follows:
Table 2: Modiﬁed heuristic search algorithm with augmentation rule of Eqn 33.
Function getOptimal(Π, ϵ)
Πo ←Π
for s ∈S where Π(s) ̸= A(s) do
a ←argmaxa/∈Π(s) QΠ(s, a)
if V (Π + (s, a)) ≥(1 −ϵ)V ∗then
Π′ ←getOptimal (Π + (s, a), ϵ)
if g(Π′) > g(Πo) then
Πo ←Π′
end
end
end
return Πo
15

Milani Fard & Pineau
The algorithm in Table 2 leads to a running time of O(|S|d(tm +tg)). However this does
not guarantee that we see all non-augmentable policies. This is due to the fact that after
adding an action, the order of values might change. If the transition structure of the MDP
contains no loop with non-zero probability (transition graph is directed acyclic, i.e. DAG),
then this heuristic will produce the optimal result while cutting down the search time.
Theorem 4. For MDPs with DAG transition structure, the algorithm of Table 2 will gen-
erate all non-augmentable ϵ-optimal policies that would be generated with a full search.
Proof. To prove this, ﬁrst notice that we can sort the DAG with a topological sort. There-
fore, we can arrange the states in levels, having each state only make transitions to states
at a future level. It is easy to see that adding actions to a state for a non-deterministic
policy can only change the worst-case value of past levels. It will not have any eﬀect on the
Q-values at the current level or any future level.
Now given any non-augmentable ϵ-optimal policy generated with a full search, there is
a sequence of augmentations that generated that policy. Any permutation of that sequence
would create the same policy and all the intermediate polices are ϵ-optimal. Now we re-
arrange that sequence such that we add actions in the reverse order of the level. By the
point mentioned above, the Q-value of actions at the point where they are being added will
not change until the target policy is realized. Therefore all the actions with Q-values above
the minimum value must be in the policy, or otherwise we can add them, which conﬂicts
with the target policy being non-augmentable. Since all the actions above a certain Q-value
must be added, we can add them in order. Therefore the target policy can be realized with
the rule of Eqn 33.
When the transition structure is not a DAG, one might do a partial evaluation of the
augmented policy to approximate the value after adding the actions, possibly by doing a few
backups rather than using the original Q-values. This oﬀers the possibility of trading-oﬀ
computation time for better solutions.
5. Empirical Results
To evaluate our framework and proposed algorithms, we ﬁrst test both the MIP and search
formulations on MDPs created randomly, and then test the search algorithm on a real-world
treatment design scenario. Finally, we conduct an experiment on a computer-aided web
navigation task with human subjects to assess the usefulness of non-deterministic policies
in assisting human decision-making.
5.1 Random MDPs
In the ﬁrst experiment, we aim to study how non-deterministic policies change with the
value of ϵ and how the two algorithms compare in terms of running time. To begin, we
generated random MDPs with 5 states and 4 actions. The transitions are deterministic
(chosen uniformly at random) and the rewards are random values between 0 and 1, except
for one of the states with reward 10 for one of its actions; γ was set to 0.95. The MIP
method was implemented with MATLAB and CPLEX.
16

Non-Deterministic Policies in Markovian Decision Processes
ϵ = 0
ϵ = 0.01
ϵ = 0.02
ϵ = 0.03
Figure 5: MIP solution for diﬀerent values of ϵ ∈{0, 0.01, 0.02, 0.03}. The labels on the
edges are action indices, followed by the corresponding immediate rewards.
Figure 5 shows the solution to the MIP deﬁned in Eqn 32 for a particular randomly
generated MDP. We see that the size of the non-deterministic policy increases as the per-
formance threshold is relaxed. We can see that even with small values for ϵ there are several
actions included in the policy for each state. This is of course a result of the Q-values being
close to each other. Such property is typical in many medical scenarios where diﬀerent
treatments provide only slightly diﬀerent results.
To compare the running time of the MIP solver and the search algorithm, we constructed
random MDPs as described above with more state-action pairs. Figure 6 shows the running
time averaged over 20 diﬀerent random MDPs with 5 states, assuming ϵ = 0.01 (which
allows several solutions). As expected, both algorithms have a running time exponential
in the number of state-action pairs (note the exponential scale on the time axis).
The
running time of the search algorithm has a bigger constant factor (possibly due to our naive
implementation), but has a smaller exponent base, which results in a faster asymptotic
running time. Even with the exponential running time, one can still use the search algorithm
to solve problems with a few hundred state-action pairs. This is more than suﬃcient for
many practical domains, including real-world medical decision scenarios as shown in the
next section.
To observe the eﬀect of the choice of ϵ on the running time our algorithms, we ﬁx the
size of random MDPs to have 7 states and 5 actions at each state, and then change the
17

Milani Fard & Pineau
Figure 6: Running time of MIP and the search algorithm as a function of the number of
state-action pairs with ϵ = 0.01.
value of ϵ and measure the running time of the algorithms over 100 trials. Figure 7 shows
the average running time of both algorithms with diﬀerent values for ϵ. As expected, the
search algorithm will go deeper in the search tree as the optimality threshold is relaxed and
its running time will thus increase. The running time of the MIP method, on the other
hand, remains relativity constant as it exhaustively searches in the space of all possible
non-deterministic policies. These results are representative of the relative behaviour of the
two approaches over a range of problems.
Figure 7: Running time of MIP and the search algorithm as a function of ϵ, with 7 states
and 5 actions. Many of the actions are included in the policy with ϵ = 0.02.
5.2 Medical Decision-making
To demonstrate how non-deterministic policies can be used and presented in a medical
domain, we tested the full search algorithm on an MDP constructed for a medical decision-
making task involving real patient data. The data was collected as part of a large (4000+
patients) multi-step randomized clinical trial, designed to investigate the comparative eﬀec-
tiveness of diﬀerent treatments provided sequentially for patients suﬀering from depression
(Fava et al., 2003). The goal is to ﬁnd a treatment plan that maximizes the chance of
18

Non-Deterministic Policies in Markovian Decision Processes
remission. The dataset includes a large number of measured outcomes. For the current
experiment, we focus on a numerical score called the Quick Inventory of Depressive Symp-
tomatology (QIDS), which was used in the study to assess levels of depression (including
when patients achieved remission). For the purposes of our experiment, we discretize the
QIDS scores (which range from 5 to 27) uniformly into quartiles, and assume that this,
along with the treatment step (up to 4 steps were allowed), completely describe the pa-
tient’s state. Note that the underlying transition graph can be treated as a DAG, as the
study is limited to four steps of treatment and action choices change between these steps.
There are 19 actions (treatments) in total. A reward of 1 is given if the patient achieves
remission (at any step) and a reward of 0 is given otherwise. The transition and reward
models were estimated empirically from the medical database using a frequentist approach.
Table 3: Policy and running time of the full search algorithm on the medical problem.
ϵ = 0.02
ϵ = 0.015
ϵ = 0.01
ϵ = 0
Time (seconds)
118.7
12.3
3.5
1.4
5 < QIDS < 9
CT
CT
CT
CT
SER
SER
BUP
CIT+BUS
9 ≤QIDS < 12
CIT+BUP
CIT+BUP
CIT+BUP
CIT+BUP
CIT+CT
CIT+CT
12 ≤QIDS < 16
VEN
VEN
VEN
VEN
CIT+BUS
CIT+BUS
CT
16 ≤QIDS ≤27
CT
CT
CT
CT
CIT+CT
CIT+CT
CIT+CT
Table 3 shows the non-deterministic policy obtained for each state during the second
step of the trial (each acronym refers to a speciﬁc treatment). This is computed using the
search algorithm, assuming diﬀerent values of ϵ. Although this problem is not tractable with
the MIP formulation (304 state-action pairs), a full search in the space of ϵ-optimal policies
is still possible. Table 3 also shows the running time of the algorithm, which as expected,
increases as we relax the threshold ϵ. Here, we did not use any heuristics. However, as the
underlying transition graph is a DAG, we could use the heuristic discussed in the previous
section (Eqn 33) to get the same policies even faster.
An interesting question is how to set ϵ a priori.
In practice, a doctor may use the
full table as a guideline, using smaller values of ϵ when he/she wants to rely more on the
decision support system, and larger values when relying more on his/her own assessments.
We believe this particular presentation of non-deterministic policies could be used and
accepted by clinicians, as it is not excessively prescriptive and keeps the physician and the
patient in the decision cycle. This is in contrast with the traditional notion of policies in
reinforcement learning, which often leaves no place for the physician’s intervention.
19

Milani Fard & Pineau
5.3 Human Subject Interaction
Finally, we conduct an experiment to assess the usefulness of non-deterministic policies with
human subjects. Ideally, we would like to conduct such experiments in medical settings and
with physicians, but such studies are costly and diﬃcult to conduct given that they require
participation of many medical professionals. We therefore study non-deterministic policies
in an easier domain by constructing a web-based game that can be played by any computer
and human (either jointly or separately).
The game is deﬁned as follows. A user is given a target word and is asked to navigate
around the pages of Wikipedia and visit pages that contain that target word. The user can
click on any word in a page. The system then uses a Google search on the Wiki website
with the clicked word and a keyword in the current page (the choice of this keyword is
discussed later). It then randomly chooses one of the top eight search results and moves
to that page.
This process mimics the hyperlink structure of the web (extending over
the hyperlink structure of the Wiki to make target words more easily reachable).
The
user is given ten attempts and is asked to reach as many pages with the target word as
possible. A similar game was used in another work to infer the semantic distances between
concepts (West, Pineau, & Precup, 2009). Our game, however, is designed in such a way
that a computer model can provide results similar to a human player and thus enable us to
assess the eﬀectiveness of computer-aided decisions with non-deterministic policies.
We construct this task on the CD version of Wikipedia (Schools-Wikipedia, 2009), which
is a structured and manageable version of Wikipedia intended for use in schools. To test our
approach we also need to build an MDP model of the task. This is done using empirical data
as follows. First, we use Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) using Gibbs sampling (Griﬃths
& Steyvers, 2004) to divide the pages of Wikipedia into 20 topics. Each topic corresponds
to a state in the MDP. The LDA algorithm identiﬁes each topic by a set of keywords that
occur more often in pages with that topic. We deﬁne each of these sets of keywords to be an
action (20 actions totals, each corresponding to 20 keywords). We then randomly navigate
around the Wiki using the protocol described above (with a computer player that only
clicks LDA keywords) and collect 200,000 transitions. We use the observed data to build
the transition and reward model of our MDP (the reward is 1 for each hit and 0 otherwise).
The speciﬁc choices for the LDA parameter and the number of states and actions in the
MDP are made in such a way that the best policy provided by the model has comparable
performance with that of the human player.
Using Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk, 2010), we consider three experimental con-
ditions with this task. In one experiment, given a target, the computer chooses a word
(uniformly at random) from the set of keywords (the action) that comes from the optimal
policy on the MDP model. In another experiment, human subjects choose and click the
word themselves without any help. Finally, we test the domain with human users while the
computer highlights, as hints, the words that come from the non-deterministic policy with
ϵ = 0.1. We record the time taken during the process and number of times the target word
is observed (number of hits). Table 4 summarizes the average outcomes of this experiment
for four of the target words (we used seven target words, but could not collect enough data
for all of them). We also include the p-value for the t-test comparing the results for human
agents with and without the hints. The computer score is averaged over 1000 runs.
20

Non-Deterministic Policies in Markovian Decision Processes
Table 4: Comparison of diﬀerent agents in the web navigation task. The t-test is between
the number of hits for a human player that uses hints and one that does not.
Target
Computer
Human
Human with hint
t-Test
Marriage
1.88 hits
1.94 hits
2.63 hits
0.012
103 seconds
93 seconds
(1000 runs)
(86 subjects)
(86 subjects)
Military
4.72 hits
4.86 hits
5.61 hits
0.049
91 seconds
84 seconds
(1000 runs)
(67 subjects)
(97 subjects)
Book
3.77 hits
3.67 hits
4.39 hits
0.014
85 seconds
89 seconds
(1000 runs)
(98 subjects)
(83 subjects)
Animal
2.50 hits
3.18 hits
3.42 hits
0.46
96 seconds
85 seconds
(1000 runs)
(92 subjects)
(123 subjects)
For the ﬁrst three target words, where the performance of the computer agent is close to
a human user, we observe that providing hints to the user results in a statistically signiﬁcant
increase in the number of hits. In fact we see that the computer-aided human outperforms
both the computer and human agents.
This shows that non-deterministic policies can
provide the means to inject human domain knowledge to computer models in such a way
that the ﬁnal outcome is superior to the decision-making solely performed by one party.
For the last word, the computer model is working poorly, judging by its low hit rate. Thus,
it is not surprising to see that the hints do not provide much help to the human agent
in this case (as seen by the non-signiﬁcant p-value). We also observe a general speedup
(for three of the targets) in the time taken by the agent to choose and click the words,
which further shows the usefulness of non-deterministic policies in accelerating the human
subjects’ decision-making process.
6. Discussion
This paper introduces the new concept of non-deterministic policies and their potential use
in decision support systems based on Markovian processes. In this context, we investigate
how the assumption that a decision-making system should return a single optimal action
can be relaxed, to instead return a set of near-optimal actions.
Non-deterministic policies are inherently diﬀerent from stochastic policies. Stochastic
policies assume a randomized action selection strategy with some speciﬁc probabilities,
whereas non-deterministic policies do not impose such constraint. We can thus use best-
case and worst-case analysis with non-deterministic policies to highlight diﬀerent scenarios
with the human user.
21

Milani Fard & Pineau
The beneﬁts of non-deterministic policies for sequential decision-making are two-fold.
First, when we have several actions for which the diﬀerence in performance are negligible,
we can report all those actions as near-optimal options. For instance, in a medical setting,
the diﬀerence between the outcome of two treatment options might not be “medically
signiﬁcant”.
In that case, it may be beneﬁcial to provide all the near-optimal options.
This makes the system more robust and user-friendly.
In the medical decision-making
process, for instance, the physician can make the ﬁnal decision among the near-optimal
options based on side eﬀects burden, patient’s preferences, expense, or any other criteria
that is not captured by the model used in the decision support system. The key constraint,
however, is to make sure that regardless of the ﬁnal choice of actions, the performance of
the executed policy is always bounded near the optimal. In our framework, this property
is maintained by an ϵ-optimality guarantee on the worst-case scenario.
Another potential use of the non-deterministic action sets in Markovian decision pro-
cesses is to capture uncertainties in the optimality of actions. Often times, the amount of
data from which models are constructed is not suﬃcient to clearly identify a single optimal
action. If we are forced to chose only one action as the optimal one, we might have a high
chance of making the wrong decision. However, if we are given the chance to provide a set
of possibly-optimal actions, then we can ensure we include all the promising options while
cutting oﬀthe obviously bad ones. In this setting, the task is to trim the action set as much
as possible while providing the guarantee that the optimal action is still among the top few
possible options.
To solve the ﬁrst problem, this paper introduces two algorithms to ﬁnd ﬂexible near-
optimal policies. First we derive an exact solution with a MIP formulation to ﬁnd a maximal
ϵ-optimal policy. The MIP solution is, however, computationally expensive and does not
scale to large domains. We then describe a search algorithm to solve the same problem with
less computational cost. This algorithm is fast enough to be applied to real world medical
domains. We also show how to use heuristics in the search algorithm to ﬁnd the solution for
DAG structures even faster. The heuristic search can also provide approximate solutions in
the general case.
Another way to scale the problem to larger domains is to approximate the solution to
the MIP program by relaxing some of the constraints. One can relax the constraints to
allow non-integral solutions and penalize the objective for values away from 0 and 1. The
study of such approximation methods remains an interesting direction of future work.
The idea of non-deterministic policies introduces a wide range of new problems and
research topics. In Section 4, we discuss the idea of near optimal non-deterministic policies
and address the problem of ﬁnding the one with the largest action set. As mentioned, there
are other optimization criteria that might be useful with decision support systems. These
include maximizing the decision margin (the margin between the worst selected action and
the best one not selected), or alternatively minimizing the uncertainty of a wrong selection.
Formalizing these problems into a MIP formulation, or incorporating them into a heuristic
search, might prove to be useful.
As evidenced by our human interaction experiments, non-deterministic policies can sub-
stantially improve the outcome of planning and decision-making tasks in which a human
user is assisted by a robust computer-generated plan. Allowing several suggestions at each
step provides an eﬀective way of incorporating domain knowledge from the human side of
22

Non-Deterministic Policies in Markovian Decision Processes
the decision-making process. In medical domains where the physician’s domain knowledge
is often hard to capture in a computer model, a collaborative model of decision-making such
as non-deterministic policies could oﬀer a powerful framework for selecting eﬀective, and
clinically acceptable, treatment strategies.
