Distributed Evolution Strategies Using TPUs for
Meta-Learning
1st Alex Sheng
College of Arts and Science
New York University
New York, USA

2nd Jun Yi Derek He
Academy of Science and Technology
The Woodlands College Park High School
The Woodlands, USA

Abstract—Meta-learning traditionally relies on backpropaga-
tion through entire tasks to iteratively improve a model’s learning
dynamics. However, this approach is computationally intractable
when scaled to complex tasks. We propose a distributed evolution-
ary meta-learning strategy using Tensor Processing Units (TPUs)
that is highly parallel and scalable to arbitrarily long tasks with
no increase in memory cost. Using a Prototypical Network trained
with evolution strategies on the Omniglot dataset, we achieved
an accuracy of 98.4% on a 5-shot classiﬁcation problem. Our
algorithm used as much as 40 times less memory than automatic
differentiation to compute the gradient, with the resulting model
achieving accuracy within 1.3% of a backpropagation-trained
equivalent (99.6%). We observed better classiﬁcation accuracy
as high as 99.1% with larger population conﬁgurations. We
further experimentally validate the stability and performance
of ES-ProtoNet across a variety of training conditions (varying
population size, model size, number of workers, shot, way, ES hy-
perparameters, etc.). Our contributions are twofold: we provide
the ﬁrst assessment of evolutionary meta-learning in a supervised
setting, and create a general framework for distributed evolution
strategies on TPUs.
Index Terms—meta-learning, evolution strategies, tpu
I. INTRODUCTION
Meta-Learning is a rapidly growing ﬁeld in deep learning
which allows for the creation of models that can modify their
own learning dynamics [1, 2, 3]. One critical aspect of human
intelligence, which meta-learning algorithms aim to emulate,
involves being able to classify unseen objects after only a
few instances of viewing it. This is the goal of few shot
learning [4, 5, 6]. This paper assesses the viability of an
evolutionary strategy meta-learning approach on supervised
few-shot classiﬁcation problems.
Matching Nets (MN) use neural networks augmented with
an attention mechanism to embed an unseen data point given
a support set and uses a weighted distance calculation to
determine the closest known class label to the new test point
[4]. This effectively combines beneﬁcial traits of parametric
learning and nonparametric learning to solve the few shot
classiﬁcation problem.
A model proposed in 2017, the Prototypical Network (Pro-
toNet), is also geared towards solving few shot classiﬁcation
problems [7]. A neural network is trained to map its embed-
ding of instances of various classes into a latent vector space,
where the mean of the instances of each class is computed
to determine the class “prototype”. A distance calculation is
performed with the prototype and new embedded cases to
determine how to classify those new cases.
Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning (MAML) is another key
development. MAML attempts to meta-learn a model initial-
ization that converges after a small number of gradient steps
on a variety of tasks [8]. When the model is trained to adapt
to new tasks, a gradient of each task’s loss with repect to
the initial parameters can be computed to iteratively adapt
the model initialization. The key advantage of MAML is that
it inherits the convergence guarantees of gradient descent,
introducing a helpful inductive bias for the meta-learner.
Early work in the evolutionary meta-learning area used
genetic algorithms in an adversarial environment to evolve
self-referential meta-learner agents [9]. Furthermore, the work
provided a biological rationale for evolutionary meta-learning
as a paradigm to evolve increasingly intelligent agents.
ES-MAML [10] introduced by Song et al. showed that
evolutionary strategies could be used to replace the outer
loop backpropagation step in MAML, removing the need
for computing second-order gradients. ES-MAML showed
promising results on meta-learning tasks in reinforcement
learning, but few experiments (few-shot sine regression) were
done on supervised learning tasks. In this paper, we extend the
evolutionary meta-learning regime to the supervised learning
by using evolution strategies to train ProtoNet.
II. ALGORITHMS
A. Few-shot Classiﬁcation
In few-shot learning, the goal is to train a meta-learner to
quickly learn new tasks [1, 2]. A common objective is to
learn to accurately classify a set of image classes given only
a few samples from each class [11]. This is typically done
with 1 or 5 samples per class, referred to as 1-shot or 5-shot
classiﬁcation respectively. Few-shot learning is broken down
into episodes. In each episode, multiple classes are sampled.
Typically, either 5 classes (5-way classiﬁcation) or 20 classes
(20-way classiﬁcation) are used.
In N-way K-shot classiﬁcation, N classes are sampled
per episode to create a N-way classiﬁcation task. K labeled
samples from each class are given to a meta-learner to learn
978-1-7281-2547-3/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE
arXiv:2201.00093v1  [cs.NE]  1 Jan 2022

the task. These samples used to learn the task are referred to as
the support set. The conditioned meta-learner is then evaluated
on a separate query set (multiple unlabeled, unseen samples
from the current episode’s classes), and the resulting average
loss is used to update the meta-learner parameters.
Over many episodes, the meta-learner becomes able to
quickly learn new tasks with little data. In order to evaluate the
meta-learner’s ability to learn new tasks, validation episodes
sample unseen classes from a validation set of classes, and
the performance of the meta-learner on the query sets of these
classes after conditioning on the corresponding support sets
is averaged to determine the validation set loss and accuracy.
The same procedure is carried out for test episodes, using a
separate test set of classes, which are only used once at the
end of training.
B. Prototypical Networks
Prototypical Networks use a neural network f parameterized
by ϕ that maps an input x of M dimensions into an N-
dimensional latent space [7]. In an episode’s support set, each
instance is mapped into latent space, and the mean of the latent
vectors of all instances in each class k is deemed the prototype
ck for that class. The number of classes in these sets is denoted
by n.
The similarity D between a query instance and each class
prototype is found using a similarity metric, either negative
squared Euclidean distance [12] or cosine similarity [13],
and a softmax function is applied to the query-to-prototypes
similarity vectors to generate class probability distributions
[14, 15]. Categorical cross entropy is applied to the resulting
class probabilities to compute the loss [16].
D(x, y) = −(fϕ(x) −y)2
(1)
pϕ(fϕ(x) = k|x) =
exp (D(x, ck))
Pn
i=0 exp (D(x, cki))
(2)
J(ϕ) = −log pϕ(fϕ(x) = k|x)
(3)
C. Evolution Strategies
Evolution strategies, originally proposed in the 1970s, is
an optimization methodology that is inspired by biological
evolution [9, 17, 18]. In ES, a population of candidate models
is instantiated by sampling from a standard distribution in
parameter space with mean µ and standard deviation σ. All
candidate models are evaluated based on a ﬁtness function
and assigned a reward. Based on these rewards, µ and σ are
updated via an optimization rule. A new population is then
instantiated using the updated mean and standard deviation,
and the process repeats. In the variation of ES that we use
in this paper, the initial mean µ is randomly initialized, the
standard deviation σ is a ﬁxed scalar hyperparameter, and the
ﬁtness function is the negative of the few-shot cross-entropy
loss. Our update rule performs gradient descent using the
gradient of the expected loss computed via REINFORCE, in
a very similar manner to Natural Evolution Strategies.
Natural Evolution Strategies (NES) incorporates informa-
tion from every candidate solution to estimate the search
gradient [19]. Given a probability distribution function π(z, θ)
parameterized by θ, the loss function J can be calculated by
ﬁnding the expected value of the objective function F with
respect to the model parameters z, which can be expressed
below [20]:
J(θ) = Eθ[F(z)] =
Z
F(z)π(z, θ)dz
(4)
The gradient of the loss function can be found by using the
‘log-likelihood trick’ [20], shown below:
∇θJ(θ) = Eθ[F(z)∇θ log π(z, θ)]
(5)
Given a population zi of N candidate solutions [10], the
gradient can be approximated as:
∇θJ(θ) ≈1
N
N
X
i=0
F(zi)∇θ log π(zi, θ)
(6)
D. Evolutionary Meta-learning Rationale
The key advantage of meta-learning is the ability to incorpo-
rate the learning dynamics of the model itself into the training
signal. In the case of few-shot learning, this is achieved by
casting entire tasks as training samples for a meta-learner.
This is traditionally done by storing activations and model
states throughout a task, and then backpropagating through the
entire task to compute meta-level gradients that account for the
learning dynamics of the model over the course of the task.
However, such a formulation of meta-learning requires storing
backpropagation graphs that increase in size when scaling to
longer tasks (the backpropagation graph will typically grow
proportionally to task length), resulting in prohibitive memory
costs when attempting meta-learning on complex tasks.
The learning dynamics of a meta-learner can also be in-
terpreted as being similar to the hidden state dynamics of a
recurrent neural network, with backpropagation through a task
in meta-learning being analogous to backpropagation-through-
time in RNN training. With such an interpretation, it would
theoretically be possible to use forward-mode differentiation
similar to Real-time Recurrent Learning (RTRL) [21] to do
meta-learning with memory cost that is invariant with respect
to task length. Unfortunately, such an approach would inherit
RTRL’s prohibitive computational complexity with respect to
model size. However, such a formulation successfully ofﬂoads
the bulk of the memory cost of meta-learning from the
backpropagation graph to the large jacobian matrices used in
forward-mode differentiation (the largest jacobian is typically
comprised of the gradients of the present-step hidden state
w.r.t. the model parameters). The key advantage here would
be the ability to compute meta-level gradients with memory
cost that is invariant with respect to task length, although
the inherent complexity and poor parallelizability of forward-
mode differentiation makes it a poor candidate to meaningfully
reduce the computational cost of meta-learning.

We propose an evolutionary meta-learning approach as a
potential solution to the aforementioned problem. Speciﬁ-
cally, meta-learning using evolution strategies would achieve
backpropagation-free meta-learning (thus memory cost invari-
ant with respect to task length) without the inherent computa-
tional complexity of forward-mode differentiation, while also
being highly parallel. ES-based meta-learning would further
ofﬂoad the bulk of the memory cost of meta-learning from
the large jacobians used in forward-mode differentiation to
the population matrix used in ES. This would make meta-
learning much more scalable and computationally tractable,
as evolution strategies are naturally parallelizable along the
population axis, and the population size in ES can be further
adjusted to manage memory cost (although it is important to
note that there is a tradeoff between memory cost and gradient
accuracy when adjusting the population size in ES).
E. Evolution vs. Analytical Methods for Meta-learning
The dominant term ΩBP in the memory cost of meta-
learning by backpropagation is the sum g of the memory sizes
of all intermediate tensors computed in each inner-loop step
multiplied by the number of inner-loop steps l in a task, such
that ΩBP = g × l. Because of this linear scaling of memory
cost with regard to task length, it is possible for the memory
cost of backpropagation meta-learning to grow indeﬁnitely as
task size increases.
When meta-learning tasks exceed a certain number of steps
in length, it is more memory-efﬁcient to use forward-mode
differentiation than to use backpropagation. This is true specif-
ically when the memory size ΩBP of the backpropagation
graph is greater than the memory size ΩF M of the Jacobian
matrix formed by aggregating the gradients of the inner-loop
model state ψ ∈RDψ w.r.t. the meta-learner parameters
ϕ ∈RDϕ. The “inner-loop model state” refers to a ﬂattened
vector of size Dψ containing information about the adapted
model during a task. In MAML, for example, this model state
would contain the task-adapted parameters θ′ = ψ with the
same size as the meta-learning parameters θ = ϕ such that
Dψ = Dϕ, resulting in a forward-mode Jacobian of size
Dψ × Dϕ = D2
ϕ. On the other hand, the model state in
ProtoNet would contain the stored class prototypes C from a
task, such that the size of the model state is equal to the size
Dc of each class prototype multiplied by the number of classes
N, resulting in a Jacobian of size Dψ × Dϕ = Dc × N × Dϕ.
The dominant term ΩF M in the memory cost of forward-
mode differentiation depends only on the number of meta-
learner parameters Dϕ and the number of elements in the
model state Dψ. These scaling properties make forward-
mode differentiation a suitable substitute for backpropagation
(the memory cost of which also depends on task length) to
reduce memory cost when performing meta-learning on long
tasks. Because that both backpropagation and forward-mode
differentiation are analytical differentiation methods, they will
compute identical gradients and ultimately have the same
convergence properties.
The dominant term ΩES in the memory cost of evolution
strategies meta-learning is the size of the population matrix,
equal to the product of the population size n and the number
of meta-learner parameters Dϕ. Because that P is a tuneable
hyperparameter, it can be set smaller than Dψ to achieve a
lower memory cost than forward-mode differentiation: ΩES <
ΩF M given P < Dψ.
Backpropagation is ideal for simple tasks with few inner-
loop steps, as it is computationally cheap for short tasks
and computes exact (analytical) gradients. Forward-mode
differentiation also computes exact gradients, but is more
memory-intensive than backpropagation on short tasks where
g × l < Dψ × Dϕ and less memory-intensive on long
tasks where g × l1 > Dψ × Dϕ. Evolution strategies, on
the other hand, computes gradients numerically (therefore
producing less exact gradients), but can be made less memory-
intensive than forward-mode differentiation in almost any task
by lowering the population size hyperparameter such that
P < Dψ. With this lower constant memory cost, evolution
strategies becomes less memory-intensive than backpropaga-
tion at a lower threshold of task length than forward-mode
differentiation: g × l2 = P × Dϕ where l2 < l1 when
P < Dψ. Even in cases where P > Dψ, evolution strategies
may still be more feasible to implement due to being more
parallel than backpropagation or forward-mode differentiation.
Evolution strategies effectively allows for less memory cost by
trading off gradient accuracy, potentially resulting in slower
convergence and lower resulting model performance. However,
we empirically show in this paper that the accuracy lost when
using evolution strategies in place of analytical gradients is
not substantial.
Backpropagation and forward-mode differentiation use the
same set of forward and backward operations (backpropaga-
tion backpropagates through the entire task while forward-
mode backpropagates through individual steps to update the
Jacobian matrix) to compute gradients, resulting in similar
time demands to train a meta-learner on a given task. Evolution
strategies only requires a forward pass, resulting in about
half as many operations as backpropagation. However, these
operations are more expensive, as the forward propagation
is performed with one input per candidate model in parallel.
Thus, the exact time demands of evolution strategies depends
heavily on parallelization and communication overhead.
F. TPU Evolution Strategies
A key advantage of parallel evolution algorithms is that
a large number of independent ﬁtness-level evaluations can
be made in parallel across large clusters of processors [22].
Because of this, parallel evolution algorithms are most efﬁcient
when problems involve long ﬁtness-level evaluations, low
cross-worker communication overhead, and potential beneﬁt
when running a large number of evaluations in parallel. Due
to these properties, parallel evolution strategies via TPUs are
an ideal approach for meta-learning. Meta-learning entire tasks
results in long ﬁtness evaluations, TPU pod high-speed mesh
networks mitigate the communication overhead of parallel ES,

and high-dimensional optimization of deep meta-learners can
beneﬁt greatly from parallel evaluations for accurate gradient
computation.
As a key contribution of this paper, we present the ﬁrst-
ever framework for distributed evolution strategies on TPUs.
We use a similar algorithm to OpenAI’s distributed ES [23],
with a modiﬁed update rule. In OpenAI-ES, the population is
sampled using a ﬁxed seed, allowing for individual workers to
re-sample the exact candidate model parameters of every other
worker. Thus, it is possible to greatly reduce cross-worker
communication overhead by only communicating ﬁnal reward
values. However, the re-sampling step in OpenAI-ES causes
the per-worker computational cost to increase proportionally to
the total number of workers, which results in poor efﬁciency
when scaling to large population sizes. Our algorithm takes
advantage of the TPU’s efﬁcient communication topology
to remove this constraint, by evaluating multiple candidates
on each worker and computing gradient estimates separately
without communicating rewards. The ﬁnal gradient is then av-
eraged across workers before the update step. Our formulation
of distributed ES is especially suitable for TPUs, as it takes
advantage of high communication bandwidth to cut out the
resampling step, achieving low per-worker computational cost
when scaling to arbitrarily large clusters. Speciﬁcally, we use
the unique TPU AllReduce operation to efﬁciently average the
gradient node across all cores.
G. Evolution Strategy Prototypical Networks
In our evolution strategy, we randomly initialize the mean
model parameter vector µ of the neural network. We generate
candidate solutions x by adding displacement ε using a
Gaussian distribution centered on 0 with standard deviation
σ.
xi = µ + ε
(7)
ε = N(0, σ)
(8)
Instead of weighting each candidate solution with the prob-
ability distribution function as in NES, our gradient estima-
tion takes the sum of all candidate solutions’ displacements
weighted by their corresponding standardized ﬁtness (reward)
scores [24]. We call this gradient-based evolution strategy
Weighted Standard Rewards (WSR). Given the population size
n, objective function F, mean reward F(m), and standard
deviation of rewards σ′, the gradient can be approximated by
the following expression:
∇µJ(µ) ≈1
n
n
X
i=0
F(µ + ε) −F(m)
σ′
∗εi
(9)
Another method of gradient estimation involves using ﬁnite
differences to numerically approximate the partial derivative of
the loss with respect to every parameter. Interestingly, the ﬁnite
differences method can easily be cast within the framework of
an ES model, in which the total population size is set equal
to the number of parameters plus one, and the ES sampling
procedure is modiﬁed to apply ﬁnite differences to the pa-
rameters. In this modiﬁed sampling procedure, all candidate
models would be near identical, except each model would have
a single parameter—chosen based on a one-to-one mapping
of parameters to candidate models—nudged with a small
positive value σF D = 0.001, while every other parameter is
held constant. An additional candidate model is instantiated
with its parameters set equal to the mean parameter vector
of the population with no parameters changed. The ﬁtness
of this mean candidate model is used in place of F(m) in
(9), and the ﬁnite difference value σF D is used in place of
the standard deviation σ′. The resulting modiﬁed gradient
approximation expression is used to compute the gradient
for ﬁnite differences. We explore the performance of ﬁnite
differences as an additional training algorithm for ProtoNet, in
order to compare ES to an alternative numerical optimization
algorithm for few-shot learning.
III. EXPERIMENT
A. Hardware
Tensor Processing Units (TPUs) are a class of deep learning
ASICs designed for compute-intensive neural network train-
ing. TPUs have been found to be, on average, 15 to 30 times
faster than contempary GPUs and CPUs [25, 26]. TPUs and
TPU pods are available through the Google Cloud Platofrm.
Each TPU device contains eight TPU cores, across which
training can be parallelized and quickly synced. Each TPU
core has either 8 gigabytes (in the case of TPUv2) or 16
gigabytes (in the case of TPUv3) of high bandwidth memory
(HBM). Multiple TPU devices can be assembled together as
TPU pods, in which constituent TPU devices are intercon-
nected by high-speed mesh networks for fast communication.
This design results in TPUs being geared toward highly
parallel training tasks, speciﬁcally training with large batch
sizes, or—as we demonstrate in this paper—population paral-
lelism in evolutionary algorithms. The TPUs we used in our
experiments were the v3-8 (single TPUv3 device containing 8
cores), and the v3-256 (TPUv3 pod containing 256 cores).
It is important to note that the TPU cluster size determines
the number of shards across which the population in ES is
partitioned. The number of partitions is equal to the number
of TPU cores, such that a v3-8 with 8 cores will partition the
population across 8 shards and a v3-256 with 256 cores will
partition the population across 256 shards. The population size
per core is a tuneable hyperparameter that we choose based on
per-core memory constraints, and total population size is the
per-core population size multiplied by the number of cores.
B. Experiment
The Omniglot dataset [27] is comprised of 1623 classes of
handwritten characters, each of which containing 20 grayscale
105 × 105 images. The images were resized to 32 × 32 for our
experiments, and the dataset was augmented using rotations
of 90 degrees, 180 degrees, and 270 degrees. The original
orientations were kept, so that the post-augmentation dataset

TABLE I
SUMMARY OF RESULTS
TPU
α
σ
Channels
Pop. per core
Total pop.
Way
Shot
Accuracy
v3-8
1
0.01
16
64
512
20
1
0.964 ± 0.013
v3-256
10
0.1
16
64
16384
20
1
0.973 ± 0.014
ProtoNet
N/A
N/A
64
N/A
N/A
20
1
0.987
v3-8
1
0.01
32
32
256
10
5
0.990 ± 0.005
v3-256
10
0.1
16
64
16384
20
5
0.991 ± 0.009
ProtoNet
N/A
N/A
64
N/A
N/A
20
5
0.996
is four times the size of the original dataset. The augmented
dataset was randomly split into train, validation, and test sets
with 4804, 1012, and 676 classes respectively. The results
reported below are from the test set.
Each trial consisted of 200 epochs, each with 100 episodes
of training and one episode of validation. Each trial had a 5-
way test and either 1-shot or 5-shot setup during meta-testing.
Test accuracies were determined by running the trained model
on 200 episodes with classes randomly sampled from the test
set classes, and the standard deviation of the each accuracy
value is reported as well.
We varied variables such as TPU size and number of
convolution channels to reﬂect the effect of hardware avail-
ability and desired model size on test performance. All other
hyperparameters were chosen based on validation performance
(highest validation accuracies) to ﬁnd the ideal hyperparameter
conﬁgurations for each given value of the variable under
scrutiny. A set of high-performing hyperparameter conﬁgura-
tions on the validation set for each given value of the variable
under scrutiny was kept and re-evaluated on the test set. The
resulting accuracies are reported throughout this section.
Our ES-ProtoNet used the same convolutional network
architecture as Snell et al. [7]: a sequence of four identical
convolution blocks, with each block comprised of a 3 × 3
convolution, batch normalization layer, ReLU nonlinearity,
and 2x2 max-pooling layer in the same order that they are
mentioned. The original ProtoNet used 64 channels for all of
its convolution layers, but we experiment with 64, 32, and 16
channels across different trials. The rest of our experimental
parameters were set up identically to the original ProtoNet
paper, unless otherwise stated.
In Table 1, we summarize our results for the best performing
models. In Table 2, we demonstrate how changes to the
step size (alpha) and population standard deviation (sigma)
parameters could cause test accuracy to deteriorate. In table
2 only, alpha and sigma values were varied while all other
hyperparameters were held constant (rather than tuned using
the validation set). The control variables are the Euclidean
distance metric, the population size, the train way, and the
number of convolutional ﬁlters or channel counts. The term
“Pop. per core” will be used to refer to the population size
per TPU core (shard/worker) in the tables, whereas the total
population size is equal to the per-core population multiplied
by the number of cores, and is referred to by the “Total pop.”
term. The dependent variable is the accuracy and accompany-
ing standard deviation.
TABLE II
HYPERPARAMETER OPTIMIZATION
α
σ
Accuracy
0.1
0.001
0.62 ± 0.028
1
0.01
0.987 ± 0.009
10
0.1
0.971 ± 0.011
25
0.25
Collapse
Effect of varying α and σ on test accu-
racy, with all other variables held constant
(TPU=v3-8, Channels=16, Pop. per core=128,
Total pop.=1024, Way=10).
It can be seen that different TPU models had different
optimal alpha (step size) and sigma (population standard
deviation) values. When alpha and sigma were too large, the
test accuracy would collapse to random guessing. When they
were too small, the model parameters could not escape a local
minimum in the loss function.
We experimented with different numbers of train way (num-
ber of classes sampled per training episode) from 5, 10, and 20
on different TPU models with different alpha and sigma values
as seen in Fig. 1. The control variables were the channel count
and the test way. The population size per core was inversely
proportional to the train way size. Refer to table 5 in the
appendix for details.
A train way of 10 allowed for the highest performances for
the v3-8, but a value of 20 allowed for the highest performance
for the v3-256 for both alpha and sigma combinations. This
is consistent with the conclusion that models are more robust
when the test way is smaller than the train way, as proposed
in Snell et al. [7].
We tested convolution with 16 channels, 32 channels, and 64
channels, with different TPUs as seen in Table 3. The constants
were the alpha and sigma values. Because that model size
depended heavily on channel count (parameter count in the
convolution blocks grows as a quadratic function of channel
count) while memory available per core was constant, we were
able to use larger per-core population sizes when using smaller
convolution channel counts. Conversely, we could use larger
channel counts when using smaller per-core population sizes.
There was relatively little variation in accuracy performance
based on the number of channels. 32 channels was optimal for
v3-8, but 16 was optimal for v3-256.
Fig. 2 compares the training progress of v3-8 TPU models
depending on the number of convolution channels. The train
way was 10 for all three channel counts. The larger channel

count led to faster convergence but had similar performance
after 200 epochs.
The last set of experiments with our evolution strategy
(WSR) was the one-shot tests, which can be found in Table 6
in the appendix.
Fig. 1. Modifying Train Way
TABLE III
MODIFYING NUMBER OF CHANNELS
Channels
Pop. per core
Total pop.
Way
Accuracy
64
16
128
5
0.978 ± 0.011
64
8
64
10
0.984 ± 0.008
32
64
512
5
0.98 ± 0.009
32
32
256
10
0.99 ± 0.005
32
16
128
20
0.987 ± 0.009
16
128
1024
10
0.987 ± 0.009
(with TPU=v3-8, α = 1, σ = 0.01)
32
32
8192
10
0.989 ± 0.008
32
16
4096
20
0.988 ± 0.01
16
64
16384
20
0.991 ± 0.009
16
128
32768
10
0.989 ± 0.008
(with TPU=v3-256, α = 10, σ = 0.1)
In the ﬁnite differences strategy experiments, it was found
that the Euclidean distance metric achieved substantially lower
accuracy compared to cosine similarity. The independent vari-
ables were the learning rate, population size, and train way.
In Table 4 we display the highest performing instances of the
ﬁnite differences trials.
Because that the ﬁnite differences algorithm signiﬁcantly
underperformed compared to evolution strategies in 5-shot
classiﬁcation, 1-shot trials were not attempted.
Lastly, different learning rates of the ﬁnite differences algo-
rithm were investigated. The results in Fig. 3 are from cosine
similarity calculations because Euclidean distance was found
to signiﬁcantly underperform. In addition, different population
sizes and train way conﬁgurations were tried, as shown in
Table 7 in the appendix. The optimal learning rate for v3-8
was 5×10-03, and 5×10-04 for v3-256.
Fig. 2. Convergence Speed Based on Number of Channels
We observed a clear disparity in performance between
ﬁnite differences and evolution strategies on ﬁve-shot ProtoNet
classiﬁcation. Although ﬁnite differences ensures that the
search directions of all candidate models are orthogonal to
each other in parameter space, the same property conﬁnes the
candidate models to a limited number of directions. In contrast,
evolution strategies allows for a potentially inﬁnite number
of search directions. However, based on our experimental
results, we believe that the inﬁnite possible search directions
evaluated allows for more accurate gradient estimations than
ﬁnite differences.
TABLE IV
FINITE DIFFERENCES 5-SHOT RESULTS
TPU
Distance
Learning Rate
Way
Accuracy
v3-8
Cosine
5E-03
10
0.939 ± 0.012
v3-8
Cosine
1E-02
20
0.944 ± 0.014
v3-256
Cosine
5E-04
20
0.956 ± 0.014
v3-8
Euclidean
1E-03
10
0.853 ± 0.026
v3-256
Euclidean
1E-03
10
0.855 ± 0.028
Fig. 3.
Modifying Finite Differences (Cosine Similarity Metric) Learning
Rate

IV. CONCLUSION
We experimentally validated the viability of evolution
strategies as an alternative to backpropagation in supervised
few-shot learning. We successfully used ES to train a pro-
totypical network to perform competitively compared to a
backpropagation-trained counterpart.
We observed an almost negligible difference in performance
( 0.5% accuracy drop) from backpropagation-trained Protonet,
which we attribute to the natural inaccuracy of gradients esti-
mated by evolution strategies in comparison to exact methods
like backpropagation. We were able to achieve competitive
results with many different hyperparameter conﬁgurations
(including different model sizes, numbers of workers/cores,
population sizes, step sizes, and population sampling standard
deviation values), demonstrating the stability of ES-ProtoNet
convergence across a broad variety of training conditions.
We observed especially interesting results with some of
the computationally cheaper training conﬁgurations we used,
particularly one which involved training a ProtoNet with 64
channels using a total population size of 64. In this particular
run, the memory cost of the ES population matrix was ap-
proximately forty times smaller than the memory cost of the
dominant jacobian matrix in the equivalent analytical gradient
computation. With theoretically as little as 3% of the memory
cost, ES-ProtoNet was able to achieve 98.4% accuracy on
5-shot Omniglot classiﬁcation (as shown in Table 3), within
1.3% of the original ProtoNet at 99.6%.
By conceding a marginal amount of performance, it is
possible to achieve meta-learning that not only has constant
memory complexity with respect to task length, but is also
easily parallelizable along the population axis (potentially
distributing the computational cost better than any other par-
allelization method). Furthermore, the performance difference
can be almost completely rectiﬁed either by using a large
population size, or by accumulating gradients over multiple
population steps to achieve a large effective population size.
Such a result is promising, as it demonstrates the pos-
sibility of eliminating the backward step in meta-learning
while only storing the population matrix, which can be made
smaller than the jacobian matrix necessary for forward-mode
differentiation. Using ES, it is possible to perform meta-
learning on arbitrarily complex tasks without bearing the full
memory complexity of forward-mode differentiation, while
also distributing most of the computational cost over large
TPU clusters. We hope that these results will encourage future
work to use evolution-based algorithms to scale up meta-
learning to more complex and impactful task domains.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Our research was supported with Cloud TPUs from
Google’s TensorFlow Research Cloud (TFRC).
