SAFEMYRIDES: Application of Decentralized Control Edge-Computing to 
Ridesharing Monitoring Services 
 
Samaa Elnagar1*, Manoj A. Thomas2, Kweku-Muata Osei-Bryson3 
1Howard University, 2University Of Sydney, 3Virginia Commonwealth University 
 
 

 
Abstract 
Edge computing is changing the face of many industries and services. Common edge computing models offload 
computing which is prone to security risks and privacy violation. However, advances in deep learning enabled Internet 
of Things (IoTs) to take decisions and run cognitive tasks locally. This research introduces a decentralized-control 
edge model where most computation and decisions are moved to the IoT level. The model aims at decreasing 
communication to the edge which in return enhances efficiency and decreases latency. The model also avoids data 
transfer which raises security and privacy risks. To examine the model, we developed SAFEMYRIDES, a scene-aware 
ridesharing monitoring system where smart phones are detecting violations at the runtime. Current real-time 
monitoring systems are costly and require continuous network connectivity. The system uses optimized deep learning 
that run locally on IoTs to detect violations in ridesharing and record violation incidences. The system would enhance 
safety and security in ridesharing without violating privacy.  
 
Keywords: Decentralized control; Edge Computing; Deep Learning; Internet of Things; Ridesharing; Monitoring, Privacy. 
Highlights 
• 
A shift is needed towards decentralized control for IoTs to decrease computational costs and maintain privacy.   
• 
Technologies such as Deep learning for IoTs and decision support could be used to detect ridesharing violations 
locally on smartphones. 
• 
Monitoring ridesharing sessions is technically and socially challenging. 
• 
The system doesn’t record the entire ridesharing session, but it only records violation incidents. 
• 
The system enhances the ridesharing services by ensuring privacy, responsiveness, accuracy, and efficiency.   
1 
Introduction 
On the one hand edge computing led to huge reduction in communication cost and speedup computation (T. Wang, 
2020). However, with tens of IoTs trying to connect single edge node, computation bottlenecks and delays are still 
problems. Moreover, edge computing didn’t fully address security and privacy issues (T. Wang, 2020). On the other 
hand, little research has focused on moving and computation and decentralizing decisions to IoTs (Elnagar & Thomas, 
2020). What inspire decentralized edge-models that smartphones' specifications as the Internet of Things (IoT) are 
continuously enhanced while the cost is fairly decreasing (El Khaddar & Boulmalf, 2017). Moreover, optimized deep 
learning models could run on the limited processing, batteries, and memory of IoTs to provide stand-alone decision-
making and cognitive tasks (Elnagar & Thomas, 2020). Decentralizing control and federating the computation at the 
IoT level will minimize security, privacy and latency risks that emerge from transferring data to other computation 
nodes (Li & Taeihagh). 
One of the IoT applications that can’t contemplate privacy and decision latency is the ridesharing service where safety 
is a significant concern (Feeney, 2015). Some countries in Europe and developing parts of the world report ridesharing 
to be comparatively unsafe (Chaudhry, El-Amine, & Shakshuki, 2018), which suggests the dire need of imposing 
additional safety measures to protect both the driver and the passenger (Hong, 2017).  From the social and governance 
aspects, recording the entire rideshare session violates passengers’ privacy (Anderson, 2016; Z. Lee, Chan, Balaji, & 
Chong, 2016). Technical challenges include storing and processing ridesharing monitoring sessions, and latency in 
detecting violations. Moreover, cellular communication in developing countries, where crime rates are higher, is 
limited (Dillahunt, Kameswaran, Li, & Rosenblat, 2017). In attempts to solve the latency and cloud dependency issues, 
edge computing-based monitoring solutions focused on increasing the transmission bandwidth, optimizing workloads, 
and increasing the number of edge processing nodes (T. Wang, 2020). However, these solutions not only necessitate 
costly special infrastructure but also impose security and privacy risks. In high traffic, the latency issue would be 
doubled due to the increased processing workload dedicated to each edge unit (Meshram, Choudhary, & Velaga, 2020; 
Zhang, Wang, Lu, Liu, & Shi, 2019).  Therefore, edge computing-based solutions partially solve the latency issue, but 
the privacy, and network dependency issues are not entirely solved.  
This research proposes a decentralized-control edge model that aims to fill the efficiency, responsiveness, and privacy 
gaps in current edge computing systems by moving most of the computation and decision making to the IoT level. 
With application to ridesharing monitoring, the model minimizes cost represented in network dependency, costly 
infrastructure, or sacrificing latency. So, we introduce a local decentralized scene-aware monitoring system for 
ridesharing services using the driver’s smartphones. To ensure passenger privacy, the system record only violation 
incidences instead of recording the entire rideshare session. The system applies state-of-the-art deep learning 
optimized models to smartphones to detect ridesharing violations. To ensure security, The system encrypts the detected 

violations before submitting them to ridesharing agents. The implementation of the system exhibits superior detection 
latency among current solutions.  
 
So, the broad research problem is shifting the gear towards decentralized edge computing and empowering the decision 
making of IoTs. The narrow research focus is implementing SAFEMYRIDES, a decentralized control to in ridesharing 
monitoring to address the safety concerns in ridesharing sessions.  
SAFEMYRIDES is motivated by the lack of real-time monitoring systems in ridesharing, the high cost (connectivity 
cost, infrastructure cost, and processing cost), and the preach of privacy of the current solutions (continuous 
monitoring of passengers). The system also could be applied in developing countries where high computational 
resources and mobile internet connections are limited.  
In the following sections, we review prior research on ridesharing monitoring. Then, an overview of ridesharing 
violations, followed by the methodology and description of the proposed system. The architecture of the system is 
described and evaluated experimentally and using illustrative scenarios. Finally, future work and limitations are 
provided. 
2 
Literature Review 
2.1 
 Current Research in Edge Computing 
 
Current edge computing research is dedicated to improving media processing and computation latency and accuracy 
on the edge computational units. Video Analytics in Public Safety (VAPS) is one of the most successful edge 
computing applications (Zhang et al., 2019). However,  due to the high real-time requirements and communication 
overhead, it is hard to implement VAPS at scale or in developing countries. Long, Cao, Jiang, and Zhang (2017) 
developed a cooperative video processing scheme using an edge computing framework to enable cooperative 
processing on resource-abundant mobile devices for delay-sensitive multimedia IoT tasks.  In the research, several 
edge nodes cooperate for enhanced media task preprocessing performance. Yi et al. (2017) presents the LAVEA 
system, an edge computing platform, which offloads computation between clients and edge nodes, and collaborates 
with nearby edge nodes. The research aims to provide low-latency video analytics at places closer to the users to 
minimize the response time. 
(L. Wang, Zhang, Li, Zhong, & Shi, 2019) designed MobileEdge, a three-task offloading system that shares computing 
tasks to nearby on-road computational units. The system target achieving optimal task scheduling for collaborative 
computing. The system used Tensorflow lite (TF lite) that is used in our research. The results show that MobileEdge 
significantly reduces the application response latency. However, on-road computational units exist only in certain 
areas in developed countries, Moreover, collaborative computing with other computational units is prone to serious 
security threats and privacy violations. Simaraly,  DeepDecision, a mobile deep learning framework for edge video 
analytics, was developed  (Ran, Chen, Zhu, Liu, & Chen, 2018). The framework ties together computationally weak 
front-end devices with more powerful back-end helpers to allow deep learning to choose local or remote execution 
and determine an optimal offload strategy. Yet, the system assumes a well-defined shared computation infrastructure.  
2.2 
Previous Ridesharing Monitoring Systems 
 
Monitoring ridesharing sessions has been a controversial issue. According to Ulrich Beck's concept of risk society 
(Beck, Lash, & Wynne, 1992), surveillance risks mitigate the safety avails offered. Therefore, using monitoring 
systems in ridesharing would enhance safety and consequently increase user satisfaction. Y. S. Lee (2018) conducted 
a study on Lateral Surveillance in Singapore. They found that contrary to the belief that individuals are always 
skeptical about surveillance, the respondents, on average, reported a positive perception of lateral surveillance. 
Previous ridesharing monitoring systems include the Safe-ShareRide system developed by L. Liu, Zhang, Qiao, and 
Shi (2018). The system can detect violations happening in the vehicle by detecting a predefined list of seeking help 
phrases. The system uses speech recognition for verbal help detection. Then, the system starts recording videos and 
analyze them on the nearest computational points. However, depending on the seeking help phrases for violation 
detection is not typical in most cases, especially for passengers under influence.  
Kumar, Mukherjee, and Singh (2017) used smartphones for monitoring roads through sensing the road surface and 
conditions from a moving vehicle using fuzzy logic-based road surface roughness classification. The system collects 
accelerations of users; processes the information and communication them to a central server. Then, a georeferenced 
database is updated based on collected information and visualization on Google® maps. To obtain a broader picture 
of the current status of ridesharing monitoring, Table 1 provides a comparison between previous systems and the 
proposed system in terms of methodology and service quality issues. 

 
Table 1: A Comparison Between Pervious Edge computing Systems and The Proposed System. 
Research 
Methodology 
Computation Level 
Latency 
Privacy 
Efficiency 
Kumar et al. (2017) 
Fuzzy logic-based 
Central Server 
- 
- 
yes 
Ran et al. (2018) 
Mobile 
deep 
learning, 
Local 
or 
remote 
execution 
yes 
- 
yes 
Long et al. (2017), Yi 
et al. (2017), Zhang et 
al. (2019) 
Edge computing 
Nearby edge nodes, or 
Shared IoT 
yes 
- 
- 
L. Liu et al. (2018) 
Speech 
recognition 
for 
verbal 
help 
detection 
At 
IoT 
(speech 
recognition), 
edge 
unit (video) 
yes 
- 
- 
Proposed Approach 
Tensorflow 
lite, 
Optimized 
deep 
learning 
At 
the 
IoT 
(smartphone) level 
yes 
yes 
yes 
2.3 
Violations in Ridesharing 
According to most ridesharing companies, there is an agreeable code of conduct to be followed by both passengers 
and drivers. A common code of conduct includes (Armant & Brown, 2020; BILL): Avoid sitting next to the driver on 
the passenger seat. Avoiding any physical interaction with the driver. Physical interaction with the driver includes 
violent actions, seductions, and arguments. Moreover, the driver cannot sit next to the passenger in the back seats 
(Macmurdo, 2015). A Driver must wear a seatbelt all the time. The code of conduct also illegalizes the use and hold 
of weapons during ridesharing sessions. In addition, the code of conduct condemns any sexual conduct between the 
driver and passenger (Lyft, 2019). In the design of the ridesharing monitoring system, we trained the system's deep 
learning model to detect these types of violations. 
3 
Conceptual Framework 
The gap in literature could be summarized that current edge solutions are oriented towards optimizing the computation 
and media processing on the cloud or nearby edge nodes (Cheng, Bao, Zarifis, & Mou, 2019; Z. Lee et al., 2016). 
Also, there is an inclination towards using edge analytics for media processing where multiple edge units are 
collaborating to decrease the latency.  On the other hand, solutions that share the computation are inefficient requiring 
costly infrastructure that is hard to be implemented in developing countries and rural areas. In addition sharing 
computation is violating the privacy and security of user’s data (Cheng, Su, Luo & Cai, 2021). Finally, none of the 
edge solutions are trying to move computation locally to the IoT level to decrease network reliance and ensure privacy. 
On the other hand, the ridesharing monitoring issues discussed in the literature section could be summarized as the 
lack of privacy, safety, and late response. These issues have affected customer satisfaction and trust. Most edge 
computing research avoided moving computation to the IoT level because of the limited computational resources of 
IoT. Therefore, ensuring system efficiency in terms of battery, memory, and storage consumption in our research is 
crucial. So, the proposed model aims at enhancing efficiency, (Functionality), privacy, and responsiveness as key 
factors to enhance IoTs applications performance such as ridesharing monitoring services. The description of each 
factor is discussed below: 
Privacy: gauges the degree to which the IoT application protects customer information and only with their consent, 
disseminate it to other business activities (Hizam & Ahmed, 2020). Since mobile devices are accessible to sensitive 
information including biometric features, privacy has been an essential factor in assessing electronic applications 
(Wolfinbarger & Gilly, 2003; Zeithaml, Parasuraman, & Malhotra, 2002). In SAFEMYRIDES, the ridesharing session 
is recorded based on passenger consent and only violation incidence is recorded. Moreover, recorded media (photos 
or videos) will be encrypted before they are saved. 
Efficiency: measures the resources and ease with which a system is accessed and used (Zeithaml et al., 2002). The 
decentralized-control edge approach aims to consume fewer resources in terms of less network communication that 
consume less battery and data transfer cost. The approach also uses DL optimization techniques such as quantization 
and compression of DL networks. Quantization maximize memory savings during the inference process, and 
compression of DL networks decreases the size of the network to few megabytes, makes it efficient to be used in low 

storage devices (Jacob et al., 2018). Moreover, efficiency will be evaluated by the resources consumed such as 
memory, storage, and battery consumed. 
Responsiveness: is one of the most important service quality dimensions for human-computer-interaction (HCI) (Ho 
& Lee, 2007). Responsiveness is how the system delivers the results of an operation to users in a timely and organized 
manner. Latency is directly correlated with responsiveness, the delayed is the response, the less responsiveness in the 
system. Therefore, the proposed approach will be evaluating the average latency as a measure of Responsiveness. 
Accuracy: there are different definitions of accuracy. In the context of SAFEMYRIDES, accuracy is defined as the 
ability of the system to detect violations correctly out of all violation incidences. The confusion matrix of precision 
and recall is also a principal part of calculating accuracy. 
4 
Methodology 
In this research, we follow a design science approach  (Hevner, March, Park, & Ram, 2004). The decentralized-control 
edge computing approach is considered a model artifact, and the ridesharing monitoring system (SAFEMYRIDES) is 
considered a framework artifact (Peffers, Rothenberger, Tuunanen, & Vaezi, 2012). The framework artifact is 
implemented to show functionality and test performance. The system is evaluated as instantiation using synthetic or 
real-world situations to evaluate the detection accuracy, latency, privacy, and consumed resources. So, the evaluation 
is performed using controlled experiments or the study of the artifact in a controlled environment for qualities. Next, 
an overview of decentralized-control edge computing approach is presented.  
4.1 
Decentralized Control Edge Model 
Edge computing was built upon the concept of computation offloading where end devices and IoTs perform data 
collection and sensing (Huda & Moh, 2022) as shown in the right side of Fig.1. Complex processing and real time 
analysis are performed on the edge units or on the cloud. However, running machine learning and decision-making 
algorithms on IoTs is now an attainable task fueled by the increase in computational resources are significant decrease 
in computational cost (Mocnej et al., 2021). Complex computation tasks such as deep learning inference could run on 
IoTs with regular consumption of resources.  The decentralized control edge model is proposed on the left side of 
fig.1. The model limits the computation on the edge or the cloud side to limit traffic and computational overheads. 
 
The model moves most of computation and decision-making to the end device level to allow decentralized control 
(task onloading). The role of edge units and/or cloud platforms in the decentralized-control model is archiving/logging 
events of the IoT. So, IoTs connect edge units or the cloud platforms for saving logs or upgrading the processing of 
tasks. The model not only decreases network traffic between end devices and edge units but also, allow a real-time 
response to IoT sensed events. Thus, this model focuses on IoTs Task Onloading and IoT-edge communication 
reduction. However, since deep learning models are complex and resources exhaustive, deep learning tasks should be 
optimized first before they could be applied to IoTs as discussed in the next sections 
 
Fig. 1: Decentralized Control Edge Model 
 

 
4.2 
Deep Learning Networks Optimization 
DL models are known for their high computational cost and complexity, so they mostly run on servers on the cloud 
(Wu et al., 2018). On the other hand, end devices (e.g., IoTs) and edge devices (e.g., routers) are often battery-powered, 
have limited memory, and processing to store and process data. Applying DL models to IoT is challenging; DLNs 
must be optimized and compressed to fit IoTs limited computational sources. In addition, the optimization of the IoTs 
themselves is also necessary in terms of memory and hardware optimization (Synced, 2017). 
Compression is one of the main optimization techniques that aim to reduce the massive size of DL networks. One of 
the popular compression methods is the Pruning technique that eliminates the connections between neurons to directly 
reduce the feature map width and shrink the network size. Quantization is another optimization technique that aims at 
compacting the number of bits required to store the DLN weights, usually from 64 bit to 8 bits (Han, & Dally, 2015). 
4.3 
SAFEMYRIDES Design 
The proposed system is an on-site decision support system for monitoring ridesharing vehicles, where the driver's 
smartphone can detect the violation and decides the proper action. We trained a Mobile SSD network to detect 
violation incidences. Then, the trained Mobile SSD is optimized to be deployed to smartphones. The design of the 
proposed system is shown in Fig. 2 and the components of the system are discussed below in detail. 
 
 
Fig. 2: Decision Support System for Monitoring Ridesharing Vehicles. 
4.3.1 
Optimized Deep Learning (DL) Model 
Usually, Deep learning models (DLMs) consist of many connected layers resulting in millions of parameters and 
weight. So, running DLMs tends to be a resource-intensive process in terms of energy consumption and memory 
accesses and hardware accelerators. To apply a DLM to IoTs and small devices such as smartphones, DLMs must be 
compressed and quantized. Also, the DLM running on IoTs are read-only means that these compressed models cannot 
be retrained or edited. We used a Mobile Single Shot Detector (Mobile SSD) which is based on a feed-forward 
convolutional network that produces a fixed-size collection of bounding boxes and scores for the presence of object 
class instances in those boxes. SSD is designed to be independent of the base network, and so it can run on top of any 
base network such as VGG, YOLO, MobileNet (W. Liu et al., 2016). 
 
The DLM is quantized where parameters are represented in 8 bits instead of 32 bits to accelerate the inference process. 
The DLM will have a post-training quantization which is the most used form of quantization. In this approach, 

quantization takes place only after the model has finished training. Moreover, the network is compressed to be 10x 
less in size of the trained network following the method presented by (Singh, Manikandan, & Namboodiri, 2019).  
4.3.2 
The Ridesharing Smart Phone 
Recently smartphones' specifications are enhancing rapidly at a very reasonable cost. The average processing power 
of most smartphones currently could host an optimized DLM and run inference smoothly. For the system to run 
smoothly, the smartphone should have a minimum RAM (not less than 4GB) and an acceptable resolution camera 
according to TensorFlow Guide1. 
4.3.3 
Decision Support System (DSS) 
The DSS is built inside the smartphone. It is responsible for acting in case of detected violation. If a violation is 
detected by the Mobile SSD, a warning is voiced to passengers/drivers. If violations continue to be detected, the 
DSS will record the incidence, encrypt it, and save the incidence in a hidden folder in the ridesharing's smartphone. 
Then, the recorded incidence is sent to the ridesharing agent and attached with encrypted media. 
4.3.4 
Encrypting and Transferring Violation Incidence 
For security, images or videos that document the violation incidences are encrypted and saved in the ridesharing's 
smartphone storage to ensure passenger/driver privacy. In addition, encryption ensures secure transfer to the 
ridesharing agent. Otherwise, violation evidence could be deleted before it is reported to the ridesharing agent. On 
the other hand, encryption will ensure security if the media is shared with nearby road units. So, passengers' 
information will be kept confidential without driver intervention. Moreover, passenger/driver data is secured in case 
the phone is stolen or hijacked.   
4.3.5 
Transferring Violation Evidence using The Cellular Server Units (CSU)  
After the violation incidence is securely recorded and encrypted, it will be uploaded to the nearest cellular server 
units. In case of no cellular connection, Violation incidences could be uploaded to the nearest on-road units in smart 
cities infrastructure or sent in text messages. CSUs could be the driver cellular network or the networks that exist on 
the roadsides in developed countries. So, mostly CSUs are the nearest access point where the DSS could upload 
incident videos even if no cellular internet is turned off on the phone. 
4.3.6 
The Ridesharing Vehicle 
Information about the ridesharing vehicle is saved in the ridesharing agent database. If the violation requires legal 
authorities' interventions, the ridesharing vehicle could be found easily. In addition, the ridesharing agent requires 
registered vehicles to have a valid title, proper condition, and valid insurance of the driver. 
5 
Implementation 
The implementation process is divided into two steps. The first step is the training and testing of the Mobile SSD 
network used in detecting violations. In this step, we collect, annotate, and pre-process relevant ridesharing violation 
samples. Then, after the network is fully trained, it is optimized (compressed and quantized) to be easily embedded in 
IoT(smartphone). The second section is implementing the DSS system that runs locally on the driver's smartphone. 
The DSS act when the Mobile SSD detects violations. The DSS actions include sending warnings, encrypting violation 
incidences, and reporting them to the ridesharing agent. In the following sections, the implementation of each section 
is discussed in detail. 
5.1 
Implementing the Trained Mobile SSD Network 
5.1.1 
The Training Dataset 
There is no ready to use dataset that contains images of ridesharing violations incidents.  The training and testing 
samples used to train the Mobile SSD model are retrieved from web searches, ridesharing agents' articles, and public 
ridesharing violations videos. The violation images were a collection of the five-standard code of conduct rules such 
as interacting physically with the driver as specified earlier. The images collection was taken during the day and at 
night. We also included normal images where there is no violation. 
 
1 https://www.tensorflow.org/lite/guide 
 

5.1.2 
Annotation and Preprocessing: 
Images were annotated in three classes: driver, passenger, and violation. Annotation was performed using Roboflow2. 
Dataset was divided into 90% training, 6 % validation, and 4 % testing. Images were annotated and saved in 
TFRECORD format. Every class in the image was surrounded by a bounding box representing a driver (pink box), 
passenger (green box), and violation (purple box), as shown in fig. 3. Noted that all passengers are annotated if the 
image has more than a passenger. Image preprocessing included resizing pictures to 416 x 416, Auto-Orientation, and 
Auto-Adjust of Contrast through contrast stretching (Munteanu & Lazarescu, 1999). 
 
 Fig. 3: Annotated Training, Validation Images Where Each Class is surrounded with A Bounding Box.  
5.1.3 
Hardware and Software 
The Training was performed on the cloud Google Collaboraty using Jupiter notebooks. To accelerate the training 
process, we used one GPU. The network was trained using TensorFlow 1 and a Keras version less than 2.0 as 
recommend for custom models training settings3. The ridesharing DSS was created using Android studio 4.1.2 and 
SDK 28. The device used for running and debugging is a Mac-book pro with intel core i5 2.5 GHz processor, 8 GB 
Ram. The build and debug were performed on a Google PIXEL AVD before the system was deployed to a smartphone. 
5.1.4 
Optimized MobileNet Single Shot Detector Network 
We trained a MobileNet Single Shot Detector (v2) (ssd_mobilenet_v2) that is popular for performing object detection 
tasks on IoT devices. ssd_mobilenet_v2 is optimized for lightweight inference, enabling it to perform well natively on 
compute-constrained mobile and embedded devices. The Mobile SSD is quantized to parameters size of 8 bit. 
Quantization consumes less memory bandwidth. Fetching numbers in the 8-bit format from RAM requires only 25% 
of the bandwidth of the standard 32-bit format. On the other hand, quantizing neural networks results in 2x to 4x 
speedup during inference. We didn't train the network from scratch; rather, we transferred learning from a pre-trained 
model with a COCO dataset.  COCO dataset training weights were uploaded to the training network in the form of 
.h5 format.  Also, we used the same configuration for MSCOCO Dataset as shown below in table 2. 
Table 2: Trained Network Configuration. 
Parameter 
Value 
The number of layers 
6 
Minimum network scale 
0.2 
Max Network scale 
0.95 
Number of steps 
100000 
Activation Function 
RELU_6 
 
2 https://app.roboflow.com/ 
3 Model Customization 

After the network was trained, we ran an inference test, and then we compressed the network and quantized it to 8 bit. 
Then, the trained network was converted into TFLITE format. The 8 bit quantization format is used to run inference 
on IoTs such as smartphone devices. The average time spent per training step is global_step/sec:4.96517. 
So, the entire training session duration lasted 13.7921 hours. 
5.2 
Implementing the SAFEMYRIDES Decision Support System  
5.2.1 
 Detection Response 
The DSS was developed in Java for Android using Android Studio IDE.  The DSS primary interface runs a scene view 
stream of the smartphone camera. The stream is not recorded. Otherwise, the detection runs on the fly using the 
smartphone camera running scene. The system has access to both the front and rear cameras. When a violation is 
detected with confidence level greater than 80 %, the system speaks out "Violation Detected" using the Text to sound 
android library. If another violation is detected, the system saves the current scene into an encrypted image file and 
stores it in a hidden folder in the ridesharing's phone. The average inference time of the system is 28 ms for detecting 
the three classes of (passenger, driver, and violation). 
5.2.2 
 Encrypting Violation Incidences  
For encryption, each violation image is converted into a byte array; then, an XOR operation is applied on each value 
of the byte array using a predefined encryption key (2-bit key). After performing the XOR operation on each byte 
array value, the encrypted image is written to a new image file in a jpeg format. However, the driver won't be able to 
read the encrypted image or decrypt it. Only the ridesharing agent has the predefined key and can decrypt the image. 
The encryption key acts as a password to encrypt and decrypt the violation image. 
5.2.3 
The Ridesharing Smart Phone 
We ran experiments on two different smartphones with different specifications to monitor the performance of the 
proposed system on different hardware specifications.  The first smartphone used during experiments was a Samsung 
s10 + phone running on Android.  And the second phone is an LG V30+ also running on Android.  
The system was built upon the starter code offered by android for object detection using TensorFlowLite4. The system 
added the custom trained Mobile SSD network. The code was adjusted to detect the three classes of driver, passenger, 
and violation. We added a text-to-speech module to send violation warnings. In addition, we added the encryption-
decryption module for securing violation images. 
5.2.4 
 Results  
These are some screenshots from the ridesharing violation application running on a Samsung s10 + phone. The 
application can detect three classes. A detecting bounding box surrounds each detected class. The number on the right 
top of the bounding box is the network confidence score in making this prediction. Examples of detected violations 
by the SAFEMYRIDES are shown in Fig. 4. a, 2. b. The confidence score of the DL network measures how confident 
is the network assigning an object a specific class.  
6 
Evaluation 
The evaluation will be performed on different levels, as shown in table 3. The evaluation of the trained Mobile SSD 
network will be functional. The network is evaluated before and after it is compressed and quantized. Functional 
evaluation metrics include testing and training accuracy. We also traced the network testing and validation loss. The 
system itself is performed through controlled experiments where evaluation relativeness is absolute (e.g., test if the 
artifact achieves its goal?). Then, another evaluation is performed by conducting a comparison of the artifact 
performance on a different device of different hardware/software specifications (Cleven, Gubler, & Hüner, 2009). The 
stages of evaluation performed are summarized in table 3. 
6.1 
Evaluating the Trained Mobile SSD Network 
6.1.1 
Training loss/ Validation Loss 
There are two critical measures to evaluate the Mobile SSD: the training loss and the validation loss. The loss is the 
cost function used while training that needs to be minimized. At the end of every 100 training steps, the network is 
 
4 GitHub Code 
 

evaluated for the loss in training and validation. As long as the loss decreases, that means that the network is trained 
correctly, and it can generalize well (Jancsary, & Rother, 2012). It is expected for the validation loss to be slightly less 
than the training loss. If the gap between training loss and validation loss increases, this indicates network overfitting.  
Across the 100K steps of training iterations, the training loss vs. validation loss is plotted as shown in fig. 4. The 
training and validation loss start high and start decreasing gradually. The gap between the training and validation loss 
is tight. However, at some steps, the validation loss is less than the training loss, which indicates that the validation 
samples are easier to detect than training samples. The iteration with the least loss is selected in step 96800 with a 
validation loss of 1.0199343. Then validation loss starts increasing afterward, which means that the network overfits. 
The MAP (Mean Average Precision) is another metric used in measuring the accuracy of object detecting networks.  
The average precision computes the average precision value for the recall values over 0 to 1 using IoU (Intersection 
over the union) (Henderson & Ferrari, 2016). the MAP was calculated at the end of each 10000 training steps at 
IoU=0.5 
the 
maximum 
MAP 
achieved 
was 
0.3816 
at 
step 
55867, 
and 

 
 
 
Fig. 4: a,b  a Violation of Sitting Next to The Driver, Interacting Physically with the Driver. 
Table 3: Evaluation Stages with Involved Components and Criteria. 
Artifact 
Evaluation 
Method 
Assessed 
Criteria 
Level of 
Evaluation 
Form of 
Evaluation 
Relativeness 
of Evaluation 
Trained 
Mobile 
SSD 
Reporting 
the 
functional 
performance 
of 
the 
trained network 
Training 
accuracy 
Loss/validation 
accuracy Loss, 
Instantiation 
 
Quantitative 
/ measured 
Absolute 
Proposed 
System 
Demonstration of 
the performance of the 
artifact with 
several real examples 
Goal, 
Accuracy, 
Latency 
Instantiation 
/ Real 
examples  
 
Quantitative 
/ measured 
Absolute 
Proposed 
System 
Observing 
the 
differences 
between performance 
on different devices 
Comparison between 
accuracy, 
latency 
efficiency 
on 
different devices 
Instantiation 
 
Quantitative 
/ measured 
Relative 

6.1.2 
Training and Validation Accuracy 
We ran an inference test on the trained network before we performed optimization: compression and quantization to 
study the effect of the optimization on accuracy and latency. The full-sized mobile SSD model sized 245 MB with a 
32-bit inference parameter. The highest training accuracy achieved is 0.94546, and the highest validation accuracy is 
0.93123. The average time spent by Google Collaboratory for inference testing is 3.56 seconds. 
 
 
Fig. 5: Training loss Vs. Validation Loss of the Trained Mobile SSD. 
6.2 
Evaluating the SAFEMYRIDES Decision Support System 
 
Firstly, the entire SAFEMYRIDES system was evaluated using a controlled simulated environment where the system 
was applied in a real ridesharing setting. The first experiments were running on the Samsung S10+ phone. The driver/ 
passenger performed different violation scenarios such as: interacting physically with the driver, violence, and sitting 
next to the driver. Examples of detected violations are shown in Fig. 6 a, b.        
6.2.1 
Latency 
The average system Latency is also measuring the system responsiveness that affects service quality and customer 
satisfaction. Latency would be represented by the average system response time to detect a violation. However, the 
response time is affected by the surrounding conditions. For example: the response time to detect a violation in daylight 
is different than the response time at night. After setting the minimum required confidence level to 0.80 (the confidence 
score of the Mobile SSD that the detected incidence is a violation), the average response time to violations detection 
during daylight is 450 ms while at night is 790 ms. However, this average response time is higher to other systems 
used in ridesharing media processing, as shown in table 4 and fig. 6.  
Table 4: A Comparison Between SAFEMYRIDES and Other Proposed Systems. 
Research 
Average Latency 
Media type 
L. Liu et al. (2018) 
1273ms 
Sound 
L. Wang et al. (2019)  
8345 ms 
A 60-second video data 
Long et al. (2017) 
2234 ms. 
Compressed Videos. Latency (model processing time + 
network transmission time). 
Ran et al. (2018) 
32100 ms. 
video chunk is set as S= 1MB, 15 edge nodes 
SAFEMYRIDES 
620 ms. 
Scene view stream 
 
 

 
 
 
 
Fig. 6: Detected Violations using Different Violations: Violence and Physical Interaction. 
 
Fig. 7 : Average Latency of the Proposed System Versus Previously Developed Systems. 
 
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
5000
Liu et al. (2018)
(Wang et al. 2019)
(Long et al. 2017)
(Ran et al. 2018)
SAFEMYRIDES
Average Latency

6.2.2 
Efficiency 
In terms of the resources used by the system, the system used 29.09 MB of the phone's internal storage. The average 
size of an encrypted media image is 120kB. Energy consumed of running the system for 15 minutes at a rate of 17 m 
(milliamp), or 79.8 mAH (milliamp hour). Memory used by the system is 104 MB Which means it is consuming less 
than 1% of the smartphone RAM of 8 GB.  
6.2.3 
 The System Accuracy and Confusion Matrix  
In this experiment, we are evaluating the optimized trained network running on the Android S10 plus. The optimized 
network size is 27 MB, almost 10x less than the actual model size, and runs at 8-bit inference parameters. To get an 
in-depth analysis of how the optimized network performed, a confusion matrix was created to analyze the accuracy, 
precision, and recall of the front and rear cameras as in table 5 and table 6. The confusion matrix was built during a 
simulated session during the day, trying 51 different normal and violations poses. The front camera and the rear camera 
were used to detect a violation. The rear cameras of the Samsung S10 plus are 12MP, 12 MP, and 16 MP ultra-wide 
module cameras. The front-facing cameras are 8MP, 10 MP f/1.9 selfie cameras.  
Precision: It tells what fraction of predictions as a positive class were genuinely positive. To calculate precision, use 
the following formula: 𝑻𝑷/(𝑻𝑷+ 𝑭𝑷)  or 0.9111 for the rear camera and 0.906 for the front camera according to the 
confusion matrix.  
Recall: also known as Sensitivity, Probability of Detection. It tells what fraction of all positive samples were correctly 
predicted as positive by the classifier. To calculate Recall, use the following formula: 𝑻𝑷/(𝑻𝑷+ 𝑭𝑵) or 0.976 for 
the rear camera and 0.928 for the front camera. 
Accuracy: is the measure of what fraction of violation incidences were correctly detected by the system; the accuracy 
formula is Accuracy = (𝑇𝑃+ 𝑇𝑁)/(𝑃+ 𝑁). Based on the formula, the system's accuracy in detecting correct 
violation incidences is 46/51=0.9019 for the front camera and 0.862. 
Table 5: Confusion Matrix of The Proposed System (Rear Camera). 
True/Detected 
True  
False 
True 
41 (TP) 
1 (FN) 
False 
4 (FP) 
5 (TN) 
Table 6: Confusion Matrix of the proposed system (Front camera). 
True/Detected 
True  
False 
True 
39 (TP) 
3 (FN) 
False 
4 (FP) 
5 (TN) 
6.2.4 
Privacy 
Surveillance systems have raised apprehension about their threat to individuals' privacy rights (Cheung, Venkatesh, 
Paruchuri, Zhao, & Nguyen, 2009). Privacy protection is a core objective in the proposed system through ensuring 
transparency, authorization, and encryption.  Transparency means that both the driver and the passenger are aware 
that the ridesharing session is monitored. A warning of "Violation Detected" is declared when the system detects a 
violation. Media surveillance is privacy-intrusive because it allows the observation of certain information that is 
considered privacy intrusive such as a person's identity or characteristics (age, race, gender) (Senior, 2009) . Therefore, 
authorization of users is required to monitor ridesharing sessions. Moreover, negotiation of privacy preference 
(Consortium, 2002) or flexible authorization is offered when users prefer monitoring at night sessions or in remote 
destinations. 
Privacy protection technologies have focused mainly on different visual obfuscation techniques. Encryption of 
violation incidences is applied to protect sensitive personal information from being saved and transferred securely 
(Diffie & Landau, 2010) . In the proposed system, an XOR operation with a (2 bit) encryption key is applied for every 
detected violation incidence and saved in a secured folder in the ridesharing phone. The detected violation incidences 
are only shared with ridesharing agents or official legal authorities. 

6.3 
Evaluating SAFEMYRIDES on Different Devices 
In this section, the SAFEMYRIDES is applied to a different device to notice the discrepancy in the system 
performance with different hardware specifications. In the previous section, the system was applied to a Samsung S10 
plus device. In this section, the system will be applied to an LG V30 plus phone to compare and contrast the system's 
performance on different hardware settings.  
LG V30 plus has only two rear cameras (16 MP and 12 MP) and one 5MP front camera compared to three rear cameras 
and two front cameras in the Samsung S 10 plus. The LG V30 Adreno 540 GPU is compared to an Adreno 640 GPU 
in S10+. Also, the S10 + has a Li-Ion 4100 mAh Battery, and 8 GB RAM is compared to Li-Po 3300 mAh and 4 GB 
in LG V30.  Table 7 and Fig. 7 compares the performance of SAFEMYRIDES on the two devices in terms of average 
latency, average accuracy, and efficiency (the resources used) for running the system for 15 minutes. The comparison 
is performed using the rear cameras because of higher resolution and night shots adjustment features. 
While the Samsung S10 + achieved higher performance and less latency than The LG V30, the resources consumed 
(battery and RAM were higher). Samsung S10 + has three cameras which consumed more battery power and RAM in 
return. There is almost a 4 % difference in the accuracy between the LG V30 and Samsung S10 + and more than 350 
ms difference in Latency. 
Table 7:  Performance Comparison for Applying SAFEMYRIDES on Different Devices. 
Metric/ Device 
LG V30 (Rear Camera) 
Samsung S 10 plus (Rear Camera) 
Accuracy 
0.8845 
0.9019 
Latency 
1297 ms  
920 ms. 
RAM 
89 MB 
104 MB 
Battery Consumption 
48.7 mAH (milliamp hour) 
79.8 mAH (milliamp hour). 
Internal Storage 
29.8 MB 
28.09 MB 
Average CPU 
0.72 
0.64 
 
 
Fig. 8: Performance Comparison between LG and Samsung using Rear Camera. 
 

 
7 
Discussion and Implications 
While most of current edge computing approaches focus on optimizing processing and data transfer on edge units, 
little research focus on empowering IoT to decrease dependency on task offloading. So, we developed a decentralized-
control edge computing model where computation and decision making are moved to the IoT level. Moving the 
computation to IoT (onsite) will enhance efficiency, responsiveness, accuracy, and privacy issues of many IoT 
applications. The decentralized-control model is fueled by technologies such as TF lite and IoT optimization 
techniques which empower IoTs to run cognitive tasks at humble consumption of resources. As a proof of concept, 
we build a scene-aware ridesharing monitoring system to detect violations at runtime with an average latency of 620 
ms. The system was evaluated technically and functionally using controlled experiments by stimulating different 
violation poses in real ridesharing settings. 
The system was designed to ensure safety and privacy. So, violation incidences are saved in hidden folders in an 
encrypted format with an average file size of 120KB. The system responsiveness (latency) was comapred against 
previously developed systems. The system achieved the least latency and reduced the cost of transferring images for 
processing on edge nodes. Instead, the system detects violations locally on the driver’s smartphone.  Given the limited 
number of training samples, the system achieved a 90.1% accuracy rate for detecting 51 different violations poses 
with a 94% sensitivity rate. On the other hand, we can notice the significant difference in average inference time 
(delay) between the full network of 3.56 seconds and the optimized network of 920 ms which gives optimized DL 
networks an additional advantage to be applied for real time response.  
When the system was applied to different devices, a variance in performance was detected which affected the detection 
accuracy and latency. The higher is the resolution of the phone's camera, the better is the accuracy. Moreover, the 
higher is the GPU/CPU, the less is the system latency. In addition, detection using rear cameras is better than front 
cameras. Moreover, we noticed there is not much difference in detection accuracy during the day, but there is a 
difference in detection accuracy at night. In general, the lower detection accuracy at night calls for increasing the 
number of night training samples. Moreover, since most smartphone cameras don’t have night vision, the camera 
ability to balance colors of night images affects detection accuracy. Also, the false-positive rate calls for training the 
network with more regular ridesharing poses. The system is efficient to use in terms of storage (29 MB) and memory 
consumption (less than 1% of active memory (RAM) consumption).  
8 
Limitations and Future Work 
The implementation of the ridesharing monitoring system was performed as a proof of concept for the decentralized 
control edge computing model. The size of the dataset used was limited. Increasing the training and validation samples 
will positively affect the accuracy and the latency of predictions. In addition, the encryption of violation incidences 
was performed using a simple XOR function. More sophisticated encryption methods using a 128-Bit key are 
preferred. Also, additional privacy preservation mechanisms such as video inpainting and data-hiding schemes will 
add extra confirmation on user privacy (Cheung et al., 2009). Since the system achieved lower accuracy and decreased 
sensitivity in detecting violations during the night, the deep learning network needs to be trained with more night 
samples, where poor light obstructs definite detection of violations. 
Future research on the optimization of camera usage is required in terms of battery consumption as the energy 
consumption of cameras is considered above average, assuming that a ridesharing driver will be using the system for 
hours. Moreover, the system should be deployed in a real setting to address other intangibles quality measures such 
as reliability, understanding, and courtesy. 
Other future work includes implementing the ridesharing monitoring system on other platforms such as IOS and 
Raspberry PI. The system should be tested on different platforms for benchmarking. Benchmarking will help 
determine the minimum required for a smartphone to run the system. While the system used compression and 
quantization techniques such as optimization methods for the Mobile SSD, applying other optimization techniques 
such as pruning might enhance the optimized network accuracy.  
The proposed system is trying to solve the safety and privacy issues related to ridesharing, and it has several 
implications to practice. Firstly, the system allows local ridesharing monitoring on the driver's smartphone, saving the 
cost of an additional device for monitoring. Having the monitoring system running on the same device used in the 
ridesharing will ensure efficiency and privacy. Secondly, the system uses no network communication while detecting 
violations and limits the network communication to reporting the violation incidences to the ridesharing agent. 

Minimizing network communication ensures privacy, security, and efficiency. So, the system could be used where 
poor network connections exist. Thirdly, encryption of ridesharing incidences ensures privacy and security. So, the 
passenger/driver data are only shared directly with the ridesharing agent in case of detected violation. 
This research contributes to the Information System research by applying the concept of decentralized control where 
an IoT (smartphone) can independently detect violations and make decisions. The research is one of the early attempts 
to apply different optimization methods to deep learning networks to run efficiently on an IoT. The research sheds 
light on the importance of limiting cloud/edge computation and limiting network communications while enhancing 
the decisions making process and analytics of the IoTs. 
9 
Conclusion 
This research is introducing a decentralized-control edge computing model where computation and decision making 
is moved to the IoT level. The model addresses the efficiency, responsiveness, and privacy issues that current edge 
computing models still contemplate. Although battery powered, IoTs could run cognitive tasks at reasonable 
consumption of resources using different optimization techniques. We applied the model to build a scene-aware 
ridesharing monitoring system to detect violations at runtime. The system uses an optimized deep learning model on 
IoTs that can locally detect violations in ridesharing sessions on the driver's smartphone. The system records violations 
incidents only and saves them in an encrypted format. So, the system addresses the safety issue without violating 
privacy. On the technical level, the decentralized control edge model is reducing communication cost and latency, 
ensure privacy and less prone to data transfer security risks. 
10 
Declaration of interests 
The authors declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential 
competing interests. This research was supported in part by 2019 Small Grants Award from Virginia Commonwealth 
School of Business Information Systems Department. 
 
11 
References: 
Anderson, D. N. (2016). Wheels in the head: ridesharing as monitored performance. Surveillance & Society, 14(2), 
240-258.  
Armant, V., & Brown, K. N. (2020). Fast optimised ridesharing: Objectives, reformulations and driver flexibility. 
Expert Systems with Applications, 141, 112914.  
Beck, U., Lash, S., & Wynne, B. (1992). Risk society: Towards a new modernity (Vol. 17): sage. 
BILL, H. Passenger Protection Act. Retrieved from 
https://www.ncleg.gov/Sessions/2019/Bills/House/PDF/H391v7.pdf 
Chaudhry, B., El-Amine, S., & Shakshuki, E. (2018). Passenger safety in ride-sharing services. Procedia computer 
science, 130, 1044-1050.  
Cheng, X., Bao, Y., Zarifis, A., & Mou, J. (2019). A model of customer trust in sharing economy-driven ride-
sharing platforms involving psychological contract violation and recovery.  
Cheng, X., Su, L., Luo, X., Benitez, J., & Cai, S. (2021). The good, the bad, and the ugly: impact of analytics and 
artificial intelligence-enabled personal information collection on privacy and participation in ridesharing. 
European Journal of Information Systems, 1-25.  
Cheung, S.-C., Venkatesh, M. V., Paruchuri, J. K., Zhao, J., & Nguyen, T. (2009). Protecting and managing privacy 
information in video surveillance systems. In Protecting Privacy in Video Surveillance (pp. 11-33): Springer. 
Cleven, A., Gubler, P., & Hüner, K. M. (2009). Design alternatives for the evaluation of design science research 
artifacts. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Design Science Research in 
Information Systems and Technology. 
Consortium, W. W. W. (2002). The platform for privacy preferences 1.0 (P3P1. 0) specification.  
Diffie, W., & Landau, S. (2010). Privacy on the line: The politics of wiretapping and encryption: The MIT Press. 
Dillahunt, T. R., Kameswaran, V., Li, L., & Rosenblat, T. (2017). Uncovering the values and constraints of real-
time ridesharing for low-resource populations. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems. 
El Khaddar, M. A., & Boulmalf, M. (2017). Smartphone: the ultimate IoT and IoE device. Smartphones from an 
applied research perspective, 137.  
Elnagar, S., & Thomas, M. A. (2020). Federated Deep Learning: A Conceptual Model and Applied Framework for 
Industry 4.0.  

Feeney, M. (2015). Is ridesharing safe? Cato Institute Policy Analysis(767).  
Han, S., Mao, H., & Dally, W. J. (2015). Deep compression: Compressing deep neural networks with pruning, 
trained quantization and huffman coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1510.00149.  
Henderson, P., & Ferrari, V. (2016). End-to-end training of object class detectors for mean average precision. Paper 
presented at the Asian Conference on Computer Vision. 
Hevner, A. R., March, S. T., Park, J., & Ram, S. (2004). Design science in information systems research. MIS 
quarterly, 75-105.  
Hizam, S. M., & Ahmed, W. (2020). A conceptual paper on SERVQUAL-framework for assessing quality of 
Internet of Things (IoT) services. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.01840.  
Ho, C.-I., & Lee, Y.-L. (2007). The development of an e-travel service quality scale. Tourism management, 28(6), 
1434-1449.  
Hong, S. J. (2017). Assessing economic value of reducing perceived risk in the sharing economy: the case of ride-
sharing services.  
Huda, S. A., & Moh, S. (2022). Survey on computation offloading in UAV-Enabled mobile edge computing. 
Journal of Network and Computer Applications, 103341.  
Jacob, B., Kligys, S., Chen, B., Zhu, M., Tang, M., Howard, A., . . . Kalenichenko, D. (2018). Quantization and 
training of neural networks for efficient integer-arithmetic-only inference. Paper presented at the Proceedings of 
the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 
Jancsary, J., Nowozin, S., & Rother, C. (2012). Loss-specific training of non-parametric image restoration models: 
A new state of the art. Paper presented at the European Conference on Computer Vision. 
Kumar, R., Mukherjee, A., & Singh, V. (2017). Community sensor network for monitoring road roughness using 
smartphones. Journal of Computing in Civil Engineering, 31(3), 04016059.  
Lee, Y. S. (2018). Watching You Watching Me: Lateral Surveillance in Singapore.  
Lee, Z., Chan, T., Balaji, M., & Chong, A. Y.-L. (2016). Technology-mediated sharing economy: Understanding 
user participation in collaborative consumption through the benefit-cost perspective. Paper presented at the 
Proceedings of the 20th Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems (PACIS). 
Li, Y., & Taeihagh, A. The governance of risks in ridesharing: Lessons learned from Singapore.  
Liu, L., Zhang, X., Qiao, M., & Shi, W. (2018). SafeShareRide: Edge-based attack detection in ridesharing services. 
Paper presented at the 2018 IEEE/ACM Symposium on Edge Computing (SEC). 
Liu, W., Anguelov, D., Erhan, D., Szegedy, C., Reed, S., Fu, C.-Y., & Berg, A. C. (2016). Ssd: Single shot multibox 
detector. Paper presented at the European conference on computer vision. 
Long, C., Cao, Y., Jiang, T., & Zhang, Q. (2017). Edge computing framework for cooperative video processing in 
multimedia IoT systems. IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, 20(5), 1126-1139.  
Lyft. (2019). Code of Business Conduct and Ethics. Retrieved from https://investor.lyft.com/static-files/8861ea0b-
6a32-4414-a909-d8a9618f582f 
Macmurdo, M. (2015). Hold the Phone-Peer-to-Peer Ridesharing Services, Regulation, and Liability. La. L. Rev., 
76, 307.  
Meshram, A., Choudhary, P., & Velaga, N. R. (2020). Assessing and modelling perceived safety and comfort of 
women during ridesharing. Transportation research procedia, 48, 2852-2869.  
Mocnej, J., Pekar, A., Seah, W. K., Papcun, P., Kajati, E., Cupkova, D., . . . Zolotova, I. (2021). Quality-enabled 
decentralized IoT architecture with efficient resources utilization. Robotics and Computer-Integrated 
Manufacturing, 67, 102001.  
Munteanu, C., & Lazarescu, V. (1999). Evolutionary contrast stretching and detail enhancement of satellite images. 
Paper presented at the Proc. Mendel. 
Peffers, K., Rothenberger, M., Tuunanen, T., & Vaezi, R. (2012). Design science research evaluation. Paper 
presented at the International Conference on Design Science Research in Information Systems. 
Ran, X., Chen, H., Zhu, X., Liu, Z., & Chen, J. (2018). Deepdecision: A mobile deep learning framework for edge 
video analytics. Paper presented at the IEEE INFOCOM 2018-IEEE Conference on Computer Communications. 
Senior, A. (2009). Privacy protection in a video surveillance system. In Protecting Privacy in Video Surveillance 
(pp. 35-47): Springer. 
Singh, P., Manikandan, R., Matiyali, N., & Namboodiri, V. P. (2019). Multi-layer pruning framework for 
compressing single shot multibox detector. Paper presented at the 2019 IEEE Winter Conference on Applications 
of Computer Vision (WACV). 
Synced. (2017). Deep Learning in Real Time – Inference Acceleration and Continuous Training.  

Wang, L., Zhang, Q., Li, Y., Zhong, H., & Shi, W. (2019). MobileEdge: Enhancing On-Board Vehicle Computing 
Units Using Mobile Edges for CAVs. Paper presented at the 2019 IEEE 25th International Conference on Parallel 
and Distributed Systems (ICPADS). 
Wang, T. (2020). Application of Edge Computing in 5g Communications. Paper presented at the IOP Conference 
Series: Materials Science and Engineering. 
Wolfinbarger, M., & Gilly, M. C. (2003). eTailQ: dimensionalizing, measuring and predicting etail quality. Journal 
of retailing, 79(3), 183-198.  
Wu, J., Zhang, Y., Bai, H., Zhong, H., Hou, J., Liu, W., . . . Huang, J. (2018). PocketFlow: An Automated 
Framework for Compressing and Accelerating Deep Neural Networks.  
Yi, S., Hao, Z., Zhang, Q., Zhang, Q., Shi, W., & Li, Q. (2017). Lavea: Latency-aware video analytics on edge 
computing platform. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the Second ACM/IEEE Symposium on Edge 
Computing. 
Zeithaml, V. A., Parasuraman, A., & Malhotra, A. (2002). Service quality delivery through web sites: a critical 
review of extant knowledge. Journal of the academy of marketing science, 30(4), 362-375.  
Zhang, X., Wang, Y., Lu, S., Liu, L., & Shi, W. (2019). Openei: An open framework for edge intelligence. Paper 
presented at the 2019 IEEE 39th International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS).
