Personalized Federated Deep Learning
for Pain Estimation From Face Images
Ognjen (Oggi) Rudovic*1,2, Nicolas Tobis*2, Sebastian Kaltwang2, Björn Schuller2, Daniel
Rueckert2, Jeffrey F. Cohn3 and Rosalind W. Picard1
1Massachusetts Institute of Technology, MA, USA, 2Imperial College London, UK, 3Department of Psychology, PA, USA

ABSTRACT
Standard machine learning approaches require centralizing the
users’ data in one computer or a shared database, which raises
data privacy and confidentiality concerns. Therefore, limiting cen-
tral access is important, especially in healthcare settings, where
data regulations are strict. A potential approach to tackling this is
Federated Learning (FL), which enables multiple parties to collab-
oratively learn a shared prediction model by using parameters of
locally trained models, while keeping raw training data locally (e.g.,
on a mobile device). In the context of AI-assisted pain-monitoring,
we wish to enable confidentiality-preserving and unobtrusive pain
estimation for long-term pain-monitoring, and reduce the burden
on the nursing staff who perform frequent routine check-ups. To
this end, we propose a novel Personalized Federated Deep Learning
(PFDL) approach for pain estimation from face images. PFDL per-
forms collaborative training of a deep model, implemented using a
lightweight CNN architecture, across different clients (i.e., subjects)
without sharing their face images. Instead of sharing all parameters
of the model, as in standard FL, PFDL retains the last layer locally
(used to personalize the pain estimates). This (i) adds another layer
of data confidentiality, making it difficult for an adversary to infer
pain levels of the target subject, while (ii) enabling to personalize
the pain estimation to each subject through local parameter tuning.
We show using a publicly available dataset of face videos of pain
(UNBC-McMaster Shoulder Pain Database), that PFDL performs
comparably or better than the standard centralized and FL algo-
rithms, while further enhancing data privacy. This, in turn, has
potential to improve the traditional pain monitoring by making it
more secure, computationally efficient and scalable to a large num-
ber of individuals (e.g., for in-home pain monitoring), for whom
we aim to provide timely and unobtrusive pain measurement.
1
INTRODUCTION
While the potential applications of Federated Learning (FL) [34]
are numerous and highly diverse, the promise of a confidentiality-
preserving1, less computationally demanding machine learning
1While standard Federated Learning does not provide privacy guarantees (in the sense
that it is not possible for an adversary to infer properties of the data that is considered
private); it provides confidentiality guarantees (i.e., the data is not accessible to users
that are not authorized to access it). In the context of this work we refrain from
using the term privacy-preserving, and use the term confidentiality-preserving instead.
However, to our knowledge there is no prior work that succeeded in reconstructing
user’s face images from a deep-model parameters only, and we argue that it would be
extremely difficult to achieve this using the subset of the parameters shared by our
PFDL model (see Sec.3.4 for more details).
O.Rudovic and N.Tobis contributed equally to this work.
approach, can be particularly valuable for the healthcare space.
Healthcare data are typically among the most strictly regulated with
HIPAA [21] in the US and GDPR [1] in the European Union, gov-
erning the strict rules by which such data can be accessed/shared.
At the same time, pooling personal health data from healthcare
facilities, insurance providers, and government agencies on a re-
gional, national or even global scale holds enormous potential, for
example, for research on rare diseases [46], through clinical trials or
treatment best-practices, such as automated pain monitoring [17].
The latter, for instance, can inform the nursing stuff in a timely
way about a patients’ response to medication, and, thus, allow them
to adjust the treatment through personalized delivery of the tar-
get medication [7]. This could potentially improve the quality of
care and life for patients, and help reduce risks related to both
pain-reliever underdosing and overdosing.
Research on automated pain monitoring has been facilitated by
the availability of publicly available datasets [48], especially of fa-
cial expressions of pain (the UNBC-McMaster dataset [32]). Over
the last decade, various machine learning (ML) and computer vi-
sion (CV) models have been proposed for pain estimation using this
face-videos dataset (e.g., [3, 25, 31, 45]). So far, these methods have
explored only the centralized learning of models for pain estimation,
which inevitably requires sharing raw personal data (face images).
Data sharing across multiple sites (hospitals or mobile devices)
can greatly increase the amount of data for training ML models,
which helps improve the performance of the pain estimation sys-
tems. Nevertheless, this raises questions about data confidentiality,
accountability and governance, especially if such systems are to be
implemented in real-world settings. To address this, we use FL [34]
to design a novel framework for distributed deep learning of pain
estimation models from face images. Specifically, we propose a new
learning algorithm that preserves the user’s confidentiality by never
sharing their raw personal data, but only their model parameters
during the model training. To further prevent a potential misuse
of private data2, the model parameters required for estimation of
the user’s pain (the classification layer in our model) are also never
shared; instead, they are optimized locally using a small portion of
the target user’s pain data. The contributions of this work can be
summarized as follows:
• To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work that
addresses the confidentiality-preserving estimation of pain
from face images. Using a challenging dataset of real-world
2In this work, with "private data" we refer to the user’s face images and corresponding
pain labels.
1
arXiv:2101.04800v1  [cs.LG]  12 Jan 2021

0 Initialize model
2 Send partial model updates to server
4
Local fine-tuning
3
Send average updates back to clients
1
Local training
Figure 1: Personalized Federated Deep Learning for Pain Estimation From Face Images. Initially, the deep model is pre-trained
on available data of non-target subjects (Step 0). The parameters of this model are then used to initialize the target-subject-
specific models, which are trained using the subject data locally (Step 1). The parameters of the local (individual) models –
the convolutional layers but not the last two fully-connected dense layers (thus further securing the confidentiality of the
subjects) – are updated using the federated averaging approach (Step 2). These updates are then returned to local sites (Step 3)
and only the two dense layers are further fine-tuned for estimation of the subject-specific pain expressions (Step 4). The steps
1-4 are repeated on-the-fly for the new recording sessions, as depicted in Fig. 4.
spontaneously displayed facial expressions of pain ("UNBC-
McMaster Shoulder Pain Expression Archive"), we show that
the performance of personalized FL with deep models for
pain estimation is similar or better (in terms of the F1 score
for classification of pain/no pain in test images) than the
traditional centralized learning. The key advantage of our
approach is that it preserves data confidentiality - the user’s
data (face images and pain labels) are always retained locally
(e.g., on the user’s camera-enabled device).
• We introduce a novel modification of the traditional FL algo-
rithm, termed federated personalization, that adds an addi-
tional level of data protection. Instead of using all the model
parameters for communication rounds between the user-
specific models, our approach retains the classification layer
in the deep model for pain estimation. This makes it hard for
an adversary to infer the user’s expressions of pain, while
allowing the model to personalize its estimations to the target
user.
The outline of our personalized FL approach for pain estimation in
a real-world setting (e.g., using mobile phones to monitor pain) is
shown in Fig. 1. We depict there the communication rounds dur-
ing the training of the deep model for confidentiality-preserving
pain estimation. To facilitate further evaluation of the models in-
troduced in this paper and encourage future research in this im-
portant direction, the code used to conduct the experiments in
this paper is made publicly available and can be downloaded from
https://github.com/ntobis/federated-machine-learning.
2
BACKGROUND WORK
2.1
Federated Machine Learning
Federated Machine Learning was first introduced by Google in
2016 [27, 28, 34]. Different from a centralized setting, in a FL set-
ting, multiple devices e.g., end-user devices such as mobile phones,
or business infrastructure such as hospital servers, contribute to
learning a machine learning classifier. The classifier can be a deep
neural network, but also can be a simpler model with fewer pa-
rameters such as a support vector machine, or a logistic regression
model [18]. FL models are distinct in that the original training data
never leaves the respective local device that collected it. Each device
(also dubbed client) maintains a version of the same model, which is
updated with every new observation. The updates to the model (i.e.,
the updated weights and biases of neurons in a deep network), and
not the observations (in our case, the face images) themselves, are
then shared with a central server, which averages the parameters
of the newly trained models from all participating devices. Once a
new version of the model has been trained, it is pushed back down
to all clients. This process repeats continuously until the model
converges, and/or the training data is exhausted. The key difference
of the personalized FL approach introduced in this paper is that
the standard FL performs averaging of all the model parameters -
by contrast, in our approach the last (decision) layers of the deep
models are not shared and are updated only locally. In this way,
we enable the models to easily personalize to target clients while
introducing another level of confidentiality-preserving (since the
parameters of the last layer of our deep models for pain estimation
are never shared with a central server, see Fig. 1).
2

The approach proposed here is also related to the recently pro-
posed concept of split-learning (https://splitlearning.github.io), where
only parts of the model, i.e., a subset of its parameters are shared
across different clients (in their case, different hospitals) [36]. How-
ever, in contrast to our approach, their model ’splitting’ is intrigu-
ingly a kind of opposite of what our approach is doing - their
split-learning is holding back the early layers of the deep model,
not the final layer, as proposed here - which, in the context of pain
estimation, is critical for enabling efficient model personalization.
2.2
Applications of Federated Learning
Potential applications for FL are vast and differ substantially in
vertical and specific use-case, but they typically bear three common
traits [49]: (i) Task labels do not necessarily need to be provided
by humans but can be derived naturally from user interaction.
(ii) Training data are confidentiality-sensitive, and (iii) Training
datasets are large, and hard to collect in a central location. Not all
of these conditions strictly need to hold when applying FL, but it is
under these circumstances that FL tends to provide the most value
over other machine learning algorithms. To illustrate the potential
of FL, we briefly review some recent applications of FL models.
For instance, the computer chip-maker Intel [41] leverages FL to
showcase how multiple healthcare institutions can collaborate in
a confidentiality-preserving manner, leveraging each institution’s
electronic health records (EHR). The authors argue that while col-
laboration between institutions could address the challenge of ac-
quiring sufficient data to train machine learning classifiers, the
sharing of medical data is heavily regulated and restricted. They
present the first use of an FL classifier for multi-institutional col-
laboration and find that they can learn a federated semantic model
for brain tumour segmentation that compares favorably to a model
trained on centralized data. Further evidence of benefits of leverag-
ing FL from the health records under data-privacy constraints can
be found in recently published works [6, 9, 10, 30]. These support
the hypothesis that FL can lead to increased data-privacy protection
within the health space, which is also discussed in more detail in a
recent overview of digital health applications with FL [39].
Beyond health, FL has also been used in other applications such
as using data from 360K users to improve the search results in
the Firefox Search Bar [19], without collecting the users’ actual
data. Millions of URLs are entered into Firefox daily, notably im-
proving the auto-complete feature for users, while enhancing user
experience and potentially increasing retention. Likewise, Google
describes one of the first implementations of FL on a large scale,
training a global model "to improve virtual keyboard search sugges-
tion quality" [49]. In this work, the authors address the technical
challenges of coordinating the model training on millions of devices
worldwide. Examples include connectivity issues, the bias of train-
ing a model across different time zones, and minimizing the impact
on user experience that training a machine learning model locally
has (e.g., battery-life and device-speed). They note that future work
on privacy still needs to be done and cautiously call their method
"privacy-advantaged", vs. "privacy-preserving". For similar reasons,
in this work we adopted the term "confidentiality-preserving" in-
stead of "privacy-preserving".
The works mentioned above demonstrate empirically the ben-
efits of FL on real-world problems; however, to the best of our
knowledge, the FL approach has not been explored before in the
context of pain estimation from face images. This is a challenging
problem where data are non-stationary, i.e., they change over time
(the same person may show facial expressions of different pain
levels in different recording sessions). Furthermore, the face-image
data of positive and negative examples of pain (i.e., pain vs. no pain)
are highly imbalanced and not easily distinguishable as the under-
lying data distribution also evolves over time and space (different
camera orientations, lighting, and so on), as would be expected in
real-world applications. Taken together, all these factors make the
problem of pain estimation from the real-world face images highly
challenging, which is even more true in the case of distributed
learning algorithms such as FL.
2.3
Practical Challenges for Federated
Learning
As with the standard machine learning, FL is also sensitive to some
of the data properties. Below we emphasize the key aspects of the
data that directly affect the performance of the FL algorithms. for
more detailed summary of challenges and open problems in FL,
see [24].
Non-IID and Unbalanced Data. If we draw a sufficiently large
sample at random from the overall data distribution, we can state,
with a specified level of confidence, that the sample is representative
of the overall population (independent and identically distributed
- IID). In FL, clients’ datasets will often differ substantially from
those of other clients (e.g., in the case of mobile phones the phone’s
dataset is dependent mostly on the interaction with one particular
user). Specifically, in the case of pain estimation from face images,
there are large individual differences in the face morphology and
facial texture, dynamics of facial expression and also expressiveness
of pain (some subjects have their facial expressions of pain toned-
down due to long-term exposure to pain) – see Fig. 2. Moreover, the
factors such as the camera view, illumination changes, and similar
contribute significantly toward violating the IID assumption. Thus,
sampling a client’s data at random is not likely to yield training
data that are representative of the target population, making FL
sensitive to the artifacts mentioned above.
Furthermore, the clients’ data may vary substantially in size and
diversity. As mentioned above, in the dataset for pain estimation
used in this work, some subjects have considerably less instances
of "pain" images than the others. Moreover, for all the subjects, the
data labels are highly dominated by the negative class (no pain),
which can be observed from Table. 1 on the individual level, and
overall in Fig. 2. Also, since we are dealing with the real-world
longitudinal recordings of each subject (i.e., different recording
sessions), some subjects may or may not participate in certain
sessions, and a majority of the subjects have data for only the first
few sessions (see Table. 1). While this creates a highly challenging
learning context for both the centralized learning and FL, it is
more pronounced in the latter case as we need to ensure that each
individual (instead of the whole group as in case of centralized
learning) provides enough and balanced data for the local (e.g., on-
device) fine-tuning of the federated models. Since the global models
3

are derived through averaging of the local model parameters, it
is thus important for FL to have access to robust locally learned
models prior to the averaging of their parameters. Therefore, any
corrupted local-models (trained on highly imbalanced data) can
adversely affect the global model parameters.
Limited Communication. Mobile phones are frequently offline or
are connected to flaky or expensive internet connections. Health-
care facilities, especially in rural areas of developed countries such
as the United States, often have slow internet connections or a mini-
mal number of computers that are linked to the internet [33]. While
it is usually cheap to compute the updates locally, when the amount
of training data is small, communicating these local updates be-
comes much more time-consuming, making communication-speed
and averaging the main bottleneck in FL. In this work we use
data of naturalistic facial expressions of pain by different subjects,
recorded at different physiotherapy sessions, to simulate the real-
world FL of their models for pain estimation. Note however that
in this dataset not all the subjects are present in all the recording
sessions, and/or may have short sessions, sometimes without the
pain expressions (the target exercise may not induce pain at the
specific times). While this is likely to adversely affect FL of the
deep models for pain estimation, we use such data to evaluate the
robustness of our algorithms under these challenging conditions.
Maintaining performance. Another important aspect of FL is that
the global model (obtained by combining the parameters of the
federated models) is not trained on the raw data (face images) – it
is trained using only the parameters of the locally-tuned models
(for each client), as only the local models have access to the raw
data (face images and their labels). Thus, unconventional learning
strategies are needed to achieve similar performance in a federated
setting compared to a centralized machine learning approach. If a
model fully preserves the confidentiality of a client but produces
inaccurate predictions, it is essentially useless. Therefore, to start
the learning of our FL models, we assume that we are given an
initial global model trained on a sub-population of patients (e.g.
those who opted in to share their face data). Once such model is
instantiated and learned centrally, we use it as a starting point to
perform further learning via FL. During this time, the goal of the
learning is to produce model parameters that would enable better
generalization and no regression in the performance, in terms of
pain estimation, for the target subjects.
In summary, the challenges of FL that we described above are
all important and pose a serious bottleneck for FL algorithms. In
this work, we tackle the challenge of learning from non-IID and
unbalanced data, by applying data augmentation via targeted image
pre-processing, and class-stratified sampling of the client’s data, to
mitigate those challenges (see Sec. 2.4 for more details). For the chal-
lenges associated with the limited communication and performance
maintenance, we design a novel training and evaluation scheme
that enables to learn the model parameters from one-session-at-the-
time of the target client (thus being adjusted for the longitudinal
nature of the data used in this work). Moreover, to prevent the effect
of catastrophic forgetting when training neural networks [26], we
use the new session data of the target client to validate instead of to
train the local models (later those data are used to train the model
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
0
1,000
2,000
3,000
40,029
Pain intensity
Number of frames
∼
PAIN
NO-PAIN
Figure 2: Distribution of pain levels (PSPI) in the the UNBC-
McMaster dataset [32].
as well when a new round of the FL communication starts). For
details of the newly introduced model training approach, see Fig.4.
2.4
Automated Pain Estimation
The importance of regularly checking on a patient’s well-being is
described in Atul Gawande’s "The Checklist Manifesto" [14]. While
there is evidence suggesting that improved pain monitoring (either
by the nursing staff or through self-reports) yields better patient
outcomes [47], such an approach is often difficult to implement
in practice. This is because of the competing demand for nursing
staff [2], and the need for patients to regularly provide their self-
report of pain intensity (e.g., using the Visual Analog Scale (VAS),
a subjective measure for acute and chronic pain, commonly used
to rate patients’ pain level on a scale 0-10).
Automated pain monitoring from face images could provide a
more objective and continuous (in time) measurement of pain, and
also help to differentiate real from fake pain in order to provide
adequate dosage of medication for treating the underlying condition.
According to Prakchin and Solomon [37], the bulk of what humans
experience as pain can be described by the activations of six (out of
44) facial Action Units (AUs), defined by the Facial Action Coding
System (FACS) [13]. These include: brow lowering (AU4), orbital
tightening (AU6 and AU7), elevator contraction (AU9 and AU10)
and eye closure (AU43). A follow-up paper presents the Prkachin
and Solomon Pain Intensity (PSPI) metric [38], proposing the level
of pain as the following function of facial AU intensities:
𝑃𝑎𝑖𝑛= 𝐴𝑈4 + 𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝐴𝑈6,𝐴𝑈7) + 𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝐴𝑈9,𝐴𝑈10) + 𝐴𝑈43. (1)
The result is a 16-point scale, where the first five AUs are scored
on a 6-point scale (0 = absent to 5 = maximum intensity), and the
activation of AU43 (eyes open/closed) is binary. For an example
of pain vs. no pain face images, see Fig. 2. To obtain the PSPI pain
labels, the face images are manually coded in terms of AUs by
FACS [13] certified experts. This manual process is highly tedious,
time-consuming, and costly. To this end, a number of methods for
automated pain estimation from face images have been proposed
(for surveys, see [4, 8, 16, 48]).
Due to subtle changes in facial expressions and inter-subject
variability, per frame PSPI estimation is very challenging. For this
reason, many researchers have attempted to automate pain detec-
tion (pain vs. no pain) instead of the full-range intensity estimation
4

of pain, for instance, using Active Appearance Model (AAM) - based
features combined with a Support Vector Machine (SVM) to classify
pain versus no pain images [32]. Others [17] have addressed estima-
tion of pain intensity on a 4 level scale, using one-versus-all SVM
classifiers, while others [25] have used Relevance Vector Regression
to estimate the full pain range (0-15). Some have used temporal
models for pain estimation, e.g., using long short-term memory
(LSTM) neural networks [40]. In this approach, raw face images are
directly fed to a CNN that extracts the frame-based features. These
features are then used as input to LSTMs to predict the PSPI score
per frame. A number of other deep-learning models have recently
been proposed for pain estimation (e.g.,see [12, 43, 45]).
In this work, we focus on pain estimation per frame and in terms
of binary detection of pain (0 - no pain, 1 - pain) because of the
highly imbalanced nature of the pain PSPI scores. Namely, we group
all the face images with PSPI 1-15 as pain, and those with PSPI=0
as no pain. While this reduces the label imbalance, even the binary
pain labels are highly imbalanced per subject/session in the dataset
used (see Fig. 2). This already poses a serious challenge for FL from
different subjects.
3
METHODS
3.1
Data Pre-Processing and Augmentation
Each image frame of the 200 video sequences from the UNBC data-
base is a color image of 250 x 250 pixels. As color is not relevant to
detecting pain using the FACS system, we greyscaled all images, to
reduce the number of input features required to pass to the network
by two thirds. Following this step, we performed histogram equal-
ization for each image to increase its contrast. Since the Prkachin
and Solomon Pain Intensity Scale is measured by looking at only a
limited number of features on a person’s face, we want the appear-
ance of these features to be as poignant as possible. Increasing the
image’s contrast makes features like the person’s eyes or eyebrows
stand out further.
As can be seen from Fig. 2, examples of test subjects experiencing
no pain significantly outnumber those experiencing pain. This
imbalance would also be expected in a ‘real-world’ example, where
patients may only experience pain sporadically during their hospital
visit. We upsample the positive examples by applying two data
augmentation techniques: we first created a flipped copy of all
images. We then created another copy of all originals and flipped
copies, respectively, that was randomly rotated by either 10 degrees
to the left or the right. After the rotation, each image was cropped
from 250 x 250 pixels to 215 x 215 pixels in order not to have
any whitespace or artificial filling around the images. To make the
input shape consistent across mutations, all images were cropped
to 215 x 215 pixels. We underscore the importance of applying these
steps to both positive and negative examples, as the network might
otherwise learn that a specific image mutation always represents a
positive example. Finally, to balance the dataset, we downsampled
the majority class (no-pain) samples so that it matches the number
of the train pain images, i.e., of the minority class (see Sec. 4 for
more details).
INPUT

Conv2D

Conv2D

Conv2D

FC

FC + 
softmax

BN+ReLU
BN+ReLU
+ Max Pooling
(2x2, stride 2)
BN
+ReLU
PAIN / NO-PAIN
BN+ReLU
Flatten
Figure 3: Network architecture of the base deep model for
pain estimation.
3.2
Deep Learning for Pain Estimation
In part inspired by MobileNets: Efficient Convolutional Neural Net-
works (CNNs) for Mobile Vision Applications [23], we designed a
lightweight CNN-based model architecture (see Fig. 3) that can
also be trained for a small number of epochs on hardware-limited
computing devices. Similar architectures have previously shown
success in the task of facial expression recognition from face images,
including facial expressions of pain [45].
Our base deep model for pain estimation takes as input a (215,
215) re-scaled and processed face image, as explained above. This
representation is then fed into 3 convolutional layers for feature
extraction. The first layer has 32 filters, a kernel size of (5x5), and
is followed by a batch normalization (BN) and ReLU layer. The
convolutional layers are followed by 2x2 max-pooling (with stride 2),
and two fully-connected layers: with 128 units, and with 1 unit plus
the sigmoid activation (see Fig. 3). We used the SGD optimizer with
a learning rate of 10−4, and the binary cross-entropy loss function.
We applied early stopping when there was no improvement in
the loss function after 5 training epochs. This helped to reduce
overfitting. We also experimented with the well-known pre-trained
deep architectures such as ResNet50 [20] and VGGNet [42] by fine-
tuning the last two layers of the networks. However, as also found
in [45], for the target task, simpler network architectures work
better in practice. Therefore, we used the architecture from Fig. 3.
3.3
Federated Learning
In FL, we assume that the dataset is not centrally stored, but is
partitioned over 𝑘= 1, . . . , 𝐾clients. We use the following notation:
• Each partition is represented as a set of indices P𝑘of data
points that a given client 𝑘holds
• 𝑛represents the number of all data points collected by all
clients and thus 𝑛𝑘represents the number of data points that
the client holds
• 𝑛𝑘= |P𝑘|.
If the standard definition of minimizing a loss function is given
by:
min
𝜃∈R𝑑𝑓(𝜃), where 𝑓(𝜃)
𝑑𝑒𝑓= 1
𝑛
𝑛
∑︁
𝑖=1
𝑓𝑖(𝜃),
(2)
and 𝑓𝑖(𝜃) represents the loss for a prediction of one observation
(𝑥𝑖,𝑦𝑖) given model parameters𝜃, this loss function can be rewritten
to represent 𝐾clients in a federated setting, such that:
𝑓(𝜃) =
𝐾
∑︁
𝑘=1
𝑛𝑘
𝑛𝐹𝑘(𝜃),
(3)
5

where:
𝐹𝑘(𝜃) = 1
𝑛𝑘
∑︁
𝑖∈P𝑘
𝑓𝑖(𝜃).
(4)
Thus, instead of computing loss (i.e., the binary cross-entropy)
as an average over 𝑛number of samples from a centralized data set
as: 1
𝑛
Í𝑛
𝑖=1 𝑓𝑖(𝜃), we compute the average loss 𝐹𝑘(𝜃) for a specified
client 𝑘as 1
𝑛𝑘
Í
𝑖∈P𝑘𝑓𝑖(𝜃) and then group the loss of all participat-
ing clients 𝐾, by computing a weighted average loss based on the
number of labelled data points 𝑛𝑘that each client holds.
Similar to computing the loss, we also compute the gradients of
the federated model. In a federated setting each client computes
the average gradient 𝑔𝑘on its local data as:
𝑔𝑘= ∇𝐹𝑘(𝜃) .
(5)
Then, each client takes a step of gradient descent and updates its
parameters accordingly, formalized as:
∀𝑘,𝜃𝑘←𝜃−𝜂𝑔𝑘.
(6)
This step can be repeated multiple times, i.e., for multiple epochs 𝐸,
until a central server then computes the weighted average of these
gradients similar to the weighted average of the loss above as:
𝜃←
𝐾
∑︁
𝑘=1
𝑛𝑘
𝑛𝜃𝑘,
(7)
to update the model parameters of the overall model, stored on the
central server. This concludes a full round of updates to the global
model.
Assuming mini-batch stochastic gradient descent, in such a feder-
ated setting the computational effort for one full update is controlled
by three parameters:
(1) The fraction 𝐶of clients 𝐾that participate in a given update
round.
(2) The number of steps of gradient descent (or epochs) 𝐸that
each client performs.
(3) The batch size 𝐵used for all client updates.
While 𝐶impacts the computational power required at the server
level (more participating clients requires more transfer of data to
the server and more effort in aggregating information), 𝐸and 𝐵
impact the computational effort required on the client-side. The
complete pseudo-code for this approach was first proposed in [34].
3.4
Federated Personalization
Our benchmark FL algorithm mirrors the FederatedAveraging
algorithm proposed in [34], originally applied to the Google Key-
board, to suggest improvements to the next iteration of Gboard’s
query suggestion model for each user’s device. For our purposes,
each target subject from the UNBC dataset represented one user.
In this context, the underlying premise of FL is that instead of per-
forming the centralized learning of the models, the models can be
learned locally and by averaging the parameters across the clients,
the resulting parameters performing similarly to centralized learn-
ing. For theoretical justification of this, see [5, 34]. In the proposed
FPDL approach, only the weights of the convolutional layers (no
feature maps) are sent to the central server for averaging, while
Algorithm 1 Federated Personalization. The K clients are
indexed by k; B is the local minibatch size, E is the number of
local epochs, F denotes the rounds that the local model is fine-
tuned, and 𝜂is the learning rate. 𝛼denotes the factor by which the
learning rate is decreased in the ClientFineTuning procedure. 𝑤𝑔
denotes the global model parameters (the shared layers), 𝑤𝑘=1,...,𝐾
𝑙
denotes the local model parameters (only the prediction layer), and
𝜃= {𝑤𝑔∪𝑤𝑘=1,...,𝐾
𝑙
}.
procedure Server executes:
initialize 𝑤𝑔0
initialize 𝑤𝑙0
for each round 𝑡= 1, 2, ...,𝑇do
𝑚←max(𝐶× 𝐾, 1)
𝑆𝑡←(random set of 𝑚clients)
for each client k ∈𝑆𝑡in parallel do
𝑤𝑘𝑔𝑡+1 ←ClientUpdate(𝑤𝑔𝑡,𝑤𝑘
𝑙𝑡)
𝑤𝑔𝑡+1 ←Í𝐾
𝑘=1
𝑛𝑘
𝑛𝑤𝑘𝑔𝑡+1
for each client k ∈𝑆𝑡in parallel do
ClientFineTuning(𝑤𝑔𝑡+1,𝑤𝑘
𝑙𝑡+1)
𝜃𝑡+1 = {𝑤𝑔𝑡+1 ∪𝑤𝑘=1,...,𝐾
𝑙𝑡+1
} used for inference in this
round
procedure ClientUpdate(𝑤𝑔,𝑤𝑙)
⊲Run on client k
B ←(split P𝑘into batches of size 𝐵)
for each local epoch 𝑖from 1 to 𝐸do
{𝑤𝑔∪𝑤𝑙} ←{𝑤𝑔∪𝑤𝑙} −𝜂∇ℓ({𝑤𝑔∪𝑤𝑙};𝑏) ⊲Update
all layers
return 𝑤𝑔to server
procedure ClientFineTuning(𝑤𝑔,𝑤𝑙)
⊲Run on client k
B ←(split P𝑘into batches of size 𝐵)
for each local epoch 𝑖from 1 to 𝐹do
𝑤𝑙←𝑤𝑙−𝛼𝜂∇ℓ(𝑤𝑙;𝑏)
⊲Update local layers only
the weights of the fully-dense output layers are retained locally
(i.e., their parameters are never shared). This is for two reasons.
First, [22, 35] showed that even when only the network parameters
are shared with a central server, an adversary can use a generative
adversarial network (GANs) [15], to iteratively learn new pieces of
information about another client’s training data, potentially becom-
ing able to reconstruct private information about the client (in our
case, the face images3). Without access to all layers in the network,
an adversary misses a critical building block to infer the subject’s
pain level. This results in an additional layer of confidentiality to
the traditional FederatedAveraging algorithm.
Second, applying the FL optimization algorithm to the lower con-
volutional layers enables the model to learn general facial features
from a large population. On the other hand, the final upper layers
of a deep network are mostly informative for the final prediction
task (pain/no pain). Thus, they do not necessarily need to learn
from the entire population, and could potentially even benefit from
3It would still be very difficult to reconstruct the high-dimensional face images, given
that the CNN feature maps are not shared during federated learning in our approach.
6

learning only the target subject’s pain expressions, as subtle facial
expressions might only generalize well for that subject, but not
for the whole population. This intuition is the basis of our FPDL
algorithm, described in detail in Alg.1, and depicted in Fig. 1.
To start, all clients receive a model whose parameters are initial-
ized with the pre-trained parameters of a model that was trained
centrally, without personalization, on the same task, with a dif-
ferent subset of the data. The algorithm then follows the steps of
the FederatedAveraging algorithm, except that once local train-
ing is complete, i.e. procedure ClientUpdate concludes, only the
weights of the convolutional layers 𝑤𝑔are sent to the central server
for averaging. The weights of the final full-connected layers 𝑤𝑙
stay locally with the client 𝑘, just like the data. Consequently, only
the convolutional weights are averaged to 𝑤𝑔𝑡+1 and then used
to update each local client model. We must then engage in "lo-
cal fine-tuning" - see procedure ClientFineTuning. To fine-tune,
we "freeze" the convolutional layers 𝑤𝑔for each client and de-
crease the optimizer’s learning rate 𝜂for each client by a factor
𝛼in order to avoid overshooting. The decrease in learning rate
ensures that the local layers slowly "reconnect" to the previously
detached, globally averaged, convolutional layers. We then train
the local models for a number of epochs, before using the result-
ing 𝜃𝑡+1 = {𝑤𝑔𝑡+1 ∪𝑤𝑘=1,...,𝐾
𝑙𝑡+1
} for inference on new data. The
final ClientFineTuning step ensures that models become person-
alized, as each client’s dense layers are only trained on locally
available data during this step. We implemented this approach in
Python using the Keras framework and the tensorflow back-end;
the code is made publicly available and can be downloaded from
https://github.com/ntobis/federated-machine-learning.
4
EXPERIMENTAL SETTING
Data. To evaluate the models, we used the UNBC-McMaster
Shoulder Pain Expression Archive database [32], containing 48,106
video frames from 25 test subjects undergoing a range-of-motion
tests to their affected and unaffected limbs. These video frames
come from up to 10 sessions per subject, and are annotated using
the PSPI scores, as described in Sec. 2.4. Since these pain labels
are highly imbalanced, we categorized every example of level 1 or
higher as pain, and categorized level 0 as no pain. The summary of
the label distribution per test subject/session is reported in Table 1.
Evaluation Setting. The models from Sec. 3 were first pre-trained
on data of a subset of 13 subjects. The further model learning and
evaluation was then performed on the remaining 12 subjects ("test
subjects"). To simulate a real-world setting, we assumed that each
session only becomes available once the model has been trained
on the previous session. The new session first serves as an unseen
test-set, and is then converted into a validation set, and is finally
merged into the training data, once a new session becomes available
(see Fig. 4 for details). Therefore, no data from the current (test)
session is used to train the models. To balance the intra-session data
for each client we sampled at random 200 positive/negative pain
examples, with replacement, for each subject, from each session
that was available for that subject, leading to 400 images per target
subject/session (see also Sec. 2.4). Using this data balancing strategy
and also the data from the previous session to validate the model
parameters was important to achieve robust FL of the deep models.
Positive Examples per Session
Total
ID
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Pain
No Pain
Pain %
43
140
228
368
4,112
8%
48
148
188
336
3,192
10%
52
72
44
120
188
424
10,012
4%
59
532
532
2,560
17%
64
244
64
64
248
620
5,576
10%
80
1,052
536
484
484
660
792
264
4,272
3,584
54%
92
464
696
724
1,884
4,124
31%
96
112
512
88
712
8,700
8%
107
32
848
60
828
1,768
6,396
22%
109
600
116
716
6,896
9%
115
60
220
56
60
396
4,736
8%
120
116
188
304
5,960
5%
Table 1: Number of positive examples by session and target
subjects. Each target subject participated in as many consec-
utive sessions as specified in the column # of Sessions, start-
ing with session 0. No number indicates no positive exam-
ples for that session (but negative examples, if the session
index is smaller than # of Sessions). We also show the dis-
tribution of the pain/no pain labels per target subject after
binarizing the 16 pain levels (0) - no pain, (1-15) - pain, from
the UNBC-McMaster dataset. Note that the resulting distri-
bution is still highly imbalanced for most subjects.
Figure 4: The training/validation/test protocol. The first ses-
sion is zero-indexed. In step (1), the pre-trained model is
tested on session 1. In step (2), the model is trained on ses-
sion 0, using session 1 as a validation set to apply early stop-
ping. In step (3), the model trained in (2) is tested on session
2. In step (4), session 1 has become part of the training data,
i.e., the model is then trained on sessions 0/1, and validated
on session 2. This process is repeated until the last session.
Models. The models compared are: the base CNN (Sec. 3) trained
in a centralized manner on non-target subjects, i.e., the subjects
used to pre-train the deep model. We refer to this model as the
base centralized deep learning (BCDL), serving as the baseline. We
also perform centralized deep learning on target subjects (CDL), as
well as the traditional Federated Deep Learning (FDL), described in
Sec. 3.3. For comparisons, we also include subject-specific models
trained locally using data of the target subjects only (LDL). Note
that all of the learning algorithms use the base CNN as their under-
lying model, and the training of the CDL, FDL and LDL models is
performed using the same protocol as described in Fig. 4. We also
report the results by the randomly initialized CNN model (RND),
where no model training was performed. We ran all of the models
with 10 random seeds, and report the average results.
7

Method
|
ID
#43
#48
#52
#59
#64
#80
#92
#96
#107
#109
#115
#120
Average (±std)
RND
35
24
10
37
14
44
51
25
42
31
15
36
30 ± 13
BCDL
24
5
32
56
25
60
79
8
59
30
35
65
40 ± 24
CDL
64
7
30
56
39
53
67
45
62
32
46
61
46 ± 18
LDL
75
7
35
56
34
49
53
37
68
33
42
46
44 ± 19
FDL
27
7
44
56
25
58
81
46
63
42
35
62
46 ± 20
PFDL
72
7
36
56
37
52
76
35
68
29
47
48
47 ± 20
Table 2: F1 score (in % and rounded to the nearest integer) per target subject. Best model for each subject is highlighted in bold.
The results are averaged across the available sessions of target subjects.
5
RESULTS
Table 2 shows the pain estimation performance per subject (av-
eraged across available sessions for that subject) in terms of F-1
score. First, we observe that all models outperform the random
approach, as expected. Note that this approach achieves an F-1 of
30%, instead of 50%, which would be the chance level for a binary
classification. This is because of the unbalanced test data. The pre-
trained centralized model (BCDL) performs worse, on average, than
the models that were updated across the sessions using the target
subjects past data (see Fig. 4).
Specifically, the centralized deep model (CDL) gains 6% in per-
formance due to the adaptation – the same performance achieved
by the standard federated deep learning (FDL). This result supports
the robustness of the proposed training strategy, which reaches the
same performance without sharing the raw image data of each tar-
get subject but only the models’ parameters. Likewise, the subject-
specific models (LDL), trained using only the data of the target
subject also have improvements over the pre-trained BCDL model.
However, they do not reach the full performance of the CDL and
FDL models, which leverage the data/parameters of the other sub-
jects. On the other hand, the personalized federated model (PFDL)
reaches the performance of the fully federated model (FDL), even
outperforming it slightly on average (1%). This shows that PFDL
can retain the performance of the fully federated or centralized-
learning models while adding an additional layer of confidentiality,
i.e., without sharing the parameters of the final personalized classi-
fication layer.
From the performance of the models at the individual level, we
make the following observations. First, note that for subject #43,
both LDL and PFDL significantly outperform both CDL and FDL.
By inspecting the data of this subject in Table 1, we see that only
two sessions were available: thus, PFDL enabled learning of the
local models better than through the standard averaging across
sessions as done by FDL. Similar conclusions can be derived for
subjects #64 and #107. On the other hand, for subjects where FDL
outperforms the other models, in most cases the performance of
PFDL is close and better than that of the local LDL models. Thus,
we note a general trend of the PFDL model: it provides a good
trade-off between the subject-specific models and fully federated
models, likely because it performs subject-specific adaptation of
the last (classification) layer while always taking into account the
data of other subjects, rendering it more robust in this challenging
scenario of learning from highly unbalanced data.
We also note that all of the models fail on subject #48. Looking
at Table 1, we see that there are only two sessions available for
this subject, but the main reason for the models underperforming
is that this subject’s data have mainly PSPI intensity 1, which is
extremely difficult to distinguish from no pain (PSPI=0). We further
inspected the pain estimates for this subject, and all the models
mainly produced the "no pain" label, which negatively affected the
computation of the F-1 score for this subject. We also note that
for subject #59 all of the models produced the same estimates as
this subject has only one session of data; thus, no adaptation was
possible. In other words, when testing on session 1, all of the models’
parameters are identical, since they were just initialized with the
centrally pre-trained model parameters, thus yielding identical test
scores for all models for this session. Also, for subject #80, there is
a drop in performance by all of the adapted models compared to
the pre-trained BCDL model. We attribute this to the fact that, even
though this subject has multiple sessions and active pain levels, the
levels are mainly low PSPI levels of pain, the majority of which
were PSPI=1. This, again, makes it difficult to separate the face
images of this subject from no-pain images.
Overall, we note that the traditional FL (FDL) and centralized
learning (CDL) achieve similar performance. This is promising
and it is due to the fact that FDL has flexibility to adjust the model
parameters to each subject prior to the FL averaging, without seeing
all raw image data. Furthermore, the locally trained models perform
slightly worse on average, but when there are improvements, they
can be large (e.g., see subject #43). However, the performance of
LDL is bounded by the amount of individual data, and has no means
of recovering from severe overfitting that may occur (as in the case
of subjects #120 and #80). We observe a similar trend in average
performance across different metrics reported in Table 3. Note that
even-though the accuracy is the highest for the PFDL (by a small
margin), this metric is less robust to unbalanced data than the F-1
score as it does not provide insights into how well the models are
estimating (positive) pain - high accuracy can be achieved even if all
data were estimated as no-pain due to this class largely dominating
the dataset. On the other hand, precision-recall AUC is perhaps
a more robust performance measure for unbalanced data. In this
context, FDL outperforms the other models. However, to use this
in practice would require finding optimal classification thresholds
for each subject, which is difficult.
It is important to emphasize that even though the average perfor-
mance of these models is low, the models are evaluated on highly
unbalanced data. Also, we used the raw face images without expert-
driven processing (e.g., without using facial landmarks or face align-
ment). We did that to reduce computational cost, but we expect that
additional image processing would significantly increase the esti-
mation performance. However, the focus here was on assessing the
8

Method
ACC
PR-AUC
F1
RND
44 ± 15
31 ± 16
30 ± 13
BCDL
72 ± 12
55 ± 16
40 ± 24
CDL
73 ± 13
58 ± 16
46 ± 18
LDL
75 ± 13
56 ± 18
44 ± 19
FDL
73 ± 12
59 ± 17
46 ± 20
PFDL
76 ± 12
57 ± 18
47 ± 20
Table 3: Average (±std) accuracy (ACC), precision-recall area
under the curve (PR-AUC), and F1 score, across different ses-
sions/test subjects. The high std reflects large variability in
the performance per test subject.
benefits of different FL strategies, especially when the personalizing
layer in the model is not shared, but is kept only locally.
We next focus on F-1 performance of the FDL and PFDL models
per session. In Fig. 5, we show on how many test subjects one model
outperformed the other per session. Both models perform the same
on the first session as there is still no adaptation of the models. We
then note that in sessions 2-5 the PFDL outperforms the standard
FDL, while in sessions 8 and 9 each of the models outperforms
the other. Drawing conclusions from these two sessions would be
misleading as there are only one or two subjects available in these
sessions. (Note session 7 had no test subject data).
Finally, we analyze behaviour of the models during training by
inspecting their training /validation loss during adaptation across
different sessions. In all the models, the validation loss spikes sub-
stantially in session 5. In session 5, the number of examples with
PSPI=1 is much higher than for the other levels (PSPI=2-15). Again,
due to the very small changes in facial expression due to the pain
level "1", it is very hard to separate it from pain level "0" (no pain).
The validation loss also drops close to 0 in session 7. Looking at
Table 1, we find that there are no positive examples in session 7.
Consequently, the model becomes good at identifying true negative
examples (no pain). Note that this is much more pronounced in
PFDL and LDL models, which, in contrast to CDL and FDL, per-
form local fine-tuning of their last layer, most likely overfitting the
adaptation set. As mentioned above, sessions 8 and 9 cannot pro-
vide reliable insights, as they contain only one or two participating
test subjects. However, we note that FDL manages to reduce the
validation loss, while PFDL and LDL keep increasing the validation
loss during their adaptation to the one subject (#52) in session 9.
We suspect that this is a consequence of overfitting, which occurs
in these two models while trying to train the last (classification)
layer on the data of the previous session of that subject (using only
a small number of positive examples from session 6 of this subject).
6
DISCUSSION
In real-world applications, the pain rating can be provided by clini-
cal staff or via self-reports (e.g., using the traditional Visual Analog
Scale) for a limited number of short video clips of pain expressions
of the target subject. Using machine learning, and federated learn-
ing, as shown in this work, could enable the system to adapt to
the target subject over time and thus reduce the need for manual
labeling of the pain face-images. However, pain estimation from
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Session #
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
# of test subjects
FDL
PFDL
Figure 5: Personalized vs. standard federated learning of
deep models for pain estimation. The bars show on how
many subjects one model outperformed the other (in terms
of F-1) in each session.
face images is difficult since the pain classifier relies on very subtle
changes in facial expressions of target subjects. We showed that a
light-weight CNN that adapts its parameters to test subjects, can
largely outperform a pre-trained model that does not leverage the
target subject’s data. While this is expected, we showed it empiri-
cally on a challenging real-world pain dataset. More importantly,
we showed that FL can achieve robust estimation of pain that is
comparable to that achieved by the vanilla centralized training of
the models. FL also tends to produce a more stable learning curve
(see Fig. 5), most likely because the model averaging has a similar
effect as common regularization techniques such as dropout. Our
findings on whether standard FL can yield substantially better re-
sults compared to centralized learning for a majority of clients are
still not definite as the data contain a relatively small number of
subjects. However, based on the results, we conjecture that in a
federated setting, the data of subjects showing facial expressions
of more intense pain experience nudge the average model more
strongly in their favour.
Interestingly, the subject-specific models that did not participate
in FL, still achieved comparable average results in terms of F-1
score, and better than the non-adapted pre-trained models. These
results support the value of individual data and the potential of
model personalization. In the experiments, we saw that these mod-
els largely outperformed the FL and centralized-learning models
on some subjects, despite the fact that they were trained using
only a handful of adaptation data of the target subject. While this
may seem a promising approach (to use only the subject-specific
models), these models do not have means for recovering from cor-
rupt data (e.g., incorrect and/or highly noisy labels), as they rely
fully on the local data. Conversely, the personalized FL approach
proposed here combines the best of the two approaches: the per-
sonalization of the local models and the resilience of the models
trained using the standard FL. Our experiments revealed that this
federated personalization rendered models that were not always
performing the best. However, they consistently followed the best
performing model, even in cases where other models would largely
underperform. This is promising as it shows that by using federated
personalization we can obtain overall more robust pain estimation,
9

0
20
40
60
80
100
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
S: 1
S: 2
S: 3
S: 4
S: 5
S: 6
S: 7
S: 8
S: 9
Train loss
Validation loss
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Federated Communication Rounds
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
S: 1S: 2 S: 3
S: 4
S: 5
S: 6
S: 7
S: 8
S: 9
Train loss
Validation loss
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Federated Communication Rounds
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
S: 1 S: 2 S: 3 S: 4 S: 5 S: 6
S: 7
S: 8
S: 9
Centralized Epochs
Train loss
Validation loss
0
20
40
60
80
Federated Communication Rounds
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
S: 1
S: 2 S: 3 S: 4 S: 5 S: 6
S: 7
S: 8
S: 9
Train loss
Validation loss
PFDL
LDL
FDL
CDL
Figure 6: Average (± 1 std) training/validation loss of ten different runs of the models, during communication rounds with
different recording sessions.
while also providing another layer of data confidentiality (by not
sharing the pain estimation layer).
Regarding data-privacy and -confidentiality concerns, of course
we cannot make any guarantees, as there could always be a breach
locally. However, with respect to the shared data, our approach
adds another confidentiality layer by not sharing as much as FL
usually shares. Specifically, only the CNN layers in the network
participate in FL but not the last fully-connected layer used to
make a decision about the presence/absence of pain. Since this boils
down to exchanging the parameters of the CNN kernels, and not
their feature maps (i.e., the network output activations) or fully
connected layers, it would be extremely difficult4 for an adversary
to reconstruct the face images of the target subject, let alone infer
their pain labels. This, however, does not mean that in this setting
the subject’s ID (i.e., where the data is coming from, not necessarily
from whom) cannot be identified - the shared parameters may still
contain individual biases that could be inferred by an adversary. Still,
the adversary cannot see any raw data of the target subject without
breaching the subject’s local storage. In cases where inferring the
subject’s ID is a breach of privacy (as it would be in most cases),
methods based on differential privacy [11] can be used to further
test and secure the privacy-preserving properties of our approach.
We plan to investigate this in our future work.
Another important aspect of our analysis concerns the pain
dataset used in this work. This dataset poses a number of challenges
that may have obscured some insights into the models that we
investigated - as we describe in what follows. However, we wanted
to evaluate the robustness of FL on publicly available real-world
data. The difference between the face images of lower levels of
4By using the shared CNN parameters only (i.e., the CNN weights) it would not be
possible to re-construct the original image of the target person. To our knowledge, no
prior work has attempted this.
pain and where test subjects do not experience any pain may be
very nuanced. This, it turn, makes it challenging to estimate pain
from such images even when the centralized training is applied.
Moreover, the dataset is largely imbalanced and sparse in terms
of the pain vs. no pain images, as shown in Table 1. To improve
the baseline model of the learning algorithms under study, models
that encode temporal dependencies in data (e.g., LSTMs), could be
used in the FL settings. This and other more advanced base models
have potential to better discriminate low levels of pain from no
pain by having access to temporal context, which is one of the
limitations of the currently used CNN architecture. To address the
strong imbalance of the pain labels in the dataset, implementing
different loss functions such as hinge loss, or weighted binary cross-
entropy, may yield performance improvements. Yet, we believe that
having access to richer pain datasets – in terms of the number of
subjects and their recording sessions over a longer period of time,
as well as the pain ratings for the face-images/videos, is critical for
achieving pain estimation performance that is needed for real-world
applications. To our knowledge, such data are not readily available,
and are challenging to collect and annotate. We expect that this will
change in the near future as the mobile and wearable technologies
become more pervasive [29]. Nevertheless, note that the focus of
this paper was not to outperform the state-of-the-art systems for
pain estimation; rather, the aim of this work was to benchmark
centralized and federated learning algorithms on the challenging
problem of pain estimation from face images, and identify some of
the key challenges in tackling this problem using FL.
There is certainly room for improvement of the federated per-
sonalization algorithm proposed in this work. In some sessions,
there were subjects for whom the models experienced a decrease in
performance compared to the pre-trained baseline model. This de-
crease is likely to be caused by some of the new sessions’ data that
10

the models were trained on (most likely, overfitted to), resulting
in negative transfer [44]. This typically occurs when the original
data distribution is very different from the target data distribution.
While we hoped that by adapting the model using data of previous
sessions of the target subject the performance would constantly
increase, in practice this is not the case. Even the data (the pain
expressions) of the same subject may vary largely from session
to session, thus, hurting the model performance after adaptation
to such data. To prevent or reduce such negative transfer, more
sophisticated model validation strategies need to be designed. Also,
implementing a "fallback"-model in a federated setting that would
prevent the updated model from underperforming on the future
sessions, could reduce the negative transfer that our approach is
currently sensitive to. Finally, evaluating our approach on health
datasets that contain considerably more subjects would hopefully
reveal the full potential of this approach. These challenges are the
focus of our ongoing research.
7
CONCLUSIONS
We presented an evolution of the federated averaging algorithm,
which we term federated personalization. This algorithm adds one
more layer of confidentiality to the traditional FL algorithm, by
allowing only a fixed subset of the model parameters to be shared
with a centralized server. We evaluated the new model by simulat-
ing a real-world setting in which the data of target subjects arrive
in sessions, as would be the case in hospital facilities with remote
and unobtrusive monitoring of patients’ pain experience. Currently,
this approach only modestly outperforms the traditional FL on a
challenging problem of pain estimation from facial expressions;
however, we discuss ways in which this approach can further be
enhanced. The proposed is of high importance for healthcare do-
mains, where regulations of confidentiality and privacy, as well as
governance and accountability for individual data are top priorities.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The work by O.Rudovic was conducted while funded by the Euro-
pean Commission Horizon 2020 programme, Marie Curie Action -
Individual Fellowship 2016-2019 (EngageMe), under the agreement
number 701236. The authors declare no competing interests.
