arXiv:1003.5956v2  [cs.LG]  1 Mar 2012
Unbiased Ofﬂine Evaluation of Contextual-bandit-based
News Article Recommendation Algorithms
Lihong Li
Wei Chu
John Langford
Xuanhui Wang
Yahoo! Labs
701 First Ave, Sunnyvale, CA, USA 94089

ABSTRACT
Contextual bandit algorithms have become popular for on-
line recommendation systems such as Digg, Yahoo! Buzz,
and news recommendation in general. Oﬄine evaluation of
the eﬀectiveness of new algorithms in these applications is
critical for protecting online user experiences but very chal-
lenging due to their“partial-label”nature. Common practice
is to create a simulator which simulates the online environ-
ment for the problem at hand and then run an algorithm
against this simulator.
However, creating simulator itself
is often diﬃcult and modeling bias is usually unavoidably
introduced. In this paper, we introduce a replay method-
ology for contextual bandit algorithm evaluation. Diﬀerent
from simulator-based approaches, our method is completely
data-driven and very easy to adapt to diﬀerent applications.
More importantly, our method can provide provably unbi-
ased evaluations. Our empirical results on a large-scale news
article recommendation dataset collected from Yahoo! Front
Page conform well with our theoretical results. Furthermore,
comparisons between our oﬄine replay and online bucket
evaluation of several contextual bandit algorithms show ac-
curacy and eﬀectiveness of our oﬄine evaluation method.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.5 [Information Systems]: On-line Information Ser-
vices; I.2.6 [Computing Methodologies]: Learning
General Terms
Algorithms, Experimentation
Keywords
Recommendation, multi-armed bandit, contextual bandit,
oﬄine evaluation, benchmark dataset
1.
INTRODUCTION
Web-based content recommendation services such as Digg,
Yahoo! Buzz and Yahoo! Today Module (Figure 1) leverage
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
WSDM’11, February 9–12, 2011, Hong Kong, China.
Copyright 2011 ACM 978-1-4503-0493-1/11/02 ...$10.00.
user activities such as clicks to identify the most attractive
contents. One inherent challenge is how to score newly gen-
erated contents such as breaking news, especially when the
news ﬁrst emerges and little data are available. A person-
alized service which can tailor contents towards individual
users is more desirable and challenging.
A distinct feature of these applications is their “partial-
label” nature: we observe user feedback (click or not) for an
article only when this article is displayed. A key challenge
thus arises which is known as the exploration/exploitation
tradeoﬀ: on one hand, we want to exploit (i.e., choose arti-
cles of higher quality estimates to promote our business of
interest), but on the other than, we have to explore (i.e.,
choose articles with lower quality estimates to collect user
feedback so as to improve our article selection strategy in
the long run).
The balance between exploration and ex-
ploitation may be modeled as a “contextual bandit” [18]—a
subclass of reinforcement learning problems [26], and is also
present in many other important Web-based applications
such as online ads display and search query suggestion, etc.
An ideal way to evaluate a contextual-bandit algorithm
is to conduct a bucket test, in which we run the algorithm
to serve a fraction of live user traﬃc in the real recommen-
dation system.
However, not only is this method expen-
sive, requiring substantial engineering eﬀorts in deploying
the method in the real system, but it may also have negative
impacts on user experience. Furthermore, it is not easy to
guarantee replicable comparison using bucket tests as online
metrics vary signiﬁcantly over time. Oﬄine evaluation of
contextual-bandit algorighms thus becomes valuable when
we try to optimize an online recommendation system.
Although benchmark datasets for supervised learning such
as the UCI repository [9] have proved valuable for empiri-
cal comparison of algorithms, collecting benchmark data to-
wards reliable oﬄine evaluation has been diﬃcult in bandit
problems. In our application of news article recommenda-
tion on Yahoo!
Front Page, for example, each user visit
results in the following information stored in the log: user
information, the displayed news article, and user feedback
(click or not). When using data of this form to evaluate a
bandit algorithm oﬄine, we will not have user feedback if the
algorithm recommends a diﬀerent news article than the one
stored in the log. In other words, data in bandit-style ap-
plications only contain user feedback for recommendations
that were actually displayed to the user, but not all candi-
dates. This “partial-label” nature raises a diﬃculty that is
the key diﬀerence between evaluation of bandit algorithms
and supervised learning ones.

Common practice for evaluating bandit algorithms is to
create a simulator and then run the algorithm against it.
With this approach, we can evaluate any bandit algorithm
without having to run it in a real system. Unfortunately,
there are two major drawbacks with this approach. First,
creating a simulator can be challenging and time-consuming
for practical problems. Second, evaluation results based on
artiﬁcial simulators may not reﬂect the actual performance
since simulators are only rough approximations of real prob-
lems and unavoidably contains modeling bias.
Our contributions are two-fold.
First, we describe and
study an oﬄine evaluation method for bandit algorithms,
which enjoys valuable theoretical guarantees including un-
biasedness and accuracy.
Second, we verify the method’s
eﬀectiveness by comparing its evaluation results to online
bucket results using a large volume of data recorded from
Yahoo! Front Page. These positive results not only encour-
age wide use of the proposed method in other Web-baesd
applications, but also suggest a promising solution to create
benchmark datasets from real-world applications for bandit
algorithms.
Related Work.
Unbiased evaluation has been studied before under dif-
ferent settings.
While our unbiased evaluation method is
brieﬂy sketched in an earlier paper [19] and may be inter-
preted as a special case of the exploration scavenging tech-
nique [17], we conduct a thorough investigation in this work,
including improved theoretical guarantees and positive em-
pirical evidence using online bucket data.
2.
CONTEXTUAL BANDIT PROBLEMS
The multi-armed bandit problem [7] is a classic and popu-
lar model for studying the exploration-exploitation tradeoﬀ.
Despite the simplicity of the model, it has found wide appli-
cations in important problems like medical treatment allo-
cation, and recently, in challenging, large-scale problems like
Web content optimization [2, 19]. Diﬀerent from the classic
multi-armed bandit problems, we are particularly concerned
with a more interesting setting where for each round contex-
tual information is available for decision making.
2.1
Notation
For the purpose of this paper, we consider the multi-armed
bandit problem with contextual information. Following pre-
vious work [18], we call it a contextual bandit problem.1 For-
mally, we deﬁne by A = {1, 2, . . . , K} the set of arms, and
a contextual-bandit algorithm A interacts with the world in
discrete trials t = 1, 2, 3, . . .. In trial t:
1. The world chooses a feature vector xt known as the
context. Associated with each arm a is a real-valued
payoﬀrt,a ∈[0, 1] that can be related to the context
xt in an arbitrary way. We denote by X the (possibly
inﬁnite) set of contexts, and (rt,1, . . . , rt,K) the payoﬀ
vector. Furthermore, we assume (xt, rt,1, . . . , rt,K) is
drawn i.i.d. from some unknown distribution D.
2. Based on observed payoﬀs in previous trials and the
current context xt, A chooses an arm at ∈A, and
1In the literature, contextual bandits are sometimes called
bandits with covariate [28], associative reinforcement learn-
ing [14], bandits with expert advice [6], bandits with side
information [27], and associative bandits [25].
receives payoﬀrt,at. It is important to emphasize here
that no feedback information (namely, the payoﬀrt,a)
is observed for unchosen arms a ̸= at.
3. The algorithm then improves its arm-selection strategy
with all information it observes, (xt,at, at, rt,at).
In this process, the total T -trial payoﬀof A is deﬁned as
GA(T )
def
= ED
" T
X
t=1
rt,at
#
,
where the expectation ED[·] is deﬁned w.r.t. the i.i.d. gener-
ation process of (xt, rt,1, . . . , rt,K) according to distribution
D (and the algorithm A as well if it is not deterministic).
Similarly, given a policy π that maps contexts to actions,
π : X 7→A, we deﬁne its total T -trial payoﬀby
Gπ(T )
def
= ED
" T
X
t=1
rt,π(xt)
#
= T · ED

r1,π(x1)

,
where the second equality is due to our i.i.d. assumption.
Given a reference set Π of policies, we deﬁne the optimal
expected T -trial payoﬀwith respect to Π as
G∗(T )
def
= max
π∈Π Gπ(T ).
For convenience, we also deﬁne the per-trial payoﬀof an
algorithm or policy, which is deﬁned, respectively, by
gA
def
=
GA(T )
T
gπ
def
=
Gπ(T )
T
= ED

r1,π(x1)

.
Much research in multi-armed bandit problems is devoted to
developing algorithms with large total payoﬀ. Formally, we
may search for an algorithm minimizing regret with respect
to the optimal arm-selection strategy in Π. Here, the T -trial
regret RA(T ) of algorithm A with respect to Π is deﬁned by
RA(T )
def
= G∗(T ) −GA(T ).
(1)
An important special case of the general contextual bandit
problem is the well-known K-armed bandit in which the con-
text xt remains constant for all t. Since both the arm set
and contexts are constant at every trial, they have no eﬀect
on a bandit algorithm, and so we will also refer to this type
of bandit as a context-free bandit.
In the example of news article recommendation, we may
view articles in the pool as arms, and for the t-th user visit
(trial t), one article (arm) is chosen to serve the user. When
the served article is clicked on, a payoﬀof 1 is incurred;
otherwise, the payoﬀis 0.
With this deﬁnition of payoﬀ,
the expected payoﬀof an article is precisely its click-through
rate (CTR), and choosing an article with maximum CTR
is equivalent to maximizing the expected number of clicks
from users, which in turn is the same as maximizing the
total expected payoﬀin our bandit formulation.
2.2
Existing Bandit Algorithms
The fundamental challenge in bandit problems is the need
for balancing exploration and exploitation. To minimize the
regret in Equation (1), an algorithm A exploits its past ex-
perience to select the arm that appears best. On the other
hand, this seemingly optimal arm may in fact be subopti-
mal, due to imprecision in A’s knowledge. In order to avoid

this undesired situation, A has to explore the world by ac-
tually choosing seemingly suboptimal arms so as to gather
more information about them (c.f., step 3 in the bandit pro-
cess deﬁned in the previous subsection). Exploration can in-
crease short-term regret since some suboptimal arms may be
chosen. However, obtaining information about the arms’ av-
erage payoﬀs (i.e., exploration) can reﬁne A’s estimate of the
arms’ payoﬀs and in turn reduce long-term regret. Clearly,
neither a purely exploring nor a purely exploiting algorithm
works best in general, and a good tradeoﬀis needed.
There are roughly two classes of bandit algorithms. The
ﬁrst class of algorithms attempt to minimize the regret as
the number of steps increases.
Formally, such algorithms
A ensure the quantity RA(T )/T vanishes over time as T
grows. While low-regret algorithms have been extensively
studied for the context-free K-armed bandit problem [7],
the more general contextual bandit problem has remained
challenging. Another class of algorithms are based on Bayes
rule, such as Gittins index methods [13]. Such Bayesian ap-
proaches may have competitive performance with appropri-
ate prior distributions, but are often computationally pro-
hibitive without coupling with approximation [2].
The Appendix describes a few representative low-regret
algorithms used in our experiments, but it should be noted
that our method is algorithm independent, and so may be
applied to evaluate Bayesian algorithms as well.
3.
UNBIASED OFFLINE EVALUATION
Compared to machine learning in the more standard su-
pervised learning setting, evaluation of methods in a contex-
tual bandit setting is frustratingly diﬃcult. Our goal here
is to measure the performance of a bandit algorithm A, that
is, a rule for selecting an arm at each time step based on
the preceding interactions and current context (such as the
algorithms described above).
More formally, we want to estimate the per-trial payoﬀ
gA = GA(T )
T
= 1
T ED
" T
X
t=1
rt,at
#
.
Here, at is the t-th action chosen by A, and in general de-
pends on the previous contexts, actions, and observed re-
wards. Because of the interactive nature of the problem, it
would seem that the only way to do this evaluation unbias-
edly is to actually run the algorithm online on “live” data.
However, in practice, this approach is likely to be infeasible
due to the serious logistical challenges such as extensive en-
gineering resources and potential risks on user experiences.
Rather, we may only have oﬄine data available that was
collected at a previous time using an entirely diﬀerent log-
ging policy. Because payoﬀs are only observed for the arms
chosen by the logging policy, which are likely to diﬀer from
those chosen by the algorithm A being evaluated, it is not
at all clear how to evaluate A based only on such logged
data. This evaluation problem may be viewed as a special
case of the so-called “oﬀ-policy policy evaluation problem”
in the reinforcement-learning literature [22]. In the multi-
armed bandit setting, however, there is no need for “tempo-
ral credit assignment”, and thus more eﬃcient solutions are
possible.
One solution is to build a simulator to model the bandit
process from the logged data, and then evaluate A with the
simulator. Although this approach is straightforward, the
modeling step is often very expensive and diﬃcult, and more
importantly, it often introduces modeling bias to the sim-
ulator, making it hard to justify reliability of the obtained
evaluation results. In contrast, we propose an approach that
is unbiased, grounded on data, and simple to implement.
In this section, we describe a sound technique for carrying
out such an evaluation, assuming that the individual events
are i.i.d., and that the logging policy chose each arm at each
time step uniformly at random. Although we omit the de-
tails, this latter assumption can be weakened considerably so
that any randomized logging policy is allowed and the algo-
rithm can be modiﬁed accordingly using rejection sampling,
but at the cost of decreased data eﬃciency.
More precisely, we suppose that there is some unknown
distribution D from which tuples are drawn i.i.d. of the form
(x, r1, . . . , rK), each consisting of observed context and un-
observed payoﬀs for all arms. We also posit access to a long
sequence of logged events resulting from the interaction of
the uniformly random logging policy with the world. Each
such event consists of the context vector x, a selected arm a,
and the resulting observed payoﬀra. Crucially, this logged
data is partially labeled in the sense that only the payoﬀra
is observed for the single arm a that was chosen uniformly
at random.
Our goal is to use this data to evaluate a bandit algorithm
A, which is a (possibly randomized) mapping for selecting
the arm at at time t based on the history ht−1 of t−1 preced-
ing events together with the current context. Therefore, the
data serves as a benchmark, with which people can evaluate
and compare diﬀerent bandit algorithms. As in supervised
learning, having such benchmark sets will allow easier, repli-
cable comparisons of algorithms in real-life data.
It should be noted that this section focuses on contextual
bandit problems with constant arm sets of size K. While
this assumption leads to easier exposition and analysis, it
may not be satisﬁed in practice. For example, in the news
article recommendation problem studied in Section 4, the set
of arms is not ﬁxed: new arms may become available while
old arms may be dismissed. Consequently, the events are
independent but drawn from non-identical distributions. We
do not investigate this setting formally although it is possible
to generalize our setting in Section 2 to this variable arm set
case. Empirically, we ﬁnd the evaluator is very stable.
3.1
An Unbiased Ofﬂine Evaluator
In this subsection, for simplicity of exposition, we take this
sequence of logged events to be an inﬁnitely long stream.
But we also give explicit bounds on the actual ﬁnite number
of events required by our evaluation method. A variation
for ﬁnite data streams is studied in the next subsection.
The policy evaluator is shown in Algorithm 1 [19]. The
method takes as input a bandit algorithm A and a desired
number of “valid” events T on which to base the evaluation.
We then step through the stream of logged events one by
one. If, given the current history ht−1, it happens that the
policy A chooses the same arm a as the one that was se-
lected by the logging policy, then the event is retained (that
is, added to the history), and the total payoﬀˆGA updated.
Otherwise, if the policy A selects a diﬀerent arm from the
one that was taken by the logging policy, then the event
is entirely ignored, and the algorithm proceeds to the next
event without any change in its state.
Note that, because the logging policy chooses each arm

Algorithm 1 Policy_Evaluator (with inﬁnite data stream).
0: Inputs: T > 0; bandit algorithm A; stream of events S
1: h0 ←∅{An initially empty history}
2: ˆGA ←0 {An initially zero total payoﬀ}
3: for t = 1, 2, 3, . . . , T do
4:
repeat
5:
Get next event (x, a, ra) from S
6:
until A(ht−1, x) = a
7:
ht ←concatenate(ht−1, (x, a, ra))
8:
ˆGA ←ˆGA + ra
9: end for
10: Output: ˆGA/T
uniformly at random, each event is retained by this algo-
rithm with probability exactly 1/K, independent of every-
thing else. This means that the events which are retained
have the same distribution as if they were selected by D.
As a result, we can prove that two processes are equivalent:
the ﬁrst is evaluating the policy against T real-world events
from D, and the second is evaluating the policy using the
policy evaluator on a stream of logged events. Theorem 1
formalizes this intuition.
Theorem 1. For all distributions D of contexts and pay-
oﬀs, all algorithms A, all T , all sequences of events hT , and
all stream S containing i.i.d. events from a uniformly ran-
dom logging policy and D, we have
Pr
Policy Evaluator(A,S)
(hT ) = Pr
A,D(hT ).
Furthermore, let L be the number of events obtained from
the stream to gather the length-T history hT , then
1. the expected value of L is KT , and
2. for any δ ∈(0, 1), with probability at least 1 −δ, L ≤
2K(T + ln(1/δ)).
This theorem says that every history hT has an identical
probability in the real world as in the policy evaluator. Any
statistics of these histories, such as the estimated per-trial
payoﬀˆGA/T returned by Algorithm 1, are therefore unbi-
ased estimates of the respective quantities of the algorithm
A. Hence, by repeating Algorithm 1 multiple times and then
averaging the returned per-trial payoﬀs, we can accurately
estimate the total per-trial payoﬀgA of any algorithm A and
respective conﬁdence intervals. Further, the theorem guar-
antees that, with high probability, O(KT ) logged events are
suﬃcient to retain a sample of size T .
Proof. The ﬁrst statement can be proved by mathemati-
cal induction on the time steps of event streams [19]. Second,
since each event from the stream is retained with probabil-
ity exactly 1/K, the expected number required to retain T
events is exactly KT . Finally, the high-probability bound
is an application of the multiplicative form of Chernoﬀ’s in-
equality.
Given the unbiasedness guarantee, one may expect con-
centration is also guaranteed; that is, the evaluator becomes
more and more accurate as T increases. Unfortunately, such
a conjecture is false for general bandit algorithms, as ex-
plained in Example 3 of the next section.
Algorithm 2 Policy_Evaluator (with ﬁnite data stream).
0: bandit algorithm A; stream of events S of length L
1: h0 ←∅{An initially empty history}
2: ˆGA ←0 {An initially zero total payoﬀ}
3: T ←0 {An initially zero counter of valid events}
4: for t = 1, 2, 3, . . . , L do
5:
Get the t-th event (x, a, ra) from S
6:
if A(ht−1, x) = a then
7:
ht ←concatenate(ht−1, (x, a, ra))
8:
ˆGA ←ˆGA + ra
9:
T ←T + 1
10:
else
11:
ht ←ht−1
12:
end if
13: end for
14: Output: ˆGA/T
3.2
Sample Complexity Result
Next, we consider a situation that may be more relevant to
practical evaluation of a static policy when we have a ﬁnite
data set S containing L logged events. Roughly speaking,
the algorithm steps through every event in D as in Algo-
rithm 1 and obtains an estimate of the policy’s average per-
trial payoﬀbased on a random number of valid events. The
detailed pseudocode in Algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2 is very similar to Algorithm 1.
The only
diﬀerence is that the number of valid events, denoted T in
the pseudocode, is a random number with mean L/K. For
this reason, the output of Algorithm 2 (namely, ˆGA/T ) may
not be an unbiased estimate of the true per-trial payoﬀof A.
However, the next theorem shows that the ﬁnal value of T
will be arbitrarily close to L/K with high probability as long
as L is large enough. Using this fact, the theorem further
shows that the returned value of Algorithm 2 is an accurate
estimate of the true per-trial payoﬀwith high probability
when A is a ﬁxed policy that chooses action at independent
of the history ht−1. To emphasize that A is a ﬁxed policy,
the following theorem and its proof use π instead of A.
Theorem 2. For all distributions D over contexts and
payoﬀs, all policies π, all data stream S containing L i.i.d.
events drawn from a uniformly random logging policy and
D, and all δ ∈(0, 1), we have, with probability at least 1−δ,
that

ˆGπ
T
−gπ
 = O
 r
Kgπ
L
ln 1
δ
!
.
Therefore, for any g ≥gπ, with high probability, the the-
orem guarantees that the returned value ˆGπ/T is a close
estimate of the true value gπ with error on the order of
˜O
p
Kg/L

. As L increases, the error decreases to 0 at
the rate of O(1/
√
L). This error bound improves a previ-
ous result [17, Theorem 5] for a similar oﬄine evaluation
algorithm and similarly provides a sharpened analysis for
the T = 1 special case for policy evaluation in reinforce-
ment learning [15]. Section 4 provides empirical evidence
matching our bound.
Proof. The proof involves a couple applications of the
multiplicative Chernoﬀ/Hoeﬀding bound [20, Corollary 5.2].
To simplify notation, we use Pr(·) and E[·] in the proof to

denote the probability and expectation with respect to ran-
domness generated by π and S. Let (xt, at, rt,at) be the t-th
event in the stream S, Vt be the (random) indicator that
at matches the arm chosen by policy π in the context (xt).
Then, T = PL
t=1 Vt, ˆGπ = PL
t=1 Vtrt,at, and the returned
value of Algorithm 2 is ˆGπ/T . We bound the denominator
and numerator, respectively.
First, since at is chosen uniformly at random, we have
E[Vt] = 1/K for all t and thus E
hPL
t=1 Vt
i
= L/K. Using
the multiplicative form of Chernoﬀ’s bound, we have
Pr
T −L
K
 ≥γ1L
K

≤2 exp

−Lγ2
1
3K

(2)
for any γ1 > 0. Let the right-hand side above be δ/2 and
solve for γ1:
γ1 =
r
3K
L ln 4
δ .
Similarly, since at is uniformly chosen, we have E
h
ˆGπ
i
=
Lgπ/K. Applying the multiplicative Chernoﬀbound again,
we have for any γ2 > 0 that
Pr
 ˆGπ −Lgπ
K
 > γ2Lgπ
K

≤2 exp

−Lgπγ2
2
3K

.
(3)
Let the right-hand side above be δ/2 and solve for γ2:
γ2 =
r
3K
Lgπ ln 4
δ .
Now applying a union bound over the probabilistic state-
ments in Equations (2) and (3), we can see that, with prob-
ability at least 1 −δ, the following holds:
1 −γ1
K
≤T
L ≤1 + γ1
K
gπ(1 −γ2)
K
≤
ˆGπ
L ≤gπ(1 + γ2)
K
.
These two inequalities together imply

ˆGπ
T
−gπ
 ≤(γ1 + γ2)gπ
1 −γ1
= O
 r
Kgπ
L
ln 1
δ
!
,
which ﬁnishes the proof.
Given Theorem 2, one might wonder if a similar result
holds for general bandit algorithms. Unfortunately, the fol-
lowing example shows that such a concentration result is
impossible in general.
Example 3. Consider a contextual bandit problem with
K = 2 and x ∈{0, 1} in which rt,1 = 1 and rt,2 = 0 for
all t = 1, 2, . . .. Suppose x is deﬁned by a uniform random
coin ﬂip. Let A be an algorithm that operates as follows: if
x1 = 1 the algorithm chooses at = 1 for all t; otherwise,
it always chooses at = 2. Therefore, the expected per-trial
payoﬀof A is gA = 0.5. However, in any individual run of
the algorithm, its T -step total reward ˆGA is either T (if A
always chooses at = 1) or 0 (if A always chooses at = 0),
and therefore,
 ˆGA/T −gA
 ≡0.5 no matter how large T is.
This counterexample shows that an exponential tail style
deviation bound does not hold for general bandit algorithms
Figure 1: A snapshot of the “Featured” tab in the
Today Module on the Yahoo! Front Page [19]. By
default, the article at F1 position is highlighted at
the story position.
that are dependent on history. Not all hope is lost though—
there are some known algorithms for which deviation bounds
are provable; for example, epoch-greedy algorithm [18],
UCB1 [5], and EXP3.P [6]. Furthermore, as commented ear-
lier, we can always repeat the evaluation process multiple
times and then average the outcomes to get accurate esti-
mate of the algorithm’s performance. In the next section,
we show empirically that Algorithm 1 returns highly stable
results for all algorithms we have tried.
4.
CASE STUDY
In this section, we apply the oﬄine evaluation method in
the previous section to a large-scale, real-world problem with
variable arm sets to validate the eﬀectiveness of our oﬄine
evaluation methodology. Speciﬁcally, we provide empirical
evidence for: (i) the unbiasedness guarantee in Theorem 1,
(ii) the convergence rate in Theorem 2, (iii) the low variance
of the evaluation result, and (iv) the eﬀectiveness of the
evaluation method when the arm set may change over time.
While the proposed evaluation methodology has been ap-
plied to the same application [19], our focus here is on the
eﬀectiveness of the oﬄine evaluation method itself.
More
importantly, we also provide empirical evidence of unbiased-
ness for not only ﬁxed policies but also learning algorithms,
by relating oﬄine evaluation metric to online performance
in large-scale production buckets on Yahoo! Front Page.
We will ﬁrst describe the application and show how it can
be modeled as a contextual bandit problem.
Second, we
compare the oﬄine evaluation result of a policy to its on-
line evaluation to show our evaluation approach is indeed
unbiased and it gives results that are asymptotically con-
sistent when the number of valid events (the quantity T in
Algorithms 1 and 2) is large. Third, we provide empirical
evidence that our oﬄine evaluation method gives very sta-
ble results for a few representative algorithms. Finally, we
study the relationship between oﬄine evaluation results to
online bucket performance for three bandit algorithms.
4.1
News Article Recommendation on Yahoo!
Front Page Today Module
The Today Module is the most prominent panel on the
Yahoo! Front Page, which is also one of the most visited

pages on the Internet; see a snapshot in Figure 1. The de-
fault “Featured” tab in the Today Module highlights four
high-quality news articles, selected from an hourly-refreshed
article pool maintained by human editors. As illustrated in
Figure 1, there are four articles at footer positions, indexed
by F1–F4.
Each article is represented by a small picture
and a title. One of the four articles is highlighted at the
story position, which is featured by a large picture, a title
and a short summary along with related links. By default,
the article at F1 is highlighted at the story position. A user
can click on the highlighted article at the story position to
read more details if interested in the article. The event is
recorded as a story click. To draw visitors’ attention, we
would like to rank available articles according to individual
interests, and highlight the most attractive article for each
visitor at the story position.
In this paper, we focus on
selecting articles for the story position.
This problem can be naturally modeled as a contextual
bandit problem. Here, it is reasonable to assume each user
visits and their click probabilities on articles to be (approx-
imately) i.i.d. Furthermore, each user has a set of features
(such as age, gender, etc.) from which the click probability
of a speciﬁc article may be inferred; these features are the
contextual information used in the bandit process. Finally,
we may view articles in the pool as arms, and the payoﬀ
is 1 if the user clicks on the article and 0 otherwise. With
this deﬁnition of payoﬀ, the expected payoﬀof an article is
precisely its CTR, , and choosing an article with maximum
CTR is equivalent to maximizing the expected number of
clicks from users, which in turn is the same as maximizing
the per-trial payoﬀgπ in our bandit formulation.
We setup cookie-based buckets for evaluation. A bucket
consists of a certain amount of visitors. A cookie is a string
of 13 letters randomly generated by the web browser as
an identiﬁer. We can specify a cookie pattern to create a
bucket. For example, we could let users with the starting
letter “a” in their cookies fall in one bucket. In a cookie-
based bucket, a user is served by the same policy, unless the
user changes the cookie and then belongs to another bucket.
For oﬄine evaluation, millions of events were collected
from a “random bucket”from Nov. 1, 2009 to Nov. 10, 2009.
In the random bucket, articles are randomly selected from
the article pool to serve users. There are about 40 million
events in the oﬄine evaluation data set, and about 20 articles
available in the pool at every moment.
We focused on user interactions with the story article at
the story position only. The user interactions are recorded
as two types of events, user visit event and story click event.
We chose CTR as the metric of interest, which is deﬁned as
the ratio between the number of story click events and the
number of user visits. To protect business-sensitive infor-
mation, we only report relative CTRs which are deﬁned as
the ratio between true CTRs and a hidden constant.
4.2
Unbiasedness Analysis
Given a policy, the unbiasedness of the oﬄine evaluation
methodology can be empirically veriﬁed by comparing oﬄine
metrics with online performance. We set up another cookie-
based bucket, noted as “serving bucket”, to evaluate online
performance. In the serving bucket, a spatio-temporal al-
gorithm [3] was deployed to estimate article CTRs.2
The
article with the highest CTR estimate (also known as the
2Note that the CTR estimates are updated every 5 minutes.
winner article) was then used to serve users. We extracted
the serving policy from the “serving bucket”, i.e., the best
article at every 5 minutes from Nov. 1 2009 to Nov. 10 2009.
Note that it is in the same period of time of the oﬄine eval-
uation data set, ensuring that the sets of available arms are
the same in both the serving and random buckets. Then,
we used Algorithm 1 to evaluate the serving policy on the
events from the random bucket for the oﬄine metric.
It should be noted that the outcome of our experiments
are not a foregone conclusion of the mathematics presented,
because the setting diﬀers in some ways from the i.i.d. as-
sumption made in our theorems as is typical in real-world ap-
plications. In particular, events are not exchangeable since
old articles leave the system and new ones enter, there are
sometimes unlogged business rule constraints on the serv-
ing policy, and users of course do not behave independently
when they repeatedly visit the same site. We ﬁnesse away
this last issue, but the ﬁrst two are still valid.
In the serving bucket, a winner article usually remains the
best for a while. During its winning time, the user repeat-
edly sees the same article. At the same time, the users in
the random bucket are very likely to see diﬀerent articles
at user visit events, due to the random serving policy. It
is conceivable that the more a user views the same article,
the less likely the user clicks on the article. This conditional
eﬀect violates the i.i.d. assumption in Theorem 1. Fortu-
nately, the discrepancy can be removed by considering CTR
on distinct views. For each user, consecutive events of view-
ing the same article are counted as one user visit only. The
CTR on distinct views in the serving bucket measures user
interactions to the winner articles across the whole session.
Regarding the oﬄine evaluation metric as in Algorithm 2,
the subset of events sampled in the random bucket also mea-
sures user interactions with the winner articles across the
whole session.
We ﬁrst compared online and oﬄine per-article CTRs.
Only winner articles that were viewed more than 20, 000
times in the serving bucket are used in the plot so that their
online CTRs are accurate enough to be treated as ground
truth. Figure 2 shows that the CTR metric evaluated oﬄine
are very close to the CTR estimated online.
We next compared online and oﬄine CTRs at the policy
level. These CTRs are the overall CTR of the serving policy
aggregated over all articles. Figure 3 shows the two CTRs
are very close on each individual day.
Both sets of results corroborate the unbiasedness guar-
antee of Theorem 1, a property of particular importance in
practice that is almost impossible with simulator-based eval-
uation methods. Therefore, our evaluation method provides
a solution that is accurate (like bucket tests) without the
cost and risk of running the policy in the real system.
4.3
Convergence Rate Analysis
We now study how the diﬀerence between oﬄine and on-
line CTRs decreases with more data (namely, the quantity T
in the evaluation methods). To show the convergence rate,
we present the estimated error versus the number of samples
used in oﬄine evaluation. Formally, we deﬁne the estimated
error by e = |c −ˆc|, where c and ˆc are the true CTR and
estimated CTR, respectively.
Figures 4 and 5 present convergence rate of the CTR es-
timate error for various articles and the online serving pol-
icy, respectively, and the red curve is 1/
√
T—the functional

0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
online bucket
offline evaluator
article relative CTR scatter plot
Figure 2: Articles’ CTRs in the online bucket versus
oﬄine estimates.
form of the upper conﬁdence bound. These results suggest
that, in practice, we can observe the error decay rate pre-
dicted by Theorem 2 for reasonably stable algorithms such
as those evaluated.
4.4
Low Variance of Evaluation Results
In this subsection, we chose three representative algo-
rithms (c.f., Appendix) to illustrate the low variance of the
oﬄine evaluation technique:
• ǫ-greedy, a stochastic, context-free algorithm;
• UCB, a deterministic, context-free variant of UCB1 [5];
• LinUCB [19], a deterministic, contextual bandit algo-
rithm that uses ridge regression to estimate arm pay-
oﬀs based on contexts.
Each of the algorithms above has one parameter: ǫ for ǫ-
greedy and α for UCB and LinUCB (see [19] for details). We
ﬁxed the parameters to reasonable values: ǫ = 0.4 and α =
1. We collected over 4, 000, 000 user visits from a random
bucket on May 1, 2009. To evaluate variance, we subsampled
this data so that each event is used with probability 0.5. We
ran each algorithm 100 times on independently subsampled
events and measure the returned CTR using Algorithm 2.
Table 1 summarizes statistics of CTR estimates for the
three algorithms.3 It shows that the evaluation results are
highly consistent across diﬀerent random runs. Speciﬁcally,
the ratio between standard deviation and the mean CTR
is about 2.4% for ǫ-greedy, and below 1.5% for the UCB
and LinUCB which have known algorithm-speciﬁc deviation
bounds.
This experiment demonstrates empirically that our evalu-
ation method can give results that have small variance for a
few natural algorithms, despite the artiﬁcial counterexample
in Section 3, suggesting that with large datasets the result
obtained from only one run of our evaluation method are
already quite reliable.
3In the terminology of [19], the CTR estimates reported
in Table 1 are for the “learning bucket”. Similar standard
deviations are found for the so-called “deployment bucket”.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
2
Days in Nov−2009
metric − relative CTR
daily relative CTR metric
online bucket
offline evaluator
Figure 3: Daily overall CTRs in the online bucket
versus oﬄine estimates.
algorithm
mean
std
max
min
ǫ-greedy
1.2664
0.0308
1.3079
1.1671
UCB
1.3278
0.0192
1.3661
1.2812
LinUCB
1.3867
0.0157
1.4268
1.3491
Table 1: Statistics of CTR estimates for three rep-
resentative algorithms using Algorithm 2.
4.5
Consistency with Online Performance
Sections 4.2 and 4.3 give evidence for the accuracy when
the oﬄine evaluation method is applied to a static policy
that is ﬁxed over time. In this section, we show complimen-
tary accuracy results for learning algorithms that may be
viewed as history-dependent, non-ﬁxed policies. In particu-
lar, we show the consistency between our oﬄine evaluation
and online evaluation of three ǫ-greedy bandit models:
• Estimated Most Popular (EMP): we estimate CTR of
available articles over all users via a random explo-
ration bucket, and then serve users in the EMP bucket
by the article of the highest CTR;
• Segmented Most Popular (SEMP): we segment users into
18 clusters based on their age/gender information. We
estimate CTR of available articles within each clus-
ter, and for each user cluster serve the article with the
highest CTR. Note that users’ feedback may change
serving policy for the cluster in future trials;
• Contextual Bandit Model (CEMP): this is a ﬁne-grained
personalized model. In this model, we deﬁne a sepa-
rate context for each user based on her age, gender,
etc.
For each available article, we maintain a logis-
tic regression model to predict its CTR given the user
context. When a user comes, in the CEMP bucket, we
estimate the CTRs of all articles for the user and se-
lect the article with highest estimated CTR to display.
Users with diﬀerent contexts may be served by diﬀer-
ent articles in this bucket, while each user’s feedback

0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
x 10
4
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
sample size
error
convergence on article
Figure 4: Decay rate of error in articles’ CTR esti-
mates with increasing data size. The red curve plots
the function 1/√x.
will aﬀect other users’ click probability estimation on
this article in future trials.
For all these three bandit models, we set up three online
bcookie-based buckets to deploy the three bandit models re-
spectively. We also set up another bucket to collect random
exploration data. This random data is used to update the
states of three online bandit models and also used for our
oﬄine evaluation. For a given period, we obtain the per-trial
payoﬀs gonline
A
for A ∈{EMP, SEMP, CEMP}. Using data in the
random exploration bucket, we run our oﬄine evaluation for
these three models in the same period and get the per-trial
payoﬀs goﬄine
A
.
It is important to note that there were unlogged business-
rule constraints in all online serving buckets of Today Mod-
ule; for instance, an article may be forced to shown in a given
time window. Fortunately, our data analysis (not reported
here) suggested that such business rules have roughly the
same multiplicative impact on an algorithm’s online CTR,
although this multiplicative factor may vary across diﬀerent
days. To remove eﬀects caused by business rules, we report
the ratio of oﬄine CTR estimate and online CTR for each
model: ρA = goﬄine
A
/gonline
A
. If our oﬄine evaluation metric
is truthful of an algorithm’s online metric in the absence of
business rules, then it is expected that, for a given period
of time like one day, ρA should remain constant ideally and
does not depend on the algorithm A.
In Figure 6, we present a scatter plot of ρEMP vs. ρSEMP of
16 days, from May 03, 2009 to May 18, 2009. In each day,
we have about 2, 000, 000 views (i.e., user visits) in each of
the four online buckets. The scatter plot indicates a strong
linear correlation. The slope in least squares linear regres-
sion is 1.019 and the standard deviation in residue vector
is 0.0563. We observed that business rules give almost the
same impact on CTR in buckets for the two serving policies.
SEMP is a relatively simple bandit algorithm similar to EMP.
In the next experiment, we study the online/oﬄine correla-
tion of a more complicated contextual bandit serving policy
CEMP, in which CTRs are estimated using logistic regression
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
x 10
5
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
sample size
error
covergence on policy
Figure 5: Decay rate of error in overall CTR esti-
mates with increasing data size. The red curve plots
the function 1/√x.
on user features and a separate logistic regression model is
maintained for each article. Figure 7 shows the scatter plot
of ρEMP vs ρCEMP in 18-day data from May 22, 2010 to June
8, 2010. In each day, we have 2, 000, 000 ∼3, 000, 000 views
in each online bucket. The scatter plot again indicates a
strong linear correlation. In this comparison, the slope and
standard deviation in residue vector is 1.113 and 0.075 re-
spectively. It shows that the diﬀerence between our oﬄine
and online evaluation, caused by business rules and other
systemic factors, e.g. time-out in user feature retrieval and
delays in model update, is comparable across bandit models.
Although the daily factor is unpredictable, the relative per-
formance of bandit models in oﬄine evaluation is reserved
in online buckets. Thus, our oﬄine evaluator can provide
reliable comparison of diﬀerent models on historical data,
even in the presence of business rules.
5.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
This paper studies an oﬄine evaluation method of ban-
dit algorithms that relies on log data directly rather than
on a simulator.
The only requirement of this method is
that the log data is generated i.i.d. with arms chosen by an
(ideally uniformly) random policy. We show that the eval-
uation method gives unbiased estimates of quantities like
total payoﬀs, and also provide a sample complexity bound
for the estimated error when the algorithm is a ﬁxed pol-
icy. The evaluation method is empirically validated using
real-world data collected from Yahoo! Front Page for the
challenging application of online news article recommenda-
tion. Empirical results verify our theoretical guarantees, and
demonstrate both accuracy and stability of our method us-
ing real online bucket results.
These encouraging results
suggest the usefulness of our evaluation method, which can
be easily applied to other related applications such as online
reﬁnement of ranking results [21] and ads display.
Our evaluation method, however, ignores (K −1)/K frac-
tion of logged data. Therefore, it does not make use of all
data, which can be a problem when K is large or when

0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
Age−Gender SEMP
EMP
Figure 6: Scatter plot of ratios of oﬄine metric and
online bucket performance of 16 days in 2009.
1
1.5
2
2.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Personalized CEMP
EMP
Figure 7: Scatter plot of ratios of oﬄine metric and
online bucket performance in 18 days in 2010.
data is expensive to obtain.
Furthermore, in some risk-
sensitive applications, while we can inject some randomness
during data collection, a uniformly random policy might be
too much to hope for due to practical constraints (such as
user satisfaction). As we mentioned earlier, our evaluation
method may be extended to work for data collected by any
random policy with rejection sampling, which enjoys similar
unbiasedness guarantees, but reduces the data eﬃciency at
the same time. An interesting future direction, therefore, is
exploiting problem-speciﬁc structures to avoid exploration
of the full arm space. A related question is how to make use
of non-random data for reliable oﬄine evaluation, for which
a recent progress has been made [24].
