Student and AI responses to physics problems examined through the lenses of
sensemaking and mechanistic reasoning
Amogh Sirnoorkar, Dean Zollmanb, James T Lavertyb, Alejandra J Maganac, Sanjay Rebellod,e, Lynn A Bryana,d,e
aCentre for the Advancement of Teaching and Learning of STEM (CATALYST), Purdue University, 100 N University St, West
Lafayette, 47907, Indiana, USA
bDepartment of Physics, Kansas State University, Cardwell Hall, 1228 N Martin Luther King Junior Drive, Manhattan, 66506, Kansas, USA
cComputer and Information Technology, Purdue University, 401 Grant Street, West Lafayette, 47907, Indiana, USA
dDepartment of Physics and Astronomy, Purdue University, 525 Northwestern Avenue, West Lafayette, 47907, Indiana, USA
eDepartment of Curriculum and Instruction, Purdue University, 100 N University St, West Lafayette, 47907, Indiana, USA
Abstract
Several reports in education have called for transforming physics learning environments by promoting sensemaking
of real-world scenarios in light of curricular ideas. Recent advancements in Generative-Artificial Intelligence has
garnered increasing traction in educators’ community by virtue of its potential in transforming STEM learning. In
this exploratory study, we adopt a mixed-methods approach in comparatively examining student- and AI-generated
responses to two different formats of a physics problem through the cognitive lenses of sensemaking and mechanistic
reasoning. The student data is derived from think-aloud interviews of introductory students and the AI data comes
from ChatGPT’s solutions collected using Zero shot approach. The results highlight AI responses to evidence most
features of the two processes through well-structured solutions and student responses to effectively leverage represen-
tations in their solutions through iterative refinement of arguments. In other words, while AI responses reflect how
physics is talked about, the student responses reflect how physics is practiced. Implications of these results in light of
development and deployment of AI systems in physics pedagogy are discussed.
Keywords: Generative-AI, Sensemaking, Mechanistic Reasoning, Physics problem solving
1. Introduction
Contemporary reports on higher education have
called for shifting the focus of classroom learning
from rote-memorization of concepts to sensemaking of
real-world scenarios using curricular ideas [1]. Con-
sequently, several studies in science education have
explored the process of “making sense of a phe-
nomenon” [2, 3] along with developing learning ma-
terials that push students to blend everyday and for-
mal ideas [4]. While the former group of studies have
put forth several theoretical and analytical accounts of
sensemaking, the latter have focused on developing
research-based assessments to facilitate this process.
Sensemaking is a common cognitive process through
which we integrate new information into our knowledge

1Centre for the Advancement of Teaching and Learning of STEM
(CATALYST), Purdue University
system [2]. Through sensemaking, students develop so-
phisticated epistemology, the feature of making effec-
tive transitions between different forms of knowledge
(e.g., conceptual, procedural, intuitive, etc.) [5]. Sense-
making also leads to generation of new knowledge us-
ing existing ideas [6] which in turn, leads into enhanced
content understanding [7]. Given this significance, there
has been an uptick in investigations focused on promot-
ing sensemaking in the learning of physics [8, 9].
The Generative-Artificial Intelligence (AI), particu-
larly ChatGPT, has garnered significant traction among
educators’ community in the last year [10].
The
Generative-AI is a Large Language Model that is pre-
trained on vast multi-modal data, including texts and
images, to generate probabilistic responses. The chat-
bot’s feature to produce human-like, grammatically
sound, and assertive responses to a wide variety of tasks
has promised a huge potential in transforming science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) ed-
ucation. In physics education, studies have focused on
Preprint submitted to Elsevier
January 2, 2024
arXiv:2401.00627v1  [physics.ed-ph]  1 Jan 2024

exploring the efficacy of AI responses to various forms
of assessments that go into a typical course.
These
include standardized assessments such as Force Con-
cept Inventory [11], free-response homework assign-
ments [12], clicker questions, multiple choice questions,
programming tasks [13], short-essays assignments [14],
and end-of-the chapter problems [15].
However, a predominant focus of this literature has
been on empirically exploring the conceptual accuracy
of AI responses to various tasks and discussing the re-
sults’ implications in light of leveraging AI systems in
teaching and learning of physics. However, given the
recent efforts to promote authentic knowledge-building
practices in physics classrooms [16, 17, 18], there is
also a need to examine the AI responses in light of
such practices. The practices-focused examination of
AI solutions can shed valuable insights on how AI plat-
forms can complement educators’ efforts in facilitating
students’ scientific inquiry in our classrooms.
We contribute to the ongoing efforts by going be-
yond gauging conceptual accuracy of Generative-AI re-
sponses to comparatively examining them vis-a-vis stu-
dents’ responses through the cognitive lenses of sense-
making and mechanistic reasoning. Mechanistic rea-
soning – the process of unpacking the underlying mech-
anism of an observed phenomenon – too is a central
approach to scientific inquiry spanning across multi-
ple disciplines. We adopt a mixed-methods approach
in examining students’ and ChatGPT’s solutions to two
versions of a physics problem designed to unpack the
underlying mechanism of a real-world context using
physics and mathematical principles.
While the stu-
dents’ data are derived from think-aloud interviews, the
AI data are from ChatGPT’s (version 3.5) responses
recorded using the Zero Shot approach, i.e., prompting
the problems directly to chatbot without providing any
context and recording the generated answer.
In the rest of this manuscript, we answer the fol-
lowing research question: How do students and AI re-
sponses compare with each other with regard to the fea-
tures of sensemaking and mechanistic reasoning? We
address this question through an initial qualitative ex-
amination of a sample solution from each data set in
terms of sensemaking and mechanistic reasoning fol-
lowed by the discussion of the quantitative distribution
of these markers manifesting across the two sets of data.
Results highlight the AI responses to reflect the mark-
ers of sensemaking and mechanistic reasoning with an
exception of the meta-cognitive feature of noticing in-
consistencies in “knowledge system”. However, these
features are evidenced despite providing an incorrect
reasoning in every response. On the other hand, students
data reveal varying degree of evidence of the markers
of the two processes but reflecting the rich practices of
“doing physics”, e.g., diagram-based reasoning, itera-
tive refinement of arguments, etc. Thus, we claim that
while AI responses reflect how physics is talked about,
student responses reflect how physics is practiced. Im-
plications of these results, particularly in the context of
designing classroom activities involving Generative-AI
are discussed.
This manuscript is structured as follows: in the next
section, we briefly review the literature on sensemak-
ing and Large Language Models (LLMs) in physics
education. We then present the theoretical constructs
of sensemaking and mechanistic reasoning processes in
Section 3. In Section 4, we detail the physics problem
along with our methods of data collection and analy-
sis. In Section 5, we qualitatively analyze a represen-
tative solution from each data set before providing the
quantitative distribution of the two processes’ features
in Section 6. We end with discussing the implications
and limitations of this work, along with future studies in
Sections 7 and 8.
2. Background
In this section, we briefly review the literature on
sensemaking and the use of Large Language Models
(LLMs) in physics education.
2.1. Sensemaking
Sensemaking is a common cognitive process through
which we integrate new information into our knowledge
system. Numerous studies have explored the process
of “making sense of a phenomenon”, particularly in the
context of science education. Literature on sensemaking
can be mainly characterized into three groups: theoret-
ical accounts, analytical accounts, and outcomes of the
sensemaking process.
The first section of the sensemaking literature in-
volves studies that have explored the theoretical mech-
anisms involved in the process of “making sense of a
phenomenon”. These studies have described sensemak-
ing in terms of modeling [19], transfer [20], argumenta-
tion [21], an epistemic frame [22] (in the moment under-
standing of “what’s going on here”), and an epistemic
game [23] (a systematic approach to inquiry with defi-
nite starting and ending points). Given these diverse de-
scriptions of the same process, Odden and Russ provide
a coherent account of sensemaking and define it as a
process guided by the metacognitive feature of noticing
2

gaps in one’s understanding (Refer Section 3). For de-
tailed description on theoretical accounts of sensemak-
ing, we recommend readers the reference [2].
The second section of the sensemaking literature fo-
cuses on the analytical descriptions of the reasoning ap-
proaches or snippets of reasoning that qualify as sense-
making. These studies are mainly contextualized in the
application of mathematics in physics (also referred to
as “mathematical sensemaking”) [3, 24, 25]. Few an-
alytical descriptions of sensemaking include: seeking
coherence between different forms of representations in
physics (equations, diagrams, plots, etc.) [26, 27], map-
ping mathematics with physical world including causal
relations [28, 29], and reasoning quantitative problems
with qualitative insights [25]. For additional details on
analytical accounts of sensemaking, refer [30].
The last group of the sensemaking studies dwell on
its outcomes. As noted in Section 1, there are three
major outcomes of the sensemaking process: (i) devel-
opment of sophisticated epistemology, (ii) generation
of new knowledge, and (iii) enhanced content under-
standing. Since sensemaking entails establishing coher-
ence between different forms of knowledge, one of the
primary outcomes of the process entails effective nav-
igation between different knowledge forms or sophis-
ticated epistemology [5].
Sensemaking also involves
leveraging existing ideas through thought experiments,
or analogies in making novel claims, thereby leading to
the generation of new knowledge- the second outcome
of the sensemaking process [31, 32]. Lastly, navigating
between different sources knowledge forms in generat-
ing new knowledge leads to enhanced content under-
standing in science [33, 34, 35] - the final outcome of
the sensemaking process.
2.2. Large Language Models in Physics Education
The history of technology-enhanced learning in
physics dates back to several decades. However, since
2022, there has been a significant increase in the num-
ber of investigations focused on Generative-AI in edu-
cational contexts mainly driven by the advent of Chat-
GPT from OpenAI 2. In physics education, researchers
have explored the use of Generative-AI in qualitative
education research [36], generating synthetic student
data [37], grading student responses [38], providing
feedback [39] along with developing and analyzing as-
sessments [40]. However, given the focus of this paper,
we primarily focus on the relevant literature involving
the intersection of AI and physics assessments.
2https://snnubiai.github.io/chatgpt arxiv analysis/
The early investigations on Generative-AI in physics
education have focused on the AI’s efficacy in respond-
ing to physics standardized and course assessments.
Researchers have explored the increased accuracy of
evolving versions of ChatGPT to the Force Concept In-
ventory. West [11] observed the ChatGPT-4 to ace the
standardized assessment with an impressive accuracy
around 90%. A similar performance from AI has also
been recorded on short-form physics essays where the
ChatGPT’s responses qualified for a “First Class” qual-
ification with an average score of 71±2% [14].
Several other studies have examined the accuracy
of ChatGPT in responding to assessments in typical
physics courses and end-of-the chapter problems. Ko-
rtemeyer [13] observed ChatGPT to “just pass” a typi-
cal physics course with various assessment formats in-
cluding the FCI (60% accuracy), open-ended homework
assignments (55%), clicker questions (93%), program-
ming exercises (90%), and end of the course examina-
tions (47%). In another study, Yeadon and Halliday [41]
analyzed the responses from GPT-4 and GPT-3.5 to 42
examination papers from 10 physics courses between
2018 to 2022 at Durham University. The authors ob-
served the two GPT versions each scoring 50.8% and
41.6% respectively on the examination papers with the
accuracy dropping on higher-level physics questions re-
quiring complex calculations.
Wang et al [15] analyze ChatGPT’s accuracy in re-
sponding to science and engineering problems across
well-specified problems (involving abstract contexts
and adequate data) and under-specified ones (involv-
ing real-world contexts and incomplete data).
The
authors observe ChatGPT to accurately solve 62.5%
of well-specified problems but only 8.3% of under-
specified problems. Given the varying performance of
LLMs on various forms of tasks, Polverini and Gre-
gorcic [42] discuss how prompting techniques (ways of
posing prompts to the chatbot) can enhance the perfor-
mance of AI interfaces.
This broad overview of the literature highlight that
the studies on AI in the context of physics assessments
have mainly focused on gauging the accuracy of AI re-
sponses with little or no focus on the processes that fa-
cilitate generation of new knowledge in science. We
address this gap in the literature by analyzing students
and AI responses to two versions of a physics problem
through the cognitive lenses of sensemaking and mech-
anistic reasoning.
3

3. Theoretical Frameworks
In the rest of this section, we discuss the theoretical
frameworks of the sensemaking and mechanistic rea-
soning processes. It is important to note that these two
processes are independent of the correctness of solu-
tions. That is, a person may engage in these two pro-
cesses despite providing an incorrect description or so-
lution of a given scenario.
3.1. Sensemaking
Sensemaking is a common cognitive process that hu-
mans engage in both within and beyond formal settings.
It is the process through which we integrate new in-
formation into our knowledge system. In the rest of
this manuscript, we adopt the following account from
Odden and Russ [2] who define sensemaking as:
a dynamic process of building or revising
an explanation in order to ‘figure something
out’ - to ascertain the mechanism underly-
ing a phenomenon in order to resolve a gap
or inconsistency in one’s understanding. One
builds this explanation out of a mix of every-
day knowledge and formal knowledge by it-
eratively proposing and connecting up differ-
ent ideas on the subject. One also simultane-
ously checks that those connections and ideas
are coherent, both with one another and with
other ideas in one’s knowledge system.
Based on the above definition, we deduce the follow-
ing markers (henceforth referred as “sensemaking ele-
ments”) which together evidence the sensemaking pro-
cess:
1. Noticing inconsistency in one’s understanding.
2. Use of everyday and formal knowledge while rea-
soning about a phenomenon.
3. Ascertaining the underlying mechanism of the phe-
nomenon.
4. Generating and connecting up different ideas.
5. Seeking coherence between the generated ideas.
In terms of the above-mentioned sensemaking ele-
ments, we qualitatively analyze the features of sense-
making in student and AI responses to two versions of a
physics problem in Section 5. We then discuss the quan-
titative distribution of these elements across the two sets
of data in Section 6.
3.2. Mechanistic reasoning
Unpacking the underlying mechanism of a phe-
nomenon (the fifth sensemaking element in our list) is
a complex cognitive process in itself and has been re-
ferred to as “mechanistic reasoning”. Mechanistic rea-
soning is a form of causal reasoning that entails the de-
scription of the underlying events and factors that give
rise to an observed phenomenon [43, 44]. This form of
reasoning often entails generating explanations by tran-
sitioning from observable features of a phenomenon at
the macro level to the underlying entities/processes (of-
ten at the micro level). The process of ascertaining the
mechanism can further involve transitioning back from
the micro to the macro features, and testing the validity
of the generated explanation by varying the spatial or
temporal organization of the entities/processes [43].
As an example, consider the phenomenon of a coin
placed in a glass of water as being raised when viewed
from above. A mechanistic account for this observa-
tion can be provided using the principle of refraction of
light. When a ray of light passes from a denser medium
(water) to a rarer medium (air), it deviates away from
an imaginary line perpendicular to the surface between
these two media. This deviation results in the forma-
tion of an apparent image of the coin, making it appear
closer to the water’s surface. Similarly, one can argue
that an object in air when viewed from water (e.g., while
swimming underwater) would appear to be farther away
than the actual distance.
3.2.1. Analytic framework on mechanistic reasoning
Russ et al. [45] put forward an analytic framework to
capture the extent of sophistication in mechanistic ac-
counts such as the one described above. This frame-
work characterizes mechanistic reasoning into seven hi-
erarchical codes in the increasing order of their sophis-
tication that relatively evidence mechanistic reasoning.
1. Describing the target phenomenon. Articulation of
a stable phenomenon concerning which reasoning
about the underlying mechanism occurs. In our ex-
ample, the explicit articulation of the apparent shift
in the coin’s position in water evidences this code.
2. Identifying set up conditions. Noting the enabling
conditions of the environment that trigger regular
changes of mechanism leading to the phenomenon.
In our case, identifying water as a denser medium,
and air as a rarer medium evidences this code.
3. Identifying entities. The identification of objects or
entities such as a ray of light and the two media
that play crucial role in the manifestation of the
phenomenon.
4

4. Identifying activities. The identification of actions
and interactions of the entities (such as the light
ray moving from one media to another) in a mech-
anism correspond to this code.
5. Identifying properties of entities. The identification
of general properties of entities (e.g., light travel-
ing in straight lines) that are instrumental in the
mechanism.
6. Identifying organization of entities. The descrip-
tion of spatial organization, location, and the struc-
ture of entities, such as the location of coin in
denser medium, reflects this code.
7. Chaining: backward and forward.
Lastly, rea-
soning about the events that were crucial for the
current behavior of systems (backward chaining),
or about the potential future behavior of systems
given its current state (forward chaining) mark this
code. In our case, an object in air being viewed
from water appearing to be farther than the actual
distance.
The authors further note that the presence of higher
codes (e.g., identifying properties of entities) often sub-
sume the evidence of lower codes (e.g., identifying en-
tities) in mechanistic accounts. Furthermore, contem-
porary literature has increasingly highlighted the role
of representations such as diagrams and gestures dur-
ing mechanistic reasoning [46]. Thus, we examine our
student data by taking into account the above-mentioned
seven codes along with diagrams and gestures employed
in the mechanistic explanations.
4. Methods
4.1. Context
The objective of this study is to examine sensemak-
ing and mechanistic reasoning in students and AI re-
sponses to a physics problem – the “Gravitron problem”
– posed in two different formats. The problem consists
of a rotating cylindrical amusement ride in which riders
lean against the wall and students are asked to determine
whether riders would fall off the Gravitron’s walls under
the specified parameters. One of the ways to approach
this problem is by first identifying the forces acting on
the rider and noting that riders would stay put against
the wall if the force of friction would balance the force
of gravity. If this condition mathematically holds true,
then riders would sustain inside the Gravitron or else
they would slide off. A detailed solution of this prob-
lem can be found in our earlier work [47].
This problem had two different formats: open-ended
(Fig 1) and scaffolded (Fig 2). Unlike the open-ended
You are asked to design a Gravitron for the
county fair, an amusement park ride where the
rider enters a hollow cylinder, radius of 4.6 m,
the rider leans against the wall and the room
spins until it reaches angular velocity, at which
point the floor lowers. The coefficient of static
friction is 0.2.
You need this ride to sustain
mass between 25-160 kg to be able to ride safely
and not slide off the wall. If the minimum ω is
3 rad/s, will anyone slide down and off the wall
at these masses? Explain your reasoning using
diagrams, equations and words.
Figure 1: Open-ended version of the Gravitron task
version, the scaffolded version explicitly asked for the
underlying assumptions and the free body diagram (di-
agram highlighting the forces along with their directions
acting on the riders) required to solve the problem.
4.2. Data
Our data consists of two sets: student and AI re-
sponses. Student responses were collected through two
sets of think-aloud interviews each involving 10 in-
troductory students solving a set of physics problems.
While the first set of interviews were conducted in the
spring of 2018, the second were conducted in Spring
2019.
Both interview protocols involved asking stu-
dents to think-aloud while solving the problems and
treat the problem-solving exercise as an untimed exam.
The interviewer intervened during instances of pro-
longed silence through phrases such as “What are you
thinking?” to nudge participants to think-aloud. Partic-
ipants were provided with a calculator and an equation
sheet, and were compensated with a $20 gift card. Par-
ticipants’ demographic information was not collected
during the interviews.
The problem sets across the two interviews were de-
signed using the “Three-Dimensional Learning Assess-
ment Protocol” (3D-LAP) [48] to elicit scientific prac-
tices. While a subset of problems in the first interview
were designed to elicit the practice of “Developing and
Using Models”, the second set consisted of problems
designed to elicit the practice of “Using Mathematics”.
Two interviews across the each set had issues with au-
dio/video. Thus, the data reported in this study consists
of responses from a total of 16 student interviews evenly
split across two sets.
On the other hand, the AI data involves responses
collected from ChatGPT-3.5 using Zero Shot approach.
5

You are asked to design a Gravitron for the
county fair, an amusement park ride where the
enters a hollow cylinder, radius of 4.6 m, the
rider leans against the wall and the room spins
until it reaches a specified angular velocity ω, at
which point the floor lowers. The coefficient of
static friction is 0.2. You need this ride to sus-
tain mass between 25-160 kg (i.e., they should
be able to ride safely and not slide off the wall.
A.) What assumptions do you need to make
to be able to solve this?
B.) Create a free body diagram for the rider
when the room is spinning. Note all applicable
forces and label them.
C.) If the floor drops out when ω is 3 rad/s,
will anyone slide off the wall in the given mass
range? Explain your reasoning.
Figure 2: Scaffolded version of the Gravitron task
This method of prompting involves seeking a response
from the interface posing the problem directly with-
out providing any prior context.
To maintain parity
across the student data, ChatGPT was prompted with
the physics problem sixteen times (eight each across
open-ended and scaffolded versions) by initiating as
many separate “conversations”.
4.3. Data Analysis
As part of the analysis, students’ verbal arguments
and written solutions to the Gravitron task were ana-
lyzed through the lens of the five sensemaking elements
described in Section 3.1. The first element – noticing
inconsistencies – was identified in the responses by not-
ing puzzling questions [49], intermittent pauses [47], in-
complete arguments, etc. The second sensemaking ele-
ment – blending everyday and formal knowledge – was
identified when the responses reflected anamalgamation
of formal physics principles with the Gravitron’s “phys-
ical system”. Arguments such as “the rider being pulled
down by the gravity” or “friction preventing the rider
from slipping down” were coded as the blending of ev-
eryday and formal knowledge. The third and fourth el-
ements were captured based on the generation and vali-
dation of intuitive, conceptual, or procedural ideas.
We captured the fifth sensemaking element (mech-
anistic reasoning) by identifying the nine hierarchical
codes described in Section 3.2.1. The first code, de-
scription of the target phenomenon, was marked when
the responses explicitly noted the phenomenon of riders
being held against the wall without slipping. The “iden-
tifying set up conditions” code was marked when re-
sponses highlighted the features such as the lowering of
the Gravitron’s floor or the spinning of the room. Codes
associated with entities (identifying entities, their activ-
ities, properties, and organization) were noted by the
description of the interplay of the forces on the rider
e.g., gravity acting downwards, mass remaining con-
stant, etc. Lastly, the chaining code was marked when
the required conclusion was made.
We highlight that our data across student and AI re-
sponses have two different modalities. While the stu-
dent data entails verbal arguments, and written solu-
tions, the ChatGPT’s data corresponds to written texts.
We acknowledge this major limitation in our methods
of data collection/analysis in comparing two different
categories of data. Yet, we adopt this approach as our
primary motivation is to empirically explore how stu-
dents typically reason about a real-world scenario us-
ing physics principles and how AI would respond to the
same context. As practitioners, we were aware that stu-
dents would not prefer writing detailed reflective argu-
ments in their solutions, particularly when answering a
series of complex problems like the described in this pa-
per.
5. Qualitative analysis of a student’s and ChatGPT’s
solution
In this section, we provide a detailed qualitative anal-
ysis of a student named Joshua’s (pseudonym) and an
AI’s solution to the scaffolded version of the Gravitron
task.
While Joshua’s attempt involves an unsuccess-
ful bid to solve the problem, the AI solution provides
a detailed but incorrect solution to the problem. The
student’s solution approach reflects all features of the
sensemaking process and most features of mechanistic
reasoning (except the “chaining” code). The AI’s solu-
tion on the other hand, evidences most of the sensemak-
ing features (with an exception of noticing gaps in its
“knowledge system”) and all analytical codes of mech-
anistic reasoning. Tables 5.2 and 5.2.1 highlight the ev-
identiary quotes from the two data samples highlighting
the features of sensemaking and mechanistic reasoning.
We focus on the scaffolded version, since a detailed
case-study analyses of two students’ sensemaking about
the open-ended version of the same task can be found
in our earlier work [47]. As noted in Section 4, the
scaffolded version (Figure 2) has three sub-prompts.
The first two sub-prompts “A” and “B” respectively ask
about the assumptions required to solve the problem and
6

Figure 3: Joshua’s written solution to the scaffolded version of the
Gravitron task.
a free body diagram highlighting the forces acting on
the rider. The third sub-prompt “C” asks whether riders
would fall off the Gravitron’s walls under the specified
parameters.
5.1. Joshua’s attempt at the Scaffolded Gravitron task
In response to the first two prompts of the task,
Joshua assumes the Gravitron’s walls to be perpendicu-
lar to its floor and constructs a free-body diagram high-
lighting the forces acting on the rider. While answer-
ing to the first two prompts, he notices a gap in his
understanding about a force that counteracts the cen-
tripetal force. He tries to address this perceived gap
through several conceptual ideas such as angular mo-
mentum, impulse, and velocity.
Unable to make a
breakthrough, he finally quits the problem. Figure 3
highlights Joshua’s written solution. Overall, Joshua’s
attempt reflected all features of the sensemaking pro-
cess and six of the seven codes of mechanistic reasoning
(with the exception of chaining). Tables 5.2 and 5.2.1
highlight the representative quotes from Joshua evi-
dencing the sensemaking elements and codes of mech-
anistic reasoning. These markers are evidenced despite
the participant not solving the problem completely.
Below,
we discuss Joshua’s attempt into three
episodes with the first episode focusing on the prob-
lem’s sub-parts A and B (focused on assumptions and
free-body diagram) and the remaining two episodes fo-
cused on the problem’s sub-part C. Across each episode,
we first summarize the specific segment, present the par-
ticipant’s transcript, and then explicitly call out the fea-
tures of the sensemaking and mechanistic processes.
5.1.1. Episode 1. Joshua’s assumptions and free-body
diagram
Summary Upon going through the problem state-
ment, Joshua articulates that one of the assumptions re-
quired to solve the problem should be considering the
Gravitron’s floor to be orthogonal to its floor. The ar-
ticulation of this assumption is accompanied by a hand-
gesture as shown in Figure 4. Moving on to the part
B, he constructs a free-body diagram highlighting the
rider’s center of mass, gravitational force, centripetal
force, and angular momentum as shown in Figure 3.
Transcript
[Reads prompt A] The angle of the wall...
like.. when spinning should be orthogonal?
[gestures hand] I mean to the wall with re-
spect to the floor [inaudible]. I don’t know. I
am not given theta and I don’t know if I need
to solve for it. It’s going to be pretty difficult
for me to do. [Looks at the equation sheet.]
Well, will come back at it later. [Writes the
assumption].
[Reads prompt B] Okay, I have the center of
gravity [draws a dot], and centripetal force?
And... uh... [stares at the solution for 15 sec-
onds] I don’t know how to solve this. This is
a tough question. I don’t even know what the
centripetal force formula is [looks at the equa-
tion sheet]. I have not looked at any of these
recently either. It has to be angular momen-
tum right? [Draws the left arrow and denotes
it as “L”] I don’t exactly remember about the
angular momentum.
Features of sensemaking. Joshua’s approach in the
first two sub-prompts highlight his noticing of an incon-
sistency about his understanding about the forces act-
ing on the Gravitron’s rider. His consistent acknowl-
edgement about his (lack of) understanding about the
forces is evidenced by the “I don’t know” phrases oc-
curring several times while constructing the force dia-
gram. Such acknowledgement of gaps in understanding
mark the initiation of the sensemaking process [49, 23].
Codes of mechanistic reasoning. On the mechanis-
tic reasoning front, this segment reflects the identifying
entities and identifying organization of entities in the
phenomenon of the riders being held up inside the Grav-
itron. Joshua identifies several entities such as Gravit-
ron’s walls, its floor, gravitational and centripetal forces,
and angular momentum. In addition to noting them, he
reasons about their spatial organization through the con-
struction of the free-body diagram and through the ver-
7

bal arguments such as “The angle of the wall .. should
be orthogonal?”.
5.1.2. Episode 2: Joshua’s approach to prompt C
Summary Moving to the final sub-part of the prob-
lem (Part C), Joshua continues to reason about the
forces acting on the rider. Identifying friction as the
force counteracting gravity, he struggles to reason about
the force counteracting the centripetal force and di-
rected into the wall.
Transcript
[Reads the third prompt] So, we need the
momentum to outweigh....
What’s pointing
up? Is it the friction? What’s the friction?
[Draws the upper arrow and denoted it as
“F f ”]. Okay. So. I haven’t entirely figured
out the normal force into the wall. I have to
come back to it later. [Looks at the equation
sheet] Okay, so the force of friction is keep-
ing them off the ground from Fg. Yeah I don’t
know. [inaudible]. Okay, we need this cen-
tripetal force as 0.2 times the mass and the
acceleration into the wall [inaudible] which
is not the momentum? I do not have anything
pointing at the wall right now. I need to figure
out how to do that.
[Stares at the equation sheet for 25 seconds]
Now I am trying to remember how exactly
to... I am seriously trying to understand cen-
tripetal force right now. Because I only have
something pointing to the center of the circle
but I don’t know what’s going out of the cir-
cle. That is a moving mass [inaudible]. Nor-
mal force is equal to m w r which is going
to keep them up. Which is equal to mass times
acceleration into the wall, which I don’t know.
Okay [Stares at the solution for 30 seconds]
Features of sensemaking. This segment of Joshua’s
transcript reflects his continued acknowledgement about
the gap in his understanding about the forces and blend-
ing everyday and formal knowledge to address the per-
ceived gap. While he identifies friction as opposing the
gravity (“Okay, so the force of friction is keeping them
off the ground from Fg”), he struggles to reason about
the force which is directed into the wall, acting against
the centripetal force. This is evidenced by his arguments
“I do not have anything pointing at the wall right now. I
need to figure out how to do that.” and “Because I only
have something pointing to the center of the circle but I
don’t know what’s going out of the circle.” These argu-
ments also reflect the amalgamation of the description
Figure 4: One of the gestures made by Joshua while solving the scaf-
folded version of the Gravitron task.
of physical features of the system using formal concep-
tual ideas, the second sensemaking element.
Codes of mechanistic reasoning. The same segment
of the transcript also evidences several mechanistic rea-
soning codes including identifying entities, their prop-
erties, their activities and their (spatial) organization.
Joshua identifies frictional and normal forces as entities
influential in describing how the rider sustains inside the
Gravitron. He further goes on to identify the properties
of those forces (entities) such as the normal force being
equal to the product of m, w, and r along with the ac-
tivities engaged by the entities (friction keeping the rid-
ers from falling and the constant motion of the rider’s
mass). Lastly, his arguments also evidence the spatial
organization of the entities such as the centripetal force
being directed towards to the center of the Gravitron,
frictional force directed opposite to gravity, etc.
5.1.3. Episode 3: Joshua quits the prompt C
Summary A prolonged pause at the end of the pre-
vious segment makes the interviewer intervene with
“What are you thinking” to which Joshua replies as try-
ing to figure out the force directed into the wall. He in-
vokes the concepts of impulse, velocity, and momentum
in trying to identify the inward-acting force. Unable to
make inroads, he quits the problem solving exercise.
[Interviewer]
What
are
you
thinking?
[Joshua] I don’t know what I am doing.
I
need to somehow say... uh. I need to figure
out how much of their force is heading into
the wall using their momentum [gesturing
hand] momentum of the lightest person, but
8

Figure 5: ChatGPT’s free-body diagram generated in response to the
scaffolded version of the Gravitron task.
I don’t know how to do that.
Uh.
I don’t
remember how to do momentum problems.
Um, trying to remember about impulse, how
we calculated velocity.
Force is change in
momentum over change in time. But I don’t
know how much time.
And....
I am just
thinking whether there is anything wrong in
it.
I need to find the acceleration into the
wall. Wasted a lot of time probably on this.
Will move to the next problem
Features of sensemaking.
The final segment of
Joshua’s transcript highlights the generation of vari-
ous ideas and attempts to seek coherence between them
while trying to identify the force directed into the Grav-
itron’s walls. He invokes the construct of impulse, try-
ing to remember the calculation of velocity, and also
refers to the mathematical definition of force as the rate
of change of momentum. Unable to seek a coherence
between these ideas, he finally abandons his pursuit.
Codes of mechanistic reasoning. Joshua’s final ar-
guments reflect the codes of identifying additional enti-
ties such as impulse, velocity, and time.
5.2. AI’s solution to the Scaffolded Gravitron task
In the rest of this subsection, we analyze one of the
eight AI’s solutions to the scaffolded version of the
Gravitron task through the lens of sensemaking and
mechanistic reasoning.
Similar to categorization of
Joshua’s transcript, we divide the solution into three
segments: the first one focusing on the sub-parts A and
B, and the last two segments focusing on the sub-part
C. For each segment, we begin with a brief summary,
followed by the transcript, and its discussion in terms of
the features of sensemaking and mechanistic reasoning.
The AI’s transcript explicitly evidences most features
of sensemaking with an exception of noticing gaps in
its “knowledge system” and all the codes of the mech-
anistic reasoning.
Tables 5.2 and 5.2.1 highlight the
representative quotes from the AI’s solution evidencing
sensemaking and mechanistic reasoning.
5.2.1. Segment 1: Solutions to prompts A and B
Summary. The AI’s response to the first prompt en-
tails a total of five assumptions to solve the problem.
The assumptions span across the forces acting on the
rider, the rider’s orientation on the wall, and the radius
of the Gravitron.
In response to the second prompt,
the ChatGPT’s response entails a free-body diagram as
shown in Figure 5 along with it’s description of gravita-
tional, frictional, and centripetal forces.
A. To solve this problem, we can make the fol-
lowing assumptions:
1. The gravitational force acting on the riders
is the only significant force involved in deter-
mining their ability to stay against the wall.
Other forces such as air resistance, normal
force, or friction between the riders and the
floor can be neglected.
2. The riders lean against the wall and do
not apply any additional force to maintain
contact with it. The only force keeping them
against the wall is the static friction between
their bodies and the wall.
3.
The riders are evenly distributed along
the wall of the cylinder, and their weight is
uniformly distributed.
This assumption al-
lows us to consider the forces acting on a sin-
gle rider instead of analyzing each individual
rider separately.
4. The radius of the cylinder remains constant
throughout the ride and does not change due
to deformation or stretching.
5. The riders are motionless relative to the
rotating frame of reference. In reality, there
might be some slight movement or sliding, but
for simplicity, we assume that they remain sta-
tionary with respect to the cylinder’s rotating
frame.
9

Table 1: Representative evidentiary quotes of sensemaking elements in Joshua’s and ChatGPT’s responses to the scaffolded Gravitron task.
Sensemaking elements
Joshua
ChatGPT
Noticing
inconsisten-
cies in understanding
“I only have something pointing to the
center of the circle but I don’t know what’s
going out of the circle.” [Episode 2]
-
Use of everyday and
formal knowledge
“Normal force is equal to m w r which is
going to keep them up.” [Episode 2]
“If fs max is greater than or equal to mg,
the riders will stay against the wall and
not slide off.” [Segment 2]
Generating
and
con-
necting ideas
“Um, trying to remember about impulse,
how we calculated velocity.
Force is
change in momentum over change in
time.” [Episode 3]
“[..]we need to compare the maximum
static friction force (fs max) with the grav-
itational force (mg) for the riders in the
given mass range.” [Segment 2]
Seeking coherence be-
tween ideas
“I need to figure out how much of their
force is heading into the wall using their
momentum momentum of the lightest per-
son, but I don’t know how to do that.”
[Episode 3]
“[..] we can see that fs max is significantly
less than mg. This means that the maxi-
mum static friction force provided by the
wall is not enough to counteract the grav-
itational force for a rider[..]” [Segment 3]
These assumptions simplify the problem and
allow us to focus on the gravitational force
and the static friction acting on a single rider.
B. When the room is spinning, we can create
a free body diagram for the rider. In this case,
the rider experiences two main forces: the
gravitational force (mg) and the static friction
force (fs) provided by the wall. Here is the free
body diagram:
In the diagram, the gravitational force (mg)
acts vertically downward since it is the force
due to the rider’s weight. The static friction
force (fs) acts radially inward, directed to-
wards the center of the circular path. This
force is responsible for providing the cen-
tripetal force required to keep the rider
against the wall.
It’s important to note that the static friction
force adjusts its magnitude to exactly balance
the gravitational force to prevent the rider
from sliding down the wall.
The maximum
static friction force (f smax) can be calculated
using the formula f smax = µsN, where µs is
the coefficient of static friction and N is the
normal force (equal to the gravitational force
in this case).
This free body diagram helps us understand
the forces acting on the rider and how they
contribute to keeping the rider against the
wall while the room is spinning.
Features of sensemaking. From the viewpoint of
sensemaking, this segment reflects the blending of ev-
eryday and formal knowledge along with generation of
ideas by describing the Gravitron mechanism in terms
of formal concepts of physics.
All five assumptions
(in response to prompt A) and the description of the
free-body diagram focusing on the interaction of various
forces keeping the rider stay put evidence this feature.
Furthermore, the segment also entails several concep-
tual and mathematical ideas of the involved forces.
Codes of mechanistic reasoning. From the perspec-
tive of mechanistic reasoning, this segment entails the
first six analytical codes. While the description of the
target phenomenon is evidenced at the end of the de-
scription of the force diagram (“[...] keeping the rider
against the wall while the room is spinning.”), the set-
up conditions are identified in the beginning of the re-
sponse to prompt B by identifying the forces acting on
the rider when the room starts spinning. Several enti-
ties such as the forces, riders, radius of the cylinder, and
coefficient of static friction are identified that play key
roles in the observed phenomenon. In addition, the ac-
tivities and properties of entities are highlighted through
description of the forces acting on the rider (e.g., grav-
ity activity downwards by virtue of the rider’s weight).
Lastly, this segment also captures the spatial organiza-
tion of various entities such as the riders leaning and
evenly distributed against the wall, constant radius of
the Gravitron, static friction being directed towards the
Gravitron’s center, etc.
10

Table 2: Representative evidentiary quotes highlighting the analytical codes of mechanistic reasoning in Joshua’s and ChatGPT’s responses to the
scaffolded Gravitron task.
Mechanistic
codes
Joshua
ChatGPT
Describing target
phenomenon.
-
“To determine whether anyone will slide
off the wall when the floor drops out [..]”
[Segment 2]
Identifying set up
conditions.
-
“[...] when the floor drops out at an angu-
lar velocity of 3 rad/s.” [Segment 3]
Identifying enti-
ties.
“I have the centre of gravity. [..] It has to
be angular momentum right?” [Episode 1]
“The gravitational force acting on the rid-
ers is the only [...]” [Segment 1]
Identifying activ-
ities.
“[..] the force of friction is keeping them
off the ground from Fg.” [Episode 2 ]
“The static friction force (fs) acts radially
inward. [...]” [Segment 1]
Identifying prop-
erties of entities.
“[..] I only have something pointing to the
center of the circle but I don’t know what’s
going out of the circle.” [Episode 2]
“ [..] the gravitational force (mg) acts ver-
tically downward since it is the force due
to the rider’s weight.” [Segment 1]
Identifying orga-
nization of enti-
ties.
“The angle of the wall... like.. when spin-
ning should be orthogonal?” [Episode 1]
“The riders are evenly distributed along
the wall of the cylinder, [...]” [Segment 1]
Chaining:
back-
ward
and
for-
ward.
-
“[..] a rider weighing 160 kg would likely
slide off the wall when the floor drops out.”
[Segment 3]
5.2.2. Segment 2. Solution to prompt C
Summary.
In order to determine whether anyone
will slide off the Gravitron’s walls, the AI solution
mentions of comparing the frictional and gravitational
forces. Expressing friction in terms of normal force and
equating (though incorrectly) the normal force to grav-
ity, the solution argues that if the friction is greater than
the gravity, then the riders would stay put.
Transcript
C. To determine whether anyone will slide off
the wall when the floor drops out at an angu-
lar velocity ω of 3 rad/s, we need to compare
the maximum static friction force (fs max)
with the gravitational force (mg) for the riders
in the given mass range.
The maximum static friction force can be cal-
culated using the formula fs max = µs * N,
where µs is the coefficient of static friction
and N is the normal force.
In this case,
the normal force is equal to the gravitational
force acting on the rider, so N = mg.
If fs max is greater than or equal to mg, the
riders will stay against the wall and not slide
off. However, if fs max is less than mg, the
riders will not have enough static friction
force to prevent sliding and may potentially
slide off the wall.
Features of sensemaking. This segment of the AI
transcript highlights the generation of ideas component
of the sensemaking process. The arguments of relating
the frictional and gravitational forces, and equating nor-
mal force to gravity evidence this feature.
Codes of mechanistic reasoning. This segment also
highlights the description of the target phenomenon,
identifying set-up conditions, and chaining codes of
mechanistic reasoning. While the transcript’s first sen-
tence highlights the initial two codes (describing the tar-
get phenomenon and identifying set-up conditions), the
final arguments, i.e., the necessary condition between
the frictional and gravitational forces evidences the fi-
nal code (chaining).
5.2.3. Segment 3. Conclusion to prompt C
Summary. The condition is then mathematically for-
mulated by equating the two forces and further simpli-
fying the equation through substitution of the given val-
ues. In the end, the solution concludes that riders would
slide off the Gravitron’s walls, as the gravity outweighs
the frictional force.
Let’s calculate fs max for the riders at the up-
per end of the mass range, which is 160 kg.
11

We’ll assume the coefficient of static friction
(µs) is 0.2, as stated in the initial question.
fs max = µs * N = µs * mg = 0.2 * 160 * 9.8
= 313.6 N
Now, we need to determine the magnitude of
the gravitational force acting on the rider: mg
= 160 kg * 9.8 m/sˆ2 = 1568 N
Comparing fs max (313.6 N) with mg (1568
N), we can see that fs max is significantly
less than mg. This means that the maximum
static friction force provided by the wall is not
enough to counteract the gravitational force
for a rider of 160 kg when the floor drops out
at an angular velocity of 3 rad/s.
Therefore, with the given parameters, a rider
weighing 160 kg would likely slide off the wall
when the floor drops out. It’s important to
adjust the ride or implement additional safety
measures to ensure riders’ safety in the spec-
ified mass range.
Features of sensemaking. This final segment evi-
dences the coherence seeking feature of the sensemak-
ing process.
Making the final conclusion based on
the calculated magnitudes of frictional and gravitational
forces evidences this feature.
Codes of mechanistic reasoning. On the other hand,
this segment evidences identifying the set-up conditions,
the properties of entities, their activities, and chaining
codes of mechanistic reasoning. The initial set-up con-
ditions are re-iterated through the phrase “[...]when the
floor drops out at an angular velocity of 3 rad/s. Fur-
thermore, the numerical comparison between the mag-
nitudes of the two forces evidences the code corre-
sponding to identifying the properties of entities. Lastly,
the concluding statement about the riders falling of the
walls marks the identifying the activities of entities (i.e.,
riders) and chaining codes.
5.3. Comparative reflection between Joshua’s and AI’s
solutions
We examined a representative solution from a stu-
dent (Joshua) and ChatGPT to the scaffolded Gravitron
task. The solution approaches were analyzed through
the theoretical lenses of sensemaking elements and an-
alytical codes of mechanistic reasoning (highlighted in
Tables 5.2 and 5.2.1). Both these approaches have dis-
tinct and distinguishing features from each other.
Joshua’s response reflects a student quitting a prob-
lem upon trying to solve it from multiple ways. Despite
the unsuccessful attempt, the student’s approach high-
lighted several key features of scientific inquiry includ-
ing the meta-cognitive perception of discrepancies in
one’s own understanding, iterative refinement of argu-
ments, and leveraging representation-based reasoning.
Joshua perceived an inconsistency in his understanding
about the forces acting on the Gravitron’s riders. He
sought to address this gap by through identifying sev-
eral forces and trying to recollect his knowledge about
centripetal forces. In the process, he iteratively refined
his arguments, initially considering the construct of an-
gular momentum, then exploring force acting against
centripetal force (centrifugal force), and later reflecting
on impulse and the mathematical definition of a force.
These shifts in arguments were accompanied by repre-
sentations such as the constructed free-body diagram in
Figure 3 and gestures as shown in Figure 4.
On the other hand, the ChatGPT’s solution completed
the problem through requisite prediction. Despite ac-
companying conceptual flaws (e.g., equating normal
force to gravity) and providing incorrect conclusion,
the solution reflected an elegant structure clearly high-
lighting the underlying assumptions necessary to solve
the problem, the target rider-Gravitron system, relevant
forces acting on the rider, and a descriptive conclusion.
This clear articulation of various facets of the solution
resulted in evidencing all the codes of mechanistic rea-
soning thereby reflecting mechanistic sophistication.
6. Quantitative distribution of sensemaking and
mechanistic reasoning features across the two
data sets
In this section, we detail the features of sensemaking
and mechanistic reasoning manifesting in students and
AI responses across the two versions of the Gravitron
task. We first discuss the sensemaking elements before
moving on to the analytical codes of mechanistic rea-
soning.
6.1. Sensemaking
Table 5.2.3 highlights the sensemaking elements ev-
idenced in students’ and AI’s solutions across the two
versions of the Gravitron task.
Unlike student solutions, all of the AI responses ex-
hibited the sensemaking features with the exception of
noticing “knowledge gaps”. Around 50% of the student
responses evidenced the metacognitive feature of notic-
ing inconsistencies in their knowledge systems (similar
to the one’s observed in Joshua’s case discussed in the
previous section). However, though not surprising, none
12

Table 3: Evidence of sensemaking elements in student and AI responses to the open-ended and scaffolded versions of the Gravitron task.
Sensemaking elements
Open-ended (8)
Scaffolded (8)
Student
AI
Student
AI
Noticing inconsistencies in understanding
4
-
4
-
Use of everyday and formal knowledge
6
8
8
8
Generating and connecting ideas
5
8
6
8
Seeking coherence between ideas
4
8
6
8
of the AI responses evidenced this feature. At least as
of writing this manuscript, large language models have
not been observed to notice gaps in “their knowledge
systems”, a crucial feature of the sensemaking process.
Concerning the second sensemaking element, blend-
ing everyday and formal knowledge, six of the eight stu-
dent solutions to the open-ended task and all eight re-
sponses to the scaffolded version evidenced conceptual
reasoning about the given system. The two solutions in
the open-ended version did not reflect this feature, pri-
marily due to the fixation on “choosing the right equa-
tion” and “plugging-and-chugging” of equations. How-
ever, a students’ better evidencing of this sensemaking
feature to the scaffolded version may be due to the pres-
ence of sub-prompts, where the participants were first
asked to identify the forces (and assumptions) acting on
the rider before solving the problem. Explicit identifica-
tion of the forces made students to describe the features
of the Gravitron’s ride in terms of the formal concepts
of physics thereby evidencing the second sensemaking
element. On the AI front, all responses, irrespective of
the problem format were explicit in describing the inter-
play of various concepts in the functioning of Gravitron
system. This feature can also be seen in the sample so-
lution analyzed in the previous section.
On the third sensemaking element – generating and
connecting ideas – the sophistication of AI responses
across the two problem formats seemed to be relatively
better as compared to student ones.
This could be
largely attributed to AI’s varied assumptions and de-
tailed descriptions of mathematical formulae in each so-
lution. In contrast, the student responses tended to have
less detailed formulaic explanations, which might be a
result of having access to an equation sheet during the
interview. Secondly, unlike AI responses, students’ ar-
guments reflected iterative refinement of ideas - a key
feature of productive learning in science. Though it’s
not surprising that AI responses did not iteratively re-
fine arguments, there were instances in solutions where
certain conceptual arguments made in the earlier phases
of solution were not followed up.
On the penultimate feature of sensemaking, i.e., seek-
ing coherence between the generated ideas, all AI so-
lutions reflected this feature whereas, about half and
three-fourth of the student solutions each across the two
formats reflected a coherent conclusion. The last sense-
making element, generating mechanistic accounts is de-
tailed below.
6.2. Mechanistic Reasoning
Table 6.1 highlights the analytical codes of mecha-
nistic reasoning evidenced in student- and AI-generated
solutions across the open-ended and scaffolded formats
of the Gravitron task. Overall, AI responses evidenced
sophistication in mechanistic reasoning (albeit provid-
ing incorrect arguments) whereas student solutions re-
flected the effective use of representations (diagrams
and gestures).
One of the crucial distinctions between the two sets
of responses (also evident from the two sample solu-
tions analyzed in the previous section) lie in evidencing
the lower and higher codes, particularly describing the
target phenomenon, identifying set up conditions, and
backward/forward chaining. Many students did not ex-
plicitly describe the lower codes such as the target phe-
nomenon or the initial set up conditions of the Gravit-
ron. These were rather inferred from their interaction
with the force diagrams. The absence of lower codes
may be perhaps due to students considering such argu-
ments to be “obvious”, especially considering they had
already solved around five problems prior to the Gravit-
ron task. Furthermore, eleven student responses across
the two problem formats did not evidence the higher hi-
erarchical code of chaining, primarily because of not
being able to solve the problem completely and make
the required prediction.
Additionally, Table 6.1 also
highlights explicit scaffolding to be influential in evi-
dencing the higher codes.
Next crucial difference between the two sets of re-
sponses corresponded to use of representations in mech-
anistic reasoning reasoning. While every student solu-
tion to the open-ended problem accompanied force dia-
grams, only three of the AI solutions reflected the same.
13

Table 4: Distribution of mechanistic reasoning codes in student and ChatGPT responses to the open-ended and scaffolded versions of the Gravitron
task.
Markers of mechanistic reasoning
Open-ended (8)
Scaffolded (8)
Student
AI
Student
AI
Describing target phenomenon.
8
8
8
8
Identifying set up conditions.
8
8
8
8
Identifying entities.
8
8
8
8
Identifying activities.
7
8
8
8
Identifying properties of entities.
7
8
8
8
Identifying organization of entities.
6
8
8
8
Chaining: backward and forward.
5
8
6
8
Use of diagrams
8
3
8
8
Use of equations
8
8
8
8
Use of gestures
4
-
4
-
Though a contemporary shortcoming, AI generated di-
agrams were relatively unsophisticated (as can be seen
in Figure 5) and were not referred in the solutions.
7. Discussion and Implications
In the previous two sections, we examined student-
and AI-generated solutions to a physics problem posed
in two different formats.
The solutions were ana-
lyzed through the theoretical lenses of sensemaking and
mechanistic reasoning. While Section 5 presented qual-
itative analysis of representative solutions, Section 6
presented the quantitative distribution of the processes
across each data set.
The results, highlighted in Ta-
bles 5.2, 5.2.1, 5.2.3 and 6.1, can be summarized as:
1. The AI solutions evidenced most features of the
sensemaking process and all codes of mechanistic
reasoning across both open-ended and scaffolded
versions of the Gravitron task.
The student re-
sponses on the other hand, evidenced a subset of
the sensemaking features and most codes of the
mechanistic reasoning.
2. AI responses were particularly better at describing
the physical features of the given system in light
of conceptual ideas (blending everyday and formal
knowledge) and evidencing the lower and higher
codes of mechanistic reasoning.
3. Half of the total student responses highlighted the
feature of noticing gaps in their understanding and
iterative refinement of arguments in their solutions.
4. Unlike AI responses, student solutions effectively
leveraged diagrams in making sense of the given
context.
5. While scaffolding had no effect on AI solutions,
the student responses better evidenced the mech-
anistic reasoning codes when scaffolded with ex-
plicit prompts.
Across each data set, all AI solutions explicitly ev-
idenced the seven codes of mechanistic reasoning. In
contrast, student responses (e.g., Joshua’s response in
Section 5), did not explicitly evidence the lower and
higher analytical codes, particularly the ones pertain-
ing to calling out the target phenomenon, describing the
system’s initial conditions, and predicting the system’s
behavior based on its current state. On the sensemaking
front, the AI solutions also clearly described the rider-
Gravitron system in terms of physics concepts (blending
everyday and formal knowledge) such as the interplay
of various forces on the riders and the conditions neces-
sary for sustaining riders inside the Gravitron.
Another distinguishing feature between the two sets
of responses corresponded to noticing gaps in knowl-
edge system. Half of the total students evidenced notic-
ing inconsistencies in their understanding surrounding
the knowledge required to solve the Gravitron task. This
meta-cognitive reflection resulted in students iteratively
refining their arguments as they progressed in their ap-
proaches. On the other hand, none of the AI responses
reflected this feature. This should not come as a surprise
as the large language models are not capable (at least
as of writing this manuscript) of noticing gaps in their
“knowledge system”. This result however needs to be
reemphasized as the interactive, grammatically sound,
assertive, and expert-like answers can make one to as-
sociate the probabilistic responses generated by an algo-
rithm to a human “responding from the other end”. As
Kortemeyer [13] observes
14

“It is irritatingly hard not to anthropomor-
phize ChatGPT. As a physics teacher, one in-
variably finds oneself rooting for the students
and thus by extension also for ChatGPT, cel-
ebrating its successes and being frustrated
about its occasionally inexplicable failures.”
Another unsurprising but distinguishing feature be-
tween the two sets of responses corresponds to the ways
of leveraging representations in the problem-solving
exercise. Every student who engaged with the prob-
lem constructed a diagram and referred to it several
times during their reasoning. However, only 3 AI so-
lutions generated representations without being specif-
ically prompted to do so in the open-ended task. Even
the ones which accompanied free-body diagrams (Fig-
ure 5) were relatively unsophisticated and were not con-
sistently referred in the solutions. This is again not sur-
prising as generation of sophisticated representations is
a major shortcoming of contemporary large language
models.
We also observed explicit prompting in problems,
particularly those involving diagram-based reasoning,
to elicit more sophisticated mechanistic accounts from
students. Most of the participants evidenced the higher
codes of mechanistic reasoning while responding to the
scaffolded version. Perhaps, this could be attributed to
the requirement in the scaffolded task for participants to
first reason about the interaction of forces on the rider
before making their prediction. In the context our prob-
lem, explicit emphasis on forces results in evidencing
several codes related to entities (properties, activities
and organization of entities). However, there was no de-
pendence observed between the codes and the problem
format in ChatGPT’s responses.
Lastly, though beyond the purview of the two pro-
cesses, AI solutions often included a variety of assump-
tions necessary for their conclusions to be valid. In the
open-ended version, without specific prompting, three
out of eight solutions explicitly stated the assumptions
underlying their conclusions.
On the student front,
students hardly referred to assumptions when solving
open-ended task, and when explicitly prompted, they
often struggled to articulate assumptions [50].
Sec-
ondly, none of the AI responses across the two problems
provided a correct solution despite exhibiting sophisti-
cation on various aspects. This observation aligns with
findings from other studies which have made cautioned
about ChatGPT’s seemingly confident solutions despite
accompanying major conceptual flaws [38, 41].
The above-mentioned results have several implica-
tions for educators in leveraging AI for teaching and
learning of physics. Firstly, our results highlight that
AI is particularly effective at conveying the vocabu-
lary of physics (mechanistic codes such as highlight-
ing the interplay between physical features, mathemat-
ical formalisms, and conceptual ideas). This vocabu-
lary is further embedded in a systematically organized
solution structure such as initial descriptions of target
systems, mathematical calculations, and clear articula-
tion of conclusions accompanied by underlying assump-
tions. These aspects are often beneficial for beginners
in early stages of their physics courses in effectively
structuring and communicating their results. Activities
such as and multilingual students in the early phases
of their courses. asking students to solve challenging
problems or write descriptive essays (say about, fun-
damental laws of physics), and making them compare
their responses to AI-generated ones can tactfully com-
municate the physics terminology along with the struc-
tural communication of ideas. Such practices can also
be useful for multilingual students getting started with
learning physics in English language.
Furthermore, there are ongoing efforts in designing
large language models (LLMs) that can provide per-
sonalized learning assistance to students [51]. Our ob-
servation of explicit prompting to facilitate students’
mechanistic reasoning can lead to designing planned
scaffolds focused on the analytical codes that can sup-
port students in generating sophisticated mechanistic
accounts.
Calibrated interventions aimed at nudging
students towards identifying the appropriate target sys-
tem, relevant entities, and associated activities can lead
to enhanced learning about real-world systems, partic-
ularly in university-level physics. For instance, in our
case study, an explicit scaffold asking Joshua to re-
consider the relevance of inward directed force or the
role of normal force in providing the necessary cen-
tripetal force would have helped him in continuing the
problem-solving endeavor.
In a similar way, several
studies are also exploring on providing personalized
feedback based on students’ solutions. The features of
our adopted frameworks (sensemaking elements and an-
alytical codes of mechanistic reasoning) can also inform
the nature and structure of feedback.
Consistent with the contemporary literature, we too
observed AI responses confidently articulating incorrect
solutions through sophisticated vocabulary. This feature
can be leveraged by asking students to critique the AI-
generated solutions. Such exercises can not only make
students aware of the imperfections underlying AI re-
sponses, but can also implicitly communicate the so-
phisticated lexical patterns of scientific communication.
In addition, confident phrasing of incorrect solutions
15

can also be a fertile ground for students to notice gaps
in their knowledge systems, thereby facilitating sense-
making in our classrooms.
Contemporary studies have also called for design-
ing next-generation assessments in which Generative-
AI can support students instead of impeding their learn-
ing.
Our results highlight designing assessments fo-
cused on diagram- and gesture-based reasoning to be
potentially productive as the contemporary AI systems
seem to be relatively less unsophisticated in responding
to such prompts.
8. Conclusion, Limitations, and Future Work
The recent advent of Generative-AI, particularly
ChatGPT, has garnered significant traction in physics
education community. A predominant section of stud-
ies have focused on gauging the accuracy of AI in
answering various forms of physics assessments. We
contribute to these studies by going beyond capturing
the correctness of AI-generated responses and compar-
atively examining them with students’ reasoning to two
versions of a physics problem based on real-world con-
text. Using mixed-methods approach, we analyze the
responses through the lens sensemaking and mechanis-
tic reasoning - the processes central to scientific inquiry.
We observed that while AI responses evidenced most
features of the two processes through well-structured
solutions, student responses effectively leveraged repre-
sentations in their solutions through iterative refinement
of arguments. In other words, while AI responses re-
flected the sophisticated lexical patterns of experts’ vo-
cabulary (albeit providing incorrect solutions), the stu-
dent approaches reflected the rich epistemic practices of
physics. That is, while the AI responses reflected how
physics is talked about, the student responses reflected
how physics is practiced.
Engaging with physics not only entails leveraging di-
verse arguments such as experimental facts, approxima-
tions, etc. [33, 34], but also entails communicating ideas
and results using appropriate vocabulary. This vocab-
ulary may entail clear description of the target system
under investigation, discussion of the relevant physi-
cal quantities and mathematical formalisms leveraged in
the given context, or providing appropriate justification
for conclusions (particularly in the context of problem
solving) [52, 53]. ChatGPT consistently mirrored these
features through well-structured responses, thereby re-
flecting how physics is talked about.
On the other hand, student responses effectively re-
flected the conventional knowledge-building practices
in physics, or how physics is practiced.
These in-
cluded representation-based reasoning (use of diagrams
and gestures), along with iterative refinement of argu-
ments. Diagram- and gesture-based reasoning are cen-
tral to knowledge creation in physics. Conceptual ideas
such as the direction of magnetic field around a current
carrying conductor or the distribution of electric-field
lines around a system of charges are often discussed
through gestures and diagrams. Furthermore, conven-
tional knowledge-building practices in physics such as
argumentation and modeling are iterative in nature, i.e.,
these practices involve iterative refinement of arguments
in making sense of novel contexts [5, 54].
This study makes several contributions to the contem-
porary literature focused on the intersection of artificial
intelligence in STEM education. Firstly, this study goes
beyond gauging the accuracy of AI responses to ana-
lyzing them through the lens of cognitive processes that
are central to scientific inquiry. We adopt a framework-
based approach in unpacking the subtle features of sci-
entific inquiry in AI generated solutions and compar-
ing them with students’ responses. Secondly, though
several studies have explored ChatGPT’s causal reason-
ing in diverse domains such as neuropathic pain di-
agnosis [55] and publicly available multilingual multi-
modal data [56], this study explores mechanistic reason-
ing (which subsumes causal reasoning) in physics with
a focus on diagrams and equations.
Our findings however accompany several limitations.
Firstly, the claims made in this study are based on the
analysis of limited number of student and AI responses
to just one physics problem. Analysis of a larger data
set of responses to a diverse physics problems would
undoubtedly shed more insights.
Secondly, the stu-
dents interview involved interventions from the inter-
viewer during prolonged pauses and may have poten-
tially impacted the participants’ “chain of thought”. We
acknowledge this inherent limitation of think-aloud in-
terview and in our approach to data collection. Finally,
the data collected from ChatGPT and that from stu-
dents are categorically of different nature. While stu-
dents’ data consisted of verbal arguments, gestures, and
written solutions, ChatGPT’s data consisted entirely of
texts. Comparing textual data across the two would have
been an ideal scenario. However, our primary objective
was to explore how students naturally reason about a
context and how AI would respond to the same context.
As practitioners, we were aware that students would not
prefer to write every argument in their solutions, partic-
ularly to as complex problem as the one described in this
paper. Thus, we acknowledge that a major limitation of
this work corresponds to making claims by analyzing
16

two categorically different forms of data.
Future work would involve analyzing AI and stu-
dent solutions to other problems from our data through
the lens of additional processes such as modeling and
argumentation that are integral to scientific reasoning.
Further studies would also focus on extending simi-
lar methodology across students’ written essays and
AI responses. Analysis of AI- and student-generated
assumptions along with the epistemological messages
conveyed by AI responses to students on what counts
as “knowing” or “doing” physics are also avenues for
future explorations.
9. Acknowledgements
Special thanks to Katherine C. Ventura and Amali
Priyanka Jambuge for creating the assessments and con-
ducting the interviews reported in this study.
10. Declaration of generative AI in scientific writing
During the preparation of this work the first author
used ChatGPT-4 in order to improve language and read-
ability.
After using this tool/service, the author re-
viewed and edited the content as needed and takes full
responsibility for the content of the publication.
