Time Series Forecasting Using Fuzzy Cognitive Maps: A Survey
Omid Oranga,∗, Petrˆonio Cˆandido de Lima e Silvab,a, Frederico Gadelha Guimar˜aesc,a
aMachine Intelligence and Data Science (MINDS) Laboratory, Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil
bFederal Institute of Education Science and Technology of Northern Minas Gerais, Janu´aria Campus, Brazil
cDepartment of Electrical Engineering, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil
Abstract
Among various soft computing approaches for time series forecasting, Fuzzy Cognitive Maps (FCM) have
shown remarkable results as a tool to model and analyze the dynamics of complex systems. FCM have
similarities to recurrent neural networks and can be classiﬁed as a neuro-fuzzy method. In other words,
FCMs are a mixture of fuzzy logic, neural network, and expert system aspects, which act as a powerful tool
for simulating and studying the dynamic behavior of complex systems. The most interesting features are
knowledge interpretability, dynamic characteristics and learning capability. The goal of this survey paper is
mainly to present an overview on the most relevant and recent FCM-based time series forecasting models
proposed in the literature. In addition, this article considers an introduction on the fundamentals of FCM
model and learning methodologies. Also, this survey provides some ideas for future research to enhance
the capabilities of FCM in order to cover some challenges in the real-world experiments such as handling
non-stationary data and scalability issues. Moreover, equipping FCMs with fast learning algorithms is one
of the major concerns in this area.
Keywords:
Time Series Forecasting, Fuzzy Cognitive Maps, Soft Computing, Fuzzy Systems.
1. Introduction
In recent decades, tackling real complex problems in a highly reliable way has become one of the major
challenges for researchers. Increasing complexity comes from some factors including uncertainty, ambiguity,
inconsistency, multiple dimensionalities, increasing the number of eﬀective factors and relation between
them. Some of these features are common among most real-world problems which are considered complex
and dynamic problems. In other words, since the data and relations in real world applications are usually
highly complex and inaccurate, modeling real complex systems based on observed data is a challenging task
especially for large scale, inaccurate and non stationary datasets. Therefore, to cover and address these
diﬃculties, the existence of a computational system with the capability of extracting knowledge from the
complex system with the ability to simulate its behavior is essential. In other words, it is needed to ﬁnd a
robust approach and solution to handle real complex problems in an easy and meaningful way [1].
Hard computing methods depend on quantitative values with expensive solutions and lack of ability to
represent the problem in real life due to some uncertainties. In contrast, soft computing approaches act as
alternative tools to deal with the reasoning of complex problems [2]. Using soft computing methods such
as fuzzy logic, neural network, genetic algorithms or a combination of these allows achieving robustness,
tractable and more practical solutions. Generally, two types of methods are used for analyzing and modeling
dynamic systems including quantitative and qualitative approaches. In some cases, modeling complex and
∗Corresponding author

URL: https://minds.eng.ufmg.br/ (Frederico Gadelha Guimar˜aes)
Preprint submitted to International-journal-of-approximation-reasoning
January 11, 2022
arXiv:2201.02297v2  [cs.AI]  10 Jan 2022

nonlinear systems through quantitative techniques is diﬃcult and costly [3]. In contrast, qualitative methods
do not suﬀer from the mentioned restrictions. Fuzzy Cognitive Map (FCM) is a kind of important qualitative
soft computing technique proposed by Kosko [4] in 1986, as an extension of a cognitive map. FCM has
attracted great attention among researchers, with high capability of solving dynamic and complex problems.
FCM is a graph knowledge-based method and like any traditional cognitive maps, composed of concepts
and causal relationships among the concepts. The diﬀerence is that in FCMs the concepts are modeled
by fuzzy sets and fuzzy connections deﬁne the relationship among them. In other words, the existence of
the fuzzy feedback in FCMs structure creates an option to extract and model the causal knowledge. Based
on [5], FCM can be described by two characteristics. The ﬁrst one is the type of relationship among the
concepts with diﬀerent intensities represented by uncertain fuzzy numbers. The second one is the system
dynamicity, that is, it evolves with time. In FCMs structures composed of feedbacks, changes in one concept
may inﬂuence other concepts. They have the ability to incorporate human knowledge and adapt it through
learning procedures as the major advantage [6].
FCMs seem to have similarities to recurrent neural networks and can be classiﬁed as a neuro-fuzzy
method. In other words, FCMs are a mixture of fuzzy logic, neural network, and expert system aspects, which
act as a powerful tool for simulating and studying the dynamic behavior of complex systems. Therefore,
FCMs can learn due to their dynamic structure from an Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) point of view. This
learning capability of FCM improves its structure and computational behavior [6, 7, 8]. By considering
this feature, diverse methods of learning algorithms have been proposed in the literature to improve the
performance of the FCM, such as Diﬀerential Hebbian Learning (DHL) [9], Genetic Algorithm [10, 11], Ant
Colony Optimization [12] etc.
Qualitative modeling, ease of perception, high ability to dealing with uncertainties, capability to represent
nonlinear and causal behaviors, ﬂexibility and explainability can be accounted as interesting attributes of
FCMs [13]. According to these properties, plenty of papers were published in the ﬁeld of FCMs that cover
diverse domains involving decision making, control systems, time series forecasting, classiﬁcation, electrical
and software engineering, medicine etc [14, 15, 5].
The goal of this paper is mainly to present an overview on the progress in the studies of time series
forecasting utilizing FCMs. In other words, this paper provides an up-to-date survey covering some relevant
proposed FCM-based time series forecasting techniques which are presented in Section 4. Before that, some
major characteristics of FCMs are reminded. Thus, the remainder of this work is organized as follows: in
Section 2, in Section 3, the most relevant learning strategies are introduced; Section 4 focuses on a thorough
review of some developments and updated FCM-based time series forecasting methods and ﬁnally Section
5 highlights some challenges and future research possibilities.
2. Fuzzy Cognitive Maps
2.1. Fuzzy Cognitive Maps Fundamentals
Fuzzy Cognitive Map (FCM) proposed by Kosko [16] is a particular family of Cognitive Map (CM) theory
that was introduced by Axelrod [17]. The term of CM was introduced to investigate the cognitive activities
of rats using some learning experiments on their choice of an appropriate path to food. Later Axelrod, a
political scientist, used the knowledge of people to form the CM in the form of causal relationships between
concepts to formulate decision making in political science.
CM is a causal and qualitative model composed of concepts (nodes) and the causal connection among
the concepts. These directed signed arrows among the concepts are represented as weights that reﬂect the
eﬀect of one node on another one. These assigned directions among the concepts of CM can be positive
or negative. In [18, 19] several methodologies have been suggested to represent the CM and analyze its
complexity. If the node inﬂuences on others, we say it is a cause and if inﬂuenced by others, it is an eﬀect
(cause and eﬀect causality). In binary cognitive maps (BCM) the concept labels are mapped to binary
states denoted as ai ∈{0, 1}, where the value 1 means that the concept is activated. Also, the weights
belong to the crisp set wij ∈{−1, 0, 1} in BCM [17]. The value 1 represents, positive causality, that the
activation (change from 0 to 1) of concept ci occurs concurrently with the same activation of concept cj or
2

that deactivation (change from 1 to 0) ci occurs concurrently with the same deactivation of concept cj. The
value −1 represents the opposite situation, in which the activation of ci deactivates the concepts cj or vice
versa. The wij = 0 means that there are no concurrently occurring changes of the states of the concepts.
CMs were used in various areas such as decision-making [19, 20, 21], ﬁnancial [22] and other areas.
Accordingly, FCM is a hybrid soft computing technique based on the CM concept as a combination
of fuzzy logic and CM to present uncertainties and complex characteristics of the systems.
FCM has
also emerged as a powerful paradigm for knowledge representation by providing a ﬂexible mechanism for
knowledge representation of intelligent systems [23, 24, 25, 26, 27]. In FCM there exist partial causal relations
among the concepts. Thus these connections can be represented using fuzzy subsets which indicate vague
values in the range [−1, 1]. It means that the elements of the weight matrix in FCM can be full positive
(+1), full negative (-1), or any value positioned in the interval [−1, 1]. Thus, this feature discriminates FCM
from CM which enables FCM to deal with imprecise and uncertain data. For each FCM with k number of
concepts, the casual relation among concepts is represented by one k × k square weight matrix (connection
matrix) W.
W =




w11
. . .
w1k
...
...
...
wk1
. . .
wkk




(1)
Each member wij of the matrix denotes the directed connection between concepts ci and cj which governs
the intensity of the relationships between a pair of concepts to measure their inﬂuence degree on each other.
On the other hand, the strength of causal relations among concepts is represented by absolute fuzzy value.
The higher the absolute value of weight among concepts leads to the stronger (closer) relationship among
couple of concepts. In details, there exist three possible options for each individual of the weight matrix as
follows:
1. wij < 0: means negative connection among concepts ci and cj. It means that a decrease/increase in
the value of node ci makes an increase/decrease in the value of node cj.
2. wij > 0: means positive connection among concept ci and cj. It means that a decrease/increase in
the node ci makes a decrease/increase in the node cj.
3. wij = 0: conﬁrms null relation among nodes ci and cj.
Figure 1-A shows a simple example of FCM with 5 concepts while Figure 1-B presents the connections
among the concepts, as weight matrices, with the dimension of 5 × 5.
From the graphical perspective, FCM is composed of concepts and connections among them that are
represented by signed, weighted, and directed arcs. So, FCM is a signed, weighted digraph. In other words,
the degree, sign, and direction of the inﬂuence of one concept on the others are required, apart from the
number of concepts. C = [c1, . . . , ck] is the set of k concepts which are variables (nodes of the graph) that
compose the system and W is the connection matrix among the concepts. FCMs are deﬁned by the 4-tuple
(C, W, a, f) where the third element, a = (a1, . . . , ak) is the state vector containing the set of all concepts.
At any time t, each concept ci has an activation or fuzzy value restricted into the interval [0, 1]. On the
other hand, FCM operation is based on the application of a speciﬁc inference rule which calculates the next
value of each concept by considering the total impacts of the concepts directly connected to this one in
each iteration. Generally, based on the literature [28, 15], there exist diﬀerent kinds of inference rules with
respect to the past concept’s value and self-connection relation for each concept. Equation (2) indicates
Kosko’s transition rule for concept ci at time t + 1 with no self-connection and without memory, which is
widely used in many FCM-based applications.
ai(t + 1) = f


k
X
j=1,j̸=i
wjiaj(t)


(2)
3

Figure 1: Simple FCM with 5 nodes (A) graphical structure (B) Weight matrix
where k is the number of concepts and wij highlights the causal connection among concept ci and cj, whereas
ai(t) denotes the sate value of concept ci at time step t. It can be said that ai(t + 1) and ai(t) are response
vector and state vector of FCM respectively. Once the values of all weights of the FCM (i.e. the relationship
matrix of FCM) are determined, FCM starts from a given initial state vector to carry out reasoning through
the consecutive iterations computation according to the equation (2). At each time step, the FCM generates
a state vector that contains all concept activations. The state vector a(t) = (a1(t), . . . , ak(t)) refers to the
activation level of all concepts at time t. This updating rule is iteratively repeated until the termination
condition is satisﬁed. It means that in any iteration a new state value of the concepts is gained and after
a certain number of repetitions, one of the three possible states can occur for FCM [16] including ﬁxed
equilibrium point, limited cycle and chaotic behavior. In both cases of chaotic or cyclic, the output may be
partially unreliable because of the lack of stability. When the FCM reaches a ﬁxed equilibrium point, it can
be concluded that the FCM has been converged.
Although the mentioned updating rule has been used in many FCM-based applications, other modiﬁca-
tions have been developed in the literature [28, 15].
The investigation proposed in [29, 6] introduces the modiﬁed version of rule updating as the below formula
indicates. In this way, in addition to the corresponding weights and activation values from other concepts,
concepts consider their own past activation value known as memory factors for the nodes.
Therefore,
equation (3) shows Kosko’s updating rule with memory and without self-connection.
ai(t + 1) = f

ai(t) +
k
X
j=1,j̸=i
wjiaj(t)


(3)
Although the above equations ignore the eﬀect of self-connection, the following one highlights the infer-
ence rule by adding self-connection.
ai(t + 1) = f

ai(t) +
k
X
j=1
wjiaj(t)


(4)
The other type of rule updating is described by taking only the eﬀect of self-connection into account and
4

Activation Function
Mathematical Representation
bivalent
f(x) =
(
0
if
x < 0
1
if
x ≥0
trivalent
f(x) =





1
if
x ≥0.5
0
if
−0.5 ≤x ≤0.5
−1
if
x ≤−0.5
hyperbolic tangent
f(x) = exp2x −1
exp2x +1
sigmoid
f(x) =
1
exp−γx +1
Table 1: Most widely used FCM activation functions
ignoring the memory element.
ai(t + 1) = f


k
X
j=1
wjiaj(t)


(5)
Researchers in [30] reported another version of updating inference rule without considering memory and
self connection according to the following equation that outperforms equation (2) when used for predictions
tasks implemented on real-world data.
ai(t + 1) = f


k
X
j=1,j̸=i
wji(2aj(t) −1))


(6)
The other alternative was proposed in [7] to avoid the conﬂicts emerging in the case of inactive concepts.
From this perspective, it can be said that the element (2ai(t) −1) acts like bias weights. More clearly, it
prevents saturation problems where there is no information about the initial concepts state [15].
ai(t + 1) = f


k
X
j=1,j̸=i
wji(2aj(t) −1) + (2ai(t) −1)


(7)
Choosing the convenient updating rule to model the dynamic behavior of the system depends on the
problem and a strong understanding of the target simulated system.
The function f in updating rule equations speciﬁes the transfer/activation/limiting function used to
maintain the activation state of each concept to the predeﬁned range. Table 1 highlights the most commonly
used activation functions in the literature [15]. Both bivalent and trivalent are discrete and generate a ﬁnite
number of states.
The hyperbolic tangent and the sigmoid function are categorized in the continuous
group and produce inﬁnite states. Unlike generating ﬁnite states by using the ﬁrst two discrete functions,
hyperbolic tangent and sigmoid functions as continuous functions, generate an inﬁnite number of states used
for simulating qualitative and quantitative cases. Nevertheless, the studies veriﬁed the higher performance
of FCM by applying continuous activation functions [31]. A benchmarking study was organized in [32] where
the best performance is obtained using the sigmoid activation function in comparison to the other ones.
In sigmoid activation function γ is steepness parameter (function slope). The higher values of steepness
value, the more sensitive to the changes of x.
Depending on the various problems properties, diﬀerent
amounts of γ can be tuned. Generally, the values of γ are selected up to ﬁve in most of the references in the
literature. For instance, in [3] the value of γ has been adopted to 5. Furthermore, a dynamical optimization
of γ has been suggested in [33, 34] to choose the optimum value according to the problem deﬁnition.
5

2.2. High Order Fuzzy Cognitive Maps (HFCM)
Dynamically speaking, equations (2) to (6) express the ﬁrst order FCM. It means that through this way
only the ﬁrst-order dynamics of FCM will be obtained. Rewriting them, for instance equation (5), indicates
precisely that the activation value of each concept, the degree to which the observed value of a time series
yi(t) belongs to the fuzzy set, at a particular time step (t + 1), only relies on the activation level of all
concepts at t moment, as displayed in the following formula:
a(t + 1) = f(W · a(t))
(8)
where a(t) = [a1(t), a2(t), . . . , ak(t)] indicates the vector of the activation value of all nodes in time t.
Similarly, a(t + 1) = [a1(t + 1), a2(t + 1), . . . , ak(t + 1)] denotes the vector of the activation level of all nodes
in time t + 1. Furthermore, W is the weight matrix that stores the edge values among the concepts.
Due to the aforementioned constraint, an accurate modeling of FCM will not be captured only by
considering the current activation value of the concepts and ignoring the past values. For the purpose of
tackling the mentioned restriction and elevate the FCMs performance, especially for describing the dynamic
behavior of the complex systems more accurately, high order FCMs was introduced in which the reasoning
rule equation is modiﬁed and described as follows [35, 36, 37]:
ai(t + 1) = fi


k
X
j=1
w1
jiaj(t) + w2
jiaj(t −1) + . . . + wn
jiaj(t −n + 1) + wj0


(9)
where wn
ij ∈[−1, 1] stands for the casual relation originating from ci and pointing to cj at time step t−n+1,
while wj0 ∈[−1, 1] is the bias weight related to the i-th node.
As the above equation exhibits, the activation level of i-th concept at the moment t + 1 depends on the
activation values of all concepts at {t, t −1, . . . , t −n + 1} moments, not only the activation values of the
concepts at time t, during the consecutive iterations.
fi is deﬁned as the associated activation function for each concept. For instance if we consider sigmoid
activation function, the activation function for each concept can be deﬁned based on the steepness parameters
γi associated with i-th concept as follows:
fi(x) =
1
e−γix + 1
(10)
In vector term, the n-order FCM is replaced by the following formula:
a(t + 1) = f
 W 0 + W 1a(t) + . . . + W na(t −n + 1)

(11)
where f = [f1(t), f2(t), . . . , fk(t)]T is activation function vector where each member denotes associated
activation function with the i-th concept. W 1, W 2 . . . , W k are weight matrices to storing all weights of
HFCM at t, t −1 . . . , t −k + 1 moment. W 0 = [w01, w02, . . . , w0k]T describes the bias vector of HFCM.
a(t+1), a(t), . . . , a(t−n+1) illustrates vectors of activation levels of all nodes in HFCM in t+1, t, . . . , t−n+1
moment. a(t), a(t−1), . . . , a(t−n+1) are the state vectors of HFCM in t, t−1, . . . , t−n+1,while a(t+1) is
the response vectors of HFCM for a(t), a(t −1), . . . , a(t −n + 1). It is necessary to mention that, according
to the above formula, increasing the number of order leads to increasing the number of FCM parameters
regarding to the size of weight matrices.
2.3. Advanced Aspects
2.3.1. Extensions of FCMs
According to the literature [5, 38, 39], extensions of FCM have been designed to enhance the performance
of the traditional FCM proposed by Kosko. Fuzzy Grey Cognitive Maps (FGCM) [40], Intuitionistic Fuzzy
Cognitive Maps (iFCM) [41, 38], Belief-Degree-Distributed Fuzzy Cognitive Maps (BDD-FCMs) [42], Rough
Cognitive Maps (RCM) [43], Dynamical Cognitive Networks (DCN) [44], Evolutionary Fuzzy Cognitive Maps
6

(E-FCM) [45], Fuzzy Time Cognitive Maps (FTCM) [46],Dynamic Random Fuzzy Cognitive Maps (DRFCM)
[47], Rule-Based Fuzzy Cognitive Maps (RB-FCM) [48], Fuzzy Rules Incorporated in Fuzzy Cognitive Maps
(FRI-FCM) [49] and Generalized FCM (GFCM) [39] are some extended format of traditional FCM.
Proposal of various FCM models was raised to cover FCM limitations including uncertainty problem
or dynamic problems. For instance FGCM,iFCM,BDD-FCMs and RCM have been presented to deal with
uncertainty problems. On the other side, DCN, E-FCM,FTCM and DRFCM have been developed to deal
with dynamic problems. In 2019 the authors in [39] proposed a new form of FCM called FGCM to deal both
uncertainty and dynamic problems. Also, it provides a literature review of the conventional FCM approaches,
and ﬁgures out the strengths and weaknesses of some important advances in FCMs to understand their
potential in modeling complex qualitative systems. Since most of these models are employed in decision
making domains, they are not elaborated in details in this review paper.
2.3.2. Dynamic Properties of FCMs
As discussed, FCMs produce a new state vector at each discrete time step in a repetitive process until
the stop condition is met such as a maximum number of iteration or the system stabilizes. More precisely,
the relational structure and inference mechanism of FCMs play critical roles in the dynamic behavior of
FCMs to determine the state value at time t + 1 by considering the previous state at time t. Based on this
perspective, three possible scenarios are available to present the dynamic behavior of FCMs [50, 15]. If the
activation degree of the concepts remains stable after a ﬁnite number of time steps, then a ﬁxed point is
obtained with the convergence ability. Mathematically speaking, ∃tα ∈[1, 2, . . . , T −1] : at+1 = at, ∀t ≥tα
which means that atα = atα+1 = . . . = at. On the other side, in the limit cycle scenario, FCM generates
dissimilar responses with the exception of a few states that are periodically produced.
In other words,
∃tα, P ∈{1, 2, . . . , T −1} : at+P = at, ∀t ≥tα which is equivalent to atα = atα+P = atα+2P = . . . = atα+jP
where tα + jP ≤T such that j ∈{1, 2, . . . , T −1}.Finally, in the Chaos scenario a diﬀerent state vector
generated at each iteration. Thus, the system is neither ﬁxed nor cyclic.
Although updating the reasoning rule stops once a maximum number of iteration is reached, the output
can be unreliable due to the lack of stability in chaotic or cyclic situations. It means that in order to better
understanding the system behavior, stable responses are needed. So, convergence is often favorable in some
scenarios including decision making and pattern classiﬁcation. According to the literature [15], some factors
including the method for updating concepts’ values, the pattern encoded in the weight matrix and non-
decreasing activation function are the most convergence issues related to FCM-based systems. Accordingly,
there exist some investigations around this subject such as [51, 52, 53, 54, 55] to improve convergence.
2.3.3. FCMs against Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANNs)
The relation between FCM and Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANNs) is one of the attractable issues and
some studies have focused their main attention to compare FCMs with the other computational intelligence
tools, in particular fuzzy rules knowledge-based systems and Recurrent Neural fuzzy Networks (RNNs). In
other words, FCMs can be expressed as interpretable RNNs based on their interpretability as the signiﬁcant
feature.
From this perspective, FCMs consist of fuzzy logic elements during the knowledge engineering
phase. In fact, the concepts of FCMs can be supposed as neural processing entities indicating that the
activation degree of each neuron is deﬁned through the value of the transformed weighted sum unit received
from the connected neurons in the network.
Generally speaking, however, there are similarities among FCMs and AANs, there are some limitations
and diﬀerences. From a structural point of view, an FCM is taken into account as a special type of RNN.
Apart from topological similarity among FCMs and RNNs, they function diﬀerently. It is related to the
knowledge interpretability of FCM as its super property. This feature enables FCM to be used successfully
in modeling complex real-world problems. This means that, unlike traditional ANNs/RNNs, FCM neurons
and the causal relations among them provide accurate interpretation of the system for humans. But in
ANNs/RNNs, the neurons are considered as a computational unit without reﬂecting any clear meaning. In
other words, an ANN/RNN performs its duty in a perfect manner but with limited interpretability because
the presence of hidden neurons is neither interpretable nor explains why/how the solution is appropriate
for the desired problem. On the other hand, in an FCM, each node has its meaning with a clear relation
7

to other nodes.
Besides, FCM can be regarded as an extension of Hopﬁeld RNN [50] with a diﬀerent
structure while wij = wji is needed to converge to a ﬁxed point. Based on these diﬀerences, the modiﬁed
ANN learning methods are used as FCM learning strategies and it is impossible to use them directly.
Therefore, as discussed, it is often said that there is a trade-oﬀbetween the interpretability of FCM and the
approximation ability of ANN. A few studies interpret FCM-based methods as ANNs [56, 31, 57, 58, 59].
To encapsulate, like other fuzzy logic systems, learning has a basic role in designing FCM in practical
applications. Although a variety of methods are introduced in the literature to adapt FCM, the close relation
between FCMs and ANNs theories can provide a promising FCM learning strategy. Hence, the next section
examines some important FCM learning methods proposed in the literature.
3. Learning Algorithms
The core contribution of FCM learning is to extract the weight matrix according to either expert inter-
vention and/or the available historical data. In fact, learning algorithms aim to ﬁne-tune FCMs. However
diverse FCM learning methodologies are available in the literature, they are mostly classiﬁed in a triple
class based on their fundamental learning pattern comprising Hebbian-based, population-based and hybrid
techniques [60]. Therefore, this section concentrates speciﬁcally on examining and explaining the available
methods in the literature.
3.1. Hebbian-Based Learning Methods
The particular aim of such unsupervised learning methods is to ﬁnd weight matrices based on the domain
experts’ knowledge. Various Hebbian-based learning algorithms exist in the literature and some of these
relevant methods are introduced in the following.
Diﬀerential Hebbian Learning (DHL) was suggested in [61, 9] based on the Hebbian theory [62]; it is the
ﬁrst Hebbian-Based algorithm proposed by Dickerson and Kosko. In DHL, the weight matrices are modiﬁed
when the value of corresponding concepts changes. Thus, the value of weights is updated repeatedly so
that if there is no change in the value of concepts, the weight values remain the same in the next iteration.
In other words, the learning process modiﬁes the weight values until it reaches the desired state.
The
main drawback of this learning methodology is that the weight among a couple of concepts is updated
by considering only the corresponding concepts and the eﬀect from other concepts is ignored. Moreover,
the order of data presentation plays a considerable role in the DHL method [63]. The weight is updated
according to the following formula in this learning algorithm:
wij(t + 1) =
(
wij(t) + ηi[∆ai(t)∆aj(t) −wij(t)]
if
∆ai(t) ̸= 0
wij(t)
if
∆ai(t) = 0
(12)
where ηi is the learning factor, ai(t) is the activation value of concept ci and ∆aj(t) = ai(t) −ai(t −1)
computes discrete changes along the time.
To handle aforementioned DHL issue, an improved version of DHL known as Balanced Diﬀerential
Algorithm (BDA), was suggested in [64]. Through this way, the change of all concepts at the same time
step and with the same direction is considered in the weight updating process. This method improves on
the limitation of DHL by considering the values of all the concepts that change at the same time as the
weights are updated. Although DBA alleviates the limitation of DHL method, its application is restricted
to just binary FCMs. Noteworthy that the following equation is employed to update the weights:
wij(t + 1) =







wij(t) + ηi[(
∆ai(t)
∆aj (t)
Pn
k=1
∆ai(t)
∆ak(t)
) −wij(t)]
if
∆ai(t)∆aj(t) > 0, i ̸= j
wij(t) + ηi[(
−∆ai(t)
∆aj (t)
Pn
k=1
∆ai(t)
∆ak(t)
) −wij(t)]
if
∆ai(t)∆aj(t) < 0, i ̸= j
(13)
8

In 2004 other two unsupervised Hebbian-based learning algorithms called Active Hebbian Learning
(AHL) [65] and Nonlinear Hebbian Learning (NHL) [66] were adopted while the learning of FCMs ex-
tremely depends on the expert’s intervention [67, 68, 69]. In NHL method the range of concepts value,
as well as the sign of edges, are speciﬁed by expert intervention while zero edges are not updated. Hence
the main drawback of NHL is the construction of the initial graph which is recommended by experts. The
initial graph structure elicited from the experts is remained during the learning process, thus, its physical
interpretation is preserved. The stopping criterion is formed based on constraints imposed on nodes. The
weights are adjusted when the stopping criteria are satisﬁed which include: (1) a close-enough solution to
the desired response has been reached or (2) a ﬁxed-point attractor has been identiﬁed. In this method the
weights are updated using the following equation:
wij(t + 1) = (wij(t) + ηaj(t)(ai(t) −aj(t).wij(t)))
(14)
In AHL the desired set of concepts, an initial structure, and interconnections of concepts as well as the
sequence of activation concepts are determined by expert knowledge. Unlike other methods, all weights are
updated not only nonzero ones. Thus, the weights in AHL are adjusted in seven steps iterative learning
process to satisfy the predeﬁned criteria. Furthermore, to prevent getting stuck in a local minimum, authors
in [70] designed the Improved Nonlinear Hebbian Learning (INHL) technique in which a new term named
impulse was added into the update rule. In this case, the rule to compute the weights can be summarized
as follows:
wij(t + 1) = (1 −γ)wij(t) + ηai(t)[aj(t) −aj(t).wij(t)]
(15)
Data-Driven Nonlinear Hebbian Learning (DD-NHL) was introduced in [71] as an improved NHL method.
DD-NHL method relies on a similar learning principle as NHL, but the learning quality of DD-NHL is
higher because of using historical data and decision concepts. Unlike other Hebbian methods, the initial
weight matrix can be produced randomly in DD-NHL. Although the experimental results prove the super
performance of the proposed method compared to NHL methods, its performance is poor in classiﬁcation
issues.
3.2. Population-Based Learning Techniques
In these supervised learning methods, the historical data is used in the shape of input-output pairs to train
the model. In other words, we design the algorithm with the correct answer to each member of a dataset. In
such problems, the algorithm tries to calculate the output for each new input by considering datasets into
account. Therefore, the main goal is deriving the weight matrix to reﬂect the impact among the concepts by
utilization of optimization algorithms to minimize error among the target and predicted responses. For this
reason, these approaches can also be called Error-driven approaches [15] and the experts are replaced by
historical data. On the other hand, such learning methods aim to search the models to optimize the objective
function, which is computationally expensive. Thus, automatic learning methodologies based on historical
observations, unlike experts’ knowledge-based ones (conventional methods) with the lack of ability to model
large size FCMs, become an important challenge. Accordingly, various types of evolutionary algorithms
were introduced in the literature for training FCM and adjusting the optimal weight matrix.
The authors in [6] introduced Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) as a learning method of FCMs using
historical data to determine and formulate the sub-optimal weight matrix of FCMs. The authors used the
proposed method to minimize the ﬁtness function to reach a desired ﬁnal value for the FCMs with ﬁxed
architecture whereas determining the constraints depends on the human knowledge in this way.
Real-Coded Genetic Algorithm (RCGA) was exploited in [11] as an FCM learning method to create
FCM structure using the historical data in the frame of time series, which includes a single sequence of
state vector values and without human intervention. The proposed RCGA is employed to minimize three
various ﬁtness functions to select the best one. Then selected function is used to perform experiments by
considering a diﬀerent number of concepts and FCM densities. The bigger the size of input data, the more
precise learning is. On the other hand, the accuracy depends on the size of input data in the proposed
RCGA and the learning performance degrades when increasing the size of the maps.
9

Multi-Objective Evolutionary FCMs is the other evolutionary learning algorithm proposed in [72] based
on GA to support multi-objective decision-making problems. This method is applied to search the optimal
weight matrix which satisﬁes predeﬁned activation levels among the participant nodes by the selection of
the initial weights randomly.
Evolution strategy (ES) has been introduced in [73] as an eﬃcient way to design and construct the
FCMs. To ignore external intervention for ﬁne-tuning of FCM parameters, more speciﬁcally in complex
systems, the paper focused on ES as a robust and ﬂexible training procedure. The proposed method, which
is a composition of FCM and ES, is examined for potential implementation in FCM-based systems. In this
algorithm, the learning process will stop when the optimal FCM structure is obtained.
In [74] a Memetic Particle Swarm Optimisation (MPSO) algorithm is suggested as FCM learning method
to extract weight matrix by minimizing the ﬁtness function to construct the desired system. The proposed
MPSO is a combination of PSO as a global search algorithm and the Hooke and Jeeves (HJ) algorithm as a
local search component. The ﬁnal results have proved the outperformance of MPSO in comparison to PSO.
In [75] Simulated Annealing (SA) algorithm was introduced as another metaheuristic FCM learning
method to extract weight matrices from the input historical data without expert intervention. The compar-
ison among the performance of SA and GA in this paper illustrates that with more nodes (complex FCMs),
the GA algorithm will deteriorate the FCM performance meanwhile SA improves the learning quality by
covering the GA limitation, as well as improving the speed of training for each nodes number. Thereby, the
proposed method performs eﬀectively for every map size. That is, the GA learning method is used for small
FCM size while SA in large FCM size in this experiment.
Later an improved SA learning algorithm called Chaotic Simulated Annealing (CSA) was considered
as FCM learning method in [76]. According to the results, with more nodes, CSA outperforms SA with
smaller learning error. Although the CSA performs well for every map size, the execution time is longer in
comparison to SA. Thus, the authors introduced another new learning strategy termed as Tabu Search (TS)
[77] in which the quality of learning improved in comparison to GA. The TS algorithm generates smaller
errors in comparison to GA as well as using fewer nodes. Besides, in some cases, the computational time
of TS is less than GA especially for FCMs with small map sizes. To sum up, in terms of eﬃciency, the
performance of CSA and TS is greater than conventional SA.
In addition to the above learning strategies, there exist other various types of population-based learning
algorithms in the literature. For instance, [63] presents a novel learning technique namely asexual repro-
duction optimization (ARO) and Modiﬁed ARO (MARO). Also, it provides a comprehensive review of the
available population-based learning methods. Game-based learning model was reported in [78] by mixing
FCM with game-based learning. Immune algorithm (IA) developed in [79] which can be utilized for de-
signing and modeling complex systems, Big Bang-Big Crunch (BB-BC) in [80], Ant Colony Optimization
(ACO) as FCM learning algorithm in [12], Extended Great Deluge Algorithm (EGDA) in [81], Artiﬁcial Bee
Colony (ABC) algorithm in [82], Cultural Algorithm(CA) in [83], Imperialist Competitive Learning Algo-
rithm (ICLA) in [84] as a new robust, fast and accurate FCM learning method, Multi-objective optimization
algorithm so-called MOEA-FCM in [85], dynamic multi-agent genetic algorithm (DMAGA) proposed in [86],
evolutionary multi-tasking multi-objective memetic FCMs (MMMA-FCMs) learning algorithm adopted in
[87], Inactivation-based batch many-task evolutionary algorithm (IBMTEA-FCM) in [88] are some other
examples of population-based FCM learning methodologies which have been introduced in the literature.
3.2.1. Fitness Functions of population-Based Learning Approaches
With the goal of training FCMs, a myriad of ﬁtness functions have been used to assess the performance
of the designed FCM approaches based on the case studies. To be more precise, each chromosome’s mea-
surement of ﬁtness function is done via one-step modeling of the relevant FCM. The output error among
the actual responses of the system against the obtained state vectors, as FCM responses, is exploited to
measure the ﬁtness value. Therefore, the objective of ﬁtness function applications is the assessment of the
corresponding FCM through calculating the accumulated prediction error among the response values and
real ones. The obtained error is averaged over the collection of nodes and the number of steps within the
sequence of learning. Thus, this subsection reviews some objective functions available in the literature.
10

In [73] the authors proposed genetic learning method to optimize the objective function to set weights
which transforms input to output vector as below. n and k indicate the number of instances and concepts
respectively.
E(x) =
k
X
k=1
n
X
i=1
|aki −˜aki|
(16)
where aki and ˜aki represent the current and expected responses respectively.
The following equation unveils the Heaviside function (H) as the well-known ﬁtness function introduced
in [6] using PSO as the learning approach.
Ek(x) =
n
X
i=1
H(Li −a∗
ik)|Li −a∗
ik| +
n
X
i=1
H(a∗
ik −Ui)|a∗
ik −Ui|
(17)
where a∗
ik denotes the activation value of i-th decision concept, whereas Ui and Li are upper and lower
bounds respectively. It must be highlighted that this ﬁtness function is not suitable for the gradient-based
methods because it is not diﬀerentiable. This kind of ﬁtness function is eﬀectively used in PSO and memetic
algorithms in [89, 74].
In [90] investigators designed Diﬀerential Evolution (DE) learning method to minimize the objective
function (E(X) or F(W)) deﬁned as follows:
E(x) =
n
X
i=1
|Li −a∗
ik| + |a∗
ik −Ui|
(18)
The below equation represents the ﬁtness function that was introduced in [91, 14, 11] while the parallel
version of RCGA was applied to improve the scalability of the algorithm.
F(x) =
1
α(error + 1)
(19)
such that α indicates the ﬁtness function coeﬃcient and error is expressed through the following formula:
error =
1
n(k −1)
K
X
k=1
n
X
i=1
|ai(t) −ap
i (t)|
(20)
where n is the number of the historical data, k is the number of concepts, ai and ap
i describe actual and
predicted values respectively.
In [92] the researchers examined the divide and conquer approach for training large FCMs to optimize
another ﬁtness function, which was stressed as follows:
F(x) =
α
β PT −1
t=1
PM
i=1(at
i −˜at
i)
2 +1
(21)
α, β are positive scaling factors.
Besides the mentioned ﬁtness functions, there exist very popular and useful ﬁtness functions that were
employed in papers which are described in the following [63, 87].
In-sample-error: This function is used to evaluate the learned model’s ability to reconstruct the
input data for learning.
In other words, the model performance is calculated based on the pre-
observed data via this criterion.
In fact, the function measures the diﬀerence between the input
data and the data generated by corresponding FCM from the initial state vector for the input data.
Mathematically, it is explained as a normalized average absolute error between corresponding concept
11

values at each iteration between the two sequences of state vectors based on the below equation
[73, 11, 84, 91, 92, 71, 93]:
E(x) =
1
k(n −1)
N
X
t=1
K
X
k=1
|ak(t) −ˆak(t)|
(22)
where ak denotes the value of node k at iteration t in the input data, ˆak is the value of node k at
iteration t from simulation of the candidate FCM; N the number of input data points; K the number
of nodes.
Out-of-sample-error: computes the capabilities of generalization of the candidate FCM. To measure
this criterion, both the input model and the candidate FCMs are simulated from randomly chosen
initial state vectors. Therefore, the evaluation of the candidate FCM is based on new data that were
not used for learning. This measure is normalized and expressed as an average error per concept per
iteration similar to the in-sample error. The out-of-sample error is deﬁned as: [11, 91, 92, 93, 84, 85, 94].
E(X) =
1
P(n −1)k
P
X
p=1
N
X
t=1
K
X
k=1
|ap
k(t) −ˆaP
k (t)|
(23)
where aP
k (t), ˆaP
k (t) are the values of node k at iteration t for data produced by input FCM and
candidate FCM respectively started from pth initial state vector. N is the input data length, K is
total number of nodes and P is the total number of diﬀerent initial state vectors.
Error-l or Data-Error: This function is mainly the variance or the average of the squared diﬀerence
between two time series and is deﬁned as follows [82, 83, 80]:
E(X) =
1
k(n −1)P
P
X
P =1
T −1
X
t=1
K
X
k=1
(aP
k (t) −ˆaP
k (t))2
(24)
where aP
k , ˆaP
k represent the k-th node value at iteration t for the data generated via original FCM
model and candidate FCM model respectively started from r-th initial state vector. Besides, N is the
length of data, K is the nodes number and P is the number of randomly selected initial state vectors.
Model-Error: This error compares the weight matrix of the trained FCM and the ground-truth
weight matrix which is deﬁned by the following formula: [87]
E(X) = 1
k2
k
X
i=1
k
X
j=1
|wij −w
′
ij|
(25)
where wijindicates the weight among node i and node jin the real FCM whereas w
′
ij is the weight
among nodes i and j in the trained FCM and k is the number of nodes.
Weaknesses and Strengths of The Proposed Learning Methods
As discussed, learning algorithms are employed in FCMs to extract/tune/adjust the weight matrix. With
regards to the problem, based on the expert’s knowledge and historical data, the proper learning method used
to construct an accurate FCM model. There are some strengths and limitations for both population-based
and Hebbian-based methods.
Various learning methodologies are applied in diﬀerent domains for FCM modeling, FCM time series
prediction, FCM classiﬁcation, FCM decision making, and FCM optimization as detailed in [5]. Based on
the literature, population-based methods are used widely in a major proportion of the applications due
12

to their lower simulation error, higher functionality, robustness, and generalization abilities [60]. Unlike
the mentioned advantages, some generic limitations such as time-consuming, a large number of learning
parameters, availability of historical data, a large number of learning processes, and convergence issues
maybe hinder the application of learning approaches in some cases in this category. Hebbian-based methods,
on the opposite side, are useful because of some features such as cheap cost of computing, ease of use,
keeping signs of connection, and causal meaning of adjusted weights. Poor generalization, dependence on
the experts, dependence on initial states and connections, low deviation from the initial weights can be taken
into accounts as the main drawbacks for the Hebbian- based methods. Due to the mentioned analysis, it
can be deduced that Hebbian-based algorithms are suitable for control problems [95], while the population-
based methods are applied more widely in areas such as time series forecasting, classiﬁcation, simulating the
chaotic behavior and virtual system, etc.[11].
3.3. Hybrid Methods
As noted earlier, both Hebbian and population-based methods are conﬁned in some cases due to their
limitation. To alleviate the existing drawbacks and improve the eﬃciency, hybrid techniques which incor-
porate Hebbian and population methods were proposed as an alternative. In the sense that hybrid learning
methods consider both features including the eﬀectiveness of Hebbian learning and the global search ability
of population-based methods to train FCMs. Indeed, the focus of hybrid methods is to updating/modifying
the connection matrices extracted from the historical data and experts’ knowledge. Although hybrid algo-
rithms can cope well with complex systems, according to the literature, little researches have been devoted
to that method.
In[96] a hybrid method was introduced which is a mixture of unsupervised learning methods, NHL al-
gorithm, and diﬀerential evolution (DE) strategy to handle some FCMs drawbacks, improve the behavior
of the FCMs dynamically and enhance the ﬂexibility of FCMs. Ease of implementing, inexpensive com-
putation, lower number of control parameters, comparable DE convergence properties as well as eﬃcient
handling of nonlinear, non-diﬀerentiable and multimodal ﬁtness functions are the motivation factors of the
investigated technique in this paper. The proposed NHL-DE algorithm is divided into two steps. Primarily
the NHL method is employed to learn FCM then DE is used for FCM retraining. The goal of the ﬁrst
stage is to search for the appropriate weights while the responsibility of the second stage is recomputing the
weights and minimizing the optimal ﬁtness function. Noting that in this method the initial DE population
directly depends on the performance of the ﬁrst stage that is extracting a priori knowledge to incorporate
in evolutionary computation is based on the good solutions in the ﬁrst stage. Two termination conditions
are considered in this method and the minimization process will be ﬁnished as the optimization criterion is
satisﬁed in the second stage. The experimental results illustrate the high speed and eﬃciency of the model
examined in three various FCM models.
Besides, the authors in [97] introduced a new hybrid learning FCM method coupling NHL and RCGA
algorithms.
Exploiting RCGA and NHL as the key components of the algorithm improves the FCM’s
ability to extract data from the historical data and to explore the optimal weight matrices based on expert
knowledge. This method beneﬁts from both the eﬀectiveness of the NHL learning method and the global
search ability of the RCGA method. In the proposal method, RCGA is applied as an input data mining
algorithm while the NHL is used for optimal weight reﬁning. However the results are promising, the model
is time-consuming as the size of the model increased.
In [98] a hybrid method has been proposed using NHL and extended great deluge algorithm(EGDA).
EGDA approach is similar to the SA training method with global search ability however it requires a lower
number of parameters. Simplicity, high speed of convergence, and dealing with continuous concepts value
are the main outstanding properties of the NHL algorithm. Taking the mentioned advantages of NHL and
EGDA, the more accuracy of the hybrid method has. Herein, after training FCM using the NHL algorithm,
the outcome is fed to EGDA. In other words, the method has been constructed in two steps. In the ﬁrst
step, NHL is applied for FCM training to extract the optimal weight matrix. Afterward, the candidate
objective function is optimized using the EGDA algorithm in the second step.
13

3.4. Other Methods
There exist other methods proposed by investigators to construct or optimize FCM-based systems which
do not belong to the triple above categories.
[99] developed a novel unsupervised learning method. The weights of the directed edges are adapted from
the transition to the Petri Net via the learning process. To analyze the dynamic behavior of the algorithm,
the Hebbian-based learning algorithm was exploited considering natural decay in weights. After convergence
of the learning algorithm, the network can be used to compute the beliefs of the desired propositions from
the supplied beliefs of the axioms (places with no input arcs). The conditional nature of the algorithm in
terms of stability allows the model to be used in complex decision making and learning. The other model
was developed for knowledge reﬁnement by adaptation of weights in a fuzzy Petri net using a diﬀerent form
of Hebbian learning. Also, a combined fuzzy cognitive maps (FCMs)–petri nets (PN) approach has been
developed in [100] for the energy management of autonomous polygeneration microgrids. The PN is used
as an activator in the fuzzy cognitive map structure to enable diﬀerent FCMs to be activated depending on
the state of the microgrids.
Another technique based on Fuzzy Boolean Nets (FBNs) as a hybrid fuzzy neural technique adopted in
[101] for training rule-based FCMs. In this method fuzzy Boolean nets are employed to extract qualitative
fuzzy rules from crisp/quantitative data. Even though the main focus of this work is on the optimization
and completion of Fuzzy Causal Rule Bases (FCRb), it can be generalized to all fuzzy rule-based. In other
words, FBNs act like qualitative interpolators with perfect generalization ability. However, as the process
generalizes, the performance of the method deteriorates due to the exponential increase in FBN size as
the number of predecessors increases, even if it can be compensated by granularity employment in FBN’s
internal memories.
In [102] a new FCM learning framework (e-FCM) proposed used for recognizing speech emotion. In
this approach, the pleasure-arousal-dominance emotion scale is employed to measure the casual relations
among emotions where the structure of the network is determined via certain mathematical derivations.
The structure of e-FCM includes an input layer that collects data from speech features and an output layer
composed of emotion classes.The proposed method is much faster and more accurate than traditional and
population-based methods such as GA particularly for large-scale FCMs.
Moreover, [103] outlined a learning method based on partial expert estimation and evolutionary algo-
rithms to handle the lack of certainties in expert estimations of FCM weight matrices. This article hired
a modiﬁcation of Interactive Evolutionary Computing (IEC) for training and optimizing FCM termed as
Interactive Evolutionary Optimization of Fuzzy Cognitive Maps (IEO-FCM).
Besides the aforementioned methods, the other FCM adaptation methods include gradient-based tech-
niques. However these methods are used to minimize the cost function as a kind of error-driven approaches,
they do not use metaheuristics. Therefore, they are classiﬁed in this learning group. A new FCM gradient-
based learning method suggested in [104] to improve the performance of population-based methods through
their combination with local search approaches [104]. Hence, this study evaluates the performance of the
proposed automatic learning method which combines RCGA and DE with a gradient-based local search
method. In fact, the mentioned method considers both abilities of exploitation and exploration in gradient
procedures and evolutionary ones respectively.
In [105] a composition of the memetic algorithm (MA) and artiﬁcial neural network (ANN) is adopted
to learn large-scale FCMs, referred to as MA-NN-FCM. However MA is considered as a fast evolutionary-
based method to ﬁnd a set of regulated nodes, it suﬀers from the slow rating of weight matrix exploration.
Therefore, a neural network employed to extract the weight matrix using the gradient descent approach.
Experimental results prove the eﬃciency of the proposed method learning large-scale FCMs up to 100 nodes.
Based on the network topology of FCM, several FCMs learning methods inherited from ANN learning
approaches to compute the weight matrix. [106] proposed a supervised gradient-based methodology based
on delta rule and Backpropagation principle which originally developed for multi-layered networks. The
extended version of the Backpropagation algorithm termed Backpropagation through time (BPTT) is applied
in this investigation. Thus, three approaches including One-step Delta Rule, Every-step Delta Rule with
Windowed BPTT and One-step Delta Rule with Windowed BPTT have been employed to measure the
regression problem of FCM training.
14

The other automated FCM learning method introduced by [107]. This approach exploits the evolutionary
structure of cellular automata to train the weight matrix of FCM based on historical data consisting of one
sequence of state vectors. Encoding the weight parameters are adopted via one-dimension cellular automata
and a cell space is made by selecting the states of cellular in the range [0,1]. In this method the learning
algorithm composed of 7 elements including where C-Cellular Automata code, E-ﬁtness function, P-initialize
Cellular Automata Conﬁguration, M-initialize Cellular Automata Conﬁguration size, S-selection, R-rule, T-
stopping condition which can be deﬁned in a 7-tuple (C, E, P, M, S, R, T). It is necessary to highlight that
the employment of a mutation operator in the algorithm will improve the speed of convergence.
In [108], optimization technique was introduced to model complex systems containing a large number
of concepts in the domain of decision making and management. The focus of this paper is to present a
new FCM concept reduction approach and its application to develop less complex FCM which is easy to
use. Accordingly, a clustering algorithm based on the fuzzy tolerance method was introduced as an FCMs
reduction procedure by reducing the number of nodes and connections among them. The concepts with
the same behavior are classiﬁed into the same cluster. Afterward, the weight values are recalculated. The
constructed FCM model with less complexity is capable to deal with the uncertainty in diﬀerent scientiﬁc
ﬁelds.
Deterministic learning of hybrid Fuzzy Cognitive Maps and network reduction approach proposed by
[109]. In this technique, FCMs are exploited to model dynamic systems, which are conditioned by several
input variables that inﬂuence output ones. Thus, in this study expert knowledge combines with population-
based knowledge mining as a hybrid method to create such a system. It means that the relation among
input variables is determined by experts, while the extracted model from data provides the simulation of
the output variable states. So, the scheme of the proposed model depends on both expert knowledge and
historical data. As the other contribution, the authors introduced a very fast, deterministic (inverse method)
and accurate learning rule to determine the weight matrix to deﬁne the system based on the Moore Penrose
inverse, thus it does not require any parameter to be speciﬁed. Also, to guaranty that the learned weights are
within the allowable range, a weight normalization approach has been considered. At last, a model proposed
to distinguish irrelevant weights in the learned FCM network. As the model motivation, the absolute weight
values have been taken into account as well as the concept activation values. Additionally, oﬀset correction
and weight correction methods were employed to tune FCM-based after removing a weight, however, the
results verify that sigmoid slop calibration is more convenient than weight calibration in terms of eﬃcacy.
The reported MSE and processing time over 35 datasets indicate the superiority of the model compared
with PSO, RCGA and DE.
In [110] a new straightforward, rapid, and robust learning method titled LEFCM proposed to tackle
some limitations of convenient learning methods such as time-consuming dealing with large-scale FCMs
,lack of robustness when the experimental data contain noise as well as rarely weight distribution which
aﬀects the FCM performance. The crux of the investigated method is that the learning problem of FCM
can be considered as a convex optimization problem with constraints that can be solved in polynomial
time complexity by applying the gradient-based method. In the LEFCM method, the introduction of the
least squares term into the convex optimization problem ensures the robustness of the well learned FCM.
Furthermore, the performance of the generated FCM is improved because of the existing more reasonable
weight distribution by considering entropy constraint in the convex optimization problem.
Overall the
proposed method is rapid and robust to learn large-scale FCMs up to 200 neurons, speciﬁcally, for learning
FCMs using noisy data.
Also, Gradient Residual Algorithm in [111], Extreme Learning Machine in [112], Gradient-based search
in [113], Multi-step Gradient in [114] and LASSOF CM in [115] belong to the last group of FCM learning
methods, as can be seen from the Table 2.
This table summarizes the proposed FCM learning algorithms into diﬀerent groups while population-
based methods make up the major proportion of learning methods. More detailed look at the table reveals
that some of the population-based algorithms have been introduced to deal with large scale problem. In
other words, based on the paper [88], solving the large-scale FCM learning problems can be solved exploiting
three types of evolutionary-based algorithms including high-dimensional optimization technique [86, 116],
decomposition strategy [117, 118] and search space reduction [119, 120].However, all of the these methods
15

are either ineﬀective or time-consuming to cope with the large-scale FCM learning problems due to the
large search space [88]. In order to enhance the speed and performance of the existing methods, a random
inactivation-based batch multitasking evolutionary algorithm, IBMTEA-FCM was proposed in [88] to handle
large-scale FCM learning problems. In this method, the learning of local connections of nodes in a single
FCM is modeled as a many-task optimization (MaTO) problem.
16

Category
Learning Technique
Author
Node Num.
Hebbian-based
Diﬀerential Hebbian Learning (DHL)
[61, 9]
10
Balance Diﬀerential Algorithm (BDA)
[64]
{5,7,10}
Nonlinear Hebbian Learning (NHL)
[66]
5
Active Hebbian Learning (AHL)
[65]
8
Data-Driven NHL
[71]
{5,10,20}
Population-based
Particle Swarm Optimization(PSO)
[6]
5
Genetic Algorithm(GA)
[72]
16
Real Coded Genetic Algorithm (RCGA)
[11]
{4,6,8,10}
Parallel RCGA
[91]
{10,20,40,80}
Evolutionary Strategy (ES)
[73]
6
Memetic Particle Swarm Optimisation (MPSO)
[74]
18
Simulated Annealing (SA)
[75]
{2,3,...,15}
Chaotic Simulated Annealing (CSA)
[76]
14
Tabu Search (TS)
[77]
{3,4,...,15}
Game based learning
[78]
33
Immune Algorithm (IA)
[79]
26
Diﬀerential Evolutionary (DE)
[121]
5
Big Bang-Big Crunch (BB-BC)
[80]
{5,6,10}
divide and conquer RCGA
[92]
40
Ant Colony Optimization (ACO)
[12]
40
Extended Great Deluge Algorithm (EGDA)
[81]
6
Sparse RCGA
[93]
40
Decomposed ACOR based on ACO
[117]
100
Artiﬁcial Bee Colony (ABC)
[82]
13
Cultural Algorithm (CA)
[83]
13
Imperialist Competitive Learning Algorithm (ICLA)
[84]
{5,7,8,10,13,20,24,30,40,50}
Structure Optimisation Genetic Algorithm (SOGA)
[122]
8
Dynamic Multi-Agent Genetic Algorithm (DMAGA)
[86]
{5,10,20,40,100,200}
Decomposed RCGA with tournament selection
[123]
{10,50,100,200,300}
Multi-objective Evolutionary Algorithm (MOEA-FCM)
[85]
{5,10,20,40}
Decomposition-based DMAGA
[124]
{300,500}
Mutual Information based Two-phase Memetic Algorithm(MIMA-FCM)
[119]
{7,8,10,13,20,24,40,100,200,300,500}
Niching-based Multi-Modal Multi-Agent GA (NMMMAGA −FCM)
[118]
{5,10,20,40,100}
Asexual Reproduction Optimisation (ARO) and Modiﬁed ARO (MARO)
[63]
{5,6,7,10,24,100}
RCGA combined boosting strategy(RCGA-BFCMs)
[125]
{10,20,40,100}
17

Multi-tasking Multi-objective Memetic FCMs (MMMA-FCMs)
[87]
{10,20,40,100,200,400,600}
MAGA based on the convergence error (MAGA-Convergence)
[116]
{5,10,20,40,100,200}
Inactivation-based batch many-task evolutionary algorithm( IBMTEA-FCM)
[88]
{20,40,100,200,330,500}
Hybrid
NHL+DE
[96]
8
RCGA +SA
[75]
15
NHL+RCGA
[97]
3
NHL+EGDA
[98]
3
PSO+ACO
[126]
25
Other
Gradient Residual Algorithm
[111]
7
RCGA+ DE+a gradient-based method
[104]
{4,6,8,10,12,24,38}
Extreme learning machine
[112]
6
Gradient-based search
[113]
20
MA+Gradient descent
[105]
{20,40,100}
Multi-step Gradient
[114]
8
Extended Delta Rule
[127]
34
LASSOF CM
[115]
{10,20,40,100,200}
e-FCM
[102]
5
IEO-FCM
[103]
6
Entropy-based method (LEFCM)
[110]
{20,40,100,200}
Table 2: Proposed FCM learning techniques in the literature
18

4. Time Series Forecasting using Fuzzy Cognitive Maps
4.1. Terminology of the problem
Time series forecasting includes predicting the future observations based on the trained model on the
historical observations. Thus, deﬁning an accurate prediction model plays an essential role to make a better
decisions in several ﬁelds for instance on engineering, medicine, economy, meteorology, etc. In other words,
let Y (t) as given time series. The goal of time series forecasting models is to predict the next values of
time series considering the prediction horizon (H) which can be divided into four categories including very
short, short, medium and long term forecasting. On the other side, time series forecasting can be classiﬁed
as univariate and multivariate models. In the case of univariate, only a single variable varies along the time.
Accordingly, ˆy(t + H) = Mu(y(t)) is used to calculate the next values of time series with regards to the
H value where Mu is forecasting model. In the case of multivariate time series, ˆY(t + H) = Mm(Y(t))
measures the next values for multivariate time series so that Y(t) = (y1(t), . . . , yi(t), . . . , yn(t)) contains
multiple variables that are varying over the time and Mm is employed as the forecasting model. Besides,
multivariate models can be grouped into Multiple Input Single Output (MISO) and Multiple Input Multiple
Output (MIMO) for instance [128] provides both MISO and MIMO fuzzy time series (FTS) forecasting
models. In the MISO approaches, among numbers of variables, one of them is chosen as the endogenous (or
target) variable while the others are considered as explanatory or exogenous variables. In contrast, in the
MIMO approach, all variables have a chance to be forecasted or in the other words, all variables are target
variables.
However, there is no perfect model to predict exact future values due the existence of the uncertainty
and non-linearity associated with most of the real world phenomena. Accordingly, numerous time series
forecasting methods have been presented in the literature to perform forecasting operation and estimate
forecasted value ˆy(t + H), from statistical methods (like ARMA, ARIMA, SARIMA, etc) to some new
intelligent techniques (like LSTM, CNN, GRU, etc). Thereby, constructing the proper model is vital to
minimize the prediction error between forecasted and real values.
During recent decades, studies show remarkable advances of time series forecasting using FTS models
based on some basic characteristics such as simplicity, readability, scaleability and high forecasting accuracy.
Also, FCMs as weighted knowledge-based FTS techniques have found excellent applicability in the ﬁeld of
time series forecasting as a signiﬁcant part of FCMs’ research in many areas.
Therefore, the following
subsections provide the general structure of FCM-based forecasting models as well as a review of some
proposed FCM forecasting models in the literature.
4.2. General FCM Model For Time Series Forecasting
FCMs, as useful vehicles to represent time series in an easy and meaningful way, are a kind of inter-
pretable recurrent neural networks, composed of neurons and weights. These weighted methods boost the
forecasting accuracy by adding weights to the fuzzy rules compared with weightless ones. Therefore, de-
signing proper FCM structure under given time series, calculating the FCM parameters (weight matrices)
and reconstructing numerical values based on the FCM are essential considerations as they applied for time
series modeling, time series dynamic behavior explanation and forecasting.
The forecasting model M in FCM is related to the FCM-based network. It means that after mapping
FCM neurons to time series variables, learning FCM is considered to extract the weights by testing within the
prediction horizon. The basic issue in FCM-based time series forecasting models is formulating its structure,
including the neurons and causal relations among pairs of them, based on the given time series. In time
series, as a series of numeric data, the identiﬁcation of concepts is not as easy as the traditional systems
and needs to be explored [37]. For this reason, various studies on time series forecasting using FCMs, have
been focused mainly on discovering the appropriate structure of FCM as well as deﬁning the best learning
algorithm to compute weight matrices to describe the dynamic behavior of the system. In simple terms,
time series prediction by FCMs utilization consists of two stages. Firstly, designing the structure of FCMs
by employing common successful strategies including granularity [129], membership values representation
[130], fuzzy c-means clustering [37]. Furthermore, wavelet transformation and empirical mode decomposition
(EMD) are also proposed to identify FCM’s structure and enhance the forecasting performance [36, 35, 131].
19

Secondly, training weight matrix using diﬀerent learning methods as introduced earlier in section 3. Without
high-quality weight matrices, the system will lose its interpretability, even with a crystal clear FCM reasoning
[132].
4.3. Literature Review
The main purpose of this section is to provide a review study of some of the relevant FCM based time
series forecasting methods in the literature.
Apart from various partitioning methods proposed in the literature, fuzzy c-means clustering technique
has been used widely to generate fuzzy sets (concepts) by dividing the Universe of Discourse(U) into intervals
with some overlaps. [133, 134] are examples of univariate time series forecasting using FCM which fuzzy
C-means clustering technique is applied to cluster all learning values of time series such that the number
of clusters (denoted as concepts) is deﬁned by the user and each cluster acts as a fuzzy set.
Through
this method, at any time, the membership degree indicates the value of the time series that belongs to
the generated cluster. Meanwhile, the level of belongingness of the current value of time series y(t) to the
concept ci determined as activation value Ai. This procedure will be done for all concepts to reach the state
vector. PSO used as a learning method to obtain weight matrix to optimize Mean Absolute Error (MSE)
error among FCM responses and the targets.
The proposed method in [133] is based on the moving window technique, inﬂuenced by window size
and widow step size, to extract the concepts. Then, a map composed of several layers is formed so that
the obtained concepts in the previous step are located in each layer. Although it is an interpretable and
clear FTS model, extracting appropriate concepts number is impossible. Thus, there is a trade-oﬀbetween
window size and accuracy in this model. In other words, the accuracy of this model depends signiﬁcantly
on the size of the window. The larger the window size, the bigger the map which creates some problems in
relation to training, visualizing, and interpreting. On the other hand, the researchers in [134] suggested a
posteriori FCM simpliﬁcation strategies, complexity reduction, by removing weak nodes and weights after
evaluating their eﬀectiveness in the map. Hereby it turned out that around 1
6 of the edges and 1
3 could be
dropped without any substantial increase in the prediction error.
The authors in [135] unveiled a univariate time series forecasting method based on the coupling of FCMs
and information granules employing fuzzy c-means clustering technique to translate the original time series
into granular time series. Thus, in the following, FCM is employed to describe obtained granular time series
and accomplish forecasting tasks. PSO has been used as the learning algorithm in this method to extract
the weight matrix among the concepts (granules). The proposed model is suitable for large-scale time series
prediction because of its automatic structure. Noticeable that the more clusters, the higher accuracy, and
the lower interpretability.
A feasible and eﬀective time series forecasting framework based on fuzzy cognitive maps was investigated
in [136] to predict the enrollments of the University of Alberta on the linguistic level. The proposed quantita-
tive technique is a composition of the c-means clustering algorithm, FCM, and RCGA. The FCM structure
formulated using c-means clustering which transforms original time series to FTS and extracts linguistic
labels. Then, the constructed FCM is trained through the RCGA algorithm to represent the converted FTS
and realize linguistic forecasting.
A new time series forecasting method was outlined in [37] by combining high order fuzzy cognitive
map (HFCM) and fuzzy c-means clustering. The proposed model consists of two stages. In the ﬁrst stage,
HFCM model is constructed and the second stage exploits the generated HFCM prediction model to perform
inference and prediction. In other words, ﬁrstly, a fuzzy c-means clustering algorithm is exploited to create
information granules by translating original time series into granular time series and generate a structure
of the HFCM model automatically. In the next, the PSO algorithm is implemented as a learning method
to extract weight matrices and complete the HFCM prediction model. Eventually, the designed HFCM has
been used to generate numeric prediction by doing inference in the granular space. Notice that the adopted
method is driven through a couple of adaptable parameters: the number of clusters and orders. The best
outcomes obtained when the number of clusters and order are 9 and 4 respectively. Based on the literature,
it is kind of Simple, legible with a high level of interpretability as well as a strong ability to predict large
scale time series.
20

In [137] a new method has been implemented for time series forecasting where the lagged time series is
mapped to the concepts. The method is a mixture of FCM reconstruction procedure with moving (sliding)
window approach considered for both training and testing samples. In this method, The size of the map
corresponds to the moving window size and it informs about the length of historical data, which produces
time series model.
It is worth mentioning that unlike other existing forecasting methods, fuzziﬁcation
an defuzziﬁcation steps are not performed in this study and fuzziﬁcation has been replaced by min-max
normalization in this paper. More precisely, time series modeling and forecasting depend on the moving
window technique. PSO learning method is used to optimize objective function (MSE) for three real-time
series data. Moreover, the performance of the model was evaluated in two cases: with and without the
presence of the bias weights. Thus, this paper investigated the roles of map size and bias on the accuracy
performance of the proposed method. Additionally, it is not equally good for all kinds of data and does not
perform well for trend and seasonality data.
In [33] dynamic optimization of FCM (DFCM) was suggested to predict time series. The main goal of the
DFCM method is to optimize not only the weights but also all elements of FCM as well as the whole learning
process to reach more accuracy. Accordingly, the structure of the FCM together with the transformation
function and its parameters as well as the length of the learning period are optimized. In this case, ﬁve
diﬀerent population-based algorithms such as GA, PSO, SA, ABC, and DE were applied to optimize all of
the mentioned parameters. The proposed method is so competitive compared with other methods in the
literature while is useful only for linear and stationary time series.
An extension of the time series forecasting method was designed in [129].
This two-level technique
enables the model to carry out modeling and forecasting in both numerical and linguistic terms as the
crux advantage by combining FCMs and granules. The outstanding characteristic of this candidate FCM
corresponded to the beneﬁts of the proposed RCGA learning technique. It must be considered that the
number of granular time series from the output of the fuzziﬁcation module represents the number of nodes
in FCM-based modeling.
Further, equal width of fuzzy sets and equal data frequency are used in this
paper. The results indicate linguistic accuracy of the proposed method decreases as the number of fuzzy
sets becomes higher, while at the same time, the numerical prediction accuracy increases. This shows that
some trade-oﬀexist between the quality of the numerical and linguistic predictions. Also, the tests show
that the statistical characteristics of the input time series inﬂuence the quality of the results. A higher
standard deviation of the input time series results in a slightly worse accuracy of prediction.
Researchers in [138] published a comparative analysis of the evolutionary and adaptive learning method
of FCM to evaluate the proper method for a special prediction problem. In other words, the performance
of the proposed method evaluated by RCGA and DE as the evolutionary methods in comparison to DHL
and balanced diﬀerential learning algorithm (BDA) as adaptive methods . The results demonstrate that the
predictive capabilities of adaptive methods are not competitive with evolutionary algorithms. The predictive
capabilities of the proposed method were examined by forecasting weather conditions in this study
The aim of the proposed research in [139] is to create the FCM model for long-term prediction of prostate
cancer based on an improved learning evolutionary learning method enabling FCM to better optimizing the
ﬁtness function for long-term prediction of multivariate time series. In other words, in this investigation,
two types of FCM are designed for both short and long-term prediction by adding horizon parameter (H)
to the prediction error. Therefore, two diﬀerent FCM structures developed for H = 1 and 1 ≤H ≤7. The
experimental results conﬁrmed that obtained in-sample and out-of-sample prediction errors are much better
for the second type by considering the propagation of errors that was occurred given H > 1. Noteworthy,
the model complexity has been reduced by removing |wij| < 0.3 .
The model elaborated in [30] is another application of evolutionary learning FCM in which the main
target is focused on the multi-step prediction of pulmonary infection based on the real clinical dataset. The
experimental results conﬁrm the good performance of the model for long-term forecasting and the capability
of the proposed multi-step learning method to simulate fully both system dynamic nature and internal
changes.
An unprecedented model for predicting chaotic time series designed in [130, 140] implementing FCMs
based on novel fuzzy neural network. In the contrary of the principal drawback of the conventional FCM
models where determining the states of the investigated system and quantifying causalities mainly depends
21

on the experts’ knowledge, the proposed model equips the inference mechanism of original FCMs with the
automatic identiﬁcation of membership functions and quantiﬁcation of causalities. Thereby, the construction
of FCM can be modeled automatically from the data independently with less intervention of experts. In this
manner, the proposed fuzzy neural network composed of four layers. The ﬁrst layer consists of input variables
and each node represents a concept in the concerned system. The second layer performs fuzziﬁcation while
each node represents the linguistic-term set of inputs, the third layer in which the nodes represent the output
variables linguistic term, two tasks including the causalities among concepts in FCMs and defuzziﬁcation
are carried out.
Finally, in the last layer, the nodes represent non-fuzzy variables.
The application of
the proposed fuzzy neural network provides a crystal mathematical representation of the causalities and
makes the inference process more understandable. Noting that Backpropagation-based learning algorithm
is employed to adjust the relevant parameters by minimizing the RMSE as the objective function. Simple
architecture and better forecasting accuracy conﬁrmed the outperformance of the proposed method.
Despite several advantages of FCMs in solving decision-making problems due to their transparent and
comprehensive nature, some FCM shortcomings limit its performance in the domain of time series forecasting
and analysis. [132] introduced a novel practical FCM method employing ARIMA to enabling FCM to predict
multi-steps ahead of a ﬂuctuating time series which keeps prediction accuracy, as well as keeping transparency
of the weight matrix. In other words, to overcome the convergence issue, the updating rule adopted utilizing
moving average and weight ampliﬁcation function. Also, It has applied a modiﬁed version of the sigmoid
activation function to conﬁne the activation values in the allowable range. However, the results conﬁrm the
advantage of the model in predicting multiple steps of a oscillating time series, some parameters like lower
prediction accuracy as well as less transparency aﬀect these achievements.
In another investigation, [141] proposed a new method to alleviate the problem of forecasting multivariate
interval-valued time series for the ﬁrst time. For this purpose, FGCMs as an easy-to-interpret knowledge
representation tool were designed as a non-linear predictive model. A genetic algorithm has been developed
for training FGCM based on the historical data. In this model, the approximation of the time series is
subjected to forecast instead of accurate numerical time series. As the experimental results indicated the
better prediction performance is obtained as the prediction horizons are limited or for short-term prediction.
For instance, it outperformed compared to ARIMA, VAR or na¨ıve models for just up to three days prediction
horizons. Note that this investigation has used a sliding window concerning the both the size of training
and testing windows and their eﬀect on the ﬁnal results. The model meets the better performance with the
short prediction horizon, less data variability, and absence of trends in data.
The other approximate time series forecasting framework proposed in [142] which is a kind of new
double-phased approach. In the ﬁrst phase, the original time series is transformed to a sequence of granules
to organize granular time series (GTS). In the second phase, the obtained granules from the ﬁrst phase
are clustered using fuzzy c-means clustering and the centers of obtained clusters are regarded as the FCM
concepts. Through this procedure, FCM is applied to forecast the concepts’ activation vectors. Conceptually,
the maximum activation level of the FCM concept is depicted the forecasted granule. Numerically, the
forecasted granule is considered as a fuzzy set that is described in terms of its bounds and modal value. It
should be reminded that in this research the GA has been deﬁned as FCM learning method. The model is
not suitable for random time series; however, it is the most proper for ones with a stable cyclic component
as well as forecasting the changes of the amplitude.
In [143] a new model is adopted for forecasting interval-valued time series mixing interval-valued intu-
itionistic fuzzy sets (IVI-FS) with a fuzzy cognitive map (FCM) trained via DE learning method. Also,
this study has been focused on forecasting approximation of time series to create interval-valued time series
(ITS). That is, the exact values are replaced by minimal and maximal values in the predeﬁned periods. For
this reason, an FCM-based model has been designed to predict ITS which is termed the Intuitionistic Fuzzy
Grey Cognitive Map (IFGCM) using interval-valued intuitionistic fuzzy sets. The obtained results verify
the satisfactory eﬀect of the method compared by FCMs and FGCMs.
In [144] an approach proposed for time series modeling and forecasting using clustering technique to
design FCM in which the main focus is on structure or map node selection. In the proposed scheme, ﬁrstly,
time series transformed into two-dimensional space of amplitude–change of amplitude as a basic and popular
method. In other words, based on the [129] set of concepts in FCM are positioned in the two-dimensional
22

space of amplitude and change of amplitude. Then, FCM clustering technique is used to create concepts
(k = 3, 4, 5, ..24). Cluster validity indexes are applied in the next step to evaluate the generated concepts. 40
diﬀerent validity indexes are exploited to evaluate the properties of the obtained concepts such as similarity
of the points located in the same clusters, dissimilarity of the points belong to various clusters, both of them,
or other features. Among all, just ﬁve cluster validity indexes performed well as top-ﬁve indexes. Step four
includes the application of PSO as a learning algorithm for proposed FCM with k = 3, 4, 5, dots, 24 concepts
to minimizing the MSE as the ﬁtness function and evaluating the model performance. In the other words,
the evaluation is centralized on selecting the best structure of FCMs using cluster validity indexes with the
promising and minimum MSE value.
A combination of FCM with a multi-step supervised learning algorithm for time series prediction and
monitoring was developed in [145]. Application of gradient model and Markov model of the gradient are used
as a multi-step learning strategy for FCM in this investigation. On the other hand one-step gradient, multi-
step gradient method, and Markov model of the gradient were employed to learn FCM and tune the relevant
parameters by minimizing the forecasting error. Using the mentioned strategy provides the possibility of
forecasting the next values according to the currently monitored values of the system.
High ﬂexibility,
especially in small datasets, ease of usage, and cheap cost of implementation are the bold characteristics of
the model. Most importantly though, less complex FCM produced through the SOGA training algorithm
with semantic meaning in the provided relationships among concepts. The concepts of the obtained FCM
is used as input for ANN with high accuracy.
The authors in [146] investigated a new FCM learning algorithm for the water demand problem. Thereby,
the focal objective of this research is presenting the new SOGA learning method compared with other learning
procedures including multi-step gradient model (MGM) and RCGA to optimize an objective function. In
addition to investigate learning algorithms of FCM for multivariate time series modeling and prediction
in this research, introducing a new FCM learning algorithm that ﬁnds the most important connections is
considered as the other objective of this paper. However MSE, RMSE, MAPE, and MAE were used to
evaluate the model’s performance, it seems that the SOGA performs more eﬃciently regarding to the MSE
as the accuracy metric of the model. Further, based on the outcomes, the accuracy of summer demand
prediction is better than winter demand.
Furthermore, in [147] a novel ensemble time series forecasting technique was explored which combines
FCM and artiﬁcial neural network (ANN). This multivariate method is based on the eﬃcient capabilities
of evolutionary fuzzy cognitive maps (FCMs) enhanced by structure optimization algorithms and artiﬁcial
neural networks (ANNs) including two stages. In the ﬁrst stage, an evolutionary FCM is made based on the
SOGA in [146, 148]. Use of SOGA allows the construction of FCM model automatically from the historical
data in which the most eﬀective nodes (attributes) and weights are chosen to provide less complex and
more eﬃcient FCM-based model. In the next stage, the created FCM determines the inputs of ANN where
the BP method with momentum or Levenberg-Marquardt (LM)algorithm IS exploited as ANN training
strategies. Various kinds of accuracy metrics were employed to assess the model’s performance using four
various datasets. It is worth noting that the developed software tool ISEMK (intelligent expert system based
on cognitive maps) used to evaluate the proposed method in all the experiments.
A novel two-stage forecasting technique introduced in [149] which combines FCM and ANN to predict
day-ahead gas consumption in Greece. In the ﬁrst step, SOGA learning algorithm is employed to construct
the FCM construction from the original time series. In other words, SOGA is applied to extract the weight
matrices as well as the model simpliﬁcation by discarding the less eﬀective concepts on the prediction
accuracy. In the second stage, the selected concepts of the simpliﬁed FCM considered as inputs for ANN
trained with the application of the back-propagation method with momentum and the Levenberg-Marquardt
algorithm.
Moreover, another novel ensemble forecasting methodology developed by [150] based on evolutionary
FCMs, artiﬁcial neural networks (ANNs), and their hybrid structure (FCM-ANN). In other words, the
ensemble learning technique in this method combines various learning algorithms including SOGA-based
FCMs, RCGA-based FCMs, eﬃcient and adaptive ANNs architectures, and a hybrid SOGA-FCM-ANN
recently proposed for time series forecasting structure proposed in [147] to solve the time series prediction
problem of gas consumption in Greece. In this research, two of the most popular ensemble methodologies
23

including the simple average (AVG) and error-based (EB) [151, 152] employed to evaluate the performance
of individual predictors, the ensemble predictors, and their combination. The obtained results indicate the
eﬃcacy and eﬃciency of the deﬁned method when compared with other autonomous methods like ANN,
FCMs and LSTM.
In addition to the aforementioned options, to determine the FCM’s architecture and elevate the forecast-
ing performance of FCMs, wavelet transformation and empirical mode decomposition (EMD) were recom-
mended by some authors. In [35] a time series forecasting method has been adopted based on the synergy
of high order FCM and wavelet transform (redundant Haar wavelet) which is termed as Wavelet-HFCM.
The proposed method is useful to handle large-scale non-stationary time series while the original signal is
decomposed into the multivariate time series by wavelet transform. Then, HFCM is exploited for mod-
eling and forecasting the multivariate time series. Making more generalization, the proposed model was
trained via ridge regression to solve optimization problems unlike the lasso regression procedure adopted for
FCM leaning in [153, 154] . Based on the outcomes, the regularization factor and number of nodes have a
considerable eﬀect on the accuracy unlike the lower impact of the order.
An accurate and robust method to deal with non-stationary and large-scale time series was proposed
in [36] which is based on the combination of empirical mode decomposition (EMD) as self-adaptive feature
extraction technique and high-order FCMs (HFCMs), known as EMD-HFCM. Therefore, the EMD-HFCM
is useful to handle some of the limitations of existing FCMs methods including low precision and sensitivity
to hyperparameters.
This novel method exploits EMD to create the set of stationary nodes of HFCM
by extracting features from the original sequence. Then, a precise and eﬃcient learning model based on
Bayesian ridge regression, which is more robust than ridge regression, was employed to provide regular
parameters from data. The experimental results verify the excellent performance of the proposed EMD-
HFCM on eight public time series datasets dealing with large-scale and non-stationary time series compared
to other available models.
However [35] developed wavelet-HFCM method to handle large-scale non-stationary times series success-
fully, it suﬀers from some weaknesses relating to the wavelet transformation. Regarding this issue, a novel
and robust forecasting technique proposed in [131] based on the synergy of HFCM and empirical wavelet
transformation (EWT) to boost the performance of conventional FCMs dealing with non-stationary and
outliers. EWT used as a novel adaptive signal decomposition method with a signiﬁcant eﬀect on the model
in analyzing non-stationary time series data. EWT is employed to decompose the original time series into
diﬀerent levels in the Fourier domain which captures information of diﬀerent frequencies. Afterward, HFCM
will be trained through a novel method based on ϵ-support vector regression (ϵ-SVR) which elevates its
robustness against outliers. In the end, the crisp value is obtained by dividing the summation of all the
concept values of each node by two. The experimental results on eight publicly available time series show
the superiority of the proposed model by comparing it with other models.
Although FCMs have a strong ability to apply for time series forecasting, the performance is limited
due to some deﬁciencies using available feature extraction frameworks which inﬂuence the FCM’s prediction
accuracy. In other words, in these methods, some features of the original time series will be lost when the
original time series mapped to FTS. As instances [35] applied Harr wavelet to extract the features time
series or fuzzy c-means in [155]. To deal with some limitations of proposed feature time series models, a
novel and generalized feature time series extraction method is suggested bt [156] merging kernel mapping
and HFCM that has been inspired by the kernel methods and the support vector regression (SVR), referred
to as kernel HFCM. Kernel mapping is deﬁned to transfer the original one-dimensional time series into the
multidimensional feature time series, and then key feature time series (KFTS) from the multidimensional
feature time series are selected through the proposed feature selection algorithm to develop HFCM. In
the next step, a fast HFCM learning algorithm based on ridge regression is applied to adopt the fuzzy
relationship of the HFCM. Lastly, the predicted one-dimensional time series is generated from the feature
time series by exploiting reverse kernel mapping. However employing kernel mapping can help to capture
the implicit patterns in the data, a suitable method for KFTS evaluation is still required to reduce the
regression problem of the non-stationary time series and to improve the accuracy of the prediction.
A new time series forecasting strategy proposed in [157] based on a sparse Autoencoder (SAE) and a
high-order FCM (HFCM), named SAE-FCM to handle some time series forecasting pitfalls such as the
24

inability of extracting good features of original time series, trapping in local minima and low prediction
accuracy.
SAE has been exploited to dealing with the ﬁrst limitation by extracting features from the
original time series through an unsupervised training method. Then the second limitation is solved by a
combination of outputs of SAE and HFCM calculate the forecasted value. Finally, the batch gradient descent
method (limited-memory Broyden-Fletcher-Goldfarb-Shanno (L-BFGS)), as ﬁne-tuning algorithm inspired
from deep learning, is used to update the weights of SAE-FCM and to improve the performance of SAE-FCM
by removing the third limitation. The obtained results demonstrate the high accuracy performance of the
proposed SAE-FCM.
Another FCM-based time series forecasting strategy presented in [158] using pseudoinverse learning model
namely FCM-MP. Therefore, this study mainly has focused on developing a new time-eﬃcient learning
algorithm based on Moore-Penrose inverse to deal with some FCM learning limitations including time-
consuming and poor accuracy of evolutionary and Hebbian-based methods respectively. High forecasting
accuracy, cheap cost of computation, multiple-step-ahead multivariate forecasting, and lack of laborious
adjustment of parameters are counted as the signiﬁcant strengths of the proposed learning strategy. The
experiment results on 41 diﬀerent time series highlight the superiority of the mentioned technique considering
the value of slope parameter of activation function λ in the set {1.0, 1.5, 2.0, 2.5, 3.0, 3.5, 4.0, 4.5, 5.0}.
The authors in [159] formulated a new extension of FCM for multivariate time series forecasting termed
DEEP FCM (DFCM). In other expression, a deep neural network-based fuzzy cognitive map model was
introduced to reach interpretable multivariate prediction. The proposed model combines the strength of
interpretability of FCM with the strength of deep neural network by introducing the deep neural network
models into the FCM knowledge-based models as the main solution for building an interpretable predictor
strategy. DFCM as an extension of conventional FCM, modeled the nonlinear and non-monotonic eﬀects
among the concepts and unknown exogenous factors that have a latent inﬂuence on system dynamics via
a fully connected neural network and a recurrent neural network (LSTM-based u-function) respectively.
Furthermore, to calculate the strength of connection among a couple of concepts, the model equipped
with a partial derivative-based approach to guarantee interpretability.
An Alternate Function Gradient
Descent (AFGD) approach based on Backpropagation (BP) also was exploited for parameter inference
which enhanced its prediction ability compared to other standard FCM.
The recent publication in [160] introduced a new time series modeling based on least square FCM termed
as LSFCM. In this developed method, Fuzzy c-means clustering is employed to construct concepts of the
FCM while the least square method is exploited to adopt the weight matrices from the given historical
observation of time series. In contrast to other traditional FCM, the LSFCM model is a direct and one-time
solution of matrix equation without repetitious stochastic searching. LSFCM model is a straightforward,
robust, and rapid learning method, owing to its reliability and eﬃciency. In the ﬁrst stage of this two-stage
model, the least square method is exploited to form an FCM model. In the second step, the LSFCM is
optimized through concept reﬁnement by relocating the concept’s positions to obtain the optimal concepts
through PSO to improve the prediction accuracy. In this study, the slope parameter of sigmoid activation
function λ plays a signiﬁcant role to keep the values of weights elements in the interval [−1, 1]. It means that
the proper weight matrix is obtained when λ ≥λ1 and λ1 = max{|wij|},i, j = 1, 2, .., c. The results conﬁrm
the eﬃciency and accuracy of the model compared with other conventional models considering various time
series for the diﬀerent values of concepts range from {2, 3, ..., 20} and λ belongs to {1, 5, 10, 50}.
A new FCM-based prediction model has been proposed in [161] based on partitioning strategies. Firstly,
fuzzy c-means clustering is employed to partition time series into several sub-sequence. Consequently, each
partition has its corresponding sequences. Subsequently, the FCMs are constructed in terms of these sub-
sequences respectively. Finally, the FCM models are merged by fuzzy rules. Therefore, this model has not
been designed by modeling the whole data directly similar to other existing models in the literature. The
constructed model performs well in numerical prediction and also has well interpretability. As the results
indicates, the forecasting precision can not continuously improve by increasing the number of nodes. In
reverse, the model is more accurate as the number of partitions increases.
It is worth mentioning that Table 3 summarizes a list of these proposed FCM-based time series forecasting
strategies arranged according to the date of publication taking into account some important parameters such
as learning methods, order number, presence of bias, and the number of nodes.
25

26

Author
Method
Uni/Multi variate
Learning method
Order
Bias
Node Num.
[129]
FCM+information granule
Multivariate
RCGA
1
without
9
[138]
Comparative study of adaptive
and evolutionary FCM
Multivariate
DHL, BDA, DE, RCGA
1
without
4, 5, 8
[30]
Evolutionary based FCM
Multivariate
Single-step RCGA
, New multi-step learning method
1
without
15
[139]
Evolutionary based FCM
Multivariate
RCGA
1
withot
6
[136]
fuzzy C-means clustering+FCM
Univariate
RCGA
1
without
5
[133]
fuzzy C-means clustering +
FCM+ moving window
Univariate
PSO
1
without
Node Num.=3,
map size=3,6,..,27
[134]
fuzzy C-means clustering+FCM
Univariate
PSO
1
without
27
[135]
fuzzy C-means clustering+
FCM+information granules
Univariate
PSO
1
with
{3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8}
[37]
fuzzy C-means clustering
+HFCM
Univariate
PSO
{1,2,3,4,5}
with
{3,5,7,9,10}
[141]
FGCM,FGCM/ARIMA,
FGCM/naive,FGCM/ES,
FGCM/VAR
Multivariate
GA
1
without
5
[137]
Moving window+FCM
Univariate
PSO
1
with+without
{3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12}
[145]
Multi-step Learning Algorithm
Multivariate
Gradient method and
Markov Model of Gradient
1
without
22
[146]
FCMs+ learning algorithms
based on gradient-based
and population-based methods
Multivariate
MGM,RCGA,SOGA
1
without
6
[147]
FCM+ANN
Multivariate
RGGA,SOGA
+BP with momentum and LM
1
without
{8,9,14,26}
[162]
FCM+ANN
Multivariate
SOGA +BP with momentum
SOGA+ LM
1
without
9
[142]
fuzzy C-means clustering+
granular FCM
Univariate
GA
1
without
{2,3,4,5,6}
[144]
New clustering based on cluster
validity indexes
Multivariate
PSO
1
without
{3, 4, . . . , 24}
[132]
FCM+ARIMA
Multivariate
Real-valued Genetic Algorithm
1
without
3
[149]
FCM+ANN
Multivariate
RCGA,SOGA+BP,LM
1
without
6
[150]
Ensemble of Methods (AVG and
EB) combining FCMs and ANNs
Multivariate
SOGA,RCGA,BP
1
without
-
[157]
SAE+HFCM
Univariate
Ridge regression+(L-BFGS)
{4,5,8,13}
with
{25,30,35,45}
[35]
Wavelet+HFCM
Multivariate
Ridge regression
{2,3,4,6,23}
with
{4,5,6,7,8}
27

[143]
IFGCM
Univariate+ Multivariate
DE
1
without
5
[36]
EMD+HFCM
Univariate
Bayesian ridge regression
{2,6,9,11,22}
without
self-adaptive
(depends on EMD)
[131]
EWT+HFCM
Univariate
ϵ-SVR
{12, 48}
without
3
[156]
Kernel mapping+ HFCM
Univariate
Ridge regression
{2,3,4,5,6,7}
with
{2,3,4,5,6,7}
[158]
FCM-MP
Multivariate
Moore-Penrose inverse
1
with
{2,3,4,5,6,10,14,50}
[159]
DFCM
Multivariate
AFGD based on BP
1
without
{6, 9}
[163]
HFCM-FTS
Univariate
GA
2
with+without
{5, 10, 20}
[160]
LSFCM
Univariate
least squares
1
without
{2, 3, .., 20}
[161]
Partitioning strategies
Univariate
constrained least squares
1
without
{3, 5, 7}
Table 3: Summary of the most relevant time series forecasting methods using FCM in the literature
28

5. Research opportunities and challenges
As the literature reviews and according to the Table 3, research on FCM-based forecasting models is
continually increasing in recent years. Various univariate and multivariate FCM-based methods have been
developed to enhance conventional FCM performance in terms of predictive accuracy and interpretation.
Although the proposed models have achieved signiﬁcant success in time series modeling and forecasting,
there are some gaps and challenges ahead that are counted as follows.
Firstly, FCMs still comprise weakness in dealing with the nonstationarity and outliers even though
[131] has focused on this issue.
Secondly, most of the models have been constructed to deal one step
ahead forecasting and very limited number of papers focused on multiple steps ahead forecasting including
[132, 30]. Thirdly, most FCMs implemented evolutionary algorithms as learning method which are very time
consuming. So, the other signiﬁcant challenge is to ﬁnd a faster learning algorithm like least squares in [160].
The other challenges is to handle large-scale non-stationary multivariate time series which is considered in
[35]. In addition, scaleable learning methods, MIMO models, probability FCM forecasting can be considered
as another future possibilities of FCM-based models.
6. Conclusion
This survey has been organized to provide an overview of recent developments on time series forecasting
methods using FCMs and to explore potential future research opportunities. Also, this survey covers an
introduction and revision on some corresponding properties/fundamentals of FCM (including the structure
of FCMs and reasoning rules, high order FCMs, extensions of FCMs and dynamic properties of FCMs) and
FCMs learning methodologies.
With respect to the FCM structure, the core attention of FCM-based approaches is basically focused on
building FCM’s structure and extracting weight connections among the concepts. It means that common
methods such as C-means clustering or information granules are employed to formulate the FCM structure
and then learning algorithms are introduced to capture causal relation among a couple of nodes. Hebbian-
based methods, population-based methods, their combinations, as well as ANN-based methods are the
main category of FCM learning approaches, which, as mentioned, have advantages and disadvantages. In
addition, a variety of activation functions and reasoning rules were explored by researchers to generate exact
and meaningful results by choosing the appropriate ones.
FCMs as eﬃcient member of soft computing society, have been widely used in time series forecasting
domain to improve the accuracy as well as interpretability as a nonlinear predictive model. Time series
forecasting applying FCMs includes two stages: designing a proper FCMs structure and appropriate weight
training techniques. Hence, diﬀerent FCM models have been implemented to predict time series taking
into account diﬀerent numbers of concepts and orders and learning as well as various learning strategies.
Since most FCMs used evolutionary learning algorithms, the recent remarkable challenges of FCMs is to
ﬁnd a fast training method such as least squares because evolutionary-based learning methods are much
time consuming. Although various univariate and multivariate methods have been presented to boost the
conventional FCM particularly dealing with uncertainty in data, still exist some open challenges and future
research possibilities as we discussed in section 5.
