A Deeper Understanding of State-Based Critics
in Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
Xueguang Lyu, Andrea Baisero, Yuchen Xiao, Christopher Amato
Northeastern University

Abstract
Centralized Training for Decentralized Execution, where train-
ing is done in a centralized ofﬂine fashion, has become a popu-
lar solution paradigm in Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning.
Many such methods take the form of actor-critic with state-
based critics, since centralized training allows access to the
true system state, which can be useful during training despite
not being available at execution time. State-based critics have
become a common empirical choice, albeit one which has had
limited theoretical justiﬁcation or analysis. In this paper, we
show that state-based critics can introduce bias in the policy
gradient estimates, potentially undermining the asymptotic
guarantees of the algorithm. We also show that, even if the
state-based critics do not introduce any bias, they can still
result in a larger gradient variance, contrary to the common
intuition. Finally, we show the effects of the theories in prac-
tice by comparing different forms of centralized critics on a
wide range of common benchmarks, and detail how various
environmental properties are related to the effectiveness of
different types of critics.
1
Introduction
The rising popularity of Centralized Critics in Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning (MARL) has led to the usage of state
information becoming common practice. The rationale be-
hind state-based critics is straightforward—centralized critics
train in a centralized ofﬂine manner and usually have access
to the environment state, which appears desirable compared
to local observations. Because critics can be discarded after
the training of actors, they do not hinder independent exe-
cution by each agent. As a result, state-based critics have
become a convenient and popular design decision for cen-
tralized training with actor-critic methods (Foerster et al.
2018; Wang et al. 2020; Du et al. 2019; Zhou et al. 2020;
Su, Adams, and Beling 2021; Du et al. 2021; Schroeder de
Witt et al. 2019; Baker et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2021). How-
ever, state-based critics have received little formal analysis,
making the state-based critic’s beneﬁts and downsides insufﬁ-
ciently understood in the ﬁeld. In this paper, we point out that
there exists misconceptions in the ﬁeld towards state-based
critics. Our primary contribution is to ﬁll this knowledge gap
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
by providing both intuition and analysis of theoretical prop-
erties of state-based critics, complimented with empirical
ﬁndings and suggestions.
First, we show how the state-based critic is not entirely
sound in theory. We provide bias analysis to conclude that the
state-based critic may incur unbounded bias on the policy gra-
dient compared to the asymptotically unbiased history-based
critic. Second, even assuming that the state-based critic is
unbiased, we analyze policy gradient variance and show that
the policy gradient variance with the state-based critic cannot
be less than that of the history-based critic. We also give
trivial and intuitive toy examples that highlight the essence
of our arguments and provide an intuitive understanding of
the theories.
We also compare the empirical performance of state-based
and history-based critics. Supported by a wide array of ex-
periments, we also discuss the implications of our theories
in practice. We highlight particular circumstances regarding
reactive policies, information gathering, and representation
learning. We demonstrate how the effectiveness of different
types of critics depends on observation models of the tasks
and highlight the deﬁciencies of popular benchmarks. We
also test an alternative critic that combines state and his-
tory information, which demonstrates reliability across tasks.
Through linking empirical results with theory, we establish a
deeper understanding of where the state-based critics work
and where they fall short.
2
Related Work
Centralized
Training
for
Decentralized
Execution
(CTDE) (Oliehoek, Spaan, and Vlassis 2008; Foerster
et al. 2016) has shown signiﬁcant beneﬁts for learning
decentralized policies by addressing environmental non-
stationarity that emerges in independent learning methods.
CTDE provides access to global information during training
while having decentralized execution. Learning decentralized
actors with a centralized critic has thus arisen as a direct
and widespread use of the CTDE framework. There are
many variants of the information used by the centralized
critic, such as the environment state, joint observation, joint
action-observation history, or even mixed combinations.
COMA (Foerster et al. 2018), as the ﬁrst deep multi-agent
actor-critic-based algorithm with CTDE, learns a centralized
critic to provide joint Q-value estimations with explicit ac-
arXiv:2201.01221v2  [cs.LG]  25 May 2022

cess to ground truth state information. MADDPG (Lowe et al.
2017), the other pioneer, also uses centralized critics to up-
date decentralized actors. In MADDPG, each critic accesses
the joint-observation, which implicitly results in it being a
state-based critic as the considered multi-agent domains are
fully observable. We include a deeper dive into the implicit
assumptions and the scope of the work of COMA and MAD-
DPG in Appendix A.
The impressive performance achieved by COMA in SMAC
and MADDPG in OpenAI Particle environments caused
many future methods to use state-based critics without fur-
ther study. For example, numerous other popular works such
as SQDDPG (Wang et al. 2020), LIIR (Du et al. 2019),
LICA (Zhou et al. 2020),VDAC-mix (Su, Adams, and Beling
2021), DOP (Wang et al. 2021) and MACKRL (Schroeder de
Witt et al. 2019) also utilize state-based centralized critics.
Centralized state-based critic is also used in larger scale envi-
ronments for emergence tool use (Baker et al. 2020).
The decision of whether critics condition on states or ob-
servations is often considered not of algorithmic importance;
thereby, recent state-of-the-art methods treat state-based crit-
ics as an engineering decision rather than an algorithmic
design (e.g., in DOP (Wang et al. 2021) which focuses on fac-
torization). However, it is unclear whether state-based critics
are strictly beneﬁcial since there is little theoretical analysis
about how a state-based centralized critic impacts decentral-
ized policy optimization. Ablation comparisons over different
centralized critic designs are necessary but missing in the
current literature. In this paper, we ﬁll this gap by providing
a theoretical and practical analysis of state-based critics.
3
Preliminaries
3.1
Dec-POMDPs
Decentralized partially observable Markov decision pro-
cesses (Dec-POMDPs) (Oliehoek and Amato 2016) are
multi-agent cooperative sequential decision making prob-
lems. A Dec-POMDP is composed of a set of agents I,
a state space S, with initial state s0 ∈S,
a joint ac-
tion space A
.= ×i∈I Ai, one per agent,
a joint obser-
vation space Ω.= ×i∈I Ωi, one per agent, a state tran-
sition function T : S × A →∆S,
a joint observation
function O: S × A →∆Ω,
a joint reward function
R: S × A × S →R, and a discount factor γ ∈[0, 1].
Control in Dec-POMDPs is performed by a set of poli-
cies π = ⟨π1, . . . , π|I|⟩, one per agent, each representing a
(possibly stochastic) mapping from the agent’s past obser-
vations to its next action, πi : Hi →∆Ai. At each timestep
t, a joint action a = ⟨a1,t, ..., a|I|,t⟩is taken by the agents,
each using their own individual history. As feedback from
the system, a scalar reward rt = R(st, at, st+1) is shared
by all agents, and each agent receives a local observation
⟨o1,t, . . . , o|I|,t⟩∼O(st, at). The collective objective of
all agents is that of maximizing the expected performance
J .= E [G0], where Gt .= P
k γkrt+k are the discounted sum
of future rewards, also called returns.
We focus on ﬁnite horizon problems for theoretical anal-
ysis; note, however, that the ﬁnite horizon can be arbitrarily
large enough to approximate episodic and inﬁnite-horizon
problems as well. We will consider value functions over his-
tories, states and history-state pairs. We ﬁrst introduce the
history-state value functions (Bono et al. 2018) Qπ(h, s, a),
it is later served as a link between state values and history
values; it is deﬁned as the expected return given the agents
being in history h and state s and taking action a:
Qπ(h, s, a) = E [G | h, s, a] .
(1)
The history and state values are related to the history-state
values via marginalization over the conditional on-policy
distributions ρ(s | h) and ρ(h | s), respectively (Sutton,
Precup, and Singh 1999) (see Appendix B):
Qπ(h, a) =
E
s∼ρ(s|h) [G | h, s, a] =
E
s∼ρ(s|h) [Qπ(h, s, a)] ,
(2)
Qπ(s, a) =
E
h∼ρ(h|s) [G | h, s, a] =
E
h∼ρ(h|s) [Qπ(h, s, a)] .
(3)
3.2
Multi-Agent Actor Critic Methods
Actor Critic (AC) (Konda and Tsitsiklis 2000; Sutton et al.
2000) is a popular Policy Gradient (PG) method which in-
volves the training of policy and critic models; we consider
the centralized training case (Lowe et al. 2017; Bono et al.
2018; Lyu et al. 2021), where there is one policy model per
agent (each separately parameterized by θi), and a single
centralized critic model (parameterized by φ). We will often
omit the model parameterization, when implicitly clear from
context. To distinguish the critic models from the value func-
tions that they are trained to model, we will denote them as ˆV .
The policy gradient theorem states that the policy gradient
follows the expected returns provided by the joint history
values Qπ(h, a):
∇iJh = Eh∼ρ(h),a∼π(h) [Qπ(h, a)∇θi log πi(ai; hi)] .
(4)
Similarly, COMA (Foerster et al. 2018) and MAD-
DPG (Lowe et al. 2017) introduced policy gradient variants
which employed state values Qπ(s, a):
∇iJs = E
h,a

E
s∼ρ(s|h) Qπ(s, a)∇θi log πi(ai; hi)

.
(5)
In either case, the values Qπ can be estimated in a number
of ways; in actor critic, it is common to use one-step returns
and the critic model to estimate Qπ(h, a) as r + γ ˆV (hao),
and Qπ(s, a) as r + γ ˆV (s′). In advantage actor critic, the
critic model is further used as baseline for variance reduction,
resulting in the following estimates:
Qπ(h, a) −V π(h) ≈r + γ ˆV (hao) −ˆV (h) ,
(6)
Qπ(s, a) −V π(s) ≈r + γ ˆV (s′) −ˆV (s) .
(7)
4
Bias and Variance of State Values and
Gradients
In this section, we analyze the bias and variance resulting
from the use of state value functions Qπ(s, a). Without loss

of generality, we consider single-sample Monte Carlo esti-
mates of Equations (4) and (5),
ˆ∇iJh = Qπ(h, a)∇log πi(ai; hi) ,
(8)
ˆ∇iJs = Qπ(s, a)∇log πi(ai; hi) ,
(9)
where h, s ∼ρ(h, s) and a ∼π(h). In Section 4.1, we show
that the state-based gradient estimate ˆ∇iJs can be biased. In
Section 4.2, we show that even if the state-based gradient
estimate ˆ∇iJs is unbiased, it will have a variance equal to or
higher than that of ˆ∇iJh.
In a related single-agent work (Baisero and Amato 2021),
state values are found to be undeﬁned due to the potential non-
existent of history distributions in inﬁnite-horizon case. Our
analysis, on the other hand, assumes ﬁnite-horizon, so that
history distributions and state values can be properly deﬁned;
and we show how even when the state values are properly
deﬁned, they are still not unbiased. In addition to bias, we
will also provide comparisons on gradient variance. Note that
the Q values for our analysis is the analytical return values,
not the results of learned models. Representation learning is
a separate problem discussed in the experimental section.
4.1
Bias Analysis
We begin by noting that the gradient given by the history-
based critic ˆ∇iJh (Equation (4)) has already been proven
to be unbiased (Foerster et al. 2016; Lyu et al. 2021) due
to the joint histories are Markov states for the history-
MDP (Oliehoek and Amato 2016) in which the policy gra-
dient theorem holds (Sutton et al. 2000). On the other hand,
the gradient given by the state-based critic is:
∇iJs =
E
h,s∼ρ(h,s),a∼π(h) [Qπ(s, a)∇log πi(ai; hi)]
= E
h,a

Es∼ρ(s|h) [Qπ(s, a)] ∇log πi(ai; hi)

. (10)
Together with history-based gradient (Equation (4)), we see
the state-value-based-gradient ˆ∇iJs is also unbiased iff
Qπ(h, a) = Es∼ρ(s|h) [Qπ(s, a)] .
(11)
Therefore, the analysis of the bias of ˆ∇iJs can be per-
formed indirectly through Qπ(s, a). We adopt the method-
ology employed by prior work for the single-agent control
case (Baisero and Amato 2021), and will treat Qπ(s, a) as
an estimator of Qπ(h, a). Consequently, if Qπ(s, a) is un-
biased, then ˆ∇iJs is also unbiased.
Consider the tabular form of the history-state function un-
der a speciﬁc action a, Qπ
a ∈R|S|×|H|, such that Qπ
a,ij =
Qπ(h, s, a) where i and j are the indices respectively corre-
sponding to the joint history h and a state s (we will use this
convention for the remainder of this section); if both the state
and observation spaces are ﬁnite, Qπ
a will be a ﬁnite matrix.
Also consider the tabular form of the normalized discounted
visitations P π ∈[0, 1]|S|×|H|, such that P π
ij = ρ(h, s). Note
that recovering ρ(h | s) and ρ(s | h) from P π requires renor-
malizing the values in a speciﬁc row or column,
ρ(h | s) =
ρ(h, s)
P
s′ ρ(h, s′) =
P π
ij
P
j′ P π
ij′
(12)
ρ(s | h) =
ρ(h, s)
P
h′ ρ(h′, s) =
P π
ij
P
i′ P π
i′j
(13)
The matrices Qπ
a and P π contain the necessary information
to determine all marginal history Qπ(h, a) and state values
Qπ(s, a) as normalized dot products:
Qπ(h, a) =
X
s
ρ(s|h)Qπ(hsa) =
X
j′
P π
ij′
P
j′ P π
ij′ Qπ
a,ij′ ,
(14)
Qπ(s, a) =
X
h
ρ(h|s)Qπ(hsa) =
X
i′
P π
i′j
P
i′′ P π
i′′j
Qπ
a,i′j .
(15)
On the other hand, the correct expected state value as listed
in Equation (11) is obtained as
Es∼ρ(s|h) [Qπ(s, a)]
=
X
s
ρ(s | h)Qπ(s, a)
=
X
s
ρ(s | h)
X
h′
ρ(h′ | s)Qπ(h′, s, a)
=
X
j′
P π
ij′
P
j′′ P π
ij′′
X
i′
P π
i′j′
P
i′′ P π
i′′j′ Qπ
a,i′j′ .
(16)
Note that Qπ(h, a) in Equation (14) only involves the
elements on a speciﬁc row of both Qπ
a and P π, while the
expected state value in Equation (16) involves all elements
of both Qπ
a and P π. While this provides an intuitive reason
for the fact that the two values are not necessarily the same,
the inequality proof is still incomplete; in fact, the values in
Qπ
a and P π are not arbitrary, but are related by problem dy-
namics, policies, and history-state Bellman equations, which
may still result in Equations (14) and (16) being numerically
equivalent. However, we prove that this is not the case.
Theorem 1. Qπ(s, a) may be a biased estimate of Qπ(h, a)
(proof in Appendix C.1).
Corollary 1.1. ∇iJs may be biased (proof in Appendix C.2).
The example below serves as prove-by-example for Theo-
rem 1. See Appendix C.1 for an alternative proof.
Example
In classic Dec-POMDP domain Dec-Tiger (Nair
et al. 2003), two agents face two doors, left and right; a
tiger is randomly initialized behind one of the doors. The
agents can listen, open-left or open-right. The listen ac-
tion is used to detect the tiger location and produces either
hear-left or hear-right which indicates the correct tiger lo-
cation with probability 85%. The cost for listen is −2; the
episode ends with a −50 penalty if the tiger door is opened
by both agents, and +20 for the other door. If two differ-
ent doors are opened by the two agents, the episode ends
with a penalty of −100. If only one agent opens a door (the

other agent listens), the episode ends with −101 if the state
is tiger and +9 otherwise. For the purpose of this exam-
ple, we use a ﬁnite horizon of 3 for calculating the values.
We use the optimal policy in which the agents listen twice
and pick the most promising door. We focus on the history
h = {(listen, listen), (hear right, hear right)} and actions
for the agents a = (listen, listen) as our example. By solving
analytically (see supplementary material), we come to the
follow history and state values:
Q(h, a) ≈13.8859
(17)
Q(tiger left, a) = −16.175
(18)
Q(tiger right, a) = −16.175
(19)
That is, after each agent listens once and both hear the tiger
on the right, listening again by both agents is has an esti-
mated value of 13.8859. In contrast, the state-based estimates
just represent the value achieved after visiting the state and
taking the corresponding action. It is obvious that no mat-
ter with what probability our state values in Equations (18)
and (19) are combined, we can only get a value of −16.175
which is a biased estimator of our history value in Equa-
tion (17). Note that our h contains a promising observation
(hear right, hear right) which brings our conﬁdence that the
tiger is behind the right to very high (96.98%). However,
as illustrated in Equation (16), the state values are aver-
aged over different histories, good and bad. The reason why
Q(tiger right, a) is negative is because it has to consider sit-
uations where agents get less promising observations (like
(hear left, hear right)) or no observations (at the beginning
of the episode) while being in the corresponding state. That
is, history critics represent the true value of the history-based
policy while state critics are averaged over all the histories
that visit the state. As a result, we see that in Dec-Tiger, the
state values are biased estimators of history values.
4.2
Variance Analysis
In this section, we discuss the effect of state values Qπ(s, a)
on the variance of the policy gradient estimate ˆ∇iJs. Like
our bias analysis, we discuss the oracle values Qπ instead of
its estimated counterpart ˆQπ. The policy gradient theorem for
Dec-POMDPs explicitly requires the history value Qπ(h, a)
to be the value used to weigh the policy’s score function (Lyu
et al. 2021; Bono et al. 2018). In that capacity, Qπ(h, a)
is a speciﬁc scalar associated with the history, and has no
variance. On the other hand, using state value Qπ(s, a) as
estimator of Qπ(h, a) introduces variance, as s is sampled
from the history’s associated belief b(h). However, it does
not necessarily imply that the corresponding gradient ˆ∇iJs
also has higher variance than ˆ∇iJh in general. Instead, we
show that, if Qπ(s, a) is unbiased for a given policy and a
Dec-POMDP, then ˆ∇iJs has a variance greater or equal than
that of ˆ∇iJh.
Theorem 2. When the state value function Qπ(s, a) is un-
biased, the state-based policy gradient estimates ˆ∇iJs have
a variance greater or equal than that of the history-based
policy gradient estimates ˆ∇iJh, i.e.,
Qπ(h, a) = Es∼ρ(s|h) [Qπ(s, a)]
=⇒Var
h
ˆ∇iJs
i
≥Var
h
ˆ∇iJh
i
.
(20)
(proof in Appendix C.3).
Although Theorem 2 alone contains a result which is con-
ditional to an equality which does not necessarily hold for a
generic Dec-POMDP, combining Theorems 1 and 2 results in
a broader statement about the overall quality of state-based
policy gradient estimates, i.e.,
Corollary 2.1. ˆ∇iJs cannot be guaranteed to have strictly
better bias/variance properties than ˆ∇iJh, i.e., either its bias
is higher (or equal), or its variance is higher (or equal),
or neither is lower (or equal) (Follows directly from Corol-
lary 1.1 and theorem 2).
Example
Consider a (single-agent) beverage domain, in
which the agent is a barista who serves coffee or tea to a client.
The client, who either prefers coffee or tea, represents the
randomly sampled initial state. The agent does not observe
the client’s preference (we denote this as h = ε) and receives
a reward of 1 if it chooses to serve the correct beverage,
and −1 if it chooses the wrong beverage. In either case, the
episode ends. Suppose the agent chooses to serve tea. Then,
Qπ(s = coffee, a = tea) = −1
(21)
Qπ(s = tea, a = tea) = 1
(22)
Qπ(h = ε, a = tea) = 0
(23)
While Qπ(h = ε, a = tea) is a constant with zero variance,
the random variable Qπ(s, a = tea) conditioned on h = ε
has strictly positive variance,
Vars|h=ε [Qπ(s, a = tea)]
= Es|h=ε

Qπ(s, a = tea)2
−Es|h=ε [Qπ(s, a = tea)]2
= Es|h=ε [1] −02
= 1 .
(24)
Therefore, the policy gradient estimates will have a higher
variance with the state-based critic. For more intuition on the
variance of state-based critic, refer to the Dec-Tiger example
in Appendix E.
5
Experiments
To understand the performance of centralized critics in prac-
tice, we test state-based critics and history-based critics using
vanilla Advantage Actor-Critic with a centralized critic. We
implement state or history value functions V (s), V (h) and
V (h, s) instead of Q functions; and the advantages are calcu-
lated using one-step differences as mentioned in Section 3.2.
We highlight some of the interesting results and discuss the
potential reasons behind performance differences. Further-
more, we introduce and test history-state-based Critics (HSC),
where the concatenation of state and history is used as the
input of the critic, analogous to Unbiased Asymmetric Actor-
Critic (Baisero and Amato 2021) in single-agent settings.
HSC uses V (h, s) directly as the critic, which can be shown
to have no bias but larger variance in theory compared to the
history-based critic (Appendix D).

Experiment
Setup
The
ﬁgures
shown
are
mean-
aggregation of 20 runs per method; standard deviation is
drawn as shaded bands around the lines. The experiments
were conducted on compute clusters with nodes equipped
with Dual Intel Xeon E5-2650 CPUs and 128GB of RAM.
Hyperparameters are individually tuned while ﬁxing other
hyperparameters.
5.1
Observation Information Sufﬁciency
Some environments give partial yet ”sufﬁcient” local infor-
mation in the sense that the optimal policy does not depend
on the entire history. That is, the history-MDP (or even
observation-MDP) is (close to) value-equivalent to the true
underlying MDP; in some cases, reactive policies (policies
that only condition on the last observation) can achieve op-
timal performance (Figures 1 and 7). For example, in the
Meeting-in-a-Grid domains (Bernstein, Hansen, and Zilber-
stein 2005; Amato, Dibangoye, and Zilberstein 2009), agents
observe their own location but not the teammate while trying
to meet in a grid-world. Optimally, agents would navigate
to a predetermined spot (e.g., the center) and wait. Another
example is Find Treasure (Jiang 2019) in which one agent has
to step onto a trigger location to open a door while the other
agent goes through the door to ﬁnd treasure. Again, even
though the agent only observes local information, the optimal
policy does not require remembering history because policies
do not beneﬁt from additional action-observation history. In
these environments in Figure 1, one may safely assume that
a given state will produce similar return distributions with
different histories because the history information does not
meaningfully affect the policy and the return distributions
since the policy conditions on the last observation, which is
produced by the state. However, we note that in harder and
more partially-observable tasks, we expect that the optimal
policies are not reactive.
5.2
Reactive Policies
We note that using reactive policies is not sufﬁcient to make
state-based critics unbiased in the general case, because at
any time step the observation produced by the state may
still cause the policy to behave differently (Equation (30)).
Therefore, the state-based critic is unbiased for a reactive
policy only when there is also a deterministic observation
model. That is, for a speciﬁc agent, a given state-action pair
can only produce a certain deterministic observation. This
restriction ensures at most one non-null entry in each column
of matrix Qπ
a, thus warranting unbiased expected state-values
Q(o, a) = Es∼φ(s|h)Q(s, a). It is precisely the reason why
MADDPG is not biased in their particle environments (Lowe
et al. 2017). This situation also is not uncommon, which
we see in numerous benchmarks including the classic task
Recycling as well as environments with radius-based ob-
servation models such as StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge
(SMAC) (Samvelyan et al. 2019) which we discuss in Sec-
tion 5.4. We hence note that the benchmarks used in recent
state-of-the-art works usually has the aforementioned deter-
ministic observation model, which is in fact a special case of
imperfect information.
Cooperation
The situation where reactive policies are not
optimal is captured in the multi-agent recycling task for
which policies with different types of critics all converged
to a suboptimal solution. In the multi-agent recycling task,
we expect the agents to work together while maintaining
battery levels. The task contains recyclable small and large
targets, and the large ones require two agents to act simultane-
ously. The agents only observe their own battery levels. For
policies that recycle large targets to be competitive against
small-target-policies (reactive), agents must estimate their
teammate’s battery level based on observation history (non-
reactive). Learning to cooperate in this case is especially
difﬁcult because the agents suffer the problem of shadowed
equilibrium (Matignon, Laurent, and Le Fort-Piat 2012) de-
spite the usage of a centralized critic (Lyu et al. 2021). Fig-
ure 1 shows performance for Recycling agents with various
critics, in which none of the methods learns to recycle large
targets (See Appendix F.6 for performance of reactive poli-
cies). Therefore, reactive policies are learned that are not
signiﬁcantly biased with state-based critics. Note that being
unbiased means that the shadowed equilibrium also applies
for policies trained with state-based critics.
5.3
History-State-Based Critics
We also test history-state-based critics (HSC), which esti-
mate the value of a state and history pair. For experiments,
we concatenate the state and history without changing other
aspects of implementation. Note that the results shown in
Figure 2 are not explicitly tuned but use the set of param-
eters tuned for the history-based critic (HC). In the Dec-
Tiger (Bernstein, Hansen, and Zilberstein 2005), Box Push-
ing and Cleaner (Jiang 2019) domains in Figure 2 we see that
the history-state-based critics have a clear advantage over
critics that use state or history information alone, especially
in the later stages of training. It suggests that there exist situ-
ations where the history-state-based critic can beneﬁt from
the advantages of both the state as well as the history as dis-
cussed in Section 6.2 and Section 6.1. We refer readers to
the appendix for the details on those environments, but gener-
ally, both Box Pushing and Cleaner are grid world tasks with
observations local to the cells around the agent. The agent
needs to estimate their teammates’ locations or paths to act
optimally. Information gathering is even more crucial in Dec-
Tiger, where we see history-based critics already distinctly
outperform state-based ones, with HSC achieving the best re-
sults. By listening, the agents move from histories with little
or no information to histories with more information in the
same state; hence history and history-state critics can accu-
rately represent the different values. The state-based critic, on
the other hand, regard different histories with the same value,
hence not incentivizing the policy to gather information, as
we have shown in Section 4.1.
5.4
State Representation
We also see tasks where it is acceptable or even preferred
to use state-based critics. A typical example is the StarCraft
Multi-Agent Challenge (SMAC) benchmark. As seen in Fig-
ure 3, most scenarios show that state-based critics exhibit

0
100
200
300
400
Evaluation
40
50
60
70
80
90
Evaluation Return
Meeting-in-a-Grid
SC
HC
SHC
0
100
200
300
400
Evaluation
50
60
70
80
90
100
Evaluation Return
Find Treasure
SC
HC
SHC
0
100
200
300
400
Evaluation
200
220
240
260
280
300
Evaluation Return
Recycling
SC
HC
SHC
Figure 1: Performance evaluation of state-based critics (SC), history-based critics (HC) and history-state-based critics (HSC) in
cooperative multi-agent partially observable environments: Meeting-in-a-Grid (Amato, Dibangoye, and Zilberstein 2009), Find
Treasure (Jiang 2019), Multi-agent Recycling (Amato, Bernstein, and Zilberstein 2007)
0
100
200
300
400
500
Evaluation
−25
−20
−15
−10
−5
0
5
Evaluation Return
Dec-Tiger
SC
HC
SHC
0
100
200
300
400
500
Evaluation
200
300
400
500
600
Evaluation Return
Box Pushing
SC
HC
SHC
0
100
200
300
400
Evaluation
35
40
45
50
55
Evaluation Return
Cleaner
SC
HC
SHC
Figure 2: Performance evaluation of SC, HC and HSC on Dec-Tiger (Nair et al. 2003), Box Pushing (Seuken and Zilberstein
2007) and Cleaner (Jiang 2019).
the best overall performance. In SMAC, each agent con-
trols a combat unit to engage enemy units, and the state
includes the statuses of friendly agents and opponent units.
We ﬁnd SMAC agents usually have self-centered acting lim-
its (e.g., ﬁring ranges). We ﬁnd far-away units rarely affect
an agent’s decisions. This limit causes the occluded informa-
tion to rarely affect expected values. Thus, the history values
associated with a state are usually similar; as a result, using a
state-based critic does not introduce signiﬁcant bias in this
case. It is related to results also discussed in Section 5.2.
In speciﬁc scenarios, we see that state-based critics perform
better than history-based ones. Note that the observation for
an agent is a masked version of the state, in which the infor-
mation regarding far-away units is unobservable. Therefore,
both the state and the observation have similar and concise
representations, while the history will contain redundant and
outdated information. Learning to ignore this information
can be difﬁcult and take time. Together with a deterministic
observation model, and history carrying semi-redundant in-
formation, it is reasonable to believe that state-based critics
may give a overall more reliable estimate for policy training.
6
Discussion
We discuss the tasks and scenarios where we can see the ad-
vantages of each type of critics and the underlying rationale.
6.1
Advantage of History-Based Critics
It is shown that the history-based critic is unbiased in theory,
so does it translate to increased performance? Toy examples
aside, some of the more realistic environments shown above
may also favor history-based critics due to its ability to eval-
uate observed information—for a given history, the ability to
distinguish how much information was gathered by the pol-
icy in the form of observation-action histories and reﬂect the
information in terms of values. The information gained from
observations helps in reducing uncertainty and with such his-
tories the policy can achieve better values compared to ones
with less information, and history values encode this value
difference explicitly. At a high level, history-based policies
and critics have a simple one-to-one update relationship, but
state-based critics have history-based policies that may have
a many-to-many update relationship. Often, you will have
two or more histories being mapped to the same state-value
when they would have different history values. This mapping
can cause aliasing in values, which is the source of the bias.
Being able to represent the value of information is the key
strength we see in history-based critics and the key weakness
of state-based critics. For example, suppose the agents can
gather information regarding the distribution of the world
state. In that case, histories with more information have an
advantage compared to less informed histories (Kaelbling,
Littman, and Cassandra 1998). Using the notation in our
bias analysis, that is, for a certain state s, its history-state
values (a column of Qπ
a) vary depending on the history. Each
(s,h) pair, therefore, represents a distinct condition in which
the agent can have different behaviors (and thus returns),
but share the same state value. Since the state-based value
function is the marginalization of the values of these more or
less informed history values, state values remain incapable
of evaluating how information effects future returns. On the

0
200
400
600
800
1000
Evaluation
0
20
40
60
80
100
Mean Test Won %
2s_vs_1sc
SC
HC
SHC
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Evaluation
0
20
40
60
80
100
Mean Test Won %
3m
SC
HC
SHC
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Evaluation
0
20
40
60
80
100
Mean Test Won %
2s3z
SC
HC
SHC
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Evaluation
0
20
40
60
80
100
Mean Test Won %
1c3s5z
SC
HC
SHC
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Evaluation
0
20
40
60
80
100
Mean Test Won %
bane_vs_bane
SC
HC
SHC
Figure 3: Performance comparison of COMA with different critics in multiple scenarios of SMAC.
other hand, for a speciﬁc state, the history values distinguish
histories with different levels of uncertainty, which results in
different payoffs; Therefore, in environments where gathering
information is critical, we suggest using history-state critics
that can take information gathering into account and beneﬁt
from state information.
Using State Value as Baseline
The gradient estimates of
implementations which use Monte Carlo returns with value
functions as baselines, such as in DICG (Li et al. 2021) or
MAGIC (Niu, Paleja, and Gombolay 2021), are guaranteed
to be unbiased. As a baseline, the bias of the state value
function does not affect the bias of the overall policy gradient.
However, it may affect its variance: although the history
value baselines are widely considered to have good variance
reduction properties, it is not clear whether the same can be
said of state value baselines due to its potential bias.
6.2
Advantage of State-Based Critics
On the other hand, state-based critics have proven helpful in
recent works (Wang et al. 2020; Du et al. 2019, 2021). We
speculate that there are three main reasons behind state-based
critics being able to provide signals that give good perfor-
mance despite their theoretical shortcomings. First, observe
that in some environments, using the state as input more eas-
ily allows the value function to extract meaningful features
compared to extracting features from histories. It is especially
the case when the state representation is concise or when the
history feature extraction requires a considerable amount of
training. For example, some grid-world environments’ states
involve agent locations, while observations stem from on-
screen pixels that are of much higher dimension. This happen
to be not unusual in current multi-agent reinforcement learn-
ing benchmarks (see Sections 5.3 and 5.4).
Second, we observe that the state representation is usually
a complete version of the observation information in multi-
agent benchmarks used by recent state-of-the-art works. As
discussed in Section 5.4, those environments generate obser-
vations either by masking the underlying state representation
or by outputting state fragments. As a result, the state informa-
tion is not drastically different from observations, implying
that the state-based value functions are well aligned with
history-based value functions. This alignment is ampliﬁed in
situations where the information omitted in observations (e.g.,
information regarding far-away teammates or opponents) has
zero or negligible effect on the expected values, which is ap-
plied in popular benchmarks such as SMAC (Samvelyan et al.
2019) and partially observable particle environments (Lowe
et al. 2017). Shown in Figures 3, 4 and 6, as long as the
information gathering issue mentioned above is either non-
existent or not effecting the value estimation, the state-based
critics can give good return signals for the purpose of policy
learning.
7
Conclusion
In this paper, we take a close look at state-based critics in
multi-agent actor-critic methods. We show how state-based
critic values may incur bias in training decentralized history-
based policies. We also show that, in theory, that state-based
critics exhibit more variance in the policy gradient. We also
suggest and evaluate an alternative using state information
in conjunction with the history information to train critics
which have seen reliable results empirically. We discuss task-
speciﬁc conditions in which the bias will prominently occur,
explain the empirical performance of these critics on various
environments, summarizing where and why state and history-
based critics should be effective. This work ﬁll in the gap
of theoretical understanding of state-based critics popular in
multi-agent reinforcement learning, providing a principled
foundation for future works on centralized critics in multi-
agent reinforcement learning.
