MIXED FORMAL LEARNING 
A Path to Transparent Machine Learning 
 
Sandra Carrico 
Vice President & Chief Data Scientist 
Glynt.AI 
Mountain View, CA. USA 
 
 
 
Abstract—This paper presents Mixed Formal Learning, a new 
architecture that learns models based on formal mathematical 
representations of the domain of interest and exposes latent 
variables. The second element in the architecture learns a 
particular skill, typically by using traditional prediction or 
classification mechanisms. Our key findings include that this 
architecture: (1) Facilitates transparency by exposing key latent 
variables based on a learned mathematical model; (2) Enables 
Low Shot and Zero Shot training of machine learning without 
sacrificing accuracy or recall. (Abstract) 
Keywords-component; 
explainability, 
transparency, 
mixed 
formal learning, machine learning, low shot, zero shot 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Today, machine learning models that utilize only neural 
networks lack transparency.  Neural networks, or other 
machine learning methods combined with formal mathematical 
models addresses the lack of transparency, while retaining the 
option of utilizing otherwise opaque models.  We call this 
architecture Mixed Formal Learning.  It exposes latent 
variables based on a formal mathematical model of the domain 
with 
semantic 
meaning. 
Latent 
variables 
enable 
the 
development of families of learned-models relevant to the 
domain.  The use of formal mathematical representations to 
facilitate learning a model to expose latent variables, in part, 
addresses transparency. 
This method also produces the effect of Low and Zero Shot 
learning. This paper defines Low Shot learning as supervised 
training requiring 10 or fewer examples.  Zero Shot learning is 
defined as requiring no training examples for tasks that are 
traditionally supervised.  Our GLYNT application requires 
fewer than 10 labeled examples in many cases to extract 
numerical and phrase data from semi-structured documents 
with F1 scores of 95% or better. 
I. 
RELATED WORK 
Though our work with the GLYNT system has gone a step 
further, recent work at other companies has parallels to our 
own. Wengong Jin, et al. [1] used an autoencoder to find latent 
variables for their second model to automate the design of 
molecules based on specific chemical properties. The 
autoencoder, while not apparently based on a formal model, 
enables 100% validity of identified molecules, an effect 
consistent with our performance expectations of a well-
designed formal model. R Devon Hjelm, et al. [2] explore 
mutual information, a concept that is related to how a formal 
model helps to guide the second model. Their paper also uses 
adversarial techniques to computationally learn a model of a 
latent space of variables. This differs from our method of 
defining the formal model a-priori. Jacob Devlin, et al. [3] 
create a language representation model to enable a number of 
fine-tuning models for different applications. The fine-tuning 
models correspond to the non-formal aspects of our 
architecture. 
A paper by Supasorn Suwajanakorn et al. [4] of Google 
follows our Mixed Formal Learning architecture. The paper 
identifies key points, spatial locations that stand out on an 
image and remain regardless of distortion. The authors describe 
training two neural networks. The first network uses the 
orthogonal Procrustes problem as a learning method to create a 
3D representation from two sequential 2D images, such as 
photographs. In other words, imagine two successive still-
frames of a Ferrari in motion. Insert these two flat images into 
Google’s system and it can render a representation of a 3D 
image of the Ferrari. 
The 3D representation enables the next model to more 
easily find keypoints by exploiting the helpful latent variables. 
The second model’s more typical neural net finds keypoints as 
accurately, or better, by using the exposed latent variables, 
rather than solutions utilizing large sets of labeled training data. 
Since the method required no labels on the training data, the 
result is image keypoint identification with Zero Shot Learning. 
At the conceptual level, GLYNT and Google used the same 
approach: an architecture of multiple models, one to model the 
domain and one to make predictions from the first model’s 
outputs. The synergy between the two models often results in 
Zero or Low Shot training requirements. 
II. 
MIXED FORMAL LEARNING IMPLEMENTATION 
The use of the formal representation to generate latent 
variables exposes key features of the problem domain that 
other models leverage.  These exposed variables provide a level 
of semantic understanding of the family of models and 
facilitates transparency. The transparency helps humans 
understand the model and also exposes that understanding to 
subsequent models.  In addition, the implementation benefits 
include faster training on less data, with potentially excellent 
accuracy.  
In the GLYNT application of Mixed Formal Learning, the 
architecture learns a domain-specific mathematical model for 
semi-structured documents and then combines exposed latent 
variables with typical machine learning methods based on 

observed data. The result is an AI solution that requires small 
training sets while often achieving F1 scores of 95% or better. 
The GLYNT application of Mixed Formal Learning requires 
fewer than 10 examples for training to extract specific fields. 
While Mixed Formal Learning can support any number of 
models, the GLYNT implementation uses two primary models 
arranged in sequence. The first model learns latent variables 
based on a tightly constructed mathematical representation, 
tailored to the domain. Getting this representation right is key 
to enabling Low Shot Learning. The next model in the 
sequence combines the latent variables and the incoming 
labeled data and learns to find a phrase or numerical field and 
properly assign a label to it. 
 
Figuratively speaking, to learn from such little data, the 
formal math-based model shines a glint of light on the area of 
the answer, allowing the second model to more quickly learn 
its skill. It was this glint effect that is the origin of the name 
GLYNT.  
The formal model enables a set of capabilities shared by 
diverse domains. Each domain can leverage the formalism to 
create AI applications. GLYNT, for example, uses a domain-
specific model to extract unstructured data, but the formal 
mathematical model can also be used in supply chain 
optimization and genomics data sets. 
The second element in the architecture learns a particular 
skill, typically by using traditional prediction or classification 
mechanisms. A fine-tuning approach, as is often used with 
embeddings.  It would qualify as a Mixed Formal Learning 
architecture if the embeddings were produced based on a 
transparent mathematical formalism rather than an empirically 
successful happenstance. The initial GLYNT application 
identifies fields according to customer-specified names. 
It is notable that the formal model enables follow-on 
applications. Zero Shot applications should be expected for 
some cases. In the case of GLYNT, an application of interest 
would identify new fields that alert users to field-level changes 
in their set of documents. We envision a Zero Shot 
implementation in this case. Another useful follow-on 
application would categorize the documents according to the 
publisher. 
A. Sources for formal model inspiration 
Operations research and avionics historically used formal 
models for prediction.  Their literature provides many novel 
applications. Typically, those methods are limited by the 
accuracy of the mathematics. Mixed Formal Learning improves 
on bare mathematical models, which often imperfectly model 
the domain, with a machine learning based model.  The result 
benefits from the transparency of a formal model with the 
power of modern machine learning techniques.  
The architecture also benefits from the ability to base a 
family of applications related to the domain upon the learned 
formal model.  Businesses typically need to predict or classify 
many aspects of their data set.  Once the formal domain model 
and its generated latent variables are learned, additional models 
can learn quickly in Low Shot mode with few labels, or even 
with no labels, for models that otherwise would require 
supervised learning techniques  
B. Potential Formal Models 
Thus far we have cited two examples of real-world 
solutions using the Mixed Formal Learning architecture.  How 
can others confidently apply this method to solve their own 
problems?  What are some potential formal models? We 
examined a few examples below as exemplars.  The 
practitioner should deeply understand the domain and the 
business needs to find ideal formal models.   
1) Self driving Cars 
Understanding the movement of many objects in the real 
world is useful for applications such as self-driving cars.  
While Newtonian physics provides a straightforward model 
that could expose such latent variables to a model, it may prove 
impractical to calculate the trajectory for many moving objects 
in space.  In that case learning a model based in part on Newton 
physics to predict the location of many objects may perform 
better on small embedded chips as might be found in cars. 
The secondary models in that case may predict the best 
evasion maneuver if the formal model predicts a collision.  In 
that case the secondary model would need to consider several 
angles of steering or breaking. 
2) Supply Chain Optimization: Picking 
When picking and packing for a warehouse, the locale of 
the items influences the efficiency and capacity of the 
operation.  Fluid flow models used to optimize a velocity based 
stowage policy could be used to learn a model to optimally 
place objects within the warehouse [5]. That base-model could 
inform models when determining optimal warehouse size, 
placement, supply and resupply. 
3) Improved Recycling Center Design 
A multi-stage material separation process such as might be 
used in cracking can be repurposed to model operations within 
a recycling plant.  This formal model enables learning a useful 
set of latent variables that closely match the domain 
semantic[5].  With those latent variables additional models 
could predict output of the recycling center, expected revenues, 
and expected mixes of outputs. 
III. 
EXPERIMENTS 
To demonstrate the performance of the GLYNT mixed 
formal learning implementation, we ran a series of tests to 
extract data from semi-structured documents.  The first 
observation was that the formal model delivered such high-
quality latent variables to the subsequent model that the 
combination achieved better than 95% F1 score with 7 or fewer 

training examples.  This capability is often referred to as Low 
Shot learning. 
The graph below shows results from the extraction of 
unstructured data from four document sets, each with 50 
documents. The documents are from the energy industry (2 
different utility bills) and the healthcare industry (insurance 
cards and clinic visit summaries). 10 documents in each set 
were reserved for training and 40 documents in each set form a 
holdout set. The graph shows how well the data extraction 
performs as the size of the training document set increases (For 
more details see our related paper: Low Shot Learning in 
Action). 
 
 
 
The F1 score is displayed on the graph for each document 
set. The key result is F1 score performance at 95% and above, 
obtained with fewer than 10 documents in the training set. As 
the graph indicates, the gain in performance levels off at about 
7 documents. Most of the improvement in performance derives 
from improvements in recall, as accuracy remains fairly 
uniform. In previous work, we have documented the high 
performance of the GLYNT data extraction system. The results 
here show that with the addition of Low Shot Learning, 
GLYNT is able to achieve this level of performance on very 
little training data. This is in sharp contrast to other machine 
learning systems that require training data sets of 15,000 to 
300,000 documents and months of work for similar tasks. 
GLYNT produces results in under an hour 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Mixed Formal Learning liberates unstructured data more 
transparently with significantly less training data. As well, it 
eliminates the advantage of large data sets in the AI ecosystem 
and creating a new landscape where advanced AI products and 
solutions are available to researchers and data scientists at 
large, rather than only the lucky few sitting on huge data 
assets. 
 
We expect to see three extensions of this work. First, the 
formal mathematical models of Mixed Formal Learning is 
tightly tailored to the domain at hand, but with mathematical 
insight, the same model can be used in seemingly disparate 
domains. As mentioned, the GLYNT formal model might well 
capture aspects of the domains of genomic data analysis and 
supply chain optimization. Second, other researchers are 
edging towards the same architecture, and enabling Low Shot 
Learning in structurally different applications. Third, the 
second model of Mixed Formal Learning provides automated 
skills. In the GLYNT application the skill is extraction of 
unstructured data. Additional skills can be used with 
GLYNT’s formal model, such as new field identification or 
document classification. It is expected that the new skills will 
have Zero or Low Shot functionality and require very little 
training data if any. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT  
Thank you to Martha Amram for her work editing this 
work, and setting up and executing the experiments.
