Author copy 
 
Just an Update on PMING Distance for Web-based Semantic 
Similarity in Artificial Intelligence and Data Mining 
VALENTINA FRANZONI, La Sapienza University of Rome, Italy 

 
ABSTRACT 
 One of the main problems that emerges in the classic approach to semantics is the difficulty in acquisition and 
maintenance of ontologies and semantic annotations. On the other hand, the Internet explosion and the massive 
diffusion of mobile smart devices lead to the creation of a worldwide system, which information is daily 
checked and fueled by the contribution of millions of users who interacts in a collaborative way. Search 
engines, continually exploring the Web, are a natural source of information on which to base a modern approach 
to semantic annotation. A promising idea is that it is possible to generalize the semantic similarity, under the 
assumption that semantically similar terms behave similarly, and define collaborative proximity measures 
based on the indexing information returned by search engines. The PMING Distance is a proximity measure 
used in data mining and information retrieval, which collaborative information express the degree of 
relationship between two terms, using only the number of documents returned as result for a query on a search 
engine. In this work, the PMINIG Distance is updated, providing a novel formal algebraic definition, which 
corrects previous works. The novel point of view underlines the features of the PMING to be a locally 
normalized linear combination of the Pointwise Mutual Information and Normalized Google Distance. 
The analyzed measure dynamically reflects the collaborative change made on the web resources. 
 
• Computing methodologies → Heuristic function construction • Computing methodologies → Artificial intelligence 
Additional Key Words and Phrases: proximity measure, distance measure, ranking algorithms, top-K, 
semantic similarity, heuristics 
 
 
 INTRODUCTION 
PMING Distance is a measure of proximity, which conveys information on relationships between 
two terms, e.g. word or expressions, carrying semantic meaning, used on various applications for 
web-based semantic similarity, such as automatic generation of significant semantic annotations for 
images and web objects, emotion recognition from short text [Biondi et al. 2016; Franzoni et al. 
2016; Franzoni and Milani 2016; Franzoni and Milani 2014; Leung et al. 2013; Franzoni et al. 2016; 
Franzoni and Milani 2012; Franzoni and Milani 2015]. The automatic generation of significant 
semantic annotations is an important requirement for both design and implementation of web-based 
and information retrieval advanced services, such as query expansion, image similarity, emotion 
recognition, recommendation systems, et cetera, which are nowadays, more than ever, based on the 
management of semantic objects, rather than a simple syntactic approach.  
If, on one hand, the existing semantic models are expressive enough, on the other hand they find 
their basic limitation on the evolution and management of ontological models and annotated content, 
which are not taken into account in the model itself. It results in a lack of automation capabilities 
and evolutionary maintenance that is highly relevant especially when you want to generate context-
based semantic annotations or focus on specific social networks or repositories.  
For a modern approach, search engines are the natural source of semantic information. To use the 
indexing content, which they provide, is a valid approach to evaluate proximity semantics of pairs 
of terms, or groups of terms. The general idea is to use search engines as a black box to which submit 
queries and extract useful statistics, to evaluate proximity semantics about the occurrence of a term 
or a set of terms, just counting the number of results.  
This study updates the PMING, correcting previous works. The novel point of view underlines the 
features of the PMING to be a locally normalized linear combination of the Pointwise Mutual 
Information and Normalized Google Distance. Among the significant contributions of this work is 
the introduction of a novel formal algebraic definition of the PMING Distance, which tests carried 

39:2 
                                                                                                                           V. Franzoni 
 
 
Author copy 
out the best performances, obtained separately from the measures considered in literature [Franzoni 
and Milani 2016; Franzoni and Milani 2012]. 
RELATED WORK 
PMING Distance was presented firstly in May 2012 in [Franzoni 2012], then in December 2012 in 
[Franzoni and Milani 2012] with a broad comparison with state-of-the-art measures and metrics, 
e.g. PMI, NGD, Confidence, Chi-squared in information retrieval. The aim of the work was to study 
the features of those measures of semantic proximity, which best adapt to the use of information 
provided by search engines as a base for a semantic content extraction. Among the main 
contributions by Franzoni, there was the systematic comparison of diverse measures, with respect 
to different search engines (both generalist, e.g. Bing, Google, Yahoo, and specialized, e.g. 
YouTube, Flickr) on a complete set of evaluation metrics, including a novel approach on clustering 
as a metric for evaluation of semantics, which contribute has been later deepened in a dedicated 
work [Franzoni and Milani 2016]. 
PMING Distance has been used in artificial intelligence as a heuristic in applications related to 
heuristic search and retrieval, e.g. heuristic semantic browsing of collaborative networks [Franzoni 
and Milani 2013], semantic context extraction for cooperative work in design [Franzoni and Milani 
2015], multi-path traces in semantic networks [Franzoni 2017], semantic concept chaining 
[Franzoni and Milani 2014]. 
PMING Distance has also been used in data mining for automated extraction and tagging of images, 
in [Pallottelli et al. 2016; Leung et al. 2013], and then, recently, for semantic emotion recognition 
in web objects [Biondi et al. 2016; Franzoni et al.2016], where PMING is also compared with other 
measures for semantic extraction in the emotional domain, using the VSM for latent knowledge 
elicitation on the Ekman model of emotions. 
PMING DISTANCE: AN UPDATED ALGEBRAIC FORMULATION 
PMING is based on assigning a distance value on words queried in a search engine, e.g. Google, 
Bing, Yahoo, Flickr, YouTube, and so on, useful in any generalist or specialized search engine that 
indexes a high number of documents, and its effectiveness in improving methods and results for 
concept distance and context extraction has been proved with experiments using thousands of 
queries on several data sets.  
We hereby give an updated formal algebraic definition of PMING. 
PMING Distance of two terms x and y in a context W is defined, for ݂ሺݔ) ≥݂ሺݕ), as a function 
ܲܯܫܰܩ: ܹ×ܹ→ሾ0,1ሿ: 
ܲܯܫܰܩሺݔ, ݕ) = ߩቈ1 −ቆlog ݂ሺݔ, ݕ)ܯ
݂ሺݔ)݂ሺݕ)ቇ1
ߤଵ
቉+ ሺ1 −ߩ) ቆlog ݂ሺݔ) −log ݂ሺݔ, ݕ)
ሺlog ܯ−log ݂ሺݕ))ߤଶ
ቇ 
 
 
 
 
 
where: 
1. ߩ is a parameter to balance the weight of components (e.g. ߩ= 0.3); 
2. ߤଵ and ߤଶ are constants which depend on the context of evaluation W, and can be defined 
as: 
o 
ߤଵ=max PMI(x,y), with x,y ∈ W (PMI is the Pointwise Mutual information 
[Turney 2002; Franzoni and Milani 2013]) 
o 
ߤଶ=max normalized NGD(x,y), with x,y ∈ W (NGD is the Normalized Google 
Distance[Cilibrasi 2007; Franzoni 2016; Pallottelli et al. 2016]) 

Just an Update on PMING Distance 
 
Author copy 
o 
Distances and proximity are interchangeable if on the same scale and normalized 
over [0,1], such that distance=1-proximity and proximity=1-distance 
3. f(x),f(y),f(x,y) are the frequency of results of queries on search engines for the term x, the 
term y (occurrence) and the term (x AND y) (co-occurrence) 
4. M is the total number (if known) or estimated number (if not known) of documents indexed 
by the search engine. 
With this formulation, the author underlines how PMING conveys the features of PMI and NGD, 
and can be used on queries of two terms, i.e. two groups of terms, on a search engine, as a blackbox 
to extract the semantic meaning of the terms. 
CONCLUSIONS 
One of the main problems that emerges in the classic approach to semantics is the difficulty in 
acquisition and maintenance of ontologies and semantic annotations. On the other hand, the Internet 
explosion and the massive diffusion of mobile smart devices lead to the creation of a worldwide 
system. PMING Distance is a measure of proximity, which conveys information on relationships 
between two terms, and it conveys the features of a linear combination of PMI, semantic proximity, 
and NGD, semantic distance. PMING Distance has several applications in information retrieval, 
artificial intelligence, data mining and can be successfully used as a blackbox to obtain semantic 
proximity. 
The formulation presented in this work underlines the algebraic features of PMING Distance as a 
combination of a proximity measure and a distance measure.
