Lyceum: An efﬁcient and scalable ecosystem for robot learning
Colin Summers1, Kendall Lowrey1, Aravind Rajeswaran1
Siddhartha Srinivasa1, Emanuel Todorov1,2

1 University of Washington Seattle, 2 Roboti LLC
Abstract
We introduce Lyceum, a high-performance computational ecosystem for robot learning. Lyceum is
built on top of the Julia programming language and the MuJoCo physics simulator, combining the
ease-of-use of a high-level programming language with the performance of native C. In addition,
Lyceum has a straightforward API to support parallel computation across multiple cores and
machines. Overall, depending on the complexity of the environment, Lyceum is 5-30X faster
compared to other popular abstractions like OpenAI’s Gym and DeepMind’s dm-control. This
substantially reduces training time for various reinforcement learning algorithms; and is also fast
enough to support real-time model predictive control through MuJoCo. The code, tutorials, and
demonstration videos can be found at: www.lyceum.ml.
1. Introduction
Progress in artiﬁcial intelligence has exploded in recent years, due in large part to advances computa-
tional infrastructure. The advent of massively parallel GPU computing, combined with powerful
automatic-differentiation tools like TensorFlow (Abadi et al., 2016) and PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2017),
have lead to new classes of deep learning algorithms by enabling what was once computationally
intractable. These tools, alongside fast and accurate physics simulators like MuJoCo (Todorov et al.,
2012), and associated frameworks like OpenAI’s Gym (Brockman et al., 2016) and DeepMind’s
dm_control (Tassa et al., 2018), have similarly transformed various aspects of robotic control like
Reinforcement Learning (RL), Model-Predictive Control (MPC), and motion planning. These plat-
forms enable researchers to give their ideas computational form, share results with collaborators, and
deploy their successes on real systems.
From these advances, simulation to real-world (sim2real) transfer has emerged as a promis-
ing paradigm for robotic control. A growing body of recent work suggests that robust control policies
trained in simulation can successfully transfer to the real world (OpenAI, 2018; Rajeswaran et al.,
2016; Sadeghi and Levine, 2016; Lowrey et al., 2018a; Tobin et al., 2017; Mordatch et al., 2015).
However, many algorithms used in these works for controller synthesis are computationally intensive.
Training control policies with state-of-the-art RL algorithms often takes many hours to days of
compute time. For example, OpenAI’s landmark Dactyl work (OpenAI, 2018) required 50 hours
of training time across 6144 CPU cores and 8 NVIDIA V100 GPUs. Such computational budgets
are available only to a select few labs. Furthermore, such experiments are seldom run only once
in deep learning and especially in deep RL. Indeed, RL algorithms are notoriously sensitive to
choices of hyper-parameters (Rajeswaran et al., 2017; Henderson et al., 2017; Mania et al., 2018).
Thus, many iterations of the learning process may be required, with humans in the loop, to improve
hyperparameter choices and reward functions, before ﬁnally deploying solutions in the real world.
© C. Summers, K. Lowrey, A. Rajeswaran, S. Srinivasa & E. Todorov.
arXiv:2001.07343v1  [cs.RO]  21 Jan 2020

LYCEUM: AN EFFICIENT AND SCALABLE ECOSYSTEM FOR ROBOT LEARNING
This computational bottleneck often leads to a scarcity of hardware results, relative to the number of
papers that propose new algorithms on highly simpliﬁed and well tuned benchmark tasks. Exploring
avenues to reduce experiment turn around time is thus crucial for scaling up to harder tasks and
making resource-intensive algorithms and environments accessible to research labs without massive
cloud computing budgets.
In a similar vein, computational considerations have also limited progress in model-based control
algorithms. For real-time model predictive control (MPC), the computational restrictions manifest
as the requirement to compute actions in bounded time with limited local resources. As we will
show, existing frameworks such as Gym and dm_control, while providing a convenient abstraction
in Python, are too slow to meet this real-time computation requirement. As a result, most planning
algorithms are run ofﬂine and deployed in open-loop mode on hardware. This is unfortunate, since it
does not take feedback into account which is well known to be critical for stochastic control.
Our Contributions:
Our goal in this work is to overcome the aforementioned computational
restrictions to enable faster training of policies with RL algorithms, facilitate real-time MPC with
a detailed physics simulator, and ultimately enable researchers to engage with complex robotic
tasks. To this end, we develop Lyceum, a computational ecosystem that uses the Julia programming
language and the MuJoCo physics engine. Lyceum ships with the main OpenAI gym continuous
control tasks, along with other environments representative of challenges in robotics. Julia’s unique
features allow us to wrap MuJoCo with zero-cost abstractions, providing the ﬂexibility of a high-level
programming language to enable easy creation of environments, tasks, and algorithms, while retaining
the performance of native C. This allows RL and MPC algorithms implemented in Lyceum to be
5-30X faster compared to Gym and dm_control. We hope that this speedup will enable RL researchers
to scale up to harder problems with reduced computational costs, and also enable real-time MPC.
2. Related Works
Recently, various physics simulators and the computational ecosystems surrounding them have
transformed robot learning research. They allow for exercising creativity to quickly generate new
and interesting robotic scenes, as well as quickly prototype various learning and control solutions.
We summarize the main threads of related work below.
Physics simulators:
MuJoCo (Todorov et al., 2012) has quickly emerged as a leading physics
simulator for robot learning research. It is fast and efﬁcient, and particularly well suited for contact-
rich tasks. Numerous recent works have also demonstrated simulation to reality transfer with
MuJoCo through physically consistent system identiﬁcation (Lowrey et al., 2018a) or domain
randomization (OpenAI, 2018; Mordatch et al., 2015; Nachum et al., 2019). Our framework wraps
MuJoCo in Julia and enables programming and research with a high level language, while retaining
the speed of native C. While we primarily focus on MuJoCo, we believe that similar design principles
can be extended to other simulators like Bullet (Coumans, 2013) and DART (Lee et al., 2018).
Computational ecosystems:
OpenAI’s gym (Brockman et al., 2016) and DeepMind’s dm_control
(Tassa et al., 2018) sparked a wave of interest by providing Python bindings for MuJoCo with
a high-level API, as well as easy-to-use environments and algorithms. This has enabled the RL
community to quickly access physics-based environments and prototype algorithms. Unfortunately,
this ﬂexibility comes at the price of computational efﬁciency. Existing ecosystems are slow due
to inefﬁciencies and poor parallelization capabilities of Python. Prior works have tried to address
2

LYCEUM: AN EFFICIENT AND SCALABLE ECOSYSTEM FOR ROBOT LEARNING
some of the shortcomings of Python-based frameworks by attempting to add JIT compilation to the
language (Lam et al., 2015; Paszke et al., 2017; Agrawal et al., 2019) but only support a subset of the
language, and do not achieve the same performance as Julia. Fan et al. (2018) developed a framework
similar to Gym that supports distributed computing, but it still suffers the same performance issues
of Python and multi-processing. Perhaps closest to our motivation is the work of Koolen and Deits
(2019), which demonstrates the usefulness of Julia as a language for robotics. However, it uses a
custom and minimalist rigid body simulator with limited contact support. In contrast, our work
addresses the inefﬁciencies of existing computational ecosystems through use the of Julia, and
directly wraps a more capable simulator, MuJoCo, with zero overhead.
Algorithmic toolkits and environments:
A number of algorithmic toolkits like OpenAI Base-
lines (Dhariwal et al., 2017), mjRL (Rajeswaran et al., 2017), Soft-Learning (Haarnoja et al., 2018),
and RL-lab (Duan et al., 2016); as well as environments like Hand Manipulation Suite (Rajeswaran
et al., 2018), Robel (Ahn et al., 2019), Door Gym (Urakami et al., 2019), and Surreal Robosuite (Fan
et al., 2018) have been developed around existing computational ecosystems. Our framework sup-
ports all the underlying functionality needed to transfer these advances into our ecosystem (e.g.
simulator wrappers and automatic differentiation through Flux). Lyceum comes with a few popular
algorithms out of the box like NPG (Kakade, 2002; Rajeswaran et al., 2017) for RL and variants of
MPPI (Lowrey et al., 2018b; Williams et al., 2016) for MPC. In the future, we plan to port further
algorithms and advances into our ecosystem and look forward to community contributions as well.
3. The Lyceum ecosystem
The computational considerations are unique for designing infrastructure and ecosystems for robotic
control with RL and MPC. We desire a computational ecosystem that is high-level and easy to use
for research, can efﬁciently handle parallel operations, while ideally also matching serial operation
speed of native C to be usable on robots. We found Julia to be well suited for these requirements,
and we summarize some of these main advantages that prompted us to use Julia. Subsequently, we
outline some salient features of Lyceum.
3.1. Julia for robotics and RL
Julia is a general-purpose programming language developed in 2012 at MIT with a focus on technical
computing (Bezanson et al., 2017). While a full description of Julia is beyond the scope of this paper,
we highlight a few key aspects that we leverage in Lyceum and believe make Julia an excellent tool
for robotics and RL researchers.
Just-in-time compilation
Julia feels like a dynamic, interpreted scripting language, enabling an
interactive programming experience. Under the hood, however, Julia leverages the LLVM backend
to "just-in-time" (JIT) compile native machine code that is as fast as C for a variety of hardware
platforms (Bezanson et al., 2017). This enables researchers to quickly prototype ideas and optimize
for performance with the same language.
Julia can easily call functions in Python and C
In addition to the current ecosystem of Julia
packages, users can interact with Python and C as illustrated below. This allows researchers to beneﬁt
from existing body of deep learning research (in Python), and also interact easily with low-level
robot hardware drivers.
3

LYCEUM: AN EFFICIENT AND SCALABLE ECOSYSTEM FOR ROBOT LEARNING
using PyCall
so = pyimport("scipy.optimize")
so.newton(x -> cos(x) - x, 1)
ccall((:mjr_getError,libmujoco),Cint,())
Easy paralellization
Julia comes with extensive support for distributed and shared-memory multi-
threading that allows users to trivially parallelize their code. The following example splits the indices
of X across all the available cores and performs in-place multiplication in parallel:

X[i] *= 2
end
Julia can also transpile to alternative hardware backends, allowing use of parallel processors like
GPUs by writing high level Julia code.
Simple package management
To handle the 3000+ packages available, Julia comes with a built-in
package manager, avoiding "dependency hell", and facilitating collaboration and replication. This
means less time is spent getting things to run and more time for focusing on the task at hand.
3.2. Salient Features of Lyceum
Lyceum consists of the following packages
1. LyceumBase.jl, a "base" package which deﬁnes a set of abstract environment and con-
troller interfaces, along with several utilities.
2. MuJoCo.jl, a low-level Julia wrapper for the MuJoCo physics simulator.
3. LyceumMuJoCo.jl, a high-level "environment" abstraction similar to Gym and dm_control.
4. LyceumMuJoCoViz.jl, a ﬂexible policy and trajectory visualizer with interaction.
5. LyceumAI.jl, a collection of various algorithms for robotic control.
LyceumBase.jl
At the highest level we provide LyceumBase.jl, which contains several
convenience utilities used throughout the Lyceum ecosystem for data logging, multi-threading, and
controller benchmarking (i.e. measuring throughput, jitter, etc.). LyceumBase.jl also contains
interface deﬁnitions, such as AbstractEnvironment which LyceumMuJoCo.jl implements.
See the appendix for the full AbstractEnvironment interface.
This interface is similar to the popular Python frameworks Gym and dm_control, where an agent’s
observations are deﬁned, actions are chosen, and the simulator can step. A few key differences are as
follows:
1. The ability to arbitrarily get/set the state of the simulator, a necessary feature for model-based
methods like MPC or motion planning. An important component of this is deﬁning a proper
notion of a state, which is often missing from existing frameworks, as it can include more than
just the position and velocities of the dynamics.
2. Optional, in-place versions for all functions (e.g. getstate!(·)) which store the return value in
a pre-allocated data structure. This eliminates unnecessary memory allocations and garbage
collection, enabling environments to be used in tight, real-time control loops.
4

LYCEUM: AN EFFICIENT AND SCALABLE ECOSYSTEM FOR ROBOT LEARNING
3. An optional "evaluation" metric. Often times reward functions are heavily "shaped" and hard
to interpret. For example, the reward function for bipedal walking may include root pose, ZMP
terms, control costs, etc., while success can instead be simply evaluated by distance of the root
along an axis.
We expect most users will be interested in implementing their own environments, which forms a
crucial part of robotics research. Indeed, different researchers may be interested in different robots
performing different tasks, ranging from whole arm manipulators to legged locomotion to dexterous
anthropomorphic hands. To aid this process, we provide sensible defaults for most of the API, making
it easy to get started and experiment with different environments. The separation of interface and
implementation also allows for other simulators and back-ends (e.g. RigidBodySim.jl or DART) to
be used in lieu of the MuJoCo-based environments we provide, should the user desire.
MuJoCo.jl, LyceumMuJoCo.jl, and LyceumMuJoCoViz.jl
MuJoCo.jl is a low-level
Julia wrapper for MuJoCo that has a one-to-one correspondence to MuJoCo 2.0’s C interface and
includes soft body dynamics. All data is memory mapped with no overhead, and named ﬁelds in a Mu-
JoCo.xml ﬁle are exposed to the data structures, enabling ﬁeld access as d.qpos[:, :arm]. We
then build LyceumMuJoCo.jl, the MuJoCo implementation of our AbstractEnvironment
API, on top of MuJoCo.jl. This is the construction of an environment based in MuJoCo, and allows
the user to conﬁgure tasks rewards and programatically modify dynamics before passing the structure
to algorithms for processing. Finally the LyceumMuJoCoViz.jl package visualizes the results
of MuJoCo based models. Data is passed in as a list of trajectories for viewing or control function; a
trained policy or MPC controller, for example, can be passed to the visualizer, which has hooks for
keyboard and mouse interaction. Robots in the real world encounter perturbations and disturbances,
and with LyceumMuJoCoViz.jl the user can interact with the simulated environment to test the
robustness of a controller.
LyceumAI.jl
Coupled with these environments is LyceumAI.jl, a collection of algorithms
for robotic control that similarly leverage Julia’s performance and multi-threading abilities. Currently
we provide implementations of "Model Predictive Path Integral Control" (MPPI), a stochastic
shooting method for model-predictive control and Natural Policy Gradient. We compare these
methods with a Python implementation in the next sections. Both of these methods beneﬁt from
multi-threaded rollouts, either with respect to controls or a policy, which can be performed in parallel.
Neural networks and automatic differentiation for objects like control policies or ﬁtted value functions
are handled by Flux.jl and Zygote.jl (Innes et al., 2018; Innes, 2018), which are also Julia based. The
combination of efﬁcient compute utilization, ﬂexible high level programming, and an ecosystem of
tools should allow both robotics and RL researchers to experiment with different robotic systems,
algorithm design, and hopefully deploy to real systems.
4. Benchmark Experiments and Results
We designed our experiments and timing benchmarks to answer the following questions: (a) Do
the implementations of Gym RL environments and algorithms in Lyceum produce comparable
results? (b) Does Lyceum lead to faster environment sampling and experiment turn-around time
when compared to Gym and dm_control?
5

LYCEUM: AN EFFICIENT AND SCALABLE ECOSYSTEM FOR ROBOT LEARNING
Experiment Setup
All experiments are performed on a 16-core Intel i9-7960X with the CPU
governor pinned at 1.2GHz so as to prevent dynamic scaling or thermal throttling from affecting
results. As Gym and dm_control do not come with built-in support for parallel computing, the
authors implement this functionality using Python’s multiprocessing library as recommended
in several GitHub Issues by the respective library authors. Below we describe the various benchmarks
we considered and their results.
Sampling Throughput
In the ﬁrst benchmark, we study the sampling throughput and parallel
scaling performance of LyceumMuJoCo.jl against Gym, dm_control, and a native C implementa-
tion using an OpenMP thread pool. To do so, we consider various models of increasing complexity:
CartPole, Ant, HERB, and Humanoid. In the ﬁrst experiment, we use all 16 of the avail-
able cores to measure the number of samples we can collect per second. Figure 1 (left) shows the
results, which are presented in two forms: as a fraction of native C’s throughput, and as samples
per second. We see that Lyceum and native C signiﬁcantly outperform Gym and dm_control in all
cases. In particular, for CartPole, Lyceum is more than 200x faster compared to Gym.
In the second experiment, we study how the sampling performance scales with the number of
cores for the various implementations. To do so, we consider the Humanoid model and measure the
number of samples that can be generated per second with varying number of cores. The results are
presented in Figure 1 (right), where we see substantial gains for Lyceum. In particular, the scaling
is near linear with the number of cores for C and Lyceum, while there are diminishing returns for
Gym and dm_control. This is due to inherent multi-threading limitations of (pure) Python. When
using more cores (e.g. on a cluster), the performance difference is likely to be even larger.
Reinforcement Learning with Policy Gradients
In the second benchmark, we compare the
learning curves and wall clock time of Natural Policy Gradient (Kakade, 2002; Rajeswaran et al.,
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Throughput
Relative to C
Sampling Throughput Across Environments
C
DMC
Gym
Lyceum
Ant
Cartpole
HERB Humanoid
101
103
105
Samples/Second
1
2
4
8
16
0
5.0 × 104
1.0 × 105
1.5 × 105
Number of Threads
Samples/Second
Parallel Scaling of Sampling Throughput
C
DMC
Gym
Lyceum
Figure 1: (Left) Comparison of sampling throughput for models of varying complexity. In the top
left plot, we provide the sampling throughput relative to native C, while in the bottom left
plot, we provide samples per second. This experiment uses all 16 available cores (see main
text for details). We ﬁnd that Lyceum can match the performance of native C, while still
retaining the beneﬁts of writing research code in a high-level language. (Right) Sampling
throughput as a function of threads for the Humanoid model.
6

LYCEUM: AN EFFICIENT AND SCALABLE ECOSYSTEM FOR ROBOT LEARNING
0
78
0
100
200
300
400
Swimmer-v2
Lyceum
Gym
0
297
0
1000
2000
3000
Experiment Time (s)
Hopper-v2
0
221
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Walker-v2
0
1 × 106
0
100
200
300
400
0
1 × 106
0
1000
2000
3000
Samples
0
1 × 106
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Figure 2: Reinforcement learning with NPG in the Gym and Lyceum frameworks, training for one
million time-steps. Top row presents environment reward vs experiment (i.e. wall clock
time), and bottom row presents environment reward vs number of simulated timesteps.
Performance of the underlying deterministic policy is reported.
2017), which is closely related to TRPO (Schulman et al., 2015), between Gym and Lyceum. Our
implementation of NPG, closely based on the algorithm as described in Rajeswaran et al. (2017) and
consistent with majority practice in the community, considers 2 layer neural network policies. Details
about hyperparameters are provided in the appendix. We compare based on three representative tasks
(Swimmer, Hopper, and Walker) and ﬁnd that the learning curves match across the two frameworks.
The results are summarized in Figure 2, and we ﬁnd that the performance curves match well. We
note that RL algorithms are known to be sensitive to many implementation details (Henderson et al.,
2017; Ilyas et al., 2018), and thus even approximately matching results is a promising sign for
both the original code base and Lyceum. We expect that with further code-level optimization, the
performance of RL algorithms in Lyceum can match their counterparts in Gym.
Model Predictive Control
In the ﬁnal benchmark, we compare the performance of a model-based
trajectory optimizer on Gym and Lyceum. For this purpose, we consider the Model Predictive
Path Integral (MPPI) algorithm (Williams et al., 2016), which in conjunction with learning based
techniques have demonstrated impressive results in tasks like aggressive driving and dexterous hand
manipulation (Lowrey et al., 2018a; Nagabandi et al., 2019). MPPI is a sampling based algorithm
where different candidate action sequences are considered to generate many potential trajectories
7

LYCEUM: AN EFFICIENT AND SCALABLE ECOSYSTEM FOR ROBOT LEARNING
Task
Time (s)
Success (%)
Hand (gym)
40.4
92 ± 5.31 %
Hand (ours)
14.3
88 ± 6.36 %
Reacher (gym)
3.67
100%
Reacher (ours)
0.119
100%
Figure 3: (Left) Illustration of the 30-DOF in-hand manipulation task with a Shadow Hand (Adroit).
The goal is to manipulate the (blue) pen to match the (green) desired pose. (Middle)
Illustration of the reaching task with a 7-DOF Sawyer arm. Goal is to make the end-
effector (blue) reach the (green) target. (Right) comparison of time taken and success
percentage in gym and Lyceum. Time refers to the time taken to execute a single episode
with the MPPI controller (in MPC mode). Success % measures the number of successful
episodes when the robot is controlled using the MPPI algorithm. 95% conﬁdence intervals
are also reported. See appendix for additional details and hyperparameters.
starting from the current state. Rewards are calculated for each of these trajectories, and the candidate
action sequences are combined with exponentially weighted trajectory rewards.
We consider two tasks for the MPPI comparison: a 7-DOF sawyer arm that reaches various
spatial goals with the end effector, and a 30-DOF in-hand manipulation task where a Shadow
hand (Adroit) (Kumar, 2016) has to perform in-hand manipulation of a pen to match a desired
conﬁguration. We compare the times taken by MPPI to optimize a trajectory and also the fraction
of times MPPI optimized a successful trajectory. The results are provided in Figure 3. In summary,
we ﬁnd that the MPPI success percentage are comparable in both Gym and Lyceum, and the
Lyceum implementation is approx. 30x faster for the Sawyer arm task and 3x faster for the Shadow
Hand task. This trend is consistent with the earlier trend, where the relative differences are larger
for lower dimensional systems with fewer contacts. This is because for complex models with many
contacts like the Shadow Hand, most of the computational work is performed by MuJoCo, thereby
diminishing the impact of overheads in Gym. We also note, however, that we found the performance
scaling with cores to be better in Lyceum compared to Gym, and thus the difference between the
frameworks is likely larger when using more cores (e.g. on a cluster).
5. Conclusion and Future Work
We introduced Lyceum, a new computational ecosystem for robot learning in Julia that provides
the rapid prototyping and ease-of-use beneﬁts of a high-level programming language, yet retaining
the performance of a low-level language like C. We demonstrated that this ecosystem can obtain
substantial speedups compared to existing ecosystems like OpenAI gym and dm_control. We also
demonstrated that this speed up enables faster experimental times for RL and MPC algorithms. In
the future, we hope to port over algorithmic infrastructures like OpenAI’s baselines (Dhariwal et al.,
2017). We also hope to include and support models and environments involving real robots like
Cassie, HERB (Srinivasa et al., 2009), ROBEL (Ahn et al., 2019), and Shadow Hand (Kumar, 2016;
Rajeswaran et al., 2018; Jain et al., 2019), and also support for fast rendering to enable research
integrating perception and control.
8

LYCEUM: AN EFFICIENT AND SCALABLE ECOSYSTEM FOR ROBOT LEARNING
