Worst-Case Upper Bound for (1, 2)-QSAT 
 Minghao Yin 
Department of Computer, Northeast Normal University, Changchun, China, 130117 

 
Abstract. The rigorous theoretical analysis of the algorithm for a subclass of 
QSAT, i.e. (1, 2)-QSAT, has been proposed in the literature. (1, 2)-QSAT, first 
introduced in SAT’08, can be seen as quantified extended 2-CNF formulas. 
Until now, within our knowledge, there exists no algorithm presenting the worst 
upper bound for (1, 2)-QSAT. Therefore in this paper, we present an exact 
algorithm to solve (1, 2)-QSAT. By analyzing the algorithms, we obtain a 
worst-case upper bound O(1.4142m), where m is the number of clauses. 
Keywords: (1, 2)-QSAT; the worst case; upper bound  
1   Introduction 
Quantified Boolean Formulas (QBF) can be viewed as a generalization version of 
the Boolean satisfiability (SAT) with existential or universal quantifiers to every 
variable in propositional formulas. This problem permits both universal and 
existential quantifiers over Boolean variables. Deciding whether a QBF is satisfiable 
is the prototypical problem for PSPACE-complete problems, and is also one of the 
most important issues in artificial intelligence field. Many practical problems can be 

transformed into QBF, such as intelligent planning problems, non-monotonic 
reasoning problems and reasoning about knowledge problems.  
Based on the fact that there is no polynomial time algorithm exists for SAT 
problems, assuming P≠NP stands, developing fast exact algorithm for testing 
satisfiability of propositional formulas are crucial in determining the scale of the 
problems that can be solved. Because a slight improvement from O(ck) to O((c-)k) 
may significantly increase the size of the problem being tractable, it is not surprising 
to view tremendous efforts made by researchers to designing exact algorithms 
providing better upper bound of SAT problems. Take 3-SAT problem for instance. 
The currently best upper bound for deterministic algorithm is O(1.439n) achieved by 
Kutzkov and Scheder [6], and that for local search algorithm is O(1.32216n) achieved 
by Rolf [7]. 
 When it comes to QBF problem, the best upper bound of QBF problem in 3CNF 
(conjunctive normal form) is O(1.619m) where m is the number of clauses, as can be 
seen in ([8]. However, this upper bound is achieved under the restriction that the 
number of clauses should be equal to the number of variables. Moreover, Williams 
pointed out that when the clause-to-variable ratio approaches 2, the bound approaches 
2n. In this paper, we focus on a subclass of closed quantified Boolean formulas, (1, 2)-
QSAT, which was first introduced in [2]. (1, 2)-QSAT-formulas are in the form of 
(
, )
X Y
X Y


, where X has
1n variables, Y has 
2n variables, and 
(
, )
X Y

 is a 
conjunction of 3-clauses, each of which containing exactly one universal literal and 
two existential ones. This problem can be seen as an extension version of 2SAT. An 
extreme situation is that when 
1n  is of logarithmic order compared to the number of 

variables n, this problem can be solved in polynomial time. But in general case, this 
problem is co-NP-complete [2]. Creignou have studied the phase transition 
phenomenon of (1, 2)-QSAT [2, 3]. However, up to now, within our knowledge, no 
literals have studied the worst upper bound of the problem. Therefore in this paper, 
we focus on deriving a non-trivial worst case upper bound for (1, 2)-QSAT. 
Specifically, we present an algorithm to slove (1, 2)-QSAT. By analyzing the 
algorithm, we obtain a worst-case upper bounds O(1.4142m), where m is the number 
of clauses. 
2 Basic Concepts 
In this section, we recall some necessary concepts in this paper. We describe some 
definitions used in this paper. A variable x can take the values true or false. A literal 
of a variable is either the unnegated literal x, having the same truth value as the 
variable, or the negated literal x, having the opposite truth value as the variable. A 
clause is a disjunction of literals, referred to as a k-clause if the clause is a disjunction 
on k literals. A k-SAT formula F in Conjunction Normal Form (CNF) is a conjunction 
of clauses, each of which contains exactly k literals. A (1, 2)-QSAT formula F is in 
the form of  
(
, )
X Y
X Y


 
where X has
1n variables, Y has 
2n variables, and 
(
, )
X Y

 is a conjunction of 3-
clauses, each of which containing exactly one universal literal and two existential 
ones. We define m as the number of clauses in F, and n as the number of variables F 
contains. Note that (1, 2)-QSAT can be viewed as an extension version of 2SAT, 

because if we can get a formula of 2SAT by deleting the universal literal in each 
clause and the superfluous arbitrary quantifier of (1, 2)-QSAT. A truth assignment for 
F is a map that assigns each variable a value. A (1, 2)-QSAT formula is satisfiable if 
for each assignment of the variables X, there exists an assignment to the variables Y 
such that is true.  
 
 
   
3 Estimating the Running Time  
In this section, we explain how to compute the complexity of our algorithms. We will 
use a notion called branching tree. The branching tree [5] is a hierarchical tree 
structure consisting of a set of nodes, and each node is labeled with a proposition 
formula. Consider a node labeled with a formula F, then its sons are labeled with the 
sub formulae F1, F2,…, Fn , with Fi(1
i
n) being obtained by assigning a value to 
one of the variables in F. According to the above definition we can see that the 
process of constructing a branching tree is the same as the process of executing 
DPLL-style algorithms, therefore, we make use of the branching tree to estimate the 
time complexity. 
In the branching tree, every node has a branching tuple [4]. Suppose a node is 
labeled with F0 and its children nodes are labeled with F1, F2, …, Fk. Then the 
branching tuple of that node is (r1, r2,…, rk), where ri=m(F0)-m(Fi) (m(F0) represents 
the number of clauses of F0). The value of the branching tuple of a node, is called 
branching number (
(r1, r2,…, rk)), which is obtained as the positive root of  the 
following equation.  

1
i
k
i
r
x
=1. 
(1) 
The branching number of the branching tree can be defined as the maximum 
branching number(max
(r1, r2,…, rk))of nodes among the branching tree. There is a 
close relationship between the branching number of a branching tree and the running 
time (T(m)) of DPLL-style algorithms. Here, we assume that DPLL-style algorithms 
performing on each node take polynomial time. Then we obtain the following 
inequality. 
T(m)
 (max
(r1, r2,…, rk)) mpoly(F)= max
1
k
i
T(m-ri))mpoly(F) . 
(2) 
Where m is the number of clauses of the formula F, ploy(F) is the polynomial time 
executing on the node F, and 
 (r1, r2,…, rk)= 
1
k
i
T(m-ri). 
(3) 
In addition, let m be the number of clauses, mi be the number of clauses in the sub-
formula Fi (1
i
k) of the formula F. If a QBF problem recursively solved by the 
DPLL-style algorithms, the time required doesn’t increase, for 
1
k
i
T(mi)
 T(m) where m =
1
k
i
mi. 
(4) 

4   Transformation Rules 
This section discusses the transformation rules used in our algorithm for solving (1, 
2)-QSAT. The transformation rules are applied before choosing a variable to branch.  
According to the complexity analysis described above, we just need to take into the 
difference value between the number of clauses of the input formula and the number 
of clauses of the formulae obtained from it by branching. The larger of the difference 
value, the smaller the upper bound obtained. In order to obtain a better upper bound, 
we should reduce as many clauses as possible. Therefore, we introduce some 
transformation rules such that the simplified formulae contain a fewer number of 
clauses and are equi-satisfiable with the original formula. 
Trivial  falsity  rule. A (1, 2)-QSAT F is false, if there is a clause C only 
containing universal variables.   
Unit clause rule. Let F be a (1, 2)-QSAT formula, if there is a unit clause C={li} 
whose the only variable is existential, then the unit literal li must be assigned true. 
Note that the unit clause rule only can be applicable to the existential variables. 
Similarly, the unit propagation rule is also applicable to the existential variables. In 
fact, if there is a unit clause whose only variable is universal, then the (1, 2)-QSAT is 
false based on the trivial falsity rule. Therefore, the unit clause rule and the unit 
propagation rule are ruled out for universal variables. In the following, we will 
describe the unit propagation rule. 

Unit propagation rule. Let F be a (1, 2)-QSAT formula, if F contains a unit literal li 
and the literal is existential, then the unit propagation rule executes the following. 
(1) Remove all clauses containing the literal li from F; 
(2) Delete all occurrences of the negation of the literal li from the other clauses; 
(3) Perform the process as far as possible. 
Monotone literal rule. Given a (1, 2)-QSAT F and a monotone literal li in F, if li is 
universal, then li must be assigned false; if li is existential, then li must be assigned 
true. 
  Notice that the trivial falsity rule enables us to judge their truth value directly. And 
the other transformation rules can simplify the formulae into simpler ones. Now we 
discuss the equivalence between the simplified formula and the original one. 
Theorem 1. Given a (1, 2)-QSAT F and a simplified formula F’ obtained by applying 
the unit clause rule, the unit propagation rule, and the monotone literal rule, F and F’ 
are equi-satisfiable. 
Proof. In order to prove F and F’ are equi-satisfiable, we need to prove the three rules 
make the simplified formula equi-satisfiable with F respectively. 
(1) F and F’ are equi-satisfiable where F’ is obtained from F by using the unit 
clause rule. 
Suppose F’ is satisfiable. Consider a satisfying assignment I for F’. It is obvious 
that the assignment I
{li} satisfies F. On the other hand, in all satisfying assignments 
to F, the truth assignment to li must be true. And F’\ F =
. Therefore, each 
assignment satisfying F also satisfies F’. 

(2) F and F’ are equi-satisfiable where F’ is obtained from F by using the unit 
propagation rule. 
We know that F is satisfiable if and only if
'
F is satisfiable, where
'
F is obtained 
from F by using unit clause rule from (1). As a matter of fact, the unit propagation 
rule is performed based on the unit clause rule which is applied repeatedly as new unit 
clauses are generated. Therefore, F and F’ are equi-satisfiable. 
(3) F and F’ are equi-satisfiable where F’ is obtained from F by using the 
monotone literal rule. 
We prove it in two cases. The one is that li is universal; the other case is that li is 
existential. Let’s consider the first case. 
li is universal. Suppose F’ is satisfiable. Consider a satisfying assignment I for F’. 
The assignment I satisfies the clauses that originally contain li in F. Since li assigned 
false has no influence to the truth value of the clauses li in, I
{
li } satisfies F. 
Moreover, it is clear that I
{li } also satisfies F. Therefore, if F’ is satisfiable, F is 
also satisfiable. On the contrary, since F’\ F =
, each assignment satisfying F also 
satisfies F’. 
li is existential. We assume that there is a satisfying assignment I for F’. It is 
obvious that the assignment I
{ li } satisfies F. On the other hand, F’\ F =
. Thus, 
each assignment satisfying F also satisfies F’. 
Therefore, F and F’ are equi-satisfiable, where F’ is obtained by applying the unit 
clause rule, the unit propagation rule, and the monotone literal rule.               

5   Algorithm Sm for Solving (1, 2)-QSAT 
In this section, we present the algorithm Sm for solving (1, 2)-QSAT and prove an 
upper bound O(1.4142m). The basic idea of the algorithm is to choose a variable in the 
outermost quantification set to branch, firstly transforming 3-CNF clauses into 2-CNF 
ones, and then solving the 2-CNF QSAT directly. The algorithm Sm has one 
subroutine, Function Reducem, which is to reduce F as far as possible by using the 
trivial falsity rule, the unit clause rule, the unit propagation rule, and the monotone 
literal rule. In the following, we describe the Function Reducem in Figure 1. In the 
function, Exist_literals (resp. Univer_literals) denotes the set of the existential literals 
(resp. universal literals); {C: li
C } denotes the clauses contain the literal li. 
 
Function Reducem (F) 
(R1): If there is a clause C containing only universal literals, then return false. 
(R2): For all C ={ li } and li
Exist_literals, 
       F:= F /{C: li
C }, 
       F:= F /{C:
li
C }
{C:
li
C }/
li, 
   Endfor 
(R3): If there is a monotone literal li in F and li
Exist_literals, then 
       F:= F /{C: li
C }, 
       F:= F /{C:
li
C }
{C:
li
C }/
li, 
    Endif 
    If there is a monotone literal li in F and li
Univer_literals, then 
       F:= F /{C: li
C }
{C: li
C }/li, 
    Endif 
(R4): If F changed in (R1) - (R3), then Reducem (F). 
     Return F. 
  
Fig. 1. Framework of Function Reducem. 
 

Next, let’s consider the algorithm Sm. Given a (1, 2)-QSAT F, the basic strategy of 
Davis-Putnam-Logemann-Loveland (DPLL) is to choose a variable vi in the 
outermost quantification set. As we know, each clause in the (1, 2)-QSAT formulae 
consists of exactly one universal literal and two existential literals, and the universal 
literal is earlier quantified than the two existential literals. In other words, if there is a 
universal variable in a clause, the variable must be chosen as a branch variable when 
the algorithm deals with the clause. In the following, we propose the framework of 
the algorithm Sm in Figure 2. At first, F is simplified by the Function Reducem (line 1). 
If the simplified F is empty, then Sm stops and returns true, which means the input 
formula F is satisfiable (line 2). If the simplified F contains an empty clause, then Sm 
stops and returns false, which means the input formula F is unsatisfiable (line 3). If 
the algorithm doesn’t stop, it chooses variables obey the quantification order until the 
(1, 2)-QSAT formula doesn’t contain 3-CNF clauses (line 4). If the chosen variable is 
an existential variable, we just need to make sure one of the two branches is 
satisfiable. And if the chosen variable is a universal variable, we need to make sure 
that both branches lead to a satisfying assignment. When there is no 3-CNF clause, 
the algorithm will solve the formula by QSAT2(F). Note that the function QSAT2(F) 
can solve the 2-CNF QSAT in polynomial time [1]. 
 

Algorithm Sm(F) 
 
1.F= Reducem(F). 
2. If F is empty, then return true. 
3. If F contains an empty clause, then return false. 
4. If there exist 3-CNF clauses, pick a variable and construct two branches: 
(1) If there exists clauses of the form { li, lj, lk } and {
li, l’j, l’k },where li is an
universal literal, 
then return Sm(Reducem(F[li])) 
 Sm(Reducem(F[
li])). 
(2) If there exists clauses of the form { li, lj, lk }, {
li, l’j }, and {l, l’,
l’j },where li is
an universal literal, 
then return Sm(Reducem(F[li])) 
 Sm(Reducem(F[
li])). 
(3) If there exists clauses of the form { li, lj, lk }, {
li, l’j }, and {l,
l’j },where li is an
universal literal, 
then return Sm(Reducem(F[li])) 
 Sm(Reducem(F[
li])). 
5. Return QSAT2(F). 
 
Fig. 2. Framework of Algorithm Sm. 
6   Complexity Analysis 
In this section, we use the branching tree to estimate the time complexity of the 
algorithm Sm. Since the function QSAT2(F) can solve the 2-CNF QSAT in 
polynomial time, we only need to estimate the running time taken in the process of 
transformation from 3-clause formula into 2-clause formulae. The detailed proof will 
be presented in Theorem 2. Note that when computing the elements of the branching 
tuple, we only count the number of clauses without the universal variables by 
branching. This is because the simplified clauses containing only existential literals 
can be obtained by reducing or branching, but the simplified clauses containing 
universal literals can only be obtained by branching. 

Theorem 2. Algorithm Sm runs in O(1.4142m) time, where m is the number of clauses. 
Proof. Let us analyze the algorithm in detail. 
Case 1 (line 1) is the course of simplification, which can solve in polynomial time. 
Thus it runs in O(1). 
Case 2 (line 2) and case 3 (line 3) can solve the problems completely. These cases 
run in O(1). 
In case 4.1, when li=true, every clause containing li is removed and li is removed 
from clauses. That is to say at least the clause { li, lj, lk } is removed and li is 
removed from the clause{
li, l’j, l’k }. Therefore, the current formula contains at least 
two 3-CNF clauses less than F. So we have T(m)=2T(m-2) because the same situation 
is encountered when li =false. This case takes O(1.4142m) time. 
In case 4.2, when li=true, l’j is forced to be assigned true. Thus, as least one clause 
is removed from F and another 2-CNF clause is reduced to a clause consisting of only 
existential literal. When li =false, at lease two clauses are removed. Therefore, the 
worst case is when T(m)=T(m-2)+T(m-2) with solution O(1.4142m). 
In case 4.3, since li=true, l’j is forced to be assigned true. Then every clause 
containing li or l’j is removed, and therefore, the current formula contains at least 
three clauses less than F. When li =false, every clause containing li is removed and 
li is removed from clauses. Thus, at least one clause removed from F and one 3-CNF 
clause is reduced to 2-CNF clause. Therefore, the worst case is when T(m)=T(m-
2)+T(m-2) with solution O(1.4142m). 
In total, the upper bound for the algorithm Sm is O(1.4142m).                  

7 
Conclusion 
This paper addresses the worst-case upper bound for the (1, 2)-QSAT problem with 
the number of clauses as the parameter. The basic idea behind the algorithm is to 
transform 3-CNF clauses into 2-CNF ones, and then solving the 2-CNF QSAT 
directly. After a skillful analysis of these algorithms, we obtain the worst-case upper 
bound O(1.4142m) for X3SAT.
