97 
Dynamic J ointrees 
Adnan Darwiche 
Department of Mathematics 
American University of Beirut 
PO Box 11 - 236 
Beirut, Lebanon 

Abstract 
It is well known that one can ignore parts of 
a belief network when computing answers to 
certain probabilistic queries. It is also well 
known that the ignorable parts (if any) de­
pend on the specific query of interest and, 
therefore, may change as the query changes. 
Algorithms based on jointrees, however, do 
not seem to take computational advantage 
of these facts given that they typically con­
struct jointrees for worst-case queries; that is, 
queries for which every part of the belief net­
work is considered relevant. To address this 
limitation, we propose in this paper a method 
for reconfiguring jointrees dynamically as the 
query changes. The reconfiguration process 
aims at maintaining a jointree which corre­
sponds to the underlying belief network after 
it has been pruned given the current query. 
Our reconfiguration method is marked by 
three characteristics: (a) it is based on a non­
classical definition of jointrees; (b) it is rela­
tively efficient; and (c) it can reuse some of 
the computations performed before a jointree 
is reconfigured. We present preliminary ex­
perimental results which demonstrate signif­
icant savings over using static jointrees when 
query changes are considerable. 
1 
Introduction 
There is a number of algorithms for exact inference in 
belief networks, but the ones based on jointrees seem 
to be the most dominant [3, 4, 5]. According to these 
algorithms, the structure of a belief network is con­
verted into a jointree which is then used as the basis 
for computing posterior probabilities given evidence. 
One of the main drawbacks of jointree algorithms, 
however, is that they prepare for worst-case queries. 
I 
c 
D 
Figure 1: Belief networks and respective jointrees. 
That is, these algorithms typically build jointrees un­
der the assumption that every node in the belief net­
work can be observed or updated (its posterior proba­
bility computed). This means that the whole structure 
of the belief network is involved in computing a join­
tree which may, in certain situations, turn out to be 
an overkill. This happens when only part of the be­
lief network turns out to be relevant to a given query, 
therefore, permitting inference with respect to a much 
simpler jointree. 
Consider the belief network and its corresponding join­
tree shown in Figure 1(a) for an example. This jointree 
is built for the worst-case: any node can be observed 
and any node can be updated. Suppose, however, that 
in reality only Node B is observed and only Node C 
needs to be updated. In such a case, the pruned be­
lief network and its corresponding jointree shown in 
Figure 1(b) will suffice for handling the situation. 
Adopting the jointree in Figure 1 (b) will clearly involve 
less work, but the problem is that one may not know 
upfront that the query of interest is Pr(c I b). There­
fore, one is forced to build the jointree of Figure 1(a) 
in the first place to prepare for the worst case. 
One suggestion, however, is to postpone the construc­
tion of the jointree until a specific query material-

98 
Darwiche 
izes. Once the query is known, the belief network can 
be pruned and a jointree can be constructed for the 
pruned belief network. 
There are two main problems with such a proposal 
however. First, building a jointree is costly. There­
fore, building a jointree each time the query changes 
may not be cost effective. Second, even if building a 
jointree can be done efficiently, changing the jointree 
each time the query changes means that we are toss­
ing away the results of any computations performed 
thus far. But the reuse of such computations has been 
crucial for the performance of existing jointree algo­
rithms. Therefore, building a new jointree each time 
the query changes could undermine any savings that 
are expected from having a better jointree. 
It appears, therefore, that any successful proposal for 
reconfiguring jointrees must satisfy at least two proper­
ties. First, it must provide a method for reconfiguring 
jointrees efficiently. Second, it must provide a mecha­
nism for reusing the results of computations performed 
before the jointree is reconfigured. 
In this paper, we propose a method for dynamically 
reconfiguring jointrees in response to query changes. 
The method is shown to satisfy the above two prop­
erties and is inspired by a non-classical definition of 
jointrees, which is the subject of Section 2. Based on 
this non-classical definition, we propose a method for 
building jointrees in Section 3 and study its properties. 
In particular, we show how jointrees constructed using 
this method can be reconfigured in response to query 
changes. We then turn in Section 4 to a theorem which 
allows for the efficient reconfiguration of jointrees us­
ing our method. Section 5 is then dedicated to an­
other important theorem which explicates conditions 
under which computations performed before reconfig­
uring a jointree remain valid after reconfiguration. Ex­
perimental results are then given in Section 6 where we 
demonstrate significant savings using this new method 
when query changes are considerable. We finally close 
in Section 7 with some concluding remarks. 
Proofs of all theorems can be found in [1]. 
2 
A Non-Classical Definition of 
Jointrees 
We review in this section the standard definition of 
a jointree and then propose an alternative definition 
which wilL underly our formal developments in this pa­
per. We start first with some preliminary definitions. 
A graph is a pair (V, A) where V is a finite set of 
nodes and A is a subset of V. x V known as edges. 
A labeled graph is a triple (V,A,L) where (V,A) is 
a) Belief Network 
b) Basic Jointree 
c) Jointree 
Figure 2: A belief network, a corresponding basic join­
tree, and a classical jointree induced by the basic join­
tree. In (b) and (c), the label of each node is shown 
inside it. 
a graph and L is a function that maps each node i 
in V to a label Li. Directed acyclic graphs (dags), 
undirected graphs, and trees are special cases of graphs 
obtained by imposing the usual conditions on the set 
of edges A. The family of a node in a dag 9 is the set 
containing the node and its parents in g. 
Definition 1 A jointree for a directed acyclic graph 
g is a labeled tree I = (V, A, C) where 
1. Each label Ci is called a clique. 
2. Each family in g is contained in some clique Ci. 
3. If a node belongs to two cliques Ci and Ci, it must 
also belong to every clique ck where k is a node 
on the path connecting nodes i and j in /. 
The separator of edge (i, j) in A is defined as 
def 
sij 
= ci ncj. 
The jointree in Figure l(a) has two nodes with the 
associated cliques being {A, B, C} and {B, C, D}. It 
also has one separator {B, C}. 
We now present an alternative definition of jointrees, 
which has inspired our proposal for reconfiguring join­
trees in response to a query change. Simply stated, a 
jointree for dag g is nothing but an aggregation of the 
families of g into groups which are connected in the 
form of a tree. 
Definition 2 A basic jointree for a directed acyclic 
graph g is a labeled tree I = (V, A, 1-l) where 
1. Each label1li is called a hypernode. 
2. Each family in g is contained in some hypernode 
1-li. 
3. Each hypernode 1-li is the union of some families 
in Q. 

Figure 2 (a) depicts a dag and Figure 2 (b) depicts a cor­
responding basic jointree with four hypernodes: 1£1 = 
{A}, 1£2 = {A,B}, 1£3 = {A,C} and 1£4 = {B,C,D}. 
Here, each hypernode contains a single family of the 
dag, which creates a one-to-one correspondence be­
tween the families of the dag and the hypernodes of 
its basic jointree. 
Given a labeled tree T = (V,A,L) and an edge (i,j) 
in A, we will use Lij to denote the union of all labels 
Lk where k is a node on the i-side of the edge (i,j). 
For example, in Figure 2(b), 1i34 = 1£1 U 1£2 U 1£3 = 
{A,B,C} and 1£43 = 1£4 = {B,C,D}. 
Note that Definition 2 of a basic jointree does not 
mention separators or cliques. These are derivative 
notions: 
Definition 3 Let (V, A, 1£) be a basic jointree. The 
separator associated with edge (i,j) in A is defined as 
follows: 
def 
sii = 1lij n 1lji· 
Moreover, the clique associated with node i in V is 
defined as follo;;;;s:-
ci d;j1li u U sij· 
j 
That is, the separator associated with an edge in a 
basic join tree contains nodes which are shared by fam­
ilies on opposite sides of the edge. In Figure 2(b), 
1£34 = {A,B,C} and 1£43 = {B,C,D}. Therefore, 
S34 = {B, C} which are nothing but the nodes shared 
by families on opposite sides of the edge (3, 4). 
The clique associated with a node in a basic jointree 
contains its hypernode and all adjacent separators. In 
Figure 2, 1£3 = {A,C}, S13 = {A,B} and S43 = 
{B, C}. Therefore, C3 = 1£3 U S13 U S43 ={A, B, C}. 
Theorem 1 Let T = (V, A, 1£) be a basic jointree for 
dag g and let Ci be the clique associated with node i 
in V. The labeled tree (V, A, C) is then a jointree for 
dag g. Moreover, for every edge (i,j) in A, we have 
ci n Cj = 1lij n 1lji· 
This theorem asserts two important results. First, that 
we can covert any basic jointree into a classical join­
tree by simply converting each of its hypernodes into 
a clique as given by Definition 3. Second, that the 
separators of a basic jointree and those of its induced 
jointree are equal. Figure 2(c) depicts the jointree in­
duced by the basic jointree in Figure 2(b) .1 
1From the classical viewpoint, cliques C1 and C2 in Fig­
ure 2(c) are redundant and should be eliminated. However, 
we shall keep them because we would like to establish a 
a) Belief Network 
Dynamic Jointrees 
99 
b) Family Graph 
c) Basic lointtee 
Figure 3: A belief network, its family graph and a 
spanning tree of the graph. In (b) and (c), the label 
of each node is shown inside it. 
Note that in the standard definition of jointrees, 
cliques are primary objects and separator are sec­
ondary ones. Specifically, one defines a jointree by 
imposing a property on cliques and then defines sepa­
rator as a further detail needed by jointree algorithms. 
In our alternative definition of jointrees, however, both 
cliques and separators are derivative objects. The 
essence of a jointree according to our definition is an 
aggregation of families into a tree structure, leading to 
what we call a basic jointree. Once such an aggrega­
tion is committed to, separators and cliques follow as 
derivative objects that facilitate computations. Even 
then, however, separators are primary and cliques are 
secondary. 
Theorem 1, therefore, suggests a non-classical defini­
tion of join trees which promotes two key points. First, 
that the defining characteristic of a jointree is an ag­
gregation of families into groups and a connection of 
these groups into a tree. Second, that the separator 
associated with an edge is nothing but the intersection 
of families on opposite sides of the edge. We shall see 
in the following section how this viewpoint of jointrees 
can be exploited to reconfigure jointrees in response to 
a query change. 
3 
A Non-Classical Method for 
Building Jointrees 
According to Theorem 1, one can construct a jointree 
T for dag g by simply constructing a basic jointree for 
g according to Definition 2 and then converting each 
of its hypernodes into a clique as given by Definition 3. 
The second step is deterministic, but the first step can 
be realized using a number of methods. We shall adopt 
a specific method in the rest of this paper for the sake 
of concreteness. Specifically, we will construct a basic 
jointree for a dag by simply connecting its families into 
a tree structure. 
one-to-one correspondence between the nodes of a belief 
network and the cliques of its jointree. This will be dis­
cussed further in the following section. 

100 
Darwiche 
b)dJv<) 
A 
AC 
evidence on B, query on C 
evidence on A, query on C 
Figure 4: 
Three belief networks with correspond­
ing basic jointrees. Double circles represent evidence 
nodes, filled circles represent nodes to be updated. 
Definition 4 Let g 
= 
(V, A) be a dag. 
The 
family graph of g is a labeled dag (V, A, F) where Fi 
is the family of node i in g. 
Each spanning tree of this family graph is then a basic 
jointree. 
Theorem 2 Let Z;t be the family graph of dag g and 
let T be a spanning tree of 9'. Then T is a basic 
jointree for g. 
Figure 3 depicts a belief network, its family graph and 
a basic jointree which corresponds to a spanning tree 
of the family graph. 2 According to our method then, 
constructing a basic jointree is just a matter of delet­
ing enough arcs from the family graph until the graph 
becomes singly connected. 
Realize that once a basic jointree is constructed, sepa­
rators and cliques are determined uniquely given Def­
inition 3. We shall therefore speak mostly about the 
basic jointree, leaving separators and cliques implicit. 
Now here's the basic observation underlying our pro­
posal for reconfiguring jointrees in response to a query 
change. Consider the belief network and its basic join­
tree shown in Figure 4(a). This basic jointree can be 
viewed as preparing for the worst-case: it can be used 
for computing the posterior probability of any node 
given evidence about any other node. Suppose now 
that we have evidence about Node B and we want 
to update Node C. We can, of course, use the ba­
sic jointree in Figure 4(a) to handle this query, but 
this amounts to performing inference with respect to 
the full belief network. As we have observed earlier, 
however, the simpler, pruned belief network in Fig­
ure 4(b) is sufficient for handling this query. Therefore, 
2It appears that our method for constructing jointrees 
can be justified using the transformation approach given in 
[2]. In particular, computing a spanning tree of the family 
graph can be viewed as successively applying the collapse 
transformation to the trivial cluster graph as defined in [2]. 
we will reconfigure the basic jointree in Figure 4(a) so 
it becomes a basic jointree for the pruned network in 
Figure 4(b).3 This can be achieved by simply remov­
ing the family of Node D, given that it was pruned, 
from its corresponding hypernode, leading to the basic 
jointree in Figure 4(b). This simpler, basic jointree is 
indeed a basic jointree for the pruned network in Fig­
ure 4(b) (according to Definition 2), and, therefore, 
can be used to answer the above query. 
The simple method we used in the previous example 
is valid in general. That is, all we have to do is remove 
the family of each pruned node from its corresponding 
hypernode. We shall formalize this method now, but 
only after formalizing the notions of a query and that 
of pruning a belief network given a query. 
Definition 5 Let E and Q be two sets of nodes in dag 
g and let e be an instantiation of nodes E.4 The pair 
( e, Q) is called a query for dag g. 
The intuition here is that e represents evidence about 
nodes E and Q represents nodes whose posterior prob­
abilities must be computed. 
Given a belief network and a query (e, Q), not all 
nodes of the network may be relevant to the computa­
tion. In particular, any leaf node in the network which 
does not belong to either E or Q can be removed from 
the network. When this pruning operation is applied 
recursively, a large portion of the belief network may 
be pruned, which in turn may lead to a much sim­
pler jointree. Our goal, of course, is to reconfigure 
the originally constructed jointree so it corresponds to 
this pruned belief network. We put two constraints on 
ourselves, however: efficiency of reconfiguration, and 
reuse of previously performed computations. We will 
address these two constraints in the following two sec­
tions, but first we formalize the reconfiguration pro­
cess. 
Definition 6 Let g be a dag and let q = ( e, Q) be a 
query for g. The pruning of g given q, denoted gq, is 
the dag which results from successively removing leaf 
nodes from g if they are not in E U Q. 
This is a standard definition of pruning where removed 
leaf nodes are known as barren-nodes. 
3We have two choices when trying to perform inference 
with respect to the pruned belief network in Figure 4(b): 
We can directly compute a basic jointree for the network 
or we can reconfigure the basic jointree in Figure 4(a) for 
that purpose. We have opted for the second choice in order 
to generate a basic jointree which is as similar as possible 
to the original one. This is crucial for computation reuse 
as we shall discuss later. 
4 An instantiation of E contains one pair ( E, e) for each 
node E in E, where e is a value of node E. 

Definition 7 Let g be a dag and T 
= (V, A, 1i) 
be a basic jointree for g {induced by a spanning tree 
of its family graph). Let q be a query for Q. The 
pruning of r given q, denoted rq' is a labeled tree 
(V, A, 1iq) where 
1iq dg { 1ii, if i is a node in gq; 
i 
-
0, 
otherwise. 
That is, pruning a basic jointree is simply a matter of 
emptying the hypernode corresponding to each pruned 
node. 
Theorem 3 In Definition 7, the pruned tree Tq is 
guaranteed to be a basic jointree for the pruned dag 
gq. 
Therefore, Definition 7 can be viewed as a proposal for 
reconfiguring a basic jointree in response to a query 
change. The reconfiguration suggested by this defini­
tion leaves the structure of the basic jointree intact, 
but it may change the contents of its hypernodes, 
therefore, leading to a possible change in separators 
and cliques. 
We will close this section by discussing how inference is 
performed in this framework of dynamic jointrees. The 
first thing to observe is that in the jointrees we have 
been generating, each clique ci has associated with it 
a single family; the family of node i. We will then 
associate the probability matrix of node i with clique 
Ci. Hence, initially, the local information associated 
with clique Ci is the matrix of node i multiplied by 
any likelihood vector representing evidence available 
about node i. If node i is pruned later, there will be 
no local information associated with its corresponding 
clique. For uniformity though, we assume that the 
local information is the unit potential 1 in such a case. 
From here on, we will use <Pi to represent the local 
information associated with clique ci under query q. 
Moreover, for each edge ( i, j), we will use <PiJ to denote 
nk ¢'£, where k is a node on the i-side of edge (i,j). 
We can now define the message from node i to node j 
under query q in the usual way: 
Mij ' L <Pi II M't,i. 
(1) 
Ci\S'fi 
k=f.j 
Note, here, that messages, separators and cliques have 
superscripts q because they are now defined with re­
spect to a particular query q (and its pruned basic 
jointree Tq). 
To compute the probability distribution of a particular 
node i under query q, we can then use the standard 
formula: 
Prj = L <Pi II M't,i. 
Cf\{i} 
k 
(2) 
Dag 
Dynamic Jointrees 
101 
Family Graph 
Spanning Tree 
Figure 5: Computing a basic jointree as a spanning 
tree of the family graph. 
Please note that Equations 1 and 2 are nothing but 
the standard algorithm for jointrees as given in [4, 5]. 
The only difference, however, is that everything now 
is indexed by a query q. 
4 
Reconfiguring a J ointree Efficiently 
Reconfiguring a jointree in response to a query change 
involves two steps: (1) reconfiguring the underlying 
basic jointree; and (2) recomputing separators and 
cliques. To realize Step 1, all we have to do is de­
cide which nodes have been pruned from the underly­
ing dag given the current query and then update the 
hypernodes accordingly. Step 1 can be realized quite 
efficiently since pruning a belief network (according to 
Definition 6) can be done in time linear in the size of 
the network. Realizing Step 2, however, can be more 
involved since we must recompute 1iiJ n 1iji for each 
edge ( i, j) in the basic jointree (V, A, 1i). In the worst 
case, computing this intersection is quadratic in the 
number of nodes in the underlying dag. 
One can do better than this, however, if one utilizes 
the following theorem. 
Theorem 4 Let (V, A, F) be a family graph and let 
(V, A', F) be one of its spanning trees. Let 
S d,;f {i: (i,j) E A and (i,j) (/A' for some j}. 
For every edge (i,j) in A and A', Fii nFJi \ {i} Æ S. 
First, note that S is the set of all nodes that have lost 
outgoing edges in the process of rendering the family 
graph singly connected. In Figure 5 for example, only 
one node, C, has lost an outgoing edge in this process. 
Therefore, S = { C} in this case. 
Theorem 4 is then saying that if a node k is shared 
by families on opposite sides of edge (i,j) (that is, k E 
FijnFJi), and if k =f i, then it must be a node that has 
lost an outgoing edge in the process of rendering the 

102 
Darwiche 
family graph singly connected. The major implication 
of this theorem is: 
Corollary 1 Regarding the edge (i,j) in Theorem 4: 
Consider Figure 5 again where S = { C}. According to 
this corollary, the separator of any edge which extends 
from node i to node j can only contain node i and, 
possibly, Node C. 
Therefore, given Corollary 1, computing a separator is 
no longer quadratic in the number of nodes in the dag. 
It is only quadratic in the size of set S; that is, it is 
only quadratic in the number of nodes that have lost 
outgoing edges in the process of rendering the family 
graph singly connected. 
In fact, Corollary 1 suggests a heuristic for construct­
ing jointrees from family graphs: minimize the number 
of nodes that will lose outgoing edges when rendering 
the family graph singly connected. Note that the size 
of any separator cannot exceed the size of set S plus 1; 
therefore, the previous heuristic will attempt to mini­
mize the size of separators.5 
We have taken advantage of the above theorem in our 
implementation, which has led to an efficient compu­
tation of separators. This has made the time spent 
on reconfiguring jointrees insignificant compared to 
the achieved savings, as our experimental results will 
demonstrate later. 
5 
Reusing Computations in Dynamic 
Jointrees 
We now turn to the important issue of computation 
reuse. A key objective attempted by algorithms for be­
lief network inference is to reuse computations across 
different queries. That is, having computed the pos­
teriors of nodes Q given evidence e, algorithms save 
the results of their intermediate computations for the 
possibility of reusing them when trying to compute the 
posteriors of nodes Q' given evidence e'. In jointree 
algorithms, for example, if a message comes from a 
part of the jointree which did not involve a change in 
evidence, that message can be reused without having 
to recompute it again. 
5 An interesting implication of Corollary 4 is the follow­
ing result. Compute a loop-cutset of the family graph and 
generate a spanning tree by eliminating (from the graph) 
only edges that are outgoing from nodes in the loop-cutset. 
This is always possible by definition of a loop-cutset. Un­
der these conditions, we are guaranteed that no separator 
will have more than c + 1 nodes where c is the size of the 
loop-cutset. 
c) 
Figure 6: Figures (c) and (d) depict basic jointrees for 
the queries ( {}, { D}) and ( {}, { C}), respectively. 
In this section, we start by a theorem which states 
conditions under which a message computed with re­
spect to a basic jointree 'P1 will remain valid (can be 
reused) in the reconfigured basic jointree Tq2• Our re­
sults are with respect to a dag 9, its basic jointree T, 
and two corresponding queries q1 and q2. 
Theorem 5 For every edge ( i, j), if ¢ iJ 
S9? = S9 then M = M  
•J 
•J ' 
•J 
•J . 
= "' and 
'-'•J 
That is, if the local information associated with nodes 
on the i-side of edge (i,j) did not change when switch­
ing from query q1 to query q2, then the message from 
node i to node j can be reused. This is similar to 
message reuse in standard jointree algorithms except 
that standard algorithms do not check for the condi­
tion S'/J = S01; the condition always hold given that 
the jointree does not change. 
We do have, however, an even stronger theorem which 
implies the one given above. 
Theorem 6 For every edge (i,j), if <Pi} 
S'fj Æ S'fJ , then 
Mij = L Mij . 
S'/J \S'[J 
= "' and 
'!-'•J 
That is, even if the separator corresponding to a par­
ticular message does change as a result of changing the 
query, it may still be possible to reuse that message but 
only after marginalizing it. 
Let us consider an example illustrating the use of The­
orem 6. Figure 6(a) depicts a belief network and Fig­
ure 6(b) depicts its family graph. Suppose now that 
we have the query q1 = ( {}, { D}): we are interested in 
the prior distribution of Node D. The basic jointree 
in Figure 6(c) can be used to answer this query. Us­
ing Equations 1 and 2 to compute the distribution of 

Node D, we end up computing three messages: MAB, 
MBe and Men. Suppose now that the query changes 
to q2 = ( {}, { C}): we are now interested in the prior 
distribution of Node C. Node D becomes irrelevant 
and is pruned given this new query. Reconfiguring 
the basic jointree in Figure 6(c), we obtain the one in 
Figure 6(d). Note here the change in separators. In 
particular, the separator between Nodes B and C has 
changed from {A, B} to { B}. Since the local informa­
tion associated with Nodes A and B remain the same 
Theorem 6 tells us that 
' 
MQ2 - "' Mql 
Be- L...J 
Be· 
{A} 
That is, there is no need to recompute the message 
from Node B to Node C, we can simply reuse its pre­
vious value after we have marginalized it. 
6 
Preliminary Experimental Results 
If there are no query changes, our method will degen­
erate into the standard method for computing with 
jointrees, except possibly for the fact that we are con­
structing jointrees differently. However, if the query 
changes, then our method will reconfigure the jointree 
in response, reusing some - but not necessarily all -
computations that have been performed with respect 
to the previous jointree. 
Our goal in this section is twofold. First, to substanti­
ate the claim that reconfiguring a jointree (as accom­
plished by our method) consumes insignificant time 
compared to the achieved savings. Second, to give an 
indication of the amount of saving possible as a result 
of reconfiguring a jointree. 
We start by describing our experiments, that is, how 
we generated our belief networks and the correspond­
ing queries. Each belief network was generated given 
three parameters: the number of nodes, a probability 
distribution over sizes of families, and a graph-width 
parameter which controls the connectivity of gener­
ated networks. Each of the generated networks had, 
on average, 20% root nodes, 10% single-parent nodes, 
25% two-parent nodes, 35% three-parent nodes and 
10% four-parent nodes. The graph-width parameter 
was varied to generate networks with separators con­
taining up to 20 nodes. 
We have conducted two sets of experiments. In the 
first, we attempted a standard computation: Compute 
the prior distribution of each leaf node in a belief net­
work (no evidence). However, we did this as follows. 
Given leaf nodes 1, 2, . .. , i, we have generated i queries 
({},{1}), ({},{2}), ... , ({},{i}). This has forced our 
algorithm to reconfigure the jointree before each query 
Dynamic Jointrees 
103 
is attempted. We have counted the number of addi­
tions and multiplications performed by our algorithm 
to compute these priors. We have also counted the 
same number of operations by running the algorithm 
but without reconfiguring the jointree. 
Table 1 depicts the results of this experiment. It shows 
ten sets of networks, each set containing 50 networks 
generated randomly using the same parameters. For 
each of the sets, the table shows the average and maxi­
mum saving factor: number of operations for the static 
jointree algorithm divided by the number of operations 
for the dynamic jointree algorithm. Note that for cer­
tain networks, the saving factor is as large as 282.54! 
In fact, it appears that the more connected the network 
is, the higher the saving factor is. Table 1 supports this 
observation by showing the average size of the maximal 
separator for both dynamic and static jointrees. On 
average, it is clear that reconfiguring jointrees leads to 
reducing the size of the maximal separator. 
Table 1 also lists (in the last column) the ratio be­
tween the time spent reconfiguring jointrees and the 
time spent on standard inference - this is shown as a 
percentage. It should be clear from this table that this 
percentage is insignificant when viewed in light of the 
saving entailed by jointree reconfiguration. Again, no­
tice how this percentage gets smaller as the networks 
get more connected. 
The second experiment involved changing evidence 
only. For this experiment, we picked up 10% of a net­
work's non-root nodes, instantiated them randomly, 
and then computed the posterior distribution for each 
root node in the network. We then considered each of 
the instantiated nodes in turn, changing the evidence 
on it randomly and recomputing the posterior distri­
bution of each root node. We repeated this process 
five times for each network. 
Our goal here was to generate a mixture of evidence 
changes, some leading to significant jointree reconfigu­
ration and others leading to no reconfiguration. Each 
of the five repetitions per network leads to a signifi­
cant jointree reconfiguration since evidence nodes are 
changing significantly. Within each repetition, how­
ever, no reconfiguration takes place since evidence 
nodes are the same - only their observed values 
change. 
Table 2 shows ten sets of networks, each set containing 
50 networks generated randomly using the same pa­
rameters. The table shows the same indicators shown 
in Table 1. Note that Table 2 supports the same hy­
potheses supported by Table 1: The saving factor in­
creases as the networks become more connected; The 
time spent on reconfiguring jointrees is insignificant 
relative to the achieved savings; Dynamic reconfigura-

104 
Darwiche 
Table 1· Evaluating the savings entailed by dynamically reconfiguring jointrees 
Network 
Saving Factor 
Average Size of Maximal Separator 
Reconfiguration 
Size 
Average 
Maxtmum 
Dynam1c JT 
-static JT 
Time% 
50 
1.44 
2.20 
5.48 
5.74 
43.10 
50 
1.85 
4.14 
6.58 
7.24 
21.06 
50 
2.98 
9.81 
7.88 
9.24 
18.00 
50 
4.17 
19.35 
8.26 
9.76 
10.30 
50 
7.76 
36.90 
8.90 
11.04 
13.04 
75 
1.69 
4.24 
6.90 
7.56 
26.90 
75 
3.05 
10.91 
8.68 
9.98 
13.68 
75 
5.21 
20.74 
9.70 
11.68 
7.78 
75 
11.95 
65.80 
9.96 
13.12 
6.96 
75 
27.64 
282.54 
11.06 
14.54 
5.54 
Table 2· Evaluating the savings entailed by dynamically reconfiguring jointrees 
Network 
Saving Factor 
Average Size of Maximal Separator 
Reconfiguration 
Size 
Average 
Maxtmum 
vynamtc JT 
l:itatlc JT 
Time% 
50 
2.99 
13.8 
5.70 
50 
5.00 
14.18 
6.30 
50 
11.51 
74.63 
7.56 
50 
16.16 
165.20 
8.08 
50 
22.75 
250.58 
8.64 
75 
4.41 
18.16 
6.88 
75 
13.01 
81.75 
8.12 
75 
26.43 
181.95 
9.88 
75 
42.11 
289.88 
10.76 
75 
56.58 
294.02 
11.16 
tion of jointrees does reduce the size of maximal sep­
arator on average; The savings due to reconfiguring 
jointrees can be quite significant, getting close to a 
factor of 300 in certain situations. 
The reported experiments are by no means comprehen­
sive. However, they involve a total of 1000 networks 
with many queries attempted per network. Their in­
dications, therefore, are not to be underestimated. 
7 
Conclusion 
This paper is based on two contributions. First, a non­
classical definition of jointrees which stresses proper­
ties of jointrees that have not been given enough at­
tention in the literature. Second, an application of this 
non-classical definition to inference situations involv­
ing considerable query changes. 
For these kind of situations, we have proposed to re­
configure the jointree as the query changes. We have 
also proposed a specific method for this reconfiguration 
and shown that it satisfies two important properties. 
First, it can be done efficiently. Second, it allows the 
reuse of some results computed before the reconfigu­
ration takes place. 
Finally, we provided a preliminary experimental anal­
ysis indicating that significant savings can be expected 
6.20 
5.88 
7.36 
4.94 
8.92 
4.74 
9.82 
4.66 
10.46 
3.24 
7.48 
5.68 
9.96 
3.00 
12.04 
2.40 
13.68 
1.76 
14.24 
1.64 
from reconfiguring jointrees in situations where query 
changes are considerable.
