arXiv:2201.03891v3  [cs.CV]  4 Apr 2022
A Saliency based Feature Fusion Model for EEG Emotion Estimation
Victor Delvigne1,2,∗, Antoine Facchini2, Hazem Wannous2, Thierry Dutoit1
Laurence Ris3 and Jean-Philippe Vandeborre2
Abstract— Among the different modalities to assess emotion,
electroencephalogram (EEG), representing the electrical brain
activity, achieved motivating results over the last decade.
Emotion estimation from EEG could help in the diagnosis or
rehabilitation of certain diseases. In this paper, we propose a
dual model considering two different representations of EEG
feature maps: 1) a sequential based representation of EEG
band power, 2) an image-based representation of the feature
vectors. We also propose an innovative method to combine
the information based on a saliency analysis of the image-
based model to promote joint learning of both model parts.
The model has been evaluated on four publicly available
datasets: SEED-IV, SEED, DEAP and MPED. The achieved
results outperform results from state-of-the-art approaches for
three of the proposed datasets with a lower standard deviation
that reﬂects higher stability. For sake of reproducibility, the
codes and models proposed in this paper are available at
https://github.com/VDelv/Emotion-EEG.
I. INTRODUCTION
Emotion estimation is a trending topic in various research
applications. Advances in this ﬁeld could help to have
a better understanding of language processing and non-
verbal communication in the context of Human-Computer-
Interaction (HCI). Although most of the proposed works con-
sider voice/sound, video, images or text, recent works have
shown that the emotional state can also be predicted from
biomedical signals. An example is the MPED corpus [21]
presenting a dataset composed of physiological recordings,
i.e. EEG, electrocardiogram (ECG), respiration and galvanic
skin response (GSR), with an initial benchmark aiming to
estimate emotional state are presented. Furthermore, other
works have shown that eye-tracking signals can also be
considered to estimate emotion [24].
During the last decade, Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) and
specially Machine-Learning (ML) based algorithms have
known an increase in interest. The reasons are varied: higher
robustness, higher accuracy, technological democratisation
and the growing simplicity of their development. Through
the scientiﬁc community, ML-based algorithms are used in a
wide range of technologies and domains including medical
ﬁeld with for instance: diseases and infections detection from
physiological recordings [7], understanding of the human
genomes [12], human behaviour prediction [17] or drugs
discovery [15].
1 ISIA Lab, Faculty of Engineering, University of Mons, Belgium;
2 IMT Nord Europe, CRIStAL UMR CNRS 9189, France;
3 Neuroscience Lab, Faculty of Medecine and Pharmacy, University of
Mons, Belgium

On another side, the recent researches on Brain-Computer
Interfaces (BCI) have led to an increase in their use in
innovative applications and projects. BCI aims to create a
connection between computers and users’ brains through
physiological signals, e.g. EEG, Magnetoencephalogram
(MEG), Magnetic Resonance Images (MRI). This connection
is invasive/non-invasive; open-loop (e.g. recording signals
during a speciﬁc task on a computer) or closed-loop (e.g.
video game evolving with the brain activity) depending on
the considered application.
In the context of emotion estimation, an increase of
research projects proposing BCI application have been noted.
As reported by Craik et al. [3], one paper out of 6 consid-
ering the use of Deep Learning (DL) algorithm for EEG
is dedicated to emotion estimation tasks. The existing works
present datasets to assess emotional state [26], [25], [21], [8]
and different models often based on DL algorithms to retrieve
the emotional state from EEG signals [13], [22], [28], [27].
The proposed methodologies consider EEG under different
forms: e.g. graph representation of EEG signals [22], [27],
vectors separated between each hemispheres [13], [28] and
even images based representation [23].
One of the major concerns for the use of ML algorithms
in medical applications and especially for EEG processing
is the explainability of models. Recent works [11] have
shown that biases may exist in several works considering
ML-based processing of EEG. In this context, it is important
to consider interpretable models. Different approaches have
been designed for this purpose. For instance, the signal can
be projected in a latent space to have a better representation
of the signals [16] to help in the classiﬁcation. Another
approach [19] consists in visualizing the elements (i.e. pixels
of an image, point of a graph or element of an array) used
by the model to make a decision.
In this context, a framework aiming to estimate emotion
from EEG is presented. This framework is composed of
two parallel modules: (1) a higher-level network considering
an image-inspired representation of EEG to beneﬁt from
advantages of computer vision models; (2) a lower-level
network considering each electrode contribution through an
array representation of EEG. The contributions of the two
networks are then combined to estimate the corresponding
emotion state from a given EEG trial.
II. METHOD
As in previous works, the proposed framework follows a
general pipeline to estimate emotion from EEG signals. In
this section, each step composing this pipeline is presented.

A. Feature extraction
Let’s consider an EEG sample ∈Rnchannels×nsamples with
nchannels the number of electrodes on the EEG headset and
nsamples = duration ∗fsampling the sample size for each
trial. It is possible to manually extract nfeatures for each
EEG segments considered as time series to have a represen-
tation of EEG in a smaller subspace ∈Rnchannels×nfeatures.
The considered features may represent temporal, spatial (i.e.
related to electrodes location on the scalp) or frequential (i.e.
feature related to the contribution of different frequential
bands) information from signals. Due to the difﬁculty to
characterize raw EEG signals and their trend to be affected
by noise (e.g. electrical noise and muscles given their close
frequency to EEG [14]), a majority of dataset proposed
denoised EEG and pre-extracted features [26], [21], [25].
Among the most commonly considered feature extraction
methods for emotion estimation, two have been kept: 1) the
power spectral density (PSD) representing the contribution of
each frequential band in the EEG signal, 2) the differential
entropy (DE) reﬂecting the temporal evolution of EEG seg-
ments [5]. The feature extraction methods can be considered
separately or combined by computing DE on EEG signals
ﬁltered at speciﬁc frequencies. The choice of these feature
extraction methods is motivated by their encouraging results
for emotion estimation [23], [5], [26], [1].
From the array representation, it is also possible to con-
sider spatial information through more visual representation
image-based EEG feature maps [2]. Given the location of
the electrodes in a 3D frame (i.e. cartesian coordinate of
the position on the scalp), it is possible to consider an
azimuthal projection to represent their locations in 2D.
Finally, after assigning the feature values to each electrode
in the 2D discrete representation an image is created by
interpolating the values in the two projected dimensions.
Finally, the constituted images will have the following shape
[nfeatures × h × w] with the height h and width w taken
arbitrarily.
B. Images estimation
From
the
image
representation
of
EEG
signals
∈
Rnfeat×h×w, two-family of models, initially dedicated to im-
age processing, have been considered: convolutional neural
networks (CNN) and capsule networks.
The CNN approach consists of a VGG-inspired model
[20] with an architecture composed of three modules each
of them respectively composed of 4, 2 and 1 convolutional
layers followed by batch normalization layers. Each module
is separated by a max-pooling layer.
The capsule-based model consists of the general architec-
ture presented by Sabour et al. [18]. One of the advantages of
this network is its ability to extract the spatial information
between elements composing an image, e.g. automatically
taking into account the nose or mouth position for face
detection systems. In our method, the initial dynamic routing
between capsules has been adapted to match EEG images.
The consideration of this novel approach allows us to study
the spatial relevance among EEG images. Moreover, the use
of capsule networks remains also interesting for their lower
computational cost compared to other CNN architectures
during inference.
C. Array estimation
On the other hand, a more understandable approach com-
pared to the previously presented models has also been
considered. This last consists of a recurrent neural network
(RNN) composed of the succession of hierarchical sub-
networks, each of these networks aiming to extract infor-
mation at different levels: electrodes, physiological regions
or hemispheres based relationships. This model has been
inspired by the hierarchical RNN (H-RNN) [4] aiming to
classify motor movements from skeleton recordings at dif-
ferent locations and levels, e.g. ﬁngers, hands, arms, trunk.
The network aims at considering the contribution of each
element at each spatial level: relative electrodes positions,
physiologically deﬁned electrodes regions and hemispheres.
A representation of the framework with the H-RNN is shown
in Figure 1. During the training, it is possible to compute the
activation of each level and then to measure the contribution
of each element composing the feature array to estimate the
emotional state.
More, RNN has shown motivating results on various
public EEG datasets and especially for emotion estimation
[13].
D. Merging models methodology
From the results provided by the models presented above,
a combination of these last has been considered to merge
their strengths and improve the classiﬁcation accuracy. Dif-
ferent methodologies can be considered depending on the
fusion location of the models: 1) output fusion considering
a linear combination of both estimated classes; 2) feature
fusion consisting in concatenating of the features vectors
extracted by the two DL models.
To promote the synchronised learning of both networks
and help transfer learning between modules, a novel ap-
proach based on saliency analysis has been considered. This
last consists of estimating the most salient electrodes/regions
of the scalp to make the estimation for the RNN and to
integrate this information during the training of the image-
based network. The feature vector saliency from the RNN
is computed as Saliency =

 ∂Class
∂X

. These vectors mea-
sure the importance of each electrodes’ feature to estimate
emotion. From the saliency vector, an image representation
is considered and used to weigh the image representation
of the feature vector. This process aims to concentrate the
learning around the most important region of the EEG.
III. EXPERIMENT
In this section, the considered datasets for training the pro-
posed model are presented, then its implementation details
are presented and an adversarial training methodology as a
domain classiﬁcation is proposed.

Fig. 1: Overview of the framework composed of the feature extraction and represenation (left part), the H-RNN (top part),
the CNN (bottom part) and the emotion and domain classiﬁcation (right part). The saliency maps extracted by the H-RNN
are used to weight input images of the CNN.
A. Datasets
We consider four different datasets to evaluate our ap-
proach. The choice of working with four different datasets,
despite optimizing only one of them, is done to promote
a general approach working on different participants of
different backgrounds.
• SEED IV [25] contains EEG recordings of 15 different
participants spread over 3 sessions each consisting of 24
trials. One trial consists of EEG recording during video
clips promoting several emotions, during which several
physiological signals are recorded (eye positions and
EEG). In this dataset, four emotion classes have been
considered: happy, sad, neutral and fear.
• SEED [26] is composed of recordings from 3 sessions
repeated for 15 participants, each session is composed
of 15 trials. The experimental setup consists of the
recording of EEG during video promoting speciﬁc emo-
tion. In the SEED dataset, emotions have been separated
into three more general classes: positive, negative and
neutral.
• MPED [21] contains the recordings of several physi-
ological signals (EEG, ECG, GSR) for a total of 30
participants. Similarly, the recordings have been made
during video clips. The promoted emotion during the
videos have been separated into seven classes: joy,
funny, anger, disgust, fear, sad and neutrality.
• DEAP [8] is a multi-modal dataset composed of EEG,
electromyogram (EMG) and electrooculogram (EOG)
recordings of 32 participants. During the dataset cre-
ation, it has been asked to participants to look at
the video and to self-assess emotion state according
to three dimensions: arousal (i.e. from excitation to
disinterest), valence (i.e. from pleasant to unpleasant)
and dominance (i.e. the ability to control the feelings
from weak to empowered) considered as the labels of
the physiological recordings.
Each dataset has been recorded with biomedical EEG
headsets following the 10/20 electrodes placement of the
62 electrodes for [25], [26], [21] and 32 electrodes for
[8] (proposed model has been adapted to ﬁt the number
of considered electrodes). Moreover, the provided feature
vectors have been considered in this experiment: DE in ﬁve
frequency bands (δ, θ, α, β and γ bands) in [25], [26]. For
[21], [8] PSD has been considered with the same frequency
bands limit and methodologies as in the original paper [8].
B. Domain classiﬁcation
It has been noted that the recent advance in DL leads to
novel training methodology increasing estimation accuracy.
One of them aims at transferring the information from a
dataset to another [6]. This method consists in training
the network with the original dataset similarly to regular
cross-validation methods with an additional step. During
this step, both datasets are used but their labels are hidden
(thus considered as unknown by the network) and the goal
for the network during this step is to estimate the source
dataset of the considered element. This additional step allows
to add knowledge from other datasets and also to extract
information from input regardless of their source.
In the context of EEG processing, a similar approach has
been proposed [9] and consider the training and validation
as the two different datasets. The methodology remains valid
since the labels are not used during the domain classiﬁca-
tion. The domain classiﬁcation helps to improve the cross-
validation accuracy by promoting more general processing
of information by the DL model [9].

Model
Accuracy (µ/σ) [%]
SVM [13]
31.46/9.20
DGCNN [22]
52.82/9.83
BiDANN [28]
65.59/10.39
BiHDM [13]
69.03/8.66
RGNN [27]
73.84/8.02
H-RNN∗
63.56/5.74
Image EEG (CNN)∗
64.97/6.15
Image EEG (Capsule)∗
60.83/8.53
Output Fusion∗
69.34/5.14
Feature Fusion∗
71.48/5.02
Saliency Fusion∗
74.42/4.76
TABLE I: Leave One Subject Out cross-validation accuracy
for emotion estimation on SEED-IV dataset [25].∗denotes
the results obtained from our model experiments.
C. Implementation details
In image-based representation, the number of channels
for the three CNN sub-modules has been respectively set
to 16, 64 and 128. Moreover, we consider 32×32 images to
consider square shape images that better ﬁt with convolution.
For the other representation, the hidden dimension of the
RNN has been set to 32. During the training phase, a cross-
entropy loss has been considered, moreover, adam optimizer
with an adaptative learning rate has been considered: lr =
10−3 and weight decay, wd = 10−8. The number of epochs
has been ﬁxed to 150, if the loss was not evolving favourably
during 5 epochs the training was stopped. All the models
have been implemented with Pytorch library and were trained
on one 24 GB Nvidia Titan RTX GPU. For the sake of
reproducibility, the model architecture is freely available
online.1
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
To assess the results provided by the proposed models,
we have ﬁrst considered the training and validation of the
different approaches proposed above on the SEED-IV dataset
[25], this last being the bigger. Then, the best approaches
have been compared to the state-of-the-art models on the
three other datasets [26], [21], [8].
The considered metric for model evaluation is the Leave
One Subject Out (LOSO) cross-validation accuracy. With this
evaluation methodology, all the subjects except one are used
to train the model and the evaluation is made on the re-
maining one. This evaluation is repeated for each participant
and the corresponding mean and standard deviation are com-
puted. The LOSO cross-validation accuracy has been chosen
to assess the model ability to generalise to participants never
met previously. EEG signals being very person-speciﬁc [11],
a large gap is often noted for the cross-validation accuracy
between participant dependant and participant independent
(i.e. LOSO). Nevertheless, BCI applications are supposed
to be directly used on the participant in real-life, i.e. their
signals are not used during the training of the DL model.
It was thus decided to consider LOSO cross-validation to
monitor the model ability to generalise.
1https://github.com/VDelv/Emotion-EEG
As reported in Table I, all the described approaches
previously mentioned have been trained on the SEED-IV
[25] dataset. As shown, the best results for the primary study
(standalone approach without models combination) were
found for the image-based approach with CNN. Besides,
lower results were also noted for the hierarchical RNN
with higher stability among participants (i.e. lower standard
deviation). For this reason, it has been chosen to consider the
combination of these two models to merge their advantages.
Three different approaches have been used to merge
the models: concatenating the output estimation (Output
Fusion), concatenating feature vectors with saliency ex-
traction from the low-level model (Saliency Fusion) and
without saliency (Feature Fusion). As reported in Table
I, the merged models present better results, especially the
saliency-based combination that exceeds the results from
state-of-the-art methods but also our previous experiments.
Another advantage of the saliency-based feature fusion is
its low standard deviation compared to other models. This
expresses the fact that saliency-based fusion presents similar
results independently of the participants. The improvements
provided by the saliency-based approach are explained by
this dual methodology considering in parallel the sequential
information provided by the H-RNN and the more general
region activation highlighted by the CNN. Furthermore,
focusing the training on the speciﬁc region of the image-
based EEG with a raw attention mechanism presents better
performance than a simple concatenation.
In Table III, a comparison of the results of two of the
previously mentioned models are presented with state-of-the-
art models for emotion estimation from EEG. As shown,
our approaches present the best results for some datasets
and remain on the same scale for other datasets that proved
their ability to estimate emotion in various cases. More,
our approach presents better results than [23], however, the
exact scores being not given in their paper, our results have
been compared to their results in their presented Figures. As
seen in Table III, the results obtained by our saliency-based
approach exceed those obtained by previous works. Although
this last may seem only slightly better than previous works,
it is important to note that the proposed approach is able,
at least, to achieve a comparable subject independent cross-
validation accuracy as previous works. The purpose of the
proposed method is to present a general model instead of a
ﬁnely tuned approach working only in a speciﬁc context.
TABLE II
Dataset
SEED-IV
SEED
DEAP
MPED
BiHDM [13]
69.03/8.6
85.40/7.5
-
28.27/4.9
RGNN [27]
73.84/8.1
85.30/6.7
-
-
RODAN [10]
60.75/10.4
-
56.60/3.5
-
Saliency∗
74.42/4.8
84.11/2.9
78.47/4.9
32/4.7
Leave One Subject Out cross-validation accuracy for emotion
estimation on several datasets: SEEED-IV [25], SEEED [26],
MPED [21] and DEAP [8].∗denotes the results obtained
from our model experiments.

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a novel framework aiming to
estimate emotion from EEG. The proposed model is com-
posed of a dual approach considering the spatial relationship
between EEG channels through a hierarchical RNN and
a DL representation through CNN. The proposed method
shows encouraging results on three datasets. In further work,
it could be interesting to consider novel ML models with
different representations (e.g. graph neural network) and
more understandable approaches with other feature extrac-
tion methods.
In the next few years, emotion estimation from EEG could
be used in various applications covering several ﬁelds, e.g.
entertainment or medical domain.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Research jointly supported by the University of Mons and
Institut Mines-T´el´ecom Nord Europe. The content is solely
the responsibility of the authors. Any opinions, ﬁndings,
conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material
are those of the author(s). This work has been made in
collaboration with the Centre de Recherche et de Formation
Interdisciplinaire en Psychophysiologie et Electrophysiologie
de la Cognition (CiPsE). The authors would like to thank
Nathan Hubens and Luca La Fisca for their collaboration.
