FEATURE SPACE HIJACKING ATTACKS AGAINST
DIFFERENTIALLY PRIVATE SPLIT LEARNING
A PREPRINT
Grzegorz Gawron
LiveRamp, Privacy Tech R&D

Philip Stubbings
LiveRamp, Privacy Tech R&D

January 17, 2022
ABSTRACT
Split learning and differential privacy are technologies with growing potential to help with privacy-
compliant advanced analytics on distributed datasets. Attacks against split learning are an important
evaluation tool and have been receiving increased research attention recently. This work’s contribution
is applying a recent feature space hijacking attack (FSHA) to the learning process of a split neural
network enhanced with differential privacy (DP), using a client-side off-the-shelf DP optimizer. The
FSHA attack obtains client’s private data reconstruction with low error rates at arbitrarily set DP ϵ
levels. We also experiment with dimensionality reduction as a potential attack risk mitigation and
show that it might help to some extent. We discuss the reasons why differential privacy is not an
effective protection in this setting and mention potential other risk mitigation methods.
1
Introduction
Privacy compliant data processing has been receiving an increasing amount of attention recently. Take a consortium of
hospitals as a motivational example. Each owns a data set describing treatments given to patients, together with the
treatments’ outcomes. There is a potential great value in learning from all of the data sets taken together. However,
the hospitals are bound by privacy regulations that prevent them from sharing the data in raw form. For a thorough
discussion of distributed learning from patient data see Vepakomma et al. [2018a].
Split learning (see Gupta and Raskar [2018]), a type of federated learning, has been proposed to address scenarios
like this. It is a neural network training mechanism, which splits the network into modules corresponding to the
private data silos, so that each module is trained within the silo and no raw data is exposed outside. Another reason
for growing popularity of split learning is it’s performance. Since only the processed or smashed data of lower
dimensions is being exchanged among silos and their coordinator, the process is more efﬁcient than some of the more
established mechanisms of distributed learning, such as federated averaging. Yet, relying on smashing the data as the
only mechanism of protecting privacy has been shown by Erdogan et al. [2021b] to be misguided and that even an
honest-but-curious actor having access to smashed data can reconstruct the private inputs. Vepakomma et al. [2018b]
have surveyed various methods to deal with split learning privacy leaks having, what they call a no peek learning, as
their target.
In this paper we focus on another technique which can be used to enhance split learning’s privacy compliance: differential
privacy (DP). Its promise is to provide a rigorous mathematical privacy guarantee (see Dwork et al. [2014]). Abadi
et al. [2016] showed that training with DP is feasible, while having control over model performance degradation and
privacy cost. There has also been work by Papernot et al. [2020] on ﬁne tuning deep learning with DP to minimise the
performance cost with some good results. Geyer et al. [2017] is another example of the work on optimizing the DP
deep learning process.
Theoretical privacy guarantees, when applied in practice, need to be backed by automatic evaluation, which helps
to guard against plain bugs or other implementation issues. There are multiple, already well established libraries
arXiv:2201.04018v2  [cs.CR]  14 Jan 2022

Feature Space Hijacking Attacks against Differentially Private Split Learning
A PREPRINT
Figure 1: Plots comparing the private input (top row) and its corresponding reconstruction (bottom row) in a successful
FSHA attack on MNIST.
Figure 2: FSHA split network architecture with the DP logic implemented by a DPOptimizer from TENSORFLOW-
PRIVACY package
available, which provide the necessary evaluation components, e.g. ADVERSARIAL-ROBUSTNESS-TOOLBOX1 or
TENSORFLOW-PRIVACY2. For a comprehensive overview of attack and defences literature and evaluation best practices
we refer the reader to Carlini et al. [2019].
Attack based evaluation is particularly relevant for newly emerging methods like split learning. There have already been
ﬁrst papers published on this subject. One recent attack method is feature space hijacking attack FSHA by Pasquini
et al. [2021], where a malicious attacker taking over the server module is able to reconstruct all of the client private
input data with arbitrarily low reconstruction error on MNIST and other visual datasets. See Figure 1 for an illustration
of a successful FSHA attack on a MNIST dataset, based on an experiment reproduction from the original paper -
without DP applied.
As a testament to the rapid pace of research progress in the ﬁeld, methods guarding against such attacks have already
been presented, see Erdogan et al. [2021a].
Our contributions. This work contributes by applying differential privacy to the client module of a split neural network,
running a suite of FSHA attacks against it and drawing conclusions for differentially private split learning system
implementations. To our knowledge this is the ﬁrst FSHA style attack attempt at such a setup. Hitaj et al. [2017] have
shown the limits of applying DP to general collaborative deep learning and we validate the vulnerability of split learning
in that respect.
1https://github.com/Trusted-AI/adversarial-robustness-toolbox
2https://github.com/tensorflow/privacy
2

Feature Space Hijacking Attacks against Differentially Private Split Learning
A PREPRINT
We reuse the software prototype from Pasquini et al. [2021] found at https://github.com/pasquini-dario/
SplitNN_FSHA and aim to introduce minimal code changes to reach our goal. We also follow the authors’ choice of
using TENSORFLOW and use its sub-package TENSORFLOW-PRIVACY for the application of DP clipping and noise.
See McMahan et al. [2019] for the description of this package.
2
Architecture
In what follows we brieﬂy describe the original FSHA attack split learning architecture and refer the reader to the
original paper of Pasquini et al. [2021] for a complete discussion of the components (we use the same notation as
in the original paper). We restrict our investigation to a situation where the attacker takes over only the server. The
clients are not taken over and believe they are part of a legitimate cooperation. However, as highlighted in the original
paper, the same attack would work successfully by taking over one of the clients only. The example neural network in
Figure 2 is split into two main components: client and server (in general there could be multiple clients). The client
owns their private data stored in a silo Xpriv and is responsible for training the f model component of the network. The
server runs the attacker’s code, which instead of running its part of the split learning protocol, trains two components:
discriminator D and an auto-encoder ˜f and ˜f −1. The auto-encoder, when given inputs from Xpub, encodes them using
˜f to an internal representation (feature space) and decodes using ˜f −1 with the loss set, so as to learn to reconstruct the
original input data. Finally, discriminator D is responsible for classifying the input as coming from either f model or
the ˜f model. The ultimate attacker’s target is for the discriminator D to force the private model f’s output to come from
the same feature space as the outputs of ˜f and the ˜f −1 to be able to decode it with minimal error, just as it learned to
decode the ˜f.
The standard way of applying differential privacy during neural network training is on the gradients during back
propagation. In our scenario the most natural place to apply the DP clipping and noise to the f gradients is just before
applying the gradient updates sent back by server’s discriminator D as illustrated by the green fragments in Figure 2.
This allows the client data owner to control the noise application process and conﬁgure it according to their privacy
preferences.
3
Experiments
3.1
Experimental Setup
We enhanced the FSHA code with DP by introducing only minimal changes, with the aim of being able to easily compare
the results. We used TensorFlow-privacy python package to add a differentially private optimizer DPAdamGaus-
sianOptimizer. We parametrised DP with δ = 0 and various levels of ϵ from 1 to 100.
We deployed several GCP Notebooks instances with the following hardware: (a) a2-highgpu-1g (Accelerator Optimized:
1 NVIDIA Tesla A100 GPU, 12 vCPUs, 85GB RAM); and (b) n1-standard-4 (4 vCPUs, 15 GB RAM, 1 NVIDIA Tesla
T4). GPU load was 30 percent on (a) and 80 percent on (b) with similar run times, so we settled on the latter to optimize
the experiment cost.
(a) 10 000 iterations, DP with ϵ = 10.
(b) 10 000 iterations, DP with ϵ = 100.
Figure 3: Private input (top row) and its corresponding reconstruction (bottom row) for various epsilon settings and
10 000 iterations.
3

Feature Space Hijacking Attacks against Differentially Private Split Learning
A PREPRINT
3.2
MNIST Results
We start with the MNIST dataset because it is widely used for benchmarking and its simplicity helps to clearly show
the impact of the application of DP. Note, that we focus on showing the reconstruction visualisations, as they nicely
communicate the results. The diagrams of the actual reconstruction errors can be found in the Appendix.
(a) 100 000 iterations, DP with ϵ = 0.5.
(b) 100 000 iterations, DP with ϵ = 10.
Figure 4: Plots comparing the private input (top row) and its corresponding reconstruction (bottom row) for various
epsilon settings and 100 000 iterations.
We reproduced the results from the original paper, without any differential privacy applied. Figure 1 shows a successful
FSHA reconstruction attack after 10 000 iterations of 64 element mini-batches. This corresponds to 10 epochs of
training, since there are N = 60 000 samples in the training set. The next step is to run the same number of iterations
using DP with ϵ = 10 and δ = 1/N. Figure 3a shows that the reconstruction was far less successful, however the
reconstruction error was still declining after the training stopped. This suggested that more iterations might make the
attack successful. As expected the attack against a split learning with ϵ = 100 is able to reconstruct the private data
with much less error (Figure 3b). We continued with the training process running for 100 000 iterations (100 epochs)
and at ϵ = 10 it was enough to produce very low-error reconstructions, as illustrated in Figure 4b. Finally, we set ϵ to a
much lower value 0.5 and obtained the reconstruction results shown in Figure 4a. Although the error is much higher
than with the previous experiment (where ϵ = 10) the reconstruction error was still steadily declining, so by increasing
the number of iterations we could expect the error to go down as per previous experiments.
See the Appendix for a more complete record of reconstruction plots.
3.3
FASHION-MNIST Results
Beyond the FASHION-MNIST attacks reproduced from Pasquini et al. [2021] we have experimented with removing
some of the image classes from the public data set and applying differential privacy in both settings.
We ﬁrst removed the category 0 representing t-shirts/tops and ran the attacks with and without the DP. We present the
relevant results in Figure 5a and Figure 5b. In both cases the shapes were mostly visible, but the DP version had less
logo details visible (see the two pictures to the right).
There are, however, other categories in the public data set (see Figure 10) that are similar to the t-shirts, so the process
had more chance to learn the relevant features to also reconstruct t-shirts. In an attempt to minimise this effect, we
remove the category which is least similar to others: bags (category = 8). The result is illustrated in Figures 5c and 5d.
Interestingly, the version without DP reconstructs some of the bags as shoes, perhaps because they activate similar
latent features learned by the attack model. However we can recognise certain features coming from the private data
e.g., the circle on the right t-shirt. With DP added we see no ’bag as shoe’ effect. The images are more blurred, but the
general shapes are reconstructed. This might be due to regularisation effect of DP. It is important to note that it should
be possible to improve this results by running more training iterations (we stopped at 100 000).
To summarise, FASHION-MNIST data set with some of the classes removed from the public data set achieves lower
reconstruction precision, especially with DP applied. This helps demonstrate the point that the reconstructions are really
generated out of the feature space driven by the access to similar public data. The closer the public and private data
distributions are, the more successful the attacks.
3.4
Mitigating the attack with dimensionality reduction
We explored the application of DP during the model training process as a means to mitigate the attack and demonstrated
that DP can at most delay FSHA convergence.
4

Feature Space Hijacking Attacks against Differentially Private Split Learning
A PREPRINT
(a) no DP, iterations = 100 000
(b) ϵ = 10, iterations = 100 000
(c) no DP, iterations = 100 000
(d) ϵ = 10, iterations = 100 000
Figure 5: FSHA against FASHION-MNIST with category 0 (tops) missing from the public data set in Figures 5a and 5b
and category 8 (bags) missing in Figures 5c and 5d.
In an un-trusted environment in which it can be assumed a client or server will attempt to exploit the learning protocol
by means of the FSHA method, additional steps should be taken to protect the underlying data. One possibility is to
apply dimensionality reduction techniques directly to the data prior to training to a level which still yields acceptable
model accuracy.
(a) Image compression
(b) FSHA recovered images
Figure 6: PCA image compression and recovery. 1st row - no compression, 2nd row - principal components = 4, 3rd
row - principal components = 2.
To test this hypothesis, we re-run the FSHA attack up to 100k iterations on image data which has been compressed
using various levels of PCA principal components as shown in Figure 6a (also in Appendix Figure 11a). We make use
of the CELEBA dataset and deﬁne the classiﬁcation task to predict whether the celebrity is likely male or female.
The resulting recovered images shown in Figure 6b (also in Appendix Figure 11b) demonstrate that applying dimen-
sionality reduction to the data can mitigate the attack to a degree in which the celebrities are no longer identiﬁable. One
should note though, that some reconstructed image features might still be obvious and unique to certain individuals.
4
Conclusions
The FSHA mechanism used is very robust. It only requires that the client part of the model can be successfully trained;
and for any useful usage that must be the case. Once the attacker obtains a sufﬁciently good client model they can
reconstruct the private data which are passed from the client to server during the training process. As Pasquini et al.
[2021] notice, they could also infer certain features out of the private data, if that’s what they choose to do.
It might seem surprising that the DP doesn’t give enough protection against FSHA. However, the DP noise applied
during the training is designed to prevent the model from memorizing data so that the private data cannot be retrieved
5

Feature Space Hijacking Attacks against Differentially Private Split Learning
A PREPRINT
from the trained model itself. It must still allow for training useful models. After a successful training, a good DP model
must be able to achieve high inference accuracy. The inferred values might well be sensitive and constitute a privacy
leak. Hence, having access to the model being trained allows an attacker to either reconstruct or infer properties of the
private data. We refer the reader to Hitaj et al. [2017] for a more thorough discussion of this topic.
Employing some dimensionality reduction techniques might make the potential reconstructions useless, but we must
remember that it might not always produce a model with good enough utility and even more importantly the attacker
might still infer sensitive properties from the private data.
Detection methods such as ones proposed by Erdogan et al. [2021a] might also be used, but they are not bullet proof
and require constant attention to new detection method workarounds used by potential attackers.
As for now, to ensure that the split learning process is safe we should mitigate the risk of someone taking over the
server (or indeed any other split network component). The risk mitigation might rely on enforcing a secure compute
environment with e.g. only a certiﬁed version of the training code running on all the modules of the split network. It
also follows that the application of the DP trained split neural network model should happen in an environment of
trust. That is, the owners of private data should trust that inferred outputs are appropriately taken care of. It is safe, for
instance, if the model is applied directly by the data owner on their own data and they own the inferred results.
