Learning quantum data with the quantum Earth Mover’s distance
Bobak Toussi Kiani1,2, Giacomo De Palma2,3,4,5, Milad Marvian6, Zi-Wen Liu7, and Seth
Lloyd2,3
1Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
MA, USA
2Research Laboratory of Electronics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA
3Department of Mechanical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA
4Scuola Normale Superiore, Pisa, Italy
5Department of Mathematics, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy
6Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, USA
7Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics, Waterloo, Canada
Abstract
Quantifying how far the output of a learning algorithm is from its target is an essential task in
machine learning. However, in quantum settings, the loss landscapes of commonly used distance metrics
often produce undesirable outcomes such as poor local minima and exponentially decaying gradients.
To overcome these obstacles, we consider here the recently proposed quantum earth mover’s (EM) or
Wasserstein-1 distance as a quantum analog to the classical EM distance. We show that the quantum
EM distance possesses unique properties, not found in other commonly used quantum distance metrics,
that make quantum learning more stable and eﬃcient. We propose a quantum Wasserstein generative
adversarial network (qWGAN) which takes advantage of the quantum EM distance and provides an
eﬃcient means of performing learning on quantum data. We provide examples where our qWGAN is
capable of learning a diverse set of quantum data with only resources polynomial in the number of qubits.
1
Introduction
A fundamental task in quantum machine learning is designing eﬃcient algorithms for learning quantum
states [1–10], transformations [10–17], and classical data stored as or generated by quantum states [18–
20]. In the general setup, one is given a target quantum object, say a target quantum state, and aims to
generate or approximate that target object by eﬃciently learning parameters in a quantum circuit. For
example, quantum generative adversarial networks (qGAN) are parameterized sets of quantum circuits and
quantum operators designed to learn target states or transformations via optimization over the parameters
of a quantum generator and discriminator [7,9].
A crucial component of a quantum machine learning algorithm is an objective function (often a distance
metric) which determines how close a generated object is to its target. This choice of metric is important not
only as a measure of performance but also as a means for optimization. For example, certain metrics lead
to eﬃcient algorithms for calculating gradients with respect to that metric, allowing algorithms to perform
optimization via gradient based optimizers (e.g., gradient descent). Naturally, for learning pure states, a
common choice for the distance metric is a function of the inner product between quantum states. Similarly,
for learning density matrices, researchers commonly choose distance metrics which simplify to a function of
the inner product when measuring the distance between pure states.
Previous approaches to learning quantum data have typically suﬀered from the presence of vanishing
gradients [21–23] and poor local minima [24–26] in the loss landscape induced by the choice of distance
metric. Intuitively, these “barren plateaus” and traps arise due to the fact that random quantum states have
inner product that diminishes exponentially with the number of qubits. Our approach helps surmount these
1
arXiv:2101.03037v2  [quant-ph]  16 May 2022

challenges by formulating an algorithm which provides an eﬃcient means for learning pure and mixed states
using the recently proposed quantum earth mover’s (EM) distance, also known as the quantum Wasserstein
distance of order 1 [27]. As we will demonstrate, the quantum EM distance is a natural distance metric for
optimization over local operations and avoids common pitfalls faced by other distance metrics which reduce
to functions of the inner product. This is in agreement with results in classical machine learning, where
algorithms employing the earth mover’s distance are often more stable and avoid issues with vanishing or
exploding gradients [28–32] (see Appendix A for a more complete discussion of the literature and Appendix B
for a presentation of the classical EM distance). Intuitively, the quantum EM distance can be interpreted as
a continuous version of a quantum “hamming distance”, which allows local gates to optimize over the few
qubits on which they act instead of over some global distance metric which often decays exponentially in the
number of qubits.
In this work, we study the quantum EM distance from an applied setting and make the following con-
tributions. First, we overview the construction of the quantum EM distance and analyze the properties
of diﬀerent quantum distance metrics and the loss landscapes they produce in quantum machine learning
settings. Here, we show that the quantum EM distance has unique advantages over other common distance
metrics. Then, to operationalize the quantum EM distance, we devise a new heuristic method to approxi-
mate the quantum EM distance eﬃciently given copies of quantum states. In learning settings, this leads to
our development of a quantum Wasserstein generative adversarial network (qWGAN) which is a quantum
analog to the classical Wasserstein generative adversarial network [28] (see also [9]). Importantly, like its
classical analog, our qWGAN employs an earth mover’s distance in its cost function. Numerical results show
that our qWGAN is eﬃcient at learning quantum data with shallow circuits in various settings. Finally, we
discuss near term applications of our qWGAN for both classical and quantum problems.
2
Quantum distance metrics and quantum EM distance
To approximate or reconstruct a target probability distribution with a machine learning algorithm, the choice
of distance metric, measuring how well the approximating distribution matches the target distribution, is
crucial to the performance of the algorithm. Classically, generative adversarial networks (GAN) provide a
neural network approach for learning a target probability distribution and generating new samples from the
approximate distribution [28, 33]. The choice of loss metric for a GAN is a distance or divergence metric
which is minimized when the target and generated distributions coincide.
In the quantum setting, distance metrics between states or density matrices are employed in the im-
plementation of quantum generative adversarial networks (qGAN) [7, 9, 26, 34]. As in the classical setting,
the choice of distance metric is crucial to the runtime and performance of the quantum machine learning
algorithm. Here, we consider common distance metrics and show that the quantum earth mover’s (EM)
distance recently deﬁned in [27] possesses desirable properties that are not found in the other metrics.
For a brief overview of the notation used in quantum mechanics, we refer the reader to Appendix C.
Let ρ, σ ∈CN×N be the density matrices corresponding to two quantum states, e.g., ρ can be the quantum
state generated by a GAN and σ is the target state. Until now, common distance metrics employed to
train quantum GANs have been unitarily invariant, i.e., invariant with respect to the conjugation of both
quantum states with the same unitary matrix and reducing to a function of the inner product for pure states
(i.e., orthogonal projectors with rank one). Commonly used distance metrics in prior works include:
• Trace Distance:
The simplest and most common choice (e.g., see [1,34]) is the trace distance:
D1(ρ, σ) = 1
2 ∥ρ −σ∥1 ,
(1)
where ∥· ∥1 denotes the trace norm, i.e., the sum of the singular values.
• Quantum Fidelity: Another common choice (e.g., see [10]) is the maximum absolute value squared
of the inner product between puriﬁcations of ρ and σ:
F(ρ, σ) = ∥√ρ √σ∥2
1 .
(2)
2

F(ρ, σ) is often modiﬁed to arccos
p
F(ρ, σ) to construct a proper distance metric.
• Quantum Wasserstein Semimetric: Introduced in [9] as a quantum generalization of the Wasser-
stein distance, this distance, denoted qW(ρ, σ), is calculated by forming a coupling between quantum
states ρ and σ in CN×N. The coupling is a quantum state in
 CN×N⊗2 whose marginal states are equal
to ρ and σ, respectively. The quantum Wasserstein semimetric is the minimum of the expectation value
of the projector onto the symmetric subspace of
 CN⊗2. qW does not satisfy the triangle inequality,
hence the name semimetric. Importantly, qW is unitarily invariant, and for pure states, it reduces to a
function of their inner product: for any |u⟩, |v⟩unit vectors in CN, qW(|u⟩⟨u| , |v⟩⟨v|) = (1−|⟨v|u⟩|2)/2.
Further details can be found in Appendix D.
The quantum EM distance
In this paper we consider the case of n qubits, where N = 2n, and employ
the quantum generalization of the Wasserstein distance of order 1 to the states of n qubits recently proposed
in [27] and also known as the earth mover’s (EM) distance. We adopt the latter terminology as it is more
prevalent in the machine learning community, hereby denoting the quantum EM distance with DEM. Unlike
all the previously employed distances, the quantum EM distance is not unitarily invariant. We will show that,
similar to its classical counterpart [28], DEM possesses several properties that are desirable when learning
quantum data.
The quantum EM distance of [27] is based on the notion of neighboring states. Two quantum states of n
qubits are neighboring if they diﬀer in only one qubit, i.e., if they coincide after one qubit is discarded. The
quantum EM distance is the distance that is induced by the maximum norm that assigns distance at most
one to any couple of neighboring states. We denote with ∥· ∥EM the corresponding norm, whose analytical
expression can be found below. This deﬁnition enforces the continuity of the distance with respect to local
operations, i.e., any quantum operation acting on a single qubit can displace a state by at most one unit
with respect to the quantum EM distance. Indeed, for the quantum states of the computational basis the
quantum EM distance recovers the classical Hamming distance (equal to the number of elements that diﬀer
between two strings), i.e., for any two strings of n bits x and y we have DEM(|x⟩⟨x| , |y⟩⟨y|) = h(x, y). More
generally, for quantum states diagonal in the computational basis, the quantum EM distance recovers the
classical EM distance. The quantum EM distance admits a dual formulation [27], based on the quantum
generalization of the Lipschitz constant, which is more suitable for implementation of quantum GANs.
We denote with On the set of n-qubit observables, i.e., the set of the 2n × 2n Hermitian matrices. The
quantum Lipschitz constant of the observable H ∈On is
∥H∥L = 2
max
i=1, ..., n min
n
∥H −˜H¯i∥∞: ˜H¯i ∈On acts as identity on the i-th qubit
o
.
(3)
The quantum Lipschitz constant deﬁned above is a generalization of the Lipschitz constant for the functions
on strings of n bits, and coincides with the classical Lipschitz constant for the observables that are diagonal
in the computational basis [27]. The quantum EM distance between the quantum states ρ and σ is equal to
the maximum diﬀerence between the expectation values on ρ and σ of a quantum observable with Lipschitz
constant at most one:
DEM(ρ, σ) = max {Tr [(ρ −σ) H] : H ∈On, ∥H∥L ≤1} .
(4)
When the quantum EM distance plays the role of a cost function in a machine learning algorithm, it can
be considered as an energy associated to the parameter conﬁguration. For this reason, we may refer to the
observables H in (4) as Hamiltonians.
Equivalently, the quantum EM distance can be also deﬁned by its primal formulation [27, Deﬁnition 6]:
DEM(ρ, σ) = 1
2 min
( n
X
i=1
∥Xi∥1 : Xi ∈On, TriXi = 0 ∀i = 1, . . . , n,
n
X
i=1
Xi = ρ −σ
)
.
(5)
To show why DEM possesses desirable properties, we ﬁrst consider the case where both the target σ and
the generated ρ are pure states in a simple toy model. Here, as we will show, undesirable critical points
3

. . .
. . .
|0⟩
RX(θ1)
|ψ(θ)⟩
|0⟩
RX(θ2)
|0⟩
RX(θ3)
|0⟩⊗n−3
(a)
10
20
30
40
50
number of qubits (n)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
success probability
ﬁdelity
EM distance
(b)
Figure 1: (a) Simple quantum circuit which can generate the GHZ state when parameter values are appro-
priately chosen. (b) In learning settings, this circuit presents challenges for loss metrics that are a function
of the inner product between target and initial states. Simulations show that, with a loss function such as
ﬁdelity (blue line), gradient based optimizers eventually fail to ﬁnd global optimum in virtually all instances
when circuit contains many qubits, instead converging to the state |0n⟩. In contrast, the use of the quan-
tum EM distance (orange line) results in convergence to the global optimum in virtually all instances tested.
Here, optimization is performed for up to 105 steps using the Adam optimizer (simulations with EM distance
generally achieved convergence within about 1000 steps). Experiments are repeated 1000 times for each n
to estimate success probability. See Appendix E for full details of experiments.
are clearly present and endemic to the loss landscapes for metrics which are a function of the inner product
between two pure states.
In contrast, the quantum EM distance DEM avoids these undesirable critical
points. Finally, we generalize the ﬁndings of this toy model to a larger class of quantum machine learning
settings.
2.1
A simple toy model
In this section, we consider an intuitive example which shows the advantages of using the quantum EM
distance when the learning is performed over local quantum gates. Namely, we show that the commonly used
distance metrics which are a function of the inner product between states feature two key issues in learning
via local gates. First, the inner product between a generated and target state fails to show improvement
when gates are optimized one by one or layer-wise [35]. Second, when parameters are initialized randomly,
gradients in this example decay exponentially when the distance metric is a function of the inner product.
The quantum EM distance avoids both of these drawbacks and allows for eﬃcient learning in this scenario.
In this toy model, the task at hand is to learn the correct values of parameters in the circuit in Figure 1a
to generate the GHZ state of n qubits |GHZn⟩= (|0n⟩+ |1n⟩) /
√
2. This circuit consists of a parameterized
Pauli X rotation on the ﬁrst qubit and controlled parameterized Pauli X rotations on later qubits (see
Appendix C for description of Pauli operators). When n is a multiple of 4, setting θ1 equal to π/2 and all
other parameters equal to π will construct the target GHZ state.
Consider the case where one aims to maximize the ﬁdelity F between the generated state |ψ(θ)⟩and the
GHZ state |GHZn⟩. Given our circuit, F takes a simple form:
F = | ⟨GHZn|ψ(θ)⟩|2 =
cos(θ1)
√
2
+
Qn
i=1 sin(θi)
√
2
2
.
(6)
The ﬁrst problem associated with learning via F is that the loss landscape has undesirable local minima
associated with the state |0n⟩. Note that ﬁxing any θi = 0 will force a learning algorithm (e.g., gradient
4

descent) to optimize the cos(θ1) term, converging to the state |0n⟩. In other words, if any algorithm aims to
optimize the gates in a layer-wise fashion (e.g., optimizing θ1, θ2, . . . in order as in [36]), that algorithm will
get stuck in the local optimum at |0n⟩.
Of course, in practice, parameters θ are typically initialized randomly so it is unlikely that any θi =
0; however, even here, we have the second issue that gradients with respect to θ2, θ3, . . . , θn all decay
exponentially with n since the product of sine functions with random parameter values decays exponentially
to zero.
∂F
∂θi
=







−cos θ1 sin θ1 + cos 2θ1
Qn
k=2 sin θk
i = 1
+ sin θ1 cos θ1
 Qn
k=2 sin θk
2
cos θi
Q
k̸=i sin(θk)

cos(θ1) + Qn
k=1 sin(θk)

i > 1
.
(7)
Notably, ∂F
∂θi = O( 1
2n ) for i > 1, but ∂F
∂θi = O(1) for i = 1. For large n,
∂F
∂θ1 ≈−cos θ1 sin θ1 indicating
that gradient optimizers will converge to a poor local minimum outputting the state |0n⟩(θ1 = 0 mod 2π).
In fact, since the loss function F (equation (6)) takes a simple form, gradient descent on the parameters can
be eﬃciently performed classically, and results shown in Figure 1b show that gradient descent converges to
the undesirable local optimum associated with the |0n⟩state even as more qubits are added (simulations
stopped after 100000 steps of optimization).
The challenges described above are encapsulated by the feature of the inner product that, for example,
the states |0000⟩, |1000⟩, and even |1110⟩are equally distant (orthogonal) to the state |1111⟩– i.e., local
updates induce no change in the inner product distance metric. Using a loss function with the quantum EM
distance DEM naturally avoids these challenges. Since the quantum EM distance recovers the Hamming
distance between two computational basis states, local operations on one and two qubits can reduce DEM as
long as those operations reduce the Hamming distance between the target and generated states. For example,
unlike the inner product distance metric, |1000⟩and |1110⟩are three and one units away respectively from
the state |1111⟩in the quantum EM distance. In our toy model, local gates, even when applied in isolation,
result in changes to single qubits which either reduce or increase the quantum EM distance.
If we set θ1 = π/2, θ2 = . . . = θk = π and θk+1 = . . . = θn = 0 in the quantum circuit of Figure 1a,
we obtain the quantum state |Ψk⟩=
 |0k⟩+ (−i)k |1k⟩

|0n−k⟩/
√
2. The following Proposition 1 intuitively
explains this success and shows that the sequence of states |Ψ0⟩= |0n⟩, |Ψ1⟩, . . . , |Ψn⟩= |GHZn⟩gets
closer and closer to the target state |GHZn⟩, with a guaranteed improvement every two steps. The proof is
in Appendix F.
Proposition 1. For any k = 0, . . . , n, let Dk = DEM (|Ψk⟩⟨Ψk|, |GHZn⟩⟨GHZn|). We have n/2 ≤D0 ≤
(n + 1)/2, Dn = 0, and (n −k)/2 ≤Dk ≤
 n −k +
√
2

/2 for any k = 1, . . . , n −1. In particular, we have
Dk+2 < Dk for any k = 0, . . . , n −2.
Furthermore, as shown in Figure 1b, optimization using the quantum EM distance is, in virtually all
cases, successful at learning the GHZ state. In the simulations for Figure 1b, the quantum EM distance
is eﬃciently estimated (lower bounded) using the dual formulation by considering the expectation of the
generated state over a subset of O(n) Hermitian operators Hi all with Lipschitz constant equal to one.
˜DEM = max
Hi
⟨ψ(θ)| Hi |ψ(θ)⟩−⟨GHZn| Hi |GHZn⟩

≤DEM
 |ψ(θ)⟩⟨ψ(θ)| , |GHZn⟩⟨GHZn|

,
(8)
where ˜DEM is the approximation which lower bounds DEM by taking the maximum over the O(n) operators
Hi chosen for optimization of the circuit (see Appendix E for list of operators).
Using ˜DEM, we can
successfully learn and generate the GHZ state regardless of the size of the system. Given the simpliﬁed form
of our circuit, calculating ˜DEM can be eﬃciently performed using a classical computer and the methodology
is detailed in Appendix E. Interestingly, though the subset of Hamiltonians considered in calculating ˜DEM
5

is signiﬁcantly less than the total space of Hamiltonians available needed to exactly calculate DEM, the
simpliﬁed form of ˜DEM still suﬃces to completely learn the GHZ state. This perhaps surprising fact is one
motivation for our qWGAN, discussed later, which uses similar techniques to construct a general algorithm
for learning quantum data in more complex settings.
2.2
Properties of quantum EM distance in learning settings
For the EM distance over probability distributions, the classic work of [28] showed that the EM distance has a
number of properties that confer advantages in learning settings over other distance metrics such as the total
variational distance. Here, we show that our quantum EM distance oﬀers corresponding analogous properties
when learning in quantum settings. These properties provide intuitive explanations for why learning was so
successful in the toy model analyzed earlier. First, the quantum EM distance is super-additive with respect
to the tensor product [27, Proposition 4]:
Proposition 2. For any two quantum states ρ, σ of n qubits and any k = 1, . . . , n −1,
DEM(ρ, σ) ≥DEM(ρ1...k, σ1...k) + DEM(ρk+1...n, σk+1...n) ,
(9)
where ρ1...k and ρk+1...n are the marginal states of ρ over the ﬁrst k and the last n −k qudits, respectively,
and analogously for σ.
In the case of product states where ρ = ρ1...k ⊗ρk+1...n and σ = σ1...k ⊗σk+1...n, then the above is an
equality:
DEM(ρ, σ) = DEM(ρ1...k, σ1...k) + DEM(ρk+1...n, σk+1...n) ,
(10)
Intuitively, the Proposition above implies that operations which reduce the distance between two states
over a portion of their qubits will proportionally reduce the total distance over all of the qubits. Note that
no unitarily invariant distance can have this property. For example, to learn a target state |GHZ2⟩|1⟩,
updating the state |000⟩to |GHZ2⟩|0⟩results in a signiﬁcant improvement in the quantum EM distance
but, since the updated state is still orthogonal to the target state, no unitarily invariant distance will show
any improvement. As an aside, super-additivity is relevant in noisy contexts as it implies that if noise only
eﬀects a small number of qubits, then the change in the EM distance is correspondingly bounded by the
number of qubits on which the noise acts.
A second useful property of the quantum EM distance is that it recovers the classical earth mover’s
distance for quantum states diagonal in the canonical basis, and in particular, it recovers the classical
Hamming distance for the quantum states of the computational basis [27, Proposition 6]:
Proposition 3. Let p, q be probability distributions on {0, 1}n, and let
ρ =
X
x∈{0,1}n
p(x) |x⟩⟨x| ,
σ =
X
y∈{0,1}n
q(y) |y⟩⟨y| .
(11)
Then, DEM(ρ, σ) = DEM(p, q). In particular, the quantum EM distance between vectors of the canonical
basis coincides with the Hamming distance: DEM(|x⟩⟨x|, |y⟩⟨y|) = h(x, y) for any x, y ∈{0, 1}n.
The above proposition implies that advantages conferred in classical machine learning algorithms when
using the classical EM distance directly translate into quantum settings when using the quantum EM dis-
tance. Finally, the quantum EM distance is always contained between the trace distance and n times the
trace distance [27, Proposition 2]:
Proposition 4. For any two quantum states ρ, σ,
D1(ρ, σ) ≤DEM(ρ, σ) ≤n D1(ρ, σ) .
(12)
In particular, a small quantum EM distance guarantees that the trace distance is also small and vice-
versa. Thus, convergence in the quantum EM distance necessarily implies convergence in more conventional
quantum distance metrics such as ﬁdelity or trace distance.
6

2.3
EM Distance Evaluation
As in the classical Wasserstein GAN [28], approximations to the EM distance are required to construct
learning algorithms that have eﬃcient runtimes. Note, the quantum EM distance can be exactly evaluated
using algorithms for semideﬁnite programs [37, 38] which run in time polynomial in the dimension of the
quantum state and the number of constraints. Such an exact approach would require algorithmic runtimes
that are exponential in the number of qubits and furthermore, do not lead to obvious methods for calculating
the gradient of the quantum EM distance. Instead, we provide a procedure below to estimate the quantum
EM distance between two distributions of quantum states using its dual formulation (4). To avoid cumber-
some computation of Lipschitz constants, we construct a parameterized family of functions which preserve
a quantum Lipschitz constraint upon optimization. Let
H =
X
I⊆{1, ..., n}
HI ,
(13)
where each HI acts non-trivially only on the qubits in the corresponding set I. Then, Proposition 10 of [27]
provides an upper bound to the quantum Lipschitz constant of a Hamiltonian in terms of its local structure.
∥H∥L ≤2
max
i=1, ..., n

X
i∈I⊆{1, ..., n}
HI

∞
,
(14)
where the maximum is taken over the qubits. The notation i ∈I ⊆{1, . . . , n} indicates that the sum is
taken only over the set of operators which act non-trivially (i.e., not the identity) on qubit i. Intuitively,
since the Lipschitz constant bounds the change in a Hamiltonian induced by changes to a single qubit, the
bound above can be viewed as a bound on the maximum singular value of nontrivial operators thus also
bounding the corresponding Lipschitz constant. A natural choice for the operators HI are a subset of the
Pauli operators which we explore in our construction of a quantum generative adversarial network next.
3
qWGAN Algorithm
Our quantum Wasserstein generative adversarial net (qWGAN) consists of a discriminator and generator
which approximates a target distribution over states ρtar by “playing” a min-max game. Here, the generator
sets its parameters θ outputting a state G(θ), and the discriminator H(W) is a parameterized sum of
Hermitian operators with weights W.
In each iteration of optimization, the discriminator ﬁrst sets its
operator weights, outputting a Hamiltonian Hmax which is the Hamiltonian maximizing our dual formulation
estimate of DEM(G(θ), ρtar). Then, a gradient update is performed on the parameters of the generator θ.
This iterative process is repeated either until convergence in the generator parameters θ or until a stopping
criterion is reached. We detail the forms of the discriminator and generator as well as the steps of the
algorithm in this section.
3.1
Form of the discriminator
In an optimal scenario, a discriminator explores the complete set of Hamiltonians which have Lipschitz
constant less than or equal to one. However, this ideal case does not lend itself to eﬃcient algorithms, and
we instead construct a discriminator which eﬃciently estimates (lower bounds) the quantum EM distance.
The discriminator we choose is a parameterized sum of strings of Pauli operators:
H(W) =
X
P1, ..., Pn∈{I,X,Y,Z}
wP1...Pn σ(1)
P1 ⊗σ(2)
P2 ⊗. . . ⊗σ(n)
Pn ,
(15)
where σI is the 2×2 identity matrix, σX, σY and σZ are the Pauli matrices, superscripts specify the qubit on
which the corresponding Pauli matrix acts and each wP1...Pn is the trainable parameter for the corresponding
7

Pauli string σ(1)
P1 ⊗σ(2)
P2 ⊗. . .⊗σ(n)
Pn . To simplify notation, we denote the set of all trainable parameters as W.
Finding the exact Lipschitz constant of the Hamiltonian (15) can be computationally expensive. However,
noting that Pauli operators have inﬁnity norm of 1 and applying the triangle equality, (14) provides an easily
computable upper bound to ∥H(W)∥L, which we denote with ∥H(W)∥˜L:
∥H(W)∥˜L = 2
max
i=1, ..., n
X
P1, ..., Pn∈{I,X,Y,Z}:Pi̸=I
|wP1...Pn| ≥∥H(W)∥L .
(16)
The Hamiltonian (15) has 4n parameters and is impractical to train. For this reason, we restrict opti-
mization to operators that contain only terms acting on few qubits. One option is to choose the set of k-local
(i.e., acting on k qubits and not necessarily geometrically local) Pauli operators as the discriminator. We
denote with O(k)
n
the linear span of such operators. For example, the most general element of O(2)
n
is
H(W) = wI +
n
X
i=1
X
P ∈{X,Y,Z}
w(i)
P σ(i)
P +
n−1
X
i=1
n
X
j=i+1
X
P, Q∈{X,Y,Z}
w(i,j)
P,Q σ(i)
P ⊗σ(j)
Q ,
(17)
where each wI, w(i)
P
and w(i,j)
P, Q is the trainable parameter for the corresponding Pauli operator. For k ≪n,
there are O(nk) total terms in the above summation, polynomial in the number of qubits.
We can now deﬁne an approximated EM distance by restricting the optimization in (4) to k-local Hamil-
tonians and replacing the exact Lipschitz constant with the approximated Lipschitz constant (16):
D(k)
EM(ρ, σ) = max
n
Tr [(ρ −σ) H] : H ∈O(k)
n , ∥H∥˜L ≤1
o
.
(18)
The approximated quantum EM distance is increasing with respect to k and provides a lower bound to the
exact quantum EM distance, i.e., for any two quantum states ρ and σ,
D(1)
EM(ρ, σ) ≤D(2)
EM(ρ, σ) . . . ≤D(n)
EM(ρ, σ) ≤DEM(ρ, σ) .
(19)
The order k of Pauli operators can be tuned to the complexity of a given problem. To learn truly random
states, access to the full set of Hamiltonian operators is needed, but in many cases, especially when learning
data generated by shallow circuits or data that can be discriminated via reduced density matrices, learning
using only lower order Pauli operators can be eﬀective.
The approximated EM distance (18) can be computed with the following linear program, which can
be eﬃciently solved.
To simplify notation, we assume all parameters are enumerated in a list W =
{w1, w2, . . . , w|W |}. For each parameter wi, we let Ii be equal to the set of qubits which the corresponding
Pauli string acts on. Thus, with |W| parameters and n qubits, one maximizes the following linear program:
maximize
|W |
X
j=1
cjwj
subject to
X
j:i∈Ij
|wj| ≤1,
i = 1, ..., n
(20)
where cj is the trace of the product between the j-th Pauli string and G(θ) −ρtar. i.e., assuming wj is asso-
ciated to Pauli string σ(a)
Pa σ(b)
Pb . . . σ(k)
Pk , then cj = Tr
h
(G −ρtar)σ(a)
Pa σ(b)
Pb . . . σ(k)
Pk
i
. In the above formulation,
there exists a constraint for each qubit i limiting the sum of magnitudes of operators acting on that qubit
to less than or equal to one.
The linear program in (20) can be transformed into a standard form linear program with n constraints
(one for each qubit), which outputs a sparse set of at most n non-zero weights [39] (the number of non-zero
variables in linear programs in standard form is at most the number of constraints). Speciﬁcally, the linear
8

program will output nactive ≤n operators with non-zero weights, called active operators, constructing a
Hamiltonian Hmax which is passed onto the generator for optimization:
Hmax =
nactive
X
i=0
w∗
i H∗
i ,
(21)
where w∗
i and H∗
i are the weights and active operators respectively. As an example, we show in Appendix H
that for single qubit states, the linear program outputs an optimal Hamiltonian composed of single qubit
Pauli terms chosen by selecting the single qubit Pauli term which has the greatest contribution on each qubit
(thus nactive = n in this setting). Since nactive ≤n, gradient updates on the generator which aims to minimize
the expectation of Hmax can be performed. However, this eﬃciency comes at the cost of potentially missing
certain active operators in the optimal Hamiltonian. Equation 21 is naturally biased towards including low
order operators in its set of active operators. Especially for problems where the optimization needs to access
higher order operators, this methodology may fail to perform eﬀectively.
Appendix H compares values of the estimated distance D(2)
EM with the actual distance DEM for random
states generated by shallow circuits showing that there is a correlation between the two measures, although
the approximation may introduce an unwanted bias. As we show in Appendix G, restricting the optimiza-
tion over operators to terms acting on few qubits does not aﬀect the value of the distance, since the optimal
unconstrained Hamiltonian for the maximization problem (20) contains only these terms whenever the co-
eﬃcients cj associated to single Pauli operators are all Ω(1). Furthermore, since operators only act on few
qubits, eﬃcient algorithms from [40,41] can be applied to calculate the expectations of |W| Pauli operators
in (17) using O(log |W|) copies of the generated and target states. If a large number of higher order Pauli
terms are included in the decomposition above, such logarithmic dependence may no longer hold.
We stress that the approximation employed here is the central limitation in successfully applying our
qWGAN model.
Improving this approximation is crucial to expanding the scope of application of our
qWGAN beyond the assorted examples provided in section 4. Generally, there are two paths by which one
can improve the approximation. The ﬁrst path consists of identifying a more optimal relaxation to the
semideﬁnite program in comparison to the linear relaxation of Equation 20. Existing quantum algorithms
for solving semideﬁnite programs [37, 38] may help in realizing this goal.
The second path consists of
ﬁnding methods to more optimally choose the subset of Hamiltonians or Pauli operators included in the
approximation. In some cases, higher order Pauli operators are needed to distinguish states and avoiding
these altogether may produce sub-optimal results. In light of this, we describe below one technique that
empirically helps in ﬁnding a good subset of Pauli operators.
Optional cycling of operators
Over a small number of steps of optimization, changes to the expectations
of operators cj are expected to be very small.
Therefore, if the expectation of a given operator in the
discriminator is small, it is unlikely that the operator will be chosen as an active operator over the course of
optimization. Therefore, one has the option of removing these “bad” operators and including new operators
(here, we choose the new operators uniformly randomly from the set of all Pauli operators) into the set of
operators over which the discriminator optimizes. Many choices exist for cycling operators; here, we opt for a
simple choice where operators are cycled out when the expectation of an operator is below a threshold equal
to P(mini c∗
i ) (i.e., minimum taken over all active operators) where 0 < P ≤1. When an operator is cycled
out, a random Pauli operator is then included in the discriminator’s set of operators including potentially
Pauli operators that were removed in earlier cycles. Cycling operators may, of course, be detrimental if
operators are cycled out that end up being useful during later phases of training.
Nevertheless, in our
experiments, we often ﬁnd that the amount of cycling can serve as another tunable hyperparameter for
improving the performance of our qWGAN.
3.2
Form of the generator
In its most general form, a generator is an object or function, that when given an input (potentially a
sample from a random variable), outputs a state which approximates or produces a sample drawn from a
9

distribution close to the target distribution. Similar to classical machine learning where neural networks
are customized to given settings – e.g., convolutional neural networks optimized for image analysis [42–44]
and transformer networks optimized for text analysis [45–47] – the form of the generator in our quantum
algorithm can and should be customized to the speciﬁc problem setting. Many options exist for constructing
a generator including parameterized quantum circuits [48, 49] and quantum neural networks [50–53]. The
form of the generator determines the space of functions which a generator can access, and ideally this space
should overlap with the function of the target object. Given we can only cover a limited class of generators
in our analysis, we focus here on a single, though generic, form for the generator, encouraging future research
to construct and analyze generators customized to speciﬁc applications in quantum machine learning.
In this generic formulation, the generator G(θ) is a function which maps a starting state |ψ0⟩⟨ψ0|
to a density matrix ρ representing the distribution over quantum states that one aims to reconstruct.
As in [9], our generator is constructed by a set of probabilities and associated parameterized unitaries
{(p1, U1), . . . , (pr, Ur)}:
G(θ) =
r
X
i=1
piUi |ψ0⟩⟨ψ0| U †
i ,
(22)
where we use θ to denote the set of all parameters for the generator which includes the probabilities pi and
parameters for each unitary Ui. r is the maximum rank of the output density matrix which can be tuned as
a hyperparameter. Later, we consider Ui constructed by parameterized quantum circuits with one and two
qubit gates. The choice of these parameterized circuits depends on the nature of the problem (see section 4
for examples).
3.3
qWGAN optimization procedure
The algorithm for the qWGAN detailed in Algorithm 1 iteratively optimizes parameters of the generator and
discriminator, consistent with methods used in classical GANs [28]. The following two steps are repeated
until convergence in the parameters of the generator θ. First, the parameters w are updated using the linear
program (20) to maximize the quantum EM distance DEM in equation (4). Then, a gradient update is
performed on the parameters of the generator θ.
Algorithm 1 qWGAN with quantum earth mover’s distance
Require: initial discriminator operators: H[0]
i
▷e.g., set of 2-local Paulis
Require: initialization of generator parameters: p[0]
i
and θ[0]
i
Require: hyperparameters for generator optimizer (e.g., learning rate α)
1: while θ, p have not converged do
▷alternatively, stop after T steps
▷discriminator optimization:
2:
measure operator expectations: ci ←Tr [Hi(G(θ) −ρtar)]
3:
ﬁnd w∗
i , H∗
i (linear program, equation (20))
▷Hmax = P
i w∗
i H∗
i
4:
optional: cycle operators
▷generator optimization:
5:
ﬁnd gradients gp, gθ of Tr [G(θ)Hmax]
▷see Appendix I
6:
perform gradient update on θ and p
▷e.g., θ ←θ −αgθ
3.4
Properties of the gradient
As stated earlier, one can calculate the gradients with respect to the parameters of the unitary operator
implemented by the circuit (step 5 in Algorithm 1) via the parameter shift rule [54]. As an example, let
G(θ) be generated by the quantum circuit that implements the unitary operator
U(θ) =
Y
k
Uk e−iθkPk ,
(23)
10

where each Uk is a unitary operator that does not contain any parameter and each Pk is a generalized Pauli
operator. Then, given an optimal Hamiltonian Hmax, one can calculate the gradient as follows for a given
parameter θk:
∂
∂θk
Tr [G(θ)Hmax] = Tr [G(θ+)Hmax] −Tr [G(θ−)Hmax],
(24)
where θ+ and θ−are the values of the parameters shifted by π
4 in either direction for the entry corresponding
to θk [54].
This parameter-shift rule has the beneﬁt that the equation for the gradient is in fact exact
(not an approximation). Gradients for each individual parameter must be calculated using separate circuit
evaluations.
Prior work has shown that local cost functions avoid barren plateaus up to poly-logarithmic depth in
the circuit [23]. Due to the super-additivity property of the quantum EM distance and the construction of
the linear relaxation in (20), the optimal Hamiltonian is heavily biased towards local terms and thus ﬁts
into this regime. We formalize this below by showing that high order Pauli strings acting nontrivially on k
qubits must have magnitude greater than k times the smallest single qubit Pauli contribution to the optimal
Hamiltonian Hmax.
Proposition 5. Let w∗: {I, X, Y, Z}n →R be the set of parameters that achieve the maximum in (20), and
let
a =
min
i=1, ..., n
max
P =X,Y,Z
Tr
h
(G(θ) −ρtar) σ(i)
P
i .
(25)
Then, w∗
P1...Pn = 0 for any P1, . . . , Pn ∈{I, X, Y, Z} such that
|cP1...Pn| < a |{i = 1, . . . , n : Pi ̸= I}| .
(26)
In particular, w∗
P1...Pn = 0 for any Pauli string that acts nontrivially on more than 2/a qubits.
The proof of the above is deferred to Appendix G. As a corollary of the above, any global k-qubit Pauli
term that appears in the optimal Hamiltonian must exceed the sums of the maximum single qubit Pauli
terms on the k qubits on which it acts. Thus, the optimal Hamiltonian Hmax will be at most 2/a-local
which is constant when the expectation of single qubit Paulis is Ω(1). In these settings, the qWGAN will
avoid barren plateaus whenever the generator has depth that does not grow faster than logarithmically in
the number of qubits (see Theorem 2 of [23]).
4
Experiments
Our qWGAN can eﬃciently learn quantum data of various forms. Here, we apply the qWGAN directly to
the toy model of subsection 2.1 and also consider a more general scenario where the qWGAN learns states
generated by a mixing circuit previously known to suﬀer from barren plateaus [21, 23, 55]. In Appendix J,
we include results for the qWGAN in two other scenarios: one where the generator is a circuit formed by a
quantum alternating operator ansatz (QAOA) [56–58] and one where the qWGAN is tasked with learning
mixed states. The Adam optimizer with a default learning rate of 0.01 was used to train the qWGAN [59].
Details on the structure of the quantum circuits and on how the simulations were performed are provided
in Appendix K and Appendix L, respectively.
Learning the GHZ state
The n-qubit GHZ state is an entangled state which requires a simple circuit of
depth n to construct. However, as noted in subsection 2.1, the correct parameters of this circuit are hard to
learn when using cost metrics that are a function of the inner product between the generated and target GHZ
state. Continuing our analysis, we show that our qWGAN is especially eﬃcient and eﬀective at learning the
correct parameters of a circuit to generate the GHZ state.
As shown in Figure 2 for 10 random simulations, our qWGAN eﬃciently generates the n = 8 qubit GHZ
state in around 500 steps of optimization– results for circuits of diﬀerent size are also consistent with this
analysis and detailed in Appendix J. The generator circuit has n + 2 parameters and depth n. Simulations
11

0
200
400
600
800
1000
optimization step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
distance metric
percentiles
10th percentile
25th percentile
median
75th percentile
90th percentile
metric
est. EM loss
ﬁdelity
Figure 2: The qWGAN consistently generates the 8 qubit GHZ state. Estimated EM loss (quantum EM
distance estimated by active operators) is plotted in grey alongside the ﬁdelity in blue. EM distance is
normalized to a maximum of one by dividing by the number of qubits. Percentiles are calculated across 50
simulations. Individual simulations are plotted as transparent lines.
are repeated 50 times across random initializations. The discriminator starts with access to k = 2 local
Pauli operators, cycling out “bad” operators every ﬁve steps. Estimated EM loss is also plotted in Figure 2
(normalized by dividing by the number of qubits), which is equal to the quantum EM distance as measured
by the active operators in the discriminator (lower bounding the actual quantum EM distance). Jumps in
the estimated EM loss can be observed when operators are cycled and later become active, highlighting the
importance of randomly cycling operators in these simulations. It is interesting to note that during the early
phases of learning, the qWGAN often optimizes the EM distance while temporarily decreasing the ﬁdelity.
This learning proﬁle is typically associated with transitions from the state |0n⟩to the GHZ state. As our
toy model indicated, this transition characterized by a temporary decrease in the ﬁdelity is needed to reach
the global optimum.
Teacher-student learning
To analyze our qWGAN in a more general setting, we consider a “teacher-
student” setup where the circuit used to generate the target state and perform learning are both of the form
shown in Figure 3a. This circuit is a generic mixing circuit also studied in [21,23,55] where barren plateaus
in the loss landscape are observed. For our simulations, the target state φtar is generated by a depth 2
circuit (i.e.
gates shown in Figure 3a repeated twice) with parameters drawn i.i.d.
from the standard
normal distribution. As a point of comparison, we compare our qWGAN to a quantum GAN equipped with
the loss function F = 1 −|⟨φtar|φ(θ)⟩|2 which is a function of the inner product between the target and
generated state. Figure 3b shows that when a circuit of the same form is used to learn the target state,
gradients of F (function of the inner product) decay exponentially with more qubits whereas gradients of the
quantum EM loss function remain constant. Note that the exponentially decaying gradients for the inner
product loss metrics are observed here for constant depth shallow circuits. This result further conﬁrms that
loss landscapes for the quantum EM distance avoid common pitfalls faced by conventional distance metrics
including the Wasserstein semi-metric proposed in [9].
Furthermore, as shown in Figure 4, the qWGAN successfully learns the states constructed by n = 8 qubit
teacher circuits using student circuits of depth 4. This circuit has 96 trainable parameters. Simulations are
repeated 50 times across random initializations in Figure 4. Target states are generated by drawing the
parameters of the teacher circuit i.i.d. from the standard normal distribution. Learning is typically achieved
within a few hundred steps of optimization. In these simulations, the discriminator for the qWGAN contains
all order 2 Pauli operators and no cycling of the operators was performed. We ﬁnd that, in general, learning
in the teacher-student setting is best achieved when the student circuit is deeper than the teacher circuit.
Furthermore, due to the approximations made in calculating the quantum EM distance, we ﬁnd that our
12

θ2,1
θ4,3
θ4,1
θ2,2
θ4,2
θ2,3
|0⟩
RY (θ1,1)
RY (θ3,1)
|0⟩
RY (θ1,2)
RY (θ3,2)
|0⟩
RY (θ1,3)
RY (θ3,3)
|0⟩
RY (θ1,4)
RY (θ3,4)
|0⟩
RY (θ1,5)
RY (θ3,5)
|0⟩
RY (θ1,6)
RY (θ3,6)
(a)
4
6
8
10
12
14
num. qubits (n)
10−2
10−1
100
ℓ1 norm of gradient vector
qWGAN metric
inner product metric
(b)
Figure 3: (a) Single layer of mixing circuit consisting of alternating layers of parameterized Pauli Y rotations
and parameterized Pauli Z-Z rotations applied to pairwise qubits. Here, the form of the circuit is shown for
six qubits. (b) Learning using two layers of mixing circuit (shallow, constant depth) results in exponentially
decaying gradients for conventional loss metrics. Gradients of the qWGAN remain constant while gradients
with respect to a loss metric as a function of the inner product decay exponentially in the number of qubits.
Gradients are calculated at ﬁrst step of optimization and ℓ1 norm is divided by n to normalize to the number
of parameters in the circuit. Findings are consistent when the average is taken for the ℓ2 norm or of individual
gradient entries as shown in Appendix J. Results are averaged across 100 simulations for each data point.
algorithm struggles to learn especially deep 8-qubit teacher circuits which are four layers or more in depth.
For these deeper target circuits, we suspect that higher order Paulis are needed to eﬃciently estimate the
quantum EM distance, and further improvements to the optimization must be made to incorporate these
higher order Paulis in the estimation procedure. Additional simulations for diﬀerent circuit sizes are shown
in Appendix J.
5
Discussion
As interest in quantum machine learning algorithms has ﬂourished, recent research has highlighted the chal-
lenges associated with learning using quantum computers. At the root of these challenges are adverse prop-
erties of loss landscapes in quantum machine learning settings, perhaps most notably that loss landscapes
have poor local minima and exponentially decaying gradients. In this work, we show that the loss land-
scape induced by the quantum EM distance can potentially confer advantages in machine learning settings,
especially when optimization is performed over local gates in shallow circuits. Our results provide a new
approach to constructing loss landscapes which can avoid common quantum machine learning roadblocks.
For the speciﬁc application of learning quantum data, we have proposed a qWGAN which leverages the
quantum EM distance to produce an eﬃcient learning algorithm. In accord with its classical counterpart [28],
we show that our qWGAN can potentially improve convergence and stability in learning quantum data.
Nevertheless, the qWGAN struggles in learning more “random” data or data generated from deep circuits.
These challenges stem from two approximations made in the learning procedure. First, to ensure runtime
eﬃciency, the discriminator was restricted to measuring a subset of local Pauli operators.
Second, the
optimization statement to calculate the quantum EM distance was relaxed into a linear program to ensure
it can be eﬀﬁciently calculated classically. Though this estimated distance is well correlated to the true
distance when learning certain structured states like the GHZ state or states generated by shallow circuits, it
failed to tightly bound the quantum EM distance in more challenging settings. Looking forward, improving
the bounds given by relaxations of the quantum EM distance can potentially allow for application of our
13

0
200
400
600
800
1000
optimization step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
distance metric
percentiles
10th percentile
25th percentile
median
75th percentile
90th percentile
metric
est. EM loss
ﬁdelity
Figure 4: The student circuit is able to approximate well the state generated by the teacher circuit. Here,
the target is constructed by randomly setting the parameters of a depth 2 mixing circuit (teacher circuit).
The qWGAN, equipped with a depth 4 generator circuit, successfully learns the target state by optimizing
over the quantum EM distance. Estimated EM loss (quantum EM distance estimated by active operators)
is plotted in grey alongside the ﬁdelity in blue. EM distance is normalized to a maximum of one by dividing
by the number of qubits. Percentiles are calculated across 50 simulations. Individual simulations are plotted
as transparent lines.
qWGAN in these more challenging settings.
Beyond the test cases studied here, the qWGAN has many potential applications. In quantum controls,
one can use it to search for robust or optimal control parameters [60, 61]. For unsupervised learning, the
qWGAN provides a framework and approach to quantum circuit compression, data encoding, and sampling
[62–64]. For quantum error correction, one can use a qWGAN to develop new techniques for constructing
quantum error codes or assisting error correction procedures [65–68].
Acknowledgement
This work was funded by AFOSR, ARO under the Blue Sky Initiative, DARPA, and NSF. MM is partially
supported by the NSF Grant No. CCF-1954960. GDP is a member of the “Gruppo Nazionale per la Fisica
Matematica (GNFM)” of the “Istituto Nazionale di Alta Matematica “Francesco Severi” (INdAM)”.
Author Contributions
BTK developed the structure of the qWGAN algorithm and performed simulations under the supervision
of SL. All authors contributed to the design of the qWGAN algorithm. The EM distance was motivated by
prior work from GDP, MM, and SL. BTK and GDP wrote the manuscript. GDP developed mathematical
proofs in the appendix. All authors reviewed the results.
