Optimal Demand Response Using Device Based
Reinforcement Learning
Zheng Wen, Daniel O’Neill, and Hamid Reza Maei ∗†
Abstract
Demand response (DR) for residential and small commercial buildings is estimated to
account for as much as 65% of the total energy savings potential of DR, and previous work
shows that a fully automated Energy Management System (EMS) is a necessary prerequisite
to DR in these areas. In this paper, we propose a novel EMS formulation for DR problems in
these sectors. Speciﬁcally, we formulate a fully automated EMS’s rescheduling problem as a
reinforcement learning (RL) problem, and argue that this RL problem can be approximately
solved by decomposing it over device clusters. Compared with existing formulations, our
new formulation (1) does not require explicitly modeling the user’s dissatisfaction on job
rescheduling, (2) enables the EMS to self-initiate jobs, (3) allows the user to initiate more
ﬂexible requests and (4) has a computational complexity linear in the number of devices.
We also demonstrate the simulation results of applying Q-learning, one of the most popular
and classical RL algorithms, to a representative example.
Key Words: Demand Response, Energy Management System, Building and Home Au-
tomation, Reinforcement Learning, Markov Decision Process
1
Introduction
Demand response (DR) systems [4, 5, 1] dynamically adjust electrical demand in response to
changing electrical energy prices or other grid signals. DR oﬀers several beneﬁts. By suitably
adjusting energy prices, load can be shifted from peak energy consumption periods to other
times. This, in turn, can improve operational eﬃciency, reduce operating costs, improve capital
eﬃciency, and reduce harmful emissions and risk of outages. The variability of renewables can
create an additional need to shift energy consumption in order to better match energy demand
with unforecasted changes in electrical energy generation. The beneﬁt is a reduction in backup
(ancillary) generation frequently used to hedge renewable sources.
There are several types of DR. In direct DR a utility or other entity directly modiﬁes the
energy consumption of users by adjusting the operation of user’s equipment. Interruptible tariﬀs
allow a utility to interrupt the supply of power to a company under predeﬁned conditions.
Price driven DR uses pricing mechanisms to attempt to modulate energy demand. DR has
been extensively investigated for larger energy users and has been implemented in many areas
(e.g., [16, 14]). Residential and small commercial building DR [9, 8, 7, 11] oﬀers similar potential
beneﬁts. DR for residential and small commercial buildings was estimated to account for as much
as 65% of the total energy savings potential of DR. However, DR in the residential and small
commercial building sector faces several challenges.
Technical challenges include deploying an infrastructure supplying real-time pricing infor-
mation to energy consumers1 in a useful way, ensuring security, and implementing advanced
∗Z. Wen, D. O’Neill and H. Maei are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University,
Stanford, CA 94305 USA

1Throughout this paper, we use the terms “user” and “consumer” interchangeably.
1
arXiv:1401.1549v2  [cs.LG]  28 Jun 2014

metering and networking devices [11, 12]. In addition to all these technical challenges, another
challenge vital to the success of DR in the residential and small commercial building sectors is
that it requires a fully automated Energy Management System (EMS) [11, 15]. This is because
with price driven DR, consumers face a continuing sequence of decisions to either use a particular
device now and consume energy at current (known) prices or to defer using the device until later
at possibly unknown prices. Each decision requires the consumer to weigh the cost diﬀerential
against his dissatisfaction due to rescheduling device usage. This is particularly burdensome
when the consumer must also estimate future energy prices. Further many of these decisions
have limited ﬁnancial impact on the consumer [13], and, as a result, many rational consumers
in the residential and small commercial building sectors may not be suﬃciently incentivized to
make these decisions over the long run (known as “decision fatigue” in [13]).
To be eﬀective, an EMS system needs to automatically make energy consumption decisions
that are consistent with the cost delay trade-oﬀs of energy users, in this way acting as an energy
agent. It is often diﬃcult to cost-eﬀectively model the behaviors of the idiosyncratic consumers
and the temporal variations of the energy prices, a successful DR EMS needs to learn to make
optimal decisions for consumers from interacting with the consumers and energy prices. Recently,
O’Neill et al. [13] proposed a fully-automated EMS algorithm based on reinforcement learning
(RL), which learns how to make optimal decisions for consumers. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the ﬁrst paper to apply RL to DR in residential and small commercial building sector.
The authors adopt a request inventory model for the system dynamics and use Q-learning, a
classical RL algorithm, to learn how to make the optimal decisions for energy consumers. In this
approach, users make energy requests to the EMS system (e.g. pushing a button on a device
that a user wants to run) and the system schedules the time of operation by calculating the
user’s trade-oﬀs between delay and energy prices. It learns these trade-oﬀs by observing energy
consumer’s behaviors and observing the patterns of energy pricing. Over time the EMS learns to
make the best decisions for energy users in the sense that it balances energy cost and the delay
in energy usage in the same way that the customer optimally would, but without the consumer
having to make the decision. The authors explicitly assume that (1) consumers’ dissatisfaction
with delay can be modeled by known disutility functions, and (2) that consumers explicitly
initiate all energy usage. This approach has several limitations:
• Finding speciﬁc disutility functions for a particular residence or small business can be dif-
ﬁcult and costly. In [13], the authors assume these functions have particular mathematical
properties, but do not address how these functions might be determined. These functions
are likely to be idiosyncratic and are speciﬁc to energy price vs. time delay trade-oﬀs.
• Many energy consuming activities occur without the consumer directly initiating them.
HVAC in oﬃce buildings and pool heaters in residential settings are obvious examples.
A useful EMS would self-initiate jobs for these and similar devices without explicit user
requests or reservations. For example, if it is unexpectedly hot in a summer afternoon
and the current energy price is expected to be cheaper than that in the evening, then the
EMS should be allowed to turn on AC without an explicit request/reservation from the
consumer.
• The computational complexity of this approach grows exponentially as the number of
devices. Known as the “curse-of-dimensionality” in dynamic programming (DP) and RL
literature, this problem limits the approach to fairly small numbers of devices.
In this paper, we propose a novel EMS formulation that addresses the limitations of [13]
described above. Our proposed algorithm also uses RL, but adopts a device centric point of
view, and, as we will discuss in detail in Section 3, under reasonable assumptions, the RL
problem decomposes over device clusters and it is suﬃcient to apply an RL algorithm to each
individual device cluster. Speciﬁcally, the algorithm addresses these issues:
2

1. Our EMS formulation does not require a pre-speciﬁed disutility function modeling the
consumer’s dissatisfaction on job rescheduling. Instead, under this formulation, the EMS is
able to learn the consumer’s dissatisfaction based on his evaluations on completed/canceled
jobs. In other words, our new RL formulation has eliminated the impractical assumption
in [13] that consumers’ dissatisfactions with delay can be captured by known disutility
functions.
2. Our approach allows both user-initiated jobs and EMS-initiated jobs. The EMS-initiated
jobs use a probing/feedback mechanism to ﬁnd the best way to anticipate future energy
usage.
3. Our EMS algorithm also enables more ﬂexible user-initiated jobs, speciﬁcally
• A consumer request’s target time can be diﬀerent from its request time, where the
request time is the time when the EMS receives this consumer request, and the target
time is the time when the consumer prefers this request to be satisﬁed.
• Consumer requests/reservations can have diﬀerent priorities, whereas in [13], all the
consumer requests have the same priority.
• Energy requests can be canceled by the consumer, reﬂecting the behavior of real
energy users.
4. The computational complexity of our approach grows linearly with the number of device
clusters, and thus many classical RL algorithms can be applied even when there are a large
number of devices.
In this paper, we also propose new performance metrics for RL algorithms applied to this
problem. In particular, we suggest methods of measuring performance relative to the user’s
current pattern of behavior and relative to a prescient optimal pattern of behavior.
Before proceeding, we brieﬂy review some relevant literature. [10] also applies RL techniques
to a smart grid application. In particular, it focuses on how to use RL to control a population of
heterogeneous thermostatically-controlled loads. Another directly relevant paper is [19], which
also proposed device based Markov decision process (MDP) models. Compared with [19], this
paper is new in the following three points: ﬁrst, this paper motivates and discusses why the
optimal DR problem is approximately decomposed over device clusters, while [19] does not
include such motivation/discussion and directly focuses on device based MDP models without
justifying why this approach is reasonable. Second, [19] assumes that the models of the user
behavior and grid signals are known. As we have discussed above, such assumptions are not
realistic in practice. In this paper, we use RL techniques to learn such models. Finally, though
the MDP model proposed in this paper is still a simpliﬁed model, it is much more general and
realistic than the models proposed in [19].
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we brieﬂy describe how
a practical fully-automated EMS should interact with the consumer and the grid signals. In
Section 3, we argue that the optimal demand response problem is approximately decomposed
over device clusters, and pose it as a collection of device based RL problems. In Section 4, we
motivate and propose a simpliﬁed MDP model for a device based RL problem, and discuss how
to extend it to more general models. Then, in Section 5, we demonstrate the simulation results
on a representative example when the classical Q-learning is applied. We conclude and discuss
future work in Section 6.
2
Description of fully-automated EMS
A fully-automated EMS (henceforth referred to as EMS) is a necessary prerequisite to DR in
the residential and small commercial building sectors. Furthermore, an EMS needs to learn how
3

to make the optimal decisions for the user while interacting with them and the real-time grid
signals. In this section, we describe how a fully-automated EMS should interact with the user
and the grid signals.
Generally speaking, a fully-automated EMS observes the grid signals, receives requests and
evaluations from the user, and schedules the jobs over the devices (Figure 1). We detail the
interaction mechanisms in the remainder of this subsection.
Consumer	
  
(User)	
  
EMS	
  
Requests/	
  
Cancella7ons	
  
Evalua7ons	
  
Communi
ca7on	
  
Networks	
  
Grid	
  
Signals	
  
Device	
  1	
  
Schedule	
  
Requests	
  
Device	
  2	
  
Device	
  N	
  
Figure 1: Fully-Automated EMS
Grid Signals
The EMS observes the grid signals through a communication network, where the “communica-
tion network” refers to the infrastructure that supplies grid signals to the EMS. Any exogenous
information that is eﬀectively delivered by the communication network and is useful for the EMS
to make the scheduling decisions can be regarded as a grid signal. The most common grid signal
is the real-time energy price; other grid signals might include the expected future energy prices,
the real-time temperature and weather condition, and other useful exogenous information.
Notice that most grid signals are exogenous in the sense that the EMS’s actions will not
inﬂuence them. In particular, we assume that the energy price is exogenous (i.e. the EMS
is a price-taker). This assumption is reasonable since in the residential and small commercial
building sectors, the market power of an individual EMS (or equivalently, of an individual
consumer) is so small that the impact of its actions on energy prices is negligible.
User-Initiated Jobs and EMS-Initiated Jobs
A fully-automated EMS should perform the following functions:
• The EMS receives requests from the consumers, and then schedules when to fulﬁll the
received requests. We henceforth refer to this case as a user-initiated job. We further
assume that the EMS allows a customer to cancel existing uncompleted requests.
• If a smart device managed by the EMS is idle (i.e. currently there is no request for that
device), the EMS could speculatively power that device. We henceforth refer to this case
as an EMS-initiated job. For instance, in a small commercial building, the EMS might
speculatively turn on the building’s air conditioning in advance of the tenant’s arrival to
capture early morning lower energy costs or to mask the latency of cooling the building.
Notice that we should not allow the EMS to do speculative jobs on all the smart devices
(such as dishwashers).
We assume time is discrete t = 0, 1, · · · and that there are N smart devices managed by the
EMS and numbered n = 1, 2, · · · , N. To simplify exposition, we assume that all the jobs done
4

by device n are standardized and hence they can be completed in one time step and consume a
constant energy Cn, which only depends on the type of the smart device. This assumption can
be readily relaxed to devices with diﬀerent operating periods.
Interaction between user and EMS
We now describe how the EMS interacts with the consumer (user) in a user-initiated job and
an EMS-initiated job. Speciﬁcally, as its name suggests, a user-initiated job starts with a user
sending a request to the EMS. Speciﬁcally, each consumer request is represented by a four-tuple
J = (n, τr, τg, g), where
• n denotes the requested device;
• τr is the request time and denotes when the EMS receives this request;
• τg is the target time and denotes when the user prefers this requested job to be completed;
• g denotes the priority of this request, with higher priority implying the “stronger prefer-
ence” of the user that they want the requested job to be completed at a time close to the
target time τg.
Notice that the target time τg is not necessarily equal to the request time τr; instead, the user
might request to use a device in a later time (i.e. τg ≥τr). On the other hand, for a request
J = (n, τr, τg, g), it is unreasonable to assume that τg −τr, the diﬀerence between the target
time and the request time, can be arbitrarily large. Thus, in this paper, we assume that (1) for
any request J = (n, τr, τg, g), its target time τg must satisfy τr ≤τg ≤τr + Wn, and (2) if the
request J = (n, τr, τg, g) is not fulﬁlled by time τg + Wn, then it will be automatically canceled
by the EMS, where Wn is a known time window and only depends on the type of device.
We also assume that an unsatisﬁed consumer request can be canceled by the user. Fur-
thermore, we assume that at some time (e.g., at the end of a day), the user will evaluate some
(not necessarily all) completed/canceled requests. As we will see later, the EMS can use such
evaluations to learn the user’s dissatisfaction on the rescheduling of the user-initiated jobs.
On the other hand, an EMS-initiated job is started by the EMS, without receiving a request
from the user. The only interaction between the EMS and the user for such jobs is that the user
will evaluate some EMS-initiated jobs at some time. As is in the user-initiated jobs, the EMS
also exploits such evaluations to learn user’s dissatisfaction with the EMS-initiated jobs.
In summary, the interaction between user and EMS is as follows: for user-initiated jobs, the
possible interactions include (1) the user sends requests to the EMS, (2) the user can choose
to cancel the unsatisﬁed requests and (3) the user evaluates some completed/canceled requests.
On the other hand, for EMS-initiated jobs, the only interaction between user and EMS is that
the user evaluates some completed EMS-initiated jobs.
3
Device Based Reinforcement Learning
This section proceeds as follows. We ﬁrst motivate and deﬁne the dissatisfaction function and
instantaneous cost function in Subsection 3.1. Explicit dissatisfaction functions are not required
in practice, but we assume they are known in the ﬁrst two subsections to facilitate easy exposition
of the problem. Then, Subsection 3.2 decomposes the optimal demand response problem into
a collection of device based MDPs under suitable assumptions. We motivate and propose the
reinforcement learning formulation for a device based MDP in Subsection 3.3.
3.1
Dissatisfaction Function and Cost Function
To formalize the notion of optimal demand response, in this subsection, we deﬁne the dissatis-
faction function for a consumer (user) that captures their preferences (dissatisfaction) over job
rescheduling.
5

Let Ht denote the “history” of device operations, consumer requests/cancellations and the
EMS decisions by the end of time period t. Then the user’s dissatisfaction on rescheduling at
time t should be a function of Ht, and we denote this function as ¯U(t) (Ht). Furthermore, we
use H(n)
t
to denote the “history” of device operations, consumer requests/cancellations and the
EMS decisions for device n by the end of time period t.
Obviously, directly working with ¯U(t) (Ht) will result in a computationally intractable prob-
lem. To overcome this challenge, in this paper, in this paper, we make the following simplifying
assumption:
Assumption 1. For any t ≥0, the dissatisfaction function ¯U(t) is approximately additive over
the devices, that is
¯U(t) (Ht) ≈
N
X
n=1
¯U(t,n)(H(n)
t
),
(1)
where ¯U(t,n) captures the consumer’s dissatisfaction at time t for device n and H(n)
t
is the “his-
tory” for device n by time t.
Assumption 1 is motivated by the observation that a rational consumer’s preference over job
rescheduling is weak compared to his preferences in other aspects of life2 (see the justiﬁcation
on “decision fatigue” in [13]).
With the dissatisfaction function ¯U(t) deﬁned above, we further assume the instantaneous
cost function of the consumer at time t has the following form:
Pt
X
n∈D(t)
Cn + γ ¯U(t) (Ht) ,
(2)
where D(t) = {devices that do a job at time t}, Pt is the electricity price at time t, and γ > 0
represents the tradeoﬀbetween the electricity bill paid and the consumer’s dissatisfaction on
rescheduling. Speciﬁcally, notice that P
n∈D(t) Cn is the total electricity energy consumed at
time t, and hence Pt
P
n∈D(t) Cn is the electricity bill paid at time t.
Note that from the EMS’s perspective, both the electricity price and the consumer behavior
are exogenous and stochastic; thus, in this paper, we assume that EMS aims to minimize the
expected inﬁnite-horizon discounted cost:
E



∞
X
t=0
αt

Pt
X
n∈D(t)
Cn + γ ¯U(t)(Ht)




,
where 0 < α < 1 is a discrete-time discount factor. Under Assumption 1, the inﬁnite-horizon
discounted cost function can be approximated by
N
X
n=1
"
E
( ∞
X
t=0
αt h
PtCn1(n ∈D(t)) + γ ¯U(t,n) 
H(n)
t
i)#
,
(3)
2 Let us provide an intuitive motivation for Assumption 1 from the following perspective: let ¯uDR ∈ℜN be
a vector encoding the user’s dissatisfactions on job rescheduling over N devices, and ¯uother be a vector encoding
the user’s dissatisfactions in other aspects of life. Assume the overall dissatisfaction (unhappiness) of the user is
f(¯uDR, ¯uother), where f is a general non-linear function. Now we consider f(¯uDR + ∆¯uDR, ¯uother), notice that
the weak preference over job rescheduling implies that ∆¯uDR is “small”, thus, f(¯uDR + ∆¯uDR, ¯uother) can be well
approximated by f(¯uDR, ¯uother) + ∇¯uDRf(¯uDR, ¯uother)∆¯uDR, where ∇¯uDRf is the partial derivative vector of f
with respect to ¯uDR. Notice that for our purpose, we only care about the “change” of the user’s overall unhappiness
as a function of the “changes” in his dissatisfactions on job rescheduling, thus, the user’s dissatisfaction function
is ¯U(∆¯uDR) = f(¯uDR + ∆¯uDR, ¯uother) −f(¯uDR, ¯uother) ≈∇¯uDRf(¯uDR, ¯uother)∆¯uDR, which is a weighted sum of
∆¯uDR. In Assumption 1, we further simplify the dissatisfaction function by assuming that all the weights are
equal to 1.
6

which decomposes over devices.
3.2
Decomposition of the Problem
In this subsection, we ﬁrst propose a dynamic model for the grid signals. Then, we motivate an
assumption on user behavior (Assumption 3), and show that under the proposed assumptions,
the optimal demand response problem (i.e. the EMS’s job scheduling problem) is approximately
decomposed over device clusters.
Let us start by proposing a dynamic model for the grid signals (e.g. energy price, tempera-
ture). As discussed in Section 2, grid signals are exogenous in the sense that the EMS’s actions
will not inﬂuence them. As is discussed in some recent literature (e.g. [13]), grid signals can be
modeled as Markov processes. Thus, throughout this paper, we make the following assumption:
Assumption 2. All the grid signals follow exogenous Markov processes.
Notice that in general, these Markov processes are time-dependent. We now propose an
assumption on user behavior under which the EMS’s job scheduling problem is approximately
decomposed over device clusters.
Assumption 3. The N devices can be classiﬁed into clusters such that conditioning on time
and grid signals, the consumer requests/cancellations to diﬀerent device clusters are weakly sta-
tistically dependent.
Assumption 3 is motivated by daily observations. For instance, in a residential household,
we can classify the air-conditioner, electric vehicle, laundry machine and dryer into three clus-
ters: cluster 1 includes the air-conditioner; cluster 2 includes the laundry machine and dryer;
and cluster 3 includes the electric vehicle. Under this clustering, it is observed that for most
residential consumers, conditioning on time and grid signals (especially the energy price), the
statistical dependence between their requests to devices in diﬀerent clusters are weak.
Recall that the EMS’s objective is to ﬁnd an optimal scheduling policy to minimize (3),
which approximately decomposes over devices under Assumption 1. Assumption 3 states that
the consumer requests/cancellations to diﬀerent device clusters are almost conditionally inde-
pendent. Thus, under Assumptions 1-3, the EMS’s job scheduling problem is approximately
decomposed over device clusters. Speciﬁcally, for each device cluster C ⊆{1, 2, . . . , N}, its job
scheduling problem is characterized by
• discount factor α, tradeoﬀparameter γ;
• dissatisfaction function ¯U(t,n) and energy consumption rate Cn for each device n in the
cluster;
• exogenous Markov processes modeling grid signals;
• statistical model of user requests/cancellations to devices in this cluster.
The objective of this job scheduling problem is to minimize
X
n∈C
"
E
( ∞
X
t=0
αt h
PtCn1(n ∈D(t)) + γ ¯U(t,n) 
H(n)
t
i)#
,
(4)
As we will discuss in Section 4, by properly specifying the statistical model of user requests/cancellations,
this job scheduling problem can be modeled as an MDP. We henceforth refer to this MDP as
the device based MDP and focus on it in the remainder of this paper.
Since the optimal demand response problem is approximately decomposed over device clus-
ters, thus, a near-optimal solution can be obtained by solving all the decomposed device based
MDPs separately. Obviously, the computational complexity to derive this near-optimal solution
is linear in the number of device clusters.
7

3.3
Reinforcement Learning Formulation
However, as we discussed in Section 1, in most practical cases, the dissatisfaction function of the
user and the statistical models of the grid signals and user requests/cancellations are initially
unknown. Thus, the EMS must learn how to make optimal decisions for a device cluster based
on the incrementally gathered data from the user and the grid signals. Reinforcement learning
(RL) is a collection of techniques for a decision-maker to learn how to make optimal decisions
while interacting with an unknown “environment” [17, 3, 18, 22, 23]. RL tries to strike a balance
between learning (exploration) and optimization (exploitation), and has been extensively used
in many other ﬁelds, such as artiﬁcial intelligence and robotics [6] and petroleum engineering
[24, 25]. As we have discussed in Section 1, some recent literature has also applied RL to some
smart grid applications [10]. As has been discussed in [13], it is natural to use RL to solve an
EMS’s learning problem since EMS needs to learn to make decisions while interacting with the
user and the grid signals. As is shown in Figure 2, under the RL formulation of the optimal
DR problem, the agent is the EMS, and the environment includes both the grid signals and the
user. Since this RL problem focuses on a device cluster, we refer to it as the device based RL
EMS	
  
Decision
-­‐Maker	
  
Environment	
  
Grid	
  
Signals	
  
User	
  
Ac9on	
  
Observa9on	
  
Figure 2: Device Based Reinforcement Learning
problem.
In practice, the statistical models of the grid signals and user requests/cancellations can be
learned by directly observing the user behavior and the grid signals. As we will discuss in Section
4, under reasonable assumptions, the user’s dissatisfaction function can be learned based on the
user’s evaluations on completed/canceled jobs.
It is worth pointing out that any RL algorithm (see [17, 3, 18, 22]) can be applied to the
device based RL problem. To demonstrate the performance of an RL algorithm, we need to
compare it with a reasonable baseline policy. Since this paper focuses on how demand response
(DR) can potentially reduce a user’s (expected inﬁnite-horizon discounted) cost, we choose the
baseline policy as the one without job rescheduling.
Speciﬁcally, under this baseline policy,
the EMS never self-initiates a job, and all the jobs initiated by the user are scheduled to be
completed at their target times. We use this baseline policy in Section 5.
4
A Simpliﬁed MDP Model
This section proceeds as follows. We ﬁrst propose a simpliﬁed device based MDP model in
Subsection 4.1 to 4.3. Then, in Subsection 4.4 and 4.5, we motivate and deﬁne a performance
metric for RL algorithms applied to the proposed device based MDP model. Finally, we discuss
how to extend the proposed MDP model to more general models in Subsection 4.6.
It is worth pointing out that all the assumptions in this section are made to simplify the
exposition of the device based MDP model. These simplifying assumptions are nonessential in
the sense that as long as the assumptions proposed in the previous section hold, the EMS’s job
8

scheduling problem is approximately decomposed over device clusters. We will discuss how to
relax some of these simplifying assumptions in Subsection 4.6.
4.1
Simplifying Assumptions
We start by making some simplifying assumptions. First, we assume that each device cluster has
only one device. Thus, we focus on deriving an optimal scheduling policy for a single device in
this section. Second, we assume that the only available grid signal is the real-time energy price,
and the statistical models of the energy price and user behavior3 are time-invariant. Third, we
also assume that the user will not submit a new request to a device if that device currently has an
uncompleted request.4 Finally, we assume that the user will evaluate all the completed/canceled
jobs immediately after the job is completed/canceled. As we will detail in Subsection 4.6, all
these simplifying assumptions can be eﬀectively relaxed.
4.2
Functional Form of Dissatisfaction Function
In this subsection, we propose a speciﬁc functional form for the dissatisfaction function ¯U(t,n),
for any device n. Since a rational consumer’s preference over job rescheduling is weak compared
to his preferences in other aspects of life, we assume that
• If there is no job completed/cancelled at time t on device n, we assume that ¯U(t,n)(H(n)
t
) =
0.
• If there is a job completed/cancelled at time t on device n, we assume that ¯U(t,n)(H(n)
t
)
only depends on the job completed/canceled. That is, ¯U(t,n)(·) is time-invariant and does
not depend on the previously completed/canceled jobs. Speciﬁcally, if device n satisﬁes
consumer request J(t, n) = (n, τr, τg, g) at time t, we assume
¯U(t,n)(H(n)
t
) = ˜U(n)
r
(t −τg, g),
(5)
where the subscript “r” denotes that it is the dissatisfaction incurred when a request is
satisﬁed, and g is the priority of the request. Note t −τg captures not only the distance
between the current time t and the request’s target time τg, but also whether or not the
target time has passed. Similarly, if the request J(t, n) = (n, τr, τg, g) is canceled by the
consumer at time t, we assume
¯U(t,n)(H(n)
t
) = ˜U(n)
c
(t −τg, g),
(6)
where the subscript “c” denotes that it is the dissatisfaction incurred when a request is
canceled. Finally, if EMS initiates a job on device n at time t, we assume that
¯U(t,n)(H(n)
t
) = ˜U(n)
e
(t −τp),
(7)
where the subscript “e” denotes that it is the dissatisfaction incurred when an EMS-
initiated job is done, and τp −1 is the time when the previous job on device n (either
user-initiated or EMS-initiated) is completed or cancelled.
Note that the dissatisfaction function class described in Equations (5-7) is still quite general,
and it is very challenging to proceed to derive the speciﬁc functional forms of ˜U(n)
r
, ˜U(n)
c
and
˜U(n)
e
. In practice, ˜U(n)
r
, ˜U(n)
c
and ˜U(n)
e
should be learned based on the user’s evaluations on
completed/canceled jobs. In this section, we make the following assumption:
3By “statistical model of user behavior”, we mean statistical model of user requests/cancellations/evaluations
to that device.
4Notice that this assumption does not rule out request replacement.
Speciﬁcally, the user can replace an
uncompleted request with a new request by ﬁrst canceling the uncompleted request and then submitting the new
request.
9

Assumption 4. The user’s dissatisfaction on the rescheduling of a completed/canceled job is
equal to their evaluation on this job.5
We now brieﬂy motivate Assumption 4: for a rational user, their evaluation on a com-
pleted/canceled job mainly reﬂects their dissatisfaction on this job, and this dissatisfaction is
either due to the (high) energy price or the (undesirable) rescheduling of the job. As we have
discussed in Section 1, due to “decision fatigue”, most rational users will not reference the cur-
rent energy price or any expected future energy prices before they send their evaluations to the
EMS. Thus, their evaluations will mainly reﬂect their dissatisfactions on job rescheduling. Thus,
it is reasonable to assume Assumption 4.
4.3
MDP Model
We now propose a simpliﬁed MDP model for the device based RL problem, under the simplifying
assumptions proposed in Subsection 4.1. We also assume that the user’s dissatisfaction function
has the functional form speciﬁed by (5-7). Thus, we only need to specify the statistical models
of the energy price and user requests/cancellations.
Since we focus on deriving an optimal
scheduling policy for a single device, we drop the subscript n to simplify the exposition. For
example, we will use W instead of Wn to denote the time window and represent a request as
J = (τr, τg, g). We also use the term “smart device” and “EMS” interchangeably in this section,
since one can think each smart device (i.e. each device cluster in this case) has its own EMS.
First, we assume that the energy price Pt follows an exogenous ﬁnite-state ergodic Markov
chain. We use P to denote the set of states of this Markov chain, and use |P| to denote the
number of states.
We model the user requests/cancellations to the smart device as a controlled stochastic
process. Moreover, we make the following simplifying assumption on our proposed MDP model:
Assumption 5. The consumer requests/cancellations are statistically independent of the energy
price process Pt.
We now brieﬂy motivate Assumption 5. Notice that on one hand, as we have discussed
in Section 2, in the residential and small building sector, the market power of an individual
consumer is so small that the impact of their behavior on Pt is negligible. On the other hand,
as we have discussed in Section 1, due to “decision fatigue”, most rational consumers are not
incentivized to reference energy prices before sending requests/cancellations to the EMS. In
other words, for such consumers, their requests/cancellations are not inﬂuenced by energy prices.
Thus, it is reasonable to assume Assumption 5.
The “user-EMS interaction timeline” in a single time period6 is illustrated in Figure 3. We
End	
  of	
  	
  
'me	
  period	
  	
  t	
  
Start	
  of	
  	
  
'me	
  period	
  t	
  
Receive	
  requests	
  
Schedule	
  and	
  
complete	
  jobs	
  
Receive	
  cancella'ons/	
  
evalua'ons	
  
Figure 3: User-EMS interaction timeline in time period t
5Assumption 4 is an idealized assumption on the relationship between evaluation and dissatisfaction.
In
practice, it might be more reasonable to assume that the user’s evaluation on a job is equal to their dissatisfaction
on the rescheduling of this job plus a (zero-mean, ﬁnite-variance, statistically independent) “behavioral noise”.
However, the “behavioral noise” does not fundamentally change the assumption and we make Assumption 4 to
simplify exposition.
6That is, whether the EMS receives the user requests, cancellations, and evaluations before or after it schedules
jobs in that time period.
10

further assume that the timeline for a smart device can be divided into “episodes”, which in
general consists of multiple time steps. Speciﬁcally, we assume that whenever the smart device
completes a job (either initiated by the user or by the EMS) or the current unsatisﬁed request
is canceled by the user, the current episode terminates. In the next time step, the smart device
“regenerates” its state according to a ﬁxed distribution π0 and a new episode starts. The notion
of episode is illustrated in Figure 4.
Start	
  of	
  
Episode	
  k	
  at	
  
/me	
  t’	
  
A	
  Job	
  is	
  Done	
  Or	
  
Cancelled	
  at	
  /me	
  t,	
  
Episode	
  k	
  Ends	
  
State	
  Regenera/on	
  at	
  /me	
  t+1	
  
	
  Start	
  of	
  Episode	
  k+1	
  
/me	
  
Figure 4: Illustration of the notion of episode, where episode k starts at time t′ and ends in time
t
We now propose an MDP model for a single smart device. The state of the MDP at time t
is xt = [Pt, st, gt]T ∈S, where Pt is the exogenous electricity price at time t, st is the elapsed
time at time t, gt is the priority of request at time t and S is the state space. Speciﬁcally, we
deﬁne
st =
 t −τp
if no request received in the current episode
t −τg
otherwise
(8)
where τp is the start time of the current episode and τg is the target time of the received request.
Furthermore, we use gt = 0 to denote that no request has yet been received in the current episode;
once a request is received in the current episode, we assume its priority gt ∈{1, 2, · · · , gmax}.
Since the energy price is exogenous, we can partition the state xt = [Pt, st, gt]T as the “price
portion” Pt and “device portion” [st, gt]T . The “device portion” of the MDP state transition
model is summarized in Figure 5; notice that there are (2W + 1)gmax + ˆW + 1 “device portion”
states. Recall that we use P to denote the set of states of the price Markov chain, so the price
Markov chain has |P| states, and the cardinality of the state space for the device based MDP is
|S| = |P|
h
(2W + 1)gmax + ˆW + 1
i
, which is aﬃne in |P|, W, ˆW and gmax.
Note that the action space at each state x ∈S is A = {oﬀ, on}, where action “on” means the
smart device completes a job7 at the current time and “oﬀ” means the smart device does nothing
at the current time. We use Φ (xt, at, xt+1) to denote the instantaneous cost at state-action-state
triple (xt, at, xt+1).
Based on the above discussion, the proposed device based MDP model is detailed below.
• Pt follows an exogenous Markov Chain with |P| states.
• If the smart device has not received a consumer request in the current episode, recall that
we set gt = 0 and elapsed time st = t −τp. Notice that:
1. If action “oﬀ” is selected, the current cost is Φ (xt, at, xt+1) = 0. Then the smart
device receives a consumer request (t+1, τg, g) at the next time step (time t+1) with
probability pst,t+1−τg,g, where t + 1 ≤τg ≤t + 1 + W and g ∈{1, 2, · · · , gmax}. In
other words, the “device portion” state transits to [st+1 = t + 1 −τg, gt+1 = g]T with
probability pst,t+1−τg,g, for any t + 1 ≤τg ≤t + 1 + W and any g ∈{1, 2, · · · , gmax}
(notice that the target time and priority together specify the type of the received
request). On the other hand, with probability 1 −Pt+1+W
τg=t+1
Pgmax
g=1 pst,t+1−τg,g, the
7More speciﬁcally, it completes a user-initiated job if a consumer request has been received in the current
episode, and completes an EMS-initiated job otherwise.
11

(0,0)	
  
(1,0)	
  
(Ŵ,0)	
  
(Ŵ-­‐1,0)	
  
(-­‐W,1)	
  
(-­‐W+1,1)	
  
(W,1)	
  
(-­‐W,2)	
  
(-­‐W+1,2)	
  
(W,2)	
  
(-­‐W,gmax)	
  
(-­‐W+1,gmax)	
  
(W,gmax)	
  
No	
  request	
  received	
  
Priority	
  1	
  
Priority	
  2	
  
Priority	
  gmax	
  
p(0,)	
  
P(1,)	
  
p(Ŵ-­‐1,)	
  
p(Ŵ,)	
  
Figure 5: The state transition model of the “device portion”. Notice that each circle corresponds
to a “device portion” state [st, gt]T and each square corresponds to the termination of the current
episode and regeneration in the next time step. The hollow arrows indicate the state transitions
under action “on”, while the line arrows indicate the state transitions under action “oﬀ”. The
bold line arrows across the dotted line indicate the fact that the states below the dotted line
can transit to many states above the dotted line, since there are (W + 1)gmax types of requests.
smart device does not receive the consumer request at time t + 1 and the “device
portion” state transits to [st+1 = st + 1, gt+1 = 0]T .
2. On the other hand, if action “on” is selected, then the smart device completes an EMS-
initiated job at time t. Thus, the current cost is Φ (xt, at, xt+1) = PtC + γ ˜Ue (st),
where ˜Ue (st) is deﬁned in (7) and C is the constant energy consumed by a standard-
ized job. Then the current episode terminates and the smart device regenerates the
“device portion” state based on distribution π0.
Note that the transition probability pst,t+1−τg,g and the dissatisfaction ˜Ue (st) depend on
st. To ensure the state space is ﬁnite, we assume pst,t+1−τg,g = p ˆ
W,t+1−τg,g and ˜Ue (st) =
˜Ue( ˆW) for any st ≥ˆW.8
• If the smart device has already received a consumer request in the current episode but
has not satisﬁed this request, recall we set st = t −τg, where τg is the target time of this
request. Notice that:
1. If action “oﬀ” is selected, then with probability ˜pst,gt, the “device portion” state
transits to [st+1 = st + 1, gt+1 = gt]T at time t + 1 and the cost associated with this
transition is Φ (xt, at, xt+1) = 0.
On the other hand, with probability 1 −˜pst,gt,
the user will cancel this request at the end of time period t. In this case, the cur-
rent episode terminates and the smart device regenerates the “device portion” state
based on distribution π0 at time t + 1.
The cost associated with this transition
is Φ (xt, at, xt+1) = γ ˜Uc(st, gt), where ˜Uc is deﬁned in (6). Notice that we assume
˜pst,gt = 0 if st = W.
2. If action “on” is selected, the current cost is Φ (xt, at, xt+1) = PtC+γ ˜Ur (st, gt), where
˜Ur (st, gt) is deﬁned in (5) and C is the constant energy consumed by a standardized
8That is, when st ≥ˆ
W and action “oﬀ” is selected, with probability 1 −
t+1+W
X
τg=t+1
gmax
X
g=1
p ˆ
W ,t+1−τg,g, the smart
device will stay at the same state.
12

job. Then the current episode terminates and the smart device regenerates the “device
portion” state based on distribution π0 at time t + 1.
Note that if the transition model of the device based MDP and the dissatisfaction function
of the consumer are known, the device based MDP can be solved by dynamic programming
(DP). Following ideas in classical DP, it is straightforward to derive the Bellman equation (see
Appendix A) from which we can compute the optimal Q-function Q∗. Speciﬁcally, many DP
algorithms, such as value iteration and policy iteration, can be used to compute Q∗(see [2]).
We observe that for many DP algorithms, computing Q∗is tractable since the cardinalities of
the state space S and action space A in a device based MDP are usually small. Once Q∗is
available, one optimal policy µ∗is µ∗(xt) ∈argmina∈A Q∗(xt, a).
Under the RL formulation, we assume that the EMS initially knows the state space S, the
action space A, the discount α, the trade-oﬀparameter γ and the per-job energy consumption C;
but it does not know the state transition model or the user’s dissatisfaction function. It observes
the state transitions and the user’s evaluations (which are equal to the user’s dissatisfactions
on rescheduling under Assumption 4) as it interacts with the user and the real-time energy
price. At each time step, it aims to make good decisions based on its initial information, past
observations and current state.
4.4
Demand Response Potential
As we have discussed in Section 3, any RL algorithm can be applied to the device based MDP
model proposed in Subsection 4.3. To justify a RL algorithm achieves satisfactory performance,
we need to compare its experimental performance with respect to the baseline policy without
job rescheduling. In this subsection, we motivate and propose the notion of demand response
potential, which upper bounds the cost reduction that can be achieved by any RL algorithm.
We start by deﬁning some useful notation: we use µ : S ×A →[0, 1] to denote a (randomized
and stationary) policy of a device based MDP. Speciﬁcally, under (randomized) policy µ, at any
state x = [P, s, g]T ∈S, action a ∈A is chosen with probability µ(x, a). As is classical in DP
and RL, we use Qµ to denote the Q-function of the device based MDP under policy µ (see [17]).
Since we assume that the energy price Pt follows an exogenous ergodic Markov chain; thus,
we use πP to denote the unique stationary distribution of this price Markov chain. Moreover,
recall that once an episode terminates, the “device portion” state is regenerated according to
distribution π0. Recall that state x = [P, s, g]T , thus, we use x ∼πP × π0 to denote P ∼πP ,
[s, g]T ∼π0, and P and [s, g]T are statistically independent. We deﬁne the performance of a
policy µ as follows:
Vµ = Ex∼πP ×π0

Ea∼µ(x,·) [Qµ (x, a)|x]
	
.
(9)
We use µbase to denote the baseline policy, and are interested in how much an RL algorithm can
reduce the user’s cost with respect to Vµbase.
Recall that we use µ∗to denote the optimal policy. We deﬁne the demand response (DR)
potential as
DRP = Vµbase −Vµ∗.
(10)
By deﬁnition, DR potential is the maximum expected cost reduction that can be achieved by
DR. Obviously, in the case when the transition model and the dissatisfaction function are known,
µ∗can be derived beforehand and hence DRP is achieved. However, in the practical cases when
the EMS needs to learn µ∗through some RL algorithm, DRP is generally not achievable. We
deﬁne the relative DR potential (RDRP) as
RDRP = DRP/Vµbase = (Vµbase −Vµ∗) /Vµbase.
(11)
13

Of course, DRP and RDRP depend on the problem instance. We are particularly interested in how
DRP and RDRP vary with γ, since γ speciﬁes the consumer’s tradeoﬀbetween job rescheduling
and the electricity bill paid. Under mild conditions, we have the following results on DRP and
RDRP:
Theorem 1. If (a) the energy price is always strictly positive, (b) the user’s dissatisfaction
function satisﬁes (5-7) and is always non-negative; (c) the user’s dissatisfaction is 0 when a
user’s request is satisﬁed at its target time or is canceled before its target time, then we have that
1. Vµbase does not depend on γ.
2. There exists a γ∗> 0 s.t. µbase is an optimal policy when γ > γ∗. Thus, as γ →∞,
DRP →0.
3. DRP and RDRP are non-increasing functions of γ.
4. If γ = 0, then RDRP = 1.
Please refer to Appendix B for the proof of Theorem 1.
Note that the condition (c) is
reasonable since for a rational user, it is proper to assume his dissatisfaction is minimal if his
request is satisﬁed at the target time, or canceled by him before the target time. Condition (a)
and (b) can be achieved by shifting the dissatisfaction function and/or the energy price by a
constant.
4.5
Performance Metric
We now propose a performance metric for RL algorithms. We start by deﬁning some notation:
for any t = 0, 1, · · · , use ˜µt to denote the policy under which the RL algorithm chooses the
action at at the beginning of time period t. We deﬁne the performance of the RL algorithm as
˜V = E
" ∞
X
t=0
αtΦ (xt, ˜µt (xt) , xt+1)
#
,
(12)
note that the expectation is not only taken with respect to the initial state (similarly as (9), we
assume x0 = [P0, s0, g0]T ∼πP × π0 in (12)), but also with respect to the subsequent stochastic
transitions, noisy evaluations and possible randomizations in the RL algorithm. Note that by
deﬁnition, we have Vµ∗≤˜V .
The performance metric of an RL algorithm is its relative improvement (RI) with respect to
the baseline, which is deﬁned as
RI = (Vµbase −˜V )/Vµbase.
(13)
RI captures the normalized expected cost reduction the user will beneﬁt from an RL algorithm.
Note that since Vµ∗≤˜V , we have RI ≤RDRP. That is, the relative DR potential is an upper
bound on the relative improvement. Notice that RI can be negative, since there is no guarantee
that ˜V ≤Vµbase. We also note that the ratio RI/RDRP serves as an indicator on whether or not it
is worthy to explicitly model the user behavior/dissatisfaction and the energy price. Speciﬁcally,
if DRP is large but RI/RDRP is small for many widely used RL algorithms, then it might be worthy
to explicitly model the user behavior/dissatisfaction and the energy price, as long as the cost of
such modeling is smaller than ˜V −Vµ∗.
4.6
Possible Extensions
We now brieﬂy discuss how to extend the device based MDP model proposed in Subsection 4.3,
by relaxing the simplifying assumptions proposed in Subsection 4.1.
14

• For device clusters consisting of more than one devices, we can propose similar MDP models
with possibly higher-dimensional states. One example is a device cluster consisting of a
laundry machine and a dryer, for which we can combine these two devices as a “super
device”, and still deﬁne the state as xt = [Pt, st, gt]T , where Pt is the energy price, st is
the elapsed time9, and gt encodes information about both the stage10 and the priority of
a job.
• If there are other exogenous grid signals, and/or the statistical models of the grid signals
and the user behavior are time-varying (e.g. periodic), then we can propose a similar MDP
model by incorporating other grid signals and/or time into the state xt.
• Our proposed MDP model can be easily extended to enable the user to submit a new
request while keeping the existing uncompleted requests (known as stacking requests). One
way to achieve this is to deﬁne τg, the target time of the device, as a vector. Speciﬁcally, the
cardinality of τg is the number of uncompleted requests to this device, and its components
denote the target times of these requests. When the user submits a new request, we simply
concatenate its target time to τg.
• In practice, the user will only evaluate some completed/canceled jobs at some later time
(e.g. the end of a day). It is easy to extend our proposed MDP model to this case. One
reasonable extension is to assume there is a ﬁxed evaluation time each day (say 9pm each
day), and at the evaluation time, for each completed/canceled request in the previous 24
hours, the user will evaluate with probability peval, where peval ∈(0, 1) is the evaluation
probability. In general, peval can depend on the device, the request priority, and whether
it is completed or canceled.
5
Experiment Results
In this section, we ﬁrst brieﬂy review the classical Q-learning algorithm in Subsection 5.1. Then
we discuss a representative simulation example in Subsection 5.2. Finally, the simulation results
are demonstrated in Subsection 5.3.
5.1
The Q-Learning Algorithm
As we have discussed in Section 4, many RL algorithms can be applied to our proposed device
based RL problem. In this subsection, we implement one of the most popular and classical
RL algorithms, known as Q-learning [21]. Q-learning is an oﬀ-policy learning algorithm; that
is, it allows the learning agent to follow an exploratory policy while learning about an optimal
policy. Another desirable features of Q-learning is that it is online, incremental and is easy to
implement on real-time data.
Q-learning works based on temporal-diﬀerence learning [17]. At each time-step t the learning
algorithm receives an input data in the form of (xt, at, Φt, xt+1), where Φt
def
= Φ (xt, at, xt+1) is
the observed instantaneous cost after taking action at from state xt and arriving at state xt+1.
Then the Q-learning algorithm updates the action-value function Qt(xt, at) according to
Qt+1(xt, at) := Qt(xt, at)
+βt

Φt + α min
a′∈A Qt(xt+1, a′) −Qt(xt, at)

,
9In this example, we assume the user only cares when the dryer completes the job. Thus, there is only one
target time and the elapsed time is well-deﬁned (see (8)).
10In this example, the stage indicates if a request has been received, and if the laundry machine has completed
the request. Notice that we should not allow the EMS to do speculative jobs in this example.
15

and Qt+1(x, a) := Qt(x, a) if (x, a) ̸= (xt, at). Note Qt ∈ℜ|S||A| is the state-action value function
(Q-function) estimate in time period t, and βt > 0 denotes step-size in time period t. If the
step-size sequence satisﬁes P+∞
t=0 βt = +∞and P+∞
t=0 β2
t < +∞, then Q-learning is guaranteed
to converge to the optimal solution if all states are visited inﬁnitely often (see [17]).
To complete the description of a Q-learning algorithm, we also need to specify a behavioral
policy µb under which the algorithm chooses actions.
The choice of µb will aﬀect data and
thus would help the algorithm to learn an optimal policy faster. One main ingredient of µb
is that is it has to be exploratory policy during the learning process. One of standard, but
crude, suggestions for how to select µb is as follows: for a small 0 < ϵ < 1, with probability ϵ
(henceforth referred to as the “exploration probability”), the algorithm chooses action at from
state xt according to a randomized policy, and with probability 1 −ϵ, the algorithm chooses
at ∈argmina∈A Qt (xt, a), where Qt refers to the state-action value function estimate at time t.
Here, we consider a randomized policy in the form of Boltzmann exploration
π(at|xt) =
exp [−Qt(xt, at)/η]
P
a′∈A exp [−Qt(xt, a′)/η],
where η > 0 is a tuning parameter and is referred to as the “temperature” of the Boltzmann ex-
ploration. The Q-learning algorithm that we implement in this paper is illustrated in Algorithm
1.
Algorithm 1 The Q-Learning Algorithm
1: Initialize Q0 arbitrarily
2: Repeat for each episode j:
3: Choose a small constant step-size βj > 0 for each episode
4: for each time period t in episode j do
5:
Take action at at state xt according to the behavioral policy µb
6:
Observe the instantaneous cost Φt and new state xt+1
7:
Compute the TD error
δt := Φt + α min
a′∈A Qt
 xt+1, a′
−Qt (xt, at)
8:
Update
Qt+1(x, a) :=
 Qt(x, a) + βjδt
if (x, a) = (xt, at)
Qt(x, a)
otherwise
9: end for
5.2
Experiment Setup
In this subsection, we propose a representative example to which we apply the Q-learning algo-
rithm detailed in Algorithm 1. Speciﬁcally, in this example, we assume that the exogenous price
Markov chain has state space P = {10, 12, 15, 20}, and the consumer requests have two diﬀerent
priorities, “high” and “normal”. We set the time windows W = 4 and ˆW = 5, the discrete-time
discount α = 0.9995 and the per job energy consumption C = 1. Thus, there are |S| = 96 states
in this example. The dissatisfaction functions ˜Ur, ˜Uc and ˜Ue are illustrated in Figure 6(a), 6(b)
and 6(c). Notice that these dissatisfaction functions satisfy the conditions of Theorem 1.
As to the transition model, we assume that if the smart device has not received a consumer
request in the current episode, then under action “oﬀ”, it will receive a consumer request in the
next time step with probability pst. Notice that pst is chosen to be an increasing function of the
elapsed time st (see Figure 6(d)). We further notice that there are (W + 1)gmax = 10 types of
consumer requests (with diﬀerent target times and priorities), for simplicity, we assume these
10 types of requests are equally likely. Furthermore, if the smart device has received a consumer
16

−4
−2
0
2
4
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Elapsed Time
Dissatisfaction
 
 
Normal Priority
High Priority
(a) ˜Ur
−4
−2
0
2
4
0
5
10
15
Elapsed Time
Dissatisfaction
 
 
Normal Priority
High Priority
(b) ˜Uc
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Elapsed Time
Dissatisfaction
(c) ˜Us
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Elapsed Time
Probability
(d) ps(t)
−4
−2
0
2
4
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Elapsed Time
Probability
(e) ˆps(t)
Figure 6: Dis-satisfactions Functions and Transition Model
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Tradeoff parameter γ
Relative DR potential
Figure 7: Relative DR potential (RDRP) as a Function of γ
request in the current episode, then under action “oﬀ”, the unsatisﬁed request will be canceled
with probability ˆpst. In this example, we assume the “cancellation probability” ˆp only depends
on the elapsed time st and is independent of the priority gt. We choose ˆpst as an increasing
function of st (see Figure 6(e)). Finally, we assume that when the smart device regenerates its
state, with probability 1, the regenerated “device portion” state is [st+1 = 0, gt+1 = 0]T .
We plot the RDRP of this example as a function of the trade-oﬀparameter γ (see Figure 7).
Since this example satisﬁes the conditions of Theorem 1, thus, RDRP is a non-increasing function
of γ. Furthermore, when γ = 0, RDRP = 1, and RDRP →0 as γ →∞.
5.3
Performance
In this subsection, we present the simulation results of the Q-learning algorithm on the rep-
resentative example detailed above. We start by describing how we implement the Q-learning
algorithm. We choose the “exploration probability” ϵ = 0.05 and the “temperature” of the
softmin policy η = 0.1. For episode j, we choose the step-size βj =
10
20+j . We initialize the
Q-learning algorithm by setting Q0 = 0.
For each trade-oﬀparameter γ = 0, 0.1, 0.2, · · · , we run the Q-learning algorithm for
l
2
1−α
m
=
17

0
1
2
3
4
5
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Tradeoff parameter γ
 
 
Relative DRP
Relative Improvement
Figure 8: Relative improvement (RI) as a Function of γ
4, 000 episodes, and repeat the simulation for 200 times. Then we approximate ˜V by its sample
mean, i.e., by averaging the simulation results in these 200 simulations. Note that Vµbase can
be analytically derived based on the Bellman equation under policy µbase. Thus, RI can be
(approximately) computed based on Vµbase and the sample mean of ˜V . The simulation results
are summarized in Figure 8, where we plot the RI as function of the trade-oﬀparameter γ. Note
that we only plot the simulation results for 0 ≤γ ≤4.3, since for γ ≥4.4, we have ˜V > Vµbase.
Consequently, for γ ≥4.4, RI is negative.
We conclude this section by brieﬂy discussing about the simulation results.
Notice that
Figure 8 shows that in this representative example, RI is a decreasing function of γ.
This
implies that with all the other parameters ﬁxed, the more the user prefers “no rescheduling” to
“low energy price”, the harder for the Q-learning algorithm to achieve a signiﬁcant improvement
compared with the baseline.
6
Conclusion and Future Work
We have motivated and proposed a novel EMS formulation for the DR problem in the residential
and small commercial building sectors, which we refer to as the device based RL problem.
Speciﬁcally, we have shown that under appropriate assumptions, our proposed EMS formulation
does not require a pre-speciﬁed disutility function modeling the consumer’s dissatisfaction on job
rescheduling, and has a computational complexity that grows linearly with the number of device
clusters. Our new EMS formulation also enables the EMS to self-initiate jobs and allows the users
to the initiate more ﬂexible requests. We have also demonstrated the simulation results when
the classical Q-learning algorithm is applied to a representative example. Simulation results
suggest that for a broad range of trade-oﬀparameter γ, the Q-learning algorithm outperforms
the baseline policy without any job rescheduling.
Finally, we brieﬂy discuss some possible future work. It is worth pointing out that some
assumptions in this paper (e.g. Assumption 3) are motivated by daily observations. One possible
future work is to test these assumptions based on real-world data and statistical methods.
Moreover, in this paper, we have only applied Q-learning, one of the classical RL algorithms,
to a representative synthetic example. In the future, we plan to apply some state-of-the-art RL
algorithms (see [18, 20]) to this example, as well as other synthetic/real-world examples.
Acknowledgment
We acknowledge Prof. Benjamin Van Roy for his insightful comments on this paper.
18
