Operationally meaningful representations
of physical systems in neural networks
Hendrik Poulsen Nautrup* 1, Tony Metger* 2, Raban Iten* 2, Soﬁene Jerbi1, Lea M. Trenkwalder1,
Henrik Wilming2, Hans J. Briegel1 3, and Renato Renner2
1Institute for Theoretical Physics, University of Innsbruck, Technikerstr. 21a, A-6020 Innsbruck, Austria
2Institute for Theoretical Physics, ETH Z¨urich, 8093 Z¨urich, Switzerland
3Department of Philosophy, University of Konstanz, 78457 Konstanz, Germany
To make progress in science, we often build abstract representations of physical systems that meaning-
fully encode information about the systems. The representations learnt by most current machine learning
techniques reﬂect statistical structure present in the training data; however, these methods do not al-
low us to specify explicit and operationally meaningful requirements on the representation. Here, we
present a neural network architecture based on the notion that agents dealing with diﬀerent aspects of
a physical system should be able to communicate relevant information as eﬃciently as possible to one
another. This produces representations that separate diﬀerent parameters which are useful for making
statements about the physical system in diﬀerent experimental settings. We present examples involv-
ing both classical and quantum physics. For instance, our architecture ﬁnds a compact representation
of an arbitrary two-qubit system that separates local parameters from parameters describing quantum
correlations. We further show that this method can be combined with reinforcement learning to enable
representation learning within interactive scenarios where agents need to explore experimental settings
to identify relevant variables.
1
Introduction
Neural networks are among the most versatile and suc-
cessful tools in machine learning [1–3] and have been
applied to a wide variety of problems in physics (see [4–
6] for recent reviews).
Many of the earlier applica-
tions have focused on solving speciﬁc problems that
are intractable analytically and for which conventional
numerical methods deliver only unsatisfactory results.
Conversely, neural networks may also lead to new in-
sights into how the human brain develops physical in-
tuition from observations [7–14].
Recently, the potential role that machine learning
might play in the scientiﬁc discovery process has re-
ceived increasing attention [15–22]. This direction of
research is not only concerned with machine learning
as a useful numerical tool for solving hard problems,
but also seeks ways to establish artiﬁcial intelligence
methodologies as general-purpose tools for scientiﬁc
research.
This is motivated from various directions:
from an artiﬁcial intelligence perspective, having ma-
chines autonomously discover scientiﬁc concepts about
the world is often seen as an important step towards
artiﬁcial general intelligence [23]; from the perspective
of science, machine learning might complement human

* These authors contributed equally to this work.
scientiﬁc research to both speed up scientiﬁc discovery
and make it less susceptible to human biases.
An important step in the scientiﬁc process is to con-
vert experimental data, which can be seen as a very
high-dimensional and noisy representation of a physi-
cal system, to a more succinct representation that is
amenable to a theoretical treatment.
For example,
when we observe the trajectory of an object, the nat-
ural experiment is to record the position of the object
at diﬀerent times; however, our theories of kinemat-
ics do not use time series of positions as variables, but
rather describe the system using quantities, or param-
eters, such as velocity and initial position. Concepts
such as velocity are more versatile because they can be
used in diﬀerent ways for making predictions in many
diﬀerent physical settings.
When using neural networks to ﬁnd such parameteri-
sations, one encounters the limitation of standard tech-
niques from representation learning [24–26], an area
of machine learning devoted to problems of this type.
With these standard techniques, we are typically not
able to specify explicit criteria on the parameterisation,
such as which aspects of a system should be stored in
distinct parameters. Instead, a separation or disentan-
glement typically arises implicitly from the statistical
distribution of the training data set. This works well
for many practical problems [26]; however, for scientiﬁc
applications, it is desirable that diﬀerent parameters
1
arXiv:2001.00593v1  [quant-ph]  2 Jan 2020

Figure 1: Conceptual overview. Various agents interact with diﬀerent aspects of nature through experiments.
We assume that diﬀerent agents only deal with parts of the experimental settings to achieve their objective. This
induces structure on our description of Nature. When the agents build a model of Nature, i.e., learn to parameterise
their experimental settings, we want this model to reﬂect the structure enforced by the requirement that agents
compress and communicate parameters in the most eﬃcient way.
in the representation are relevant for diﬀerent experi-
ments one can actually perform on the system. Oth-
erwise it is likely that our model reﬂects biases we im-
plicitly, and likely unknowingly, had in collecting the
experimental data. In the following we will call a repre-
sentation that fulﬁlls this desideratum an operationally
meaningful representation.
Naturally, formulating operationally meaningful re-
quirements for a representation and translating them
to a neural network implementation depends heavily
on the speciﬁc scenario one is interested in.
In this
work, we consider a scenario which is particularly rele-
vant in the context of scientiﬁc discovery. Speciﬁcally,
we impose structure on the parameterisation of experi-
mental data1 by assuming that diﬀerent agents, which
deal with diﬀerent sets of questions, each only require
knowledge of a subset of the parameters to successfully
answer any speciﬁc question from their respective set
of questions. For instance, two agents may each have
to predict the movement of a charged particle in the
presence of an electrostatic ﬁeld: the ﬁeld’s strength
is relevant for both agents, whereas the individual pa-
rameters of each particle, such as charge, mass, etc.,
are only relevant for one agent; or many agents have to
make sequences of operations to answer whether (and if
so, how) various phenomena – such as high-dimensional
entanglement [16] – can be generated in an experiment.
More generally, the criterion for imposing structure
can be understood in terms of communicating agents.2
An ensemble of agents would like to predict the re-
sults of various experimental settings. However, only
one agent A has access to reference data from the ex-
1We consider a speciﬁc notion of measurement which we elab-
orate on in Sec. 3.
2Throughout this paper, we use the term agent in a generic
sense [27] and do not speciﬁcally mean reinforcement learning
agents.
perimental setting (which is the high-dimensional full
representation of the experimental setting). This agent
has to identify and communicate the relevant param-
eters of the system to the other agents, each of whom
only requires partial information to solve their ques-
tion. Agent A therefore splits the parameters in such
a way that the remaining agents can share them opti-
mally, in the sense that each agent requires the small-
est possible subset of parameters and that parameters
required by multiple agents are shared without redun-
dancies. We formalise this notion in Sec. 3.
In this work, we introduce a network architecture
that allows us to explicitly impose the aforementioned
operational criterion on the parameters used by a neu-
ral network to represent a physical system [15]. The
model architecture is detailed in Sec. 4. In Sec. 5 we
provide two illustrative examples of a scenario in which
agents are given (a high-dimensional representation of)
an experimental setting and are required to make a pre-
diction w.r.t. a speciﬁc question. In an example from
classical mechanics, the network autonomously distin-
guishes parameters that are only relevant to predict
the behaviour of an individual particle from parame-
ters that aﬀect the interaction between particles. This
structure arises naturally in an experiment with mul-
tiple charged particles, when diﬀerent agents have to
predict the motion of their charged particle in the pres-
ence or absence of the other agents’ charged particles.
The method is agnostic to the theory underlying an
experiment and can thus also be applied to quantum
mechanical experiments. We illustrate this by learn-
ing a representation of a two-qubit system that sep-
arates parameters relevant for two individual qubits
from those parameters describing the quantum corre-
lations between qubits. In fact, this parameterisation
is similar to the standard, analytic representation de-
scribed in Refs. [28, 29].
In Sec. 6, we consider scenarios where the answer to
2

a speciﬁc question can be described as a sequence of ac-
tions; such a sequence either does or does not achieve
a speciﬁc goal, i.e., feedback about the quality of an
action may be discrete and delayed. For instance, this
tends to be the case for optimisation problems such as
the design and control of complex systems or the devel-
opment of gadgets and software solutions for diﬀerent
scientiﬁc and technological purposes [30]. In the con-
text of scientiﬁc discovery, the speciﬁc goal may be to
build experimental settings which bring about a spe-
ciﬁc phenomenon, e.g., entanglement [16]. In such a
scenario, we may ﬁrst explore the space of experimen-
tal settings and learn solutions through reinforcement
learning [31] before applying the criterion of minimal
communication to impose structure on the parameter-
isation of experimental data.
Therefore, we provide
a formal description of reinforcement learning envi-
ronments where our architecture may capture opera-
tionally meaningful structure, and demonstrate this by
means of an illustrative example.
2
Related work
The ﬁeld of representation learning is concerned with
feature detection in raw data. While, in principle, all
deep neural network architectures learn some represen-
tation within their hidden layers, most work in repre-
sentation learning is dedicated to deﬁning and ﬁnding
good representations [24]. A desirable feature of such
representations is the interpretability of its parameters
(stored in diﬀerent neurons in a neural network). Stan-
dard autoencoders, for instance, are neural networks
which compress data during the learning process. In
the resulting representation, diﬀerent parameters in the
representation are often highly correlated and do not
have a straightforward interpretation. A lot of work
in representation learning has recently been devoted to
disentangling such representations in a meaningful way
(see e.g. [26, 32–35]). In particular, these works intro-
duce criteria, also referred to as priors in representation
learning, by which we can disentangle representations.
β-variational autoencoders.
Autoencoders are
one particular architecture used in the ﬁeld of rep-
resentation learning, whose goal is to map a high-
dimensional input vector x to a lower-dimensional la-
tent vector z using an encoding mapping E(x) = z.
For autoencoders, z should still contain all information
about x, i.e., it should be possible to reconstruct the
input vector x by applying a decoding function D to z.
The encoder E and the decoder D can be implemented
using neural networks and trained unsupervised by re-
quiring D(E(x)) = x. β-variational autoencoders (β-
VAEs) are autoencoders where the encoding is regu-
larised in order to capture statistically independent fea-
tures of the input data in separate parameters [26].
In Ref. [15] a modiﬁed β-VAE, called SciNet, was
used to answer questions about a physical system. The
criterion by which the latent representation is disentan-
gled is statistical independence equivalent to standard
β-VAE methods. In the present work, we use a simi-
lar architecture but impose an operational criterion in
terms of communicating agents for the disentanglement
of parameters.
Another prior that was recently proposed to dis-
entangle a latent representation is the consciousness
prior [36]. There, the author suggests to disentangle
abstract representations via an attention mechanism
by assuming that, at any given time, only a few inter-
nal features or concepts are suﬃcient to make a useful
statement about reality.
State Representation Learning. State represen-
tation learning (SRL) is a branch of representation
learning for interactive problems [37].
For instance,
in reinforcement learning [31] it can be used to cap-
ture the variation in an environment created by an
agent’s action [34, 35, 38, 39].
In Ref. [34] the rep-
resentation is disentangled by an independence prior
which encourages that independently controllable fea-
tures of the environment are stored in separate param-
eters. A similar approach was recently introduced in
Ref. [35] where model-based and model-free reinforce-
ment learning are combined to jointly infer a suﬃcient
representation of the environment. The abstract repre-
sentation becomes expressive by introducing represen-
tation and interpretability priors. Similarly, in Ref. [39]
robotic priors are introduced to impose a structure re-
ﬂecting the changes that occur in the world and in the
way a robot can interact with it. As shown in Ref. [35]
and [39], such requirements can lead to very natural
representations in certain scenarios such as creating an
abstract representation of a labyrinth or other naviga-
tion tasks.
In Ref. [40] many reinforcement learning agents with
diﬀerent tasks share a common representation which
is being developed during training. They demonstrate
that learning auxiliary tasks can help agents to im-
prove learning of the overall objective. One important
auxiliary task is given by a feature control prior where
the goal is to maximise the activations of hidden neu-
rons in an agent’s neural network as they may represent
task-relevant high-level features [41, 42]. However, this
representation is not expressive or interpretable to the
human eye since there is no criterion for disentangle-
ment.
Projective Simulation The projective simulation
(PS) model for artiﬁcial intelligence [43] is a model for
agency which employs a speciﬁc form of an episodic and
compositional memory to make decisions. It has found
applications in various areas of science, from quantum
physics [16, 44, 45] to robotics [46, 47] and the mod-
elling of animal behaviour [48]. Its memory consists of
a network of so-called clips which can represent basic
episodic experiences as well as abstract concepts. Be-
sides the usage for generalisation [49, 50], these clip net-
works have already been used to represent abstract con-
cepts in speciﬁc settings [17, 47]. In Ref. [17], PS was
used to infer the existence of unobserved variables such
as mass, charge or size which make an object respond in
3

certain experimental settings in diﬀerent ways. In this
context, the authors point out the signiﬁcance of ex-
ploration when considering the design of experiments,
and thereby adopt the notion of reinforcement learn-
ing similar to Ref. [16]. In line with previous works,
we will also discuss reinforcement learning methods for
the design of experimental settings.
Unlike previous
works however, we provide an interpretation and formal
description of decision processes which are speciﬁcally
amenable to representation learning. Moreover, we em-
ploy neural networks architectures to infer continuous
parameters from experimental data. In contrast, PS is
inherently discrete and therefore better suited to infer
high-level concepts.
In this work, we suggest to disentangle a latent rep-
resentation of a neural network according to an oper-
ationally meaningful principle, by which agents should
communicate as eﬃciently as possible to share relevant
information to solve their tasks. Technically, we disen-
tangle the representation according to diﬀerent ques-
tions or tasks, as described in more detail in the fol-
lowing section.
3
Formal setting
Our setting is inspired by the idea that the physically
meaningful parameters are those which are useful for
answering diﬀerent questions about or solving diﬀerent
tasks related to the same physical system. For instance,
we use the parameters mass m and charge q to describe
a particle because there exist operationally meaningful
questions about the particle in which only the mass
or only the charge is relevant, and other questions for
which both are required. If we stored m + q and m −q
instead (in some ﬁxed units), we would still have the
same information, but to answer a question just involv-
ing the mass, we would need both parameters instead
of one; in contrast, there are few, if any, operationally
meaningful questions for which only m + q is relevant.
Therefore, we say that m and q are operationally mean-
ingful parameters, whereas m + q and m −q are not.
Note that we assume a speciﬁc notion of experiments
in this paper and will continue to do so implicitly in
the following. Here we understand an experiment as a
stochastic function which maps a space of input param-
eters onto an output space representing measurement
data such that the output distribution is reproducible
for ﬁxed parameters. An experimental setting is then
an instance of an experiment with speciﬁed parameters.
We assume that we can sample many diﬀerent experi-
mental settings, i.e., sample many instance of the same
experiment with diﬀerent parameters. For example, in
an experiment involving a mass, we can sample many
experimental settings with diﬀerent (but possibly un-
known) values for this mass.
3.1
Communicating agents
Here, we consider the following generic setting (see
Fig. 2(a)).
Various agents have access to a physical
system in form of e.g., measurement data. However,
not all agents have access to the same data and some
agents need to communicate with each other in or-
der to answer a question or solve a task within this
physical system. The constraint that agents need to
communicate eﬃciently imposes structure on the rep-
resentation of the communicated data.
In the sim-
plest case, a single encoding agent A makes an ob-
servation o ∈O on a physical system with randomly
chosen unknown parameters and generates a param-
eterised representation r ∈R, where O is the set of
possible observations and R is a representational pa-
rameter space. For instance, the agent could observe a
time series of particle positions and represent the ve-
locity parameter. Other, decoding agents B1, . . . , Bk
are given questions q1, . . . , qk randomly sampled from
Q1, . . . , Qk, respectively, and are required to produce
an answer ai(o, qi). For now, we assume that both the
observation o and the optimal answer a∗
i (o, qi) ∈Ai
may be obtained directly from the respective experi-
mental setting. In Sec. 6, we consider the case where
the optimal answer is not immediately apparent from
an observation o but may be learnt through reinforce-
ment learning. Formally, one data sample consists of

o,
 q1, . . . , qk

,
 a∗
1(o, q1), . . . , a∗
k(o, qk)

. To generate
the training data set, we collect such samples for many
conﬁgurations of the unknown parameters of the phys-
ical system and many randomly chosen questions. By
contrast, in Sec. 6 the training data is eﬀectively gen-
erated by a trained reinforcement learning agent. In
practice, we can represent observations, questions and
answers as tuples of real numbers, and we will do so
implicitly for the rest of this paper. Instead of having
access to the entire observation o, B1, . . . , Bk only re-
ceive (part of) the encoding r. That is, A is required
to communicate part of its representation to the other
agents such that they can solve their respective tasks
optimally.
The values (o, qi, a∗
i ) are related to our notion of ex-
periments (see Fig. 3) in the following way.
An ex-
periment E = (E1, . . . , Ek) maps a parameter space Φ
and a question space Qi onto a result space Ai, i.e.
Ei : Φ × Qi →Ai.
The parameters in Φ may be
(partially) hidden or not directly observable, and we
would like to learn a representation for them. There-
fore, we construct a reference experiment Er which can
be used to generate measurement data o as a high-
dimensional representation of the hidden parameters,
i.e., Er : Φ →O. This experiment is labeled the ref-
erence because it provides the data which is used, or
referenced, in parts by the other agents to make pre-
dictions.
Questions may be considered as additional
parameters of the experiment of which we do not seek
to ﬁnd a representation, but which are useful for ﬁnd-
ing meaningful representations of the parameters in Φ.
4

(a)
(b)
Figure 2: Communicating agents and an implementation with neural networks. (a) In the generic com-
munication setting that we consider, agents have access to information (e.g., observations) about the environment,
which can be considered as a physical system, and can interact with part of it (e.g., by making predictions).
Diﬀerent agents may observe or interact with diﬀerent subsystems, but might not have access to other parts of the
environment. To solve certain tasks, agents may require information that can only be accessed by other agents.
Therefore, the agents have to communicate. To this end, they encode their information into a representation that
can be communicated eﬃciently to other agents, i.e., they have to ﬁnd an eﬃcient “language” to share relevant
information. Arrows passing through boundaries represent interactions with the physical system in form of data
gathering or predictions. Arrows between agents suggest possible communication channels. (b) In the speciﬁc
settings that we consider, an encoding agent maps an observation (given as a sample) obtained from the cur-
rent experimental setting onto a latent representation, part of which has to be communicated to decoding agents.
Decoding agents receive additional information specifying the question which they are required to answer; for ex-
ample, the question may just deﬁne the problem setting. In our architecture, we thus view the question as coming
from the environment, but in general, it could also include information from other agents. The functions E, ϕi, Di,
representing encoder, ﬁlter, and decoder respectively, are each implemented as neural networks. To answer a given
question, each decoder receives the part of the representation that is transmitted by its ﬁlter. The cost function
is designed to minimise the error of the answer and the amount of information that is being transmitted from the
encoder to decoders, which can be seen as minimising the amount of parameters that have to be communicated
between agents.
Given the hidden parameters (encoded in o ∈O) and
question (encoded in qi ∈Qi), the experiment produces
some results a∗
i ∈Ai which may be used to evaluate
the answer given by an agent Bi.
3.2
Learning objectives
The operational criteria or learning objectives impos-
ing structure on a representation take the form of dif-
ferent losses, which are often referred to as priors in
representation learning [35, 36, 39]. In our case, the
representation is generated under two criteria:
• With a prediction loss we impose that agents need
to learn to answer their questions as accurately as
possible, given (part of) the representation.
• With a communication loss, we impose that agents
have to share the representation in the most data-
eﬃcient way.
In other words, the objective of the ensemble of agents
A, B1, . . . , Bk is to correctly answer as many questions
as possible, while also minimising the communication
between A and the other agents. Therefore, A needs
to disentangle its representation in a way that allows
it to communicate the relevant parameters. More for-
mally, we specify the encoding agent A by a function
E : O →R ≡Rl for some l (see Fig 2). This func-
tion can be thought of as an encoding from the high-
dimensional experimental observation o to a lower-
dimensional vector of physically relevant parameters.
In representation learning, the output of this function
is called the representation. Each decoding agent Bi
is speciﬁed by a ﬁlter ϕi : Rl →Rli and a function
Di : Rli × Qi →Ai such that the answer produced
by the agent given an observation o and question qi
5

Measurement
Question
Answer
Hidden Parameters
Reference 
Experiment
Prediction
Experiment
Measurement
Loss
Data
Agents
Figure 3: Experimental settings for representation learning. Here, we illustrate the type of experiments that
is used to provide data to agents. In our notion of experiments, experimental measurement results are governed by
(hidden) parameters depicted as gears. When designing experiments (pictured as a complex network of gears) for
the speciﬁc examples in Sec. 5, we start with reference experiments whose measurement results (data) comprise a
high-dimensional encoding of the hidden parameters. This data is referenced by other agents to make predictions,
hence the name. With the encoding and additional information given as a question, our architecture can produce
predictions (or answers) about the results of similar experimental settings, dubbed prediction experiments. Insofar
as diﬀerent agents answer diﬀerent questions, their prediction experiments may yield distinct outcomes. Those
parts of an experiment that are associated with a (coloured) agent are depicted by the same colouring. In our
setting, questions may inﬂuence the prediction experiment in various ways. For instance, we consider experiments
where questions are encoded by specifying additional parameters of the experiment given to an agent as low- or
high-dimensional representation (see Sec. 5). We also study the minimal case where questions are constant and
just distinguish the tasks of diﬀerent agents in Sec. 6.
is ai(o, qi) = Di

ϕi
 E(o)

, qi

(see Fig 2). The ﬁlter
eﬀectively restricts the agent’s access to the representa-
tion by only transmitting a part of the representation;
formally, ϕi(r1, . . . , rl) = (rj1, . . . , rjli). We call li the
dimension dim(ϕi) of the ﬁlter. Intuitively, one may
imagine that the dimension and the indices j1, . . . , jli
of the transmitted components can be chosen by the
agent. It is important that the ﬁlter is independent of
the observation and question, since the transmission of
parameters to agents should not depend on a partic-
ular data sample, but is instead viewed as a property
of the theory that applies to all data samples equally.
The function Di, called a decoder, takes the transmit-
ted part of the representation and the question and
produces an answer. Ideally, agent A produces a rep-
resentation which allows each agent Bi to answer its
questions correctly while only accessing the smallest-
possible part of the representation.
3.3
Multiple encoding agents
Up to now, we have assumed that there exists one
agent A who has access to the entire system to make
an observation and to communicate its representation.
However, just as diﬀerent decoding agents Bi only deal
with a part of the system, we can consider the more
general scenario of having multiple encoding agents
A1, . . . , Aj. In this scenario, each agent Ai makes dif-
ferent measurements on the system. For example, one
agent might make a collision experiment between two
particles, while another observes the trajectory of a
particle in an external ﬁeld. Here, only the aggregate
observations of all agents A1, . . . , Aj provide suﬃcient
information about the system required for the agents
B1, . . . , Bk to make predictions.
The formalisation is analogous to the previous sec-
tion and we only sketch it here: we associate to each
agent Ai an encoder function Ei. The domain of the
ﬁlter functions of the agents B1, . . . , Bk is now a carte-
sian product of the output spaces of the encoders (i.e.,
the output vectors of the encoders are concatenated
and used as inputs to the ﬁlters).
In the case where a physical system has an oper-
ationally natural division into k interacting subsys-
tems, a typical case would be to have the same num-
ber of encoding agents A1, . . . , Ak as decoding agents
B1, . . . , Bk, where both Ai and Bi act on the same i-th
subsystem. Here, we expect that Ai and Bi are highly
correlated, i.e., the ﬁlter for Bi transmits almost all in-
formation from Ai, but less from other agents Aj. In
this case, one can intuitively think of a single agent per
subsystem i, that ﬁrst makes an observation about that
subsystem, then communicates with the other agents
6

to account for the interaction between subsystems, and
uses the information obtained from the communication
to make a prediction about subsystem i.
4
Model implementation
Here, we discuss the details of the implementation and
training of E, ϕi and Di (see Fig 2). For brevity, we
consider the case of a single encoding agent. The im-
plementation of the multi-encoder scenario is analo-
gous.
The functions E, ϕi, Di are each implemented
as neural networks.
The encoder and decoder func-
tions of the agents can be easily implemented using
fully connected deep neural networks analogously to
the architecture from Ref. [15].
To be more precise,
the encoder is simply a deep neural network that maps
a high-dimensional input to a low dimensional output
consisting of a few so-called latent neurons. After being
passed through the ﬁlter functions (which will be de-
scribed in detail later) the representation is forwarded
to all decoders. Additionally, each decoder receives a
corresponding question vector as input. The decoder’s
neural network maps these to an output representing
the answer.
While encoder and decoder are easy to implement,
the implementation of ﬁlter functions ϕi poses a diﬃ-
culty because these essentially need to learn a binary
value, “on” or “oﬀ”, for each of the latent neurons.
Learning such discontinuous functions is not possible
with standard backpropagation-based gradient descent.
Therefore, we will need to introduce a smoothed version
of this problem. However, we ﬁrst need to understand
the measure of success, i.e. the loss function that will
be minimised.
4.1
Learning objectives as loss functions
As described above, the learning objective can be ex-
pressed in terms of loss or cost functions which are to
be minimised by the ensemble of agents. The overall
performance of the ensemble is quantiﬁed by a weighted
sum of the following terms:
• Prediction losses La,i = (ai(o, qi)−a∗
i (o, qi))2 that
measures how well the decoder answers the ques-
tion.
• A communication loss Lf
= P
i dim(ϕi) that
counts the total number of parameters transmitted
to the agents B1, . . . , Bk.
In
order
to
minimise
the
total
cost,
the
neu-
ral
network
corresponding
to
the
agent
en-
semble
is
then
trained
on
a
set
of
triples

o,
 q1, . . . , qk

,
 a∗
1(o, q1), . . . , a∗
k(o, qk)

.
As
de-
scribed in the previous section, this data is provided in
the form of measurement data obtained from various
experimental settings.
4.2
Implementation of ﬁlters
Due to the diﬃculty of implementing a binary value
function with neural networks, we need to replace the
ideal cost Lf by a comparable version with a smooth
ﬁlter function. To this end, instead of viewing the la-
tent layer as the deterministic output of the encoder
(the generalisation to multiple decoders is immediate),
we consider each latent neuron j as being sampled from
a normal distribution N(µj, σj). The sampling is per-
formed using the renormalisation trick [51], which al-
lows gradients to propagate through the sampling step.
The encoder outputs the expectation values µj for all
latent neurons.
The logarithms of the standard de-
viations log(σj) are provided by neurons, which we
call selection neurons, that take no input and output
a bias; the value of the bias can be modiﬁed during
training using backpropagation. Using the logarithm
of the standard deviation has the advantage that it
can take any value, whereas the standard deviation it-
self is restricted to positive values. The ideal ﬁlter loss
Lf = P
j dim(ϕj) is replaced by ˜Lf = −P
j log(σj).
The intuition for this scheme is as follows: when the
network chooses σj to be small (where the standard
deviation of µj over the training set is used as normal-
isation), the decoder will usually obtain a sample that
is close to the mean µj; this corresponds to the ﬁlter
transmitting this value. In contrast, for a large value
of σj, a sample from N(µj, σj) is usually far from the
mean µj; this corresponds to the ﬁlter blocking this
value. The loss ˜Lf is minimised when many of the σj
are large, i.e., when the ﬁlter blocks many values.
Instead of thinking of probability distributions, one
can also view this scheme as adding noise to the latent
variables, with σj specifying the amount of noise added
to the j-th latent neuron. If σj is large, the noise ef-
fectively hides the value of this latent neuron, so the
decoder cannot make use of it.
We also note that ˜Lf is in principle unbounded.
However, in practice this does not present a problem
since the decoder can only approximately, but not per-
fectly, ignore the noisy latent neurons. For suﬃciently
large σj, the noise will therefore noticeably aﬀect the
decoders’ predictions, and the additional loss incurred
by worse predictions dominates the reduction in ˜Lf ob-
tained from larger values for σj.
The success of this method to lead to an approxi-
mation of a binary ﬁlter depends on the weighting of
the success loss in relation to the communication loss.
This weight is a hyperparameter of the machine learn-
ing system.
5
Examples with simple systems
We demonstrate our method, both for single and mul-
tiple encoders, on two examples, one from classical me-
chanics, one from quantum mechanics. In all cases, the
network ﬁnds a representation that complies with our
operational requirements. We emphasise again that we
7

(a)
(b)
Figure 4: Toy example from classical mechanics with charged masses.
(a) There are two separated
decoding agents, so there is no interaction between their individual experimental setups. Each agent is required
to shoot a mass mi into a hole in the presence of a ﬁxed gravitational ﬁeld. They do this by elastically colliding
a projectile of ﬁxed mass mﬁx with the mass mi. The distance to the hole is ﬁxed. The agents are given the
velocity with which the projectile is shot as a question. The correct answer is the angle out of the plane of the
table s.t. if the projectile is ﬁred with the given velocity at this angle, the mass mi lands directly in the hole. (b)
Now we consider two decoding agents that are subject to the Coulomb interaction between their charged masses.
Each agent is again required to shoot a projectile at its charged mass (mi, qi). The charged mass will move in
the Coulomb ﬁeld of the other agent’s charge. Similar to the ﬁrst situation, each agent is given a velocity vi as
a question and has to predict an angle (this time in the plane of the table, i.e., gravity does not play a role) s.t.
if the mass is ﬁred at this angle, it will roll into the hole while the position of the other charge stays ﬁxed. (The
experiment is then repeated with the roles of the agents reversed, i.e., the agent that ﬁrst ﬁred his mass now ﬁxes
it at its starting position, and vice versa.)
refer to the term of experiment in order to describe a
function mapping input parameters onto measurement
data. An experimental setting is then an instance of
an experiment with speciﬁed parameters and we as-
sume access to a sampling method that produces ex-
perimental settings with varying parameters.
In de-
signing the following example experiments we follow
the approach in Fig. 3 specifying reference and predic-
tion experiments.
5.1
Charged masses
5.1.1
Setup
We consider the setup shown in Fig. 4: take parti-
cles with masses m1, m2 and charges q1, q2, where both
masses and charges are parameters that are varied be-
tween training examples. To generate the input data
which is provided to the encoding agent A, we perform
the following two reference experiments:
1. We elastically collide each of the particles with
masses mi, initially at rest, with a reference mass
mref moving at a ﬁxed reference velocity vref, and
observe a time series of positions (x1, . . . , xn) of
the particle mi after the collision. In practice, we
use n = 10.
2. For each of the particles (mi, qi), we place the par-
ticle at the origin at rest, and place a reference
particle (mref, qref) with ﬁxed mass and charge at
a ﬁxed distance d0. Both particles are free to move.
We observe a time series of positions of the particle
(mi, qi) as it moves due to the Coulomb interaction
between itself and the reference particle.
Diﬀerent agents now are required to answer diﬀerent
questions about the system in form of a prediction ex-
periment (cf. Fig. 3). In this context, these questions
can most easily be phrased as the agents trying to win
games, both involving a target hole. The initial posi-
tions of the particles and the target holes are ﬁxed.
• Agents B1 and B2 each are given projectiles with a
ﬁxed mass mﬁx. As question input, they are given
the (variable) velocity vi with which this projec-
tile will hit mi.
They can vary the angle αi in
the yz-plane with which they shoot this projectile
against the mass mi. After being hit, the mass will
ﬂy towards the target hole under the inﬂuence of
gravity. The agent’s goal is to hit the mass in pre-
cisely such a way that it lands directly in the hole,
similar to a golfer attempting a lob shot that lands
directly in the hole without bouncing. The predic-
tion loss is given by the squared diﬀerence between
the angle chosen by the agent and the correct an-
gle that would have landed the mass directly in the
hole; this correct angle can be determined by ex-
periments on the system. Alternatively, one could
use the minimal distance of the trajectory of the
particle to the hole as a cost function.
• Similarly, agents B3 and B4 are given projectiles.
The velocities of these projectiles are again given
as a question input. The goal of the agent is to
choose the angle ϕi in the xy-plane so that when
8

the mass moves in the Coulomb ﬁeld of the other
mass (which stays ﬁxed, then the experiment is
repeated with the roles of moving and ﬁxed mass
reversed for the other agent), it will roll into the
hole.
In both cases, we restrict the velocities given as ques-
tions to ones where there actually exists a (unique)
angle that makes the particle land in the hole.
5.1.2
Results
To analyse the learnt representation, we plot the ac-
tivation of the latent neurons for diﬀerent examples
with diﬀerent (known) values of m1, m2, q1, q2 against
those known values.
This corresponds to comparing
the learnt representation to a hypothesised representa-
tion that we might already have. The plots are shown
in Fig. 5. The ﬁrst and second latent neurons are lin-
ear in m1 and m2, respectively, and independent of
the charges; the third latent neuron has an activation
that resembles the function q1·q2 and is independent of
the masses. This means that the ﬁrst and third latent
neurons store the masses individually, as would be ex-
pected since the setup in Fig. 4(a) only requires individ-
ual masses and no charges. The third neuron roughly
stores the product of the charges, i.e., the quantity rel-
evant for the strength of the Coulomb interaction be-
tween the charges. This is used by the agents dealing
with the setup in Fig. 4(b), where the particle’s tra-
jectory depends on the Coulomb interaction with the
other particle.
5.1.3
Multiple encoders
One can easily adapt the above example to the multi-
encoder setting described in Sec. 3.3. Instead of having
a single agent A, we use two agents A1 and A2, where
agent Ai only observes the results of the reference ex-
periment associated with particle i.
We provide de-
tailed results in Appendix A. The main ﬁnding is that
there is no way for the encoding agents to directly en-
code the product of the charges q1 ·q2 anymore because
each agent only has access to reference experiments in-
volving a single charge.
Instead, the representation
produced by each encoding agent now stores qi indi-
vidually (in addition to the mass mi as before). Hence,
the additional structure imposed by splitting the en-
coding agent in two yields further disentanglement of
the physical parameters of the system, allowing us to
identify the individual charges rather than merely their
product.
5.2
Local representation of two-qubit states
5.2.1
Setup
We consider a two-qubit system, i.e., a four dimen-
sional quantum system.
Finding a representation of
such a system from measurement data is a non-trivial
task called quantum state tomography [52]. In our op-
erational setting, an agent A has access to a reference
experiment consisting of two devices, where the ﬁrst
device creates (many copies of) a quantum system in a
state ρ, i.e., a positive semi-deﬁnite 4 × 4 matrix with
unit trace, which depends on the parameters of the de-
vice. The second device can perform binary measure-
ments (with output “zero” or “one”), described by pro-
jections |ψ⟩⟨ψ|, where |ψ⟩is a pure state of two qubits.
3 For the reference experiments, we ﬁx 75 randomly
chosen binary measurements |ψ1⟩⟨ψ1| , . . . , |ψ75⟩⟨ψ75|.
For a given state ρ, the input to the encoder A then
consists of the probabilities to get “one” for each of
the ﬁxed 75 measurements, respectively. The state ρ is
varied between training examples.
Three agents B1, B2 and B3 are now required to an-
swer diﬀerent questions about prediction experiments
with the two-qubit system:
• Agent B1 and B2 are asked questions about mea-
surement output probabilities on the ﬁrst and sec-
ond qubit, respectively.
• Agent B3 is asked to predict joint measurement
output probabilities on both qubits.
More concretely, the question inputs consist of a bi-
nary measurement |ω⟩⟨ω| (on one or two qubits, re-
spectively), parametrised again by 75 randomly cho-
sen projectors |ϕ1⟩⟨ϕ1| , . . . , |ϕ75⟩⟨ϕ75|.
That is, the
i-th question input corresponds to the probabilities
p(ω, ϕi) := |⟨ϕi|ω⟩|2 for all i ∈{1, . . . , 75}.
5.2.2
Results
We ﬁnd that three latent neurons are used for each of
the local qubit representations as required by agents B1
and B2. These local representations store combinations
of the x-,y- and z-component of the Bloch sphere repre-
sentation ρ = 1/2(1+xσx +yσy +zσz) of a singe qubit
(see Fig. 6), where σx, σy, σz denote the Pauli matrices.
In general, a two-qubit mixed state ρ is described by 15
parameters, since a Hermitian 4×4 matrix is described
by 16 parameters, and one parameter is determined by
the others due to the unit trace condition. Indeed, we
ﬁnd that the agent who has to predict the outcomes of
the joint measurements accesses 15 latent neurons, in-
cluding the ones storing the two local representations.
Having chosen a network structure with 20 latent neu-
rons, the 5 superﬂuous neurons are being successfully
recognised and ignored by all of the agents B1, B2 and
B3. These numbers correspond to the numbers found
in the analytical approach in Ref. [28].
3The probability to get outcome “one” for a measurement
|ψ⟩⟨ψ| is given by p(ρ, ψ) := ⟨ψ| ρ |ψ⟩.
9

Figure 5: Results for the classical mechanics example with charged masses. The used network has 3
latent neurons and each column of plots corresponds to one latent neuron. For the ﬁrst row we generated input
data with ﬁxed charges q1 = q2 = 0.5 and variable masses m1, m2 in order to plot the activation of latent neurons
as a function of the masses. We observe that latent neuron 1 and 2 store the masses m1, m2 respectively while
latent neuron 3 remains constant. In the second row, we plot the neurons’ activation in response to q1, q2 with
ﬁxed masses m1, m2 = 5. Here, the third latent neuron approximately stores q1 · q2, which is the relevant quantity
for the Coulomb interaction while the other neurons are independent of the charges.
The third row shows which decoder receives information from the respective latent neuron. Roughly, the y-axis
quantiﬁes how much information of the latent neuron is transmitted by the 4 ﬁlters to the associated decoder as a
function of the training epoch. Positive values mean that the ﬁlter does not transmit any information. Decoders
1 and 2 perform non-interaction experiments with particles (m1, q1) and (m2, q2), respectively. Decoders 3 and
4 perform the corresponding interaction experiments. As expected, we observe that the information about m1
(latent neuron 1) is received by decoders 1 and 3 and the information about m2 (latent neuron 2) is used by
decoders 2 and 4. Since decoders 3 and 4 answer questions about interaction experiments, the product of charges
(latent neuron 3) is received only by them (the green line of decoder 3 in the last plot is hidden below the red
one).
6
Reinforcement learning
So far, we have considered scenarios where agents make
predictions about speciﬁc experimental settings and
disentangle a latent representation by answering var-
ious questions. There, we understood answering dif-
ferent questions as making predictions about diﬀerent
aspects of a subsystem. Instead, we could have under-
stood answers as sequences of actions that achieve a
speciﬁc goal. For example, such a (delayed) goal may
arise when building experimental settings that bring
about a speciﬁc phenomenon, or more generally when
designing or controlling complex systems. In particu-
lar, we may view a prediction as a one-step sequence.
In the case of predictions, it is easy to evaluate the
quality of a prediction, since we are predicting quanti-
ties whose actual value we can directly observe in Na-
ture. In contrast, the correct sequences of actions may
not be easily accessible from a given experimental set-
ting: upon taking a ﬁrst action, we do not yet know
whether this was a good or bad action, i.e., whether it is
part of a “correct” sequence of actions or not. Instead,
10

Figure 6: Results for the quantum mechanics example with two-qubit states. We consider a quantum-
mechanical system of two qubits. An encoder A maps tomographic data of a two-qubit state to a representation
of the state. Three agents B1, B2 and B3 are asked questions about the measurement output probabilities on
the two-qubit system, where a question is given as the parameterisation of a measurement. Agents B1 and B2
are asked to predict measurement outcome probabilities on the ﬁrst and second qubit, respectively. The third
agent B3 is tasked to predict measurement probabilities for arbitrary measurements on the full two-qubit system.
Starting with 20 available latent neurons, we ﬁnd that only 15 latent neurons are used to store the parameters
required to answer the questions of all agents B1, B2 and B3. Agent B3 requires access to all parameters, while
agents B1 and B2 need only access to two disjoint sets of three parameters, encoded in latent neurons 3,4,13 and
9,10,17, respectively. The plots show the activation values for these latent neurons in response to changes in the
local degrees of freedom of each qubit, with the bottom axes of the plots denoting the components of the reduced
one-qubit state ρ = 1/2(1 + x σx + y σy + z σz) on either qubit 1 or 2.
we might only receive a few, sparsely distributed, dis-
crete rewards while taking actions. In the typical case,
there is only a binary reward at the end of a sequence of
actions, specifying whether we reached the desired goal
or not. Even in a setting where a single action suﬃces
to reach a goal, such a binary reward would prevent
us from deﬁning a useful answer loss in the same man-
ner as before. To see this, consider the toy example
in Fig. 4a again: the agent had to choose an angle αi,
given a (representation of the) setting, speciﬁed by the
parameters (mfix, m1, q1, m2, q2) and a question vi, in
order to shoot the particle into the hole. We assumed
that we can evaluate the “quality” of the angle cho-
sen by the agent by comparing it to the optimal angle
(or equivalently measuring the distance between the
agent’s shot and the hole). If we instead only have ac-
cess to a binary reward specifying whether or not the
agent successfully hit the (ﬁnite-sized) hole, we can-
not deﬁne a smooth answer loss, which is required for
training a neural network.
The problem that the feedback from the environ-
ment, i.e., the reward, is discrete or delayed can both
be solved by viewing the situation as a reinforcement
learning environment: given a representation of the set-
ting (described by the masses and charges) and a ques-
tion (a velocity), the agent can take diﬀerent actions
(corresponding to diﬀerent angles at which the mass is
shot) and receives a binary reward if the mass lands
in the hole. Therefore, we can employ reinforcement
learning techniques and learn the optimal answer.
In reinforcement learning [31], an agent learns to
choose actions that maximise its expected, cumulative,
future, discounted reward. In the context of our toy
example, we would expect a trained agent to always
11

choose the optimal angle.
Hence, predicting the be-
haviour of a trained agent would be equivalent to pre-
dicting the optimal answer and would impose the same
structure on the parameterisation. In this example, the
optimal solution consists of a single choice. In a more
complex setting, it might not be possible to perform
a (literal and metaphorical) hole-in-one. Generally, an
optimal answer may require sequences of (discrete or
continuous) actions, as it is for example the case for
most control scenarios. In the settings we henceforth
consider, questions might no longer be parameterised
or given to the agent at all. That is, the question may
be constant and just label the task that the agent has
to solve.
In this section, we impose structure on the parame-
terisation of an experimental setting by assuming that
diﬀerent agents only require a subset of parameters to
take a successful sequence of actions given their respec-
tive goals.
To this end, we explain how experimen-
tal settings may be understood in terms of instances
of a reinforcement learning environment and demon-
strate that our architecture is able to generate an oper-
ationally meaningful representation of a modiﬁed stan-
dard reinforcement learning environment by predicting
the behaviour of trained agents.
Moreover, in Appendix C, we lay out the details for
the algorithm that allows us to generate and disen-
tangle the parameterisation of a reinforcement learn-
ing environment given various reinforcement learning
agents trained on diﬀerent tasks within the same envi-
ronment. There, we also prove that this algorithm pro-
duces agents which are at least as good as the trained
agents while only observing part of the disentangled
abstract representation. The detailed architecture used
for learning is described in Appendix D and is comb-
ing methods from GPU-accelerated actor-critic archi-
tectures [53] and deep energy-based models [54] for pro-
jective simulation [43].
6.1
Experiments as reinforcement learning envi-
ronments
In Ref. [16] the design of experimental settings has
been framed in terms of reinforcement learning [31] and
here we formulate a similar setting: an agent interacts
with experimental settings to achieve certain results.
At each step the agent observes the current measure-
ment data and/or setting and is asked to take an ac-
tion regarding the current setting.
This action may
for instance aﬀect the parameters of an experimental
setting and hence might change the obtained measure-
ment data. The measurement results are subsequently
evaluated and the agent might receive a reward if the
results are identiﬁed as “successful”. The correspon-
dence between experiments as described in this section
and reinforcement learning environments can be under-
stood as follows (cf. Fig. 7a). An experimental setting
is interpreted as the current, internal state of an envi-
ronment. The measurement data then corresponds to
the observation received from the environment. The
agent performs an action according to the current ob-
servation and its question. Actions may aﬀect the in-
ternal state of the experimental setting. For instance,
the experimental parameters describing the setting can
be adjusted or chosen by an agent through actions.
The reward function, which takes the current measure-
ment data as input, describes the objective that is to
be achieved by an agent.
Since the same experiment can serve more than
one purpose, we can have many agents interact with
the same experimental setting to achieve diﬀerent re-
sults. In fact, we can expect most experiments to be
highly complex and have many applications. For in-
stance, photonic experiments have a plethora of appli-
cations [55] and various experimental and theoretical
gadgets have been developed with these tools for diﬀer-
ent tasks [56–58]. In this context, we may task various
agents to develop gadgets for diﬀerent task. At ﬁrst, we
assume that all reinforcement learning agents have ac-
cess to the entire measurement data. Once they have
learnt to solve their respective tasks, we can employ
our architecture from the previous section to predict
each agent’s behaviour. Eﬀectively, we can then fac-
torise the representation of the measurement data by
imposing that only a minimal amount of information
be required to predict the behaviour of each trained
reinforcement learning agent.
That is, we interpret
the space of possible results in an experiment as high-
dimensional manifold. When solving a given task how-
ever, an agent may only need to observe a submanifold
which we want to parameterise.
Due to the close resemblance to reinforcement learn-
ing, we consider a standard problem in reinforcement
learning in the following and demonstrate that our ar-
chitecture is able to generate an operationally meaning-
ful representation of the environment. More formally,
we consider partially-observable Markov decision pro-
cesses [59] (POMDP). Given the stationary policy of a
trained agent, we impose structure on the observation
and action space of the POMDP by discarding obser-
vations and actions which are rarely encountered. This
structure deﬁnes the submanifold which we attempt to
parameterise with our architecture. A detailed descrip-
tion of these environments is provided in Appendix B.
6.2
Example with a standard reinforcement
learning environment
6.2.1
Setup
Here, we consider the simplest version of a task that is
deﬁned on a high-dimensional manifold while the be-
haviour of a trained agent may become restricted to
a submanifold. Consider a simple grid world task [31]
where all agents can move freely in a three-dimensional
space whereas only a subspace is relevant to ﬁnding
their respective rewards (see Fig. 7b). Despite the ap-
parent simplicity of this task, actual experimental set-
tings may be understood as navigation tasks in com-
12

Environment
action
observation
 
and reward
Agent
Control Parameters
Question
Measurement
and Analysis
(a)
x
y
z
Agent 3
Agent 1
Agent 2
(b)
Figure 7: Experiments and reinforcement learning environments. (a) In reinforcement learning an agent
interacts with an environment. The agent can perform actions on the environment and receives perceptual infor-
mation in form of an observation, i.e. the current state of the environment, and a reward which evaluates the
agent’s performance. An agent can also interact with an experimental setting (pictured as a complex network of
gears) to answer its question by e.g., adjusting some control parameters (represented as red gears). It receives
perceptual information in form of measurement data which may also have been analysed to provide an additional
assessment of the current setting. (b) Sub-grid world environment. In this modiﬁed, standard reinforcement learn-
ing environment, agents are required to ﬁnd a reward in a 3D grid world. Diﬀerent agents are assigned diﬀerent
planes in which their respective rewards are located. Agents observe their position in the 3D gridworld and can
move along any of the three spatial dimensions. An agent receives a reward once it has found the X in the grid.
Then, the agent is reset to an arbitrary position and the reward is moved to a ﬁxed position in a plane intersecting
the agent’s initial position.
plicated mazes [16]. This reinforcement learning envi-
ronment can be phrased as a simple game.
• Three reinforcement learning agents are positioned
randomly within a discrete 12×12×12 grid world.
• The rewards for the agents are located in a (x, y)-,
(y, z)- and (x, z)-plane relative to their respective
initial positions. The locations of the rewards in
their respective planes are ﬁxed to (6, 11), (11, 6)
and (6, 6).
• The agents observe their position in the grid, but
not the grid itself nor the reward.
• The agents can move freely along all three spatial
dimension but cannot move outside the grid.
• An agent receives a reward if it can ﬁnd the re-
warded site within 400 steps.
Otherwise, it is
reset to a random position and the reward is
re-positioned appropriately in the corresponding
plane.
Generally, in reinforcement learning the goal is to max-
imise the expected future reward. In this case, this re-
quires an agent to minimise the number of steps until
a reward is encountered. Therefore, the optimal policy
of an agent is to move on the shortest path towards
the position of the reward within the assigned plane.
Clearly, to predict the behaviour of an optimal agent,
we require only knowledge of its position in the asso-
ciated plane.
We refer to Appendix C for a concise
protocol to predict behaviour of a reinforcement learn-
ing agent. A detailed description of the architecture
can be found in Appendix D.
6.2.2
Results
The optimal policy of an agent is to move on the short-
est path towards the position of the reward within its
assigned plane. Predicting the behaviour of an opti-
mal agent, we require only knowledge of its position
in the associated plane. Hence, the information about
the coordinates should be separated such that the dif-
ferent agents have access to (x, y), (y, z) and (x, z), re-
spectively. Using the minimal number of parameters,
this is only possible if the encoding agent A encodes
the x, y, z coordinates of the agents B1, B2 and B3 and
communicates their respective position in the plane4.
We verify this by comparing the learnt representa-
tion to a hypothesised representation.
For instance,
we can test whether certain neurons respond to cer-
tain features in the experimental setting, i.e., reinforce-
ment learning environment. Indeed, it can be seen from
Fig. 8 that the neurons of the latent layer only respond
separately to changes in the x, y or z position of an
agent respectively. Note that the encoding agent uses
a nonlinear encoding of the x- and z-parameters. In-
terestingly, this reﬂects the symmetries in the problem:
4Because the observation space is discrete, an encoding agent
can, in principle, “cheat” and encode multiple coordinates into a
single neuron. In practice, this does not happen for suﬃciently
large state spaces.
13

x-axis
0
2
4
6
8
10
y-axis
0
2
4
6
8
10
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Latent neuron
activation
Latent neuron 1
x-axis
0
2
4
6
8
10
y-axis
0
2
4
6
8
10
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Latent neuron 2
x-axis
0
2
4
6
8
10
y-axis
0
2
4
6
8
10
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Latent neuron 3
y-axis
0
2
4
6
8
10
z-axis
0
2
4
6
8
10
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Latent neuron
activation
x-axis
0
2
4
6
8
10
z-axis
0
2
4
6
8
10
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
x-axis
0
2
4
6
8
10
z-axis
0
2
4
6
8
10
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
0
1
2
3
4
5
Training Episodes
1e6
8
4
0
4
8
Selection
neuron
activation
0
1
2
3
4
5
Training Episodes
1e6
0
1
2
3
4
5
Training Episodes
1e6
Decoder 1
Decoder 2
Decoder 3
Figure 8: Results for the reinforcement learning example. We consider a a 12 × 12 × 12 3D grid world.
The used network has 3 latent neurons and each column of plots corresponds to one latent neuron. For the ﬁrst
and second row we generated input data in which agent’s position is varied along two axes and ﬁxed to 6 in the
remaining dimension. The latent neuron activation is plotted as a function of the agent’s position. We observe
that the latent neurons 1,2 and 3 respond to changes in the x-, y- and z-position, respectively.
The third row shows which decoder receives information from the each latent neuron. Roughly, the y-axis quantiﬁes
how much of the information in the latent neuron is transmitted by the 3 ﬁlters to the associated decoder as a
function of the training episode. Positive values mean that the ﬁlter does not transmit any information. Decoder 1
has to make a prediction about the performance of a trained reinforcement learning agent whose goal is located
within a (x, y)-plane relative to its starting position. We observe that decoder 1 indeed only receives information
about the agent’s x- and y-position, i.e. latent variables 1 and 2. Similarly, predictions made by decoders 2 and 3
only require knowledge of the agents’ (y, z)- and (x, z)-position, respectively, which is conﬁrmed by the selection
neuron activations (the blue line of decoder 1 in the second plot is hidden behind the orange one).
the reward is located at position x = z = 6 whenever x
or z are relevant coordinates for an agent, whereas for
the y-coordinate, the reward is located at position 11.
The encoding used by the network in this example sug-
gests that an encoding of discrete bounded parameters
may carry additional information about the hidden re-
ward function, which may eventually help to improve
our understanding of the underlying theory.
7
Conclusion
Machine learning is rapidly developing into the newest
tool in the physicists’ toolbox [60]. In this context, neu-
ral networks have become one of the most versatile and
successful methods [2, 3]. However, deep neural net-
works, while performing very well on a variety of tasks,
often lack interpretability [61]. Therefore, representa-
tion learning, and in particular methods for learning
interpretable representations, have recently received in-
creased attention [17, 26, 34–36, 39]. In the scientiﬁc
process in particular, representations of physical sys-
tems play a central role.
To this end, we have de-
veloped a neural network architecture that can gener-
ate operationally meaningful representations within ex-
perimental settings. Roughly, we call a representation
operationally meaningful if it can be shared eﬃciently
between various agents that have diﬀerent goals. We
have demonstrated our methods for small toy exam-
ples in classical and quantum mechanics.
Moreover,
we have also considered cases where the experimental
process may be framed as an interactive reinforcement
learning scenario [16]. Our architecture also works in
such a setting and generates representations which are
physically meaningful and relatively easy to interpret.
In this work, we have interpreted the learnt represen-
tation by comparing it to some known or hypothesised
representation. Instead, we could also seek to automate
this process by employing unsupervised learning tech-
14

niques that categorise experimental data by a metric
deﬁned by the response of diﬀerent latent neurons. For
the toy examples that we considered here, the learnt
representation is small and simple enough to be inter-
pretable by hand. However, for more complex prob-
lems, additional methods for making the representa-
tion more interpretable may be required. For example,
instead of using a single layer of latent neurons to store
the parameters, recent work has shown the potential of
semantically constrained graphs for this task [62]. We
expect that these methods can be integrated into our
architecture to produce interpretable and meaningful
representations even for highly complex latent spaces.
While we used an asynchronous, deep energy-based
projective simulation model for reinforcement learn-
ing, our method for representation learning within re-
inforcement learning environments is independent of
the exact reinforcement learning model and can be
combined with other state-of-the-art techniques such
as asynchronous, advantage actor-critic (A3C) meth-
ods [63]. In fact, it may even be applied in settings
with auxiliary tasks [40] to develop meaningful repre-
sentations.
Source code and implementation details
The
source
code,
as
well
as
details
of
the
network
structure
and
training
process,
in-
cluding
parameters,
is
available
at
https:
//github.com/tonymetger/communicating scinet
(for the ﬁrst examples) and https://github.com/
HendrikPN/reinforced scinet
(for
the
reinforce-
ment learning part) The networks were implemented
using the Tensorﬂow [64] and PyTorch [65] library,
respectively.
Contributions
HPN, TM and RI contributed equally to the initial de-
velopment of the project and composed the manuscript.
HPN and TM performed the numerical work. SJ and
LMT contributed to the theoretical and numerical de-
velopment of the reinforcement learning part. HJB and
RR initialised and supervised the project. All authors
have discussed the results and contributed to the con-
ceptual development of the project.
