IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications (JSAC), 2024
Communication-Efficient Federated Learning for
LEO Satellite Networks Integrated with HAPs
Using Hybrid NOMA-OFDM
Mohamed Elmahallawy, Student Member, IEEE, Tie Luo∗, Senior Member, IEEE, and Khaled Ramadan
Abstract—Space AI has become increasingly important and
sometimes even necessary for government, businesses, and soci-
ety. An active research topic under this mission is integrating
federated learning (FL) with satellite communications (SatCom)
so that numerous low Earth orbit (LEO) satellites can collab-
oratively train a machine learning model. However, the special
communication environment of SatCom leads to a very slow FL
training process up to days and weeks. This paper proposes
NomaFedHAP, a novel FL-SatCom approach tailored to LEO
satellites, that (1) utilizes high-altitude platforms (HAPs) as
distributed parameter servers (PSs) to enhance satellite visibility,
and (2) introduces non-orthogonal multiple access (NOMA) into
LEO to enable fast and bandwidth-efficient model transmissions.
In addition, NomaFedHAP includes (3) a new communication
topology that exploits HAPs to bridge satellites among different
orbits to mitigate the Doppler shift, and (4) a new FL model
aggregation scheme that optimally balances models between
different orbits and shells. Moreover, we (5) derive a closed-form
expression of the outage probability for satellites in near and far
shells, as well as for the entire system. Our extensive simulations
have validated the mathematical analysis and demonstrated the
superior performance of NomaFedHAP in achieving fast and
efficient FL model convergence with high accuracy as compared
to the state-of-the-art.
Index Terms—Low Earth orbit (LEO), federated Learning,
high altitude platform (HAP), non-orthogonal multiple Access
(NOMA).
I. INTRODUCTION
S
Atellite communication (SatCom) technology is consid-
ered a major player of the Internet of Remote Things
(IoRT) [1]. Recent advancements in SatCom have stimulated
giant companies such as SpaceX, Amazon, and OneWeb, as
well as government agencies such as ESA and NASA, to
launch a large number of small satellites into space on low
Earth orbits (LEOs) [2]. These satellites are equipped with
high-resolution cameras and collect massive satellite imagery
[3]. Meanwhile, the booming developments of AI have moti-
vated the leverage of machine learning (ML) to perform satel-
lite data analytics. However, traditional ML approaches which
require downloading the massive imagery from satellites to a
ground station (GS) are not practical due to the limited SatCom
bandwidth. In this regard, federated Learning (FL) [4], [5]
∗Corresponding author.
M. Elmahallawy and T. Luo are with the Department of Computer Science,

munication Engineering, The Higher Institute of Engineering in Elshorouk

This work was supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) under
Grant No. 2008878.
offers a potential solution as it replaces data transmission with
model transmission, where each satellite trains an ML model
onboard using its own data and then only sends the trained
model to the GS. This substantially reduces the demand for
bandwidth and gains the additional benefit of preserving data
privacy.
However, integrating FL with SatCom is non-trivial and
involves significant challenges. This is because FL entails
an iterative training process that typically involves hundreds
of communication rounds between clients and the parameter
server (PS). While this is not a big issue in usual networks, it
is a critical bottleneck in SatCom/LEO, where clients are LEO
satellites and the PS is the GS, due to four factors. First,
the highly sporadic, intermittent, and irregular connectivity
pattern between LEO satellites and the GS. This is caused by
the distinction of travel trajectories and speeds between LEO
satellites and the PS, where satellites orbit the earth with
an inclination angle between 0–90o while PS travels along
the Earth rotation direction. Second, the long propagation
and transmission delays in SatCom, due to the long distance
and low data rate. Third, FL models are often large (e.g.,
528/549MB for VGG16/19, 232MB for ResNet152, 479MB
for EfficientNetV2L) because of the high image resolution and
accuracy dictated by satellite applications such as national and
homeland security, disaster and weather monitoring. Lastly,
the wireless channels between LEO satellites and GS are
unreliable due to adverse weather conditions like rain, fog,
wind turbulence, and interference from other radio signals
especially near the Earth’s surface. As a result, the short
visible time window between a satellite and the PS is often
insufficient to allow the complete transmission of a model,
especially when multiple satellites’ transmissions are involved.
Ultimately, the above challenges significantly impede the FL
training process and result in slow convergence that takes days
or even weeks [6], [7].
In this paper, we propose a novel FL-SatCom framework
called NomaFedHAP that is tailored to LEO satellites to ad-
dress the above challenges. First, it introduces non-orthogonal
multiple access (NOMA) as a spectrum-efficient communica-
tion scheme into FL-SatCom to enable satellites at different
orbit shells (hence different altitudes) to transmit models
concurrently from/to the PS. Second, following our previ-
ous work [8], NomaFedHAP utilizes multiple high-altitude
platforms (HAPs) in lieu of GSs to act as distributed PSs
to improve satellite visibility. But unlike [8], NomaFedHAP
introduces a new satellite-HAP communication topology in
1
arXiv:2401.00685v2  [cs.LG]  16 Feb 2024

2
which each HAP also serves as a relay to forward models
among HAPs. This has the benefit of handling multiple orbits
of satellites without inter-orbit communication, thus avoiding
significant Doppler shifts. Third, NomaFedHAP proposes an
FL model aggregation scheme that optimally balances the
number of models between different orbits and shells prior to
model aggregation, thereby avoiding a biased global model.
In summary, this paper makes the following contributions:
• To the best of our knowledge, NomaFedHAP is the first
work that introduces NOMA to FL-SatCom, addressing
the link budget limit and enabling concurrent transmis-
sions of large FL models within short and sporadic visible
windows. It also uses HAPs instead of GS as PS to
achieve faster convergence.
• We propose to use orthogonal frequency division multi-
plexing (OFDM) for communication among satellites in
the same orbit. This results in a hybrid NOMA-OFDM
communication scheme. Furthermore, we derive a closed-
form expression of the outage probability for satellites
located in near and far orbit shells, as well as for the
entire system.
• We also propose (i) a new satellite-HAP communication
topology in substitution of the traditional star topology of
FL, where we let HAPs act as inter-orbit relays to mitigate
the Doppler shift, (ii) a new intra-orbit model propa-
gation algorithm that utilizes inter-satellite links (ISL)
and sub-orbital model aggregation to enable “straggler”
satellites to participate in FL without waiting for their
visible windows, and (iii) a new FL model aggregation
scheme that optimally balances the number of models
between different orbits to avoid a biased global model.
• We extensively evaluate NomaFedHAP using 3 common
datasets and a real satellite dataset, and demonstrate its
efficient bandwidth utilization and high data rate when
transmitting FL models between satellites and HAPs. We
also show that NomaFedHAP accelerates FL convergence
by an order of magnitude as compared to state-of-the-art
FL-SatCom algorithms (4 vs. 72 hours), while achieving
the highest model accuracy.
II. RELATED WORK
While research in FL-SatCom is still in a nascent stage, a
decent number of interesting studies have recently appeared
[6]–[20] and have made appealing progress.
Synchronous FL. In synchronous FL, the PS (e.g., GS)
has to wait until all LEO satellites complete training and send
their local models to PS when they sequentially come into its
visible zone. Only after that, the PS will proceed to aggregate
those received models into a global model and then start the
next communication round by sending the global model back
to all the satellites for retraining. In such synchronous FL,
slow satellites or “stragglers”, who have limited visibility to
the PS, will become the bottleneck of the training process,
where fast satellites have to idly wait.
Despite this, synchronous FL as a simple (and hence
desirable) approach has been applied to LEO constellations
in several studies. For instance, [6] adopted the traditional
synchronous FL approach (i.e, FedAvg [4]) without any tai-
loring for LEO constellations and demonstrated that FL is
more advantageous than a direct download of raw data to
a centralized server for training. The study, however, did
not take into account the satellite-GS visibility challenge
which slows down the FL training processes significantly. To
deal with this challenge, [7] proposed an intra-orbit routing
technique called FedISL specifically designed for FL-SatCom.
It performs well when the PS is a GS situated either at the
North Pole (NP) or a medium Earth orbit (MEO) satellite
flying above the Equator (at an altitude of 20,000 km). In
these cases, each satellite visits the PS at regular intervals,
resulting in more frequent communication and hence faster
convergence. However, when the PS is located at a different
position, the convergence time increases significantly, taking
several days instead of just a few hours. Moreover, NP is
an ideal location which is often unavailable in practice, and
MEO would incur considerable Doppler shifts. To address this
limitation, FedHAP [8] introduces HAPs as a proxy of GS to
LEO constellations without restriction on locations. However,
the FL model still requires more than a day to converge
due to the non-ideal PS locations. Lin et al. [9] proposed
an approach to dynamically aggregate satellite models based
on connection density, excluding stragglers in cases of sparse
connections, and involving the collaboration of multiple GSs
at distributed locations. However, ensuring model consistency
at multiple GSs is nontrivial and incurs more overhead,
and excluding straggler satellites can introduce bias in the
global model towards frequently visible satellites. In [10], a
clustering and edge selection approach is proposed, where a
GS selects an LEO server, clusters neighboring LEO clients
with good channel quality, and then selects satellites within
each cluster to participate in the training process. However,
this may result in a biased model toward satellites with good
channel quality. The authors of [11] proposed a decentralized
learning paradigm, eliminating the need for a PS. They utilize
intra- and inter-orbit ISLs with a traditional communication
scheme like OFDM [21], attempting to address convergence
speed; however, this approach still requires a higher data rate
due to the Doppler shift among different orbits. Moreover,
all the above studies evaluate their models on non-SatCom-
related datasets, and the convergence time still takes long
hours and days. Most recently, FedLEO [12] enhances the FL
convergence through the use of intra-plane model propagation
and scheduling of sink satellites, and uses a real satellite
dataset to test their model. On the other hand, it requires each
satellite to run a scheduler to determine a sink satellite, leading
to delays during model exchanges with the GS.
Asynchronous FL. Unlike synchronous FL, asynchronous
FL allows the PS to receive only a subset of the satellites’
(typically fast ones’) model updates to proceed to the next
communication round. This mitigates the idleness problem
in synchronous FL, but faces another problem called model
staleness, where outdated models from straggler satellites
will arrive in later communication rounds, potentially affect-
ing the model convergence and performance adversely (e.g.,
FedAsync [5]).
Razmi et al. [13] proposed FedSat, an asynchronous FL

3
approach tailored for SatCom. FedSat adapts FedAvg [4]
to an asynchronous setting, where it averages the received
satellite models based on their visibility order, assuming
regular satellite visits to the GS. In response to this ideal
consideration, they proposed another work [14], FedSatSched-
ule, that considers the location of the GS can be anywhere.
FedSatSchedule is developed to reduce model staleness by
determining whether each satellite has sufficient visible time
for downloading the global model, training a local model, and
uploading it. Otherwise, the satellite will schedule uploading
its local model for the next communication round, allowing
it to train its local model during its “long” invisible period.
However, FedSatSchedule has only limited improvement in
efficiency, still requiring several days for an FL model to
converge. The authors of [15] proposed another asynchronous
FL approach, FedSpace, which stores satellite models into
a buffer with a predicted size and reduces the weighting of
stale models. On the other hand, this method requires each
satellite to upload a small amount of its raw data to the GS
in order to be used for scheduling the model aggregation,
which is contrary to the FL principle of maintaining privacy
by not sharing raw data. Wang et al. [16] proposed a graph-
based routing and resource reservation algorithm aimed at
optimizing the delay in FL model parameter transfer. The
algorithm enhances a storage time-aggregated graph, enabling
a joint representation of the satellite networks’ transmission,
storage, and computing resources. AsyncFLEO [17] is a more
recent asynchronous FL approach that offers a solution to
the staleness challenge, where it first groups satellites from
different orbits based on the similarity of their models, and
then selects only fresh models from each group to include
in the model aggregation. Outdated satellite models are only
selected when it is the only model in a group and will be down-
weighted during aggregation. Finally, Wu et al. [18] proposed
FedGSM, which implements a compensation mechanism to
mitigate gradient staleness. FedGSM utilizes the deterministic
and time-varying topology of the orbits to counteract the
negative impact of staleness. However, their approach still
requires a long time for convergence.
While considerable efforts have been made to accelerate
the convergence of the FL-SatCom model and address the
challenge of satellite-GS sporadic connectivity, no work has
been proposed to formally address the issue of uploading large
satellite ML models to the PS (e.g., GS, MEO, HAPs) within
the satellite link budget limit and the sporadic short satellite
visibility periods. In addition, most of the existing works rely
on direct communication between the server (often a GS) and
LEO satellites, not leveraging the potential benefits of utilizing
HAPs in space to improve FL training. Moreover, balancing
among orbits to mitigate bias was overlooked too. This work
aims to fill these gaps.
III. SYSTEM MODEL AND PROBLEM FORMULATION
Consider a general LEO satellite constellation consisting
of N orbital shells, where each shell consists of L orbits,
all at the same altitude dn1. In a shell n, each orbit l ∈
1The orbit shell consists of multiple orbits, each carrying a number of
satellites at the same altitude.
Fig. 1. An FL system in the context of satellite constellations, using multiple
HAPs as parameter servers. For the sake of clarity, only two orbit shells are
shown.
L = {l1, l2, ..., ln} carries Kl equally distributed homoge-
neous satellites with an inclination angle of Θl. Each satellite
in the orbit l has a unique ID and travels at a speed of
vk =
q
GeM
(rE+dn) with an orbital period of Tk = 2π(rE+dn)
vk
,
where rE
= 6371 km is the Earth’s radius, Ge is the
Earth gravitational constant, and M is the mass of the Earth
(GeM = 3.98 × 1014m3/s2). In addition, consider H HAPs,
where each HAP h serves as a PS and communicates with
a diverse set of satellites deployed in different orbits/shells
and performs (partial or full) model aggregation. Furthermore,
a HAP h can perform NOMA among satellites located in
different shells based on their distance.
For the communication to be established between any
satellite k ∈K and the PS (i.e., a set of HAPs), the line
of sight (LoS) link between them must not be blocked by the
Earth. In mathematical terms, this can be expressed as:
ϑk,PS(t) ≜∠(rPS(t), (rk(t) −rPS(t))) ≤π
2 −ϑmin
(1)
where rk(t) and rPS(t) are the trajectories of satellite k and
the PS, respectively, and ϑmin is the minimum elevation
angle, a constant depends on each HAP’s location. To account
for communication between any satellite and the PS, we
consider two particular satellites that are the closest and the
farthest to the PS, referred to as the nearest satellite (NS) and
the farthest satellite (FS), respectively. An illustration of our
system model is given in Fig. 1.
A. FL-LEO Computation Analysis
Consider an LEO satellite constellation K, where each
satellite k collects a set of Earth observational images.
These images, collected by different satellites, are typi-
cally non-independent and identically distributed (non-IID)
due to varying orbital speeds, altitudes, and coverage areas.
Specifically, a satellite k captures its own dataset Dk =
{(X1, y1), (X2, y2), . . . , ((Xmk, ymk)}, where Xi and yi are
the feature vector and its corresponding label of the i-th sample

4
Fig. 2. Illustration of an FL-LEO system.
(labels are not required but written here for notation purposes
only). The overarching objective of the FL-LEO system is to
have the LEO satellites and the PS work collaboratively to
train a global ML model with the objective of minimizing the
overall loss function F(w):
arg min
w∈Rd F(w) =
X
k∈K
|Dk|
|D| Fk(w),
(2)
where w is a vector representing the model weights, |D| =
P
i∈K |Dk| is the total number of data samples collected by
LEO satellites, and Fk(w) is satellite k’s loss function:
Fk(w) =
1
|Dk|
|Dk|
X
i=1
fk(w; Xi, yi),
(3)
where fk(w; Xi, yi) is the training loss over a data point Xi.
The training process in a synchronous FL-LEO system
such as FedHAP [8] requires multiple communication rounds
β = 0, 1, 2, . . . , where |B| is the total number of commu-
nication rounds needed to achieve FL model convergence.
During each round, the PS awaits each satellite k to enter
its visible zone (transiently) in order to send its aggregated
global model wβ or to (subsequently) receive this satellite’s
local model wβ
k. What happens is that the satellite k carries
out a local optimization method such as stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) on the received global model wβ using its
local data, iterating J local epochs to update the model:
wβ,j+1
k
= wβ,j
k
−ζβ∇Fk(wβ,j
k ; Xj
k, yj
k), j = 1, 2, ..., J (4)
where ζβ is the learning rate at the round β. After this training
process, the satellite k obtains an updated local model. It then
transmits this model back to the PS when entering the PS’s
visible zone again. At the PS, after it receives all the satellites’
models, it aggregates them into a global model as
wβ+1 =
X
k∈K
|Dk|
|D| wβ,J
k
.
(5)
The above procedure repeats, where β continuously increases,
until the FL model converges, i.e., achieves a target accuracy
or loss, or reaches the maximum communication rounds.
Fig. 2 gives an illustration of the FL-LEO system. One of
the major challenges with this learning process is that all
communications (uplink/downlink) can only occur when a
satellite is transiently visible to the PS, which significantly
limits the communication opportunities and prolongs the entire
process to several days or even weeks. This makes the learning
speed unable to keep up with the rate at which data is collected
by LEO satellites, and as a result, the global FL model
is always outdated. Moreover, another challenge to FL-LEO
convergence is that during the visible window of the PS for an
LEO satellite, the limited bandwidth can be insufficient for a
large satellite model to be fully uploaded to the PS and hence
the satellite has to wait for the next longer visible window to
start over, resulting in large delays.
B. FL-LEO Communication Analysis
In this paper, we consider a set of HAPs as the PS
that coordinates the model aggregation process in the FL-
LEO system. Because of this, we incorporate two types of
communication links, satellite-HAP link (SHL) and inter-HAP
link (IHL), in addition to the satellite-GS link and inter-
satellite link (ISL) which exist in prior studies. We apply the
Shadowed Rician channel fading model to analyze these links
since there will be direct LoS and multi-path links during the
visible periods, and the transmission between satellites can be
affected by various factors including atmospheric conditions,
rains, and obstacles or debris in space. Note that HAPs and
LEO satellites can use free-space optical (FSO) links instead
of radio frequency (RF) links to communicate at much higher
data rates. However, we do not take this advantage in our
simulation, so we can have a consistent setup with current
state-of-the-art research and a fair comparison.
Our analysis of SHL takes into account four factors: i) free-
space path loss, ii) antenna gain of the transmitter and receiver,
iii) antenna pointing error and shadowing, and iv) fading of the
channel. Consequently, the total link budget of SHL between
a satellite k and a HAP h, without small-scale fading, can be
expressed as [22]
SHL(k, h) = Gh Gk(θ)
Lk,h Lp
,
(6)
where Gh is the antenna gain of a HAP h, Gk(θ) is the beam
gain of a satellite k,which given by [23]
Gk(θ) = Gk
 
J1(ks)
2ks
+ 36J3(ks)
(ks)3
!2
(7)
where Gk is the antenna gain of k, J(·) is the Bessel function,
and ks is a constant denoting the distance between the beam
of a satellite k to a HAP h and its entire coverage radius. Lk,h
is the free-space pass loss between a satellite k and a HAP h.
As long as a LoS link between them is established (i.e., not
blocked by the Earth), Lk,h can be given by [8]
Lk,h =
4π∥k, h∥2fc
c
2
(8)
where ∥k, h∥2 is the Euclidean distance between satellite k
and HAP h, fc denotes the carrier frequency, and c is the
speed of light. In (6), Lp is the antenna pointing error loss,
which can be expressed as [22]
Lp = 2.7211 × 10−20 fc
2 θe
2 Dc
2
(9)

5
Fig. 3.
A simulated visibility pattern over two days of six LEO satellites
located in three different shells, each containing two satellites positioned at
an altitude of 500km, 1250km, and 2000km, respectively. The PS is a GS
located in Rolla, Missouri, USA. In the figure, ki,j represents the i-th satellite
in the j-th orbit.
where θe denotes the angle of the pointing error, and Dc is
the diameter of the aperture antenna.
When using traditional communication schemes, such as
orthogonal multiple access (OMA) systems, the total time tc
required to exchange the local model generated by a satellite
wk with the global model w generated by a HAP h can be
calculated as:
tc = tt + tp + tk + th,
(10)
tt = q|D|
R ,
tp = ∥k, h∥2
c
,
(11)
where tt and tp are the transmission and propagation times,
respectively, tk and th are the processing delay at a satellite
k and a HAP h, respectively (we omit them in our simulation
since they are much smaller than tt and tp), |D| is the data
samples of the dataset D, q is the number of bits in each
sample, and R is the maximum achievable data rate.
In OMA systems, since R is limited by the bandwidth
allocated to each satellite, the time required to transmit a
satellite’s model to a PS can be longer than the satellites’
visibility period and thus will fail. In the next section, we show
that by using NOMA in FL-LEO, we can essentially increase
the value of R and thereby allow for exchanging large satellite
model parameters within a short visible window.
IV. NOMAFEDHAP COMMUNICATION FRAMEWORK
NomaFedHAP is a synchronous FL framework proposed to
address the slow convergence of FL-LEO training due to the
short and irregular visibility of LEO satellites. Fig. 3 shows
an example of a visibility pattern for an LEO satellite con-
stellation, which indicates that each satellite’s visible window
is only a few minutes and the invisible periods (i.e., gaps in
between) are much longer and highly irregular.
The cause of this problem is that LEO satellites fly very fast,
typically taking only 90-120 minutes to orbit the Earth, while
the Earth takes 24 hours to rotate one cycle. More importantly,
satellites and the Earth are moving along distinct trajectories.
As a result, each LEO satellite meets up with the PS in a very
infrequent and transient manner, and eventually, this impedes
the convergence of FL tremendously.
NomaFedHAP
introduces
the
NOMA
communication
scheme to FL-LEO to address this issue. It enables satellites
to fully utilize the entire bandwidth of downlink and exchange
their ML models with the PS at high data rates and low
bit error rates (BER), thereby drastically reducing the model
transmission time to only a few seconds which is shorter
than any visible window. In consequence, the issue of having
straggler satellites is no longer eminent in NomaFedHAP
despite its synchronous nature.
On top of that, NomaFedHAP introduces other techniques
(OFDM, HAPs, model propagation, unbiased model aggrega-
tion) to expedite FL convergence further, which we describe
in later sections.
A. NomaFedHAP Communication Architecture
To address the high propagation and transmission delays be-
tween LEO satellites and the traditional PS such as GS, LEO
satellite, or MEO satellite, NomaFedHAP utilizes multiple
HAPs following our work in [8] as PS to propagate the local
and global models between LEO satellites and HAPs. HAPs
also serve as relays among orbits, mitigating the Doppler
shift when the PS is an LEO or MEO satellite [7], [11]. In
the stratosphere at an altitude 17-22 km above the Earth’s
surface [24], HAPs, such as unmanned airships, aircraft, or
balloons, serve as quasi-stationary aerial stations that improve
the network connectivity and throughput [25]. In general,
HAPs can offer the following advantages over traditional PS
(e.g., GS):
• Enhanced visibility: Due to HAP’s elevated altitude, it
can “see” more satellites at once or see each satellite more
frequently than GS (GS has an angular view of 180o−Θ,
while a HAP can view even beyond 180o).
• Improved communication environment: HAPs operate
in the stratosphere which offers a clearer, stabler, and less
interfered environment than the troposphere. Moreover,
HAPs and LEO satellites can use FSO rather than RF
links and thereby achieve a much higher data rate and
lower latency (1-2 ms) [26], [27]. Note, however, that we
do not use FSO in our experiments, for a fair comparison
with other approaches.
• Lower-cost and flexible deployment: A GS can cost
millions of dollars while a HAP costs much lower [28],
[29]. Also, a GS is difficult to relocate, while a HAP
can move easily for provisioning on-demand services or
adapting to LEO changes.
• Better energy management: HAPs can be powered by
solar panels more effectively due to the higher altitude,
and even completely self-powered with careful trajectory
optimization [30].
Traditional FL communication follows a star topology
where the PS sits in the center. In our work, due to the
introduction of collaborative HAPs as PS and relays between
orbits, we design a two-layer communication architecture. The

6
Fig. 4. NomaFedHAP with orbital shells 1,2,...N and a single HAP as PS for illustration. Only visible satellites are drawn so all the shown links are LoS
links.
first layer is a HAP layer or server layer, which is composed
of all the HAPs that aggregate and transmit global models.
The second layer is a satellite layer or worker layer, which
is composed of all LEO satellites that train and transmit local
models. We use intra-orbit ISL only and no inter-orbit ISL for
communication among satellites,2 to avoid any considerable
Doppler shift. Therefore, the HAPs will serve as relays that
bridge different orbits.
The server layer is organized in a ring structure for inter-
HAP communication. In addition, each HAP communicates
with a collection of visible satellites from different orbits
as in a star topology. Therefore, the eventual communication
architecture becomes a ring of small stars.
Such a parallel connectivity pattern among the rings can
significantly enhance communication. Even when there is
only a single HAP, our local model propagation algorithm
(Section V-A) allows satellites to leverage current or soon-
to-be visible satellite to exchange models with PS without
waiting for their own visible windows, thus reaping substantial
performance gains.
B. Introducing NOMA to FL-LEO
Fig. 4 gives an overview. For illustration purposes, it only
shows one orbit per shell and a single HAP. However, No-
maFedHAP supports multiple orbits per shell and multiple
HAPs.
NomaFedHAP introduces a hybrid NOMA-OFDM com-
munication scheme to LEO satellites. Specifically, visible
satellites on different shells communicate with HAPs using
PD-NOMA, while satellites on the same shell (i.e., at the
same distance from the HAPs) communicate with HAPs and
other satellites in the same orbit using OFDM (the intra-orbit
communication is for the purpose of model propagation which
is described in Section V-A).
Over the downlink, all the visible satellites from different
shells transmit signals (i.e., their ML models) to their respec-
2A satellite has four antennas, two on the roll axis for intra-orbit ISL
communication and two on the pitch axis for inter-orbit ISL communication.
tive visible HAPs within the whole bandwidth using NOMA.
Each HAP h ∈H will thus receive a combined signal y from
all the satellites K′ in h’s visible zone, which can be expressed
as, due to different power allocation coefficients,
y = n +
X
k∈K′
λk
p
ak Ps xk
(12)
where λk is the channel coefficient of k-th satellite, ak is
a fractional power coefficient, Ps is the maximum downlink
transmission power of each visible satellite, and xk is the k-
th satellite’s signal with unit energy. The other term, n ∼
CN(0, σ2), is complex additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN)
with variance σ2 = KBTB, where KB = 1.38 × 10−23J/K
is the Boltzmann constant, T is the noise temperature, and B
is the bandwidth.
The power coefficient ak is adjusted by each satellite k
based on its channel condition, and satisfies P
k∈K′ ak ≤1
to limit the interference from other satellites. Note that ak
is inversely related to the satellite’s channel condition, which
means that a satellite with a poor channel will select a higher
transmission power coefficient.
Next, each HAP starts to decode the combined signal
using successive interference cancellation (SIC) iteratively.
The satellites are ordered according to their channel gain
(strongest first), as
|λ1|2 ≥|λ2|2 ≥... ≥|λK′|2
(13)
The HAP will then decode the signal of the strongest satellite
first, i.e., x1, by treating the signal from other satellites as
interference. Next, it re-modulates and subtracts the decoded
signal x1 from the received signal y. After that, it performs
SIC for the next strongest satellite (i.e., x2) and so forth until
the last satellite’s signal xk is decoded. See Fig. 4 for an
illustration.
In our analysis below, we focus on the downlink NOMA, as
the uplink in our system can use any standard satellite commu-
nication scheme since it only involves the PS broadcasting the
same global model to all the satellites, and thus each satellite

7
independently decodes a single signal.
1) Signal-to-Interference Noise Ratio Analysis. Once all
the visible satellites’ signals are decoded at the HAP, the
signal-to-interference noise ratio (SINR) of the first satellite
(i.e., strongest signal) can be computed by [31]:
SINR1 = a1ρ|λ1|2
(14)
where ρ = Ps/σ2 is the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). For the
the remaining visible satellites k ∈K
′, k ̸= 1, the SINR can
be calculated by
SINRk =
akρ|λk|2
ρ Pk−1
i=1 |λi|2ai + 1
(15)
2) Data Rate Analysis. Once the SINR of downlink NOMA
is determined, we can obtain the maximum achievable rate at
a HAP h. Assuming that the symbols x1, x2, . . . , xk−1 have
been decoded correctly, the maximum data rate at h to decode
satellite k’s symbol xk is given by
Rk→h = log2

1 +
akρ|λk|2
ρ Pk−1
i=1 |λi|2ai + 1
|
{z
}
SINRk

.
(16)
Note that Rk→h is normalized per unit bandwidth. Conse-
quently, the maximum total rate Rtotal for a HAP to correctly
decode all its visible satellites’ symbols is
Rtotal =
X
k∈K′
log2(1 + SINRk)
= log2

1 + a1ρ|λ1|2
+ P
k∈K′,k̸=1 log2

1 +
akρ|λk|2
ρ Pk−1
i=1 |λi|2ai+1

= log2
 
1 + a1ρ|λ1|2

×

1 +
a2ρ|λ2|2
a1ρ|λ1|2 + 1

×

1 +
a3ρ|λ3|2
a1ρ|λ1|2 + a2ρ|λ2|2 + 1

× . . .
!
= log2

1 + ρ
X
k∈K′
|λk|2ak

.
(17)
When ρ ≫1, Rtotal can be approximated as
Rtotal ≈log2

ρ
X
k∈K′
|λk|2ak

.
(18)
3) Channel Model Statistics. The downlink between each
visible satellite k and its connected HAP can be modeled by
a shadowed-Rician fading channel, whose probability density
function (PDF) of |λk|2 is given by [32]
f|λk|2(x) = µke(−βkx)
1F1(mk; 1; δkx)
(19)
where µk
=
1
2bk
 2bkmk
2bkmk+Ωk )mk, βk
=
1
2bk , δk
=
Ωk
2bk(2bkmk+Ωk), 1F1(.; .; .) is a confluent hypergeometric func-
tion of the first type [33], 2bk is the multi-path component, mk
is the integer-valued fading severity parameter of the channel,
and Ωk is the average power of the LoS link. Using mk, the
hypergeometric function 1F1 can be expressed as
1F1(mk; 1; δkx) = eδkx
mk−1
X
i=0
(−1)i(1 −mk)i(δkx)i
(i!)2
|
{z
}
κ(i)
= eδkx
mk−1
X
i=0
κ(i),
(20)
where (·)i is the pochhammer symbol. With the aid of [34,
Eq. (3.351.2)], we obtain the cumulative distribution function
(CDF) for f|λk|2(x) as in (19) as
F|λk|2(x) = 1 −µke−(βk−δk)x
mk−1
X
i=0
κ(i)
i
X
j=0
i!
j!xj×
(βk −δk)−(i−j+1).
(21)
It is assumed that the links between each HAP h and the
GS (for transmitting the final global model after the training
completes) follow Nakagami-m fading, whose PDF can be
expressed by [22]
f|λh|2(x) =
mh
Ωh
mh xmh−1
Γ(mh) e
−
mh
Ωh x
(22)
where mh and Ωh are the severity parameter and the average
power of LoS, respectively, for a HAP h. Hence, the CDF for
f|λh|2(x) can be given by
F|λh|2(x) = 1 −e
−
mh
Ωh x
mh−1
X
n=0
 mh
Ωh
x
 1
n!.
(23)
4) Outage Probability Analysis. Here we analyze the NOMA
downlink reliability from the perspective of system outage
probability (OP). In the context of LEO satellites, OP refers
to the probability that the received power at a HAP h falls
below a threshold such that the SINR is too low for the HAP
to decode the correct signal xk. Mathematically,
OPh = 1 −Pr
 Q1 ∩Q2 ∩· · · ∩Qk

(24)
where Qj, j = 1, ..., k, denotes the event that a satellite signal
xj is correctly decoded by HAP h. The OP can be rewritten
as
OP k
h = Pr

SINRk→h < γk
th

= Pr

akρ|λk|2
ρ Pk−1
i=1 |λi|2ai+1 < γk
th

= Pr
 
|λk|2 < γk
th
 ρ Pk−1
i=1 |λi|2ai + 1

akρ
!
= Pr

|λk|2 < η∗
k

= F|λk|2(η∗
k)
= 1 −µke−(βk−δk)η∗
k
mk−1
X
i=0
κ(i)
i
X
j=0
i!
j!(η∗
k)j
× (βk −δk)−(i−j+1)
(25)
where γk
th is the SINR threshold of k-th satellite to be
correctly decoded and η∗
k = max{η1, η2, . . . , ηk} with ηj =
γj
th
 ρ Pj−1
i=1 |λi|2ai+1

ajρ
.
Below, we derive a closed-form OP expression for the near-
est satellite (NS) and that for the farthest satellite (FS), which
represent the strongest and the weakest signals, respectively,
with respect to any HAP h. We also derive the closed-form

8
OP for the entire LEO system subsequently.
a) Derivation of OP for the NS: The outage for the NS
scenario occurs when the NS’ transmitted signal xNS cannot
be successfully decoded by its connected HAP h, which can
be expressed as
OP NS
h
= Pr
 γNS
x
< γNS
th

= 1 −Pr
 γNS
x
≥γNS
th

(26)
where γNS
th
= 22RNS −1 is the target SINR threshold for the
NS to be correctly decoded by h, and RNS is the target data
rate for correctly receiving the NS’s signal by h. The SINR
γNS
x
can be written as
γNS
x
= aNSρ |λNS|2
(27)
Using (27), we can write OP NS
h
as
OP NS
h
= 1 −Pr

|λNS|2 ≥γNS
th
ω1
aNS

= 1 −

1 −F|λNS|2 A ω1

= F|λNS|2 A ω1
 (28)
where A = γNS
th
aNS and ω1 = 1
ρ. With the aid of (21), we obtain
the closed-form expression for OP NS
h
as
OP NS
h
= 1 −µke−(βk−δk)Aω1
mk−1
X
i=0
κ(i)
i
X
j=0
i!
j!(Aω1)j
× (βk −δk)−(i−j+1)
(29)
b) Derivation of the outage for the FS: The OP for the
FS scenario occurs under two conditions: i) its connected HAP
h fails to decode both the NS signal xNS and its transmitted
signal FNS, and ii) h can decode the NS signal xNS but cannot
decode its signal xF S. Mathematically, that is
OP F S
h
=Pr
 γNS
x
< γNS
th

Pr
 γF S
x
< γF S
th

+
Pr
 γNS
x
≥γNS
th

Pr
 γF S
x
< γF S
th

=1 −Pr
 γF S
x
≥γF S
th

(30)
Similar to NS, γF S
th
= 22RF S −1 denotes the target SINR
threshold of the FS to be correctly decoded by h, and RF S is
the target data rate for correctly receiving the FS’s signal by
h. But here γF S
x
is given by
γF S
x
=
aF Sρ|λF S|2
ρ PF S−1
i=1
|λi|2ai + 1
(31)
Similar to the derivation of OP NS
h
, we can derive the closed-
form expression for the OP of the FS scenario by substituting
from (21) as follows:
OP F S
h
= 1 −µke−(βk−δk)Eω2
mk−1
X
i=0
κ(i)
i
X
j=0
i!
j!(Eω2)j
× (βk −δk)−(i−j+1)
(32)
where E = γF S
th
aF S and ω2 = ρ PF S−1
i=1
|λi|2ai+1
ρ
.
c) Derivation of OP for the entire LEO system: By
combining the outage experience at h for both NS and FS
scenarios, the overall system OP can be expressed as3
OPsys =1 −Pr
 γNS
x
≥γNS
th

Pr
 γF S
x
≥γF S
th

3Note that our derivation has accounted for the case when there are extra
satellites between NS and FS, which can be seen from (31).
=1 −

1 −F|λNS|2 A ω1

×

1 −F|λF S|2 E ω2

=1 −

µke−(βk−δk)Aω1
mk−1
X
i=0
κ(i)
i
X
j=0
i!
j!(Aω1)j
× (βk −δk)−(i−j+1)
×

µke−(βk−δk)Eω2
mk−1
X
i=0
κ(i)
i
X
j=0
i!
j!(Eω2)j × (βk −δk)−(i−j+1)
(33)
To the best of our knowledge, the OP of NOMA for
LEO satellites as “clients” has never been derived in the
literature. Additionally, we also demonstrate via simulations
that our NomaFedHAP scheme achieves higher data rates and
experiences less outages even when a large number of satellites
communicate simultaneously with the PS.
V. NOMAFEDHAP CONVERGENCE FRAMEWORK
In NomaFedHAP, FL convergence is achieved through two
key components, a model propagation algorithm, and a model
aggregation algorithm. The model propagation algorithm is
proposed to minimize the “idleness” in traditional synchronous
FL-LEO approaches, where “straggler” satellites cause the PS
to idly wait for long periods for model exchange. Note that
unlike existing works which resort to asynchronous FL and
thereby face the stale model problem, our solution keeps the
synchronous nature (and hence benefits from all instead of a
subset of models) yet still accelerates the process substantially,
by enabling intra-orbit client communications. The second
component, the model aggregation algorithm, runs on the HAP
layer and aggregates the sub-orbital models received from
each HAP. This model aggregation algorithm differs from
traditional FL, which only aggregates individual client models.
A. NomaFedHAP Model Propagation Algorithm
This algorithm consists of propagation of global, local, and
sub-orbital models, as illustrated in Fig. 5 and explained below.
Global Model Propagation within HAP Layer (Fig. 5a).
When there are multiple HAPs in the HAP layer, one HAP
will be designated as the source while the other (the farthest
one from the source) as the sink. To begin with, the source
HAP generates the initial global model w0 and sends it to
its adjacent HAPs via IHL. Simultaneously, it also broadcasts
w0 to its currently visible satellites at different altitudes
using our proposed NOMA-OFDM scheme (see Section IV-B).
The adjacent HAPs, upon receiving w0, forward w0 to their
respective next-hop neighbors, and also send it to their re-
spective visible satellites. This continues until the sink HAP
receives w0 and transmits it to its currently visible satellites.
In subsequent rounds (β = 1, 2, ...), the same procedure as
above takes place again, except that w0 is replaced by wβ.
Local and Sub-orbital Model Propagation within Satel-
lite Layer (Fig. 5b). In any round, say the β-th, as soon as
the visible satellites successfully receive and decode the global
model wβ, each of them performs two tasks. First, it retrains
wβ using its own data to obtain an updated local model wβ
k.
Second, it transmits both wβ and a weighted version of wβ
k,

9
(a) Global model propagation within the HAP
layer.
(b) Local and sub-orbital models propagation
within the Satellite Layer.
(c) Sub-orbital model propagation within the HAP
layer.
Fig. 5. Illustration of the proposed model propagation algorithm. (a) The source HAP h1 forwards the global model wβ to the sink HAP h4; (b) Visible
satellites are represented by blue, and invisible satellites by black. Colored curved arrows show the propagation of models (global model and sub-orbital
model) from k2 →k4, k4 →k7, k7 →k10, k10 →k11, k11 →k2. (c) The sink HAP h4 propagates the sub-orbital model wkβ to the source HAP h1
along the reverse pathway.
Algorithm 1: NomaFedHAP model propagation algorithm
Initialize: Global iteration β=0, wβ, and Uh|h∈H = ϕ
1 while Termination criterion is not met do
2
foreach h ∈H do ▷
Global Model Propagation from
source to sink HAP
3
Forward wβ to its next-neighbor HAP
4
if h has LoS connection with satellites then
5
Transmit wβ to its visible satellites
6
foreach k ∈K that is visible to h do
▷
Local/Sub-orbital Models propagation
7
Retrain wβ to update wβ
k using its own
data
8
foreach invisible k′ between k and k + 1
do ▷
Aggregation of sub-orbital models
9
Retrain wβ to update wβ
k′ using its own
data
10
Aggregate wβ
k and wβ
k′ using (34)
11
Propagate wβ and wβ
k to next k′
12
Transmit wβ
k by Sat k + 1 to its visible
HAP
13
Update Uh ←Uh ∪{wβ
k}
14
Store all the propagating Sat IDs
15
foreach h ∈H do ▷
Sub-orbital Models
Propagation from sink to source HAP
16
Transmit Uh to the next neighboring HAP
17
β ←β + 1
Note: The above process provides a sequential representation for clarity. However, in real-
world scenarios and our simulations, computation and transmission occur concurrently.
which is wβ
k := γkwβ
k + 0 (see Eq. (34) below, where γk
is defined similarly), to its next-hop satellite k′ via ISL. The
propagation direction is pre-designated as either clockwise or
counterclockwise. Sending wβ is to ensure k′ to have a copy
of the global model regardless of whether k′ is visible to any
PS. Next, the satellite k′ will first retrain wβ to obtain wβ
k′,
like what k did; then, it will perform sub-orbital aggregation
by combining its own wβ
k′ with the received wβ
k (which has
been weighted by k) as follows:
wβ
k′ = γk′wβ
k′ + wβ
k
(34)
where γk′ = |Dk′|/|D| is a scaling factor that weighs model
importance according to data size, |Dk′| is the data size of
satellite k′ and |D| is the sum of all the data sizes in the same
orbit. Thus, wβ
k′ is a partially aggregated model which we refer
to as an sub-orbital model. Next, wβ
k′ will be sent to the next-
hop satellite (say k′′), together with the global model wβ, like
above. This uni-directional forwarding continues until reaching
a visible satellite (say k∗), which will stop forwarding further;
instead, after training and partial-aggregation like above, it will
transmit the aggregated model wβ
k∗to its visible HAP using
NOMA, with a power coefficient based on its current altitude
(static and dynamic power allocations are both evaluated in
Section VI). Hence essentially, Eq. (34) is FedAvg computed
in a sequential manner.
In summary, unlike traditional FL approaches where the PS
must wait for all the satellites to be visible for an appropriate
visibility period before receiving their updated local models
and then aggregating them into a global model, we are able
to “activate” all satellites, even those that are invisible or
visible within a short visibility period (through introducing
the NOMA scheme), by propagating satellite local models
together with the sub-orbital models to invisible satellites
within the same orbit, and thus accelerate the FL convergence
processes.
Sub-orbital Model Propagation within HAP Layer
(Fig. 5c). After each HAP receives the sub-orbital models
from all its visible satellites, it will propagate these sub-orbital
models along the reverse pathway (from the sink HAP to
the source HAP). The source HAP will then aggregate all

10
Algorithm 2: NomaFedHAP model aggregation algorithm
Initialize: Uβ ̸= ϕ
1 while Termination criterion is not met do
2
Sort all received sub-orbital models as (35) and
(36)
3
Filter redundant sub-orbital models from Uβ
according to satellite IDs
4
Generate U′β
5
if Source HAP receives all sub-orbital models then
6
Aggregate wβ+1 using (37)
7
else
8
Wait for all sub-orbital models to be received
9
β ←β + 1
the received sub-orbital models into a global model wβ+1,
following Section V-B (Eq. 37), and propagates wβ+1 to all
the HAPs as in phase 1 (Fig. 5a).
Algorithm 1 summarizes the above three phases of model
propagation. It has an overall complexity of O(T∗A)), where
T is the number of iterations until the termination criterion is
met, and A represents the nested loop operations governing the
training, aggregation, and propagation of models by invisible
satellites. Please note, the loops at lines 2, 6, 8, and 15 occur
concurrently, while lines 9-11 run sequentially.
B. NomaFedHAP Model Aggregation Algorithm
When all HAPs gather the sub-orbital models from their
visible satellites, a propagation round begins from the sink
HAP to the source HAP by forwarding the received models.
Once the source HAP receives all sub-orbital models, it sorts
them as follows:
Uβ = {S1, S2, . . . , SL}
(35)
where Uβ is the set of all sub-orbital models received by HAPs
in round β, and Sl ⊂Uβ is a subset of Uβ that comprises all
sub-orbital models for an orbit l, which can be expressed as
Sl =
n
{wβ
k}h1
| {z }
Uh=1
, {wβ
k}h2
| {z }
Uh=2
, . . . , {wβ
k}H
| {z }
UH
o
l
(36)
It is possible for Sl to encompass redundant sub-orbital mod-
els, particularly when a satellite is visible to multiple HAPs at
the same time. In such cases, NomaFedHAP utilizes satellites’
IDs, which are unique and sent as metadata with each sub-
orbital model, to filter out these redundant models. Con-
sequently, NomaFedHAP yields U′β = {S′
l1, S′
l2, . . . , S′
L},
where S′
l is a set of distinct sub-orbital models for an orbit l.
Subsequently, for all orbits L, NomaFedHAP checks
whether any satellite ID has been excluded from U′β. This
scenario occurs infrequently, typically when an orbit lacks
visible satellites to any HAP for an extended time. In such
cases, NomaFedHAP will not generate an updated version of
wβ immediately. Instead, it waits until any HAP h receives
the sub-orbital models containing the IDs of those satellites.
These sub-orbital models are then transmitted to the source
HAP to update U′β. This ensures a balanced collection of
models from all orbits, allowing all satellites to contribute
equally in generating wβ. It also prevents biasing the global
model toward a specific orbit.
Once the source HAP has received all the remaining sub-
orbital models and updated U′β, NomaFedHAP aggregates all
the models in U′β as follows:
wβ+1 =
L
X
l=1
H
X
h=1
|D|l
U′
h
|D|l
wβ
U′
h
(37)
where |D|l
U′
h is the total data size of the satellites in the set U′
h
for an orbit l, whereas |D|l is the total data size for an orbit
l. Subsequently, the entire procedure will recommence from
Section V-A, until the FL model is converged.
Algorithm 2 summarizes the entire process. It has an overall
complexity of O(T(BLog2B)), where B is the number of
received sub-orbital models. The (BLog2B) term signifies the
complexity of sorting and organizing the models, which dom-
inates the filtering operations and the subsequent aggregation
process.
C. Convergence Analysis of NomaFedHAP
In this section, we analyze the convergence of the NomaFed-
HAP approach. To do that we make the following assumptions
regarding the loss functions of the satellites F1, . . . , FK,
1 ≤k ≤K. These assumptions align with the commonly
encountered assumptions in the FL literature. [35], [36].
Assumption 1 (Smoothness). All the functions F1, . . . , FK in
Equation (3) exhibit Λ-smoothness, as for any a and b ∈Rd
and any k ∈K, it holds that:
Fk(a) ≤Fk(b) + (a −b)⊤∇Fk(b) + Λ
2 ∥a −b∥2
2
Assumption 2 (Strong convex). All the functions F1, . . . , FK
in Equation (3) exhibit ϱ-strongly convex, as for any a and
b ∈Rd and any k ∈K, it holds that:
Fk(a) ≥Fk(b) + (a −b)⊤∇Fk(b) + ϱ
2∥a −b∥2
2
Assumption 3 (Bounded variance). Let ξβ
k be a data point
randomly sampled from the dataset Dk of satellite k. The vari-
ance of the stochastic gradients at each satellite is constrained
as follows:
E∥∇Fk(wβ
k, ξβ
k ) −∇Fk(wβ
k)∥2
2 ≤σ2
k
This constraint applies to all satellites, with k ranging from 1
to K.
Assumption 4 (Bounded stochastic gradients). The square
norm of the expected stochastic gradients of Fk is uniformly
bounded, satisfying the inequality:
E∥∇Fk(wβ
k, ξβ
k )∥2
2 ≤G2
This constraint applies to all satellites, with k ranging from 1
to K.
Theorem 1. Supposing that Assumptions 1-4 are met, with
Λ, ϱ, σk, and G defined accordingly, we can consider a Fed-
erated Learning in Low Earth Orbit (FL-LEO) configuration

11
with K fully participating satellites in each round β. In this
setup, the goal is to train a machine learning model as in
Equation (3), and as a result, the NomaFedHAP framework
fulfills the following condition:
E[F(w|B|)] −F ∗≤
2υ
δ + |B|
Z
ϱ + 2Λ∥w0 −w∗∥2
2

(38)
Here, we set υ as Λ
ϱ , δ as max{8υ, J}, the learning rate ζβ
as
2
ϱ(δ+β), and define Z as
Z =
K
X
k=1
αk
2σk
2 + 6ΛΓ + 8(J −1)2G2
where αk is calculated as |Dk|
|D| and represents the full satellites
participation, and Γ = F ∗−PK
k=1 αkF ∗
k ≥0.
We provide the proof of Theorem 1 in Appendix A.
VI. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
A. Experiment Setup
LEO Satellite Constellation. We examine a Walker-delta
constellation K [37] consisting of 60 LEO satellites in six
orbits, with ten satellites in each orbit (see Figs. 6 and 7).
The six orbits are located on three different shells at altitudes
of 500 km, 1000 km, and 1500 km above the Earth’s surface.
Each shell contains two orbits and each orbit has an inclination
angle of 70◦. We examine a variety of PS scenarios, including
GS, single HAP, two HAPs, and three HAPs. For both the GS
and single-HAP scenarios, they are located at Rolla, Missouri,
USA (but can be anywhere of/above the Earth). The scenarios
with two/three HAPs involve one HAP positioned above the
city of Chinook, MT, USA, and another HAP positioned above
the city of Primorsky Krai, Russia, in addition to the HAP
above the city of Rolla, USA. All PSs are situated at an
altitude of 25 km above the Earth’s surface and maintain a
minimum elevation angle of 10◦. To compute the visiting
pattern of LEO satellites to each PS, we use a simulator
called Simulator Tool Kits (STK) developed by AGI. All PS-
Satellite connections are monitored over a period of three days
to obtain a comprehensive set of results.
Communication links. The parameters pertaining to the
communication channel of the NOMA system, as discussed
in Section III-B, are assigned as follows: Ps varies from -40
to 40 dBm, the antenna gain for Gk(θ) and GPS is set to
6.98 dBi, the carrier frequency f is 20 GHz, T is 354.81 K,
and B is set to 50 MHz. The power allocation coefficients
allocate 75% and 25% power to the FS and NS, respectively.
The path loss exponent is 4, and the fading severity parameter
m is 2. The average power of the multi-path component
ι and the LoS component Ωare set to 0.279 and 0.251,
respectively. Finally, we select the communication channel
type as shadowed Rician, with QPSK as the modulation type.
Baselines. To the best of our knowledge, the NOMA scheme
has not been introduced to FL with LEO satellites as clients
before. Therefore, we first investigate the performance of No-
maFedHAP with a single HAP as PS in comparison with tra-
ditional OMA schemes. Second, we compare NomaFedHAP
against state-of-the-art (SOTA) FL-LEO approaches proposed
recently and reviewed in Section II, including:
• Synchronous FL approaches: FedAvg [4], FedHAP [8],
FedISL [7], and DSFL [11].
• Asynchronous FL approaches: FedSatSchedule [14],
FedSpace [15], FedSat [13], AsyncFLEO [17], and
FedAsync [5].
Datasets and ML models. To evaluate the performance of
NomaFedHAP against baseline approaches, we focus on image
classification. We employ commonly used model training
datasets including MNIST, CIFAR-10, and CIFAR-100, which
are frequently utilized in various FL-SatCom studies [6], [8],
[14], [17]. In addition, despite the lack of space application
datasets, we utilize a real dataset of high-resolution satellite
images called DeepGlobe for road extraction to provide a
realistic evaluation of NomaFedHAP as well as demonstrate
its applicability to real-world scenarios. The specifics of each
dataset are as follows:
• MNIST [38]: is a dataset consisting of 70,000 grayscale
images of handwritten numbers of size 28×28 pixels. To
train our satellites, we use a convolutional neural network
(CNN) with three convolutional layers, three pooling lay-
ers, and one fully connected layer with 437,840 trainable
parameters.
• CIFAR-10 [39]: is a dataset consisting of 60,000 colored
images of ten classes, each with 6000 images. Each
image has a size of 32×32 pixels (images of animals
and vehicles). To train our satellites, we also use the CNN
model with 798,653 training parameters.
• CIFAR-100 [39]: is a dataset similar to CIFAR-10,
but contains 100 classes with 600 images each, which
makes the training task more challenging. As a result, the
CNN model is constructed using six convolutional layers
and two fully connected layers, with 7,759,521 training
parameters.
• DeepGlobe for Road Extraction [40]: is a dataset
consisting of 6,226 colored satellite images of size
1024×1024 with a high-resolution of 50 cm/pixel. For
more effective training, we apply various data augmen-
tation techniques, such as flipping, rotating, and contrast
adjusting, resulting in a dataset size of 12,452. To train
our satellites, We use the U-Net model with 3,048,576
training parameters.
Our analysis considers both IID and non-IID data distributions
(except for DeepGlobe where the images are already non-
IID). In the IID setup, each satellite on each shell trains over
the same classes of images, but these images are shuffled
randomly and distributed equally across satellites. In the non-
IID setup, satellites on each of two shells train on a distinct
set of 30% of the classes, while satellites on the other shell
train on 40% of the classes. The training hyperparameters are
set as follows: the number of local training epochs is 100, the
learning rate ranges from 0.1 to 0.0001, and the mini-batch
size is 32.
B. Evaluation of NomaFedHAP’s Communication Scheme
We first compare the performance of the NomaFedHAP
scheme to traditional OMA schemes with LEO satellites as

12
(a) GS located in Rolla.
(b) Single HAP
(c) Two HAPs
(d) Three HAPs
Fig. 6. Simulated Walker-delta constellation in 3D with a variety of PS scenarios: (a) GS located in Rolla, MO, USA, (b-d) HAPs located above Rolla,
USA; Chinook, USA; and Primorsky Krai, Russia.
(a) GS located in Rolla.
(b) Single HAP
(c) Two HAPs
(d) Three HAPs
Fig. 7. Simulated Walker-delta constellation in 2D with a variety of PS scenarios: (a) GS located in Rolla, MO, USA, (b-d) HAPs located above Rolla,
USA; Chinook, USA; and Primorsky Krai, Russia
clients. Figure 8.a shows the BER performance against trans-
mitting power of an NS and FS satellite at altitudes of 500km
and 1500 km, respectively, for various scenarios: i) when
using the NomaFedHAP with both static and dynamic power
allocation (PA) based on their distance to h, and ii) when
employing the OMA scheme. According to this figure, the
OMA scheme achieves a slightly better BER compared to both
PA scenarios of NomaFedHAP. This advantage is because the
transmitted data from various satellites do not interfere with
each other in OMA. However, despite this small improvement
in the BER, the capacity of satellites that NomaFedHAP
can support simultaneously at the same time and frequency
is much higher compared to OMA. This is illustrated in
Fig. 8.b, which shows the achievable satellite capacity versus
transmitting power of the simulated NomaFedHAP approach.
Furthermore, in Fig. 9.a, we compare NomaFedHAP’s
achievable data rate versus transmitting power under various
scenarios of altitudes for NS and FS, as well as for the
overall system rate. From this figure, we observe that when
the distance between the NS and FS is large enough, the
overall system rate is higher compared to smaller distances.
This is because the PS can easily decode the signals from
distant satellites without interference. Notably, in both cases,
the achievable data rate ranges from 140 Mbps to 160 Mbps
at a transmitting power of 40 dBm and bandwidth of 50 MHz,
which is more than sufficient to transmit large models like
the VGG-16 model of 528 MB. This means the uploading of
models to the PS only takes around 30.17 to 26.4 seconds,
demonstrating that employing NOMA with LEO satellites
significantly reduces the required time for model uploading
from minutes to just a few seconds.
In Fig. 9.b, we show the OP experienced by h versus
transmitting power for the same two scenarios of the NS
and FS, as well as for the overall system. According to the
simulated results, the overall outage of the communication
between the NS or FS to the PS is around 1% chance when
the transmitting power is around 20 dBm, and this decreases
to 0.1% when the transmitting power is increased to 40 dBm.
These results demonstrate that NomaFedHAP achieves lower
OP under various scenarios.
Finally, in Fig. 10, we show the total sum rate versus the
maximum number of satellites that NomaFedHAP can support,
considering varying multi-path and LoS average powers at dif-
ferent transmitting power levels. Two key observations emerge
from this figure. Firstly, NomaFedHAP can support a high
number of satellites even with lower multi-path or LoS average
power. For instance, with a transmitting power of 30 dBm,
using ι=0.279 and Ω=0.251, NomaFedHAP can communicate
with 14 satellites simultaneously, achieving 12 bps/Hz, and
with B=50 MHz, each satellite will have approximately 600
Mbps. In addition, increasing B will further boost the sum
rate and allow for an increase in the number of supported
satellites while maintaining high data rates. Secondly, there
is a drop-off point beyond which the data rate decreases. How-
ever, even after this drop-off, NomaFedHAP still supports a
substantial number of satellites with high data rates. Therefore,
introducing NOMA to FL-LEO significantly improves system
capacity, allowing for more satellites to be launched without
bandwidth limitations experienced with OMA schemes.

13
(a) The BER vs. transmitting power.
(b) The achievable satellites capacity vs. transmitting power.
Fig. 8. Performance of NomaFedHAP with fixed and dynamic power allocation vs. OMA scheme.
(a) The achievable data rate vs. transmitting power.
(b) The outage probability vs. transmitting power.
Fig. 9. Comparison of achievable data rate and outage probability for NomaFedHAP at two altitudes (NS and FS). B=50 MHz.
C. Evaluation of NomaFedHAP’s Convergence Operation
1) Comparing
NomaFedHAP
with
baselines:
Table
I presents the convergence performance of NomaFedHAP
against baselines based on MNIST, CIFAR-10, and CIFAR-
100 datasets in a non-IID setting with a GS in Rolla, USA
serving as a PS. Additionally, we use a GS at NP for some
baselines to align with their setup environment. The table
shows that NomaFedHAP achieves an accuracy of 82.73%,
77.36%, and 62.81% on the MNIST, CIFAR-10, and CIFAR-
100 datasets, respectively, within only 24-hour timestamp and
without any impractical assumption using a GS as baselines,
and not HAPs (results with HAPs are provided in Table II).
Asynchronous
approaches
such
as
FedSat
[13],
or
AsyncFLEO [17] can achieve better or comparable accuracy to
NomaFedHAP. However, their usability in realistic scenarios
is limited due to their oversimplified assumption that satellites
should visit the GS in a regular manner or overlook the
sink satellite’s visibility period. When the authors of FedSat
omitted this assumption by developing FedSatSchedule [14],
the convergence speed is doubled to 48 hours, and the accuracy
is reduced by 14-24% in comparison with FedSat on differ-
ent datasets. Although FedSatSchedule offers more realistic
consideration, traditional FedAsync [5] can achieve similar
accuracy for the same convergence period. Despite FedSpace’s
[15] efforts to balance idleness and staleness in synchronous
approach and asynchronous FL approaches, respectively, its
performance is limited to 50% or less on the three datasets
tested.
For the synchronous FL approaches, FedISL [7] is the
fastest synchronous FL approach with a convergence time of
8 hours and an accuracy of 82.76%, 73.62%, and 66.57% on
MNIST, CIFAR-10, and CIFAR-100, respectively, when the
GS is located at the NP. However, when the GS location is
changed, its accuracy drops to 61.06%, 52.11%, and 47.99%

14
(a) Varying the multi-path average power component.
(b) Varying the LoS average power component.
Fig. 10. The sum data rate vs. number of supported satellites in NomaFedHAP under different settings.
TABLE I
ACCURACY AND CONVERGENCE TIME OF NOMAFEDHAP VS. BASELINES UNDER NON-IID SETTING.
FL-LEO
Accuracy (%)
Convergence
Remark
Approaches
MNIST
CIFAR-10
CIFAR-100
time (h)
FedAsync [5]
70.36
61.81
56.37
48
GS at any location
FedSat [13]
85.15
81.18
72.19
24
GS located at the NP
FedSatSched [14] 73.61
62.77
54.59
48
GS at any location
FedSpace [15]
52.67
39.41
36.04
72
Satellites need to upload portion of their raw data
Async FL
AsyncFLEO [17]
79.49
69.88
61.43
9
Assuming enough visible period for sink satellites
FedAvg [4]
79.41
70.68
61.66
60
GS at any location
FedISL [7]
82.76
73.62
66.57
8
GS located at NP
FedISL [7]
61.06
52.11
47.99
72
GS located at any location
FedHAP [8]
81.62
76.63
59.89
48
GS located at any location
DSFL [11]
76.69
71.63
62.18
19
Require higher data rates for model exchange due to Doppler shift
FedLEO [12]
84.69
73.26
61.31
36
GS at any location (requires scheduling sink satellite)
Sync FL
NomaFedHAP
82.73
77.36
62.81
24
GS located at any location
TABLE II
ACCURACY AND CONVERGENCE TIME OF NOMAFEDHAP UNDER VARIOUS PSs SCENARIOS.
MNIST Dataset
CIFAR-10 Dataset
CIFAR-100 Dataset
Accuracy (%)
Converge Time (h)
Accuracy (%)
Converge Time (h)
Accuracy (%)
Converge Time (h)
PS
IID
Non-IID
IID
Non-IID
IID
Non-IID
IID
Non-IID
IID
Non-IID
IID
Non-IID
GS
97.14
90.69
24
36
88.28
80.23
32
42
76.56
71.99
52
61
Single HAP
93.12
90.88
3
9.11
85.19
82.5
4.92
12
78.28
72.82
48
54
Two HAPs
96.23
93.67
1.74
3.68
87.67
83.29
3.17
4.38
77.67
75.13
24
30
Three HAPs 97.62
95.19
1.62
3
89.13
84.67
2.27
3.81
80.09
78.62
22
26
on the same datasets after 72 hours of training. DSFL [11]
is the second fastest, converging within 19 hours, however,
it suffers from the Doppler shift due to the inter-orbit ISL
communication. The comparison with the rest of the baselines
is summarized in Table I.
2) Evaluating NomaFedHAP in-depth: We extensively
evaluate NomaFedHAP’s performance across various scenar-
ios, including various PS setups and datasets with different
distribution settings. The left side of Table II shows the
maximum achievable accuracy with respect to the convergence
speed of NomaFedHAP on the MNIST dataset. The results
indicate that utilizing HAP as PS instead of traditional PS
significantly accelerates the convergence of the FL, reducing
the convergence speed from days to just a few hours without

15
(a) MNIST dataset.
(b) CIFAR-10 dataset.
(c) CIFAR-100 dataset.
Fig. 11. NomaFedHAP’s accuracy over time for various datasets in the IID setting.
(a) MNIST dataset.
(b) CIFAR-10 dataset.
(c) CIFAR-100 dataset.
Fig. 12. NomaFedHAP’s accuracy over time for various datasets in the non-IID setting.
sacrificing the target accuracy. When two/three HAPs were
employed, there was a slightly different improvement in con-
vergence speed for the IID setting compared to the single
HAP scenario. However, the use of multiple HAPs had a more
significant impact on the convergence speed for the non-IID
settings, particularly when compared to the GS scenario. These
findings demonstrate that employing multiple HAPs as PSs
can enhance the convergence speed and have a substantial
influence on the FL-LEO system.
Table II also shows the accuracy and convergence speed
of NomaFedHAP using more complex datasets of CIFAR-10
and CIFAR-100. The trends observed on these datasets are
similar to those seen on the MNIST dataset. According to our
evaluation of NomaFedHAP’s performance using these two
datasets, we find that when the number of classes increased
from 10 to 100, there was a reduction in accuracy of 10-15%
and an increase in convergence time of 14-45 hours.
Fig. 11 and Fig. 12 evaluate the performance of the No-
maFedHAP under various evaluation conditions on a larger
scale. From these figures, we can infer using even a single
HAP in lieu of GS can provide higher convergence accuracy
with less convergence time by an order of magnitude. This
advantage also still holds under various datasets and tough
distribution (non-IID), which proves its effectiveness.
3) Evaluating NomaFedHAP using real satellite im-
agery: We finally evaluate the performance of NomaFedHAP
on real satellite images of the DeepGlobe dataset for extracting
road. To assess NomaFedHAP’s effectiveness on this dataset,
we use two evaluation metrics: the Intersection-over-Union
(IoU) and Dice coefficient (F1 score), which are more pre-
cise than pixel accuracy for segmentation tasks. The results
demonstrate that NomaFedHAP can accurately detect roads
with an IoU of 61.87% and a Dice coefficient of 65.12%
after only 5 hours. These metrics improve to 72.68% and
73.90%, respectively, after 10 hours. In Fig. 13, we present
a sample of images after 5 hours vs. 10 hours, illustrating
that NomaFedHAP can quickly achieve convergence without
compromising model performance across various datasets.
Comparing NomaFedHAP with one of the baseline ap-
proaches [12], that baseline initially achieves an IoU of
36.18% and a Dice coefficient of 40.11% after 5 hours, which
subsequently improves to 69.32% and 72.76% after 16 hours.
However, NomaFedHAP consistently achieves significantly
higher accuracy—approximately 25% more than this particular
approach. Moreover, other baseline approaches exhibit signifi-
cantly longer convergence times with lower accuracy under the
same settings. Notably, when incorporating realistic satellite
images into the training process, NomaFedHAP demonstrates
the ability to expedite convergence by at least a factor of 2 to

16
(a) Samples of original satellite images.
(b) Corresponding ground truth labels of roads.
(c) Corresponding predicated labels after 5 hours during convergence.
(d) Corresponding predicated labels after 10 hours during convergence.
Fig. 13. Comparison of NomaFedHAP’s segmentation performance at two different timestamps (5 hours vs. 10 hours during convergence) over sample images
from the DeepGlobe dataset. The PS is a single HAP located at Rolla, Mo, USA.
5 when compared to those baseline FL-LEO approaches.
VII. CONCLUSION
This paper introduces NomaFedHAP, a novel FL framework
tailored for LEO satellite constellations, leveraging HAPs as
distributed PSs to facilitate FL model training. NomaFedHAP
tackles the challenge of much prolonged FL-LEO training
time due to the irregular and sporadic LEO satellite connec-
tivity with the PS, and transient visibility windows. To that
end, NomaFedHAP introduces NOMA into FL-LEO, enabling
efficient utilization of SatCom bandwidth and fast model
exchange between satellites and the PS within just seconds.
Under our new communication architecture, we also derive a
closed-form expression for the outage probability of the NS
and FS scenarios as well as the entire system orchestrated
by HAPs. NomaFedHAP consists of i) a new communica-
tion topology utilizing HAPs as relays to mitigate Doppler
shift among satellites in different orbits, ii) a novel model
propagation scheme for seamless model exchange between
satellites and HAPs, and iii) an optimized model aggrega-
tion approach for balancing models from different orbits and
shells to achieve rapid FL convergence. Extensive simulations
demonstrate NomaFedHAP’s superiority in rapid and efficient
FL model convergence on realistic satellite datasets, while
limiting the OP of NOMA to only 0.1%, outperforming the
state-of-the-art approaches by at least 5 times in terms of
convergence speed.

17
APPENDIX A
PROOF OF THEOREM.1
Let wβ
k is the local model updated by satellite k during
communication round β with SGD local iterations E ≥1
before transmitting the updated version to the PS. Addi-
tionally, let IE represents the set of global synchronization
steps, denoted as IE = {nE|n = 1, 2, . . . }. Thus, the update
equation for NomaFedHAP, with partially visible satellites,
can be expressed as
vβ+1
k
= wβ
k −ζβ∇Fk(wβ
k, ξβ
k )
(39)
wβ+1
k
=
(
vβ+1
k
if β + 1 /∈IE,
PK
k=1 αkvβ+1
k
if β + 1 ∈IE.
(40)
In Equation (39), we introduce an additional variable vβ+1
k
,
which represents the immediate result of one step of SGD from
wβ
k. Here, wβ+1
k
can be viewed as the model obtained after
the aggregation round β + 1, which corresponds to a global
synchronization step.
Motivated by [36], we define two virtual sequences, namely,
¯vβ = PK
k=1 αk¯vβ
k and ¯
wβ = PK
k=1 αk ¯
wβ
k. We can therefore
interpret ¯vβ+1 as the result of a single-step SGD update from
¯
wβ. When β + 1 is not within IE, both ¯vβ and ¯
wβ are inac-
cessible. However, if β + 1 is part of IE, we can only access
¯
wβ+1. For convenience, we define ¯gβ = PK
k=1 αk∇Fk(wβ
k)
and gβ = PK
k=1 αk∇Fk(wβ
k, ξβ
k ). Thus, we have Egβ = ¯gβ
and ¯vβ+1 = ¯
wβ −ζβ¯gβ
Lemma 1 (Results of single-step SGD). Assuming Assump-
tions 1 and 2 are satisfied, if ζβ ≤
1
4Λ, then we have:
E∥¯vβ+1 −w∗||2
2 ≤(1 −ζβϱ)E∥¯
wβ −w∗||2
2 + ζ2
βE∥gβ −¯gβ∥2
2
+ 6Λζ2
βΓ + 2E
K
X
k=1
αk∥¯
wβ −wβ
k∥2
2.
where w∗is the target model that achieves the desired
accuracy.
Lemma 2 (Bounding the variance). Assuming Assumption 3
is satisfied, then we have:
E∥gβ −¯gβ∥2
2 ≤
K
X
k=1
α2
kσ2
k.
Lemma 3 (Bound wβ
k divergence). Assuming Assumption 4
is satisfied and ζβ ≤2ζβ+E is non-increasing ∀β ≥1, then
we have:
E
" K
X
k=1
αk∥¯
wβ
k −wβ
k∥2
2
#
≤4ζ2
β(E −1)2G2.
Proof. Let ∆β = E∥¯
wβ+1
k
−w∗∥2
2, and ¯
wβ+1 = ¯vβ+1 in
both scenarios, whether β + 1 ∈IE or β + 1 /∈IE. Drawing
upon the results of Lemmas 1-3, we have
∆β+1 ≤(1 −ζβϱ)∆β + ζ2
βZ
(41)
For a decreasing step size, let ζβ =
ε
β+δ, where ε > 1
ϱ and
δ > 0 are chosen such that ζ1 ≤min{ 1
ϱ,
1
4Λ} =
1
4Λ, and
ζβ ≤2ζβ+E. We aim to prove that ∆β ≤
τ
β+δ, where τ =
max{ ε2Z
εϱ−1, (δ + 1)∆1}.
To achieve this, we employ the induction method. Beginning
with the base case of β = 1 and considering the definition of
τ, we ensure its hold for some β as follows
∆β+1 ≤(1 −ζβϱ)∆β + ζ2
βZ
=

1 −
εϱ
β + δ

τ
β + δ +
ε2Z
(β + δ)2
= β + δ −1
(β + δ)2 τ +

ε2Z
(β + δ)2 −εϱ −1
(β + δ)2 τ

≤
τ
β + δ + 1
Leveraging Assumption 2, which asserts the strong convexity
of F(·), we obtain
E[F( ¯
wβ)] −F ∗≤Λ
2 ∆β ≤Λ
2
τ
δ + β .
In particular, with the choice of ε = 2
ϱ and δ = max{8 Λ
ϱ −
1, E}, and denoting υ = Λ
ϱ , we have ζβ = 2
ϱ
1
δ+β , therefore
E[F( ¯
wβ)] −F ∗≤
2υ
δ + β
Z
ϱ + 2Λ∆1

