System Design for a Data-driven and Explainable
Customer Sentiment Monitor
An Nguyena,c,∗, Stefan Foerstelb, Thomas Kittlere, Andrey Kurzyukovc, Leo
Schwinna, Dario Zancaa, Tobias Hippc, Da Jun Sund, Michael Schrappc, Eva
Rothgangb, Bjoern Eskoﬁera
aMachine Learning and Data Analytics Lab, Friedrich-Alexander-Universit¨at
Erlangen-N¨urnberg, Germany
bUniversity of Applied Sciences Amberg-Weiden, Germany
cSiemens Healthcare GmbH, Germany
d Siemens Shanghai Medical Equipment Ltd., China
einfoteam Software AG, Germany
Abstract
The most important goal of customer services is to keep the customer satisﬁed.
However, service resources are always limited and must be prioritized. There-
fore, it is important to identify customers who potentially become unsatisﬁed
and might lead to escalations. Today this prioritization of customers is often
done manually. Data science on IoT data (esp. log data) for machine health
monitoring, as well as analytics on enterprise data for customer relationship
management (CRM) have mainly been researched and applied independently.
In this paper, we present a framework for a data-driven decision support system
which combines IoT and enterprise data to model customer sentiment. Such de-
cision support systems can help to prioritize customers and service resources to
eﬀectively troubleshoot problems or even avoid them. The framework is applied
in a real-world case study with a major medical device manufacturer. This in-
cludes a fully automated and interpretable machine learning pipeline designed
to meet the requirements deﬁned with domain experts and end users. The over-
all framework is currently deployed, learns and evaluates predictive models from
terabytes of IoT and enterprise data to actively monitor the customer sentiment
∗Corresponding authors

Preprint submitted to Elsevier
January 12, 2021
arXiv:2101.04086v1  [cs.LG]  11 Jan 2021

for a ﬂeet of thousands of high-end medical devices. Furthermore, we provide
an anonymized industrial benchmark dataset for the research community.
Keywords:
customer service, decision support system, IoT data, explainable
AI, machine learning, big data.
1. Introduction
Companies are interested in monitoring the performance of their installed
systems. The success of a system depends on the health status of a machine (e.g.
derived from IoT data like event logs) and customer perception (e.g. derived
from ticket data). However, these two perspectives are mostly separated in the
literature. The machine health perspective is often considered in disciplines like
predictive maintenance or more generally prognostic health management [1].
Sipos et al. [2], for example, used a data-driven approach based on multiple-
instance learning from event log data for predictive maintenance for high-end
medical devices. Additionally, event log data are analyzed for intrusion detec-
tion [3, 4] or failure detection in data and computing centers [5, 6]. On the other
side, the customer perspective is emphasized in the framework of customer re-
lationship management (CRM), which is a broad discipline including strategies
and processes for organizations to handle customer interactions and to keep
track of all customer-related information [7]. Customer escalations are mostly
predicted based on ticket data only [8, 9]. In manufacturing companies (e.g. for
medical devices), available data typically falls in two distinct groups. First is
the IoT data/machine logs generated on the system. The second group contains
complementary enterprise systems. This includes ticketing systems for service
activities, spare part consumption, and reported system malfunctions. To keep
customers satisﬁed with the operation of their systems is crucial for the success
of medical device manufacturer. Therefore, it is important to identify unsatis-
ﬁed customers who might lead to escalations. Hence, a framework making use
of both data sources in order to combine these two perspectives would be desir-
able. Such a system should combine existing IoT (log) data and enterprise data.
2

It could serve as a decision support system for the end user to encourage data-
driven and therefore more objective decision-making. In this paper, we present
a fully automated end-to-end machine learning framework which combines both
data sources to model customer sentiment. We show that customer sentiment
can be better estimated when looking at the system performance based on both
the machine log data (e.g. to detect system malfunction aﬀecting the customer)
and enterprise data (e.g. ticket data from customer interactions). We use his-
torical data of escalations as labels for our predictive models to continuously
learn a probability for an escalation as an estimate for the customer sentiment.
This resulting decision support system helps to better prioritize customers and
trouble shoot problems. The concrete problem formulation and proposed solu-
tion which combines log and enterprise data to increase predictive power and
interpretability for the real-world case study serve as our main contributions.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 describes the
problem to be solved as well as the data sources. Section 3 describes the over-
all methodology. Section 4 presents the experimental results. Then, Section 5
discusses the results and presents the proposed workﬂow. Section 6 concludes
our paper and discusses future research directions.
2. Problem Description
2.1. Business Problem
Customer satisfaction and hence service resource prioritization is a key pri-
ority in many organizations. Here, we analyze data from a large and worldwide
installed ﬂeet of high-end medical devices. Therefore, customers, as well as lo-
cal service entities, naturally diﬀer in the way they communicate and document
problems. This inevitably leads to situations where customers facing similar
problems address the service provider in vastly diﬀerent ways. Hence, objec-
tively prioritizing customers and service resources is a hard problem. Combin-
ing relevant information from machine log and enterprise data could potentially
help to better understand problems in the ﬁeld and how they aﬀect the cus-
3

tomer sentiment. Therefore, we design a data-driven decision support system
to help prioritizing customers based on an estimated sentiment. This can help
to minimize unexpected escalations as a product of a more proactive customer
support. The case study at hand was conducted with a major medical device
company for a ﬂeet of thousands of high-end systems used by customers world
wide. Major challenges are the amount, heterogeneity, and complexity of the
diﬀerent data sources.
2.2. Data Description
In order to solve the business problem at hand we make use of two major
data sources which we describe here in more detail.
2.2.1. Log Data
Log data is a time-based protocol of events recorded by diﬀerent compo-
nents of a medical system. An event consists of a timestamp (indicating when
the event occurred), an event source (specifying which system component gen-
erated the event), an event id (representing a category of similar event types by
the given event source), an event severity (typically: information, warning and
error), and a message text (describing the event and giving more details like
sensor values). Events are deﬁned and implemented by the developers of each
particular system component. The severity and amount of sensor data logged
is decided by each individual developer.
Depending on which combination of event-source, event-id and message-
text we deﬁne as unique, we get approximately 105 diﬀerent events. There can
theoretically be an unlimited number of distinct message texts depending on the
usage. One system typically generates from 104 to 106 of these events per day.
A typical system family having several thousand installed systems worldwide
would then generate up to 100 GB of log data per day.
These log ﬁles are typically used by customer support centers to diagnose
problems as well as by the original system developers to track whether their
developed systems work as intended.
4

Major challenges for analyzing log data are the volume and complexity. We
describe later how we automatically extract relevant information from incoming
log ﬁles.
2.2.2. Enterprise Data Sources
Enterprise data sources are mostly collected by and stored in enterprise
resource planning (ERP) systems. Types of enterprise data are:
• service activity data / ticket data - documenting all customer interactions
and problems which occur
• spare part data - typically related to service activities, includes which
spare parts have been used for maintenance / repair of a system
• customer base / contract data - listing all customers and the corresponding
relationships, especially what kind of service level has been signed
Major challenges regarding the enterprise data are:
• getting a consistent picture for all customers and service activities world-
wide, which is made more diﬃcult by diﬀerent local ERP systems
• manual data inputs contain errors due to typos and incorrect usage
• worldwide standards diﬀer a lot, especially since there is no precise deﬁni-
tion what a “well running medical system” is and, therefore, interpretation
of service data can diﬀer from country to country
• regional ticket data is often written in the local language
Globally operating companies can have several levels of customer service cen-
ters ranging from regional to global and all of them are generating ticket data.
In our case, we consider three diﬀerent ticket levels from regional to global.
Furthermore, we analyze tickets generated by an information system tracking
escalations from customer service to the R&D department.
5

2.3. Requirements
There are special requirements to be met for a successful deployment of a
decision support system in a real-world scenario as in the presented case study.
We describe these requirements in this section and adapt all design decisions
accordingly. During the whole development life cycle from proof-of-concept up
to deployment, we worked closely together with domain experts and stakeholders
from all relevant departments including potential end users for the implemented
decision support system. Thus, we can assure that we meet all requirements
and build a framework which has a real impact for the end users.
• Dynamics and Eﬃciency: Currently, decisions about escalations are
made on a weekly basis. Hence, our framework must process data and
provide predictions on a weekly basis as well.
The overall framework
should be capable to eﬃciently load new data, extract features, train a
model, and perform predictions on a weekly basis. This should be done
in the time frame of a few hours, e.g. on Monday mornings.
• Model Performance and Output: The escalation ﬂags (highest esca-
lation level) used as a label in this case study are very sparse and noisy.
This causes special challenges for the prediction task. A binary output
is not desired, but rather a probability of escalation which models the
customer sentiment. Customers with the largest probabilities will then be
analyzed in more detail by the end users. Therefore, it is not the main goal
to design a machine learning model, which perfectly predicts escalations,
but rather a system that helps to identify, based on the designed features,
which customers might need special attention.
• Interpretability: This is especially important for real-world applications
as the present case study since the end user wants to understand the
reasoning behind the output of the prediction model not only to take the
appropriate actions but also to build trust. We extract speciﬁc features
from the log and enterprise data. These features were designed together
6

with domain experts and end users to incorporate prior knowledge and
interpretable features into the decision support system.
• Usability: An interactive application was developed based on a com-
mercial Business Intelligence tool which is currently in use by the med-
ical device provider. Usability also includes considerations of what data
sources need to be provided based on the end user’s request. The ability
to interact with the provided decision support system enables continuous
feedback for validation. Based on the explanations of the model and fea-
tures, the end user can decide if the predictions are valid and with that
provide more and cleaner labels for future prediction cycles. We will later
describe an envisioned workﬂow for the designed decision support system.
3. Methodology
In this section, we describe the designed framework to solve the business
problem at hand. A high-level overview of the implemented framework is de-
picted in Fig. 1. Hundreds of gigabytes of incoming log and enterprise data
from all over the world are automatically analyzed via a log evaluation frame-
work to calculate relevant features designed together with domain experts. We
design an automated and interpretable machine learning pipeline to calculate a
probability of escalation, which models the customer sentiment. The provided
decision support system includes an explanation for the calculated probability,
as well as historical feature data based on extracted log and enterprise data for
the end user. There are major beneﬁts when combining both data sources from
the user perspective. Depending on which features explain a prediction, it is
possible to identify problems as either being more related to R&D (log features)
or customer service (enterprise features).
7

Log 
Evaluation
Framework
Log Data
 
  
 
 
  
 
Log Feature
Domain knowledge
 
  
 
 
  
 
Enterprise 
Data
Feature 
Extractor
Enterprise 
Feature
Domain knowledge
Predictive Model
Decision Support System
Labels
Model 
Versioning
Figure 1: High-level schema of the overall processing pipeline.
Systems from all over the
world are sending log data. Additionally, enterprise data (sales and ticket data) are collected.
Features are extracted based on domain knowledge in order to train a predictive model. The
resulting data and predictions are integrated into a decision support system for the end user.
3.1. Build Dataset
Algorithm 1 describes how we built the dataset for the experimental setup.
In the following, we will describe the process in more detail.
3.1.1. Labeling
Let I be the set of all customers. Fig. 2 depicts the labeling approach for one
example customer i ∈I using a sliding window approach. The step size is set
to 1 week. We set the window size to 10 steps, which was proposed by domain
experts. Diﬀerent values were also evaluated but did not yield an improvement.
From this window a feature vector xi,tpred is extracted, where tpred is deﬁned
as the last week in a window. Let Ti,esc be the set of all escalations ﬂags for
customer i and ti,esc a speciﬁc time point of an escalation ﬂag for customer
i.
The predictive interval is set to 2 steps.
If there has been an escalation
ti,esc ∈Ti,esc in the predictive interval, the label (yi,tpred) for the sample will be
set to 1 and 0 otherwise (line 9-12). After an escalation ti,esc, the following 4
steps are deﬁned as an infected interval. All samples where the sliding window
contains weeks from the infected interval are excluded (line 14-15). This was
8

deﬁned together with domain experts. We assume that there is already a special
focus on customers for which a recent escalation occurred. As described in line
2-3, we repeat this procedure for all customers for a ﬁxed time frame of 104 steps,
which in our case is equivalent to 2 years. The dataset Dtpred = (xtpred, ytpred)
contains samples for all customers with complete data (line 4). This results
in the distributions depicted in Fig. 3. Note that the number of customers
|ytpred| is increasing while the number of escalations ∥ytpred∥1 remains almost
constant over time.
This is due to limited service resources which yields to
an approximate constant number of customers put into focus each week. We
provide an anonymized version of D for the research community as an industrial
benchmark [10] 1.
3.1.2. Feature Extraction
Weekends and public holidays can introduce noise into calculated features.
Therefore, we decided together with domain experts to aggregate features on a
weekly basis. For all customers i ∈I and prediction weeks tpred, we calculate
features for a window of 10 weeks (line 2-8).
Log Data
Due to the high volume and complexity of existing data sources, feature ex-
traction is required. The machine log data as described in 2.2.1 is not feasible
to analyze in their raw format. We use a log evaluation framework to detect
the occurrences of speciﬁc sequences of events, determined by domain experts.
The extracted features have clear meanings and are related to speciﬁc system
malfunctions, which can aﬀect customers in their daily work routines. Such fea-
tures include, for example: abort of operation, system delay, user interface (UI)
freeze, and UI pop ups. We also extract whether there was a software (SW)
update performed for a system.
1https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4383145
9

…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
Figure 2: Description of the labeling approach for one example customer i ∈I. We assume
that tpred (last week in window) starts at some point t0.
(a) Sample with negative label
(yi,tpred ←0 ) since there is no escalation within predictive interval of 2 weeks. (b), (c)
Samples are labeled positive (yi,tpred ←1) since there is an escalation within the predictive
interval. (d) We exclude infected samples from the dataset. (e) First valid sample after the
infected interval.
Enterprise Data
The enterprise data available can be split in two connected groups - sales data
and customer service tickets - as described in 2.2.2.
Features for sales data
are the number and total cost of replaced parts. Features derived from ticket
data include the number of open tickets, age of the oldest open ticket, the rated
severity, as well as the number of site visits for each customer depending on
availability in the diﬀerent ticketing systems. These features can be extracted
10

0
20
40
60
80
100
tpred −t0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
2000
|ytpred|
0
1
2
3
4
∥ytpred∥1
Figure 3: Sample distribution for the whole dataset D. The graph depicts all samples (|ytpred|)
and positive samples (∥ytpred∥1) for tpred = t0 + {0, . . . , 104}.
on a global level.
3.2. Modeling
In order to meet the requirements described in Section 2.3, we selected a
speciﬁc approach to model the customer sentiment. Major challenges are the
large class imbalance (Fig. 3) and signiﬁcant amount of label noise as a result of
manual decision for an escalation. The output of a machine learning model can
be helpful in several ways. First, we can identify which speciﬁc problems de-
picted in the designed features lead to escalation. Additionally, we can identify
customers which have similar problems and might need special attention. We
compare diﬀerent machine learning methods: ensembles of decision trees and
deep neural networks (DNNs). For both methods, we calculate post-hoc expla-
nations for each prediction using either a tree explainer [11] or a modiﬁcation of
DeepLift [12]. Both algorithms are implemented in the SHAP libary [12]2 and
we refer to the explanatory outputs as SHAP values.
2https://github.com/slundberg/shap
11

3.2.1. Ensemble of Decision Trees
Ensemble of decision tree methods have the following beneﬁts:
• The computed feature importance [13, 14] helps end users understand
which of the designed features are “correlating” with escalations/customer
sentiment.
• Ensemble methods provide a probability as a model output which can be
interpreted as the customer sentiment (probability for escalation).
• Since each combination of time point (week) in a window and designed
feature is modeled as a single input variable, we can provide the rele-
vance of each input variable for all predictions to the end user for better
troubleshooting.
The decision tree ensemble methods we select are Random Forest (RF) [15]3 and
XGBoost (XGB) [16] 4. Random Forest and XGBoost are ensemble learning
techniques which can be used for both classiﬁcation and regression.
In our
case, we are interested in classiﬁcation. In general, a RF is a collection of weak
classiﬁers {Ci} where each classiﬁer gets the same input x and outputs the most
probable class Ci(x) = yi ∈S with S being the set of all possible classes. The
output of the Random Forest is then deﬁned as
RF(x) = arg max|{yi : yi = Ci(x)}| = y∗∈S,
the class which is most probable for the majority of the Ci. In the original
paper[15] and also in our case, we used decision trees as weak classiﬁers. The
decision trees for RF are generated independently and in parallel via a bag-
ging (bootstrap aggregation) approach. This means that each decision tree is
generated in two steps:
3https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.ensemble.
RandomForestClassifier.html
4https://xgboost.readthedocs.io/en/latest/python/python_api.html
12

1. Bootstrapping: Independently sampling the input data set Dtrain = (xj, yj)
with j ∈{1, . . . , m} for each Ci on data points and features.
This means the data points from D are sampled iid (independent and
identically distributed) into a subset Dtraini = (xi
j, yi
j)j∈Ji where Ji ⊂
{1, . . . , m}.
Also, the feature space is sampled iid, such that if xj contains the features
F = {fk : k ∈{1, . . . , n}}, then xi
j contains the features from F i ⊂F.
2. Aggregating: Averaging or in our case deciding by a majority vote which
class should be chosen.
Gradient Boosting[17] also combines many weak classiﬁers into a strong clas-
siﬁer, but the idea how to combine those weak learners diﬀers. In contrast to
bagging, the decision trees are not built in parallel but sequentially, while results
are combined along the way. In our case, we chose XGBoost [16] which is an
improved variant of the Gradient Boosting algorithm using a more regularized
formalization of the model leading to a reduction of over-ﬁtting. In both cases
the output is the predicted class (here: 0 or 1) as well as the probability the
model assigns to each prediction. We use the probability the model assigns to
class 1 as the predicted customer sentiment ˆytpred for each input xtpred. We ad-
dress the imbalanced class problem by applying either random oversampling of
the minority class, SMOTE [18] or random undersampling of the majority class
[19] using the imblearn libary [20]5. We treat the sampling strategy as a hyper-
parameter in our model selection approach, which we will describe later. We
tested 8 diﬀerent model conﬁgurations as summarized in Table 1. We applied
two diﬀerent data fusion approaches. For “early” fusion (M1, M2) we simply
stack enterprise ( xent) and log ( xlog) features to train a single classiﬁer (RF
or XGB). In “late” fusion (M3, M4) we train one base classiﬁer based on xent
and one based on xlog. The output of each base classiﬁer is then fed into a
subsequent logistic regression layer for the ﬁnal prediction. Both base classiﬁer
5https://github.com/scikit-learn-contrib/imbalanced-learn
13

are either RF or XGB. We additionally tried to train a classiﬁer only based on
xent (M5, M6) or only on xlog (M7, M8).
3.2.2. Deep Neural Networks
We implemented a DNN based on long short-term memory (LSTM) neural
networks (NNs) [21] in order to model xtpred as a time series. Given a sequence
of inputs xtpred = ⟨x(1), x(2), . . . , x(10)⟩, a LSTM computes sequences of outputs
⟨h(1), h(2), . . . , h(10)⟩via the following recurrent equations:
f (t)
g
= σ(Wf[x(t), h(t−1)] + bf)
(forget gate),
i(t)
g
= σ(Wi[x(t), h(t−1)] + bi)
(input gate),
˜c(t) = tanh(Wg[x(t), h(t−1)] + bg)
(candidate memory),
c(t) = f (t)
g
◦c(t−1) + i(t)
g
◦˜c(t)
(current memory),
o(t)
g
= σ(Wo[x(t), h(t−1)] + bo)
(output gate),
h(t) = o(t)
g
◦tanh(c(t))
(current hidden state),
∀t ∈{1, 2, . . . , 10}.
{Wf,i,g,o, bf,i,g,o} are trainable parameters, σ is the sigmoid activation func-
tion, ◦denotes the Hadamard product (element-wise product), h(t) and c(t) are
the hidden state and cell memory of a LSTM cell. Additionally, a LSTM cell
uses four gates to manage its states over time to avoid the problem of explod-
ing/vanishing gradients in the case of longer sequences [22]. f (t)
g
(forget gate)
determines how much of the previous memory is kept, i(t)
g
(input gate) controls
the amount new information (˜c(t)) stored into memory, and o(t)
g
(output gate)
determines how much information is read out of the memory. The hidden state
h(t) is commonly forwarded to a successive layer. In our experiments, we set the
number of LSTM layers to ∈{1, 2} as a hyperparameter. Additionally, we set
as a hyperparameter if the LSTM is bidirectional [23] or not. The ﬁnal output
vector from the last LSTM cell h10 is then forwarded to a fully connected layer
using dropout [24] for regularization and softmax activation for prediction. Fig.
14

4 depicts the implemented DNN architecture. We address the imbalanced class
problem by applying either random oversampling of the minority class or ran-
dom undersampling of the majority class [19]. We used the PyTorch framework
6 to implement our DNN architecture.
LSTM
Dense Layer + 
Softmax
Dropout
Figure 4: Implemented DNN architecture.
3.3. Training and Validation
Our experiments are designed to simulate the real-world performance of our
decision support system. Algorithm 2 line 1-9 and Fig. 5 depict the experimental
setup.
3.3.1. Evaluation Metrics
For a given set of estimated customer sentiment values ˆytpred and ground

t0 + {53, . . . , 104} as an evaluation metric. ∥ytpred∥1 is the number of positive
samples and |ytpred| the total number of samples at tpred, respectively. We deﬁne

P
tpred True(N(ˆytpred))
P
tpred ∥ytpred∥1
,
6https://pytorch.org/
15

where N() denotes the N largest elements and True() denotes the number of
samples which have a positive ground truth value. Furthermore, we deﬁne

P100

100
,

range of values N.
3.3.2. Model Selection and Evaluation
We perform a weekly analysis for one year (tpred = t0 + {53, . . . , 104}) to
evaluate our approach. For each week, we use the past year as training data
(Dtrain ←Dtpred−53:tpred−2). The gap of 2 weeks are needed since in deployment
we would have complete data until tpred. Therefore, we only know the label for
samples until tpred −2, given our predictive interval is 2 weeks. Fig. 6 shows the
resulting distributions for Dtrain and Dtest. We additionally split the training
data for model selection into the ﬁrst 41 (Dtrain∗←Dtpred−53:tpred−13) and last 10
(Dval ←Dtpred−11:tpred−2) weeks. We apply the tree-structured Parzen estimator
(TPE) [25] approach for hyperparameter tuning. TPE is a Bayesian optimiza-
tion approach for hyperparameter tuning and can yield better results compared
to grid and random search [25]. We use the TPE implementation 7 in the Op-
tuna [26] library for our pipeline. We train models with diﬀerent hyperparameter

Dval. The LSTM model (M9) is trained for 150 epochs on Dtrain∗and stops
training if the validation loss did not decrease for 15 epochs. A model check-

all sampled hyperparameter combinations is chosen for ﬁnal evaluation. For
RF and XGB we use the best set of hyperparameters to train a model on the
complete training data Dtrain. The resulting model is used to calculate predic-
tions on the current test data (Dtest ←Dtpred) in order to obtain the estimated
7https://github.com/optuna/optuna
16

customer sentiment ˆytpred. The hyperparameters for the diﬀerent classiﬁers are

on ˆytpred and ytpred over the whole year (tpred ∈{t0 + 53, . . . , t0 + 104}). This
measures the percentage of escalations we would have predicted in one year if
we would look at the N largest estimated customer sentiments at each week.
In deployment (Algorithm 3), we provide information regarding the customer
sentiment in the current week (tpred + 1) based on ˆytpred since we only have the
full data available up to and until tpred. The source code for our experiments is
available on GitHub8.
…
Figure 5:
Illustration of the proposed training and evaluation setup (Algorithm 2).
We
evaluate the decision support system on a weekly basis for one year (tpred ∈{t0 + 53, . . . , t0 +
104}). For each week we use the data from the previous year (52 weeks) to train a model

evaluate the performance over the whole year.
4. Results

8https://github.com/annguy/customer-sentiment-monitor
17

60
70
80
90
100
30000
40000
50000
60000
70000
|ytpred|
Dtrain
66
68
70
72
74
76
78
80
82
∥ytpred∥1
60
70
80
90
100
tpred −t0
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
|ytpred|
Dtest
0
1
2
3
4
∥ytpred∥1
Figure 6: Resulting distribution of samples in Dtrain and Dtest. The graphs depict all samples
(|ytpred|) and positive samples (∥ytpred∥1) for tpred = t0 + {53, . . . , 104}.

Early and late fusion: Comparing M1 vs. M3 and M2 vs. M4 shows that
there is a slight overall beneﬁt of late fusion compared to early fusion in terms

Feature conﬁguration: Using log features only (M7 and M8) yielded the

ing enterprise features only (M6 and M7) resulted in 35.99 and 34.11 in terms

18

Algorithm 1 Build Dataset
1: D = ∅
▷Dataset
2: for all customers i ∈I do
3:
for tpred = t0 : t0 + 104 do ▷for every week for 2 years create samples
starting from an arbitrary time point t0
4:
if customer exists since tpred −10 then
5:
for t = tpred −10 + 1 : tpred do
▷for every week in
look-behind window of size 10
6:
extract log features →xi,t,log
7:
extract enterprise features →xi,t,ent
8:
xi,tpred ←(xi,t,log, xi,t,ent), ∀t ∈{tpred −10 + 1, . . . , tpred}
▷
feature vector for customer i and tpred
9:
if ∃ti,esc ∈Ti,esc ∧ti,esc ∈{tpred + 1, tpred + 2} then
▷
escalation ﬂag within the next 2 weeks?
10:
yi,tpred ←1
11:
else
12:
yi,tpred ←0
13:
D ←Di,tpred = (xi,tpred, yi,tpred)
▷add sample to dataset
14:
for all escalation ﬂags ti,esc ∈Ti,esc do
15:
D ←D \ Di,ti,esc:ti,esc+10+4
▷discard infected intervals after
escalation ﬂags from dataset
Fig. 8 shows the feature importance of all resulting models for the model conﬁg-
uration M2. One can see that enterprise features are generally more important
than log features.
Note the small scale and that some log features do have
a relatively large feature importance for some weeks.
Furthermore, the ap-
plied machine learning models can potentially exploit non-linear relationships
between the diﬀerent features.
RF and XGB: RF almost consistently outperformed XGB (M2 vs. M1, M4

vs. 39.07 and 16.36 vs. 13.97). The only exception where XGB performs better
19

Algorithm 2 Training and Validation
1: for tpred = t0 + 53 : t0 + 104 do
▷simulate one year of application
2:
Dtrain ←Dtpred−53:tpred−2
▷52 weeks training data
3:
Dtrain∗←Dtpred−53:tpred−13 ▷41 weeks for training for model selection
4:
Dval ←Dtpred−11:tpred−2
▷10 weeks for validation data
5:
Dtest ←Dtpred
▷current test samples
6:

▷
model selection using TPE sampler
7:
train model with best hyperparameter on Dtrain
8:
test model on Dtest →ˆytpred
▷estimated customer sentiments

Algorithm 3 In Deployment
1: current week is tpred + 1
2: output ˆytpred and corresponding SHAP values
than RF is the conﬁguration with enterprise features only (M6 vs. M5) in terms

Deep Neural Networks Our LSTM model (M9) is consistently outperformed

(34.43 vs. 36.89 −44.13).
5. Discussion
Model conﬁgurations M2 and M4 yielded the best results (RF with early
and late fusion). Thereby, late fusion (M4) performed slightly better in terms

ingful SHAP values for the late fusion case since the base classiﬁer are based
on diﬀerent feature sets. Therefore, our practical recommendation is to use M2
with early fusion. RF generally performed better than XGB. We assume that
this might be because the gradient-based construction of decision tree ensem-
20

Model
features
classiﬁer
fusion
M1
(xlog, xent)
XGB
early
M2
(xlog, xent)
RF
early
M3
(xlog, xent)
XGB
late
M4
(xlog, xent)
RF
late
M5
xent
XGB
n.a.
M6
xent
RF
n.a.
M7
xlog
XGB
n.a.
M8
xlog
RF
n.a.
M9
(xlog, xent)
LSTM
early
Table 1: Diﬀerent model conﬁgurations used for the experiments.

tions listed in Table 1.
Model

M1
12.5
22.22
30.56
36.11
40.28
55.56
36.89
M2
13.89
29.17
34.72
41.67
48.61
59.72
42.46
M3
12.5
29.17
38.89
40.28
48.61
50.0
39.07
M4
16.67
25.0
40.28
45.83
50.0
59.72
44.13
M5
6.94
23.61
33.33
34.72
41.67
51.39
35.99
M6
4.17
15.28
20.83
30.56
36.11
59.72
34.11
M7
5.56
12.5
12.5
15.28
15.28
16.67
13.97
M8
6.94
12.5
13.89
15.28
16.67
26.39
16.36
M9
13.89
25.0
27.78
33.33
37.5
50.0
34.43
bles might be more prone to overﬁtting on the heavily imbalanced dataset with
noisy labels. We assume a similar problem with overﬁtting when using deep
learning models for this kind of data. This might explain the inferior perfor-
mance of M9 despite the potential to better model the temporal structure in
the data. Furthermore, XGB and LSTM based models are more than 10 times
slower to train compared to RF and are harder to tune. We also noticed that
the computation of SHAP values [12] for LSTM based models is signiﬁcantly
slower compared to XGB and RF. As a conclusion, we recommend using model
21

0
20
40
60
80
100
N
0
10
20
30
40
50
60

M1
M2
M3
M4
M5
M6
M7
M8
M9

1.
conﬁguration M2. In practice, we estimate that one customer support employee
can scan around 10 customers in depth with our tool per hour. Hence, if for
example a team of 5 customer support employees would invest one hour each
week using the proposed decision support system with model M2, they could
potentially prevent around 48.61% of the escalation in a year. Furthermore, the
decision support system can help to learn which speciﬁc problems, depicted in
the designed features, lead to escalation, as well as to identify customers which
have similar problems and might need special attention. In the following we
explain in detail how the designed decision support system could be used in
practice.
22

60
70
80
90
100
tpred −t0
log f1
log f2
log f3
log f4
log f5
log f6
log f7
log f8
log f9
log f10
log f11
log f12
log f13
log f14
log f15
log f16
ent t1 f1
ent t1 f2
ent t1 f3
ent t2 f1
ent t2 f2
ent t2 f3
ent t2 f4
ent t3 f1
ent t3 f2
ent t3 f3
ent t4 f1
ent t4 f2
ent t4 f3
ent t4 f4
ent t5 f1
ent t5 f2
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0.025
0.030
Figure 8: Feature importance for all trained models for conﬁguration M2.
5.1. Proposed Workﬂow
The following section brieﬂy outlines how the data-driven decision support
system is integrated into a productive environment and how it could be used by
customer support employees.
The envisioned workﬂow, which is how this system is mainly used, can be
grouped into ﬁve distinct steps, which are outlined in Fig. 9.
• Step 1: Producing new predictions This step is fully automated and
all relevant processes are triggered at the beginning of each week. The
ﬁrst process within this step is to load the most recent raw data for all
monitored customers from the respective data sources and to conduct the
necessary preprocessing steps.
Afterwards, all available samples up to
23

Figure 9: Schematic overview of the envisioned workﬂow.
this point for which labels can be deﬁned are used to train a new model.
Once a new model has been trained, it is used to predict the customer
sentiment of all monitored customers. Additionally, the SHAP values for
each prediction and each feature are calculated. Predictions and SHAP
values are then copied to a database and automatically loaded into an
interactive dashboard which serves as a user interface.
• Step 2: Identifying high risk customers One element of the user
interface is an interactive table showing the most recent predictions for
all monitored customers, along with some additional information about
each customer, e.g. location and operated system type. Within this step,
the user identiﬁes a system within his or her area of responsibility with
a particularly high probability for an escalation within the following two
weeks. Once a customer has been identiﬁed, it can be selected, which
reduces the information shown on the user interface to just the relevant
information about the customer in question.
• Step 3: Single out the most relevant features with SHAP val-
ues Knowing only which customers are at high risk of causing escalations
without knowing why is only of limited use. In order to explain why a spe-
ciﬁc customer has a high probability for escalation (customer sentiment),
SHAP values for each prediction and each feature are displayed in the
user interface. With such a visualization, the user can easily single out
one or a few features which, according to their respective SHAP values,
24

have a large eﬀect on the customers sentiment. By selecting these speciﬁc
features, the information shown on the interface is further reduced, now
only displaying information connected to the selected customer and the
selected feature or features.
• Step 4: Analyzing speciﬁc features Once a set of few features has
been selected, the user is provided with the actual values of these features
and how these values have been changed over the past weeks. With this
information, the user can easily identify open, yet unresolved, tickets and
see immediately for how long a speciﬁc ticket has been unresolved. An-
other example could be the accumulation of speciﬁc malfunctions reﬂected
in log features.
• Step 5: In depth analysis of certain problem At this point, the
experienced user probably has a good idea of where a potential problem
with the customer in question might be found (e.g. unresolved tickets,
spare parts, software issues). For an in depth analysis of ticket data or
consumed spare parts, other tools are already available which are tailored
for such tasks. Therefore, once the user has identiﬁed the potential root
cause for a bad customer sentiment, he or she is provided with a direct
link to these external tools in order to continue the analysis as eﬃcient as
possible with the goal to act before an escalation occurs.
The main idea of a productive use of a data-driven decision support system is
to help customer support employees decide which customers to focus on and
where to look.
6. Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, we propose a general framework and an interactive workﬂow
with a decision support system. Additionally, we provide a publicly available
industrial benchmark dataset, including all code necessary to reproduce or to
improve our results. Our designed and implemented decision support system is
25

currently deployed to monitor the customer sentiment of thousands of customers
of high-end medical devices worldwide. The explainability of the system helps
a variety of end users to identify problems in the ﬁeld. We demonstrate that
using both log and enterprise data-based features enables more eﬀective trou-
bleshooting compared to using either of these data sources alone. Furthermore,
the gained insights can help to achieve better and more proactive customer re-
lations, as well as improve product management by focusing on problems which
aﬀect the customer the most. There are some open challenges which could be
addressed in future research using the provided benchmark dataset and eval-
uation framework. For example, more eﬃcient methods for merging log and
enterprise data information which preserve explainability can be investigated.
Another challenge is to design models that, within the implemented framework,
allow to increase its predictive power without trading interpretability. Finally,
alternative learning problem formulations, like anomaly detection, could be ex-
plored for the task. This could help with the heavy class imbalance present in
the benchmark dataset.
