Chapter 45
 Robots as powerful 
allies for the study of 
embodied cognition from 
the bottom up
Matej Hoffmann and Rolf Pfeifer
Introduction
The study of human cognition—​and human intelligence—​has a long history and has 
kept scientists from various disciplines—​philosophy, psychology, linguistics, neu-
roscience, artificial intelligence, and robotics—​busy for many years. While there 
is no agreement on its definition, there is wide consensus that it is a highly complex 
subject matter that will require, depending on the particular position or stance, a 
multiplicity of methods for its investigation. Whereas, for example, psychology and 
neuroscience favor empirical studies on humans, artificial intelligence has proposed 
computational approaches, viewing cognition as information processing, as algorithms 
over representations. Over the last few decades, overwhelming evidence has been 
accumulated showing that the pure computational view is severely limited and that it 
must be extended to incorporate embodiment, i.e., the agent’s somatic setup and its in-
teraction with the real world, and, because they are real physical systems, robots became 
the tools of choice to study cognition. There have been a plethora of pertinent studies, 
but they all have their own intrinsic limitations. In this chapter, we demonstrate that a 
robotic approach, combined with information theory and a developmental perspective, 
promises insights into the nature of cognition that would be hard to obtain otherwise.
We start by introducing “low-​level” behaviors that function without control in the 
traditional sense; we then move to sensorimotor processes that incorporate reflex-​based 
loops (involving neural processing). We discuss “minimal cognition” and show how the 
role of embodiment can be quantified using information theory, and we introduce the 
Hoffmann, M. & Pfeifer, R. (2018), Robots as powerful allies for the study of embodied cognition from the bottom up, 
in A. Newen, L. de Bruin; & S. Gallagher, ed., 'The Oxford Handbook 4e Cognition', Oxford University Press, pp. 841-861. 
DOI - Link to OUP website: https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198735410.013.45.

842      Robots and Embodied Cognition
 
so-​called SMCs, or sensorimotor contingencies, which can be viewed as the very basic 
building blocks of cognition. Finally, we expand on how humanoid robots can be pro-
ductively exploited to make inroads in the study of human cognition.
Behavior Through Interaction
What cognitive scientists are regularly forgetting is that complex coordinated 
behaviors—​for example, walking, running over uneven terrain, swimming, avoiding 
obstacles—​can often be realized with no or minimal involvement of cognition/​repre-
sentation/​computation. This is possible because of the properties of the body and the 
interaction with the environment, that is, the embodied and embedded nature of the 
agent. Robotics is well suited for providing existence proofs of this kind and then to fur-
ther analyze these phenomena. We will only briefly present some of the most notable 
case studies.
Low-​Level Behavior: Mechanical Feedback Loops
A classical illustration of behavior in complete absence of a “brain” is the passive dy-
namic walker (McGeer 1990):  a minimal robot that can walk without any sensors, 
motors, or control electronics. It loosely resembles a human, with two legs, no torso, 
and two arms attached to the “hips,” but its ability to walk is exclusively due to the down-
ward slope of the incline on which it walks and the mechanical parameters of the walker 
(mainly leg segment lengths, mass distribution, foot shape, and frictional characteris-
tics). The walking movement is entirely the result of finely tuned mechanics on the right 
kind of surface. A motivation for this research is also to show how human walking is 
possible with minimal energy use and only limited central control. However, most of 
the problems that animals or robots are faced with in the real world cannot be solved 
solely by passive interaction of the physical body with the environment. Typically, 
active involvement by means of muscles/​motors is required. Furthermore, the actu-
ation pattern needs to be specified by the agent,1 and hence a controller of some sort 
is required. Nevertheless, it turns out that if the physical interaction of the body with 
the environment is exploited, the control program can be very simple. For example, the 
passive dynamic walker can be modified by adding a couple of actuators and sensors and 
a reflex-​based controller, resulting in the expansion of its niche to level ground while 
keeping the control effort and energy expenditure to a minimum (Collins et al. 2005).
However, in the real world, the ground is often not level and frequent corrective 
action needs to be taken. It turns out that often the very same mechanical system can 
1  In this chapter, we will use “agent” to describe humans, animals, or robots.

Behavior through interaction      843
 
generate this corrective response. This phenomenon is known as self-​stabilization and is 
a result of a mechanical feedback loop. To use dynamical systems terminology, certain 
trajectories (such as walking with a particular gait) have attracting properties and small 
perturbations are automatically corrected, without control—​or one could say that “con-
trol” is inherent in the mechanical system.2 Blickhan et al. (2007) review self-​stabilizing 
properties of biological muscles in a paper entitled “Intelligence by Mechanics”; 
Koditschek et al. (2004) analyze walking insects and derive inspiration for the design of 
a hexapod robot with unprecedented mobility (RHex—​e.g., Saranli et al. 2001).
Sensorimotor Intelligence
Mechanical feedback loops constitute the most basic illustration of the contribution of 
embodiment and embeddedness to behavior. The immediate next level can be probably 
attributed to direct, reflex-​like, sensorimotor loops. Again, robots can serve to study 
the mechanisms of “reactive” intelligence. Grey Walter (Walter 1953), the pioneer of this 
approach, built electronic machines with a minimal “brain” that displayed phototactic-​
like behavior. This was picked up by Valentino Braitenberg (Braitenberg 1986) who 
designed a whole series of two-​wheeled vehicles of increasing complexity. Even the most 
primitive ones, in which sensors are directly connected to motors (exciting or inhibiting 
them), display sophisticated behaviors. Although the driving mechanisms are simple 
and entirely deterministic, the interaction with the real world, which brings in noise, 
gives rise to complex behavioral patterns that are hard to predict.
This line was picked up by Rodney Brooks, who added an explicit anti-​representation-
alist perspective in response to the in-​the-​meantime-​firmly-​established cognitivistic 
paradigm (e.g., Fodor 1975; Pylyshyn 1984) and “good old-​fashioned artificial intelli-
gence” (GOFAI) (Haugeland 1985). Brooks openly attacked the GOFAI position in the 
seminal articles “Intelligence without Reason” (Brooks 1991a) and “Intelligence without 
Representation” (Brooks 1991b), and proposed behavior-​based robotics instead. Through 
building robots that interact with the real world, such as insect robots (Brooks 1989), 
he realized that “when we examine very simple level intelligence we find that explicit 
representations and models of the world simply get in the way. It turns out to be better to 
use the world as its own model” (Brooks 1991b). Inspired by biological evolution, Brooks 
created a decentralized control architecture consisting of different layers; every layer is 
a more or less simple coupling of sensors to motors. The levels operate in parallel but 
are built in a hierarchy (hence the term subsumption architecture; Brooks 1986). The in-
dividual modules in the architecture may have internal states (the agents are thus not 
purely reactive any more); however, Brooks argued against calling the internal states 
representations (Brooks 1991b).
2  The description is idealized—​in reality, a walking machine would fall into the category of “hybrid 
dynamical systems,” where the notions of attractivity and stability are more complicated.

844      Robots and Embodied Cognition
 
Minimal Embodied Cognition
In the case studies described in the previous section, the agents were either mere phys-
ical machines or they relied on simple direct sensorimotor loops only—​resembling 
reflex arcs of the biological realm. They were reactive agents constrained to the “here-​
and-​now” time scale, with no capacity for learning from experience and also no pos-
sibility of predicting the future course of events. Although remarkable behaviors were 
sometimes demonstrated, there are intrinsic limitations.
The introduction of first instances of internal simulation, which goes beyond the 
“here-​and-​now” time scale, is considered the hallmark of cognition by some (e.g., Clark 
and Grush 1999). This could be a simple forward model (as present already in insects—​
see Webb 2004) that provides the prediction of a future sensory state given the current 
state and a motor command (efference copy). Forward models could provide a possible 
explanation of the evolutionary origin of first simulation/​emulation circuitry3 and of 
environmentally decoupled thought—​the agent employing primitive “models” before 
or instead of directly operating on the world.
Early emulating agents would then constitute the most minimal case of what Dennett 
calls a Popperian creature—​a creature capable of some degree of off-​line reasoning 
and hence able (in Karl Popper’s memorable phrase) to “let its hypotheses die in its 
stead” (Dennett 1995, p. 375). (Clark and Grush 1999, p. 7)
Importantly, we are still far from any abstract models or symbolic reasoning. Instead, 
we are dealing with the sensorimotor space and the possibility for the agent to extract 
regularities in it and later exploit this experience in accordance with its goals. For ex-
ample, the agent can learn that given a certain visual stimulation, say, from a cup, a par-
ticular motor action (reach and grasp) will lead to a pattern of sensory stimulation (in 
humans: we can feel the cup in the hand). The sensorimotor space plays a key part here 
and it is critically shaped by the embodiment of the agent and its embedding in the envi-
ronment: a specific motor signal only leads to a distinct result if embedded in the proper 
physical setup. If you change the shape and muscles of the arm, the motor signal will not 
result in a successful grasp.
Quantifying the Effect of Embodiment Using 
Information Theory
For cognitive development of an agent, the “quality” of the sensorimotor space 
determines what can be learned. First, the type of sensory receptors—​their mechanism 
3  See Grush (2004) for the similarities and differences between emulation theory (Grush 2004) and 
simulation theory (Jeannerod 2001).

Minimal embodied cognition      845
 
of transduction—​determines what kind of signals the agent’s brain or controller will 
be receiving from the environment. Furthermore, the shape and placement of these 
sensors will perform an additional transformation of the information that is available in 
the environment.
For example, different species of insects have evolved different non-​homogeneous 
arrangements of the light-​sensitive cells in their eyes, providing an advantageous non-
linear transformation of the input for a particular task. One example is exploiting ego-​
motion together with motion parallax to gauge distance to objects in the environment 
and eventually facilitate obstacle avoidance. Using a robot modeled after the facet eye 
of a housefly, Franceschini et al. (1992) showed that the nonlinear arrangement of the 
facets—​more dense in the front than on the side—​compensates for the motion par-
allax and allows uniform motion detection circuitry to be used in the entire eye, which 
makes it easy for the robot to avoid obstacles with little computation. These findings 
were confirmed in experiments with artificial evolution on real robots (Lichtensteiger 
2004). Artificial eyes with designs inspired by arthropods include Song et al. (2013) and 
Floreano et al. (2013).
It is not always possible to pinpoint the specific transformation of sensory signals 
that is facilitated by the morphology as in the previous case. A more general tool is pro-
vided by the methods of information theory. Information is used in the Shannon sense 
here—​to quantify statistical patterns in observed variables. The structure or amount of 
information induced by particular sensor morphology could be captured by different 
measures, for example, entropy. However, information (structure) in the sensory 
variables tells only half of the story (a “passive perception” one in this case), because 
organisms interact with their environments in a closed-​loop fashion: sensory inputs 
are transformed into motor outputs, which in turn determine what is sensed next. 
Therefore, the “raw material” for cognition is constituted by the sensorimotor variables 
and it is thus crucial to study relationships between sensors and motors, as illustrated 
by the sensorimotor contingencies (see next section). Furthermore, time is no less im-
portant a variable. Lungarella and Sporns (2006) provide an excellent example of the 
use of information theoretic measures in this context. In a series of experiments with 
a movable camera system, they could show that, for example, the entropy in the visual 
field is decreased if the camera is tracking a moving visual target (a red ball) compared 
to the condition where the movement of the ball and the camera were uncorrelated. 
This is intuitively plausible, because if the object is kept in the center of the visual field, 
there is more “order,” i.e., less entropy. A collection of case studies on information-​
theoretic implications of embodiment in locomotion, grasping, and visual perception is 
presented by Hoffmann and Pfeifer (2011).
Sensorimotor Contingencies
Sensorimotor contingencies (SMCs) were originally presented in the influential ar-
ticle by O’Regan and Noë (2001) as the structure of the rules governing sensory changes 
produced by various motor actions. The SMCs, according to O’Regan and Noë, are the 

846      Robots and Embodied Cognition
 
key “raw material” upon which perception, cognition, and eventually consciousness 
operates. Furthermore, they sketch a possible hierarchy ranging from modality-​related 
(or apparatus-​related) SMCs to object-​related SMCs. The former, the modality-​related 
SMCs, would capture the immediate effect that certain actions (or movements) have 
on sensory stimulation. Clearly, these would be sensory modality specific (e.g., 
head movement will induce a different change in the SMCs of the visual and audi-
tory modalities—​turning the head will change the visual stimulation almost entirely, 
whereas changes in the acoustic system will be minimal) and would strongly depend 
on the sensory morphology. Therefore, this concept is strongly related to what we have 
discussed in the previous sections: (1) different sensory morphology importantly affects 
the information flow induced in the sensory receptors and hence also the corresponding 
SMCs; (2) the effect of action is already constitutively included in the SMC notion itself.
Although conceptually very powerful, the notion of SMCs was not articulated con-
cretely enough in O’Regan and Noë (2001) such that it could be expressed mathemat-
ically or directly transferred into a robot implementation, for example. Bührmann 
et al. (2013) have proposed a formal dynamical systems account of SMCs. They devised 
a dynamical system description for the environment and the agent, which is in turn 
split into body, internal state (such as neural activity), motor, and sensory dynamics. 
Bührmann et al. are making a distinction between sensorimotor (SM) environment, 
SM habitat, SM coordination, and SM strategy. The SM environment is the relation be-
tween motor actions and changes in sensory states, independent of the agent’s internal 
(neural) dynamics. The other notions—​from SM habitat to SM strategies—​add internal 
dynamics to the picture. SM habitat refers to trajectories in the sensorimotor space, but 
subject to constraints given by the internal dynamics that are responsible for generating 
motor commands, which may depend on previous sensory states as well—​an ex-
ample of closed-​loop control. SM coordination then further reduces the set of possible 
SM trajectories to those “that contribute functionally to a task.” For example, specific 
patterns of squeezing an object in order to assess its hardness would be SM coordination 
patterns serving object discrimination. Finally, SM strategies take, in addition, “reward” 
or “value” for the agent into account.
As wonderfully illustrated by Beer and Williams (2015), the dynamical systems and 
information theory are two complementary mathematical lenses through which brain–
body–environment systems can be studied. While acknowledging the merits of both 
frameworks as “intuition, theory, and experimental pumps” (Beer and Williams 2015), 
it is probably fair to say that compared to dynamical systems, information theory has 
been thus far more successfully applied to the analysis of real systems of higher dimen-
sionality. This is true for both natural systems—​in particular, brains (Garofalo et al. 
2009; Quiroga and Panzeri 2009)—​and artificial systems. Thus, to study sensorimotor 
contingencies in a real robot beyond the simple simulated agents of Bührmann et al. 
(2013) and Beer and Williams (2015), we chose to use the lens of information theory. 
Following up on related studies of e.g., Olsson et al. (2004), we conducted a series of 
studies in a real quadrupedal robot with rich nonlinear dynamics and a collection 
of sensors from different modalities (Hoffmann et  al. 2012; Hoffmann et  al. 2014; 
Schmidt et al. 2013) (see Box 45.1). We have applied the notion of “transfer entropy” 

Minimal embodied cognition      847
 
Box 45.1  Sensorimotor contingencies in a quadruped robot
Experiments were conducted on the quadrupedal robot Puppy (Figure 45.1a), which has 
four servomotors in the hips together with encoders measuring the angle at the joint, four 
encoders in the passive compliant knees, and four pressure sensors on the feet. We used 
the notion of “transfer entropy” from information theory, which can be used to measure 
sensory data only
(f)
(g)
(e)
(c)
(a)
(b)
4x motors
4x
pressure
sensors
4x knee encoders
4x hip encoders
(d)
40
90
80
70
60
Classiﬁcation accuracy (%)
50
100
sensory data + action
sensory data + action
from 2 epochs
sensory data + action
from 3 epochs
Mean
Best
Figure 45.1.  Robot “Puppy” and sensorimotor contingencies.

848      Robots and Embodied Cognition
 
directed information flows between time series. In our case, the time series were collected 
from individual motor and sensory channels and the information transfer was calculated 
for every pair of channels two times, once in every direction (say, from hind right motor to 
front right knee encoder and also in the opposite direction). Loosely speaking, transfer en-
tropy from channel A to channel B measures how well the future state of channel B can be 
predicted knowing the current state of channel A (see Schmidt et al. 2013 for details).
First, we wanted to investigate the “sensorimotor structure,” i.e., the relative strengths 
of relationships between different sensors and motors, which is intrinsic to the robot’s em-
bodiment (body + sensor morphology only). To this end, random motor commands were 
applied and the relationships between motor and sensory variables were studied, closely 
resembling the notion of SM environment (Bührmann et al. 2013). The strongest infor-
mation flows between pairs of channels were extracted and are shown overlaid over the 
schematic of the Puppy robot (dashed lines) in panel B. The transfer entropy is encoded 
as thickness and gray level of the arrows. The strongest flow occurs from the motor sig-
nals to their respective hip joint angles, which is clear because the motors directly drive 
the respective hip joints. The motors have a smaller influence on the knee angles (stronger 
in the hind legs) and on the feet pressure sensors—​on the respective legs where the motor 
is mounted, thus illustrating that body topology was successfully extracted (at the same 
time, the flows from the hind leg motors and hips to the front knees highlight that the func-
tional relationships are different than the static body structure; see also Schatz and Oudeyer 
2009). These patterns are analogous to the modality-​related SMCs; just as we can predict 
what will be the sensory changes induced by moving the head, the robot can predict the 
effects of moving the hind leg, say.
In a second step, we studied the relationships in the sensorimotor space when the robot 
was running with specific coordinated periodic movement patterns or gaits. The results 
for two selected gaits—​turn left and bound right*—​are shown in panels C and D, respec-
tively. The flows from motors to the hip joints, which would again dominate, were left out 
of the visualization. The plots clearly demonstrate the important effect of specific action 
patterns in two ways. First, they markedly differ from the random motor command situ-
ation: the dominant flows are different and, in addition, the magnitude of the information 
flows is bigger (the number of bits—​note the different range of the color bar compared to 
B), illustrating how much information structure is induced by the “neural pattern gener-
ator.” Second, they also significantly differ between themselves. The “turn left” gait in panel 
C reveals the dominant action of the right leg and in particular the knee joint. In the “bound 
right” gait in D, the motor signals are predictive of the sensory stimulation in the hind knees 
and also the left foot. The gaits were obtained by optimizing the robot’s performance for 
speed or for turning and thus correspond to patterns that are functionally relevant for the 
robot and can even be said to carry “value.” Thus, in the perspective of Bührmann et al. 
(2013), our findings about the sensorimotor space using the gaits can be interpreted as 
studying the SM coordination or even SM strategy of the quadruped robot.
Finally, next to the embodiment or morphology (shape of the body and limbs, type and 
placement of sensors and effectors, etc.) and the brain (the neural dynamics responsible 
for generating the coordinated motor command sequences), the SMCs are co-determined 
by the environment as well. All the results thus far came from sensorimotor data collected 
from the robot running on a plastic foil ground (low friction). Panels E and F depict how the 
information flows for the bound right gait are modulated when the robot runs on a different 
ground (E—​Styrofoam, F—​rubber). The overall pattern is similar to D, but the flows to 
the left foot disappear, and eventually flows to the left knee joint become dominant. This 

Minimal embodied cognition      849
 
from information theory, which can be used to characterize sensorimotor flows in the 
robot—​for example, how strongly sensors are affected by motor commands—​and we 
tried to isolate the effects of the body, motor programs (gaits), and environment in the 
agent’s sensorimotor space. Finally, we tested the predictions of SMC theory regarding 
object discrimination. In our investigations, we have chosen the situated perspective—​
analyzing only the relationships between sensory and motor variables that would also 
be available to the agent itself. However, information-​theoretic methods can also be pro-
ductively applied to study relationships between internal and external variables, such as 
between sensory or neuronal states and some properties of an external object (e.g., its 
size, Beer and Williams 2015; or any other property that can be expressed numerically). 
Using this approach, one can obtain important insights into the operation and temporal 
is because the posture of the robot changed: the left foot contacts the ground at a different 
angle now, inducing less stimulation in the pressure sensor. Also, as the friction increases 
(from the foil over Styrofoam to rubber), the push-​off during stance of the left hind leg 
becomes stronger, resulting in more pronounced bending of the knee. Finally, since the 
high-​friction ground poses more resistance to the robot’s movements, the trajectories are 
less smooth and the overall information flow drops.
While all the components (body, brain, environment) have a profound effect on the 
overall sensorimotor space, our analysis reveals that in this case, the gait used (as prescribed 
primarily by the “neural/​brain” dynamics) is a more important factor than the environment 
(the ground)—​the latter seems to modulate the basic structure of information flows induced 
by the gait. This has important consequences for the agent when it is to learn something 
about its environment and perform perceptual categorization, for example. In order to in-
vestigate this quantitatively, we have presented the robot with a terrain (the surface/​ground 
it was running on) classification task. Relying on sensory information alone leads to signifi-
cantly worse terrain classification results than when the gait is explicitly taken into account in 
the classification process (Hoffmann, Stepanova, and Reinstein 2014). Furthermore, in line 
with the predictions of the sensorimotor contingency theory, longer sensorimotor sequences 
are necessary for object perception (Maye and Engel 2012). That is, while in short sequences 
(motor command, sensory consequence), modality-​related SMCs (panel B) will be domi-
nant, longer interactions will allow objects the agent is interacting with to stand out. Using 
data from our robot, this is convincingly demonstrated in panel G. The first row shows clas-
sification results when using data from one sensory epoch (two seconds of locomotion) 
collapsed across all gaits, i.e., without the action context. Subsequent rows report results 
where classification was performed separately for each gait and increasingly longer inter-
action histories were available. “Mean” values represent the mean performance; “best” are 
classification results from the gait that facilitated perception the most (see Hoffmann et al. 
2012 for details).
*  “Turn left” was a movement pattern dominated by the action of the right hind leg that was pushing 
the robot forward and left. Regarding “bound right,” bounding gait is a running gait used by small 
mammals. It is similar to gallop, and features a flight phase, but is characterized by synchronous 
action of every pair of legs. However, in this study, we used lower speeds without an aerial phase. 
In addition, the symmetry of the motor signals was slightly disrupted, resulting in a right-​turning 
motion.

850      Robots and Embodied Cognition
 
evolution of categorization, for example. Performing this in the ground discrimination 
scenario on the quadrupedal robot constitutes our future work.
While the studies on “minimally cognitive agents” are of fundamental importance 
and lead to valuable insights for our understanding of intelligent behavior, the ultimate 
target is, of course, human cognition. Toward this end, one may want to resort to more 
sophisticated tools, for example, humanoid robots.
Human-​like Cognition in Robots
In the previous section, we showed how robots can be beneficial in operationalizing, 
formalizing, and quantifying ideas, concepts, and theories that are important for un-
derstanding cognition but that are often not articulated in sufficient detail. An obvious 
implication of this analysis is that the kind of cognition that emerges will be highly de-
pendent on the body of the agent, its sensorimotor apparatus, and the environment it is 
interacting with. Thus, to target human cognition, the robot’s morphology—​shape, type 
of sensors, and their distribution, materials, actuators—​should resemble that of humans 
as closely as possible. Now we have to be realistic: approximating humans very closely 
would imply mimicking their physiology, the sensors in the body, and the inner organs, 
the muscles with comparable biological instantiation, and the bloodstream that supplies 
the body with energy and oxygen. Only then could the robot experience the true con-
cept, e.g., of being thirsty or out of breath, hearing the heart pumping, blushing, or the 
feeling of quenching the thirst while drinking a cold beer in the summer. So, even if, on 
the surface, a robot might be almost indistinguishable from a human (like, for example, 
Hiroshi Ishiguro’s recent humanoid “Erica”), we have to be aware of the fundamental 
differences: comparatively very few muscles and tendons, no actuators that can get sore 
when overused, no sensors for pain, only low-​density haptic sensors, no sweat glands in 
the skin, and so on and so forth. Thus, “Erica” will have a very impoverished concept of 
drinking or feeling hot. In other words, we have to make substantial abstractions.
Just as an aside, making abstractions is nothing bad—​in fact, it is one of the most 
crucial ingredients of any scientific explanation because it forces us to focus on the 
essentials, ignoring whatever is considered irrelevant (the latter most likely being the 
majority of things that we could potentially take into account). Thus, the specifics of 
the robot’s cognition—​its concepts, its body schema—​will clearly diverge from that of 
humans, but the underlying principles will, at a certain level of abstraction, be the same. 
For example, it will have its own sensorimotor contingencies, it will form cross-​modal 
associations through Hebbian learning, and it will explore its environment using its sen-
sorimotor setup. So if the robot says “glass,” this will relate to very different specific sen-
sorimotor experiences, but if the robot can recognize, fill, and hand a “glass” to a human 
for drinking, it makes sense to say that the robot has acquired the concept of “glass.”
Because the acquisition of concepts is based on sensorimotor contingencies, which in 
turn require actions on the part of the agent, and because the patterns of sensory stim-
ulation are associated with the respective motor signals, the robot platforms of choice 
will ideally be tendon-​driven—​just like humans who use muscles and tendons for 

Human-like cognition in robots      851
 
movements. Given our discussion on abstraction earlier, we can also study concept ac-
quisition in robots that have motors in the joints—​we just have to be aware of the con-
crete differences. Still, the principles governing the robot’s cognition can be very similar 
to that of humans (see Box 45.2 for examples of different types of humanoid robots).
BOX 45.2  Humanoid embodiment for modeling cognition
(a)
(b)
(c)
(e)
(g)
(d)
(f)
Figure 45.2.  Humanoid robots.

852      Robots and Embodied Cognition
 
A large number of humanoid robots have been developed over the last decades and many 
of them can, one way or other, be used to study human cognition. Given that all of them to 
date are very different from real humans—​each of them, implicitly or explicitly, embodies 
certain types of abstractions—​there is no universal platform, but they have all been de-
veloped with specific goals in mind. Here we present a few examples and discuss the ways 
in which they are employed in trying to ferret out the principles of human cognition. The 
categories shown in Figure 45.2 are musculoskeletal robots (Roboy and Kenshiro), “baby” 
robots with sensorized skins (iCub and fetus simulators), and social interaction robots 
(Erica and Pepper).
In order to use the robots for learning their own complex dynamics and for building up 
a body schema, both Roboy and Kenshiro (Nakanishi et al. 2012) need to be equipped with 
many sensors so that they can “experience” the effect of a particular actuation pattern. Given 
rich sensory feedback, using the principle that every action leads to sensory stimulation, 
both these robots can, in principle, employ motor babbling in order to learn how to move. 
Especially for Kenshiro, with his very large number of muscles, learning is a must. A very 
important step in this direction is the work of Richter et al. (2016), who have combined a 
musculoskeletal robotics toolkit (Myorobotics) with a scalable neuromorphic computing 
platform (SpiNNaker) and demonstrated control of a musculoskeletal joint with a simu-
lated cerebellum.
Finally, if the interest is social interaction, it might be more productive to use robots like 
Erica or Pepper. Both Erica and Pepper are somewhat limited in their sensorimotor abilities 
(especially haptics), but are endowed with speech understanding and generation facilities; 
they can recognize faces and emotions; and they can realistically display any kind of facial 
expression.
Musculoskeletal robots: Roboy and Kenshiro
Figure 45.2a. Roboy overview: The musculoskeletal design can be clearly observed. At this 
point, Roboy has 48 “muscles.” Eight are dedicated to each of the shoulder joints. This can 
no longer be sensibly programmed: learning is a necessity. Currently, Roboy serves as a re-
search platform for the EU/​FET Human Brain Project to study, among other things, the 
effect of brain lesions on the musculoskeletal system. Because it has the ability to express a 
vast spectrum of emotions, it can also be employed to investigate human–robot interaction, 
and as an entertainment platform.
Credit: © Embassy of Switzerland in the United States of America.
Figure 45.2b. Close-​up of the muscle-​tendon system. Although the shoulder joint is 
distinctly dissimilar to a human one—​for example, it doesn’t have a shoulder blade—​
it is controlled by eight muscles, which require substantial skills in order to move prop-
erly:  which muscles have to be actuated to what extent in order to achieve a desired 
movement?
Credit: © Erik Tham/​Corbis Documentary/​Getty Images.
Figure 45.2c. Kenshiro’s musculoskeletal setup. The musculoskeletal design is clearly vis-
ible. At this point, Kenshiro has 160 “muscles”—​50 in the legs, 76 in the trunk, 12 in the 

Human-like cognition in robots      853
 
shoulder, and 22 in the neck. In terms of musculoskeletal system, it is the one robot that 
most closely resembles the human. So, if learning of the dynamics in this system is the goal, 
Kenshiro will be the robot of choice. Note that although Kenshiro is “closest” to a human 
in this respect, it is still subject to enormous abstractions. Currently, Kenshiro serves as a 
research platform at the University of Tokyo to investigate tendon-​controlled systems with 
very many degrees of freedom (Nakanishi et al. 2012).
Credit: Photo courtesy Yuki Asano.
“Baby” robots with sensitive skins
Figure 45.2d. Fetus simulator. A musculoskeletal model of human fetus at 32 weeks of gesta-
tion has been constructed and coupled with a brain model comprising 2.6 million spiking 
neurons (Yamada et al. 2016). The figure shows the tactile sensor distribution, which was 
based on human two-​point discrimination data.
Reproduced from Yasunori Yamada, Hoshinori Kanazawa, Sho Iwasaki, Yuki Tsukahara, 
Osuke Iwata, Shigehito Yamada, and Yasuo Kuniyoshi, An Embodied Brain Model of 
the Human Foetus, Scientific Reports, 6 (27893), Figure 1d, doi:10.1038/​srep27893 © 2016 
Yasunori Yamada, Hoshinori Kanazawa, Sho Iwasaki, Yuki Tsukahara, Osuke Iwata, 
Shigehito Yamada, and Yasuo Kuniyoshi. This work is licensed under the Creative 
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0). It is attributed to the authors 
Yasunori Yamada, Hoshinori Kanazawa, Sho Iwasaki, Yuki Tsukahara, Osuke Iwata, 
Shigehito Yamada, and Yasuo Kuniyoshi.
Figure 45.2e. The iCub baby humanoid robot. The iCub (Metta et al. 2010) has the size 
of a roughly four-​year-old child and corresponding sensorimotor capacities: 53 degrees of 
freedom (electrical motors), two stereo cameras in a biomimetic arrangement, and over 
4,000 tactile sensors covering its body. The panel shows the robot performing self-​touch 
and corresponding activations in the tactile arrays of the left forearm and right index 
finger.
Social interaction robots: Erica and Pepper
Figure 45.2f. Erica, the latest creation of Prof. Hiroshi Ishiguro, was designed specifically 
with the goal of imitating human speech and body language patterns, in order to have 
“highly natural” conversations. It also serves as a tool to study human–robot interaction, 
and social interaction in general. Moreover, because of its close resemblance to humans, 
the “uncanny valley”—​the fact that people get uneasy when the robots are too human-​
like—​hypothesis can be further explored and analyzed (see, e.g., Rosenthal-​von der 
Pütten, Marieke, and Weiss 2014, where the Geminoid HI-​1 modeled after Prof. Ishiguro 
was used).
Credit: Photo courtesy of Hiroshi Ishiguro Laboratory, ATR and Osaka University.
Figure 45.2g. Pepper, a robot developed by Aldebaran (now Softbank Robotics), although 
much simpler (and much cheaper!) than Erica, is used successfully on the one hand to 
study social interaction, for entertainment, and to perform certain tasks (such as selling 
Nespresso machines to customers in Japan).

854      Robots and Embodied Cognition
 
The Role of Development
A very powerful approach to deepen our understanding of cognition, and one that 
has been around for a long time in psychology and neuroscience, is to study onto-
genetic development. During the past two decades or so, this idea has been adopted 
by the robotics community and has led to a thriving research field dubbed “develop-
mental robotics.” Now, a crucial part of ontogenesis takes place in the uterus. There, 
tactile sense is the first to develop (Bernhardt 1987) and may thus play a key role in 
the organism’s learning about first sensorimotor contingencies, in particular, those 
pertaining to its own body (e.g., hand-​to-​mouth behaviors). Motivated by this fact, 
Mori and Kuniyoshi (2010) developed a musculoskeletal fetal simulator with over 
1,500 tactile receptors, and studied the effect of their distribution on the emergence 
of sensorimotor behaviors. Importantly, with a natural (non-homogeneous) distri-
bution, the fetus developed “normal” kicking and jerking movements (i.e., similar to 
those observed in a human fetus), whereas with a homogeneous allocation it did not 
develop any of these behaviors. Yamada et al. (2016), using a similar fetal simulator 
and a large spiking neural network brain model, have further studied the effects of in-
trauterine (vs. extrauterine) sensorimotor experiences on cortical learning of body 
representations. A physical version—​the fetusoid—​is currently under development 
(Mori et al. 2015). Somatosensory (tactile and proprioceptive) inputs continue to be of 
key importance also in early infancy when “infants engage in exploration of their own 
body as it moves and acts in the environment. They babble and touch their own body, 
attracted and actively involved in investigating the rich intermodal redundancies, tem-
poral contingencies, and spatial congruence of self-​perception” (Rochat 1998, p. 102). 
The iCub baby humanoid robot (Metta et al. 2010) (Box 45.2E), equipped with a whole-​
body tactile array (Maiolino et al. 2013) comprising over 4,000 elements, is an ideal 
platform to study these processes. The study of Roncone et al. (2014) on self-​calibration 
using self-​touch is a first step in this direction.
Applications Of Human-​Like Robots
Finally, this research strand—​employing humanoid robots to study human cognition—​
has also important applications. In traditional domains and conventional tasks—​such 
as pick-​and-​place operations in an industrial environment—​current factory automa-
tion robots are doing just fine. However, robots are starting to leave these constrained 
domains, entering environments that are far less structured and are starting to share 
their living space with humans. As a consequence, they need to dynamically adapt to 
unpredictable interactions and guarantee their own as well as others’ safety at every 
moment. In such cases, more human-​like characteristics—​both physical and “mental”—​
are desirable. Box 45.3 illustrates how more brain-​like body representations can help 
robots to become more autonomous, robust, and safe. The possibilities for future 
applications of robots with cognitive capacities are enormous, especially in the rapidly 

Human-like cognition in robots      855
 
BOX 45.3  Body schema in humans vs. robots
A typical example of a traditional robot and its mathematical model is depicted in the upper 
right of Figure 45.3. The robot is an arm consisting of three segments with three joints be-
tween the base and the final part—​the end-​effector. Its model is below the robot—​the for-
ward kinematics equations that relate configuration of the robot (joint positions θ1, θ2, θ3) to 
the Cartesian position of the end-​effector (px, py, pz). The model has the following character-
istics: (1) it is explicit—​there is a one-​to-​one correspondence between its body and the model 
(a1 in the model is the length of the first arm segment, for example); (2) it is unimodal—​
the equations directly describe physical reality; one sensory modality (proprioception—​
joint angle values) is needed to get the correct mapping in the current robot state; (3) it is 
centralized—​there is only one model that describes the whole robot; (4) it is fixed—​normally, 
this mapping is set and does not change during the robot operation. Other models/​mappings 
are typically needed for robot operation, such as inverse kinematics, differential kinematics, 
or models of dynamics (dealing with forces and torques), but they would all share the above-​
mentioned characteristics (see Hoffmann et al. 2010 for a survey).
As pointed out earlier, animals and humans have different bodies than robots; they also 
have very different ways of representing them in their brains. The panel in the lower left 
shows the rhesus macaque and below some of the key areas of its brain that deal with body 
representations (see, e.g., Graziano and Botvinick 2002). There is ample evidence that these 
representations differ widely from the ones traditionally used in robotics—​namely, “the 
body in the brain” would be (1) implicitly represented—​there would hardly be a “place” or 
1. Modeling mechanisms of
biological body representations
centralized
distributed
implicit
multimodal
explicit
amodal or unimodal
ﬁxed
plastic
2. Better performance of robots
- autonomy, robustness, safety
Figure 45.3.  Characteristics of body representations.
Credit: Monkey photo source: Einar Fredriksen/​Flickr/​Attribution-​ShareAlike 4.0  
International (CC BY-​SA 4.0)
Credit: Brain image source: Hugh Guiney/​Attribution-​ShareAlike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-​SA 3.0)
Credit: Line drawing and equations source: Reproduced with the permission of Dr. Hugh Jack from  
http://​www.engineeronadisk.com
Credit: iCub Robot source: © iCub Facility—​IIT, 2017

856      Robots and Embodied Cognition
 
growing area of service robotics, where robots perform tasks in human environments. 
Rather than accomplishing them autonomously, they often do it in cooperation with 
humans, which constitutes a big trend in the field. In cooperative tasks, it is of course 
crucial that the robots understand the common goals and the intentions of the humans 
in order to be successful. In other words, they require substantial cognitive skills. We 
have barely started exploiting the vast potential of these types of cognitive machines.
Conclusion
Our analysis so far has demonstrated that robots fit squarely into the embodied and 
pragmatic (action-​oriented) turn in cognitive sciences (e.g., Engel et al. 2013), which 
a “circuit” encoding, say, the length of a forearm; such information is most likely only indi-
rectly available and possibly in relation to other variables; (2) multimodal—​drawing mainly 
from somatosensory (tactile and proprioceptive) and visual, but also vestibular (inertial) and 
closely coupled to motor information; (3) distributed—​there are numerous distinct, but par-
tially overlapping and interacting representations that are dynamically recruited depending 
on context and task; (4) plastic—​adapting over both long (ontogenesis) and short time scales, 
as adaptation to tool use (e.g., Iriki et al. 1996) or various body illusions testify (e.g., humans 
start feeling ownership over a rubber hand after minutes of synchronous tactile stimulations 
of the hand replica and their real hand under a table; Botvinick and Cohen 1998).
The iCub robot “walking” from the top right to the bottom left in the figure is illustrating 
two things. First, in order to be able to model the mechanisms of biological body 
representations, the traditional robotic models are of little use—​a radically different approach 
needs to be taken. Second, by making the robot models more brain-​like, we hope to inherit 
some of the desirable properties typical of how humans and animals master their highly 
complex bodies. Autonomy and robustness or resilience are one such case. It is not realistic 
to think that conditions, including the body, will stay constant over time and a model given 
to the robot by the manufacturer will always work. Inaccuracies will creep in due to wear 
and tear and possibly even more dramatic changes can occur (e.g., a joint becomes blocked). 
Humans and animals display a remarkable capacity for dealing with such changes: their 
models dynamically adapt to muscle fatigue, for example, or temporarily incorporate objects 
like tools after working with them, or reallocate “brain territory” to different body parts in 
case of amputation of a limb. Robots thus also need to perform continuous self-​modeling 
(Bongard et al. 2006) in order to cope with such changes. Finally, unlike factory robots that 
blindly execute their trajectories and thus need to operate in cages, humans and animals use 
multimodal information to extend the representation of their bodies to the space immedi-
ately surrounding them (also called peripersonal space). They construct a “margin of safety,” 
a virtual “bubble” around their bodies that allows them to respond to potential threats such 
as looming objects, warranting safety for them and also their surroundings (e.g., Graziano 
and Cooke 2006). This is highly desirable in robots as well, and can transform them from 
dangerous machines to collaborators possessing whole-​body awareness like we do. First 
steps along these lines in the iCub were presented by Roncone et al. (2016).

Conclusion      857
 
implies that whole behaving systems rather than passive subjects in brain scanners need 
to be studied. Robots provide the necessary grounding to computational models of the 
brain by incorporating the indispensable brain–​body–environment coupling (Pezzulo 
et al. 2011). The advantage of synthetic methodology, or “understanding by building” 
(Pfeifer and Bongard 2007), is that one learns a lot in the process of building the robot 
and instantiating the behavior of interest. The theory one wants to test thus automat-
ically becomes explicit, detailed, and complete. Robots become virtual experimental 
laboratories retaining all the virtues of “theories expressed as simulations” (Cangelosi 
and Parisi 2002), but bring the additional advantage that there is no “reality gap”: there is 
real physics and real sensory stimulation, which lends more credibility to the analysis if 
embodiment is at center stage.
We are convinced that robots are the right tools to help us understand the embodied, 
embedded, and extended nature of cognition because their makeup—​physical artifacts 
with sensors and actuators interacting with their environment—​automatically warrants 
the necessary ingredients. It seems that they are particularly suited for investigations 
of cognition from bottom up (Pfeifer et al. 2014), where development under particular 
constraints in brain–body–environment coupling is crucial (e.g., Thelen and Smith 
1994). It also becomes possible to simulate conditions that one would not be able to test 
in humans or animals—​think of the simulation of fetal ontogenesis while manipulating 
the distribution of tactile receptors (Mori and Kuniyoshi 2010). Furthermore, many ad-
ditional variables (such as internal states of the robot) become easily accessible and lend 
themselves to quantitative analysis, such as using methods from information theory. 
Therefore, the combination of a robot with sensorimotor capacities akin to humans, 
the possibility of emulating the robot’s growth and development, and finally the ease of 
access to all internal variables that can be subject to rigorous quantitative investigations 
create a very powerful tool to help us understand cognition.
We want to close with some thoughts on whether it is possible to realize—​next to 
embodied, embedded, and extended—​enactive robots as well. Most researchers in 
embodied AI/​cognitive robotics automatically adopt the perspective of extended func-
tionalism (Clark 2008; Wheeler 2011), whereby the boundaries of cognitive systems can 
be extended beyond the agent’s brain and even skin—​including the body and environ-
ment. However, it has been pointed out by the proponents of enactive cognitive science 
(Di Paolo 2010; Froese and Ziemke 2009) that in order to fully understand cognition in 
its entirety, embedding the agent in a closed-​loop sensorimotor interaction with the en-
vironment is necessary, yet may not be sufficient in order to induce important properties 
of biological agents such as intentional agency. In other words, one should not only study 
instances of individual closed sensorimotor loops as models of biological agents—​that 
would be the recommendation of Webb (2009)—​but one should also try to endow 
the models (robots in this case) with similar properties and constraints that biological 
organisms are facing. In particular, it has been argued that life and cognition are tightly 
interconnected (Maturana 1980; Thompson 2007), and a particular organization of living 
systems—​which can be characterized by autopoiesis (Maturana 1980) or metabolism, 
for example—​is crucial for the agent to truly acquire meaning in its interactions with 
the world. While these requirements are very hard to satisfy with the artificial systems of 

858      Robots and Embodied Cognition
 
today, Di Paolo (2010) proposes a way out: robots need not metabolize, but they should 
be subject to so-​called precarious conditions. That is, the success of a particular instantia-
tion of sensorimotor loops or neural vehicles in the agent is to be measured against some 
viability criterion that is intrinsic to the organization of the agent (e.g., loss of battery 
charge, overheating leading to electronic board problems resulting in loss of mobility, 
etc.). The control structure may develop over time, but the viability constraint needs to 
be satisfied, otherwise the agent “dies” (McFarland and Boesser 1993). In a similar vein, in 
order to move from embodied to enactive AI, Froese and Ziemke (2009) propose to ex-
tend the design principles for autonomous agents of Pfeifer and Scheier (2001), requiring 
the agents to generate their own systemic identity and regulate their sensorimotor inter-
action with the environment in relation to a viability constraint. The unfortunate impli-
cation, however, is that research along these lines will in the short term most likely not 
produce useful artifacts. On the other hand, this approach may eventually give rise to 
truly autonomous robots with unimaginable application potential.
