Adjustment Criteria in Causal Diagrams:
An Algorithmic Perspective
Johannes Textor
Institute for Theoretical Computer Science
University of L¨ubeck, Germany

Maciej Li´skiewicz
Institute for Theoretical Computer Science
University of L¨ubeck, Germany

Abstract
Identifying and controlling bias is a key prob-
lem in empirical sciences.
Causal diagram
theory provides graphical criteria for decid-
ing whether and how causal eﬀects can be
identiﬁed from observed (nonexperimental)
data by covariate adjustment. Here we prove
equivalences between existing as well as new
criteria for adjustment and we provide a new
simpliﬁed but still equivalent notion of d-
separation. These lead to eﬃcient algorithms
for two important tasks in causal diagram
analysis: (1) listing minimal covariate adjust-
ments (with polynomial delay); and (2) iden-
tifying the subdiagram involved in biasing
paths (in linear time). Our results improve
upon existing exponential-time solutions for
these problems, enabling users to assess the
eﬀects of covariate adjustment on diagrams
with tens to hundreds of variables interac-
tively in real time.
1
Introduction and Motivation
A notorious problem aﬀecting probabilistic reasoning
in causal structures is bias. For instance, we might
study whether regular coﬀee drinking (C) increases
the risk of suﬀering a heart attack (H). Such a study
might be compromised by an unobserved genetic pre-
disposition (U) that causes an increased preference
for coﬀee drinking but also for smoking (S), which
does increase the risk to suﬀer a heart attack. These
causal inﬂuences can be modeled as a causal diagram
G = C ←U →S →H, whose arrows indicate the
directionality of causal relationships between the vari-
ables of interest [9]. The paths from U to both C and
H in this diagram indicate that an observed relation
between C and H will be confounded by U, which may
obscure or artiﬁcially increase the putative causal ef-
fect. This bias can be controlled by adjustment for S,
e.g. by averaging separate eﬀect estimates for smok-
ers and non-smokers. We can represent adjustment in
the diagram by labeling S: C ←U →S →H. This
labeling blocks the biasing path from C to H.
To avoid bias, it may seem advisable to adjust for all
covariates in our study. Unfortunately, adjustment can
also create bias. A folklore example is the following:
If we ask Harvard students for their grades and their
parents’ income, we may well ﬁnd an inverse correla-
tion between the two, which could lead us to the inter-
esting hypothesis that rich people have dumber than
average children. However, a more likely explanation
is that having rich parents (R) or being smart (S) both
increase the odds of getting to Harvard (H). This hy-
pothesis corresponds to the diagram R →H ←S, in
which H is labeled because we implicitly adjusted for
H by restricting our study to Harvard students only.
Because H is a common descendant of R and S, this
opens a biasing path between R and S, which leads to
so-called Berksonian bias [2] – hence, our “interesting”
observation is merely an artifact. A further example
where confounding and Berksonian bias combine to
so-called M-bias is shown in Figure 1. In general, any
type of bias that can be expressed in the formal frame-
work of causal diagrams corresponds to a certain type
of path, called a biasing path [10]. Within the math-
ematical theory behind causal diagrams [9], graphical
identiﬁcation criteria have been derived that tell us
whether – and how – we may dissect the causal ef-
fect from bias by covariate adjustment, provided that
we know the causal relationships between exposure,
outcome, and covariates in our study. Sets of covari-
ates that allow identifying the causal eﬀect are called
adjustments.
In this paper, we are concerned with
minimal adjustments, which do not contain other ad-
justments as proper subsets (e.g., {FI} and {MD, MR}
but not {FI, MD, MR} in Figure 1). Minimal adjust-
ments are important because adjusting for too many
variables may decrease statistical power.

(a)
(b)
FI
MR
MD
LE
D
FI
MR
MD
LE
D
(c)
(d)
FI
MR
MD
LE
D
FI
MR
MD
LE
D
Figure 1: Causal diagram [10, Chapter 12] for a study
of the eﬀect of low education (LE) on diabetes risk
(D) with the covariates family income (FI), mother’s
genetic risk to develop diabetes (MR), and mother’s
diabetes (MD). The unadjusted estimate (a) is biased
due to the common ancestor FI – bias “ﬂows” via the
biasing path LE ←FI →MD →D (bold edges). Ad-
justment for MD (b) blocks this biasing path, but
opens a new one because FI and MR become corre-
lated. The minimal adjustments {MD, MR} (c) and
{FI} (d) close all biasing paths.
2
Contributions
If done by hand, testing the graphical criteria for ad-
justment is a cumbersome and error-prone process un-
less the diagram is very small. This is because most
criteria are stated as path properties, and even dia-
grams with merely tens of variables and edges can
contain millions of paths1. The analysis of such di-
agrams lends itself well to automation by a computer
program. In 2010, at least three programs were pre-
sented for analyzing causal diagrams: The DAG pro-
gram by Kn¨uppel [6]; dagR by Breitling [3]; and Com-
mentator by Kyono [7]. However, even these programs
still have their problems with large diagrams [3], to the
extent that diagrams with tens of variables can be in-
tractable.
We argue that the root of these problems is that ex-
isting criteria do not lend themselves well to algorith-
mic implementation. For example, the aforementioned
programs contain functions to list all minimal adjust-
ments. They do this by generating all possible covari-
ate sets, and then testing for each set whether Pearl’s
back door criterion (to be deﬁned later) is satisﬁed.
For a diagram with 30 variables, this means that 230
covariate sets may have to be tested – a very large
number even for a computer program. Here, we will
develop criteria that lead naturally to more eﬃcient
algorithms for solving such problems.
1The author knows of an incident where a student was
asked to list all paths for a diagram with 10 variables and
37 edges. It took three months.
After deﬁning the preliminaries in Section 3, the pre-
sentation of our results is organized in two parts: the
analysis of adjustment and d-separation criteria in Sec-
tion 4, and the algorithmic applications in Section 5.
Thus causality theorists who may be interested in the
discussion of the criteria, but not in the algorithms,
can focus on to Section 4. Speciﬁcally, our contribu-
tions address the two following problems:
(1) Enumeration of all minimal adjustment sets. The
ﬁrst complete (i.e., necessary and suﬃcient) criterion
for validity of covariate adjustment was recently given
by Shpitser et al. [12]. We prove that when restricting
our attention to minimal adjustments, this is equiva-
lent to Pearl’s suﬃcient, but not necessary, back-door
criterion [9]. This way we also obtain a complete crite-
rion for minimal covariate adjustment in terms of the
moral graph [8].
Our results hold for acyclic causal
diagrams (DAGs) and extend to the case where expo-
sure and outcome are sets of variables, with the minor
restriction that the diagrams be loop-free with respect
to the exposure (i.e. there exists no causal path that
starts and ends in X).
Because the moral graph is an undirected graph, this
leaves us with a minor variation of a standard graph
problem: ﬁnding vertex separators of an undirected
graph. In Section 5.1, we present an algorithm that
outputs the set of all minimal adjustments (which may
have exponential size) using only polynomial time per
element output.
This improves upon existing algo-
rithms that either require exponential worst-case time
before producing any output (such as those used in the
aforementioned programs), or terminate in polynomial
time but output only one solution (e.g. [1, 15]).
(2) Identifying all biasing paths. It is often desirable
to determine via which covariates a bias is actually
mediated (bold paths in Figure 1a,b). In large dia-
grams, this can be diﬃcult as the somewhat intricate
deﬁnition of biasing paths allows sometimes, but not
always, to use edges in the opposite direction. In Sec-
tion 4.2, we show that one can transform (by stripping
the heads from certain arrows) a diagram G adjusted
for Z into a mixed graph GZ
φ with the property that
open paths in G bijectively correspond to forks in Gφ;
a fork is a pair of directed paths connected by an undi-
rected path. This characterization yields an algorithm
that ﬁnds all biasing paths (i.e., labels all edges ly-
ing on biasing paths like in Figure 1a,b) in linear time
(Section 5.2).
To our knowledge, no previous algo-
rithm exists that addresses this problem; to facilitate
bias diagnosis in causal diagrams, the DAG program
and dagR instead resort to listing all biasing paths –
which quickly becomes intractable in even modestly
sized diagrams, as discussed above.

3
Preliminaries
We use the following terms from the causal diagram
literature, most of which are identical to their standard
graph theory counterparts. However, we would like to
point out to readers unfamiliar with causal diagrams
that the notion of a path in a causal diagram is in
fact a bit diﬀerent from the usual notion of a path in a
directed graph (termed here a directed or causal path).
Graphs and variables.
A digraph is a tuple G =
(V, E) of vertices (nodes) V and directed edges E ⊆
{(u, v) | u, v ∈V, u ̸= v}.
More generally, a mixed
graph is a tuple G = (V, E) of vertices V and di-
rected or undirected edges E ⊆{(u, v) | u, v ∈V, u ̸=
v} ∪{{u, v} | u, v ∈V, u ̸= v}.
Because the ver-
tices in causal diagrams represent observed variables,
we use the terms “vertex”, “node” and “variable” in-
terchangeably. Given two vertex sets X and Y , the
other vertices from V \ (X ∪Y ) are also called covari-
ates. We will often specify a subset of latent covariates
L ⊆V \ (X ∪Y ), for which we cannot adjust.
Paths.
A path of length k −1 is a sequence of ver-
tices v1, . . . , vk in which each vertex occurs at most
once, and for all i ∈{1, . . . , k −1}, vi and vi+1 are
connected by a directed edge (vi, vi+1) or (vi+1, vi) or
an undirected edge {vi, vi+1}. A path can have length
0. A path from x ∈V to y ∈V is called causal or di-
rected if it only contains directed edges pointing away
from x, and is called biasing otherwise.
A directed
or mixed graph is called acyclic if there is no directed
path of nonzero length from a vertex to itself; “directed
acyclic graph” is abbreviated by “DAG”.
Descendants and Ancestors.
If there is a directed
path from x to y then x is an ancestor of y and y
is a descendant of x.
The ancestor set An(X) of a
vertex set X contains all ancestors of vertices in X
(this includes X).
Analogously, the descendant set
De(X) is the set of all descendants of any node in X.
Given a graph G = (V, E) and a vertex set W ⊆V ,
the ancestor graph G[An(W)] is the subgraph of G
consisting only of the vertices in An(W) and all edges
between them.
In addition to these standard concepts, we use the fol-
lowing notions from the causal diagram literature.
Deﬁnition 3.1 (d-Connectivity and d-Separation [9]).
A path π = v1, . . . , vk in a DAG G = (V, E) is called d-
connected, active or open with respect to Z ⊆V if (1)
for all subsequences of π of the form vi−1 ←vi →vi+1,
vi−1 →vi →vi+1 or vi−1 ←vi ←vi+1, the middle
vertex vi is not in Z; (2) for all subsequences of π of
the form vi−1 →vi ←vi+1, the middle vertex vi is in
An(Z). If one of these conditions does not hold then
the path is called blocked by Z. Two disjoint vertex
sets X, Y ⊆V are d-connected with respect to Z if
there exists a d-connected path from some x ∈X to
some y ∈Y . If such a path does not exist then X and
Y are said to be d-separated by Z.
Deﬁnition 3.2 (Moral Graph [8]). Given a directed
graph G, the moral graph Gm is the undirected graph
obtained by transforming G as follows: (1) For all pairs
of edges of the form (u, v), (w, v), add an undirected
edge u, w to G.
(2) Substitute every directed edge
(u, v) by an undirected edge {u, v}.
Deﬁnition 3.3 (Back-Door Graph). Given a directed
graph G = (V, E) and a vertex set X ⊆V , the back-
door graph, denoted as G
¯X, is obtained by removing
all edges (u, v) ∈E where u ∈X and v /∈X.
To deﬁne the causal eﬀect of X on Y we use Pearl’s
do(x) notation [9], which intuitively corresponds to an
idealized experiment in which the variables in X can be
set to given values; in the causal diagram, this would
correspond to removing all edges entering X, discon-
necting directed inﬂuences stemming from the parent
variables of X. We will denote the resulting graph as
G ¯
X.
Deﬁnition 3.4 (Adjustment [9]). Given a DAG G =
(V, E) and three pairwise disjoint vertex sets X, Y, Z ⊆
V , the set Z is called covariate adjustment for estimat-
ing the causal eﬀect from X to Y , or simply adjust-
ment, if P(y | do(x)) = P
z P(y | x, z)P(z) in every
model that induces G. Z is a minimal adjustment if
no proper subset of Z is also an adjustment.
4
Criteria for Adjustment and Biasing
Paths
This section is organized in two parts.
In the ﬁrst
part, we show that the sound but incomplete back-door
criterion for identiﬁability of the causal eﬀect becomes
equivalent to the slightly more complex, but sound and
complete criterion recently proposed by Shpitser et al.
[12] if we consider only minimal adjustments. These
results hold for all directed acyclic graphs with the
following property:
Deﬁnition 4.1 (X-Loop-Freeness). A DAG G =
(V, E) is X-loop-free with respect to the vertex set
X ⊆V if it contains no directed path π = v1, . . . , vk,
with k ≥3, v1, vk ∈X and v2, . . . , vk−1 ̸∈X.
G is always X-loop-free if X is a singleton set. For an
example DAG G that is not X-loop-free see Figure 2.

x1
z1
z2
x2
y
Figure 2: An example of a causal diagram G that is
not X-loop-free with respect to the vertex set X =
{x1, x2}. For G and the vertex set Y = {y} the set Z =
{z1, z2} fulﬁlls the adjustment criterion by Shpitser
et al. [12] but there is no set Z′ fulﬁlling the back-door
criterion by Pearl [9]. Moreover, no Z′ satisﬁes the
moral graph criterion (Deﬁnition 4.3 below) as well.
4.1
Equivalence of Adjustment Criteria in
the X-Loop-Free, Minimal Case
The following criterion was recently given by Shpitser
et al. [12], and is the ﬁrst complete criterion for co-
variate adjustment.
Theorem 4.2 (Adjustment Criterion [12]). Given a
causal diagram G = (V, E) and three pairwise disjoint
vertex sets X, Y, Z ⊆V the following two statements
are equivalent:
1. Z is an adjustment in G with respect to X and Y .
2. (Adjustment Criterion) (i) No element in Z is a
descendant in G ¯
X of any w ∈V \ X on a causal
X-Y -path2 (forbidden vertex), and (ii) all non-
causal paths in G from X to Y are blocked by Z.
The following two criteria from the literature are
sound, but not complete.
Deﬁnition 4.3. Let G = (V, E) be a given causal
diagram and let X, Y, Z ⊆V be disjoint sets of nodes.
• (Back-door Criterion [9]) Z satisﬁes the back-door
criterion relative to (X, Y ) if (i) no element in Z
is a descendant of X and (ii) Z d-separates X and
Y in G
¯X.
• (Moral Graph Criterion3) Z satisﬁes the moral
graph criterion relative to (X, Y ) if (i) Z
⊆
An(X ∪Y )\De(X) and (ii) Z separates X and Y
in the ancestor moral graph (G
¯X[An(X ∪Y )])m.
It is easy to see that the criteria of Theorem 4.2 are not
equivalent with the back-door criterion. For example
the graph z ←x →y does not fulﬁll the back-door
criterion but both criteria of Theorem 4.2 are satis-
ﬁed. However, if we restrict our attention to minimal
vertex sets Z then all criteria became equivalent if we
2Shpitser et al. [12] write instead “... on a proper causal
X-Y -path”. However, in the X-loop-free DAGs we con-
sider, all causal X-Y -paths are proper.
3This criterion is an extension of the work by Lauritzen
et al. [8] and has been used e.g. by Kyono [7].
assume additionally that a DAG G is X-loop-free. As
usually we say here that Z is a minimal set satisfy-
ing a property P if Z satisﬁes P and no proper subset
Z′ ⊊Z satisﬁes P.
Theorem
4.4
(Minimal
Covariate
Adjustment).
Given a causal diagram G = (V, E) and three pair-
wise disjoint vertex sets X, Y, Z ⊆V , such that G is
X-loop-free, the following statements are equivalent:
1. Z is a minimal covariate adjustment for identify-
ing the causal eﬀect from X to Y .
2. Z is a minimal set satisfying the adjustment cri-
terion relative to (X, Y ).
3. Z is a minimal set satisfying the back-door crite-
rion relative to (X, Y ).
4. Z is a minimal set satisfying the moral graph cri-
terion relative to (X, Y ).
As shown in Figure 2 the assumption that a DAG G
is additionally X-loop-free is essential.
We prove the theorem using the following auxiliary
lemmata for an arbitrary causal diagram G = (V, E)
and pairwise disjoint sets of vertices X, Y, Z ⊆V , such
that G is X-loop-free with respect to X. The consid-
ered criteria are relative to (X, Y ) in G.
Lemma 4.5 ([12], Lemma 1). If Z satisﬁes the back-
door criterion then Z satisﬁes the adjustment crite-
rion.
Lemma 4.6. If Z is a minimal set satisfying the
adjustment criterion then Z contains no descendant
of X.
Proof. Assume that there exists z ∈Z which is a de-
scendant in G of a vertex in X. Note that from the
adjustment criterion it follows that there is no directed
path from z to a vertex in Y . Moreover, from the as-
sumption that G is X-loop-free it follows that there is
no directed path from z to a vertex in X.
Let W ⊆V be the subset of all descendants of z in
G, including z. It is true that (1) there exists at least
one node z ∈Z ∩W, (2) in G there exists no edge
from a node in W to a node in V \ W (but there
may be edges from nodes in V \ W to nodes in W),
and (3) X ∪Y ⊆V \ W. The properties (1) and (2)
follow easily from the deﬁnition of W. The fact that
Y ⊆V \W is true since otherwise there exists a causal
path in G connecting a node in X with a node in Y
that is blocked. Finally X ⊆V \ W is true since G is
X-loop-free.
Now we remove all nodes z ∈Z ∩W from Z and
call the new set Z′.
By the property (1) above Z′
is a proper subset of Z.
We show that Z′ satisﬁes

both statements (i) and (ii) of the adjustment criterion
which contradicts the assumption that Z is minimal.
Since Z satisﬁes the statement (i) and Z′ ⊆Z hence
Z′ has to satisfy (i), too. Below we show that also
statement (ii) is true, i.e. that any non-causal path π
in G from X to Y is blocked by Z′.
To see this consider ﬁrst that π does not cross W,
i.e. that π does not contain any node in W. Since
π is blocked by Z and it does not contain any node
in Z \ Z′ (recall, we removed these nodes from Z) π
remains blocked by Z′. Next assume that π reaches
a node in W. The path has length at lest 2, i.e. π
consists of at least 3 vertices. Let v1, v2, . . . , vk, with
k ≥3, be the consecutive nodes along that path. Let i
be the smallest index such that vi−1 ̸∈W and vi ∈W.
From the property (3) above it follows that such an
i exists.
Moreover, let j > i be the smallest index
such that vj ̸∈W; again by (3) such an index exists,
too. Now, from the property (2) we get that the edge
incident to vi−1 and vi has to be vi−1 →vi and the
edge incident to vj−1 and vj has to be vj−1 ←vj.
Since neither vi, . . . vj−1 nor their descendants belong
to Z′, the path π has to be blocked.
Lemma 4.7. If Z is a minimal set satisfying the ad-
justment criterion then Z is a minimal set satisfying
the back-door criterion.
Proof. Assume Z is a minimal set satisfying the ad-
justment criterion. By Lemma 4.6 we have that no
element in Z is a descendant of X. Moreover, by the
property (ii) of the adjustment criterion it follows that
Z d-separates X and Y in G
¯X. Thus, Z satisﬁes the
back-door criterion. To prove the minimality, assume a
proper subset Z′ of Z satisﬁes the back-door criterion.
From Lemma 4.5 it follows that Z′ satisﬁes the ad-
justment criterion – a contradiction to the assumption
that Z is a minimal set satisfying this criterion.
Lemma 4.8. If Z is a minimal set satisfying the back-
door criterion then Z is a minimal set satisfying the
adjustment criterion.
Proof. Assume Z is a minimal set satisfying the back-
door criterion. From Lemma 4.5 it follows that Z sat-
isﬁes the adjustment criterion. To see the minimal-
ity assume to the contrary that a minimal Z′ ⊆Z
satisfying this criterion is a proper subset of Z. By
Lemma 4.7 we get that Z′ is a minimal set satisfying
the back-door criterion – a contradiction.
Proof (of Theorem 4.4). We have proved that state-
ments (1), (2) and (3) in Theorem 4.4 are equivalent;
we now complete the proof by showing that state-
ments (3) and (4) are equivalent. This means show-
ing that a minimal adjustment Z contains only vari-
ables from An(X ∪Y ) \ De(X). It was shown above
that Z contains no variables from De(X); thus we
are left with showing that Z ⊆An(X ∪Y ).
Sup-
pose the converse, then there exists a z ∈Z such that
z /∈An(X) ∪An(Y ) ∪De(X). Then removing all ver-
tices Z \ (An(X) ∪An(Y ) ∪De(X)) from Z we get a
proper subset Z′ of Z and it is easy to see that Z′ still
blocks all paths from X to Y . Thus Z is not minimal,
a contradiction.
4.2
A Simpliﬁed Notion of d-Connectedness
In the following, we show that the rather intricate con-
cept of d-connectedness can be translated to a simpler
notion in a mixed graph.
This will be useful later
on to calculate the union of all biasing paths in an
insuﬃciently adjusted causal diagram. Note that for
this purpose, no special treatment of latent variables
is necessary.
Deﬁnition 4.9 (Fork). A path v1, . . . , vk in a mixed
graph G = (V, E), is called a fork if for some i, j with
1 ≤i ≤j ≤k, vi →. . . →v1 and vj →. . . →vk are
directed paths in G and vi—. . .—vj is an undirected
path in G.
For example, t →u →v and t ←u — v →w are forks
but t →u — v is not a fork.
Deﬁnition 4.10 (Fork Graph). Given a DAG G =
(V, E) and three disjoint vertex sets X, Y, Z ⊆V ,
the fork graph GZ
φ = (V, E′), E′ ⊆{(v, w), {v, w} |
v, w ∈V } is constructed by performing for every edge
(v, w) ∈E the following: (1) If v ∈Z, remove (v, w).
(2) If w ∈An(Z), then substitute (v, w) by an undi-
rected edge {v, w}. (3) Otherwise leave (v, w) unmod-
iﬁed.
E.g. for G= x
y
a
b c
d
e
f
(where Z = {c}),
GZ
φ = x
y
a
b c
d
e
f
where the bold edges are
those that were substituted by undirected edges.
Theorem
4.11
(Mapping d-connected paths to
forks). Given a causal diagram G = (V, E), three pair-
wise disjoint vertex sets X, Y, Z ⊆V and a path π from
X to Y , then π is d-connected in G with respect to Z
if and only if π is a fork in GZ
φ .
Proof. First note that all paths from X to Y in GZ
φ
that contain no collider u →v ←w are forks. In fact,
if there is no undirected edge on the path then we are
done. Otherwise suppose u →v — w are violating

edges; this would imply either that v →w is an edge
in E and w is an ancestor of some z ∈Z or that v ←w
belongs to E and v is an ancestor of some z ∈Z; in
both cases we get the contradiction that u →v remains
an edge in GZ
φ . If u — v ←w are violating edges, we
argue analogously.
Now let π be any d-connected path in G. Note that π
remains a path in GZ
φ since the only edges we remove
from G constructing GZ
φ are the edges (v, w) with v ∈
Z and there will not be such an edge on a d-connected
path from X to Y . To show that π is a fork in GZ
φ
we distinguish two cases. (1) π contains no collider
u →v ←w in G. Then π is itself a fork in G and
constructing GZ
φ any substitution of a directed edge
by an undirected one implies that all its predecessor
edges in a directed subpath become undirected thus
yielding a fork in GZ
φ . (2) π contains a collider u →
v ←w. Because π is d-connected, the middle node v
is in An(Z). Thus, in GZ
φ , the edges from v’s leftmost
and rightmost ancestors in π that point to v are all
undirected in GZ
φ . Iterating this argument yields that
π is a fork in GZ
φ .
For the other direction, let π be any fork in GZ
φ . The
undirected part of π consists entirely of vertices from
An(Z), and no edge on π points towards a vertex
in An(Z) on π because it would otherwise have been
deleted from GZ
φ . Hence π is d-connected in G.
5
Algorithmic Applications
The results of the previous section brought the criteria
for covariate adjustment in causal diagrams closer to
standard graph theory, which we can now exploit to
obtain eﬃcient algorithms for two important problems
related to causal diagram analysis.
5.1
Enumerating Minimal Adjustment Sets
Problem 5.1 (list-minimal-adjustments).
Input A DAG G = (V, E) and three pairwise disjoint
vertex sets X, Y, L ⊆V such that G is X-loop-
free.
Output The set of all minimal covariate adjustments
Z ⊆V that allow identiﬁcation of the causal eﬀect
from X to Y and contain no variables from L.
Due to the equivalence of the adjustment and back-
door criteria in the minimal case (Theorem 4.4), we
can solve the above problem by listing instead all min-
imal d-separators of G
¯X.
Formally, this shows that
the above problem can be reduced in linear time to
the following one:
Problem 5.2 (list-minimal-d-separators).
Input A DAG G = (V, E) and three pairwise disjoint
vertex sets X, Y, L ⊆V such that G is X-loop-
free.
Output The set of all minimal covariate sets Z ⊆V
that d-separate X from Y in G and contain no
variables from L.
Algorithms for similar problems were presented by
Acid and Campos [1] and Tian et al.
[15].
These
algorithms are either directly based on or very sim-
ilar to the well-known Ford-Fulkerson-Algorithm for
ﬁnding a separating set in an undirected graph. They
are thus able to output one d-separator, if it exists, in
worst-case polynomial time.
Unfortunately, they do
not lend themselves to generalization for outputting
all d-separators.
In fact, a polynomial time algorithm that outputs all
d-separators cannot exist for the simple reason that the
number of these sets may be exponential in the size of
the graph, such that the output alone would require
more than polynomial time. This problem is addressed
by so-called polynomial delay algorithms, whose com-
plexity is measured not by their total running time,
but per object output. Thus, if the number of solu-
tions is polynomial, a polynomial delay algorithm will
ﬁnd and output them all in polynomial time. Other-
wise, it can still produce a polynomially long list of
diﬀerent outputs in polynomial time, and the listing
can be stopped and resumed at any time. This seems
well suited to the problem at hand, because the ad-
justments are usually to be assessed by a human user,
for whom a complete exponentially long list of options
would be of little use. For more information on polyno-
mial delay algorithms, we refer to the nice introduction
in Takata’s paper [13].
Theorem 5.3 (Listing minimal d-separators with
polynomial delay). The problem
list-minimal-d-
separators can be solved by an algorithm that, af-
ter O(n3) preprocessing time, starts outputting the list
of minimal d-separators using at most O(n3) process-
ing time per element output, where n is the number of
variables in the input DAG.
Proof. Applying the moral graph criterion, this boils
down to a simple adaptation of an algorithm by Takata
[13] that lists all minimal X-Y -separators of an undi-
rected graph with polynomial delay O(nm) and total
space requirement O(n), where m is the number of
edges in the graph. We only need to show that this
algorithm can be extended to list only those mini-
mal separators that do not contain any vertex from
L ∪W (where W are the “forbidden vertices” from
Theorem 4.2). For this purpose we can assume that
W ⊆L, i.e., we make all forbidden variables latent.

To ensure that forbidden vertices are not used in sep-
arators, we connect in the ancestor moral graph all
variable pairs that are linked via forbidden vertices
and then remove all forbidden vertices. Formally, let
Gm = (V, E) be the ancestor moral graph. Let the
graph GL = (V \L, E′) be deﬁned by {u, v} ∈E′ iﬀ(1)
{u, v} ∈E or (2) there exists an undirected path u—
l1—. . .—lk—v in G such that all intermediate vertices
li are in L. It is easy to see that the X-Y -separators of
GL are precisely those X-Y -separators of Gm that do
not contain any vertex from L. GL can be constructed
from G in time O(n2).
Now, the following algorithm fulﬁlls the properties
claimed by the theorem: (1) Given the DAG G and
X, Y, L, construct the ancestor moral graph Gm :=
(G
¯X[An(X ∪Y )])m.
(2) Construct GL from Gm as
explained above. (3) Apply Takata’s algorithm to out-
put all minimal X-Y -separators of GL. The runtime
of O(n3) is larger than the one of Takata’s algorithm
(O(nm)) because of the additional edges that are in-
serted into the moral graph and the L-transitive graph.
The space requirement is O(n), which is asymptoti-
cally optimal [13].
5.2
Identifying Bias in Insuﬃciently
Adjusted Diagrams
Beyond minimal adjustments, causal diagrams provide
an in-depth understanding of the “ﬂow” of causal ef-
fects and bias via the causal and biasing paths they
contain. The set of biasing paths, in particular, con-
stitutes a witness of insuﬃcient adjustment in a dia-
gram and is thus useful for analyzing study design. To
facilitate such analysis, the aforementioned programs
DAG program and dagR contain algorithms that list
all paths in a diagram. Such a list is easy to generate
with polynomial delay using a standard backtracking
approach. However, a full list of paths quickly becomes
prohibitively long as the number of variables increases.
A strategy in such cases is to output a compressed rep-
resentation of the path list rather than the list itself.
The most natural compressed representation of a list
of paths in a graph is probably the subgraph induced
by these paths. Formally, we state our goal as solving
the following problem:
Problem 5.4 (identify-biasing-paths).
Input A DAG G = (V, E) and three pairwise disjoint
vertex sets X, Y, Z ⊆V .
Output The list of all edges in E lying on biasing
paths from X to Y that are not blocked by Z.
This problem requires more eﬀort to solve than one
would perhaps expect. In particular, the following two
approaches do not work.
First, one might consider constructing the ancestor
moral graph (G
¯X[An(X ∪Y ∪Z)])m and then label-
ing all undirected paths between X and Y in that
graph. To see that this fails, consider the diagram in
Figure 1a; in the ancestor moral graph, MR lies on an
undirected path between LE and D even though it does
not lie on a biasing path in the diagram (unless we ad-
just for MD like in Figure 1b). Second, one might con-
sider using Shachter’s “Bayes-Ball” algorithm [11] that
performs an extended depth-ﬁrst search to ﬁnd out if
X and Y are d-separated by Z. However, “Bayes-Ball”
also would label edges that lie on non-simple biasing
paths, i.e., biasing paths where edges can occur more
than once. There appears to be no easy way of resolv-
ing these issues.
However, the equivalence between
d-connected paths and forks proved in Theorem 4.11
can be used to solve this problem in linear time.
Theorem 5.5 (Identifying biasing paths in linear
time). The problem identify-biasing-paths can be
solved in time O(|V | + |E|).
We will prove this theorem by showing that all X-Y -
forks in the fork graph (G
¯X)Z
φ , obtained from G by
removing all edges emanating from X and then apply-
ing Deﬁnition 4.10, can be identiﬁed in linear time. To
this end, we generalize an algorithm presented by Epp-
stein [4, 5] to ﬁnd disjoint directed paths from common
ancestors to vertex sets X and Y in DAGs, which cor-
responds to the special case Z = ∅of our problem.
Eppstein’s algorithm is based on computing for each
vertex an index which we generalize to mixed graphs
as follows:
Deﬁnition
5.6
(Bottleneck number). Given the
acyclic mixed graph G = (V, E) and two disjoint ver-
tex sets X, Y ⊆V , let T : V →N be a topological
numbering of G, i.e. an index with T(v) < T(w) if
there is a directed path from v to w in G. Then the
bottleneck number B(v) ∈N ∪{⊥} is deﬁned for ev-
ery vertex v as the largest index T(w) of a vertex w
(possibly equal to v) through which all directed paths
from v to X and all directed paths from v to Y go, if
at least one such path exists. Otherwise B(v) = ⊥.
E.g for T(v) = 8
7
6
5 4
2
3
1
, we get B(v) =
8
7
6
⊥⊥
8
⊥
7
(forks labeled bold) in the ex-
ample introduced after Deﬁnition 4.10. Eppstein [4,
Lemma 7] proved that for every v ∈V , there are
two disjoint directed paths from v to X and Y if and
only if B(v) = T(v) (e.g. for the vertex with index
6 above). We generalize this lemma to acyclic mixed
graphs through the following two lemmata. The proofs
will appear in the full version of this paper.

Lemma 5.7. Let G = (V, E) be an acyclic mixed
graph and for every v ∈V , let B(v) denote the bot-
tleneck number of v with respect to X, Y ⊆V . Then v
lies on a fork between X and Y if and only if one of the
following three conditions holds: (1) B(v) = T(v); (2)
v lies on an undirected path between two vertices u, w
with B(u), B(v) ̸= ⊥and B(u) ̸= B(v); (3) B(v) ̸= ⊥
and v is reachable via a directed path from another ver-
tex u for which one of the previous two conditions is
satisﬁed.
Lemma 5.8. Let Gφ = (V, E) be the fork graph of
some DAG G and vertex set Z, and ﬁx two disjoint
vertex sets X, Y
⊆G.
Every edge (u, v) ∈E or
{u, v} ∈E lies on a fork between X and Y if and
only if both u and v lie on forks between X and Y .
Proof. (Theorem 5.5) Given G, X, Y, Z, we ﬁrst com-
pute (G
¯X)Z
φ , which requires O(|V | + |E|) time. Then
we compute the bottleneck numbers B(v) through a
trivial extension of the O(|V |+|E|) algorithm by Epp-
stein [4]. It remains to be shown that the vertices that
lie on forks in (G
¯X)Z
φ can be identiﬁed in linear time.
We ﬁrst compute a list of all biconnected components
with respect to the undirected edges in (G
¯X)Z
φ . For
every such component C with at least two vertices, we
then perform the following on a copy of C: Find all
vertices v in C with B(v) ̸= ⊥and for every distinct
value n of B(v), create two new vertices sn and tn
with an edge {sn, tn}. For every v with B(v) ̸= ⊥,
create also an edge {tB(v), v}. Compute C’s block tree
Cblock, whose vertices correspond to the biconnected
components and articulation points (vertices belong-
ing to more than one biconnected component) in C.
Every edge {sn, tn} from C corresponds to a leaf in
Cblock; label all these vertices, and afterwards label all
vertices on paths between labeled vertices in the block
tree. This corresponds to a labeling of the edges in C.
Delete all edges that have not been labeled from C,
and afterwards delete all isolated vertices except those
with B(v) = T(v). Every remaining vertex fulﬁlls ei-
ther condition (1) or condition (2) from Lemma 5.7.
Every vertex v not belonging to one of the components
treated above can be deleted from (G
¯X)Z
φ if it does
not fulﬁll either condition (1) or condition (3) from
Lemma 5.7. A list of all vertices fulﬁlling condition
(3) can be obtained by a single traversal of (G
¯X)Z
φ
after computing the bottleneck numbers.
6
Conclusion
We studied several criteria for adjustment and d-
separation in causal diagrams and obtained via these
criteria fast algorithms for listing minimal adjustments
and for identifying bias in causal diagrams. These al-
gorithms form the basis for our online tool DAGitty
(dagitty.net), which provides a graphical user inter-
face for analyzing causal diagrams [14]. With the new
algorithms, DAGitty is capable of analyzing causal di-
agrams with tens of variables, including some that
were intractable by earlier programs, in real time.
DAGitty’s open source code can be consulted for ad-
ditional reference on the algorithms presented here.
Future work could develop similar algorithms for other
adjustment methods like front-door adjustment [9].
