Lexis: An Optimization Framework for Discovering
the Hierarchical Structure of Sequential Data
Payam Siyari
GeorgiaTech
Atlanta, GA, USA

Bistra Dilkina
GeorgiaTech
Atlanta, GA, USA

Constantine Dovrolis
GeorgiaTech
Atlanta, GA, USA

ABSTRACT
Data represented as strings abounds in biology, linguistics,
document mining, web search and many other ﬁelds. Such
data often have a hierarchical structure, either because they
were artiﬁcially designed and composed in a hierarchical
manner or because there is an underlying evolutionary pro-
cess that creates repeatedly more complex strings from sim-
pler substrings.
We propose a framework, referred to as
Lexis, that produces an optimized hierarchical representa-
tion of a given set of “target”
strings.
The resulting hi-
erarchy, “Lexis-DAG”, shows how to construct each target
through the concatenation of intermediate substrings, min-
imizing the total number of such concatenations or DAG
edges.
The Lexis optimization problem is related to the
smallest grammar problem. After we prove its NP-hardness
for two cost formulations, we propose an eﬃcient greedy
algorithm for the construction of Lexis-DAGs. We also con-
sider the problem of identifying the set of intermediate nodes
(substrings) that collectively form the “core”
of a Lexis-
DAG, which is important in the analysis of Lexis-DAGs. We
show that the Lexis framework can be applied in diverse ap-
plications such as optimized synthesis of DNA fragments in
genomic libraries, hierarchical structure discovery in protein
sequences, dictionary-based text compression, and feature
extraction from a set of documents.
1.
INTRODUCTION
In both nature and technology, information is often rep-
resented in sequential form, as strings of characters from a
given alphabet [11]. Such data often exhibit a hierarchical
structure in which previously constructed strings are re-used
in composing longer strings [21]. In some cases this hierar-
chy is formed “by design” in synthetic processes where there
are some cost savings associated with the re-use of exist-
ing modules [15, 19]. In other cases, the hierarchy emerges
naturally when there is an underlying evolutionary process
that repeatedly creates more complex strings from simpler
ones, conserving only those that are being re-used [19, 21].
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or re-
publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission

KDD ’16, August 13-17, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA
c⃝2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4232-2/16/08...$15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2939672.2939741
For instance, language is hierarchically organized starting
from phonemes to stems, words, compound words, phrases,
and so on [20]. In the biological world, genetic information
is also represented sequentially and there is ample evidence
that evolution has led to a hierarchical structure in which se-
quences of DNA bases are ﬁrst translated into amino acids,
then form motifs, regions, domains, and this process contin-
ues to create many thousands of distinct proteins [8].
In the context of synthetic design, an important problem is
to construct a minimum-cost Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG)
that shows how to produce a given set of “target strings”
from a given “alphabet” in a hierarchical manner, through
the construction of intermediate substrings that are re-used
in at least two higher-level strings. The cost of a DAG should
be related somehow to the amount of “concatenation work”
(to be deﬁned more precisely in the next setion) that the
corresponding hierarchy would require. For instance, in de
novo DNA synthesis [4, 7], biologists aim to construct tar-
get DNA sequences by concatenating previously synthesized
DNAs in the most cost-eﬃcient manner.
In other contexts, it may be that the target strings were
previously constructed through an evolutionary process (not
necessarily biological), or that the synthetic process that was
followed to create the targets is unknown. Our main premise
is that even in those cases it is still useful to construct a cost-
minimizing DAG that composes the given set of targets hier-
archically, through the creation of intermediate substrings.
The resulting DAG shows the most parsimonious way to rep-
resent the given targets hierarchically, revealing substrings
of diﬀerent lengths that are highly re-used in the targets and
identifying the dependencies between the re-used substrings.
Even though it would not be possible to prove that the given
targets were actually constructed through the inferred DAG,
this optimized DAG can be thought of as a plausible hypoth-
esis for the unknown process that created the given targets
as long as we have reasons to believe that that process cares
to minimize, even heuristically, the same cost function that
the DAG optimization considers. Additionally, even if our
goal is not to reverse engineer the process that generated the
given targets, the derived DAG can have practical value in
the applications such as compression or feature extraction.
In this paper, we propose an optimization framework, re-
ferred to as Lexis,1 that designs a minimum-cost hierarchi-
cal representation of a given set of target strings. The re-
sulting hierarchy, referred to as “Lexis-DAG”, shows how to
construct each target through the concatenation of inter-
mediate substrings, which themselves might be the result
1Lexis means “word” in Greek.
arXiv:1602.05561v3  [cs.AI]  11 Jun 2016

of concatenation of other shorter substrings, all the way to
a given alphabet of elementary symbols. We consider two
cost functions: minimizing the total number of concatena-
tions and minimizing the number of DAG edges. The choice
of cost function is application-speciﬁc. The Lexis optimiza-
tion problem is related to the smallest grammar problem [6,
14]. We show that Lexis is NP-hard for both cost functions,
and propose an eﬃcient greedy algorithm for the construc-
tion of Lexis-DAGs. Interestingly, the same algorithm can
be used for both cost functions. We also consider the prob-
lem of identifying the set of intermediate nodes (substrings)
that collectively form the “core” of a Lexis-DAG. This is the
minimal set of DAG nodes that can cover a given fraction
of source-to-target paths, from alphabet symbols to target
strings. The core of a Lexis-DAG represents the most cen-
tral substrings in the corresponding hierarchy.
We show
that the Lexis framework can be applied in diverse appli-
cations such as optimized synthesis of DNA fragments in
genomic libraries, hierarchical structure discovery in protein
sequences, dictionary-based text compression, and feature
extraction from a set of documents.
2.
PROBLEM STATEMENT
2.1
Lexis-DAG
Given an alphabet S and a set of “target” strings T over
the alphabet S, we need to construct a Lexis-DAG. A Lexis-
DAG D is a directed acyclic graph D(V, E), where V is
the set of nodes and E the set of edges, that satisﬁes the
following three constraints.2
First, each node v ∈V in a Lexis-DAG represents a string
S(v) of characters from the alphabet S. The nodes VS that
represent characters of S are referred to as sources, and they
have zero in-degree.
The nodes VT that represent target
strings T = {t1, t2, . . . , tm} are referred to as targets, and
they have zero out-degree. V also includes a set of interme-
diate nodes VM, which represent substrings that appear in
the targets T. So, V = VS ∪VM ∪VT .
Second, each node in VM ∪VT of a Lexis-DAG represents
a string that is the concatenation of two or more substrings,
speciﬁed by the incoming edges from other nodes to that
node. Speciﬁcally, an edge e ∈E from node u to node v is a
triplet (u, v, i) such that the string S(u) appears as substring
of S(v) at index i (the ﬁrst character of a string has index
1). Note that there may be more than one edges from node
u to node v. The number of incoming and outgoing edges
for v is denoted by din(v) and dout(v), respectively. I(v) is
the sequence of nodes u that appear in the incoming edges
(u, v, i) of v, ordered by edge index i. We require that for
each node v in VM ∪VT replacing the sequence of nodes in
I(v) with their corresponding strings results in exactly S(v).
Third, a Lexis-DAG should only include intermediate nodes
that have an out-degree of at least two,
∀v ∈VM, dout(v) ≥2.
(1)
In other words, every intermediate node v ∈VM in a Lexis-
DAG should be such that the string S(v) is re-used in at least
two concatenation operations. Otherwise, S(v) is either not
used in any concatenation operation, or it is used only once
and so the outgoing edge from v can be replaced by re-wiring
2To simplify the notation, even though D is a function of S
and T, we do not denote it as such.
a
b
abbbbbba
1
7
bbb
2 5
1
23
(a)
a
b
abbbb
1
bbbb
2
bba
3
bb
1
abbbbbba
1
6
1 3
12
(b)
a
b
abbbb
1
bbbb
2
bbbba
5
1
abbbbbba
1
4
bb
1
3
1
2
(c)
Figure 1:
Illustration of the Lexis-DAG for targets T
=
{abbbbbba} and sources S = {a, b}. Edge-labels indicate the oc-
currence indices: (a) A valid Lexis-DAG having both minimum
number of concatenations and edges. (b) An invalid Lexis-DAG:
two intermediate nodes are re-used only once.
(c) An invalid
Lexis-DAG: the top-layer string is not equal to the concatenation
of its two in-neighbors (best viewed in color).
the incoming edges of v straight to the single occurrence
of S(v).
In both cases node v can be removed from the
Lexis-DAG, resulting in a more parsimonious hierarchical
representation of the targets. Fig. 1 illustrates the concepts
introduced in this section.
2.2
The Lexis Optimization Problem
The Lexis optimization problem is to construct a minimum-
cost Lexis-DAG for the given alphabet S and target strings
T. In other words, the problem is to determine the set of
intermediate nodes VM and all required edges E so that the
corresponding Lexis-DAG D is optimal in terms of a given
cost function C(D).
min
(E,VM ) C(D)
s.t. D = (V, E) is a Lexis-DAG for S and T
(2)
The selection of an appropriate cost function is somewhat
application-speciﬁc. A natural cost function to consider is
the number of edges in the Lexis-DAG. In certain applica-
tions, such as DNA synthesis, the cost is usually measured in
terms of the number of required concatenation operations.
In the following, we consider both cost functions. Note that
we choose to not explicitly minimize the number of inter-
mediate nodes in VM; minimizing the number of edges or
concatenations, however, tends to also reduce the number
of required intermediate nodes. Additionally, the constraint
(1) means that the optimal Lexis-DAG will not have redun-
dant intermediate nodes that can be easily removed without
increasing the concatenation or edge cost. More general cost
formulations, such as a variable edge cost or a weighted av-
erage of a node cost and an edge cost, are interesting but
they are not pursued in this paper.
2.2.1
Edge cost
Suppose that the cost of each edge is one. The edge cost to
construct a node v ∈V is deﬁned as the number of incoming
edges required to construct S(v) from its in-neighbors, which
is equal to din(v). The edge cost of source nodes is obviously
zero. The edge cost E(D) of Lexis-DAG D is deﬁned as the
edge cost of all nodes, equal to the number of edges in D:

d
c
b
a
aabcaabdaabc
8 4
12 3
7
11
1
2 5 6 9 10
d
c
b
a
aabcaabdaabc
8
aabc
1 9
aab
5
4
1
3
1 2
(a)
d
c
b
a
aabcaabdaabc
8
4
12
aab
1 2 5
3
1 2
(b)
(c)
Figure
2:
Illustration
of
G-Lexis
given
target
T
=
{aabcaabdaabc} and sources S = {a, b, c, d}. - (a) Initial Lexis-
DAG: The string passed to the suﬃx tree is I(aabcaabdaabc) =
aabcaabdaabc. (b) Substring aab has maximum SavedCost. The
target can be now written as I(aabcaabdaabc) = σaabcσaabdσaabc
where σaab is the substring aab of the new intermediate node. We
also have that I(aab) = aab. The strings passed to the suﬃx tree
are {I(aabcaabdaabc), I(aab)}.
(c) Substring σaabc has maxi-
mum SavedCost and is chosen for a new intermediate node. In
this example, this would be the last iteration.
E(D) =
X
v∈V
din(v) = |E|
(3)
2.2.2
Concatenation cost
Suppose that the cost of each concatenation operation is
one. The concatenation cost to construct a node v ∈VM ∪VT
is deﬁned as the number of concatenations required to con-
struct S(v) from its in-neighbors, which is equal to din(v)−1.
The concatenation cost C(D) of Lexis-DAG D is deﬁned as
the concatenation cost of all non-source nodes; it is easy to
see that this is equal to the number of edges in D minus the
number of non-source nodes,
C(D)
=
X
v∈V \VS
(din(v) −1)
=
|E| −|V \VS|
(4)
Theorem 1. The optimization problem in Eq. (2) is NP-
hard for both the edge cost of Eq. (3) and the concatenation
cost of Eq. (4).
The proof is given in the Appendix. Note that the objective
in Eq. (4) is an explicit function of the number of interme-
diate nodes in the Lexis-DAG. Hence the optimal solutions
for the concatenation cost can be diﬀerent than those for the
edge cost. An example is shown in the Appendix.
3.
THE GREEDY LEXIS ALGORITHM
In this section, we describe a greedy algorithm, referred to
as G-Lexis, for both previous optimization problems. The
basic idea in G-Lexis is that it searches for the substring ξ
that will lead, under certain assumptions, to the maximum
cost reduction when added as a new intermediate node in
the Lexis-DAG. The algorithm starts from the trivial Lexis-
DAG with no intermediate nodes and edges from the source
nodes representing alphabet symbols to each of their occur-
rences in the target strings.
Recall that for every node v ∈VT ∪VM, I(v) is the se-
quence of nodes appearing in the incoming edges of v, i.e.,
the sequence of nodes whose string concatenation results in
the string S(v) represented by v. The sequences I(v) can
be interpreted as strings over the “alphabet” of Lexis-DAG
nodes. Note that every symbol in a string I(v) has a cor-
responding edge in the Lexis-DAG. We look for a repeated
substring ξ in the strings IT ∪M = {I(v)|v ∈VT ∪VM} that
can be used to construct a new intermediate node. We can
construct a new intermediate node for ξ, create incoming
edges based on the symbols in ξ (remember ξ is a substring
over the alphabet of nodes), and replace the incoming edges
to each of the non-overlapping repeated occurrences of ξ
with a single outgoing edge from the new node.
Consider the edge cost ﬁrst. Suppose that ξ is repeated
RT ∪M,ξ times in the strings IT ∪M. If these occurrences of ξ
are non-overlapping, the number of required edges would be
|ξ| RT ∪M,ξ. After we construct a new intermediate node for ξ
as outlined above, the edge cost will be |ξ|+RT ∪M,ξ. So, the
reduction in edge cost from re-using ξ would be (RT ∪M,ξ −
1)(|ξ| −1) −1. Under the stated assumptions about ξ, this
reduction is non-negative if ξ is repeated at least twice and
its length is at least two.
Consider the concatenation cost now. If these occurrences
of ξ are non-overlapping, the number of required concate-
nations for all the repeated occurrences would be (|ξ| −
1) RT ∪M,ξ. After we construct a new intermediate node for ξ
as outlined above, the concatenation cost will be |ξ|−1. We
expect a reduction in the number of required concatenations
by (RT ∪M,ξ −1)(|ξ| −1).
So, the greedy choice for both cost functions is the same:
select the substring ξ that maximizes the term SavedCost =
(RT ∪M,ξ −1)(|ξ| −1). For this reason, our G-Lexis algo-
rithm can be used for both cost functions we consider. It
starts with the trivial Lexis-DAG, and at each iteration it
chooses a substring of IT ∪M in the Lexis-DAG that maxi-
mizes SavedCost, creates a new intermediate node for that
substring and updates the edges of the Lexis-DAG accord-
ingly.
The algorithm terminates when there are no more
substrings of IT ∪M with length at least two and repeated
at least twice.
The pseudocode for G-Lexis is shown in
Algorithm 1.
An example of application of the G-Lexis
algorithm is shown in Fig. 2.
Algorithm 1. G-Lexis
Input: Alphabet S, Targets T Output: Lexis-DAG D
1. Initialize V ←VT ∪VS and E, constructing each target in
T from characters in S. VM ←∅.
2. Repeat:
(a) IT ∪M←{I(v)|v ∈(VT ∪VM)};
(b) Select ξ with maximum (RT ∪M,ξ −1)(|ξ| −1), where
RT ∪M,ξ is the number of repeats of substring ξ in
IT ∪M; #GreedyChoice
(c) If (RT ∪M,ξ −1)(|ξ| −1) = 0, break;
(d) V ←V ∪{σξ}, where σξ is the new intermediate node,
and update E accordingly; #UpdateLexis-DAG
At each iteration of G-Lexis, we need to ﬁnd eﬃciently
the substring of IT ∪M with maximum SavedCost. We ob-
serve that the substring that maximizes SavedCost is a“max-
imal repeat”. Maximal repeats are substrings of length at
least two, whose extension to the right or left would reduce

its occurrences in the given set of strings. Suppose that it
is not. Then, there is a substring ˆσ, which is not a maximal
repeat, that maximizes SavedCost. If we can extend ˆσ to
the left or right we can increase its length without reducing
its number of occurrences. By doing so, we construct a new
substring with higher SavedCost than ˆσ, violating our initial
assumption. So, the substring that maximizes SavedCost is
a maximal repeat. A suﬃx tree over a set of input strings
captures all right-maximal repeats, and right-maximal re-
peats are a superset of all maximal repeats [11]. To pick
the one with maximum SavedCost, we need the count of
non-overlapping occurrences of these substrings. A Minimal
Augmented Suﬃx Tree [5] over IT ∪M can be constructed and
used to count the number of non-overlapping occurrences of
all right-maximal repeats in overall O(L log L) time, where
L is the total length of target strings. Using a regular suf-
ﬁx tree instead, this can be achieved in only O(L) time;
but suﬃx tree may count overlapping occurrences. In our
implementation we prefer to use regular suﬃx tree, follow-
ing related work [10] that has shown that this performance
optimization has negligible impact on the solution’s qual-
ity. So, the substring that is chosen for the new Lexis-DAG
node is based on length and overlapping occurrence count.
We then use the suﬃx tree to iterate over all occurrences of
the selected substring, skipping overlapping occurrences. If
a selected substring has less than two non-overlapping oc-
currences, we skip to the next best substring.
Using the
suﬃx tree, we can update the Lexis-DAG with the new in-
termediate node, and with the corresponding edges for all
occurrences of that substring, in O(L) time. The maximum
number of iterations of G-Lexis is O(L) because each itera-
tion reduces the number of edges (or concatenations), which
at the start is O(L). So, the overall run-time complexity
using suﬃx tree is O(L2).
We have also experimented with other algorithms, such
as a greedy heuristic that selects the longest repeat in each
iteration of building the DAG, i.e., it chooses based on length
among all substrings that appear at least twice in the targets
or intermediate node strings. This heuristic can be eﬃciently
implemented to run in only O(L) time [13]. Our evaluation
shows that G-Lexis performs signiﬁcantly better than the
longest repeat heuristic in terms of solution quality, despite
some running time overhead. Running both algorithms on
a machine with an Intel Core-i7 2.9 GHz CPU and 16GB of
RAM on the NSF abstracts dataset (introduced in Section
5) of 2, 309 target strings with total length 245, 968 symbols
takes 562 sec for G-Lexis and 408 sec for the longest repeat
algorithm. The edge cost with G-Lexis is 169,060 compared
to 183,961 with the longest repeat algorithm. More detailed
results can be found in the Appendix.
4.
PATH-CENTRALITY AND THE CORE OF
A LEXIS-DAG
After constructing a Lexis-DAG, an important question is
to rank the constructed intermediate nodes in terms of sig-
niﬁcance or centrality. Even though there are many related
metrics in the network analysis literature, such as closeness,
betweenness or eigenvector centrality [22], none of them cap-
tures well the semantics of a Lexis-DAG. In a Lexis-DAG,
a path that starts from a source and terminates at a target
represents a dependency chain in which each node depends
on all previous nodes in that path. So, the higher the num-
ber of such source-to-target paths traversing an intermediate
node v is, the more important v is in terms of the number
of dependency chains it participates in. More formally, let
PD(v) be the number of source-to-target paths that traverse
node v ∈VM; we refer to PD(v) as the path centrality of
intermediate node v.
The path centrality of sources and
targets is zero by deﬁnition. First, note that:
P(v) = PS(v) PT (v)
(5)
where PS(v) is the number of paths from any source to v,
and PT (v) is the number of paths from v to any target.
This suggests an eﬃcient way to calculate the path centrality
of all nodes in a Lexis-DAG in O(|E|) time: perform two
DFS traversals, one starting from sources and following the
direction of edges, and another starting from targets and
following the opposite direction.
The ﬁrst DFS traversal
will recursively produce PS(v) while the second will produce
PT (v), for all intermediate nodes.
Second, it is easy to see that PT (v) is equal to the number
of times string S(v) is used for replacement in the target
strings T. Similarly, PS(v) is equal to the number of times
any source node is repeated in S(v), which is simply the
length of S(v). So, the path centrality P(v) of a node in
a Lexis-DAG can be also interpreted as its “re-use count”
(or number of replaced occurrences in the targets) times its
length. Thus, an intermediate node will rank highly in terms
of path centrality if it is both long and frequently re-used.
An important follow-up question is to identify the core of a
Lexis-DAG, i.e., a set of intermediate nodes that represent,
as a whole, the most important substrings in that Lexis-
DAG. Intuitively, we expect that the core should include
nodes of high path centrality, and that almost all source-to-
target dependency chains of the Lexis-DAG should traverse
at least one of these core nodes.
More formally, suppose K is a set of intermediate nodes
and P−(K) is the set of source-to-target paths after we re-
move the nodes in K from D. The core of D is deﬁned as
the minimum-cardinality set of intermediate nodes ˆK such
that the fraction of remaining source-to-target paths after
the removal of ˆK is at most τ:
min
K⊆VM
|K|
s.t. |P−(K)| ≤τ |P−(∅)|
(6)
where |P−(∅)| is the number of source-to-target paths in the
original Lexis-DAG, without removing any nodes.3
Note that if τ = 0 the core identiﬁcation problem becomes
equivalent to ﬁnding the min-vertex-cut of the given Lexis-
DAG. In practice a Lexis-DAG often includes some tendril-
like source-to-target paths traversing a small number of in-
termediate nodes that very few other paths traverse. These
paths can cause a large increase in the size of the core. For
this reason, we prefer to consider the case of a positive, but
potentially small, value of the threshold τ.
We solve the core identiﬁcation problem with a greedy al-
gorithm referred to as G-Core. This algorithm adds in each
iteration the node with the highest path-centrality value to
the core set, updates the Lexis-DAG by removing that node
and its edges, and recomputes the path centralities before
the next iteration. The algorithm terminates when the de-
sired fraction of source-to-target paths has been achieved.
G-Core requires at most O(|V |) iterations, and in each it-
3It is easy to see that |P−(∅)| is equal to the cumulative
length of all target strings L.

eration we update the path centralities in O(|E|) time. So
the run-time complexity of G-Core is O(|V ||E|).
5.
APPLICATIONS OF LEXIS
We now discuss a variety of applications of the proposed
framework. Note that in all experiments, we use the library
from [10] for extracting the maximal repeats and NetworkX
[12] as the graph library in our implementation.
5.1
Optimized String Hierarchies
Lexis can be used as an optimization tool for the hierarchi-
cal synthesis of sequences. One such application comes from
synthetic biology, where novel DNA sequences are created
by concatenating existing DNA sequences in a hierarchical
process [7]. The cost of DNA synthesis is considerable today
due to the biochemical operations that are required to per-
form this “genetic merging” [7, 4]. Hence, it is desirable to
re-use existing DNA sequences, and more generally, to per-
form this design process in an eﬃcient hierarchical manner.
Biologists have created a library of synthetic DNA se-
quences, referred to as iGEM [2]. Currently, there are 787
elementary “BioBrick parts” from which longer composite
sequences can be created. Longer sequences are submitted
to the Registry of Standard Biological Parts in the annual
iGEM competition, then functionally evaluated and labeled.
In the following, we analyze a subset of the iGEM dataset.
In particular, this dataset contains 1, 375 composite DNA
sequences that are labeled as iGEM devices because they
have distinct biological functions; we treat these sequences
as Lexis targets.
The cumulative length of the target se-
quences is 6, 957 symbols.
The 787 elementary BioBrick
parts are treated as the Lexis sources. The iGEM dataset
also includes other BioBrick parts that are neither devices
nor elementary, and that have been used to construct more
complex parts in iGEM; we ignore those because they do
not have a distinct biological function (i.e., they should not
be viewed as targets but as intermediate sequences that dif-
ferent teams of biologists have previously constructed).
We constructed an optimized Lexis-DAG for the given sets
of iGEM sources and targets. To quantify the gain that re-
sults from using a hierarchical synthesis process, we compare
the number of edges and concatenations in the Lexis-DAG
versus a ﬂat synthesis process in which each target is inde-
pendently constructed from the required sources. The Lexis
solution requires only 52% of the edges (or 56% of the con-
catenations) that the ﬂat process would require.
The se-
quence with the highest path centrality in the Lexis-DAG
is B0010-B0012.4 This part is registered as B0015 in the
iGEM library and it is the most common “terminator” in
iGEM devices. Lexis identiﬁed several more high central-
ity parts that are already in iGEM, such as B0032-E0040-
B0010-B0012, registered as E0240. Interestingly, however,
the Lexis-DAG also includes some high centrality parts that
have not been registered in iGEM yet, such as B0034-C0062-
B0010-B0012-R0062. A list of the top-15 nodes in terms of
path centrality is given in the Appendix.
To explore the hierarchical nature of the iGEM sequences,
we compared the “Original” Lexis-DAG, the one we con-
structed with the actual iGEM devices as targets, with“Ran-
domized” Lexis-DAGs. “Randomized” Lexis-DAG is the re-
sult of applying G-Lexis to a target set where each iGEM
4 BioBricks start with BBa preﬁx that are omitted here.
100
101
1
Length
100
101
102
103
No. of Replacements
Original
Randomized
100
101
102
Out-degree
100
101
102
103
No. of Replacements
Original
Randomized
Figure 3: Comparison of the Lexis-DAGs that result from the
Original and Randomized iGEM devices (best viewed in color).
The size of each point represents the path-centrality of that node.
device sequence is randomly reshuﬄed.
We compare the
Original Lexis-DAG characteristics to the average Lexis-
DAG characteristics over ten randomized experiments. The
Original Lexis-DAG has fewer intermediate nodes than the
Randomized ones (169 in Original vs 359 in Randomized),
and its depth is twice as large (8 vs 4.4). Importantly, the
Randomized DAGs are signiﬁcantly more costly: 44% higher
cost in terms of edges and 52% in terms of concatenations.
To further understand these diﬀerences from the topo-
logical perspective, Fig. 3 shows scatter plots for the length,
path centrality, and re-use (number of replacements) of each
intermediate node in the Original Lexis-DAG vs one of the
Randomized Lexis-DAGs. With randomized targets, the in-
termediate nodes are short (mostly 2-3 symbols), their re-use
is roughly equal to their out-degree, and their path central-
ity is determined by their out-degree; in other words, most
intermediate nodes are directly connected to the targets that
include them, and the most central nodes are those that have
the highest number of such edges. On the contrary, with the
original targets we ﬁnd longer intermediate nodes (up to 11-
12 symbols) and their number of replacements in the targets
can be up to an order of magnitude higher than their out-
degree. This happens when intermediate nodes with a large
number of replacements are not only used directly to con-
struct targets but they are repeatedly combined to construct
longer intermediate nodes, creating a deeper hierarchy of re-
use. In this case, the high path centrality nodes tend to be
those that are both relatively long and common, achieving
a good trade-oﬀbetween speciﬁcity and generality.
5.2
Structure Discovery
As mentioned in the introduction, it is often the case that
the hierarchical process that creates the observed sequences
is unknown. Lexis can be used to discover underlying hier-
archical structure as long as we have reasons to believe that
that hierarchical process cares to minimize, even heuristi-
cally, the same cost function that Lexis considers (i.e., num-
ber of edges or concatenations). A related reason to apply
Lexis in the analysis of sequential data is to identify the
most parsimonious way, in terms of number of edges or con-
catenations, to represent the given sequences hierarchically.
Even though this representation may not be related to the
process that generated the given targets, it can expose if the
given data have an inherent hierarchical structure.
As an illustration of this process, we apply Lexis on a
set of protein sequences. Even though it is well-known that
such sequences include conserved and repeated subsequences
(such as motifs) of various lengths, it is not currently known
whether these repeats form a hierarchical structure. That

would be the case if one or more short conserved sequences
are often combined to form longer conserved sequences, which
can themselves be combined with others to form even longer
sequences, etc. If we accept the premise that a conserved
sequence serves a distinct biological function, the discovery
of hierarchical structure in protein sequences would suggest
that elementary biological functions are combined in a Lego-
like manner to construct the complexity and diversity of the
proteome. In other words, the presence of hierarchical struc-
ture would suggest that proteins satisfy, at least to a certain
extent, the composability principle, meaning that the func-
tion of each protein is composed of, and it can be understood
through, the simpler functions of hierarchical components.
Our dataset is the proteome of baker’s Yeast5, which con-
sists of 6,721 proteins. However, this includes many protein
homologues.
It is important that we replace each cluster
of homologues with a single protein; otherwise Lexis can
detect repeated sequences within two or more homologues.
To remedy this issue, we use the UCLUST sequence clus-
tering tool [1], which is based on the USEARCH similarity
measure (or identity search) [9]. The Percentage of Identity
(PID) parameter controls how similar two sequences should
be so that they are assigned to the same cluster. We set
PID to 50%, which reduces the number of proteins to 6,033.
Much higher PID values do not cluster together some obvi-
ous homologues, while lower PID values are too restrictive.6
To reduce the running time associated with the randomiza-
tion experiments described next, we randomly sample 1,500
proteins from the output of UCLUST.
The total length of the protein targets is about 344K
amino acids.
The resulting Lexis-DAG has about 151K
edges and 5,171 intermediate nodes, and its maximum depth
is 7. Fig. 4(a) shows a scatter plot of the length and number
of replacements of these intermediate Lexis nodes (repeated
sequences discovered by Lexis).
Of course some of these sequences may not have any bi-
ological signiﬁcance because their length and number of re-
placements may be so low that they are likely to occur just
based on chance.
For instance, a sequence of two amino
acids that is repeated just twice in a sequence of thousands
of amino acids is almost certain (the distribution of amino
acids is not very skewed). To ﬁlter out the sequences that are
not statistically signiﬁcant, we rely on the following hypoth-
esis test. Consider a node that corresponds to a sequence
with length l and number of replacements r in the given
targets.
The null-hypothesis is that sequences with these
values of l and r will occur in a Lexis-DAG that is con-
structed for a random permutation of the given targets. To
evaluate this hypothesis, we randomize the given target se-
quences multiple times, and construct a Lexis-DAG for each
randomized sequence. We then estimate the probability that
sequences of length l and number of replacements r occur
in the randomized target Lexis-DAG, as the fraction of 500
experiments in which this is true. For a given signiﬁcance
level α = 0.1, we can then identify the pairs (l, r) for which
we can reject the null-hypothesis; these pairs correspond to
the nodes that we view as statistically signiﬁcant.7
5http://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000002311
6http://drive5.com/usearch/manual/uclust algo.html
7Another way to conduct this hypothesis test would be to
estimate the probability that a speciﬁc sequence of length
l will be repeated r times in a permutation of the targets.
The number of randomization experiments would need to
On average, the randomized target Lexis-DAGs have a
smaller depth (5.0) and more edges (155K) than the original
Lexis-DAG. Fig. 4(b) shows the intermediate nodes of the
original Lexis-DAG that pass the previous hypothesis test.
100
101
102
103
Length
100
101
102
103
No. of Replacements
Protein DAG
100
101
102
103
Length
100
101
102
103
No. of Replacements
Significant Nodes
(a)
(b)
Figure 4: Length and number of replacements for the intermedi-
ate nodes in the protein sequence Lexis-DAG (a) before and (b)
after we ﬁlter out the nodes that are not statistically signiﬁcant.
Fig. 5 shows a small subgraph of the Lexis-DAG, show-
ing only about 30 intermediate nodes; all these nodes have
passed the previous signiﬁcance test.
The grey lines rep-
resent indirect connections, going through nodes that have
not passed the signiﬁcance test (not shown), while the bold
lines represent direct connections. Interestingly, there seems
to be a non-trivial hierarchical structure with several long
paths, and with sequences of several amino acids that re-
peat several times even in this relatively small sample of
proteins. Despite these preliminary results, it is clearly still
early to draw any hard conclusions about the presence of hi-
erarchical structure in protein sequences. We are planning
to further pursue this question using Lexis in collaboration
with domain experts.
5.3
Compression
Recent work has highlighted the connection between pat-
tern mining and sequence compressibility [16]. Data com-
pression looks for regularities that can be used to compress
the data, while patterns are often useful as such regulari-
ties. In dictionary-based lossless compression, the original
sequence is encoded with the help of a dictionary, which is
a subset of the sequence’s substrings as well as a series of
pointers indicating the location(s) at which each dictionary
element should be placed to fully reconstruct the original se-
quence. Following the Minimum Description Principle, one
strives for a compression scheme that results in the smallest
size for the joint representation of both the dictionary and
the encoding of the data using that dictionary. The size of
this joint representation is the total space needed to store
the dictionary entries plus the total space needed for the re-
quired pointers. We assume for simplicity that the space to
store an individual character and a pointer are the same.
We now evaluate the use of a Lexis-DAG for compression
(or compact representation) of strings. To do so, we need to
decide 1) how to choose the patterns that will be used for
compression, and 2) if a pattern appears more than once,
which occurrences of that pattern to replace. A naive ap-
proach is to simply use the set of substrings that appear in
the Lexis-DAG as dictionary entries, and compare them to
sets of patterns found by other substring mining algorithms.
be much higher in that case, however, to cover all sequences
that we see in the actual Lexis-DAG, each with a given value
of r.

SA
ST
ILSDFSSLK
         (4,2)
IL
SSL
SS
PSSSAAPTSSAA
         (4,2)
AA
SSSEVCTECTETESTSYVTPYVSSSTAAANYTSSFSSSSEVCTECTETESTSTST
         (12,4)
TECTETEST
SSSS
SSSEVCTECTETESTSYVTPYV
         (4,5)
TEST
SSSEVCTECTETEST
         (3,6)
AAAVSQITDGQVQAAK
AV
         (2,718)
AKSSSAAPSS
         (3,4)
STAAAVSQITDGQVQAAKST
         (3,2)
NSSTNATTTASINVRTSATTTEST
         (3,3)
TNATTTASINVRTSATT
         (3,5)
TNATTT
NVRTSATT
SI
SATT
NATTNSSTNATTTASTNVRTSATT
         (5,2)
STTSS
         (2,5)
SSSSL
         (2,5)
TSSSSSSSEVCTECTETESTSYVTPYVSSSTAAANYTSSFSSSSEVCTECTETESTSTSTPYVTSSSWSSSEVCTECTETESTSYVTPYVSSSTAAANYTSSFSSSSEVCTECTETESTSTST
         (7,2)
MSSSS
         (2,5)
(2,952)
(3,10)
(2,15)
(2,862)
(3,8)
(2,18)
(4,10)
(2,1099)
(2,120)
(2,1819)
(2,988)
(5,4)
(2,1202)
(2,52)
Figure 5: A small subgraph of the Lexis-DAG for 1,500 Yeast proteins. This plot only shows statistically signiﬁcant nodes. Bold edges
represent a direct connection between two nodes, while grey edges represent indirect connections (through nodes that are not shown in
this plot). The label on top of each node shows the tuple (in-degree, number of replacements).
Given a set of patterns as potential dictionary entries, select-
ing the best dictionary and pointer placement is NP-hard. A
simple greedy compression scheme, that we refer to as Com-
pressLR, is to iteratively add to the dictionary the substring
that gives the highest compression gain when replacing all
Left-to-Right non-overlapping occurrences of that substring
with pointers. We re-evaluate the compression gain of can-
didate dictionary entries in each iteration. For a substring v
with length |v| and number of left-to-right non-overlapping
occurrences Rv, the compression gain is:
Rv × |v| −Rv −|v| = (Rv −1) × (|v| −1) −1
(7)
We compare the substrings identiﬁed by Lexis with the
substrings generated by a recent contiguous pattern mining
algorithm called ConSgen [27] (we could only run it on the
smallest available dataset). Additionally, we compare the
Lexis substrings with the set of patterns containing all 2-
and 3-grams of the data. The comparisons are performed
on six sequence datasets: the “Yeast” and iGEM datasets
of the previous sections, as well as four “NSF CS awards”
datasets that will be described in more detail in the next
section.
Table 1 shows the comparison results under the headings:
Lexis-CompressLR, 2+3grams-CompressLR and ConSgen-
CompressLR. These naive approaches are all on par with
each other. This comparison, however, treats G-Lexis as
a mere pattern mining algorithm. Instead, the G-Lexis al-
gorithm constructs a Lexis-DAG that puts the generated
patterns in a hierarchical context.
One can think of the
Lexis-DAG as the instructions in constructing a hierarchical
“Lego-like” sequence. The edges into the targets tell us how
to place the ﬁnal pointers, i.e., which occurrences of a dictio-
nary entry to replace in the targets. Further, the rest of the
DAG shows how to compress the patterns that appear in the
targets using smaller patterns. It is easy to see that using
this strategy the compressed size becomes equal to the num-
ber of edges in the DAG. Using this strategy that is encoded
in the Lexis-DAG results in an additional 2%-20% reduction
in the compressed size over the CompressLR approaches.
5.4
Feature Extraction
The Lexis-DAG can also be used to extract machine learn-
ing features for sequential data.
The intermediate nodes
that form the core of a Lexis-DAG, in particular, correspond
to sequences that are both relatively long and frequently re-
Dataset
Lexis
Lexis
2+3-gram
ConSgen
DAG
CompressLR
CompressLR
CompressLR
Know&Cog
68.69
76.58
77.13
—
Networks
78.48
86.47
86.43
—
Robotics
73.19
80.62
79.69
—
Theory
79.41
81.89
82.63
—
Yeast
44.28
51.08
50.71
—
iGEM
47.86
67.47
67.75
67.47
Table 1: Compression ratio (i.e., percentage of compressed data
size over original data size).
used in the targets. We hypothesize that such sequences will
be good features for machine learning tasks such as classiﬁ-
cation or clustering because they can discriminate diﬀerent
classes of objects (due to their longer length) and at the same
time they are general within the same class of objects (due
to their frequent occurrence in the targets of that class).
To test this hypothesis, we used Lexis to extract text fea-
tures for four classes of NSF research award abstracts during
the 1990–2003 time period.8 We pre-processed each award’s
abstract through stopword removal and Porter stemming.
The alphabet S is the set of word stems that appear at least
once in any of these abstracts. Table 2 describes this dataset
in terms of number of abstracts, cumulative abstract length,
and average length per abstract for each class.
Table 2: Description of 4 classes of NSF award abstracts
Class
|T |
L
L/|T |
|VM|
Knowledge
411
47,858
116
2,902
&Cog Sci
Networks
836
74,738
89
3,730
Robotics
496
56,481
113
4,560
Theory
566
66,891
118
4,247
We constructed the Lexis-DAG for each class of abstracts,
and then used the G-Core algorithm to identify the core for
each DAG. We stopped G-Core at the point where 95% of
indirect paths in the Lexis-DAG are covered. The strings in
each core are the extracted features for the corresponding
class of abstracts. Table 3 shows the 5 strings extracted by
G-Core for each class. We create a common set of G-Core
features by taking the union of the sets of core substrings
derived for each class.
The next step is to construct the
8archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/machine-learning-databases/
nsfabs-mld/nsfawards.data.html

feature vector for each abstract. We do so by representing
each abstract as a vector of counts, with a count for each
substring feature.
Table 3: 5 word stems in the Lexis-DAG core of each class of
abstracts.
Knowledge & Cog
Networks
machine learn
request support nsf connect
knowledg base
bit per second
natur languag
two year
artiﬁci intellig
provide partial support
neural network
high perform
Robotics
Theory
comput vision
comput scienc
ﬁrst year
real world
robot system
complex class
object recognit
complex theori
real time
approxim algorithm
Table 4: SVM classiﬁcation accuracy.
# nonzeros is the
number of nonzero elements in the term-document matrix
with each feature set. The accuracies and the parameters
are ﬁt based on 10-fold cross-validation for each feature set.
Method (# Features)
# Nonzeros
(γ, c)
Accuracy
Bag-of-words (9,7k)
190,2k
(0.0015,3)
88.3%
G-Core (14,4k)
55,5k
(0.02,1)
90.0%
2-Gram (124,9k)
228,0k
(0.0015,3)
91.3%
3-Gram (186,3k)
234,5k
(0.001,1)
75.8%
1+2-Gram (134,6k)
418,2k
(0.001,1)
90.9%
1+2+3-Gram (321,0k)
652,8k
(0.001,1)
89.2%
To assess how good these features are, we compare the
classiﬁcation accuracy obtained using the Lexis features with
more mainstream representations in text mining on NSF
data: “bag-of-words”, 2-gram, 3-gram, and two combina-
tions of these representations. We use a basic SVM classiﬁer
with an RBF kernel. We used the SVM implementation in
MATLAB. The accuracy results are similar to those with a
KNN classiﬁer that we tried with a Cosine distance, and the
accuracy is evaluated with 10-fold cross-validation.
Table 4 shows that the Lexis features result in a much
sparser term-document matrix, and so in smaller data over-
head in learning tasks, without sacriﬁcing classiﬁcation ac-
curacy. Lexis also results in a lower feature dimensionality
(with the exception of the 1-gram method but the accuracy
of that method is much lower). Note that most Lexis features
are 2-grams but the Lexis core (for 95% of path coverage)
may also include longer n-grams. Lexis becomes better, rel-
ative to the other feature sets, as we decrease the number
of considered features.
For instance, with 3, 000 features
the accuracy with Lexis is 74%, while the accuracy with the
1-gram and 2-gram features is 69% and 64%, respectively.
6.
RELATED WORK
Lexis is closely related to the Smallest Grammar Problem
(SGP), which focuses on the following question: What is the
smallest context-free grammar that only generates a given
string? The constraint that the grammar should generate
only one string is important because otherwise we could sim-
ply consider a Σ∗as the generator of any string over Σ. The
SGP is NP-hard, and inapproximable beyond a ratio of 8569
8568
[6]. Algorithms for SGP have been used for string compres-
sion [18] and structure discovery [21] (for a survey see [10]).
There are major diﬀerences between Lexis and SGP. First,
in Lexis we are given a set of several target strings, not only
one string.
Second, Lexis infers a network representation
(a DAG) instead of a grammar, and so it is a natural tool
for questions relating to the hierarchical structure of the
targets. For instance, the centrality analysis of intermediate
nodes or the core identiﬁcation question are well understood
problems in network analysis, while it is not obvious how to
approach them with a grammar-based approach.
One can also relate Lexis to the body of work on sequence
pattern mining, where one is interested in discovering fre-
quent or interesting patterns in a given sequence. Most work
in this area has focused on mining subsequences, i.e., a set
of ordered but not necessarily adjacent characters from the
given sequence. In Lexis, we focus on identifying substrings,
also known as contiguous sequence patterns.
A couple of
recent papers develop algorithms for mining substring pat-
terns [27, 26], since sequence mining algorithms do not read-
ily apply to the contiguous case. However, they rely on the
methodology of candidate generation (commonly used in se-
quence pattern mining), where all patterns meeting a certain
criterion are found, such as having frequency of at least two
or being maximal. In the sequence mining literature, it has
been recently observed that the size of the discovered set of
patterns as well as their redundancy can be better controlled
by mining for a set of patterns that meet a criterion collec-
tively, as opposed to individually. This is useful when these
patterns are used as features in other tasks such as sum-
marization or classiﬁcation. Algorithms for such set-based
pattern discovery have been recently developed for sequence
pattern mining [16, 25].
In the context of substring pat-
tern mining, Paskov et al [24] show how to identify a set of
patterns with optimal lossless compression cost in an unsu-
pervised setting, to be then used as features in supervised
learning for classiﬁcation. In a follow-up paper [23], DRAC-
ULA provides a“deep variant”of [24] that is similar to Lexis,
in terms of the general problem setup. DRACULA’s focus is
mostly on complexity and learning aspects of the problem,
while Lexis focuses on network analysis of the resulting opti-
mized hierarchy. For instance, DRACULA considers how to
take into account how dictionary strings are constructed to
regularize learning problems, and how the optimal Dracula
solution behaves as the cost varies. We have shown that,
although not speciﬁcally designed for feature extraction or
compression, the Lexis framework also results in a small and
non-redundant set of substring patterns that can be used in
classiﬁcation and compression tasks.
Optimal DNA synthesis is a new application domain, and
we are only aware of the work by Blakes et. al. [4]; they de-
scribe DNALD, an algorithm that greedily attempts to max-
imize DNA re-use for multistage assembly of DNA libraries
with shared intermediates. Even though the Lexis frame-
work was not speciﬁcally designed for DNA synthesis, the
Lexis-DAGs can be seemlessly used as solutions for this task.
In our illustrative example with the iGEM dataset, G-Lexis
returns solutions with 11% lower synthesis cost (equivalent
to concatenation cost) than DNALD.
Structure discovery in strings has been explored from sev-
eral diﬀerent perspectives. For example, the grammar-based
algorithm SEQUITIR [21] presents interesting possible ap-
plications in natural language and musical structure iden-
tiﬁcation. In an information-theoretic context, Lancot et.
al. [17] shows how to distinguish between coding and non-
coding regions by analyzing the hierarchical structure of ge-
nomic sequences.

7.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
Lexis is a novel optimization-based framework for explor-
ing the hierarchical nature of sequence data.
In this pa-
per, we stated the corresponding optimization problems in
the admittedly limited context of two simple cost functions
(number of edges and concatenations), proved their NP-
hardness, and proposed a greedy algorithm for the construc-
tion of Lexis-DAGs. This research can be extended in the
direction of more general cost formulations and more eﬃ-
cient algorithms. Additionally, we are working on an incre-
mental version of Lexis in which new targets are added to
an existing Lexis-DAG, without re-designing the hierarchy.
We also applied network analysis in Lexis-DAGs, propos-
ing a new centrality metric that can be used to identify the
most important intermediate nodes, corresponding to sub-
strings that are both relatively long and frequently occurring
in the target sequences. This network analysis connection
raises an interesting question: are there certain topological
properties that are common across Lexis-DAGs that have re-
sulted from long-running evolutionary processes? We have
some evidence that one such topological property is that
these DAGs exhibit the hourglass eﬀect [3].
Finally, we gave four examples of how Lexis can be used in
practice, applied in optimized hierarchical synthesis, struc-
ture discovery, compression and feature extraction. In future
work, we plan to apply Lexis in various domain-speciﬁc prob-
lems. In biology, in particular, we can use Lexis in compar-
ing the hierarchical structure of protein sequences between
healthy and cancerous tissues. Another related application
is generalized phylogeny inference, considering that horizon-
tal gene transfers (which are common in viruses and bacte-
ria) result in DAG-like phylogenies (as opposed to trees).
8.
