Revelation of Task Difﬁculty in AI-aided Education
1st Yitzhak Spielberg
Computer Science Department
Ariel University
Ariel, Israel
2nd Amos Azaria
Computer Science Department
Ariel University
Ariel, Israel
Abstract—When a student is asked to perform a given task,
her subjective estimate of the difﬁculty of that task has a strong
inﬂuence on her performance. There exists a rich literature
on the impact of perceived task difﬁculty on performance and
motivation. Yet, there is another topic that is closely related to
the subject of the inﬂuence of perceived task difﬁculty that did
not receive any attention in previous research - the inﬂuence
of revealing the true difﬁculty of a task to the student. This
paper investigates the impact of revealing the task difﬁculty on
the student’s performance, motivation, self-efﬁcacy and subjective
task value via an experiment in which workers are asked to solve
matchstick riddles. Furthermore, we discuss how the experiment
results might be relevant for AI-aided education. Speciﬁcally, we
elaborate on the question of how a student’s learning experience
might be improved by supporting her with two types of AI
systems: an AI system that predicts task difﬁculty and an AI
system that determines when task difﬁculty should be revealed
and when not.
I. INTRODUCTION
When a student (or worker) receives a certain task, her
subjective estimate of the difﬁculty of that task has a strong
inﬂuence on her performance. Research has shown that per-
ceptions of task difﬁculty are strongly correlated to both
performance metrics such as the success rate and the solution
time and psychological factors that inﬂuence performance such
as motivation, interest, self-efﬁcacy and subjective task value
(attainment value, intrinsic value, utility value).
Most commonly, the student’s perception of the difﬁculty
of a given task is obtained implicitly from the description
of the task, the background or setting in which the task was
provided, the duration of time allotted for the task, or other
information related to the task. Yet, there also exist tasks,
for which the objective (true) difﬁculty of the task may be
available for a teacher. In this case, the teacher will face an
important question: should she reveal the objective difﬁculty
of the task to the student? Will the revelation of the objective
task difﬁculty beneﬁt the student or will it be harmful to her
performance?
The inﬂuence of perceived task difﬁculty on the student’s
performance has been studied extensively [4]. Yet, to the best
of our knowledge, the costs and beneﬁts of revealing the
objective (true) task difﬁculty to the student have not been
analyzed.
This paper investigates the costs and beneﬁts of revealing
the true difﬁculty of a given task to the student that is supposed
to solve that task. In particular, it examines the inﬂuence
of revealing the task difﬁculty on performance metrics as
Fig. 1. Example of a matchstick riddle where 2 matches need to be moved,
in order to result in a legal mathematical equation.
well as psychological factors that impact performance, such
as motivation, self-efﬁcacy and subjective task value. We
study these effects using the matchstick riddle task - a simple
mathematical equation in which the numbers and the operator
consist of matchsticks, some of which need to be moved in
order to obtain a correct mathematical expression (see Figure
1 for an example).
For many tasks, the task difﬁculty is unknown a priori.
However, for a given task category (such as matchstick rid-
dles), it might be possible to build a data-driven AI that
predicts the difﬁculty level of a given task from that category.
Whether the development of such an AI is beneﬁcial depends
on the inﬂuence of revealing task difﬁculty on the student’s
performance. Therefore, understanding the inﬂuence of reveal-
ing task difﬁculty (in case that it is available) is particularly
relevant with respect to AI-supported education.
Whereas the inﬂuence of revealing the task difﬁculty on the
student’s performance might be consistent (always positive or
always negative), it might also be more complex. In particular,
it might turn out that this inﬂuence depends on several external
parameters, such as certain speciﬁc attributes of the task or
the student’s personality. For example, a student who enjoys
challenges might become more motivated when she is told
that the task is hard while revealing the same information to
an anxious student might have the opposite effect. Therefore,
in light of these considerations, it might be useful to consider
an additional type of AI - an AI that predicts when to reveal
the task difﬁculty and when not.
In summary, this paper investigates the following questions:
1) What is the inﬂuence of revealing the task difﬁculty on
the student’s performance, motivation, self-efﬁcacy and
subjective task value?
2) How to improve the learning experience using 2 types
of AI systems - an AI system that predicts the task
difﬁculty and an AI system that decides when to reveal
arXiv:2201.04633v1  [cs.HC]  12 Jan 2022

the task difﬁculty?
II. RELATED WORK
As noted previously, to the best of our knowledge, there is
no literature on the inﬂuence of revealing the difﬁculty of a
given task on the student’s performance. However, the topic
of the impact of revealing the task difﬁculty is closely related
to the topic of the impact of perceptions of task difﬁculty - a
subject that has been discussed in a number of scientiﬁc publi-
cations. This section lists the central conclusions with respect
to the inﬂuence of perceived task difﬁculty on performance,
on the main psychological factors that inﬂuence performance
(motivation and self-efﬁcacy), and on subjective task value.
One remarkable conclusion from the literature that has been
reviewed is the existence of contradicting hypotheses - partic-
ularly, concerning the impact of perceived task difﬁculty on
performance and motivation. Since the various studies have
taken place on different tasks, one possible explanation for
the contradictions might be that the relationship between per-
ceived task difﬁculty and performance/motivation depends on
characteristics that deﬁne the speciﬁc nature of the given task.
The following discussion of the relevant literature is structured
in accordance with the following four factors: performance,
motivation, self-efﬁcacy and subjective task value.
Performance: In this paper, the performance of a cohort
of students on a task is being measured by two metrics: the
success rate and the average solution time. There exists a
rich literature on the inﬂuence of perceived task difﬁculty
on performance [4]. There are two main hypotheses that
appear in the literature. The ﬁrst hypothesis states that the
student’s performance decreases as perceived task difﬁculty
increases. According to the second hypothesis, however, the
perceived task difﬁculty has no inﬂuence on the student’s
performance. Although there seems to be more support for
the ﬁrst hypothesis ( [4], [6], [9]), there is also some support
for the second hypothesis [5]. Although, on the ﬁrst glance,
these two hypotheses seem to contradict each other, it might be
the case that upon deeper reﬂection there is no contradiction
between them, because the studies were performed on different
tasks and the relationship between perceived task difﬁculty and
performance/motivation might depend on the speciﬁcs of the
task.
Motivation: The literature on the inﬂuence of perceived task
difﬁculty on motivation also contains contradicting hypothe-
ses. The ﬁrst hypothesis, namely, that motivation is negatively
correlated to perceived task difﬁculty is supported by Hom
[5]. Barron et. al. also provide evidence for this hypothesis
and augment it with an additional claim; according to their
analysis motivation is mediated by self-efﬁcacy. They suggest
that an increase in perceived task difﬁculty leads to a decrease
in self-efﬁcacy which causes a decrease in motivation [1]. The
contradicting hypothesis, that higher perceived task difﬁculty
leads to higher motivation - appears in the literature as well.
Boggiano et. al. suggest that not only the level of motivation
but also the level of interest increases when students perceive a
task as being more difﬁcult [2]. If high levels of exertion are
considered to be an expression of high levels of motivation
then the ﬁnding that higher perceived task difﬁculty leads
to higher levels of exertion [11] can also be regarded as a
support for the contradicting hypothesis. Another alternative
hypothesis that can be found in the literature is that there is
no relation between perceived task difﬁculty and motivation.
Evidence for this alternative claim can be found in Robinson
et. al. [12].
Self-Efﬁcacy: The term “self-efﬁcacy” denotes the student’s
conﬁdence in her ability to succeed in a given task. There
exists a rich literature on the connection between perceived
task difﬁculty, self-efﬁcacy, motivation and performance (see
for example [6]–[8]). Particularly, it is worth noting, that
self-efﬁcacy is closely related to motivation, such that higher
self-efﬁcacy usually leads to higher motivation. Therefore,
it makes sense to assume that the relationship between per-
ceived task difﬁculty and self-efﬁcacy is very similar to the
relationship between perceived task difﬁculty and motivation.
Since the ﬁrst hypothesis from the paragraph above - that
higher perceived task difﬁculty leads to lower motivation - has
the strongest support in the literature, it might be reasonable
to suspect that there also exists literature that conﬁrms the
analogous statement with respect to self-efﬁcacy - and, indeed,
this seems to be the case (see [13]–[15]). Concerning the re-
lationship between high perceived task difﬁculty and low self-
efﬁcacy, it is particularly interesting that it is not clear which
factor is the cause and which - the effect. While Wigﬁeld and
Eccles suggest that higher perceived task difﬁculty leads to
lower self-efﬁcacy [13], Li et. al. [6] claim the reverse cause-
effect relationship: a student is inclined to consider the task
as more difﬁcult precisely because she has low conﬁdence in
her ability to solve the task.
Subjective Task Value: The term “subjective task value”
relates to the various ways in which a given task can be
valuable to the student. Expectancy-value theory of motivation
[13] deﬁnes three types of subjective task values:
• Intrinsic value: the level of pleasure that the student
derives from the task.
• Identity value: the amount of self-conﬁdence gained from
succeeding in the task.
• Utility value: the value of the knowledge and skills
obtained from performing the task.
A review of the literature revealed that perceived task difﬁculty
inﬂuences all categories of subjective task value. With regard
to intrinsic value, Li et. al. suggest that a student who perceives
a task as very difﬁcult will experience lower levels of pleasure
in comparison to a student who perceives the same task as less
difﬁcult [6]. With regard to identity value, the literature con-
tains multiple hypotheses. While Brown [3] presents evidence
for a positive correlation between perceived task difﬁculty and
identity value, Li et. al. [6] do not ﬁnd any correlation at all.
With regard to utility value, we found only one hypothesis in
the literature: Li et. al. suggest that utility value increases as
perceived task difﬁculty increases [6].

Fig. 2. Example of a matchstick riddle where 1 match needs to be moved.
III. EXPERIMENTAL SETTING
A. The Task
In order to determine the effects of revealing the difﬁculty
of a task to a student we use the matchstick riddle as our test-
bed. A matchstick riddle is an equation with 4 tokens (3 digits,
1 operator) and an “=” sign, in which each token consists
of multiple matchsticks. The digit tokens can represent any
digit 0,1..,9 and the operator token can be a ‘+’ or ‘-’. The
riddle starts with an incorrect mathematical expression, such
as ‘3+2=7’ or an expression that contains invalid tokens. In
order to solve the riddle, the participant needs to move 1 or
more matchsticks to transform the expression into a correct
mathematical equation. The amount of matches to be moved
is displayed to the participant. Clearly, matchstick riddles have
different difﬁculty levels, see Figure 1 for an example of a
difﬁcult riddle, and Figure 2 for an example of an easy riddle.
The solution to Figure 1 is “9 −1 = 8”, and the solution to
Figure 2 is “4 −2 = 2”.
We use the domain of matchstick riddles because the com-
puter can automatically generate many tasks of different dif-
ﬁculty and easily check if the answer is correct. Furthermore,
since this type of task is not well known (unlike mathematical
questions, English questions or sudoku), we could expect
the performance to be somewhat consistent between different
participants, so using the performance of some participants to
predict the difﬁculty of the task may seem more appropriate
when using the matchstick riddle.
All experiments (described below) were performed on a
collection of matchstick riddles that was generated by a
program that we implemented. The collection consists of 500
riddles with 1 match to be moved and another 500 riddles with
2 matches to be moved. Although, as one might intuit, 2-stick
riddles are more difﬁcult than 1-stick riddles on average, it
turned out that there were many 1-stick riddles that were more
difﬁcult than 2-stick riddles, according to the performance
statistics. This observation suggests that the difﬁculty of a
riddle depends not only on the number of matches that need to
be moved but also on the speciﬁc locations of these matches.
B. Experiment Details
To investigate the inﬂuence of revealing task difﬁculty we
conducted an experiment in which the participants (or workers)
were asked to solve matchstick riddles. The experiment, which
was implemented as a HIT (human intelligence task) on the
Amazon Mechanical Turk platform, can be described by the
following characteristics.
• The worker saw the riddle and was informed about the
number of matches that needed to be moved. To solve
the riddle she needed to select the correct matches and
to move them into the appropriate positions.
• The order in which the riddles were being displayed to
the worker was random (without repetition).
• In order to provide some motivation for the worker, the
worker received a small monetary reward for each correct
solution.
• The worker had an unlimited amount of time for each
riddle. She could move on to the next riddle whenever
she liked.
• The worker decided by herself how many riddles she
wanted to complete. She was allowed to ﬁnish the HIT
whenever she desired.
• The worker’s performance was measured on each riddle.
More precisely, the system measured two variables: the
time spent on the riddle and whether the worker was able
to solve the riddle or not.
After completing the HIT the worker was asked to ﬁll out a
short survey. The survey contained the following statements:
1) I enjoyed the task. (S1)
2) I found the task interesting. (S2)
3) I believe that I performed well on the task. (S3)
4) I would like to perform similar tasks in the future. (S4)
All statements had to be evaluated on a 7-level Likert scale,
by choosing an answer from the following list: “strongly dis-
agree” (1), “disagree” (2), “somewhat disagree” (3),“neutral”
(4),“somewhat agree” (5), “agree” (6), and “strongly agree”
(7).
The experiment consisted of two versions of the riddles HIT.
In the ﬁrst version, the riddle difﬁculty level was not displayed.
In the second version, the difﬁculty level of the riddle was
displayed on top of the riddle. In the following elaboration,
the group of workers that performed the 1st/2nd version will
be called group 1 and group 2 respectively. The group sizes
were N1=97 and N2=125.
For each of the two groups the individual performance
statistics were aggregated into group-level performance statis-
tics by averaging. The following group-level statistics have
been computed:
• Average attempt ratio, which equals the number of riddles
attempted divided by the total number of riddles seen. A
riddle is considered to be ’attempted’ if the worker spent
at least 20s on it.
• Average solution ratio, which is the number of riddles
solved divided by the number of riddles seen.
• Average time spent on the HIT.
• Average solution time, which includes only solved rid-
dles.
• Average riddle time, which includes all riddles (solved
and unsolved).
All of these group-level statistics were computed not only on
the collection of all riddles (table I), but also for the following
two subsets of riddles: easy riddles (table II) and hard riddles

Group 2
Group 1
(difﬁculty displayed)
(w/o difﬁculty)
No. workers
129
100
No. riddles seen
4459
3443
Avg seen
34.57
34.43
Avg solved
30.9
30.28
Avg attempted
31.95
31.89
Avg solution ratio
0.89
0.88
Avg attempt ratio
0.92
0.93
Avg time on HIT
3238
2745
Avg solution time
91.92
77.61
Avg riddle time
93.68
79.74
TABLE I
PERFORMANCE STATISTICS ON THE ENTIRE RIDDLE COLLECTION.
(table III), as described hereunder. Furthermore, group-level
statistics were computed for the survey results.
C. Determining the Task Difﬁculty
As mentioned previously, for group 2 the difﬁculty level of
the riddle was displayed on top of each riddle. The possible
difﬁculty levels were 1,2,..,5 where 1 corresponded to ’very
easy’ and 5 to ‘very hard’. In the discussion of the results
the scale that will be used will be a coarser scale with only 3
levels - for greater clarity. The category ‘hard’ will correspond
to levels 4 and 5 on the ﬁner scale, the category ‘medium’ will
correspond to level 3 and the category ‘easy’ will correspond
to levels 1 and 2.
The difﬁculty level of each riddle was speciﬁed before
the experiment by running the HIT on a separate group of
workers that did not participate in the experiment afterward.
The difﬁculty level of a riddle was determined by the average
solution time of that riddle: the higher the average solution
time the higher the difﬁculty level. The size of the group was
determined such that each riddle was solved by approximately
10 workers. The function for mapping the average solution
time to difﬁculty level assumes that the number of riddles
in each difﬁculty category is roughly the same. That is, the
average solution times are partitioned into ﬁve quantiles—one
for each difﬁculty level, where the ﬁrst quantile contains the
lowest solution times (the easiest tasks, i.e., difﬁculty level
1) and the ﬁfth quantile contains the highest solution times
(difﬁculty level 5).
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
The purpose of the experiment was to understand the
inﬂuence of revealing task difﬁculty on multiple performance-
related features. This section compares the results of the two
groups of workers (group 1 and group 2) with respect to
performance and three performance-related features - moti-
vation, self-efﬁcacy and subjective task value. All statistics
were computed on the entire collection of riddles and on two
subsets: easy riddles and hard riddles. This means that each
statistic comes in three versions. For example, there exists
an average solution time on the set of all riddles, an average
solution time on the set of easy riddles and an average solution
time on the set of hard riddles.
Group 2
Group 1
(difﬁculty displayed)
(w/o difﬁculty)
No. workers
114
89
No. riddles seen
1796
1418
Avg seen
15.75
15.93
Avg solved
14.97
14.75
Avg attempted
15.19
15.13
Avg solution ratio
0.95
0.93
Avg attempted ratio
0.96
0.95
Avg time on HIT
1014
892
Avg solution time
61.18
53.92
Avg riddle time
64.39
56.21
TABLE II
PERFORMANCE STATISTICS ON EASY RIDDLES.
Group 2
Group 1
(difﬁculty displayed)
(w/o difﬁculty)
No. workers
118
86
No. riddles seen
1756
1322
Avg seen
14.88
15.37
Avg solved
12.54
12.69
Avg attempted
13.11
13.67
Avg solution ratio
0.84
0.83
Avg attempted ratio
0.88
0.89
Avg time on HIT
1845
1623
Avg solution time
127.11
106.84
Avg riddle time
124.05
105.6
TABLE III
PERFORMANCE STATISTICS ON HARD RIDDLES.
A. Inﬂuence on Performance
One of the key goals of this paper is to understand
the impact of revealing the task difﬁculty on the student’s
performance. The 2 variables that we use to measure the
performance, are the solution ratio and the average solution
time. We are particularly interested in two questions: (a)
Whether revealing that an easy task is easy improves the
performance. (b) Whether revealing that a hard task is hard
diminishes the performance. For this purpose, the performance
statistics are measured and analyzed both on the entire set of
riddles and on the two subsets of riddles (i.e., easy riddles and
hard riddles).
The analysis of the experiment results shows that there is
no statistically signiﬁcant difference between the two groups
with regard to the solution ratio. This is true both for the entire
collection of riddles and for the two subsets. The solution for
group 1 and group 2 ratios are similar. For example, on the
subset of easy riddles, the average solution ratio is 0.93 for
group 1 and 0.95 for group 2.
However, with regard to solution time, it seems that the
inﬂuence of revealing task difﬁculty is negative. On the subset
of easy riddles, there is no signiﬁcant difference between
Group 2
Group 1
(difﬁculty displayed)
(w/o difﬁculty)
No. workers
125
97
Enjoyment
6.34
6.38
Interesting
6.42
6.39
Perform well
5.86
5.81
Similar in future
6.53
6.54
TABLE IV
SURVEY RESULTS

the groups. On the subset of hard riddles, however, group
1 clearly outperforms group 2, with 107 seconds for group
1, and 126 seconds for group 2. This result contradicts the
initial hypothesis that expecting a task to be easy improves
the performance, at least on the matchstick riddle task.
B. Inﬂuence on Motivation
Another important question is the inﬂuence of revealing task
difﬁculty on motivation. We use the average attempt ratio and
the average riddle time as proxies for the worker’s level of
motivation. This approach is based on the intuition, that a
worker who is more motivated will give up less quickly, which
leads to a higher average riddle time as well as to a higher
attempt ratio.
The experiment results reveal that on the subset of hard
riddles the average riddle time is higher for group 2 than for
group 1 (106s (group 1), 124s (group 2)). This result holds for
hard riddles only. On the entire collection of riddles and on
the subset of easy riddles there is no signiﬁcant difference in
the average riddle time between the 2 groups. This indicates
that in certain cases, such as the speciﬁc matchstick riddles
task, knowing that a task is hard might increase the student’s
motivation and persistence.
With regard to the attempt ratio, there is no statistically
signiﬁcant difference between the two groups. This result
holds both for the entire collection of riddles and each of the
two subsets of riddles (easy riddles, hard riddles).
With regard to the survey statistics, the one statement from
the survey that might be particularly relevant with respect to
motivation is S2 (“I found the task interesting”), as interest
facilitates motivation. The experiment results seem to indicate
that those workers who were informed about the task difﬁculty
did not ﬁnd the task more interesting than those workers that
were not. There is no signiﬁcant difference between the 2
groups with regard to the score on S2 with an average of 6.39
for group 1, and 6.42 for group 2.
C. Inﬂuence on Self-Efﬁcacy
The term ’self-efﬁcacy’ denotes a student’s conﬁdence in
his or her ability to succeed in a given task. As noted above,
there might be a close relationship between self-efﬁcacy and
motivation, such that, in most cases, a student who is highly
motivated on a given task has high conﬁdence that she will
be able to succeed in it. Therefore, it might be assumed that
the inﬂuence of revealing task difﬁculty on self-efﬁcacy is
very similar to the inﬂuence of revealing task difﬁculty on
motivation.
While it is possible to measure motivation via performance
metrics, such as the average attempt ratio, it is not possible
to measure self-efﬁcacy this way. Usually, the level of self-
efﬁcacy is measured by asking the student about her conﬁ-
dence in succeeding on the task before she starts the task.
In our case, however, such an approach would have been
infeasible, since in one HIT an average worker attempts about
30 riddles and it might cause her too much discomfort to
ask about her conﬁdence level before each riddle. For this
reason, we use a different approach. Instead of measuring self-
efﬁcacy, we measure the a-posteriori version of self-efﬁcacy:
the worker’s conﬁdence about her performance on the task
after completion. For this purpose, the statement S3 (“Do you
believe that you performed well on the task?” ) was included in
the survey that was ﬁlled out by every worker after completing
the HIT.
The analysis of the survey results (in particular the S3
statement) shows that indeed, the relation between revealing
the task difﬁculty and self-efﬁcacy is very similar to the
relation between revealing the task difﬁculty and motivation.
There is no signiﬁcant difference between the 2 groups in the
score on S3, with 5.81 for group 1, and 5.86 for group 2. This
result is very similar to the corresponding result with respect
to motivation. As discussed previously, those metrics that are
indicative of the level of motivation (with the exception of
riddle time for hard riddles) were not inﬂuenced at all by the
revelation of task difﬁculty.
D. Inﬂuence on subjective Task Value
As mentioned, there are three types of subjective task val-
ues: intrinsic value, identity value and utility value. Although
the statements in the survey do not precisely correspond to
these three types of subjective task value, three of the four
statements can be closely linked to them. In particular, it
seems meaningful to associate intrinsic value with S1 (”Did
you enjoy the task?”), while identity value and utility value
might be associated with S2, S4, albeit more loosely.
In order to determine whether revealing task difﬁculty
inﬂuences any of the types of subjective task values, the
average scores on the corresponding survey statements have
been analyzed. With respect to S1, the difference in the scores
of 6.38 for group 1 and 6.34 for group 2, is not large enough to
be statistically signiﬁcant. The same conclusion holds true on
S2 and S4 as well, where the scores of the two groups are also
close to each other. These results reject the intuitive hypothesis
that students who are informed about the task difﬁculty might
assign a higher identity value to the task (for example, students
might ﬁnd it rewarding to solve a task when they know that
it is hard).
V. AI THAT PREDICTS THE TASK DIFFICULTY
In the previous section, we have analyzed the inﬂuence
of revealing task difﬁculty on the student’s performance and
some performance-related features such as motivation and self-
efﬁcacy. The analysis showed that, indeed, there are certain
performance-related features that are positively inﬂuenced by
revealing the task difﬁculty, such as average riddle time on
hard riddles. In order to reveal the task difﬁculty to the student,
the system (software) that feeds the tasks to the student needs
to know the difﬁculty of every task from the given category
of tasks (e.g. matchstick riddles). Although for certain task
instances the difﬁculty level might be known a priori from
performance statistics, such as solution time and solution ratio,
there may be many other task instances whose difﬁculty level
is unknown. This calls for a difﬁculty predictor (an AI model)

that would be able to compute the difﬁculty level of any task
from a given task category automatically.
Although it might be unrealistic to design a generic dif-
ﬁculty predictor that would operate on all task categories, it
might be possible to create one that is speciﬁc to a given
category of tasks, such as matchstick riddles. For any given
category of tasks, this difﬁculty predictor would operate on
a set of features that are speciﬁc to that task category. The
difﬁculty predictor can be a model from an arbitrary class
of predictor models such as support vector machines or deep
neural networks. In case that the chosen class of predictor
models is a neural network, the architecture of the network
should be chosen with regard to the size of the training
set, taking into account the general rule that larger networks
require more training data.
In order to train the difﬁculty predictor, a training set of
tasks needs to be generated. This can be accomplished in a
similar way as was done for the matchstick riddles collection
(see “Experimental setting” section). The ﬁrst step would
be the generation of a collection of tasks from the given
category. Afterward, a cohort of workers should be asked to
solve these tasks and certain performance statistics such as the
solution times and the solution ratios should be recorded. In
the ﬁnal step, these performance statistics might be leveraged
to determine the difﬁculty level of each task in the training
set.
For many task categories predicting the difﬁculty level
of a task might be much simpler than solving it since the
former only requires training a difﬁculty predictor on task-
difﬁculty-tuples, while the latter calls for the development of a
solution algorithm for the given task category, which might be
extremely hard or even impossible for certain task categories.
Therefore, it is important to emphasize that the task difﬁculty
predictor does not need to know the solution of the task. This
is a very important feature of the predictor because it allows
to build a predictor even when a solution algorithm is not
available.
VI. PREDICTING TASK DIFFICULTY ON THE MATCHSTICK
RIDDLES TASK
To test the ideas presented in the previous section we built
a solution time predictor for the matchstick riddles task. Since
the difﬁculty of a riddle, as we deﬁned it, was determined only
by the solution time, the solution time prediction can be trans-
formed into a difﬁculty prediction. Because of the staggering
success of deep learning in various domains in recent years,
the function class that was chosen for the predictor was the
class of fully connected neural networks with rectiﬁed linear
unit (ReLU) neurons. In order to obtain optimal performance,
multiple network architectures were tested - all of them
consisting of 2-4 hidden layers and 10-20 neurons per layer.
Furthermore, each layer was regularized by a dropout layer
with a dropout rate of 0.5. The model training was performed
using an early stopping strategy (the training session ended
when the validation error did not decrease for a period of 10
consecutive epochs).
The basis for the data, that was used for training, validating
and testing the model was a collection of 1300 matchstick
riddles and the corresponding solution times. The experiment
yielded 5-10 solution times for every riddle (each solution
time corresponds to a different worker). The median of these
solution times was chosen as the prediction target. Thus, each
sample in the resulting data set consisted of the riddle’s feature
vector and the corresponding median solution time. We chose
to predict the median solution time rather than the average
solution time, because the median is more robust to outliers
than the average. Finally, the data was partitioned into a
training set (60 %), a validation set (20 %) and a testing set
(20 %).
In order to understand how the choice of features inﬂu-
ences the quality of the difﬁculty predictor, multiple difﬁculty
predictors have been trained - each one on a different set of
features. The ﬁrst predictor leveraged a minimal collection
of features that used only the information contained in the
riddle, but not the solution. This feature collection consisted
of the match positions of the original expression (encoded as
a one-hot vector) and the number of matches that needed to be
moved. The second predictor was based on an extended feature
collection that utilized the task solution. This extended collec-
tion consisted of the minimal feature collection, augmented by
a one-hot vector, that encoded the initial and ﬁnal positions of
those matches that needed to be moved and a boolean feature
that indicates whether there is a change in the operator (’+’
to ’-’ or ’-’ to ’+’).
After training, all models were evaluated on the test set.
With regard to the model performance, the differences between
the different model architectures that were tested were negligi-
ble. Moreover, it was observed that adding the solution-based
features to the minimal feature collection did not improve
the model performance. All models, including those that
used the extended feature collection, yielded a mean average
error (MAE) of approximately 35 seconds on the test set.
To evaluate the predictive power of the models, they were
compared to a primitive model that produces a constant output
for every riddle: the average target value (averaged over the
training set). This primitive model produced a MAE of 42
seconds. Although this result is worse than the MAE of the
neural network, unfortunately, the differences are quite small.
There might be multiple explanations for the relatively poor
performance of the neural network solution time predictor on
the matchstick riddles task. One possible explanation for this
phenomenon is the complexity of the given prediction task. It
is not clear which features determine the complexity - aside
from the number of matches that need to be moved. Initially,
we hypothesized that 2 features that are likely to make a riddle
more difﬁcult are a change in the operator and a change in
the right side. Yet, the analysis of the data does not support
this hypothesis. Furthermore, it might be worth noting that the
prediction task (predicting the median solution time) cannot be
accomplished by a human within a few seconds - a fact that
might be another indicator of the complexity of the prediction
task.

VII. AI THAT DECIDES WHEN TO REVEAL THE TASK
DIFFICULTY
The analysis of the experiment results showed, that re-
vealing task difﬁculty indeed does have an impact on the
student’s performance and motivation, albeit only on certain
subsets of tasks (for example on hard riddles). Yet, from
the experiment results, it did not become clear whether this
inﬂuence is positive or negative. As reviewed above, the
literature on the inﬂuence of perceived task difﬁculty contains
contradicting hypotheses. One possible interpretation of this
ﬁnding might be the hypothesis that this inﬂuence might
depend on additional factors that were not taken into account,
such as certain speciﬁcs of the task or the student’s attributes.
For instance, an anxious student might easily lose motivation
by being told that the task is hard, while a very self-conﬁdent
student, in contrast, might gain additional motivation from this
information.
The assumption that the inﬂuence of revealing task difﬁculty
depends on external factors, such as speciﬁc of the given
task category or the student’s personality, calls for an AI
system that would determine in which cases task difﬁculty
should be revealed. The inputs for this system might include
various features, such as scores for the student’s personality
traits and possibly certain features of the given task category.
The system’s output could be either binary (’yes’ or ’no’) or
continuous (a score that indicates the beneﬁt of revealing the
task difﬁculty). A more sophisticated system could produce
scores that would reﬂect how beneﬁcial revealing task difﬁ-
culty would be with regard to every single performance-related
feature: performance, motivation, self-efﬁcacy and subjective
task value. It should be mentioned that at this point the
description of this system is rather abstract because more
research would be required to understand how to design such
a system. In particular, more research would be required to
understand which factors modulate the inﬂuence of revealing
task difﬁculty, how exactly they modulate this inﬂuence and
how they correlated with each other.
There exists evidence that conﬁrms that a student’s level of
motivation on a given task depends on her personality [10].
Therefore, the student’s personality proﬁle could be a key
factor that determines whether revealing the task difﬁculty has
a positive or negative impact on her motivation, which means
that a model that determines in which cases task difﬁculty
should be revealed, might require the student’s psychological
proﬁle. This psychological proﬁle should contain scores on
various personality traits, such as trait neuroticism and trait
openness, which might be relevant with regard to the inﬂuence
of perceived task difﬁculty. The ﬁeld of psychometrics offers
numerous ways to generate such a personality proﬁle, among
others, specialized psychological tests and questionnaires.
VIII. DISCUSSION & CONCLUSION
The current paper explored the inﬂuence of revealing the
difﬁculty level of a task on the student’s performance and
several performance-related features such as motivation, self-
efﬁcacy and subjective task value. The purpose of this effort
was to understand whether revealing task difﬁculty improves
the student’s performance and to discuss how to support a
student with two types of AI systems: an AI that predicts the
task difﬁculty and an AI that determines when to reveal the
task difﬁculty. The matchstick riddles experiment produced
several interesting results. While some of these results are
intuitive and in line with the existing literature, others are less
expected.
Three important experiment results, which are in line with
the literature, can be regarded as intuitive. The ﬁrst result
is related to the solution time, which is an indicator of
performance. It has been observed that the solution time
increased when the worker was told that the riddle is hard. This
result is in line with the hypothesis from [4], [6], [9] that states
that an increase in perceived task difﬁculty causes a decrease
in performance. The two other notable results are linked to the
inﬂuence of revealing task difﬁculty on motivation and interest.
With regard to these two features (motivation and interest), the
experiment results indicate that revealing the difﬁculty of the
riddles did not inﬂuence neither motivation nor interest.
Another result, related to performance, contradicts certain
ﬁndings from the literature [4], [6], [9]. Namely, when the
worker was informed that a task is easy, her performance did
not improve - neither with respect to the solution time nor
with respect to the solution ratio.
With regard to motivation, there are 2 counterintuitive
experiment results that are also in contradiction to certain
results from the literature [12] . Firstly, it was observed that the
worker’s motivation did not decrease when she was informed
that a riddle is hard—there was even evidence for an increase
in motivation. Secondly, when a worker was informed that a
riddle is easy, her motivation did not increase.
In conclusion, the riddles experiment showed that the impact
of revealing task difﬁculty is neither clearly positive nor
clearly negative, but depends on different factors such as the
speciﬁc performance-related feature that is being inspected
(performance, motivation etc.) and the difﬁculty of the task.
We believe that there are four major conclusions that can be
drawn from the experiment:
•
Conclusion 1: Revealing task difﬁculty has positive as
well as negative effects on the student’s performance and
performance-related features (motivation etc.).
• Conclusion 2: In some cases, the impact of revealing
task difﬁculty can be ambiguous (positive and negative
simultaneously). For example, revealing task difﬁculty on
hard tasks leads to an increase in solution time, which can
be regarded either as a decrease in performance or as an
increase in exertion.
• Conclusion 3: Revealing the task difﬁculty seems to
impact only some of the performance-related features
(performance and motivation) but has no impact on others
(self-efﬁcacy, subjective task value).
• Conclusion 4: The impact of revealing task difﬁculty
might depend on the speciﬁcs of the task and the student’s
personality.

It is important to emphasize that the experiment discussed in
this paper was performed on a single task category (matchstick
riddles). Thus, it is not certain that the conclusions, derived
from the experiment results can be generalized to other task
categories. For this reason, an interesting direction of research
for future work could be to perform a similar experiment on
other task categories (e.g. sudoku).
The goal of the paper was to investigate the utility of
supporting students with an AI that predicts task difﬁculty
for a given task category (such as matchstick riddles). The
analysis of the experiment results showed that in many cases
revealing task difﬁculty can have positive effects. Therefore, an
AI that predicts task difﬁculty might be useful for increasing
the students’ performance and motivation. On the other hand,
the experiment results also indicate that sometimes revealing
task difﬁculty impacts the student in a negative way. For this
reason, the difﬁculty predictor should be augmented with an
AI that determines when to reveal task difﬁculty and when not
to do so.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was supported in part by the Ministry of
Science, Technology & Space, Israel.
