A Concept Knowledge Graph for User Next Intent Prediction at
Alipay
Yacheng He
Ant Group
Hangzhou, China

Qianghuai Jia∗
Ant Group
Hangzhou, China

Lin Yuan
Ant Group
Hangzhou, China

Ruopeng Li
Ant Group
Hangzhou, China

Yixin Ou
Zhejiang University
Hangzhou, China

Ningyu Zhang
Zhejiang University
Hangzhou, China

ABSTRACT
This paper illustrates the technologies of user next intent prediction
with a concept knowledge graph. The system has been deployed
on the Web at Alipay1, serving more than 100 million daily active
users. To explicitly characterize user intent, we propose AlipayKG,
which is an offline concept knowledge graph in the Life-Service
domain modeling the historical behaviors of users, the rich content
interacted by users and the relations between them. We further
introduce a Transformer-based model which integrates expert rules
from the knowledge graph to infer the online user’s next intent.
Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed system can
effectively enhance the performance of the downstream tasks while
retaining explainability.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Information systems →Query representation; Information
extraction.
KEYWORDS
Knowledge Graph; Intent Prediction; Graph Embedding
ACM Reference Format:
Yacheng He, Qianghuai Jia, Lin Yuan, Ruopeng Li, Yixin Ou, and Ningyu
Zhang. 2023. A Concept Knowledge Graph for User Next Intent Prediction at
Alipay. In Companion Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2023 (WWW
’23 Companion), April 30-May 4, 2023, Austin, TX, USA. ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 4 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3543873.3587308
1
INTRODUCTION
User next intent prediction – the ability to automatically infer the
next decision of users based on historical behavior and background
knowledge – holds an important place in in-device Apps [5]. For
example, in digital life service platforms such as Alipay, users often
∗Corresponding author.
1https://global.alipay.com/platform/site/ihome
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
WWW ’23 Companion, April 30-May 4, 2023, Austin, TX, USA
© 2023 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9419-2/23/04.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3543873.3587308
Buy movie
tickets
Take an
internet taxi
User Historical Behavior
Sequence
Location Time Interaction
s
Online Next
Intent Prediction
Downstream
Applications
Intents
Order coffee
…
?
?
…
Next Intent
Prediction
Model
Buy snacks
Recommender
System
Search
System
Transaction Risk 
Management
…
isA/Consequent
Intent
Product
Function
Consist
Consist
Sememe
Has
Has
Alipay
Knowledge
Graph
isA
Buy movie
tickets
Movie
tickets
Buy
Consist
Consist
coupon
Has
look
shows
buy
Entertainment 
Ticketing
Buy
snacks
Watch the
reality show
Watch
Reality
show
image
Consequent
Has
Has
Has
Has
Subgraph
Consist
Consist
The core ontology 
User_1
history
present & future
intent
product
function
sememe
Alipay
Knowledge Graph
(b) Next Intent Prediction Framework
(c) Downstream Applications
(a) Overview of Alipay Knowledge Graph
Figure 1: The user next intent prediction system at Alipay.
Sub-figure (a) illustrates the core ontology and subgraph of
AlipayKG. In sub-figure (b), an example of the user’s his-
torical interactions and intent sequence is shown in gray-
grounded boxes, and the next intent is marked with a red
"?" that has been inferred as "buy snacks" by the next intent
prediction model, whose outputs will provide a clear signal
to downstream applications as shown in sub-figure (c).
purchase snacks at the cinema (corresponding intent "buy snacks")
after buying movie tickets via TaoPiaoPiao2 (corresponding intent
"buy movie tickets"), which implies the intent of "buy movie tickets"
may lead to the following intent of "buy snacks." As shown in Figure
1, the ability to infer the future intents of users has the potential
to be advantageous for tasks such as recommendation, searching,
transaction risk management and so on.
Intuitively, user intent can be characterized as clustering pat-
terns of user behaviors, which are usually hidden in the content
and interacted with or generated by users in mobile applications.
Specifically, the core of understanding user intent in Alipay lies in
systematic and explicit knowledge modeling of the user’s situation
and the user’s interacted item content, which consists of queries,
applet services, bills, coupons, stores, reviews, etc. Concretely, we
2https://dianying.taobao.com/
arXiv:2301.00503v3  [cs.CL]  14 Mar 2023

WWW ’23 Companion, April 30-May 4, 2023, Austin, TX, USA
Yacheng He, et al.
summarize two non-trivial issues in user next intent prediction at
Alipay as follows:
• How to characterize user intent. It is challenging to abstract
and encode intent from user behaviors that are very diverse and
can not be directly observed. In particular, unlike e-commerce
scenarios such as Amazon3 which mainly contains shopping
intent, the behaviors at Alipay are various, including shopping,
trip and payment, which further increases the difficulty of intent
representation.
• How to predict the user’s next intent in real-time. The user’s
next intent is not only based on the user’s profile and preference
but also largely influenced by spatial and temporal factors. For
example, the intent of "buy movie tickets" tends to occur at the
weekend, while the intent of "order coffee" often occurs at Star-
bucks in the afternoon.
To address the above-mentioned issues, we propose a user next
intent prediction system based on the Knowledge Graph (KG) and
apply it to downstream applications at Alipay. We summarize the
contributions of this paper as follows:
• We propose AlipayKG, a concept knowledge graph that explic-
itly represents user behaviors by defining an intent architecture
to achieve a unified representation of multi-source heterogeneous
data. Meanwhile, we propose a systematic approach to obtain
structured knowledge from those multi-source data. With the
proposed AlipayKG, we address the first issue.
• As for the second issue, we design a next intent prediction frame-
work that integrates expert rules from AlipayKG, which improves
the performance while increasing interpretability by expert rules
during inference.
• We evaluate this system on downstream tasks. Experimental
results demonstrate that the proposed system deployed at Alipay
can enhance the performance of several real-world applications,
which serve more than 100 million daily active users.
2
ALIPAYKG-BASED USER NEXT INTENT
PREDICTION SYSTEM
An overview of our user intent system is presented in Figure 1,
and it is composed of two parts as follows: 1) AlipayKG to suf-
ficiently characterize user intent, and 2) Next Intent Prediction
Framework to accurately predict the user’s next intent in real-
time. All collected data are anonymized and reviewed by the
IRB committee at Alipay to preserve privacy.
2.1
AlipayKG Construction
In general, user intent plays a crucial role in promoting the per-
formance and interpretability of user modeling systems. However,
uniformly capturing the users’ intents and expressing them is ardu-
ous due to the various kinds of users’ behaviors in digital life service
platforms. Therefore, to sufficiently characterize user intent, we
propose a concept KG in the Life-Service domain called AlipayKG.
The core ontology of AlipayKG is shown in Figure 1(a), which
includes four types of nodes and four types of relations. Specifi-
cally, "Intent" describes the decision drivers behind users’ needs
and mainly consists of "Function" and "Product," such as "take an
3https://www.amazon.com/
phrase mining
crowdsourcing
Intents
bayesian network
Intent-isA-Intent
Relation
Intent-Consequent-
Intent Relation
Intent Function &
Intent Product
Sememe
isA/Consequent
Intent
Product
Function
Consist
Consist
Sememe
Has
Has
sememe multilabel
classification
part-of-speech tagging
& short text matching
lexical rule-based
& embedding-based
KG Nodes Mining
KG Relations Mining
Alipay Knowledge Graph
Query: withdraw provident fund
Bill: Tickets Avatar, Prices …
Service: Starbucks, order …
Item Content: …
Item Content
Figure 2: The process of constructing AlipayKG consists of
nodes mining and relations mining (by different colors).
internet taxi 打网约车" and "order coffee 点咖啡." Furthermore,
"Product" and "Function" can be represented by more fine-grained
Hownet sememes4 [4] that are regarded as the basic units for se-
mantic understanding, such as "movie ticket|电影票= {coupon|票
证, look|看, shows|表演物}." Meanwhile, we introduce two spe-
cific types of relations between "Intent" nodes: 1) "isA" relation
builds the semantic hyponymy of "Intent" nodes, such as "rent an
iPhone13 -isA- rent a mobile phone"; 2) "Consequent" relation is
used to establish the order effect of "Intent" nodes, such as "buy
a house -consequent- renovate a house." Figure 2 illustrates the
framework of AlipayKG construction, which contains two parts: 1)
KG Nodes Mining and 2) KG Relations Mining. It is worth noting
that crowdsourcing (we train hundreds of human annotators and
ask them to filter incorrect facts in KG) is employed for data quality
control throughout the whole process.
2.1.1
KG Nodes Mining. To mine "Intent" nodes, we adopt the au-
tomated phrase mining approach [3] based on item content and
extend it with a self-constructed ground dictionary for high-quality
phrase classification, where item content is chosen as our data
source since users often directly express their requirements by in-
teracting with items. Although the items in Alipay are multi-source
heterogeneous, the text of different items shares the same critical
information and can be used as input data sources for knowledge
mining. Then, we utilize lexical rule matching, part-of-speech tag-
ging, and short text matching models and structure the "Intent"
nodes into two parts: "Function" and "Product." Moreover, HowNet
[4] has a wealth of artificially annotated corpus, through which we
train a multi-label classification model [6] to automatically obtain
sememe information of "Function" and "Product." Due to aliasing
and ambiguity issues with node names, we further use alignment
models of Bert-Int [7] on "Intent" and "Product" nodes for semantic
disambiguation, respectively.
2.1.2
KG Relations Mining. In this part, the mining methods of
the "isA" and "Consequent" relations between "Intent" nodes are
elaborated. It is worth noting that the other two relations (i.e.,
"Consist" and "Has") have been obtained in the "KG Nodes Mining"
Section.
"isA" Relation: Since "isA" is used to organize "Intent" nodes
in a hierarchical tree structure, it is challenging to acquire the
knowledge that belongs to common sense through data mining. For
4https://github.com/thunlp/OpenHowNet.git

A Concept Knowledge Graph for User Next Intent Prediction at Alipay
WWW ’23 Companion, April 30-May 4, 2023, Austin, TX, USA
Dot
Product
Informer Encoder
Informer Decoder
Concatenated
Feature Map
Predicted
Intent Outputs
0
0
0
0
0
isA/Consequent
Intent
Product
Function
Consist
Consist
Sememe
Has
Has
Graph Convolutional
Network (GCN)
Intent Label
Embedding
Intent Time Stamp
Location Time Stamp
Global Time Stamp
𝜲!"#$%_'"
𝜲!"#$%_('
AlipayKG
Item Text
Multi-Label
Loss
Dot
Product
N
Item Embedding
Item Images
ResNet
StructBERT
Encoder
…
(b) Offline Item-Intent Understanding Model
(c) Online Next Intent Prediction Model
(a) Intent Representation
Figure 3: User next intent prediction framework. Figure(a):
GCN is learned over the AlipayKG to obtain intent label rep-
resentation, which is applied to predict output intents. Fig-
ure(b): Intent label generation of each item via the multi-
label classification model. Figure(c): 1) The encoder receives
massive long sequence inputs (intent, location and global
time); 2) The decoder receives long sequence inputs, pads the
target intents into zero, and instantly predicts output intents
(marked orange) in a generative style.
instance, it is easy to know that "buy an iPhone13" is a kind of "buy
a mobile phone," but difficult for a machine to understand. To this
end, we propose two different methods described as follows:
1) Lexical Rule-based Method: This method utilizes the "isA" of the
"Product" to build the "isA" relation between "Intent" nodes. For
example, "buy an iPhone13" and "buy a mobile phone" have the
same "Function," and it can be obtained from the general knowledge
graph that "iPhone13" is a kind of "mobile phone," then the relation
of "buy an iPhone13 -isA- buy a mobile phone" can be generated.
2) Embedding-based Method: This method employs the information
of the text semantics to avoid the drawbacks of the lexical rule-based
method. Specifically, we first apply StructBERT [8] pre-trained on
Alipay corpus to represent the embedding of the "Product." Secondly,
we calculate the cosine distance between "Product" nodes and recall
the top-K candidates with the closest semantics. Finally, we sample
the triples having an "isA" relation between "Intent" nodes.
"Consequent" Relation: Bayesian network [1] is leveraged
from the probability network to mine the "Consequent" relation in
AlipayKG. Specifically, the "Intent" of different time segments is first
aggregated as the input of the Bayesian network. After learning the
Bayesian network structure, it leverages relation inference to obtain
numerous pairs of "Intent" nodes. Finally, we can build the "Con-
sequent" relation on pairs of highly correlated and order-sensitive
"Intent" nodes.
2.2
Next Intent Prediction Framework
Figure 3 illustrates the next intent prediction framework, which
consists of two parts: 1) Offline Item-Intent Understanding Model
to label the user interacted items with "Intent," and 2) Online User
Next Intent Prediction Model to forecast the next intent of users
with low latency and high prediction accuracy.
2.2.1
Offline Item-Intent Understanding Model. Since user intent is
always hidden in the items that users interact with, it is important
to establish the Item-Intent relationships, which can be regarded
as a matching problem between "Item" and "Intent." For example,
"Starbucks applet" contains various "Intent" such as "order coffee"
and "buy coffee beans."
The overview of the item-intent understanding model is shown
in Figure 3(b). Firstly, we follow Kiela et al. [2] to unify the multi-
source heterogeneous input data. Specifically, we adopt Resnet to
extract image features and combine them with text features. Then,
the concatenated features are fed into StructBERT [8] model to
obtain the item representation. Besides, intent embedding is gener-
ated via graph algorithms such as GCN as shown in 3(a). Finally, we
can obtain the intent label scores by matching the learned intent
embedding with item representation.
2.2.2
Online User Next Intent Prediction Model. Online real-time
next intent prediction model needs low latency while guarantee-
ing high prediction accuracy. Hence, an efficient Transformer-
based model for long time-series forecasting named Informer [9]
is adopted in our work. In this model, the input consists of three
parts: the intent timestamp, the location timestamp and the global
timestamp (e.g., the time including Minutes, Hours, Weeks and
Months when the intent occurs.). Moreover, AlipayKG is fused into
the model to enhance the prediction accuracy, as shown in Figure
3(c). Additionally, the mined rules (such as "take an internet taxi
-consequent- buy movie tickets -consequent- buy snacks") are ap-
plied to the post-processing stage (by literal mapping) of the model,
which further improves the interpretability of the predicted results.
2.3
Industrial Deployment
The proposed system has now been deployed at Alipay for
a few months, to support a variety of business scenarios,
achieving better online performance. First of all, it can be ob-
served from Figure 4 that the recommendation engine is composed
of a recall stage and a ranking stage. In the recall stage, a candidate
item set (recall pool) is generated by merging results from different
recall methods. In the ranking stage, those candidates are passed
through ranking and re-ranking to output the final recommenda-
tion list. Secondly, the proposed user intent system is applied to
the recommendation engine in the recall and ranking stages. As
shown in Figure 4, according to history behavior data and current
spatial-temporal information, the next intent prediction model can
predict the user’s top-K intent candidates with the highest prob-
ability, which helps bring the intent-based recall method directly
into the recall stage. Meanwhile, the generated Top-K intent candi-
dates, intent embedding and item-intent relations can contribute
to better-personalized modeling of user behaviors in the ranking
stage. Finally, the whole system is in a positive feedback loop, as
shown in Figure 4. User Intent System can predict user intent based
on user-interacted data, which facilitates better recommendations.
In return, a better recommendation can provide more real user

WWW ’23 Companion, April 30-May 4, 2023, Austin, TX, USA
Yacheng He, et al.
Item Pool
Recall Stage
Location-based
Method
Embedding-based
Method
Intent-based
Method
…
Recall
Pool
Ranking
Re-Ranking
Ranking Stage
User Historical
Interactions Data
User spatial-temporal
information
Online Next Intent
Prediction Model
Top-K Predicted
Intent Labels
AlipayKG
Intent Embeddings
& Item-Intent
Relations
User Features & 
Item Features
User Interaction
Recommendation List
User Intent System
Alipay Homepage
Offline Item-Intent
Understanding Model
User Historical
Intent Sequence
Figure 4: Industrial deployment of User Next Intent Predic-
tion System in the Alipay recommendation engine. The rec-
ommendation engine contains two stages: the recall stage
and the ranking stage. The dataflows of recommended items
are guided by the grey arrows. The system provides intent
embeddings, item-intent relations and top-K predicted in-
tents based on historical information, thereby improving
the performance of the recall and ranking stages and pro-
viding users with a more in-demand recommendation list.
behavior data to improve the performance of intent understanding.
Besides, we illustrate the efficacy of the deployment in Section 3.3.
3
EVALUATION
3.1
Evaluation of AlipayKG
In AlipayKG, we have accumulated 104𝐾+ "Intent," 31𝐾+ "Func-
tion," 66𝐾+ "Product," and 1.9𝐾+ "Sememe." With the item-intent
understanding model, we have collected relatively static data, such
as 1, 316𝐾+ Service-Intent triples and 57, 852𝐾+ Store-Intent triples,
and relatively dynamic data, such as 10K-level Coupon-Intent triples
and billion-level Bill-Intent triples, etc.
3.2
Evaluation of Next Intent Prediction
Framework
In this Section, we evaluate the proposed intent prediction frame-
work from the following two aspects:
1) Offline Item-Intent Understanding Model: We evaluate our
matching model on item-intent prediction with 3𝐾+ primary intent
labels. In this task, we choose the multi-label classification model
[6] based on StructBERT[8] Encode as the baseline. Compared
with the baseline method, our model introduced in Section 2.2.1
brings an increase of 3.08% and reaches 90.64% in micro-F1.
2) Online Next Intent Prediction Model: We evaluate our next-
intent prediction model on 30𝐾sampled user historical behavior
data. To restore online scenarios, we only predict the user’s next in-
tent at a specific time and location. Experimental results show that
the baseline method based on the Informer [9] model achieves

ing the Intent Graph Embedding shown in Figure 3(b), the metrics

3.3
Evaluation of Downstream Applications
In this section, we further evaluate whether the user next intent
prediction system can improve the downstream tasks’ performance
at Alipay. We divide users into buckets for the online A/B test.
1) Home Recommendation: Home recommendation is one of the
essential business scenarios in which our system helps to discover
user interests in real-time, as shown in Section 2.3. Online experi-
ments demonstrate that the recommendation performance with the
user intent system improves by 1.61% in CTR (Click-Through-Rate).
Such a relative increase proves that our system can enhance the
recommendation with the real-time predicted user intent.
2) Transaction Risk Management: To create a secure payment
environment, the potential risks (e.g., embezzlement and money
laundering) of each transaction should be estimated to determine
whether it is invalid, which consumes a huge amount of compu-
tation. To reduce the cost, we treat users’ consumption intent as
an important transaction feature to discover low-risk transactions.
By leveraging the credible transaction identification based on the
proposed user intent system, the coverage rate of low-risk transac-
tions is relatively increased by 100%.
4
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this work, we present the user intent system and demonstrate
its effectiveness in downstream applications deployed in Alipay.
In the future, we will continually maintain the AlipayKG to cover
more business data and applications, and hopefully, it can benefit
more downstream tasks in digital life. Furthermore, we will make
efforts in the direction of interpretable reasoning for better user
intent prediction.
