Preprint submitted to 
1 
Urban-Semantic Computer Vision: 
A Framework for Contextual Understanding of People in Urban Spaces 
 
 
Anthony Vanky, Ph.D., Corresponding author 
Graduate School of Architecture, Planning and Preservation 
Columbia University, New York, NY 10025 

 
Ri Le 
Graduate School of Architecture, Planning and Preservation 
Columbia University, New York, NY 10025 

 
 

 
Preprint submitted to 
2 
KEYWORDS 
 
artificial intelligence, computer vision, urban space, urban context, urbanism, semantic meaning, thick description, 
evaluation 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Increasing computational power and improving deep learning methods have made computer vision technologies 
pervasively common in urban environments. Their applications in policing, traffic management, and documenting 
public spaces are increasingly common. Despite the often-discussed biases in the algorithms' training and unequally 
borne benefits, almost all applications similarly reduce urban experiences to simplistic, reductive, and mechanistic 
measures. There is a lack of context, depth, and specificity in these practices that enables semantic knowledge or 
analysis within urban contexts, especially within the context of using and occupying urban space. This paper will 
critique existing uses of artificial intelligence and computer vision in urban practices to propose a new framework 
for understanding people, action, and public space.   
  
This paper revisits Geertz's use of thick descriptions in generating interpretive theories of culture and activity and 
uses this lens to establish a framework to evaluate the varied uses of computer vision technologies that weigh 
meaning. We discuss how the framework's positioning may differ (and conflict) between different users of the 
technology. This paper also discusses the current use and training of deep learning algorithms and how this process 
limits semantic learning and proposes three potential methodologies for gaining a more contextually specific, urban-
semantic, description of urban space relevant to urbanists.  
  
This paper contributes to the critical conversations regarding the proliferation of artificial intelligence by 
challenging the current applications of these technologies in the urban environment by highlighting their failures 
within this context while also proposing an evolution of these algorithms that may ultimately make them sensitive 
and useful within this spatial and cultural milieu. 
 
 
 

 
Preprint submitted to 
3 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
Ever-powerful computational ability, the reduced cost of communications infrastructure, and the increase-
diminishing size of sensors have enabled the pervasive placement of technologies into the fabric of urban spaces, 
birthing a movement of the “smart city.” For many in the so-called smart cities movement, the trend has been 
towards the instrumentalization of cities, finding greater efficiencies, and the problematization of many facets of 
urban living (Hollands, 2008). For technologists working in this field, the enumeration game is being applied to all 
domains ranging from mobility and infrastructure to public safety and democratic participation (Eagle & Pentland, 
2009; Goldsmith & Crawford, 2014; Jiang et al., 2013). Nevertheless, the defining social characteristics of urban 
space defy a reduction to a mere optimization problem.  
 
These digital technologies and their resultant models and data outcomes have the ability to shape our perspective of 
the built environment. No different than the well-publicized challenges of bias prevalently found in other 
algorithmic processes (Crawford, 2018; Kirchner et al., 2016), the black box methodologies and opaque outcomes so 
too can unduly influence our reading of the places we inhabit (Schwarzer, 2017). Despite this conflict between 
reductivism and complexity, there is an urgent need to understand through new models and tools may open new 
avenues for research into public space and urban form in light of rapid urbanization and the increased privatization 
of urban space (E. Talen & Ellis, 2002).  
 
As if it were an iteration from the modernist use of photography in urban planning, the growing ubiquity of deep 
learning and computer vision applications have created new opportunities to understand cities through imagery 
(Lecun et al., 2015). While there is optimism in how these emerging technologies can allow for a more precise (and 
perhaps, broad) method for understanding cities, questions remain.  
 
Within this computational milieu, this paper focuses specifically on the nascent, but growing role of these 
algorithmic tools are being applied to urban planning and management. In one sense, they quantify human behavior 
in urban space that offers the ability for decision-makers to base policy in more informed ways. In another, this 
numerical reductivism applied to urban space is blind to the specificity and essential character that makes cities 
unique places of inhabitation. As such, this paper argues that in addition to situated technologies’ reductivist 
orientation, there is a need for a distinct approach to their use in the understanding of how people inhabit and use 
these public urban spaces. Further, with the increased proliferation of computer-vision and image-based approaches 
toward the instrumentalization of cities, an urban-specific lexicon to the training, implementation, and adoption of 
urban technologies.  
 
While the use of computer vision technologies has spanned many facets of urban management, such as infrastructure 
utilization and public safety, this paper considers explicitly using these technologies to understand how people 
inhabit and use public space. This paper argues that image-based artificial intelligence is a natural progression in the 
modernist use of photo imagery to capture data on the city. This paper also reviews, in brief, how artificial 
intelligence is being applied to image-based data to illustrate the potential weaknesses in creating thicker, domain-
specific ontologies about the occupants and the spaces in which they inhabit. Further, this paper discusses how thin 
data is being marketed by both public and private actors to the potential detriment of planning human-centric spaces. 
However, this paper also discusses potential approaches to reconceptualize the methodologies currently used to get 
toward an urban-semantic description of public space using these algorithmically-based methodologies despite these 
limitations.  
 
2. “URBANISM”, AND THE ISSUE OF CONTEXT 
 
A fundamental challenge is defining what characteristics make a space or practice urban, especially when 
contemporary city building is neo-liberal and capital driven. In other words, what makes Washington Square Park 

 
Preprint submitted to 
4 
urban while the Hudson Yards feel not, despite being just a few kilometers apart in Manhattan? Or what makes 
Seoul’s Namdaemun Night Markets an urban experience versus the nearby, impressively large Lotte Shopping 
Center? 
 
By their nature, urban space is where individual experience comes together with strangers, even though they seldom 
share our values, history, and perspective. It is in these spaces where the mingling and contact with individuals and 
groups differ in their social presentation, appearance, and experience. As urbanist Michael Brill (1989) frames these 
experiences, it is where inhabitants “can seek and find excitement and extraordinariness in the productions and 
presentations created by strangers, and in those they create themselves.” The spaces around them influence these 
social dynamics; the form and configuration of urban space frame the interactions of those in them. Ultimately, 
public life is uniquely able to be experienced in these spatial commons—the streets and public, urban spaces—
because of how they make inhabitants' acute awareness of their dependence on one another, as well as the societal 
obligations that dependence spawned (Chidster, 1989). Cities are, in a sense, where individualism intermixes to 
create collective experience.  
 
Defining these socio-spatial interrelationships is a difficult challenge, and there exist differing perspectives on the 
nature of a good public realm. There exist divergent but parallel theories about the character of these spaces, which 
take up a significant portion of the physical city: streets, sidewalks, squares, arcades, non-motorized transport, 
greenways, and the like. Jane Jacobs (1961) describes the importance of streets as public spaces:  
 
“Streets are almost always public: owned by the public, and when we speak of the public realm, we are 
speaking in large measure of streets. If we can develop and design streets so that they are wonderful, 
fulfilling places to be, community-building places, attractive public places for all people of cities and 
neighborhoods, then we will have successfully designed about one-third of the city directly and will have 
had an immense impact on the rest.” 
 
The sidewalk is, as she called them, “the main public places of the city” and “its most vital organ.” In a similar vein, 
Jan Gehl (1987) calls attention to the life between buildings. It is in the spaces between architecture where the social 
connections of inhabitants are created and reaffirmed and where the space of movement coexists with the city's 
social life. These aspects form inter-related patterns of movement and activity to which buildings, in turn, respond. 
To Kevin Lynch (1960), this life also imbues these spaces with meaning, whereby they become “imageable,” 
containing spatial qualities that strengthen the attention and meaning of urban space to its inhabitants.  Such spaces 
establish memorable relationships among buildings, paths, features, and amenities due to their proximity to one 
another or the geometric configuration of the space itself. 
 
Ultimately, these concepts are intended to influence the practice of place-making or the shaping of urban spaces that 
support the public activities mentioned. Designers are often unaware of their own biases and roots as influencing 
their decision-making (A. Jacobs & Appleyard, 1987). The profession of urban planning would be helped by a 
renewed quest for the elements of “good city form,” where the planning of the physical city is concentrated on 
people and place (Emily Talen & Ellis, 2015). For designers and planners, normative limits such as time and 
budgets are often drivers of the opportunities available to improve urban space. However, they are often exacerbated 
by a lack of understanding of how both users and non-users perceive them and the characteristics of users (Chidster, 
1989). Such an endeavor would have to deal with the complexities of aesthetic, ethical, and political theory to secure 
its foundations and, as such, require domain-specific ontologies unique to the social and physical milieu of 
urbanism.    
 
 
 
 

 
Preprint submitted to 
5 
3. IMAGERY AS URBAN DATA 
 
Imagery had enormous agency in being evidence of human activity in public space. Our contemporary era has seen 
the ubiquity of cameras as tools used to documentation of social ills and injustice. Videos of vegetable seller 
Mohamed Bouazizi setting himself on fire in protest in Tunisia (Noueihed, 2011) or of George Floyd gasping “I 
can’t breathe” as police offers aggressively restrained him (J. Collins, 2020) have served as evidence for protests 
demanding justice and change. Yet, the use of photographic imagery as a data source for learning and exploring 
urban space dates as far back as the technology itself.  
 
Louis Daguerre’s View of the Boulevard du Temple, created in 1938, was the earliest photograph to include people 
in a busy street. Although it depicts two men on a street corner, they appear only because one has his shoes polished 
by the other and thus required them to be stationary. The long exposure required left no trace of moving traffic and 
other people. In the 1860s, the nascent art of urban photography became a political tool for social and urban reform. 
In Paris, Charles Meville’s commissions to photo-document the modernization efforts of Baron Georges-Eugène 
Haussmann recorded both dirty and cramped “before” and grand, triumphalist “after” vignettes of the city. 
Melville’s photographs have been the fodder for debates on whether they served more than an archive of a foregone 
Paris on behalf of the city by also acting as propagandist justifications for the razing of many neighborhoods 
(Dahlberg, 2015). Historian Shelley Rice’s (1997) critiques of Meville’s repetitious and “clinical” streetscapes point 
to the photographer’s “passivity” toward the grand transformations of the city. On the other side of the Atlantic, 
Jacob Riis, while working as a police reporter for the New York Tribune, documented the slum conditions on the 
Lower East Side of Manhattan. Using lantern slide shows, illustrated articles, and printed books, Riis harnessed the 
power of photographic imagery as evidence of the need for housing and social reform, which galvanized the 
politically connected gentile and policymakers to action and reform.  
 
Where once rare, the twentieth century saw the increased ubiquity of cameras which served in the modernist era as 
tools that could provide an unblinking empiricism in the documentation of human behavior. Powered by the 
increased availability to take photos from aircraft and satellites, planners and architects were drawn to the newly 
available planar perspective afforded by flight as a way to document the formal development of the city. For Le 
Corbusier (1935), the eye of the airplane offered a “pitiless”, objective record of reality, and for many planners in 
the United States and Europe in the post-war era, aerial photographs served as evidence of urban blight. This 
documentation provided the opportunity of seeing the world anew, but also as confirmation for the need to replan 
(Hinchcliffe, 2010). In their seminal work, Learning from Las Vegas, Venturi and Scott Brown (1972) experimented 
with various visual media to explore ways of representing American urban form in the late-1960s. As a critical 
exploration about the automotive orientation and iconographic expressiveness of Las Vegas, their Yale research 
group explored the city using photography and film as both mechanisms for data collection and representation. 
Notably, their post-modernist approach adopted “drive-by photography” taken from inside moving cars, a technique 
borrowed from the artist Ed Ruscha, as a means of contextual representation. 
 
Taken together, the imagery serving as data also produces meaning as understood by people. In investigating 
urbanism, what is learned about cities and their inhabitants is both mediated and shaped by the characteristics and 
limitations of the media and the mode of production (Azar et al., 2021). While historic precedent relies on the 
curation of the framing and representation, emerging technologies are increasingly less reliant on humans—images 
are increasingly being made by machines, for machines (Paglan, 2016). This computational process forms a shift in 
how the production of urban knowledge, vis-à-vis enumeration, data, or models, is being generated and understood, 
while remaining potentially invisible to the human altogether.  
 
 
 
 

 
Preprint submitted to 
6 
4. IMAGE-BASED ANALYSIS IN THE “SMART CITY” 
 
From the horse to the automobile to the telephone, the physical city, as a social artifact, has long evolved in response 
to prevalent technologies of the day. Today, the rise of the so-called “smart city” introduces two parallel 
technological interventions: a digitally connected citizenry possessing connected devices such as mobile phones and 
the ubiquitous instrumentation of the physical artifice of the city through the “internet of things.” Pervasive sensing 
enabled by both has created the ability to dynamically sense, analyze and understand individual mobility traces more 
quickly and accumulate detailed knowledge over time to see patterns and trends.  
 
This “big data” approach—having access to large volume datasets to study phenomena and their dynamics—
augments the process by which urban space is designed, developed and evaluated, and offers opportunities for data-
driven analysis and design of the built environment. McLuhan foresaw technologies serving as civic thermostats “to 
pattern life in ways that will optimize human awareness” (Norden, 1969). He said, “already, it is technologically 
feasible to employ the computer to program societies in beneficial ways.” He stressed that “the programming of 
societies could actually be conducted quite constructively and humanistically.” Greenfield (2013) comments that 
“the final intent of all this... is to make every unfolding process of the city visible […], to render the previously 
opaque or indeterminate not merely knowable but actionable.”  
 
Despite its complexity, the desire to make understandable the complex nature of vibrant cities has been both a dream 
of Euclidean modernists and those who pursue an organic method of urban planning. For instance, for urbanist Jane 
Jacobs, “the variables are many, but they are not helter-skelter; they are interrelated into an organic whole.” Jacobs 
was talking about Hudson Street in 1960s-era Manhattan (J. Jacobs, 1970), but the same could be said of any street 
in any city today. The critical difference is that today, digital data allows us to describe and analyze Jacobs’s 
“interrelated variables” better than she could ever have imagined. Big Data may lead to the discovery of fascinating 
dependencies and intimate knowledge. (Jemielniak, 2020) 
 
As city officials, urbanists, and urban planners analyze the figurative reams of data available; imagery has also been 
leveraged as a means of understanding larger urban dynamics. For instance, Girardin et al. (2008) used individually-
uploaded photographs on the online photograph sharing platform Flickr to assess the different visitation footprints in 
Barcelona of domestic, Spanish tourists, and international Britons visiting the country. To do so, the researchers 
analyzed the underlying exchangeable image file (EXIF) that stores metadata created by the camera and user-
volunteered information such as locations, profile demographics, including the countries and cities where the 
photographer was from, tags and descriptions. The fusion of this information provided insight into how different 
groups may use a city differently (Offenhuber et al., 2013): the British tend to stay to primary, famed tourist sites 
such as La Ramba, while Spaniards were willing to go farther afield. It also reaffirmed notions of the “imageable 
city,”1 exposing locations that attracted photographers’ attention (monuments, churches, public spaces, for instance) 
were exposed, and where the absence of images may reveal locales considered more introverted. 
 
Although the use of volunteered imagery is still commonly used, Street View images have provided a dataset that is 
both immensely comprehensive in its coverage (thanks to the deep financial resources of its creator company, 
Google) and consistent in its format. This undertaking was driven by co-founder Larry Page’s belief that this type of 
street-level imagery contained a tremendous amount of information that could be organized, made available, and 
mined (Anguelov et al., 2010). By 2017, the company captured 16 million kilometers of Street View imagery across 
83 countries (Ackerman, 2017). This powerful dataset, albeit through restrictive commercial and proprietary means, 
has allowed researchers to investigate street-level dynamics and changes of urban space at a massive, aggregated 
scale from understanding the prevalence of tree canopies and green space (Li et al., 2015) to pedestrian counts (Yin 
et al., 2015).  
 
1 “Imageable” here is taken to mean a cognitive, memory-based image as was used in the previous reference of Lynch’s work.  

 
Preprint submitted to 
7 
 
However, several projects have sought to use this dataset to assess more ephemeral or culturally specific attributes 
about these spaces. Salesses et al. (2013) used the street-level images in an online survey of people’s reactions to 
whether a space looked more or less safe than another to index the perceived safety of a specific location in many 
cities around the world, based on visible characteristics such as street width, program use, apparent blight, among 
many other formal attributes seen in the photograph. Taken together, Naik & Philipoom (2014) use machine 
learning algorithms to scale the survey results into an index applicable to many other cities around the world. The 
EthinCITY Linguistic Landscape project from the Spatial Analysis Lab (2019) captured 9 million textual signs on 
the streets of Los Angeles—ranging from official street names to business signs and advertisements. By extracting 
the text and language of the message and geocoding the words and languages, the team assessed the languages used 
to the parcel level. What emerged is a dynamic map that reflects the cultural diversity of tableau that traditional 
government sources of data cannot collect, including small, ethnic establishments. In addition to macro-scale 
findings such as there being not just one “Chinatown” in the city but five smaller ones, they could redefine notions 
of ethnic enclaves as static neighborhoods and instead explore the dynamic, overlapping, and interspersed nature of 
urban cultural diversity.  
 
While user-generated imagery comes at extraordinary velocity, volume, and veracity, a general lack of 
standardization of what is captured2 and when limits the potential for a deeper inquiry into specific locales. For 
instance, while there are over 2 million photographs of “Disneyland” in California on Flickr, there is only one of 
“Captain Kidd's Family Dining” located just across the street from the entrance to the theme park. Moreover, while 
Street View images remedy the aspects of standardization at a massive scale, the enormous cost of capturing the 
images limits the potential to understand the whole dynamic nature of cities in real-time. However, the emergence of 
smart city technologies through placed sensors provides opportunities for deeper urban inquiry that addresses the 
standardization and volume concerns while providing the opportunity to understand places in real-time and over 
longer durations.  
 
4.1. Automated Eyes on the Street 
 
With the emergence of the smart cities movement, much investment in sensing has focused on the domain of 
computer vision, advanced machine learning (or deep learning), and more specifically, Convolutional Neural 
Networks (CNN) to perform analytics on a single image or a series of images. This artificial intelligence is 
concerned with the automatic analysis and extraction of useful information from these images or videos. In other 
domains, computer vision has opened new frontiers in disease treatment and diagnosis, agricultural and industrial 
efficiency, robotic navigation and self-driving vehicles, and more. In cities, this automated technology is being used 
in wildlife tracking, intelligent traffic management, pedestrian flow monitoring, public safety, and infrastructure 
management (Kwet, 2020).  
 
This boom is following a concomitant growth in the number of surveillance cameras being placed in the built 
environment for various reasons and by a multitude of public and private parties (Lin & Purnell, 2019).  
It is estimated that the number of surveillance cameras globally will exceed one billion by the end of 2021, with over 
85 million in the United States alone, rivaling China’s per person camera penetration rate (IHS Markit, 2019). While 
cameras on their own lack the overall ability to do the computational performance being described, it is estimated 
that 350 million of these situated cameras will possess built-in technology to allow for artificial intelligence in 2025, 
with more than 65 per cent of cameras shipped in that year will come with at least one AI chipset (ABI Research, 
2021).  
 
 
2 These together form the commonly used “four V’s” of big data: velocity, veracity, volume and variety.  

 
Preprint submitted to 
8 
To enumerate and describe the behaviors of inhabitants, these smart devices apply a domain of vision-based 
machine learning called “action recognition,” which seeks to extract peoples’ identifiable physical features, acts, and 
behaviors.  Generally, all computer vision approaches generate data abstractions from the captured images and 
videos, thereby reducing the image to a series of numerical matrices that can be more easily analyzed.3 These 
matrices are produced by assessing patterns in the red-green-blue (RBG) pixel values of a digital image (and depth 
information, if available). They are compared against pre-trained models developed from the analysis of prior 
imagery. The creation of this pre-trained model is vital as it provides the foundation for comparison, much like how 
humans learn how to identify objects: we learn by establishing priors—formal characteristic, visual appearance, 
defining features, or other attributes—to be able to hypothesize about the nature of something new. To get to the 
point of accurate enumeration, enormous data is required to train the statistical and deep learning models to ascertain 
human action from noise.  
 
These processes are often ambivalent to the identification of a human as a specific individual unless they are 
specifically focused on that task, such as through the use of facial recognition technology. Generally, the first step in 
identifying human action is to identify features in an image that statistically resembles the figure of a person. Here, 
one can think of this abstracted figure as a blob, box, or skeleton (Figure 1). Each of these offers different tradeoffs 
in the computational resources and statistical strength but represents humans in different ways.  
 
 
 
Figure 1. How a computer interprets subjects and actions in an image. (Original photograph credit: Chetan, 2019.) 
 
The computationally simplest method is blob detection, whereby an algorithm can assess a figure in the foreground 
of a video as being distinct from the background by comparing attributes that change between frames. This approach 
toward blob detection is very frequently used in describing movement flows. In Figure 1, we simply identify the 
hotspot of where the person is or has been as a measure of where the figure has been relative to the camera’s view, 
establishing the background frame. The dichotomous nature of this foreground-background comparison can be used 
to make the assignment of actions computationally more efficient by focusing the more intense box or skeleton 
analysis on a smaller portion of the total image, however. Within this subset, an algorithm can do one of several 
things: compare track this boxed subset within the frame, compare the RBG pixel values against the trained models 
(classification), or further reduce the figure to the relationships of certain parts as probable limbs or critical physical 
features vis-à-vis a digital, topological skeleton. Ultimately, it is the comparison of these two reductions, the boxed 
pixel values or the skeleton, that is used to assess human action algorithmically. These actions can be categorized 
according to the complexity of activity: primitive, single person, interaction, and group (Al-Faris et al., 2020), and 
form the foundation for the computer assessment of activity. The combination of these methods and categories 
allows us to identify individuals' activities in urban space.  
 
3 While this paper will not comprehensively review the technology and its application depth, other papers have sought to categorize various 
approaches. See Ibrahim et al., 2020, for instance.  

 
Preprint submitted to 
9 
4.2. The Players and Builders 
 
The use of the term smart cities has been characterized as incorporating computational tools into the operations and 
management of municipalities and regions. However, this also brought a different paradigm of urban improvement 
as the private sector played a more significant role in city-building. Many cities saw the implementation of these 
technologies as two-fold endeavors: a means of economic development in an increasingly globally competitive 
marketplace (Zukin, 2020), and in light of diminished resources, a means of outsourced services management. 
Particularly in light of the inability of city bureaucrats to develop or implement new data collection means, greater 
attention has been paid to technology companies, startups, and academics to create and implement these new 
technologies within the urban domain.  
 
Fundamental to planning or policymaking is the restructuring of complexity to a discrete set of standardized 
measurements that are understandable by those shaping the environment. Normatively, these measures are drawn 
from a desire to benchmark the use or inhabitation of public space. Much of the development of these technologies 
have operated at two scales: the infrastructural, driven by transportation and mobility efficiency, and the 
architectural, driven to quantify the economic productivity of a space.  
 
Although primarily focused on the level of service or throughput of a street, much attention has been paid toward the 
management of road infrastructure. With increased demand on existing and aging infrastructure leading to 
congestion and economic tolls, many entities see opportunities to develop technology to “solve” traffic. Many 
universities (Yang et al., 2020), startups such as Miovision, CurrexVision, and vivacitylabs, and incumbent 
automotive companies such as Honda have developed different algorithms and sensor packages to count and track 
automotive traffic on roadways, each with slightly distinct approaches informed by the countries from which the 
companies are from. Automotive companies are also seeking to leverage the data aggregated from individual 
vehicle’s sensor suites (Massaro et al., 2017) including the onboard, external cameras to analyze for future products 
and to use as derivative data that can be monetized.  
 
Similar technologies have also been used to analyze interior spaces, particularly in retail or commercial 
environments. Companies like Indoor Atlas and Brickstream are applying similar approaches as with car traffic, 
including understanding common paths and behaviors to understand consumer patterns in discrete spaces. 
RetailNext, in addition to algorithmic counting tracking of occupants and heatmap generation, fuses image data with 
cellphone tracking to know how these patterns differentiate between men, women, and children and track repeat 
visitors to a space.  
 
The public adoption of online shopping has required better management of these areas of the street and so valuable 
is this piece of real estate that cities are investing in systems to increase access to this space. The World Economic 
Forum (2020) estimates that the number of commercial delivery vehicles will increase by 36% in inner cities, 
globally. Using similar technologies as the transportation measurement companies, companies like Automotus and 
curbFlow focus on the management and monetization of the curb to increase the curb’s efficient use for deliveries, 
parking, and repair.  
 
In public, human-oriented spaces such as sidewalks and plazas, companies like Numina and Placemeter have sought 
to enumerate individuals on foot or bicycle. Driven by concerns about privacy, Natix and Numina has taken a 
different approach than many other companies to intentionally reduce the amount of data it assesses and does it 
within the sensor through an edge computing framework, with the intent to put privacy into precedence. Placemeter, 
now part of Netgear’s Arlo home monitoring brand, used off-the-shelf, consumer-grade cameras to quantify and 
categorize people, bicycles, motorcycles and vehicles. With the City of Paris, Placemeter piloted projects on the 
enumeration of a public plaza and pools. While much development into the technology has been done into issues of 
crowding dynamics (usually within the rhetoric of public safety) and level of service, little work has been done to 

 
Preprint submitted to 
10 
precisely understand the complexity of pedestrian behavior. While research is emerging into understanding non-
commuting behavior (Seer et al., 2014; Sun et al., 2020)—that is to say, ambulating or non-intentional travel—
technologies for understanding social behaviors are still nascent.  
 
With the creation of the LinkNYC network of upwards of 7,500 digital kiosks built by Intersection (a subsidiary of 
Sidewalk Labs, which is a sister company to Google, and a subsidiary of Alphabet), many residents were concerned 
with the potential invasion of privacy through citywide, digital tracking, and issues with ubiquitous security 
surveillance that would result (Kofman, 2018). Originally proposed as a twenty-first-century replacement to the 
ubiquitous payphone, the new kiosks would provide free Wi-Fi and digital signage and included a suite of three 
cameras and thirty sensors and heightened sight lines above the crowds and onto the streets below. While these 
technologies were touted as opportunities to move into infrastructure management and pedestrian counting, concerns 
arose around the program’s vast and indefinite data retention and the possibilities for unwarranted NYPD 
surveillance (ACLU, 2016). 
 
While not fundamentally opposed to the potential to understand public behavior, these camera technologies can also 
be used for policing and security purposes at large using the same algorithms, whose ethical rationales have 
conflicted with civil libertarians. This issue arises when the desire to scale and monetize every facet of the artificial 
intelligence and sensing platform manifests itself into multiple products; when services used for the public good can 
be easily adapted for surveillance practices. For instance, cities increasingly turn to facial recognition to identify 
individuals with outstanding warrants or pose specific threats. The Singaporean police force, for example, has 
installed nearly 80,000 cameras in key public areas, with each camera having the capability to run real-time video 
analytics to detect potential criminal threats (Lin & Purnell, 2019). Large companies like Verizon, Amazon, IBM, 
and Microsoft have readily available, scalable technologies that offer police and security agencies the ability to 
capture and fuse various image sources to provide real-time situational awareness and identification of individuals in 
a crowd. The New York Police Department, for example, partnered with Microsoft to equip cameras with the 
technology to, they claim, identify crime based on “potentially suspicious body language (Stanley, 2019).”  
 
However, in the contentious public debate about using these technologies, the concerns span public and privately-
owned digital infrastructure. In addition to public networks, cities are also developing so-called “plug-in” platforms 
where business owners can connect their privately-owned, internet-connected cameras to city-operated camera 
networks. Most notable of these is Project Greenlight in Detroit, although similar networks exist across the United 
States. Their automation systems are built upon facial recognition technology from biometrics system company 
DataWorks Plus. The project uses the company’s Face Plus video surveillance product. It compares captured faces 
to a database of over 500,000 mugshots with additional access to a statewide database that includes drivers’ license 
photographs (Garvie & Moy, 2019). In 2021, the network has grown to over 700 cameras, but cities like Chicago 
and New York have tens of thousands of networked surveillance devices (Kwet, 2020). Despite concerns from 
individual homeowners, Amazon has also made data from its branded doorbell cameras to 400 police forces 
(Harwell, 2019).  
 
The use of these technologies has come with much criticism, including from the industry itself (Shepardson, 2020), 
for the lack of transparency around the use of these technologies—including their questionable accuracy (Hill, 2020; 
Lee, 2020)—and the ethical concerns around their use. Using algorithms to label people based on race or ethnicity 
has become relatively easy from a technology standpoint. Both IBM and Microsoft readily advertise their services to 
sort people into broad groups, including by race (Attribute Detection with Body Camera Analytics, 2020). With 
reports that this technology has been used for tracking of to track and control Uighurs individuals in China (Mozer, 
2019) and Black Lives Matter protesters in the United States (Selinger & Fox Cahn, 2020), many are questioning the 
appropriateness of these technologies in cities.  
 

 
Preprint submitted to 
11 
The same technologies used to identify faces are also being used to identify features of the face for advertising and 
retail purposes. Emerging technologies read facial characteristics to measure different types of engagement with 
media, such as measuring attention (Picard, 1995). Startups like RealEyes, SightCorp, and Kairos offer technologies 
to pinpoint the coordinates and directionality of a person’s gaze, relating it to capturing and holding an individual’s 
attention. Going further, Affectiva is tuning to the characteristics of the face as it relates to affect, measuring one’s 
emotional state. Their algorithms have been tuned through the analysis of 7.5 million faces from 87 countries, 
mostly collected from opt-in recordings of people watching TV or driving their daily commute. While their 
applications are clear concerning enumerating commercial activity, these datasets can also be tuned toward 
understanding facets of the built environment at large, including the emotional landscape of cities. For instance, an 
application of affective computing applied to communities explored the overall emotional happiness around the 
university campus of MIT by reading the faces of passers-by and finding the variances by department, building, and 
time of semester (Hernandez et al., 2012).   
 
4.3. The Underlying Data and the Underlying Problem 
 
The generation of identities, tracks, or outputs is incumbent on creating models that can interpret the live stream of 
real-world data. Therefore, a dataset is required to both train and validate these models and must include additional 
annotations and metadata to ascertain meaning from the results. Due to the emerging nature of these technologies, 
only a handful of datasets account for the vast variety of model-creation. However, a growing number of specialized 
datasets are also becoming available to the research and development community.  
 
Among the most commonly used training dataset for computer vision identification are Imagenet (Deng et al., 2009) 
which includes approximately 14 million hand-annotated images and 20,000 categories, and Open Images, with its 
nine million images and nearly 20,000 human-verified classes (Krasin et al., 2017). At the same time, many datasets 
have been created specifically to train models on human action (Ofli et al., 2013), most derived opportunistically 
from existing sources such as film and television or online video-sharing platforms (Idrees et al., 2017; Patron-Perez 
et al., 2012; Smaira et al., 2020). The Kinetics-700 dataset, for instance, used 650,000 YouTube video clips to 
generate a dataset covering 700 human actions. Business interests are also driving the creation of specific datasets to 
improve the abilities of computer vision in the marketplace. The Affectiva-MIT Facial Expression Detection dataset 
(McDuff, El Kaliouby, Senechal, et al., 2013) is a provocative image collection of facial emotions of people from 
around the world, enabling researchers and companies to measure affect, with applications towards retail, media and 
advertising (McDuff, El Kaliouby, Demirdjian, et al., 2013). The increased interest in self-driving vehicles led to 
creating the Cityscapes dataset (Cordts et al., 2016), which annotated 25,000 images specific to urban cityscapes 
taken from the street.  
 
While the latter shows promise to shape a digital understanding of urban spaces, the focus on vehicles narrowly 
focuses the image set on the spatial perspective of the driver and a car’s navigation through this singular aspect of 
the city. The Cityscape does identify people and 30 classes ranging from “sky” to recognizing different types of 
street objects and vehicles, but only as it informs a vehicles’ ability to navigate a street and not a proper 
understanding of how an urban space operates. Additionally, being generated from the imagery of only German 
cities, it may lack a diversity of potential, infrastructural histories and standards, and mobility options.  
 
This point poses a critical question within the space of urbanism: can they account for cities' real experiential and 
social diversity? Of course, one cannot assume that the compilation of data with varying levels of detail and depth 
will always be problem-free (Brannen, 2005). The challenge in creating these datasets is the embedded and implicit 
values and assumptions made by those who both organize and annotate the images.  
 
Firstly, the orientation towards universal applicability of these datasets creates an ontology that privileges 
generalities over specificity where no agreed upon standard may exist. Societal appreciation of architectural styles or 

 
Preprint submitted to 
12 
the role it plays in broad society, for instance, varies greatly between cultures and context (Berlyn, 1971; Kubo et 
al., 2010).  
 
Secondly, these datasets built from the opportunistic collection of imagery, such as ImageNet and Kinetics-700, may 
omit specific populations’ experiences because of more significant societal inequities. The gender and racial 
inequities (R. L. Collins, 2011; Desmond & Danilewicz, 2010) and a lack of geographic diversity (Shankar et al., 
2017) in television and media may be reinforced by the derivative use these datasets in the training of new 
algorithms unless ameliorated. For instance, the largest share of users and content on YouTube originate from the 
United States. Similarly, the United States exerts enormous global soft power in the production of television and 
media. Any algorithm trained on that dataset will perform worse on non-American contexts with increasing error as 
a culture is more distinct from that standard. For digital images to be useful, they must be organized in accordance 
with some type of knowledge system (Pasquinelli, 2015). As this data disappears into the black box of the algorithm 
and manifests itself as the building block for policy and the physical reshaping of our cities, it is incumbent to 
question whether these existing datasets and paradigms adequately describe urbanism.  
 
5. MEANING IN SPACE 
 
Innovations in computing avail new avenues for urban research, but critical considerations remain regarding the use 
of these technologies within an urbanism discourse. As Duarte and DeSouza (2020) argue, urban technologies must 
consider more fundamentally how the epistemologies behind extensive data methodologies as well as how they 
shape ontologies and heuristics about cities, as ultimately there will be lasting transformations to both society and 
space due to the specific responsibility of urban planning in shaping communities.  
 
Among the epistemological standards with computer vision technologies is the orientation towards reductivism or 
simplified numeric representations (Dreyfus, 1992). In itself, this approach has vast implications for how residents 
and policymakers understand the built environment (Winner, 2017). While this reductivism can produce a 
generalized intelligence about a location that may lead to prediction, this reductivism is often uninterested in the 
ephemeral qualities that make cities unique. Companies that are developing these technologies strive for scalability 
or the universal applicability of their products. This efficiency strategy is opposed to considering unique or 
distinguishing factors unique to a place, including the inherent complexity of such environments (Gershenson, 2013; 
Gill, 2020). It thus prioritizes simple-to-measure factors such as counts or duration over nuanced observation of 
sociability or idiosyncratic behavior. As Czarniawska (1992) frames this focus, the current paradigm of urban 
observation excludes the “anthropological frame of mind” that more seeks to explain these behaviors.  
 
This conflict of definition parallel Clifford Geertz’s (1973) arguments for an interpretive approach to understanding 
culture. To Geertz, the existing paradigm of anthropological research was through thin descriptions derived from 
which includes surface-level observations of behavior. Similar to the superficial enumeration of many urban 
technologies, these observations lack the context and interpretive turn that define thick descriptions. He analogizes 
the difference through identification of a wink between two children, the thin description. However, the meaning 
behind the wink—be it coded communication between them, a random biological twitch, or an attempt at seeking 
attention—can only be understood through think descriptions. For urbanism, a similar a framework could be 
understood in everyday activities. For instance, someone holding out their hand in a park may be a gesture to a 
friend while the same gesture in the street may be the hailing of a taxi.  
 
The creation of the metrics by which cities are documented can also distort toward one type of description. There is 
also a worry that the ease of thin description through both data collection and analytics runs a risk of privileging 
infrastructural efficiency over the more complex social promotion. The apparent focus in the mobility domain 
toward level of service also bias interpretations of cities toward thin descriptions, as they premise cities on the sole 

 
Preprint submitted to 
13 
metric of infrastructural efficiency. The relative ease of this type of data collection has implications on how the 
cities are described, with the risk that they are seen as optimization challenges versus social environments.  
 
This conflict is fundamental to the emerging practice of big data research, let alone when embedded within complex 
social environments such as cities. Geertz’s position with the derivation of thick descriptions sought to evolve 
ethnographic research toward the ascertainment of more significant meaning. Nevertheless, it relied on the existing 
models of practice as a foundation for criticism. However, in urban science research, like the computational social 
sciences on which it is founded, the canons of practice are still being formed (Jemielniak, 2020; Rossman & Rallis, 
2017). Thus, the critical observation of urban phenomena is caught uncomfortably unformed between the data 
science discourse—where the prevailing axiom accepts the unknowability of models and analytics performed within 
the analogous black box are worth the gains in accuracy from such processes—and that of the interpretive 
anthropological work.  
 
Lessons in performing observations in this liminal space between reductivism and interpretation may be found from 
pre-computer research. In the pursuit of documenting public space as part of the Street Life Project, William H. 
Whyte (1980) notably used Super 8 film to understand the use of plazas and public spaces. Whyte and his associates 
recorded and analyzed hundreds of hours of time-lapse film to assess variation and regularity in the behavior of 
anonymous pedestrians in just a handful of cases. His research was performed to provide data critical to measuring 
activity patterns in urban spaces, which did not exist at the time. Whyte’s investigations are among the earliest 
attempts at using new technologies to surveil and understand human activities at scale. While the process was still 
incredibly manual, as researchers needed to comb hours of video manually, it was an attempt to document an entire 
public square as a whole and an example of a technology that was not yet readily available to the public. In doing so, 
the project revealed both generalized behaviors, such as the conclusion that park use was directly related to the 
amount of “sittable space” and not shape or size as previously thought, and idiosyncratic behaviors of individuals, 
such as gender differences in seat and location choice.  
 
The dual nature of his research on ascertaining thin, generalized patterns of behavior and thicker, contextually 
derived considerations allowed Whyte to discover practices that would inform zoning regulations and propose 
interventions. For instance, a key characteristic identified for plazas that succeeded as popular gathering spots was 
the presence of a variety and abundance of places to sit, including benches, movable chairs, ledges, and steps. They 
also found that physical characteristics, including tree canopies, water features, public art, and food vendors, all 
played a role in attracting people to urban plazas and parks. These attributes played a role in creating positive 
feedback loops for bringing people together, while streets observed with blank walls and devoid of shops, windows, 
or doors saw little activity. In Whyte’s words, “what attracts people most, it would appear, is other people.” While 
these findings are taken for granted in the twenty-first century, Whyte’s findings broke with contemporary 
paradigms of modernist urban design. These findings would notably lead to New York City passing zoning 
regulations that required plazas and publicly-owned public spaces to no more than three feet above or three feet 
below street level to allow for visibility and easy access, and the complete revitalization of Bryant Park, which in the 
1980s saw little activity, to increase its visibility and to add more seating, including its now-familiar moveable 
furniture. Today, the park is popular year-round with more than 1,000 movable chairs plus several cafe kiosks and 
many scheduled events. 
 
5.1. The Conflicts in Meaning 
 
There was much optimism for new opportunities for digitally-mediated and more open civic governance (Goldsmith 
& Crawford, 2014). However, the mismatched objectives of neo-liberal development and the scale-driven focus of 
industry and the slower, discursive, community-oriented democratic process of urban management in many cases 
yielded incompatible metrics and conflicting outcomes. While it is not in dispute that the ability to understand and 
enumerate how residents used urban spaces could lead to more appropriately responsive interventions, the more 

 
Preprint submitted to 
14 
considerable utility of these datasets to urbanists is questioned. Fundamental to this conflict is how each party saw 
the challenge of enumeration and what would entail defining the “use” of public space.  
 
Similarly, tradeoffs with computational intensity limit the fidelity by which technologists can process the imagery. 
As imagery processing requires immense computing power, and many companies rely on weaker edge computing 
platforms to preserve privacy, the scale, detail, and precision of what can be enumerated is directly related to the 
number of computational resources available. These limitations are present at all points in the technology: from the 
captured image’s pixel resolution, to the storage and transmission of the image, to the amount of processing power 
available to convert the image into a useable measurement. As such, many purported benefits of particular 
technologies are mitigated by such computation’s cost and physical demands.  
 
Ultimately a series of tradeoffs, the interrelationship between capacity limitations, societal impacts, and the 
thickness of its meaning offers a way to evaluate how citizens can evaluate the appropriateness of computer vision 
or any smart cities technology. In Figure 2, we evaluate the companies previously mentioned to organize the 
tradeoffs and limitations on each of these three metrics. Taken together, they offer a way for citizens to both assess 
the adequacy of various technologies for their community and find ontological clusters of technologies that share 
similar opportunities and constraints across domains.  
 
 
 
Figure 2. Evaluating the meaning, impacts and computational costs of various technologies. 
 
This taxonomy of tradeoffs also offers a lens by which citizens can evaluate the potential societal impacts of 
computer vision technologies. Where certain activities such as the maintenance of a sidewalk bear few stakes for 
society at large, high-fidelity and detail are likely unnecessary, and costs associated with processing high resolution, 
real-time images are likely unnecessary. However, these technologies’ use in policing has high implications for the 
citizens when questions of justice are involved and requires extraordinary precision and accuracy. For instance, the 
high false positive rate of the Detroit facial recognition program, where the police chief points to a 96% error rate 

 
Preprint submitted to 
15 
and reflects the inadequacies of the technologies and algorithms (Lee, 2020), should give pause in how readily 
citizens should accept the meaning of its outputs.   
 
6. REFRAMING THE METHODS TOWARD URBAN-SEMANTICS 
 
Many of the vision-based smart cities technologies that seek to understand how people use space lack specificity for 
how people use urban space within urbanism discourse. This presents an opportunity for computer vision research to 
develop semantically specific approaches that are appropriate and contextually informed to the nuances of urban 
studies. However, what would an urban-sematic computer vision look like? To relate to Geertz’s writing, at present, 
the state of computer vision is proficient in identifying winks but does very poorly in identifying what those discrete 
objects may mean within a city.  
 
The state of the art of technology allows for a computer to identify objects and actions in isolation. However, when 
accurate, the definitions are thin in their descriptions without a situation to contextualize the assessment.  
In Figure 3, four photographs of “people sitting on a bench” were run through the ImSitu object recognition 
algorithm (Yatskar et al., 2016) to identify the images through the algorithm’s perspective. The algorithm attempts 
situation recognition, by which the algorithm provides a concise summary by including the main activity, the actors, 
and roles. The algorithm was trained on FrameNet, which contained over 125,000 images and 200,000 unique 
situations. The same images were identified by individuals working in urban design and planning, and the most 
frequent description was used in the image, although the human descriptions varied little.  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Results of ImSitu algorithm versus human identification of four images of people sitting on a bench. 
(Photograph credits: hjl, 2012; byronv2, 2019, 2020a, 2020b) 
 
 
The findings showed fairly accurate thin descriptions across the four images, although the confidence varied due to 
the image quality and color differences on each image. While it was interesting that the algorithm could identify 
individuals sitting on a bench, the nuance of what each group was doing was missed. This could be due to a variety 
of reasons, including the lack of lexical data on those specific activities, the quality or perspective of the image, or 
improper training of the dataset. In any case, the algorithm could not achieve the definition of the already-reductive 
human descriptions and demonstrates the current challenge of assessing thicker descriptions of urban activities.  
 

 
Preprint submitted to 
16 
Recognizing the limitations of state of the art in computer vision, we highlight potential methodologies by which 
technology developers can gain a thicker understanding of activities in urban spaces. The challenge with using 
algorithmic black boxes is that the processes from which outcomes are computed are unknown. However, 
understanding the general mechanics of how algorithms operate may open opportunities to contextualize computer 
vision toward urban-specific contexts.  
 
Firstly, when we can consider how models are derived and the generalized libraries commonly used for training. We 
can derive urban-specific identification through a priori contextualization by creating a spatially specific corpus of 
images containing descriptions of and action annotations calibrated to urbanism. That is, an unambiguously urban 
dataset must be arranged in a taxonomic form so that an algorithm might deem what is and is not relevant 
information specific to a particular context. A disadvantage of this approach is the necessity to plan in advance the 
classes and categories of urban-semantic annotations or relying on a large group of human annotators trained toward 
specific city-focused labels of footage.  
 
An alternative is to consider an a posteriori approach. Here, we leverage the strengths of computer vision algorithms 
to find common patterns from imagery, and an algorithm clusters similar activity. Humans could then verify and 
label tag these clusters with thicker descriptions after the clusters were found. While technically feasible, 
unsupervised action identification from the footage is new (O’Hara et al., 2011; Soomro & Shah, 2017) but can 
allow urbanists to revisit the world of individuals like Whyte to the computer could find that humans could not.  
 
Within a societal context of cities, there are also questions about these technologies’ relationship with the public. 
Residents are not strictly customers nor users of these services and may not have any option to opt-out of these 
technologies. Despite the risk of these black-box processes reinforcing the detrimental status quo, or worse, 
furthering pre-existing bias, how these technologies are created and therefore drive planning, policy, and design 
decisions often lack the input of those whom they will impact. The Boston Beta Blocks program was created as a 
policy-based mechanism to pilot technologies and create a platform for community engagement and empowerment. 
In addition to civic experimentation with technologies, the program also organizes educational workshops and 
events with the platform providers, whether or not they are considered for procurement (Mayor's Office for New 
Urban Mechanics, 2018).  
 
Under the civic experimentation mandate, new technologies are piloted in the open in pre-selected areas where the 
community has mechanisms for feedback, offering transparency and citizen oversight into selecting, testing, and 
creating success metrics. The residents are invited to co-generate with the city and the companies the values around 
civic and privacy concerns. They also provide oversight into the processes and policies that govern these 
experiments. As a result, the social milieu around the implementation of technologies is contextualized to the 
people, needs, place, and time of that specific community.  
 
7. CONCLUSION 
 
The current orientation of computer vision technologies has been inwardly focused on its own development and 
toward broad generalizability of its applications. However, as the adage goes, “when something is good at 
everything, it is the best at nothing.” When these technologies are implemented within the complex milieu of cities, 
the application thus far has erred toward reductive quantifications at the sacrifice of the dynamic characteristics of 
public space that draw billions of people to live, work, and play. Precisely because of these dynamic characteristics, 
the conception and development of these tools should be reconsidered to appreciate the idiosyncrasies of these 
spaces.  
 
Drawing from precedent conversations in anthropology and the social sciences, urban technologists must move 
algorithmic enumeration away from simplistic ontologies toward thick descriptions that better capture the dynamism 

 
Preprint submitted to 
17 
of cities. Like Whyte, the interrelationship between enumeration, description, and interpretation is vital to drawing 
conclusions about the urban spaces. As the proliferation of these technologies persists, mechanisms to consider bias 
in the recording, training, development and use of these datasets and algorithms are vital, especially when the 
benefits may be inequitably born by inhabitants, and because the role these analytics may play in the shaping of the 
built environment and its policies.  
 
While imperfect, these proposed approaches allow urbanist to move slightly away from what David Hand (2020) 
considers “dark data,” the data that is inaccessible from current tools and do not fit within existing methods, but still 
can influence the decisions and policies that may result. These approaches allow urbanists to “hard work of theory” 
to critically examine the ontological and epistemological frameworks that exist with the use of these technologies, 
and reorient the practice toward metrics that relate to the social life of cities and away from reductive, service-
oriented quantifications (Pickles, 1997).  
 
 

 
Preprint submitted to 
18 
8. BIBLIOGRAPHY 
 
ABI Research. (2021). Deep Learning-Based Machine Vision in Smart Cities. 
https://www.abiresearch.com/press/global-installed-base-smart-city-cameras-ai-chipset-reach-over-350-
million-2025/ 
Ackerman, D. (2017, May 30). Google Maps Street View celebrates its 10th birthday. CNet. 
https://www.cnet.com/news/google-maps-street-view-celebrates-its-10th-birthday/ 
ACLU, N. Y. (2016). NYCLU: CITY’S PUBLIC WI-FI RAISES PRIVACY CONCERNS. 
Al-Faris, M., Chiverton, J., Ndzi, D., & Ahmed, A. I. (2020). A review on computer vision-based methods for 
human action recognition. Journal of Imaging, 6(6). https://doi.org/10.3390/jimaging6060046 
Anguelov, D., Dulong, C., Filip, D., Frueh, C., Lafon, S., Lyon, R., Ogale, A., Vincent, L., & Weaver, J. (2010). 
Google street view: Capturing the world at street level. Computer, 43(6), 32–38. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/MC.2010.170 
Attribute detection with Body Camera Analytics. (2020). IBM Intelligent Video Analytics Documentation. 
https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/iva/2.0.0?topic=video-attribute-detection-body-camera-analytics 
Azar, M., Cox, G., & Impett, L. (2021). Introduction: ways of machine seeing. In AI and Society (pp. 1–12). 
Springer Science and Business Media Deutschland GmbH. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00146-020-01124-6 
Berlyn, D. E. (1971). Aesthetics and Psychobiology. Appleton-Century-Crofts. 
Brannen, J. (2005). Mixing methods: The entry of qualitative and quantitative approaches into the research process. 
International Journal of Social Research Methodology: Theory and Practice, 8(3), 173–184. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/13645570500154642 
Brill, M. (1989). An Ontology for Exploring Urban Public Life Today. Places, 6(1), 24–31. 
http://escholarship.org/uc/item/4kc602c7 
byronv2. (2019). Texting One Another [Photograph]. Flickr. https://flic.kr/p/23B3Jc4 
byronv2. (2020a). Ice Cream Time [Photograph]. Flickr. https://flic.kr/p/2jjDBQv 
byronv2. (2020b). Lunch al Fresco [Photograph]. Flickr. https://flic.kr/p/2iEczU1 
Chetan, V. (2019). Man Jumping From A Rock [Photograph]. Pexels. https://www.pexels.com/photo/man-jumping-
from-a-rock-2923157/ 
Chidster, M. (1989). Public Places, Private Lives: Plazas and the Broader Public. Places, 6(1), 32–37. 
http://escholarship.org/uc/item/9gr5n6hd 
Collins, J. (2020, July 15). Police Bodycam Video Shows George Floyd’s Distress During Fatal Arrest. NPR. 
https://www.npr.org/2020/07/15/891516654/police-bodycam-video-provides-fuller-picture-of-george-floyds-
fatal-arrest 
Collins, R. L. (2011). Content Analysis of Gender Roles in Media: Where Are We Now and Where Should We Go? 
Sex Roles, 64(3), 290–298. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11199-010-9929-5 
Cordts, M., Omran, M., Ramos, S., Rehfeld, T., Enzweiler, M., Benenson, R., Franke, U., Roth, S., & Schiele, B. 
(2016). The Cityscapes Dataset for Semantic Urban Scene Understanding. Proceedings of the IEEE Computer 
Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2016-Decem, 3213–3223. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2016.350 
Crawford, K. (2018, June 25). Artificial Intelligence’s White Guy Problem. The New York Times. 
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/26/opinion/sunday/artificial-intelligences-white-guy-problem.html 
Czarniawska, B. (1992). Exploring Complex Organizations: A Cultural Perspective: Toward an Anthropological 
Perspective. SAGE. 
Dahlberg, L. (2015). Charles Marville, Photographer of Paris / Piercing Time: Paris after Marville and Atget, 1865–
2012. History of Photography, 39(2), 194–196. https://doi.org/10.1080/03087298.2015.1035533 
Deng, J., Dong, W., Socher, R., Li, L.-J., Kai Li, & Li Fei-Fei. (2009). ImageNet: A large-scale hierarchical image 
database. 2009 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 20(11), 248–255. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2009.5206848 
Desmond, R., & Danilewicz, A. (2010). Women are on, but not in, the news: Gender roles in local television news. 
Sex Roles, 62(11), 822–829. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11199-009-9686-5 
Dreyfus, H. L. (1992). What Computers Still Can’t Do: A Critique of Artificial Reason. The MIT Press. 
Duarte, F., & DeSouza, P. (2020). Data Science and Cities: A Critical Approach. Harvard Data Science Review. 
https://doi.org/10.1162/99608f92.b3fc5cc8 
Eagle, N., & Pentland, A. S. (2009). Eigenbehaviors : identifying structure in routine. 1057–1066. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00265-009-0739-0 
Garvie, C., & Moy, L. M. (2019). America Under Watch. https://www.americaunderwatch.com/ 

 
Preprint submitted to 
19 
Geertz, C. (1973). Thick description: Toward an interpretive theory of culture. In Turning points in qualitative 
research: Tying knots in a handkerchief. (pp. 143–168). 
Gehl, J. (1987). Life between buildings: using public space. Island Press. 
Gershenson, C. (2013). The Implications of Interactions for Science and Philosophy. Foundations of Science, 18(4), 
781–790. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10699-012-9305-8 
Gill, K. S. (2020). Prediction Paradigm: The Human Price Of Instrumentalism. In AI and Society (Vol. 35, Issue 3, 
pp. 509–517). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00146-020-01035-6 
Girardin, F., Calabrese, F., Fiore, F. D., Ratti, C., & Blat, J. (2008). Digital Footprinting: Uncovering Tourists with 
User-Generated Content. IEEE Pervasive Computing, 7(4), 36–43. https://doi.org/10.1109/MPRV.2008.71 
Goldsmith, S., & Crawford, S. (2014). The City as Digital Platform. In The Responsive City. Jossey-Bass. 
Greenfield, A. (2013). Against the Smart City. Do Projects. 
Hand, D. J. (2020). Dark Data: Why What You Don’t Know Matters. Princeton University Press. 
Harwell, D. (2019, August 28). Ring, the doorbell-camera firm, has partnered with 400 police forces, extending 
surveillance reach. The Washington Post. https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2019/08/28/doorbell-
camera-firm-ring-has-partnered-with-police-forces-extending-surveillance-reach/ 
Hernandez, J., Hoque, M. (Ehsan), Drevo, W., & Picard, R. W. (2012). Mood meter: counting smiles in the wild. 
Proceedings of the 2012 ACM Conference on Ubiquitous Computing - UbiComp ’12, 301. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2370216.2370264 
Hill, K. (2020, August 3). Wrongfully Accused by an Algorithm. The New York Times. 
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/06/24/technology/facial-recognition-arrest.html 
Hinchcliffe, T. (2010). Aerial photography and the Postwar urban planner in London. London Journal, 35(3), 277–
288. https://doi.org/10.1179/174963210X12814015170232 
hjl. (2012). Blind Date - Green Park [Photograph]. Flickr. https://flic.kr/p/cBGctS 
Hollands, R. G. (2008). Will the real smart city please stand up? City, 12(3), 303–320. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/13604810802479126 
Ibrahim, M. R., Haworth, J., & Cheng, T. (2020). Understanding cities with machine eyes: A review of deep 
computer vision in urban analytics. Cities, 96, 102481. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cities.2019.102481 
Idrees, H., Zamir, A. R., Jiang, Y.-G., Gorban, A., Laptev, I., Sukthankar, R., & Shah, M. (2017). The THUMOS 
challenge on action recognition for videos “in the wild.” Computer Vision and Image Understanding, 155, 1–
23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cviu.2016.10.018 
IHS Markit. (2019). Security Technologies Top Trends For 2019. In IHS Markit Security Technologies. 
https://technology.informa.com/Research-by-Market/551540/security-technology 
Jacobs, A., & Appleyard, D. (1987). Toward an Urban Design Manifesto. Journal of the American Planning 
Association, 53(1), 112–120. https://doi.org/10.1080/01944368708976642 
Jacobs, J. (1961). The Death and Life of Great American Cities. Vintage Books. 
https://books.google.com/books?hl=en&lr=&id=P_bPTgOoBYkC&oi=fnd&pg=PA7&ots=JW1O38Fpf5&sig
=X-9dkYK56vjYblU9O1I-kh0yYFQ#v=onepage&q&f=false 
Jacobs, J. (1970). The economy of cities. Random House. 
Jemielniak, D. (2020). Thick Big Data. In Thick Big Data. Oxford University Press. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780198839705.001.0001 
Jiang, S., Fiore, G. A., Yang, Y., Ferreira, J., Frazzoli, E., & González, M. C. (2013). A Review of Urban 
Computing for Mobile Phone Traces : Current Methods , Challenges and Opportunities. UrbComp. 
Kirchner, L., Mattu, S., Larson, J., & Angwin, J. (2016, May 23). Machine Bias. ProPublica. 
https://www.propublica.org/article/machine-bias-risk-assessments-in-criminal-sentencing 
Kofman, A. (2018, September 8). Are New York’s Free LinkNYC Internet Kiosks Tracking Your Movements? The 
Intercept. https://theintercept.com/2018/09/08/linknyc-free-wifi-kiosks/ 
Krasin, I., Duerig, T., Alldrin, N., Ferrari, V., Abu-El-Haija, S., Kuznetsova, A., Rom, H., Uijlings, J., Popov, S., 
Kamali, S., Malloci, M., & Pont-Tuset, Jordi and Veit, Andreas and Bel, K. (2017). OpenImages: A public 
dataset for large-scale multi-label and multi-class image classification. 
https://storage.googleapis.com/openimages/web/index.html 
Kubo, M., Pasnik, M., & Grimley, C. (2010, April 6). Tough Love: In Defense of Brutalism. Architect Magazine. 
https://www.architectmagazine.com/design/tough-love-in-defense-of-brutalism_o 
Kwet, M. (2020, January 27). The Rise of the Video Surveillance Industrial Complex. The Intercept. 
https://theintercept.com/2020/01/27/surveillance-cctv-smart-camera-networks/ 
Le Corbusier. (1935). Aircraft. The Studio. 
Lecun, Y., Bengio, Y., & Hinton, G. (2015). Deep learning. In Nature (Vol. 521, Issue 7553, pp. 436–444). Nature 

 
Preprint submitted to 
20 
Publishing Group. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature14539 
Lee, T. B. (2020, June 30). Detroit Police Chief Cops To 96-Percent Facial Recognition Error Rate. Ars Technica. 
https://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2020/06/detroit-police-chief-admits-facial-recognition-is-wrong-96-of-the-
time/ 
Li, X., Zhang, C., Li, W., Ricard, R., Meng, Q., & Zhang, W. (2015). Assessing street-level urban greenery using 
Google Street View and a modified green view index. Urban Forestry and Urban Greening, 14(3), 675–685. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ufug.2015.06.006 
Lin, L., & Purnell, N. (2019). A World with a Billion Cameras Watching You Is Just Around the Corner. The Wall 
Street Journal. https://www.wsj.com/articles/a-billion-surveillance-cameras-forecast-to-be-watching-within-
two-years-11575565402 
Lynch, K. (1960). The Image of the City. MIT Press. 
Massaro, E., Ahn, C., Ratti, C., Santi, P., Stahlmann, R., Lamprecht, A., Roehder, M., & Huber, M. (2017). The Car 
as an Ambient Sensing Platform [Point of View]. Proceedings of the IEEE, 105(1), 3–7. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/JPROC.2016.2634938 
Mayor’s Office for New Urban Mechanics. (2018). BETA BLOCKS. City of Boston. 
McDuff, D., El Kaliouby, R., Demirdjian, D., & Picard, R. (2013). Predicting online media effectiveness based on 
smile responses gathered over the Internet. 2013 10th IEEE International Conference and Workshops on 
Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition, FG 2013. https://doi.org/10.1109/FG.2013.6553750 
McDuff, D., El Kaliouby, R., Senechal, T., Amr, M., Cohn, J. F., & Picard, R. (2013). Affectiva-MIT Facial 
Expression Dataset (AM-FED): Naturalistic and Spontaneous Facial Expressions Collected “In-the-Wild.” 
IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops, 881–888. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPRW.2013.130 
Mozer, P. (2019, April 14). One Month, 500,000 Face Scans: How China Is Using A.I. to Profile a Minority. The 
New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/14/technology/china-surveillance-artificial-intelligence-
racial-profiling.html 
Naik, N., & Philipoom, J. (2014). Streetscore-predicting the perceived safety of one million streetscapes. 
Proceedings of the IEEE …. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPRW.2014.121 
Norden, E. (1969). Marshall McLuhan--A Candid Conversation with the High Priest of Popcult and metaphysician 
of Media. Essential McLuhan, 233–270. 
Noueihed, L. (2011, January 19). Peddler’s martyrdom launched Tunisia’s revolution | Reuters. Reuters. 
https://www.reuters.com/article/tunisia-protests-bouazizi-idAFLDE70G18J20110119 
O’Hara, S., Lui, Y. M., & Draper, B. A. (2011). Unsupervised learning of human expressions, gestures, and actions. 
Face and Gesture 2011, 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1109/FG.2011.5771473 
Offenhuber, D., Nabian, N., Vanky, A., & Ratti, C. (2013). Data dimension: accessing urban data and making it 
accessible. Proceedings of the ICE - Urban Design and Planning, 166(1), 60–75. 
https://doi.org/10.1680/udap.12.00011 
Ofli, F., Chaudhry, R., Kurillo, G., Vidal, R., & Bajcsy, R. (2013). Berkeley MHAD: A comprehensive Multimodal 
Human Action Database. 2013 IEEE Workshop on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV), 53–60. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/WACV.2013.6474999 
Paglan, T. (2016, December 8). Invisible Images (Your Pictures Are Looking at You) – The New Inquiry. The New 
Inquiry. https://thenewinquiry.com/invisible-images-your-pictures-are-looking-at-you/ 
Pasquinelli, M. (2015). Anomaly Detection: The Mathematization of the Abnormal in the Metadata Society. 
Transmediale Festival, 1–10. 
Patron-Perez, A., Marszalek, M., Reid, I., & Zisserman, A. (2012). Structured Learning of Human Interactions in 
TV Shows. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 34(12), 2441–2453. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2012.24 
Picard, R. W. (1995). Affective Computing. In Perceptual Computing Section Technical Reports (Issue 221). 
Pickles, J. (1997). Tool or Science?GIS, Technoscience, and the Theoretical Turn. Annals of the Association of 
American Geographers, 87(2), 363–372. https://doi.org/10.1111/0004-5608.00058 
Rice, S. (1997). Parisian Views. The MIT Press. 
Rossman, G. B., & Rallis, S. F. (2017). An Introduction to Qualitative Research: Learning in the Field. In An 
Introduction to Qualitative Research: Learning in the Field (Fourth Edition). SAGE Publications, Inc. 
https://doi.org/10.4135/9781071802694 
Salesses, P., Schechtner, K., & Hidalgo, C. a. (2013). The Collaborative Image of The City: Mapping the Inequality 
of Urban Perception. PLoS ONE, 8(7). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0068400 
Schwarzer, M. (2017). Computation and the Impact of New Technologies on the Photography of Architecture and 

 
Preprint submitted to 
21 
Urbanism. Architecture_MPS. https://doi.org/10.14324/111.444.amps.2017v11i4.001 
Seer, S., Brändle, N., & Ratti, C. (2014). Kinects and human kinetics: A new approach for studying pedestrian 
behavior. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 48, 212–228. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2014.08.012 
Selinger, E., & Fox Cahn, A. (2020, July 17). Did you protest recently? Your face might be in a database. The 
Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2020/jul/17/protest-black-lives-matter-database 
Shankar, S., Halpern, Y., Breck, E., Atwood, J., Wilson, J., & Sculley, D. (2017). No Classification without 
Representation: Assessing Geodiversity Issues in Open Data Sets for the Developing World. ArXiv. 
http://arxiv.org/abs/1711.08536 
Shepardson, D. (2020, September 11). IBM says U.S. should adopt new export controls on facial recognition 
systems. Reuters. https://www.reuters.com/article/us-ibm-facial-recognition-exports/ibm-says-u-s-should-
adopt-new-export-controls-on-facial-recognition-systems-idUSKBN2621PV 
Smaira, L., Carreira, J., Noland, E., Clancy, E., Wu, A., & Zisserman, A. (2020). A Short Note on the Kinetics-700-
2020 Human Action Dataset. ArXiv. http://arxiv.org/abs/2010.10864 
Soomro, K., & Shah, M. (2017). Unsupervised Action Discovery and Localization in Videos. 2017 IEEE 
International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 696–705. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCV.2017.82 
Spatial Analysis Lab. (2019). Ethnicity Linguistic Landscape Data. https://slab.today/2019/09/ethnicity-lld/ 
Stanley, J. (2019). The Dawn of Robot Surveillance. In ACLU (Issue June). https://www.aclu.org/report/dawn-robot-
surveillance 
Sun, P., Hou, R., & Lynch, J. P. (2020). Measuring the utilization of public open spaces by deep learning: A 
benchmark study at the detroit riverfront. ArXiv, 1, 2228–2237. 
Talen, E., & Ellis, C. (2002). Beyond Relativism: Reclaiming the Search for Good City Form. Journal of Planning 
Education and Research, 22(1), 36–49. https://doi.org/10.1177/0739456X0202200104 
Talen, Emily, & Ellis, C. (2015). Beyond Relativism Reclaiming the Search for Good City Form. 36–49. 
Venturi, R., Brown, D. S., & Izenour, S. (1972). Learning from Las Vegas. The MIT Press. 
Whyte, W. (1980). The Social Life of Small Urban Spaces. The Conservation Foundation. 
http://trid.trb.org/view.aspx?id=521122 
Winner, L. (2017). Do artifacts have politics? Routledge. 
World Economic Forum. (2020). The Future of the Last-Mile Ecosystem. In Transition Roadmaps for Public- and 
Private-Sector Players (Issue January). https://www.weforum.org/reports/the-future-of-the-last-mile-
ecosystem 
Yang, S., Bailey, E., Yang, Z., Ostrometzky, J., Zussman, G., Seskar, I., & Kostic, Z. (2020). COSMOS Smart 
Intersection: Edge Compute and Communications for Bird’s Eye Object Tracking. 2020 IEEE International 
Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communications Workshops, PerCom Workshops 2020. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/PerComWorkshops48775.2020.9156225 
Yatskar, M., Zettlemoyer, L., & Farhadi, A. (2016). Situation recognition: Visual semantic role labeling for image 
understanding. Proceedings of the IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern 
Recognition, 2016-Decem, 5534–5542. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2016.597 
Yin, L., Cheng, Q., Wang, Z., & Shao, Z. (2015). “Big data” for pedestrian volume: Exploring the use of Google 
Street View images for pedestrian counts. Applied Geography, 63, 337–345. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apgeog.2015.07.010 
Zukin, S. (2020). Seeing like a city: how tech became urban. Theory and Society, 49(5–6), 941–964. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11186-020-09410-4
