1 
Detecting Danger: The Dendritic Cell  
Algorithm  
 
 
Julie Greensmith1, Uwe Aickelin1, and Steve Cayzer2  
 
1 
 
 
2 
 
School of Computer Science, University of Nottingham, Jubilee Campus,  
Wollaton Road Nottingham, NG8 1BB, UK  

Hewlett Packard Labs, Filton Road, Stoke Giford, Bristol, BS34 8QZ, UK  

 
Summary. The Dendritic Cell Algorithm (DCA) is inspired by the function of the dendritic 
cells of the human immune system. In nature, dendritic cells are the intrusion detection agents 
of the human body, policing the tissue and organs for potential invaders in the form of 
pathogens. In this research, and abstract model of DC behaviour is developed and subsequently 
used to form an algorithm, the DCA. The abstraction process was facilitated through close 
collaboration with laboratory- based immunologists, who performed bespoke experiments, the 
results of which are used as an integral part of this algorithm. The DCA is a population based 
algorithm, with each agent in the system represented as an 'artificial DC'. Each DC has the 
ability to combine multiple data streams and can add context to data suspected as anomalous. In 
this chapter the abstraction process and details of the resultant algo- rithm are given. The 
algorithm is applied to numerous intrusion detection problems in computer security including 
the detection of port scans and botnets, where it has produced impressive results with relatively 
low rates of false positives.  
 
 
1.1 Introduction  
 
The Dendritic Cell Algorithm (DCA) is a biologically-inspired technique, de- veloped 
for the purpose of detecting intruders in computer networks. This algorithm belongs 
to a class of biologically inspired algorithms known as Ar- tificial Immune Systems 
[de Castro and Timmis, 2002]. Such algorithms use abstract models of the immune 
system to underpin algorithms capable of per- forming some useful computational 
task. The human immune system is a rich source of inspiration as it provides a high 
level of protection for the host body, without causing harm to the host [Coico et al., 
2003].  
As the name suggests, the DCA is based on a metaphor of naturally oc- curing 
dendritic cells (DCs), a type of cell which is native to the innate arm of the immune 
system. DCs are responsible for the initial detection of in- truders, including bacteria 
and parasites through responding to the damage  

2 
Julie Greensmith, Uwe Aickelin, and Steve Cayzer  
 
caused by the invading entity. Natural DCs receive sensory input in the form of 
molecules which can indicate if the tissue is healthy or in distress. These cells have the 
ability to combine these various signals from the tissue and to produce their own 
output signals. The output of DCs instructs the responder cells of the immune system 
to deal with the source of the potential damage. DCs are excellent candidate cells for 
abstraction to computer security as they  
are the body's own intrusion detection agents  
The DCA is a multi-sensor data fusion and correlation algorithm, that can perform 
anomaly detection on ordered datasets, including real-time and time- series data. The 
signal fusion process is inspired by the interaction between DCs and their 
environment. In a similar manner, the DCA uses a population of agents, each 
representing an individual DC which can perform fusion of signal input to produce 
their own signal output. The assessment of the signal output of the entire DC 
population is used to perform correlation with 'suspect' data items. Further details of 
this mechanism and of the function of the DCA are presented in Section 1.4.  
In this chapter the history of the development of the DCA is presented, including 
a brief overview of the abstract biology used to underpin the algor- tithm. This is 
followed by a detailed description of a generic DC based algo- rithm, including 
pseudocode and worked example calculations. This chapter concludes with a 
discussion of the applications of the algorthim to date, and application areas to which 
the algorithm could be applied are suggested.  
 
 
1.2 Biological Inspiration  
 
1.2.1 Danger, Death and Damage  
 
The immune system is a decentralised, robust, complex adaptive system. It performs 
its function through the self-organised interaction between a diverse set of cell 
populations. Classically, immunology has focussed on the body's ability to 
discriminate between protein molecules belonging to 'self' or 'non- self', through the 
careful selection of cells during foetal and infant stages. This theory has underpinned 
the research performed in immunology since its conception by Paul Ehrlich in 1891 
[Silverstein, 2005]. However, numerous problem have been uncovered with this 
paradigm. For example, if the immune system is tuned to respond only to non-self then 
why do autoimmune diseases occur, such as multiple sclerosis and rheumatoid 
arthritis? Why do intestines contain millions of bacteria, yet the immune system does 
not react against  
these colonies of non-self invaders?  
In 1994, immunologist Polly Matzinger controversially postulated that the immune 
system's objective is not to discriminate between self and nonself, but to react to signs 
of damage to the body. This theory is known as the Danger Theory [Matzinger, 
1994]. This theory postulates that the immune system responds to the presence of 
molecules known as danger signals, which  

1 Detecting Danger: The Dendritic Cell Algorithm  
3 
 
are released as a by-product of unplanned cell death, necrosis. When a cell undergoes 
necrosis, the cell degrades in a chaotic manner, producing various molecules 
(collectively termed 'the danger signals'), formed from the oxidation and reduction of 
cellular materials. Dendritic cells are sensitive to increases in the amount danger 
signals present in the tissue environment, causing their maturation which ultimately 
results in the activation of the immune system.  
There are two sides to the danger theory: activation and suppression. While the 
presence of danger signals is sufcient to activate the immune system, the presence of a 
diferent class of signal can prevent an immune response. This mechanism of 
suppression arises as a result of apoptotic cell death, which is the normal manner in 
which cells are removed from the body. When a cell undergoes this process of 
apoptosis, it releases various signals into the environment. DCs are also sensitive to 
changes in concentration of this signal. DCs can combine the danger and safe signal 
information to decide if the tissue environment is in distress or is functioning normally. 
The danger theory states that the immune system will only respond when damage is 
indicated and is actively suppressed otherwise.  
In addition to the danger theory related signals, one other class of sig- nal is 
processed as environmental input by DCs. These signals are termed PAMPs 
(pathogenic associated molecular patterns) and are a class of molecule that are 
expressed exclusively by micro-organisms such as bacteria. The 'in- fectious nonself' 
theory of immunology, developed by Janeway in the late 1980s [Janeway, 1989] states 
that the immune system will respond by attack- ing cells which express PAMP 
molecules. PAMPs are biological signatures of potential intrusion.  
 
 
1.2.2 Introducing Dendritic Cells  
 
DCs are the immune cells which are sensitive to the presence of danger sig- nals in the 
tissue. In addition to danger signals, DCs are also sensitive to two other classes of 
molecule namely PAMPs and 'safe' signals. PAMPs are molecules produced by 
microorganisms and provide a fairly definitive indi- cator of pathogenic presence. Safe 
signals are the opposite of danger signals, and are released as a result of controlled, 
planned cell death. In response to the collection of signals, the DC produces its own 
set of output signals - the relative concentrations of the output signals is dependent on 
the relative con- centrations of the input signals over time. It is the combination of 
external signals and current internal state which results in what is defined in this work 
as context.  
In addition to the processing of environmental signals, DCs also collect proteins 
termed 'antigen'. DCs have the ability to combine the signal infor- mation with the 
collected antigen to provide 'context' for the classification of antigen. If the antigen are 
collected in an environment of mainly danger and PAMP signals, the context of the 
cell is 'anomalous' and all antigen collected by the cell are deemed as potential 
intruders. Conversely, if the environment  

4 
Julie Greensmith, Uwe Aickelin, and Steve Cayzer  
 
contains mainly safe signals, then the context of the cell is 'normal' and all collected 
antigen are deemed as non-threatening. This theory contrasts the classical self non-
self theory as the structure of the antigen proteins is not used as a basis of 
classification, the context is used to determine if an antigen is derived from a potential 
invader. The structure of the antigen is important for the subsequent response, but the 
processing performed by DCs involves the examination of the tissue 'context' and are 
unafected by the structure of the antigen.  
In the natural system, this antigen-plus-context information is passed on to a class 
of responder cells, termed T-cells. The T-cells translate the information given to them 
by the local DC population. If sufcient DCs present a particular antigen to T-cells in an 
anomalous context, the immune system responds by eliminating any cell containing 
that antigen. It is noteworthy that this is a simplified description of a highly 
complicated immune function. For more information on the action of T-cells, please 
refer to a standard immunology text such as Janeway [Janeway, 2004].  
The description above is a simplified description of the events which occur in vivo. 
For readers interested in the exact mechanism of DC function, refer to Lutz and 
Schuler [Lutz and Schuler, 2002]. In this chapter, these principles are abstracted to 
form a model of DC behaviour which is described in Section 1.3.  
 
 
1.3 Abstract Model  
 
1.3.1 The Approach  
 
The DCA has been developed as part of an interdisciplinary project, known as the 
'Danger Project' [Aickelin et al., 2003], which comprised a team of re- searchers 
including practical immunologists, computer scientists and computer security 
specialists. The aim of the project was to bring together state-of-the- art immunology 
with artificial immune systems to improve the results of such systems when applied to 
computer network intrusion detection. The abstract model presented in this section is 
the result of the collaboration between the computer scientists and immunologists. 
Thorough analysis of the literature as- sisted the interdisciplinary collaboration, 
facilitating the performance of the immunological research which contributes to the 
results of the abstraction process. Following this important development, key 
published findings from DC biology were collated.  
To meet the needs of the development of the algorithm, and to further research in 
immunology, aspects of DC function are investigated. This in- cludes the 
characterisation of signals and the efects of DCs on the responder cells. Various wet-
lab experiments have been performed using natural DCs to determine this necessary 
information [Williams et al., 2007], results of which assist in clarifying certain aspects 
of DC function. This research is performed  

1 Detecting Danger: The Dendritic Cell Algorithm  
5 
 
 
System  
Biology  
Understanding  
dendrites  
fully mat  
 
 
ure  
 
 
immature  
 
 
 
semi-mature  
 
presents en antig  
 
 
class Cell  
{ 
//method definitions  
} 
//defining constructor  
Cell::Cell()  
{
} 
//defining methods  
int Cell::apoptose(int pop)  
{ 
gear = 6;  
return pop;  
} 
void Cell::printInfo(Cell dendrite)  
Algorithm  
Algorithm  
Implementation  
Creation  
 
 
 
Fig. 1.1. A depiction of the abstraction process used in this chapter, and the rela- tionship 
between abstraction and immunology.  
 
 
following intense discussion and debate between computer scientists and im- 
munologists, and is mutually beneficial. A diagram of the process used to develop the 
DCA is shown in Figure 1.1.  
 
 
1.3.2 Abstract DC biology  
 
As explained in Section 1.2, the biological function of DCs is as a natural intrusion 
detector. The mechanisms by which it performs this function are complex, numerous 
and still debated within immunology [Matzinger, 2007]. To produce an algorithm, the 
disparate information regarding DC biology must be combined to form an abstract 
model. The developed abstract model forms the basis of the DCA. Several key 
properties of DC biology are used to form the abstract model. These properties are 
compartmentalisation, difer- entiation, antigen processing, signal processing and 
populations.  
Compartmentalisation provides two separate areas in which DCs perform 
sampling and analysis. The processing of input signals and collection of anti- gen 
occur in 'tissue', which is the environment monitored by DCs. Upon mat- uration DCs 
migrate to a processing centre, termed a lymph node. Whilst in the lymph nodes, DCs 
present antigen coupled with context signals, which is interpreted and translated into 
an immune response. In nature, this is de-  

6 
Julie Greensmith, Uwe Aickelin, and Steve Cayzer  
 
 
Semi-mature  
 
 
 
Immature  
 
 
 
 
 
 
-collect antigen -
receive signals  
-in tissue  
 
 
 
 
 
Safe Signals  
 
 
 
 
Danger Signals  
PAMPS  
 
 
 
 
 
-present antigen  
-produce costimulation  
-provide tolerance cytokines  
-in lymph node  
 
Mature  
 
 
 
 
 
-present antigen  
-produce costimulation  
-provide reactive cytokines  
-in lymph node  
 
Fig. 1.2. An abstract model of the diferentiation of DCs, showing the transforma- tion between 
states and the signals responsible for the transitions. The inﬂammatory signal (not depicted) acts 
to amplify the efects of all other signals.  
 
 
signed to keep potentially deadly T-cells away from direct contact with the tissue until 
it is required.  
In this model DCs exist in one of three states, termed its state of diferen- tiation: 
immature, semi-mature and mature. Transitions to semi-mature and mature occur 
through the diferentiation of the immature DC. This trans- formation is initiated upon 
the receipt of input signals. The resultant DC state is determined through the relative 
proportions of input signal categories received by the immature cell. The terminal state 
of diferentiation dictates the context of antigen presentation where 'context' is an 
interpretation of the state of the signal environment. Semi-mature implies a 'safe' 
context and ma- ture implies a 'dangerous' context. This is a pivotal decision 
mechanism used by the immune system, and is the cornerstone of this abstract model.  
Antigen processing through collection and presentation is vital to the func- tion of 
the system. The pattern matching of the antigen structure is not used in this model 
unlike previous AIS models [Balthrop et al., 2002]. The collec- tion of antigen is not 
responsible for the activation of the immune system although it is necessary for 
antigen to be sampled in order to have an en- tity to classify. This is analogous to 
sampling a series of 'suspects' or data to classify. The process of a immature DCs 
collecting multiple antigen forms the  

1 Detecting Danger: The Dendritic Cell Algorithm  
7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1.3. A UML activity diagram representing the key features of DC biology, presented in a 
systemic manner. The processes on the left occur in the tissue, on the right in the lymph node.  
 
 
sampling mechanism used by the DCA. Each DC collects a subset of the total antigen 
available for sampling.  
Dendritic cells perform a type of biological signal processing. DCs are sen- sitive to 
diferences in concentration of various molecules found in their tissue environment. 
Safe signals are the initiators of maturation to the semi-mature state. Danger signals 
and PAMPs are responsible for maturation to the fully- mature state. Simultaneous 
receipt of signals from all classes increases the production of all three output signals, 
though the safe signal reduces the ex- pected amount of mature output signal 
generated in response to danger and PAMP signals [Williams et al., 2007]. Output 
signals are generated at con- centrations proportional to the input signals received.  
DCs do not perform their function in isolation, residing in tissue as a pop- ulation. 
Each member of the population can sample antigen and signals. This multiplicity of 
DCs is an important aspect of the natural system. Multiple DCs are required to 
present multiple copies of the same antigen type in order to invoke a response from the 
adaptive immune system. This is an error toler- ant component of DC behaviour as it 
implies that a misclassification by one cell is not enough to stimulate a false positive 
error from the immune system. Using a population of DCs also means that diversity 
can be generated within the population, such as assigning each DC its own threshold 
values, if desired. Such diversity may also add robustness to the resultant process, 
presented in Figure 1.3.  

8 
Julie Greensmith, Uwe Aickelin, and Steve Cayzer  
 
Signal  
Biological Property  
Abstract Property  
Computational  
Example  
PAMP  
Indicator of micro- Signature  
of  likely Error messages per  
bial presence  
anomaly  
second  
 
Danger  
sig- Indicator  
of  tissue High levels indicate Network packets per  
nals  
damage  
potential anomaly  
second  
 
Safe signals  
Indicator of healthy High levels indicate Size of network pack-  
tissue  
normally functioning ets  
system  
 
Inﬂammation Indicating  
general Multiplies the all User physically ab-  
tissue distress  
other input signals sent  
 
Table 1.1. Biological signal functions and their abstracted counterparts.  
 
 
1.3.3 Signals and Antigen Overview  
 
As this model is in part inspired by the danger theory, various signals drive the 
system. In the natural system the signals are a reﬂection of the state of the 
environment. Four categories of signal are used in this abstract model, inclusive of 
PAMPs, danger signals, safe signals and inﬂammation. The various categories of signal 
direct the DC population down two distinct pathways, one causing the activation of 
the immune system, and one responsible for generating peripheral tolerance. Upon 
examination of the relevant biology, it appears that DCs process all categories of 
signal stated above to produce their own output signals [Lutz and Schuler, 2002]. The 
output signals include a costimulation signal (CSM) which shows that the cell is 
prepared for antigen presentation and two context signals, the mature and semi-mature 
output signals. An overview of the names and functions of the biological signals and 
their abstracted counterparts is given in Table 1.1. In the forthcoming sections (1.3.4-
1.3.8) all signals used in the abstract DC model are explained and rationalised 
individually.  
 
 
1.3.4 PAMPs  
 
In a biological context, PAMPs are essential products produced by microor- ganisms, 
but not produced by the host. These molecules are not unique to pathogens, but are 
produced by microbes, regardless of their potential pathogenicity [Medzhitov and 
Janeway, 2002]. PAMP molecules are a firm in- dicator to the innate immune system 
that a non-host based entity is present. Specific PAMPs bind to specific receptors on 
DCs (termed pattern recogni- tion receptors) which can lead to the production two 
output signal molecules. These output signals are termed envision molecules (CSM) 
and the 'mature'  

1 Detecting Danger: The Dendritic Cell Algorithm  
9 
 
output signal. Both of these chemical outputs can indicate a likely presence of a 
foreign entity. In this abstract model, a PAMP is interpreted as a signal which is a 
confident indicator of an abnormality. An increase in the strength of the PAMP input 
signal leads to an increase in two of three potential output signals, namely the CSM 
signal and the mature output signal, produced by the artificial DCs in the abstract 
model.  
In the abstract model, PAMPs are certain indicators of an anomaly. This is based on 
their role in vivo as signatures of bacterial presence. In this research this is translated 
as mapping to a signature of intrusion or abnormally high rate of errors when the DCA 
is applied to computer security problems. For example, when applied to the detection 
of scanning activity, a high frequency of networking errors is translated as a high 
value of PAMP signal.  
 
 
1.3.5 Danger signals  
 
In the human immune system, danger signals are released as a result of un- planned 
cell death. Specifically danger signals are the by-product of cellu- lar degradation in 
an uncontrolled manner. The constituent components of danger signals are formed 
from the erratically decomposing macro-molecules normally found inside the cell, 
encapsulated by the cell membrane. They are indicators of damage to tissue, which the 
immune system is trying to protect. In a similar manner to PAMPs the receipt of 
danger signals by a DC also causes diferentiation to the fully mature state. However, 
the resultant efect on DCs through danger signals is less than that of PAMPs. This 
means that a higher concentration of danger signal molecules are needed in order to 
elicit a response of the same magnitude as with a similar concentration of PAMPs, 
where concentration is the number of molecules of signal per unit volume.  
Within the context of the abstract model, danger signals are indicators of 
abnormality, but have a lower value of confidence than associated with the PAMP 
signal. The receipt of danger signals also increases the amount of CSMs and mature 
output signals produced by the DC. The receipt of danger signals causes the 
presentation of antigen in a dangerous context. This can ultimately lead to the 
activation of the adaptive immune system. In a computational context, for example to 
detect scanning activity on a computer network, the danger signal can be derived from 
the rate of sent/recieved network packets per second. A high rate of sending of packets 
may be indicative of an anomaly at high levels, but at low levels is likely to indicate 
normal system function.  
 
 
1.3.6 Safe signals  
 
Within the natural immune system, certain signals are released as a result of healthy 
tissue cell function. This form of cell death is termed apoptosis - the signals of which 
are collectively termed 'safe signals' in this work. The receipt of safe signals by a DC 
results in the production of CSMs in a similar manner  

10  
Julie Greensmith, Uwe Aickelin, and Steve Cayzer  
 
to the increase caused by PAMPs and danger signals. In addition the 'semi- mature' 
output signal is produced as a result of the presence of safe signals in the tissue. The 
production of the semi-mature output signal indicates that antigen collected by this DC 
was found in a normal, healthy tissue context. Tolerance is generated to antigen 
presented in this context.  
The secondary efect of safe signals, is their inﬂuence on the production of the 
mature output signal. In the situation where tissue contains cells under- going both 
apoptosis and necrosis, the receipt of safe signals suppresses the production of the 
mature output signal in response to the danger and PAMP signals present in the tissue 
[Williams et al., 2007]. This appears to be one of many regulatory mechanism 
provided by the immune system to prevent the generation of false positives. This is a 
key mechanism of suppression of the response to antigen not directly linked to a 
pathogen. The balance between safe and danger signals and the resultant efects on the 
production of the ma- ture output signal is incorporated in the signal processing 
mechanism. The incorporation of this mechanism is significant for the danger project 
as its use was facilitated by the close collaboration achieved with the team of laboratory 
based immunologists.  
Within this abstract model, input signals which indicate normality are termed 'safe 
signals'. This signal is interpreted as data which indicates normal system/data 
behaviour and a high level of this signal will increase the output signal value for the 
'semi-mature signal'. In-line with the biological efect of this signal, subsequent receipt 
of a high safe signal value will reduce the cumulative value of the 'mature' output 
signal, incremented by the receipt of either PAMPs or danger signals. The interaction 
between these signals is shown in Figure 1.5.  
In a computational context, for example to detect scanning activity on a computer 
network, the safe signal is an indicator of normal machine behaviour, which can also be 
derived from the rate of sent/recieved network packets per second. In previous work it 
is identified that scanning activity produces highly 'regular' and small network packet 
sizes. Therefore the safe signal value is produced in proportion to the average packet 
size, with a high safe signal value created if the average packet size is sufciently 
larger than the expected size.  
 
 
1.3.7 Inﬂammation  
 
As shown in [Sporri and Caetano, 2005], the presence of inﬂammatory sig- nals in 
human tissue are insufcient to initiate maturation of an immature DC. However, the 
presence of inﬂammation not only implies the presence of inﬂammatory cytokines 
(cytokines are biological signals which act as messen- ger molecules between cells) but 
also that the temperature is increased in the afected tissue. Additionally, the rates of 
reaction are increased because of this increasing heat, plus inﬂammatory cytokines 
initiate the process of dilating  

1 Detecting Danger: The Dendritic Cell Algorithm  
11  
 
blood vessels, recruiting an increased number of cells to the tissue area under distress.  
A variant of this concept is employed in the abstract model, where inﬂam- mation 
has the efect of amplifying the other three categories of input signal, inclusive of safe 
signals. The resultant efect of the amplification is an increase in the artificial DC's 
output signals. An increase in inﬂammation implies that the rate of DC migration will 
increase, as the magnitude of the CSMs pro- duced by the DC will occur over a 
shorter duration, and hence resulting in a shortened DC life span in the tissue 
compartment. It is important to stress however, that the presence of inﬂammatory 
signals alone is insufcient to instruct the immune system how to behave appropriately.  
 
 
1.3.8 Output signals  
 
From examination of the biological literature, it is evident that DCs produce a set of 
output signals as a result of exposure to the environmental input signals experienced 
in the tissue. By process of abstraction, three signals in  
particular are selected to be the output signals of the DCs:  
1. CSM output: limits the lifespan of a DC, through being assessed against  
a migration threshold  
2. Semi-mature: output incremented in response to safe signals  
3. Mature: output incremented in response to PAMP and danger signals;  
reduced in response to safe signals  
In the natural system DC CSM production is combined with production  
of another receptor which attracts the DC to the lymph node for antigen presentation, 
where the DCs present their antigen to a responder cell. This mechanism is 
complicated and is abstracted to a simpler version for use within an algorithm. In the 
abstract model an increased amount of CSMs increases the probability of a DC 
leaving the tissue and entering the lymph node for analysis. This is abstracted into a 
model through the assignment of a migration threshold, which is described in detail in 
Section 1.4. In the abstract model, if this threshold is exceeded, the state of the cell 
changes from immature to either semi-mature or mature. The cell then enters the 
antigen presentation stage where its context is assessed.  
In nature, the presence or absence of these two chemicals controls the response of 
the responder cells. In this presented model, these responder cells do not feature, and 
therefore the information provided through the use of these context signals is used in a 
diferent manner. The context of the DC in the abstract model is controlled by the 
relative proportions of the semi-mature signal to the mature signal. The DCs context 
is assigned by whichever of the two output signals is greater upon presentation of 
antigen by the DC. A larger value of semi-mature signal implies the presented antigen 
was collected in a primarily 'normal' context whereas a larger value of the mature 
output  

12  
Julie Greensmith, Uwe Aickelin, and Steve Cayzer  
 
Biological  
Abstract  
PAMP  
PAMP  
necrotic products  
danger signals  
apoptotic cytokines  
safe signals  
inﬂammatory  
cy-  inﬂammation  
tokines  
Table 1.2. Biological and abstract computational terms for the input signals.  
 
 
signal would imply that the presented antigen was collected in a potentially 'anomalous' 
context.  
 
 
1.3.9 Signal Summary  
 
In Table 1.2 the various synonyms for the various terms at diferent levels of 
abstraction is given, from the actual biological terms to the terms used in the general 
model of a DC based algorithm. A state chart showing the inﬂuence of the various 
signals and the corresponding output signals is presented in Figure 1.4, where IL-12 
and IL-10 are the mature and semi-mature output signals respectively.  
 
 
1.3.10 Accounting for Potency: Signal Processing  
 
The actual mechanisms of internal DC signal processing are vastly complex and are 
termed signal transduction mechanisms. For the purpose of the ab- stract model and 
resultant algorithm a simplified version of signal processing can be implemented 
without compromising the underlying metaphor. An ab- stracted model of signal 
transduction is developed, which accounts for the magnitude of responses, but does 
not involve the intricacies of a signaling network. This interaction is simplified to a 
weighted sum equation, which is performed for the transformation of input signals to 
output signals. A rep- resentation of this process is shown in Figure 1.5. The inﬂuence 
of a signal on a cell, the potency, is translated as the weight value given to each signal, 
and efcacy represented as either a positive or negative weight value. In the system 
presented in this chapter, the weight values given above are used as an integral part of 
the system, and it is repeatedly shown that these values suit the chosen applications. 
However, these weights are given as a guideline - other values may be more suitable for 
diferent applications. This may become apparent as the DCA is applied to a more 
diverse set of applications.  
 
 
1.3.11 Abstract Antigen  
 
The combination of signals provides the basis of classification which can be used for 
the purpose of anomaly detection. The processing of signals would be  

1 Detecting Danger: The Dendritic Cell Algorithm  
13  
 
 
 
DC created from monocyte  
 
 
Immature DC  
 
Resident: tissue 
Antigen: collect  
Express: IL-2  
T-cell: no action  
 
 
exposed to  
exposed to PAMP,  
safe signals and  
danger signals and  
inflammation  
inflammation  
 
 
 
 
semi-mature DC  
 
Resident: lymph node  
Antigen: present  
Express: CSM, IL-10  
T-cell: supress  
 
 
 
 
mature DC  
 
Resident: lymph node  
Antigen: present  
Express: CSM, IL-2  
T-cell: activate  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1.4. A state chart showing various DC states and the featured input and output signals, 
where responder cells are termed T-cells.  
 
 
sufcient to indicate if the tissue is currently in distress or under attack, but it would not 
yield any information regarding the originator of the anomaly, namely the culprit 
responsible. Antigen is required in order to link the evi- dence of the changing 
behaviour of tissue with the culprits which may have caused this change in behaviour. 
Antigen is necessary: it is the data that is to be classified, with the basis of 
classification derived not from the structure of this antigen but from the relative 
proportions of the three categories of input signal, processed across a population of 
DCs.  
It is important to note that a single antigen of a specific structure will not be 
sufcient to elicit any response from the immune system. Concentrations of antigens 
with identical structures are found in tissue and processed by the DCs. In selecting 
suitable data, either multiple items with the same struc- ture should be used, forming 
an antigen type. Aggregate sampling of multiple antigens is a key property of the 
system, and may provide some robustness and tolerance against rogue signal 
processing of a small number of DCs. In  

14  
Julie Greensmith, Uwe Aickelin, and Steve Cayzer  
 
 
 
 
Inputs  
 
Danger  
 
 
 
PAM
P  
 
 
 
CS
M  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
semi-mature  
Outputs  
Safe  
mature  
 
Positive Weight  
Negative Weight  
Thickness of line ~ Transforming Weight  
 
Fig. 1.5. An abstract model of DC signal processing. The inﬂammatory signal (not pictured) acts 
as a general amplification signal.  
 
 
this abstraction no processing of antigen is performed as the focus is on the treatment 
of the diferent categories of input signal.  
 
 
1.3.12 Assumptions and Simplifications  
 
As part of this abstraction process various assumptions and simplifications are made, 
as the purpose of this process is to derive a feasible algorithm, not produce a realistic 
simulator of DC biology. It is assumed that no other type of immune cells are required 
for this algorithm to function. Unlike the approach of [Twycross, 2007], DCs in the 
DCA function in isolation and the T-cell component is replaced with a statistical 
technique. This is possible as system changing responses do not form part of this 
model. It is also assumed that no inter-cell communication occurs and that individual 
DCs do not communicate with one another. This can be assumed as no adaptation is 
present in this system.  
It is assumed that four signal categories exist, and that the DC does not respond to 
any other signal. Of course, DCs express a plethora of receptors for various molecules. 
In this abstraction only the molecules responsible for immune activation are used. In a 
similar manner it is assumed that three output signals are produced. It is also assumed 
that DCs are impervious to unexpected death, unlike in the human immune system. In 
this model a single tissue compartment is used.  
The above assumptions are used to make the abstraction clearer and the resultant 
algorithm simpler to understand. There are also various assumptions in this abstraction 
which are made due to the lack of understanding of natural DCs within immunology. 
In this abstraction it is assumed that each DC has a fixed size capacity for antigen 
storage. This is assumed as there is no biological  

1 Detecting Danger: The Dendritic Cell Algorithm  
15  
 
data available to confirm the antigen capacity of DCs. In a similar manner, it is 
unknown which agent is responsible for limiting the sampling period of the DCs 
within the tissue. In this abstraction, measurement of CSMs against a migration 
threshold determines the duration of the DCs life span. As the objective of this work 
is to produce an algorithm, not n accurate simulation, it is acceptable to make such 
assumptions, provided they are useful in leading to a feasible algorithm.  
 
 
1.4 The Dendritic Cell Algorithm  
 
1.4.1 Algorithm Overview  
 
The development of an abstract model of DC behaviour is one step in the 
development of a danger theory inspired intrusion detection system. To trans- form the 
abstract model of DC biology into an immune-inspired algorithm, it must first be 
formalised into the structure of a generic algorithm and into a series of logical 
processes. It must also be expressed appropriately so that the DCA can be 
implemented feasibly. A generic form of the algorithm is given in this section. For 
further details of the algorithm and for information regarding its implementation as a 
real-time anomaly detection system, please refer to Greensmith et al. [Greensmith et 
al., 2008].  
The purpose of a DC algorithm is to correlate disparate data-streams in the form 
of antigen and signals. The DCA is not a classification algorithm, but shares properties 
with certain filtering techniques. It provides information representing how anomalous a 
group of antigen is, not simply if a data item is anomalous or not. This is achieved 
through the generation of an anomaly coef- ficient value, termed the MCAV - mature 
context antigen value. The labelling of antigen data with a MCAV coefcient is 
performed through correlating a time-series of input signals with a group of antigen. 
The signals used are pre- normalised and pre-categorised data sources, which reﬂect 
the behaviour of the system being monitored. The signal categorisation is based on 
the four signal model, based on PAMP, danger, safe signals and inﬂammation. The co-
occurrence of antigen and high/low signal values forms the basis of cate- gorisation 
for the antigen data.  
This overview, whilst technically correct, is still somewhat abstract. To ce- ment 
the ideas which form the DCA, a generic representation of the algorithm is presented. 
A formal description of the algorithm and details of it's imple- mentation are presented 
in [Greensmith et al., 2008] and [Greensmith, 2007]. To further elaborate on the 
workings of a DC based algorithm, each key com- ponent is described in turn. The 
primary components of a DC based algorithm  
are as follows:  
1. Individual DCs with the capability to perform multi-signal processing  
2. Antigen collection and presentation  

16  
Julie Greensmith, Uwe Aickelin, and Steve Cayzer  
 
Algorithm 1: Pseudocode of the functioning of a generic DC object.  
input : signals from all categories and antigen  
output: antigen plus context values  
initialiseDC;  
while CSM output signal < migration Threshold do  
get antigen;  
store antigen;  
get signals;  
calculate interim output signals;  
update cumulative output signals;  
end  
cell location update to lymph node;  
if semi-mature output > mature output then  
cell context is assigned as 0 ;  
else  
cell context is assigned as 1;  
end  
kill cell;  
replace cell in population;  
 
 
 
3. Sampling behaviour and state changes  
4. A population of DCs and their interactions with signals and antigen  
5. Incoming signals and antigen, with signals pre-categorised as PAMP, dan-  
ger, safe or inﬂammation  
6. Multiple antigen presentation and analysis using 'types' of antigen  
7. Generation of anomaly coefcient for various diferent types of antigen  
The DCA is a population based algorithm, with the population consist-  
ing of a set of interacting objects, each representing one cell. Each cell in the 
population has a set of instructions which is followed each time a cell is updated. The 
control of the frequency and nature of cell updates is specific to the implementation 
and will be described in the second half of this chap- ter. Each DC object within the 
population performs its own antigen sampling and signal collection. Diversity is 
generated within the DC population by ini- tiation of migration of the DCs at diferent 
time points i.e. the cessation of data sampling. This creates a variable time window 
efect throughout the DC population, which may add some robustness to the system.  
 
 
1.4.2 An Individual DC  
 
As aforementioned, each DC in the system is represented by an object, capa- ble of 
executing its own behavioural instructions. DCs process input signals to form a set of 
cumulatively updated output signals in addition to the collection of antigen throughout 
the duration of the sampling stage. Each DC can exist  

1 Detecting Danger: The Dendritic Cell Algorithm  
17  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1.6. DC state transition overview diagram, showing the diferent possible states over a DC 
life span, where t(m) represents the migration threshold of the cell and CSM is the 
costimulatory output signal.  
 
 
in one of three states at any point in time. These states are namely imma- ture, semi-
mature or mature. The relationship between these various states is shown in the UML 
state chart in Figure 1.6. However, the diferences in the semi-mature and mature state 
is controlled by a single variable, determined by the relative diferences between two 
output signals produced by the DCs. The initiation of the state change from immature 
to either mature or semi-mature is facilitated not by the collection of antigen, but by 
sufcient exposure to sig- nals. This exposure is limited by the assigned migration 
threshold. Pseudocode of a generic DC object is given in Algorithm 1.  
Whilst in the immature state, the DC has three functions, which are per-  
formed each time a single DC is updated:  
1. Sample antigen: the DC collects antigen from an external source (in this  
case, from the 'tissue') and places the antigen in its own antigen storage data 
structure.  
2. Update input signals: the DC collects values of all input signals present in  
the signal storage area  
3. Calculate interim output signals: at each iteration each DC calculates  
three temporary output signal values from the received input signals, with the 
output values then added to form the cell's cumulative output signals.  
Signal processing occurs within DCs of the immature state. The signal pro-  
cessing performed is suggested to be in the form of a weighted sum equation, 
bypassing the modelling of any biologically realistic gene regulatory network or signal 
transduction mechanism. A simple weighted sum equation is used  

18  
Julie Greensmith, Uwe Aickelin, and Steve Cayzer  
 
Signal  
PAMP Danger  
Safe  
W1  
CSM  
Semi-mature  
Mature  
W1  
0 
W2  
2 
0 
W2  
2 
W 1 ∗ 1 .5  
1 
-W 2 ∗ 1.5  
 
Table 1.3. Derivation and interrelationship between weights in the signal processing equation, 
where the values of the PAMP weights are used to create the all other weights relative to the 
PAMP weight. W 1 is the the weight to transform the PAMP signal to the CSM output signal 
and W 2 is the weight to transform the PAMP signal to the mature output signal.  
 
 
in order to reduce any additional computational overheads, with the intended DCA 
application being real-time anomaly detection. In the generic algorithm, the only 
crucial component of this procedure is the ability of the end user to map raw input 
data to one of the four categories of input signal (PAMP, danger, safe and 
inﬂammation). The general form of the signal processing  
equation is shown in Equation 1.1, where Pw are the PAMP related weights,  
Dw for danger signals etc.  
 
 
Output = (  
(Pn ∗ Pw) +  
(Dn ∗ Dw) +  
(Sn ∗ Sw)) ∗ (1 + I)  
(1.1)  
 
In the generic form of the signal processing equation (Equation 1.1) Pn, Dn and Sn 
are the input signal value of category PAMP (P), danger (D) or  
safe (S) for all signals (n) of that category, assuming that there are multiple  
signals per category. In this equation, I represents the inﬂammation signal. This sum is 
repeated three times, once per output signal. This is to calculate the interim output 
signal values for the CSM output, the semi-mature output and mature output signals. 
These values are cumulatively summed over time.  
The weights used in this signal processing procedure are derived empiri- cally 
from immunological data, generated for the purpose of the model devel- opment 
[Williams et al., 2007]. From past experience these are combinations that have worked 
well, shown through sensitivity analysis to work for the chosen applications - though 
they are not fundamental to the algorithm. The actual values used for the weights can 
be user defined, though the relative values determined empirically are kept constant. 
The relative weight values are presented in Table 1.3. These signals are used to assess 
the state of the DC upon termination of the sampling phase of a DCs life span. The 
three output signals of a DC perform two roles, to determine if an antigen type is 
anomalous and to limit the time spent sampling data. A summary of the three  
output signals and their function is given in Table 1.4, where:  
1. To limit the life span/sampling duration of an individual cell  
2. To assess which terminal DC state should be reached i.e. semi-mature  
versus mature.  

1 Detecting Danger: The Dendritic Cell Algorithm  
19  
 
Output signal  
Function  
Costimulatory signal assessed against a threshold to limit the duration of DC signal  
and antigen sampling, based on a migration threshold  
Semi-mature signal terminal state to semi-mature if greater than resultant mature  
signal value  
Mature signal  
terminal state to mature if greater than resultant semi-mature  
signal value  
 
Table 1.4. Table of cumulative output signals and their associated implications for  
the DCA  
 
 
Within the Danger Project, the word context is used extensively. The word context 
refers to the circumstances in which an event occurs. Context means a representation 
of the signal circumstances in which an antigen is processed. The context used to 
categorise antigen is not achieved with one DC for one antigen, but the aggregate total 
of contexts across a population of DCs and a set of antigen. Nevertheless, each 
member of the DC population is assigned a context upon its state transition from 
immature to a matured state. Each DC makes a binary choice, as an individual cell can 
only be either mature or semi-mature, but not both.  
Diversity and feedback in the DC population is maintained through the use of 
variable migration thresholds. This concept is touched upon in Section 1.3, but what 
implications does it actually have for the algorithm, and what exactly is a variable 
migration threshold? The natural mechanism of DC mi- gration is complex and not 
particularly well understood, involving the up and down regulation of many interacting 
molecules. Instead of using a model of what is ascertainable from the natural system, a 
surrogate mechanism which shows similar end results is implemented.  
In this algorithm multiple DCs are used to form a population, each sam- pling a set 
of signals within a given time window'. Each DC in the population is assigned a 
'migration threshold value' upon its creation. Following the up- date of the cumulative 
output signals, a DC compares the value it contains for CSMs with the value it is 
assigned as its migration threshold. If the value of CSM exceeds the value of the 
migration threshold the DC is removed from the sampling area and its life span is 
terminated upon analysis in the 'lymph node' area, which is a diferent compartment 
than tissue.  
Each member of the DC population is randomly assigned a migration threshold 
upon its creation. The range of the random threshold is a user definable parameter, 
with this range being applicable to the whole DC popu- lation. Previous experience 
with the DCA, the median point about which the migration thresholds are assigned 
equates to a DC sampling for two iterations when the signal strengths are half the 
expected total input signal maximum. This process discounts the use of inﬂammation 
in this derivation. Addition- ally the range of the random assignment is ± 50% of the 
median value of a uniform distribution. A derivation of this is shown in Equation 1.2. 
In this  

20  
Julie Greensmith, Uwe Aickelin, and Steve Cayzer  
 
Algorithm 2: Context assessment for a single DC.  
input : semi-mature and mature cumulative output signals  
output: collected antigen and cell context  
if semi-mature output > mature output then  
cell context is assigned as 0 ;  
else  
cell context is assigned as 1;  
end  
print collected antigen plus cell context  
 
 
equation maxp is the maximum observed level of PAMP signal, and weightpc is the 
corresponding transforming weight from PAMP to CSM output signal.  
In a similar manner maxd and maxs and weightdc weightsc are equivalent  
values for danger signal and safe signal. Inﬂammation is not included in this  
derivation.  
 
 
tmedian = 0.5 ∗ ((maxp ∗ weightpc) + (maxd ∗ weightdc) + (maxs ∗ weightsc))  
(1.2)  
The net result of this is that diferent members of the DC population 'experience' 
diferent sets of signals across a time window. If the input signals are kept constant, this 
implies that members of the population with low values of migration threshold present 
antigen more frequently, and therefore produce a tighter coupling between current 
signals and current antigen. Conversely, DCs with a larger migration threshold may 
sample for a longer duration, producing a more relaxed coupling between potentially 
collected signal and context. Having a diverse population, whom all sample diferent 
total sets of signals, is a positive feature of this algorithm, demonstrated through 
results presented in [Greensmith et al., 2008].  
Once the cell has migrated, its role is to then present the antigen and output 
signals it has collected throughout its life span. As part of this pro- cess the kinds of 
signal it was exposed to over its life span are assessed and transformed into a binary 
value - this is termed the DC context. This can be achieved through a simple 
comparison between the remaining two out- puts signals, which are resultant 
cumulative values. These two values (semi and mature output signals) are compared 
directly with each other using the relationship described in Algorithm 2.  
The context is vital to assign any collected antigen with the context in which the 
cell performed its collection. Another important feature of the al- gorithm is that each 
DC can sample multiple antigens per iteration and can store these antigens (up to a 
certain capacity) internally for presentation upon maturation.  
To summarise, each DC has the ability to process and collect signals and antigen. 
Through the generation of cumulative output signals, the DC forms  

1 Detecting Danger: The Dendritic Cell Algorithm  
21  
 
a cell context which is used to perform anomaly detection. in the assessment of 
antigen. The life-span of the DC is controlled by a threshold, termed the migration 
threshold, which is randomly assigned to each DC in the population (within a given 
range). Upon migration the cumulative output signals are assessed and the greater of 
semi or mature output signal becomes the cell context. This cell context is used to 
label all antigen collected by the DC with the derived context value of 1 or 0. This 
information is ultimately used in the generation of an anomaly coefcient.  
 
 
1.4.3 Populations, Tissue And Assessment - The Macroscopic  
Level  
 
As mentioned the DCA is a population based algorithm, based on an agent-like system 
of artificially created cells whom interact with an artificially created environment. 
This consists of a tissue compartment and a lymph node com- partment. In the tissue 
compartment signals and antigen are stored for use by the DC population. DCs are 
transferred to the lymph node compartment for analysis upon migration. It is in the 
lymph node where the antigen plus context values are logged for analysis.  
The interaction between cells and environment - termed here as tissue - is crucial, 
and drives the system. From a DC's perspective the enviroment/tissue is what it can 
sense. In the case of natural DCs, they sense the world around them through activation 
or deactivation of receptors found on the surface. Indeed the DCs outlined in the 
section above have a similar system of being able to sense the signal data present in 
the tissue and to respond through the generation of output signals.  
In addition to sensing signals, DCs also interact with antigen. This is performed 
through the transfer of antigen from its store in the tissue com- partment to the 
internal storage for antigen within the sampling DC. For use in a DC based algorithm, 
the environment for a DC in the sampling popu- lation consist only of signals and 
antigen. Therefore, in a generic DC-based algorithm, tissue is comprised of signals 
and antigen as this is what the cell population can respond to and process.  
It is proposed that the updates of antigen, signals and cells are performed 
independently. The dictated timing of when entities are updated is left to the user. In 
the real-time implementations described in this thesis, cells are updated once per 
second. In the implemented system, signals are also updated at a rate of once per 
second, with antigen updated as soon as the data becomes available. The rate of update 
is dependent upon the requirements of the user and the nature of the input data and 
application. The exact nature of the update mechanisms are not specific to the 
algorithm, it can be up to the user, or dictated by the nature of the data processed by 
the algorithm. However, it is noteworthy that each of the three updates need not occur 
simultaneously: this temporal correlation between asynchronously arriving data is 
performed by the processing of the cells themselves.  

22  
Julie Greensmith, Uwe Aickelin, and Steve Cayzer  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1.7. A UML overview of the processes at the tissue level of the program, showing the 
asynchronous update of cells, signals and antigen. It also shows the two main stages of update 
and initialisation and subsequent analysis.  
 
 
The population dynamics are used to perform the actual anomaly detec- tion. The 
ultimate classification of a particular type of antigen is derived not from a single DC, 
but from an aggregate analysis produced across the DC population over the duration 
of an experiment.  
The derived value for the cell context is assigned to each antigen (if indeed any) 
collected by the assessed DC. This information is used to derive the MCAV anomaly 
coefcient for a particular type of antigen. This relies on the fact that during their time 
as sampling entities, the DCs sample both antigen and signals. This is also dependent 
upon the use of antigen types. This means that the input antigen are not unique in 
value, but belong to a population in themselves. Numerous experiments in this thesis, 
the ID value of a running program is used to form antigen, with each antigen generated 
every time the program sends an instruction to the low level system. Therefore a 
population of antigen is used, linked to the activity of the program, and all bearing the 
same ID number.  
Each DC can sample multiple antigens per iteration and can store a fixed 
maximum amount of antigen within whilst sampling signals. It is the consen- sus value 
for an entire antigen type which gives rise to the anomaly detection within this 
algorithm. The MCAV is mean value of context per antigen type. Pseudocode for the 
generation of the MCAV is given in Algorithm 3. The closer the MCAV is to one, the 
more likely it is that the majority of the anti- gen existed in the tissue at the same time 
as a set of signals. This is similar to the principle of guilt by association, which has a 
temporal basis. If more than one tissue compartment were used this association would 
also be spatial. The 'cause and efect' means of classification is facilitated by the 
temporal correla- tion produced through the use of DCs whom sample signals and 
antigen over diferent durations.  

1 Detecting Danger: The Dendritic Cell Algorithm  
 
Algorithm 3: The generation of MCAV coefcients for each antigen type 
sampled by the DC Algorithm.  
input : total list of antigen plus context values per experiment  
output: MCAV coefcient per antigen type  
for all antigen in total list do  
increment antigen count for this antigen type;  
if antigen context equals 1 then  
increment antigen type mature count;  
end  
end  
for all antigen types do  
MCAV of antigen type = mature count / antigen count;  
end  
 
 
 
1.4.4 Generic DC Algorithm Summary  
23  
 
An overview of the DCS is presented in Figure 1.8. In Section 1.4 a generic 
description of the algorithm is presented, outlining its key features and mecha- nisms 
for processing data, filtering and detecting anomalous antigen. At a cell level, the DC is 
a signal processing unit, who makes a binary (yes/no) decision as to whether the 
antigen it has collected during its life span was collected un- der anomalous conditions. 
At a population level, the greater DC population is used to perform anomaly detection 
based on the consensus opinion of the col- lection of cells. This behaviour produces a 
robust method of detection through the incorporation of multiple antigen and signal 
sampling across a population of artificial cells all with variable life spans. This forms a 
filter-based corre- lation algorithm which includes a 'time window' efect which 
reduces false positive errors [Greensmith, 2007].  
 
 
1.5 Applications: Past and Present  
 
The DCA is designed with the objective of its ultimate application to problems in 
network intrusion detection, through reducing the high rates of false posi- tives 
previously seen with anomaly detection systems [Aickelin et al., 2004]. While the 
DCA has been applied to such problems [Greensmith et al., 2006], it has also enjoyed 
some preliminary successes in sensor networks and mobile robotics.  
Early work with the algorithm involved its application to a standard ma- chine 
learning data set [Greensmith et al., 2005], where it was shown that the algorithm can 
process classification data, but is sensitive to the data order. Once the algorithm was 
deemed feasible through its application to the ma- chine learning dataset, the DCA 
has also been applied to the detection of port scans and scanning based activity 
[Greensmith et al., 2008], which produced  

24  
Julie Greensmith, Uwe Aickelin, and Steve Cayzer  
 
Input Data  
 
 
 
'Tissue'  
- Storage area for data  
 
S1  
Ag1  
 
S2  
Ag2  
Signal Matrix  
Antigen  
behavioural signals S3  
(network ow) ...  
 
Sn  
 
Data Sampling  
Phase  
Ag3 collected data  
... (process IDs)  
 
Agn  
 
 
Immature Dendritic Cell Population  
Maturation  
Phase  
 
more safe  
more danger  
signals  
signals  
 
'Semi-Mature'  
'Mature'  
 
 
 
Analysis  
 
Fig. 1.8. Illustration of the DCA showing data input, continuous sampling, the maturation 
process and aggregate analysis.  
 
 
high rates of true positives and low rates of false positives. In the case of the port scan 
experiments, signals are taken as behavioural attributes and system calls are used to 
form antigen. This research is ongoing and now encompasses the detection of other 
forms of malicious mobile code, such as botnets and scanning worms.  
In addition to standard network anomaly detection tasks, Kim et al. [Kim et al., 
2006] produced an implementation of the DCA for detecting mis- behaviour in sensor 
networks. The signals are based on the behaviour of packet sending and is used to 
determine which nodes in the network are potentially under attack. The use of the 
DCA in this scenario produced satisfactory re- sults. In conclusion, this problem is 
suitable for use with in the DCA as data fusion from disparate sources is required to 
perform detection.  
Oates et al. [Oates et al., 2007] have applied the DCA to object detec- tion using 
mobile robots. The DCA is used to classify specific object based  

1 Detecting Danger: The Dendritic Cell Algorithm  
25  
 
on combining data from various robot sensors in real-time. As part of this research, 
theoretical analysis of the algorithm is being performed to assist in its application to 
difcult robotic problems. This research indicates that the DCA is a suitable algorithm 
for applications in mobile robotics.  
As the DCA can analyse time-dependent data in real-time, there are nu- merous 
areas to which the algorithm could be applied, both within computer network intrusion 
detection and in other more general scientific applications. For example, it may be 
useful in the prediction of earthquakes, by looking for 'danger' in the form of seismic 
activity and correlate this information with lo- cation, encoding antigen. Similar 
signal/location correlating problems such as the analysis of radio anomalies in space 
and the analysis of real-time medical data may be potential applications areas for the 
DCA.  
 
 
1.6 Conclusions  
 
In this chapter the Dendritic Cell Algorithm is presented as an immune- inspired 
algorithm. This algorithm is based on an abstract model of the biolog- ical dendritic 
cells (DCs), which are a key decision making cell of the human immune system. The 
abstract model presented in this chapter shows the key properties of the natural 
system, and such properties are presented to form a model. From this model a generic 
DC based algorithm is presented. This algo- rithm forms the DCA, and is capable of 
performing multi-sensor data fusion on the input signals, combined with a correlation 
component, linking signals to antigen data. The process by which the signals are used 
and combined is detailed, in combination with a description of the behaviour for each 
artificial cell within the algorithm.  
The DCA has enjoyed success so far in its application to the detection of port 
scans, and is shown in the related work to be a robust and decentralised algorithm. The 
key to the robustness lies in the 'time-window efect', where diferent members of the 
population sample input data across diferent du- rations. This efect is thought decrease 
the number of false positive results produced by the algorithm.  
Future developments with the DCA include the addition of a 'responder cell' 
component, to calculate the MCAV anomaly coefcient dynamically. This would 
potentially increase the sensitivity of the system. Understanding the exact workings of 
the DCA is a non-trivial task. So far the majority of its characterisation has been 
performed empirically, through sensitivity analysis and parameter modification. 
However, in future more theoretical approach to its analysis will be taken, through the 
use of various theoretical tools such as constraint satisfaction. Perhaps through the 
performance of this analysis it can be shown exactly why this algorithm produces the 
good rates of detection in a robust manner.  

26  
Julie Greensmith, Uwe Aickelin, and Steve Cayzer
