arXiv:1203.3051v1  [cs.AI]  14 Mar 2012
Combining Voting Rules Together
Nina Narodytska1 and Toby Walsh2 and Lirong Xia3
Abstract. We propose a simple method for combining together vot-
ing rules that performs a run-off between the different winners of
each voting rule. We prove that this combinator has several good
properties. For instance, even if just one of the base voting rules has
a desirable property like Condorcet consistency, the combination in-
herits this property. In addition, we prove that combining voting rules
together in this way can make ﬁnding a manipulation more computa-
tionally difﬁcult. Finally, we study the impact of this combinator on
approximation methods that ﬁnd close to optimal manipulations.
1
INTRODUCTION
An attractive idea in the Zeitgeist of contemporary culture is “The
Wisdom of Crowds” [9]. This is the idea that, by bringing together
diversity and independence of opinions, groups can be better at mak-
ing decisions than the individuals that make up the group. For exam-
ple, in 1907 Galton observed the wisdom of the crowd at guessing
the weight of an ox in the West of England Fat Stock and Poultry
Exhibition. The median of the 787 estimates was 1207 lb, within 1%
of the correct weight of 1198 lb. We can view different voting rules
as having different opinions on the “best” outcome to an election.
We argue here that it may pay to combine these different opinions
together. We provide both theoretical and experimental evidence for
this thesis. On the theoretical side, we argue that a combination of
voting rules can inherit a desirable property like Condorcet consis-
tency when only one of the base voting rules is itself Condorcet con-
sistent. We also prove that combining voting rules together can make
strategic voting more computationally difﬁcult. On the experimental
side, we study the impact of combining voting rules on the perfor-
mance of approximation methods for constructing manipulations.
1.1
RELATED WORK
Different ways of combining voting rules to make manipulation com-
putationally hard have been investigated recently. Conitzer and Sand-
holm [4] studied the impact on the computational complexity of ma-
nipulation of adding an initial round of the Cup rule to a voting rule.
This initial round eliminates half the candidates and makes manipu-
lation NP-hard to compute for several voting rule including plurality
and Borda. Elkind and Lipmaa [7] extended this idea to a general
technique for combining two voting rules. The ﬁrst voting rule is run
for some number of rounds to eliminate some of the candidates, be-
fore the second voting rule is applied to the candidates that remain.
They proved that many such combinations of voting rules are NP-
hard to manipulate. Note that theirs is a sequential combinator, in
which the two rules are run in sequence, whilst ours (as we will see

soon) is a parallel combinator, in which the two rules are run in par-
allel. More recently, Walsh and Xia [10] showed that using a lottery
to eliminate some of the voters (instead of some of the candidates) is
another mechanism to make manipulation intractable to compute.
2
VOTING RULES
Voting is a general mechanism to combine together the preferences
of agents. Many different voting rules have been proposed over the
years, providing different opinions as to the “best” outcome of an
election. We formalise voting as follows. A proﬁle is a sequence of n
total orders over m candidates. A voting rule is a function mapping a
proﬁle onto one candidate, the winner. Let NP (i, j) be the number of
voters preferring i to j in P. Where P is obvious from the context, we
write N(i, j). Let beats(i, j) be 1 iff N(i, j) > n
2 and 0 otherwise.
We consider some of the most common voting rules.
• Positional scoring rules: Given a scoring vector (w1, . . . , wm)
of weights, the ith candidate in a vote scores wi, and the winner
is the candidate with highest total score over all the votes. The
plurality rule has the weight vector (1, 0, . . . , 0), the veto rule
has the vector (1, 1, . . . , 1, 0), the k-approval rule has the vector
(1, . . . , 1, 0 . . . , 0) containing k 1s, and the Borda rule has the vec-
tor (m −1, m −2, . . . , 0).
• Cup: The winner is the result of a series of pairwise majority elec-
tions between candidates. Given the agenda, a binary tree in which
the roots are labelled with candidates, we label the parent of two
nodes by the winner of the pairwise majority election between the
two children. The winner is the label of the root.
• Copeland: The candidate with the highest Copeland score
wins. The Copeland score of candidate i is P
j̸=i beats(i, j). The
Copeland winner is the candidate that wins the most pairwise elec-
tions.
• Maximin: The maximin score of candidate i is minj̸=iN(i, j). The
candidate with the highest maximin score wins.
• Single Transferable Vote (STV): This rule requires up to m −1
rounds. In each round, the candidate with the least number of voters
ranking them ﬁrst is eliminated until one of the remaining candidates
has a majority.
• Bucklin (simpliﬁed): The Bucklin score of a candidate is the
smallest k such that the k-approval score of the candidate is strictly
larger than n/2. The candidate with the smallest Bucklin score wins.
Note that in some cases, there can be multiple winning candidates
(e.g. multiple candidates with the highest Borda score). We there-
fore may also need a tie-breaking mechanism. All above voting rules
can be extended to choose a winner for proﬁles with weights. In this
paper, we study the manipulation problem (with weighted votes), de-
ﬁned as follows.
Deﬁnition 1 In a manipulation problem, we are given an instance
(r, P NM, ⃗wNM, c, k, ⃗wM), where r is a voting rule, P NM is the

non-manipulators’ proﬁle, ⃗wNM represents the weights of P NM,
c is the alternative preferred by the manipulators, k is the num-
ber of manipulators, and ⃗wM
=
(w1, . . . , wk) represents the
weights of the manipulators. We are asked whether there exists a
proﬁle P M of indivisible votes for the manipulators such that c ∈
r((P NM, P M), (⃗wNM, ⃗wM)).
When all weights equal to 1, the problem is called manipulation with
unweighted votes. In this paper, we assume that the manipulators
controls the tie-breaking mechanism, that is, all ties are broken in
favor of c.
A large number of normative properties that voting rules might
possess have been put forwards including the following.
• Unanimity: If a candidate is ranked in the top place by all voters,
then this candidate wins.
• Monotonicity: If we move the winner up a voter’s preference or-
der, while keeping preferences unchanged, then the winner should
not change.
• Consistency: If two sets of votes select the same winner then the
union of these two sets should also select the same winner.
• Majority criterion: If the majority of voters rank a same candidate
at the top, then this candidate wins.
• Condorcet consistency: If a Condorcet winner exists (a candidate
who beats all others in pairwise elections) then this candidate wins.
• Condorcet loser criterion: If a Condorcet loser exists (a candidate
who is beaten by all others in pairwise elections) then this candidate
does not win.
Such properties can be used to compare voting rules. For example,
whilst STV satisﬁes the majority criterion, Borda does not. On the
other hand, Borda is monotonic but STV is not.
3
VOTING RULE COMBINATOR
We consider a simple combinator, written +, for combining together
two or more voting rules. This combinator collects together the set
of winners from the different rules. If all rules agree, this is the over-
all winner. Otherwise we recursively call the combination of voting
rules on this restricted set of winning candidates. If the recursion
does not eliminate any candidates, we call some tie-breaking mech-
anism on the remaining candidates. For example, plurality + veto
collects together the plurality and veto winners of an election. If they
are the same candidate, then this is the winner. Otherwise, there is a
runoff in which we call plurality + veto on the plurality and veto
winners. As both plurality and veto on two candidates compute the
majority winner, the overall winner of plurality + veto is the win-
ner of a majority election between the plurality and veto winners.
This combinator has some simple algebraic properties. For exam-
ple, it is idempotent and commutative. That is, X + X = X and
X + Y = Y + X. It has other more complex algebraic properties.
For example, (X + Y ) + X = X + Y . In addition, many norma-
tive properties are inherited from the base voting rules. Interestingly,
it is sometimes enough for just one of the base voting rules to have a
normative property for the composition to have the same property.
Proposition 1 For unanimity, the majority criterion, Condorcet
consistency, and the Condorcet loser criterion, if one of X1 to
Xk and the tie-breaking mechanism satisfy the property, then
X1 + . . . + Xk also satisfy the same property.
On the other hand, there are some properties which can be lost by
the introduction of a run-off.
Proposition 2 (Monotonicity) plurality and Borda are both
monotonic but plurality + Borda is not.
Proof: Suppose we have 6 votes for b ≻c ≻a, 4 votes for c ≻
a ≻b, and 3 votes for a ≻b ≻c and 3 votes for a ≻c ≻b.
Tie-breaking for both Borda and plurality is c ≻a ≻b. Now c is
the Borda winner and a is the plurality winner. By tie-breaking, c
wins the run-off. However, if we modify one vote for a ≻c ≻b to
c ≻a ≻b, then b becomes the plurality winner and wins the run-off.
Hence, plurality + Borda is not monotonic. ✷
We give a stronger result for consistency. Scoring rules are consis-
tent, but the combination of any two different scoring rules is not. By
“different rules” we mean that there exists a proﬁle for which these
two rules select different winners. If two scoring rules are different,
then their scoring vectors must be different. We note that the reverse
is not true.
Proposition 3 (Consistency) Let X and Y be any two different
scoring rules, then X + Y is not consistent.
Proof:
Let s(P, a) and r(P, a) be the score given to candidate
a by X and Y in proﬁle P respectively. Since X and Y are dif-
ferent, there exists P1 over a1 to am such that X on P1 selects
a1 and Y on P1 selects a2. Then s(P1, a1) > s(P1, a2) but
r(P1, a1) < r(P1, a2). WLOG suppose a1 beats a2 in pairwise
elections in P1 and tie breaking elects a1 in favour of a2 when
they have the same top score. Let P2 consist of m votes V1 to Vm
where for i < m, Vi ranks a2 in ith place and a1 in i + 1th
place, and Vm ranks a1 in 1st place and a2 in last place. Then
s(P2, a1) = s(P2, a2) and r(P2, a1) = r(P2, a2). Let k be such
that k(r(P1, a2) −r(P1, a1)) > r(Vm, a1) −r(Vm, a2), and P3 be
the following proﬁle of cyclic permutations: a1 ≻a2 ≻a3 ≻. . . ≻
am, a1 ≻a2 ≻a4 ≻. . . ≻a3, . . ., a1 ≻a2 ≻am ≻. . . ≻am−1,
a2 ≻a1 ≻a3 ≻. . . ≻am, a2 ≻a1 ≻a4 ≻. . . ≻a3, . . .,
a2 ≻a1 ≻am ≻. . . ≻am−1. Let P4 be k copies of P2, and P5 be
km copies of P1, Vm and km|P1| copies of P3. Now X + Y on P4
or P5 selects a1 as winner. But X + Y on P4 ∪P5 selects a2. ✷
It follows immediately that plurality + Borda is not consistent.
4
STRATEGIC VOTING
Combining voting rules together can hinder strategic voting. One
appealing escape from the Gibbard-Satterthwaite theorem was pro-
posed by Bartholdi, Tovey and Trick [2]. Perhaps it is computation-
ally so difﬁcult to ﬁnd a successful manipulation that voters have
little option but to report their true preferences? As is common in
the literature, we consider two different settings: unweighted votes
where the number of candidates is large and we have just one or
two manipulators, and weighted votes where the number of candi-
dates is small but we have a coalition of manipulators. Whilst un-
weighted votes are perhaps more common in practice, the weighted
case informs us about the unweighted case when we have probabilis-
tic information about the votes [5]. Since there are many possible
combinations of common voting rules, we give a few illustrative re-
sults covering some of the more interesting cases. With unweighted
votes, we prove that computational resistance to manipulation is typ-
ically inherited from the base rules. With weighted votes, our results
are stronger. We prove that there are many combinations of voting
rules where the base rules are polynomial to manipulate but their
combination is NP-hard. Combining voting rules thus offers another
mechanism to make manipulation more computationally difﬁcult.
A FIRST OBSERVATION
It seems natural that the combination of voting rules inherits the com-
putational complexity of manipulating the base rules. However, there

is not a simple connection between the computational complexity of
the bases rules and their combination. In this section, we show two
examples of artiﬁcial voting rules to illustrate this discrepancy. In
the ﬁrst example, manipulation for the base rules are NP-hard, but
manipulation for their combination can be computed in polynomial-
time; in the second example, manipulation for the base rules are in P,
but manipulation for their combination is NP-hard to compute.
Proposition 4 There exist voting rules X and Y for which com-
puting a manipulation is NP-hard but computing a manipulation of
X + Y is polynomial.
Proof: We give a reduction from 1 in 3-SAT on positive clauses.
Boolean variables 1 to n are represented by the candidates 1 to n.
We also have two additional candidates 0 and −1. Any vote with 0
in ﬁrst place represents a clause. The ﬁrst three candidates besides
0 and −1 are the literals in the clause. Any vote with −1 in ﬁrst
place represents a truth assignment. The positive literals in the truth
assignment are those Boolean variables whose candidates appear be-
tween −1 and 0 in the vote. With 2 candidates, X and Y both elect
the majority winner. With 3 or more candidates, X elects candidate
−1 if there is a truth assignment in the votes that satisﬁes exactly
one out of the three literals in each clause represented by the votes
and otherwise elects 0. Computing a manipulation of X is NP-hard.
Similarly, with 3 or more candidates, Y elects candidate 0 if there is
a truth assignment in the votes that satisﬁes exactly one out of the 3
literals in every clause represented by the votes and otherwise elects
−1. Computing a manipulation of Y is NP-hard. However, X + Y
is polynomial to manipulate since 0 and −1 always go through to the
runoff where the majority candidate wins. ✷
Proposition 5 There exist voting rules X and Y for which comput-
ing a manipulation is polynomial but computing a manipulation of
X + Y is NP-hard.
Proof: The proof uses a similar reduction from 1 in 3-SAT on posi-
tive clauses. With 2 candidates, X and Y both elect the majority win-
ner. With 3 or more candidates, X elects candidate −1 if there is a
truth assignment in the votes that satisﬁes at least one out of the three
literals in each clause represented by the votes and otherwise elects
0, whilst Y elects candidate −1 if there is a truth assignment in the
votes that satisﬁes at most one out of the three literals in each clause
represented by the votes and otherwise elects 0. Computing a manip-
ulation of X or Y is polynomial since we can simply construct either
the vote that sets each Boolean variable to true or to false. However,
computing a manipulation of X + Y as it may require solving a 1 in
3-SAT problem on positive clauses. ✷
UNWEIGHTED VOTES, TRACTABLE CASES
If computing a manipulation of the base rules is polynomial, it of-
ten remains polynomial to compute a manipulation of the combined
rules. However, manipulations may now be more complex to com-
pute. We need to ﬁnd a manipulation of one base rule that is com-
patible with the other base rules, and that also wins the runoff. We
illustrate this for various combinations of scoring rules.
Proposition 6 Computing a manipulation of plurality + veto is
polynomial.
Proof: We present a polynomial-time algorithm that checks whether
k manipulators can make c win in the following two steps: we ﬁrst
check for every candidate a, whether the manipulators can make c to
be the plurality winner for P ∪M while a is the veto winner, and c
beats a in the runoff (or c = a). Then, we check for every candidate
a whether the manipulators can make c to be the veto winner while
a is the plurality winner, and c beats a in the runoff.
For the ﬁrst step, let S be a subset of candidates that beat a in P
under veto. We denote ∆s as the difference in the veto score of s,
s ∈S, and a in P. If the veto scores are equal and s ≻a in the
tie-breaking rule then we set ∆s = 1. If P
s∈S ∆s > k then a can
not win under veto. Otherwise, we place s in last positions in exactly
∆s manipulator votes. This placing is necessary for a to win under
veto. We place c in the ﬁrst position and a in the second position
in all votes in M. We ﬁll the remaining positions arbitrarily. This
manipulation is optimal under an assumption that a wins under veto
as c is always placed in the ﬁrst position. For each possible candidate
for a, we check if such a manipulation is possible and check if c is
the winner of the run-off round. If we ﬁnd a manipulation we stop.
The special case when a = c is analogous.
For the second step, let b be the candidate with maximum
plurality score in P. We denote ∆a to be the difference in the
plurality scores of b and a. We place a in the ∆a ﬁrst positions in
the manipulator votes. The condition is necessary for a to win under
plurality. We put a in the second position in the remaining votes.
We put c in the second position after a in ∆a manipulator votes and
put c in the ﬁrst position in the remaining k −∆a votes. To ensure
that c wins under veto we perform the same procedure as above. The
only simpliﬁcation is that we do not need to worry about tie-breaking
rule as c wins tie-breaking by assumption. We ﬁll the remaining po-
sitions arbitrarily. This manipulation is optimal under an assumption
that a wins under plurality, as c is placed in the ﬁrst position unless
a has to occupy it. For each possible candidate a we check if such
a manipulation is possible and check if c is the winner of the run-
off round. If we ﬁnd a manipulation we stop. Otherwise, there is no
manipulation. ✷
It is also in P to decide if a single agent can manipulate an elec-
tion for any combination of scoring rules. Interestingly, we can use a
perfect matching algorithm to compute this manipulation.
Proposition 7 Computing a manipulation of X + Y is polynomial
for a single manipulator and any pair of scoring rules, X and Y .
Proof:
Suppose there is a manipulating vote v such that c wins
P ∪{v} under X + Y . Let X and Y have the scoring vectors
(x1, . . . , xm) and (y1, . . . , ym). As is common in the literature, we
assume tie-breaking is in favour of c. Suppose c wins under X in a
successful manipulation. The case that c wins under Y is dual. Sup-
pose another candidate a wins under Y , c is placed at position i and
a is placed at position j in v. We show how to construct this vote if
it exists by ﬁnding a perfect matching in a bipartite graph. For each
candidate besides c and a, we introduce a vertex in the ﬁrst partition.
For each position in [1, m] \ {i, j} we introduce a vertex in the sec-
ond partition. For each candidate ck besides c and a we connect the
corresponding vertex with a vertex t in the second partition iff (1)
the score of ck in P under X less the score of c in P under X is less
than or equal to xi −xk, and (2) the score of ck in P under Y less
the score of a in P under Y is less than or equal to yj −yt, or if two
differences are equal then a is before ck in the tie-breaking rule. In
other words, we look for a placement of the remaining candidates in
v such that c wins in P ∪{v} under X, a wins in P ∪{v} under
Y , c is at position i and a is at position j in v. There exists a perfect
matching in this graph iff there is a manipulating vote that satisﬁes
our assumption. If a = c, the reasoning is similar but we only need
to ﬁx the position of c. Using this procedure, we check for each can-
didate a and for each pair of positions (i, j) if there exists a vote v
such that c wins in P ∪{v} under X, a wins in P ∪{v} under Y , c is

at position i and a is at position j in v. If such a vote exists, we also
check if c beats a in the run-off round. If c loses to a in the run-off
for all combinations of a and (i, j) then no manipulation exists. ✷
UNWEIGHTED VOTES, INTRACTABLE CASES
We begin with combinations involving STV. This was the ﬁrst com-
monly used voting rule shown to be NP-hard to manipulate by a sin-
gle manipulator [1]. Not surprisingly, even when combined with vot-
ing rules which are polynomial to manipulate like plurality, veto, or
k-approval, manipulation remains NP-hard to compute.
Proposition 8 Computing a manipulation of X + ST V is NP-hard
for X ∈{plurality, k-approval, veto, Borda} for 1 manipulator.
Proof: (Sketch) Consider the NP-hardness proof for manipulation
of STV [1]. We denote the proﬁle constructed in the proof P. The
main idea is to modify P so that the preferred candidate c can win
under X + ST V iff c can win the modiﬁed election under ST V . For
reasons of space, we illustrate this for X = Borda. Other proofs are
similar. Candidate w (who is the other possible winner of P) has the
top Borda score. Hence, c must win by winning the STV election
(which is possible iff there is a 3-cover). We still have the problem
that w beats c in the run-off. Hence, we introduce a dummy candidate
g′ after c in each vote. This makes sure that the score of g′ is greater
than or equal to (n −6)|P|. We also introduce G =
 |P |
n

blocks of
n votes. Let P ′ = SG
k=1
Sn
i=1(g′ ≻ci ≻. . . ≻ci−1). The Borda
score of g′ in P ∪P ′ is greater than that of any other candidate. In
an STV election on P ∪P ′, g′ reaches the last round. Therefore,
the elimination order remains determined by the votes in P. Hence,
if there is a 3-cover, the candidate c can reach the last round. In the
worst case, when |P| is divisible by n, the plurality scores of c and
g′ are the same and c wins by tie-breaking. ✷
We turn next to combinations of Borda voting, where it is NP-hard
to manipulate with two manipulators [6, 3].
Proposition 9 Computing a manipulation of X + Borda by two
manipulators is NP-hard for X ∈{plurality, k-approval, veto}
Proof: (Sketch) Consider the NP-hardness proof for manipulation
of Borda which uses a reduction from the permutation sums problem
[6]. Due to the spaces constraint, we consider only veto + Borda.
Other proofs are similar but much longer and more complex. The re-
duction uses the following construction to inﬂate scores to a desired
target. To increase the score of candidate ci by 1 more than candi-
dates c, c1 . . . , ci−1, ci+1, . . . , cn−1 and by 2 more than candidate
cn we consider the following pair of votes:
ci ≻cn ≻c1 ≻. . . ≻cn−1
cn−1 ≻cn−2 ≻. . . ≻c1 ≻ci ≻cn
We change the construction by putting c in the last place in the
ﬁrst vote in each pair of votes and ﬁrst place in the second vote, and
leaving all other candidates unchanged when we increase the score
of ci ̸= c by one. This modiﬁcation does not change the desired
properties of these votes. Note that c and cn cannot be winners under
veto. Hence, c must win under Borda and then win the run-off. This
is possible iff there exists a solution for permutation sums problem.
✷
WEIGHTED VOTES, TRACTABLE CASES
We focus on elections with weighted votes and 3 candidates. This
is the fewest number of candidates which can give intractability. All
scoring rules besides plurality (e.g. Borda, veto, 2-approval) are NP-
hard to manipulate in this case [8]. We therefore focus on combi-
nations of the voting rules: plurality, cup, Copeland, maximin and
Bucklin. Computing a manipulation of each of these rules is poly-
nomial in this case. We were unable to ﬁnd a proof in the literature
that Bucklin is polynomial to manipulate with weighted votes, so we
provide one below.
Proposition 10 Computing a manipulation of Bucklin is polyno-
mial with weighted votes and 3 candidates.
Proof: It is always optimal to place the preferred candidate c in the
ﬁrst position as this only decreases the scores of the other 2 candi-
dates, a and b. We argue that the winner is chosen in one of the ﬁrst
two rounds. In the ﬁrst round, if c still loses to a or b then there is no
manipulation that makes c win. In the second round, we must have
at least one candidate with a majority. Suppose we did not. Then the
sum of scores of the 3 candidates is at most 3n/2. But the sum of the
approval votes is 2n which is a contradiction. Hence, if c does not get
a majority in this round, one of the other candidates wins regardless
of the manipulating votes. ✷
We recall that in this paper all ties are broken in favor of c, which
is crucial in the proof of the above proposition. In fact, we can show
that if some other tie-breaking mechanisms are used, then Bucklin is
hard to manipulate with weighted votes, even for 3 candidates.
We next identify several cases where computing a manipulation
for combinations of these voting rules is tractable.
Proposition 11 Computing a manipulation of Copeland + cup, or
of Copeland + Bucklin is polynomial with weighted votes and 3
candidates.
Proof: First we consider the outcome of c vs a and c vs b assuming
that c is ranked at the ﬁrst position by all manipulators.
Case 1. Suppose c is a Condorcet loser. In this case, c can only win
if c wins under both Copeland and Y . However, c must lose under
Copeland because Copeland never elects the Condorcet loser.
Case 2. Suppose c is a Condorcet winner. Then c is a winner of
both rules as they are both Condorcet consistent.
Case
3.
Suppose
there
exists
a
candidate
a
such
that
NP ∪M(a, c) > NP ∪M(c, a) and NP ∪M(b, c) ≤NP ∪M(c, b)
even if c is ranked ﬁrst by all manipulators. We argue that if there
is a manipulation, then all manipulators can vote c ≻b ≻a.
We consider the case that c wins under Copeland and b wins un-
der cup. The other cases (b wins under Copeland, c wins under
Bucklin, etc.) are similar. For c to win under Copeland, all can-
didates have to have the Copeland score of 0 as, by assumption, c
loses to a. Hence, the maximum Copeland score of c is 0. There-
fore, for c to win the following holds NE∪M(b, a) > NE∪M(a, b)
and NE∪M(c, b) > NE∪M(b, c). The only possible agenda is a v
c, and the winner playing b. In all other agendas, b loses to c in one
of the rounds. For b to win cup, NP ∪M(b, a) ≥NP ∪M(a, b) and
tie-breaking has c ≻b ≻a. The manipulation vote c ≻b ≻a will
only help achieve the inequalities in both cases. ✷
Proposition 12 Computing a manipulation of Bucklin + cup is
polynomial with weighted votes and 3 candidates.
Proof: We consider three possible outcomes of pairwise comparison
between c vs a and c vs b assuming that c is ranked at the ﬁrst position
by all manipulators.
Case 1. Suppose c is a Condorcet loser after the manipulation. c
can only win overall if c wins under both Bucklin and cup. How-
ever, c must lose under cup.

Case 2. Suppose c is a Condorcet winner. Then c must be a winner
of cup as this is Condorcet consistent. Hence, regardless of the rest
of the manipulating votes, c reaches the run-off round and beats any
other candidate.
Case 3. Suppose there exists candidate a such that NP ∪M(a, c) >
NP ∪M(c, a) and NP ∪M(b, c) ≤NP ∪M(c, b). Note that M must
guarantee that a does not reach the run-off round as c loses to a in
the pairwise elections. There are two sub-cases: c wins under cup
and b wins under Bucklin in P ∪M, or b wins under cup and c
wins under Bucklin. As shown in the proof of the last Proposition,
if there is a manipulation, c ≻b ≻a will work in both cases. ✷
WEIGHTED VOTES, INTRACTABLE CASES
We continue to focus on combinations of the voting rules: plurality,
cup, Copeland, maximin and Bucklin. We give several results which
show that there exists combinations of these voting rules where ma-
nipulation is intractable to compute despite the fact that all the base
rules being combined are polynomial to manipulate. These results
provide support for our argument that combining voting rules is a
mechanism to increase the complexity of manipulation.
Proposition 13 Computing a manipulation of plurality + Y where
Y ∈{cup, Copeland, maximin, Bucklin}, is NP-complete with
weighted votes and 3 candidates.
Proof:
(Sketch) We consider the case plurality + cup. Other
proofs are similar but longer. We reduce from a PARTITION prob-
lem in which we want to decide if integers ki with sum 2K divide
into two equal sums of size K. Consider the following proﬁle:
4Ka ≻b ≻c
4K
a ≻c ≻b
1Kb ≻a ≻c
9K
b ≻c ≻a
For each integer ki, we have a member of the manipulating coali-
tion with weight 2ki. The tie-breaking rule is c ≻a ≻b. The cup
has a play b, and the winner meets c. Note that b cannot reach the
run-off as they beat c in pairwise elections whatever the manipula-
tors do. Note that c cannot win the plurality rule. Hence a must be
the plurality winner. The run-off is a, the plurality winner against
c, the cup winner (which is the same as the ﬁnal round of the cup).
For this to occur, the manipulators have to partition their votes so that
exactly 2K manipulators put c above a and 2K put a in the ﬁrst po-
sition (and above c).4 Therefore there exists a manipulation iff there
exists a partition. ✷.
Proposition 14 Computing a manipulation of Copeland + Y
where Y ∈{plurality, maximin}, is NP-complete with weighted
votes and 3 candidates.
Proof:
(Sketch) We consider the case Copeland + plurality.
Other proofs are similar but longer. We again reduce from a PAR-
TITION problem. Consider the following proﬁle:
7K
b ≻c ≻a
K
b ≻a ≻c
4K
a ≻c ≻b
2K
a ≻b ≻c
1 c ≻a ≻b
For each integer ki, we have a member of the manipulating coali-
tion with weight 2ki. Now, b must not reach the run-off round and
a must win plurality by similar arguments to the last proof. Hence
c must be the Copeland winner. For this to occur, the manipulators
have to partition their votes so that exactly 2K manipulators put c
above a, 2K manipulators put a in the ﬁrst position (and above c)
and put b in the last position in all votes. Therefore there exists a
manipulation iff there exists a partition. ✷
4 Here we abuse the notation by saying “2K manipulators”, which we meant
“manipulators whose weights sum up to 2K”.
Proposition 15 Computing
a manipulation
of
maximin + Y
where Y ∈{plurality, cup, Copeland, Bucklin}, is NP-complete
with weighted votes and 3 candidates.
Proof:
(Sketch) We consider the case maximin + plurality.
Other proofs are similar but longer. We reduce from a PARTITION
problem in which we want to decide if integers ki with sum 2K di-
vide into two equal sums of size K. Consider the following proﬁle:
4K
b ≻c ≻a
2K
b ≻c ≻a
2K
a ≻b ≻c
2K
a ≻c ≻b
For each integer ki, we have a member of the manipulating coali-
tion with weight 2ki. Now, b must not reach the run-off round and a
must win plurality by similar arguments to the last proof. Hence c
must be the maximin winner. For a to win plurality, manipulators
with total weight at least 2K must rank a ﬁrst. Before the manipu-
lators vote, the maximin score of a is 4K, of b is 6K and of c is
2K. We note that c must be ranked above b in all manipulators votes
and above a in 2K manipulators votes, otherwise c loses to b under
maximin. As 2K manipulators must vote a ≻
c ≻b, we have
NP ∪M(a, b) ≥6K, NP ∪M(c, b) ≥4K and NP ∪M(a, c) ≥6K.
This increases the maximin score of a to 6K and of c to 4K. Now c
must be ranked above a in at least 2K manipulators votes to increase
its maximin score to 6K. Hence, the only possible option is if 2K
manipulators vote a ≻c ≻b and 2K vote and c ≻a ≻b with
weight 2K. In this case the maximin score of all candidates are the
same and equal to 6K. By the tie-breaking rule, c wins. Therefore,
there exists a manipulation iff there exists a partition. ✷
We summarize our results about weighted manipulation in the fol-
lowing table.
X + Y
plurality
maximin
Copeland
cup
Bucklin
plurality
P
NPC
NPC
NPC
NPC
maximin
–
P
NPC
NPC
NPC
Copeland
–
–
P
P
P
cup
–
–
–
P
P
Bucklin
–
–
–
–
P
Table
1.
Computational
complexity
of
coalition
manipulation
with
weighted votes and 3 candidates
5
APPROXIMATION
One way to deal with the intractability of manipulation is to view
computing a manipulation as an approximation problem where we
try to minimise the number of manipulators. We argue here that com-
bining voting rules together can make such approximation problems
more challenging. In particular, we show that a good approximation
method for a rule like Borda will perform very poorly when Borda
is combined with a simple rule like plurality or veto. We consider
the Greedy algorithm for Borda that computes a manipulation that
is within 1 of the optimal number of manipulators [11].
Proposition 16 There exists a family of proﬁles such that the
Greedy approximation method on X + Borda requires k +Ω(|P|)
manipulators where k is an optimum number of manipulators for
Borda, P is the proﬁle in question and X = {plurality, veto}
Proof: We consider veto + Borda. A similar argument holds for
plurality + Borda. Consider the following proﬁle: (ci mod n ≻
c(i+1) mod n ≻. . . ≻cn+i−1 mod n) for i = 0, . . . , n −1, and
1 vote for (cn−1 ≻. . . ≻c1 ≻c0). The tie-breaking rule is c0 ≻
cn−1 ≻. . . ≻c1 where the preferred candidate is c0. The score of

n, m
Opt
Greedy
Plur
AdaptGreedy
4,4
1.17
1.44
1.81
1.41
4,8
1.78
2.02
2.52
2.02
4,16
1.94
2.25
2.63
2.19
4,32
2.85
3.17
3.99
3.07
8,8
–
2.00
2.83
1.81
8,16
–
2.44
3.36
2.21
8,32
–
3.63
5.25
3.13
16,16
–
2.85
4.32
2.27
16,32
–
3.71
6.11
2.92
32,32
–
3.96
6.36
2.88
n, m
Opt
Greedy
Plur
AdaptGreedy
4,4
2.19
2.35
2.76
2.34
4,8
3.79
4.09
4.50
4.03
4,16
7.68
7.99
8.59
7.92
4,32
11.68
12.20
13.07
11.94
8,8
–
4.42
5.25
4.21
8,16
–
8.41
10.06
8.12
8,32
–
17.79
20.85
16.95
16,16
–
9.73
11.83
9.18
16,32
–
16.98
21.07
15.79
32,32
–
18.66
23.28
17.64
(a) The uniform model.
(b) The urn model.
Table 2.
Experiments on randomly generated proﬁles: average number of required manipulators.
the candidates ci is n(n−1)/2+i, i = 0, . . . , n−1. The Greedy al-
gorithm outputs the vote (c0 ≻c1 ≻. . . ≻cn−1). This increase the
number of veto points of cn−1 by 1. Note that ci, i = 1, . . . , n−2 all
have only one veto point. Hence, cn−2 wins by the tie breaking. Note
that c0 has 2 veto-points. However, c0 loses to cn−2 in the run-off
round as cn−2 is ranked before c0 in n−2 votes. Hence, the Greedy
algorithm will continue to produce pairs, (c0 ≻c1 ≻. . . ≻cn−1)
and (c0 ≻cn−1 ≻. . . ≻c1), until c0 takes ﬁrst positions in n −1
votes and wins the run-off round. On the other hand, if we add the
votes (c0 ≻c1 ≻. . . ≻ci−1 ≻ci+1 ≻. . . ≻cn−1 ≻ci)
for i = ⌈n/2⌉, . . . , n −2 then we increase veto points of candi-
dates c⌈n/2⌉, . . . , cn−2 by one. Hence, c⌊n/2⌋wins under veto by
tie-breaking, and then loses to c0 in the run-off. ✷
6
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
We investigated the effectiveness of approximation methods on com-
binations of voting rules experimentally. We used a similar setup
to [6]. We generated uniform random votes and votes drawn from
the Polya Eggenberger urn model. In the urn model, votes are drawn
from an urn at random, and are placed back into the urn along with
a other votes of the same type. This captures varying degrees of so-
cial homogeneity. We set a = m! so that there is a 50% chance that
the second vote is the same as the ﬁrst. For each combination of the
number of candidates n, n ∈{4, 8, 16, 32}, and the number of vot-
ers, m, m ∈{4, 8, 16, 32} and n ≤m, we generated 200 instances
of elections for each model.
We ran four algorithms. The ﬁrst algorithm, Opt, ﬁnds an opti-
mum solution of the manipulation problem for plurality + Borda.
We use a constraint solver to encode the manipulation problem as
a CSP. We could only solve small problems using complete search
as the CSP model is loose. The second algorithm is Greedy algo-
rithm from [11] that we run until the winner it produces is also
a winner of plurality + Borda. The third algorithm, Plur, is a
greedy algorithm for plurality. Again, we run until its output is a
winner of plurality + Borda. The fourth algorithm, AdaptGreedy,
is our modiﬁcation of Greedy that simultaneously tries to manipu-
late Borda and plurality. The algorithm runs the Greedy heuris-
tic ﬁrst and checks if the preferred candidate c is a winner under
plurality + Borda. If c loses under both rules we increase the num-
ber of manipulators. If c wins under one of the rules we check if we
can make a candidate a ∈C \ c the winner of the other rule, where
C is the set of candidates. If we want a to win under plurality then
we place a in exactly as many ﬁrst positions as it needs to win under
plurality and place c in the remaining ﬁrst and second positions.
We run Greedy to place the remaining positions starting with votes
where the ﬁrst two positions are ﬁxed. If we want a to win under
Borda, we ﬁnd the maximum number of ﬁrst positions for c such
that a still can win under Borda and ﬁll the remaining positions us-
ing Greedy. In both case, we check that the preferred candidate is
winner under plurality + Borda. If not, we increase the number
of manipulators. Tables 2 show the results of our experiments. First,
they show that we need to adapt approximation algorithms for indi-
vidual rules to obtain a solution that is close to the optimum number
of manipulators. As the size of the election grows individual approx-
imation algorithms require signiﬁcantly more manipulators than the
optimum. Second, for the combination of plurality and Borda, our
adaptation of the Greedy method works very well and ﬁnds a good
approximation. Experimental results suggest that it ﬁnds a solution
with at most one additional manipulator.
7
CONCLUSION
We have put forwards a simple method for combining together voting
rules that performs a run-off between the different winners of each
voting rule. We have provided theoretical and experimental evidence
for the value of this combinator. On the theoretical side, we proved
that a combination of voting rules can inherit a desirable property
like Condorcet consistency or the majority criterion from just one
base voting rule. On the other hand, two important properties can be
lost by the introduction of a run-off: monotonicity and consistency.
Combining voting rules also tends to increase the computational dif-
ﬁculty of ﬁnding a manipulation. For instance, with weighted votes,
we proved that computing a manipulation for a simple combination
like plurality and cup is NP-hard, even though plurality and cup
on their own are polynomial to manipulate. On the experimental side,
we studied the impact of this combinator on approximation methods
that ﬁnd close to optimal manipulations.
