Computing Horn Rewritings of Description Logics Ontologies
Mark Kaminski and Bernardo Cuenca Grau
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK
Abstract
We study the problem of rewriting an ontology O1
expressed in a DL L1 into an ontology O2 in a
Horn DL L2 such that O1 and O2 are equisatisﬁ-
able when extended with an arbitrary dataset. On-
tologies that admit such rewritings are amenable to
reasoning techniques ensuring tractability in data
complexity. After showing undecidability when-
ever L1 extends ALCF, we focus on devising ef-
ﬁciently checkable conditions that ensure existence
of a Horn rewriting. By lifting existing techniques
for rewriting Disjunctive Datalog programs into
plain Datalog to the case of arbitrary ﬁrst-order pro-
grams with function symbols, we identify a class
of ontologies that admit Horn rewritings of poly-
nomial size. Our experiments indicate that many
real-world ontologies satisfy our sufﬁcient condi-
tions and thus admit polynomial Horn rewritings.
1
Introduction
Reasoning over ontology-enriched datasets is a key require-
ment in many applications of semantic technologies. Stan-
dard reasoning tasks are, however, of high worst-case com-
plexity. Satisﬁability checking is 2NEXPTIME-complete for
the description logic (DL) SROIQ underpinning the stan-
dard ontology language OWL 2 and NEXPTIME-complete
for SHOIN, which underpins OWL DL [Kazakov, 2008].
Reasoning is also co-NP-hard with respect to data complex-
ity—a key measure of complexity for applications involving
large amounts of instance data [Hustadt et al., 2005].
Tractability in data complexity is typically associated with
Horn DLs, where ontologies correspond to ﬁrst-order Horn
clauses [Ortiz et al., 2011; Hustadt et al., 2005]. The more
favourable computational properties of Horn DLs make them
a natural choice for data-intensive applications, but they also
come at the expense of a loss in expressive power. In partic-
ular, Horn DLs cannot capture disjunctive axioms, i.e., state-
ments such as “every X is either a Y or a Z”. Disjunctive ax-
ioms are common in real-world ontologies, like the NCI The-
saurus or the ontologies underpinning the European Bioinfor-
matics Institute (EBI) linked data platform.1
1http://www.ebi.ac.uk/rdf/platform
In this paper we are interested in Horn rewritability of de-
scription logic ontologies; that is, whether an ontology O1
expressed in a DL L1 can be rewritten into an ontology O2
in a Horn DL L2 such that O1 and O2 are equisatisﬁable
when extended with an arbitrary dataset. Ontologies that ad-
mit such Horn rewritings are amenable to more efﬁcient rea-
soning techniques that ensure tractability in data complexity.
Horn rewritability of DL ontologies is strongly related to
the rewritability of Disjunctive Datalog programs into Data-
log, where both the source and target languages for rewriting
are function-free. Kaminski et al. [2014b] characterised Dat-
alog rewritability of Disjunctive Datalog programs in terms
of linearity: a restriction that requires each rule to contain
at most one body atom that is IDB (i.e., whose predicate also
occurs in head position in the program). It was shown that ev-
ery linear Disjunctive Datalog program can be rewritten into
plain Datalog (and vice versa) by means of program transpo-
sition—a polynomial transformation in which rules are “in-
verted” by shufﬂing all IDB atoms between head and body
while at the same time replacing their predicates by auxil-
iary ones. Subsequently, Kaminski et al. [2014a] proposed
the class of markable Disjunctive Datalog programs, where
the linearity requirement is relaxed so that it applies only to
a subset of “marked” atoms. Every markable program can be
polynomially rewritten into Datalog by exploiting a variant of
transposition where only marked atoms are affected.
Our contributions in this paper are as follows. In Section
3, we show undecidability of Horn rewritability whenever
the input ontology is expressed in ALCF. This is in conso-
nance with the related undecidability results by Bienvenu et
al. [2014] and Lutz and Wolter [2012] for Datalog rewritabil-
ity and non-uniform data complexity for ALCF ontologies.
In Section 4, we lift the markability condition and the trans-
position transformation in [Kaminski et al., 2014a] for Dis-
junctive Datalog to arbitrary ﬁrst-order programs with func-
tion symbols. We then show that all markable ﬁrst-order pro-
grams admit Horn rewritings of polynomial size. This re-
sult is rather general and has potential implications in areas
such as theorem proving [Robinson and Voronkov, 2001] and
knowledge compilation [Darwiche and Marquis, 2002].
The notion of markability for ﬁrst-order programs can
be seamlessly adapted to ontologies via the standard FOL
translation of DLs [Baader et al., 2003].
This is, how-
ever, of limited practical value since Horn programs ob-
arXiv:1504.05150v2  [cs.AI]  21 Apr 2015

tained via transposition may not be expressible using stan-
dard DL constructors.
In Section 5, we introduce an al-
ternative satisﬁability-preserving translation from ALCHIF
ontologies into ﬁrst-order programs and show in Section 6
that the corresponding transposed programs can be trans-
lated back into Horn-ALCHIF ontologies. Finally, we fo-
cus on complexity and show that reasoning over markable
L-ontologies is EXPTIME-complete in combined complex-
ity and PTIME-complete w.r.t. data for each DL L between
ELU and ALCHIF. All our results immediately extend to
DLs with transitive roles (e.g., SHIF) by exploiting stan-
dard transitivity elimination techniques [Baader et al., 2003].
We have implemented markability checking and evaluated
our techniques on a large ontology repository. Our results in-
dicate that many real-world ontologies are markable and thus
admit Horn rewritings of polynomial size.
The proofs of all our results are delegated to the appendix.
2
Preliminaries
We assume standard ﬁrst-order syntax and semantics. We
treat the universal truth ⊤and falsehood ⊥symbols as well
as equality (≈) as ordinary predicates of arity one (⊤and ⊥)
and two (≈), the meaning of which will be axiomatised.
Programs A ﬁrst-order rule (or just a rule) is a sentence
∀⃗x∀⃗z.[ϕ(⃗x,⃗z) →ψ(⃗x)]
where variables ⃗x and ⃗z are disjoint, ϕ(⃗x,⃗z) is a conjunc-
tion of distinct atoms over ⃗x ∪⃗y, and ψ(⃗x) is a disjunction
of distinct atoms over ⃗x. Formula ϕ is the body of r, and ψ
is the head. Quantiﬁers are omitted for brevity, and safety is
assumed (all variables in the rule occur in the body). We de-
ﬁne the following sets of rules for a ﬁnite signature Σ: (i) P⊤
Σ
consists of a rule P(x1, . . . , xn) →⊤(xi) for each predicate
P ∈Σ and each 1 ≤i ≤n and a rule →⊤(a) for each con-
stant a ∈Σ; (ii) P⊥
Σ consists of the rule having ⊥(x) in the
body and an empty head; and (iii) P≈
Σ consists of the standard
axiomatisation of ≈as a congruence over Σ.2 A program is
a ﬁnite set of rules P = P0 ∪P⊤
Σ ∪P⊥
Σ ∪P≈
Σ with Σ the
signature of P0, where we assume w.l.o.g. that the body of
each rule in P0 does not mention ⊥or ≈, and the head is
non-empty and does not mention ⊤. We omit Σ for the com-
ponents of P and write P⊤, P⊥and P≈. A rule is Horn if its
head consists of at most one atom, and a program is Horn if
so are all of its rules. Finally, a fact is a ground, function-free
atom, and a dataset is a ﬁnite set of facts.
Ontologies We assume familiarity with DLs and ontology
languages [Baader et al., 2003]. A DL signature Σ consists of
disjoint countable sets of concept names ΣC and role names
ΣR. A role is an element of ΣR ∪{R−| R ∈ΣR}. The
function inv is deﬁned over roles as follows, where R ∈ΣR:
inv(R) = R−and inv(R−) = R. W.l.o.g., we consider nor-
malised axioms as on the left-hand side of Table 1.
An ALCHIF ontology O is a ﬁnite set of DL axioms of
type T1-T6 in Table 1. An ontology is Horn if it contains no
axiom of type T1 satisfying m ≥2. Given O, we denote with
⊑∗the minimal reﬂexive and transitive relation over roles in
2 Reﬂexivity of ≈is axiomatised by the safe rule ⊤(x) →x ≈x.
O such that R1 ⊑∗R2 and inv(R1) ⊑∗inv(R2) hold when-
ever R1 ⊑R2 is an axiom in O.
We refer to the DL where only axioms of type T1-T3 are
available and the use of inverse roles is disallowed as ELU.
The logic ALC extends ELU with axioms T4. We then use
standard naming conventions for DLs based on the presence
of inverse roles (I), axioms T5 (H) and axioms T6 (F). Fi-
nally, an ontology is EL if it is both ELU and Horn.
Table 1 also provides the standard translation π from nor-
malised axioms into ﬁrst-order rules, where at(R, x, y) is de-
ﬁned as R(x, y) if R is named and as S(y, x) if R = S−.
We deﬁne π(O) as the smallest program containing π(α) for
each axiom α in O. Given a dataset D, we say that O ∪D is
satisﬁable iff so is π(O) ∪D in ﬁrst-order logic.
3
Horn Rewritability
Our focus is on satisﬁability-preserving rewritings. Standard
reasoning tasks in description logics are reducible to unsat-
isﬁability checking [Baader et al., 2003], which makes our
results practically relevant. We start by formulating our no-
tion of rewriting in general terms.
Deﬁnition 1. Let F and F′ be sets of rules. We say that F′
is a rewriting of F if it holds that F ∪D is satisﬁable iff so is
F′ ∪D for each dataset D over predicates from F.
⋄
We are especially interested in computing Horn rewritings
of ontologies—that is, rewritings where the given ontology
O1 is expressed in a DL L1 and the rewritten ontology O2
is in a Horn DL L2 (where preferably L2 ⊆L1). This is not
possible in general: satisﬁability checking is co-NP-complete
in data complexity even for the basic logic ELU [Krisnadhi
and Lutz, 2007], whereas data complexity is tractable even
for highly expressive Horn languages such as Horn-SROIQ
[Ortiz et al., 2011]. Horn rewritability for DLs can be formu-
lated as a decision problem as follows:
Deﬁnition 2. The (L1, L2)-Horn rewritability problem for
DLs L1 and L2 is to decide whether a given L1-ontology ad-
mits a rewriting expressed in Horn-L2.
⋄
Our ﬁrst result establishes undecidability whenever the in-
put ontology contains at-most cardinality restrictions and thus
equality. This result is in consonance with the related un-
decidability results by Bienvenu et al. [2014] and Lutz and
Wolter [2012] for Datalog rewritability and non-uniform data
complexity for ALCF ontologies.
Theorem 3. (L1, L2)-Horn rewritability is undecidable for
L1 = ALCF and L2 any DL between ELU and ALCHIF.
This result holds under the assumption that PTIME̸=NP.
Intractability results in data complexity rely on the abil-
ity of non-Horn DLs to encode co-NP-hard problems, such
as non-3-colourability [Krisnadhi and Lutz, 2007; Hustadt et
al., 2005]. In practice, however, it can be expected that on-
tologies do not encode such problems. Thus, our focus from
now onwards will be on identifying classes of ontologies that
admit (polynomial size) Horn rewritings.
4
Program Markability and Transposition
In this section, we introduce the class of markable programs
and show that every markable program can be rewritten into

T1.
dn
i=1 Ai ⊑Fm
j=1 Cj
Vn
i=1 Ai(x) →Wm
j=1 Cj(x)
T2.
∃R.A ⊑C
at(R, x, y) ∧A(y) →C(x)
T3.
A ⊑∃R.B
A(x) →at(R, x, f(x)); A(x) →B(f(x))
T4.
A ⊑∀R.C
A(x) ∧at(R, x, y) →C(y)
T5.
S ⊑R
S(x, y) →at(R, x, y)
T6.
A ⊑≤1 R.B
A(z) ∧at(R, z, x1) ∧at(R, z, x2) ∧B(x1) ∧B(x2) →x1 ≈x2
Table 1: Normalised DL axioms. A, B are named or ⊤; C named or ⊥; role S is named and R is a (possibly inverse) role.
a Horn program by means of a polynomial transformation,
which we refer to as transposition. Roughly speaking, trans-
position inverts the rules in a program P by moving certain
atoms from head to body and vice versa while replacing their
corresponding predicates with fresh ones. Markability of P
ensures that we can pick a set of predicates (a marking) such
that, by shufﬂing only atoms with a marked predicate, we
obtain a Horn rewriting of P. Our results in this section gen-
eralise the results by Kaminski et al. [2014a] for Disjunctive
Datalog to ﬁrst-order programs with function symbols.
To illustrate our deﬁnitions throughout this section, we use
an example program Pex consisting of the following rules:
A(x) →B(x)
B(x) →C(x) ∨D(x)
C(x) →⊥(x)
D(x) →C(f(x))
Markability. The notion of markability involves a partition-
ing of the program’s predicates into Horn and disjunctive. In-
tuitively, the former are those whose extension for all datasets
depends only on the Horn rules in the program, whereas the
latter are those whose extension may depend on a disjunc-
tive rule. This intuition can be formalised using the standard
notion of a dependency graph in Logic Programming.
Deﬁnition 4. The dependency graph GP = (V, E, µ) of a
program P is the smallest edge-labeled digraph such that:
(i) V contains all predicates in P; (ii) r ∈µ(P, Q) when-
ever r ∈P, P is in the body of r, and Q is in the head of r;
and (iii) (P, Q) ∈E whenever µ(P, Q) ̸= ∅. A predicate Q
depends on r ∈P if GP has a path ending in Q and involving
an r-labeled edge. Predicate Q is Horn if it depends only on
Horn rules; otherwise, Q is disjunctive.
⋄
For instance, predicates C, D, and ⊥are disjunctive in our
example program Pex, whereas A and B are Horn. We can
now introduce the notion of a marking—a subset of the dis-
junctive predicates in a program P ensuring that the transpo-
sition of P where only marked atoms are shufﬂed between
head and body results in a Horn program.
Deﬁnition 5. A marking of a program P is a set M of dis-
junctive predicates in P satisfying the following properties,
where we say that an atom is marked if its predicate is in M:
(i) each rule in P has at most one marked body atom; (ii) each
rule in P has at most one unmarked head atom; and (iii) if
Q ∈M and P is reachable from Q in GP, then P ∈M. We
say that a program is markable if it admits a marking.
⋄
Condition (i) in Def. 5 ensures that at most one atom is
moved from body to head during transposition. Condition
(ii) ensures that all but possibly one head atom are moved to
the body. Finally, condition (iii) requires that all predicates
depending on a marked predicate are also marked. We can
observe that our example program Pex admits two markings:
M1 = {C, ⊥} and M2 = {C, D, ⊥}.
Markability can be efﬁciently checked via a 2-SAT reduc-
tion, where we assign to each predicate Q in P a propositional
variable XQ and encode the constraints in Def. 5 as 2-clauses.
For each rule ϕ ∧Vn
i=1 Pi(⃗si) →Wm
j=1 Qj(⃗tj), with ϕ the
conjunction of all Horn atoms in the rule head, we include
clauses (i) ¬XPi ∨¬XPj for all 1 ≤i < j ≤n, which en-
force at most one body atom to be marked; (ii) XQi ∨XQj
for 1 ≤i < j ≤m, which ensure that at most one head
atom is unmarked; and (iii) ¬XPi ∨XQj for 1 ≤i ≤n and
1 ≤j ≤m, which close markings under rule dependencies.
Each model of the resulting clauses yields a marking of P.
Transposition. Before deﬁning transposition, we illustrate
the main intuitions using program Pex and marking M1.
The ﬁrst step to transpose Pex is to introduce fresh unary
predicates C and ⊥, which stand for the negation of the
marked predicates C and ⊥. To capture the intended mean-
ing of these predicates, we introduce rules X(x) →⊥(x)
for X ∈{A, B, C, D} and a rule ⊥(x) →⊥(f(x)) for the
unique function symbol f in Pex. The ﬁrst rules mimick the
usual axiomatisation of ⊤and ensure that an atom ⊥(c) holds
in a Herbrand model of the transposed program whenever
X(c) also holds. The last rule ensures that ⊥holds for all
terms in the Herbrand universe of the transposed program—
an additional requirement that is consistent with the intended
meaning of ⊥, and critical to the completeness of transpo-
sition in the presence of function symbols. Finally, a rule
⊥(z)∧C(x)∧C(x) →⊥(z) ensures that the fresh predicate
C behaves like the negation of C (⊥(z) is added for safety).
The key step of transposition is to invert the rules involv-
ing the marked predicates by shufﬂing marked atoms between
head and body while replacing their predicate with the corre-
sponding fresh one. In this way, rule B(x) →C(x) ∨D(x)
yields B(x) ∧C(x) →D(x), and C(x) →⊥(x) yields
⊥(x) →C(x). Additionally, rule D(x) →C(f(x)) is trans-
posed as ⊥(z)∧D(x)∧C(f(x)) →⊥(z) to ensure safety. Fi-
nally, transposition does not affect rules containing only Horn
predicates, e.g., rule A(x) →B(x) is included unchanged.
Deﬁnition 6. Let M be a marking of a program P. For each
disjunctive predicate P in P, let P be a fresh predicate of the
same arity. The M-transposition of P is the smallest program
ΞM(P) containing every rule in P involving only Horn pred-
icates and all rules 1–6 given next, where ϕ is the conjunction
of all Horn atoms in a rule, ϕ⊤is the least conjunction of ⊥-
atoms making a rule safe and all Pi, Qj are disjunctive:
1. ϕ⊤∧ϕ∧Vm
j=1 Qj(⃗tj)∧Vn
i=1 P i(⃗si) →Q(⃗t) for each rule
in P of the form ϕ ∧Q(⃗t) ∧Vm
j=1 Qj(⃗tj) →Wn
i=1 Pi(⃗si)

where Q(⃗t) is the only marked body atom;
2. ⊥(x) ∧ϕ ∧Vm
j=1 Qj(⃗tj) ∧Vn
i=1 P i(⃗si) →⊥(x), where
x a fresh variable, for each rule in P of the form ϕ ∧
Vm
j=1 Qj(⃗tj) →Wn
i=1 Pi(⃗si), with no marked body atoms
and no unmarked head atoms;
3. ϕ ∧Vm
j=1 Qj(⃗tj) ∧Vn
i=1 P i(⃗si) →P(⃗s) for each rule in
P of the form ϕ ∧Vm
j=1 Qj(⃗tj) →P(⃗s) ∨Wn
i=1 Pi(⃗si)
where P(⃗s) is the only unmarked head atom;
4. ⊥(z) ∧P(⃗x) ∧P(⃗x) →⊥(z) for marked predicate P;
5. P(x1, . . . , xn) →⊥(xi) for each P in P and 1 ≤i ≤n;
6. ⊥(x1) ∧. . . ∧⊥(xn) →⊥(f(x1, . . . , xn)) for each n-ary
function symbol f in P.
⋄
Note that rules of type 1 in Def. 6 satisfy {P1, . . . , Pn} ⊆
M since Q ∈M, while for rules of type 3 we have
{Q1, . . . , Qm} ∩M = ∅since P /∈M.
Clearly, Pex is unsatisﬁable when extended with fact A(a).
To see that ΞM1(Pex)∪{A(a)} is also unsatisﬁable, note that
B(a) is derived by the unchanged rule A(x) →B(x). Fact
C(a) is derived using A(x) →⊥(x) and the transposed rule
⊥(x) →C(x). We derive D(a) using B(x)∧C(x) →D(x).
But then, to derive a contradiction we need to apply rule
⊥(z)∧D(x)∧C(f(x)) →⊥(z), which is not possible unless
we derive C(f(a)). For this, we ﬁrst use ⊥(x) →⊥(f(x)),
which ensures that ⊥holds for f(a), and then ⊥(x) →C(x).
Transposition yields quadratically many Horn rules. The
following theorem establishes its correctness.
Theorem 7. Let M be a marking of a program P. Then
ΞM(P) is a polynomial-size Horn rewriting of P.
It follows that every markable set of non-Horn clauses N
can be polynomially transformed into a set of Horn clauses
N ′ such that N ∪D and N ′ ∪D are equisatisﬁable for every
set of facts D. This result is rather general and has poten-
tial applications in ﬁrst-order theorem proving, as well as in
knowledge compilation, where Horn clauses are especially
relevant [Darwiche and Marquis, 2002; Del Val, 2005].
5
Markability of DL Ontologies
The notion of markability is applicable to ﬁrst-order pro-
grams and hence can be seamlessly adapted to ontologies via
the standard translation π in Table 1. This, however, would
be of limited value since the Horn programs resulting from
transposition may not be expressible in Horn-ALCHIF.
Consider any ontology with an axiom ∃R.A ⊑B and any
marking M involving R. Rule R(x, y)∧A(y) →B(x) stem-
ming from π would be transposed as B(x)∧A(y) →R(x, y),
which cannot be captured in ALCHIF.3
To address this limitation we introduce an alternative trans-
lation ξ from DL axioms into rules, which we illustrate us-
ing the example ontology Oex in Table 2. The key idea is to
encode existential restrictions in axioms T3 as unary atoms
over functional terms. For instance, axiom α2 in Oex would
yield B(x) →D(fR,D(x)), where the “successor” relation
between an instance b of B and some instance of D in a Her-
brand model is encoded as a term fR,D(b), instead of a binary
3Capturing such a rule would require a DL that can express prod-
ucts of concepts [Rudolph et al., 2008].
atom of the form R(b, g(b)). This encoding has an immediate
impact on markings: by marking B we are only forced to also
mark D (rather than both R and D). In this way, we will be
able to ensure that markings consist of unary predicates only.
To compensate for the lack of binary atoms involving func-
tional terms in Herbrand models, we introduce new rules
when translating axioms T2, T4, and T6 using ξ. For instance,
ξ(α3) yields the following rules in addition to π(α3): a rule
D(fR,D(x)) →D(x) to ensure that all objects c with an R-
successor fR,D(c) generated by ξ(α2) are instances of D; a
rule D(fR,B(x)) →D(x), which makes sure that an object
whose R-successor generated by ξ(α4) is an instance of D
is also an instance of D. Finally, axioms α1 and α5, which
involve no binary predicates, are translated as usual.
Deﬁnition 8. Let O be an ontology. For each concept ∃R.B
in an axiom of type T3, let fR,B be a unary function symbol,
and Φ the set of all such symbols. We deﬁne ξ(O) as the
smallest program containing π(α) for each axiom α in O of
type T1-T2 and T4-T6, as well as the following rules:
• A(x) →B(fR,B(x)) for each axiom T3;
• A(fR′,Y (x)) →C(x) for each axiom T2 and R′ and Y s.t.
fR′,Y ∈Φ and R′ ⊑∗R.
• A(finv(R′),Y (x)) →C(x) for each axiom T4 and R′ and
Y s.t. finv(R′),Y ∈Φ and R′ ⊑∗R.
• A(x) ∧Y (finv(R′),Y (x)) →C(finv(R′),Y (x)) for each ax-
iom T2 and R′ and Y s.t. finv(R′),Y ∈Φ and R′ ⊑∗R.
• A(x) ∧Y (fR′,Y (x)) →C(fR′,Y (x)) for each axiom T4
and R′ and Y s.t. fR′,Y ∈Φ and R′ ⊑∗R.
• A(z)∧B(fR′,Y (z))∧at(R, z, x)∧B(x) →fR′,Y (z) ≈x
for each ax. T6 and R′, Y s.t. fR′,Y ∈Φ and R′ ⊑∗R.
• A(finv(R′),Y (x))∧B(x)∧at(R, finv(R′),Y (x), y)∧B(y) →
x ≈y for each axiom T6 and R′ and Y s.t. finv(R′),Y ∈Φ
and R′ ⊑∗R.
• A(z) ∧B(fR′
1,Y1(z)) ∧B(fR′
2,Y2(z)) →fR′
1,Y1(z) ≈
fR′
2,Y2(z) for each axiom T6 and fR′
i,Yi ∈Φ s.t. R′
i ⊑∗R.
• A(finv(R′
1),Y1(x)) ∧B(x) ∧B(fR′
2,Y2(finv(R′
1),Y1(x))) →
x ≈fR′
2,Y2(finv(R′
1),Y1(x)) for each axiom T6 and each R′
i
and Yi s.t. {finv(R′
1),Y1, fR′
2,Y2} ⊆Φ and R′
i ⊑∗R.
⋄
Note that, in contrast to the standard translation π, which
introduces at most two rules per DL axiom, ξ can introduce
linearly many rules in the size of the role hierarchy induced
by axioms of type T5.
The translation ξ(Oex) of our example ontology Oex is
given in the second column of Table 2. Clearly, Oex is unsat-
isﬁable when extended with A(a) and E(a). We can check
that ξ(Oex) ∪{A(a), E(a)} is also unsatisﬁable. The follow-
ing theorem establishes the correctness of ξ.
Theorem 9. For every ontology O and dataset D over predi-
cates in O we have that O∪D is satisﬁable iff so is ξ(O)∪D.
This translation has a clear beneﬁt for markability check-
ing: in contrast to π(O), binary predicates in ξ(O) do not
belong to any minimal marking.
In particular, Mex
=
{B, D, ⊥} is the only minimal marking of ξ(Oex).
Proposition 10. (i) If ≈is Horn in ξ(O) then so are all bi-
nary predicates in ξ(O). (ii) If ξ(O) is markable, then it has
a marking containing only unary predicates.

Ontology Oex
Rule translation ξ(Oex)
Transposition ΞMex(ξ(Oex))
Horn DL rewriting Ψ(ΞMex(ξ(Oex)))
α1
A ⊑B ⊔C
A(x) →B(x) ∨C(x)
A(x) ∧B(x) →C(x)
A ⊓B ⊑C
α2
B ⊑∃R.D
B(x) →D(fR,D(x))
D(fR,D(x)) →B(x)
∃RD.D ⊑B
α3
∃R.D ⊑D
R(x, y) ∧D(y) →D(x)
R(x, y) ∧D(x) →D(y)
D ⊑∀R.D
D(fR,D(x)) →D(x)
D(x) →D(fR,D(x))
D ⊑∀RDD
D(fR,B(x)) →D(x)
D(x) →D(fR,B(x))
D ⊑∀RBD
α4
C ⊑∃R.B
C(x) →B(fR,B(x))
⊥(z) ∧C(x) ∧B(fR,B(x)) →⊥(z)
C ⊓∃RB.B ⊑⊥
α5
D ⊓E ⊑⊥
D(x) ∧E(x) →⊥(x)
E(x) ∧⊥(x) →D(x)
E ⊓⊥⊑D
X(x) →⊥(x), X ∈{A, B, C, D, E}
X ⊑⊥
R(x1, x2) →⊥(xi), 1 ≤i ≤2
⊤⊑∀R.⊥, ∃R.⊤⊑⊥
⊥(x) →⊥(fR,Y (x)), Y ∈{B, D}
⊥⊑∃RY .⊥
Table 2: Rewriting the example ELU ontology Oex into a Horn-ALC ontology using the marking Mex = {B, D, ⊥}.
Thus, we deﬁne markability of ontologies in terms of ξ
rather than in terms of π. We can check that π(Oex) is not
markable, whereas ξ(Oex) admits the marking Mex.
Deﬁnition 11. An ontology O is markable if so is ξ(O).
⋄
We conclude this section with the observation that mark-
ability of an ontology O can be efﬁciently checked by ﬁrst
computing the program ξ(O) and then exploiting the 2-SAT
encoding sketched in Section 4.
6
Rewriting Markable Ontologies
It follows from the correctness of transposition in Theorem 7
and ξ in Theorem 9 that every ALCHIF ontology O admit-
ting a marking M has a Horn rewriting of polynomial size
given as the program ΞM(ξ(O)). In what follows, we show
that this rewriting can be expressed within Horn-ALCHIF.
Let us consider the transposition of ξ(Oex) via the mark-
ing Mex, which is given in the third column of Table 2. The
transposition of α1 and α5 corresponds directly to DL ax-
ioms via the standard translation in Table 1. In contrast, the
transposition of all other axioms leads to rules that have no
direct correspondence in DLs. The following lemma estab-
lishes that the latter rules are restricted to the types T7-T20
speciﬁed on the left-hand side of Table 3.
Lemma 12. Let O be an ontology and M a minimal marking
of ξ(O). Then ΞM(ξ(O)) contains only Horn rules of type
T1-T2 and T4-T6 in Table 1 as well as type T7-T20 in Table 3.
We can now specify a transformation Ψ that allows us to
translate rules T7-T20 in Table 3 back into DL axioms.
Deﬁnition 13. We deﬁne Ψ as the transformation mapping
(i) each Horn rule r of types T1-T2 and T4-T6 in Table 1 to
the DL axiom π−1(r) (ii) each rule T7-T20 on the left-hand
side of Table 3 to the DL axioms on the right-hand side.4
⋄
Intuitively, Ψ works as follows: (i) Function-free rules are
“rolled up” as usual into DL axioms (see e.g., T7). (ii) Unary
atoms A(fR,Y (x)) with A ̸= ⊥involving a functional term
are translated as either existentially or universally quantiﬁed
4For succinctness, axioms resulting from T7, T8, T12, T13, T14,
T16 and T18 are not given in normal form.
concepts depending on whether they occur in the body or in
the head (e.g., T10, T11); in contrast, atoms ⊥(fR,Y (x)) in
rules ⊥(x) →⊥(fR,Y (x)) are translated as ∃RY .⊥, instead
of ∀RY .⊥(see T9). (iii) Rules T15-T18, which involve ≈in
the head and roles R′ and R in the body, are rolled back into
axioms of type T6 over the “union” of R and R′, which is
captured using fresh roles and role inclusions.
The ontology obtained by applying Ψ to our running ex-
ample is given in the last column of Table 2. Correctness of
Ψ and its implications for the computation of Horn rewritings
are summarised in the following lemma.
Lemma 14. Let O be a markable ALCHIF ontology and
let M be a marking of O. Then the ontology Ψ(ΞM(ξ(O)))
is a Horn rewriting of O.
A closer look at our transformations reveals that our rewrit-
ings do not introduce constructs such as inverse roles and car-
dinality restrictions if these were not already present in the
input ontology. In contrast, fresh role inclusions may origi-
nate from cardinality restrictions in the input ontology. As a
result, our approach is language-preserving: if the input O1 is
in a DL L1 between ALC and ALCHI, then its rewriting O2
stays in the Horn fragment of L1; furthermore, if L1 is be-
tween ALCF and ALCIF, then O2 may contain fresh role
inclusions (H). A notable exception is when O1 is an ELU
ontology, in which case axioms T2 and T3 in O1 may yield
axioms of type T4 in O2. The following theorem follows
from these observations and Lemma 14.
Theorem 15. Let L be a DL between ALC and ALCHI.
Then every markable L ontology is polynomially rewritable
into a Horn-L ontology.
If L is between ALCF and
ALCHIF, then every markable L ontology is polynomially
rewritable into Horn-LH. Finally, every markable ELU on-
tology is polynomially rewritable into Horn-ALC.
7
Complexity Results
We next establish the complexity of satisﬁability checking
over markable ontologies.
We ﬁrst show that satisﬁability checking over markable
ELU ontologies is EXPTIME-hard. This implies that it is not

T7.
⊥(z) ∧B(x) ∧R(x, y) ∧A(y) →⊥(z)
B ⊓∃R.A ⊑⊥
T8.
⊥(z) ∧A(fR,Y (x)) ∧B(x) →⊥(z)
B ⊓∃RY .A ⊑⊥
T9.
⊥(x) →⊥(fR,Y (x))
⊥⊑∃RY .⊥
T10.
B(x) →A(fR,Y (x))
B ⊑∀RY .A if A ̸= ⊥or B ̸= ⊥
T11.
B(fR,Y (x)) →A(x)
∃RY .B ⊑A
T12.
A(x) ∧B(fR,Y (x)) →C(fR,Y (x))
A ⊓∃RY .B ⊑∀RY .C
T13.
⊥(z) ∧A(x) ∧B(fR,Y (x)) ∧C(fR,Y (x)) →⊥(z)
A ⊓∃RY (B ⊓C) ⊑⊥
T14.
B(fR,Y (x)) ∧C(fR,Y (x)) →A(x)
∃RY (B ⊓C) ⊑A
T15.
A(z) ∧B(fR′,Y (z)) ∧at(R, z, x) ∧B(x)
R′
Y ⊑S{R′
Y ,R} and R ⊑S{R′
Y ,R} and
→fR′,Y (z) ≈x
A ⊑≤1S{R′
Y ,R}.B
T16.
A(fR′,Y (x)) ∧B(x) ∧at(R, fR′,Y (x), y) ∧B(y)
˜R′
Y ⊑S{ ˜
R′
Y ,R} and R ⊑S{ ˜
R′
Y ,R} and
→x ≈y
A ⊑≤1S{ ˜
R′
Y ,R}.B and ˜R′
Y ≡inv(R′
Y )
T17.
A(z) ∧B(fR,Y (z)) ∧B(fR′,Z(z))
RY ⊑S{RY ,R′
Z} and R′
Z ⊑S{RY ,R′
Z} and
→fR,Y (z) ≈fR′,Z(z)
A ⊑≤1S{RY ,R′
Z}.B
T18.
A(fR,Y (x)) ∧B(x) ∧B(fR′,Z(fR,Y (x)))
˜RY ⊑S{ ˜
RY ,R′
Z} and R′
Z ⊑S{ ˜
RY ,R′
Z} and
→x ≈fR′,Z(fR,Y (x))
A ⊑≤1S{ ˜
RY ,R′
Z}.B and ˜RY ≡inv(RY )
T19.
R(x, y) →⊥(x)
∃R.⊤⊑⊥
T20.
R(x, y) →⊥(y)
⊤⊑∀R.⊥
Table 3: Transformation Ψ from transposed rules to DLs. Role names ˜R are fresh for every R, and S{R,R′} for every {R, R′}.
possible to polynomially rewrite every markable ELU ontol-
ogy into EL. Consequently, our rewriting approach is optimal
for ELU in the sense that introducing universal restrictions
(or equivalently inverse roles) in the rewriting is unavoidable.
Lemma 16. Satisﬁability checking over markable ELU on-
tologies is EXPTIME-hard.
All Horn DLs from ALC to ALCHIF are EXPTIME-
complete in combined complexity and PTIME-complete in
data complexity [Kr¨otzsch et al., 2013]. By Theorem 15, the
same result holds for markable ontologies in DLs from ALC
to ALCHIF. Finally, Lemma 16 shows that these complex-
ity results also extend to markable ELU ontologies.
Theorem 17. Let L be in-between ELU and ALCHIF. Sat-
isﬁability checking over markable L-ontologies is EXPTIME-
complete and PTIME-complete w.r.t. data.
8
Related Work
Horn logics are common target languages for knowledge
compilation [Darwiche and Marquis, 2002].
Selman and
Kautz [1996] proposed an algorithm for compiling a set of
propositional clauses into a set of Horn clauses s.t. their Horn
consequences coincide.
This approach was generalised to
FOL by Del Val [2005], without termination guarantees.
Bienvenu et al. [2014] showed undecidability of Datalog
rewritability for ALCF and decidability in NEXPTIME for
SHI. Cuenca Grau et al. [2013] and Kaminski et al. [2014a]
proposed practical techniques for computing Datalog rewrit-
ings of SHI ontologies based on a two-step process. First,
O is rewritten using a resolution calculus Ωinto a Disjunc-
tive Datalog program Ω(O) of exponential size [Hustadt et
al., 2007]. Second, Ω(O) is rewritten into a Datalog program
P. For the second step, Kaminski et al. [2014a] propose the
notion of markability of a Disjunctive Datalog program and
show that P can be polynomially computed from Ω(O) us-
ing transposition whenever Ω(O) is markable. In contrast to
our work, Kaminski et al. [2014a] focus on Datalog as target
language for rewriting (rather than Horn DLs). Furthermore,
their Datalog rewritings may be exponential w.r.t. the input
ontology and cannot generally be represented in DLs.
Gottlob et al. [2012] showed tractability in data complexity
of fact entailment for the class of ﬁrst-order rules with single-
atom bodies, which is sufﬁcient to capture most DLs in the
DL-Litebool family [Artale et al., 2009].
Lutz and Wolter [2012] investigated (non-uniform) data
complexity of query answering w.r.t. ﬁxed ontologies. They
studied the boundary of PTIME and co-NP-hardness and es-
tablished a connection with constraint satisfaction problems.
Finally, Lutz et al. [2011] studied model-theoretic rewritabil-
ity of ontologies in a DL L1 into a fragment L2 of L1.
These rewritings preserve models rather than just satisﬁabil-
ity, which severely restricts the class of rewritable ontologies;
in particular, only ontologies that are “semantically Horn”
can be rewritten. For instance, O = {A ⊑B ⊔C}, which is
rewritable by our approach, is not Horn-rewritable according
to Lutz et al. [2011].
9
Proof of Concept
To assess the practical implications of our results, we have
evaluated whether real-world ontologies are markable (and
hence also polynomially Horn rewritable). We analysed 120
non-Horn ontologies extracted from the Protege Ontology Li-
brary, BioPortal (http://bioportal.bioontology.org/), the cor-
pus by Gardiner et al. [2006], and the EBI linked data plat-
form (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/rdf/platform). To check marka-
bility, we have implemented the 2-SAT reduction in Section 4

and a simple 2-SAT solver.
We found that a total of 32 ontologies were markable and
thus rewritable into a Horn ontology, including some ontolo-
gies commonly used in applications, such as ChEMBL (see
http://www.ebi.ac.uk/rdf/services/chembl/) and BioPAX Re-
actome (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/rdf/services/reactome/). When
using π as ﬁrst-order logic translation, we obtained 30 mark-
able ontologies—a strict subset of the ontologies markable
using ξ. However, only 27 ontologies were rewritable to a
Horn DL since in three cases the marking contained a role.
10
Conclusion and Future Work
We have presented the ﬁrst practical technique for rewriting
non-Horn ontologies into a Horn DL. Our rewritings are poly-
nomial, and our experiments suggest that they are applicable
to widely-used ontologies. We anticipate several directions
for future work. First, we would like to conduct an exten-
sive evaluation to assess whether the use of our rewritings can
signiﬁcantly speed up satisﬁability checking in practice. Sec-
ond, we will investigate relaxations of markability that would
allow us to capture a wider range of ontologies.
