Page 1 of 5 
Advancing technologies for high-resolution spatial and temporal measurements of macroscopic 
stellarator flows 
 
A. M. Wright1, D. J Den Hartog2, B. Geiger1, C. Lu3, A. Wolfmeister1, B. J. Faber1 
 
1Department of Nuclear Physics & Engineering Physics 
2Department of Physics 
3Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering 
 
University of Wisconsin – Madison 
 
Submission to the Basic Research Needs Workshop on Measurement Innovation 
 
January 4, 2024 
 
 
1. Introduction 
Stellarators, together with tokamaks, represent the two mainstream approaches to realizing fusion energy 
via toroidal magnetic confinement of highly ionized gases – plasmas – at extremely high temperatures. 
 
In stellarators, a magnetic field produced by external electromagnetic coils is sufficient to confine plasmas, 
but this magnetic field is non-axisymmetric, i.e., varies with toroidal angle, 𝜑𝜑. By contrast, in tokamaks, a 
nominally axisymmetric magnetic field, which allows large toroidal flows to develop, is generated by 
external coils but must be supplemented by a magnetic field produced by a current driven within the plasma. 
 
Consequently, the development of modern and next-generation stellarator configurations is centered on 
designing magnetic fields that produce desirable plasma confinement properties. Since stellarators admit 
magnetic fields that vary toroidally, the design space for the magnetic field and, consequently, the 
electromagnetic coils is greatly expanded compared to tokamaks. 
 
In the US stellarator program, the dominant design strategy uses approximate symmetries of the magnetic 
field to improve plasma confinement properties, as predicted by theoretical analysis. These so-called 
quasisymmetries are a symmetry in the magnitude of the magnetic field in a particular coordinate system 
and, in theory, can lead to exact confinement of plasma particles, in an idealized limit. 
 
Stellarators based on other design strategies also exist. For example, Wendelstein 7-X (W7-X) is based on 
a magnetic field that preserves particle confinement on average, again, in a theoretical, idealized limit.  
 
2. Scientific motivation 
Improving our understanding of how macroscopic flows impact equilibrium and dynamics in stellarators 
closes a significant knowledge gap and is necessary to advance the physics basis of stellarators as a fusion 
pilot plant (FPP) concept. This is especially critical for the US stellarator design program, in both the public 
and private sectors, where stellarator FPP concepts are based almost exclusively on leveraging 
quasisymmetries. 
 
There is strong experimental evidence of macroscopic flows in quasisymmetric stellarators: 
While flows have been observed to be strongly damped in W7-X, this is not true for stellarators in general. 
Indeed, the Helically Symmetric Experiment (HSX) – the world’s only operating major quasisymmetric 
stellarator – has demonstrated quite the opposite. A series of experiments in the mid-2000s showed that 
substantial plasma flow can be generated in the direction of quasisymmetry (c.f. Figures 1 and 2). Moreover, 

 
 
 
Page 2 of 5 
events such as the core density collapse (CDC) events observed in Large Helical Device, lead to rapid 
(millisecond) and large-scale changes in the plasma profiles, necessarily generating macroscopic flows. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Macroscopic flows can fundamentally alter the behavior of fusion plasmas: 
Intrinsically, fusion plasmas are extremely multi-scale and highly nonlinear. This means that macroscopic 
dynamics can affect the microscopic and vice versa, even when separated by 6 orders of magnitude, and 
that small changes can drive the system to an entirely different state. Thus, flows in a quasisymmetric 
stellarator needn’t be fast to significantly impact performance. To illustrate this theoretically, consider a 
simple visco-resistive single-fluid magnetohydrodynamic model. In the conservation of momentum 
equation: 
𝜌𝜌൬𝜕𝜕𝐯𝐯
𝜕𝜕𝜕𝜕+ 𝐯𝐯∇⋅𝐯𝐯൰= 𝜇𝜇0
−1(∇× 𝐁𝐁) × 𝐁𝐁−∇𝑝𝑝+ ν∇2𝐯𝐯 
 
There exists a nonlinearity in the fluid velocity (blue) and a nonlinearity in the magnetic field (red). The 
former also occurs in (neutral) fluid dynamics and is a convective nonlinearity associated with inertia of 
the fluid. The latter is due to the Lorentz force and arises only in plasmas, which consist of charged particles 
moving through an electromagnetic field. What’s more, through the induction equation:     
  
𝜕𝜕𝐁𝐁
𝜕𝜕𝜕𝜕= ∇× (𝐯𝐯× 𝐁𝐁) + η∇2𝐁𝐁 
 
that describes the evolution of the magnetic field in time, the fluid and magnetic field nonlinearities become 
coupled due to the Lorentz force (purple). This illustrates simply that a small change to flow and/or the 
magnetic field can be quickly amplified to produce a significant change in overall plasma performance.   
 
Fundamental assumptions are not always consistent with experiment: 
The assumption that a stellarator plasma exists in a static (𝐯𝐯= 0), steady (𝜕𝜕𝜕𝜕→0) equilibrium state at any 
instance in time, is pervasive in both theoretical and experimental settings. For example: 
- 
Microphysics models that describe transport phenomena such as turbulence are frequently built 
assuming a static macroscopic (i.e., background) magnetic field. 
- 
Equilibrium reconstruction is a key step in analyzing and interpreting experimental data.   
 
However, the strongly nonlinear nature of stellarator plasmas (as illustrated above) means that the static, 
steady state assumption is not robustly valid, even if flows are small and quantities are varying slowly in 
time. In such a contradictory state, the correctness of results – both theoretical and inferred from experiment 
– may be questioned. 
Figure 1: Reproduced from Fig. 3 of Ref. [1]. 
Figure 2: Reproduced from Fig. 2 of Ref. [2] 

 
 
 
Page 3 of 5 
3. Timeliness 
This issue becomes critical in the context of the forward extrapolations from which quasisymmetric 
stellarator FPP concepts are presently being designed and developed, especially in the US program. 
 
The starting point of current, state-of-the-art stellarator optimization and design tools are equilibrium 
models which assume a plasma state that satisfies ideal MHD force balance: 
 
𝐉𝐉× 𝐁𝐁= ∇𝑝𝑝 
 
And neglects macroscopic plasma flows entirely (𝐯𝐯= 0). This includes optimization frameworks such as 
SIMSOPT and STELLOPT which are, or have been, widely used by the US stellarator community. 
However, from HSX measurements we know that significant flows are generated in quasisymmetric 
stellarators. To reconcile the inconsistency and improve the reliability of the projections on which future 
public and private investments (potentially worth billions of dollars) into stellarator FPP concepts are based, 
it is crucial to understand macroscopic plasma flows, especially in quasisymmetric stellarators.  
 
More generally, strengthening the diagnostic capabilities necessary to advance the understanding of 
macroscopic flows in stellarators yields broad benefits beyond quasisymmetric stellarator FPPs. It has the 
potential to create synergies with existing international programs, such as efforts to measure flows in W7-
X and LHD.  
 
4. Opportunities 
With this submission we invite the community to consider how the need for improving physics 
understanding of flows in advanced stellarators can serve as a catalyst for diagnostic and measurement 
innovation. This includes the identification of synergies with on-going technology development activities 
as well as opportunities to leverage new and emerging capabilities that may stem from hardware 
improvements and software, for example, application of AI/ML and workflow integration and management. 
 
To help contextualize and ground the discussion, in the Appendix we highlight some diagnostic techniques 
where further innovation has the potential to deliver unique capabilities for high-resolution spatial and 
temporal measurements of macroscopic stellarator flows. 
 
 

 
 
 
Page 4 of 5 
Appendix. Selected examples of relevant diagnostic techniques 
 
Charge eXchange Recombination Spectroscopy: Charge eXchange Recombination Spectroscopy (CXRS) 
is based on the analysis of characteristic line radiation of impurity ions after receiving a bound electron via 
charge exchange reactions along a neutral beam [3]. Depending on the viewing geometry, the Doppler shift 
of the line radiation provides information on plasma flows in different directions. The typical time 
resolution of this type of measurement is 10 ms and, depending on the neutral beam width and geometry, 
can provide spatial resolution of few mm.  
 
2D Coherence Imaging Spectroscopy: Coherence Imaging Spectroscopy (CIS) is a relatively novel 
technique which has been explored so far to provide ion flow velocities in the edge of fusion plasmas [4]. 
The diagnostic uses recent camera-based heterodyne polarization interferometers  that 
allow 
for 
the 
detection of small Doppler-shifts of characteristic impurity line radiation, and hence provide 2D information 
on flow velocities. As an example, the flow pattern in the island divertor of W7-X could be studied using 
CIS [5].  
 
X-ray imaging crystal spectrometer: X-ray Crystal Spectrometers have been deployed that provide 
wavelength resolved 1D spatial profile of line radiation emitted inside of fusion plasmas by highly charged 
impurity ions. Thanks to the 1D coverage, reconstruction of the measured impurity emission profile is 
possible so that spatially resolved Doppler shifts, and hence, plasma flows can be determined.  
 
Turbulence propagation measurements: 2D fluctuation diagnostics such as Beam Emission Spectroscopy 
(BES), gas puff imagining (GPI) or Imagining ECE have been used to track turbulent eddies. As the Eddie-
movement is impacted by plasma flows, information about plasma rotation is obtained. In addition, Doppler 
Reflectometry systems are commonly used that measure the propagation velocity of turbulent fluctuations 
based on the Doppler shift of back-scattered signals.  
 
Finally, we remark that opportunities may present to leverage diagnostics that are already deployed to 
measure other plasma quantities such as density or electron temperature. One such diagnostic is the Fast 
Thomson Scattering system deployed on LHD. Innovations that enable the integration of multiple 
complementary techniques have the potential to yield unprecedented insight into the physics of macroscopic 
flows in stellarators.  
 
Fast Thomson Scattering diagnostic: A Fast Thomson Scattering (TS) diagnostic measures electron 
temperature and density profiles at a rate of ≥ 1 kHz.  This is usually done in a burst mode, e.g. 20 kHz 
measurement rate for 5 ms.  Dynamic changes such as those caused by ELMs, collapse events, and 
disruptions can be captured in this way.  LHD currently fields a state-of-the-art Fast TS system, with 
measurement rates from 1 to 20 kHz, at 70 points across the diameter of the plasma.  An example of the 
capability of this diagnostic is the measurement of the collapse of an electron ITB [6]. Planned next-
generation Fast TS systems will be capable of measurement rates from 1 to 100 kHz.  This will enable 
measurement of increased temporal detail during dynamic events and will begin to access kinetic 
phenomena such as temperature and density fluctuations responsible for turbulent transport. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
Page 5 of 5
