2019 22nd International Conference on Computer and Information
Technology (ICCIT), 18-20 December, 2019
Authorship Attribution in Bangla literature using
Character-level CNN
Aisha Khatun
Department of Computer
Science and Engineering
Shahjalal University of
Science and Technology
Sylhet, Bangladesh

Anisur Rahman
Department of Computer
Science and Engineering
Shahjalal University of
Science and Technology
Sylhet, Bangladesh

Md. Saiful Islam
Department of Computer
Science and Engineering
Shahjalal University of
Science and Technology
Sylhet, Bangladesh

Marium-E-Jannat
Department of Computer
Science and Engineering
Shahjalal University of
Science and Technology
Sylhet, Bangladesh

Abstract—Characters are the smallest unit of text that can
extract stylometric signals to determine the author of a text.
In this paper, we investigate the effectiveness of character-level
signals in Authorship Attribution of Bangla Literature and show
that the results are promising but improvable. The time and
memory efﬁciency of the proposed model is much higher than
the word level counterparts but accuracy is 2-5% less than
the best performing word-level models. Comparison of various
word-based models is performed and shown that the proposed
model performs increasingly better with larger datasets. We also
analyze the effect of pre-training character embedding of diverse
Bangla character set in authorship attribution. It is seen that the
performance is improved by up to 10% on pre-training. We used
2 datasets from 6 to 14 authors, balancing them before training
and compare the results.
Keywords—Character Level, Character Embedding, Bangla,
Authorship Attribution, Deep Learning
I. INTRODUCTION
Authorship attribution is generally concerned with the iden-
tiﬁcation of the original author of a given text from a set of
given authors. It has a wide range of applications including
plagiarism detection, forensic linguistics, etc. Each author
has a distinctive writing style that is exploited by statistical
analysis to detect the author.
However, in Bangla language, the amount of work done
in this area is not very rich despite being one of the
most spoken languages. In traditional methods, texts are
represented using independent features such as lexical n-gram
or frequency-based representation. In this approach, words
of similar context are likely to be represented in different
vector space as the features are independent. So, the semantic
values of the words might be lost, which is problematic.
Word embedding, also generally known as distributed term
representations, offers a solution to this problem by encoding
semantic similarity from their co-occurrences. Chowdhury
[1] experimented with the effectiveness of word embedding
in authorship attribution for Bangla language for various
architectures.
Another type of embedding, which we tried to analyze
in this paper is character embedding. Character CNN was
ﬁrst introduced by Zhang [2] for the text classiﬁcation
task. Through the empirical experiment of Sebastian [3]
and Jozefowicz [4], character level NLP has been proven
to be very promising in various ways. Although it may
seem that character on its own does not have any semantic
value, Radford [5] illustrates that character-level models
can capture the semantic properties of text. Character level
models are also better at handling out-of-vocabulary words,
misspelling, etc and provide an open vocabulary. Another
major advantage is that it reduces the dimension to as
low as 16, unlike word embedding where the dimension
can increase up to 300 while the vocabulary is also huge.
So, character embedding removes the bottleneck in training
tasks and gives huge advantages on computational complexity.
Our approach in this paper was to investigate how character
embedding performs in the task of Authorship Attribution
in Bangla language. Bangla Language has numerous words
with joint letters which can be written in a few different
forms. Moreover, there are some words with the same meaning
but slightly different spelling. These inconsistencies are not
recognized by word-level models but character-level models
can capture and relate words of this kind, making such
models more appropriate for Bangla language. Comparison
of character embedding with word embedding is discussed
according to the ﬁndings. Experiments with and without pre-
trained embedding layers have also been done to show the
effectiveness of information captured in the embeddings. No
previous work, analysis or investigation has yet published on
the effect of character embedding in Authorship Attribution
of Bangla Literature as of our knowledge to date. This paper
follows the structure provided below:
• Related Works - Extensive background study on some
works relevant to this paper are provided in this section.
• Corpus - The dataset used in our experiment is described
in this section.
• Methodology - The proposed architecture for our char-
978-1-7281-5842-6/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE
arXiv:2001.05316v1  [cs.CL]  11 Jan 2020

acter embedding model along with the strategies used
during the training phase of the neural networks are
described in depth.
• Experiments - Describes the evaluation process and the
model setup for comparison.
• Results and Discussion - Our ﬁndings along with results
and possible reasons are presented in this part.
• Conclusion - In the last section, some recommendations
and scope for future research on this ﬁeld are mentioned.
II. RELATED WORKS
A. On Authorship Attribution
Authorship Attribution has been a topic of important
research for a long time. With increased anonymity on the
internet and easy fraud, authorship attribution of writings has
become crucial. For authorship attribution, work on varying
degrees of feature selection [6], including advanced features
such as local histograms [7]. Naive similarity-based models
[8], SVMs [9] have been explored. Semi-supervised approach
to authorship attribution was also taken [10]. SOTA was
achieved by Ruder [3] using character-level and multi-channel
CNN.
Compared to other works, very few works have been done
in Bangla language, lacking any sort of high benchmarks
until very recently. Das and Mitra [11] worked with a really
small dataset of 36 documents and 3 authors to perform uni-
gram and bi-gram feature-based classiﬁcation. Chakraborty
[12] worked with SVMs on 3 authors to achieve up to 84%
accuracy. Shanta Phani also attempted to attribute 3 authors
with machine learning [13]. P. Das, R. Tasmim, and S. Ismail
used 4 authors of current times and hand-drawn features
such as word frequency, type-token ratio, number of various
POS, word/sentence lengths etc [14]. 90.67% was achieved
by Hossain and Rahman by using multiple features along
with cosine similarity [15]. Pal, Siddika, and Ismail achieved
90.74% accuracy with 6 authors using SVM on one feature
[16]. Multi-layered perceptrons were employed by Phani,
Lahiri, and Biswas [17]. Impressive results were achieved very
recently by [1] using various word embeddings on a 6 author
dataset. They demonstrated the effects of various architectures
and word embeddings on authorship attribution and concluded
that fastTexts skip-gram used with CNN tends to beat all
other models in terms of accuracy. No work has been done
on the character level classiﬁcation task as of knowledge in
Bangla literature. The effects of Bangla alphabet complexity
and language formulation on architectural design and character
embedding learning remains largely untouched.
B. On Embedding
Embeddings are effectively mappings from various entities
(character, word, sentence, etc) to continuous vector spaces
in high dimensions. The relation among the numerical
representations gives a semantic, syntactic and morphological
meaning of the entities. These meanings are leveraged by
machine learning techniques to ﬁnd patterns in texts and thus
perform various tasks such as classiﬁcation.
1) Word Embedding: Representing words in continuous
vector spaces is considered as one of the breakthroughs
of NLP. Word embeddings are learned in the form of an
embedding layer or separately in an unsupervised manner.
Among the unsupervised techniques include Continuous
Bag-of-Words(CBOW)
and
Skip-Gram
models
famously
implemented by Word2Vec and fastText. Also, there are
co-occurrence statistical methods such as Glove. Santos [18]
used word embeddings with convolutional models showing
signiﬁcant
improvements
over
baseline
methods.
Word
embeddings have been used to improve the performance of
sentiment analysis [19]. Often pre-trained embeddings are
used or are learned for speciﬁc tasks such as tree-structured
long short-term memory networks [20] and Multi-perspective
sentence similarity modeling [21]. Although words started
to be used as units of text, various works have started to
break down words and work at subword and character levels.
Wieting [22] creates subword embedding from counts of
character n-grams.
2) Character Embedding:
Character Level embeddings
are used in various ways, either by themselves or to produce
embeddings
of
higher
levels
e.g
for
words.
Character
embeddings have been employed in POS tagging [23],
language
modelling
[23]
and
dependency
parsing
[24].
Character-RNN
were
used
for
machine
translation,
for
representing words [25] or to generate character level
translations [26]. Pure Character level classiﬁcation was
ﬁrst explored using CNN architecture [2]. Jozefowicz [4]
shows that a character-level language model can signiﬁcantly
outperform state of the art models. Their best performing
model combines an LSTM with CNN input over the
characters. Besides using either just word or character
embeddings,
ideas
of
combining them
also have
been
introduced [27]. Attempts to learn character embedding and
serve as pre-trained have also been explored [28].
III. CORPUS
Because of the scarcity for the standard dataset in authorship
attribution, we made a custom web crawler to parse the data
on our own. We collected writings from an online Bangla
e-library containing writings(e.g., novels, story, series, etc.)
of different authors. Table I shows the details of our dataset.
Our dataset is larger compared to the previously worked on
datasets for Bangla as mentioned in section II with 13.4+
million words. The dataset was equally partitioned with each
document having the same length of 750 words. Various
subsets of authors were chosen and the dataset was truncated
to each author having the same number of samples.
The dataset from the paper [1] was also used. This dataset
consists of 6 authors with 350 sample texts per author and
total word count of 2.3+ million.

TABLE I
CORPUS DETAILS
Author
Word count
Unique words
candidate 01
351750
44477
candidate 02
421500
62485
candidate 03
825000
53163
candidate 04
666000
84888
candidate 05
636750
67579
candidate 06
984000
78717
candidate 07
944250
89956
candidate 08
3388500
161893
candidate 09
357000
43864
candidate 10
786000
69182
candidate 11
1056000
69648
candidate 12
1472250
109230
candidate 13
698250
76071
candidate 14
581250
84311
For pre-training our model, we used another large corpus
of Bangla Newspaper articles based on 6 topics. The topics
were accident, crime, education, entertainment, environment,
and sports. The dataset consists of 10564543 tokens.
IV. METHODOLOGY
A. Proposed Architecture
Character-level CNN can sufﬁciently replace words for
classiﬁcations [2]. This means CNN does not require the
syntactic or semantic structure of a language, which makes
such approaches effectively independent of language as the
number of characters is limited. To this end, CNN was used
in this paper to perform the task of author attribution. An
elaborate set of experiments were performed on 3 different
datasets to conclude with an architecture that successfully
extracts the character level features of any sample text. The
same architecture was used to prepare the pre-trained character
embeddings for classiﬁcation tasks. The model is a deep neural
network starting with 4 convolutional layers, each followed
with a maxpool layer of kernel size 3. As standardized in
computer vision, for the convolutional layers, the number of
ﬁlters increases while decreasing the kernel size at each layer.
The kernel sizes are respectively 7,3,1 and 1. The number of
ﬁlters is 64,128,256 and 256. Beneath all is an embedding
layer where each character is represented as a vector of
length ∥V ∥, i.e, the alphabet size. The convolutional layers
are stacked with a fully connected layer of 512 activation
nodes, activation function ReLU and dropout. Finally, an
output layer with softmax is used to provide the classiﬁcation
probabilities. For optimization Adam optimizer is used along
with categorical cross-entropy as the loss function.
B. Character Embedding
Character embedding aims to turn characters into meaning-
ful numerical representations in the form of vectors. These
vectors may represent the correlation of different characters,
or even correlation of groups of characters together i.e. words,
sentences, documents, etc. This concept can be leveraged to
use character embeddings to ﬁt misspelled words, rare or new
words, slangs or emoticons. They can also easily represent
words with variations such as drive, driving, drives, etc. There
is no more bottleneck for out of vocabulary words. The
character set can be used to make any word, even if it is out
of vocabulary, in contrast to word embeddings which simply
ignored them, or had weak representations for rare words. This
way character embeddings increase generalization compared
to words. Another signiﬁcant improvement is the vocabulary
size. Instead of having a very large vocabulary of words,
character embeddings have a ﬁxed number of characters which
is signiﬁcantly smaller, therefore reduces model complexity
and the number of parameters by a signiﬁcant amount. Fur-
thermore, they can be represented with a small vector size (e.g
16) and still be signiﬁcantly informative as opposed to word
embeddings which require at least 100-300 size vectors for a
decent model. The simplest way to represent a character is to
use a one-hot encoding. This requires the vector size to be the
size of the alphabet. We used a one-hot encoding as a baseline
for comparison of pre-trained embeddings. Otherwise, one can
randomly initialize the vectors, where the vectors can be of
any size as small as 16 to as big as 300. This becomes a
hyperparameter for tuning.
C. Training the model
The alphabet size, and therefore the embedding vector size
is 253. Among the 253 different characters are the English
letters(capital and small) and digits, Bangla letters and digits,
Bangla vowel symbols, and various other punctuation and
symbols. For comparative training, two sets of embeddings
were created for the character set. First is one-hot encoding,
and the other is pre-trained embeddings. The training was
done in two phases as stated below:
1) Pre-training
Embedding:
To
learn
character
embeddings, the architecture mentioned above was used
for classiﬁcation of the news dataset as mentioned in
section III. This is in contrast to the usual ways of learning
embeddings. No separate model was used [28] to learn the
embeddings. Instead, already available classiﬁcation task on
a marginally large dataset learns character embeddings for
its purposes. These embeddings can be used as initialization
for the author attribution task, which has a smaller dataset
compared to the former, giving it an initial boost. The model
was trained with a learning rate of 0.001 and decay of 0.0001.
The maximum length of each text sample was set as 1000
and batch size as 80. A dropout rate of 0.5 was used in the
fully connected layer to prevent over-ﬁtting. The embeddings
then learned to have an understanding of how the Bangla
language works and provide a meaningful initialization for
any classiﬁcation tasks. They were then extracted and used
for the task of authorship attribution.
2) Performing Classiﬁcation: To perform the main task of
author attribution and comparison, this training phase was
performed twice with each type of embeddings mentioned
above, i.e one-hot and pre-trained. The fully connected layer
was given a dropout probability of 0.7 and trained with batch

size 128 and the maximum length of each text was set to
be 3000 characters. Everything else was kept similar. The
classiﬁcation was carried out with 2 author attribution datasets,
one with 6 authors [1] and our dataset with maximum 14
authors. The larger dataset was trained with 6,8,10,12 and
14 authors to analyze the effects of increasing classes on the
proposed model.
V. EXPERIMENTS
We evaluate the performance of the proposed architecture
in terms of accuracy, with and without pre-training character
level embedding and comparing them on the held-out dataset.
We also try to infer how the character-level model compares
with the word level models. All models are compared for
the increasing number of authors(classes) on the corpus
mentioned to assess the quality of the models. To keep the
dataset balanced, the number of samples per class were
truncated to the minimum among the classes. We propose
a model for word-level classiﬁcation mostly similar to our
Char-CNN model. The model used for performance analysis
is as follows:
A. Word Embedding Model
This model has a close resemblance to the proposed Char-
CNN model except for a few differences to tune with the
word level version of the classiﬁcation. The model has 2
convolutional layers with the kernel sizes 7,3 and number
of ﬁlters are 128,256 respectively for each layer. Each layer
followed by a maxpool layer. The model is initialized with
pre-trained word embeddings from word2vec and fastText,
both CBOW and skip-gram versions. The convolutional layers
are stacked with an LSTM layer of 100 neurons and a fully
connected layer of 512 activation nodes both with dropout to
prevent overﬁtting. Finally, a softmax layer is used to provide
the classiﬁcation probabilities. It is trained for 10 epochs with
a learning rate of 0.001 with Adam optimizer, the batch size
is 32 and 750 words per sample are used as input to models.
All the word level models have a vocabulary size of 60000
and word embedding vector of size 300.
VI. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The accuracies achieved(in percents) on the test set of the
datasets, with pre-trained embeddings for both word and char-
acter levels are summarized in Table II. Because the datasets
were balanced, the comparison of accuracies is sufﬁcient.
TABLE II
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT MODELS WITH PRE-TRAINED
EMBEDDING
#of Authors
6 [1]
6
8
10
12
14
samples/author
350
1100
931
849
562
469
Char-CNN
83
96
92
86
75
69
W2V(CBOW)
65.3
97
82.8
83.3
76.4
71.8
fastText(CBOW)
65
73
58
35.7
37.31
40.3
W2V(Skip)
79
94
91.1
85.4
82.2
78.6
fastText(Skip)
86
98
95.2
86.35
80.9
81.2
Accuracy comparison(in percents) of the proposed model
with and without pre-trained character embeddings are sum-
marized in Table III.
TABLE III
PRETRAINED VS NON-PRETRAINED COMPARISON
#of Authors
6 [1]
6
8
10
12
14
#of samples/class
350
1100
931
849
562
469
Pretrained Embedding
83
96
92
86
75
69
Not pretrained
71
95
82
83
66
59.5
Fig. 1. Accuracy of various models with increasing number of samples.
From the accuracy comparisons shown in Table II we see
that Skip-gram implemented by fastText performs well in the
given datasets. So we can infer that subword level classiﬁca-
tion tends to extract a good amount of meaning information
and styles from the text. On the other hand, the word2vec
models, which use entire words have worse performance.
Character level model performs reasonably well in competition
with subword level as long as the dataset is big enough. When
the number of authors increased, the number of samples per
author decreased making it difﬁcult for the character-level
model to collect enough information. With larger datasets, this
model will be able to perform signiﬁcantly better [2]. This
can be illustrated from Figure 1 that with a larger number
of samples, the Char-CNN model raises steeply and performs
competitively with the other models. In terms of the number
of parameters, character level model is much superior to its
word-level counterparts. The embedding vectors for the word
level models is of size embedding vector ∗vocabulary size.
i.e. 300 * 60000. On the other hand, the character embedding
matrix is of size 253*253 given that we initially used one-hot
vectors. This size can also be reduced to as low as 253*16 as
were done in some research [4]. Another thing to consider is
the time it takes to train the models. For the word embedding
models, a pure CNN does not work satisfactorily, so an LSTM
layer had to be added to add sequential information in the
model. This improves accuracy with the cost of taking more
time to train, around 15-20 minutes. On the other hand, the
character-level model works signiﬁcantly well with only using

convolutional layers taking less than 2 minutes to train. This
effect of training time become largely magniﬁed on large-
scale cases, making the word-level model unﬁt for light-weight
devices. As stated in the paper [2], ConvNets with character
embedding can completely replace words and work even with-
out any semantic meanings. Which means that convolutional
layers can extract whatever information necessary for author
attribution, given enough data.
To illustrate the need of pre-trained character embeddings, we
see from III that using a pre-trained embedding increases the
accuracy across datasets and the different number of authors,
regardless of the amount of data for each author. Which
shows that these naively learned embeddings contain valuable
information that can be easily applied to various tasks of
the language, including author attribution, and increase the
performance a few degrees. These numerical representations
of character contain information about morphology and the
syntax of the language among other things. Therefore such
embedding can be learned from any task and applied to other
tasks as a form of transfer learning, given the alphabet remains
the same.
VII. CONCLUSION
So far no work has been done to evaluate the usefulness
of character embeddings for classiﬁcation task in Bangla
language. We attempt to ﬁll this gap and compare character
embeddings with word embeddings showing that character em-
beddings perform almost as good as the best word embedding
model. But besides accuracy, character level classiﬁcation has
a greater hand in terms of memory, time and number of param-
eters. Considering the small size of our datasets, we hope to
have improved performance with larger datasets, as is the case
for character level ConvNets [2]. Besides such network also
work better with non-curated texts, which are hard for word-
level embeddings to capture, thus more applicable to real-life
scenarios. Furthermore, we analyzed the importance of pre-
trained character embedding for author attribution and showed
that pre-training can result in better performances. Since very
large corpus is not available in Bangla language yet, we must
come up with solutions that tackle attribution tasks sufﬁciently
well even with little data. Therefore our future works include
the combination of both character and word level embeddings
to perform attribution task, in an attempt to combine the
power of both types of embeddings. More advanced levels
of transfer learning can also be performed by using language
models in place of embeddings before classiﬁcation. Language
models and embeddings can also be combined to give greater
generalization for Bangla language.
