Learning to Multi-Task by Active Sampling
Sahil Sharma
Department of Computer Science
Indian Institute of Technology, Madras
Ashutosh Kumar Jha*
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Madras
Parikshit S Hegde*
Department of Electrical Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Madras
Balaraman Ravindran
Department of Computer Science
Indian Institute of Technology, Madras
Abstract
One of the long-standing challenges in Artiﬁcial Intelligence for learning goal-
directed behavior is to build a single agent which can solve multiple tasks. Recent
progress in multi-task learning for goal-directed sequential problems has been
in the form of distillation based learning wherein a student network learns from
multiple task-speciﬁc expert networks by mimicking the task-speciﬁc policies of
the expert networks. While such approaches offer a promising solution to the
multi-task learning problem, they require supervision from large expert networks
which require extensive data and computation time for training. In this work, we
propose an efﬁcient multi-task learning framework which solves multiple goal-
directed tasks in an on-line setup without the need for expert supervision. Our
work uses active learning principles to achieve multi-task learning by sampling the
harder tasks more than the easier ones. We propose three distinct models under
our active sampling framework. An adaptive method with extremely competitive
multi-tasking performance. A UCB-based meta-learner which casts the problem of
picking the next task to train on as a multi-armed bandit problem. A meta-learning
method that casts the next-task picking problem as a full Reinforcement Learning
problem and uses actor critic methods for optimizing the multi-tasking performance
directly. We demonstrate results in the Atari 2600 domain on seven multi-tasking
instances: three 6-task instances, one 8-task instance, two 12-task instances and
one 21-task instance.
1
Introduction
Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) arises from the combination of the representation power of
Deep learning (DL) [LeCun et al., 2015; Bengio et al., 2009] with the use of Reinforcement Learning
(RL) [Sutton & Barto, 1998] objective functions. DRL agents can solve complex visual control tasks
directly from raw pixels [Guo et al., 2014; Mnih et al., 2015; Schulman et al., 2015; Lillicrap et al.,
2015; Schaul et al., 2015; Mnih et al., 2016a; Van Hasselt et al., 2016; Vezhnevets et al., 2016; Bacon
et al., 2017; Sharma et al., 2017; Jaderberg et al., 2017].
However, models trained using such algorithms tend to be task-speciﬁc and fail to generalize to an
unseen task. This inability of the AI agents to generalize across tasks motivates the ﬁeld of multi-task
learning which seeks to ﬁnd a single agent (in the case of DRL algorithms, a single deep neural
network) which can perform well on all the tasks. Training a neural network with a multi-task
learning (MTL) algorithm on any ﬁxed set of tasks (which we call a multi tasking instance (MTI))
leads to an instantiation of a multi-tasking agent (MTA) (we use the terms Multi-Tasking Network
(MTN) and MTA interchangeably). Such an MTA would possess the ability to learn task-agnostic
representations and thus generalize learning across different tasks.
* These authors contributed equally
arXiv:1702.06053v4  [cs.NE]  21 May 2017

Figure 1: Multi Tasking Instance MT7 (21 tasks). Anonymous playlist of game-play for MT7 is at:
https://goo.gl/GBXfWD. It veriﬁes our claim; tasks are visually different, difﬁcult & unrelated.
Successful DRL approaches to the goal-directed MTL problem fall into two categories. First, there
are approaches that seek to extract the prowess of multiple task-speciﬁc expert networks into a
single student network. The Policy Distillation framework [Rusu et al., 2016a] and Actor-Mimic
Networks [Parisotto et al., 2016] fall into this category. These works train k (k is the number of
tasks) task-speciﬁc expert networks (DQNs [Mnih et al., 2015]) and then distill the individual task-
speciﬁc policies learned by the expert networks into a single student network which is trained using
supervised learning. The fundamental problem with such approaches is that they require expert
networks. Training such expert networks tends to be extremely computation and data intensive.
The second set of DRL approaches to multi-tasking are related to the ﬁeld of transfer learning. Many
recent DRL works [Parisotto et al., 2016; Rusu et al., 2016b; Rajendran et al., 2017; Fernando et al.,
2017] attempt to solve the transfer learning problem. Progressive networks [Rusu et al., 2016b] is one
such framework which can be adapted to the MTL problem. Progressive networks iteratively learn to
solve each successive task that is presented. Thus, they are not a truly on-line learning algorithm.
Progressive Networks instantiate a task-speciﬁc column network for each new task. This implies that
the number of parameters they require grows as a large linear factor with each new task. This limits
the scalability of the approach with the results presented in the work being limited to a maximum of 4
tasks only. Another important limitation of this approach is deciding the order in which the network
trains on the tasks.
Our paper has the following contributions: 1) We propose the ﬁrst successful on-line multi-task
learning framework which operates on MTIs that have many tasks with very visually different
high-dimensional state spaces (See Figure 1 for a visual depiction of the 21 tasks that constitute our
largest multi-tasking instance). 2) We present three concrete instantiations of our MTL framework:
an adaptive method, a UCB-based meta-learning method and a A3C [Mnih et al., 2016a] based
meta-learning method. 3) We propose a family of robust evaluation metrics for the multi-tasking
problem and demonstrate that they evaluate a multi-tasking algorithm in a more sensible manner than
existing metrics. 4) We provide extensive analyses of the abstract features learned by our methods
and argue that most of the features help in generalization across tasks because they are task-agnostic.
5) We report results on seven distinct MTIs: three 6-task instances, one 8-task instance, two 12-task
instances and one 21-task instance. Previous works have only reported results on a single MTI. Our
largest MTI has more than double the number of tasks present in the largest MTI on which results
have been published [Rusu et al., 2016a]. 6) We hence demonstrate how hyper-parameters tuned for
an MTI (this instance has 6 tasks) generalize to other MTIs (with up to 21 tasks).
2
Background
2.1
Discounted UCB1-Tuned+
A large class of decision problems can be cast as multi-armed bandit problem wherein the goal is to
select the arm (or action) that gives the maximum expected reward. An efﬁcient class of algorithms
for solving the bandit problem are the UCB algorithms [Auer et al., 2002; Auer & Ortner, 2010].
The UCB algorithms carefully track the uncertainty in estimates by giving exploration bonuses to
the agent for exploring the lesser explored arms. Such UCB algorithms often maintain estimates
for the average reward that an arm gives, the number of times the arm has been pulled and other
exploration factors required to tune the exploration. In the case of non-stationary bandit problems, it
2

is required for such average estimates to be non-stationary as well. For solving such non-stationary
bandit problems, Discounted UCB style algorithms are often used [Kocsis & Szepesvári, 2006; Saito
et al., 2014; Garivier & Moulines, 2011]. In our UCB-based meta-learner experiments, we use the
Discounted UCB1-Tuned+ algorithm [Kocsis & Szepesvári, 2006].
2.2
Actor Critic Algorithms
One of the ways of learning optimal control using RL is by using (parametric) actor critic algorithms
[Konda & Tsitsiklis, 2000]. These approaches consist of two components: an actor and a critic.
The actor is a parametric function: πθa(at|st) mapping from states in the state space to an explicit
policy according to which the RL agent acts (θa are the parameters of the policy/actor). A biased
but low-variance sample estimate for the policy gradient is: ∇θa log πθa(at|st)(Q(st, at) −b(st))
where at is the action executed in state st. Q(st, at) is the action value function. b(st) is a state-
dependent baseline used for reducing the variance in policy gradient estimation. The critic estimates
Q(st, at) and possibly the state dependent baseline b(st). Often, b(st) is chosen to be the value
function of the state, V (st). We can also get an estimate for Q(st, at) as rt+1 + γV (st+1) where
γ is the discounting factor. The critic is trained using temporal difference learning [Sutton, 1988]
algorithms like TD(0) [Sutton & Barto, 1998]. The objective function for the critic is: Lθc =
(rt+1 + γV (st+1) −Vθc(st))2
2.3
Asynchronous Advantage Actor Critic Algorithm
On-policy RL algorithms are challenging to implement with deep neural networks as function
approximators. This is because the on-policy nature of the algorithms makes consecutive parameter
updates correlated. This problem was solved by the Asynchronous Advantage Actor Critic (A3C)
Algorithm [Mnih et al., 2016a]. It executes multiple versions of the actor and critic networks
asynchronously and gathers parameter updates in parallel. The asynchronous nature of the algorithm
means that the multiple actor threads explore different parts of the state space simultaneously and
hence the updates made to the parameters are uncorrelated. The algorithm uses the baseline (bt) and
modeling choices for Q(st, at) which were discussed in the previous subsection. This implies that
the sample estimates made by the actor for the policy gradients are: (∇θa log πθa(at|st)) A(st, at)
where A(st, at) = Q(st, at) −V (st) is the advantage function.
3
Model Deﬁnition
Figure 2: A visualization of our Active-sampling based Multi-Task Learning Framework
An on-line MTL algorithm consists of a multi-tasking network (MTN) which is trained (using the
MTL algorithm) with the objective of learning to execute all the tasks in an MTI successfully.
However, this MTN does not have access to expert networks’ predictions (since it is trained using an
3

on-line MTL algorithm) and thus must be trained by interleaving data/observations from all the tasks
in the MTI and optimizing an RL objective function. We present one such MTL framework. Figure 3
contains an illustration of our active-sampling based on-line MTL framework. In our work, the MTN
is an A3C network and our framework is presented in this context. An on-line MTL algorithm must
decide once every few time steps, the next task on which the MTN is to be trained . We call such
decision steps as task decision steps. Note that task decision steps can be event driven (eg: at the end
of every episode) or time driven (eg: once every k time steps). We ﬁrst demonstrate what a baseline
on-line MTL algorithm (called BA3C) looks like and why it fails. Then, we describe our approach
(Active-sampling A3C - A4C) as a modiﬁcation.
3.1
Baseline Multi-Tasking Agent
The BA3C is a simple on-line MTL algorithm. The MTN is a single A3C network which is trained by
interleaving observations from k tasks in an on-line fashion. The task decision steps in BA3C occur
at the end of every episode of training for the MTN. The next task for the MTN to train on is decided
uniformly at random. The full training algorithm for BA3C is given as Algorithm 2 in Appendix
C. We believe that the lackluster performance of BA3C (this has been reported in [Parisotto et al.,
2016] as well) is because of the probability distribution according to which the agent decides which
task to train on next. In BA3C’s case, this is the uniform probability distribution. We posit that this
distribution is an important factor in determining the multi-tasking abilities of a trained MTA.
3.2
Active Sampling based Multi-Tasking Agent
Our framework (A4C- Active sampling A3C) is inspired by active learning principles [Prince, 2004;
Zhu, 2005; Settles, 2010]. The core hypothesis which drives active learning in the usual machine
learning contexts is that a machine learning algorithm can achieve better performance with fewer
labeled training examples if it is allowed to choose the data from which it learns. Training algorithm
for active sampling based on-line MTL is presented as Algorithm 1. Speciﬁc instantiations of
Algorithm 1 for all of our proposed methods have been presented in Appendix C. The A4C MTN’s
architecture is the same as that of a single-task network. The important improvement is in the way
the next task for training is selected. Instead of selecting the next task to train on uniformly at
random (which is what BA3C does), our framework maintains for each task Ti, an estimate of the
MTN’s current performance (ai) as well as the target performance (tai). These numbers are then
used to actively sample tasks on which the MTA’s current performance is poor. We emphasize that
no single-task expert networks need to be trained for our framework, published scores from other
papers (such as [Mnih et al., 2016a; Sharma et al., 2017] for Atari) or even Human performance can
be used as target peformance. See Appendix G for three analyses of the robustness of our framework
to target scores.
Algorithm 1 Active Sampling based Multi-Task Learning
1: function MULTITASKING(SetOfTasks T)
2:
n ←Number of episodes used for estimating current performance in any task Ti
3:
si ←List of last n scores that the multi-tasking agent scored during training on task Ti
4:
pi ←Probability of training on task Ti next
5:
amta ←The Active Sampling multi-tasking agent
6:
meta_decider ←An instantiation of our active learning meta decision framework
7:
for train_steps:0 to MaxSteps do
8:
for i in {1, · · · , |T|} do
9:
ai ←si.average()
10:
pi
←meta_decider(ai, tai)
11:
j ∼p
// Identity of the next task to train on
12:
scorej ←amta.train(Tj)
13:
sj.append(scorej)
14:
if sj.length() > n then
15:
sj.remove_last()
4

3.3
Adaptive Active Sampling Method
We refer to this method as A5C (Adaptive Active-sampling A3C). The task decision steps in A5C
occur at the end of every episode of training for the MTN. Among the methods we propose, this is the
only method which does not learn the sampling distribution p (Line 15, Algorithm 1). It computes
an estimate of how well the MTN can solve task Ti by calculating mi = tai−ai
tai
for each of the
tasks. The probability distribution for sampling next tasks (at task decision steps) is then computed
as: pi =
e
mi
τ
Pk
c=1 e
mc
τ , where τ is a temperature hyper-parameter. Intuitively, mi is a task-invariant
measure of how much the current performance of the MTN lags behind the target performance on
task Ti. A higher value for mi means that the MTN is bad in Task Ti. By actively sampling from a
softmax probability distribution with mi as the evidence, our adaptive method is able to make smarter
decisions about where to allocate the training resources next (which task to train on next).
3.4
UCB-based Active Sampling Method
This method is referred to as UA4C (UCB Active-sampling A3C). The task decision steps in UA4C
occur at the end of every episode of training for the MTN. In this method, the problem of picking the
next task to train on is cast as a multi-armed bandit problem with the different arms corresponding to
the various tasks in the MTI being solved. The reward for the meta-learner is deﬁned as: r = mi
where i is the index of the latest task that was picked by the meta-learner, and that the MTN was
trained on. The reason for deﬁning the reward in this way is that it allows the meta-learner to
directly optimize for choosing those tasks that the MTN is bad at. For our experiments, we used
the Discounted-UCB1-tuned+ algorithm [Kocsis & Szepesvári, 2006]. We used a discounted-UCB
algorithm because the bandit problem is non-stationary (the more a task is trained on, the smaller
the rewards corresponding to the choice of that task become). We also introduced a tunable hyper-
parameter β which controls the relative importance of the bonus term and the average reward for a
given task. Using the terminology from [Kocsis & Szepesvári, 2006], the upper conﬁdence bound
that the meta-learner uses for selecting the next task to train on is: ¯
Xt(γ, i) + βct(γ, i)
3.5
Episodic Meta-learner Active Sampling Method
We refer to this method as EA4C (Episodic meta-learner Active-sampling A3C). The task decision
steps in EA4C occur at the end of every episode of training for the MTN (see Appendix A for a
version of EA4C which makes task-decision steps every few time steps of training). EA4C casts the
problem of picking the next task to train on as a full RL problem. The idea behind casting it in this
way is that by optimizing for the future sum of rewards (which are deﬁned based on the multi-tasking
performance) EA4C can learn the right sequence in which to sample tasks and hence learn a good
curriculum for training MTN. The EA4C meta-learner consists of an LSTM-A3C-based controller
that learns a task-sampling policy over the next tasks as a function of the previous sampling decisions
and distributions that the meta-learner has used for decison making.
Reward deﬁnition: Reward for picking task Tj at (meta-learner time step t) is deﬁned as:
rew(Tj) = λmj + (1 −λ)
 
1
3
X
i∈L
(1 −mi)
!
(1)
where mi was deﬁned in Section 3.3. L is the set of worst three tasks, according to 1 −mi = ai
tai
(normalized task performance). λ is a hyper-parameter. First part of the reward function is similar to
that deﬁned for the UCB meta-learner in Section 3.4. The second part of the reward function ensures
that the performance of the MTN improves on worst three tasks and thus increases the multi-tasking
performance in general.
State Deﬁnition: The state for the actor-critic meta-learner is designed to be descriptive enough for
it to learn the optimal policy over the choice of which task to train the MTN on next. To accomplish
this, we pass a 3k length vector to the meta-learner (where k is the number of tasks in the multitasking
instance) which is a concatenation of 3 vectors of length k. The ﬁrst vector is a normalized (sum of
all entries of the vector is 1) count of the number of times each of the tasks has been sampled by the
meta-learner since the beginning of training. The second vector is the identity of the task sampled at
the previous task decision step, given as a one-hot vector. The third vector is the previous sampling
policy that the meta learner had used to select the task on which the MTN was trained, at the last task
5

decision step. Our deﬁnition of the meta-learner’s state is just one of the many possible deﬁnitions.
The ﬁrst and the third vectors have been included to make the state descriptive. We included the
identity of the latest task on which the MTN was trained so that the meta-learner is able to learn
policies which are conditioned on the actual counts of the number of times a task was sampled.
4
Experimental Setup and Results
The A3C MTNs we use have the same size and architecture as a single-task network (except when
our MTL algorithms need to solve MT7, which has 21 tasks) and these architectural details are the
same across different MTL algorithms that we present. The experimental details are meticulously
documented in Appendix B. All our MTAs used a single 18-action shared output layer across all
the different tasks in an MTI, instead of different output head agents per task as used in [Rusu et al.,
2016a]. Appendix I contains our empirical argument against using such different-output head MTAs.
It is important to note that previous works [Parisotto et al., 2016; Rusu et al., 2016a] have results only
on a single MTI. Table 2 (in Appendix B) contains the description of the seven MTIs presented to
MTAs in this work. Hyper-parameters for all multi-tasking algorithms in this work were tuned on
MTI one: MT1. If an MTI consists of k tasks, then all MTNs in this work were trained on it for only
k × 50 million time steps, which is half of the combined training time for all the k tasks put together
(task-speciﬁc agents were trained for 100 million time steps in [Sharma et al., 2017]). All the target
scores in this work were taken from Table 4 of [Sharma et al., 2017]. We reiterate that for solving the
MTL problem, it is not necessary to train single-task expert networks for arriving at the target scores
used in our framework; one can use scores published in other works.
4.1
Evaluation Metrics
Previous works [Parisotto et al., 2016] deﬁne the performance of an MTA on an MTI as the arithmetic
mean (pam) of the normalized game-play scores of the MTA on the various tasks in the MTI. In what
follows, ai is the game-play score of an MTA in task i, tai is the target score in task i (potentially
obtained from other published work) and the sub-script am stands for the arithmetic mean. We
argue that pam is not a robust evaluation metric. An MTA can be as good as the target on all tasks
and achieves pam = 1. However, a bad MTA can achieve pam = 1 by being k (total number of
tasks) times better than the target on one of the tasks and being as bad as getting 0 score in all the
other tasks. We deﬁne a better performance metric: qam (Equation 2). It is better because the MTA
needs to be good in all the tasks in order to get a high qam. We deﬁne the geometric-mean and the
harmonic-mean based metrics as well.
pam =
 k
X
i=1
ai
tai
! 
k
qam =
 k
X
i=1
min
 ai
tai
, 1
! 
k
qgm =
k
v
u
u
t
k
Y
i=1
min
 ai
tai
, 1

qhm = k
  k
X
i=1
max
tai
ai
, 1
!
(2)
MTAs trained in our work are evaluated on pam, qam, qgm, qhm (Table 1 contains evaluation on qam).
All evaluations using metrics pam, qgm, qhm have been presented in Appendix E. It is geared towards
understanding the efﬁcacy of our proposed evaluation metrics.
4.2
Results on General Game-play
We conducted experiments on seven different MTIs with number of constituent tasks varying from 6
to 21. All hyper-parameters were tuned on MT1, an MTI with 6 tasks. We demonstrate the robustness
of our framework by testing all our the algorithms on seven MTIs including a 21-task MTI (MT7)
which is more than double the number of tasks any previous work [Rusu et al., 2016a] has done
multi-tasking on. Description of the MTIs used in this work is provided in Table 2 in Appendix
B. We have performed three experiments to demonstrate the robustness of our method to the target
scores chosen. These experiments and the supporting details have been documented in Appendix
G. We now describe our ﬁndings from the general game-play experiments as demonstrated in Table
1. We observe that all our proposed models beat the BA3C agent by a large margin and obtain a
6

Figure 3: Evolution of game-play performance scores for A5C,EA4C,UA4C and BA3C agents. All
training curves for all the multi-tasking instances have been presented in Appendix D.
performance of more than double the performance obtained by the BA3C agent. Among the proposed
models, on MT1 (where the hyperparameters were tuned), A5C performs the best. However, the
performance of UA4C and EA4C is only slightly lower than that of A5C. We accredit this relatively
higher performance to the fact that there are many hyper-parameters to tune in the UA4C and the
EA4C methods unlike A5C where only the temperature hyperparameter had to be tuned. We tuned
all the important hyperparameters for UA4C and EA4C. However, our granularity of tuning was
perhaps not very ﬁne. This could be the reason for the slightly lower performance. The UA4C agent,
however, generalizes better than A5C agent on the larger MTIs (MT5 & MT6). Also, the performance
obtained by EA4C is close to that of A5C and UA4C in all the multitasking instances. The MTI
MT4 has been taken from [Parisotto et al., 2016]. On MT4, many of our agents are consistently
able to obtain a performance close to qam = 0.9. It is to be noted that Actor Mimic networks are
only able to obtain qam = 0.79 on the same MTI. Having said that, this isn’t a fair comparison since
Actor Mimic networks used DQNs while we use the A3C framework. We refrained from doing a
direct comparison because we believe such a comparison would be unfair: Actor-Mimic is an off-line
MTL algorithm whereas A4C is an on-line MTL algorithm which consumes half the training data
that an Actor-Mimic MTA would. The most important test of generalization is the 21-task instance
(MT7). EA4C is by far the best performing method for this instance. This clearly demonstrates the
hierarchy of generalization capabilities demonstrated by our proposed methods. At the ﬁrst level, the
EA4C MTA can learn task-agnostic representations (demonstrated in the next sub-section) which
help it perform well on even large scale MTIs like MT7. Note that the hyper-parameters for all
the algorithms were tuned on MT1, which is a 6-task instance. That the proposed methods can
perform well on much larger instances with widely visually different constituent tasks is proof for a
second level of generalization: the generalization of the hyper-parameter setting across multi-tasking
instances.
Table 1: Comparison of the performance our MTAs to BA3C MTA based on qam
MT1
MT2
MT3
MT4
MT5
MT6
MT7
|T|
6
6
6
8
12
12
21
A5C
0.799
0.601
0.646
0.915
0.650
0.741
0.607
UA4C
0.779
0.506
0.685
0.938
0.673
0.756
0.375
EA4C
0.779
0.585
0.591
0.963
0.587
0.730
0.648
BA3C
0.316
0.398
0.337
0.295
0.260
0.286
0.308
7

Figure 4: Understanding abstract LSTM features in our proposed methods by analyzing ﬁring patterns
5
Analysis of Trained Agents
This section is geared towards understanding the reasons as to why our MTL framework A4C
performs much better than the baseline (BA3C). Based on the experiments that follow, we claim that
it is the task-agnostic nature of the abstract features that are learned in this work which allow our
proposed algorithms to perform very well. An MTA can potentially perform well at the different tasks
in an MTI due to the sheer representational power of a deep neural network by learning task-speciﬁc
features without generalizing across tasks. We empirically demonstrate that this is not the case for
the agents proposed in our work. The experiments analyze the activation patterns of the output of the
LSTM controller. We call a neuron task-agnostic if it is as equally responsible for the performance
on many of the tasks.
5.1
Activation Distribution of Neurons
In this set of experiments, our agents trained on MT1 are executed on each of the constituent tasks for
10 episodes. A neuron is said to ﬁre for a time step if its output has an absolute value of 0.3 or more.
Let fij denote the fraction of time steps for which neuron j ﬁres when tested on task i. Neuron j ﬁres
for the task i if fij ≥0.01. We chose this low threshold because there could be important neurons
that detect rare events. Figure 5.1 demonstrates that for A4C, a large fraction of the neurons ﬁre for a
large subset of tasks and are not task-speciﬁc. It plots neuron index versus the set of fraction of time
steps that neuron ﬁres in, for each task. The neurons have been sorted ﬁrst by |{i : fij ≥0.01}| and
then by P
i fij. Neurons to the left of the ﬁgure ﬁre for many tasks whereas those towards the right
are task-speciﬁc. The piece-wise constant line in the ﬁgure counts the number of tasks in which a
particular neuron ﬁres with the leftmost part signifying 6 tasks and the rightmost part signifying zero
tasks. Appendix H contains the analysis for all MTIs and methods.
8

Figure 5: Turn Off analysis heap-maps for the all agents. For BA3C since the agent scored 0 on one
of the games, normalization along the neuron was done only across the other 5 games.
5.2
Turnoff Analysis
We introduce a way to analyze multitasking agents without using any thresholds. We call this method
the turnoff-analysis. Here, we force the activations of one of the neurons in LSTM output to 0 and
then observe the change in the performances on individual tasks with the neuron switched off. This
new score is then compared with the original score of the agent when none of the neurons were
switched off and an absolute percentage change in the scores is computed. These percentage changes
are then normalized for each neuron and thus a tasks versus neuron matrix A is obtained. The variance
of column i of A gives a score for the task-speciﬁcity of the neuron i. We then sort the columns of A
in the increasing order of variance and plot a heatmap of the matrix A. We conclude from Figure
5.2 that A4C agents learn some task-speciﬁc features but many non task-speciﬁc abstract features
which help them perform well across a large range of tasks. Our experiments demonstrate that A4C
agents learn many more task-agnostic abstract features than the BA3C agent. Speciﬁcally, observe
how uniformly pink the plot corresponding to the UA4C agent is, compared to the BA3C plot.
6
Conclusions and Future Work
We propose a simple framework for training MTNs which , through a form of active learning succeeds
in learning to perform on-line multi-task learning. The key insight in our work is that by choosing the
task to train on, an MTA can choose to concentrate its resources on tasks in which it currently performs
poorly. While we do not claim that our method solves the problem of on-line multi-task reinforcement
learning deﬁnitively, we believe it is an important ﬁrst step. Our method is complementary to many
of the existing works in the ﬁeld of multi-task learning such as: [Rusu et al., 2015] and [Parisotto
et al., 2015]. These methods could potentially beneﬁt from our work. Another possible direction for
future work could be to explicitly force the learned abstract representations to be task-agnostic by
imposing objective function based regularizations. One possible regularization could be to force the
average ﬁring rate of a neuron to be the same across the different tasks.
9
