arXiv:1801.01768v1  [cs.CL]  5 Jan 2018
Learning Feature Representations for Keyphrase Extraction
Corina Florescu and Wei Jin

Abstract
In supervised approaches for keyphrase extraction, a candi-
date phrase is encoded with a set of hand-crafted features
and machine learning algorithms are trained to discriminate
keyphrases from non-keyphrases. Although the manually-
designed features have shown to work well in practice, fea-
ture engineering is a difﬁcult process that requires expert
knowledge and normally does not generalize well. In this pa-
per, we present SurfKE, a feature learning framework that
exploits the text itself to automatically discover patterns that
keyphrases exhibit. Our model represents the document as
a graph and automatically learns feature representation of
phrases. The proposed model obtains remarkable improve-
ments in performance over strong baselines.
Introduction
Keyphrase extraction (KE) is the task of automatically ex-
tracting descriptive phrases or concepts that represent the
main topics of a document. Keyphrases associated with a
document have shown to improve many natural language
processing and information retrieval tasks. Due to their im-
portance, numerous approaches to KE have been proposed
along two lines of research: supervised and unsupervised.
In supervised approaches, a candidate phrase is encoded
with a set of features, such as its tf-idf, position in the docu-
ment or part-of-speech tag, and machine learning algorithms
are trained to classify it as either positive (i.e., keyphrases)
or negative (i.e., non-keyphrases). The supervised line of re-
search has mainly been concerned with the design of various
hand-crafted features which may yield better classiﬁers that
more accurately predict the keyphrases of a document. For
example, Hulth (2003) used a combination of lexical and
syntactic features, such as the collection frequency and the
part-of-speech tag of a phrase; Medelyan, Frank, and Witten
(2009) designed features to include the spread of a phrase
and Wikipedia-based keyphraseness. Although these fea-
tures have shown to work well in practice, many of them
are computed based on statistical information collected from
the training documents which are less suited outside of that
domain. Thus, it is essential to automatically discover such
features or representations without relying on feature engi-
neering which normally does not generalize well.
This is the authors’ draft. The ﬁnal version was published in AAAI
2018 (Student Abstract and Poster Program).
An intuitive approach to replace the process of fea-
ture design is to use the existing neural language models
(Mikolov, Yih, and Zweig 2013). Learning word represen-
tations from large collections of text is an efﬁcient way
to capture rich semantic and syntactic information about
words. However, even if these representations may carry
a lot of information, they are not effective enough if di-
rectly used for KE. Similar to the design of hand-crafted
features which are built on various observations, a feature
learning process should exploit the structure of the text it-
self to discover patterns that keyphrases exhibit. Recently,
Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena (2014) introduced a general-
ization of the neural language models that allows for the ex-
ploration of a network structure through a stream of short
random walks. Applying a similar line of reasoning to word
graphs built from natural language documents results in rep-
resentations that capture characteristics of words in relation
to the topology of the document.
Inspired by this work, we propose SurfKE, a supervised
approach to KE that represents a document as a word graph
and learns feature representations of graph nodes. Our ex-
periments on a synthesized dataset show that: (1) our ap-
proach has the potential to automatically learn informative
features for KE; (2) our model that uses its self-discovered
features obtains better results than strong baselines.
Proposed Model
Our model involves three essential steps, as detailed below.
Graph Construction. Let dt be a target document for ex-
tracting keyphrases. We build an undirected word graph
G = (V, E), where each unique word that passes the part-of-
speech ﬁlters corresponds to a vertex vi ∈V . Two vertices
vi and vj are linked by an edge (vi, vj) ∈E if the words
corresponding to these vertices co-occur within a window of
w contiguous tokens in dt. The weight of an edge (denoted
as wij) is computed based on the co-occurrence count of the
two words within a window of w successive tokens in dt.
Learning Feature Representations. Let G be an undirected
graph constructed as above. Our goal is to learn a mapping
function f : V →IR|V |×d, d ≤|V | where d is a parameter
specifying the number of dimensions for the embeddings.
This function f represents the latent representations associ-
ated with each vertex vi ∈V . Similar to neural language
models, the network feature learning model needs a corpus

and a vocabulary in order to learn a mapping of nodes to
a low-dimensional space of features. We deﬁne our vocabu-
lary as the set of graph vertices, where the graph is built from
the target document. To generate a corpus for our algorithm,
we leverage a biased sampled random walk strategy. More
precisely, let us consider an arbitrary node vi ∈V and Ωvi
= vi1, vi2, ..., vil a biased random walk of length l starting at
vertex vi (vi1 = vi). Each node vij ∈Ωvi, j = 2, l is gener-
ated by the following transition probability distribution:
π = P(vij = x|vij−1 = y) =

wxy
T
(x, y) ∈E
0
otherwise
where wxy is the weight of edge (x, y) ∈E and T is the
sum of weights over all edges in the graph. Hence, for each
node vi ∈V , we sample a ﬁxed number of biased random
walks with respect to the weight of edges and use them as
contexts to learn the distributed representation of words.
Candidate Phrases. Candidate words that have contiguous
positions in a document are concatenated into phrases. The
feature vector for a multi-word phrase is obtained by taking
the mean of the vectors of words constituting the phrase.
Experiments and Results
Datasets and Evaluation Measures. To evaluate the per-
formance of our model, we carried out experiments on a
synthesized dataset including news articles and research pa-
pers from several domains. The synthesized dataset contains
1308 documents collected from two benchmark datasets,
DUC (Wan and Xiao 2008) and Inspec (Hulth 2003), and a
set of documents from the MEDLINE/PubMed database.
The human assigned keyphrases available for each dataset
were used as gold standard for evaluation.
We measure the performance of our model by comput-
ing Precision, Recall and F1-score. The evaluation metrics
were averaged in a 10-fold cross-validation setting where the
training and test sets were created at the document level. The
model parameters such as the vector dimension or the num-
ber of walks per node were estimated on a validation set.
We used the Gaussian Na¨ıve Bayes classiﬁer implemented
in the scikit-learn library to train our model. Similar to our
baselines, we evaluate the top 10 predicted keyphrases re-
turned by the model, where candidates are ranked based on
the conﬁdence scores as output by the classiﬁer.
Results and Discussion. We compare SurfKE with
two supervised models, KEA (Frank et al. 1999) and Maui
(Medelyan, Frank, and Witten 2009), and two unsupervised
models, KPMiner (El-Beltagy and Rafea 2010) and Posi-
tionRank (Florescu and Caragea 2017). KEA is a represen-
tative system for keyphrase extraction with the most impor-
tant features being the frequency and the position of a phrase
in a document. Maui is an extension of KEA which includes
features such as keyphraseness, the spread of a phrase and
statistics gathered from Wikipedia. KPMiner uses statisti-
cal observations to limit the number of candidates and ranks
phrases using the tf-idf model in conjunction with a boosting
factor which aims at reducing the bias towards single word
terms. PositionRank is an unsupervised graph-based model,
that incorporates the position information of a word’s occur-
rences into a biased PageRank to score words that are later
Approach
Precision
Recall
F1-score
KEA
0.146
0.296
0.179
Maui
0.191
0.375
0.235
KpMiner
0.165
0.357
0.220
PositionRank
0.202
0.362
0.240
SurfKE
0.220
0.390
0.260
Table 1: The comparison of SurfKE with baselines.
used to score and rank candidate phrases.
Table 1 shows the comparison of SurfKE with the four
baselines described above. As we can see in the table, Sur-
fKE substantially outperforms all baseline approaches on
the synthesized dataset. For instance, SurfKE obtains an F1-
score of 0.260 compared to 0.240 and 0.235 achieved by
the best performing baselines, PositionRank and Maui, re-
spectively. With relative improvements of 50.68% 33.33%,
15.18% and 8.91% over KEA, KPMiner, Maui and Position-
Rank respectively, the Precision of our model is signiﬁcantly
superior to that of the other models.
Conclusion and Future Work
We propose SurfKE, a supervised model for KE that rep-
resents the target document as a word graph and uses a
biased sampled random walk model to generate short se-
quences of nodes which are later used as contexts to learn the
node representations. Our experiments show that (1) our ap-
proach has the potential to exploit the word graph to capture
those ”central” terms that represent the text; (2) SurfKE ob-
tains remarkable improvements in performance over strong
baselines for KE. In future work, we would like to explore
other potential neighborhoods of a node for guiding random
walks, e.g., those words that appear early in the document or
more topically relevant to the text.
