A wearable sensor vest for social humanoid robots with GPGPU, IoT, and 
modular software architecture 
Mohsen Jafarzadeh, Stephen Brooks, Shimeng Yu, Balakrishnan Prabhakaran and Yonas Tadesse 
 
 
Cite as 
IEEE: 
M. Jafarzadeh, S. Brooks, S. Yu, B. Prabhakaran, and Y. Tadesse, “A wearable sensor vest for social humanoid robots with 
GPGPU, IOT, and Modular Software Architecture,” Robotics and Autonomous Systems, vol. 139, p. 103536, 2021. 
 
MLA: 
Jafarzadeh, Mohsen, et al. "A wearable sensor vest for social humanoid robots with GPGPU, IoT, and modular software 
architecture." Robotics and Autonomous Systems 139 (2021): 103536. 
 
APA: 
Jafarzadeh, M., Brooks, S., Yu, S., Prabhakaran, B., & Tadesse, Y. (2021). A wearable sensor vest for social humanoid 
robots with GPGPU, IoT, and modular software architecture. Robotics and Autonomous Systems, 139, 103536. 
 
Chicago: 
Jafarzadeh, Mohsen, Stephen Brooks, Shimeng Yu, Balakrishnan Prabhakaran, and Yonas Tadesse. "A wearable sensor 
vest for social humanoid robots with GPGPU, IoT, and modular software architecture." Robotics and Autonomous 
Systems 139 (2021): 103536. 
 
Harvard: 
Jafarzadeh, M., Brooks, S., Yu, S., Prabhakaran, B. and Tadesse, Y., 2021. A wearable sensor vest for social humanoid 
robots with GPGPU, IoT, and modular software architecture. Robotics and Autonomous Systems, 139, p.103536. 
 
Vancouver: 
Jafarzadeh M, Brooks S, Yu S, Prabhakaran B, Tadesse Y. A wearable sensor vest for social humanoid robots with GPGPU, 
IoT, and modular software architecture. Robotics and Autonomous Systems. 2021 May 1;139:103536. 
 
Bibtex 

title = {A wearable sensor vest for social humanoid robots with GPGPU, IoT, and modular software architecture}, 
journal = {Robotics and Autonomous Systems}, 
volume = {139}, 
pages = {103536}, 
year = {2021}, 
issn = {0921-8890}, 
doi = {https://doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2020.103536}, 
url = {https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0921889019306323}, 
author = {Mohsen Jafarzadeh and Stephen Brooks and Shimeng Yu and Balakrishnan Prabhakaran and Yonas Tadesse}, 
} 
 
 

 
This is the preprint version. The final version is published in Robotics and Autonomous Systems, Volume 
139, Year 2021, Page 103536, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2020.103536 
 
1 
 
A wearable sensor vest for social humanoid robots with GPGPU, 
IoT, and modular software architecture 
Mohsen Jafarzadeha,b, Stephen Brooksa,b, Shimeng Yuc, Balakrishnan Prabhakaranc and Yonas Tadessea,b* 
a Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, TX 75080 USA 
b Humanoid, Biorobotics and Smart Systems (HBS) Laboratory, Department of Mechanical Engineering,  
c Department of Computer Science, The University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, TX 75080 USA 

 
Abstract 
Currently, most social robots interact with their surroundings or humans through sensors that are integral parts of the 
robots, which limits the usability of the sensors, human-robot interaction, and interchangeability. A wearable sensor 
garment that fits many robots is needed in many applications. This article presents an affordable wearable sensor vest, 
and an open-source software architecture with the Internet of Things (IoT) for social humanoid robots. The vest 
consists of touch, temperature, gesture, distance, vision sensors, and a wireless communication module. The IoT 
feature allows the robot to interact with humans locally and over the Internet. The designed architecture works for any 
social robot that has a general purpose graphics processing unit (GPGPU), I2C/SPI buses, Internet connection, and the 
Robotics Operating System (ROS). The modular design of this architecture enables developers to easily 
add/remove/update complex behaviors. The proposed software architecture provides IoT technology, GPGPU nodes, 
I2C and SPI bus mangers, audio-visual interaction nodes (speech to text, text to speech, and image understanding), 
and isolation between behavior nodes and other nodes. The proposed IoT solution consists of related nodes in the 
robot, a RESTful web service, and user interfaces. We used the HTTP protocol as a means of two-way communication 
with the social robot over the Internet.  Developers can easily edit or add nodes in C, C++, and Python programming 
languages. Our architecture can be used for designing more sophisticated behaviors for social humanoid robots.  
 
Keywords: Social Robot, Internet of Things, GPGPU, Human Robot Interaction, Software Architecture, Senor Vest 
 
1. Introduction 
     Interaction between humans and humanoid robots as well as interaction between many humanoid robots among 
each other is an open problem that has been studied for many years [1-5]. The response of the robots should be real-
time such that people who interact with them [6] do not notice latency. Social humanoid robots can interact via 
different ways such as touch [7], speech [8], vision [9], etc. In addition to the local interactions, social humanoid 
robots can interact remotely. By adding Internet of Things (IoT) technology to the robots [10, 11], they can interact 
with anyone who has access to the Internet (and has permission). Moreover, IoT allows social robots to request 
information from the Internet and return it to users. Therefore, a software architecture should address real-time 
interaction through all physical mediums and the Internet. 
     Developing software architectures for social humanoid robots is challenging because the software architectures 
consist of many software nodes which require communication with each other. Software architectures are usually 
limited by hardware. The first generation of social robots only have one or few microcontrollers. For example, Robota 
used  an 80C51 microcontroller family [12]. As a result, such a robot cannot use image data because the 
microcontroller does not have enough memory. Also, the speed of the microcontroller does not allow developers to 

 
This is the preprint version. The final version is published in Robotics and Autonomous Systems, Volume 
139, Year 2021, Page 103536, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2020.103536 
 
2 
 
write a comprehensive and low latency software/codes. If the codes do not run within a reasonable time, the consumers 
experience awkward moments. The second generation of social humanoid robots have a general-purpose and more 
powerful CPU on the mainboard and run an operating system. For example, Zeno has a Vortex86DX x86 CPU and 
runs Debian Linux [13]. This generation of social humanoid robots enables developers to write complex programs. 
However, they have limited power of parallel computing.  
     Graphics processing units (GPUs) were originally attached to video cards designed specifically to accelerate 
graphics rendering and display [14]. GPU architectures employ two important execution paradigms, high floating-
point (FP) execution bandwidth and hardware multithreading [15]. Recently, the traditional fixed-function graphics 
pipeline has evolved into a much more flexible and unified many-core architecture, and non-graphics data-parallel 
languages have been introduced to program these cores [16]. The GPUs that can be used for non-graphics applications 
with non-graphics programming languages or libraries are called general-purpose graphics processing units (GPGPUs) 
[17]. The term “general-purpose” refers to “non-graphics domains”.  In other words, GPGPUs can be used for both 
graphical processing and scientific computing. The compute unified device architecture (CUDA) is the scheme by 
which NVIDIA has built GPUs that can perform both traditional graphics-rendering tasks and general-purpose tasks 
[18]. The early versions of the CUDA do not have all the necessary features to be used as a comprehensive GPGPU 
in robotics. In this paper, we only consider the CUDA with compute capability 6.0 and higher as GPGPU. NVIDIA 
Jetson TX2 (released on May 2017) [19] and  NVIDIA AGX Xavier (released on September 2018) [20] are examples 
of CUDA with compute capability 6.2 and 7.1 respectively. By this definition of the GPGPU, most of the social 
humanoid robots in the literature did not have any embedded GPGPU. Few researchers used external GPGPUs for 
their social humanoid robots. This is because the embedded GPGPU was released recently (May 2017), and there was 
not any GPGPU at the time that they designed their robots. Here, for the first time, we used an embedded GPGPU for 
a social humanoid robot. 
     The GPGPUs play an important role in training and inference of deep neural networks. Researchers widely use 
deep neural networks [21] for perception, decision, and control. For examples, the following have been presented 
imitation learning [22], image understanding (object recognition [23], object detection [24], object tracking [25], and 
object segmentation [26]), speech recognition [27], natural language processing [28], end-to-end visuomotor learning 
[29], controlling prosthetic hands with speech [30] and EMG [31], etc. In addition, GPGPU can boost speeds of 
recurrent neural networks [32, 33] and recently recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are shown relevance in robotics for 
solving time-varying problems [34-36]. After the success of deep reinforcement learning in achieving human 
performance in playing Atari [37], deep reinforcement learning is used in the humanoid robotics field. The next 
generation of social humanoid robots should use an architecture that enables robots to use deep reinforcement learning. 
In addition, the latest generation shows complex behaviors such as managing trust [38], learning from human-human 
interaction [39], inferring social situations [40], interaction based on the context [41], and learning from human [42].  
     IoT is a non-robotic technology that improves robots. IoT is a concept reflecting a connected set of anyone, 
anything, anytime, anyplace, any service, and any network [43]. IoT can be thought of as the interconnection of 
uniquely identifiable smart objects and devices within today's Internet infrastructure with extended benefits. These 
benefits typically include the advanced connectivity of these devices, systems, and services that go beyond machine-
to-machine (M2M) scenarios [44]. Sensors and data analytics technologies from IoT give robots a wider situational 
awareness that leads to better task execution [45]. Processing the data streams generated by billions of IoT devices in 
a handful of centralized data brings concerns on response time latency, massive ingress bandwidth needs and data 
privacy [46]. Therefore, working in IoT does not explicitly address the requirement of the Internet of Robotic Things 
(IoRT) to exchange continuous streams of data while interacting with the physical world [46].  
     Cloud computing is another non-robotic technology that has impacts on robotics. The cloud paradigm was adopted 
by the robotics community, called cloud robotics [47, 48]. Cloud robotics is a system that relies on the "Cloud 
Computing” infrastructure to access a vast amount of processing power and data to support its operation [49]. Robots 

 
This is the preprint version. The final version is published in Robotics and Autonomous Systems, Volume 
139, Year 2021, Page 103536, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2020.103536 
 
3 
 
can use a cloud for offloading resource-intensive tasks for sharing of data and knowledge between robots  and for 
reconfiguration of robots following an app-store model  [46]. Although there is an overlap between cloud robotics and 
the Internet of Robotic Things (IoRT), the former paradigm is more oriented towards providing network-accessible 
infrastructure for computational power and storage of data and knowledge, while the latter is more focused on M2M 
communication and intelligent data processing [46]. 
     Many organizations and institutes have designed expensive humanoid robots for specific tasks. NASA designed 
Robonaut 2 [50], other institutes presented  HRP-4 [51], Romeo [52], Kenshiro [53], Surena III [54], Atlas [55], Talos 
[56], and  DRC-Hubo [57]. The detailed information of these advanced robots is shown in supplementary file in Fig. 
S1. All the aforementioned robots are advanced and highly capable in terms of hardware performances and functions. 
However, they are very expensive and most of their sensing units, electrical connections and processing boards are 
integral parts of the robot, which inhibit modularity of the sensing unit and interchangeability. Therefore, a wearable 
sensor system that can be integrated into a stretchable garment that fits one robot and can be easily used in another 
robot is needed, which ultimately advances the field.  Wearable sensor vests are common in the healthcare area and 
for many years, researchers have worked on devices that measure human characteristics such as ECG, EMG, sweat 
rate, etc. (Supplementary files Fig. S2 and S3).  In this regard, there are many approaches the robotic community can 
adapt. Wu et al. designed as a wearable sensor node with solar energy harvesting [58]. In the energy sector,  Safety++ 
is an IoT ecosystem of connected, wearable elements aimed at improving safety in the workplace [59]. Wearable 
garments for infants have been studied and designed by many researchers [60]. Jutila et al. designed a vest to track 
seven to nine-year-old students [61]. BIOTEX is a European Union funded project that aims at developing textile 
sensors to measure physiological parameters and the chemical composition of body fluids with a particular interest in 
sweat [62]. Wearable 2.0 is a washable garment [63]. Nokia designed CHASE LifeTech FR for firefighters [64]. Carre 
Technologies Inc. (Hexoskin) [65], Enflux Inc. [66], AiQ (Motion) [67], and  Xenoma (E-Skin) [68] made garments 

supplementary file and summarized in Fig. S2. All the wearable systems discussed above lend a good lesson for social 
robots to be interactive and interchangeable. However, we cannot directly transfer these applications to social robots, 
we need to modify the hardware and the software architecture. 
     In the design of the proposed vest (Fig. 1- 4), we have tried to reduce the cost as much as possible. Therefore, we 
made a tradeoff between cost and performance. Our proposed vest has a hardware and software that works together 
to provide a unique solution to social humanoid robots. The software consists of modular systems (to be discussed 
later) and the hardware includes sensors, controllers and an embedded GPGPU kit.  The specification of our prototype 
is shown in Table 1, the first column that is a low cost (~$1000 material cost). The current technology does not satisfy 
all of our required parts and performance as well as cost limitations. Therefore, researchers can use the current design 
and further improve the vest in the future. An improved vest can be designed by using hardware according to Table 
1, column 2. These are based on the available hardware in the market. It is estimated that this may cost more than 15 
times higher than the low-cost one.  In the following, we describe the ideal vest that should be designed. The hardware 
may not be available in the market for an ideal vest.  Designers may have their own opinion about what an ideal vest 
entails. In other words, the features of an ideal vest are debatable. The ideal vest software should have the following: 
• 
Monitoring and control over Internet 
• 
Search and use information on the Internet 
• 
GUIs for users and developers 
• 
Color 3D point cloud object detection (processed locally, not IoT) from fusion of cameras and Lidar,  
• 
Text to speech (natural accent) (local, not IoT),  
• 
Accurate speech to text (local, not IoT),  
• 
Attention activation, instead of timing base architecture that takes continuous power 

 
This is the preprint version. The final version is published in Robotics and Autonomous Systems, Volume 
139, Year 2021, Page 103536, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2020.103536 
 
4 
 
• 
Reinforcement learning for behavior ( for lifelong learning) 
• 
Reconfigurable architecture by learning while maintaining ethical and safety standards 
• 
Adaptive behavior with respect to application (child interaction, adult interaction),  
• 
Personalizablity according to psychologist instruction  
 
Table 1. Hardware comparison of our prototype and a better prototype with current technology. 
Hardware 
Our prototype (low cost) 
Better option / existing in the market 
GPGPU Kit 
NVIDIA Jetson TX2 (5 x 1011 
Flops, 64-bit FPU, 170 x 170 x 
51 mm) 
NVIDIA AGX Xavier (1012 FLOPS, 64-bit FPU, 105 
x 105 x 85 mm) 
Distributed 
controller 
N/A 
Pyboard D (STM32F767) and 32-bit ADC (Analog 
Devices Inc. AD7177-2BRUZ-RL7), 32-bit DAC 
(Cirrus Logic Inc. CS43131-CNZR) 
Memory 
32 GB 
4 TB 
Internet 
Communication 
Wi-Fi 
5G 
Microphone 
8-bit unidirectional 
24-bit cardioid (Audio-Technica AT2020USBi) 
Camera 
Webcam Logitech C922x Pro 
USB 2.0 
2 x FLIR Chameleon3 CM3-U3-13Y3C-CS 
Range sensor 
Ultrasonic SFR02 and 1D ToF 
Puck VLP-16 Lidar 
Odometer 
N/A 
IMU (Bosch BNO055), AHRS (Yost Labs 3-Space), 
and GPS (Adafruit Ultimate). 
Tactile Sensors 
Interlink FSR 406 and 
capacitive touch NXP MPR121 
FSR FlexiForce A502 and capacitive touch NXP 
MPR121 
Robust to 
- 
Shock 
Hardware visibility 
to human 
Visible 
Camouflage 
Wiring 
External copper wire 
Internal copper wire 
Style 
Deep Pressure Vest 
Shirt 
 
     There are many research gaps in developing social humanoid robots. Acceptability, fault tolerance, decision 
making, and perception are four important, challenging research gaps. One of the most challenging research gaps is 
how to design a social humanoid robot that is both culturally and socially acceptable and people have a willingness to 
engage with it. The second research gap is fault tolerance, which allows the social humanoid robots to keep working 
even when components fail and the degree to which robots can continue their missions when failures or other 
unforeseen circumstances occur. In IoT, redundancy is key to fault tolerance. IoT enables redundancy of sensors, 
information, and actuation [46]. However, too much redundancy may not be possible in social humanoid robots. The 
third research gap is continuous and real-time learning and decision making. Recent developments in GPGPU and 
TPU along with new AI methods such as deep reinforcement learning improves the ability of social humanoid robots. 
However, social humanoid robots still cannot make decisions in complex environments such as collaborating with 
humans without changing the code or learning a new human language (English, Farsi, Arabic, etc.). Perception is the 
fourth challenging research gap. Sensor fusion, object detection, and recognition, processing time, and using Internet 
information are examples of problems in perception. 
     Designing a modular open-source software architecture (four-clause BSD license) that works with an affordable, 
customizable wearable, GPGPU and IoT based sensor vest for social humanoid robots is the main motivation as well 
as the contribution of this paper. Our goal is providing a general framework to be used as a basis for developing low 
cost, socially interactive humanoid robots (Fig.1). The significant features of this software architecture along with the 

 
This is the preprint version. The final version is published in Robotics and Autonomous Systems, Volume 
139, Year 2021, Page 103536, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2020.103536 
 
5 
 
wearable GPGPU and IoT-based vest enable social robots to interact with humans and other robots both locally and 
remotely via the Internet.  The proposed architecture for the wearable IoT vest provides the following: 
1)   A framework that isolates the behavior nodes from other nodes (service node, hardware node, bus manager 
node), such that users can design complex behavior without knowing/concerning about the whole system (Fig. 1). 
2)   A solution to add general-purpose graphics processing unit (GPGPU) and IoT capability to social humanoid 
robots. Administrators can monitor and control the social robots over the Internet. This solution consists of 
related nodes in the robots, a RESTful web service, and a user interface (Fig.2). 
3)   A provision for audio-visual interaction. It consists of three subsystems: speech to text, text to speech, and image 
understanding. These provisions require an embedded GPGPU. Each subsystem can be modified/optimized 
independently. 
4)   A constitution for adding/managing sensors and actuators to the social robots. This constitution rules the bus 
manager such as I2C and SPI (section 3). 
5)   A hardware architecture for accomplishing the aforementioned features (Fig. 3). The proposed hardware consists: 
a wearable vest, a GPGPU kit with I2C, SPI, and USB (3.0 or higher) busses that can run Linux, a wireless 
Internet communication either Wi-Fi or 5G, USB cameras, a microphone, a speaker, and sensors( touch, force, 
temperature, and distance) that communicate via I2C or SPI.  
     This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly describes the related works. The proposed software 
architecture is explained in section 3. Then, a case study is described in section 4 including hardware details, software 
nodes, and experimental results of the low-cost prototype. Discussion on the proposed architecture is stated in section 
5. The final section is a conclusion for the proposed architecture for social humanoid robots. A supplementary file is 
also provided that explains in greater detail in some areas with more detailed specifications, figures and explanations.  
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Fig.1. The proposed software architecture: (a) level pyramid (b) nodes arrangement. 

 
This is the preprint version. The final version is published in Robotics and Autonomous Systems, Volume 
139, Year 2021, Page 103536, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2020.103536 
 
6 
 
 
Fig.2. An illustration of how a vest for a social robot work in a typical Internet of Things (IoT) framework. 
 
 
 
Fig. 3. The hardware architecture that works with the proposed software architecture. 

 
This is the preprint version. The final version is published in Robotics and Autonomous Systems, Volume 
139, Year 2021, Page 103536, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2020.103536 
 
7 
 
2. Related Works on Small Social Robots 
     Researchers have developed many humanoid robots that are designed to be used as social interactive robots. Many 
humanoid robots are designed for other goals. In the following, some of the popular social robots are introduced. 
Robota is a series of social robots. The robots are doll-like and designed to encourage children to play and interact 
with them. The first version of the Robota was developed in 1997 [12] and uses the 80C51 microcontroller family. 
The last version of Robota has a Pocket PC (Compaq iPAQ-3850 Intel Strong ARM SA-1110 32-bit RISC Processor 
206 MHz, with 64 Mb of RAM) [70]. A motor controller board (Microchip PIC16F870) and a sensor board (Microchip 
PIC16F84) connected by a serial port to the Pocket PC. The Pocket PC has a 160x120 pixel camera with a rate of 15 
FPS. The camera of Robota enables tracking of the hands and nose of a user.  
     KASPAR is another social humanoid robot series that is popular in the study of children diagnosed with autism. 
KASPAR stands for Kinesics and Synchronization in Personal Assistant Robotics. The first version was released in 
2005 [71, 72]. The KASPAR can be used in two modes: remotely controlled as well as autonomous operation. In a 
variety of projects, KASPAR operates autonomously. An application programming interface (API) provides access 
for programmers to develop custom programs and access to open-source robot software produced under the “yet 
another robot programme”. In applications involving children with autism, a remote control was used to operate 
KASPAR. It is made of a standard wireless keypad with 20 keys. Different keys were programmed to activate different 
behaviors in KASPAR, e.g. left/right arm drumming, waving, different postures, etc. Operators can easily execute and 
develop programs for the robot using a graphical user interface (GUI), which runs on any Microsoft Windows or 
Linux computer. This interface has been used in human-robot interaction scenarios when an experimenter remotely 
controlled the robot from a laptop. [73]. The sense-think-act architecture is used to enable KASPAR to display goal-
oriented adaptive behaviors while playing, communicating, and collaborating with children [74].  
     Zeno is an emotional robot with expressive skin developed by Hanson Robotics company [13, 75, 76]. The 
RoboWorkshop software allows editing and creation of Zeno .xml animation files containing servomotor position 
information. Automatic lip-syncing text-to-speech software is also provided. However, there is no software, similar 
to NAO or iCub, available to program Zeno to perform complex behaviors [13]. In addition, Hanson Robotics has 
made RoboKind API available with extensive Java libraries to communicate with Zeno [13].  
     ACTROID-F is a social humanoid robot which is similar to a real human and can exhibit various facial expression 
[77]. The android is connected to a notebook PC via USB cable. A webcam, which captures a facial image of a target 
person for face recognition, is also connected to a notebook PC. A microphone is connected to the notebook PC via a 
voice changer. The android’s voice that is generated from speech synthesizer or the voice changer is output from a 
speaker behind the android. All of the degrees of freedom can be manually controlled by sliders in the graphical 
interface. Unconscious human motions such as blinking, gaze movements, head movements, and breathing were 
implemented on the android. The eyes show one of the pre-defined motions such as single blinking, double blinking, 
and gaze movement (vertical or horizontal) stochastically with intervals of 2 to 3 seconds. The graphical interface for 
the operator has push-buttons corresponding to pre-determined motions. These motion events from the operator are 
executed in priority to the synchronized motion.  
     NAO robots are commercial humanoid robots, which are often used in standard platform league (SPL) of Robocup 
competition [78]. Some versions of NAO robots are designed for use in education and research [79]. NAO robots have 
been used in social experiments such as teaching [80], autism [81], hotel’s information [82], etc. NAO robots are 
equipped with NAOqi 2.0 which is a branch of Linux Gentoo. Nao can be programmed in two ways, using GUI and 
using APIs that are provided through a software developer kit. The APIs enable the developers to write code in C++, 
Python, Urbi and .Net. 
     The iCub is an open-source humanoid robotic platform designed explicitly to support research in embodied 
cognition [83-85]. iCub has been used as a social robot in [86, 87]. The robot contains motor amplifiers, a set of DSP 

 
This is the preprint version. The final version is published in Robotics and Autonomous Systems, Volume 
139, Year 2021, Page 103536, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2020.103536 
 
8 
 
controllers, a PC104-based PC, and analog to digital conversion cards. The CAN bus is employed to communicate 
with the PC104 CPU.  Time-consuming computation is typically carried out externally on a cluster of machines. The 
communication with the robot occurs via a Gb Ethernet connection. The iCub software was developed on top of Yet 
Another Robot Platform (YARP) [88, 89]. YARP is a set of libraries that support modularity by abstracting two 
common difficulties in modularity in algorithms and in interfacing with the hardware. 
     Buddy is a low cost, 3D printed humanoid robot that is controlled by an Arduino Uno board [90, 91]. The board 
has an Atmel ATmega328P microcontroller (32 kB flash memory, 2 kB SRAM, and 1 kB EEPROM). The 
computational ability of the robot is very low and just can do some basic tasks such as dancing or playing music, as 
the focus of the robot was on the 3D printed structure and facial expression. The robot has a Wi-Fi IP camera that 
captures images and sends the images to a cloud. A PC can be connected to the cloud and use the camera images to 
process them and extract information. In addition, the PC can send commands to the robot through an IoT board 
(Particle Photon).  
 
     HBS1 is another 3D printed humanoid robot that is controlled by a USB2Dynamixel and a Pololu mini Maestro 
servo controller [92, 93]. The robot has two cameras with IEEE 1394 in the eyes. The main program has been written 
for the desktop PC in C++.  HBS 1.2 is the next version of HBS robots that has only the upper body [94]. The HBS 
1.2 controller is a combination of a desktop computer (Intel Core i7) and a microcontroller board (Nucleo 
STM32F767zi). The desktop program is written in MATLAB and it controls the Dynamixel servo motors via 
USB2Dynamixel adapter and RC servo motors via Pololu mini Maestro servo controller. The desktop program also 
reads and displays the two IEEE 1394 bus in the eye and ZED stereo camera in the chest. The Nucleo STM32F767zi 
is programmed in C using GNU Arm Embedded toolchains (GCC). The Nucleo board controls artificial muscles in 
its hands. The communication between the desktop computer and microcontroller board is Universal Asynchronous 
Receiver Transmitter (UART) [94]. The third version, HBS 2.0 is the newer generation of HBS robot which replaces 
the desktop computer and the microcontroller board with an embedded GPGPU (NVIDIA Jetson TX2 developer kit) 
[95]. It has a ZED stereo camera in the chest. The NVIDIA Jetson TX2 developer kit controls Dynamixel by 
USB2Dynamixel, RC servo by Pololu mini Maestro servo controller, and the artificial muscles by a combination of 
PWM generator (Adafruit PCA9685) and MOSFET boards (IRF3708). The HBS 2.0 can be programmed in C, C++, 
and Python. 
 
3. Proposed Software Architecture   
    With all distributed systems, there must be a way to connect subsystems together in order for each of the subsystems 
to communicate or interact with each other. A communication system is often one of the first needs to arise when 
implementing a new application in robotics. Here, the Robotic Operating System (ROS) [96] is chosen as the 
foundation for the messaging system that provides the interconnects between the software sub-modules. For instance, 
when a person interacts with the humanoid by hugging its waist, the software module that interprets the voltage across 
our pressure sensors in the area must be able to send that data to another sub-module that knows what the appropriate 
response should be, which may be to speak to the person or hug back. The proposed software architecture is comprised 
of many nodes. Therefore, code complexity is reduced in comparison to monolithic systems. A node is an executable 
file that uses ROS to communicate with other nodes. ROS is an operating system on another operating system (Linux 
Ubuntu). Developers can write nodes either in C++ or Python. ROS starts with the ROS Master. The Master allows 
all other ROS pieces of software (nodes) to find and talk to each other. ROS was designed to be as distributed and 
modular as possible. The ROS middleware provides publish/subscribe anonymous message passing, recording and 
playback of messages, request/response remote procedure calls and distributed parameter system. Nodes are combined 
together into a graph and communicate with one another using streaming topics, Remote Procedure Call (RPC) 
services, and the Parameter Server. Implementation details are also well hidden as the nodes expose a minimal API to 

 
This is the preprint version. The final version is published in Robotics and Autonomous Systems, Volume 
139, Year 2021, Page 103536, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2020.103536 
 
9 
 
the rest of the graph and alternate implementations, even in other programming languages, can easily be substituted. 
Messages are the ROS data type used when subscribing or publishing to a topic. Nodes can publish messages to a 
topic as well as subscribe to a topic to receive messages. There can be multiple publishers and subscribers to a topic. 
Topics are intended for unidirectional, streaming communication. In general, nodes are not aware of whom they are 
communicating with. Instead, nodes that are interested in data subscribe to the relevant topic while nodes that generate 
data publish to the relevant topic. Nodes can also provide or use a Service. The asynchronous nature of 
publish/subscribe messaging works for many communications need in robotics, but sometimes one may want 
synchronous request/response interactions between processes. Nodes that need to perform remote procedure calls, e.g. 
receive a response to a request, should use services instead. The ROS middleware also provides a way for tasks to 
share configuration information through a global key-value store. This system allows developers to easily modify their 
task settings and even allows tasks to change the configuration of other tasks. To write a new node, the developer does 
not need to be familiar with the whole system. The modularity of ROS allows developers to add nodes or entire 
packages easily with minimal effect on the system. A group of developers can work parallel, each writing their own 
modules without having to be blocked by another module’s ongoing development. Each node can be enabled or 
disabled independently, therefore, adding a new sensor is easy. If one node crashes, other nodes that are not dependent 
on it can continue working. 
     In the proposed architecture (Fig. 1), the nodes are categorized into four types: bus manager nodes, hardware nodes, 
service nodes, and behavior nodes. Hardware nodes typically have one function, which is to provide monitor and 
control (M&C) of the hardware of the robot such as sensors and motors. Behavior nodes are responsible for 
interpreting data from sensors to drive interactions. For example, one behavior node is the movement tracking behavior 
to hold eye-contact, which will continuously read the data published from the proximity sensors. When a condition is 
met (for example an object is now not directly in front of the humanoid), it will send a request to the servo motor in 
the neck to turn a specified number of degrees right or left. Service nodes only perform tasks when another node 
requests that it perform its function. We used service nodes as a function that is accessible from any other node in the 
ROS architecture. An example of this is the speaker service node. It simply takes a string input from another Node 
(almost always a behavior node) and it calls upon the text to speech (TTS) application to send the speech to the 
speaker. 
     The proposed software architecture provides the Internet of Things (IoT) functionality for social humanoid robots. 
There are two foundational features for IoT implementation. First, we wanted to be able to read real-time sensor data 
from the social humanoid robot. Second, we wanted to be able to control the social humanoid robot over the Internet. 
These two features are the foundation for a virtually endless expansion of M&C of the humanoid. There are four 
components in our IoRT architecture: a behavior node, a service node, and a public REST API hosted on a public 
cloud or VPS and a remote client user interface (UI) application. The behavior node continuously sends HTTP GET 
requests at as fast a rate as possible via the API, which is asking for any updates from the remote client. An update 
may be any command that the remote client application has sent to the RESTful web service since the last request. If 
a command is detected in the HTTP response, the IoT behavior node will determine which of the valid commands it 
has received and immediately sends a request to the IoT service node to delegate the appropriate action to any other 
service nodes. The API is built upon the Python Flask web micro-framework and can be hosted on any public-facing 
server. The API is also capable of accepting and differentiating between commands to multiple robots. Each robot can 
be assigned a unique ID and the behavior nodes will know if the command is meant for its humanoid. This extends 
also to the remote client application. A single client application could provide M&C for multiple humanoids as well 
as multiple geographically separated remote clients to control the same humanoid if desired. 
     The proposed software architecture provide a constitution for adding/managing sensors and actuators. The inter-
integrated circuit (I2C) and the serial peripheral interface (SPI) protocols are at the low-end of the communication 
protocols [97]. Both SPI and I2C offer good support for communication with low-speed devices, but SPI is better 

 
This is the preprint version. The final version is published in Robotics and Autonomous Systems, Volume 
139, Year 2021, Page 103536, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2020.103536 
 
10 
 
suited to applications in which devices transfer data streams, whereas I2C is better at bus topology (routing and 
resources). A major advantage of the I2C bus is the efficient use of an important and limited embedded system resource 
- I/O ports [98], it allows a number of sensors to be connected in  a bus. Each hardware node is able to specify which 
bus that it wishes to create a request for and the I2C manager node constructs a job object entirely based on the 
requesting node’s inputs. All access to each I2C and SPI buses is brokered by a single software module named the 
“Bus Manager.” These modules maintain two queues, one for pending requests and one for completed requests. When 
a read or write request is made by any hardware nodes with access to the specific bus manager, the requesting node 
will continually ask the bus manager if their job request has been completed. Once that Bus Manager shows that the 
specified job has been completed, it will return the requested data (if any) to the requesting node that might be waiting 
for a response and the process will be repeated. 
     Image understanding is an important subsystem of social humanoid robots. Face detection and recognition, object 
detection and tracking, gesture and emotion recognition, image segmentation, and 3D reconstruction (mapping) are 
examples of image understanding subsystems. In the proposed architecture, we used the embedded GPGPU of the 
robot to run the image understanding module in real-time. The results of image understanding subsystem are published 
in related topic to use in high-level behavior. 
     Speech is one of the most basic forms of communication that connects us as humans; therefore, we wanted our 
humanoid to be able to respond to speech from any interactor. The proposed architecture provides a speaker service 
node (speech-to-text) and a microphone publisher node (text-to-speech nodes). Advanced Linux Sound Architecture 
(ALSA) provides audio functionality to the Linux operating system and kernel-driven sound card drivers. ALSA also 
bundles a user space driven library for application developers. In the proposed architecture, we used ALSA high-level 
API development in the microphone publisher node to enable direct (kernel) interaction with sound devices through 
ALSA library.  
     The advantage of the proposed software architecture is that it provides (1) IoT technology, (2) GPGPU nodes (to 
use deep learning methods), (3) I2C and SPI bus managers, (4) speech interaction (speech to text and text to speech) 
nodes, (5) image understanding, and (6) isolation between behavior nodes and other nodes. The proposed software 
architecture handles all the six aspects, which is not available at the same time in other social humanoid robot software 
architecture. For example, YARP and NAO software architecture do not provide IoT node, I2C and SPI bus managers, 
and GPGPU nodes.  
 
4. Case Study  
4.1. Hardware of our low cost prototype 
     The proposed software architecture can be run on any social humanoid robot that has (1) embedded GPGPU, (2) 
Linux operating system, (3) robot operating system (ROS), (4) Internet communication hardware, (5) I2C/SPI bus(es). 
In this section, we explain an example. In this case study, we used a NVIDIA Jetson TX2 developer kit [19], which 
supports all of the five conditions. The board is compared with others in the supplementary file (Table S1). Fig. 4 
shows the hardware architecture and interconnection. Sensors and actuators are selected and the details are provided 
in a supplementary file (Table S2, Fig. S4). We used a USB sound adapter to connect the microphone and speaker to 
the robot. To control the servo motor, we used a Pololu mini Maestro twelve channels servo controller in USB 
communication (Virtual COM port) mode. We designed a two-layer PCB for RGB LEDs on the face of the robot. 
Each PCB has 3 RGB LEDs (Kingbright WP154A43VBDZGWCA) and 3 MOSFETs (Infineon IRLB8314PBF), i.e. 
each MOSFET connects to pin 1 of the 3 LEDs. To control the LED, we used a NXP PCA9685 PWM generator (16 
channels, with 12-bit resolution, and programmable frequency 24 Hz to 1526 Hz).  We used two types of range sensors 
that communicate via I2C. For long range, we used an ultrasonic range sensor (Devantech SRF02) and for short range, 
we used three Time of Flight (ToF) distance sensors (STMicroelectronics VL53L0X). The SRF02 has a minimum 

 
This is the preprint version. The final version is published in Robotics and Autonomous Systems, Volume 
139, Year 2021, Page 103536, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2020.103536 
 
11 
 
measurement distance of 180 mm. STMicroelectronics VL53L0X measures 30 mm to 1.2 meters in default mode. We 
used a gesture sensor from XYZ Interactive Technologies, which communicates via I2C. It is able to detect hand 
movements such as swipe, air push, hover, circle, and wave. We used a capacitive touch-sensing unit (NXP MPR121), 
which can handle up to 12 individual touchpads. It is connected to copper sheets to expand the sensing area. For 
sensing force, we used Interlink FSR 406. FSR stands for Force Sensing Resistor. It exhibits a decrease in resistance 
with an increase in applied force to the surface of the sensor, the force can be as low as 0.25 N and as high as 10 N. 
We used a 16-bit Delta-Sigma (ΔΣ) analog to digital convertor (TI ADS1115) to read the FSRs. We used a Microchip 
Technology MCP9808 temperature sensor (with a typical accuracy of ±0.5°C) for sensing the surrounding 
environment. 
 
 
 
Fig. 4. Hardware of  the our prototype vest which is mounted on a mannequin  as a case study: (a) photograph of 
the prototype front view, (b) back view, (c) side view, (d) physical diagram, and (e) connection diagrams. 

 
This is the preprint version. The final version is published in Robotics and Autonomous Systems, Volume 
139, Year 2021, Page 103536, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2020.103536 
 
12 
 
 
 
Fig. 5. Software diagram of the first prototype as a case study which is run on the GPGPU kit that is mounted on 
the mannequin. 
 
4.2. Software of the our prototype 
     Fig. 5 shows a block diagram of nodes, messages, and request services between them in this case study. In this 
prototype, all sensors and controllers use I2C bus. In this prototype, we used the CMU Pocket Sphinx library [99] in 
the speech-to-text Node and the Festival library [100] in the text-to-speech Node. There are two ways that our 
humanoid will trigger a TTS event. The simplest way is to respond to a very specific physical interaction such as 
patting the humanoid on the back and it says, “Thank you.” The second is to respond to the interactor speaking to the 
humanoid. With a dictionary of words and phrases, the microphone will convert the interactor’s speech to strings 
which are matched to the dictionary and then respond with the corresponding phrase. The method we use for this 
interaction is a Python daemon that connects to the microphone. The daemon will first measure the ambient volume 
and once a specified threshold is met, it will begin recording. It records until the silence threshold is met and 
immediately begins analyzing the converted sound. Once the captured speech is interpreted and matched to the preset 
text in the dictionary file, the robot responds with an appropriate statement by calling the TTS service. 
 
4.3. Internet of Thing of the first prototype 
     We used Amazon Web Services (AWS) Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2) as the host for our IoT application. AWS 
gives many easy-to-configure security features at the network level to ensure that our application can be accessed only 
by necessary users. This combined with Flask’s support of SSL-256 and authorization allows our data and access to 
be secure and safe. Communication over the public Internet introduces an unavoidable increase in latency between 
physical interaction and commands sent from the remote client application and vice versa. Many uncontrollable factors 
play a role in causing this latency including, but not limited to ISP inter-AS rules, geography, packet loss, and firewall 
rules. To mitigate these factors, we hosted our RESTful web service on an extremely high-reliability public network 
and infrastructure with a 99.99% service level agreement (SLA). When tested we observed a maximum of 3 seconds 
and a minimum of 1.5 seconds response times. The average response time for IoRT-based interactions is 1.8 seconds. 
 
 

 
This is the preprint version. The final version is published in Robotics and Autonomous Systems, Volume 
139, Year 2021, Page 103536, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2020.103536 
 
13 
 
4.4. Hand gesture detection with deep learning on the first prototype 
     To demonstrate the image understanding subsystem, we use a node that captures images from a webcam and detects 
the hand gesture (number zero to five). We used OpenCV and the Keras library with the backend of TensorFlow 1.9 
to implement a convolutional neural network (CNN). The raw RGB image is captured in 640X360 pixel in 60 fps 
mode. Then, the raw image is cropped to 128x128 pixels without scaling/rectifying. Next, the cropped image is 
converted to a grayscale image.  Then, it is filtered by a Gaussian filter with a window size of 3x3 and a standard 
deviation of seven. We used an adaptive thresholding method to convert the filtered image to a binary image (Edge). 
For finding the threshold for each pixel, we used the weighted average method that the weight comes from Gaussian 
with the window size of 11x11. Fig. 6 (a) shows examples of the edge images captured from a subject displaying hand 
sign to the webcam in one set of experiment (Fig.6b). The binary image is inserted into the convolutional neural 
network. Table 2 shows the detail of the CNN. We used one-hot encoding for 6 states of hands. We used cross-entropy 
for the cost function. In the training, we used a dropout technique for the fully connected layer. The training accuracy 
was 97%.  We tested the convolutional neural networks as shown in an experiment in Fig. 6b. It detected the hand 
gesture with an accuracy of 95%. The 2% difference between the training and testing shows that our designed CNN 
has low variance. The speed was 7 frames per second which is less than our desired speed (10 frames per second). To 
solve this issue (speed), we could use TensorRT to optimize the network in integer mode. Although TensorRT will 
increase the frame rate, the accuracy will decrease. Another way to increase the frame rate is to use a lighter CNN; 
however, the accuracy will decrease. A better way to increase the speed is by replacing NVIDIA Jetson TX2 with a 
more powerful (higher FLOPS) GPGPU kit. For example, NVIDIA AGX Xavier developer kit is two times faster than 
NVIDIA Jetson TX2, which increases the frame rate to 14 frames per second (more than desired). In the future works, 
we will use a combination of better GPGPU and TensorRT, i.e., we will explore a deeper CNN in integer mode, using 
TensorRT for NVIDIA AGX Xavier. 
 
 
  
Fig.6. Hand gesture recognition using deep learning and NVDIA Jetson TX2: (a) Examples of edge images, (b) 
experimental setup.  
 
 

 
This is the preprint version. The final version is published in Robotics and Autonomous Systems, Volume 
139, Year 2021, Page 103536, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2020.103536 
 
14 
 
 
Table 2. Layers of the convolution neural network (CNN) for detecting hand gesture with deep learning. 
Number 
Type 
Filter size 
Number of Filter 
Activation 
Input Size 
Output Size 
1 
Convolution 
3 x 3 
8 
ReLU 
128 x 128 x 1 
128 x 128 x 8 
2 
Pooling 
2 x 2 
1 
Max 
128 x 128 x 8 
64 x 64 x 8 
3 
Convolution 
3 x 3 
16 
ReLU 
64 x 64 x 8 
64 x 64 x 16 
4 
Pooling 
2 x 2 
1 
Max 
64 x 64 x 16 
32 x 32 x 16 
5 
Convolution 
3 x 3 
32 
ReLU 
32 x 32 x 16 
32 x 32 x 32 
6 
Pooling 
2 x 2 
1 
Max 
32 x 32 x 32 
16 x 16 x 32 
7 
Convolution 
3 x 3 
64 
ReLU 
16 x 16 x 32 
16 x 16 x 64 
8 
Pooling 
2 x 2 
1 
Max 
16 x 16 x 64 
8 x 8 x 64 
9 
Convolution 
3 x 3 
128 
ReLU 
8 x 8 x 64 
8 x 8 x 128 
10 
Pooling 
2 x 2 
1 
Max 
8 x 8 x 128 
4 x 4 x 128 
11 
Convolution 
3 x 3 
256 
ReLU 
4 x 4 x 128 
4 x 4 x 256 
12 
Pooling 
2 x 2 
1 
Max 
4 x 4 x 256 
2 x 2 x 256 
13 
Convolution 
3 x 3 
512 
ReLU 
2 x 2 x 256 
2 x 2 x 512 
14 
Pooling 
2 x 2 
1 
Max 
2 x 2 x 512 
1 x 1 x 512 
15 
Fully Connected 
512 x 128 
1 
ReLU 
1 x 1 x 512 
1 x 1 x 128 
16 
Fully Connected 
128 x 6 
1 
Softmax 
1 x 1 x 128 
1 x 1 x 6 
 
 
4.5. Time-based Sensing Module Interface 
 
The time-based sensing module means the sensors read input data periodically. The time-based sensing module 
includes modules of gesture sensing, touch sensing, force sensing, and range sensing. 
 
4.5.1. Touch Sensing Module 
 
We use an Adafruit MPR121 capacitive touch sensor, which communicates via I2C bus. The touch publisher node 
requests the I2C manager node to read data from the touch sensor periodically. When the touch sensor node receives 
data from I2C manager node, it publishes the data to the touch topic. If a touch has occurred on the touch sensor, the 
touch node will send a pre-defined phrase such as ‘thank you’ to the text to speech service node. The conceptual 
representation of the touch sensing module is shown in Fig. 7. Inside the dash lines is the process of getting touch data. 
To get the data from the touch sensor, user can send a remote command “read touch” using the user interface client 
node to the cloud. The IoRT server node subscribes to the touch topic. When the IoRT behavior node detects the 
command, it will request the IoRT server node to get the touch data from the touch topic. The codes for each segment 
are shown in Fig. 7 (b) to (e). 
 
 
 
 

 
This is the preprint version. The final version is published in Robotics and Autonomous Systems, Volume 
139, Year 2021, Page 103536, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2020.103536 
 
15 
 
 
Fig.7. Conceptual representation of touch sensing module: (a) inside dashed lines is the process of getting raw 
touch data, (b) code of touch publisher node, (c) code of the API in the cloud, (d) code of IoRT service node, and  
(e) code of IoRT behavior client node. 
 
 
 
 

 
This is the preprint version. The final version is published in Robotics and Autonomous Systems, Volume 
139, Year 2021, Page 103536, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2020.103536 
 
16 
 
4.5.2. Gesture Sensing Module  
 
    In this module, the gesture publisher node requests the I2C manager node periodically to read data from the gesture 
sensor then publishes the data to the gesture topic. The wave greeting node, which subscribes to the gesture topic gets 
the data from the gesture topic. When a wave has occurred, the wave greeting node sends a pre-defined phrase such 
as ‘Hello’ to the text to speech service node. We can also get gesture data by using IoRT communication. Fig. 8 (a) 
shows the conceptual representation of gesture sensing. 
 
4.5.3. Force Sensing Module 
 
We use two force resistive sensors and an analog-to-digital converter (ADC) in this module. The force publisher 
node requests the I2C manager node periodically to read data of all channels in ADS1115 hardware. Then the force 
publisher node publishes the data to the force topic. The hug node subscribes to the force topic to read the force data. 
If both the right and left force sensors data reach a certain threshold at the same time, then the hug node requests the 
LED driver node to change the LED color and send a pre-defined text to the text to speech service node. This indicates 
a hugging action. The conceptual representation of the force sensing module is presented in Fig. 8 (b).  
 
4.5.4. Range Sensing Module 
 
To track the position of the nearest object, three ToF range sensors are used. The range publisher node requests the 
I2C manager node to read data from each VL53L0X sensor and then publishes the data to the track topic.  We use a 
tracker node to subscribe to the tracking topic.. The tracker node finds the minimum distance measured from each 
sensor. If minimum distance is not the center distance, the tracker will request the servo service node to move toward 
the sensor with the minimum measurement. Fig. 8 (c) is the conceptual representation of the range sensing module.  
 
4.6. Event-based Sensing Module 
The event-based sensing modules mean the sensors nodes read input data after receiving a request from another 
nodes. The event-based sensing module includes ultrasound range sensing module and temperature module. 
 
4.6.1. Ultrasound Range Sensing Module 
The SRF02 sonar proximity sensor communicates via I2C bus. The sonar sensor node is a service node that reports 
the range when a call to its advertised service is made from the Internet of Robotic Things (IoRT) node. The sonar 
service node requests the I2C manager node to write a “real ranging mode-result in centimeters” command to the 
SRF02 device and waits the allotted time for the measurement to be made. Then the sonar service node reports the 
resulting range in centimeters to the IoRT service node. The conceptual representation of the ultrasound range sensing 
module is shown as Fig. 9 (a). 
 
4.6.2. Temperature Module 
We use the MCP9808 sensor to measure the temperature of the environment around the humanoid robot. The sensor, 
which communicates via I2C bus, converts temperatures to a digital word data (16 bits). This data is then manipulated 
to represent the temperature in degrees Fahrenheit. The temperature service node reports the temperature when a call 
to its advertised service is made by IoRT service node. Fig. 9 (b) shows the conceptual representation of the 
temperature module. 
 

 
This is the preprint version. The final version is published in Robotics and Autonomous Systems, Volume 
139, Year 2021, Page 103536, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2020.103536 
 
17 
 
 
Fig. 8. Conceptual Representation of: (a) Gesture Sensing Module, (b) Force Sensing Module, and (c) Range 
Sensing Module. 
 
4.7. Speech to Speech Interaction Module 
When an audio is captured by the speech publisher node, the speech to text (STT) node will interpret the raw audio 
data to text using CMU Pocket Sphinx and publish the text to the speech topic. The speech to speech interaction node 
subscribes to the speech topic with the frequency of one second. Once the speech to speech interaction node reads a 
new message from the speech topic, it will check whether the text of the message is in the dialog database, which is 
defined in the config.txt. If the text exists in the database, then the speech to speech interaction node will send the pre-
defined response in the database to the text to speech node. The conceptual representation of the speech to speech 
interaction module is shown as Fig. 9 (c). 
 

 
This is the preprint version. The final version is published in Robotics and Autonomous Systems, Volume 
139, Year 2021, Page 103536, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2020.103536 
 
18 
 
Fig. 9. Event based sensing module- Conceptual representation of: (a) Ultrasound Range Sensing Module, (b) 
Temperature Module, (c) Speech to Speech Interaction Module. 
 
 
Comparison of our hardware and software features are provided in supplementary files (Table S3, S4 and S5) by 
considering different features and to provide a more detailed explanation.   
 
4.8. Experimental result of the prototype  
Fig. 10 illustrates the experiments on the first prototype, the illustrated wearable vest. In Fig. 10 (a), a human talks 
with the robot for testing the voice interactions. The gesture sensor (Fig. 10 (b) shows the test on the gesture) requires 
a close distance to detect the hand motion. Fig. 10 (c) shows testing the ultrasonic range sensor using a paper along 
the way. Fig. 10 (d) shows testing the tracking behavior node by moving a hand over the head area. The testing touch 
sensor is demonstrated in Fig.10 (e) by tapping the back area (copper pads). The hug behavior testing illustrated in 
Fig. 10 (f), where a user presses the side sensors in the vest. These sensors are located on the left and the right side of 
the vest. Video illustration of these tests is available in the HBS lab YouTube channel in the following link: 
https://youtu.be/8RuS-vbxqPk.  The objective in this case is to show the functionality of the first low-cost prototype 
that was used to test the proposed software architecture.  Other measurements are also performed on the current 
prototype. Fig. 11 (a) shows one set of measuring distance with the ultrasonic range sensor, which was done by placing 
a paper pad at a different position from the sensor. Fig. 11 (b) shows one set of distance measurements with the ToF 
range sensor. It can be seen that the ultrasonic sensor detects a far distance from 50 to 250 cm, whereas the ToF sensor 
responds to a shorter distance from 5 to 20 cm. Fig. 11 (c) shows the sensitivity of the FSR sensor, which indicates 
that as the applied load is increased, the voltage across the FSR is decreased. This test was done by applying a 
calibrated weight on the FRS sensor and measuring the output voltage. It was discussed at the beginning that the FSR 
resistance decreases its resistance as the load increases. Fig. 11 (d) shows the time response of the temperature sensor 
when it contacts with a warm/cold object. The red line indicates warm object (400C) and the blue color is the cold 
object (220C). In both cases, as time goes by, the temperature decays and reach to steady state within 500-600 seconds.   
 

 
This is the preprint version. The final version is published in Robotics and Autonomous Systems, Volume 
139, Year 2021, Page 103536, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2020.103536 
 
19 
 
 
Fig. 10. Example of testing the modular wearable vest: (a) speech interaction, (b) gesture recognition, (c) ultra 
sound range sensor, (d) time of flight range sensor, (e) capacitive touch sensor, and (f) force sensitive resistor. 
 
 
Fig. 11. Experimental results of testing sensors: (a) ultrasound range sensor, (b) ToF range sensor, (c) FSR sensor 
and (d) temperature sensor. 

 
This is the preprint version. The final version is published in Robotics and Autonomous Systems, Volume 
139, Year 2021, Page 103536, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2020.103536 
 
20 
 
     Interaction through speech is one of the most important media for social humanoid robots. To test the ability of 
vocal interaction, a person talks to the robot (Fig. 10 (a)) as a preliminary test, and the robot recognizes the voice 
through its TTS and the software discussed earlier. The interaction consists of three parts. The first is the speech to 
the text. We performed experiments with 10 subjects to test the speech. Subjects were told to repeat certain phrases 5 
times.  Fig. 12 shows the accuracy of phrases when 10 subjects repeated each sentence/phrase 5 times (total of 50 
times). We followed IRB protocol when conducting experiments with human subjects. CMU Pocket Sphinx failed to 
detect the word “time” and successfully detected all of “what is your” phrases. This experiment shows that we should 
use a new technique to overcome this issue. We used the current hardware /software for the speech because it did not 
require Internet connection and they are available for free use. We plan to use an end-to-end neural network (deep 
learning) in future work. The accuracy of online services like IBM is better; however, it may be slower because of 
Internet communication, which should be avoided in social robots. The second part is mapping the recognized text to 
the corresponding response text in the database to create dialogues such as: 
 
• 
Dialogue 1: 
o 
Human: “What is your name?” 
o 
Robot: “My name is H B S 2” 
• 
Dialogue 2: 
o 
Human: “What is your favorite color?” 
o 
Robot: “My favorite color is blue. My vest is blue.” 
• 
Dialogue 3: 
o 
Human: “What is the temperature?” 
o 
The robot collects temperature sensor data and passes it to the TTS Service Node 
o 
Robot: “The temperature is 72 degrees” 
 
The third part is converting the response text to the speech. The resulting speech is clear; however, it is artificial 
because the software combines the phones to play. The more natural way is to have a database of sentences; however, 
it will be limited as it requires a high volume of permanent memory (SSD storage). Also, it adds more delay to search 
for the response files. Cloud computing [46, 49, 101] is another method to consider, however, it causes the robot to 
stop working when the Internet connection fails that is not desired for social robots. 
 
     Responding/reaction times are very important in social humanoid robots. If a robot shows long delays, the humans 
that interact with the robot feel awkward and they lose eagerness to talk with the robot. Fig. 13 shows some examples 
of the delay time in experiments. Reaction times to touching (capacitive) and hugging (FSR) are negligible. Shaking 
head by requesting over the Internet takes less than half a second. This demonstrates the success of our goal. Reading 
temperature takes about half a second. These delays come from the fact that I2C bus share with many sensors. 
Regardless, this much delay is acceptable. Reading the ultrasound sensor and requesting the text to speech via Internet 
takes about 1.5 s and 2.5 s respectively. These results are not acceptable and should be fixed in future works. 
 

 
This is the preprint version. The final version is published in Robotics and Autonomous Systems, Volume 
139, Year 2021, Page 103536, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2020.103536 
 
21 
 
  
Fig.12. Accuracy of speech to text when each phrase repeated 50 times (Left) and the experimental setup (right). 
Subjects are asked to stand next to the robot with sensor vest and read the phrases 5 times and the recorded voice 
is analyzed.  
 
 
Fig.13. System response time during interactions  
 
8. Discussion 
    To add a new sensor, we need to decide which bus we should to use for communication between the sensor and 
GPGPU, for example, the I2C, SPI, or UART. If we decide to use I2C to communicate with the sensor, we must 
connect the sensor to an I2C bus and create either a sensor server or a publisher node in ROS. If the sensor is unable 
to communicate via I2C, we need to create a bus manager of the type, which the sensor is compatible. When a new 
behavior node is created, it can be subscribed to one or more topics.   
    As mentioned in the introduction, social robots should respond in real-time and in a natural way to not create an 
awkward or unnatural feeling when they interact with humans. The first prototype can be improved greatly by 
replacing the speech to text and text to speech subsystem with other options. The latency of Internet communication 
can be addressed by utilizing fog computing and concurrency. The latency from the deep learning will be solved by 
using a more powerful developing kit.  
     We think that the social robot should do most of the computation locally. For example, we could record the voice 
and send it to a cloud robotic and receive the text back. We chose to use local speech to text even though we know 
that the accuracy is much lower than the cloud services. With local computing, we are able to eliminate the latency 
that comes from Internet communication. Most importantly, if the social robot depends entirely on the Internet, it will 
stop functioning when the Internet connection is lost. For communication with people that physically do not have 
access to the robot, we designed the IoT node; the node connected to a cloud server. To decrease the latency and 
increase safety, we can move to edge computing servers; however, that subject needs further study. Currently, we used 

 
This is the preprint version. The final version is published in Robotics and Autonomous Systems, Volume 
139, Year 2021, Page 103536, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2020.103536 
 
22 
 
very few sensors, but when increasing the number of sensors, we could consider the distributed software architecture 
and keep the current architecture at the top of the network (hierarchy). 
Noise and disturbance are unavoidable in electronic interfaces. These are some of the challenges in wearable vests 
for humans because human signals are analog and low power such as EMG, ECG, ENG, etc. However, noise and 
disturbance in digital buses are negligible especially in the case of USB, I2C, and SPI bus. Therefore, we only used 
digital sensors and actuators in our hardware architecture. The digital sensors refer to the combination of the sensitive 
elements and the signal processing unit that comes with the sensors or the analog to digital convertors. For example, 
the FSR and the ADS1115 combined is the digital force sensors used in the vest. 
Artificial skins for humanoids are proposed in prior works [102, 103]. We have also tried piezoelectric sensors 
embedded in flexible skin for social robots [91, 104, 105] . However, casting the materials, embedding sensors 
permanently in elastomers and integration require more involved processes. Still such flexible artificial skins can be 
used in the vest, as the sensing parts are one aspect of the current work.  In contrast to artificial skin, the wearable vest 
presented in this paper is more convenient to implement low-cost sensors (as the fabric can be stitched, weaved and 
adjusted) and is able to allow developers to add new sensors on it or remove unused sensors from it. Another advantage 
of our sensor vest over artificial skin is that the vest can be repeatedly used on different robots since it is wearable and 
fits many exist social humanoid robots. The parts used in the prototype of the vest are changeable and work 
independently. Currently, we are using some low-cost hardware components for our vest to make it affordable and 
they can be replaced based on the consideration and balancing the requirement of kinematic performance and the cost. 
    This paper presents a hardware architecture as well as a software architecture for wearable vests for social humanoid 
robots. The architecture is modular and independent of shapes, materials, and components. We showed a case study 
for this architecture and its performance. We used low-cost sensors, actuators, vest, and GPGPU kit. All elements can 
be replaced by a better one without changing the architecture. For example, the vest in the first prototype may avoid 
kinematic abilities of some robots; however, a tight fit and a muscle shirt (Fig.14a-e) that can be cut in some portion 
can be employed. This can be one design variable of the vest, such that what portion of the robot should be covered 
or not. The other issue is overheating if the robot is entirely covered by the sensor vest. This issue can be easily 
addressed by considering meshed fabrics (Fig.14 c) that are highly elastic for a tight fit or porous fabric that can be 
employed for better heat flow. This can be a second design variable of the vest that designers select. In future works, 
we will use better components (as discussed in the table S5) and replace the vest of the first prototype with a 
lightweight porous, thin, and stretchable fabric. Also, for some robots, we can cut the fabric (like Fig,14d) in a way 
that will not occlude the robot’s joints movement and cooling fans can be added to prevent overheating. In some 
applications related to children or social interaction with ASD children, the entire wiring and controller should be 
covered for safe human-robot interaction (HRI). In order to do this, a second layer should be used like the one shown 
in Fig.14 (e). Therefore, a multilayer sensor vest can be considered to address the safety issues of such robotic vest 
design.  In the case of 3D printed robots, one idea to overcome the issues of wiring is to 3D print the wires together 
with the structural parts as presented in[106]. But this will be beyond the scope of this paper.  
Fig.14 Garment design for improvement of the vest: (a) tight fit with elastic fabric, (b) full body covering tightly, 
(c) meshed or fishnet shirt design, (d) cut out in some areas and (e) multiple layers for safety protection.  (Original 
Figures a, b, and e are from amazon.com; c is from wish.com; d is from brownfashion.com).   
(a)                                (b)                                (c)                              (d)                         (e) 

 
This is the preprint version. The final version is published in Robotics and Autonomous Systems, Volume 
139, Year 2021, Page 103536, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2020.103536 
 
23 
 
 
    Here, we show the vest with standard robotics actions with cameras and sensors, such as hand gesture recognition 
or speech recognition. The goal of this research is designing a general-purpose hardware and software architecture to 
be used as a starting point of designing complex behaviors. For example, it helps psychologists to design therapy 
sessions for children with autism spectrum disorders (ASD). In this example, psychologists do not need to know about 
low-level nodes and hardware.  
     Safety, security, and privacy are common concerns in all IoT based systems. To address safety concerns, the 
architecture requires adding some administrative and/or orchestration nodes to control all other nodes to react to node 
failures that occur. The security and privacy of the robots directly depend on the cloud that runs the host. Therefore, 
they need a completely different study. 
     Medical care and health care represent one of the most attractive application areas for social robots [107-109]. The 
modular software architecture of the IoT vest makes it easy to develop more complex functions based on the basic 
sensing modules presented in our work without changing the nodes and the architecture of each module. The designed 
architecture has the potential to give rise to many medical applications such as in the treatment of attention in autistic 
children [110-112],  interacting with babies and toddlers [113], remote health monitoring [114], fitness programs, and 
elderly care [115, 116]. Compliance with treatment and medication at home and by healthcare providers is another 
important potential application. Tourism [117, 118] and education [119-121] are other areas that can benefit from this 
software architecture. 
 
7. Conclusions 
     In this paper, we showed an IoT-based wearable sensor vest with GPGPU for social humanoid robots, highlighting 
the hardware and software architectures. We showed the vest in a  robot that is connected to the wireless Internet to 
send or receive information and commands from a virtual private server (VPS) or cloud. We designed an open-source 
modular software architecture for social humanoid robots. The proposed software architecture can be used for any 
social robots that have a GPGPU, ROS, and SPI/I2C buses. The software architecture consists of low-level nodes, 
sensor nodes, and behavior nodes. The software architecture manages the communication buses. The architecture 
provides the IoT node to communicate with other people and robots via the Internet. The API is also capable of 
accepting and differentiating between commands to multiple robots. Developers can easily add/remove/update nodes 
because it is designed to be modular as much as possible. The proposed software architecture provides provisions for 
audio-visual interaction, which consists of speech-to-text, text-to-speech, and image understanding. This architecture 
helps developers to write complex behaviors for social interaction by isolating the behavior nodes from other nodes. 
     In developing the software architecture for social humanoid robots, we have encountered many challenges. Many 
sensors are connected to a bus and the bus communicates with each sensor in a time-based manner. Increasing the 
number of sensors is challenging due to management issues. We will consider distributed and hierarchy-based 
communication systems for future works. Improving the speech-to-text and text-to-speech nodes are the most 
challenging works, which should be priorities for future work to improve vocal interaction. Latency results from 
communication over the public Internet is another challenge that separate studies should address.  
 
Acknowledgment: We would like to thank the senior design team: Sharon Choi, Manpreet Dhot, Mark Cordova, Luis 
Hall-Valdez, and Stephen Brooks for design and development of the initial design.   
 
 

 
This is the preprint version. The final version is published in Robotics and Autonomous Systems, Volume 
139, Year 2021, Page 103536, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2020.103536 
 
24
