Automatic Liver and Tumor Segmentation of CT and MRI
Volumes Using Cascaded Fully Convolutional Neural Networks
Patrick Ferdinand Christa,1, Florian Ettlingera,1, Felix Gr¨una, Mohamed Ezzeldin A.
Elshaera, Jana Lipkov´aa, Sebastian Schlechta, Freba Ahmaddya, Sunil Tatavartya, Marc
Bickela, Patrick Bilica, Markus Rempﬂera, Felix Hofmannb, Melvin D’Anastasib,
Seyed-Ahmad Ahmadib, Georgios Kaissisa, Julian Holchb, Wieland Sommerb, Rickmer
Brarena, Volker Heinemannb, Bjoern Menzea
aTechnical University of Munich, Arccistrasse 21, 80333 Munich
bLMU Hospital Grosshadern, Marchioninistrasse 15, 81377 Munich, Germany
Abstract
Automatic segmentation of the liver and hepatic lesions is an important step towards deriving
quantitative biomarkers for accurate clinical diagnosis and computer-aided decision support
systems. This paper presents a method to automatically segment liver and lesions in CT and
MRI abdomen images using cascaded fully convolutional neural networks (CFCNs) enabling
the segmentation of large-scale medical trials and quantitative image analyses. We train
and cascade two FCNs for the combined segmentation of the liver and its lesions. As a ﬁrst
step, we train an FCN to segment the liver as ROI input for a second FCN. The second
FCN solely segments lesions within the predicted liver ROIs of step 1. CFCN models were
trained on an abdominal CT dataset comprising 100 hepatic tumor volumes. Validation
results on further datasets show that CFCN-based semantic liver and lesion segmentation
achieves Dice scores over 94% for the liver with computation times below 100s per volume.
We further experimentally demonstrate the robustness of the proposed method on 38 MRI
liver tumor volumes and the public 3DIRCAD dataset.
Keywords:
Liver, Lesion, Segmentation, FCN, CRF, Deep Learning
1. Introduction
1.1. Motivation
Anomalies in the shape and texture of the liver and visible lesions in computed tomogra-
phy (CT) and magnetic resonance images (MRI) images are important biomarkers for initial
disease diagnosis and progression in both primary and secondary hepatic tumor disease [1].
Primary tumors such as breast, colon and pancreas cancer often spread metastases to
the liver during the course of disease.
Therefore, the liver and its lesions are routinely
1Authors contributed equally
Preprint submitted to Medical Image Analysis
February 24, 2017
arXiv:1702.05970v2  [cs.CV]  23 Feb 2017

analyzed in primary tumor staging. In addition, the liver is also a site of primary tumor
disease such as Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) presents
the sixth-most common cancer and the third-most common cause of cancer-related deaths
worldwide [2]. HCC comprises a genetically and molecularly highly heterogeneous group of
cancers that commonly arise in a chronically damaged liver. Importantly, HCC subtypes
diﬀer signiﬁcantly in clinical outcome. The stepwise transformation to HCC is accompanied
by major changes in tissue architecture including an increase in cellularity and a switch
in vascular supply (i.e. arterialization). These quantiﬁable changes in tissue architecture
provide the basis for the non-invasive detection of HCC in imaging [3], but also lead to
highly variable structures and shapes.
In clinical routine, manual or semi-manual segmentation techniques are applied to in-
terprete CT and MRI images that have been acquired in the diagnosis of the liver. These
techniques, however, are subjective, operator-dependent and very time-consuming. In order
to improve the productivity of radiologists, computer-aided methods have been developed in
the past. However, an automated robust segmentation of combined liver and lesion remains
still an open problem because of challenges as a low-contrast between liver and lesion, dif-
ferent types of contrast levels (hyper-/hypo-intense tumors), abnormalities in tissues (such
as after surgical resection of metastasis), size and varying number of lesions. As shown in
ﬁgure 1 the heterogeneity in liver and lesion contrast is very large among subjects. Diﬀerent
acquisition protocols, diﬀering contrast-agents, varying levels of contrast enhancements and
dissimilar scanner resolutions lead to unpredictable intensity diﬀerences between liver and
lesion tissue. This complexity of contrast diﬀerences make it diﬃcult for intensity-based
methods to generalize to unseen test cases from diﬀerent clinical sites. In addition, the
varying shape of lesions due to irregular tumor growth and response to treatment (i.e surgi-
cal resection) reduce eﬃciency of computational methods that make use of prior knowledge
on lesion shape.
1.2. Related Works
Nevertheless, several interactive and automatic methods have been developed to seg-
ment the liver and liver lesions in CT volumes. In 2007 and 2008, two Grand Challenges
benchmarks on liver and liver lesion segmentation have been conducted in conjunction with
MICCAI conference [1, 4]. Methods presented at the challenges were mostly based on statis-
tical shape models. Furthermore, grey level and texture based methods have been developed
[1]. Recent work on liver and lesion segmentation employs graph cut and level set techniques
[5, 6, 7], sigmoid edge modeling [8] or manifold and machine learning [9, 10, 11, 12]. How-
ever, these methods are not widely applied in clinics, due to their speed and robustness on
heterogeneous, low-contrast real-life CT data. To overcome these weaknesses, interactive
methods were still developed [13] to overcome these weaknesses.
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) have gained signiﬁcant attention in the sci-
entiﬁc community for solving computer vision tasks such as object recognition, classiﬁcation
and segmentation [14, 15], often out-competing state-of-the art methods. Most importantly,
CNN methods have proven to be highly robust to varying image appearance, which motivates
us to apply them to fully automatic liver and lesions segmentation in CT volumes.
2

0
50
100
150
200
HU intensities
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0.025
Normalized bin count
HU intensity liver
HU intensity lesion
0
50
100
150
200
HU intensities
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.010
0.012
0.014
0.016
Normalized bin count
HU intensity liver
HU intensity lesion
0
50
100
150
200
Intensity in DW-MRI Sequence
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.010
0.012
0.014
0.016
0.018
Normalized bin count
DWI liver
DWI lesion
Figure 1: Liver and liver lesions slices in CT and diﬀusion weighted DW-MRI as well as the corresponding
histogram for liver and lesions pixels in the respective modality. The shape, size and level of contrast vary for
diﬀerent lesions. As the histograms indicate, there is a signiﬁcant overlap between liver and lesion intensities,
leading to a low overall contrast.
Semantic image segmentation methods based on fully convolutional neural networks FCN
were developed in [15], with impressive results in natural image segmentation competitions
[16, 17]. Likewise, new segmentation methods based on CNN and FCNs were developed
for medical image analysis, with highly competitive results compared to state-of-the-art.
[18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25].
1.3. Contribution
In this work, we demonstrate the combined automatic segmentation of the liver and
its lesions in low-contrast heterogeneous medical volumes.
Our contributions are three-
fold. First, we train and apply fully convolutional CNN on CT volumes of the liver for
the ﬁrst time, demonstrating the adaptability to challenging segmentation of hepatic liver
lesions. Second, we propose to use a cascaded fully convolutional neural network (CFCN)
on CT slices, which segments liver and lesions sequentially, leading to signiﬁcantly higher
segmentation quality, as demonstrated on a public challenge dataset. Third, we experimen-
tally demonstrate the generalization and scalability of our methods to diﬀerent modalities
and diverse real-life datasets, including a novel diﬀusion weighted MRI dataset and a large
multri-centric CT dataset.
A preliminary version of this work was presented in MICCAI 2016 [26] and will be presented
at ISBI 2017 [27]. In this paper, we have substantially revised and extended these previous
publications. The main modiﬁcations include an elaborated description of the proposed
3

methods, an analysis of underlying design principles and architectures as well as the appli-
cation to new datasets and modalities.
In the following sections, we will describe our proposed pipeline (2.1) including CFCN (2.3)
and 3D CRF (2.4). The experiments are illustrated in section (3).
2. Methods
2.1. Overview of our Proposed Segmentation Workﬂow
Our proposed segmentation workﬂow is depicted in ﬁgure 2.
The workﬂow consists
of three major steps. The ﬁrst step (e.g. section 2.2) deals with data preprocessing and
preparation for the neural network segmentation. In a second step (e.g. section 2.3) two
cascaded fully convolutional neural networks ﬁrst segment the liver and then lesions within
the liver region-of-interest (ROI). In the ﬁnal third step, the calculated probabilities of CFCN
will be reﬁned using a dense 3D conditional random ﬁeld to produce the ﬁnal segmentation
result.
2.2. Data Preparation
The following section deals with data preprocessing and augmentation for CT data. Pre-
processing was carried out in a slice-wise fashion. First, the Hounsﬁeld unit values were
windowed in the range [−100, 400] to exclude irrelevant organs and objects. Figure 3 shows
the eﬀect of our applied preprocessing to a raw medical slice. We increased contrast through
histogram equalization. Figure 3 shows also the ﬁnal slice after HU-windowing and contrast-
enhancement. The contrast within the liver has been enhanced to allow better diﬀerentiation
of abnormal liver tissue. For DW-MRI the data preparation scheme is similar and diﬀers in
the data normalization, which additionally performs N4bias correction [28].
As in [18, 22], to teach the network the desired invariance properties, several data aug-
mentations steps, such as elastic deformation, translation, rotation and addition of Gaussian
noise with standard deviation of the current slice, have been employed to increase the train-
ing data for the CFCN. Details on the data augmentation schemes is made available in our
sourcecode2.
2.3. Cascaded Fully Convolutional Neural Networks
In the following section, we describe diﬀerent state-of-the the art deep learning architec-
ture and design choices that we evaluated for a use in our segmentation tasks. We denote
the 3D image volume as I, the total number of voxels as N and the set of possible labels
as L = {0, 1, . . . , l}. For each voxel i, we deﬁne a variable xi ∈L that denotes the assigned
label. The probability of a voxel i belonging to label k given the image I is described by
P(xi = k|I) and will be modelled by the FCN. In our particular study, we use L = {0, 1, 2}
for background, liver and lesion, respectively.
2Sourcecode and models are available at https://github.com/IBBM/Cascaded-FCN
4

Preprocessing
CT: HU Windowing
MRI: N4 Bias correction
Training Data
CT/MRI Volumes
Test Data
CT/MRI Volumes
FCN for Liver
Segmentation
A ﬁrst FCN segments liver
from abdomen CT/MRI
Data Augmentation
Mirror, crop, addition of
noise and elastic deformation
Segmented Liver ROI
FCN for Lesion
Segmentation
A second FCN seg-
ments lesion from from
segmented liver ROIs
Data Augmentation
Mirror, crop, addition of
noise and elastic deformation
Postprocessing
3D Conditional
Random Field
Final Segmented
CT/MRI Volume
Figure 2: Overview of the proposed image segmentation workﬂow for training and testing. As the ﬁrst step
the CT/MRI volumes are preprocessed with either HU-windowing or N4 bias correction. During the training
phase the training data is augmented to foster the learning of invariance against noise and deformations in
medical data. The CT/MRI volumes are trained after pre-processing and data augmentation in a cascaded
fully convolutional neural network (CFCN). A ﬁrst FCN segments the liver from abdomen CT/MRI scans.
This segmented liver region of interest ROI is the input for a second FCN, that segments lesions from the
given segmented liver ROI. To gain the ﬁnal segmented volume is reﬁned afterwards using a 3D conditional
random ﬁeld 3D CRF.
5

Figure 3: Overview of the applied preprocessing steps. The raw CT slices (left) are windowed to a Hounsﬁeld
Unit range of -100 to 400 HU to neglect organs and tissues that are not of interest. The HU-windowed
slice (middle) is further processed using a histogram equalization to allow further contrast enhancement of
abnormal tissue (right).
2.3.1. From AlexNet to U-Net
Long et al. (2015) presented the ﬁrst fully convolutional network architecture for se-
mantic segmentation [15]. The main idea in their work is to replace the last fully connected
layers of a classiﬁcation network such as the AlexNet [14] with fully convolutional layers to
allow dense pixel-wise predictions. The last fully convolutional layers have to be upscaled
to match the input dimensions. In comparison to prior work, the AlexFCN allows pixel-
wise prediction from full-sized medical slices, instead of patch-wise classiﬁcation. Figures
4a and 4b show the training curves for training the AlexFCN (without class balancing) on
3DIRCAD dataset. Both training curves converged fast to a steady state in training and
test Dice overlap. Both training curves show a large overﬁtting of the AlexFCN without
class balancing, with Dice overlaps of 71%/90% in test/training data for liver, and 24%/60%
for lesions. In general the lesion Dice of 24% at test time is comparable low. Long et al.
(2015) explicitly stated that they did not need to apply class balancing to their natural im-
age segmentation problem. A reason for this is that they used pretrained AlexNet weights
trained on natural images, i.e. ImageNet data. However, for many medical applications it is
mandatory to apply class balancing since pre-trained networks from natural images cannot
be used properly and the class of interest occurs more seldomly in the dataset. Figures 4c
and 4d show the importance of class balancing in medical image segmentation. The training
and test Dice for both liver and lesions increases noticeably to 78% for liver and 38% for
lesions. A further large improvement can be obtained by applying the U-Net Architecture
proposed by Ronneberger et al. (2015) [18]. Besides the increased depth of 19 layers and
learnable upscaling (up-convolution), the U-Net provides a superior design pattern of skip
connections between diﬀerent stages of the neural network.
In early stages of the neural network, spatial information is present in the activations
of the current stage. In later stages of the neural network, spatial information gets trans-
ferred to semantic information at the cost of speciﬁc knowledge on the localization of these
structures. Here, for example, the original U-Net architecture reduces an input image of
6

size 388x388 to a size of 28x28 in the U-Net bottleneck. Ronneberger et al. introduced
skip-connections to allow utilization of spatial and semantic information at later stage, since
the spatial information from earlier stage can be fused in the neural network at later stages.
Thus the neural network at later stages can utilize semantic and spatial information to infer
information.
2.3.2. From FCN to CFCN
We used the U-Net architecture [18] to compute the soft label probability maps P(xi|I).
The U-Net architecture enables accurate pixel-wise prediction by combining spatial and
contextual information in a network architecture comprising 19 convolutional layers. Figures
4e and 4f show the training curves for the U-Net on 3DIRCAD data set.
The overall
performance of the lesion segmentation is further increased to 53% test Dice. The U-Net
learned features to discriminate liver and lesion at the same time.
As one of our main
contributions, we propose a cascaded training of FCNs to learn speciﬁc features for solving
a segmentation task once per training, which leads to higher segmentation performance.
The motivation behind the cascade approach is that it has been shown that U-Nets and
other forms of CNNs learn a hierarchical representation of the provided data. The stacked
layers of convolutional ﬁlters are tailored towards the desired classiﬁcation in a data-driven
manner, as opposed to designing hand-crafted features for separation of diﬀerent tissue
types. By cascading two U-Nets, we ensure that the U-Net in step 1 learns ﬁlters that are
speciﬁc for the detection and segmentation of the liver from an overall abdominal CT scan,
while the U-Net in step 2 arranges a set of ﬁlters for separation of lesions from the liver
tissue. Furthermore, the liver ROI helps in reducing false positives for lesions. Figures 5 and
6 illustrate our proposed method. We train one network to segment the liver in abdomen
slices (step 1). This network can solely concentrate on learning discriminative features for
liver vs. background segmentation, e.g. ﬁgure 5. After that we train another network to
segment the lesions, given an image of the liver (step 2). The segmented liver from step
1 is cropped and re-sampled to the required input size for the cascaded U-Net in step 2.
All non-liver regions are masked out and the second U-Net can concentrate on learning
discriminative features for lesion vs. liver background segmentation.
2.3.3. Eﬀect of Class Balancing
A crucial step in training FCNs is appropriate class balancing according to the pixel-wise
frequency of each class in the data. In contrast to [15], we observed that training the network
to segment small structures such as lesions is not possible without class balancing, due to
the high class imbalance that is typically in the range of ¡1% for lesion pixels. Therefore we
introduced an additional weighting factor ωclass in the cross entropy loss function L of the
FCN:
L = −1
n
N
X
i=1
ωclass
i
h
ˆPi log Pi + (1 −ˆPi) log(1 −Pi)
i
(1)
Pi denotes the probability of voxel i belonging to the foreground, ˆPi represents the ground
truth. We chose ωclass
i
to be
P
i 1−ˆ
Pi
P
i ˆ
Pi
if ˆPi = 1 and 1 otherwise.
7

(a) AlexFCN architecture without class bal-
ancing: Loss (black), Training Dice (light
green), Test Dice (dark green) of Liver
(b) AlexFCN architecture without class bal-
ancing: Loss (black), Training Dice (blue),
Test Dice (red) of Lesion
(c) AlexFCN architecture with class bal-
ancing: Loss (black), Training Dice (light
green), Test Dice (dark green) of Liver
(d) AlexFCN architecture with class balanc-
ing: Loss (black), Training Dice (blue), Test
Dice (red) of Lesion
(e) U-Net architecture with class balancing:
Loss (black), Training Dice (light green),
Test Dice (dark green) of Liver
(f) U-Net architecture with class balancing:
Loss (black), Training Dice (blue), Test Dice
(red) of Lesion
Figure 4: Training curves of diﬀerent network architectures and training procedures of liver and lesion on
3DIRCAD dataset.
8

Figure 5: Step 1 of Cascaded FCN: The ﬁrst U-Net learns to segment livers from a CT slice.
Figure 6: Step 2 of Cascaded FCN: The second U-Net learns to segment lesions from a liver segmentation
mask segmented in step 1 of the cascade
2.3.4. Transfer Learning and Pretraining
A common concept in deep learning is transfer learning using pretrained neural network
models. Neural networks pretrained on a other task, e.g. a natural image classiﬁcation data
set, can be used as initialization of the network weights when training on a new task e.g.
image segmentation of medical volumes. The intuition behind this idea is, that also for
other tasks or dataset the ﬁrst layers of neural networks learn similar concepts to recognize
basic structures such as blobs and edges. This concepts do not have be trained again from
scratch when using pretrained models. For our experiments we used pretrained U-Net models
provided by Ronneberger et al. (2015), which were trained on cell image segmentation data
[18]. We have released our trained models on liver and lesion segmentation to allow other
researcher to start their training with learned liver and lesion concepts3.
2.4. 3D Conditional Random Field
Volumetric FCN implementation with 3D convolutions was strongly limited by GPU
hardware and available VRAM [21].
Recent work such as V-Net and 3D U-Net, allow
nowadays 3D FCNs at decreased resolution [29, 30]. In addition, the anisotropic resolution of
medical volumes (e.g. 0.57-0.8mm in axial and 1.25-4mm in sagital/coronal voxel dimension
in 3DIRCADb) complicates the training of discriminative 3D ﬁlters. Instead, to capitalise
on the locality information across slices within the dataset, we utilize 3D dense conditional
random ﬁelds (CRFs) as proposed by [31]. To account for 3D information, we consider all
slice-wise predictions of the FCN together in the CRF applied to the entire volume at once.
3Sourcecode and models are available at https://github.com/IBBM/Cascaded-FCN
9

We formulate the ﬁnal label assignment given the soft predictions (probability maps)
from the FCN as maximum a posteriori (MAP) inference in a dense CRF, allowing us to
consider both spatial coherence and appearance.
We specify the dense CRF following [31] on the complete graph G = (V, E) with vertices
i ∈V for each voxel in the image and edges eij ∈E = {(i, j) ∀i, j ∈V s.t. i < j} between
all vertices. The variable vector x ∈LN describes the label of each vertex i ∈V. The energy
function that induces the according Gibbs distribution is then given as:
E(x) =
X
i∈V
φi(xi) +
X
(i,j)∈E
φij(xi, xj)
(2)
where φi(xi) = −log P (xi|I) are the unary potentials that are derived from the FCNs
probabilistic output, P (xi|I). φij(xi, xj) are the pairwise potentials, which we set to:
φij(xi, xj) =
µ(xi, xj)

wpos exp

−|pi−pj|2
2σ2pos

+wbil exp

−|pi−pj|2
2σ2
bil
−|Ii−Ij|2
2σ2
int
 
(3)
where µ(xi, xj) = 1(xi ̸= xj) is the Potts function, |pi −pj| is the spatial distance between
voxels i and j and |Ii −Ij| is their intensity diﬀerence in the original image. The inﬂuence
of the pairwise terms can be adjusted with their weights wpos and wbil and their eﬀective
range is tuned with the kernel widths σpos, σbil and σint.
We estimate the best labelling x∗= arg minx∈LN E(x) using the eﬃcient mean ﬁeld
approximation algorithm of [31]. The weights and kernels of the CRF were chosen using a
random search algorithm adapted on the trainind data set.
2.5. Quality Measures
We assessed the performance of our proposed method using the quality metrics intro-
duced in the grand challenges for liver and lesion segmentation by [1, 4].
Our main metric is the Dice score. Additionally we report Volume Overlap Error (VOE),
Relative Volume Diﬀerence (RVD), Average Symmetric Surface Distance (ASD) and Sym-
metric Maximum Surface Distance (MSD). Metrics are applied to binary valued volumes,
so a metric computed on the lesions for example considers only lesion objects as foreground
and everything else as background. We refer to the foreground object in the ground truth
as object A, and object B for the predicted object.
2.5.1. Dice Score (DICE)
The Dice score or F1 measure is evaluates as:
DICE(A, B) = 2|A ∩B|
|A| + |B|
where the Dice score is in the interval [0,1]. A perfect segmentation yields a Dice score of 1.
10

2.5.2. Volume Overlap Error (VOE)
VOE is the just the complement of the Jaccard coeﬃcient:
V OE(A, B) = 1 −|A ∩B|
|A ∪B|
2.5.3. Relative Volume Diﬀerence (RVD)
RVD is an asymmetric metric. It is deﬁned as follows:
RV D(A, B) = |B| −|A|
|A|
2.5.4. Average Symmetric Surface Distance (ASD)
Let S(A) denote the set of surface voxels of A. The shortest distance of an arbitrary
voxel v to S(A) is deﬁned as:
d(v, S(A)) =
min
sA∈S(A) ||v −sA||
where ||.|| denotes the Euclidean distance. The average symmetric surface distance is then
given by:
ASD(A, B) =
1
|S(A)| + |S(B)|

X
sA∈S(A)
d(sA, S(B)) +
X
sB∈S(B)
d(sB, S(A))


2.5.5. Maximum Surface Distance (MSD)
MSD is also known as the Symmetric HausdorﬀDistance. Maximum Surface Distance
(MSD) is similar to ASD, except that the maximum distance is taken instead of the average.
MSD(A, B) = max

max
sA∈S(A) d(sA, S(B)), max
sB∈S(B) d(sB, S(A)),

3. Experiments and Results
For clinical routine usage, methods and algorithms have to be developed, trained and
evaluated on heterogeneous real-life data. In this work we want to demonstrate the ro-
bustness, generalization and scalability of our proposed method by applying it to a public
dataset for comparison (section 3.1), a clinical CT dataset (section 3.2) and ﬁnally a clinical
MRI dataset (section 3.3).
11

3.1. 3DIRCAD
3.1.1. Dataset
We evaluated our proposed method on the 3DIRCADb dataset4 [32]. In comparison to
the grand challenge datasets, the 3DIRCADb dataset oﬀers a higher variety and complexity
of livers and its lesions and is publicly available. The 3DIRCADb dataset includes 20 venous
phase enhanced CT volumes from various European hospitals with diﬀerent CT scanners.
For our study, we trained and evaluated our models using the 15 volumes containing hepatic
tumors in the liver with 2-fold cross validation. The analyzed CT volumes diﬀer substantially
in the level of contrast-enhancement, size and number of tumor lesions (1 to 42).
3.1.2. Experimental Setting
Data was prepared as described in section 2.2. Our data augmentation scheme lead to a
total training data size of 22693 image slices. The CFCN were trained on a recent desktop
PC with a single NVIDIA Titan X GPU with 12 GB VRAM. The neural networks were
implemented and trained using the deep learning framework caﬀe [33] from University of
Berkeley. We used stochastic gradient descent as optimizer with a learning rate of 0.001 and
a momentum of 0.8. To reduce overﬁtting we applied a weight decay of 0.0005.
3.1.3. Eﬀect of Class Balancing
The eﬀect of class balancing can be seen in ﬁgure 4a - 4d. Introducing class balancing
improved the segmentation Dice score on both liver and lesion, while simultaneously de-
creasing over-ﬁtting. The eﬀect is less for liver, since the percentage of liver voxels in a CT
abdomen dataset is on the order of 7%, in comparison to 0.25% for lesions. For all following
experiments we accounted for class imbalance by weighting the imbalanced class according
to its frequency in the dataset by introducing a weight factor described in section 2.3.3.
3.1.4. Qualitative and Quantitative Results
The qualitative results of the automatic segmentation are presented in ﬁgure 7. The
complex and heterogeneous structure of the liver and all lesions were detected in the shown
images. The cascaded FCN approach yielded an enhancement for lesions with respect to
segmentation accuracy compared to a single FCN as can be seen in ﬁgure 7. In general, we
observe signiﬁcant5 additional improvements for Dice overlaps of liver segmentations, from
mean Dice 93.1% to 94.3% after applying the 3D CRF. For lesions we could achieve a Dice
score of 56% at a standard deviation of 26% with a 2 fold cross-validation.
3.2. Clinical Dataset CT
3.2.1. Dataset
The second dataset we evaluated is a real-life clinical CT dataset from multiple CT
scanners and acquired at diﬀerent centers. It compromises 100 CT scans from diﬀerent
patients. The examined patients were suﬀering from diﬀerent kind of cancerous diseases
4The dataset is available at http://ircad.fr/research/3d-ircadb-01
5Two-sided paired t-test with p-value < 4 · 10−19
12

Figure 7: Automatic liver and lesion segmentation with cascaded fully convolutional networks (CFCN) and
dense conditional random ﬁelds (CRF). Green depicts correctly predicted liver segmentation, yellow for
liver false negative and false positive pixels (all wrong predictions), blue shows correctly predicted lesion
segmentation and red lesion false negative and false positive pixels (all wrong predictions). In the ﬁrst row,
the false positive lesion prediction in B of a single U-Net as proposed by [18] were eliminated in C by CFCN
as a result of restricting lesion segmentation to the liver ROI region. In the second row, applying the 3D
CRF to CFCN in F increases both liver and lesion segmentation accuracy further, resulting in a lesion Dice
score of 82.3%.
Approach
Dataset
VOE
RVD
ASD
MSD
DICE
[%]
[%]
[mm]
[mm]
[%]
U-Net as in [18]
3DIRCAD
39
87
19.4
119
72.9
Cascaded U-Net
3DIRCAD
12.8
-3.3
2.3
46.7
93.1
Cascaded U-Net + 3D CRF
3DIRCAD
10.7
-1.4
1.5
24.0
94.3
Li et al. [5] (liver-only)
3DIRCAD
9.2
−11.2
1.6
28.2
Chartrand et al. [34] (semi-automatic)
3DIRCAD
6.8
1.7
1.6
24
Li et al. [6] (liver-only)
3DIRCAD
94.5
Cohen et al. [35] (liver-only)
Own Clinical CT
89
Cascaded U-Net
MR-DWI
23
14
5.2
135.3
87
Cascaded U-Net
Clinical CT
22
-3
9.5
165.7
88
Cascaded U-Net + 3D CRF
Clinical CT
16
-6
5.3
48.3
91
Table 1: Quantitative segmentation results of the liver on the 3DIRCADb dataset and other clinical CT am
MR-DWI datasets. Scores are reported as presented in the original papers.
13

with diﬀerent manifestations in the liver. The dataset ranges from single HCC lesions to
diﬀusive and conﬂuent metastatic lesions. In addition diﬀerent contrast agents and therefore
diﬀerent levels of contrast enhancement are present in this dataset. Human rater ground
truth was obtained through manual volumetric segmentation using the software TurtleSeg6
[36, 37].
3.2.2. Experimental Setting
The clinical CT dataset was prepared and augmented in the same way as the 3DIRCAD
dataset as described in 2.2. The data set was split in 60 for training, 20 for test and 20 for
validation. The neural networks, where trained on the same setup and training parameters
as the 3DIRCAD dataset. In this experiment, an Adam optimizer was applied with ϵ = 0.1
[38].
3.2.3. Qualitative and Quantitative Results
As shown in table 1 the Cascaded FCN and Cascaded FCN + 3D CRF reach up to 88%
and 91% Dice score on this dataset. An inter-rater Dice comparison among 5 training cases
yielded a Dice overlap score of 95%. Considering the inter-rater Dice score, the proposed
method provides remarkable segmentations. Furthermore, our proposed method achieves a
Dice overlap score of 61% ± 25% for lesions on the validation set.
3.3. Clinical Dataset MRI
3.3.1. Dataset
To demonstrate the generalization to other modalities we employed our methods to a
clinical DW-MRI dataset. 31 Patients underwent clinical assessment and MR imaging for
the primary diagnosis of HCC. Imaging was performed using a 1.5 T clinical MRI scanner
(Avanto, Siemens) with a standard imaging protocol including axial and coronal T2w, axial
T1w images before and after application of Gadolinium-DTPA contrast agent. Diﬀusion
weighted imaging was performed using a slice thickness of 5mm and a matrix size of 192 by
192. The human rater ground truth segmentation was created for the DW-MRI sequence to
allow further automatic image analysis e.g. section 3.4.
3.3.2. Experimental Setting
In comparison to the CT datasets, the DW-MRI dataset was prepared diﬀerently. The
DW-MRI dataset was normalized using the N4Bias correction algorithm [28]. Afterwards
the same pre-processing steps were carried out as for CT. The CFCN for the DW-MRI
dataset, where trained on the same hardware and training setup. The optimizer in this
experiment was an Adam optimizer with ϵ = 0.1.
6www.turtleseg.com
14

3.3.3. Qualitative and Quantitative Results
As seen in ﬁgure 8, the CFCN was able to segment the liver lesion correctly. In both
cases the CFCN undersegments the lesion leading to a Dice score of 85% in both cases. The
quantitative segmentation results are shown in table 1. The Cascaded U-Net was able to
reach a dice score for liver in MR-DWI of 87%. For lesion we found a mean dice score of
69.7%.
3.4. HCC Survival Prediction Based on Automatic Liver and Lesion Segmentation
Accurate liver and lesion segmentation are necessary for advanced medical image analysis
and are meant to be input to radiomics algorithms, such as the SurvivalNet predictor [27].
In this paragraph we want to introduce a possible applications of our automatic liver and
lesion segmentation algorithms in medical imaging. Survival and outcome prediction are
important ﬁelds in medical image analysis.
For hepatic- cellular carcinoma HCC, prior
work relied on manual liver and lesion segmentation in DW-MRI to calculate features over
the liver and lesion ROI in the ADC sequence to predict patient survival. In contrast to
prior work, we trained a CFCN to automatically segment liver and lesion segmentation in
DW-MRI to allow automatic survival predictions. We formulate this task as a classiﬁcation
problem with classes being “low risk” and “high risk” represented by longer or shorter
survival times than the median survival. We predict HCC malignancy in two steps: As
the ﬁrst step we automatically segment HCC tumor lesions using our proposed method
of cascaded fully convolutional neural networks (CFCN). As the second step we predict
the HCC lesions’ malignancy from the HCC tumor segmentation in the MR-DWI sequence
using classical texture features and 3D CNN features. As one of our main contributions
we found, that the accuracy of end-to-end assessment of tumor malignancy based on our
proposed cascaded fully convolutional neural networks (CFCN) is equal to assessment based
on expert annotations with high signiﬁcance (p > 0.95). In other words, our automatic
tumor malignancy framework performs equally as assessment based on expert annotations
in terms of accuracy. Detailed information can be found in Christ, Ettlinger & Kaissis et
al. (2017) [27].
4. Discussion
4.1. Combined Segmentation and Clinical Relevance
In comparison to state-of-the-art, such as [8, 6, 5, 34], we presented a framework, which
is capable of a combined segmentation of the liver and its lesion. Moreover, we presented
the clinical relevance of our proposed method by utilisation of our automatic segmentations
to derive quantitative medical insights. Furthermore, and in contrast to prior work such as
[1, 39, 40, 41], our proposed method could be generalized to segment the liver and lesion
in diﬀerent modalities and also multiple organs in medical data. As recent results from
natural image segmentation indicate, fully convolutional networks are capable of segmenting
dozens of labels with ease. By cascading the FCN architecture to smaller subregions the
segmentation accuracy could be further increased.
In addition with a runtime per slice
15

Figure 8: Automatic lesion segmentation with cascaded fully convolutional neural networks (CFCN) in DW-
MRI. The raw DW-MRI slices (left), were automatically segmented with our proposed method. Green depicts
correctly segmented lesion pixels. Red shows false positive and false negative, i.e. all wrong predictions, of
the lesions. In both cases the proposed CFCN achieves an dice score for lesions of 85%.
16

of 0.19ms and 0.59ms our proposed method enables automatic segmentation of large-scale
clinical trials in days and not months 7 using a single desktop PC.
4.2. 3D CNN and FCN Architectures
Recent works such as DeepMedic [22], the V-Net [29] and the 3D U-Net [30] became pos-
sible due to eﬃcient implementations of 3D convolutions on GPUs, and they show promising
results on their respective segmentation tasks. The proposed idea of cascaded FCN could
also be applied to novel 3D CNN and 3D FCN architectures. The restriction of the Region
of Interest ROI to relevant organs as shown for the 2D U-Net, when restricting to liver only
pixels for segmenting lesions, signiﬁcantly boosts the segmentation accuracy. The intuition
that more speciﬁc ﬁlters for the underlying problem could be trained, when restricting the
relevant regions, holds for 3D as well. Future work will show whether 3D architectures could
cope with less training data available for lesion segmentation.
4.3. 3D Conditional Random Field
We showed a statistically signiﬁcant improvement of segmentation quality, when applying
the 3D CRF to our segmentation problem. However, tuning of hyperparameters such as
those of the 3D CRF is very time-consuming and task dependent. We found that for highly
heterogeneous structures in shape and appearance, such as HCC lesions, it is hard to ﬁnd
a hyperparameter set that generalizes to unseen cases with a random search. A similar
conclusion was made in [22] when applying a 3D CRF to heterogeneous brain lesions. Recent
work successfully integrated the learning of the CRF hyperparameter in the training process
[17]. This approach in combination with additional pairwise terms that incorporate prior
knowlegde of the problem could lead to a improvement of the CRF for this task.
5. Conclusion
Cascaded FCNs and dense 3D CRFs trained on CT volumes are suitable for automatic
localization and combined volumetric segmentation of the liver and its lesions. Our proposed
method competes with state-of-the-art. We provide our trained models under open-source
license allowing ﬁne-tuning for other medical applications in CT data 8. Additionally, we
introduced and evaluated dense 3D CRF as a post-processing step for deep learning-based
medical image analysis. Furthermore, and in contrast to prior work such as [8, 6, 5], our
proposed method could be generalized to segment multiple organs in medical data using
multiple cascaded FCNs.
As future work, the application of further cascaded FCNs on
lesions ROIs to classify malignancy of the lesions as well as advanced techniques such as data
augmentation using adversarial networks could enhance the accuracy of the segmentation
further. All in all, heterogeneous CT and DW-MRI volumes from diﬀerent scanners and
protocols can be segmented in under 100s each with the proposed approach. We conclude
that CFCNs are promising tools for automatic analysis of liver and its lesions in clinical
routine and large-scale clinical trials.
7Estimating 3000 CT volumes for a large-scale clinical trial
8Trained models are available at https://github.com/IBBM/Cascaded-FCN
17

6. Acknowledgement
This work was supported by the German Research Foundation (DFG) within the SFB-
Initiative 824 (collaborative research center), “Imaging for Selection, Monitoring and In-
dividualization of Cancer Therapies” (SFB824, project C6) and the BMBF project Soft-
warecampus. We thank NVIDIA and Amazon AWS for granting GPU and computation
support.
