1
Universal Memory Architectures for Autonomous
Machines
Dan P. Guralnik†, Daniel E. Koditschek‡
Abstract—We propose a self-organizing memory architecture
for perceptual experience capable of supporting autonomous
learning and goal-directed problem solving in the absence of
any prior information about the agent’s environment. The archi-
tecture is simple enough to ensure (1) a quadratic bound (in the
number of available sensors) on space requirements, and (2) a
quadratic bound on the time-complexity of the update-execute
cycle. At the same time, it is sufﬁciently complex to provide the
agent with an internal representation which is (3) minimal among
all representations of its class which account for every sensory
equivalence class subject to the agent’s belief state; (4) capable, in
principle, of recovering the homotopy type of the system’s state
space; (5) learnable with arbitrary precision through a random
application of the available actions.
The provable properties of an effectively trained memory
structure exploit a duality between weak poc sets — a symbolic
(discrete) representation of subset nesting relations — and non-
positively curved cubical complexes, whose rich convexity theory
underlie the planning cycle of the proposed architecture.
I. INTRODUCTION
A. Motivation
A major obstacle to autonomous systems synthesis is the
absence of a capacious but efﬁcient memory architecture. In
humans, memory inﬂuences behaviour over a wide range of
time scales, leading to the emergence of what seems to be a
functional hierarchy of sub-systems [1]: from non-declarative
vs. declarative through the split of declarative memory into
semantic and episodic [2]; and on to theories of attention and
recall [3]. This variety of scales is mirrored in the collection of
problems addressed by the synthetic sciences: from learning
dependable actions/motion primitives [4], [5]; through learning
objects and their affordances [6], [7] to demonstration-driven
task execution [8], [9]; through exploring and mapping an un-
known environment [10], [11], [12], [13] and motion planning
[14], [15], [16]; and on to general problem solving [17] using
artiﬁcial general intelligence (AGI) architectures [18], [19],
[20].
One idea stands out as common to all these approaches, be-
ginning with the formal notion of a problem space introduced
by Newell and Simon [17], [21]: the purpose of a memory
architecture is to learn the transition structure of the state space
X of the system comprised of the agent and its environment
†Post doctoral fellow, Electrical & Systems Engineering, School of En-
gineering and Applied Sciences, University of Pennsylvania, , 200 S 33rd
Str., Moore Bldg. #203, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA, guraldan at
seas.upenn.edu
‡Alfred Fitler Moore Professor, Electrical & Systems Engineering, School
of Engineering and Applied Sciences, University of Pennsylvania, 200 S
33rd Str., Moore Bldg. #203, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA, kod at
seas.upenn.edu
E while processing the history of observations into a format
facilitating improved future control.
It is often argued (e.g. [22], [23], [24]) that memory
architectures for general agents should enjoy a high degree
of domain- and task-independence. In general, however, clear
deﬁnitions of notions such as ‘domain’ and ‘task’ are not
readily forthcoming across the vast breadth of literatures dis-
cussing memory, agents and autonomy. Notions of ‘universal
learners’ have been proposed [25] based on optimizing gain in
estimators of predictive entropy, however there is evidence to
suggest that the resulting level of generality may be insufﬁcient
for some tasks [26].
Absent broadly recognized formal foundations, we advance
an architecture provably satisfying intuitive universality prop-
erties, including, most centrally: (1) interactions with the
environment are encoded in the most generic, yet minimal,
manner possible, while requiring no prior semantic informa-
tion; and (2) learning obtains from direct binary sensory input,
automatically developing appropriate contextual links between
sensations of arbitrary modality. A key outcome is that the
architecture encodes its observation history in a model space
that supports the agent’s problem solving as a form of reac-
tive motion planning whereby atomic computations provably
correspond to nearest point projection in the reachable set.
B. Contribution
We consider a generic discrete binary agent (DBA): a ma-
chine sensing and interacting with its environment in discrete
time, equipped with a ﬁnite collection Σ of Boolean-valued
sensors, some of which serve as triggers for actions/behaviors
(switched on and off at will).
Given an instance of a DBA interacting with an environment
E, it is natural to view the set Ξ of sensory equivalence
classes of the associated transition system X as a subset of
the power set {0, 1}Σ. It is generally accepted [27], [28] that
a memory architecture must be capable of supporting internal
representations rich enough to account for the diversity [29]
of the transition system X: Exact problem solving, when
construed as abstract motion planning, requires an internal
representation capable, eventually, of accounting for all the
classes in Ξ and the transitions between them. Unfortunately,
as expressed forcefully in [29] and as we review at length
below, the task of obtaining an exact description of Ξ becomes
intractable in the absence of strong simplifying assumptions
about X, as the number of sensors grows.
To circumvent this obstacle, rather than imposing any spe-
ciﬁc structure on X, we propose to relax the requirement for
precise reconstruction by introducing an approximation whose
arXiv:1502.06132v1  [cs.AI]  21 Feb 2015

2
discrepancy from Ξ we characterize exactly and show to be
the smallest possible in its (computationally effective) class of
objects.
The new memory and control architecture we propose here
consists of two layers:
• A data structure S – called a snapshot – keeping track of
the current state and summarizing observations in terms
of collection of real-valued registers, of size quadratic
in the number of sensors, summarizing the history of
observations made by the agents.
• A reactive planner, built on a weak poc set structure
P ([30], [31] and defn. A.1) constituting a record of
pairwise implications among the atomic sensations as
observed by the agent; P is computed from S in each
control cycle.
A crucial property of our architecture is that P and M are
formally reconstructible from each other. The model space
M takes the form of a CAT(0) cubical complex, or cubing1,
whose 0-skeleton is contained in {0, 1}Σ. As the snapshot S is
updated by incoming observations, the space M, as encoded
by P, is transformed along with it. We can state our main
contributions – albeit, necessarily, informally at this point – in
terms of provable properties of the architecture and its model
spaces:
(i) Universality of Representation.
M is the minimal
model guaranteed to represent all the sensory equivalence
classes of any sensorium Σ satisfying the record P (see
A-E3). In particular, in the absence of information not
already encoded in P, it is impossible to distinguish the
0-skeleton of M from the set of sensory equivalence
classes, Ξ.
(ii) Topological Approximation.
As a topological space,
M is always contractible2. Provided a sufﬁciently rich
sensorium, the sub-complex M× ⊂M of faces all of
whose vertices lie in Ξ inherits from M the topology3 of
the observed space X (see appendix A-E3-A-E4).
(iii) Low-complexity, effective learning.
The proposed ar-
chitecture requires quadratic space (in the number of
sensors) for storage, and no more than quadratic time
for updating. Furthermore, an agent picking actions at
random learns an approximation of the resulting walk’s
limiting distribution on X (see II-E2).
(iv) Efﬁciency of Planning. Planning the next action given
a target sensation takes quadratic time in the number of
sensors, while eliminating the need for searching in the
model space. With sufﬁcient parallel processing power,
this bound may be reduced to a constant multiple of the
height — the maximum length of a chain of implications
of P (see III-B).
To the best of our knowledge, this combination of provable
properties has not previously appeared in the literature.
1For a good introduction CAT(0) cubical complexes, see [32]. For a tutorial
on cell complexes see [33], chapter 0 and appendix.
2The formal notion of being ‘hole-free’ — see [33], chapter 0.
3Up to homotopy equivalence — see deﬁnition in [33], chapter 0.
C. Overview and Related Literature
To establish the novelty of our contribution we now brieﬂy
review the copious literature bearing on these topics as arising
from three distinct traditions: robotics; connectionist compu-
tation; and artiﬁcial general intelligence. After presenting our
technical ideas we will explore at the end of the paper in a
more discursive form their relation to and implications for the
broader ﬁeld.
1) Relation to Mapping and Navigation: Formulating navi-
gation and mapping problems in terms of a point agent moving
through a homotopically trivial ambient space while avoiding
a collection of geometrically deﬁned obstacle regions repre-
senting forbidden states is fundamental to motion planning
[14], [15] and mapping [12], [34]. The ubiquity of obstacles
in these settings introduces topological considerations whose
primacy is well established in the algorithmic literature [34],
[35], [36], [37], [38], [39], [40], governing the complexity of
not only motion planning [41] but even set membership [42].
Our strategy is to reduce the general problem of memory
storage and its use for motion planning in the underlying
transition structure of a problem space (as sensed by a DBA)
to the geometric problem of motion planning in the agent’s
model space M (playing the role traditionally assigned to
Euclidean space). Generalizing the Euclidean setting, M has
a very strong convexity theory [31], [43] enabling low-cost
greedy navigation.
The topological point of view has been shown to be well
warranted in the discrete setting as well. As was demonstrated
by Pratt [44], oriented topological structures (cubical com-
plexes, in fact) may be used to encode the causal relations
among actions and states in symbolic transition systems. Ap-
proaches generalizing Pratt’s have since been used to formulate
very general models of reconﬁgurability and self-assembly
[45], [46].
2) Mechanisms for Learning and Planning: Snapshots use
an evolving estimate of pairwise intersections of sensor foot-
prints to form a record of implications among the atomic
sensations of the DBA. The necessity of such a record for
planning goes back (at least) to [47], yet ideas about applying
it as a way to encode context are fairly recent and specialized
[4], [23], [48]. Our internal representation takes the additional
step of applying this principle to all the sensations available
to a DBA, including the control signals it uses to interact with
its environment.
The resulting learning and control mechanisms may be
realized in a highly simpliﬁed and idealized, yet highly plastic,
network of neuron-like cells simulating the structure of P
[30]. This analogy with neural networks is not a coincidence:
estimating arbitrary intersections from near-synchronous ac-
tivation of sensors in a planar sensor ﬁeld has been explored
as a means for topological [39] as well as metric mapping by
competitive attractor networks (RatSLAM [13], [24], [48]),
as the study of the structure of stability properties vis-a-vis
topology and plasticity in more general networks is just taking
off [49], [50].
3) Model
Spaces:
The
necessity
to
maintain
high-
dimensional representations of the state space X poses a
major challenge for current approaches to learning [51], [52],

3
[22] and general problem solving [53], [54]. The method
closest to ours in its formalism seems to be that of [29] —
and even lends itself to learning by a connectionist network
[55] — but still requires an exponentially large representation
for planning purposes. By contrast, in our case, the ability
to translate action planning in M into what is essentially a
ﬂow problem in a network constructed from the underlying
sensorium obviates the need for maintaining M in memory,
allowing us to evade the curse of dimensionality. Nevertheless,
we are still guaranteed a model space that is sufﬁciently rich
to account for all sensory equivalence classes perceivable by
the DBA [27].
The computational advantages of our approach come at a
cost that is largely driven by topology, as expressed in (ii):
M necessarily has trivial topology4 [56], [31], [57], and our
own result [30] establishes formal conditions on Σ under
which the complex M× reproduces the ”topological shape”5
of X (as discussed above), which may not be topologically
trivial. The basic algorithm driving planning in our agents,
however, achieves its efﬁciency by disregarding this mismatch.
The introduction of auxiliary intrinsic motivation mechanisms
[58], [59] as a means of steering the agent away from obstacle
states in M and towards desirable behaviours (not necessarily
states!) seems to be a possible way out of this predicament,
as well as towards a solution of the problem of closing the
control loop. At this early stage, as a feasibility study for
the overall approach, we only consider very simple excitation
mechanisms causing the agent to choose actions with the
desire to maximize immediate excitation gain, to the extent
that may be sensed by Σ (and otherwise to choose random
actions).
D. Organization of the Paper
Having already given proofs of the formal results underlying
(i) and (ii) in our previous paper [30], we defer the technical
discussion of poc sets to appendix A. This appendix is
intended as an introductory overview of the theory of weak
poc sets and the geometry of their dual spaces – our agents’
model spaces — as well as a repository of proofs of technical
results we require but could not ﬁnd elsewhere in the literature.
Section II discusses (iii). We formally state the observation
model for DBAs, describe snapshots and their learning mech-
anisms, and present our early numerical work illustrating the
practical implications of the claims regarding learning.
Section III is dedicated to item (iv) in the list of contribu-
tions. Actions are introduced to the observation model, and
control algorithms are deﬁned and validated.
Finally, following an extended discussion of our results in
relation to existing literature in section IV and the aforemen-
tioned appendix dealing with poc sets, a second appendix
presents the proofs of technical results about snapshots.
II. SNAPSHOTS: FROM OBSERVATION SEQUENCES TO A
MEMORY STRUCTURE
We begin with a formal statement of what we mean by a
DBA and its observation model. We then proceed to construct
4Again, in the sense of M being contractible.
5In the sense of homotopy type — [33], chapter 0.
TABLE I
TABLE OF MATHEMATICAL SYMBOLS
Topic/Notation
Ref.
DBA Model (general)
E
Environment (with points p, q, . . .)
Sec.II-A1
X
State space of the experiment (with points
x, y, . . .)
Sec.II-A1
pos
The position map X →E
Sec.II-A1
T
Time, the set of integers
Sec.II-A2

t
Reads as: ”at time t”
Eqn.(1)
DBA model (sensing)
Σ
Sensorium (elements are a, b, c, . . .), with
involution a 7→a∗
Eqn.(6)
ρ
Realization map of the sensorium Σ
Eqn.(7)
⟨a : x⟩
Evaluation, e.g. of a ∈Σ on x ∈X
Eqns.(4-5)
DBA computational model (at time t)
S

t
Agent’s snapshot
Sec.III-B1
Γ

t
The derived poc graph, Dir(S

t)
Sec.III-B1
P

t
Derived (weak) poc set structure on Σ,
Poc(S

t)
Sec.II-B1
M

t
The model space Cube(P

t)
Sec.II-B3
M×
t
The punctured model space Cube×(P

t)
Def.III.8
O

t
Raw observation
Sec.II-B2
S

t
Recorded observation
Sec.II-B4
A

t
Decision (action) following the observation
Contents/parameters of a snapshot S
KΣ
The complete graph on Σ with all aa∗
edges removed
Def.II.2
#S
State of the snapshot
Def.II.3(a)
wab
Weight on the edge ab
Def.II.3(b)
τab
Learning threshold for the pair a, b ∈Σ
Def.II.3(c)
ω(ab)
Orientation cocycle of S
Prop.II.7
µ(ab)
Dissimilarity measure of S
App.B-C
Objects derived from a snapshot S
Dir(S)
Derived poc graph
Prop.II.8
Poc(S)
Derived weak poc set structure
Def.II.10
Weak poc sets and their duals
P, Q, . . .
Poc sets (with and without indices)
Def.A.1
P ◦
The set dual of P, the 0-skeleton of
Cube(P)
Def.A.8(b)
Dual(P)
Dual
graph
of
P,
the
1-skeleton
of
Cube(P)
Def.A.8(c)
Cube(P)
Dual cubing of the poc set P
Def.A.8(a)
Cube×(P)
The punctured dual Cube(P, ρ) with re-
spect to a realization ρ
Def.A.28
f◦
The dual map f◦: Q◦→P ◦of a poc
morphism f : P →Q
Defs.A.2,A.24

4
snapshots, their updating mechanisms and the derived weak
poc set structures, and conclude the section with results on
the learning capabilities of snapshots. Table I reviews notation
that will persist throughout the paper.
A. Observation Model for DBAs
1) Environment and State: We place an agent in an envi-
ronment E. The state space of the system will be denoted by
X, where we assume there is a map pos : X →E producing
the location pos(x) of the agent in E, given the state x ∈X of
the system as a whole. As it turns out, no further mathematical
structure on X is required for the results that follow, hence,
with a mind toward inviting the broadest range of applications,
we impose none, much in the spirit of McCarthy and Hayes
discussion of situation calculus [47].
2) Time and Transitions: We model time T as the set
of integers (the subjective time of the agent), with t = 0
corresponding to the initial time. The basic objects of study
are then trajectories, or maps of the form
ϕ : T →X ,
ϕ = (ϕ

t)t∈T
(1)
We deﬁne abstract transitions in X as follows:
Deﬁnition II.1 (n-transitions). An element of the (n+1)-fold
Cartesian power Xn+1 will be referred to as an n-transition.
For any trajectory ϕ : T →X and n ≥0 we deﬁne the map
dnϕ :
 T
→
Xn+1
t
7→
ϕ

t−n × · · · × ϕ

t
(2)
We refer to 0-transitions as states, and to 1-transitions simply
as transitions.
□
Any setting where E, X and the transition structure of the
system are speciﬁed (though, possibly, in an implicit fashion),
implies constraints on the set of achievable trajectories. We
will refer to such settings as experiments, within the frame-
work of which each allowed trajectory will be referred to as a
run of the experiment, while observations produced by sensors
during a run (below) will be called experiences.
3) Discrete Binary Agents: A discrete binary agent (DBA)
is endowed with a collection of binary sensors indexed by a
ﬁnite set Σ. We will assume that each a ∈Σ is assigned an
order na ≥1, and a realization ρ(a) ⊆Xna+1. We then
say that a is a na-sensor, or a sensor of degree na. For
example, a 0-sensor – or state sensor – responds to the system
entering a certain subset of X (a ”macro-state”), while a 1-
sensor responds to the system experiencing a transition of a
particular kind.
Evaluation of sensors is best viewed in the context of
trajectories: a n-sensor a ∈Σ is applied to a trajectory ϕ
and assigned a value at time t ∈T according to the rule
⟨a : ϕ⟩

t = 1
def.
⇐⇒dnϕ

t ∈ρ(a)
(3)
Here ⟨a : ϕ⟩

t denotes the measurement provided by the
sensor a at time t given the trajectory ϕ. To avoid a profusion
of parentheses and subscripts we will generally use bracket
notation to denote the evaluation of Boolean- and scalar-valued
functions:
⟨a : x⟩
:=
1ρ(a)(x) whenever a ∈Σ
(4)
⟨g : s⟩
:=
g(s) whenever g : S →[0, 1]
(5)
and so forth. The symbol 1A will always denote the indicator
function of a set A with respect to the appropriate super-set.
We will assume that Σ comes endowed with a map a 7→a∗
satisfying the following for all a ∈Σ:
a∗∗= a ,
a∗̸= a ,
(6)
as well as
ρ(a∗) = ρ(a)c := Xna+1 ∖ρ(a)
(7)
We also introduce the virtual sensors 0, 0∗∈P evaluating to
⟨0 : ϕ⟩

t ≡0 ,
⟨0∗: ϕ⟩

t ≡1
(8)
on any trajectory ϕ and at any time t ∈T. For subsets A ⊆Σ
we will always use the notation A∗to denote the set of all a∗,
a ranging over A.
The database structure we will be using is designed to
maintain an approximate record of the relations among sensors
in Σ believed by the agent to hold true throughout time. This
record at time t ∈T is encoded in a weak poc set structure
P

t over Σ (deﬁnition A.1).
For two n-sensors a, b ∈Σ this requirement translates
into a ≤b in P

t being treated (for planning purposes) as
the inclusion ρ(a) ⊆ρ(b) in the space Xn+1. Note how
the equivalent containment ρ(b∗) ⊆ρ(a∗) is encoded by the
contra-positive implication b∗≤a∗, which, by the deﬁnition
of a weak poc set, holds if and only if a ≤b does.
When a, b have different orders we are forced to replace
this requirement by a weaker one: at any time t, our agents
will interpret a ≤b in P

t as
⟨a : ϕ⟩

t′ ≤⟨b : ϕ⟩

t′
(9)
holding for all t′ ∈T. In other words, our agents assume that
relations among sensors do not change over time6.
For example, if a, b ∈Σ where a is a state sensor and b is
a transition sensor, consider the statements:
(†) ⟨a : ϕ⟩

t ≤⟨b : ϕ⟩

t ,
(‡) ⟨b : ϕ⟩

t ≤⟨a : ϕ⟩

t
treated as identities over both ϕ and t. We see that (‡) states
all transitions of type b must terminate in a state of type a,
while (†) means that only transitions of type b could produce
state a. It is clear that both kinds of statement are essential
for planning.
6This is not to say that our agents are not allowed to change their minds
regarding which relations hold true and which do not: the purpose of keeping
a dynamic record of relations is to eventually uncover the ‘correct’ relations.

5
B. The Model Spaces
1) A Record of Implications: Informally, a “record of
implications in Σ” is a partial ordering on Σ reﬂecting the
standard interactions between Boolean complementation and
Boolean implication. Formally, our DBA will maintain, at any
time t ≥0, a weak poc set structure P

t on Σ consisting of
a partial order relation ≤satisfying, for all a, b ∈Σ:
1) 0 ≤a;
2) a ≤b ⇒b∗≤a∗.
Note that a∗̸= a by the construction of Σ and compare with
the deﬁnition in appendix A.1.
2) Observations as vertices of a cube: From the agent’s
viewpoint, the current state of the experiment at time t
is completely characterized by the measurements ⟨a : ϕ⟩

t,
where ϕ is the agent’s trajectory. Equivalently, the state may
be encoded in a subset O

t ⊂Σ satisfying
O

t ∩{a, a∗}
 = 1
for all a ∈Σ. Such subsets of Σ are called complete ∗-
selections. An incomplete measurement of the state would then
correspond to a subset O ⊂Σ satisfying |O ∩{a, a∗}| ≤1 for
all a ∈Σ, called an (incomplete) ∗-selection – see deﬁnition
in appendixA.6, along with remarks on the notation to follow.
Thus, one thinks of the collection S(Σ)0 of all complete
∗-selections on Σ as enumerating the possible sensory equiv-
alence classes in the sensed space. However, some of the
elements in this collection are redundant given the record P

t:
an implication a ≤b means that no O ∈S(Σ)0 containing
{a, b∗} is expected by the agent to be witnessed by any
observation (see ﬁg.9). Formally, a set O ⊂Σ is coherent
(deﬁnition A.7), if no pair of elements a, b ∈O satisﬁes
a ≤b∗.
3) The model spaces: The model space M

t corresponding
to the record P

t takes the form of a cubical complex — a
topological space constructed from a collection of vertices (the
0-skeleton), a set of edges (the 1-skeleton), and successively
higher dimensional connecting cells in the form of cubes [32].
We choose the vertex set of M

t to coincide with the set of
coherent ∗-selections in S(Σ)0. Edges are inserted to join any
pair of vertices A, B satisfying |A ∖B| = 1 (this condition
turns out to be symmetric). The hop-distance on the resulting
graph may be seen as a variant of the crude, ‘information
motivated’, Hamming distance on {0, 1}Σ. The 1-dimensional
skeleton of M

t is further enriched with higher dimensional
cubes to yield the space Cube(P

t), as described in appendix
A (deﬁnition A.8) for the interested reader. While a fairly
detailed knowledge of the geometry and topology of spaces
obtained in this way is essential for following our formal
arguments regarding the modeling capabilities of this class,
much of it is unnecessary for this section’s account of how
the agent obtains its representation of M

t, the record P

t.
4) Maintaining a record of the current state: Returning to
the problem of representing the current state, observe that P

t
is expected to change as time progresses, possibly giving rise
to observations O

t that are incoherent with respect to P

t, and
therefore represent points ‘outside’ the model space. While
the raw observation O

t must be applied to the agent’s data
structure in hopes of improving P

t, the agent must resolve
the contradiction within the framework of its current model,
replacing the incoherent complete observation O

t in its role as
the record of the current state kept by the agent with a coherent
but incomplete observation (104), S

t := coh(O

t), satisfying
certain naturality requirements — see appendix B-E2 for the
complete technical discussion.
This means the agent resolves the contradiction at the price
of introducing ambiguity into its record of the current state:
instead of having a single vertex of M

t representing the
current state (“complete knowledge”), any vertex containing
the set S

t may turn out to be the correct current state.
The complexity of coherent projection (lemma III.4) and its
role in the agent’s reasoning processes, its interplay with the
convexity theory of the model space M

t and its interpretation
as the basis for viewing our architecture as a connectionist
model (albeit a very limited one) of cognition will all be
discussed in section III-B.
C. Snapshots
In [30] we have introduced the rather loose notion of a
snapshot, aiming to outline a class of database structures
for dynamically maintaining weak poc-set structures from a
sequence of observations made by an agent along a trajectory
ϕ through X. A rigorous treatment of this tool requires some
careful deﬁnitions.
Deﬁnition II.2. Denote by KΣ the graph obtained from the
complete graph over the vertex set Σ by removing all edges
of the form aa∗, a ∈Σ. Edges of KΣ will be referred to as
proper pairs in Σ. We will abuse notation and write ab ∈KΣ
for the edge {a, b} of KΣ.
□
The graph KΣ is the scaffolding for snapshots:
Deﬁnition II.3 (Snapshot). A snapshot S over Σ consists of
the following:
(a) State.
Each vertex a ∈Σ of KΣ is assigned a binary
state #aS ∈{0, 1}. The set
#S = {a ∈Σ |#a = 1}
(10)
is called the state vector of the snapshot S and is required
to be a ∗-selection on Σ (deﬁnition A.6).
(b) Edge weights. Each edge ab ∈KΣ is assigned a non-
negative real number denoted wab = wab(S).
(c) Learning Thresholds. Each edge ab ∈KΣ carries a
non-negative real number τab = τab(S) satisfying
τab = τa∗b = τab∗= τa∗b∗≤1
4 .
For every ab ∈KΣ, the restriction of S to the subgraph
induced by the vertices a, a∗, b and b∗will be denoted by
S|ab and referred to as a square in S.
□
The original motivation of [30] for the notion of a snapshot
is twofold:
1) Maintaining a consistent representation of the cur-
rent state.
For this purpose we will generally assign
the coherent projection of the current state measurement
to be stored in #S.
2) Learning implications in the sensorium.
To learn
an estimate of the implication order on Σ inherited

6
wab*
small
Fig. 1. determining edge orientations in a snapshot by restricting attention to
S|ab .
from its realization in X it should sufﬁce to maintain a
system of weights wt
ab on S

t quantifying the relevance
(e.g. frequency) of the event a ∧b, allowing one to
partially orient the snapshot according to the rule of
thumb illustrated in ﬁgure 1.
The graphical representation derived from a snapshot in this
manner does not automatically deﬁne a weak poc set, but is
nearly there:
Deﬁnition II.4 (poc graph). A poc graph Γ over Σ is a
subgraph of KΣ endowed with an orientation which satisﬁes,
for every ab ∈KΣ:
- If ab ∈Γ then b∗a∗∈Γ;
- If ab ∈Γ then a∗b, ba∗, b∗a, ab∗/∈Γ.
By abuse of notation, we use the symbol ab to mean the
directed edge emanating from a and pointing to b (if it exists
in Γ).
□
In order for a poc graph to represent a weak poc set structure
on Σ one needs:
Lemma II.5 (derived poc set). The transitive closure of the
orientation relation on a poc graph Γ over Σ is a weak poc
set structure on Σ if and only if Γ has no directed cycles.
Proof: This follows directly from the discussion in ex-
ample A-A2.
The rest of this section mainly deals with characterizing a
large class of snapshots encoding acyclic directed poc graphs
and with means of evolving snapshot representations of X
from trajectories. Given a trajectory ϕ of our agent through
X, the collection of coincidence indicators
ct
ab := ⟨a : ϕ⟩

t · ⟨b : ϕ⟩

t
(11)
may be used to evolve a sequence of snapshots S

t repre-
senting, at any time t > 0, the cumulative inﬂuence of the
agent’s observations on its perception of implications in the
sensorium.
D. Probabilistic Snapshots and Acyclicity
The following set-theoretic identities among the coincidence
indicators are easily veriﬁed for all a, b, c ∈Σ:
ct
aa∗= 0
ct
ab = ct
ba
ct
aa = ct
ab + ct
ab∗
ct
ab + ct
a∗b + ct
a∗b∗+ ct
ab∗= 1
ct
ab∗+ ct
bc∗+ ct
ca∗= ct
a∗b + ct
b∗c + ct
c∗a
(12)
These identities motivate considering snapshots with weights
obeying analogous constraints:
Deﬁnition II.6 (Probabilistic Snapshot). We say that a snap-
shot S is probabilistic, if #S is a coherent ∗-selection and the
edge weights satisfy the following:
• Consistency constraint. if ab, ac ∈KΣ then:
wab + wab∗= wac + wac∗
(13)
• Normalization constraint. for any ab ∈KΣ:
wab + wa∗b + wa∗b∗+ wab∗= 1
(14)
• Orientation constraint. if ab, bc, ac ∈KΣ then:
wa∗b + wb∗c + wc∗a = wab∗+ wbc∗+ wca∗
(15)
We denote the set of all probabilistic snapshots over Σ by PΣ,
or simply P when there is no danger of confusion.
□
A fundamental observation regarding probabilistic snap-
shots is the following
Proposition II.7 (Acyclicity Lemma). Suppose S is a proba-
bilistic snapshot over Σ and Γ is a poc graph satisfying the
orientation cocycle condition:
ab ∈Γ ⇒ω(ab) := wa∗b −wab∗> 0
(16)
Then Γ contains no directed cycles.
Proof: See appendix B-A.
This proposition puts the vague notion from ﬁgure 1 on how
to derive implications from a snapshot on a ﬁrm footing:
Proposition II.8 (Poc graphs from snapshots). Let S be a
probabilistic snapshot. Construct a poc graph Dir(S) by
setting
ab ∈Dir(S) ⇔wab∗< min

τab,
wab, wa∗b, wa∗b∗

(17)
Then Dir(S) is an acyclic poc graph.
□
Proof: The symmetries of τ• and w• immediately imply
ab ∈Dir(S) iff b∗a∗∈Dir(S). The strict inequality in (17)
implies the second condition of a poc graph holds as well.
Since the orientation cocycle is positive on every edge of
Dir(S) by deﬁnition, the acyclicity lemma applies.
The element of thresholding present in (17) may also be
used as a part of the updating procedure of a probabilistic
snapshot, without affecting the derived poc set:
Proposition II.9 (Snapshot Truncation). Let S be a proba-
bilistic snapshot. Deﬁne a new snapshot ⌊S⌋to have the same

7
state as S while for every ab ∈KΣ satisfying (17) the weights
are updated as follows:







wab∗
7→
0
wab
7→
wab + wab∗
wa∗b∗
7→
wa∗b∗+ wab∗
wa∗b
7→
wa∗b −wab∗
(18)
Then Dir(S) = Dir(⌊S⌋).
Proof: The proof amounts to a direct veriﬁcation that the
⌊S⌋is probabilistic, and that ab ∈KΣ satisﬁes (17) in ⌊S⌋if
and only if the same condition is satisﬁed by ab in S.
Following lemma II.5 we may now safely deﬁne:
Deﬁnition II.10 (Derived Poc Set). Let S be a probabilis-
tic snapshot. Denote by Poc(S) the weak poc set structure
obtained by setting a ≤b iff there exists a directed path in
Dir(S) from a to b.
□
We now proceed to introduce and study two possible
snapshot constructions.
E. Empirical Snapshots
The empirical snapshot structure maintains an empirical
approximation of the relative frequencies of observations of
the form a ∧b, a, b ∈Σ. For any trajectory ϕ of the agent
through X we could try setting
wt
ab =
t
X
k=1
ck
ab ,
(19)
with S

t a trivial snapshot for all t ≤0.
Deﬁnition II.11. A snapshot S with w• = 0 is said to be
trivial and denoted Null.
□
Properties (12) then imply that S

t satisﬁes the consistency
and cocycle constraints (defn. II.6) for all t > 0, and would
satisfy the normalization constraint if we replace the weights
wt
ab by 1
t wt
ab throughout.
1) Construction and Properties: The formal construction is
as follows:
Deﬁnition II.12 (Empirical Snapshot). A snapshot S over Σ is
an empirical snapshot if the following conditions are satisﬁed:
• For all ab ∈KΣ, wab ∈Z≥0;
• For all ab ∈KΣ, the expression
wa := wab + wab∗
(20)
is independent of the choice of b, and vanishes only if
#a = 0;
• The following expression does not depend on a ∈Σ:
Clk (S) := wa + wa∗
(21)
Denote the set of empirical snapshots over Σ by EΣ (or just
E when justiﬁed).
□
The evolution of an empirical snapshot under a sequence of
observations is then deﬁned through:
Deﬁnition II.13 (Empirical Update). Let S be an empirical
snapshot and let O ⊂Σ be complete ∗-selection. The snapshot
O ∗S is the empirical snapshot obtained from S by setting
wab(O ∗S) := wab(S) + ⟨1O : a⟩· ⟨1O : b⟩
(22)
for all ab ∈KΣ. The state of O ∗S is set to coh(O) (where,
recall, this is the the coherent projection (104) computed with
respect to the weak poc set structure derived from the new
weights).
□
Deﬁnition II.14 (Evolution). We say that a snapshot T over
Σ is an evolution of a snapshot S, either if S = T or if there
is a sequence (Ok)m
k=1 of complete ∗-selections in Σ such that
T = Ok ∗· · · ∗O1 ∗S.
□
Empirical snapshots are characterized by their ancestry:
Lemma II.15. A non-trivial snapshot S over Σ is empirical
if and only if it is an evolution of the trivial snapshot.
Proof: See appendix B-B.
Having characterized empirical snapshots as evolutions of
the trivial one, we return to the observation that the weight
w•(S)/Clk (S) on KΣ — see (21) — deﬁnes a probabilistic
snapshot. We may thus deﬁne Dir(S) accordingly, by setting
ab ∈Dir(S) ⇔wab∗< min

τab · Clk (S) ,
wab, wa∗b, wa∗b∗

(23)
and conclude that:
Proposition II.16 (empirical implies acyclic). If S is an
empirical snapshot, then Dir(S) as deﬁned in (23) is an
acyclic poc graph, and Poc(S) as deﬁned in defn. II.10 is
a weak poc set structure on Σ.
□
We will henceforth refer to DBAs endowed with empirical
snapshots and utilizing the empirical update as empirical
agents.
2) Performance of Empirical Agents: In this paper we
restrict attention to agents endowed with a ﬁxed ﬁnite set of
actions. An agent starting out at time t = 0 with a trivial
snapshot S

0 has no knowledge of its environment, and is
therefore assumed to engage in random exploration for some
time, until actionable information becomes available. This
motivates the question as to how well the memory structure
of an empirical agent performs in this initial stage.
In the case where X is ﬁnite and the agent’s actions are
deterministic it is easy to formulate this: Let Σact be the set
of available actions, and consider the graph with vertex set X,
where a vertex x is joined to a vertex y labeled by an action
α ∈Σact if applying α at x results in y. Thus, X becomes
endowed with the structure of a Markov chain, where we draw
actions uniformly at random in every state. Focus on the case
when all the actions available to the agent are reversible in
the sense that there is an edge from x to y if and only if
there is an edge from y to x (loops are allowed as well).
Then the corresponding Markov chain is a random walk and
its stationary distribution over X, denoted by π, is uniform
[60] over each connected component of the resulting transition

8
system. Thus, each normalized weight wt
ab/t is nothing but
the empirical estimate of the joint probability, given by π, for
a, b ∈Σ to ﬁre synchronously.
Restricting to a reachability component, we may assume X
is connected. By abuse of notation, for ab ∈KΣ denote
π(ab) = π(ρ(a) ∩ρ(b))
(24)
Let Dir∞denote the matrix7 with entries Dir∞
ab = 1 whenever
ρ(a) is contained in ρ(b) up to a precision of τab, that is:
π(ρ(ab∗)) < min (τab, π(ab), π(a∗b∗), π(a∗b))
(25)
and set Dir∞
ab = 0 otherwise. This matrix represents the true
poc set structure to be learned by the agent, as determined
by the ﬁxed learning thresholds. Analogously we let Dirt be
the matrix with Dirt
ab = 1 iff the directed edge ab ∈KΣ
is contained in the derived poc graph of Dir(S

t) (and 0
otherwise). A good measure of the agent’s performance would
be the behavior of the total error
Err(t) :=

Dirt −Dir∞

1
(26)
over time (the matrices viewed simply as vectors in ℓ1 of the
appropriate dimension). By Theorem 5.1 in [60], the agent’s
random walk converges to π at an exponential rate depending
only on the transition structure of X determined by the actions
Σact. We conclude:
Proposition II.17. Suppose a DBA performs a random walk
on a connected X, at each moment in time performing one
of a ﬁxed ﬁnite set of reversible deterministic actions. Then
Err(t) converges to zero at an exponential rate.
With such strong performance guarantees for a broad class
of empirical agents we are left to examine the variation in
performance as a function of the geometry/topology of the
environment (beyond the guarantees given by the preceding
discussion) we have run simulations in the following settings:
(a) The agent performs a random walk along a path with
20 edges (example A-D1), choosing between one step
forward and one step back uniformly at random for
every t ∈T, learning the poc structure of a sensorium
consisting of 20 ‘GPS’ sensors, as described in example
A-D1;
(b) The agent performs a random walk along a cycle with
20 edges, choosing between a clockwise and a counter-
clockwise step uniformly at random for every t ∈T, and
learning a sensorium consisting of 20 beacon sensors as
described in example A-D3;
(c) The agent performs a random walk (up/down/left/right)
on a square grid with 10 ‘GPS’ sensors along each of the
x−and y−axes;
(d) The agent performs a random walk along (forward/back)
a path with 20 edges, but the sensors are chosen to have
random activation ﬁelds (randomly chosen subsets of the
set of vertices along the path); the sensor ﬁelds have been
drawn anew prior to each separate run.
7Recall that Dir(S) introduced in Prop. II.8 is a directed graph. The new
notation is intended to connote a matrix representation of such a graph.
100
101
102
103
deviation
(a) Interval w/GPS
(b) Circle w/Beacons
0
500
1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000
time
100
101
102
103
deviation
(c) Square Grid w/GPS
0
500
1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000
time
(d) Interval w/Random Sensors
Fig. 2. Logarithmic plot of the mean number of incorrect edges in
the derived poc graph of an empirical snapshot (20 sensors), for
learning thresholds varying linearly between 1
4 (cyan/light) and
1
203
(blue/dark), averaged over 50 runs of random walks each.
The number of sensors is the same for each setting, and each
agent carries out 50 runs of a length that is cubic in the
number of sensors, starting at a random position with an empty
snapshot. We have tested 10 different agents for each setting,
corresponding to 10 different values of the learning threshold,
spread linearly in the interval from 1/(20)3 to the maximal
meaningful value of 1/4 (where one should not expect much
useful learning to occur).
The results are summarized in ﬁgure 2 plotting Err(t),
where we have replaced the matrix Dir∞as deﬁned in (25)
by the {0, 1}-valued matrix
Dir∞
ab = 1 ⇔ρ(a) ⊆ρ(b)
(27)
to render the effect of choosing different values for the learning
threshold more visible in the graph of Err(t).
The resulting plots show signiﬁcant, though subtle, differ-
ences in performance between the four settings, illustrating
the similarities and differences in the weak poc set structures
being approximated, most notably:
- The sharper initial decline in the mean deviation for
(b) and (c) in comparison to (a) is expected due to the
relative abundance of crossing in the former, as opposed
to complete nesting (see deﬁnition A.22) in the latter.
- Performance in the random setting (d) seems to lag
signiﬁcantly behind performance in any of the structured
settings.
- Performance in the completely nested setting (a) seems
to provide exponentially fast learning no matter what; by
contrast, the other settings seem to experience a transition
between two modes, depending on how small the learning
threshold τ is:
1) For large τ, the deviation plateaus.
2) For small enough τ, the deviation decreases to zero
in ﬁnite time.

9
We expect the critical value of τ in any ﬁnite setting to
be somewhere around the minimum probability of a state
(under the stationary distribution of the random walk):
in order for a relation a < b to be put on record, it is
necessary for the agent to have visited ρ(a) ∩ρ(b∗) at
a frequency below τ; the smaller τ is, the fewer false
relations will be recorded for posterity.
- Recalling that the poc set representing the ground truth
in (c) is the direct sum (see A-D2) of two smaller
copies of (a) having 10 sensors each, we see that the
crossing relations between the x-axis sensors and their
y-axis counterparts account for 800 of the 1600 entries
(two 20×20 null sub-matrices) in the adjacency matrix
of the derived graph. Thus, the two experiments are not
that different: loosely speaking, the 10×10 square grid
experiment projects onto a Cartesian product of two 10-
path experiments where the random walk on the 10-path
becomes a lazy walk with probability 1
2 to stay put. In
other words, the behavior of (c) may be inferred from the
behavior of (a).
- Not so when comparing (a) and (c) with (b): note how
the sub-critical values of the learning parameters in (a),(c)
and (d) force the deviation plot to ‘plunge’ into the x-
axis versus the horizontal asymptote behavior of (b). In
view of theorem A.33), our guess is that the environment
(the circle) not being contractible has something to do
with this qualitative change in behavior, but this requires
further investigation.
F. Discounted Snapshots
A notable weakness of empirical snapshots as a data
structure is their potential high cost in space, due to the
need for indeﬁnitely maintaining integer-valued counters. In
some sense, the entire history of the agent matters, and, in
some sense, matters too much. This motivates the search for
an alternative, more quantized, updating mechanism whose
dependence on any given past observation weakens at a ﬁxed
rate.
1) Construction and Properties:
Deﬁnition II.18. (discounted update) Let q ∈[0, 1] and let
S be a probabilistic snapshot over Σ. For any complete ∗-
selection O on Σ we deﬁne the snapshot O ∗q S to be the
snapshot with weights determined by
wab(O ∗q S) := qwab(S) + (1 −q) ⟨1O : a⟩· ⟨1O : b⟩(28)
The state of O ∗q S is set to coh(O), the reduction being
computed with respect to the weak poc set structure derived
from the new weights. Finally, deﬁne the q-discounted update
of S to be the snapshot ⌊O ∗q S⌋and we refer to q as the
decay parameter.
□
A signiﬁcant advantage of the discounted update is its
applicability to arbitrary probabilistic snapshots:
Lemma II.19. The q-discounted update of a probabilistic
snapshot by a complete ∗-selection is probabilistic.
□
Proof: It is clear that the discounted update preserves
probabilisticity. Proposition II.9 ﬁnishes the proof.
Consider the length of time (or the amount of evidence)
it takes a discounted snapshot to acquire an implication,
compared to the amount of evidence required for giving up
an implication already on record.
Assuming a ﬁxed value of the decay parameter q over a
considerable length of time, a lower bound on the amount
of time ∆t required for wab∗to become small enough for a
relation a ≤b to be put on record is given by the situation
when a long enough sequence of consecutive observations with
a ∧b∗not occurring is made:
q∆t < τab ⇔∆t > log2 τab
log2 q
(29)
On the other hand, once the relation a ≤b has been put on
record, the number ∆t of successive observations of a ∧b∗
required for replacing this relation with a ⋔b must satisfy:
∆t(1 −q) > τab ⇔∆t >
τab
1 −q
(30)
– this much is guaranteed by the truncation mechanism.
Overall, it seems that choosing a value of q with 1 −q
sufﬁciently small should produce meaningful learning: lower
values of τab make it both harder to learn and easier to unlearn
a false relation, while maintaining a qualitative difference
between the necessary requirements for either process.
Keeping q ﬁxed over long periods of time places an em-
phasis on the values of the learning thresholds τab. As these
values do not have to be chosen uniformly over the snapshot,
one might want to vary the values of the learning thresholds
individually with the aim of altering the ﬂexibility of the
learning process in the corresponding square. This opens up
a doorway to employing methods for varying the learning
thresholds and the decay parameter in ways analogous to [26]
and [22] as a means of improving the quality/dependability
of the model space. The simulation results below emphasize
the need for this kind of control, showing that a discounted
agent is much more susceptible to changes in geometry and
topology/combinatorics of the sensor ﬁelds than an empirical
one.
2) Performance Analysis: Figure 3 compares the mean
performance of time-discounted snapshot learning from a
random walk in the four settings described earlier in II-E2, for
the values of the decay parameter q given by q = 1 −
1
2k+2 ,
k = {0, . . . , 9}.
One immediately notices, in comparison with the empirical
case, that the dependence of the learning process on the
discount parameter is not monotone: it would seem that a
choice of k = 5 works best for all settings in terms of
optimizing the eventual deviation, — though it is hard to say
what ‘best’ would even mean for (d) — while a choice of
k = 4 is more reasonable given the observed waiting time until
meaningful learning occurs in the structured environments (a)-
(c).
Similar observations to those made for the empirical case
(ﬁgure 2) regarding the interplay between ‘learning modes’

10
100
101
102
103
deviation
(a) Interval w/GPS
(b) Circle w/Beacons
0
500
1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000
time
100
101
102
103
deviation
(c) Square Grid w/GPS
0
500
1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000
time
(d) Interval w/Random Sensors
Fig. 3. Mean number of incorrect edges in the derived poc graph of a
discounted snapshot in 4 environments (20 sensors each) for varying
values of the decay parameter, q = 1 −
1
2k+2 , k from 0 (red/dark) to
9 (yellow/light), averaged over 50 runs of a random walk.
10-1
100
101
102
103
deviation
(a) Interval w/GPS
(b) Circle w/Beacons
0
500
1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000
time
10-1
100
101
102
103
deviation
(c) Square Grid w/GPS
0
500
1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000
time
(d) Interval w/Random Sensors
Fig. 4. A comparison of the mean number of incorrect edges in the
derived poc graph as a function of time, for an empirical snapshot
(blue) and a discounted one (red). Here τ = 1/203 and q = 1−1
26 .
and geometry/topology can be made here as well, but are more
subtle, as the comparison in ﬁgure 4 shows.
G. Further Adjustments to the Weak Poc Structure
The implication record constructed from a probabilistic
snapshot in the preceding section does not recognize possible
equivalences among sensations: if, for whatever reason, a
relation of the form
wab∗= wa∗b = 0
(31)
takes place in a snapshot S, it becomes reasonable to interpret
it as the logical equivalence a ⇔b, yet Dir(S) will not register
any relations in the square S|ab , barring an agent equipped
with S from utilizing the currently observed equivalence.
Thus, an adjustment of Dir(S) is required if we are to allow
our agents the advantage of reasoning about equivalences. The
following extension of Dir(S) turns out to serve our purposes
for a restricted class of probabilistic snapshots:
Deﬁnition II.20. Let S be a probabilistic snapshot. The poc
graph Dir(S)0 is deﬁned to be the poc graph obtained from
Dir(S) by adding the directed edges ab, ba, a∗b∗, b∗a∗for
each ab ∈KΣ satisfying (31).
□
It turns out that Dir(S)0 gives rise to an adequate weak
poc set structure and model space, provided S satisﬁes the
additional requirement:
Deﬁnition II.21. A snapshot S is said to satisfy the triangle
inequality, if
wa∗b + wab∗+ wb∗c + wbc∗≥wa∗c + wac∗
(32)
holds whenever ab, bc, ac ∈KΣ.
□
A class of examples of special signiﬁcance in this work is
that of snapshots S whose edge weights are derived from a
measure µ on a space Z by pulling back along a realization
ρ : Σ →Z as follows:
wab = µ (ρ(a) ∩ρ(b))
(33)
The triangle inequality for S is then an immediate consequence
of the well-known (e.g. [61], chapter 3) triangle inequality for
measures:
µ(A △C) ≤µ(A △B) + µ(B △C) ,
(34)
where A, B, C ⊂Z are arbitrary measurable sets and A △B
denotes the symmetric difference (A ∖B) ∪(B ∖A).
The coincidence indicators ct
ab of (11) are a special case
of this example (where µ is an atomic measure), and so are
empirical snapshots (as their weights are sums of coincidence
indicators). Discounted snapshots fall into this class, too, as
their weights are convex combinations of coincidence indica-
tors.
Due to the technical nature of the interactions between
Dir(S) and the extension Dir(S)0, we postpone the formal
discussion of these interactions to appendix B-C. The bottom
line, however, is that for any probabilistic snapshot structure
satisfying the triangle inequality our agent may safely apply
the control protocols of the next section to the extended poc
graph derived from the agent’s current snapshot to arrive
at action choices while taking advantage of the perceived
equivalences within the sensorium.
Although technically we are obliged to distinguish between
Dir(S) and Dir(S)0, as well as between the weak poc set
structures they correspond to, we will treat these objects as
identical for the sake of simplifying the rest of the exposition.
III. CONTROL WITH SNAPSHOTS
This section introduces the basic control function of a
snapshot. We begin with introducing a formalism designed
to treat discrete actions as a sub-structure of the binary

11
sensorium, and discuss the effect of this formalism on shaping
the model space (III-A). We next turn to a discussion of the
snapshot S

t as a highly efﬁcient computational mechanism
for coherent state-updating and for decision making based on
the geometry of the model space M

t (III-B).
At the technical level, this section requires an understanding
of the convexity theory of cubings: The classical results are
covered in appendix A-D, while our new technical results
underlying the use of snapshots for greedy navigation in
cubings are covered in appendix B-E.
Building on these results, section III-B2 introduces the
mechanism of signal propagation over a snapshot which real-
izes the computation both of coherent projection and of closest
point projections to prescribed convex subsets of the associated
model space. This mechanism suggests a view of snapshot
architecture as highly simpliﬁed connectionist architectures,
and some related work in the literature is discussed.
At the heart of our proposed decision-making algorithm is
an assumption that the sensorium is rich enough to detect
direct causal relations between actions and other sensations.
We provide a fairly broad formalization of this assumption in
III-B3 (with an example in III-B4), and prove the ability of
an agent to correctly ‘halucinate’ the immediate consequences
of taking an action, provided sufﬁcient exposure.
An algorithm using this tool to attempt greedy navigation
over M

t to a speciﬁed target state is proposed in III-B5,
and some of its failure modes are discussed as a motivation
for future research on judicious dynamical expansions of the
sensorium which would allow the agent to overcome the
navigational obstructions formed by states in M

t having no
witness in the situation space X.
Finally, in III-C3, we explore the performance of some
excitation-driven DBAs: agents endowed with an excitation
level that changes depending on their distance from a target
in the environment E; the agents are capable of sensing
an increase or a decrease in excitation, and seek instant
gratiﬁcation in the sense of operating on the mandate to
always pick an action guaranteeing an increase in excitation
(or else act randomly). We compare the performance of such
agents in the domains considered in II-E2 and II-F2; in these
domains it is easy to guarantee arrival to the target given a-
priori knowledge of the correct snapshot structure, but we are
interested in the agent’s performance as they learn the problem
”from scratch”.
A. Deﬁning Actions
We will now restrict attention to DBAs with a sensorium
Σ endowed only with state (degree 0) and transition (degree
1) sensors. As before, we denote the realization of a sensor
a ∈Σ by ρ(a), where ρ(a) ⊆X for a state sensor and
ρ(a) ⊆X × X for a transition sensor. Thus, state sensors and
transition sensors may be viewed as Boolean and situational
ﬂuents over the situation space X, which is sufﬁcient for
setting up a discussion of actions and competencies according
to McCarthy and Hayes [47].
For our agents, we posit a set Σact ⊂Σ of transition sensors,
each of which may be switched on and off at will, earning
them the name of actions. To be precise, our requirements
are:
• Actions are binary.
We assume Σact ∩Σ∗
act = ∅, and
we denote the poc subset Σact ∪Σ∗
act ∪{0, 0∗} by Act.
• Every action has outcomes.
For any α ∈Σact and
x ∈X, the sets
α(x) = {y ∈X |x × y ∈ρ(α)}
(35)
are non-empty subsets of X.
In this we depart slightly from the accepted notion of actions
in the literature on transition systems of various ﬂavors (e.g.
[16],[62]), where actions are attached to states and the collec-
tion of actions available at each state may differ, depending
on that state. Instead, we consider actions as nothing more
than control signals, sent by the agent’s ‘mind’ to the agent’s
‘body’ in order to invoke (or not) one or more of a ﬁxed set of
available behaviors. It is the purpose of the ‘mind’ to identify
whether or not a control signal produces meaningful outcomes
as those outcomes are being sensed.
1) Invoking Actions Synchronously: Our sensor-centric ap-
proach to actions reﬂects the viewpoint that (1) an action
α ∈Σact taken at a state x ∈X imposes a time-independent
restriction on the set of states the system may enter in the
following moment, and (2) the agent is capable — at least in
principle — of observing its own decisions as they are being
invoked. We must now discuss the precise extent to which
these principles may or may not restrict our initial suggestion
that the sensations in Act are controllable.
For example, consider the situation where the agent is not
engaging in an action α ∈Σact during a transition from state x
to state y. This implies α∗is on during this transition, which
restricts the possible values of y to X ∖α(x). Hence, not
invoking any of the available α ∈Σact must then restrict
y to the intersection T
α∈Σact X ∖α(x), the set of possible
outcomes of the ”no-action”.
More generally, allowing a number of actions to be taken
at the same time (while not engaging in the rest) forces the
following interpretation by our sensing model:
1) A generalized action by the agent is a complete ∗-
selection A on Act (recall deﬁnition A.6);
2) The realization of a (generalized) action A ∈S(Act)0
is deﬁned to be
ρ(A) =
\
α∈A
ρ(α) ,
(36)
or, equivalently, for every x ∈X, the set of possible
outcomes of an action A equals
A(x) =
\
α∈A
α(x)
(37)
For this extended collection of actions one notices that the
second requirement of an action — A(x) ̸= ∅for all x ∈X —
does not necessarily hold: for example, moving forward along
a rail contradicts any motion in the opposite direction. We
will say that a generalized action A ∈S(Act)0 is admissible
at x ∈X if A(x) ̸= ∅, and that A is admissible, if it is
admissible at x for all x ∈X.

12
Aside from setting natural bounds on the meaning of the
initial statement that actions are available to the agent at will,
the notion of admissibility of a generalized action explains
how to interpret the poc set structure induced on Act from
the realization ρ: if
α < β ⇔ρ(α) ⊂ρ(β)
(38)
happens to hold for P

t, then every generalized action admis-
sible at a point x ∈X deﬁnes a vertex of Cube(Act) no
matter the choice of x ∈X. Similarly, generalized actions not
showing up as vertices Cube(Act

t), where Act

t denotes the
restriction of the poc set structure P

t to Act, represent the
agent’s belief at time t regarding combinations of elementary
actions it cannot achieve at that moment.
In the simple examples considered in this paper all agents
will be endowed with a collection of mutually exclusive atomic
actions. By this we mean that α < β∗holds for all α, β ∈Σact
(α ̸= β). Equivalently, only the ”no-action”, {α∗|α ∈Σact },
and the ”pure” actions {α}∪{β∗|β ∈Σact ∖{α}} are admis-
sible, and the resulting cubing Cube(Act) takes the form of
a starﬁsh: a tree with only one vertex of degree≥2 given
by the ”no-action” and with a set of leaves in one-to-one
correspondence with the set of ”pure” actions (see example
A-D1 and ﬁgure 11b).
2) Observations: The following set is the set of observa-
tions in P (note that it is closed under the ∗-operator):
Obs := (Σ ∖Act) ∪{0, 0∗} ,
(39)
and stands for the set of ”passive” sensations, as opposed to
actions. Sections II-C-II-G explain how a trajectory ϕ

t, t ≥0
may be used to form an evolving sequence of weak poc-set
structures (P

t)t≥0 over Σ, with each P

t representing the
agent’s belief at time t regarding which implications among
the sensors in Σ hold true throughout time. Two poc subsets
of P

t are formed by restricting its poc structure:
• Act

t is the induced poc structure on Act;
• Obs

t is the induced poc structure on Obs.
We are interested in the interaction between these smaller
poc sets and the full model space, Cube(P

t). One has two
surjections
projact : Cube(P

t) →Cube(Act

t)
projobs : Cube(P

t) →Cube(Obs

t)
(40)
deﬁned, at the level of 0-skeleta, as follows: projact sends a
coherent ∗-selection A on P

t to the ∗-selection A∩Act, and
similarly for projobs. Hence, at the level of 0-skeleta, there is
a map:
Cube(P

t) →Cube(Act

t) × Cube(Obs

t)
(41)
In fact, Sageev-Roller duality [31] implies a much more
precise statement:
Proposition
III.1. The map above (41) is a median-
preserving embedding of Cube(P

t) in the Cartesian product
Cube(Act

t) × Cube(Obs

t).
Proof: See proof in appendix B-D.
3) Example: discrete path with motion: To illustrate the
description of the model space provided by proposition III.1,
consider an agent moving in steps of unit length along a path
of integer length L > 1. Formally, the environment is given
by E = {0, . . . , L} and the agent has the actions deﬁned by:
y ∈wait(x)
⇔
pos(y) = pos(x)
y ∈fwd(x)
⇔
pos(y) = min {L, pos(x) + 1}
y ∈bck(x)
⇔
pos(y) = max {0, pos(x) −1}
(42)
enabling motion from any vertex k ∈E to the adjacent k + 1
and k −1, when they exist. We also endow the agent with
sensors a1, . . . , aL ∈Σ realized as:
⟨ak : x⟩= 1 ⇔pos(x) < k
(43)
Up to symmetry, the only relations holding in the existing
scheme are
a1 < a2 < . . . < aL ,
(44)
the ‘starﬁsh’ relations for Act:
fwd < bck∗,
bck < wait∗,
wait < fwd∗,
(45)
for the actions {fwd, bck, wait}, and the two relations
fwd < a∗
1 ,
bck < aL ,
(46)
indicating pos(x) = 0 may not be reached by applying fwd,
while pos(x) = L may not be reached by applying bck.
No other relations hold universally. Let P denote the poc set
structure over Σ recording these relations.
Fig. 5. Model space for a DBA placed in a discrete path, depicted
together with its projections to Cube(Act) (right) and to Cube(Obs)
(below). This is the case L = 5 of example III-A3.
Cube(P) is the result of forming the Cartesian product of
a 3-pronged starﬁsh Cube(Act) with the path of length L
obtained8 as Cube(Obs), and then removing two squares as
shown in ﬁgure 5, due to the relation in (46).
B. Reactive Planning
1) Statement of the planning problem: In this section we
consider a DBA at time t > 0, equipped with a snapshot S

t
with a derived poc graph Γ

t = Dir(S

t) and associated weak
poc set P

t (but keep in mind the notational simpliﬁcations at
the end of II-G). The agent’s tasks at hand are:
8Compare with example A-D1 and ﬁgure 11.

13
(T1)
Predict the immediate outcome of any α ∈Act

t
(or, more generally, of any A ∈Cube(Act

t));
(T2)
Given a set T ⊂Σ of target sensations to be achieved
jointly, decide on a (generalized) action A

t for the
agent to invoke in the next transition.
Both tasks need to be achieved based on the agent’s record
of the current state, S

t
= #S

t, which is a coherent
(though not necessarily complete) ∗-selection on P

t obtained
from the complete ∗-selection O

t representing the agent’s
raw observation of the current state at time t, by coherent
projection (104). We will keep all the above notation ﬁxed
through the rest of this section.
It is crucial that we interpret these tasks in terms of the
model space M

t = Cube(P

t). For any subset B ⊂Σ, deﬁne
the set:
h(B) :=

V ⊂Σ
V is a vertex of M

t containing B
	
(47)
These are known to be precisely the convex subsets of the
1-skeleton of M

t (see appendix A-D). Thus, the agent is
assigned the problem of reaching the convex set h(T) from a
(possibly unknown) position in the convex set h
 S

t

.
2) Signal Propagation over a Snapshot: The purpose of
Γ

t is to serve as an inference tool for the agent. Recall that
Γ

t is formed from the weight structure of the snapshot S

t,
which, in turn, is a result of updating the weights on S

t−1
with the raw observation O

t. The last step of the update is
the ‘loading’ of Γ

t with the current state S

t = coh(O

t) of
the agent.
Deﬁnition III.2. Let B ⊂Σ. Denote by [Γ

t, B] the weighted
graph obtained from Γ

t by attaching the Boolean weight
⟨1B : v⟩to each vertex v ∈Σ, and refer to it as Γ

t being
loaded with B.
□
Deﬁnition III.3. A propagation algorithm along Γ

t is any
algorithm which, for any coherent load B ⊂Σ and any T ⊆Σ
accepts [Γ

t, B] and T as input and produces as its output the
loaded graph [Γ

t, R] where a ∈R if and only if:
1) there is a directed path in Γ

t from B ∪T to a, or –
2) there is no directed path in Γ

t from a into T ∗.
The set R ⊂Σ is said to be the result of propagating the
signal T along [Γ

t, B].
□
Applying the convexity theory of the model space M

t —
speciﬁcally corollary B.16 and proposition B.4 — we ﬁnd the
following applications for propagation:
Lemma III.4 (Implementing the State Update). For any prop-
agation algorithm, propagating the signal O

t along [Γ

t, ∅]
produces S

t = coh(O

t).
□
Lemma III.5 (Reasoning in Snapshots). Let T ⊂Σ be any
set. For any propagation algorithm, propagating the signal T
along [Γ

t, S

t] produces the projection in M

t of the current
state h
 S

t

onto the reduced target h(coh(T)) ⊂M

t.
The ﬁrst lemma explains how to implement the snapshot
update, given a propagation algorithm:
Algorithm 1 A simple implementation of propagation of a
signal T over a poc graph Γ loaded with B, based on depth-
ﬁrst search.
function MAIN(Γ, B, T)
▷Propagating T over [Γ, B]
visited ←∅
▷A global variable
U ←CLOSURE(Γ, T)
return (B ∪U) ∖U ∗
end function
function CLOSURE(Γ, T)
▷Forward closure of T in Γ
for all a ∈T do
EXPLORE(Γ, a)
end for
return visited
end function
procedure EXPLORE(Γ, v)
▷Recursive step
visited ←visited ∪{v}
for all w ∈CHILDREN(Γ, v)∖visited do
EXPLORE(Γ, w)
end for
end procedure
function CHILDREN(Γ, v)
▷Children of v in Γ
return {w ∈Σ |vw ∈Γ}
end function
1) use the raw observation O

t and S

t−1 to recalculate the
edge weights for S

t;
2) compute the derived graph Γ

t;
3) propagate the signal O

t over [Γ

t, ∅] to compute S

t =
coh(O

t).
The second lemma is the key tool for turning a propagation
algorithm into the planning algorithms we discuss in the rest
of this section.
In practice, one can implement propagation using a variant
of depth-ﬁrst search (DFS) on Γ

t [63], while maintaining an
expanding record of vertices visited — see algorithm 1. This
algorithm clearly has time complexity that is at most quadratic
in the number of sensors, and we conclude:
Corollary III.6 (Quadratic Snapshot Maintenance). Both the
time and space complexity of updating the snapshot S

t−1 with
an observation O

t to form S

t are at most quadratic in |Σ|.
□
A far more efﬁcient implementation is possible provided
sufﬁcient parallel processing power, by realizing propagation
directly on Γ

t in a distributed fashion, using corollary B.16:
given [Γ

t, S

t] and a target T one ﬁrst follows all directed
paths in Γ

t emanating from (S

t ∪T) loading the traversed
vertices with 1, and then follows all reverse paths emanating
from T ∗and loads their vertices with zeros. Implementing this
algorithm in practice is problematic for large |Σ| in view of the
high plasticity of the graph Γ

t and the potentially prohibitive
requirement for the DBA to maintain up to O(|Σ|) processes,
all active at the same time. Despite its current impracticality,
such an implementation seems evocative of the notion of
neuronal networks. We discuss this tentative connection in
section IV-B.

14
3) Algorithm: Computing the consequences of an action:
Planning of any kind requires an ability to sense the context
of an action. This ability may be imparted to the agent by
introducing sensors of the form
⟨α ∧s : ϕ⟩

t = ⟨α : ϕ⟩

t · #sS

t−1
(48)
where α is an action and s ∈Σ is any sensor. The idea behind
constructing α ∧s in this way is for snapshots to be able to
detect implications of the form ”invoking α when s is on leads
to s′” simply as directed paths from α ∧s to s′ in the derived
graph. From a formal point of view, allowing this kind of
sensor requires the observability of the snapshot in X, that
is: in order for the values of sensors in Σ to be allowed as
input to (possibly other) sensors in Σ, it is necessary by our
formalism for X to carry information regarding these values
in its state.
The problem of constructing a judicious process of enrich-
ing the sensorium with an effective collection of introspective
sensors is set aside for future research. Instead, in the present
model and simulations used to illustrate these ideas for the
purposes of this paper we have committed to a sensorium
containing an over-abundance of such sensors:
• Position Sensors.
We assume the environment E is
given as the union of a collection U of its subsets, the
agent being given a state sensor loc[U] for each U ∈U
satisfying ⟨loc[U] : x⟩= ⟨1U : pos(x)⟩.
• Actions.
A collection of actions (in the form of 1-
sensors) is provided.
• Contextualized actions. For each U ∈U and α ∈Act
the agent is given the sensors α∧loc[U] and α∧loc[U]∗.
Under these assumptions, the following result yields a mech-
anism allowing the agent to ‘hallucinate’ the broadest conse-
quences of an action within the context of its current model
space M

t:
Corollary III.7 (Computing the Consequences of an Action).
For any generalized action A ⊂Act, the result of applying A
in the transition from time t > 0 to time t + 1 is the result of
propagating the collection {α ∧loc[U]}loc[U]∈S

t,α∈A along
[Γ

t, S

t].
□
Thus, propagation provides a provably correct and compu-
tationally efﬁcient mechanism for predicting the immediate
outcomes of an action, provided a sensorium of the above
form and a snapshot faithfully recording the nesting relations
among the sensors.
Combined with the results of section II demonstrating that
learning the correct relations within a ﬁxed sensorium with a
high degree of ﬁdelity is possible even for an agent performing
a random walk, the last corollary suggests that effective
(and efﬁcient) planning and closed loop control — bundled
together with life-long learning features — are entirely feasible
for DBAs carrying a snapshot architecture. We discuss both
problems in the following paragraphs.
4) Example: discrete path with motion, revisited: To il-
lustrate the above, we continue example III-A3. Recalling
E = {0, . . . , L} we see that the sensors ak deﬁned in (43)
Fig. 6. Model space for an agent on a discrete path, with two added
contextual action sensors.
may be rewritten as:
ak = loc[Uk] ,
Uk = {i ∈E |0 ≤i < k}
(49)
Thus, for example, adjoining the two sensors fwd ∧a∗
2 and
bck ∧a4 to Σ implies the relations
fwd ∧a∗
2 < a∗
3 ,
bck ∧a4 < a3 ,
(50)
whose effect on Cube(P), once they are learned by the agent,
is shown in ﬁgure 6.
Further expanding Σ to include all the sensors
fwd ∧a∗
k ,
k = 1, . . . , L −1
bck ∧ak ,
k = 2, . . . , L
(51)
turns Cube(P) into the complex illustrated in ﬁgure 7. As
shown in the ﬁgure, the order structure on P encodes both
large-scale geometry (the agent may use propagation to con-
clude ”in order to reach h(a∗
5), I need to to reach h(a∗
2)”), and
the actions required to negotiate this geometry (”I know that
fwd ∧a∗
1 implies a∗
2, and I am currently in h(a∗
1)”).
Fig. 7. Model space for an agent on a discrete path, enriched with a
full complement of contextualized action sensors (51), and illustrating
the geometry underlying planning by propagation III-B5.

15
5) Algorithm: Greedy Reactive Planning (GRP) of Motion
Towards a Speciﬁed Target: The ability to compute the imme-
diate consequences of any available action and the convexity
theory of M

t underlie the following greedy algorithm used
to decide on an action to be taken for the purpose of achieving
a long-term goal:
1) Given a set T of target sensations, propagating T over
[Γ

t, S

t] yields a list R of sensations characterizing the
projection of the region h
 S

t

representing current state
in M

t to the desired region h(T).
2) Each of the elements of R may be considered as a sub-
goal, and a generalized action guaranteed to achieve as
many of these subgoals as possible may be selected
based on the corollary III.7; any ties are broken arbi-
trarily.
3) Once an action is invoked, the same target T is presented
to the agent for an additional iteration of this procedure,
until completion.
By lemma III.5, this algorithm is directly analogous to motion
planning in the Euclidean plane in the absence of obstacles:
the agent selects an action which, to the best of its knowledge,
best approximates the greedy path towards the closest point of
the indicated target. The next section will consider the kinds
of problems arising in the presence of obstacles in the model
space and some early numerical study undertaken to explore
overcoming some of these problems.
C. Obstructions to Greedy Reactive Planning.
Where do obstructions to GRP in M

t come from? Recall
that every transition x × y ∈X × X capable of occurring in
the given experiment determines a complete ∗-selection A on
Σ, by our observation model, via:
a ∈A ⇐⇒

y ∈ρ(a)
if a is a state sensor
x × y ∈ρ(a)
if a is a transition sensor
(52)
Thus, although M

t does provide a universal model space for
any realization of the weak poc set structure P

t, the agent
is only capable of witnessing ∗-selections of the above form,
no matter the choice of action. This observation motivates the
following deﬁnition:
Deﬁnition III.8 (Punctured Model Space). By the punctured
model space at time t we mean the sub-complex M×
t of
M

t induced9 by the set of vertices of M

t of the form (52)
(compare with the discussion in appendix A-E3).
Thus, in addition to the possibility that an agent will have a
false implication on record (causing some sensory equivalence
classes to be deemed incoherent until they are sufﬁciently
sampled), it is also possible that M

t contains obstacles to
GRP in the form of vertices in M

t ∖M×
t ̸= ∅. In fact, the
presence of obstacles of this kind is guaranteed by the main
result of [30] — also reviewed in appendix A-E4, Theorem
A.33 — at least in cases when E does not have the homotopy
9Recall that a sub-complex L of a cell complex K is induced by a set of
vertices V ⊂K0, if L contains every cell of K all of whose vertices belong
to V .
type of a point and the covering U of E by location place
ﬁelds satisﬁes the richness requirements placed on it by that
theorem. We consider two of examples of this kind.
1) Example: A Punctured Grid: Consider the example of
an agent navigating an N × N square grid (realized as a
subset GN of the integer grid) and equipped with a collection
of position sensors identical to that of II-E2(d) and II-F2(d).
Denoting pos(x) := ξ × η ∈Z × Z we have the sensors
⟨xi : x⟩= 1 ⇔ξ < i ,
⟨yi : x⟩= 1 ⇔η < i ,
(53)
for i ∈{1, . . . , N −1}. This time, however, suppose that
one interior vertex v0 of the grid has been removed, so that
E = GN ∖{v0}. As in the above simulations, we assume
the agent is equipped with actions labelled up, down, left and
right whose effect at each vertex is to move to the appropriate
adjacent vertex of the integer grid if that vertex belongs to E,
and to remain in place otherwise. Suppose, for simplicity, that
the snapshot structure for this agent is empirical.
For N sufﬁciently large, the statistical nature of the learning
algorithm will cause the agent to learn the same weak poc set
structure as in the case of v0 being present: implications of
the form
up ∧y∗
i < y∗
i+1 ,
up ∧xi < xi ,
xi < xi+1
(54)
and their respective variations will be learned upon sufﬁcient
exposure, giving rise to the same poc set structure as the one
representing the complete grid GN. One could view this as
a manifestation of the fact that our model spaces are always
contractible (corollary A.31).
As a consequence, the agent is bound to attempt moving
to the unavailable vertex v0 at any time t when its position,
pt, is adjacent to v0 and v0 belongs to a shortest path in GN
joining pt with the prescribed target. In such a situation, the
agent is guaranteed to attempt motion in the direction of v0
and fail (remain in place). Moreover, after sufﬁciently many
such attempts the agent is bound to unlearn the implication
responsible for this particular choice of action; this will have
an overall negative impact on planning.
2) Example: Agent on a Circular Rail: A subtly different
example is that of II-E2(b) and II-F2(b). Here, motion along
a circular rail is modeled by setting E to be the set of
integers modulo N, with two available actions fwd and bck
corresponding to the operations of adding and subtracting a
unit, respectively (all arithmetic relating to the environment in
this example is done modulo N). Position sensors have the
form loc[Ui] where Ui = {i −1, i, i + 1}.
For simplicity consider a situation with N big and even,
and assume the agent has complete knowledge of the correct
poc set structure, which is the one generated by the relations
(appendix A-A2):
loc[Ui] < loc[Uj]∗⇔dist(i, j) > 2 ,
(55)
where dist(i, j) denotes the distance (modulo N) between
the positions i and j, as well as:
fwd ∧loc[Ui]
<
loc[Ui+1] ,
bck ∧loc[Ui]
<
loc[Ui−1]
(56)

16
for all i ∈{0, . . . , N −1}. Without loss of generality, the
current state x of the system satisﬁes pos(x) = 0.
Let the speciﬁed target be T
=
{Up}, where p
∈
{0, . . . , N −1} is sufﬁciently far from the origin (the current
position of the agent) to accommodate a pair Ui, Uj such that:
1) Ui ∪Uj does not intersect Up ∪U0;
2) Ui ∪Uj separates p from 0 (on the circle).
Thus both the current state and the target region sat-
isfy the constraints loc[Ui]∗and loc[Uj]∗, which implies
that any geodesic in the model space joining the cur-
rent model state with the model target set passes through
h(loc[Ui]∗, loc[Uj]∗), yet it is clearly impossible to guarantee
these constraints by any of the available actions.
It is, never the less, possible to extend this sensorium in
a way that enables the effective learning of a target, as the
numerical studies below demonstrate, by introducing into the
environment a graded signal whose strength encodes a measure
of distance to the target, while endowing the agent with sensors
responding to the gradient of this signal.
3) Closing the Loop: Excitation-Driven Navigation: From
the preceding examples it is clear that additional sensing —
most probably involving information regarding transitions —
is absolutely necessary for overcoming the geometric and
topological obstructions to the GRP algorithm: while the
GRP algorithm may be considered as providing a reasonable
reference dynamics for reactive planning, one must consider
possible means for replanning in the face of failure. We
conjecture that the notion of a snapshot is sufﬁciently simple
and agile for such purposes:
- Control of learning thresholds.
At this stage of our
research, no attempt is being made to control the learning
thresholds τab; it seems plausible, however, that having a
high level of ”frustration” cause the lowering of a relevant
threshold may be used as a tool for locating exceptions
to poc relations.
- Introduction of new sensors. A principled mechanism is
required for the introduction of combinations of existing
sensors, such as Boolean functions thereof, or delayed
conjunctions such as (48), to become additional members
of the sensorium. In particular, such a mechanism must be
capable of responding to exceptions, or failures of GRP,
as we had already discussed above.
The need for self-adjustment in the sensorium opens the
door to the introduction of auxiliary internal mechanisms of
evaluating the position of the agent in the environment, or,
more generally, the state of the system consisting of the pairing
of the agent with the environment. For example, the settings
described in the preceding paragraph suggests the introduction
of an internal variable evaluating success (and failure) of
invoking a planned action, while the need for closed-loop
control suggests simple local control mechanisms based on an
internally-deﬁned ‘navigation function’ [15]. Many other ideas
of internal behavior modulation ranging from varying notions
of novelty, surprise and dependability [58], [64], [22], [4] all
the way to a multivariate model of human neuro-modulation
mechanisms [59] become relevant in this context.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
deviation
(a) Interval w/GPS
(b) Circle w/Beacons
0
200
400
600
800
1000 1200 1400 1600
time
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
deviation
(c) Square Grid w/GPS
0
200
400
600
800
1000 1200 1400 1600
time
(d) Interval w/Random Sensors
Fig. 8. Mean deviation from target for empirical (blue) and a dis-
counted (red) agents (20 sensors each), as a function of time in four
different settings, averaging over 50 runs.
Excitation-Driven Agents. In the absence of tools for reactive
replanning (our current situation), we have chosen to study a
simpliﬁed notion of target, allowing us to close the control
loop with a ”motion” command generated with the aim to
guarantee an immediate decrease in the value of an internal
excitation signal.
The simplest instance of such a controller, applied to the
navigation setting, seems to be the following. In addition to
a sensorium of the form described above in III-B3 and the
examples that followed, assume that the agent possesses a pair
of sensors better and worse, responding to the decrease and
increase, respectively, in a ﬁxed measure of distance to a target
point in the environment E, over a single transition (think of
this as a radically simpliﬁed sense of smell).
Starting out as a lazy random-walking agent10, the agent
uses the algorithm of III-B5 at each step to obtain an action
resulting with better (target speciﬁcation T = {better})
as its ﬁrst priority. In the case of failure to produce such an
action, the agent attempts to guarantee worse∗, periodically
attempting a random action so as not to get stuck in place
(upon having ﬁgured out that wait < worse∗). Figure 8
presents a comparison between the mean behaviors of four
different such agents simulated in the same settings as those
analyzed in section II.
It is important to stress that, following the discussion in
III-A3 and the formal results of the preceding paragraphs,
the guarantee of the agents in ﬁgure 8(a)-(c) ﬁnding their
targets given sufﬁcient knowledge of the correct poc structure
on Σ is absolute. To see this, it sufﬁces to verify for the true
poc set structure on Σ that any position other than the target
has associated with it a location sensor a = loc[U] and an
action α such that every state x with ⟨a : x⟩= 1 satisﬁes the
requirement that α(x) is closer to the target than x is.
10An action wait is available now, to let the agent stay put when it has
found the target.

17
The only remaining question is whether or not the control
strategy we propose guarantees sufﬁcient exposure for the
agent to recover the poc relations necessary for it to capture the
target. Figure 8 offers some evidence in favor of an afﬁrmative
answer, based on simulations.
IV. DISCUSSION
A. Topological Mapping and Planning
Mapping methods vary from probabilistic representations
[10], [12], [65] to hybrid representations in which precisely
mapped contractible local metric patches are integrated into
a global map through ‘gluing instructions’ recorded in an
annotated graph that is learned by the agent in the course
of its travels ([35], [36], [37], [38]). The latter are known
as topological SLAM (simultaneous localization and mapping)
methods.
In the presence of signiﬁcant obstacles in large scale en-
vironments, the lightweight ‘topological skelteon’ of the en-
vironment recorded by a topological SLAM method provides
valuable information on loop closure, which would otherwise
be costly to obtain using global metric mapping techniques.
This observation led to an extensive effort [66], [34] to produce
a general notion of a topological map, based on the notion
of spacial semantic hierarchy (SSH), that would allow for
motion planning at varying scales. Other ways of leveraging
planar topological descriptors to obtain simple and efﬁcient
data structures supporting localization and motion planning in
simply connected planar domains have been explored as well,
e.g. [67], [28] and [68].
In view of our stated need for guaranteed universality prop-
erties, the strong dependence of SLAM methods on Euclidean
geometry made it necessary for us to adopt a signiﬁcantly more
abstract approach to localization arising from the point of view
of sensor ﬁelds. A precursor of our approach is a family of
SLAM algorithms, known as RatSLAM, employing a neural
network to simulate the function of place/pose cells in rats,
e.g. [13], [24], [48]. In a broad generalization of the neural
computational engine underlying RatSLAM, [39] tests the
hypothesis that place cells with sensor ﬁelds in any sufﬁciently
dense conﬁguration should make it possible [for a rat] not only
to localize well, but also to accurately represent the topology
of the environment by estimating the nerve11 of the system
of place ﬁelds from observations of near-synchrony in place-
cell ﬁring. It is shown through simulations that recovering
the topological invariants of a connected planar arena, as
well as some approximation of its geometry, is possible with
a sufﬁciently dense network of convex place ﬁelds. Further
evidence in support of this idea is the recently introduced [40]
method for localization in an urban canyon, as well as the
ELM architecture [23], using nerve-like information (nesting
among convex polygons in the plane) as a means of encoding
spatio-temporal context in an ‘episodic memory’ for a planar
agent.
A signiﬁcant drawback of nerve estimation is that, by
deﬁnition, computing nerve of a covering requires expo-
11See nerve of a covering in [33], section 3.3.
nential space in the cardinality of the covering12. At the
same time, restricting attention to pairwise intersections only,
and focusing on those of them that are empty turns out to
guarantee a universal model space for each combinatorial
type of this ”reduced nerve”, by Sageev-Roller duality [56],
[31]. By construction, snapshots are estimators of this reduced
nerve, turned into a computational tool for navigating the
corresponding model space after converting all relations of
the form ”A ∩B negligible/unimportant” into relations of the
form ”A implies B”.
The idea of leveraging nesting relations among geometric
descriptors of events for the purpose of properly representing
context is a well-recognized and widely used tool in the
literature, for example: nesting of planar domains is used in
[34], as well as the more recent [23], and a notion of nesting
for actions is used in [4]. What is new about the snapshot
architecture is its application of this principle to the entire
sensorium, including the set of available actions.
Our numerical experiments with closed loop control suggest
that a snapshot-driven agent with sufﬁcient actuation and
sufﬁciently rich sensorium is capable of learning a good
approximation of the gradient ﬁeld of a (discrete) Morse
function despite been given no prior semantic information and
starting out with random ‘motor babble’ for its navigation
strategy.
In fact, the snapshot architecture is ﬂexible enough to
trivialize the task of introducing discrete variants of complex
motivational systems [59] based on introspective sensing of
signals quantifying (a) internally available resources (e.g.
battery charge), (b) repulsion or fear of punishment, (c)
attraction or anticipation of a reward signal (e.g., in the
sense of navigation functions [15] or in the broad sense of
Reinforcement Learning [51]), and even (d) frustration over
the failure of a plan [69] and (e) measures of innovation [58],
[64].
We expect systems such as (a)-(c) to contribute to an agent’s
planning capabilities from the point of view of the variety of
tasks they would enable. Even more signiﬁcantly, we expect
(d) and (e) to contribute to the agent’s ability to improve
the quality of the topological representation encoded in its
snaphot. Namely, (d) could be used to facilitate chunking by
serving as a signal driving the creation of new conditional
sensors detecting inconsistent states of the model space, while
(e) could drive the learning of useful complex actions, as
has already been proposed for many other architectures [25],
[4], [22], [26], resulting in improving the connectivity of the
model space. Endowing the snapshot architecture with these
capabilities is the most immediate goal for follow-up research.
B. Connectionist Architectures
From the earliest days of the ﬁeld, even extremely simple
neural networks with a very small number of neurons have
demonstrated the ability to perform complex learning and
control tasks [70], [71], including complex symbolic struc-
tures such as context-sensitive grammars [72], [73], [74], and
12As one must keep track of the intersections of all possible sub-collections
of the covering

18
complex hierarchical schemata whose structural features vastly
outnumber the physical components the actual network [75].
Even simple feed-forward networks have been shown to be
capable of exercising ‘intelligent’ control through stigmergy
[76], the depositing of tokens in the environment. Furthermore,
the merging of reinforcement learning methods with the com-
putational power of ‘deep learning’ networks [77], [78] has
yielded architectures capable of matching and outperforming
humans in complex tasks such as learning and playing video
games [79] based only on the raw RGB output provided by
the game console.
At the same time, the power of connectionist architectures
comes with very limited formal understanding of how the
internal representations they maintain encode symbolic rep-
resentations in terms of problem spaces.
Though the connection demonstrated in this work falls short
solving this problem (due to the over-simpliﬁcation of the
connectionist structure and due to realization of plasticity in
the network by a non-neural controller), direct analogies with
current studies of plasticity and neural coding give hope that
a suitable generalization of the snapshot architecture could
yield both strength of performance and provable guarantees
of symbolic reasoning processes.
Of the classes of neural networks that are well understood,
most relevant for our purposes is that of competitive attractor
networks, whose strong stability properties [80] were applied
to modeling the navigation mechanisms in rats, also inspiring
the RatSLAM mapper [13].
Expanding on these results, [81], [49] sparked the discussion
of the structure of the set of binary codewords corresponding
to stable activity patterns of threshold-linear neural networks.
This line of inquiry was picked up in [82], producing a
combinatorial characterization of the possible codes in terms
of the network’s organization; and in [50], initiating a rigorous
study of the way codes vary as the synaptic weights are
perturbed while subject to structural constraints, exposing
interesting connections with topological invariants associated
with these constraints.
The analogy with our work is straightforward. The process
of obtaining the coherent projection of a binary observation
by propagating it through the derived graph of a snapshot is
completely analogous to the process of propagating a signal
through a threshold-linear neural network and waiting for the
network state to stabilize at a code word — especially when
taking into account the excitatory nature of relations of the
form a ≤b and inhibitory role of relations of the form a ≤b∗
under propagation.
Chasing this analogy, it could be worthwhile investigating
the degree to which the collection of codewords of a threshold-
linear network conforms to the strict demands of median ge-
ometry (represented by coherent snapshot states), to establish
a rigorous formal connection (if it exists) between the two
architectures. A more general study of which neural learning
methods [83] could be transferred into a snapshot architecture
may, on one hand, expand the range of applications for
snapshots, while, on the other hand, provide some existing
architectures with a rigorous symbolic interpretation.
V. CONCLUSION
We introduce a new computationally efﬁcient architecture
intended to endow a generic discrete binary agent with the
capacity to build over time an actionable model of its opera-
tions within a completely unknown dynamic environment, E.
The proposed architecture has a dual nature. On one hand, the
agent maintains an evolving data structure, — the snapshot
S

t — of size quadratic in the number of sensors, encoding a
planning mechanism based on propagation of excitation and
inhibition signals through the highly plastic directed network
Dir(S

t), and is, thus, in a very crude sense, a connectionist
learning and control architecture. On the other hand, the rather
speciﬁc ordering properties of networks arising in this way
(the derived ‘weak poc set structure’ P

t) also characterize
any such network as encoding a system of ‘half-spaces’ in a
geometric internal representation M

t that is just rich enough
to account for all sensory equivalence classes provided to
the agent by its sensorium Σ. This duality affords the re-
interpretation of snapshots as encoding a high-level symbolic
representation of the problem space (i.e., the state space X
and the transition system induced on it by the agents interac-
tion with its dynamic environment), through a mathematical
formalism that rigorously supports symbolic planning with the
efﬁciency and economy of a connectionist architecture.
Clearly, our current snapshot architectures (section II) lack
certain key features found in existing AGI architectures. First
and foremost among these is a mechanism for enriching the
agent’s sensorium with sensors representing general Boolean
predicates (or, even better, some limited LTL predicates), com-
posed of the original atomic sensations. Of course, the problem
lies not in proposing intuitively attractive approaches (there are
many) but rather doing so in a principled, economical way that
maintains the present combination of analytical and compu-
tational tractability. These ‘compound’ sensors are required
for facilitating chunking and the learning of useful motor
primitives. Another required feature is a capacity for symbolic
abstraction (relating problem spaces via substitutions). While
the duality theory of weak poc sets and their model spaces
(appendix A-E) affords a rigorous formulation of enriched
predicates and consequent symbolic abstraction, it is not yet
clear how to engineer an enlarged snapshot-like architecture
realizing such meta-extensions.
