UAI2001 
CHU ET AL. 
83 
Semi-Instrumental Variables: 
A Test for Instrument Admissibility 
Tianjiao Chu 
tchuCandrew.cmu.edu 
Richard Scheines 
Philosophy Department 
Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 
scheinesScmu.edu 
Peter Spirtes 
ps7zSandrew.cmu.edu 
Abstract 
In a causal graphical model, an instrument 
for a variable X and its effect Y is a ran­
dom variable that is a cause of X and in­
dependent of all the causes of Y except X 
(Pearl 1995). 
For continuous variables, in­
strumental variables can be used to estimate 
how the distribution of an effect will respond 
to a manipulation of its causes, even in the 
presence of unmeasured common causes (con­
founders). 
In typical instrumental variable 
estimation, instruments are chosen based on 
domain knowledge. 
There is currently no 
statistical test for validating a continuous 
variable as an instrument. 
In this paper, 
we introduce the concept of semi-instrument, 
which generalizes the concept of instrument: 
each instrument is a semi-instrument, but the 
converse does not hold. 
We show that in 
the framework of additive models, under cer­
tain conditions, we can test whether a vari­
able is semi-instrumental. Moreover, adding 
some distribution assumptions, we can test 
whether two semi-instruments are instrumen­
tal. 
We give algorithms to test whether a. 
variable is semi-instrumental, and whether 
two semi-instruments are both instrumental. 
These algorithms can be used to test the ex­
perts' choice of instruments, or to identify in­
struments automatically. 
Key Words: Causality, Instrumental Variables 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
One of the major advantages of knowing the causal 
relations among the variables we are interested in is 
that we can use the causal structure to predict the 
effects of interventions. For example, if we know that a 
h 
 
f 
r 
s 
fy 
1 
z----.x ---•Y 
Figure 1: One Instrumental Variable 
random variable X is the cause of Y, then intervening 
on X will change Y, but intervening on Y should not 
change X. 1 By regressing Y on X, we can estimate the 
effect of the intervention of X on Y, up to a constant, 
if no unmeasured common cause of X and Y exists. 
However, this advantage becomes problematic if we 
know, or even suspect, that there are some unmea­
sured common causes of X and Y, in which case we 
cannot estimate the direct effect of X on Y. 
Consider the the causal structure illustrated in figure 
1. Suppose that Z is not observable for the moment. 
Among X, Y, Ex, and fy, only X andY are observed 
variables. The functional relations among them are: 
1 Here by intervention we mean the manipulation of the 
value of one random variable, with the assumption that 
this manipulation can affect other variables only through 
the manipulated variable. 
We also assume no feedback, 
i.e., no directed cycles, and no reversible causal relations, 
in a causal graph. See Spirtes et al (2001) 

84 
CHU ET AL. 
UAI2001 
z 
...._ 
h 

 
r 
ey 
f 
s 
l 
X 
y 
___.;t( 
g 
Figure 2: One Common Cause 
X 
f(Z) +ex 
Y 
s(X) +ey 
E[t:Yitx] 
= 
h(Ex) 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
Note that ey and X are dependent, that is, E[EyiX] 
will be a non-constant function of X, say, >.(X). The 
regression of Y on X will give: 
E[YIXJ = s(X) + E[EyjX] = s(X) +>.(X) 
Because we have no way to estimate >.(X), we also 
have no way to identify s(X), even up to a constant. 
However, with the help of variable Z, we can estimate 
Ex by regressing X on Z to get an estimate of ex = 
X- E[XIZ]. Then, we can regress Y on X and EX to 
get: 
E[YIX,t:x] = s(X) + E[t:yiEx,X] 
= s(X) + E[EY!Ex] = s(X) + h(Ex). 2 
An additive regression method will give an estimate of 
s(X) and h(Ex) simultaneously.3 
Here Z is called an instrumental variable for X and 
Y, by which we mean that Z is a direct cause of X, 
and Z is independent of all other causes of Y except 
X. (Note that X must be a direct cause of Y.) 
2Here we use the fact that X and Ey are independent 
conditional on Ex, which is implied by the causal graph in 
figure 1. 
3For the proof of the identifiability of s(X), up to a 
constant, see Newey et a! (1999). 
2 
PRIOR WORK 
There has been intensive study of the use of instru­
ments in the econometric literature. Much work has 
focused on the study of the efficiency of an instrument 
(Nelson et al 1990, Shea 1997, and Zivot et al 1998). 
There are studies of whether a variable Z1 is an in­
strument for X and Y, provided we already have an 
instrument Z2 for X and Y (Wu 1973, Newey 1985, 
and Magdalinos 1994), but how to find the first in­
strument is still an open problem. 
There is no test 
available to find out whether a continuous variable is 
an instrument, without knowing that some other vari­
able is an instrument. 4 
In practice, people usually resort to domain knowledge 
to determine whether a variable is an instrument. As 
some studies show, moreover, it is often very difficult 
to find instruments, and a wrong choice may signifi­
cantly affect the final result (Bartels 1991, Heckman 
1995, and Bound et al 1995). Therefore, even in the 
case where we do have some domain knowledge to help 
us identify instruments, some kind of testing procedure 
is still useful in that it can serve as a double check. It 
is the goal of this paper to find out whether, under 
certain reasonable conditions, we can test whether a 
variable is an instrument. 
3 
APPROACH 
Within the framework of linear models, the fact that a 
variable is an instrument imposes no constraint on the 
joint marginal distribution of the observed variables. 
Consider the causal structure illustrated in figure 1, 
where only Z, X, and Y are observable. Assume for 
now that all the functional relations are linear. 
In 
particular, we assume that: 
X 
= 
fZ+cx 
Y 
= 
sX +t:y 
where f and s are non-zero constants. 
(4) 
(5) 
Now we construct another model based on the causal 
structure illustrated in figure 2. 
Let g' 
= 
c =/:- 0, 
g' 
g' 
81 = s- 7' and ey = Ey+yt:x. Let Z' = z, X1 =X, 
4Pearl (1995) shows that, for discrete data, Z being an 
instrument for X and Y imposes some constraint, which is 
called by him as instrumental inequality, on the joint dis­
tribution of Z, X, andY. This inequality is not sufficient 
for Z to be an instrument, and, as pointed in this paper, it 
cannot be extended to the continuous models. This paper 
does not give an instrument testing procedure for discrete 
data. 

UAI2001 
CHU ET AL. 
85 
and Y1 
= gf Z' + s1 X1 + fę. Clearly Y1 
= Y, hence 
(Z,X,Y) has the same distribution 
as (Z1,X1,Y1). 
However, we notice that in the first case, Z is an in­
strument for X and Y, while in the second case, Z1 is 
not an instrument, but a common cause of X' and Y1• 
Actually, we can set g' to be any value, and adjust s1 
and EĘ accordingly so that X' = X and Y1 = Y. This 
means that, a joint distribution implied by a model 
where Z is an instrument could also be implied by 
uncountably many other models where Z is not an in­
strument. Based on the joint distribution, we cannot 
tell whether Z is an instrument. 
The above analysis suggests two possible approaches 
for instrument testing. First, we may extend the space 
of linear structural models to a larger space. The idea 
is that the space of linear structural models already im­
poses strong constraints on each variable so that being 
an instrument does not impose any extra constraints. 
However, in a larger space, it is possible that being 
an instrument does imply some conditions not neces­
sarily satisfied by all models in that space. Another 
approach is to get more candidates for instrumental 
variables, and see whether the instrument assumption 
imposes some constraint on the joint distribution of 
these candidate variables. 
In this section we shall try a combination of both ap­
proaches. That is, we shall propose a two-stage proce­
dure. Suppose we are given a set of candidate instru­
ment variables. In the first stage of the test, we shall 
exclude some, but not necessarily all, non-instruments. 
In the second stage of the test, we shall determine 
whether all the remaining ones are instruments, pro­
vided we still have at least two candidates left. 
3.1 
SEMI-INSTRUMENTAL VARIABLES 
FOR THE ADDITIVE 
NONPARAMETRIC MODELS 
Here by an additive nonparametric model we mean 
that, for each endogenous variable, its expectation 
given its parents is a linear combination of univari­
ate functions of its parents, plus some error term with 
unknown distribution. We further assume that all ex­
ogenous variables are independent, and that they are 
independent of all the error terms. We do allow de­
pendence between the error terms of X and Y. Later 
in this paper we shall use additive model and additive 
nonparametric model interchangeably. 
Figure 1 and figure 2 give two very simple additive 
models. We can take them as two alternative hypothe­
ses about the underlying model that generates a sam­
ple with observable variables Z, X, and Y. The prob­
lem of testing whether Z is an instrument for X and 
Y is equivalent to the problem of determining which 
figure represents the correct model. 
Note that a linear model is a special case of the ad­
ditive model. Thus, given that we cannot determine 
whether a random variable is an instrument in a linear 
model, we could not, in general, determine whether it 
is an instrument in an additive model. Therefore, we 
should look for some other conditions, preferably a lit­
tle bit weaker than those required by an instrument, so 
that a random variable that satisfies these conditions 
can be identified in an additive model. 
One such candidate set of conditions is what we call 
the semi-instrumental conditions. A random variable 
Z is a semi-instrument for X and Y if the following 
conditions are satisfied: 
1. The joint distribution of Z, X, andY can be rep­
resented by an additive model M consisting only 
of Z, X, and Y as the observed variables; 
2. Z is an exogenous variable in M; 
3. Z is the cause of X, and X is a cause of Y in M; 
4. If Z is also a cause of Y, then the direct effect of 
Z on Y is a linear function of the direct effect of 
Z on X. 
Note that if a random variable Z is a semi-instrument 
for X and Y, then the direct effect of Z on Y, say, 
g(Z), is a linear function of the direct effect of Z on 
X, say, f(Z). That is, there is a pair of real numbers 
(a, b) such that g(Z) = af(Z) +b. We shall call a the 
linear coefficient of the semi-instrument Z. 
It is easy to see that the semi-instrumental assump­
tion is weaker than the instrumental assumption: All 
instruments are semi-instruments (with a linear coeffi­
cient 0), but not all semi-instruments are instruments. 
Moreover, in general, in a linear model, an exogenous 
Z that is a common cause of X and Y, which could not 
be an instrument, is a semi-instrument for X andY, 
because both its effect on X, i.e., f, and its effect on 
Y, i.e., g, are linear functions. Therefore, by extend­
ing the space of linear models to the space of additive 
models, we find that the instrument assumption does 
impose some constraints on the possible kinds of ef­
fects of Z on Y: Only models where the effect of Z 
on Y is a linear function of the effect of Z on X are 
compatible with the distribution implied by a model 
where Z is an instrument. 
To test whether a random variable Z is a semi­
instrument for X and Y, theoretically we should check 
whether all the four conditions are satisfied. 
How­
ever, it turns out that not all these four conditions are 
testable. 
For example, the second condition, i.e., Z 

86 
CHU ET AL. 
UAI2001 
is an exogenous variable, cannot be tested if we only 
have the joint distribution of X, Y, and Z. From the 
joint distribution only, there is no way to tell whether 
Z and the error term associated with X, say, t:x, are 
dependent. 
On the other hand, we do have many cases where it is 
reasonable to assume that the first three conditions are 
satisfied. For example, it is typical that when testing 
whether Z is an instrument for X and Y, we are deal­
ing with an additive model described by conditions 1 
to 4, and our question is whether Z is also a direct 
cause ofY. 
Assuming that the first three conditions are satisfied, 
under certain smoothness conditions, to test whether 
the fourth condition is also satisfied is equivalent to 
testing whether E[YjX, t:x] is a linear combination of 
a univariate function of X and a univariate function 
of t:x: 
Theorem 1 Consider the additive model given by fig­
ure 2. Suppose that (X, t:x) has a joint density, and 
that all the functions, i.e., J, g, s, and h, are differen­
tiable. 5 Then E[YIX, t:x] is a linear combination of 
a univariate function of X and a univariate function 
oft:x, and Var(YjZ,t:x) = Var(YIE[XIZ],t:x), if and 
only if g(Z) = af(Z) + b for some pair of real numbers 
(a, b). 
For the proof, see the appendix. 
The above theorem suggests an algorithm, which we 
will call the semi-instrument testing algorithm, to test 
whether Z is a semi-instrument for a sample S gener­
ated from an additive model given by figure 2. This 
test has two steps, the first step is the additivity test 
for the null hypothesis thatE[YjX, t:x] is a linear com­
bination of a univariate function of X and a univariate 
function of t:x: 
1. Regress X on Z to estimate t:x =XU E[XjZ] 
2. Regress Yon X and Z with a surface smoother, 
and score the fit of this model with some score 
function that penalizes model complexity. 
3. Regress Y on X and t:x with an additive 
smoother, and score the fit of this model with 
some score function that penalizes model com­
plexity. 
sThese two conditions are much stronger than what we 
need. Actually, we only need to assume the boundary of 
the support of the (X, t:x) has no positive probability, (see 
proof of Theorem 2.3 in Newey et a! (1999)), and that all 
the functions are absolutely continuous. We choose these 
two conditions because they are more intuitive. 
r 
Ey 
1 
s 
---•Y 
Figure 3: Two Common Causes 
4. If the additive model has a better score, accept 
the null hypothesis. Otherwise, reject it. 
The second step is the measurability test for the null 
hypothesis that Var(YjZ, t:x) = Var(YIE[XIZJ, t:x ): 
1. Regress X on Z to estimate E[XjZ] and t:x, 
2. Regress Y on Z and t:x with a surface smoother, 
and let RA be the sum of the residuals. 
3. Regress Y on E(XIZJ and t:x with a surface 
smoother, and let RN be the sum of the resid­
uals. 
4. If the regression of Y on Z and fX has a smaller 
sum of residuals, i.e., RA < RN, reject the null 
hypothesis. Otherwise, accept it. 6 
3.2 
TWO SEMI-INSTRUMENTS 
If the test for whether a random variable, say, zl' is a 
semi-instrument for X and Y gives a negative result, 
there is not much left to do with Z1. However, if the 
test says that zl is a semi-instrument, we will face 
another problem: Is Z1 an instrument? 
We have pointed out that this question cannot be an­
swered if we only have the joint distribution of Z1, X, 
and Y. However, from the Bayesian point of view, with 
some further assumption, if there is a second semi­
instrument, say, z2' we might be able to determine 
6Here we might also want to do a bootstrap estimation 
of the distribution of RN- RA. If we adopt this approach, 
we could generate bootstrap samples by adding permuta­
tions of the residuals obtained by regressing Y on E[XID] 
and ex to the fitted values of Y obtained from the same 
regression. 

UAI2001 
CHU ET AL. 
87 
whether Z1 and Z2 are both instruments. (If not both 
of them are instrument, we would not be able to tell 
whether both are non-instrumental, or only one is non­
instrumental.) The following theorem gives the condi­
tion when two semi-instruments are both instruments 
almost surely. 
Theorem 2 Let Z1 and Z2 be two independent ran­
dom variables that are both semi-instruments for X 
and Y. Let a1 and a2 be the linear coefficients of Z1 
and Z2 respectively. Suppose a1 and az are indepen­
dent, and each has a distribution function that has one 
and only one point of discontinuity, 0. 7 If Z1 and Z2 
have the same linear coefficients, then with probability 
1, Z1 and Z2 are both instruments. 
For the proof, see the appendix. 
Assume that the sample S was generated from the 
causal structure illustrated in figure 3, and that both 
Z1 and Z2 are semi-instruments for X andY. We can 
use the following algorithm, called the double instru­
ments testing algorithm, to test whether Z1 and Z2 
have the same linear coefficient: 8 
1. Create a new variable Z = ft (Z1) + h(Z2), where 
ft(Zt) == E[XIZ1], !2(Z2) = E[XIZ2]. 
2. Test whether Z is a semi-instrument. 
This algorithm is based on the following observation: 
Assume that g1 and gz are differentiable, and that Z1 
and Z2 have a joint density. Then g1(ZI) + 92(Z2) = 
a(ft(Z1) + h(Z2)) + b for some (a,b) iff g1(Z1) = 
aft(Z1) + b1 and g2(Z2) = af2(Z2) + b2 for some 
b1 + b2 =b. 9 
4 
SIMULATION 
We have done some simulation studies to estimate the 
performance of the two algorithms for semi-instrument 
7Note that here by imposing a distribution on a1 and 
a2, which are actually parameters of our models, we have 
adopted a Bayesian perspective. Also, the conditions for 
the distribution are stronger than required. What we really 
need is to ensure that the P(at == a2) = P(at = a2 = 0) > 
0. 
That is, we want to assume that it is possible that 
a1 = a2, and if a1 = a2, it is almost sure that a1 
= a2 = 0, 
which means that both Zt and Z2 are instruments. 
8Note that from the classical point of view, this algo­
rithm can be used to reject the null hypothesis that Zt and 
Z2 are both instruments in the cases where Zt and Z2 have 
different linear coefficients. However, to make it a testing 
algorithm for double instruments, a certain Bayesian as­
sumption about the prior distributions of the linear coeffi­
cients of Zt and Z2, like the one proposed in Theorem 2, 
is required. 
9The proof of this observation is similar to that of The­
orem 1. 
testing and double instrument testing. It turns out 
that, in order for the semi-instrument testing to 
work, we need to find a better additive regression 
method that can handle dependent predictors, which 
seems currently not available. However, the double­
instruments testing algorithm does work for a subset 
of additive models: the models where the influence of 
X on Y is linear. This subset includes a very impor­
tant class of models: the linear models. 10 
4.1 
SEMI-INSTRUMENT TESTING 
The semi-instrument testing algorithm requires a sur­
face smoother and an additive smoother. We use the 
Splus functions loess as the surface smoother, and 
gam as the additive smoother. The gam function im­
plements the back-fitting algorithm proposed in Hastie 
et al (1990). The loess function is an implementation 
of the local polynomial regression. We use BIC score 
function to score the fitted models returned by gam 
and loess respectively. 
We generate 6 samples from the following 2 models: 
X =  Z2 +t:x 
Y; = X2 + ciZ3 + Ey 
where E[t:ylt:x] = :i-, c1 =o: 0, and c2 = 1. 
These two models share the same Z, t:x, X, and fy, 
differ in the effect of Z on Y, and hence differ in Y. 
In the first model, Z is an instrument, hence a semi­
instrument. In the second model, Z is not a semi­
instrument. 11 For each model, we generated 3 sam­
ples with sizes 200, 1000, and 5000 respectively. 
Table 1: gam and loess models comparison 
size 
model 
gam BIC 
loess BIC 
200 
1 
486.8 
239.4 
1000 
1 
2530.3 
1041.8 
5000 
1 
12438.3 
5053.4 
200 
2 
350.9 
238.8 
1000 
2 
1404.6 
1041.8 
5000 
2 
6670.7 
5053.4 
From the above data, we can see that the gam model is 
10The second algorithm works for the models where the 
inftuence of X on Y is linear because in this case we can 
modify the algorithm so that we do not need to apply ad­
ditive regression method to models with dependent predic­
tors. For a detailed discussion, see section 4.2. 
· 
11The distribution of these variables are: Z is uniform 
between 0 and 5. There is also a latent variable T that is 
uniform between 0 and 2. EX is the sum ofT and a normal 
noise with standard deviation 0.5, Ey is the sum of T2 and 
a normal noise with standard deviation 0.5. 

88 
CHU ET AL. 
UAI2001 
always much worse than the loess model, no matter 
whether Z is a semi-instrument or not. This implies 
that no matter whether the null hypothesis is true, 
i.e., Z is a semi-instrument, the test procedure will 
always reject it! 
The most plausible explanation of 
this phenomenon is that because of the dependence 
between tx and X, the performance of gam is signif­
icantly worse than that of loess. It seems that the 
back-fitting algorithm often gets trapped in a plateau, 
and in some cases fails to converge. 
4.2 
DOUBLE INSTRUMENTS TESTING 
Despite the lack of good additive regression method, 
with some further conditions, we could still make the 
double instruments testing algorithm work. Consider 
the rnodel given by figure 3. If besides assuming Zr 
and Z2 are semi-instruments, we further assume that 
s(X) = eX + d, i.e., the direct effect of X on Y is 
a linear function in X, then we will be able to test 
whether Z1 and Z2 have the same linear coefficients. 
Let 92(Zr) = atfr(Zr) + br, g2(Z2) = a2h(Z2) + b2, 
and do = br + b2 + d we have: 
Y =eX+ d + ty + 9r(Zl) + 92(Z2) 
= (c + at)ft (ZI) + (c + a2}h(Z2) + ctx + ty + do. 
That is, Y is additive in Z1, Z2, where Z1, Z2 are 
independent of each other, and jointly independent of 
r:x an r:y. 
If Z1 and Z2 have the same linear coefficient, i.e., ar 
= 
a2, 12 we further have: 
Y = (c + ai)[ft(Zr) + h(Z2)] + ctx + ty +do. 
Let Z = !t(Zt) + h(Z2), it is easy to see that: 
Var(YIZr, Z2) = Var(etx + ty) 
® Var(ctx + ty) + Var(ar!t(Zt) + a2!2(Z2)jZ) 
= Var(YjZ) 
with the equality holds only when a1 = a2. 
The following algorithm, which is called the linear 
double instruments testing algorithm, compares the 
mean square error of regressing Y on Z1 and Z2, 
with the mean square error of regressing Y on Z = 
E[XIZt, Z2]. It can be used to test whether the two 
semi-instruments Z1 and Z2 have the same linear coef­
ficients, assuming the direct effect of X on Y is linear 
in X: 
1. Use additive regression to regress X on Zt and Z2 
12Note that by Theorem 2, under certain distribution 
assumptions, a1 
= a2 implies that a1 
= a2 = 0 w.p.l., i.e., 
both zl and z2 are instruments. 
to get E[XJZr, Z2]. 
2. Let Z = E[XJZr, Z2]. Regress Yon Z using linear 
regression, and compute the BIC score BIC1. 
3. Regress Y on Z1 and Z2 using additive nonpara­
metric regression, and compute the BIC score 
BICa. 
4. Z1 and Z2 have the same linear coefficients if 
BIC1 < BICa. 
To test the above algorithm, we generated 12 samples 
from the following 3 models: 
X= z; + Zi +Ex 
Yi = X + CiZi + Ey 
where E[tyJtx] = t, and Ct = 0, e2 = 0.2, and C3 = 1. 
These three models share the same Zr, Z2, tx, X, and 
€y' but differ in the linear coefficients of z 1 and z2' 
and hence differ in Y. In the first model, Z1 and Z2 
have the same linear coefficients. In the second model, 
there is a small difference in the linear coefficients. In 
the third model, the difference is significant. 
13 
For 
each model, we generated 4 samples with sizes 50, 100, 
200, and 500 respectively. 
Table 2: Values of BICa -BlOt for the 12 samples 
sample size 
Ct = 0 
C2 = 0.2 
C3 = 1 
50 
11.35 
8.79 
-95.57 
100 
14.23 
1.60 
-333.81 
200 
13.07 
-2.53 
-419.26 
500 
19.10 
-35.56 
-1233.05 
The entries of the above table are the values of BIC1-
BIG a for each sample. A positive value means that the 
null hypothesis is accepted for that sample. From the 
table, we can see that to detect the significant differ­
ence between the linear coefficients of Zt and Z2, a 
sample of size 50 is sufficient. But when the difference 
is small, we need a sample size of 200. 
5 
DISCUSSION AND FUTURE 
WORK 
5.1 
THREE ASSUMPTIONS 
The semi-instrument testing algorithm assumes that 
the first three semi-instrumental conditions are sat-
13The distribution of these variables are: Z1 and Z2 both 
are uniform between 0 and 4. There is also a latent variable 
T that is uniform between 0 and 2. €X is the sum ofT and 
a normal noise with standard deviation 0.5, €y is the sum 
of T2 and a normal noise with standard deviation 0.5. 

-; 
UAI 2001 
CHU ET AL. 
89 
isfied. 
While in general we cannot test whether 
a random variable satisfies all the first three semi­
instrumental conditions, it is interesting to know 
whether we can test for one of them, especially the 
second semi-instrumental condition: Z is an exogenous 
variable. The answer is: in principle, this assumption 
can be tested by the method of instrument, if we have 
an instrument for Z and X. However, it is easy to see 
that this will lead to an infinite regression. 
Another assumption key to the double instruments 
testing algorithm is: The prior probability that Z is 
instrumental is positive, while the prior probability is 
0 for a semi-instrument to have linear coefficient a if 
a -::/:- 0. This raises a question: Why does the value 
0 have a special status in the range of possible values 
of the linear coefficients of a semi-instrument? Here 
we want to give an argument for the plausibility of 
this assumption: If we take the set of possible causal 
structures among X, Y, Z1 and Z2 as a discrete sample 
space, it is reasonable to assign a positive prior prob­
ability to one element in the space, i.e., the structure 
where both Z1 and Z2 are instruments, which means 
that both Z1 and Z2 have linear coefficients 0. On the 
other hand, if a semi-instrument is not an instrument, 
there is no specific reason to believe that its linear co­
efficient should take any specific non-zero value. 
We make a third assumption in an effort to modify the 
double instruments testing algorithm so that it has suf­
ficient power: We assume that the direct effect of X 
on Y is a linear function of X. We notice that this is a 
rather strong assumption for an additive model. More­
over, because currently we do not have a suitable addi­
tive regression method for the semi-instrument testing, 
we also have to assume, without any testing, that Z1 
and Zz are semi-instruments. Nevertheless, the mod­
ified double instruments testing algorithm is general 
enough to provide a double instruments test for linear 
models. 
5.2 
FUTURE WORK 
To make the semi-instrument testing powerful, we will 
continue to look for some additive regression method 
that is suitable for the case where the predictors are 
dependent. 14 Alternatively, we may also try to find 
some new ways of testing semi-instruments where the 
problem of the dependence of the predictors will not 
significantly affect the test results. 
14Tom Minka suggested that by letting the back-fitting 
algorithm run for a sufficient number of iterations, it will 
eventually return a good fitted model, or we can use least 
squares to the the best fitted model directly (without iter­
ations). We have yet to test whether this will work.
