Science Question Answering using Instructional Materials
Mrinmaya Sachan
Avinava Dubey
Eric P. Xing
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
We provide a solution for elementary sci-
ence tests using instructional materials.
We posit that there is a hidden structure
that explains the correctness of an answer
given the question and instructional ma-
terials and present a uniﬁed max-margin
framework that learns to ﬁnd these hid-
den structures (given a corpus of question-
answer pairs and instructional materials),
and uses what it learns to answer novel
elementary science questions. Our eval-
uation shows that our framework outper-
forms several strong baselines.
1
Introduction
We propose an approach for answering multiple-
choice elementary science tests (Clark, 2015) us-
ing the science curriculum of the student and other
domain speciﬁc knowledge resources.
Our ap-
proach learns latent answer-entailing structures
that align question-answers with appropriate snip-
pets in the curriculum.
The student curriculum
usually comprises of a set of textbooks. Each text-
book, in-turn comprises of a set of chapters, each
chapter is further divided into sections – each dis-
cussing a particular science concept. Hence, the
answer-entailing structure consists of selecting a
particular textbook from the curriculum, picking
a chapter in the textbook, picking a section in
the chapter, picking a few sentences in the sec-
tion and then aligning words/multi-word expres-
sions (mwe’s) in the hypothesis (formed by com-
bining the question and an answer candidate) to a
words/mwe’s in the picked sentences. The answer-
entailing structures are further reﬁned using ex-
ternal domain-speciﬁc knowledge resources such
as science dictionaries, study guides and semi-
structured tables (see Figure 1). These domain-
speciﬁc knowledge resources can be very useful
forms of knowledge representation as shown in
previous works (Clark et al., 2016).
Alignment is a common technique in many NLP
applications such as MT (Blunsom and Cohn,
2006), RTE (Sammons et al., 2009; MacCartney
et al., 2008; Yao et al., 2013; Sultan et al., 2014),
QA (Berant et al., 2013; Yih et al., 2013; Yao
and Van Durme, 2014; Sachan et al., 2015), etc.
Yet, there are three key differences between our
approach and alignment based approaches for QA
in the literature: (i) We incorporate the curriculum
hierarchy (i.e. the book, chapter, section bifurca-
tion) into the latent structure. This helps us jointly
learn the retrieval and answer selection modules of
a QA system. Retrieval and answer selection are
usually designed as isolated or loosely connected
components in QA systems (Ferrucci, 2012) lead-
ing to loss in performance – our approach mit-
igates this shortcoming.
(ii) Modern textbooks
typically provide a set of review questions after
each section to help students understand the ma-
terial better. We make use of these review prob-
lems to further improve our model.
These re-
view problems have additional value as part of
the latent structure is known for these questions.
(ii) We utilize domain-speciﬁc knowledge sources
such as study guides, science dictionaries or semi-
structured knowledge tables within our model.
The joint model is trained in max-margin fash-
ion using a latent structural SVM (LSSVM) where
the answer-entailing structures are latent. We train
and evaluate our models on a set of 8th grade
science problems, science textbooks and multiple
domain-speciﬁc knowledge resources. We achieve
superior performance vs. a number of baselines.
2
Method
Science QA as Textual Entailment: First, we
arXiv:1602.04375v2  [cs.CL]  5 Apr 2016

!
!!
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
                      greenhouse effect 
 
           CO2 
   CH4  
                   O3 
 
 
                                                                                                   
 
 
 
Text: … Natural greenhouse gases include carbon dioxide, methane, water vapor, and ozone ... CFCs 
and some other man-made compounds are also greenhouse gases … 
 
 
 
Hypothesis: CO2, CH4, O3 and CFC gases cause the greenhouse effect 
Q: Which of the following gases cause the greenhouse effect?  !  A: CO2, CH4, O3 and CFC 
Grade&8&Science&
Curriculum&
Textbook:&Life&
Science&
Chapter:&
Animals&
Section:&
Aligators&and&
Crocodile&
...&
...&
Textbook:&Earth&
Science&
Chapter:&
Atmosphere,&
Weather,&and&
Climate&
Composition&
of&the&
atmosphere&
...&
...&
...&
...&
coreference&
elaboration!!!
Curriculum 
Hierarchy 
Alignment 
cause!
Figure 1:
An example answer-entailing struc-
ture. The answer-entailing structure consists of se-
lecting a particular textbook from the curriculum,
picking a chapter in the textbook, picking a sec-
tion in the chapter, picking sentences in the section
and then aligning words/mwe’s in the hypothesis
(formed by combining the question and an answer
candidate) to words/mwe’s in the picked sentences
or some related “knowledge” appropriately cho-
sen from additional knowledge stores. In this case,
the relation (greenhouse gases, cause, greenhouse
effect) and the equivalences (e.g.
carbon diox-
ide = CO2) – shown in violet – are hypothesized
using external knowledge resources. The dashed
red lines show the word/mwe alignments from the
hypothesis to the sentences (some word/mwe are
not aligned, in which case the alignments are not
shown), the solid black lines show coreference
links in the text and the RST relation (elaboration)
between the two sentences. The picked sentences
do not have to be contiguous sentences in the text.
All mwe’s are shown in green.
consider the case when review questions are not
used.
For each question qi
∈Q, let Ai
=
{ai1, . . . , aim} be the set of candidate answers to
the question 1. We cast the science QA problem as
a textual entailment problem by converting each
question-answer candidate pair (qi, ai,j) into a hy-
pothesis statement hij (see Figure 1)2. For each
question qi, the science QA task thereby reduces to
picking the hypothesis ˆhi that has the highest like-
lihood of being entailed by the curriculum among
the set of hypotheses hi = {hi1, . . . , him} gener-
ated for that question. Let h∗
i ∈hi be the correct
hypothesis corresponding to the correct answer.
Latent Answer-Entailing Structures help the
model in providing evidence for the correct hy-
pothesis. As described before, the structure de-
pends on: (a) snippet from the curriculum hierar-
chy chosen to be aligned to the hypothesis, (b) ex-
ternal knowledge relevant for this entailment, and
(c) the word/mwe alignment. The snippet from
the curriculum to be aligned to the hypothesis is
determined by walking down the curriculum hier-
archy and then picking a set of sentences from the
section chosen. Then, a subset of relevant exter-
nal knowledge in the form of triples and equiva-
lences (called knowledge bits) is selected from our
1Candidate answers may be pre-deﬁned, as in multiple-
choice QA, or may be undeﬁned but easy to extract with a
degree of conﬁdence (e.g., by using a pre-existing system)
2We use a set of question matching/rewriting rules to
achieve this transformation. The rules match each question
into one of a large set of pre-deﬁned templates and applies a
unique transformation to the question & answer candidate to
achieve the hypothesis. Code provided in the supplementary.
reservoir of external knowledge (science dictio-
naries, cheat sheets, semi-structured tables, etc).
Finally, words/mwe’s in the hypothesis are aligned
to words/mwe’s in the snippet or knowledge bits.
Learning these alignment edges helps the model
determine which semantic constituents should be
compared to each other.
These alignments are
also used to generate more effective features. The
choice of snippets, choice of the relevant external
knowledge and the alignments in conjunction form
the latent answer-entailing structure. Let zij rep-
resent the latent structure for the question-answer
candidate pair (qi, ai,j).
Max-Margin Approach: We treat science QA as
a structured prediction problem of ranking the hy-
pothesis set hi such that the correct hypothesis is
at the top of this ranking. We learn a scoring func-
tion Sw(h, z) with parameter w such that the score
of the correct hypothesis h∗
i and the corresponding
best latent structure z∗
i is higher than the score of
the other hypotheses and their corresponding best
latent structures. In fact, in a max-margin fashion,
we want that Sw(h∗
i , z∗
i ) > S(hij, zij) + 1 −ξi
for all hj ∈h \ h∗for some slack ξi. Writing the
relaxed max margin formulation:
min
||w||
1
2||w||2
2 + C
X
i
max
zij,hij∈hi\h∗
i
Sw(hij, zij) + ∆(h∗
i , hij)
−C
X
i
Sw(h∗
i , z∗
i )
(1)
We use 0-1 cost, i.e. ∆(h∗
i , hij) = 1(h∗
i ̸= hij) If
the scoring function is convex then this objective
is in concave-convex form and hence can be

solved
by
the
concave-convex
programming
procedure
(CCCP)
(Yuille
and
Rangarajan,
2003).
We assume the scoring function to be
linear:Sw(h, z) = wT ψ(h, z). Here, ψ(h, z) is a
feature map discussed later. The CCCP algorithm
essentially alternates between solving for z∗
i ,
zij ∀j s.t. hij ∈hi \ h∗
i and w to achieve a local
minima. In the absence of information regarding
the latent structure z we pick the structure that
gives the best score for a given hypothesis i.e.
arg maxz Sw(h, z).
The complete procedure is
given in the supplementary.
Inference and knowledge selection:
We use
beam search with a ﬁxed beam size (5) for
inference. We infer the textbook, chapter, section,
snippet and alignments one by one in this order. In
each step, we only expand the ﬁve most promising
(given by the current score) substructure candi-
dates so far.
During inference, we select top 5
knowledge bits (triples, equivalences, etc.) from
the knowledge resources that could be relevant for
this question-answer. This is done heuristically by
picking knowledge bits that explain parts of the
hypothesis not explained by the chosen snippets.
Incorporating
partially
known
structures:
Now, we describe how review questions can
be incorporated.
As described earlier, modern
textbooks often provide review problems at the
end of each section. These review problems have
value as part of the answer-entailing structure
(textbook, chapter and section) is known for these
problems.
In this case, we use the formulation
(equation 1) except that the max over z for the
review questions is only taken over the unknown
part of the latent structure.
Multi-task Learning: Question analysis is a key
component of QA systems. Incoming questions
are often of different types (counting, negation,
entity queries, descriptive questions, etc.).
Dif-
ferent types of questions usually require different
processing strategies. Hence, we also extend of
our LSSVM model to a multi-task setting where
each question qi now also has a pre-deﬁned as-
sociated type ti and each question-type is treated
as a separate task.
Yet, parameters are shared
across tasks,which allows the model to exploit the
commonality among tasks when required. We use
the MTLSSVM formulation from Evgeniou and
Pontil (2004) which was also used in a reading
comprehension setting by Sachan et al. (2015).
In a nutshell, the approach redeﬁnes the LSSVM
feature map and shows that the MTLSSVM
objective takes the same form as equation 1 with
a kernel corresponding to the feature map. Hence,
one can simply redeﬁne the feature map and reuse
LSSVM algorithm to solve the MTLSSVM.
Features: Our feature vector ψ(h, z) decomposes
into ﬁve parts, where each part corresponds to
a part of the answer-entailing structure. For the
ﬁrst part, we index all the textbooks and score the
top retrieved textbook by querying the hypothesis
statement.
We use tf-idf and BM25 scorers re-
sulting in two features. Then, we ﬁnd the jaccard
similarity of bigrams and trigrams in the hypothe-
sis and the textbook to get two more features for
the ﬁrst part. Similarly, for the second part we
index all the textbook chapters and compute the
tf-idf, BM25 and bigram, trigram features. For the
third part we index all the sections instead. The
fourth part has features based on the text snippet
part of the answer-entailing structure.
Here
we do a deeper linguistic analysis and include
features for matching local neighborhoods in the
snippet and the hypothesis: features for matching
bigrams, trigrams, dependencies, semantic roles,
predicate-argument structure as well as the global
syntactic structure:
a tree kernel for matching
dependency parse trees of entire sentences (Sri-
vastava and Hovy, 2013). If a text snippet contains
the answer to the question, it should intuitively be
similar to the question as well as to the answer.
Hence, we add features that are the element-wise
product of features for the text-question match
and text-answer match.
Finally, we also have
features corresponding to the RST (Mann and
Thompson, 1988) and coreference links to enable
inference across sentences.
RST tells us that
sentences with discourse relations are related to
each other and can help us answer certain kinds
of questions (Jansen et al., 2014). For example,
the “cause” relation between sentences in the text
can often give cues that can help us answer “why”
or “how” questions.
Hence, we add additional
features - conjunction of the rhetorical structure
label from a RST parser and the question word
- to our feature vector. Similarly, the entity and
event co-reference relations allow us to reason
about repeating entities or events.
Hence, we
replace an entity/event mention with their ﬁrst
mentions if that results into a greater score. For
the alignment part, we induce features based
on word/mwe level similarity of aligned words:

(a) Surface-form match (Edit-distance), and (b)
Semantic word match (cosine similarity using
SENNA word vectors (Collobert et al., 2011) and
“Antonymy” ‘Class-Inclusion’ or ‘Is-A’ relations
using Wordnet). Distributional vectors for mwe’s
are obtained by adding the vector representations
of comprising words (Mitchell and Lapata, 2008).
To account for the hypothesized knowledge bits,
whenever we have the case that a word/mwe in
the hypothesis can be aligned to a word/mwe in a
hypothesized knowledge bit to produce a greater
score, then we keep the features for the alignment
with the knowledge bit instead.
Negation Negation is a concern for our approach
as facts usually align well with their negated
versions.
To overcome this, we use a simple
heuristic. During training, if we detect negation
using a set of simple rules that test for the presence
of negation words (“not”, “n’t”, etc.), we ﬂip the
partial order adding constraints that require that
the correct hypothesis to be ranked below all the
incorrect ones.
During test phase if we detect
negation, we predict the answer corresponding to
the hypothesis with the lowest score.
3
Experiments
Dataset: We used a set of 8th grade science ques-
tions released as the training set in the Allen AI
Science Challenge3 for training and evaluating
our model. The dataset comprises of 2500 ques-
tions. Each question has 4 answer candidates, of
which exactly one is correct. We used questions 1-
1500 for training, questions 1500-2000 for devel-
opment and questions 2000-2500 for testing. We
also used publicly available 8th grade science text-
books available through ck12.org.
The science
curriculum consists of seven textbooks on Physics,
Chemistry, Biology, Earth Science and Life Sci-
ence. Each textbook on an average has 18 chap-
ters, and each chapter in turn is divided into 12
sections on an average.
Also, as described be-
fore, each section, on an average, is followed by
3-4 multiple choice review questions (total 1369
review questions). We collected a number of do-
main speciﬁc science dictionaries, study guides,
ﬂash cards and semi-structured tables (Simple En-
glish Wiktionary and Aristo Tablestore) available
online and create triples and equivalences used as
external knowledge.
3https://www.kaggle.com/c/the-allen-ai-science-
challenge/
Question Category
Example
Questions without
context:
Which example describes a learned behavior in a dog?
Questions
with
context:
When athletes begin to exercise, their heart rates and res-
piration rates increase. At what level of organization does
the human body coordinate these functions?
Negation
Ques-
tions:
A teacher builds a model of a hydrogen atom. A red golf
ball is used for a proton, and a green golf ball is used for
an electron. Which is not accurate concerning the model?
Table 1: Example questions for Qtype classiﬁcation
Baselines: We compare our framework with ten
baselines.
The ﬁrst two baselines (Lucene and
PMI) are taken from Clark et al. (2016).
The
Lucene baseline scores each answer candidate ai
by searching for the combination of the ques-
tion q and answer candidate ai in a lucene-based
search engine and returns the highest scoring an-
swer candidate. The PMI baseline similarly scores
each answer candidate ai by computing the point-
wise mutual information to measure the strength
of the association between parts of the question-
answer candidate combine and parts of the CK12
curriculum.
The next three baselines, inspired
from Richardson et al. (2013), retrieve the top two
CK12 sections querying q+ai in Lucene and score
the answer candidates using these documents. The
SW and SW+D baselines match bag of words con-
structed from the question and the answer answer
candidate to the retrieved document.
The RTE
baseline uses textual entailment (Stern and Dagan,
2012) to score answer candidates as the likelihood
of being entailed by the retrieved document. Then
we also tried other approaches such as the RNN
approach described in Clark et al. (2016), Jacana
aligner (Yao et al., 2013) and two neural network
approaches, LSTM (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber,
1997) and QANTA (Iyyer et al., 2014) They form
our next four baselines. To test if our approach
indeed beneﬁts from jointly learning the retrieval
and the answer selection modules, our ﬁnal base-
line Lucene+LSSVM Alignment retrieves the top
section by querying q + ai in Lucene and then
learns the remaining answer-entailment structure
(alignment part of the answer-entailing structure
in Figure 1) using a LSSVM.
Task Classiﬁcation for Multitask Learning:
We explore two simple question classiﬁcation
schemes.
The ﬁrst classiﬁcation scheme classi-
ﬁes questions based on the question word (what,
why, etc.).
We call this Qword classiﬁcation.
The second scheme is based on the type of the
question asked and classiﬁes questions into three
coarser categories: (a) questions without context,

(b) questions with context and (c) negation ques-
tions. This classiﬁcation is based on the observa-
tion that many questions lay down some context
and then ask a science concept based on this con-
text. However, other questions are framed without
any context and directly ask for the science con-
cept itself. Then there is a smaller, yet, important
subset of questions that involve negation that also
needs to be handled separately. Table 1 gives ex-
amples of this classiﬁcation. We call this classiﬁ-
cation Qtype classiﬁcation4.
Results: We compare variants of our method5
where we consider our modiﬁcation for negation
or not and multi-task LSSVMs. We consider both
kinds of task classiﬁcation strategies and joint
training (JT). Finally, we compare our methods
against the baselines described above. We report
accuracy (proportion of questions correctly an-
swered) in our results. Figure 2 shows the results.
First, we can immediately observe that all the
LSSVM models have a better performance than
all the baselines. We also found an improvement
when we handle negation using the heuristic de-
scribed above6. MTLSSVMs showed a boost over
single task LSSVM. Qtype classiﬁcation scheme
was found to work better than Qword classiﬁca-
tion which simply classiﬁes questions based on the
question word. The multi-task learner could bene-
ﬁt even more if we can learn a better separation be-
tween the various strategies needed to answer sci-
ence questions. We found that joint training with
review questions helped improve accuracy as well.
Feature Ablation: As described before, our fea-
ture set comprises of ﬁve parts, where each part
corresponds to a part of the answer-entailing struc-
ture – textbook (z1), chapter (z2), section (z3),
snippets (z4), and alignment (z5). It is interesting
to know the relative importance of these parts in
our model. Hence, we perform feature ablation on
our best performing model - MTLSSVM(QWord,
JT) where we remove the ﬁve feature parts one
by one and measure the loss in accuracy. Figure
4We wrote a set of question matching rules (similar to the
rules used to convert question answer pairs to hypotheses) to
achieve this classiﬁcation
5We tune the SVM regularization parameter C on the de-
velopment set. We use Stanford CoreNLP, the HILDA parser
(Feng and Hirst, 2014), and jMWE (Kulkarni and Finlayson,
2011) for linguistic preprocessing
6We found that the accuracy over test questions tagged
by our heuristic as negation questions went up from 33.64
percent to 42.52 percent and the accuracy over test questions
not tagged as negation did not decrease signiﬁcantly
40.04	
  
31.6	
  
32.56	
  
37.84	
  
32.42	
  
31.86	
  
27.74	
  
29.32	
  
31.26	
  
41.38	
  
43.18	
  
44.82	
  
45.44	
  
46.09	
  
46.66	
  
46.86	
  
47.68	
  
47.84	
  
25	
  
30	
  
35	
  
40	
  
45	
  
50	
  
Accuracy	
  
Lucene	
  
PMI	
  
SW	
  
SW+D	
  
RTE	
  
Jacana	
  
RNNLM	
  
LSTM	
  
QANTA	
  
Lucene+LSSVM	
  Alignment	
  
LSSVM	
  
LSSVM(NegaJon)	
  
LSSVM(JT)	
  
LSSVM(JT,	
  NegaJon)	
  
MTLSSVM(Qword)	
  
MTLSSVM(Qtype)	
  
MTLSSVM(Qword,	
  JT)	
  
MTLSSVM(Qtype,	
  JT)	
  
Figure 2: Variations of our method vs several baselines on
the Science QA dataset. Differences between the baselines
and
LSSVMs, the improvement due to negation, the im-
provements due to multi-task learning and joint-learning are
signiﬁcant (p < 0.05) using the two-tailed paired T-test.
47.84	
  
47.08	
  
46.56	
  
42.72	
  
45.62	
  
39.7	
  
45.28	
  
35	
  
40	
  
45	
  
Unablated	
  
Remove	
  z1	
  
Remove	
  z2	
  
Remove	
  z3	
  
Remove	
  z4	
  
Remove	
  z5	
  
Remove	
  K	
  
Figure 3: Ablation on MTLSSVM(Qword, JT) model
3 shows that the choice of section and alignment
are important components of our model. Yet, all
components are important and removing any of
them will result in a loss of accuracy. Finally, in
order to understand the value of external knowl-
edge resources (K), we removed the component
that induces and aligns the hypothesis with knowl-
edge bits. This results in signiﬁcant loss in perfor-
mance, estabishing the efﬁcacy of adding in exter-
nal knowledge via our approach.
4
Conclusion
We addressed the problem of answering 8th grade
science questions using textbooks, domain spe-
ciﬁc dictionaries and semi-structured tables. We
posed the task as an extension to textual entail-
ment and proposed a solution that learns latent
structures that align question answer pairs with
appropriate snippets in the textbooks. Using do-
main speciﬁc dictionaries and semi-structured ta-
bles, we further reﬁned the structures. The task re-
quired handling a variety of question types so we
extended our technique to multi-task setting. Our
technique showed improvements over a number of
baselines. Finally, we also used a set of associated
review questions, which were used to gain further
improvements.
