Date of publication xxxx 00, 0000, date of current version xxxx 00, 0000.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/ACCESS.2017.DOI
Semantic and sentiment analysis of
selected Bhagavad Gita translations
using BERT-based language framework
ROHITASH CHANDRA *1,2, (Senior Member, IEEE), VENKATESH KULKARNI *3
1Transitional Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research Group, School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia
2UNSW Data Science Hub, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia
3Department of Mechanical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Assam, India

* Both authors contributed equally
ABSTRACT It is well known that translations of songs and poems not only break rhythm and rhyming
patterns, but can also result in loss of semantic information. The Bhagavad Gita is an ancient Hindu
philosophical text originally written in Sanskrit that features a conversation between Lord Krishna and
Arjuna prior to the Mahabharata war. The Bhagavad Gita is also one of the key sacred texts in Hinduism
and is known as the forefront of the Vedic corpus of Hinduism. In the last two centuries, there has been a lot
of interest in Hindu philosophy from western scholars; hence, the Bhagavad Gita has been translated in a
number of languages. However, there is not much work that validates the quality of the English translations.
Recent progress of language models powered by deep learning has enabled not only translations but a better
understanding of language and texts with semantic and sentiment analysis. Our work is motivated by the
recent progress of language models powered by deep learning methods. In this paper, we present a framework
that compares selected translations (from Sanskrit to English) of the Bhagavad Gita using semantic and
sentiment analyses. We use hand-labelled sentiment dataset for tuning state-of-art deep learning-based
language model known as bidirectional encoder representations from transformers (BERT). We provide
sentiment and semantic analysis for selected chapters and verses across translations. Our results show that
although the style and vocabulary in the respective translations vary widely, the sentiment analysis and
semantic similarity shows that the message conveyed are mostly similar.
INDEX TERMS Language models; deep learning; sentiment analysis; semantic analysis; BERT; comparative
religion
I. INTRODUCTION
Comparative religion is a ﬁeld that encompasses a system-
atic comparison of the doctrines and practices, philosophy,
theology, and spiritual viewpoints of the world’s religions [1]–
[3]. The area of philosophy of religion [4], [5] encompasses
the study of central themes and ideas in religions and the
associated cultural traditions that relate to philosophical topics
such as metaphysics, epistemology, and ethics. On the other
hand, religious philosophy [6] is an area that encompasses
philosophical topics but from the view of the religion of inter-
est which is particularly driven by believers, such as Hindu
philosophy, Christian theology, Jewish and Islamic philosophy.
However, at times, both groups of scholars can contribute
to the subject. Hindu philosophy [7]–[9] features central
themes of ethics [10], nature of consciousness [8], karma
(duty and action) [11], [12], and the quest for understanding
ultimate reality known as Brahman [9]. Hindu philosophy
is also referred to as the Indian philosophy [13] [14]. The
Upanishads are ancient texts of Hindu philosophy which have
been the foundations of six major theistic schools, where
vedanta [15] and yoga [16] have been the most prominent.
Hindu philosophy has an intersection between philosophy
of religion and religious philosophy which has been given a
diverse study and examination by western scholars apart from
Hindu philosophers [17] [14].
The Bhagavad Gita is considered as one of the main holy
texts of Hinduism which is part of the Mahabharata which
is one of the oldest and largest epics written in verse form
[18]–[20]. The Bhagavad Gita, which translates as the song of
God is also known as a text that summarizes and comprises
VOLUME 4, 2016
1
arXiv:2201.03115v2  [cs.CL]  15 Feb 2022

the core of Hindu philosophy [14]. In the Mahabharata war,
Arjuna is the lead archer with Lord Krishna as his charioteer
representing the Pandava army who are at war with the
Kaurava. Arjuna is facing some of his family members on the
other side of the war and becomes confused whether he should
go to war or renunciate and become a yogi. The Bhagavad
Gita provides a discussion duty and ethics as a set of questions
from Arjuna and answers by Lord Krishna. The philosophy
of karma, known as karma yoga is attributed to the Bhagavad
Gita [21]–[23]. The transmission of the Bhagavad Gita has
been through oral tradition for thousands of years, from the
event of the Mahabharata war in India, with recent estimates
around 5100 years ago [24], [25]; however, the exact dates
have been debated in the literature with some scholars dating
it to around 2500 - 3500 years ago [26], [27]. We need to
note that scholars believe that the Mahabharata was written
in ancient Sanskrit where as the Bhagavad Gita has been
written in modern Sanskrit; hence, some scholars argue that
Bhagavad Gita was later inserted into the epic Mahabharata
[20], [28]. The original text, which has been composed in
Sanskrit, has been ever since translated into various languages.
The Bhagavad Gita consists of 18 chapters which feature a
series of questions and answers between Lord Krishna and
Arjuna with a range of topics that includes the philosophy of
Karma. The Mahabharata war lasted for 18 days and hence
the organisation of the Gita is symbolic. The Bhagavad Gita is
written in a poetic style so that it can be sung and remembered
for generations given the absence of a writing system. Over the
last few centuries, there has been a lot of effort in translation of
the Bhagavad Gita. There has been a major focus on English
translation and commentary by philosophers and scholars
of comparative religion, particularly from India, Europe and
United States.
Religious linguistics refers to the study of language used
in the domain of religion and primarily aims at identifying
the structures and functions of religious language (lexicon,
syntax, phonology, morphology, etc). In principle, religious
subject matters could encompass a variety of agents, states
of affairs or properties, such as God, deities, angels, miracles,
redemption, grace, holiness, sinfulness [29]. Recent research
suggests that a register of religious language, such as prayer,
induces certain psychological effects in the brain [30] which
makes certain components of religious language a cognitive
register. Analysis of religious texts has been prominent, as
highlighted, and most translations of the Bhagavad Gita
and related texts come with interpretations and commentary
regarding philosophy and how the verses relate to issues at
present [31]. The Bhagavad Gita has been predominantly used
as a text and inspired interpretations from areas of self-help
and management, psychology [32], economics [33], politics
[34] and leadership [35]. However, these commentaries dwell
with the general message of the texts rather than semantic
or syntactic analysis. Stein [36] extracted 14 multi-word
expressions using local grammar and semantic classes from
Bhagavad Gita capturing some central themes in the text.
Bawa et al. [37] provided a review on machine translation
for English, Hindi and Sanskrit languages. Rajput et al. [38]
performed a statistical analysis of the Bhagavad Gita text
for its translations in four languages: English, French, Hindi
and Sanskrit. These works, have focused on linguistic and
statistical measures which opens the road for machine learning
and natural language processing for analysis of religious and
philosophical texts.
Natural language processing (NLP) is an area of artiﬁcial
intelligence that focuses on processing and modelling lan-
guage [39]–[41]. NLP is typically implemented with language
models where deep learning has been prominent for tasks such
as topic modelling, language translation, speech recognition,
semantic and sentiment analysis [40]. Sentiment analysis
provides an understanding of human emotions and affective
states [42]–[44] which has been prominent in understanding
customer behaviour [45], health and medicine [46], stock
market predictions [47], and modelling election outcomes
[48], [49]. Deep learning methods such as long-short term
memory (LSTM) network models have been prominently used
as language models due to their capability to model tempo-
ral sequences with long-term dependencies [50]. Attention
based mechanism in LSTM models have shown signiﬁcant
improvements [51], and further progress has been made using
Transformer models which incorporate attention into encoder-
decoder LSTM framework [52], [53]. The bidirectional
encoder representations from Transformer (BERT) [54] model
has become a prominent pre-trained language model with
knowledge from a large data corpus. BERT features more than
300 million model parameters for language modeling tasks
and has the potential to provide good semantic and sentiment
analysis. BERT employs masked language modeling (MLM)
for pre-training and has been one of the most successful pre-
trained models. In our earlier work, we used BERT-based
framework for sentiment analysis of COVID-19 related tweets
during the rise of novel cases in India [55]. We also used BERT
for modelling US 2020 presidential elections with sentiment
analysis from tweets to predict state-wise winners [49]. Thus,
BERT can be used for better understanding the difference
using sentiment analysis amongst translations in philosophical
texts such as the Bhagavad Gita.
The Upanishads are a set of Hindu philosophical and sacred
texts of which some are related to the Bhagavad Gita in terms
of topics and style. The Upanishads have been translated
more than 150 times from 1783 to 1994, where western
scholars make up a signiﬁcant portion of translators and
commentators [17]. This shows the impact and interest of
Hindu texts in the west; hence, analysing the style and quality
of the translations is essential. It is important to evaluate some
of the key translations with the others in terms of sentiments
and semantics. The Bhagavad Gita, has been written originally
in verse (as a song), and it is well known that translating such
literary works not only breaks rhyming patterns, but can also
change the meaning and message behind the verses [56].
This paper is motivated by the recent progress of language
models powered by deep learning models. We compare
selected translations of the Bhagavad Gita by focusing on
2
VOLUME 4, 2016

sentiment analysis and semantic similarity of the verses. We
compare selected translations with a focus on translations
directly from Sanskrit to English and one that uses an
intermediate language (Gujarati). We use novel sentence
embedding based on BERT which provides semantic analyses
by encoding and representing the verses using sentence
embedded vectors. In the case of sentiment analysis, the pre-
trained BERT model is further tuned using a hand labelled
Twitter-based training dataset that captures 10 sentiments. We
visualise selected Bhagavad Gita chapter-wise and verse-wise
sentiments across the selected translations.
The rest of the paper is organised as follows. In Section 2,
we provide further details about background and historical
development behind the composition of the Bhagavad Gita.
Section 3 presents the methodology with details regarding
data processing and model development. Section 4 presents
the results that feature data analysis and model prediction.
Section 5 provides a discussion and Section 6 concludes the
paper.
II. BACKGROUND
A. HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENTS
The information in Hindu texts was passed through oral
transmission for thousands of years before being written in
Sanskrit [57]–[59]. Although most of the ancient Hindu texts
(Vedas, Upanishads and Bhagavad Gita) used Sanskrit, there
are some prominent texts that were written in Tamil such as the
Tirukkur¯al. [60]. Knowledge about natural and astronomical
events have been preserved through oral transitions [25] which
are linked to the Indus valley civilisation (Harappan) with
mature period dated 8000 - 9000 years BCE (before the
common era) by recent studies [61]. There are studies that
show that the earliest text of Hinduism, known as the Rig
Veda, contains accounts of the Saraswati River [62] being
active. Latest research shows that the Sarawati River started
building sediments and drying 10,000 years ago [63]. The
written history and dating of the composition of the texts
are continuously being updated, since the transmission of
knowledge was done orally for thousands of years before
being written. There has also been a call to rename the Indus
valley civilisation as the Saraswati civilisation and update the
dating of the Vedic period 1. A major challenge has been in
translating Vedic (ancient) Sanskrit which is the language
of the Rig Veda [64], [65]. The Bhagavad Gita is written in
modern Sanskrit which has been easier to translate [66] when
compared to the Rig Veda [67].
B. BHAGAVAD GITA
The Bhagavad Gita features a discourse on duty and karma
between Arjuna and Lord Krishna at the battleﬁeld of
Kurukshetra. It describes an event at the beginning of the
Mahabharata war where Arjuna, the lead archer of the land,
1Chronology
of
Indian
civilisation
is
‘dubious’,
says
IIT-
Kharagpur
calendar:
https://indianexpress.com/article/cities/kolkata/
chronology-of-indian-civilisation-is-dubious-says-iit-kharagpur-calendar-7690601/
has to ﬁght his close family members for the rightful heir to
the throne of Hastinapur [68] which is now modern day Delhi.
Arjuna is the lead archer on the side of the Pandavas with
Lord Krishna as his charioteer, who is also a close friend and
relative. The Pandavas went on war with the Kauravas who
were their close relatives (cousins) for right to the throne of
Hastinapur and Indraprastha. Arjuna, after facing his relatives,
friends and gurus on the opposing side of the battleﬁeld gets
deeply disturbed and emotional, and begins pondering about
philosophy of life and essence of dharma (ethics). Arjuna
makes a decision not to go to war and asks a series of questions
to his charioteer and mentor, Lord Krishna who is known as
the avatar (born as human) of Lord Vishnu [69], who in the
western religious notion would be equivalent to the term God.
Due to the complexity of the situation which Arjuna faces
about duty and ethics, the set of questions from Arjuna and
answers by Lord Krishna makes Bhagavad Gita the forefront
of Hindu philosophy. Bhagavad Gita also is known as the
central sacred text of Hinduism [70], [71].
C. THE SANSKRIT LANGUAGE
Sanskrit is a language known for the richness of its vocabulary
and layered meanings which induces subtle differences when
translated to other languages [72], [73]. Sanskrit is the
language for the key Hindu texts such as the Bhagavad Gita,
Ramayana, Upanishads, Vedas, and Mahabharata [74], [75].
There are a number of challenges in translating Sanskrit
texts into other languages as discussed next. Firstly, Sanskrit
is a language for research and scholarship and study of
Hinduism; however, it has a limited number of speakers.
Secondly, although the key Hindu mantras for major events
are written in Sanskrit [76], majority of Hindus do not
understand Sanskrit. On the bright side, Hindi is based on
Sanskrit and there is signiﬁcant vocabulary in Hindi from
Sanskrit [77]. Finally, Sanskrit is a major branch of Indo-
European [78] languages which have links to European
languages such as Latin, German and English [79], [80].
Indian Invasion Theory (IIT) proposed that development of
Sanskrit and Hindu (Vedic) texts in ancient India is from
invasion/migration of Indo-Aryan tribes into India in pre-
Vedic age [81]. IIT has been the forefront of colonialism and
has been used as a way for British rulers to motivate their rule
and supremacy in British India [82]. IIT aligned well with
Eurocentric education system which did not give importance
to ancient Indian and Hindu scholars such as Aryabhata who
was instrumental in developing the Hindu decimal number
system [83]–[85], which was branded as Arabic numerals
[86]. IIT has been contested heavily [87], [88] with evidence
from Harrapan excavations [61] due to inconsistent timelines
about migration/invasion and lack of evidence given by IIT.
Apart from this, the Rig Veda which is the earliest Hindu text
features hymns of Saraswati River [89] when it was ﬂowing
more than 10,000 years ago [63]. There is an opposing Out
of India Theory (OIT) [90] that suggests that the evolution of
Sanskrit and related languages moved from India to Europe
and other parts of Asia through migrations.
VOLUME 4, 2016
3

P¯anini who is known as the ’father of linguistics" [91] was
a revered philologist and grammarian in ancient India [92].
P¯anini is known for his text Ast¯adhy¯ay¯ı [93] which provides a
treatise on Sanskrit grammar with rules on linguistics, syntax
and semantics covered in verse form. The Sanskrit language
has over the decade gained a lot of interest in computational
linguistics and computer science. There has been work done
in understanding Sanskrit from the view of language models
and natural language processing [94], [95], [95]. Briggs [94]
argued that Sanskrit is the best language for modelling using
artiﬁcial intelligence methods.
There are more than 300 English translations of the
Bhagavad Gita in English. An earlier review provided a
chronology of translations and commentaries mostly from
western scholars from 1785 to 1980 [96]. The Bhagavad Gita
has been translated in more than 100 languages.
III. METHODOLOGY
A. DATASETS: TRANSLATIONS OF THE BHAGAVAD
GITA
We select prominent translations of the Bhagavad Gita that
span different translation times-frames (decades) and focus on
scholars from a Hindu background in order to avoid any trans-
lation biases [20]. Our framework for analysis of translations
can be extended to other translations of the Bhagavad Gita,
we merely select these texts as a proof-of-concept. We tried
to use the older and the most popular translations, ensuring
that the translations feature verse by verse translations. The
translations typically contain an interpretation which have
been discarded in our analysis.
The Bhagavad Gita consist of 18 chapters which features
a series of questions and answers between Lord Krishna and
Arjuna with a range of topics that includes the philosophy
of Karma. The Mahabharata war lasted 18 days [100] and
hence the organisation of the Gita is symbolic. In our work,
we consider three prominent translations of Bhagavad Gita
as the source of data for analysis. The translators’ name, text
name, and the year of publication are shown in the Table 1.
The English translation of the Bhagavad Gita published in
1946 by Mahadev Desai [97] was translated from Gujarati
version based on the commentary known as "Anasakti Yoga"
by Mahatma Gandhi [20]. It is based on talks given by Gandhi
between February and November 1926 at the Satyagraha
Ashram in Ahmedabad, India. This was the time when Gandhi
had withdrawn from mass political activity and devoted much
of his time and energy to translating Gita from Sanskrit to
his native language Gujarati. As a result, he met with his
followers daily, after morning prayer sessions, to discuss
the Gita’s contents and meaning as it unfolded before him.
Mahatma Gandhi viewed the Bhagavad Gita not as a historical
work, but one that describes the perpetual conﬂict that rages
on in the hearts of the mankind under the guise of physical
warfare. Hence, Gandhi’s non-violent interpretation is in stark
contrast with contemporary Indian freedom ﬁghters, such
as Lala Lajpat Rai, Aurobindo Ghose, Bal Gangadhar Tilak.
These freedom ﬁghters argued that it was the sacred duty
of Indians to ﬁght against the British colonial rule, just as
Krishna had urged Arjuna to fulﬁll his sacred duty [101].
The translation by Mahatma Gandhi is accompanied by short
commentaries in every chapter which are discarded in our
analysis.
The Bhagavad Gita translation by Eknath Easwaran is
a direct Sanskrit-English translation published in 1985.
Easwaran’s comprehensive introduction (55-page) places the
Bhagavad Gita in its historical setting, and brings out the
universality and timelessness of its teachings. It features
chapter introductions to clarify key concepts and provides
a context, and notes and a glossary to explain Sanskrit terms.
Eknath Easwaran’s commentary shows the Gita’s relevance
to the modern society and highlights key topics in ethics,
humanism and spirituality. Note that the introduction and
chapter commentaries have been discarded in our study.
The Bhagavad Gita translation by Shri Purohit Swami [99]
avoids the use of Sanskrit concepts that may be unfamiliar to
English-speakers, for example translating the word ’yoga’ as
’spirituality’. However, we note that ’yoga’ has been translated
as ’union’ in prominent works. This is also a direct Sanskrit-
English translation published much earlier than the previous
ones (1935). Unlike Eknath Easwaran, Shri Purohit Swami
does not present a commentary on the Bhagavad Gita, but
offers direct translation of the text.
We also considered other prominent translations and com-
mentaries, such as those by A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami
Prabhupada [102], Paramhansa Yogananda [103], Sarvepalli
Radhakrishnan [104], and Swami Chinmayananda Saraswati
[105]; however, due to limited scope of our study, we could
not use them. These texts can be considered in future studies.
B. TEXT DATA EXTRACTION AND PROCESSING
In order to process the respective ﬁles given in printable
document format (PDF), we converted them into text ﬁles.
This conversion from PDF to text ﬁle gave us a raw dataset
consisting of all the texts shown in Table 3. Next, pre-
processing is done on the entire dataset, which included the
following steps.
1) Removing unicode characters generated in the text ﬁles
due to noise in the PDF ﬁles;
2) Removing verse numbering in the Bhagavad Gita;
3) Replacing the archaic words such as "thy" and "thou"
with modern words for retaining semantic information;
4) Replacing different words used to refer to the respective
protagonists, Krishna and Arjuna (Table 2);
5) Converting verses to a single line.
6) Removing commentary on the verses by the author.
7) Removing repetitive and redundant sentences such as
"End of the Commentary".
Table 2 shows the conversion of archaic words and aliases
used for Arjuna and Krishna. In Mahatma Gandhi’s translation,
there are 136 occurrences of different words used to refer to
Arjuna, some of them being - "Partha", "Kaunteya", "Bharata",
"Mahabahu", etc. The words such as “Savyasachin”, which
4
VOLUME 4, 2016

Texts
Translator
Year
The Gita according to Gandhi [97]
Mahatma Gandhi & Mahadev Desai
1946
The Bhagavad Gita [98]
Eknath Easwaran
1985
The Bhagavad Gita [99]
Shri Purohit Swami
1935
TABLE 1: Details of the texts used for sentiment and semantic analysis.
literally means ambidextrous, have been replaced according
to the context in which they appeared (in this case – Arjuna,
because he could shoot arrows with both hands). Similar
conversions have been made for different names of Krishna. In
Shri Purohit Swami’s translation, Krishna is more commonly
referred to as the "lord" (101 occurrences). These word
transformations are done to enable the language model to
decipher the meaning and context from the verses easily. In
the case of the translation by Eknath Easwaran, no archaic
words were used and also different names were not used for
Krishna and Arjuna; hence, Table 2 does not provide any
information.
In natural language processing applications, there have been
studies regarding removal of stop words which can help in
removing low level information so that the model can focus
on the high level representation [106]–[108]. Although it is
typical for language models to remove stop words (eg. "a,"
"and," "but," "how," "or," and "what"), in the case of sentiment
analysis, it can eliminate information regarding the context of
the sentiment [109]. Hence, we did not remove stop words for
sentiment analysis. Table 3 presents examples of selected
verses from the processed text by Mahatma Gandhi and
Shri Purohit Swami after transforming words for preserving
semantic information using information given in Table 2.
Figure 1 presents the chapter-wise number of occurrences for
the word conversions during text processing for the Bhagavad
Gita translation by Mahatma Gandhi and Shri Purohit Swami.
C. SENTENCE EMBEDDING MODELS
Sentence BERT (S-BERT) [110] is a sentence embedding
model which improves BERT model by reducing computa-
tional time to ﬁnd similar pair of text using Siamese and
triplet network structures to derive semantically meaningful
sentence embeddings. Although BERT is one of the most
successful pre-trained models, it neglects dependency among
predicted tokens. Masked and permuted pre-training [111]
(MPNet) model inherits the features of BERT and and another
improved model known as generalized autoregressive pre-
training (XLNet) [112]. MPNet-base encodes sentences into
high-dimensional embedding vectors that can be used for
various natural language processing tasks. The model takes
a variable length English text as an input and gives 768-
dimensional output vector. The input sentences of length
greater than 384 tokens are truncated. MPNet uses masked and
permuted language modeling to model the dependency among
predicted tokens and see the position information of the full
sentence. The model is also ﬁne-tuned using a contrastive
FIGURE 1: Number of archaic words transformed in transla-
tions by Mahatma Gandhi and Shri Purohit Swami.
learning objective on a dataset of 1 billion sentence pairs2
for generating the embeddings. Given a sentence from a pair
of similar sentences, the model needs to predict the sentence
with which it was originally paired from a set of randomly
sampled sentences. The sentence embeddings are typically
compared using cosine similarity.
KeyBERT [113] is a keyword extraction technique that
leverages BERT embeddings to produce keywords that take
into account the semantic aspects of the document. In this
method, the input document is embedded using a pre-trained
BERT model which embeds a chunk of text into a ﬁxed-size
vector. The keywords and expressions (n-grams) are extracted
from the same document using bag of words techniques. Each
keyword is then embedded into a ﬁxed-size vector with the
same model used to embed the document. As the keywords
and the document are represented in the same embedding
space, KeyBERT computes a cosine similarity between the
keyword embeddings and the document embedding. Then,
the most similar keywords (with the highest cosine similarity
score) are extracted. Furthermore, KeyBERT includes maxi-
mum sum similarity (MSS) and maximal marginal relevance
(MMR) to introduce diversity in the resulting keywords.
MMR considers the similarity of keywords/key-phrases with
the document, along with the similarity of already selected
keywords and key-phrases. This results in a selection of
2https://huggingface.co/sentence-transformers/all-mpnet-base-v2
VOLUME 4, 2016
5

Original Word
Transformed word
Mahatma Gandhi
Shri Purohit Swami
Eknath Easwaran
"thou"
"you"
134
118
-
thy
your
84
84
-
thee
you
60
58
-
partha
arjuna
38
0
-
art
are
26
20
-
shalt
shall
21
23
-
kaunteya
arjuna
21
0
-
bharata
arjuna
19
0
-
thyself
yourself
11
11
-
Hrishikesha
Krishna
7
0
-
TABLE 2: Text processing using word conversion with same meaning.
Author
Original sentence
Transformed sentence
Mahatma Gandhi
1. If, O Janardana, thou holdest that the attitude of
detachment is superior to action, then why,
O Keshava, dost thou urge me to dreadful action?
If, O Krishna, you hold that the attitude of
detachment is superior to action, then why,
O Krishna, do you urge me to dreadful action?
Mahatma Gandhi
27. Whatever thou doest, whatever thou eatest, whatever
thou offerest as sacriﬁce or gift, whatever austerity
thou dost perform, O kaunteya, dedicate all to Me.
Whatever you do, whatever you eat, whatever
you offer as sacriﬁce or gift, whatever austerity
you do perform, O Arjuna, dedicate all to Me.
Shri Purohit Swami
7. Yet since with mortal eyes thou canst not see Me, lo!
I give thee the Divine Sight. See now the glory of
My Sovereignty.”
Yet since with mortal eyes you can not see
Me, lo! I give you the Divine Sight. See now
the glory of My Sovereignty.”
Shri Purohit Swami
3. Thou art the Primal God, the Ancient, the Supreme
Abode of this universe, the Knower, the
Knowledge and the Final Home. Thou ﬁllest
everything. Thy form is inﬁnite.
You are the Primal God, the Ancient, the Supreme
Abode of this universe, the Knower, the Knowledge
and the Final Home. You ﬁll everything. Your
form is inﬁnite.
TABLE 3: Processed text after transforming words for preserving semantic information from Mahatma Gandhi and Shri Purohit
Swami.
keywords that maximizes their within diversity with respect to
the document. In our proposed framework, we use KeyBERT
along with MMR for keyword extraction of all the chapters in
different translations of the Bhagavad Gita.
D. FRAMEWORK
We present the framework that is used for sentiment and
semantic analysis of the Bhagavad Gita. Our framework
analyzes sentiment and semantic aspects of individual verses
from the Bhagavad Gita and also derives insights about the
differences in the themes discussed in the texts. As shown
in Figure 2, we begin by converting the PDF ﬁles into text
ﬁles and process them as mentioned earlier (Section III –
B). We provide sentiment analysis via BERTbase model by
predicting sentiments of verses across the selected translations
(texts) of the Bhagavad Gita. We employ multi-label sentiment
classiﬁcation where more than one sentiment can be classiﬁed
at once, i.e a verse can be both emphatic and optimistic as
shown in Figure 2. Although sentiment analysis can be done
with model prediction that gives a positive/negative polarity
score, this would not reveal much information about the nature
of the sentiment as the positive/negative score can be vague
due to different expressions used in translations. Hence, we
use the hand-labelled SenWave dataset [114] which features
11 different sentiments labelled by a group of 50 experts for
10,000 tweets worldwide during COVID-19 pandemic in 2020.
The BERTbase model is trained using the SenWave dataset
[114] for a multi-label sentiment classiﬁcation task.
Although sentiment analysis can provide an idea regard-
ing the differences in the translations, it does not provide
information about the difference in the semantics (meaning)
across the translations. Hence, semantic analysis [115] is
vital and accompanies sentiment analysis. In the framework,
we provide further analysis of the sentiment predictions by
comparing verse-by-verse and chapter-by-chapter statistics of
the predicted sentiments across the respective translations. We
also provide semantic analysis via sentence embedding model
(MPNet which is based on BERTbase) and verse-by-verse
similarity and perform keyword extraction (based on MPNet)
for further analysis of the translations as shown in Figure 2.
We use the MPNet-base [111] sentence embedding model
to encode verses as it produces high quality embeddings.
Since the embedding is generally in a higher dimension,
we reduce the dimension of the encoded vectors to explore
the clustering of data in different translations and chapters.
We use the uniform manifold approximation and projection
6
VOLUME 4, 2016

(UMAP) [116] algorithm for dimensionality reduction in order
to visualise the high-dimensional vectors. We also extract
keywords from the text using KeyBERT to analyze central
themes. We note that related methods such as rapid automatic
keyword extraction (RAKE) [117], yet another keyword ex-
tractor! (YAKE!) [118], and term frequency–inverse document
frequency (TF-IDF) [119] can be used to extract keywords and
key-phrases. However, they are based mostly on the statistical
properties of a text rather than semantic similarity. Hence, we
use KeyBERT as it takes into account the semantic aspects of
the text. We ﬁlter out the top 10 keywords and sort them in
order of their relevance to a given chapter.
E. MODEL TRAINING
We note that although the SenWave dataset is publicly
available, permission is required from the authors for usage.
In order to ensure reproducibility of the results, and given
the constraints, we do not provide the processed dataset.
However, we provide trained models in our GitHub repository
3. The Senwave dataset features 10,000 Tweets that were
collected from March to May 2020 labelled with 10 different
sentiments plus 1 label which refers to COVID-19 ofﬁcial
report. We limit to 10 sentiments and remove the "ofﬁcial
report" in data processing. A tweet can feature sentiments
such as "optimistic", "pessimistic", "anxious", and "thankful".
The multi-label sentiment classiﬁcation task refers to the tweet
that can be classiﬁed as "optimistic" and "anxious" at once.
We train the BERTbase model on SenWave dataset by pre-
processing the tweets using our previous work [55].
The pre-trained BERT-base uncased model is further tuned
on the SenWave dataset [114] with training and test dataset
created in a 90/10 % split on a dataset of 10,000 tweets using
a batch size of 1 using 4 training epochs. We use the default
hyper-parameters for the model and implement regularisation
using a dropout [120] layer with dropout probability of 0.3
to avoid over-ﬁtting. Finally, we add a linear activation layer
with 10 outputs to predict 10 sentiments. Moreover, we use the
adaptive moment estimation (Adam) gradient [121] optimizer
for training with a learning rate of 1e-05, and binary cross
entropy loss function for the multi-label classiﬁcation task.
We encode verses using the MPNet-base model and com-
pute the verse by verse semantic similarity. We also use
the MPNet-base model for extraction of keywords (using
KeyBERT) from all chapters. However, given the constraint
in the MPNet-base model that number of tokens should
not exceed 384, it would not be possible to encode large
chapters directly. Hence, we propose a method to overcome
this limitation by breaking each chapter into paragraphs of 15
verses each. We include 3 verses from the previous paragraph
into the current paragraph to retain some context and maintain
continuity. For example, in the ﬁrst paragraph, verses 1-15 are
included, and in the second paragraph verses 13-27, then 25-
39, and so on. We keep the top 20 keywords because keywords
3https://github.com/sydney-machine-learning/sentimentanalysis_
bhagavadgita
that have a lower similarity score in the original paragraph
may be more relevant when the entire chapter is considered.
Next, we extract the keywords for all paragraphs i, with 20
candidate keywords of paragraph j, such that i ̸= j. For each
keyword, we add up its cosine similarity score for different
paragraphs. Finally, we obtain the top 10 keywords having
the highest cumulative scores. The key idea here is that if a
term is a keyword in a certain paragraph, it also needs to be
a keyword in other paragraphs for it to qualify as a keyword
for the entire chapter. We use maximal marginal relevance
(MMR) with a diversity value of 0.5 to prevent the selection
of similar meaning keywords.
IV. RESULTS
A. DATA ANALYSIS
We ﬁrst present results with basic data analysis for visualisa-
tion of the datasets. Figure 3 presents the bigrams and trigrams
obtained for the respective translations of the Bhagavad Gita.
We removed the stop words in order to obtain the bigrams and
trigrams. Throughout the Bhagavad Gita, the concept of three
’gunas’ or attributes has been widely discussed. Dominance
of the ’sattvic’ attribute leads to liberation, that of ’rajasa’
attribute leads to rebirth as humans and ’tamas’ means moving
to a lower form of life. Hence, the bigram ’three gunas’
has been aptly extracted in Gandhi’s version (Figure 3(c)).
Also, the three major human attributes (gunas) i.e. sattva,
rajas, tamas in Easwaran’s translation roughly translate to the
attributes purity, passion and ignorance as described in Shri
Purohit Swami’s translation (Figure 3(b)).
We observe that the bigram, pleasure and pain appears in
all translations. This gives the message the a person who is
ﬁt for liberation is unaffected by worldly (material) desires
and at complete peace with themselves, unaffected by either
pleasure or pain. Since the bigrams and trigrams merely
count the occurrence of a set of words, the central themes
that are emphasised will become evident afterwards. While
all three texts discuss the idea of ’supreme spirit’ or the
Atman; however, the path taken to realize it differs. Eknath
Easwaran stresses the importance of selﬂess service devoid
of selﬁsh attachments and desires (Figure 3). Shri Purohit
Swami advocates the path of right (righteous) action by
observing self control. Interestingly, Chapter 3 of Eknath
Easwaran’s translation is titled ’Selﬂess Service’ while Shri
Swami Purohit has titled it as ’Karma Yoga - The Path of
Action’. Mahatma Gandhi observes that the mind would
have to be completely self restrained to be able to renounce
the attachment to fruits of action. The essence of Mahatma
Gandhi’s interpretation is beautifully captured in verse 47 of
Chapter 2 - "Action alone is thy province, never the fruits
thereof; let not thy motive be the fruit of action, nor shouldst
thou desire to avoid action."
Furthermore, we notice that the top three bigrams and
trigrams (Figure 3) across the three different translations
are almost entirely different. It seems that the different
translators have used different words to refer to similar
concepts, for example, Eknath Easwaran’s translation features
VOLUME 4, 2016
7

FIGURE 2: Framework for semantic similarity and sentiment analysis for selected translations of the Bhagavad Gita.
[every, creature] and [supreme, goal] as top bigrams whereas
Shri Purohit Swami’s translation gives [supreme, spirit] and
[right, action]. Moreover, Mahatama Gandhi’s translation
features [fruit, action] and [pleasure, pain] which is also
present in Eknath Easwaran’s translation. Hence, a word by
word comparison using bigrams and trigrams shows a major
difference in the respective translations.
Table 4 lists all the chapter titles of the three translations.
In Mahatma Gandhi’s translation, chapters are referred to as
’discourses’. We note the difference in the way the different
translators interpreted the title of the respective chapters.
Eknath Easwaran, for example, translated Chapter 2 heading
as "Self-Realization" while Shri Purohit Swami translated it
as "The Philosophy of Discrimination".
B. SENTIMENT ANALYSIS
Next, we use the BERT model for verse-by-verse sentiment
analysis of the respective Bhagavad Gita translations. We ﬁrst
present the bigrams and the trigrams of the top ten optimistic
and pessimistic sentiments for the entire text for the respective
translations.
The sentiment analysis shows that [pleasure, pain] is an
optimistic bigram in all three translations (Figure 5, Figure
6, Figure 7). However, this has been used in the context that
one should have complete control over one’s mind, which is
one of the central themes in the Bhagavad Gita. According
to the Bhagavad Gita, the mind should not be clouded by
either pleasure or pain, by heat or cold, or by other worldly
inﬂuences (Chapter 2, verse 15). Only such a person is ﬁt for
immortality (moksha) to escape the cycle of birth and death
(Chapter 2, verse 15). Lord Krishna uses the contradicting
concepts of pleasure and pain to demonstrate this theme about
the human condition [122] in order to convince Arjuna to pick
his bow up and rise above worldly emotions.
Moreover, in terms of leading optimistic sentiments pre-
dicted by the model, according to the bigrams - we ﬁnd
[supreme, goal] and [every, creature] and the leading opti-
mistic sentiment bigrams for the Eknath Easwaran’s trans-
lation (Figure 5), whereas Shri Purohit Swami’s translation
gives [supreme, spirit] and [self, control] (Figure 7). Mahatma
Gandhi’s translation gives [pleasure, pain] and [without,
attachment] (Figure 6). We notice that [pleasure, pain] is
listed in the top ﬁve optimistic bigrams across the respective
translation which shows that although the wording used in
the translations are different, the sentiments they express are
similar. Interestingly, we notice that [every, creature] (Figure
5) and [fruit, action] (Figure 7) is listed in both pessimistic and
optimistic sentiments in the respective translations. A major
reason could be the context in which these terms appear in the
respective verses in the text.
We next present the chapter-wise sentiments for the re-
spective translations as shown in Figures 8 and 9. Figure 4
presents the sentiments for the entire text where we notice
that sentiments such as "denial", "anxious", "thankful" and
8
VOLUME 4, 2016

(a) Eknath Easwaran
(b) Shri Purohit Swami
(c) Mahatma Gandhi
FIGURE 3: Top 10 bigrams and trigrams from processed
verses of all translations.
"empathetic" are the least expressed sentiments while "an-
noyed", "optimistic" and "surprised" are the most expressed
across the three texts. In terms of chapter-wise analysis, we
ﬁnd that there is a major difference in the predicted sentiments
"optimistic", "pessimistic" and "surprise" in most cases shown
in Figures 8 and 9. While Eknath Easwaran’s translation
leads in all positive sentiments - "optimistic", "thankful" and
"empathetic", Mahatma Gandhi’s translation has the highest
number of "pessimistic", "annoyed", "anxious" and "surprise"
sentiments. It is worthwhile to look into the text and review
the exact verses and the predicted sentiments. We select
Chapter 6 (Figure 8 - Panel f) and show the verses and their
predicted sentiments which have a stark difference among
different translations in Table 5. The words used, grammar
and language style, and the meaning associated with the verse
greatly differs across the different translators as shown in
Table 5 along with the underlying sentiment. If we consider
verse 2, we ﬁnd that the given sentiments are entirely different
for the different translations. This is due to the way the verse
is presented to our BERT-based language model. In the case of
translation by Mahatama Gandhi, the verse could be perceived
as joking. Eknath Easwaran presents that same verse in a tone
that is showing annoyed and surprised sentiments while Shri
Purohit Swami presents it in a tone that is annoyed. We need
to highlight that similar to the sentiment analysis based on
tweets, the proposed model does not consider the context of
the the overall chapter and hence this could be a limitation.
We provide rest of the sentiment predictions in our GitHub
repository 4.
Figure 10 shows the heatmap with number of occurrence
of a given sentiment in relation to the rest of the sentiments
of all the verses in the respective translations. We notice that
"annoyed", "optimistic" and "surprise" are the key sentiments
across all the respective translations. In relation to rest of
the sentiments, we ﬁnd that the combination of "optimistic
and annoyed", "optimistic and surprise", and "optimistic and
joking" are the leading combinations.
We need to measure the similarity and diversity of the
sentiments expressed with verse-by-verse comparison across
the different translations. Table 6 shows the Jaccard similarity
score computed on the predicted sentiments for three pairs of
texts for selected chapters. The score is highest for Mahatma
Gandhi and Shri Purohit Swami’s versions which indicates
they had the highest overlap of the predicted sentiments.
C. SEMANTIC ANALYSIS
Next, we provide analysis of the translation using semantic
analysis of verse-by-verse comparison of the text. We encode
the verses using the MPNet-base model and report the cosine
similarity score for every chapter. Table 7 shows the verse by
verse cosine similarity score for the translations grouped by
the chapter. We provide the mean and standard deviation of
the score for the respective verses in each chapter. We observe
that Chapter 17 is semantically least similar and Chapter
4https://git.io/J9GcU
VOLUME 4, 2016
9

FIGURE 4: Text-wise sentiment analysis.
10 is most similar. Further, in the pair-wise comparison,
Mahatma Gandhi and Shri Purohit Swami’s translation are
most similar to each other. It is important to note that these two
translations also have the highest Jaccard similarity score for
the predicted sentiments. We present some of the semantically
least similar verses in Table 8. In Chapter 5 – Verse 5, Eknath
Easwaran interprets the goals of knowledge and service to
be the same, Mahatma Gandhi sees schools of Sankhya and
Yoga philosophy as one, and Shri Purohit Swami interprets
wisdom (Jnana) and right action (Dharma) as one. In this
case, Mahatma Gandhi’s verse is least similar to the other two
(Score 1 and Score 2 are both lower than Score 3), primarily
because it uses the Sanskrit terms of Sankhya and Yoga.
Whenever, a particular translation uses a Sanskrit term, it
obtains a lower cosine similarity score with respect to the
other two as BERT-based models have been primarily trained
on a large corpus of English texts. In Chapter 16 – Verse 4,
we observe that there is a difference in the devilish qualities
being discussed. Some of the qualities unique to each text
are: cruelty (Eknath Easwaran), pretentiousness, coarseness
(Mahatma Gandhi) and pride, insolence (Shri Purohit Swami).
The difference in choice of words may be due to the different
eras in which these translations were created, leading to the
use of words prevalent at that point of time. Next, we present
semantically most similar verses in Table 9. In Chapter 3 –
Verse 4, we observe that although the choice of words are
different, the meaning conveyed is similar. We ﬁnd that the
BERT-based language model assigns a high similarity score
to all the three pairs. In Chapter 9 – Verse 18, the choice of
words used by Mahatma Gandhi and Shri Purohit Swami is
almost identical and hence, we obtain a high similarity score
(Score 2).
Furthermore, we review the semantic score by presenting
the actual verses from the translated versions of a selected
chapter. We choose Chapter 12 since this chapter has one of
the least verses, it is easier for us to include it in the paper. We
publish the scores for the rest of the chapters in our GitHub
repository 5. In Table 10, we present all the verses taken from
Chapter 12 with the cosine similarity score. We also present
the mean and the standard deviation of the scores to provide an
indication about the overall semantic similarity of the verses
for the chapter for the comparison of selected translations.
We visualise the encoded verses in two dimensions using
UMAP in Figure 13. We present the visualizations for one
in every three chapters. We do not intend to ﬁnd separate
clusters for each translation as it is evident from Table 7 that
the verses from each translation are semantically very similar
to each other. However, we do ﬁnd some interesting clusters
which represent a sequence of events or consecutive verses
in the text. For example, in Figure 13(a), the distinct clusters
represent separate events. In Chapter 1, these include verses
describing Sanjaya’s description of battleﬁeld to Dhritarashtra,
Arjuna moving his chariot to the center of the battleﬁeld,
Arjuna expressing his grief to Krishna. In Chapter 4 (Figure
13(b)), we observe 3 clusters. The left-most cluster includes
verses describing different forms of sacriﬁce, the bottom-most
cluster comprises verses where Lord Krishna emphasises
renunciation of oneself from fruits of action, and the third
cluster includes the conversation between Krishna and Arjuna
from the ﬁrst ten verses of the chapter. In Chapter 10 (Figure
13(d)), the lower cluster comprises the verses in which Lord
Krishna describes his divine attributes to Arjuna, and the upper
cluster features the rest of the conversation between Krishna
and Arjuna in the chapter (primarily ﬁrst 20 verses).
Furthermore, the keywords in the text/chapter play a vital
role in semantic similarity. It is important to note that most
keywords aptly signify the themes of the chapters. This
helps us to quickly assess how different authors differ in
their interpretation of key concepts. Table 11 shows the
keywords obtained for all the chapters for the respective
translations. In order to get a better perspective, we need to
review the keywords from a selected chapter. Table 12 shows
the keywords from Chapter 12 and their associated scores
obtained using KeyBert.
Table 12 shows the keywords extracted from Chapter 12.
This chapter starts with Arjuna asking Lord Krishna who are
the better practitioners of yoga: those who love him dearly
or those who seek the eternal reality. Lord Krishna responds
that worshipping the eternal reality (Brahman) [9], [123] is
extremely difﬁcult for the humans. So, he suggests Arjuna
to meditate and be devoted to him while engaging in selﬂess
action (karma yoga). We note again that Lord Krishna is
the avatar of Lord Vishnu (supreme consciousness) who is
equivalent to the Abrahamic notion of God. A steady and
stable state of mind can only be achieved by humans with the
practice of meditation. It is pertinent to note the KeyBERT
5https://git.io/JSyPB
10
VOLUME 4, 2016

FIGURE 5: Top 10 optimistic and pessimistic bigrams and trigrams from processed verses of Eknath Easwaran’s translation.
FIGURE 6: Top 10 optimistic and pessimistic bigrams and trigrams from processed verses of Mahatma Gandhi’s translation.
FIGURE 7: Top 10 optimistic and pessimistic Bi-grams and Tri-grams from processed verses for Shri Swami Purohit’s translation
VOLUME 4, 2016
11

(a) Chapter 1: The War Within
(b) Chapter 2: Self-Realization
(c) Chapter 3: Selﬂess Service
(d) Chapter 4: Wisdom in Action
(e) Chapter 5: Renounce and Rejoice
(f) Chapter 6: The Practice of Meditation
(g) Chapter 7: Wisdom and Realization
(h) Chapter 8: The Eternal Godhead
(i) Chapter 9: The Royal Path
FIGURE 8: Chapter-wise sentiment analysis (Chapters 1 - 9.)
12
VOLUME 4, 2016

(a) Chapter 10: Divine Splendor
(b) Chapter 11: The Cosmic Vision
(c) Chapter 12: The Way of Love
(d) Chapter 13: The Field and the Knower
(e) Chapter 14: The Forces of Evolution
(f) Chapter 15: The Supreme Self
(g) Chapter 16: Two Paths
(h) Chapter 17: The Power of Faith
(i) Chapter 18: Freedom and Renunciation
FIGURE 9: Chapter-wise sentiment analysis (Chapters 10 - 18).
VOLUME 4, 2016
13

(a) Eknath Easwaran
(b) Mahatma Gandhi
(c) Shri Purohit Swami
FIGURE 10: Heatmap showing number of occurrence of a
given sentiment in relation to the rest of the sentiments of all
the verses in the respective translations.
has extracted "meditate" as one of the top 10 keywords in Shri
Purohit Swami’s translation. Lord Krishna further says that
the devotees who focus their mind with unﬂinching devotion
are very dear to him (Chapter 12 – Verse 20). ’Devotion’
and ’devotee’ marks another central theme (topic) that has
been correctly extracted, which also is the top keyword in
all three translations. Furthermore, words such as "eternal",
"unchanging", "omnipresent" are used to refer to the Atman
(self/qualia). Arjuna and Krishna, though not themes, appear
extensively in the chapter and therefore, they have been also
extracted. We report the cumulative score where we have
added the cosine similarity scores of the keywords in batches
of 15 verses each (Table 12).
In order to provide further visualisation of the keywords and
how they are related to each other, we use dimension reduction
and plot the ﬁrst two components of the latent vectors. We
use uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP)
[116] for dimension reduction. We obtained the UMAP em-
beddings by encoding top 10 keywords from all chapters using
the MPNet sentence embedding model. The keywords which
appeared in more than one chapter were removed. In these
visualisations, we are primarily interested in analyzing clusters
of data as UMAP algorithm is good at preserving the local
structure by grouping neighboring data points together. Figure
14 presents the visualisation (scatter plot) of UMAP embed-
ding. The cluster of keywords that provide important semantic
information, with respect to their use in the Bhagavad Gita, are
shaded in yellow. In Eknath Easwaran’s translation, (Figure
14(a)) the words associated to the impending battle such
"archers", "chariots", "war", "armies", "battle" form a cluster.
Also, "roared", "death" and "killed" are close to this cluster
in the embedding space. The keywords in the philosophy
of giving away (the central theme in Chapter 5 – Renounce
and Rejoice) also form a cluster. These include "sacriﬁce"
(and "sacriﬁces"), "renounce", "renouncing", "renunciation",
"abstaining", "surrendering", all of which have a similar
underlying meaning. One of the central themes in Easwaran’s
translation - selﬂess service is captured by words such as "self-
realization", "selﬂessly" ("selﬂess"), "realize" which cluster
together. However, "selﬁsh", "selﬁshly" also are a part of this
cluster though they convey the opposite meaning. The terms
"eternal", "immutable", "changeless" and "immortality" which
are closely associated with qualia (Atman) appear as a cluster.
The keywords representing the protagonists and associates
in the Bhagavad Gita ("Krishna", "Arjuna", "Duryodhana",
"Dhritarashtra") and their qualities such as "sattva", "dharma",
"tyaga", "rajas" and "tamas" form a cluster in the upper portion
of the embedding space.
In Mahatma Gandhi’s translation (Figure 14(b)), "rajas,
tamas" (both undesirable qualities) are very close to each other.
Furthermore, most of the prominent personalities representing
the righteous side of the war - "Krishna", "Arjuna", "Bhima"
(Arjuna’s brother), "Pandu" (Arjuna’s father), "Subhadra"
(Arjuna’s wife) and some of their qualities and attributes
such as "tyagi", "yogi", "sattva", "rajas", "tamas" form a
cluster. Moreover, "Ashvattha" [124] which is a sacred ﬁg
14
VOLUME 4, 2016

Chapter No.
Eknath Easwaran
Shri Swami Purohit
Mahatma Gandhi
1
The War Within
The Despondency of Arjuna
-
2
Self-Realization
The Philosophy of Discrimination
-
3
Selﬂess Service
Karma-Yoga - The Path of Action
-
4
Wisdom in Action
Dnyana-Yoga - The Path of Wisdom
-
5
Renounce and Rejoice
The Renunciation of Action
-
6
The Practice of Meditation
Self-Control
-
7
Wisdom from Realization
Knowledge and Experience
-
8
The Eternal Godhead
Life Everlasting
-
9
The Royal Path
The Science of Sciences and the Mystery of Mysteries
-
10
Divine Splendor
The Divine Manifestations
-
11
The Cosmic Vision
The Cosmic Vision
-
12
The Way of Love
Bhakti-Yoga - The Path of Love
-
13
The Field and the Knower
Spirit and Matter
-
14
The Forces of Evolution
The Three Qualities
-
15
The Supreme Self
The Lord-God
-
16
Two Paths
Divine and Demonic Civilization
-
17
The Power of Faith
The Threefold Faith
-
18
Freedom and Renunciation
The Spirit of Renunciation
-
TABLE 4: Names of Chapters in the Bhagavad Gita as given in the different translations.
Eknath Easwaran
Mahatma Gandhi
Shri Purohit Swami
Verse 2
Therefore, Arjuna, you should understand that
renunciation and the performance of selﬂess
service are the same. Those who cannot
renounce attachment to the results of their
work are far from the path.
What is called sannyasa, know you to
be yoga, O Arjuna; for none can become a
yogin who has not renounced selﬁsh
purpose.
O Arjuna! Renunciation is in fact
what is called Right Action. No one
can become spiritual who has not renounced
all desire.
Predicted Sentiment
Annoyed, Surprise
Annoyed, Joking
Annoyed
Verse 5
Reshape yourself through the power of
your will; never let yourself be degraded
by self-will. The will is the only
friend of the Self, and the will is
the only enemy of the Self.
By one’s Self should one raise oneself,
and not allow oneself to fall; for soul
(Self) alone is the friend of self,
and Self alone is self’s foe.
Let him seek liberation by the
help of his Highest Self, and let him
never disgrace his own Self. For that Self
is his only friend; yet it may also be
his enemy.
Predicted Sentiment
Optimistic, Annoyed
Pessimistic, Surprise
Optimistic, Annoyed
Verse 20
In the still mind, in the depths of
meditation, the Self reveals itself. Beholding the
Self by means of the Self, an aspirant knows
the joy and peace of complete fulﬁllment.
Where thought curbed by the practice of
yoga completely ceases, where a man sits
content within himself, soul having seen soul;
There, where the whole nature is seen in
the light of the Self, where the man
abides within his Self and is satisﬁed
there, its functions restrained by its union
with the Divine, the mind ﬁnds rest.
Predicted Sentiments
Optimistic
Pessimistic, Sad, Surprise
Optimistic, Surprise
Verse 32
ARJUNA: O Krishna, the stillness of divine union
which you describe is beyond my comprehension.
How can the mind, which is so restless,
attain lasting peace?
I do not see, O Krishna, how this
yoga, based on the equal-mindedness that
You have expounded to me, can
steadily endure, because of ﬁckleness
(of the mind).
Arjuna said: I do not see how I can
attain this state of equanimity which You
has revealed, owing to the restlessness
of my mind.
Predicted Sentiments
Surprise
Pessimistic, Annoyed
Surprise
TABLE 5: Some of the least similar verses in Chapter 6 according to predicted sentiments.
FIGURE 11: Arjuna’s sentiments over time (chapters) in the translation by Eknath Easwaran.
VOLUME 4, 2016
15

Easwaran-Gandhi
Purohit-Easwaran
Gandhi-Purohit
Chapter 3
0.604
0.506
0.684
Chapter 5
0.568
0.520
0.614
Chapter 7
0.559
0.486
0.574
Chapter 8
0.547
0.503
0.568
Chapter 9
0.501
0.486
0.565
Chapter 10
0.523
0.507
0.562
Chapter 11
0.507
0.488
0.527
Chapter 12
0.500
0.483
0.518
Chapter 15
0.494
0.490
0.516
Chapter 16
0.500
0.495
0.527
Chapter 17
0.510
0.501
0.536
*
0.526
0.497
0.563
TABLE 6: Sentiment analysis of selected pairs of translations
with Jaccard similarity score for predicted sentiments for
select chapters. We provide the mean of the scores at the
bottom (*).
tree for Hindus is very close to the keyword "tree". The words
related to the Atman (qualia) - "omnipresent", "transcending",
"unchanging", "imperishable", "everlasting" "immovable"
form a cluster near the bottom of the plot. The entities
involved in or pertaining to the impending war of Kurukshetra
- "bowmen", "vestments", "trumpets", "multitude" (referring
to huge number of armed men on both sides), "mortals",
"sons" are also found to cluster together. Finally, "lord",
"devotion", "devotee", "worship", "reverence" also form a
cluster. In Shri Purohit Swami’s translation, Figure 14(c), the
attributes of soul (as described in the Bhagavad Gita) form a
cluster. These attributes that include - "divinity", "mysticism",
"spirit", "power", "consciousness", "philosophy", "wisdom",
"knowledge" form a cluster with "souls". Sacriﬁce is an-
other key theme in Shri Purohit Swami’s translation. In our
visualization, "sacriﬁce", "relinquishment", "renunciation",
and "vow" cluster together. The idea of the eternity of the
soul is captured by the words - "omniscient", "omnipresent",
"immovable", "changeless", "eternal". While the eternity of
soul is a widely discussed theme in the Bhagavad Gita, so is
the idea of rebirth. "Progenitors", "reborn", "reincarnation",
"births", "creation", "nature", "mankind" are the keywords
closely related to this idea that cluster together. We have not
shown all the keywords due to limited space. It is interesting
to note that in the respective UMAP embeddings, the points
representing Arjuna and Lord Krishna are always closest to
each other. Please note that the bigger sizes of the words
"krishna" , "yoga" and "sacriﬁce" do not imply any semantic
importance (Figure 14(a), Figure 14(b), and Figure 14(c)).
V. FURTHER ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION
We note that the Bhagavad Gita captures the conversation
between Arjuna and Lord Krishna which takes place in the
middle of the Kurushetra battleﬁeld just before the war. The
conversation is merely a few hours long and over the course
of the Bhagavad Gita, Arjuna goes from being extremely
distressed to a more calm and lucid state aware of his
responsibilities. We wish to explore if the verses in which
Arjuna has spoken can capture the variations of the sentiments
expressed. Therefore, we provide an analysis where we
calculate a sentiment polarity score in the range [-1,1] based
on grouping the optimistic and pessimistic sentiments. In
order to quantify the polarity of predicted sentiments, we
assign a sentiment polarity score based on set of verses
in each chapter by the respective speakers (Lord Krishna
and Arjuna). We assign the sentiments such as "optimistic",
"thankful" and "empathetic" a score of +1, and further assign
"pessimistic", "anxious", "sad", "annoyed", and "denial" a
score of -1. Finally, we assign "joking" and "surprise", a score
of 0 since they can have positive or negative connotation. It
should be noted that Arjuna does not speak in certain chapters
(7, 9, 13, 15, 16) and hence, the polarity score is zero. We
show the chapter-wise polarity score for Eknath Easwaran’s
translation in Figure 11 for Arjuna where we observe that
Chapter 1 has the maximum negative sentiment over time
(chapters). This is because in the beginning of the Bhagavad
Gita, Arjuna is distraught and refuses to ﬁght the war on
seeing his family and friends on the opposite side. Moreover,
we notice the polarity increases towards positive sentiments
from Chapter 2 and then there is a bump in Chapter 11. This
is because in Chapter 11, Arjuna is overwhelmed by Lord
Krishna’s universal form (viraat roopa) and considers himself
fortunate to have witnessed it, hence the maximum positive
sentiments come from this chapter. Similarly, we have shown
the variation of Lord Krishna’s sentiments in Figure 12, where
he begins with a neutral sentiment polarity and then becomes
negative in Chapter 2, and positive afterwards till Chapter 13.
Moving on, his sentiments ﬂuctuates and also becomes close
to neutral as the time progresses.
In Table 5, verse 2 validates our earlier observation of
the differences in central themes (selﬂess service - Eknath
Easwaran, right action - Shri Purohit Swami). It is important
to note that the BERT model has been trained on a dataset of
tweets which featured sarcastic comments and jokes. Hence,
the Senwave dataset contains the label - "joking". However,
in the Bhagavad Gita, this sentiment is not apt and therefore,
some verses may have been classiﬁed as "joking" inaccurately.
Please note that we have shown the pre-processed verses here
as they have been used for sentiment prediction and not the
original verses.
In the heatmaps (Figure 10), we observe that verses labelled
as ’joking’ have a signiﬁcant overlap with "optimistic",
"annoyed" and "surprise". We could have removed the joking
label from the training data as we know that the Bhagavad Gita
does not contain jokes, but it is interesting to know that due to
the translation style, humour was detected in the way certain
questions were asked and answered. We present some verses
in Table 13 that were classiﬁed as "joking". We note that these
were not jokes but verses that can be considered humorous,
which is based on the way experts have hand-labelled tweets
during COVID-19 outbreak in 2020. We can note this as a
major limitation since we are using hand labelled sentiments
from social media as training data and applying it to a entirely
16
VOLUME 4, 2016

Easwaran vs Gandhi
Purohit vs Easwaran
Gandhi vs Purohit
Chapter 3
0.627 (0.133)
0.608 (0.146)
0.694 (0.114)
Chapter 5
0.629 (0.129)
0.637 (0.105)
0.628 (0.122)
Chapter 7
0.698 (0.144)
0.668 (0.147)
0.691 (0.148)
Chapter 8
0.662 (0.123)
0.650 (0.081)
0.673 (0.124)
Chapter 9
0.681 (0.126)
0.686 (0.109)
0.731 (0.094)
Chapter 10
0.759 (0.096)
0.747 (0.113)
0.733 (0.123)
Chapter 11
0.705 (0.109)
0.731 (0.101)
0.721 (0.110)
Chapter 12
0.609 (0.120)
0.633 (0.097)
0.724 (0.096)
Chapter 15
0.686 (0.116)
0.675 (0.110)
0.657 (0.067)
Chapter 16
0.662 (0.096)
0.667 (0.100)
0.691 (0.116)
Chapter 17
0.654 (0.111)
0.591 (0.132)
0.642 (0.132)
*
0.670 (0.119)
0.663 (0.113)
0.689 (0.113)
TABLE 7: Semantic analysis using cosine similarity for selected chapters from selected pairs of the translations. Note that the
mean is given with standard deviation (in brackets) for all the verses in the respective chapters at the bottom (*).
Chapter
Verse
Eknath Easwaran
Mahatma Gandhi
Shri Purohit Swami
Score 1
Score 2
Score 3
5
5
The goal of knowledge and
the goal of service are the same;
those who fail to see this
are blind.
The goal that the sankhyas
attain is also reached by the yogins.
He sees truly who sees both sankhya
and yoga as one.
The level which is reached by
wisdom is attained through right
action as well. He who perceives
that the two are one,
knows the truth.
0.295
0.338
0.517
9
22
Those who worship me and
meditate on me constantly, without
any other thought I will
provide for all their needs.
As for those who worship
Me, thinking on Me alone
and nothing else, ever attached
to Me, I bear the burden
of getting them what they need.
But if a man will meditate on Me
and Me alone, and will worship
Me always and everywhere,
I will take upon Myself
the fulﬁllment of his aspiration,
and I will safeguard whatsoever
he shall attain.
0.571
0.527
0.528
15
11
Those who strive resolutely on
the path of yoga see the
Self within. The thoughtless,
who strive imperfectly, do not.
Yogins who strive see Him seated
in themselves; the witless ones who have
not cleansed themselves to see Him
not, even though they strive.
The saints with great effort ﬁnd
Him within themselves; but not the
unintelligent, who in spite of every
effort cannot control their minds.
0.450
0.629
0.367
16
4
Other qualities, Arjuna, make a person
more and more inhuman: hypocrisy, arrogance,
conceit, anger, cruelty, ignorance.
Pretentiousness, arrogance, self-conceit, wrath,
coarseness, ignorance—these are to be found
in one born with the devilish
heritage.
Hypocrisy, pride, insolence, cruelty,
ignorance belong to him who is
born of the godless qualities.
0.447
0.586
0.520
17
18
Disciplines practiced in order to
gain respect, honor, or admiration
are rajasic; they are undependable and
transitory in their effects.
Austerity which is practiced
with an eye to gain praise, honour
and homage and for ostentation is said
to be rajasa; it is ﬂeeting
and unstable.
Austerity coupled with hypocrisy or
performed for the sake of
self-gloriﬁcation, popularity or vanity, comes
from Passion, and its result is
always doubtful and temporary.
0.440
0.740
0.212
TABLE 8: Semantically least similar verses. The cosine similarity (score) is given with the following combinations. Note that
the comparisons are deﬁned by Eknath Easwaran vs Mahatma Gandhi (Score 1), Mahatma Gandhi vs Shri Purohit Swami (Score
2), and Shri Purohit Swami vs Eknath Easwaran (Score 3).
Chapter
Verse
Eknath Easwaran
Mahatma Gandhi
Shri Purohit Swami
Score 1
Score 2
Score 3
3
4
One who shirks action does not
attain freedom; no one can gain
perfection by abstaining from work.
Never does man enjoy freedom
from action by not undertaking
action, nor does he attain that
freedom by mere renunciation of action.
No man can attain freedom
from activity by refraining from
action; nor can he reach perfection
by merely refusing to act.
0.753
0.879
0.837
7
9
I am the sweet fragrance in
the earth and the radiance of
ﬁre; I am the life in
every creature and the striving
of the spiritual aspirant.
I am the sweet fragrance
in earth; the brilliance in
ﬁre; the life in all beings;
and the austerity in ascetics.
I am the Fragrance of earth,
the Brilliance of ﬁre. I am
the Life Force in all beings,
and I am the Austerity of the ascetics.
0.909
0.917
0.856
9
18
I am the goal of life,
the Lord and support of all,
the inner witness, the abode of
all. I am the only refuge,
the one true friend; I am the
beginning, the staying, and the
end of creation; I am the
womb and the eternal seed.
I am the Goal, the Sustainer,
the Lord, the Witness, the Abode,
the Refuge, the Friend; the Origin,
the End the Preservation, the Treasure
house, the Imperishable Seed.
I am the Goal, the Sustainer,
the Lord, the Witness, the Home,
the Shelter, the Lover and
the Origin; I am Life and Death;
I am the Fountain and the Seed Imperishable.
0.839
0.907
0.871
12
18
That devotee who looks upon
friend and foe with equal regard,
who is not buoyed up by praise
nor cast down by blame, alike
in heat and cold, pleasure and
pain, free from selﬁsh attachments,
Who is same to foe and friend,
who regards alike respect and disrespect,
cold and heat, pleasure and pain,
who is free from attachment;
He to whom friend and foe
are alike, who welcomes equally honour
and dishonour, heat and cold, pleasure
and pain, who is enamoured of nothing,
0.827
0.885
0.820
TABLE 9: Semantically most similar verses. The cosine similarity (score) is given with the following combinations. Note that
the comparisons are deﬁned by Eknath Easwaran vs Mahatma Gandhi (Score 1), Mahatma Gandhi vs Shri Purohit Swami (Score
2), and Shri Purohit Swami vs Eknath Easwaran (Score 3).
VOLUME 4, 2016
17

Verse
Eknath Easwaran
Mahatma Gandhi
Shri Purohit Swami
Score 1
Score 2
Score 3
1
ARJUNA: Of those steadfast
devotees who love you and
those who seek you as the
eternal formless Reality, who
are the more established in yoga?
Of the devotees who thus worship
You, incessantly attached, and
those who worship the
Imperishable Unmanifest, which are
the better yogins? The Lord Said:
“Arjuna asked: My Lord! Which are the better
devotees who worship You, those who try
to know You as a Personal God, or those
who worship You as Impersonal and Indestructible?
0.414
0.589
0.573
2
KRISHNA: Those who set their hearts
on me and worship me with unfailing
devotion and faith are more
established in yoga.
Those I regard as the best yogins
who, riveting their minds on Me, ever
attached, worship Me, with the
highest faith.
Lord Shri Krishna replied: Those
who keep their minds ﬁxed on
Me, who worship Me always with
unwavering faith and concentration; these
are the very best.
0.490
0.575
0.663
3
As for those who seek the
transcendental Reality, without name,
without form, contemplating the Unmanifested,
beyond the reach of thought and
of feeling,
But those who worship the
Imperishable, the indeﬁnable, the
Unmanifest, the Omnipresent, the
Unthinkable, the Rock-seated, the Immovable,
the Unchanging,
Those who worship Me as the
Indestructible, the Undeﬁnable,
the Omnipresent, the Unthinkable,
the Primeval, the Immutable and
the Eternal;
0.579
0.826
0.488
4
with their senses subdued and
mind serene and striving for
the good of all beings, they
too will verily come unto me.
Keeping the whole host of senses
in complete control, looking on all
with an impartial eye, engrossed in
the welfare of all beings—these come
indeed to Me.
Subduing their senses, viewing all
conditions of life with the same eye,
and working for the welfare of all
beings, assuredly they come to Me.
0.533
0.619
0.742
5
Yet hazardous and slow is the
path to the Unrevealed, difﬁcult
for physical creatures to tread.
Greater is the travail of those
whose mind is ﬁxed on the
Unmanifest; for it is hard for
embodied mortals to gain the Unmanifest—Goal.
But they who thus ﬁx their
attention on the Absolute and Impersonal
encounter greater hardships, for it is
difﬁcult for those who possess a body
to realise Me as without one.
0.430
0.622
0.426
6
But they for whom I am the
supreme goal, who do all work
renouncing self for me and meditate on
me with single-hearted devotion,
But those who casting all their
actions on Me, making Me their all
in all, worship Me with the meditation
of undivided devotion,
Verily, those who surrender their actions
to Me, who muse on Me, worship Me
and meditate on Me alone, with no
thought save of Me,
0.776
0.799
0.725
7
these I will swiftly rescue from
the fragments cycle of birth and death,
for their consciousness has entered into me.
Of such, whose thoughts are centered
on Me, O Arjuna, I become before
long the Deliverer from the ocean
of this world of death.
O Arjuna! I rescue them from the ocean
of life and death, for their minds
are ﬁxed on Me.
0.546
0.752
0.560
8
Still your mind in me, still your
intellect in me, and without doubt
you will be united with me forever.
On Me set your mind, on Me rest
your conviction; thus without doubt shall
you remain only in Me hereafter.
Then let your mind cling only
to Me, let your intellect abide in
Me; and without doubt you shall live
hereafter in Me alone.
0.632
0.788
0.669
9
If you cannot still your mind
in me, learn to do so through the
regular practice of meditation.
If you can not set your mind steadily
on Me, then by the method of constant practice
seek to win Me, O Arjuna.
But if you can not ﬁx your mind
ﬁrmly on Me, then, My beloved friend,
try to do so by constant practice.
0.583
0.622
0.655
10
If you lack the will for such
self-discipline, engage yourself in my work,
for selﬂess service can lead you at
last to complete fulﬁllment.
If you are also unequal to this method
of constant practice, concentrate on service
for Me; even thus serving Me you
shall attain perfection.
And if you are not strong enough
to practise concentration, then devote yourself
to My service, do all yours acts for
My sake, and you shall still
attain the goal.
0.637
0.746
0.664
11
If you are unable to do even this,
surrender yourself to me, disciplining yourself
and renouncing the results of all your actions.
If you are unable even to do this,
then dedicating all to Me, with mind
controlled, abandon the fruit of action.
And if you are too weak even for
this, then seek refuge in union with Me,
and with perfect self-control renounce the fruit
of your action.
0.749
0.646
0.682
12
Better indeed is knowledge than mechanical
practice. Better than knowledge is meditation.
But better still is surrender of attachment to results,
because there follows immediate peace.
Better is knowledge than practice,
better than knowledge is concentration,
better than concentration is renunciation
of the fruit of all action,
from which directly issues peace.
Knowledge is superior to blind action,
meditation to mere knowledge,
renunciation of the fruit of action
to meditation, and where there is renunciation
peace will follow.
0.673
0.854
0.681
13
That one I love who is incapable of ill
will, who is friendly and compassionate.
Living beyond the reach of I and mine
and of pleasure and pain,
Who has ill-will towards none, who is
friendly and compassionate, who has shed all
thought of ‘mine’ or ‘I’, who regards
pain and pleasure alike, who is long-suffering;
He who is incapable of hatred towards any being,
who is kind and compassionate, free from
selﬁshness, without pride, equable
in pleasure and in pain, and forgiving,
0.558
0.811
0.507
14
patient, contented, self-controlled, ﬁrm
in faith, with all their heart and
all their mind given to me with
such as these I am in love.
Who is ever content, gifted with yoga,
self-restrained, of ﬁrm conviction, who has
dedicated his mind and reason to Me—that
devotee (bhakta) of Mine is dear to Me.
Always contented, self-centred, self-controlled,
resolute, with mind and reason dedicated to Me,
such a devotee of Mine is My beloved.
0.495
0.646
0.768
15
Not agitating the world or by it agitated,
they stand above the sway of elation,
competition, and fear: that one is my beloved.
Who gives no trouble to the world,
to whom the world causes no trouble,
who is free from exultation, resentment, fear
and vexation,—that man is dear to Me.
He who does not harm the world,
and whom the world cannot harm,
who is not carried away by any impulse of joy,
anger or fear, such a one is My beloved.
0.567
0.758
0.621
16
They are detached, pure, efﬁcient,
impartial, never anxious, selﬂess in all their
undertakings; they are my devotees, very dear
to me.
Who expects nothing, who is pure, resourceful,
unconcerned, untroubled, who indulges in no undertakings,
—that devotee of Mine is dear to Me.
He who expects nothing, who is pure,
watchful, indifferent, unrufﬂed, and who renounces
all initiative, such a one is My beloved.
0.684
0.847
0.569
17
That one is dear to me who runs not
after the pleasant or away from the painful,
grieves not, lusts not, but lets things come
and go as they happen.
Who rejoices not, neither frets nor grieves,
who covets not, who abandons both good
and ill—that devotee of Mine is dear
to Me.
He who is beyond joy and hate,
who neither laments nor desires,
to whom good and evil fortunes are the same,
such a one is My beloved.
0.628
0.678
0.597
18
That devotee who looks upon friend and foe
with equal regard, who is not buoyed up
by praise nor cast down by blame, alike in
heat and cold, pleasure and pain, free
from selﬁsh attachments,
Who is same to foe and friend,
who regards alike respect and disrespect,
cold and heat, pleasure and pain,
who is free from attachment;
He to whom friend and foe are alike,
who welcomes equally honour and dishonour,
heat and cold, pleasure and pain,
who is enamoured of nothing,
0.827
0.885
0.885
19
the same in honor and dishonor,
quiet, ever full, in harmony everywhere,
ﬁrm in faith such a one is dear to me.
Who weighs in equal scale blame and praise,
who is silent, content with whatever his lot,
who owns no home, who is of steady mind,—
that devotee of Mine is dear to Me.
Who is indifferent to praise and censure,
who enjoys silence, who is contented
with every fate, who has no ﬁxed abode,
who is steadfast in mind, and ﬁlled
with devotion, such a one is My beloved.
0.541
0.732
0.583
20
Those who meditate upon this immortal dharma
as I have declared it, full of faith and seeking
me as lifes supreme goal, are truly my devotees,
and my love for them is very great.
They who follow this essence of dharma,
as I have told it, with faith, keeping Me as
their goal,—those devotees are exceeding
dear to Me.
Verily those who love the spiritual wisdom
as I have taught, whose faith never fails,
and who concentrate their whole nature on Me,
they indeed are My most beloved.”
0.840
0.684
0.664
*
0.609 (0.120)
0.724 (0.096)
0.633 (0.097)
TABLE 10: Semantic similarity of verses from Chapter 12. The cosine similarity (score) is given with the following combinations.
Note that the comparisons are deﬁned by Eknath Easwaran vs Mahatma Gandhi (Score 1), Mahatma Gandhi vs Shri Purohit
Swami (Score 2), and Shri Purohit Swami vs Eknath Easwaran (Score 3). We provide the mean and standard deviation (in
brackets) of the scores at the bottom (*).
18
VOLUME 4, 2016

Chapter
Eknath Easwaran
Mahatma Gandhi
Shree Purohit Swami
1
arjuna, krishna, battle, dharma, brahmins
dhritarashtra, war, devadutta, bhishma, bhima
arjuna, maharatha, battle, devadatta, armies,
sanjaya, bhima, kripa, yudhishthira, war
arjuna, dharmaraja, maharaja, battle, dhritarashtra,
devadatta, war, duryodhana, sanjaya, kripa
2
arjuna, sorrow, souls, immortality, krishna,
death, arise, reverence, despair, disciple
arjuna, anguish, krishna, sorrowing, reverence,
arise, heartedness, compassion, endure, slain
arjuna, equanimity, anguish, krishna, reverence,
compassion, endure, terror, disciple, battle
3
arjuna, devotion, wisdom, selﬂess, selﬂessly,
krishna, knowledge, inaction, desires, brahman
arjuna, krishna, sacriﬁce, inaction, detachment,
renunciation, desires, pervading, yoga, prakriti
arjuna, wisdom, sacriﬁce, meditates, inaction,
krishna, meditate, worship, refraining, honour
4
teachings, arjuna, dharma, krishna, yoga,
eternal, devotee, sages, changeless, surrendering
arjuna, yoga, wrath, sages, devotee,
essence, changeless, succession, learnt, varnas
arjuna, reincarnate, wisdom, krishna, worship,
materialism, devotee, changeless, ancestors, births
5
selﬂess, wisdom, renunciation, arjuna, krishna,
judgment, desires, sannyasa, duality, selﬁshly
renunciation, yoga, soul, sankhyas, virtue, actions,
peace, karmayoga, attain, ascetic
meditating, wisdom, renunciation, krishna, arjuna,
praise, divine, sin, puriﬁcation, perceives
6
meditation, yoga, selfrealization, arjuna, selﬂess,
attains, energy, abiding, refrain, renounce
yoga, yogi, arjuna, oneself, contentment, nirvana,
puriﬁcation, spirit, motionless, sannyasin
spirituality, meditation, krishna, arjuna, celibacy,
puriﬁcation, renounces, virtuous, vow, sage
7
arjuna, devotion, krishna, spiritual, prakriti,
eternal, universe, yoga,nature,realize
arjuna,vedas,transcending,yoga, jiva,
essence,evil,universe,manliness,mystery
arjuna,krishna,godless,spiritual, righteousness,
eternal,scriptures,beings,natures,unto
8
brahman,arjuna,devotion, krishna, eternal,
souls, adhiyajna, death, existence, realize
brahman, arjuna, vedas, adhyatma, devotion,
death,embodied,abode,yogi,departs
arjuna,devotion,consciousness, eternity,souls,
divinity,krishna,meditate,scriptures,omniscient
9
devotion, krishna, arjuna, eternal, souls,
divine, behold, vijnana, wisdom, existence
arjuna,dharma, transcendent, prakriti, doctrine,
souls, homage, multitude, condemn, lord
devotion, arjuna, krishna, godless,mysticism,souls,
multitude,immovable,beings,universe
10
krishna, arjuna,brahman,devotion,sages,
creation,divine,manifestations,wisdom,equanimity
arjuna,brahman,devotion,gods, beings,
discernment,yoga,everlasting,contentment, inward
krishna,arjuna,devotion, godless,wisdom,
eternal,mankind,holiest,progenitors,contentment
11
arjuna,krishna,creation,behold,inﬁnite,
celestial,perceive,yoga,exalted,sages
arjuna,krishna,gods,behold, universe,
multitudes,vasus,yoga,vestments,imperishable
arjuna,krishna,omnipresent, universe,behold,
celestial,embraced,radiance,powers,petal
13
devotion,brahman,krishna,buddhi,spiritual,
immortality, wisdom, arjuna, sages, arise
brahman, consciousness, devotion, arjuna, uprightness,
body, aphoristic, aversion, immovable, pretentiousness
devotion, wisdom, vitality, perception, krishna,
omniscient, nature, arjuna, matter, renunciation
14
krishna, arjuna, tamas, indolence, transcends,
reborn, wisdom,death,rajas,wombs
arjuna,tamas,sages,creation, prakriti,
attains,heedlessness,sattva,beings,restlessness
purity,indolence,krishna, divinity,sinless,
infatuation,spirit,reborn,eternal,knowledge
15
krishna,eternal,scriptures,wisdom, essence,
immutable,ashvattha,sages,tree,universe
vedanta,ashvattha,eternal, souls,perceive,
tree,ramiﬁed,abode,inward,ancient
eternal,creation,krishna, scriptures,wisdom,
perceive,celestial,regeneration,nourishment,tree
16
krishna,arjuna,demonic,scriptures, purity,
god,renunciation,qualities,hypocrisy,shall
arjuna,sacriﬁce,purity, souls,wrath,spiritedness,
devilish,aversion,pretentiousness,god
godless,krishna,wrath, scriptures,harmlessness,
modesty,shall,destroy,delusion,hypocritical
17
tamasic,krishna,sacriﬁces,worship,arjuna,
scriptures,disregard,rajas, hypocrisy,sattva
worship,krishna, yakshas, arjuna,forsake,
shastra,sattva,rajas,pretentiousness,unholy
sacriﬁce,purity,krishna, arjuna,scriptures,
nourishing,aryans,vigour,unclean,covet
18
arjuna,discipline,sacriﬁce,renunciation, sannyasa,
discomfort,divine,tyaga,selﬁsh,meaning
arjuna,sacriﬁce,renunciation, doctrine,undertakes,
tyagi,abandon,embodied,actions,wise
arjuna,benevolence,sacriﬁce, renunciation,philosophy,
relinquishment,desire,renounce,forgoing,act
TABLE 11: Keywords for All chapters
Eknath Easwaran
Score
Mahatma Gandhi
Score
Shri Purohit Swami
Score
devotion
1.83
devotion
2.17
devotee
1.54
arjuna
1.61
arjuna
1.54
worship
1.51
krishna
1.52
omnipresent
1.20
krishna
1.33
yoga
1.31
yoga
1.16
arjuna
1.29
selﬂess
1.29
mortals
1.00
eternal
1.10
eternal
1.22
embodied
0.98
meditate
0.99
serene
1.10
lord
0.93
renunciation
0.90
renouncing
0.89
unchanging
0.92
verily
0.76
beings
0.86
attain
0.87
realise
0.70
established
0.66
steadily
0.73
attention
0.60
TABLE 12: Keywords extracted from Chapter 12 for the respective translations.
different area - philosophy and religion.
We have two major limitations of the proposed framework.
The ﬁrst major limitation is in terms of the model and the
training data, since the model is based on pre-trained BERT
model which is generic and cannot capture the essence of
Hindu philosophy. We note that there are speciﬁc Sanskrit
terms that are difﬁcult to translate. There are a number of
BERT speciﬁc models, for different domains such as Med-
BERT for medicine [125] and Legal-BERT for law [126]. In
the case of philosophy, we do not have any pre-trained model
for masked language modelling. Our application is unique,
and hence a BERT-based on western philosophy will not
sufﬁce. We would need a pre-trained BERT model for Hindu
philosophy in order to capture the essence and speciﬁc words
such as Brahman, avatar, karma, bhagwan, Vishnu, maya,
viraat roopa, and dharma. Once the key terms are recognised,
pre-processing of the respective texts will not be crude where
we simply change the words to English without considering
the context. We need to note that the English language is
heavily inﬂuenced by the concept of God in Abrahamic
religions (Christianity, Judian and Islam); hence, the term
God has a speciﬁc meaning which is in contrast to equivalent
VOLUME 4, 2016
19

concepts such as Brahman or Vishnu. The Abrahmic notion
of God refers to the creator who is not part of the universe
[127], but can control the universe and controls the mortals
(humans) with rewards and punishment. The Hindu deﬁnition
of God is entirely different [128], where the creator and
the creation are seen as the same. Hindu philosophy views
the creation featuring two major aspects; i.e consciousness
(Purusha) which is depicted by the male Gods such as Brahma
and nature and matter; nature (Prakrati) which is depicted by
their consorts, the Goddesses such as Saraswati, Parvati and
Laxmi.
We note that in Chapter 2 of the Bhagavad Gita, there are
ﬁfteen predicates used to deﬁne the Atman which in some
philosophical traditions such as the Advaita Vedanta is seen
same as the Paramatman (supreme Atman) and also Brahman
(ultimate reality). The descriptions of Atman are given by the
terms avinasin (non-perishable), avyaya (non-changeable),
anasin (non-destructible), aprameya (nonmeasurable), aja,
(non-born) nitya (eternal), sasvata (constant), sarvagata (om-
nipresent), sthanu (steadfast) acale (non-movable), sanatana
(everlasting) avyakta (non-manifest), acintya (nonconceiv-
able), avikarya (non-variable), and avadhya (non-violable).
These deﬁnitions of the supreme reality are also found in
the Upanishads [129]. These include, tat tvam asi (thou art
that) - Chandogya Upanishad - 6.8.7 aham brahm¯asmi (I am
Brahman) - Brihadaranyaka Upanishad 1.4.10 which build the
foundation of Advaita Vedanta [130].
Hinduism is often labelled as polytheist, but in principle it
is a form of pantheism [131] which is a philosophical system
based on the notion that reality is identical with divinity, i.e
the creator and creation are the same. Apart from this, Hindu
philosophy also caters for schools of atheism, such as Carvaka
philosophy [132]; and non-theism, such as Buddhism and
Jainism. These schools and deﬁnitions make it difﬁcult to
translate Sanskrit words to English since they have historical
development of the terms with philosophical annotations. For
examples, Vishnu means "preserver", "vastness" and Brahma
"refers to "the creator" and Shiva can refer to "the auspicious
one" and depending on the content, various different names
are used. For instance, Natraja refers to the the dancing
Shiva - widely known as the cosmological dancer [133].
Rudra often refers to the personality of Shiva in anger.
Moreover, certain Sanskrit terms with similar wordings can
have entirely different meaning, e. Bhram (illusion), Brahma
(creator), Brahman (ultimate reality), Brahmand (universe),
and Brahmin (priest or academic caste/profession).
Apart from the context and the difference in the philo-
sophical system, we note that the challenge of translating
the Bhagavad Gita is not only that it is written in an ancient
language which is not a conversational language nowadays,
but also that it is written as a poem (as a song). The term ’gita’
translates to ’song’ and Bhagavad Gita translates to ’song of
the divine’. The Bhagavad Gita has been written as a song
so that it can be remembered and sung and this is how it
has been transmitting through oral tradition. It is well known
that translating poetry and songs leads to losing rhyming
patterns and at times meaning, since certain metaphors and
expressions are constrained to speciﬁc languages, cultural
traditions and time-frames [134], [135]. Moreover, certain
verses in the Gita can have multiple layers of meaning since
they are written in the form of poetry and feature literary
devices such as metaphors [136]. Hence, translating such texts
is very challenging, due to language and style of the ancient
Hindu writers also known as Rishi’s [137], [138]. Note there
are certain prominent translations, such as the ’Bhagavadgita’
by Sir Edwin Arnold that give a poetic interpretation [139] but
do not distinguish the different verses. A recent translation by
Badhe [140] maintained the verses with rhythm and rhyming
patterns so that it does not lose the essence of the song-verse
style from the original Sanskrit version. Future work can
be done by analysis of sentiment and semantic similarity of
translations that maintain rhythm and rhyme.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We presented a framework for comparing translations of the
Bhagavad Gita using sentiment and semantic analysis. In
terms of the comparison of the translations with statistical
measures (such as bigrams and trigrams), we found major
differences in the translations. Due to the nature of the Sanskrit
language and the fact that the Bhagavad Gita is a song with
rhythm and rhyme, it is not surprising that different translators
used different vocabulary to describe the same concepts.
Moreover, we note the vast difference in the dates of the
translations (1935, 1946, and 1985); hence it is natural to
ﬁnd a major change in vocabulary and expressions. Moreover,
we also found that two of the earlier translators (Mahatma
Gandhi and Shri Purohit Swami) used archaic words which
were pre-processed to modern vocabulary so that it is easier
for modelling. In the translation by Eknath Easwaran, we did
not ﬁnd any archaic words. Furthermore, the translators also
used different names for Arjuna and Lord Krishna, which
we also pre-processed. Hence, the language and vocabulary
across the the different translations vastly differ.
In the sentiment analysis, we ﬁnd that although the language
and vocabulary has been vastly different, the BERT-based
language model has been able to recognise the sentiments well
which have been mostly similar given the different chapters of
the respective translations. The sentiments such as optimistic,
annoyed and surprised have been the most expressed while
the model also considered a signiﬁcant number of verses
as joking. It is also interesting to ﬁnd how the sentiment
polarity changes for Arjuna and Lord Krishna over time, as
the conversation deepens where Arjuna is pessimistic towards
the beginning and then becomes optimistic with knowledge of
Hindu philosophy and Karma Yoga imparted by Lord Krishna.
Apart from the knowledge given by the philosophy of karma
and dharma, the polarity of the sentiments expressed which
changed over time could be a reason why the Bhagavad Gita
is seen as a book of psychology, management and conﬂict
resolution. The sentiments expressed by Krishna shows that
with philosophical knowledge of dharma and mentor-ship, a
troubled mind can get clarity for making the right decisions
20
VOLUME 4, 2016

Chapter
Eknath Easwaran
Mahatma Gandhi
Shri Purohit Swami
5
Verse 23
But those who overcome the
impulses of lust and anger which
arise in the body are made
whole and live in joy.
The man who is able even here on
earth, before he is released from
the body, to hold out against the ﬂoodtide
of lust and wrath,—he is a yogi,
he is happy.
He who, before he leaves
his body, learns to surmount
the promptings of desire and anger
is a saint and is happy.
Predicted Sentiment
Joking, Optimistic
Joking, Optimistic
Joking, Optimistic
11
Verse 14
Filled with amazement, his hair
standing on end in ecstasy, he bowed
before the Lord with joined palms and
spoke these words.
Then Arjuna, wonderstruck and thrilled
in every ﬁbre of his being, bowed
low his head before the Lord, addressing
Him thus with folded hands. Arjuna Said:
Thereupon Arjuna, dumb with awe,
his hair on end, his head bowed,
his hands clasped in salutation, addressed the
Lord thus:
Predicted Sentiment
Joking
Joking, Surprise
Joking, Surprise
11
Verse 27
All are rushing into your
awful jaws; I see some of them
crushed by your teeth.
Are hastening into the fearful
jaws of Your terrible mouths. Some
indeed, caught between Your teeth,
are seen, their heads being
crushed to atoms.
I see them all rushing headlong
into Your mouths, with terrible tusks,
horrible to behold. Some are mangled between
your jaws, with their heads crushed
to atoms.
Predicted Sentiments
Joking
Joking, Anxious, Annoyed
Joking
TABLE 13: Selected verses with ’joking’ as the predicted sentiment.
in times of conﬂict.
The results from the semantic analysis also showed that
the meaning conveyed across the different translations were
similar although different language and vocabulary were used.
Further, the keywords extracted from the different translations
also showed similar terms, although in different order of
importance.
Future work can focus in using Sanskrit expert translators
to review the sentiments presented by the framework for
the different translators. Moreover, we can also apply the
framework to translations of the Bhagavad Gita that retain
rhythm and rhyme. The same framework can be used to
analyse the translations of other texts, these include the
Upanishads and also translations of texts in other domains
from different languages.
DATA AND CODE
Python-based open source code and data can be found here 6.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS STATEMENT
R. Chandra devised the project with the main conceptual ideas
and experiments and contributed to overall writing, literature
review and discussion of results. V. Kulkarni provided im-
plementation and experimentation and further contributed in
results visualisation and analysis.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We acknowledge contributions of Sweta Rathi who supported
earlier part of the project.
