arXiv:1203.0504v1  [cs.CL]  2 Mar 2012
Modelling Social Structures and Hierarchies in
Language Evolution
Martin Bachwerk and Carl Vogel
Computational Linguistics Group,
School of Computer Science and Statistics,
Trinity College, Dublin 2, Ireland

Abstract. Language evolution might have preferred certain prior social
conﬁgurations over others. Experiments conducted with models of dif-
ferent social structures (varying subgroup interactions and the role of a
dominant interlocutor) suggest that having isolated agent groups rather
than an interconnected agent is more advantageous for the emergence of
a social communication system. Distinctive groups that are closely con-
nected by communication yield systems less like natural language than
fully isolated groups inhabiting the same world. Furthermore, the addi-
tion of a dominant male who is asymmetrically favoured as a hearer, and
equally likely to be a speaker has no positive inﬂuence on the disjoint
groups.
1
Introduction
The question of how human language could have emerged from an animal-like
communication system is not only fascinating from an evolutionary point of view,
but also has broad ramiﬁcations in the area of natural language and speech devel-
opment. If we could understand how our extremely distant ancestors learned to
associate meaning with seemingly arbitrary symbols, be those symbols gestures
or sounds, then we should have an easier time of engineering artiﬁcial systems
capable of comparable levels of intelligence.
Although speculation about the origin of human language has gone on for
centuries, the problem has only relatively recently been scrutinized in empiri-
cally oriented disciplines, including anthropology and evolutionary biology [8],
linguistics [13], artiﬁcial intelligence [20,6], and computer science [15,19]. The
contribution of the latter two sciences to the problem has been mostly in the
area of modelling and simulations, concentrating on collecting experimental data
for the plausibility of some of the proposed theories of language evolution. As
helpful as such work might be, it has to be noted with some disappointment that
few of the computational approaches mentioned above have ventured deeper into
isolating the importance of the still obscure issues of symbol grounding, dialogue
structuring, questions, mental representations and pragmatics with a realistic set
of assumptions.

2
Martin Bachwerk and Carl Vogel
The current work aims to contribute in this direction with model that is
quite abstract, yet suﬃciently realistic in terms of assumptions made regarding
the cognitive capacities of early humans. We apply this model to a number of
diﬀerent hypothetical social structures among groups of agents in order to ob-
serve the communicative advantages and disadvantages of these structures with
respect to supporting the emergence of natural language. First we summarize
our modelling approach and then provide a technical description of the class
of models explored here. We present some of our most recent experiments and
discuss expected and observed outcomes, concluding with an evaluation of the
results and suggestions for future work. While the results are not decisive, we
hope to intrigue the reader with the overall approach and motivate our colleagues
to adapt the approach to other related scenarios.
2
Modelling Approach
The experiments presented in this paper have been performed using the Lan-
guage Evolution Workbench (LEW, [23]), which was extended by a more in-
tuitive forgetting mechanism as well as the possibility to run simulations with
diﬀerent underlying social structures, as explained below. This workbench pro-
vides over 20 adjustable parameters and makes as few a priori assumptions as
possible. The nevertheless assumed cognitive and social abilities of agents have
been motivated by the more widely accepted evolutionary accounts and thus ﬁt
in well with a number of models and scenarios proposed by other authors (see
Section 1 for a small selection of literature).
Abstract Model The LEW model is implemented at a relatively high level
of abstraction, meaning that some interactions and factors of the outside world
are either modelled in a very simplistic manner or not modelled at all. While we
concede that such an approach might make the model open to a certain amount
of criticism regarding its validity in terms of being an acceptable representation
of reality, there are two arguments that should be mentioned in defence of such
an approach.
First of all, a highly abstracted model of a certain system means that all
the elements of such a model are distinctly observable and their eﬀects well
quantiﬁable. While a model with hundreds of parameters would certainly bring
it closer to reality, one would ﬁnd it extremely hard to distinguish between
signiﬁcant and insigniﬁcant parameters in such a model, as well as to observe
the interactions between diﬀerent parameters.
Furthermore, by starting with a simpler model, we aim to avoid the mistake
of building features into it that have not yet been proven or observed well enough
in other disciplines. In other terms, if one does not know the precise parameter
settings for the dimensions that impinge on the problem, one should not just
build in arbitrary settings as features of the model without experimenting with
a range of parameter combinations ﬁrst. However, since the number of such
experiments grows exponentially with every free parameter in a model, we have
elected to approach this issue by tackling a smaller number of features at a time,

Modelling Social Structures and Hierarchies in Language Evolution
3
with the option of ﬁxing the parameter values of a particular feature in case
of little or no signiﬁcance and moving on to the next feature, thus gradually
extending the model.
Due to the abstracted nature of agent, entity and event representation, it
should be noted at this point that the model is easily adjustable to represent a
wide variety of social scenarios, thus making it well suited for experiments even
outside the scope of language evolution. The main emphasis of the model is on
observing how patterns emerge in a simulated system without there being any
sort of explicit force driving the system in any particular direction.
General Assumptions Agents in the LEW are equipped with the ability to
observe and individuate events, i.e. an abstracted sensory mechanism. Each agent
individuates events according to its own perspective, as likely as not distinct from
that of companions. In order to model communication, agents are assumed to be
able to join in a shared attention frame around an occurring event and engage in
an interaction, whereby one of the agents is assigned the intention to comment on
the event and the other, listening agent understands that the observed utterance
is the speaker’s comment on the event and attempts to decode the meaning of
the perceived symbols accordingly. These cognitive skills of attention sharing and
intentionality perception have been marked as integral to the origins of language
among others by [21].
Three further assumptions are relevant to symbol production and perception
during interactions between agents: that agents are able to produce discernible
symbols at all, that such phonemes can be combined to invent new symbols and
that the transmission of symbols and phonemes occurs without noise; however,
agents do not necessarily segment symbol sequences identically.1 These assump-
tions are made on the grounds that language could not have possibly evolved
without some sort of symbols being emitted.
The LEW ﬁts with the so called faculty of language in the narrow sense as
proposed by [12] in that the agents are equipped with the sensory, intentional
and concept-mapping skills at the start, and the simulations attempt to provide
an insight into how these could be combined to produce a communication system
with comparable properties to a human language. Further, the LEW agents can
be seen as having completed steps 1 and 2 in the accounts presented by [14]
or [4], i.e. autonomously re-using and inventing new symbols from a generative
unit, the phoneme.
Social Structures and Hierarchies The notion that social groups of one
type or another play a central role within the evolution of the hominid species as
such as well as the emergence of a communicative system like a proto-language
in particular is apparent from a variety of evolutionary theories and modelling
approaches. From the anthropological point of view, it has been repeatedly sug-
gested that the emergence of language is strongly connected with the increase
of hominid group sizes and the directly related neocortex ratio between 500,000
1 While the symbols are called phonemes in the current simulations, there is no reason
why these should not be representative of gestural signs. However, the physiological
constraints on the production of symbols is not a part of this model.

4
Martin Bachwerk and Carl Vogel
and 250,000 years ago (cf. [1]). Being unparalleled in any other species, this evo-
lutionary change has become the focal point of several theories on the emergence
of language. While the speciﬁc details of these theories are quite variable, two
main branches can be clearly distinguished in terms of the characteristic social
dynamics of the scenarios.
Nearly 40 years ago, [2] postulated that the unparalleled evolutionary path of
hominids is based mainly on the competition between diﬀerent bands or groups
of the species. While this phenomenon has been also observed in other primates
to some extent, the degree of competitiveness, escalating to true warfare, is
considered to be unique to the human species. In contrast to [2], [8,6] propose
scenarios that are based on the evolution of Machiavellian Intelligence in early
hominids [3]. The main diﬀerence to [2] is that the focal point in these scenar-
ios is on group-internal organisation and cooperation, rather than inter-group
competition. Accordingly, internal hierarchies play a much bigger role in these
accounts, even if considered at the simplest level of having one dominant member
in a group. In the current experiments, the groups in the no-male runs should
roughly correspond to the competing bands in [2] and the simulations with a
male – to the social structures in [8,6].
One ﬁnal remark regarding our implementation of ‘competition’ or an ‘alpha-
male’ is that even though it is common in social and political sciences to observe
a distribution of power and inﬂuence in basically any community, our model
does not involve an explicit deﬁnition of power. Consequently, we can observe
the eﬀect of being organised in a ‘democratic’ or an ‘dictatorial’ power structure,
as proposed by [9], only in approximated terms of implicit inﬂuence, i.e. based
on some agents’ higher involvement in interactions, meaning there is never a
‘semantic arbiter’.
3
Model Implementation
Agents, Entities and Events Agents in the LEW are non-physical entities
(cf. [20] for embodied implementations) and are not specialized to the question
of language evolution. What characterizes every agent in the LEW is solely a
knowledge base and a lexicon. The knowledge base consists of all experienced
events in the order in which an agent encountered these. The lexicon is repre-
sented as a set of <Meaning, Form, Weight> tuples, where a Meaning is (a
part of) an event, a Form is (a part of) an utterance that was either produced
or heard by the agent in relation to the event, and the Weight is an indicator of
conﬁdence in the mapping, incremented each time it is experienced. If forgetting
is enabled, these weights are then gradually decreased according to the selected
forgetting function and its parameters.
Events are generated by selecting one of the predeﬁned event types, which
deﬁne the combination of arguments that is permitted for event instances of the
given type (e.g. [human, human, event]), and ﬁlling it with acceptable argu-
ments. An argument of an event can either be an entity or another event, the
latter option allowing for recursive composition of events, resulting in an un-

Modelling Social Structures and Hierarchies in Language Evolution
5
bounded meaning space based on a ﬁnite number of event types. Entities are
represented as propertyless atoms, and an arbitrary number of these can be ex-
perimented with. However, in the presented work we deﬁne entities in terms of
sorts, whereby two sorts are distinguished, namely animates and inanimates.
Adding an abstracted layer of physical properties to entities for simulating con-
cept formation is a possible future extension of the LEW.
Interactions Building on the traditions of computer simulations of language
evolution, the LEW simulates interactions between agents. Every interaction in
the LEW occurs between two randomly chosen agents, a speaker and a hearer,
whereby an agent can also end up talking to himself if he gets picked as the hearer
too (language is meant for thinking as well as communicating). The speaker is
ﬁrst of all presented with an event constructed as described above, e.g. xcvww
human twedf inanimate. The speaker’s task is then to individuate the event by
segmenting it into meaning chunks or, in other terms, by combining parts of the
event into uniﬁed segments, e.g. [xcvww] [human] [twedf inanimate], which
he then attempts to communicate to his conversation partner by either using an
appropriate mapping from his lexicon or by inventing a new word if the meaning
is new to him.
The second agent – the hearer – has the task of decoding the meaning of
the heard utterance by attempting to assign (parts of) the event to (parts of)
the utterance by either looking for appropriate form-meaning pairs in its lexicon
or, failing to ﬁnd one, by simply assuming (a part of) its own perspective on
the event (e.g. [xcvww human twedf] [inanimate]) as the intended meaning.
While this scenario presumes that both agents are knowingly communicating
about the same event, their internal segmentations of the event can be, and usu-
ally are, quite diﬀerent, which ensures that no omniscient meaning-form transfer
occurs at any stage of the simulated interactions.
The words used by the agents in their interactions are implemented as combi-
nations of phonemes, whereby every phoneme is represented as a pair of phones,
thus mimicking the onset-nucleus structure (without the coda). When inventing
a new word, the speakers use a single phoneme only. However, since agents do
not possess the capacity of detecting word boundaries from an encountered ut-
terance, hearers have the ‘power’ to wrongfully segment heard utterances and
thus introduce larger words into their lexicons and subsequently, when acting as
a speaker, into the lexicons of others.2
Group Dynamics In order to be able to perform experiments with diﬀerent
social structures as described in Section 2, we have extended the LEW with three
parameters that determine the social organisation of a simulated population,
namely the presence of a ‘male’ (represented as a binary variable), the number
of groups n (≥1) that the non-male population should be split up into and the
ratios for the distribution of agents into these groups r1, .., rn, so that the size of
2 The possibility of having synchronized speech segmentation can nevertheless be ex-
plored in the LEW via the synchrony parameter, but was turned oﬀfor the presented
experiments (cf. [22] for an account of experiments with synchronous transmission).

6
Martin Bachwerk and Carl Vogel
any non-male group Ci = ri ∗(Ctotal −male), where Ctotal is the total number
of agents in the system.
After dividing the agents into a particular social structure, we can deﬁne
how they will interact with each other during the simulation using two further
parameters: the male-directed communication rate pmale, deﬁnes the chances of
an agent selecting the male as the hearer in an interaction, and the intra-group
communication rate pintra, which is deﬁned as the probability of a speaker agent
from group Gi picking another agent from his own group (including himself) as
the hearer, as opposed to an agent from groups G1..Gi−1, Gi+1..Gn, after having
decided that he does not wish to interact with the male. The probabilities of
picking an agent from either of the neighbouring groups were distributed equally
from any remaining percentage.
PPPPPPP
Speaker
Hearer Male Same group Every other group
Male
0
–
1
n
Non-Male
pmale
pintra
1−(pmale+pintra)
n−1
Table 1. Probabilities of speaker-hearer combinations for each type of agent.
Importantly, and as can be seen in Table 1, the intra-group communication
rate only applies to non-male agents, meaning that the male has equal chances
of selecting any agent from any group for an interaction, except for himself. The
avoidance of male self-talk is mainly motivated by the fact that a male is already
involved in a much larger number of communicative bouts and may simply not
have enough time to be alone and talk to himself.
4
Experiment Design
The goal of the presented experiments was to observe the eﬀect of diﬀerent hier-
archies and social structures on the overall speed and success of communication
within a group of agents. This approach extends the LEW in a way that would
enable it to be used at least as a partial model for the theories of the origins
of language that are based on social interactions of early humans. In particular,
the experiments should provide empirical data for the possibility of language
emerging in diﬀerently organized social groups, building on either the competi-
tive account presented by [2] or the grooming theory of [8] and the corresponding
comparative research by [16].
For the current experiments, all but two parameters of the LEW have been
kept ﬁxed at the following values: 9 agents divided equally into three groups of
3, with no agent addition or elimination occurring, the male-directed communi-
cation rate set to 20% in all simulations where a male was present, 100 event
types with a Zipﬁan distribution, 41 phonemes, asynchronous utterance segmen-
tation, frequency-based mapping retrieval, forgetting enabled and no questions.

Modelling Social Structures and Hierarchies in Language Evolution
7
The two varied parameters were the presence of a male in a population and the
intra-group communication rate for the non-male agents whereby ﬁve diﬀerent
rates were experimented with – 0%, 33%, 50%, 80% and 100% – resulting in ten
combinations of simulation settings that represent a variety of social structures
from free circulation to full isolation.
Expected Outcome The goal of the experimental setup described above
was to observe if a particular social structure is somehow better suited for the
emergence of a group-wide communication system. The prediction that we make
is that agents communicating mainly within their own group should achieve
higher levels of understanding; however, these agents are expected to evolve
their own sub-dialects that are quite distinct from those of other groups of the
community, thus making them unable to properly cooperate with most mem-
bers of the whole community, if the need for such cooperation ever occurred.
The evaluation measures applied during the experiments in order to verify the
postulated hypothesis and quantify the suggested eﬀects are described in more
detail below.
Evaluation Measures When two agents communicate with each other in
the LEW, they have no access to the internal states of their interlocuting coun-
terparts and are thus, rather disappointingly from their point of view, unable to
telepathically know what the other agent is talking about. However, this does
not mean that communication success is not measurable in some way. In fact,
the model includes a number of various measures that allow us to observe and
analyse the emerging symbol systems in a suﬃciently rigorous fashion, for ex-
ample by comparing the intended meaning of the speaker with the understood
meaning of the hearer, either explicitly or implicitly.
From the explicit point of view, one can observe how many of the speaker’s
words have been actually segmented correctly, and subsequently how many of the
correctly segmented words have been decoded into a meaning by the hearer that
matches exactly the intended meaning of the speaker. This explicit measure can
be also seen as measuring the cohesiveness of lexical overlap in two interacting
agents. However, understanding can be also measured implicitly, namely without
regard for the lexical items that were used to convey the meaning. So if the
speaker wants to say A, but either by accident or because of not knowing any
better, says B, then if the hearer, again by chance or lack of linguistic knowledge,
still understands A then the interaction can be seen as successful to a certain
degree.
Apart from evaluating the actual communication scenarios, we also observe
the lexicons of the agents to be able to draw more qualitative conclusions. For
instance, the lexicon size indicates the range of expressible meanings and inter-
pretable forms; the amount of synonymy and homonymy both inside the individ-
ual lexicons and across of the whole population tells us how similar the emergent
languages are to natural languages, which seem to tolerate homonymy and avoid
synonymy; while the amount of mappings shared by the whole population and
the number of agents sharing a mapping on average are both good indicators of
potential communicative success.

8
Martin Bachwerk and Carl Vogel
5
Results and Discussion
In total, 600 runs have been executed for each of the factor combinations with a
total of 200 rounds of 10 interactions within each such run. The distributions of
understanding success rates are presented in Figure 1(a) and suggest that there
is a strong diﬀerence in the potential of language evolving in a particular group
depending on the group’s hierarchical and social structure.3 In particular, one
observes an increase in communicative success with the increase of intra-group
communication rate (t ≥14.10, p < 0.0001 for every level of pintra), showing that
the more isolated a group of agents is, the likelier it seems to evolve a group-
internal language that serves well as a medium of communication. It should
be noted that the setting with no male and a 33% intra-group communication
rate corresponds to one group of 9 agents where any agent has an equal chance
of being selected as either the speaker or the hearer, and is thus essentially
the current baseline of the LEW as all previously conducted experiments were
performed with this setup [23,22].
When considering the eﬀect of having a male in the population, it can be
noted that the addition of such a single interconnected agent is not advantageous
for the whole group (t = −12.43, p < 0.0001). Most plausibly, this can be
explained by the lack of opportunity for the agents to build a common language
as they are in eﬀect too occupied with attempting to communicate with the
male. However, since the chances of the male being selected as the speaker are
equal to those of any other agent, he does not have suﬃcient power to actually
regulate and stabilize the language of other agents.
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Understanding F1
0%
33%
50%
80%
100%
No male
With male (Female)
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Lexicon size
0%
33%
50%
80%
100%
No male
With male (Female)
With male (Male)
Fig. 1. Eﬀect of male presence and varying intra-group communication rates (x-axis)
on (a) communication success rate (F1 measure) and (b) agent lexicon size.
3 Let the reader not be discouraged by the relatively low levels of understanding as
it is our foremost goal to show that at least some sort of recognition of what is
being talked about can be achieved at the very early stages of language evolution.
In addition, [5] suggests that ‘nearly’ experiences can be quite stimulating even if
the actual rewards are minimal.

Modelling Social Structures and Hierarchies in Language Evolution
9
Figure 1(b) suggests that the male lexicon in the given scenario and under
the presented experimental settings tends to exhibit a larger number of both
expressible meanings and interpretable forms, resulting in a bigger size overall,
compared to agents from the surrounding groups (t = 120.44, p < 0.0001). This
tendency is more or less a direct consequence of the setting that, regardless of the
intra-group communication rate, every agent from any group interacts with the
male 20% of the time. Having diﬀerent members of the community constantly
communicating with the male results in a deep source of linguistic data being
provided to and processed by the male.
A subsequent eﬀect of having a male in the community is that the lexicon
size of an average member actually drops below those observed in communities
without a unifying male-like agent (t = −33.02, p < 0.0001). The explanation is
purely quantitative and essentially says that if an agent is occupied with speaking
to the male 20% of the time and if the total number of interactions is kept
constant, he will have less time to devote to interacting with other members of
either his own or neighbouring groups of the community. This in turn reduces the
amount of linguistic data that an average group-agent has a chance of observing
and learning from, resulting in him learning less meaning-form mappings.
The ramiﬁcations of having a male in the presented experiments is both sim-
ilar and slightly distinct from the acceleration-deceleration eﬀect observed by
[11]. On the similar side, the eﬀects of the male acting as a hub and connecting
the agents on the one hand and being overloaded with diﬀerent idiolects and
failing to transmit a consistent language to other agents on the other hand are
certainly present in our experiments. However, it appears that another comple-
mentary eﬀect can be observed in our case, namely that since the chances of the
male acting as a speaker are equal to those of any other agent, the male appears
to take a lot of linguistic data in, but not give back equally as much, thus acting
more like a language server than a true hub.
Going further, a correlation between the higher intra-group communication
rates and agent lexicon sizes can be observed in the ﬁgures above, most notably
for the higher levels of pintra (t = −17.530, p < 0.0001 for pintra = 100% and
t = −6.998, p < 0.0001 for pintra = 80%; however p = 0.337 for pintra = 50%
and p = 0.664 for pintra = 33%). It is quite clearly the case that if a regular
agent is suﬃciently restricted to interacting with other agents of her own group
then she is exposed to less linguistic variation and consequently fewer meaning-
form mappings that she could possibly learn. On the other hand, the lexicon of
the male increases as agents become more and more group-oriented and start
developing independent dialects up to the point where they basically have their
own languages (t = 4.749, p < 0.0001 for pintra = 100%) that are only connected
by one agent – the male – who is exposed to, and basically forced into learning
all three of these. For the fully isolated groups, the smaller lexicons appear to
further result in a decrease of agent lexicon synonymy (t = −11.627, p < 0.0001);
other settings show no such eﬀect.
The explanation for the increase in agent-internal lexicon homonymy corre-
sponding with the increase in the intra-group communication rate requires some

10
Martin Bachwerk and Carl Vogel
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Agent synonymy rate
0%
33%
50%
80%
100%
No male
With male (Female)
With male (Male)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Agent homonymy rate
0%
33%
50%
80%
100%
No male
With male (Female)
With male (Male)
Fig. 2. Eﬀect of male presence and varying intra-group communication rates (x-axis)
on (a) agent lexicon synonymy and (b) agent lexicon homonymy.
clariﬁcations as to how homonyms can emerge in a language. The most intuitive
source of homonymy in the LEW is located within the utterance generation
process. In particular, when an agent is presented with a meaning that he has
not previously encountered and has hence no associated word for, he expresses
the meaning by emitting a random string. Importantly, since we are reluctant
to assume some kind of a cognitive mechanism implementing the principle of
contrast as a given, the space of such random strings is not restricted by forms
that are already present in an agent’s lexicon.4
Apart from the above scenario, the current implementation of the LEW also
introduces a certain amount of homonymy when an agent engages in a round of
self-interaction, which roughly corresponds to the primate notion of ‘thinking’.
What happens during self-talk is that when an agent assigns some random (even
previously unused) form f to a meaning m that he wishes to express, he will not
‘remember’ that he just assigned that form to the meaning m when acting as a
hearer, and if he has never heard the form before, he can end up with selecting
any random segment of the perceived event as the meaning, resulting in two
diﬀerent meanings being mapped to a single form within one interaction. This
particular ‘feature’ of the model explains why the average homonymy levels of
agent lexicons tend to increase with higher intra-group communication rates and
correspondingly higher self-talk chances (t ≥32.78, p < 0.0001 for every level
of pintra), as seen from Figure 2(b). The homonymy rates of the male lexicon
are resistant to this tendency because the experiments were set up with no male
self-talk, motivated in part by them being occupied with speaking to others most
of the time.
The initial observations appear to suggest that on an idiolectic level, homonymy
seems to creep into an agent’s lexicon when the agent frequently engages in
4 The exact chance of a previously used form being assigned to a new meaning at
time t equals the number of forms known by the agent at t divided by the space of
possible combinations of two phonemes.

Modelling Social Structures and Hierarchies in Language Evolution
11
rounds of self talk and synonymy is in general governed by the level of isolation
of a group from other groups that employ distinct dialects. What can not be con-
cluded from this, however, is if these factors have an equal eﬀect on the synonymy
and homonymy ratios of the collective language of the simulated communities. It
is not possible to make such conclusions because we can not see the whole picture
behind the evolution of meanings and forms from the perspective of any single
agent. To exemplify this, it can be imagined that the increase in agent lexicon
synonymy does indeed signify an introduction of a number of new and redundant
words to the language. However, it can also be the case that the agents within
every group previously associated an immensely large amount of words with a
few especially frequent meanings, resulting in low lexicon synonymy, but did not
know any of the mappings common to the dialects employed by the agents of
neighbouring groups, thus making the language of the community possess an
extremely high level of overall synonymy. However, if each of these agents were
to learn one form for every meaning from each of the other dialects and at the
same time forget the redundant synonyms within his own group dialect, global
synonymy would actually decrease, courtesy of these forgotten forms, yet the
agent lexicon synonymy would increase dramatically.
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Global synonymy rate
0%
33%
50%
80%
100%
No male
With male (Female)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Global homonymy rate
0%
33%
50%
80%
100%
No male
With male (Female)
Fig. 3. Eﬀect of male presence and varying intra-group communication rates (x-axis)
on (a) global lexicon synonymy and (b) global lexicon homonymy.
This last scenario of increasing idiolectic levels and decreasing global levels
does indeed apply to homonymy in the emergent language of the presented simu-
lations (cf. Figures 2(b) and 3(b)). Accordingly, the global homonymy levels are
slightly dropping with the increase of intra-group communication (t ≤−6.703,
p < 0.0001 for every level of pintra), despite the opposite tendency being ob-
served for the individual lexicon homonymy. On the other hand, the eﬀect of
group isolation on global synonymy levels appears to be well balanced between
lower dialectic and idiolectic synonymy (cf. Figure 2(a)) and the growing id-
iosyncrasy of the dialects, resulting in an insigniﬁcant overall eﬀect (p > 0.1 for
every level of pintra), as exhibited on Figure 3(a).

12
Martin Bachwerk and Carl Vogel
6
Conclusions
To summarize the results, three main conclusions can be drawn from the simu-
lation runs described above. The ﬁrst is that smaller and more isolated groups
have a clear advantage over larger or more actively interacting groups in terms of
evolving a reliable and useful communication system. The second is that having
a single interconnected agent who is asymmetrically favoured as a hearer, and
equally likely to be a speaker has no positive inﬂuence on the disjoint groups.
The third observation is that while the communicative success of agents’ inter-
actions in the closely connected groups is inferior to that of the isolated groups:
the more ‘social’ agents appear to learn a signiﬁcantly larger number of map-
pings without a commensurate increase in lexical synonymy, resulting in higher
chances of understanding utterances by a wider range of agents, including those
with diﬀerent dialects.
Going back to the two general social theories of language evolution presented
in Section 2, our results do not truly give support to either of these. In particu-
lar, the conclusion that isolated groups tend to outperform more ‘social’ groups
is seemingly at odds with the notion that language evolution was driven by ei-
ther inter- or intra-group cooperation which lies at the heart of both introduced
scenarios. In addition, the theories that are based on group-internal cooperation
and should thus involve some sort of hierarchy like having a strongly intercon-
nected alpha-male member are not reinforced by our current simulations either,
although we are willing to concede that these structures are still extremely rudi-
mentary and require further investigation.
However, when comparing our results with those of other computational mod-
ellers, it appears that the simulations in which agents interact with a higher num-
ber of other agents coincide with the results presented by [17,24], both of which
also eschew telepathic meaning transfer and explicit feedback. The experiments
conducted by these authors have exhibited similarly high levels of synonymy on
both the agent-internal and language-global levels, which is not characteristic
of human languages that we know of: all extant models are thus missing some
biological or cognitive mechanism that would explain synonymy avoidance as
an emergent property, and not a consequence of a pre-programmed principle of
discriminative reasoning.
Either way the onus remains on the modelling approaches to show that not
only can the presented models attest for the emergence of a communicative sys-
tem, but equally that this system does indeed signiﬁcantly resemble language
as we know it, which so far is yet to be the case. In particular, models of lan-
guage evolution that implement such aiding mechanisms as e.g. explicit feedback
converge on a perfect communication system without synonyms or homonyms,
and without any additional variation after the convergence has been reached
[20]. While such a system might seem quite optimal in terms of communicative
eﬃciency, it certainly does not resemble a human language.
The shortcomings of such models have been pointed out by several authors,
including [22,17], with [18] attempting to solve the problem by building a model
without omniscience or explicit feedback, but with a number of representational,

Modelling Social Structures and Hierarchies in Language Evolution
13
interpretational and social constraints instead, e.g. the “whole object” bias and
the principle of contrast. The experimental results of this model suggest that
integrating such constraints does indeed improve the communicative success of
the emergent language, while keeping it comparable to existing human languages.
However, embodiedment of these additional constraints is yet to be conclusively
proven to exist in primates or even humans; work by [10,7] suggests that these
constraints are perhaps not present in our brains at all, or at least not in the
strong version as implemented in [18].
In conclusion, the experiments presented in this paper hopefully provide an
outline of what kind of simulations of group dynamics are possible with the help
of the LEW, along with its promise and shortcomings. While the current results
are not yet comprehensive enough to speak for themselves in their generality or
importance, we hope to have made a case for the experimental approach per se.
We see this as representative of our programme of experiments on the eﬀects of
social structures and group dynamics in language evolution. Future work would
certainly beneﬁt from a further extension of the LEW to allow for more complex
group dynamics settings, including multi-level hierarchies and coalitions between
selected groups.
