Learning Goal-Conditioned Policies Ofﬂine with
Self-Supervised Reward Shaping
Lina Mezghani
Meta AI, Inria∗

Sainbayar Sukhbaatar
Meta AI
Piotr Bojanowski
Meta AI
Alessandro Lazaric
Meta AI
Karteek Alahari
Inria∗
Abstract:
Developing agents that can execute multiple skills by learning from pre-collected
datasets is an important problem in robotics, where online interaction with the en-
vironment is extremely time-consuming. Moreover, manually designing reward
functions for every single desired skill is prohibitive. Prior works [1, 2] targeted
these challenges by learning goal-conditioned policies from ofﬂine datasets with-
out manually speciﬁed rewards, through hindsight relabeling.
These methods
suffer from the issue of sparsity of rewards, and fail at long-horizon tasks. In
this work, we propose a novel self-supervised learning phase on the pre-collected
dataset to understand the structure and the dynamics of the model, and shape a
dense reward function for learning policies ofﬂine. We evaluate our method on
three continuous control tasks, and show that our model signiﬁcantly outperforms
existing approaches [1, 2], especially on tasks that involve long-term planning.
Keywords: Ofﬂine RL, Self-Supervised Learning, Goal-Conditioned RL
1
Introduction
While the goal of realizing general autonomous agents requires mastery of a large and diverse set
of skills, achieving this by focusing on each skill individually with standard reinforcement learning
(RL) frameworks is prohibitive. This is primarily due to the need for manually designed reward func-
tions and environment interactions for each skill. Unsupervised RL has opened a way for learning
agents that can execute diverse abilities without supervision (i.e., hand-crafted rewards), and then be
further adapted to downstream tasks through few-shot or zero-shot generalization [3, 4, 5, 6]. How-
ever, learning policies with such methods is impractical with real robots as they require millions of
interactions when trained online.
Recently, a line of study has emerged that uses pre-collected datasets of trajectories and trains poli-
cies ofﬂine (i.e., without additional interactions with the environment) [7, 8]. More precisely, given
a dataset of reward-free trajectories and a reward function designed to solve a speciﬁc task, the agent
learns ofﬂine by relabeling the transitions in the dataset with the reward function. This setting is par-
ticularly relevant in robotics, where data collection is extremely time-consuming: disentangling data
collection and policy learning in this context allows for faster policy iteration. However, it would
require designing one speciﬁc reward function and learning one policy for each individual task.
An important question to scale ofﬂine robot learning is therefore to ﬁnd ways of learning multi-task
policies from already collected datasets. Recent works [1, 9, 10], have targeted this problem from a
goal-conditioned perspective: given a dataset of previously collected trajectories, the objective is to
learn a goal-oriented agent that can reach any state in the dataset. The advantages of this formulation
are two-fold: ﬁrst, it makes it easy to interpret skills, and second it does not require any adaptation at
∗Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, 38000 Grenoble, France
Project page: https://linamezghani.github.io/go-fresh
6th Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL 2022), Auckland, New Zealand.
arXiv:2301.02099v1  [cs.RO]  5 Jan 2023

test time. Making this framework unsupervised requires to break free from hand-crafted rewards, as
proposed by Chebotar et al. [1], where they learn goal-conditioned policies ofﬂine through hindsight
relabeling [2]. However, their approach is subject to the pitfall of learning from sparse rewards, and
can be inefﬁcient in long-horizon tasks.
In this work, we present a self-supervised reward shaping method that enables building an ofﬂine
dataset with dense rewards. To this end, we develop a self-supervised learning phase that aims
at learning the structure and dynamics of the environment before training the policy. During this
phase, we: (i) train a reachability network [11] to estimate the local distance in the state space S,
then (ii) extract a set of representative states that covers S, and ﬁnally (iii) build a graph on this
set to approximate the global distance in S. When training the goal-conditioned policy, we use the
graph in two ways: to compute rewards through shortest path distance, and to create transitions of
intermediate difﬁculty on the path to the goal.
We evaluate our method on complex continuous control tasks, and compare it to previous state-
of-the-art ofﬂine [1, 2] approaches. We show that our graph-based reward method learns good
goal-conditioned policies by leveraging transitions from a dataset of past experience with neither
any additional interactions with the environment nor manually-designed rewards. Moreover, we
show that, contrary to prior work that uses datasets collected with a policy trained with supervised
rewards [1], our method allows for learning goal-conditioned policies even from datasets of poor
quality, e.g. containing trajectories sampled with a random policy. Our work is thus the ﬁrst to learn
goal-conditioned policies from ofﬂine datasets without any supervision, as it does not require any
hand-crafted reward function at any stage: data collection, policy training and evaluation.
2
Related Work
Goal-conditioned RL.
In its original formulation, goal-conditioned reinforcement learning was
tackled by several methods [12, 13, 2, 14]. The policy learning process is supervised in these works:
the set of evaluation goals is available at train time as well as a reward function that guides the agent
to the goal. Several works propose solutions for generating goals automatically when training goal-
conditioned policies, including self-play [15, 16, 17], and adversarial student-teacher policies [18].
A recent line of research [19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26] focuses on learning goal-conditioned policies
in an unsupervised fashion. The objective is to train general agents that can reach any goal state in
the environment without any supervision (reward, goal-reaching function) at train time. In particular,
Mendonca et al. [25] trains a model-based agent that learns to discover novel goals with an explorer
model, and reach them with an achiever policy via imagined rollouts.
Ofﬂine RL.
The data collection technique is an important aspect when studying the training of
policies from pre-collected datasets. In this context, the ﬁrst works assumed access to policies
trained with task-speciﬁc rewards [27, 28]. More recently, methods proposed to leverage unsuper-
vised exploration to collect datasets for ofﬂine RL [7, 8]. In particular, Yarats et al. [7] creates a
dataset of pre-collected trajectories, ExoRL, on the DeepMind control suite [29] generated without
any hand-crafted rewards. Similar to URLB [30], ExoRL benchmarks a number of exploration al-
gorithms [3, 6, 31, 5], and evaluates the performance of a policy trained on the corresponding ofﬂine
datasets relabeled with task-speciﬁc rewards.
Multi-task Ofﬂine RL.
Recent works proposed to learn multiple tasks from pre-collected datasets,
starting with methods [32] that generate goals to improve the ofﬂine data collection process in a self-
supervised way. This connection has also been studied in the supervised setting [9, 33] and when
learning hierarchical policies [10]. In a setting closely related to our work, Actionable Models [1]
considers the problem of learning goal-conditioned policies from ofﬂine datasets without interacting
with the environment, and with no task-speciﬁc rewards. They employ goal-conditioned Q-learning
with hindsight relabeling [2]. As opposed to their work that relies on learning from sparse rewards,
we propose to leverage a self-supervised training stage to densely shape rewards.
3
Preliminaries
Let E = (S, A, P, p0, γ, T) deﬁne a reward-free Markov decision process (MDP), where S and A
are state and action spaces respectively, P : S × A × S →IR+ is a state-transition probability
2

add edge
add node
Figure 1: Overview of the graph building algo-
rithm. Given a transition (si, si+1) ∈D, we add
si as node if it is distant enough from existing
nodes in the graph. Moreover, we add an edge in
the graph between the incoming nearest neighbor
of si and the outgoing nearest neighbor of si+1.
function, p0 : S →IR+ is an initial state distribution, γ is the discount factor, and T is the task
horizon. In the goal-conditioned setting, the objective is to learn a policy π : S × G →A that
maximizes the expectation of the cumulative return over the goal distribution, where G denotes the
goal space. Here, we make the common assumption that states and goals are deﬁned in the same
form, i.e., G ⊂S.
We assume that we have access to a dataset D of pre-collected episodes generated by using any data
collection algorithm in E. Each episode is stored in D as a series of (s, a, s′) tuples, where s, s′ ∈S
and a ∈A. In the general ofﬂine formulation introduced by Yarats et al. [7], the dataset D can be
relabeled by evaluating any reward function r : S × A →IR at each tuple in D, and adding the
resulting tuple (s, a, r(s, a), s′) in the relabeled dataset Dr. We can extend this protocol to the goal-
oriented setting by considering a goal distribution pG in the goal space, and any goal-conditioned
reward function r : S × A × G →IR. Given a tuple (s, a, s′) in D, we relabel it by sampling a goal
g ∼pG, computing r(s, a, g) and adding the resulting tuple (s, a, g, r(s, a, g), s′) in the relabeled
dataset Dr,pG.
Once the relabeled dataset Dr,pG is generated, we can learn a goal-conditioned policy by executing
any ofﬂine RL algorithm. The algorithm runs completely ofﬂine, by sampling tuples from Dr,pG and
without any interaction with the environment. The goal-conditioned policy is then evaluated online
in E on a set of ﬁxed evaluation goals that is not known during training.
4
Self-supervised Reward Shaping
We now describe our self-supervised reward shaping method. It comprises three stages that we will
detail below. In the ﬁrst stage, we train a Reachability Network (RNet) [11] on the trajectories in D
to predict whether two states are reachable from one another. The second stage consists in building
a directed graph M whose nodes are a subset of states in D, and edges connect reachable states.
We employ the RNet as a criterion to avoid adding similar states to M so that its nodes cover the
states in D uniformly. The ﬁnal stage consists in training the goal-conditioned policy on transitions
and goals sampled from D. It is trained with dense rewards computed as the sum of a global (based
on the graph distance in M) and local (based on the RNet) distance terms. The important aspect of
our method is that the whole training only uses trajectories from the pre-collected dataset D without
running a single action in the environment. We now describe each component in more detail.
4.1
Reachability network
In order to learn a good local distance between states in D, we adopt an asymmetric version of
the Reachability Network (RNet) [11]. The general idea of RNet is to approximate the distance
between states in the environment by the average number of steps it takes for a random policy to
go from one state to another. We adapted the original formulation with two modiﬁcations: ﬁrst,
we use exploration trajectories from D instead of random trajectories and second, we leverage the
temporal direction because a state can be reachable from another without the converse being true.
Let (sa
1, ..., sa
T ) denote a trajectory in D, where a is a trajectory index. We deﬁne a reachability label
yab
ij for each pair of observations (sa
i , sb
j) by
yab
ij =
1
if a = b and 0 ≤j −i ≤τreach,
0
otherwise,
for 1 ≤i, j ≤T,
(1)
where the reachability threshold τreach is a hyperparameter. The reachability label is equal to 1 iff
the states are in the same trajectory and the number of steps from sa
i to sb
j is below τreach, as shown
3

(a) Training labels for RNet
1
0.2
0.5
0.8
shortest path
(b) Visualisation of the reward computation
Figure 2: Visualization of our dense reward shaping method. (a) shows how training labels are
generated for training the RNet: given a state si, positive pairs are sampled in the same trajectory
within a threshold τreach, and the rest of the trajectory forms negative pairs. (b) presents how rewards
are implemented as a combination of a global distance term (green), computed with the shortest
path in the graph between the outgoing nearest neighbor (NNout) of the state st+1 and the incoming
nearest neighbor of the goal (NNin), and a local distance term (red) computed using the RNet value
between NNin and g.
in Figure 2a. Note that yab
ij ̸= yab
ji . We train a siamese neural network R, the RNet, to predict the
reachability label yab
ij from a pair of observations (sa
i , sb
j) in D. The RNet consists of an embedding
network g, and a fully-connected network f to compare the embeddings, i.e.,
R(sa
i , sb
j) = σ

f(g(sa
i ), g(sb
j))

,
(2)
where σ is a sigmoid function. A higher R value indicates two states reachable easily with random
walk, so they can be considered close in the environment. More precisely, R takes values in (0, 1)
and s′ is reachable from s if R(s, s′) ≥0.5. RNet is learned in a self-supervised fashion, as the
ground-truth labels needed to train the network are generated automatically.
4.2
Directed graph
In the next phase, we use trajectories in D to build a directed graph M that captures high-level
dynamics of the environment, as illustrated in Figure 1. We want the nodes of M to evenly represent
the states in D. This is achieved by ﬁltering the states in D: a state is added to M only if it is distant
enough from all the other nodes in M. More precisely, a state s ∈D is added to M if and only if
R(s, n) < 0.5 and R(n, s) < 0.5,
for all n ∈M.
(3)
Note that we require both the directions to be novel. This ﬁltering avoids redundancy by preventing
similar states to be added to the memory. It also has a balancing effect because it limits the number
of states that can be added from a certain area even if it is visited by the agent many times in D.
Once the nodes are selected, we connect pairs that are reachable from one to another. To this end, we
employ trajectories in D because they contain actual feasible transitions. Given a transition si →sj
in D, we add edge ni →nj if si can be reached from node ni and node nj can be reached from
sj. This way, we have a chain ni →si →sj →nj and can assume nj is reachable from ni.
Concretely, we select node ni to be the incoming nearest neighbor (NNin) to si, and nj to be the
outgoing nearest neighbor (NNout) from sj, i.e.,
ni = NNin(si) = argmax
n∈M
R(n, si),
nj = NNout(sj) = argmax
n∈M
R(sj, n).
(4)
By performing this action over all the transitions in D, we turn M into a directed graph where edges
represent reachability from one node to another.
4.3
Distance function for policy training
We then use the obtained directed graph to compute a global distance in the state space. Indeed,
RNet predicts reachability between si and sj so we can directly use it as a distance metric
dl(si, sj) = 1 −R(si, sj),
∀si, sj ∈S.
(5)
4

However, this reachability metric is conﬁned to a certain threshold, so there is no guarantee that the
RNet predictions will have good global properties.
In contrast, the directed graph M captures high-level global dynamics of the environment. We can
easily derive a distance function dM(ni, nj) between any pair of nodes in M by computing the
length of the shortest path in this graph, provided the graph is connected. In practice, we can use a
trick to connect the graph if necessary, by adding an edge between the pair of nodes from different
connected components with the maximum RNet value. Moreover, we can extend this distance dM
to a global distance function dg in the state space S by ﬁnding, for any pair si and sj in S their
nearest neighbors in the corresponding direction. More precisely,
dg(si, sj) = dM(NNout(si), NNin(sj)),
∀si, sj ∈S.
(6)
The distance dg between two states in the state space becomes the length of the shortest path between
their respective closest nodes in the graph. This process, summarized in Figure 2b, propagates
the good local properties of RNet to get a well-shaped distance function for states that are further
away. Since dg captures global distances while dl captures local ﬁne-grained distance, we use their
combination as a ﬁnal distance function: ∀si, sj ∈S,
d(si, sj) = dg(si, sj) + dl(si, sj).
4.4
Policy training
The last phase of our method is training the goal-conditioned policy ofﬂine. Here, we create an of-
ﬂine replay buffer B that is ﬁlled with relabeled data. We randomly sample a transition (st, at, st+1)
from D as well as a goal g and relabel the transition with reward rt = −d(st+1, g). We then push the
relabeled transition (st, at, g, rt, st+1) to B. In order to create a curriculum that artiﬁcially guides
the agent towards the goal, we experimented with two different transition augmentation techniques:
Sub-goal augmentation.
Let (st, at, g, rt, st+1) denote a relabeled transition and (n0, ..., nP −1)
the shortest path in the graph M between n0 = NNout(st) and nP −1 = NNin(g). The augmen-
tation technique consists in adding to the replay buffer every transition (st, at, ni, ri
t, st+1) for all
i ∈{0, P −1}, where ri
t = −d(st+1, ni). In other words, given a transition (st, at, st+1) and
a goal g from D, we push to the replay buffer a set of relabeled transitions with all goals on the
shortest path from st to g (and their corresponding rewards).
Edge augmentation.
Similar to the subgoal augmentation technique, we consider a relabeled tran-
sition (st, at, g, rt, st+1) and the associated shortest path (n0, ..., nP −1). This time, we keep the
same goal g for every augmented transition, but for every edge (ni−1, ni), i ∈{1, P −1}, we
add the relabeled transition (si
t, ai
t, g, ri
t, si
t+1) to B where (si
t, ai
t, si
t+1) ∈D, NNout(si
t) = ni−1,
NNin(si
t+1) = ni and ri
t = −d(si
t, g). Note that the existence of such a transition in D is guaranteed
by construction: an edge is added to the graph from one node to another iff there exist a transition
in D whose corresponding nearest neighbors are these two nodes (in the same order).
Once the replay buffer B is ﬁlled, the goal-conditioned policy can be trained using any off-policy
algorithm. In our implementation, we chose Soft Actor-Critic [34], as it is known to require few
hyper-parameter tuning, and is widely used in the literature.
5
Experiments
5.1
Environments & data collection
We perform experiments on three continuous control tasks with state-based inputs.
UMaze [35].
The ﬁrst environment, shown in Figure 3a, is a two-dimensional U-shaped maze
with continuous action space and a ﬁxed initial position. We generate the training data for this
environment by deploying a random policy with randomized start position in the maze. We collect
10k trajectories of length 1k. We evaluate the goal-conditioned agent by giving the agent a goal
sampled at random in the environment and computing the ﬁnal euclidean distance to the goal.
RoboYoga Walker [25].
Introduced by Mendonca et al. [25], the challenging RoboYoga bench-
mark is based on the Walker domain of the DeepMind control suite [29], and consists of 12 goals
5

(a) UMaze
(b) RNet distance
(c) Graph distance
Avg Room1Room2Room3Room4
0.0
0.25
0.5
Success Rate
Graph Reward
RNet Reward
(d) RNet vs. Graph Rewards
Figure 3: (a) UMaze environment, Heatmap of rewards computed with RNet (b) and graph (c)
distances, and (d) Performance of the goal-conditioned policy trained with RNet and graph-based
rewards on UMaze. In (b) and (c), high rewards are shown in yellow, and low rewards in black.
that correspond to body poses inspired from yoga (e.g. lying down, raising one leg or balancing). We
consider the state-based version of the task, and use the task-agnostic dataset from Yarats et al. [7]
generated with an unsupervised exploration policy. It contains 10k trajectories of length 1k obtained
by deploying the “proto” [5] algorithm in the Walker domain. The success metric of the evaluation
policy is assessed by the pose of the humanoid at the end of the episode.
Pusher [20].
We also apply our method on Pusher, a realistic robotic environment shown in Fig-
ure 7 (left), where a robot arm (red) needs to push a puck (blue) to a speciﬁed location on a table.
To build the ofﬂine dataset, we generated 10k random trajectories of length 200. Similar to prior
works [20, 22, 26], we generated 500 goals at random in the state space, and we measured the
performance as the ﬁnal Euclidean distance between the puck and its target location.
5.2
Ablation & design choices
We ﬁrst show that the graph structure is necessary for long-term planning. Then, we explain the
importance of the directness of the graph on tasks with asymmetric behaviours. Finally, we show
the impact of transition augmentation techniques when labeling data for the goal-conditioned policy.
Necessity of graph-based rewards.
An important component of our method is the construction of
the graph M that enables computing a distance with good global properties. To empirically validate
this hypothesis, we performed a comparison between the goal-conditioned policy trained with RNet
rewards (i.e., by using the distance dl from equation (5)) and the one trained with both distance
terms as reward. We run this experiment on the UMaze environment, and show results in Figure 3d.
We note that the model trained with graph rewards outperforms the one trained with RNet rewards
overall, particularly for distant goals (ie. rooms 3 and 4). We also notice that the model trained with
RNet rewards is slightly better for goals that are close to the initial position. This highlights the
fact that RNet is good at estimating local distances. The qualitative visualization in Figure 3b & 3c
conﬁrms this observation, as it shows low values between states in the ﬁrst and fourth rooms.
Importance of graph directness.
We then investigate the importance of the asymmetry of the
RNet and the directness of the graph. To this end, we implement an undirected version of our
method where the RNet is symmetric and the graph is undirected. All other components of our
method are unchanged. First, we compare the performance of both variants in the UMaze task in
Figure 4a, and note that asymmetric RNet and directed graph in our approach signiﬁcantly improve
the goal-conditioned policy performance (+11% on success rate), especially on goals close to the
initial location, i.e., goals in rooms 1 and 2. We then analyze qualitative visualizations of the shortest
path in the undirected and directed graphs in the RoboYoga task, as shown in Figure 4b. In the
undirected case, the humanoid deﬁes the laws of gravity and is encouraged to stand its head by
ﬂipping backwards, which might be extremely difﬁcult, or even infeasible. In the directed case, the
shortest path fosters the agent to ﬁrst get back on its legs, and then lean forward. In this exemple,
the gravity makes the dynamics of the environment non-symmetric and non-fully reversible, which
justiﬁes the directed formulation described in our method.
Transition sampling strategy.
As a ﬁnal ablation study, we study the utility of the transition aug-
mentation techniques described in subsection 4.4. We evaluate four possible variants of our method:
6

Avg
Room1
Room2
Room3
Room4
0.0
0.25
0.5
Success Rate
Directed
Undirected
(a) Comparison on the UMaze task
(b) Shortest Path visualization for undirected (top) and directed
(bottom) graphs
Figure 4: Importance of graph directness on (a) the UMaze task and (b) the RoboYoga Walker task.
(i) without any augmentation, (ii) with edge augmentation only, (iii) with subgoal augmentation
only, and (iv) with both augmentations. We execute this experiment on the RoboYoga task, and
show results in Figure 6b. We observe that both of the augmentation techniques improve the per-
formance of the goal-conditioned agent, with subgoal augmentation showing greater improvement.
Moreover, we note that combining both augmentations improves the performance further. For the
reminder of the experiments, we use both these augmentation techniques.
0
500
1000
epoch
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Success Rate
Average
0
500
1000
epoch
Room 1
0
500
1000
epoch
Room 2
0
500
1000
epoch
Room 3
0
500
1000
epoch
Room 4
Ours
HER
HER + random negative action
Actionable Models
Figure 5: Performance on the UMaze task. We show the success rate for goals sampled at random
in each of the four rooms, as well as the average over all rooms.
5.3
Comparison to prior work
Baselines. We compare our method to prior work on unsupervised goal-conditioned policy learning.
We perform an apples-to-apples comparison by implementing the baselines using the same learn-
ing framework as our method, and changing the reward relabeling process. We compare with the
following baselines:
• Hindsight Experience Replay [HER] [2] This is a re-implementation of the standard un-
supervised RL technique, adapted to the ofﬂine setting. More precisely, we relabel sub-
trajectories from D with a sparse reward, which is equal to 1 only for the ﬁnal transition
of the sub-trajectory, and 0 everywhere else. Following Chebotar et al. [1], we also label
sub-trajectories with goals sampled at random in D and zero reward.
• HER [2] with random negative action is a variant of HER where, for a transition in D
we sample an action uniformly at random in the action space and label it with zero reward.
This helps overcoming the problem of over-estimation of the Q-values for unseen actions
mentioned in Chebotar et al. [1].
• Actionable Models [1] This approach is based on goal-conditioned Q-learning with hind-
sight relabeling. We re-implemented the goal relabeling procedure that uses the Q-value at
the ﬁnal state of sub-trajectories in D to enable goal chaining, as well as the negative action
sampling trick.
Comparison on UMaze. We compare our method to the baselines on the UMaze task, and show
results in Figure 5. We observe that our model outperforms all baselines overall, and shows greater
improvements on challenging goals that are far from the initial position. Interestingly, we note
that Actionable Models reaches goals in the ﬁrst room only. This conﬁrms the intuition that sparse
rewards make it difﬁcult for the policy to learn long-horizon tasks.
7

0
500
1000
epoch
0.0
0.2
0.4
Success Rate
Ours
HER
HER + random neg action
Actionable Models
(a) Comparison to baselines
0.0
0.2
0.4
Success Rate
Subgoal + Edge
Subgoal Only
Edge Only
No Augmentation
(b) Impact of Transition Augmentation
Figure 6: Performance on the RoboYoga Walker task
Comparison on RoboYoga Walker. In a second experiment, we compare our method to baselines
on the RoboYoga task, as shown in Figure 6a. Here again, our method outperforms prior work, and
Actionable Models does not make any signiﬁcant improvement over HER. The results broken down
by goal are shown in the supplementary material. Overall these results suggest that our dense reward
shaping method allows for faster and more robust ofﬂine goal-conditioned policy training.
0
500
1000
epoch
0.00
0.04
0.08
0.12 Average Distance
0
500
1000
epoch
Hand Distance
0
500
1000
epoch
Puck Distance
Ours
HER
HER + random neg action
Actionable Models
Figure 7: Performance on the Pusher task (lower is better). We report the ﬁnal average, hand, and
puck distance to the goal for our model and all baselines.
Comparison on Pusher. As a ﬁnal experiment, we compared our method to prior work on a realistic
robotic environment, as shown in Figure 7. Our policy trained ofﬂine is evaluated by sampling
a goal at random in the state space, and measuring three different metrics: (i) the hand distance,
which corresponds to the ﬁnal distance between the end of the robot arm and the target, (ii) the puck
distance, which measures the distance between the ﬁnal puck location and the target, and (iii) the
average distance, the average of the ﬁrst two metrics. Our method outperforms the baselines on this
task, and our goal-conditioned agent is able to sequentially place the puck at the goal location, and
then place the hand at its target location. On the contrary, HER [2] places the puck at the target
location with a performance similar to our method, but lacks precision on the hand location.
6
Conclusion: Summary and Limitations
We proposed a method for learning multi-task policies from pre-generated datasets in an ofﬂine
and unsupervised fashion, i.e., without requiring any additional interaction with the environment,
nor manually designed rewards. Our method leverages a self-supervised stage that aims at learn-
ing the dynamics of the environment from the ofﬂine dataset, and that allows for shaping a dense
reward function. It shows signiﬁcant improvement over prior works based on hindsight relabeling,
especially on long-horizon tasks, where dense rewards are crucial for learning a good policy.
The main limitation of our method is that it relies on the availability of a pre-collected dataset of
trajectories, with a sufﬁciently large coverage of the state space for proper policy learning. Although
such data can be already available, as for the RoboYoga Walker task, or that ofﬂine dataset collection
could be done with random policies, as we did on the UMaze and Pusher tasks, this step can be
challenging for other environments. Another limitation is that we evaluated our method exclusively
on simulated environments, and we did not perform any experiments on real robots, for which pre-
collected dataset with expert demonstrations can be available [1].
8
