Privacy-sensitive Objects Pixelation for Live Video Streaming
Jizhe Zhou
Department of Computer and
Information Science, University of
Macau
Macau, China

Chi-Man Pun∗
Department of Computer and
Information Science, University of
Macau
Macau, China

Yu Tong
vivo AI Lab, Shenzhen & Department
of Computer and Information Science,
University of Macau
Macau, China

ABSTRACT
With the prevailing of live video streaming, establishing an on-
line pixelation method for privacy-sensitive objects is an urgency.
Caused by the inaccurate detection of privacy-sensitive objects, sim-
ply migrating the tracking-by-detection structure applied in offline
pixelation into the online form will incur problems in target initial-
ization, drifting, and over-pixelation. To cope with the inevitable
but impacting detection issue, we propose a novel Privacy-sensitive
Objects Pixelation (PsOP) framework for automatic personal pri-
vacy filtering during live video streaming. Leveraging pre-trained
detection networks as the backbone, our PsOP is extendable to
any potential privacy-sensitive objects pixelation. Employing the
embedding networks and the proposed Positioned Incremental
Affinity Propagation (PIAP) clustering algorithm, our PsOP unifies
the pixelation of discriminate and indiscriminate pixelation objects
through trajectories generation. In addition to the pixelation accu-
racy boosting, experiment results on the streaming video data we
built show that the proposed PsOP can significantly reduce the over-
pixelation ratio and the human intervention in privacy-sensitive
object pixelation.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Security and privacy →Privacy protections; • Theory of
computation →Unsupervised learning and clustering; • Com-
puting methodologies →Tracking; Scene understanding.
KEYWORDS
object pixelation; neural networks; PIAP clustering; live video-
streaming
ACM Reference Format:
Jizhe Zhou, Chi-Man Pun, and Yu Tong. 2020. Privacy-sensitive Objects Pixe-
lation for Live Video Streaming. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM International
Conference on Multimedia (MM ’20), October 12–16, 2020, Seattle, WA, USA.
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 9 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3394171.3413972
∗Chi-Man Pun is the corresponding author
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission

MM ’20, October 12–16, 2020, Seattle, WA, USA
© 2020 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-7988-5/20/10...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3394171.3413972
1
INTRODUCTION
(a) Established offline pixelation pipeline.
(b) Established offline pixelation pipeline.
Figure 1: Current pixelation methods v.s. PsOP under the
same scene. The leftmost clips are a clip of a streaming
scene. Potential privacy-sensitive objects are labeled in cir-
cles and rectangular and only circled objects shall be pixe-
lated. Tracklets rendered in gray ground require manual as-
sociation in (a). The color of the clusters in (b) represents the
corresponding colored objects. Pixelation results are shown
in the rightmost clip.
Live video streaming has never been so popular as in the past
two or three years. Live video streaming, especially the outdoors,
presents audiences unprepared, unrehearsed filming of reality, and
arXiv:2101.00604v1  [cs.CV]  3 Jan 2021

ramps up the sense of immersion, unpredictability or nervousness.
Real scenes are recorded, then instantly broadcast to audiences
mostly through streamers’ phone cameras and the mobile network.
Streaming activities join a symbiosis with the popularization of
smartphones, 5G networks, and cheaper communication costs [17].
The primary host of live streaming activities transformed from TV
stations and news bureau to ordinary individuals. Every rose has its
thorn. Without imposed censorship or filters before broadcasting,
the pervasiveness of live streaming today arouses unprecedented
violations in the personal privacy protection field. Strict law or
conservative religions even commit those violations to crimes [7].
Actually, apart from the indifference of streamers and the absence
of imposed censorship, the handcrafted pixelation process is the
main reason that leads to privacy infringements amid video stream-
ing. As a giant live-streaming hosting service provider, YouTube
is already aware of such urgent needs and published its offline
auto-pixelation tool on the latest YouTube Creator Studio. As far as
we know, current studies, including YouTube Studio and Microsoft
Azure, mainly focus on processing offline videos; whilst leave the
pixelation methods on the online live video streaming field underex-
plored. To ensure the privacy rights and the sound development of
the streaming industry, proper pixelation methods shall be interpo-
lated between the filming and broadcasting of live video streaming.
Transparency in terms of user experience is also indispensable to
keep the pixelation practical. Therefore, in this paper, we devote
to establish a pixelation method that generates automatic personal
privacy filtering during unconstrained streaming activities.
Most of the few existing offline pixelation methods adopt a simi-
lar tracking-by-detection structure that assembles privacy-sensitive
objects detectors ahead of multi-object tackers. In such a structure,
a Multi-Object Tracker (MOT) aims at continuously locating an
arbitrary target in a video with a given bounding box in the tar-
get’s initial frame, while the detector is responsible for giving the
bounding box in the target’s initial frame. As shown in Figure 1 (a),
this structure intuitively follows the manual pixelation pipeline and
works well on fine-shot videos. Once a sensitive object is spotted
by the detector, it is tracked by the tracker till its vanishment. This
action sequence loops over for every detection. Allocating Gauss-
ian or other filters on the trajectories reaches the final pixelation.
Essentially, the object trajectories determine the final pixelation
results.
In tracking-by-detection structure, trajectories are the joint ef-
fort of trackers and detectors, and in fact, trackers and detectors
are contained independently. Comparing with conventional fine-
shot videos, live streaming videos always involve very few shot
changes and the shaky camera. Recorded often by hand-held cam-
eras, shaky or jerky camera stands for frequent camera shakes,
abrupt streaming condition alteration, and noisy backgrounds. Un-
der such conditions, trackers still struggle standing up to scattered
or drifted tracklets in the long-term. Even were the long-term track-
ing accuracy somehow resolved, tracking-by-detection structure
also prone to corruption as its performance decisively in accor-
dance with detection accuracy. Trackers are unable to function well
with poor initiations. However, due to inadequate training samples
and the lack of comprehension for video contexts, false positives
and false negatives produced by the image-based detectors spring
up in streaming videos. Consequently, besides efficiency, blinking,
drifting, missing, or excessive mosaics are allocated everywhere
when migrating existing methods to pixelate live videos. Hence,
blaming unacceptable mosaics mainly on inaccurate detections,
current methods are incapable of handling live video streaming.
The other major drawback of the current pixelation workflow is
the over-pixelation problem. Introduced by the tracking algorithms
and inherited by current tracking-by-detection pixelation methods,
the over-pixelation problem occurs when the trackers insist on
generating puzzling and unnecessary mosaics for unidentifiable
privacy-sensitive objects. Heavy or fully occlusion, and massive
motion blur are the common reasons for objects’ unidentifiable.
Tracking algorithms are designed to construct seamless or long
enough trajectories for objects in avoiding frequent ID-switch. Un-
like tracking, in the meantime of blocking the privacy-sensitive
information from leaking, pixelation tasks are dedicated to preserv-
ing the audience as many originals as possible. Over-pixelation is an
intrinsic problem while migrating tracking algorithms to pixelation
tasks.
To address the aforementioned issues, our Privacy-sensitive Ob-
jects Pixelation (PsOP) introduces a brand-new framework for gen-
erating reliable pixelation with real-time efficiency in live video
streaming. To yield reliable trajectories for pixelation, PsOP fore-
most copes with the inaccurate detections caused by deep networks
insufficiency and the lack of comprehension for video contexts.
PsOP divides the potential privacy-sensitive objects into contexts-
irrelevant Indiscriminating Pixelation Objects (IPOs) and contexts-
relevant Discriminating Pixelation Objects (DPOs) to alleviate con-
texts’ effects on detection. As their sensitiveness barely changes
in scenes, IPOs, including erotic images, trademarks, phone num-
bers or car plate numbers, etc., are liable to be handled through
well-established sensitive objects detection algorithms [26]. Con-
versely, DPOs mainly made up of faces and texts are not to be solely
dealt with detection networks. When the domain of discriminating
and indiscriminating pixelation objects overlaps (e.g., the phone
number is also a kind of text), IPOs are prioritized in claiming the
overlapped bounding box for tighter privacy protection. Depicted
in Figure 1 (b), detected IPOs are smoothed and then pixelated.
The remaining Discriminating Pixelation Objects (DPOs) are
the primary concern of PsOP. The sensitiveness of instances be-
longing to DPOs changes according to scenes or contexts. The
varying sensitiveness of DPOs along with the inbuilt network in-
sufficiency cannot be simply solved through training on video data.
Such training assumes the detection, recognition, and video se-
mantics segmentation tasks share a unified network structure as
well as demands labor-intensive video data labeling. Considering
the learning-based feature vectors are in fact the central role for
instances’ trajectories association, as shown in Figure 1 (b), PsOP
abnegates tracking-by-detection structure and employs the detec-
tion, embedding, and clustering procedure to generate trajectories
under inaccurate detections.
In specific, for every class of DPOs, pre-trained detection and
embedding networks are leveraged to yield feature vectors for
instances of the class. Subsequently, we propose the Positioned
Incremental Affinity Propagation (PIAP) algorithm for clustering
under inaccurate detection and embeddings. In classic Affinity Prop-
agation (AP), affinities are the distances between feature vectors.
A series of messages about affinities, denoted as availabilities and

responsibilities, are propagated among vectors to reach a final con-
sensus on clustering results. For PsOP, since an individual instance
of DPOs cannot appear at different positions within a frame, the
detected instances positioned in the same frame serve as nega-
tive samples with minimal affinities. These minimized affinities
revise the consensus through the propagation of availabilities and
responsibilities. The preference matrix is also computed based on
availabilities and responsibilities. Weak preference indicates the de-
tection is relatively isolated in the feature space; thereby, excluded
as outliers through propagation. Besides, as a single instance owns
similar expanding availability and responsibility matrices in adja-
cent frames, positioned affinities are propagated in an incremental
way. A run of PIAP iterates until the consensus of clusters’ results
is reached for all vectors. Link the detection within the same clus-
ter forms the trajectory of an instance. Comparing with classic
AP, while retaining the ability of clustering under ill-defined clus-
ter number, PIAP solves the noise-sensitive and time-consuming
problem of AP by introducing positioned affinities and incremental
propagation. Moreover, unlike gradually fitting trackers, detection,
and embedding based PIAP simultaneously solves the inherent
over-pixelation problem.
In order to evaluate the performance of the proposed PsOP and
PIAP, we crawled raw streaming videos from YouTube Live and
Facebook Live platforms. These raw videos contents are inspected
and selected in detail to ensure the dataset diversities. Tested on
the live streaming video dataset (84261 labeled boxes and 19372
frames) we collected and manually labeled, PsOP gains significant
pixelation accuracy boosting as well as retains much more non-
sensitive originals for audiences.
In summary, the main contributions of this paper are as follows:
• We build the Privacy-sensitive Objects Pixelation (PsOP)
framework for the pixelation of privacy-sensitive objects in
live video streaming. As far as we know, PsOP is the first
online method adopts the detection, embedding, clustering
procedures and solves the over-pixelation problem.
• We proposed the Positioned Incremental Affinity Propaga-
tion (PIAP) clustering algorithm to generate trajectories for
inaccurately detected and sensitiveness varying discriminat-
ing pixelation objects. The proposed PIAP spontaneously
handles the cluster number generation, cluster under unbal-
anced sample-size problems, and further endows the classic
AP with noise-resistance and time-saving merits.
• We built a live video streaming dataset to test the proposed
PsOP framework and to be available to public. Diverse stream-
ing videos are collected through live streaming platforms,
and dense annotations on each frame are manually labeled
for the evaluation of the proposed method.
2
RELATED WORKS
To our best knowledge, face pixelation in live video streaming has
not been well studied before. Current research of privacy-sensitive
objects detection and pixelation focus on image-level [25, 26]. [26]
established a multi-task learning based algorithm to extract the user-
dependent privacy-sensitive objects. User blurred images are col-
lected and fed to the multi-task CNNs for finding privacy-sensitive
objects through a decision-tree shaped loss-function. Put the avail-
ability of such data in videos and accuracy aside, the relatively
shallow structure along with the decision-tree shaped loss-function
are unaware of the sensitiveness variations of discriminating pixela-
tion objects in videos. The most widely applied commercial offline
pixelation tools developed by YouTube Studio [9] and Microsoft
Azure [13] adopts similar detection networks in their tracking-by-
detection structure. However, these works do offer us an innovative
way of spotting the IPOs.
As we mentioned in the introduction, current pixelation methods
are incapable of functioning under poor detection. Referring to exist-
ing techniques, we firstly tried to solve the detection flaws in an end-
to-end way by replacing the 2D deep CNNs with its extension 3D
CNNs [11] or CNNs with attention mechanisms [15, 31]. Taking an
entire video as input, 3D CNNs and the attentions consider spatial-
temporal information simultaneously. Achieving great success in
video segmentation [14, 27], and action recognition areas [11, 20],
they are expected to relief the detection burden. However, tested
on the live streaming dataset we collected, both 3D CNNs and the
attention models are quite time-costing and extremely sensitive
to the video quality and length. Furthermore, without sufficient
training data, as designed to extract high-level abstractions of video
contexts, 3D CNNs cannot precisely handle the multi-task regres-
sion on individual frame-level. Therefore, the mosaics generated
by both models always blink during live-streaming.
Another proper way is to exploit multi-object tracking (MOT)
algorithms that can contend with poor initiations. Although MOT
are claimed to be thoroughly studied [30], their tracking accuracy
is still challenging in unconstrained videos. When reviewing state-
of-the-art trackers, two main categories of conventional trackers
can be found: offline and online trackers. The former category of
trackers assumes that object detection in all frames has already been
conducted, and clean tracklets are achieved by linking different
detections and tracks in offline mode [2]. This property of offline
trackers allows for global optimization of the path [28] but makes
them inappropriate in dealing with live streaming.
A typical online MOT algorithm aims at continuously locating an
arbitrary target in a video with a given bounding box in the target’s
initial frame. State-of-the-art online MOT algorithms like KCF [10]
and ECO [4] are implemented through continuous motion predic-
tion and online learning based on the correlation filter. Varieties of
tracking related works are conducted, however, they concentrate
on the association of the learning-based appearance features among
shots changes. Tracking problems give tacit consent to the bound-
ing box precisions, and intrinsic detection inaccuracy is seldom
mentioned or discussed. Only very few works [24] take the detec-
tion accuracy into consideration, and they merely acknowledge the
false negatives.
3
PROPOSED METHOD
The procedure of the proposed Privacy-sensitive Objects Pixelation
(PsOP) is shown in Figure 2. The process of contexts-irrelevant In-
discriminating Pixelation Objects (IPOs) are omitted since they are
pixelated without generating trajectories. Live streaming videos
are sliced into video segments with a fixed size for better accu-
racy. Then, frame-wise detections are applied through detectors

Figure 2: The proposed PsOP framework. Purple and blue lines respectively indicate the pixelation process of discriminate
pixelation objects, and nonsensitive objects. Dash lines and boxes presents the extendability of PsOP through pre-training.
pre-trained on image datasets. Detectors, along with corresponding
embedding networks for every class of contexts-relevant Discrim-
inating Pixelation Objects (DPOs) (not limited to face and text),
are applied in parallel. Similarly, embeddings yielded by the same
detector and embedding network are feed to the PIAP clustering.
The parallel PIAP associates the same instance across frames into
the same cluster, and sequential link within a cluster forms the tra-
jectory. As not all DPOs are sensitive in a particular scene, sensitive
thesaurus [3] or minor manual specification are appended to filter
the trajectories of DPOs further. Gaussian filters are imposed on the
final trajectories for pixelation and then streaming to the audience.
3.1
Video Segments
The proposed PsOP leverages image-based pre-trained detection
networks. Dash lines and boxes in Figure 2 shows the extendable
detection of IPOs and DPOs through user-defined pre-training
datasets. As false positives and negatives are common in detection,
we design a buffer section at the beginning of each live streaming
to promote the accuracy of trajectories without affecting the au-
dience experience. With the PsOP’s real-time efficiency, we can
stack every N frames into a short video segment by demanding a
(2 ∗N) frames buffering section at the very beginning of live video
streaming without causing discontinuities in broadcasting. Video
segments slice the typical hours-long live streaming into numerous
segments in seconds level. Transmitted to a lag at the begging, the
conflict between accuracy and efficiency is greatly alleviated. Tra-
jectories of privacy-sensitive objects could be smoothed within and
across segments. Considering the primal latency brought by data
communication and video compression, such a buffering latency
appended is acceptable to users.
3.2
Indiscriminate Pixelation Objects
Then, the Indiscriminating Pixelation Objects (IPOs) are firstly
detected in video segments. We adopt the [26] as the detection net-
work here. Training is conducted jointly on NPDI [1], METU [21],
and openALPR. The multi-task learning network is trained to han-
dle the detection of erotic image, trademark, and plate numbers
simultaneously. As in Figure 2, video segments are directly fed to
the detector of indiscriminate pixelation objects colored in purple.
Gaussian smooth among five consecutive frames is applied for com-
pensating false negatives. Within a segment, the detection which
has less than five bounding boxes with an overlapping ratio IOU≤𝜀
is eliminated as false positives to avoid the blinking of mosaics.
Afterward, the trajectories of indiscriminate pixelation objects are
established and ready for pixelation. To avoid the domain overlap-
ping of IPOs and DPOs, bounding boxes detected by both detectors
with an IOU> 𝜀are categorized to IPOs.
3.3
Discriminate Pixelation Objects
To elucidate the details of proposed pixelation method for Discrim-
inate Pixelation Objects (DPOs), faces and texts are used in the fol-
lowing as tangible instances. Following the embedding then cluster-
ing pixelation process for DPOs, in this paper, we use MTCNN [29],
and CosFace [23] to process every frame in turn. The application of
MTCNN and CosFace considers the convenience for latter cosine
similarity in PIAP. The detection and embedding networks could
be substituted by other state-of-the-art methods. MTCNN accepts
arbitrary size inputs and detects face larger than 12 ∗12 pixel. Cos-
Face generates 512 dimension feature vector for each detected face.
Faces are aligned to the frontal pose through the affine transfor-
mation before embedding. Similarly for texts, Textboxes [16] and
FastText [12] are used in texts detection and embedding. TextBoxes
receives input images containing texts with an arbitrary scale. A bit
close to MTCNN, frames are rescaled to 300 ∗300 for efficiency, and
Non-Maximum Suppression (NMS) are also leveraged to boost the
accuracy. FastText is a C-BOW like fast text classification network,
and the result of the second last layer before softmax regression is
extracted as embedding. The embedding dimension of FastText is
defined to 128. The clustering for faces and texts is conducted in
parallel.
The proposed PIAP is then activated to connect the same faces or
the same piece of text across frames according to face or text vectors.
Do notice that the efficacy of PIAP remains the same in establishing
trajectories for other objects of this type. DBSCAN [6] and Affinity

Propagation (AP) [8] are the candidates under unpredictable cluster
numbers. As noisy detection results are common in videos and
the data-size for clustering is also unbalanced, the density-based
DBSCAN is excluded. To revise the false detection, variation of
embedded vectors, and boost the clustering speed, we employ the
position information and incremental clustering in the proposed
PIAP. Sequential links within each cluster form the trajectory of
each face and text, and likewise, Gaussian smooth is applied within
a segment before pixelation.
3.3.1
Affinity Propagation (AP). Similar to traditional clustering
algorithms, the first step of classic AP is the measurement of the
distance between data nodes, denoted as the similarities. Following
the common notation in AP, 𝑖and 𝑘(𝑖,𝑘∈𝑅𝐷, 𝐷= 512 for face
and 𝐷= 128 for text) are two of the data nodes. 𝑆is the similarity
matrix stores the similarities between every two nodes. 𝑆(𝑖,𝑘) is the
element on row 𝑖, column 𝑘of 𝑆and 𝑆(𝑖,𝑘) denotes the similarity
between data node 𝑖and 𝑘, thereby indicating how well the data
node𝑘is suited to be the exemplar for data point𝑖. Similar notations
are also used in below.
The core of AP is that a series of responsibilities 𝑅(𝑖,𝑘) and avail-
abilities 𝐴(𝑖,𝑘) messages are passed among all data nodes to reach
the consensus on exemplars’ selection. 𝑅and 𝐴are the responsibil-
ity and availability matrix. 𝑖passes 𝑅(𝑖,𝑘) to its potential exemplar
𝑘indicating the current willingness of 𝑖choosing 𝑘as its exemplar
considering all the other potential exemplars. Correspondingly, 𝑘
responds 𝐴(𝑖,𝑘) to 𝑖update the current willingness of 𝑘accepting
𝑖as its member considering all the other potential members. The
sum of 𝑅(𝑖,𝑘) and 𝐴(𝑖,𝑘) can directly give the fitness for choosing
𝑘as the exemplar of 𝑖. The consensus of the sum-product message
passing process (𝑅(𝑖,𝑘) and 𝐴(𝑖,𝑘) remain the same after iterations)
stands for the final agreement of all nodes in the selection of ex-
emplars and the association of clusters is reached. Apart from the
ill-defined cluster number, AP is not sensitive to the initialization
settings; selects real data nodes as exemplars; allows asymmet-
ric matrix as input; is more accurate when measured in the sum
of square errors. Therefore, considering the subspace distribution
(least square regression), AP is effective in generating robust and
accurate clustering results for high dimension data like face vectors.
The governing equations for message passing in AP are:
𝑅(𝑖,𝑘) ←𝑆(𝑖,𝑘) −
max
𝑘′,𝑠.𝑡.𝑘′≠𝑘{𝐴(𝑖,𝑘′) + 𝑆(𝑖,𝑘′)}
(1)
𝐴(𝑖,𝑘) ←min{0, 𝑅(𝑘,𝑘) +
∑︁
𝑖′,𝑖′∉{𝑖,𝑘}
max{0, 𝑅(𝑖′,𝑘)}}
(2)
Equation (3) is used to fill in the elements on the diagonal of the
availability matrix:
𝐴(𝑘,𝑘) ←
∑︁
𝑖′,𝑠.𝑡.𝑖′≠𝑘
max{0, 𝑅(𝑖′,𝑘)}
(3)
Update responsibilities and availabilities according to (1), (2) and
(3) till convergence, then the criterion matrix 𝐶which holds the
exemplars is the sum of the 𝐴and 𝑅at each location.
𝐶(𝑖,𝑘) ←𝑅(𝑖,𝑘) + 𝐴(𝑖,𝑘)
(4)
The highest value of each row of the criterion matrix is designated
as the exemplar.
3.3.2
Positioned Incremental Affinity Propagation (PIAP). Cluster-
ing builds the connection of the same face across frames since its
result could be facilely corrected with some intervention. With the
results of face detection and recognition, the proposed PIAP process
in a segment-wise way to group the faces within and across seg-
ments simultaneously. Apparently, the longer segments offer more
information but also incur more noise and reduce efficiency. In this
paper, the proposed PsOP cuts every 150-frames into a segment and
leverages the whole existing context to reach accurate and fast face
pixelation. Define a data stream 𝑍= {𝑍1,𝑍2, ...,𝑍𝑛} is sequentially
collected face/text feature vectors of the current video segment. i.e.
𝑍is an 512 ∗𝑛matrix with 512 dimension feature vector.
For the normalization in the PIAP, cosine similarity is brought
for measurements. As an instance of DPOs (like a person’s face)
can only appear at one position in a single frame, instances that
belong to the same frame are set to the minimum similarity value
−1. Let 𝑗stands for the other instances that belong to the same
frame as 𝑖. The similarity matrix can be generated as:
𝑆(𝑖,𝑘) =


𝑖·𝑘
∥𝑖∥∥𝑘∥−1,
if 𝑘∉𝑗
−1,
if 𝑘∈𝑗
(5)
Moreover, in (2), the left side of the equation is the accumulated
evidence of how much𝑘can stand for itself (𝑅(𝑘,𝑘)), and how many
others𝑘is also responsible to stands for (Í
𝑖′,𝑖′∉{𝑖,𝑘} max{0, 𝑅(𝑖′,𝑘)}).
Every positive responsibilities of 𝑘contributes to 𝐴(𝑖,𝑘). Therefore,
according to (5), 𝐴(𝑖,𝑘) should not accumulate 𝑗’s choice as the
evidence for representing 𝑖. One step further, the choice of 𝑗will
actually repel 𝑖in availability, and the message passing of 𝐴(𝑖,𝑘)
shall be rewritten as:
𝐴(𝑖,𝑘) ←min{0, 𝑅(𝑘,𝑘)+
∑︁
𝑖′,𝑖′∉{𝑖,𝑗,𝑘}
max{0, 𝑅(𝑖′,𝑘)} −
∑︁
𝑖′,𝑖′∈{𝑗}
max{0, 𝑅(𝑖′,𝑘)}}
(6)
(5), (6) ensures 𝑖and 𝑗are mutual exclusive in the clustering process.
After the revision of the position information, the challenge
for extending AP into an incremental way is that the data nodes
received at different timestamps stay at varying statuses with dis-
proportionate responsibilities and availabilities value.
However, video frames are strongly self-correlated data. We
could assign a proper value to newly-arrived vectors according to
the ones in the previous segment without affecting the clustering
purity. The embedded vectors of a particular person or text shall
stay close with each other in the feature space across different
frames. Thus, our incremental AP algorithm is proposed based on
the fact that if two detected faces/texts are in adjacent segments
and refer to the same person/the same piece of texts, they should
not only be clustered into the same group but also have the same
responsibilities and availabilities. Such fact is not well considered
in past studies of incremental affinity propagation [18, 22].
Following the common notations in AP, the similarity matrix
is denoted as 𝑆𝑡−𝑡′ at time 𝑡−𝑡′ with (𝑀𝑡−𝑡′ ∗𝑀𝑡−𝑡′) dimension
where (𝑡−𝑡′) =
N
𝐹𝑃𝑆. And the responsibility matrix and availability
matrix at time 𝑡−𝑡′ are 𝑅𝑡−𝑡′ and 𝐴𝑡−𝑡′ with a same dimension as
𝑆𝑡−𝑡′. Then, the update rule of 𝑅𝑡and 𝐴𝑡respect to 𝑅𝑡−𝑡′ and 𝐴𝑡−𝑡′

can be written as:
𝑅𝑡(𝑖,𝑘) =


𝑅𝑡−𝑡′(𝑖,𝑘),
𝑖≤𝑀𝑡−𝑡′,𝑘≤𝑀𝑡−𝑡′
𝑅𝑡−𝑡′(𝑖′,𝑘),
𝑖> 𝑀𝑡−𝑡′,𝑘≤𝑀𝑡−𝑡′
𝑅𝑡−𝑡′(𝑖,𝑘′),
𝑖≤𝑀𝑡−𝑡′,𝑘> 𝑀𝑡−𝑡′
0,
𝑖> 𝑀𝑡−𝑡′,𝑘> 𝑀𝑡−𝑡′
(7)
Note that the dimension of three matrices is increasing with time.
𝑅𝑡(𝑖,𝑘) is the newly arrived face vectors of a segment at time 𝑡.
𝑀𝑡−𝑡′ stands for the amount of faces at time 𝑡−𝑡′.
𝑖′ = arg
max
𝑖′,𝑖′≤𝑀𝑡−𝑡′

𝑆(𝑖,𝑖′)
	
(8)
Easily, the 𝐴𝑡could be updated through
𝐴𝑡(𝑖,𝑘) =


𝐴𝑡−𝑡′(𝑖,𝑘),
𝑖≤𝑀𝑡−𝑡′,𝑘≤𝑀𝑡−𝑡′
𝐴𝑡−𝑡′(𝑖′,𝑘),
𝑖> 𝑀𝑡−𝑡′,𝑘≤𝑀𝑡−𝑡′
𝐴𝑡−𝑡′(𝑖,𝑘′),
𝑖≤𝑀𝑡−𝑡′,𝑘> 𝑀𝑡−𝑡′
0,
𝑖> 𝑀𝑡−𝑡′,𝑘> 𝑀𝑡−𝑡′
(9)
Denote 𝑧𝑞
𝑝= {𝑧𝑞
1,𝑧𝑞
2,𝑧𝑞
3...𝑧𝑞
𝑝} as the set of all 𝑝vectors extracted
in segment𝑞. The full process of PIAP algorithm can be summarized
as Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Positioned Incremental Affinity Propagation
Input: 𝑅𝑡−𝑡′,𝐴𝑡−𝑡′,𝐶𝑡−𝑡′,𝑧𝑞
𝑝
Output: 𝑅𝑡,𝐴𝑡,𝐶𝑡
1: while 𝑞is not end of a live-streaming do
2:
Compute similarity matrix according to (5).
3:
if 𝑞is the first video segment of a live-stream then
4:
Assign zeros to all responsibilities and availabilities.
5:
else
6:
Compute responsibilities and availabilities for 𝑧𝑞
𝑝accord-
ing to equation (7), (8) and (9).
7:
Extend responsibilities matrix 𝑅𝑡−𝑡′ to 𝑅𝑡, and availabili-
ties 𝐴𝑡−𝑡′ to 𝐴𝑡.
8:
end if
9:
Message-passing according to equation (1), (6) and (3) until
convergence.
10:
Compute exemplars and clustering results 𝐶𝑡as equation
(4).
11: end while
Handled by PIAP, faces, texts, and alike DPOs could be intra-
class distinguished. Cluster results are smoothed similar as the IPOs
for the exclusion of false negatives and positives. Faces and texts
within a cluster are then linked sequentially to form a trajectory.
3.4
Pixelation on Trajectories of
Privacy-sensitive Objects
In live video streaming, the appeared non-streamers are much more
than streamers but own a far smaller sample-size for each non-
streamer. Thus, as in the rightmost part of Figure 1, with trajec-
tories built by PIAP, manual specification (like screen touching)
is involved solely on the face of a newly appeared streamer. Also,
texts are further filtered through checking the sensitive thesaurus
based on [3]. With the rolling of PIAP, the previously specified
cluster is capable of guiding the future aggregation of the same
faces or texts.
The trajectories of the faces of the non-streamers, the sensitive
texts along with IPOs are gathered as the trajectories of privacy-
sensitive objects. Gaussian filters are applied on these trajectories
for pixelation before broadcasting to the audience.
4
EXPERIMENTS AND DISCUSSION
4.1
Dataset
As the privacy-sensitive objects pixelation problem in live video
streaming has not been studied before, there is no available dataset
or benchmark tests for reference. We collected and built a video live
streaming video dataset from YouTube and Facebook platforms and
manually labeled the sensitive objects for the experiments. In total,
20 streaming videos come from 4 different streaming categories
(a:street interview; b:street streaming; c:flash activities; d:dancing)
of 19372 frames are manually labeled and will be available to pub-
lic. As demonstrated in Table 1, these videos are further divided
into four groups according to the broadcasting resolution, and the
number of people showed up in streaming. Live streaming videos
with at least 720p resolution are marked as high-resolution 𝐻, and
the rest are low-resolution 𝐿. Similarly, the videos contain more
than two people are sophisticated scenes 𝑆, and the rest are naive
ones 𝑁.The number of labeled bounding boxes regarding privacy-
sensitive objects, IPOs, and DPOs are also listed to exhibit the dense
annotation.
4.2
Parameters
All the parameters remain unchanged for entire live-streaming
video tests. N = 150 for every segment contains 150 frames. 10
seconds for buffering as 2 ∗N/30. CosFace resizes the cropped face
to 112 ∗96; weight decay is 0.0005. The learning rate is 0.005 for
initialization and drops at every 60K iterations. The damping factor
for PIAP is default 0.5 as it in AP. Detection threshold for MTCNN
is [0.7,0.8,0.9]. The IOU rate 𝜀is [0.7].
4.3
Evaluation Metrics
Setting our manual pixelation annotations in the collected video
live streaming dataset as the baseline, we migrated and adopt the
algorithms including ECO and KCF tracker, currently applied com-
mercial tools like YouTube Studio and Microsoft Azure, and the
proposed PsOP for comparison. Sensitive Objects Pixelation Ac-
curacy (SOPA), Sensitive Objects Pixelation Precision (SOPP), and

Table 1: Details of the live video streaming dataset
Dataset
Quantity
of videos
Category
Resolution
People occurred
Frames
Privacy-sensitive
objects Labels*
IPOs
Labels*
DPOs
Lables*
𝐻𝑆
4
a,b,c,d
720p/1080p
≫2
4133
27337
6255
21082
𝐿𝑆
8
a,b,c,d
360p/480p
≫2
4680
23869
3975
19894
𝐿𝑁
4
a,b,c,d
360p/480p
≤2
5692
16994
7946
9048
𝐻𝑁
4
a,b,c,d
720p
≤2
4867
16061
10805
5256
*: the value amounts the occurrences of the relative objects. Meaning the same object is repeatedly counted in different frames.
Table 2: Pixelation results on collected live video streaming dataset
Method
SOPA↑
SOPA↑
SOPA↑
SOPA↑
SOPP↑
SOPP↑
SOPP↑
SOPP↑
Entire Dataset
(𝐻𝑆)
(𝐿𝑆)
(𝐻𝑁)
(𝐿𝑁)
(𝐻𝑆)
(𝐿𝑆)
(𝐻𝑁)
(𝐿𝑁)
MP↑
(frames)
OPR↓
FPS↑
YouTube [9]
0.61
0.57
0.68
0.57
0.70
0.64
0.78
0.63
238
0.44
𝑁/𝐴
Azure [13]
0.63
0.57
0.66
0.56
0.71
0.66
0.77
0.66
203
0.43
𝑁/𝐴
KCF [10]
0.59
0.52
0.68
0.61
0.69
0.63
0.79
0.70
166
0.47
>100
ECO [4]
0.57
0.61
0.69
0.66
0.66
0.75
0.79
0.74
178
0.41
30~50
PsOP
0.73
0.69
0.75
0.71
0.80
0.79
0.84
0.83
387
0.21
18 ~30
"↑"&"↓"stand for the higher the better and the lower the better respectively.
Table 3: Pixelation results of DPOs on live video streaming dataset
Method
SOPA↑
SOPA↑
SOPA↑
SOPA↑
SOPP↑
SOPP↑
SOPP↑
SOPP↑
Entire Dataset
(𝐻𝑆)
(𝐿𝑆)
(𝐻𝑁)
(𝐿𝑁)
(𝐻𝑆)
(𝐿𝑆)
(𝐻𝑁)
(𝐿𝑁)
MP↑
(frames)
OPR↓
YouTube [9]
0.45
0.42
0.56
0.49
0.53
0.47
0.77
0.63
238
0.56
Azure [13]
0.43
0.47
0.54
0.53
0.50
0.53
0.70
0.68
203
0.54
KCF [10]
0.35
0.32
0.38
0.31
0.41
0.40
0.44
0.40
113
0.64
ECO [4]
0.27
0.28
0.34
0.31
0.37
0.39
0.41
0.40
148
0.59
PsOP
(MTCNN+CosFace)
0.63
0.60
0.71
0.66
0.80
0.77
0.86
0.85
362
0.34
PsOP
(Pyramid+ArcFace)
0.63
0.62
0.71
0.65
0.80
0.79
0.86
0.85
387
0.34
"↑"&"↓"s.tand for the higher the better and the lower the better respectively.
Most Pixelated (MP) frames are the most concerned metrics. Specif-
ically:
𝑆𝑂𝑃𝐴= 1 −
Í
𝑡(𝑚𝑡+ 𝑓𝑝𝑡+ 𝑚𝑚𝑡)
Í
𝑡𝑔𝑡
where 𝑚𝑡, 𝑓𝑝𝑡, 𝑚𝑚𝑡, 𝑔𝑡correspond to the missed pixelation, false
positives in pixelation, missmatched pixelation, total pixelation in
frame 𝑡. SOPA reflects the overall performance of the PsOP.
𝑆𝑂𝑃𝑃=
Í
𝑖,𝑡𝑑𝑖,𝑡
Í
𝑡𝑐𝑡
where 𝑑𝑖,𝑡is the bounding box overlapping ratio of pixelated sensi-
tive object 𝑖with its labelled ground truth. 𝑐𝑡is the total number of
matched pixelation in frame 𝑡. Therefore, SOPP states the degree
of drifting and pixelation precision. Over-Pixelated Ratio (OPR) is
another important metric indicating the degree of over-pixelation
problem.
𝑂𝑃𝑅=
∑︁
𝑡
(𝑓𝑝𝑡)/
∑︁
𝑡
𝑐𝑡
4.4
Ablation Study
In Table 2, all the algorithms get their best performance on the
High-resolution Naive-scene (𝐻𝑆) sub-dataset.KCF and ECO here
are optimized for privacy object tracking tasks with detection based
calibration. To conduct the comparisons, we activated manual spec-
ification on occurrences of sensitive objects for the first four algo-
rithms. However, affected by the noisy detection results, KCF styled
online learning algorithms are maladjusted in video live streaming.
Although ECO applies higher dimension features than KCF, the
SOPA of ECO is lower than KCF. Overall, our PsOP achieves better
performance in terms of SOPA, SOPP, MP, and OPR. Particularly,
PsOP noticeably increases most pixelated frames and decrease the
over-pixelation ratio on the entire dataset, indicating that PsOP can

construct more robust trajectories and avoid pixelation if the object
is temporally not identifiable. The high value in SOPP suggests the
trajectory drifting in PsOP is relatively rare or happens at a later
time.
Table 3 shows the pixelation results solely on DPOs. Also, man-
ual specification is activated for the first four methods. PsOP gains
a surpassing pixelation accuracy and proves the proposed embed-
ding and PIAP clustering framework is sharp in dealing with DPOs.
Listed at the bottom line of Table 3, the boxed PsOP substitutes
the detection and embedding network with more advanced Primid-
Box [19], ArcFace [5]. The last section shows the network selection
is actually not that important for PIAP, as long as they are deep
architectured, well-tunned networks.
Table 4: Clustering purity and efficiency for faces
Dataset
Method
Purity↑
Cluster nubmer
(Clustered/Truth)
Time(s)↓
𝐻𝑆
AP
0.81
19/17
1.82
PAP
0.89
17/17
1.82
PIAP
0.89
17/17
0.07
𝐿𝑆
AP
0.72
37/43
3.05
PAP
0.84
41/43
3.05
PIAP
0.83
41/43
0.13
𝐻𝑁
AP
0.86
6/6
0.75
PAP
0.93
6/6
0.75
PIAP
0.93
6/6
0.04
𝐿𝑁
AP
0.89
7/7
0.80
PAP
0.92
7/7
0.80
PIAP
0.91
7/7
0.03
Figure 3: Qualitative comparison of YouTube (mosaics in
rectangular), KCF (mosaics in hexagons), and PsOP (mo-
saics in circles). Green boxes indicate human intervention is
needed for specification, yellow are the auto-generated mo-
saics, red ones are the over-pixelated area, and blue ones are
the miss-pixelated area.
Table 4 is the face clustering performance of classic AP, PAP (AP
after position revision), and PIAP on the collected live streaming
dataset. Comparing AP with PAP, the position information of face
vectors significantly boosts the purity of the clustering result. Ac-
cording to the results of PIAP and AP, our incremental message
passing algorithm solves the time-consuming problem of AP al-
most without affecting the purity as we stated before. The value
of the Time column is the seconds needed to reach an iteration of
consensus.
4.5
Qualitative Comparison
Qualitative comparisons among the YouTube offline pixelation tool,
migrated KCF, and PsOP are shown in Figure 2. Snapshots are
shoot from left to right. IPOs, including the trademark and the car
plate number, and DPOs, including faces and texts, are contained
in the scenes. The first row is the original scene in which a girl
streamer on the street is waving hands to greeting the audience.
The 2nd, 3rd, and 4th rows are respectively the pixelation results
after YouTube, KCF, and PsOP. Besides the significant differences
in red and blue boxes indicating accuracy, the green boxes in the
leftmost snapshot demonstrate the huge gap of required manual
work on the initialization. Only in PsoP, privacy-sensitive objects
are auto-detected and categorized, and DPOs are clustered and
pixelated with minimum intervention.
4.6
Efficiency
Training and testing are conducted on our i7-7800X, 64G RAM
and dual Nvidia GTX 1080 machine. The main cost of FPVLS is
on the face embedding algorithm. The embedding for one face
takes 10-15ms on our i7-7800X, dual GTX1080, 32G RAM machine.
The face detection, including compensation for a frame, takes 3ms.
Another time-costing part is the initialization of PIAP. The initial-
ization process takes 10-30ms depending on the case. Furthermore,
each incremental propagation loop takes 3-5ms. So PsOP can sat-
isfy the real-time efficiency requirement. In the cases of extreme
circumstances that the live video streams contain many faces or
other privacy sensitive objects, we can reduce the sampling rate
of the video frames to improve the efficiency of the detection and
recognition processes.
5
CONCLUSION
In this paper, a novel extendable and unified framework using
Privacy-sensitive Objects Pixelation (PsOP) is proposed for live
video streaming. The proposed PsOP shows significant improve-
ments in pixelation accuracy, precision, and over-pixelation ratio
compared with other offline pixelation algorithms. Also, our PsOP
requires minimum human intervention on the pixelation of discrim-
inating pixelation objects represented by faces and texts. Leveraging
the trained deep CNNs, the proposed PsOP manages to solve the
pixelation problems in video live streamings through the proposed
Positioned Incremental Affinity Propagation (PIAP) clustering. The
PIAP deals with the ill-defined cluster number issue and boosts
the accuracy of classic Affinity Propagation (AP) through position
information. Moreover, the accuracy of AP is not affected by the
incremental processing. However, the low-resolution video stream-
ings are still quite challenging because the image resolution affects

much of the detection and embedding network performance. De-
signed and trained on high-quality stationary images, these deep
neural networks can drop to a deficient performance and break the
robustness of the PsOP. Our future work will focus on the improve-
ment of accuracy and robustness under low resolution streaming
scenes.
