EOMM: An Engagement Optimized Matchmaking
Framework
Zhengxing Chen
∗
Northeastern University

Su Xue
Electronic Arts, Inc.

John Kolen
Electronic Arts, Inc.

Navid Aghdaie
Electronic Arts, Inc.

Kazi A. Zaman
Electronic Arts, Inc.

Yizhou Sun
University of California, Los
Angeles

Magy Seif El-Nasr
Northeastern University

ABSTRACT
Matchmaking connects multiple players to participate in online
player-versus-player games. Current matchmaking systems depend
on a single core strategy: create fair games at all times. These
systems pair similarly skilled players on the assumption that a fair
game is best player experience. We will demonstrate, however,
that this intuitive assumption sometimes fails and that matchmak-
ing based on fairness is not optimal for engagement.
In this paper, we propose an Engagement Optimized Matchmak-
ing (EOMM) framework that maximizes overall player engage-
ment. We prove that equal-skill based matchmaking is a special
case of EOMM on a highly simpliﬁed assumption that rarely holds
in reality. Our simulation on real data from a popular game made
by Electronic Arts,Inc. (EA) supports our theoretical results, show-
ing signiﬁcant improvement in enhancing player engagement com-
pared to existing matchmaking methods.
Keywords
matchmaking, player engagement, video games
1.
INTRODUCTION
Player-versus-Player (PvP) is a mode of video game in which
multiple players directly engage in competition or combat. PvP
games, which cover many popular genres, such as multiplayer on-
line battle arena (MOBA), ﬁrst-person shooting (FPS), and e-Sports,
have increased worldwide popularity in recent years. For example,
League of Legends, one of the most played MOBA games, has 90
million summoner names registered, 27 million unique daily play-
ers and 7.5 million concurrent users [30, 41]. As data released
∗This work was done when Zhengxing Chen was an intern student
at Electronic Arts,Inc.
©2017 International World Wide Web Conference Committee
(IW3C2), published under Creative Commons CC BY 4.0 License.
WWW 2017, April 3–7, 2017, Perth, Australia.
ACM 978-1-4503-4913-0/17/04.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3038912.3052559
.
by [39] shows, e-Sports is estimated to have 188 million viewer-
ship and 748 million dollar worth market in 2015 and the numbers
are expected to grow continuously.
Matchmaking is the process that connects players to form PvP
matches. In practice, a matchmaking system takes practical lim-
itations, such as players’ geo-location and network latency, into
consideration. For example, cross-ocean pairing is not good for
player experience. Beyond technical constraints, the strategy var-
ious matchmaking systems employ is creating fair games. This
strategy relies on the assumption that matching closely skilled play-
ers tend to create competitive games which are desired by play-
ers [21]. In order to establish player skills, numerous models have
been studied, such as Elo [16], Glicko [20] and TrueSkill [23].
Are fairly matched games always beneﬁcial for player experi-
ence? This fundamental, yet intuitive, assumption is worthy of deep
investigation. We can challenge it with a few examples. Consider a
cautious player who cares about protecting his rank among friends,
and a risk taker who enjoys difﬁcult matches. Pairing them with
the similarly skilled opponents will affect these players very differ-
ently. Even for the same player, their expectation on the coming
match when they just lost three games in a row can be very differ-
ent from that when they recently performed well. In Table 1, we
show an example that churn risks vary drastically upon players’ re-
cent match outcomes in a popular PvP game made by EA. These
facts lead to two key insights: (1) the effectiveness of matchmaking
needs to be measured quantitatively; and (2) matchmaking should
depend on dynamic and individual player states.
In this paper, we propose a new matchmaking framework, En-
gagement Optimized Matchmaking (EOMM). By formulating
matchmaking into an optimization problem, we pair players in or-
der to maximize the overall player engagement, or equivalently,
minimize the overall player disengagement. First, we measure a
player’s disengagement by their churn risk after each matchmak-
ing decision. Here churn refers to no gameplay within a period of
time, such as a week. Second, we model all players who wait in
the matchmaking pool as a complete graph, where each player is
a node, and an edge between two players is their sum churn risks
if paired. The churn risk depends on individual player states at the
moment of matchmaking. Last, we can achieve engagement opti-
mized matchmaking efﬁciently by solving a minimum weight per-
fect matching (MWPM) problem that ﬁnds non-overlapping pairs
with the minimal sum of edge weights on a complete graph.
arXiv:1702.06820v1  [cs.SI]  22 Feb 2017

Table 1: An example about the impact of player states on their
engagement. Data is from a popular PvP game made by EA.
Average churn risks vary drastically upon players’ recent three
match outcomes ((W)in, (L)ose or (D)raw). Churn risk is mea-
sured by the ratio of the players who stop playing within a pe-
riod time (7 days in this table) after a match. The churn risk of
some states with repeated losses (5.1%) is almost twice as much
as those of other "safer" states (2.6%-2.7%).
Last 3 Outcomes
Churn Risk
DLW | LLW | LDW | DDD
2.6% - 2.7%
...
...
WWW
3.7%
...
...
DLL | LWL | LDL
4.6% - 4.7%
WWL
4.9%
LLL
5.1%
EOMM provides a solid theoretical framework for matchmaking
analysis. With it, we prove that equal-skill based matchmaking is
a special case of EOMM on a simpliﬁed and often inapplicable
assumption about player states. The generic EOMM instead proves
to be optimal across a wide range of contexts.
For system development, EOMM is both ﬂexible and computa-
tionally feasible. The optimization objective can be tuned for var-
ious interests, e.g., in-game time, or even spending. Furthermore,
EOMM consists of three components: a skill model, a churn pre-
diction model and a graph matching model. All can be efﬁciently
implemented and independently upgraded. We built a simulated
system based on real data of a popular game made by Electronic
Arts, Inc. (EA), showing signiﬁcant improvement in enhancing
player engagement by EOMM against equal-skill based and other
matchmaking methods.
In sum, this paper contains the following contributions. First, we
propose an engagement optimized matchmaking framework, i.e.,
EOMM, which solves matchmaking as an optimization problem of
maximizing the overall player engagement. Second, we provide
theoretical analysis about the optimality of EOMM and the condi-
tions of the applicability of existing matchmaking methods. Last,
we build a simulated system using real game data to show signif-
icant advantages of EOMM in retaining players over the existing
matchmaking methods.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. After reviewing the
related work, we will present the formulation of matchmaking as
an optimization problem on a graph. Then we describe theoretical
ﬁndings comparing EOMM and other matchmaking methods. We
then show the case study applying EOMM on real data. Finally, we
will conclude with a discussion of the results and future directions.
2.
PREVIOUS WORK
2.1
Skill Modeling
The motivation behind skill rating is to rank players and to enable
skill-based matchmaking. Dating back to 1952, the Bradley-Terry
model [7] was developed to deal with repeated pairwise compar-
isons among a group of subjects. In the Bradley-Terry model, a
player i is assumed to have a ﬁxed, positive skill scalar, ri, and the
winning probability of player i against player j is the ratio of player
i’s skill in the sum of skills of both players. In its original form, the
Bradley-Terry model estimates player skills only after observing all
pairwise comparisons. While feasible for small groups of players,
requiring O(n2) matches is prohibitive for large player pools. One
can show that the Bradley-Terry model is equivalent to a logistic
regression model [2] in which each coefﬁcient wi corresponds to
log(ri).
The Elo system [16] addresses the relative skill ratings in player-
versus-player games, such as chess, with a probabilistic model. Elo
captures player performance, pi, as a random variable following a
one dimension Gaussian distribution with a mean, ri, and a ﬁxed
variance, β2, shared by all players. In the Elo system, ri gets up-
dated depending on the extent of agreement between expected out-
comes and real outcomes. For example, a low skill player beating a
high skill player yields a large update in adjusting their skill means
closer. Unlike the original Bradley-Terry model, ri can be updated
at an ongoing basis, i.e., as soon as after every match of player i.
The Glicko system [20], a Bayesian ranking rating system, was
later introduced. Besides mean player skill, ri, it also models the
belief about a player’s skill as RDi (rating deviation). As they
play an increasingly number of games, the belief about their skills
become stronger hence RDi decreases. However, RDi increases
when a player ceases to play for long time. To achieve high efﬁ-
ciency, Glicko uses an approximation Bayesian algorithm to update
ri and RDi.
Neither the Bradley-Terry model, the Elo system or the Glicko
system was initially applicable to team-oriented games until works
such as [23, 24, 29] to generalize these models.
For example,
TrueSkill system [23] extends the Elo system to games with ﬂex-
ible numbers of players and teams.
Researchers have proposed more advanced skill models to cap-
ture player skills in multiple facets. The works in [8, 38] model
player skills in multi-dimensions such as offensive and defensive
abilities. Delalleau et al. [10] proposed a neural network based
skill model which learns latent skill embeddings of players and is
claimed to outperform TrueSkill in a team based game. There are
skill models proposed for speciﬁc game genres, such as [11] for
chess, [9, 40] for MOBA games and for [3] RTS games.
In our paper, we will compare EOMM with skill based match-
making methods which leverage skill models. Skill models can also
facilitate EOMM in the decision of player assignment.
2.2
Matchmaking Strategies
There has been much research ensuring physical criteria of match-
making services such as network connection quality [1, 27, 28].
Besides physical criteria, matchmaking can be seen as a player
modeling technique [45] that extracts player information and deliv-
ers adaptive gaming experience [33]. A fair amount of matchmak-
ing systems assume that skill balanced games are good for engage-
ment [21] and hence resort to skill rating algorithms to identifying
similarly skilled opponents. My´slak and Deja [32] suggests addi-
tional information about player preferences in in-game avatar roles
can further improve fairness-based matchmaking systems. A few
researchers have explored methods to improve player engagement
through matchmaking. Delalleau et al. [10] proposed to train a
neural network based architecture which predicts player enjoyment
based on their historical statistics. They measured enjoyment by
directly asking players for feedback after each match. Whether or
not this method can effectively collect sufﬁcient feedbacks has not
been demonstrated with real data. Jiménez-Rodrıguez et al. [25]
proposed that matchmaking could be based on preferred roles by
players. They argue that a fun match should have players act in
roles with perceivably joyful role distribution. However, it is still
a conceptual, heuristic-based method without experiment showing
that such matchmaking system indeed improves concrete engage-
ment metrics. To our best knowledge, we have not seen any exist-

ing matchmaking method that formally treats matchmaking as an
optimization problem to maximize player engagement.
2.3
Player Engagement Prediction
Player engagement can be seen as an objective measurement of
user experience in games [6]. Player engagement can be embodied
by many speciﬁc metrics, such as time or money spent in the game,
the number of matches played within a time window, or churn risk.
We deﬁne churn risk as the proportion of total players stopping
playing the game over a period of time.
Churn prediction has been applied within various disciplines for
decades, such as telecommunications [17], online advertisements
[46] and insurance [31]. Video games have also sparked a num-
ber of churn analysis studies. For instance, Weber et al. [43] built
a regression model to predict the number of games played. They
also used the model to aid game design by identifying the most in-
ﬂuential features on player retention. Hadiji et al. [22] established
the fundamental in churn prediction in free-to-play (F2P) games
by suggesting deﬁnitions of various churn behaviors, proposing
universal behavioral telemetry, and comparing different machine
learning models across ﬁve commercial F2P games. Runge et al.
[37] not only trained a churn prediction model for a casual social
game but also showed how the game can leverage the model to in-
crease the effectiveness of promotions to players. In EOMM, we
employ churn prediction as an important building component in
engagement optimization.
2.4
Graph Matching
In a graph G = (V, E), a matching is a set of pairwise non-
adjacent edges [44]; that is, no two edges share a common vertex.
A perfect matching is a matching with every vertex in G incident on
exactly one edge in the matching. In a weighted graph G, a mini-
mum weight matching (MWM) is the matching with the lowest sum
of edge weights. A minimum weight perfect matching (MWPM) is
the perfect matching with the lowest sum of edge weights.
As will be shown in Section 3, the EOMM framework converts
the problem of determining optimal match assignment to the prob-
lem of seeking MWPM on a weighted graph. MWM/MWPM have
broad applications in other ﬁelds, including creating pairs follow-
ing speciﬁc rules in chess tournaments [34], schdeduling training
sessions among NASA shuttle cockpit simulators [4] and transmit-
ting images over networks [36]. In a similar spirit, Ólafsson [34]
leverages MWPM algorithm to determine opponents. Their goal,
however, was to create matches maximally adhering speciﬁc rules
of chess tournament, which is different than ours to optimize for
player engagement.
The ﬁrst attempt to solve MWPM is the polynomial time blos-
som algorithm proposed by Edmond [14, 15] in 1965. Since then,
researchers have steadily improved upon this algorithm. We will
compare and discuss those improved methods later when we intro-
duce EOMM.
3.
ENGAGEMENT OPTIMIZED
MATCHMAKING
In this section, we will introduce the EOMM framework which
formulates matchmaking as an optimization problem. In contrast
with the existing matchmaking methods that heuristically pair sim-
ilarly skilled co-players, EOMM aims to match players in an opti-
mal way that maximizes overall player engagement. Here we will
describe the details of match assignment for 1-vs-1 games. We will
discuss how EOMM can be extended to the matches with more
players in the ﬁnal section.
Complete graph 𝒢
Player pool 𝒫
Engagement Optimized
Matchmaking (EOMM)
Figure 1: Model matchmaking on a complete graph. Each node
represents a player, and every edge is associated with the sum
engagement metric of two players if paired. EOMM amounts
to ﬁnding an optimal pair assignment on G.
3.1
Optimization Objective
In practice, matchmaking is applied to a pool of players,
P = {p1, · · · , pN}, who are waiting to start 1-vs-1 matches. We
assume N to be an even number such that all players can be paired.
The objective of EOMM is to maximize the overall player engage-
ment, or equivalently, minimize the overall player disengagement.
We use churn risk as a concrete metric of disengagement. The term
“churn” is used by convention, which actually represents a status of
disengagement, i.e., a player not playing any games within a sub-
sequent time frame, not necessarily a permanent churn. We model
the churn risk, ci,j, of player pi after matchmaking with player pj
as a function of both players’ states, ci,j = Pr(pi churns|si, sj) =
c(si, sj). A player state is a collection of features that proﬁle an in-
dividual player, including but not limited to install date, skill, play
frequency, performance and etc. We will elaborate on learning ci,j
in the subsequent sections. Note that ci,j ̸= cj,i since two players
in a paired match may be impacted differently. We use a list of
player tuples, M = {(pi, pj)}, to denote a matchmaking result,
i.e., a pair assignment, in which all players in P are paired once
and only once. Deﬁning the overall player disengagement as the
sum of individual churn risks, EOMM seeks for an optimal pair
assignment M∗such that:
M∗= arg min
M
X
(pi,pj)∈M
c(si, sj) + c(sj, si)
(1)
We construct a graph, G, to model this environment (see Fig-
ure 1). Each player pi is a node of the graph, who has a player
state, si, before matchmaking. The edge between two players pi
and pj is associated with a weight ci,j +cj,i, which is the expected
sum disengagement metric if they are paired. Note that G is a com-
plete graph in that all pairs of players can be possibly connected.
Once all ci,j are computed, ﬁnding M∗in Eqn. 1 is converted to
a minimum weight perfect matching problem, i.e., ﬁnding a pair
assignment with the minimal sum weights of edges on graph G.
3.2
Predicting Churn Risks
We learn the function ci,j = c(si, sj) as a churn prediction
problem. In its original form, the churn risk ci,j of player pi af-
ter matchmaking depends on the states from both the player and
their opponent. Unfortunately, the well-established churn predic-
tion studies cannot be employed because normally they only use
features of players themselves without considering those of oppo-
nents. Also, naively feeding both player states as input will double

the feature dimension, which makes the prediction unintelligible
and harder since much more training data is needed.
One way to simplify the prediction of ci,j is to base it only on
player pi’s own state, si, and the resulting match outcome, oi,j,
from the view of pi. This works because the opponent’s state, sj,
such as skill, play history and style, does not directly interact with
player pi’s churn risk ci,j. It, however, inﬂuences the upcoming
match outcome, which is directly perceivable by player pi and thus
affects pi’s churn. Once the match outcome oi,j is known, ci,j be-
comes conditionally independent to the opponent’s state, sj. For-
mally, this property is represented as:
c(si, sj, oi,j) = c(si, oi,j),
(2)
In this paper, we assume that game outcomes are sampled from a
ﬁnite set, O, such as Win, Lose and Draw. For example, oi,j = W
means that pi wins over pj, while oj,i = L represents the same
outcome from the view of pj.
We employ standard skill mod-
els [16, 20] that use both players’ skills to approximately predict
game outcome probabilities. We denote player pi’s skill represen-
tation as µi, which is, for example, Elo score [16] or Glicko mean
and RD [20]. Note that µi is part of player state si. As a result, we
have:
Pr(oi,j|si, sj) ≈Pr(oi,j|µi, µj),
(3)
Putting them together, we can efﬁciently predict the churn risks
of paired players in Eqn. 1:
c(si, sj) + c(sj, si)
(4)
=
X
oi,j∈O
Pr(oi,j|si, sj) (c(si, sj, oi,j) + c(sj, si, oj,i))
(5)
≈
X
oi,j∈O
Pr(oi,j|µi, µj) (c(si, oi,j) + c(sj, oj,i)) ,
(6)
where the ﬁrst equality is a marginalization on game outcome, oi,j.
In the approximate equality, the conditional independence of ci,j
on sj given oi,j (Eqn. 2) and the game outcome prediction (Eqn. 3)
are used.
Now c(si, oi,j) can be efﬁciently learned as a standard churn
prediction problem. The input features are merely an updated player
state after knowing the matchmaking game outcome, i.e.,
supdate
i
←si and oi,j. If we decompose si = [oK
i , ˆsi], where
oK
i is a vector of the latest K game outcomes (for example, oK
i =
LWLDL when K = 5), and ˆsi represent the rest of features in
si. The state update can be done easily as:
supdate
i
←si and oi,j
(7)
=[oK
i , ˆsi] and oi,j
(8)
=[oK+1
i
, ˆsupdate
i
]
(9)
We use ˆsupdate
i
to indicate that non-game-outcome features are
also updated after a new match. For example, the total number
of games played increments by one. We can adopt any churn pre-
diction model based on the updated player state.
3.3
Finding the Optimal Pair Assignment
Given the predicted churn risks of each pair of players, i.e., the
weight of every edge in G, EOMM reduces to a minimum weight
perfect matching (MWPM) problem. The goal is to ﬁnd a pair
assignment, M∗, on a complete graph, G, which has the minimal
sum weights of edges.
For a graph with N node, the brute-force way is to exhaustedly
compare all
  N
N/2

/2
N
2 possible pair assignments and ﬁnd the best
one, but the time complexity is too high to be feasible in practical
systems. Fortunately, many polynomial time algorithms exist for
the MWPM problem. For example, several algorithms can solve
the problem in the worst time complexity O(N 3) [18, 26]. If en-
gagement measurements are pure integers, there exists a slightly
faster algorithm [19] with running time O(N 2 3
4 log K) where K
is the largest magnitude of an edge weight. There also exist greedy
algorithms, such as [12] and [13], with faster running time to ﬁnd
suboptimal solutions. Moreover, MWPM can be solved in parallel
as proposed by [35].
4.
THEORETICAL FINDINGS
Besides generating optimal matchmaking assignments, EOMM
provides a framework to conduct theoretical analysis on other match-
making related problems.
We use this framework to compare
EOMM with other matchmaking strategies under different hypo-
thetical situations to obtain many insights. Without loss of gener-
ality, we focus our discussion on 1-vs-1 games with possible game
outcomes sampled from Win, Lose and Draw.
Using the same notation in Section 3, we investigate a pair of
players pi, pj ∈P, i ̸= j. When c(si, sj) = c(oi,j), i.e., a
player’s churn risk only depends on the game outcome of the up-
coming match, regardless of all other states. This simpliﬁcation
for Eqn. 7, where supdate
i
only considers oi,j but ignores si, has
interesting implications.
• If c(Win) + c(Lose) > 2 · c(Draw), i.e., the sum churn
risk of two matched players in a tied game is lower than that
in a non-tied game. Under this circumstance, the equal-skill
based matchmaking is equivalent to EOMM, as both strive
to form matches with Draw outcomes as many as possible.
This explains the intuition and popularity behind equal-skill
matchmaking. But we should be very aware of its conditional
applicability, while EOMM is instead always optimal.
• If c(Win) + c(Lose) < 2 · c(Draw), equal-skill based
matchmaking is actually worst among all matchmaking
schemes, as its goal to create close matches contrarily mini-
mizes the overall player engagement. Although this situation
contradicts with the common intuition that fair matches are
good, it is possible for a real game. Therefore validating the
assumptions with real game data is critical before applying
an equal-skill based matchmaking algorithm.
When c(si, sj) = c(si), i.e., a player’s churn risk is determined
by his state before matchmaking, then it does not matter whom
they will play. In this case, EOMM can do no better than a ran-
dom matchmaking. Random matchmaking, from this perspective,
is not as trivial as we thought. It is a relative safe and stable base-
line choice in lack of prior information. While equal-skill based
method can perform the worst under certain conditions, random
matchmaking will never fall into the worst case.
The analysis above shows that the existing matchmaking meth-
ods, such as equal-skill based and random matching, arise within
the EOMM framework on different conditions. Practitioners can
safely apply EOMM while gathering more information about their
game and players.
5.
CASE STUDY
To test the proposed matchmaking framework, we ran simulation
which is conﬁgured based on the real data from a popular PvP game
made by Electronic Arts Inc.(EA). In the simulation, we compared

Figure 2: Predicted win probability vs. real win probability.
Real win probability is the ratio of matches, with similar pre-
dicted winning probabilities, whose outcomes are real “Wins”.
different matchmaking methods applied to the same player popu-
lation. In the end, EOMM retained signiﬁcantly higher number of
players than other matchmaking methods.
5.1
Data Collection
We collected 1-vs-1 matches from a popular game made by EA.
There are three possible match outcomes, namely Win, Lose and
Draw. In total, we collected 36.9 million matches played by 1.68
million unique players in the ﬁrst half of 2016.
5.2
Preparation
To create a realistic environment for simulation, the following
models and functions are needed. We compute them based on real
game data.
Player Skills We need to establish a distribution of player skills
for the population we simulate on. The distribution is learned from
real game data. We sorted the collected real matches temporally
and applied Glicko [20] to compute each player’s ﬁnal skill. For
each player i, the skill vector is represented by mean ri and vari-
ance RDi, i.e. µi = (ri, RDi). In simulation, we assume that the
game and player skills are stationary. The population’s skill distri-
bution is constant, where each player’s skill does not change any
more over time.
While Glicko scores can be used to estimate the winning prob-
ability of player i over player j, Pr(i > j|µi, µj), they cannot
provide the probability of draws. We deﬁned a set of rules to allow
the estimation of win/lose/draw probabilities from Glicko scores:
Pr∗(i = j) = 20%
(10)
Pr∗(i > j) =
80% · Pr(i > j|µi, µj)
Pr(i > j|µi, µj) + Pr(j > i|µj, µi)
(11)
Pr∗(i < j) = 1 −Pr∗(i = j) −Pr∗(i > j)
(12)
Basically, the draw probability (Eqn. 10) is set to 20% regardless
of skill gaps. This is based on our ﬁndings that 1) draw outcomes
only have −0.05 correlation with the difference of skill means in
Figure 3: Predicted churn risk vs. real churn risk. Real churn
risk is the ratio of matches, with similar predicted churn risks,
which are indeed the last match before churn.
the collected game data; 2) around 20% matches are draws re-
gardless of skill gaps. The win/lose probabilities are normalized
such that the probabilities of win, lose and draw sum up to 1. Fig-
ure 2 shows that the predicted win probabilities using Glicko scores
based on our rules are well aligned with the real match outcomes.
Churn Prediction Model We trained a logistic regression model
for predicting whether a player will be an eight-hour churner after
a match. The input features describe the upcoming match and the
player’s 10 most recent matches. A player is labeled as an eight-
hour churner if they do not play any 1-vs-1 match within the next
eight hours after playing this match. As discussed in Section 3,
the term of “churn” is used by convention. It represents “stopping
playing” within a period of time, which is a metric of disengage-
ment.
We use Eqn. 6 to estimate c(si, sj)+c(sj, si). The model takes
as input the player’s state si before matchmaking along with the
upcoming match outcome oi,j.
Speciﬁcally, the input features consist of:
• Each of the player’s 10 most recent matches: win/lose/draw
status, time passage since the previous match, time passage
to the upcoming match, and goal difference against his op-
ponent
• Upcoming match: one-hot encoding of the upcoming match’s
outcome win/lose/draw
• Other: the number of 1-vs-1 matches played in the last eight
hours, one day, one week and one month.
We use 5-fold cross validation and grid search to determine the
proper L2 regularization strength when training the model. The
predicted probabilities are well aligned with the real churn prob-
abilities, in particular when churn risk is less than 0.8, as shown
in Figure 3. While the performance of the predictive model still
has room to improve, the ﬂexibility of EOMM allows one to easily
reﬁne or replace the model if better ones are found.
Player States In simulation, each player’s state is sampled from
a collection of states, which are established based on real players’
states in the collected data. We ﬁrst randomly sample a subset of

matches. Both players’ states in those matches are gathered to cre-
ate this collection. A player state contains the needed features for
churn prediction, as well as the player’s skill score.
5.3
Simulation Procedure
In the simulation, we compared EOMM with three matchmak-
ing mechanisms: random matchmaking (RandomMM), which ran-
domly pairs available players in the waiting pool, skill-based match-
making (SkillMM), which pairs every two consecutive players after
sorting them by skills, and worst matchmaking (WorstMM), which
does the opposite of EOMM by minimizing the objective func-
tion of EOMM. SkillMM always seeks “fair games”. We added
WorstMM as a validation.
All methods are applied on the same population (waiting pool),
where the same player skill distribution, churn model and player
state distribution as described in Section 5.2 are used. EOMM fol-
lows Eqn. 6 to estimate churn risk c(si, sj) + c(sj, si). We used
the perfect matching algorithm [18, 26] implemented by an open-
source library [42].
For each matchmaking method M, the procedure within each
round of simulation is as follows:
1. Create a waiting pool of P players, whose player states are
sampled from the player state collection.
2. Use M to determine the pair assignment (matchmaking).
3. Simulate match outcomes according to the win/lose/draw prob-
ability predicted by the skill model
4. For each player, simulate if he will churn according to the
predicted churn probability by churn model.
5. Record the number of retained players.
In experiments, we tested P = 100, 200, 300, 400 and 500. For
each setting of P, we repeated the simulation by 10,000 rounds
of matchmaking. We compare different matchmaking methods by
the average number of their retained players per round, i.e., the
players who continue playing in the next eight hours. In order to
test statistical signiﬁcance, we conducted Welch’s t-test between
every pair of the matchmaking algorithms.
5.4
Results and Discussion
The results are shown in Table 2. All pairwise differences of re-
tained players are statistically signiﬁcant (p-value < 0.01) except
EOMM vs. RandomMM (when P = 100) and SkillMM vs. Ran-
domMM (when P = 400). In all other scenarios, EOMM outper-
forms the other three matchmaking methods. The results prove the
applicability of EOMM to act as an engagement optimizer. When
P = 100, EOMM does not retain a signiﬁcantly higher number
of players than RandomMM, and even retains fewer players than
SkillMM. It is possibly because that when P is small, the random-
ness has higher impact, and also, the room for arranging opponents
is smaller. More rounds of simulations might be needed to show
signiﬁcance in this case.
The improvement of EOMM over SkillMM, the most common
matchmaking method, in terms of the average number of retained
players are 0.3%, 0.9%, 1.1%, and 0.6% when P = 200, 300, 400
and 500 respectively. On average EOMM retains 0.7% more player
compared with SkillMM after one round of matchmaking. No-
tably the beneﬁt of retention will accumulate over time in a con-
stant population. For players who play 20 rounds of matchmaking
games within eight hours, there will be 15% more players retained
(1.00720 ≈1.15) by EOMM over those by SkillMM. The more
Table 2: Average number of retained players per round of
matchmaking simulation. 10,000 rounds of matchmaking were
simulated.
Method
P=100
P=200
P=300
P=400
P=500
WorstMM
51.50
103.39
154.57
206.65
258.21
SkillMM
52.52
103.96
156.05
207.43
259.24
RandomMM
51.81
103.97
156.09
207.09
259.65
EOMM
51.90
104.24
157.50
209.37
261.19
rounds of matchmaking are conducted, the more signiﬁcant is the
accumulative advantage of EOMM in engagement.
We did not ﬁnd a consistent climb in retention boost as P in-
creased. This may suggest that when the player pool reaches certain
size, the choices of opponents are enough to rescue those players
on the edge of churn. Beyond this size, a larger player pool may not
bring in signiﬁcantly extra beneﬁts in engagement maximization.
As a validation, WorstMM consistently retains the fewest play-
ers in the pools of all sizes. This result veriﬁes the optimum of
EOMM from the opposite side. It is also interesting to note that
SkillMM does not consistently outperform RandomMM, which is
aligned with our discussion in the theoretical ﬁndings in Section 4,
that is, balanced matches are not always optimal for engagement.
6.
CONCLUSION
The paper presents a novel framework to achieve engagement
optimized matchmaking (EOMM). It formulates matchmaking as
a problem of maximizing the player engagement, and solves the
optimization efﬁciently. EOMM employs three components, a skill
model, an engagement predictive model and a minimum weight
perfect matching algorithm, each of which can be tailored ﬂexibly
for speciﬁc applications. We ran simulations whose conﬁgurations
were based on real data from an online PvP game. The results
show that EOMM signiﬁcantly outperforms all other methods in
the number of retained players. EOMM also provides a theoretical
framework to analyze various matchmaking algorithms.
EOMM provides a measurable and ﬂexible matchmaking frame-
work. It has well-deﬁned quantitative objectives that can be mon-
itored, evaluated and improved. Within the EOMM framework,
the core building components, skill model, churn model and graph
pairing model, are uncoupled so that they can be tuned and replaced
independently. Moreover, we can even change the objective func-
tion to other core game metrics of interest, such as play time, re-
tention, or spending. EOMM allows one to easily plug in different
types of predictive models to achieve the optimization.
So far we have discussed EOMM in 1-vs-1 game scenarios. This
framework also applies to PvP games that involve teams of players,
where every component needs to be extended with additional care.
The skill model can be simply applied to a team by adding up skills
for all team members [23]. For churn prediction, we can use the
same idea that one player’s churn risk is conditionally independent
with other players’ states given that their inﬂuence on the player’s
own state, such as the game outcome, is known. Last, the minimum
weight perfect matching algorithms for pairs are no longer applica-
ble. Instead of a pair assignment, we seek a grouping assignment
on a complete graph. A related area to investigate is perfect match-
ing in hypergraphs [5], where an edge can connect more than two
vertices. Furthermore, EOMM is not even limited to games. In
broad applications, such as friend connection in a social network
and 1-on-1 tutoring in online education, EOMM’s formulation and
optimization techniques still apply.

In the future, we expect EOMM equipped with more advanced
models, such as skill model and churn model, can have higher op-
timal bound. We will explore EOMM performance in more realis-
tic situations, where practical restrictions are applied, such as net-
work connectivity, regions and friend/black lists. More restrictions
would result in fewer edges in the constructed graph of EOMM.
Last, we will explore EOMM in multi-player games with more than
two players involved and efﬁcient algorithms analogous to perfect
matching algorithms within hypergraphs.
7.
