Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
SPHERICAL CNNS ON UNSTRUCTURED GRIDS
Chiyu “Max” Jiang
UC Berkeley
Jingwei Huang
Stanford University
Karthik Kashinath
Lawrence Berkeley Nat’l Lab
Prabhat
Lawrence Berkeley Nat’l Lab
Philip Marcus
UC Berkeley
Matthias Nießner
Technical University of Munich
ABSTRACT
We present an efﬁcient convolution kernel for Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) on unstructured grids using parameterized differential operators while fo-
cusing on spherical signals such as panorama images or planetary signals. To
this end, we replace conventional convolution kernels with linear combinations of
differential operators that are weighted by learnable parameters. Differential oper-
ators can be efﬁciently estimated on unstructured grids using one-ring neighbors,
and learnable parameters can be optimized through standard back-propagation.
As a result, we obtain extremely efﬁcient neural networks that match or outper-
form state-of-the-art network architectures in terms of performance but with a
signiﬁcantly smaller number of network parameters. We evaluate our algorithm
in an extensive series of experiments on a variety of computer vision and climate
science tasks, including shape classiﬁcation, climate pattern segmentation, and
omnidirectional image semantic segmentation. Overall, we (1) present a novel
CNN approach on unstructured grids using parameterized differential operators
for spherical signals, and (2) show that our unique kernel parameterization allows
our model to achieve the same or higher accuracy with signiﬁcantly fewer network
parameters.
1
INTRODUCTION
A wide range of machine learning problems in computer vision and related areas require processing
signals in the spherical domain; for instance, omnidirectional RGBD images from commercially
available panorama cameras, such as Matterport (Chang et al., 2017), panaramic videos coupled
with LIDAR scans from self-driving cars (Geiger et al., 2013), or planetary signals in scientiﬁc
domains such as climate science (Racah et al., 2017). Unfortunately, naively mapping spherical
signals to planar domains results in undesirable distortions. Speciﬁcally, projection artifacts near
polar regions and handling of boundaries makes learning with 2D convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) particularly challenging and inefﬁcient. Very recent work, such as Cohen et al. (2018) and
Esteves et al. (2018), propose network architectures that operate natively in the spherical domain,
and are invariant to rotations in the SO(3) group. Such invariances are desirable in a set of problems
– e.g., machine learning problems of molecules – where gravitational effects are negligible and
orientation is arbitrary. However, for other different classes of problems at large, assumed orientation
information is crucial to the predictive capability of the network. A good example of such problems
is the MNIST digit recognition problem, where orientation plays an important role in distinguishing
digits “6” and “9”. Other examples include omnidirectional images, where images are naturally
oriented by gravity; and planetary signals, where planets are naturally oriented by their axis of
rotation.
In this work, we present a new convolution kernel for CNNs on arbitrary manifolds and topologies,
discretized by an unstructured grid (i.e., mesh), and focus on its applications in the spherical domain
approximated by an icosahedral spherical mesh. We propose and evaluate the use of a new parame-
terization scheme for CNN convolution kernels, which we call Parameterized Differential Operators
(PDOs), which is easy to implement on unstructured grids. We call the resulting convolution op-
erator that operates on the mesh using such kernels the MeshConv operator. This parameterization
scheme utilizes only 4 parameters for each kernel, and achieves signiﬁcantly better performance
1
arXiv:1901.02039v1  [cs.CV]  7 Jan 2019

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
θ0×
+θ1×
+θ2×
+θ3×
I
∂
∂x
∂
∂y
∇2
=
spherical
mesh
post-convolution
feature map
represented on
−−−−−−−→
Figure 1: Illustration for the MeshConv operator using parameterized differential operators to re-
place conventional learnable convolutional kernels. Similar to classic convolution kernels that es-
tablish patterns between neighboring values, differential operators computes “differences”, and a
linear combination of differential operators establishes similar patterns.
than competing methods, with much fewer parameters. In particular, we illustrate its use in various
machine learning problems in computer vision and climate science.
In summary, our contributions are as follows:
• We present a general approach for orientable CNNs on unstructured grids using parameter-
ized differential operators.
• We show that our spherical model achieves signiﬁcantly higher parameter efﬁciency com-
pared to state-of-the-art network architectures for 3D classiﬁcation tasks and spherical im-
age semantic segmentation.
• We release and open-source the codes developed and used in this study for other potential
extended applications1.
We organize the structure of the paper as follows. We ﬁrst provide an overview of related studies
in the literature in Sec. 2; we then introduce details of our methodology in Sec. 3, followed by an
empirical assessment of the effectiveness of our model in Sec. 4. Finally, we evaluate the design
choices of our kernel parameterization scheme in Sec. 5.
2
BACKGROUND
Spherical CNNs
The ﬁrst and foremost concern for processing spherical signals is distortions
introduced by projecting signals on curved surfaces to ﬂat surfaces. Su & Grauman (2017) process
equirectangular images with regular convolutions with increased kernel sizes near polar regions
where greater distortions are introduced by the planar mapping. Coors et al. (2018) and Zhao et al.
(2018) use a constant kernel that samples points on the tangent plane of the spherical image to reduce
distortions. A slightly different line of literature explores rotational-equivariant implementations of
spherical CNNs. Cohen et al. (2018) proposed spherical convolutions with intermediate feature
maps in SO(3) that are rotational-equivariant. Esteves et al. (2018) used spherical harmonic basis
to achieve similar results.
Reparameterized Convolutional Kernel
Related to our approach in using parameterized differ-
ential operators, several works utilize the diffusion kernel for efﬁcient Machine Learning and CNNs.
Kondor & Lafferty (2002) was among the ﬁrst to suggest the use of diffusion kernel on graphs. At-
wood & Towsley (2016) propose Diffusion-Convolutional Neural Networks (DCNN) for efﬁcient
convolution on graph structured data. Boscaini et al. (2016) introduce a generalization of classic
CNNs to non-Euclidean domains by using a set of oriented anisotropic diffusion kernels. Cohen &
Welling (2016) utilized a linear combination of ﬁlter banks to acquire equivariant convolution ﬁlters.
1Our codes are available on Github: https://github.com/maxjiang93/ugscnn
2

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Ruthotto & Haber (2018) explore the reparameterization of convolutional kernels using parabolic
and hyperbolic differential basis with regular grid images.
Non-Euclidean Convolutions
Related to our work on performing convolutions on manifolds rep-
resented by an unstructured grid (i.e., mesh), works in geometric deep learning address similar
problems (Bronstein et al., 2017). Other methods perform graph convolution by parameterizing the
convolution kernels in the spectral domain, thus converting the convolution step into a spectral dot
product (Bruna et al., 2014; Defferrard et al., 2016; Kipf & Welling, 2017; Yi et al., 2017). Masci
et al. (2015) perform convolutions directly on manifolds using cross-correlation based on geodesic
distances and Maron et al. (2017) use an optimal surface parameterization method (seamless toric
covers) to parameterize genus-zero shapes into 2D signals for analysis using conventional planar
CNNs.
Image Semantic Segmentation
Image semantic segmentation is a classic problem in computer
vision, and there has been an impressive body of literature studying semantic segmentation of pla-
nar images (Ronneberger et al., 2015; Badrinarayanan et al., 2015; Long et al., 2015; J´egou et al.,
2017; Wang et al., 2018a). Song et al. (2017) study semantic segmentation of equirectangular omni-
directional images, but in the context of image inpainting, where only a partial view is given as input.
Armeni et al. (2017) and Chang et al. (2017) provide benchmarks for semantic segmentation of 360
panorama images. In the 3D learning literature, researchers have looked at 3D semantic segmenta-
tion on point clouds or voxels (Dai et al., 2017a; Qi et al., 2017a; Wang et al., 2018b; Tchapmi et al.,
2017; Dai et al., 2017b). Our method also targets the application domain of image segmentation by
providing a more efﬁcient convolutional operator for spherical domains, for instance, focusing on
panoramic images (Chang et al., 2017).
3
METHOD
3.1
PARAMETERIZED DIFFERENTIAL OPERATORS
We present a novel scheme for efﬁciently performing convolutions on manifolds approximated by
a given underlying mesh, using what we call Parameterized Differential Operators. To this end, we
reparameterize the learnable convolution kernel as a linear combination of differential operators.
Such reparameterization provides two distinct advantages: ﬁrst, we can drastically reduce the num-
ber of parameters per given convolution kernel, allowing for an efﬁcient and lean learning space;
second, as opposed to the cross-correlation type convolution on mesh surfaces (Masci et al., 2015),
which requires large amounts of geodesic computations and interpolations, ﬁrst and second order
differential operators can be efﬁciently estimated using only the one-ring neighborhood.
In order to illustrate the concept of PDOs, we draw comparisons to the conventional 3×3 convolution
kernel in the regular grid domain. The 3 × 3 kernel parameterized by parameters θ: G3×3
θ
can be
written as a linear combination of basis kernels which can be viewed as delta functions at constant
offsets:
G3×3
θ
(x, y) =
1
X
i=−1
1
X
j=−1
θijδ(x −i, y −j)
(1)
where x and y refer to the spatial coordinates that correspond to the two spatial dimensions over
which the convolution is performed. Due to the linearity of the cross-correlation operator (∗), the
output feature map can be expressed as a linear combination of the input function cross-correlated
with different basis functions. Deﬁning the linear operator ∆ij to be the cross-correlation with a
basis delta function, we have:
∆ijF(x, y) :=F(x, y) ∗δ(x −i, y −j)
(2)
F(x, y) ∗G3×3
θ
(x, y) =
1
X
i=−1
1
X
j=−1
θij∆ijF(x, y)
(3)
3

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Classiﬁcation
Segmentation
L5
input
signal
L5
L4
L3
L2
L1
" #
feature
vector
" #
output
scores
MeshConv
DownSamp
ResBlock
DownSamp
ResBlock
DownSamp
ResBlock
DownSamp
ResBlock
Avg Pool
Dropout
MLP
L0
L1
L2
L3
L4
L5
L5
output
signal
MeshConv
MeshConvT
ResBlock
MeshConvT
ResBlock
MeshConvT
ResBlock
MeshConvT
ResBlock
MeshConvT
ResBlock
Concat
Concat
Concat
Concat
Concat
DownSamp
ResBlock
ResBlock(a, b, c)
Conv1x1(a, b)
Bn, ReLU
MeshConv(b, b)
Bn, ReLU
Conv1x1(b, c)
Bn
ReLU
Element-wise
Addition
Conv1x1(a, c)
Bn
Figure 2: Schematics for model architecture for classiﬁcation and semantic segmentation tasks, at a
level-5 input resolution. Ln stands for spherical mesh of level-n as deﬁned in Sec. 3.2. MeshConv
is implemented according to Eqn. 4. MeshConvT ﬁrst pads unknown values at the next level with 0,
followed by a regular MeshConv. DownSamp samples the values at the nodes in the next mesh level.
A ResBlock with bottleneck layers, consisting of Conv1x1 (1-by-1 convolutions) and MeshConv
layers is detailed above. In the decoder, ResBlock is after each MeshConvT and Concat.
In our formulation of PDOs, we replace the cross-correlation linear operators ∆ij with differential
operators of varying orders. Similar to the linear operators resulting from cross-correlation with
basis functions, differential operators are linear, and approximate local features. In contrast to cross-
correlations on manifolds, differential operators on meshes can be efﬁciently computed using Finite
Element basis, or derived by Discrete Exterior Calculus. In the actual implementation below, we
choose the identity (I, 0th order differential, same as ∆00), derivatives in two orthogonal spatial
dimensions (∇x, ∇y, 1st order differential), and the Laplacian operator (∇2, 2nd order differential):
F(x, y) ∗Gdiff
θ
= θ0IF + θ1∇xF + θ2∇yF + θ3∇2F
(4)
The identity (I) of the input function is trivial to obtain. The ﬁrst derivative (∇x, ∇y) can be obtained
by ﬁrst computing the per-face gradients, and then using area-weighted average to obtain per-vertex
gradient. The dot product between the per-vertex gradient value and the corresponding x and y
vector ﬁelds are then computed to acquire ∇xF and ∇yF. For the sphere, we choose the east-
west and north-south directions to be the x and y components, since the poles naturally orient the
spherical signal. The Laplacian operator on the mesh can be discretized using the cotangent formula:
∇2F ≈
1
2Ai
X
j∈N(i)
(cot αij + cot βij)(Fi −Fj)
(5)
where N(i) is the nodes in the neighboring one-ring of i, Ai is the area of the dual face correspond-
ing to node i, and αij and βij are the two angles opposing edge ij. With this parameterization of the
convolution kernel, the parameters can be similarly optimized via backpropagation using standard
stochastic optimization routines.
3.2
ICOSAHEDRAL SPHERICAL MESH
The icosahedral spherical mesh (Baumgardner & Frederickson, 1985) is among the most uniform
and accurate discretizations of the sphere. A spherical mesh can be obtained by progressively sub-
dividing each face of the unit icosahedron into four equal triangles and reprojecting each node to
unit distance from the origin. Apart from the uniformity and accuracy of the icosahedral sphere, the
subdivision scheme for the triangles provides a natural coarsening and reﬁnement scheme for the
4

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Model
Accuracy(%)
Number of Parameters
S2CNN (Cohen et al., 2018)
96.00
58k
SphereNet (Coors et al., 2018)
94.41
196k
Ours
99.23
62k
Table 1: Results on the Spherical MNIST dataset for validating the use of Parameterized Differential
Operators. Our model achieves state-of-the-art performance with comparable number of training
parameters.
grid that allows for easy implementations of pooling and unpooling routines associated with CNN
architectures. See Fig. 1 for a schematic of the level-3 icosahedral spherical mesh.
For the ease of discussion, we adopt the following naming convention for mesh resolution: starting
with the unit icosahedron as the level-0 mesh, each progressive mesh resolution is one level above
the previous. Hence, for a level-l mesh:
nf = 20 · 4l; ne = 30 · 4l; nv = ne −nf + 2
(6)
where nf, ne, nv stands for the number of faces, edges, and vertices of the spherical mesh.
3.3
MODEL ARCHITECTURE DESIGN
A detailed schematic for the neural architectures in this study is presented in Fig. 2. The schematic
includes architectures for both the classiﬁcation and regression network, which share a common en-
coder architecture. The segmentation network consists of an additional decoder which features trans-
pose convolutions and skip layers, inspired by the U-Net architecture (Ronneberger et al., 2015).
Minor adjustments are made for different tasks, mainly surrounding adjusting the number of input
and output layers to process signals at varied resolutions. A detailed breakdown for model architec-
tures, as well as training details for each task in the Experiment section (Sec. 4), is provided in the
appendix (Appendix Sec. B).
4
EXPERIMENTS
4.1
SPHERICAL MNIST
To validate the use of parameterized differential operators to replace conventional convolution oper-
ators, we implemented such neural networks towards solving the classic computer vision benchmark
task: the MNIST digit recognition problem (LeCun, 1998).
Experiment Setup
We follow Cohen et al. (2018) by projecting the pixelated digits onto the sur-
face of the unit sphere. We further move the digits to the equator to prevent coordinate singularity
at the poles. We benchmark our model against two other implementations of spherical CNNs: a
rotational-invariant model by Cohen et al. (2018) and an orientable model by Coors et al. (2018).
All models are trained and tested with non-rotated digits to illustrate the performance gain from
orientation information.
Results and Discussion
Our model outperforms its counterparts by a signiﬁcant margin, achieving
the best performance among comparable algorithms, with comparable number of parameters. We
attribute the success in our model to the gain in orientation information, which is indispensable for
many vision tasks. In contrast, S2CNN (Cohen et al., 2018) is rotational-invariant, and thus has
difﬁculties distinguishing digits “6” and “9”.
4.2
3D OBJECT CLASSIFICATION
We use the ModelNet40 benchmark (Wu et al., 2015), a 40-class 3D classiﬁcation problem, to
illustrate the applicability of our spherical method to a wider set of problems in 3D learning. For
this study, we look into two aspects of our model: peak performance and parameter efﬁciency.
5

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
103
104
105
106
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
PointNet++
VoxNet
S2CNN
Ours
Number of Parameters (log scale)
Accuracy
Figure 3: Parameter efﬁciency study on Model-
Net40, benchmarked against representative 3D
learning models consuming different input data
representations: PointNet++ using point clouds
as input, VoxNet consuming binary-voxel in-
puts, S2CNN consuming the same input struc-
ture as our model (spherical signal). The ab-
scissa is drawn based on log scale.
105
106
107
108
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
UNet
FCN8s
PointNet++
S2CNN
Ours
Number of Parameters (log scale)
mIoU Score
Figure 4: Parameter efﬁciency study on 2D3DS
semantic segmentation task. Our spherical seg-
mentation model outperforms the planar and
point-based counterparts by a signiﬁcant margin
across all parameter regimes.
Experiment Setup
To use our spherical CNN model for the object classiﬁcation task, we pre-
process the 3D geometries into spherical signals. We follow Cohen et al. (2018) for preprocessing
the 3D CAD models. First, we normalize and translate each mesh to the coordinate origin. We
then encapsulate each mesh with a bounding level-5 unit sphere and perform ray-tracing from each
point to the origin. We record the distance from the spherical surface to the mesh, as well as the
sin, cos of the incident angle. The data is further augmented with the 3 channels corresponding to
the convex hull of the input mesh, forming a total of 6 input channels. An illustration of the data pre-
processing process is presented in Fig. 5. For peak performance, we compare the best performance
achievable by our model with other 3D learning algorithms. For the parameter efﬁciency study, we
progressively reduce the number of feature layers in all models without changing the overall model
architecture. Then, we evaluate the models after convergence in 250 epochs. We benchmark our
results against PointNet++ (Qi et al., 2017a), VoxNet (Qi et al., 2016), and S2CNN2.
Results and Discussion
Fig. 3 shows a comparison of model performance versus number of
parameters. Our model achieves the best performance across all parameter ranges. In the low-
parameter range, our model is able to achieve approximately 60% accuracy for the 40-class 3D
classiﬁcation task with a mere 2000+ parameters. Table 2 shows a comparison of peak performance
between models. At peak performance, our model is on-par with comparable state-of-the-art models,
and achieves the best performance among models consuming spherical input signals.
4.3
OMNIDIRECTIONAL IMAGE SEGMENTATION
We illustrate the semantic segmentation capability of our network on the omnidirectional image seg-
mentation task. We use the Stanford 2D3DS dataset (Armeni et al., 2017) for this task. The 2D3DS
dataset consists of 1,413 equirectangular images with RGB+depth channels, as well as semantic la-
bels across 13 different classes. The panoramic images are taken in 6 different areas, and the dataset
is ofﬁcially split for a 3-fold cross validation. While we are unable to ﬁnd reported results on the
semantic segmentation of these omnidirectional images, we benchmark our spherical segmentation
algorithm against classic 2D image semantic segmentation networks as well as a 3D point-based
model, trained and evaluated on the same data.
2We use the author’s open-source implementations: PointNet++, VoxNet, S2CNN. We run PointNet++ with
standard input of 1000 points with xyz coordinates for the classiﬁcation task.
6

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Model
Input
Accu.
(%)
3DShapeNets (Wu et al., 2015)
voxels
84.7
VoxNet (Maturana & Scherer, 2015)
voxels
85.9
PointNet (Qi et al., 2017a)
points
89.2
PointNet++ (Qi et al., 2017b)
points
91.9
DGCNN (Wang et al., 2018b)
points
92.2
S2CNN (Cohen et al., 2018)
spherical
85.0
SphericalCNN (Esteves et al., 2018)
spherical
88.9
Ours
spherical
90.5
Table 2: Results on ModelNet40 dataset. Our method
compares favorably with state-of-the-art, and achieves
best performance among networks utilizing spherical in-
put signals.
(a) Original CAD
model and spher-
ical mesh.
(b) Resulting sur-
face distance sig-
nal.
Figure 5: Illustration of spherical signal
rendering process for a given 3D CAD
model.
Experiment Setup
First, we preprocess the data into a spherical signal by sampling the original
rectangular images at the latitude-longitudes of the spherical mesh vertex positions. Input RGB-
D channels are interpolated using bilinear interpolation, while semantic labels are acquired using
nearest-neighbor interpolation. We input and output spherical signals at the level-5 resolution. We
use the ofﬁcial 3-fold cross validation to train and evaluate our results. We benchmark our semantic
segmentation results against two classic semantic segmentation networks: the U-Net (Ronneberger
et al., 2015) and FCN8s (Long et al., 2015). We also compared our results with a modiﬁed version
of spherical S2CNN, and 3D point-based method, PointNet++ (Qi et al., 2017b) using (x, y, z,r,g,b)
inputs reconstructed from panoramic RGBD images. We provide additional details toward the im-
plementation of these models in Appendix E. We evaluate the network performance under two stan-
dard metrics: mean Intersection-over-Union (mIoU), and pixel-accuracy. Similar to Sec. 4.2, we
evaluate the models under two settings: peak performance and a parameter efﬁciency study by vary-
ing model parameters. We progressively decimate the number of feature layers uniformly for all
models to study the effect of model complexity on performance.
Results and Discussion
Fig. 4 compares our model against state-of-the-art baselines. Our spher-
ical segmentation outperforms the planar baselines for all parameter ranges, and more signiﬁcantly
so compared to the 3D PointNet++. We attribute PointNet++’s performance to the small amount of
training data. Fig. 6 shows a visualization of our semantic segmentation performance compared to
the ground truth and the planar baselines.
4.4
CLIMATE PATTERN SEGMENTATION
To further illustrate the capabilities of our model, we evaluate our model on the climate pattern
segmentation task. We follow Mudigonda et al. (2017) for preprocessing the data and acquiring
the ground-truth labels for this task. This task involves the segmentation of Atmospheric Rivers
(AR) and Tropical Cyclones (TC) in global climate model simulations. Following Mudigonda et al.
(2017), we analyze outputs from a 20-year run of the Community Atmospheric Model v5 (CAM5)
(Neale et al., 2010). We benchmark our performance against Mudigonda et al. (2017) for the climate
segmentation task to highlight our model performance. We preprocess the data to level-5 resolution.
Model
Background (%)
TC (%)
AR (%)
Mean (%)
Mudigonda et al. (2017)
97
74
65
78.67
Ours
97
94
93
94.67
Table 3: We achieves better accuracy compared to our baseline for climate pattern segmentation.
7

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
FCN8s
UNet
Ours
Ground Truth
Legend:
 beam
 board
 bookcase
 ceiling
 chair
 clutter
 column
 door
 ﬂoor
 sofa
 table
 wall
 window
←−Failure
mode
Figure 6: Visualization of semantic segmentation results on test set. Our results are generated on a
level-5 spherical mesh and mapped to the equirectangular grid for visualization. Model underper-
forms in complex environments, and fails to predict ceiling lights due to incomplete RGB inputs.
Results and Discussion
Segmentation accuracy is presented in Table 3. Our model achieves better
segmentation accuracy as compared to the baseline models. The baseline model (Mudigonda et al.,
2017) trains and tests on random crops of the global data, whereas our model inputs the entire
global data and predicts at the same output resolution as the input. Processing full global data
allows the network to acquire better holistic understanding of the information, resulting in better
overall performance.
5
ABLATION STUDY
We further perform an ablation study for justifying the choice of differential operators for our con-
volution kernel (as in Eqn. 4). We use the ModelNet40 classiﬁcation problem as a toy example
and use a 250k parameter model for evaluation. We choose various combinations of differential
operators, and record the ﬁnal classiﬁcation accuracy. Results for the ablation study is presented in
Table 4. Our choice of differential operator combinations in Eqn. 4 achieves the best performance
Convolution kernel
Accuracy
I + ∂
∂y + ∇2
0.8748
I +
∂
∂x + ∇2
0.8809
I + ∇2
0.8801
I +
∂
∂x + ∂
∂y
0.8894
I +
∂
∂x + ∂
∂y + ∇2
0.8979
Table 4: Results for the ablation study. The
choice of kernel that includes all differential
operator components achieve the best accu-
racy, validating our choice of kernel in Eqn.
4.
(a) Ground Truth
(b) Predictions
Figure 7: Visualization of segmentation for Atmo-
spheric River (AR). Plotted in the background is In-
tegrated Vapor Transport (IVT), whereas red masks
indicates the existance of AR.
8

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
among other choices, and the network performance improves with increased differential operators,
thus allowing for more degrees of freedom for the kernel.
6
CONCLUSION
We have presented a novel method for performing convolution on unstructured grids using param-
eterized differential operators as convolution kernels. Our results demonstrate its applicability to
machine learning problems with spherical signals and show signiﬁcant improvements in terms of
overall performance and parameter efﬁciency. We believe that these advances are particularly valu-
able with the increasing relevance of omnidirectional signals, for instance, as captured by real-world
3D or LIDAR panorama sensors.
