The Transfer of Evolved Artificial Immune 
System Behaviours  between  Small and Large 
Scale Robotic Platforms 
 
 
Amanda M. Whitbrook, Uwe Aickelin, and Jonathan M. Garibaldi 
 
Intelligent Modelling and Analysis Research Group (IMA), 
School of Computer Science, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, NG8 1BB 

 
 
 
Abstract.  This paper demonstrates that a set of behaviours evolved in 
simulation on a miniature robot (epuck) can be  transferred to a 
much larger scale platform (a virtual Pioneer P3-DX)  that also diﬀers in 
shape, sensor type, sensor conﬁguration and programming interface. The 
chosen architecture  uses a reinforcement learning-assisted genetic 
algorithm to evolve the epuck behaviours, which are encoded as a 
genetic  sequence. This sequence is then used by the Pioneers as part 
of  an adaptive, id- iotypic artiﬁcial immune system (AIS)  control  
architecture. Testing  in three diﬀerent simulated worlds shows  that  
the Pioneer can use these behaviours to navigate and  solve object-
tracking  tasks successfully, as long as its adaptive AIS mechanism is in 
place. 
 
 
1 Introduction 
 
Evolutionary robotics is a technique that refers to the genetic encoding of au- 
tonomous robot control systems and their improvement by artiﬁcial evolution. 
Ideally the end product should be a controller that  evolves rapidly and has 
the properties of robustness, scalability and adaptation. However, in practice it 
proves diﬃcult to achieve all of these goals without introducing an additional 
mechanism for adaptability since behaviour is essentially an emergent property 
of interaction with the environment [11]. Thus, the ma jor challenge facing 
evo- lutionary robotics is the development of solutions to the problem of 
brittleness via the design of controllers that can generalize to modiﬁed 
environments. 
The characteristics of the robot body and its sensorimotor system may be 
regarded as part of the environment [2] as all embodied systems are physically 
embedded within their ecological niche and have a dynamic reciprocal coupling 
to it  [9]. Indeed, artiﬁcial evolution often produces control systems that  rely 
heavily on body morphology and sensorimotor interaction [3], and when  
these are subsequently altered, the changes can aﬀect behavioural dynamics  
drasti- cally. Thus, a solid test for robustness, scalability and adaptation is the 
ability of an evolved control system to function not only in diﬀerent physical 
environ- ments, but also on a number of robotic platforms that diﬀer in size, 
morphology, sensor type and sensor-response proﬁle. This paper is therefore 
concerned with 
 

 
 
 
 
The Transfer of Evolved Artiﬁcial Immune System 
123 
 
demonstrating the theoretical and practical cross platform transferability of an 
evolutionary architecture designed to combat adaptation problems. 
Adaptation is usually made possible through the introduction of  
additional mechanisms that permit some kind of post-evolutionary behaviour 
modiﬁcation. The architecture used here falls into the general category of  
approaches that combine evolution or long term learning (LTL)  with a form of 
lifelong or short term learning (STL)  to achieve this [14]. The particular  
technique consists of the rapid evolution of a number of diverse behaviour  
sets  using a Webots [10] simulation (LTL)  followed by the use of an idiotypic  
artiﬁcial immune system (AIS)  for selecting appropriate evolved behaviours as  
the robot solves its task in real time (STL).  The approach diﬀers from most of 
the evolutionary schemes employed previously in the literature in that  these  
are usually based on the evolution of neural controllers [6] rather than the 
actual behaviours themselves. 
Previous papers have provided evidence that the idiotypic AIS architecture 
has advantages over a reinforcement learning scheme when applied to 
mobile robot navigation problems [15]  and have shown that  the idiotypic 
LTL-STL architecture permits transference from the simulator to a number 
of diﬀerent real-world environments [16]. The chief aim of this paper is, 
therefore, to supply further support for the robustness, scalability and 
adaptability of the architec- ture by showing that it can be extended to the 
much larger scale Pioneer P3-DX robots. For this purpose, the behaviours 
evolved for the epuck in the Webots simulator are transplanted onto the 
Pioneer and used both with and without the idiotypic network in Player’s 
Stage [5]  simulator. The results successfully demonstrate the scalability of the 
method in the virtual domain, and provide strong empirical evidence that the 
idiotypic selection feature is a vital component for achieving this. 
The  remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 introduces 
some essential background information about the problem of platform 
transfer in mobile robotics and previous attempts to achieve it. Section 3 
describes the LTL-STL  control system, including its modular structure and  
the encoding of the evolved behaviours. In particular, it shows how platform 
transfer is achieved between the epuck and Pioneer P3-DX robots. Section 4  
provides 
information 
regarding the simulated 
test 
environments and 
experimental set-up and Section 5 presents and discusses the results. Section 6 
concludes the paper. 
 
2 
Background and  Relevance 
 
Cross platform transfer of an intelligent robot-control algorithm is a highly de- 
sirable property since more generic software is more marketable for vendors 
and more practical for users with more than one robot type. Furthermore, 
software that is robust to changes in a user’s hardware requirements is 
particularly at- tractive. However, transferability between platforms is diﬃcult 
to achieve and is hence extremely rare in mobile robotics [2]. This is primarily 
due to hardware diﬀerences such as the size, morphology and spatial 
relationships between  the body, actuators and sensors, which constitute a 
drastic change of the  environ- ment from an ecological perspective. Since 
modern mobile robot  systems are 

 
 
 
 
124 
A.M. Whitbrook, U. Aickelin, and J.M. Garibaldi 
 
distributed systems, transfer may also be hindered by diversity of middleware, 
operating systems, communications protocols and programming languages and 
their libraries [13]. Furthermore, portability is made even more challenging by 
diﬀerences in sensor type, sensor characteristics and the mechanical structure 
of the robot. 
Despite its rarity, platform transfer for evolved control systems is  
reported in the literature. Floreano and Mondada  [2,3] use an incremental 
approach to evolve artiﬁcial neural networks for solving a looping maze 
navigation problem. Evolution begins with a real miniature Khepera robot and 
gradually moves to a Koala, a larger, more fragile robot supplied by the same 
manufacturer. Within this architecture, previously evolved networks are 
gradually adapted, combined, and extended to accommodate the changing 
morphology and sensorimotor inter- faces [3]. However, the scheme possesses 
some signiﬁcant drawbacks. The use of physical robots for the evolution is both 
impractical and infeasible due to the ex- cessive amount of time and resources 
required. For example, adaptability to the Koala platform emerges only after 
106 generations on the real Khepera and an additional 30 on the Koala (each 
generation taking approximately 40 minutes). Also, if each new environment  
or platform requires additional evolution then there is no controller that is  
immediately suitable for an unseen one. Another consideration is that the  
Koala was deliberately designed to support transfers from the Khepera and is 
thus very similar in terms of the wheel conﬁguration, IR sensors, vision 
module, low-level BIOS software and communication method. This is good  
from a practical perspective, but one could argue that  the new, supposedly 
unknown environment is far too engineered. 
Floreano and Urzelai [4,12] also evolve a neural network to control a light- 
switching robot but evolve the mechanisms for self-organization of the synaptic 
weights rather than the weights themselves. This means that the robot is rapidly 
able to adapt its connection weights continuously and autonomously to 
achieve its goal. The authors transfer the evolved control system from  
simulation to a real Khepera and also from a simulated Khepera to a real 
Koala. They report no reduction in performance following  the transfer.  
However, since the same platforms are used as in [2,3], the new 
environment  is, again, too engineered. In addition, the task is very simple 
and the  environment is sparse, requiring minimal navigational and obstacle 
avoidance skills. 
In this paper more complex tasks and environments are used to demonstrate 
that behaviours evolved on a simulated epuck can be used by a larger, unrelated 
robot that has not deliberately been designed for ease of transfer (the Pioneer 
P3-DX).  This represents a much more diﬃcult platform transfer exercise than 
has been attempted before and is hence a more realistic test  of control sys- 
tem adaptability. In particular, Pioneer P3-DX  robots diﬀer signiﬁcantly from 
epucks in mechanical structure, body size, body shape and wheel size and possess 
sixteen sonar sensors rather than the eight infrared (IR)  sensors of the epuck, 
which also have a diﬀerent spatial arrangement. The Pioneer is also produced 
by a diﬀerent manufacturer and uses diﬀerent middleware and a diﬀerent sim- 
ulator (Stage [5]). A full comparison between the two platforms is  provided 
in 

 
 
 
 
The Transfer of Evolved Artiﬁcial Immune System 
125 
 
Section 3.4, Table 1. In addition, the achievement of platform transfer between 
epucks and Pioneers is of practical value since Pioneer behaviours cannot be 
evolved directly on the Stage simulator within a realistic time frame; Stage is not 
fast or accurate enough, and control systems used in the Webots programming 
environment are not directly transferable to real Pioneers. Moreover, simulation 
of the epuck in Webots requires a 3D model that  is readily available, so it is 
computationally much cheaper to reuse the epuck’s evolved behaviours in Stage 
rather than to design a complex 3D Pioneer model for Webots. 
 
 
3 
System Architecture 
 
3.1  
Artificial Immune Systems and the Behavioural Encoding 
 
AISs mimic the properties of the vertebrate immune system (for example anti- 
body recognition of and stimulation by antigens). Idiotypic systems in particular 
exploit Jerne’s notion of an idiotypic network [7], where antibodies are capable 
of recognizing and being stimulated or suppressed by other antibodies via 
their paratopes and idiotopes, see [15] for further details. Idiotypic AIS  
algorithms are often based on Farmer et al.’s computational model [1] of Jerne’s 
theory and are characterized by 
a 
decentralized 
behaviour-selection  
mechanism. They are a popular choice for STL  in robotic control systems [8]  
since they allow much greater ﬂexibility for determining a robot’s actions. The 
LTL and STL  aspects of the control system presented here thus work together 
to produce adaptability; diversity of the behaviour sets is provided by the 
evolutionary (LTL) component and the idiotypic network (STL)  exploits the  
wide range of choice available to select behaviours appropriate for a given 
environmental scenario. 
The AIS analogy is that  antigens model the environmental information  
as perceived by the sensors and antibodies model the behaviours of the  
robot. Here, eight antigens (coded 1 - 8) are identiﬁed based on the robot’s 
possession of distance-measuring sensors (IR or sonar) and a camera for 
tracking coloured objects. These are 1 - target unseen, 2 - target seen, 3 - obstacle 
right, 4 - obstacle rear, 5 - obstacle left, 6 - collision right, 7 - collision rear, 8  
-  collision left. In addition, six types of basic behaviour (coded 1 - 6)  are  
used; 1 - wandering using either a left or right turn, 2 - wandering using both 
left and right turns, 
3 - turning forwards, 4 - turning on the spot, 5 - turning backwards, and 6 - 
tracking targets. More detailed individual behaviours are thus described using 
the attribute type T , which refers to the basic behaviour code, and the additional 
attributes speed S in epuck speed units per second (ψ per second), frequency of 
turn F (% of time), angle of turn A (% reduction in one wheel speed), direction 
of turn D (either 1 - left or 2 - right), frequency of right turn Rf  (% of time) and 
angle of right turn Ra    (% reduction in right wheel speed). This structure means 
that, potentially, a vast number of diverse behaviours can be created. 
However, there are limits to the attribute values [17]; these are carefully 
selected in order to strike a balance between reducing the size of the search 
space, which increases speed of convergence, and maintaining diversity. More 
details on the behavioural encoding are provided in Section 3.4. 

i
k
t
 
 
 
 
126 
A.M. Whitbrook, U. Aickelin, and J.M. Garibaldi 
 
3.2  
LTL Phase 
 
The LTL phase is a reinforcement learning-assisted genetic algorithm (GA) 
that evolves a suitable behaviour for each antigen. It works by selecting two  
diﬀer- ent parent robots via the roulette-wheel method and determining 
behaviour at- tribute values for their oﬀspring as described in [17]. The 
reinforcement learning component constantly assesses the performance of the  
behaviours during evo- lution so that poorly-matched ones are replaced with 
newly-created ones when the need arises, which accelerates the GA. All the test 
problems are assessed by measuring task completion time ti  and number of 
collisions ci  i = 1, ..., x, thus, the relative ﬁtness µi  of each member of the 
population is calculated using: 
 
1 
µi  = i + ρc  x 
k=1 (tk + ρc )−1 , 
(1) 
 
where ρ represents the weighting given to collisions (ρ = 1 here) and x is the num- 
ber of robots in the population. After convergence, the ﬁttest robot in the ﬁnal 
population is selected. However, since the idiotypic network requires a number n 
of distinct behaviours for each antigen, the whole process is repeated n times 
in order to obtain n robots from separate populations that never interbreed. 
This is an alternative to selecting a number of robots from a single, ﬁnal 
population and means that greater diversity can be achieved with smaller 
population sizes without reducing speed of convergence. The attribute values  
representing the behaviours of the n robots and their ﬁnal reinforcement  
scores are saved as a genetic sequence (a simple text ﬁle) for seeding the AIS 
system. 
 
 
3.3  
STL Phase 
 
The AIS system reads the genetic sequence generated by the LTL phase and then 
calculates the relative ﬁtness µi  of each behaviour (or antibody) set using (1), 
where  ρ = 8 to increase the weighting given to the number of collisions. It then 
produces an n×8 matrix P (analogous to an antibody paratope) representing the 
reinforcement scores, or degree of match between antibodies and antigens. The 
elements of this matrix (Pij  i = 1, ..., n, j = 1, ..., 8) are calculated by multiplying 
each antibody’s ﬁnal reinforcement score by the relative ﬁtness of its set µi. An 
n × 8 matrix I (analogous to an antibody idiotope) is also created by assigning 
a value of 1.0 to the element corresponding to the minimum Pij  for each j, and 
designating a value of 0.0 to all other elements. The matrix P is adjusted after 
every iteration through reinforcement learning, but I remains ﬁxed throughout. 
If an idiotypic network is not used then P  alone governs  antibody 
selection; the antigen-matching antibody with the highest  reinforcement score 
is used. If idiotypic stimulation and suppression of antibodies are taken into 
account then I is used to adjust  the degree of match  of each antibody as 
described in [16], which may result in a diﬀerent one being selected. 
 

 
 
 
 
The Transfer of Evolved Artiﬁcial Immune System 
127 
 
3.4  
Mechanisms of Cross Platform  Transfer 
 
Following convergence of the GA, the selected behaviours are encoded as nine 
integers in a simple text ﬁle that contains all the genetic information necessary 
to reproduce them. The ﬁrst integer represents the antigen code, and the next 
seven represent the behavioural attributes T , S, F , A, D, Rf  and Ra . The last 
integer is the ﬁnal reinforcement score attained by the behaviour prior to 
convergence. The genetic sequence encodes the principal wheel speeds in  
epuck  speed units per second (ψ  per second) where ψ = 0.00683 radians. A 
speed value of 600 ψ per second thus corresponds to 600 × 0.00683 = 4.098  
radians per second. An example line from a genetic text ﬁle is: 0 2 537 80 51 2 
37 76 50, which encodes wandering in both directions with a speed of 537 ψ 
per second, turning 80% of the time. The robot turns right 37% of this time  
by  reducing the speed of the right wheel by 76%, and turns left 63% of this 
time by reducing the speed of the left wheel by 51%. A particular genetic 
sequence thus governs how the left and right wheel speeds change with time. 
In theory, the behavioural encoding may be extended to any two-wheeled, 
non-holonomic, mobile-robot, since the wheel motions of such robots are  
fully 
described by their changing speeds. Furthermore, since the output from the 
LTL  phase is a simple text  ﬁle, any program is capable of reading it and ex- 
tracting the information necessary to form the wheel motions. Moreover, speci- 
ﬁcation of the speeds in radians per second permits automatic scaling between 
diﬀerent-sized environments,  without requiring knowledge of the particular scales 
involved, since wheel size is generally related to the scale of the environment. 
However, it is also necessary to consider some fundamental hardware and 
soft- 
ware diﬀerences between the Pioneer P3-DX and epuck robots when making the 
transfer. Table 1 below shows the technical speciﬁcation for each robot type. 
The most fundamental considerations are the larger scale of the Pioneer, the 
use 
of diﬀerent programming environments,  the use of sonar sensors on the Pioneer 
and the spatial arrangement of these sensors. These aﬀect the transfer in three 
main ways; how velocity is expressed, how the sensors are read and translated 
into antigen codes, and how blob ﬁnding is implemented. 
Use of the genetic sequence coupled with a simple conversion of ψ  per sec- 
ond to radians per second, as described above, would be adequate to cater 
for 
the scaling diﬀerences if the two platforms did not use diﬀerent APIs.  How- 
ever, the epuck is programmed using the Webots C/C++ Controller API, 
where 
robot wheel speeds are set using the diﬀerential wheels set speed method, which 
requires the left and right wheel speeds in ψ  per second as its arguments. In 
contrast, the Pioneer robot is programmed using libplayerc++,  a C++  client 
library for the Player server. In this library, the angular and linear components 
of the robot’s velocity are set separately using yaw ω and velocity v arguments 
for the SetSpeed method of the Position2dProxy class, and v is expressed in 
metres per second. As methods for encoding the genetic sequence into left L and 
right R epuck wheel speeds already exist, it is computationally cheaper to reuse 
these methods on the Pioneer and simply convert them into equivalent ω and v 
arguments. The conversions are given by: 

 
 
 
 
128 
A.M. Whitbrook, U. Aickelin, and J.M.  Garibaldi 
 
 
Table  1. Diﬀerences between the Pioneer and Epuck Robotic Platforms 
 
 
No.  Attribute  
Pioneer P3-DX  
Epuck 
 
1 
Manufacturer 
MobileRobots Inc  EPFL 
2 
Simulator 
Stage 
Webots 
3 
Middleware 
Player 
Webots 
4 
Operating system 
Linux 
N/A 
5 
Communications protocol  Wireless TCP/IP  Bluetooth 
6 
Wheel radius (cm) 
9.50 
2.05 
7 
Wheel width (cm) 
5.00 
0.20 
8 
Axle length (cm) 
33.00 
5.20 
9 
Body material 
Aluminium 
Plastic 
10 
Body length (cm) 
44 
7 
11 
Body width (cm) 
38 
7 
12 
Body height (cm) 
22 
4.8 
13 
Weight (kg) 
9 
0.15 
14 
Body shape 
Octagonal 
Circular 
15 
Sensor type 
Sonar 
Infrared 
16 
No. of sensors 
16 
8 
17 
Sensor range 
15cm to 5m 
0 to 6cm 
18 
Camera 
Canon VC-C4 
VGA 
19 
Blob ﬁnding software 
Player 
Weblobs 
 
 
 
 
ψrp (R + L) 
v = 
2 
, 
(2) 
 
ω = 
ζψre (R − L) , 
(3) 
ae 
where rp   is the radius of the Pioneer wheel, re   is the radius of the epuck wheel, 
and ae   is the axle length of the epuck. The parameter ζ = 1.575 is determined 
by empirical observation and is introduced in order to replicate the  
angular movement of the epuck more accurately. 
The antigens indexed 3 to 8 describe an obstacle’s orientation with respect to 
the robot (right, left or rear) and classify its distance from the robot as either 
“obstacle” (avoidance is needed) or “collision” (escape is needed). Thus, two 
threshold values τ1    and τ2    are required to mark the boundaries between  
“no obstacle” and “obstacle” and between “obstacle” and “collision”  
respectively. The epuck’s IR sensors are nonlinear and correspond to the 
quantity of reﬂected light, so higher readings mean closer obstacles. In 
contrast, the Pioneer’s sonar readings are linear denoting the estimated  
proximity of an obstacle in metres, so lower readings mean closer obstacles. 
Since direct conversion is diﬃcult, the threshold values τ1   and τ2   (250 and 
2400 for the epuck) are determined for the Pioneer by empirical observation of 
navigation through cluttered environments, (τ1  = 0.15 and τ2   = 0.04).  
Additionally, in order to determine the orientation of any detected obstacle, 
the epuck uses the index of the maximum IR reading, 

 
 
 
 
The Transfer of Evolved Artiﬁcial Immune System 
129 
 
where indices 0, 1 and 2 correspond to the right, 3 and 4 correspond to the 
rear and 5, 6 and 7 correspond to the left. For the Pioneer it is necessary to 
use the index of the minimum sonar reading and encode positions 4 to 9 as  
the right, 
10 to 13 as the rear and positions 0 to 3 and 14 to 15 as the left, due to the 
diﬀerent spatial arrangement of the sensors. 
Blob ﬁnding software (named Weblobs) was developed for the epuck as 
part of this research, since the Webots C/C++ Controller API has no native  
blob ﬁnding methods. However, the Pioneer robot is able to use methods 
belonging to the BlobﬁnderProxy class of libplayerc++. The objective is to 
determine whether blobs (of the target colour) are visible, and if so, to establish 
the direction (left, centre or right) of the largest from the centre of the ﬁeld of 
view. The two robot types thus use diﬀerent blob ﬁnding software, but collect 
the same information. 
 
 
3.5  
Modular  Control  Structure 
 
The entire STL  program is broken down into the pseudo code below in order 
to demonstrate its modular structure and the ease with which this facilitates 
adaptation for the Pioneer P3-DX  platform. Each block shows the module it 
calls and the method it uses within that module. Blocks marked with an asterisk 
are dealt with in the main body of the program and do not call other modules. 
1 
I n i t i a l i z e    r ob ot (ROBOT  −−>  I n i t i a l i z e R o b o t ( ) −−>   I n i t i a l i z e S e n s o r s ( ) ) 
2 
Read   g e n e t i c    s e q u e n c e   ∗ 
3 
B uild    m a t r i c e s   P   and   I   ∗ 
REPEAT 
4 
Read   s e n s o r s    (ROBOT −−>  R e a dSens o r s ( ) ) 
5 
Read  c a m e r a  (BLOBFINDER −−>   G e t B lo bI nfo ( ) ) 
6 
D et er mine    a n t i g e n    c o d e   ∗ 
7 
S c o r e    p r ev i o us    b e h a v i o u r  u s i ng    r e i n f o r c e m e n t   l e a r n i n g     
8 
U pda te   P   ∗ 
9 
S e l ec t    b e h a v i o u r ∗ 
1 0 
U p d a t e   a n t i b o d y    c o n c e n t r a t i o n s   ∗ 
1 1 
E x e c u t e   b e h a v i o u r  (BEHAVIOUR  −−>  Ex ecut e ( ) ) 
UNTIL  s t o p p i n g   c r i t e r i a  met 
 
The  only blocks that  require changes for the Pioneer platform are 1, 4, and 
5. Since these are dealt with by calling other modules, the main body of the 
program can be wholly reused, although an additional two lines in block 11 are 
necessary to convert the wheel speeds to the Player format. Some slight changes 
to block 7, which deals with using sensor data to determine the reinforcement 
score are also required. 
 
 
4 Test Environments and  Experimental Set-Up 
 
The  genetic behaviour sequences are evolved using 3D virtual epucks in the 
Webots simulator, where the robot is required to track blue markers in order 
to navigate through a number of rooms to the ﬁnish line, see  [17]. Throughout 
evolution, ﬁve separate populations of ten robots are used and the mutation 
rate 
6 is set at 5% as recommended by [17] for a good balance between maximizing 
diversity and minimizing convergence time. Following the LTL phase, the evolved 

ϕ =
i
 
 
 
 
130 
A.M. Whitbrook, U. Aickelin, and J.M. Garibaldi 
 
behaviour sequences are used with 2D virtual Pioneer robots in three diﬀerent 
Stage worlds, S1 , S2 , and S3 . S1   and S2   require maze navigation and the 
tracking of coloured door markers (Figure 1 and Figure 2), and S3    involves  
search and retrieval of a blue block whilst navigating around other obstacles  
(Figure 3). Sixty runs are performed in each Stage world, thirty using the 
idiotypic selection mechanism, and thirty relying on reinforcement learning 
only. In addition, in S3 the obstacle positions, target block location, and robot 
start point are changed following each idiotypic and nonidiotypic test, so that 
the data is paired. For all runs, the task time t and number of collisions c are  
recorded. However, a fast robot that continually crashes or a careful robot that 
takes too long to complete the task is undesirable, so an additional score metric 
ϕ that combines t and c is computed for each run. This is given by: 
t + σ  c 
2 
, 
(4) 
where σi  is the ratio of the mean task time t¯ to mean number of collisions c¯ for 
world Si . In all worlds, t¯, c¯ and ϕ¯ are computed with and without using idiotypic 
eﬀects and the results are compared using a 2-tailed t-test (paired for world S3 ), 
with diﬀerences accepted as signiﬁcant at the 99% level only. As another measure 
of task performance, runs with an above average ϕ for each world are counted 
as good and those with ﬁtness in the bottom 10% of all runs in  each world 
are counted as bad. Additionally, for each task, robots taking  longer than 
900 seconds are counted as having failed and are stopped. 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1. 2D Stage world S1    used in the Pioneer STL phase 
 
 
5 
Results and Discussion 
 
Table 2 shows t¯,  c¯  and ϕ¯  values with and without using idiotypic eﬀects in 
each world and the signiﬁcant diﬀerence levels when these are compared. It also 
displays the percentage of good and bad runs and number of fails in each 
world. 
When idiotypic eﬀects are employed, the virtual Pioneer robots prove able to 
navigate safely (the mean number of collisions is very low) and solve their tasks 
within the alloted time in all of the worlds. Navigation is also safe for the nonidio- 
typic robots, but, in terms of task time in worlds S1   and S2   there is a 17% 
failure 
 

 
 
 
 
The Transfer of Evolved Artiﬁcial Immune System 
131 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2. 2D Stage world S2    used in the Pioneer STL phase 
 
 
rate and in world S3   there is a 7% failure rate. Furthermore, mean task time is 
signiﬁcantly higher than for the idiotypic case in all worlds, although the number 
of collisions is consistently low and not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent between the 
idio- typic and nonidiotypic cases. In addition, the number of bad runs is 
higher and the number of good runs is lower for nonidiotypic robots in all 
worlds and the score is signiﬁcantly better when idiotypic eﬀects are employed 
in worlds S1   and S2 . These observations provide strong empirical evidence  
that  the behaviours evolved in simulation on an epuck robot can be 
successfully ported to the vir- tual Pioneer P3-DX  platform provided that  
the  adaptive idiotypic mechanism is applied within the STL architecture. As 
with the STL results for virtual and real epucks (documented in [16]), the 
results show that the evolutionary (LTL) phase is capable of producing sets of 
very diverse behaviours but that the STL phase requires the use of a scheme 
that selects from the available behaviours in a highly adaptive way. This is 
further  illustrated in Figure 3 which shows the paths taken by an idiotypic 
(left) and nonidiotypic (right) Pioneer when solving the block-ﬁnding problem 
in world S3 . It is evident that the nonidiotypic Pioneer takes a much less direct 
route and repeats its path several times. This is because it is less able to adapt 
its  behaviour and consequently spends much more time wandering, getting 
stuck and trying to free itself. This result is typical of the S3 experiments. 
The chosen architecture has a number of beneﬁts. The reinforcement-assisted 
GA eﬀectively balances the exploitative properties of reinforcement and the ex- 
plorative properties of the GA. This reduces convergence time, improves 
accu-racy and maintains GA reliability. The genetic encoding of the 
behaviours and the choice of separate populations permits greater diversity 
for the antibodies, which allows for a much more adaptive strategy in the 
STL  phase. Earlier work [15] suggests that the idiotypic advantage can be 
attributed to an increased rate of antibody change, which implies a much less 
greedy strategy. It also proposes that the network is capable of linking 
antibodies of similar type, so that useful but potentially untried ones can be 
used. The use of concentrations and feedback within the network may also 
facilitate a memory feature that achieves a good balance between selection 
based on past antibody use and current environmental information. However, 
the present scheme has some limitations; there is no scope to change the 
antibodies within the network, only to choose between 

 
 
 
 
132 
A.M. Whitbrook, U. Aickelin, and J.M. Garibaldi 
 
them. A possible improvement would be constant execution of the LTL phase, 
which regularly updates the genetic sequence, allowing fresh antibodies to be 
used if the need arises. In addition, success with transference to other platforms 
is presently too heavily dependent upon parameter tuning and readjustment 
of the reinforcement scheme for the particular sensor characteristics. 
 
 
Table 2. Results of Experiments with and without Idiotypic Eﬀects in Each  World. 
G = % Good, B = % Bad, F = % Fail. 
 
World   Signiﬁcance 
Idiotypic 
Nonidiotypic 
t¯ 
c¯ 
ϕ¯ 
t¯(s)   c¯    ϕ¯ 
G    B   F t¯(s)   c¯    ϕ¯ 
G    B    F 
 
S1  
100  96  100   176   2  166  70   3    0   336   4  346  47   30   17 
S2  
100  98  100   309   2  287  27  10   0   513   5  535  13   60   17 
S3  
100  56   97    160   2  233  43   7    0   395   1  322  37   37    7 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 3. World S3    showing the trail of an idiotypic (left) and nonidiotypic (right) 
robot 
 
 
6 
Conclusions 
 
This paper has described a mobile robot control architecture that consists of an 
LTL  (evolutionary) phase responsible for the generation of sets of diverse 
be- haviours, and an STL (immune system) phase, which selects from the 
available behaviours in an adaptive way. It has shown that the behaviours are 
essentially platform independent and that they can be evolved in simulation on 
a miniature epuck robot and used on a much larger virtual Pioneer P3-DX 
robot. The plat- form transfer is equivalent to a complex and diﬃcult 
environmental change and is thus a sound test of adaptability and scalability 
for the combined LTL-STL architecture. Tests in diﬀerent environments have 
shown that the Pioneer is able to accomplish navigation, obstacle avoidance and 
retrieval tasks using the epuck behaviours, and that on average it performs 
signiﬁcantly faster when employing the idiotypic mechanism as behaviour  
selection is much more adaptable than using reinforcement learning alone.  
The  next step is testing with real Pioneer P3-DX robots to establish whether 
similar levels of success can also be achieved in the real domain. 

 
 
 
 
The Transfer of Evolved Artiﬁcial Immune System 
133
