Uncertainty-Aware Driver Trajectory Prediction at Urban Intersections
Xin Huang1,2, Stephen G. McGill1, Brian C. Williams2, Luke Fletcher1, Guy Rosman1
Abstract— Predicting the motion of a driver’s vehicle is
crucial for advanced driving systems, enabling detection of
potential risks towards shared control between the driver and
automation systems. In this paper, we propose a variational
neural network approach that predicts future driver trajectory
distributions for the vehicle based on multiple sensors.
Our predictor generates both a conditional variational dis-
tribution of future trajectories, as well as a conﬁdence estimate
for different time horizons. Our approach allows us to handle
inherently uncertain situations, and reason about information
gain from each input, as well as combine our model with
additional predictors, creating a mixture of experts.
We show how to augment the variational predictor with a
physics-based predictor, and based on their conﬁdence esti-
mations, improve overall system performance. The resulting
combined model is aware of the uncertainty associated with
its predictions, which can help the vehicle autonomy to make
decisions with more conﬁdence. The model is validated on
real-world urban driving data collected in multiple locations.
This validation demonstrates that our approach improves the
prediction error of a physics-based model by 25% while
successfully identifying the uncertain cases with 82% accuracy.
I. INTRODUCTION
In the case of parallel autonomy systems, a human driver
and an autonomous system share control of a vehicle. When
the driver’s actions will put the vehicle and its surroundings
at risk, the autonomous system should intervene to avoid a
calamity. In order to plan alternative actions for the car, the
autonomous system requires knowledge of driver intention.
Trajectory prediction, then, is an important component in
improving advanced driver-assistance systems (ADAS).
Several properties are required for successful and action-
able prediction of a human driver’s intent. Models must
reason about the inherent uncertainty of the future trajectory
in both the immediate and longer term. They must leverage
all available sensory cues, and be able to reason about when
the risk of the driver’s control choices outweigh the risk of
a system intervention.
Many existing trajectory prediction algorithms [1], [2] out-
put deterministic results efﬁciently. However, these methods
fail to capture the uncertain nature of human actions. Prob-
abilistic predictions are very useful in many safety-critical
tasks such as collision checking and risk-aware motion
planning. They can express both the intrinsically uncertain
This work was part of X. Huang’s internship at Toyota Research Institute
(TRI). However, this article solely reﬂects the opinions and conclusions of
its authors and not TRI or any other Toyota entity.
1Toyota
Research
Institute,
Cambridge,
MA
02139,
USA

2Computer
Science
and
Artiﬁcial
Intelligence
Lab,
Mas-
sachusetts
Institute
of
Technology,
Cambridge,
MA
01239,
USA

Video demonstration is available at https://youtu.be/clR08hRdtlM
Fig. 1: Illustration of a motivating example where a vehicle is
in front of an intersection. The sampled predicted trajectories
using our approach are plotted in blue, where the groundtruth
future trajectory is plotted in red. In parallel autonomy,
the autonomous system can leverage the predicted driver
trajectory to avert risk and improve the driving. This requires
the system to be conﬁdent of its predicted trajectories.
prediction task at hand (human nature) and reasoning about
the limitations of the prediction method (knowing when an
estimate could be wrong [3]).
To incorporate uncertainties into prediction results, data-
driven approaches can learn common characteristics from
datasets of demonstrated trajectories [4], [5], [6]. Unfortu-
nately, these methods often express uni-modal predictions,
which may not perform well in scenarios where the driver
can choose among multiple actions. For instance, the vehicle
stopping in front of the intersection in Figure 1 can move
in two ways - turn left or go forward. To deal with such
situations, our approach predicts multiple choices for the
target vehicle.
Highway vehicle trajectory prediction [7], [8] represents
a signiﬁcant body of research, but work is lacking for
urban driving prediction. Intersections, for instance, were
responsible for 40% of crashes happened in the United States
in 2008 [9]. We therefore focus on predicting trajectories
for vehicles driving in urban environments. This is more
challenging than highway trajectory prediction due to more
complicated environments with different road shapes and
dynamic objects, as well as the variety of available driving
actions for the driver. Additionally, in many cases it is crucial
to be aware of the conﬁdence of the prediction. In cases
where those predictions cannot be accurately made, a later
planning or parallel autonomy layer can take this into ac-
count, avoiding catastrophic outcomes due to mispredictions.
arXiv:1901.05105v2  [cs.RO]  6 Mar 2019

Kinematic and dynamic motion models are well studied,
and they are efﬁcient for motion predictions, especially
over a short horizon [1], [10]. However, due to unforeseen
changes in control inputs, these models may fail over a longer
horizon. Our approach arbitrates between a wheel odometry
model that works well in simple predictions and a deep neu-
ral networks model that deals with more complicated cases.
We do so by introducing a learned conﬁdence estimator
that predicts the effectiveness of each prediction method for
different future timepoints, conditioned on the inputs.
The input features to our problem include on-board vehicle
sensor data, while foregoing mapping information. While
mapping information can be incorporated into driving pre-
dictions [11], mapping data can prove unreliable in many
scenarios due to changing environments such as construc-
tion areas. We choose sensor inputs with an emphasis on
invariance to changing environments so that our model
can generate reliable predictions. Finally, using data from
affordable and widely available sensors allows our algorithms
to be deployed across a spectrum of vehicle platforms.
Our work has three major contributions. First, we propose
a variational trajectory prediction framework based on a deep
neural network (DNN) with inputs from multiple sensor
modalities, each of which contributes to different aspects
of prediction, as we demonstrate. Second, we combine this
variational predictor with an alternative predictor, and choose
the most conﬁdent outcome using a conﬁdence measure. The
conﬁdence measure is learned through a separately trained
DNN, and helps the ﬁnal predictor achieve lower prediction
error. Third, we quantify the prediction uncertainty with
respect to the future time horizon. Knowing how far into the
future a prediction can be trusted is important for choosing
between different actions in shared-autonomy settings.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: we
give an overview of the existing work in Section I-A, and
formulate our problem in Section II. We then introduce
the proposed method including a DNN-based variational
trajectory predictor and a DNN-based conﬁdence estimator in
Section III. Overall performance is presented in Section IV,
followed by a discussion on results and future work in
Section V.
A. Related Works
Several approaches exist for shared autonomy in terms
of control and interfaces. The most common approach is to
use advanced driver-assistance systems (ADAS) [12], such
as adaptive cruise control. Parallel autonomy vehicle shared-
control frameworks, such as [13], [14], produce safe trajec-
tories, while minimizing the deviation from driver inputs. In
order to minimize this deviation (as well as gauge risk), the
system needs to know where the driver is going, which is a
major focus of our work.
Many approaches have been used to predict vehicle tra-
jectories [15]. Maneuver-based models [1], [8], [16], [17]
employ a hierarchical approach, estimating high-level ma-
neuvers and predicting vehicle trajectories for each maneuver
type. With delineated maneuver classes, the predicted trajec-
tories cover multiple actions of drivers. For example, Deo et
al. [8] use a maneuver-based approach to predict multi-modal
trajectories, and show promising results on highway driving
data. Tran et al. [17] learn maneuvers at intersections using
Gaussian regression models, and, given the most likely class
of maneuver, predict trajectories. Although these approaches
afford multi-modal predictions, deﬁning and labeling maneu-
vers can be challenging and time-consuming – especially in
urban driving with many road shapes and maneuver types.
Some prediction approaches utilize temporal networks [7],
[8], [18], [19], [20] to capture the dynamics of the car and
local environmental changes. For example, long short-term
memory (LSTM) networks [7], [18] aid in predicting the
grid-based vehicle locations probabilistically in horizons up
to two seconds. Recently, [19] applies an RNN encoder-
decoder framework with image and laser scan inputs to
predict multi-modal trajectories in urban environments. The
framework ﬁrst proposes trajectory samples and then reﬁnes
them with an inverse optimal control method. In comparison,
our approach focuses on producing predictions directly, with-
out using a reﬁnement scheme. For efﬁciency and robustness
during training and testing, we capture the vehicle’s past
trajectory by a set of basis functions. As we show in the
results section, using the past trajectory achieves comparable
performance to RNN-based techniques.
By combining a short-term motion-based predictor and a
long-term maneuver-based predictor, [1] generates accurate
trajectories over a horizon up to four seconds. Instead
of setting a time-dependent weight function, our approach
chooses weights based on estimated conﬁdence over a range
of prediction horizons. Our approach also allows us to gauge
when the prediction result is not trustworthy, which is useful
when considering whether to intervene, as in a shared-
autonomy.
A crucial part of vehicle-related deep learning tasks is
reasoning about the uncertainty of their outputs and knowing
when the outputs are unreliable. A couple of works have
addressed this concern using novelty detection on inputs.
For instance, [21] uses an auto-encoder based approach to
detect novel inputs based on reconstruction error for a vehicle
navigation task. [22] estimates pixel-wise uncertainties from
the input vehicle image using the VAE encoder network.
Additionally, [23] presents a system to detect temporal and
stereo inconsistencies between similar image pairs in order to
recognize vehicle perception failures. [24] use a variational
network to reason about mapping and localization failures
via marginalization. In our work, we focus on producing an
uncertainty-aware predictor that recognizes cases where it is
not conﬁdent in its output.
II. PROBLEM FORMULATION
We consider the probability distribution of the future posi-
tions of a target vehicle, conditioned on its past trajectory and
current sensor inputs. These inputs include camera images,
CAN bus inputs from the steering and acceleration system,
and velocities.

Fig. 2: Illustration of the inputs and outputs in the proposed
system. The inputs include past trajectories, camera images,
CAN bus data, and IMU data. The outputs are the predicted
vehicle positions as a multi-component Gaussian mixture
model plotted in ellipses.
We leverage pose invariance by working in the local frame
of the vehicle at the predicting time. As shown in Figure 2,
the x-axis points to the heading of the vehicle, and the y-
axis points to the left of the vehicle. All geometric quantities,
such as positions and velocities, are transformed to the same
frame.
Similar to [5], [25], [26], we are assuming that the
trajectories, projected onto some polynomial basis, form a
Gaussian mixture model (GMM) with diagonal covariance
matrices. Given a trajectory τ(t) : [0, T] →R2 and function
basis B(t), the projection coefﬁcients c can be computed
with Eq. 1. Reversely, given (sampling-dependent) basis and
coefﬁcients, the trajectory can be computed in Eq. 1.
c = ProjB(τ),
τ = Bc.
(1)
This assume that the vehicle’s localization is accurate
enough, as was the case in our experiments. The basis
projection operators are well deﬁned regardless of the length
of trajectory or sampling times, reducing the dimensionality
of the input and output spaces for the learning problem.
The input X to our model includes
• Projected coefﬁcients of past trajectory,
• Steering wheel angle and gas pedal position,
• Angular velocity and linear velocity,
• Images from front camera and two side cameras.
The output of the model is a probability distribution over
future trajectory, which can be transformed from a set of
projected coefﬁcients. Each coefﬁcient is represented as a
Gaussian mixture model. The number of components is
predeﬁned and used to represent the number of possible
movements for the target vehicle.
The goal is to estimate two conditional distributions
P(YG|X) and P(YC|X). The ﬁrst output YG is the GMM
parameters for the variational predictor including weights
w, means µ, and variances σ of projected coefﬁcients for
the future trajectory. By modeling the prediction accuracy
as a function of predicting horizon, the second output YC
contains a set of second-order polynomial coefﬁcients that
maps the time horizon to different conﬁdence scores (e.g., L2
prediction error, root mean squared error) for each candidate
trajectory predictor.
Variational 
Trajectory 
Pedictor
GMM 
Parameters
Confidence 
Estimator
Confidence 
Scores
Mixture 
Predictor
Expert 
Predictor 1
Additional 
Predictions
Trajectory 
Predictions
Expert 
Predictor n
...
Inputs
Fig. 3: Architecture diagram of the proposed system, which
includes a number of candidate trajectory predictors, a con-
ﬁdence estimator, and a mixture predictor generating ﬁnal
outputs.
ImageNet
VelNet
DynamicsNet
Images
CanbusNet
CAN bus
Past 
Trajectory
Velocity
Merged 
Tensor
Predictor 
Net
GMM 
Parameters
AngularNet
Angular 
Velocity
Fig. 4: Architecture diagram of variational trajectory predic-
tor, which is composed of a number of children networks
processing different kinds of input data and a predictor
network generating Gaussian mixture model parameters.
III. METHOD
In this section, we describe our proposed predicting system
depicted in Figure 3. The system includes a variational
trajectory predictor that outputs a set of GMM parameters,
and a conﬁdence estimator that generates conﬁdence scores
for the variational trajectory predictor as well as additional
expert trajectory predictors. The mixture-of-experts predictor
is responsible for choosing the best predictor among candi-
dates according to the scores estimated by the conﬁdence
estimator, or providing a warning if none of the candidates
are trustworthy.
A. Variational Trajectory Predictor
The variational predictor model (see Figure 4) is used to
predict probabilistic coefﬁcients as described in Section II.
It consists of a number of children networks processing the
sensor inputs and a predictor net that outputs the parameters
of Gaussian mixture models.

1) Children Networks: Since the input data comes from
various sensors and have different meaning and units, we
implement a number of children networks speciﬁcally for
each input, including a pre-trained VGG image network [27]
to process image data, and a set of networks for the rest
children, consisting of a number of fully connected layers
stacked on the top of each other with ReLU activations.
Between fully connected layers we use a batch normalization
layer to adjust and scale activation, and a dropout layer to
prevent overﬁtting.
The outputs of each child network are concatenated to-
gether and sent to the predictor network. We add a block-
dropout scheme at the concatenation that allows each child
network to be ignored with a certain probability to avoid
overﬁtting and to allow redundancy in the overall network.
2) Predictor Network: We use a variational prediction
network to further process the information from all children.
It consists of stacked fully connected layers with decreasing
layer width, and dropouts layers in between. The network
outputs GMM parameters, including weights, means, and
(diagonal) covariances for each mixture component.
B. Conﬁdence Estimator
The conﬁdence estimator uses a similar structure to the
variational trajectory predictor. It outputs a set of coefﬁcients
for different conﬁdent scores for each candidate predictor.
C. Additional Expert Predictor
We use an odometry-based predictor as the additional
expert predictor that uses a wheel odometry model [28] to
compute the future positions of the vehicle by assuming the
vehicle drives at constant turning rate and velocity.
Thanks to the modularity of our proposed framework, we
can use more than one expert predictor. In this work, we
only choose one for the sake of simplicity, and it performs
well in complementing the variational predictor as discussed
in Section IV.
D. Models training
Each fully connected child network in Figure 4 has two
hidden layers with a dimension of 10. The predictor network
has four hidden layers where each of the ﬁrst three layers
has a dimension of 100 and the fourth layer has a dimension
of 50. A batch size of 64 is used and the model is trained
for 2000 epochs using Adam with a learning rate of 0.0001.
Each child network has a dropout probability of 5%. The
conﬁdence estimator network shares the same architecture
and training procedures, but has a different output size and
is trained with a different loss function. Both networks are
implemented using PyTorch and trained on an AWS server
with 4 Tesla V100 GPUs in parallel.
1) Variational Trajectory Predictor Training: The model
is trained as in variational inference, with the loss function
deﬁned to be negative log-likelihood of the groundtruth
trajectory coefﬁcients given GMM parameters output by our
model, in addition to several regularization terms.
The log probability for a single Gaussian component
with basis dimensionality D is computed using Eq. 2, and
Fig. 5: Examples of image inputs encountered in our data.
Top row: stop sign with a pedestrian, unprotected left turn,
driving around roundabout. Bottom row: clear day weather,
rainy weather, shady scenes.
the negative log-likelihood for all mixture components is
computed by Eq. 3.
LPi(c)
=
1
2
D
X
d=1
−log(2πσ2
d) −(cd −µd)2/σ2
d (2)
ℓNLL(c)
=
−log
X
i
wi exp LPi(c),
(3)
where cd are the individual projection coefﬁcients of the tra-
jectory. To ensure the output weights and variance values are
reasonable, we introduce an L2 loss on weight summation,
an L0.5 norm loss on individual weights, and an L2 loss
on standard deviations. The total loss is a summation of
individual losses described above.
2) Conﬁdence Estimator Training: The loss function is
deﬁned as the L2 error between the predicted conﬁdence
scores computed using the coefﬁcients output by our model
and the actual conﬁdence scores. The conﬁdence score
can be represented by any loss metric well-deﬁned over
the variational trajectory predictor and the expert trajectory
predictor(s).
IV. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
In this section, we start by describing the dataset used
to train, validate, and test our model. We then show the
contributions of each child network to the prediction results
and describe the performance of the conﬁdence estimator,
followed by a discussion on the mixture predictor and its
temporal performances.
A. Data Collection and Processing
Since we are mostly focused on intersection turning pre-
dictions, we decide to train and validate our model with
driving data that are close to intersections (see Figure 5).
The data was collected by a Toyota Lexus vehicle equipped
with front and side cameras, Global Positions System (GPS),
and Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU). It consists of 14
trips with a total duration of 30 hours in Cambridge MA,
Ann Arbor MI, and Los Altos CA. Different weather and
lighting conditions (see Figure 5) are included in the dataset,
which is partitioned into a training and validation set and a
testing set. The training and validation set is split arbitrarily

Model Name
I
RMSE [m]
L2 [m]
Hard %
Variational Predictor
N/A
1.15
3.01
4.83
w/o Past Dynamics
0.81
1.29
3.37
8.43
w/o CAN bus
0.73
1.28
3.41
10.24
w/o IMU
0.85
1.31
3.45
10.47
w/o Image
0.74
1.34
3.64
15.57
TABLE I: Statistical performance of children networks. Left-
to-right columns: information gain, root mean squared error,
L2 endpoint error at 3 seconds, percent of hard cases (cf.
text).
twice for training the variational trajectory predictor and the
conﬁdence estimator, respectively. All the metrics mentioned
in this section are computed on the same testing set.
B. Children Networks
In this part, we show the complementary contributions
from children networks in terms of both statistics and speciﬁc
examples. In order to quantify the performance statistically,
we measure the negative log-likelihood (NLL) to estimate
the information gain I from the model. Information gain,
or mutual information, for a speciﬁc input is given by
the difference in conditional entropy with and without that
input [29]. In our case this becomes the difference in log-
probabilities over all data:
I(τ; x)
=
H(τ|X−) −H(τ|X−, x)
(4)
=
−
X
τ,X−,x
p(τ, X−, x)

log p(τ|X−) −log p(τ|X−, x)

where
H(·)
is
the
entropy,
x
denotes
an
input
of
interest,
X−
denotes
the
rest
of
the
inputs,
and
log p(τ|X−, x),
log p(τ|X−) are obtained by networks
trained with or without x as an input.
In addition, we use root mean squared error (RMSE)
to show the quality of prediction along the entire future
trajectory and L2 error at the predicting horizon of 3 seconds.
To understand when the model fails catastrophically, we
compute the percentage that the output predictions have an
L2 error greater than 5 meters. The results are recorded in
Table I.
1) Dynamics Network: We start by removing the dy-
namics network from the variational predictor model. Since
we are using a second-order polynomial basis, the past
coefﬁcients capture the dynamics including the average past
velocity and acceleration of the vehicle in each dimension. To
check the contribution of the dynamics network, we visualize
a few examples in Figure 6a where the prediction error
increases drastically after removing the dynamics network
from the variational predictor. We see that without knowing
the past dynamics, the predictions can be slightly off when
a vehicle drives smoothly on the road.
2) RNN without Dynamics Network: As stated in Sec-
tion I-A, many use RNN-based approaches to learn temporal
information such as dynamics from past observations. We
implement an RNN model that takes the same input except
for the information on the past trajectory. The model achieves
an information gain of 0.17 as compared to the variational
(a) Without dynamics inputs, the predicted trajectories
overshoot even when the vehicle drives on a straight road.
(b) Without CAN bus inputs, there is always motion
predicted even when the vehicle is not moving.
(c) Without image inputs, the predicted trajectories go out
of road boundaries especially at turns.
(d) With all sensor inputs, the prediction can still be hard
in less familiar or out-of-distribution scenarios.
Fig. 6: Illustration of challenging examples for the variational
predictor while withholding different inputs. The groundtruth
future trajectory is in red, and the sampled predicted trajec-
tories using our approach are in blue.
network without past dynamics, which is worse than the
information gain of 0.81 we would gain from the past
dynamics. This indicates that the dynamics network captures
the majority of the signal that RNN-based models can learn.
Given that the past trajectory is usually available for vehicles
with GPS sensors, we decide to use a single shot model for
our variational predictor, which takes less time to converge
during training time than an RNN model. We therefore do not
show an RNN-based approach in the rest of the experiments
and in Table I.
3) CANBUS Network: CAN bus data includes steering
wheel angle and gas pedal value, which can inform the vari-
ational predictor about the instant acceleration and turning
rate. From Table I, we see that after dropping the CAN-
BUS network, the L2 prediction error increases by 13.29%.
Without a CANBUS network, the variational predictor would
not able to know the change in acceleration. Examples in
Figure 6b show that at intersections, it is important to know
the acceleration to avoid overshooting or undershooting in
the predictions.
4) IMU Network: In complementary to the CANBUS
network, the IMU network provides information about the
instant velocity and angular rate of the vehicle.
5) Image Network: The large performance drop after
removing the image network suggests that it contributes

Fig. 7: Demonstrated predicted trajectories with the varia-
tional predictor. Top row: the vehicle is turning left and,
and turning right. Bottom row: the vehicle is following
roundabout beneath a highway, and facing two options in
front of a T intersection.
the most to the network. For example, the percentage of
hard cases has increased by two times if we remove the
image network, which means that the image network is
able to reduce many hard cases by using its information
on what exists in the future, especially in cases where the
past dynamics or the CAN bus/IMU data is unavailable.
More speciﬁcally, the pre-trained VGG network allows us
to identify the upcoming environment conditions such as
road shapes and obstacles. This can help to ﬁne-tune the
predicted trajectories to be close to the road curve and yield
higher accuracy. As shown in Figure 6c, without an image
network, the variational predictor has a hard time getting
accurate predictions when the vehicle turns at intersections.
6) Variational Trajectory Predictor: By using all the
children networks, the variational predictor gets information
about the environment ahead of the vehicle as well as the
vehicle state including acceleration, velocity, angular rate,
and past dynamics. It is able to predict trajectories with
an average prediction error of 3.01 meters in complicated
urban driving environments. Some successful predictions are
illustrated in Figure 7.
Despite the success of the variational predictor, it can fail.
Deﬁning failures as estimation errors greater than 5 meters
over the horizon, we have a 4.83% failure rate in urban
driving conditions. Figure 6d shows our failure examples in
challenging scenarios including places without well-deﬁned
road boundary, in an unfamiliar highway environment, and in
front of a street hidden behind the buildings. For a trajectory
predictor to be trustworthy in a shared-autonomy framework,
it has to recognize these uncertain cases, which motivates our
conﬁdence estimator, as described in the next section.
C. Conﬁdence Estimator
We use the results from the two candidate trajectory
predictors to obtain conﬁdence scores for each data sample.
In this work, we choose to use the L2 error between the
predicted and groundtruth position as our conﬁdence score.
The error distributions at predicting horizon of 3 seconds
for two candidate predictors are shown in Figure 9a, with an
average of 3.01 meters and 3.11 meters, respectively.
In order to compare the performance between the two
candidate predictors at different scenes, we show in Figure 8
the scatter plots of L2 errors between the variational predictor
and odometry predictor as a function of vehicle states,
where red means the former performs better and blue means
the latter performs better. We ﬁnd that when the lateral
accelerations are small, the odometry predictor performs
better, as the vehicle is moving forward or turning smoothly
without sudden lateral velocity changes. Similarly, in scenar-
ios where longitudinal accelerations are small, which means
the vehicle is driving at a constant velocity, the odometry
predictor has lower errors than the variational predictor, as
expected. On the other hand, when vehicle is driving at either
large latitudinal or longitudinal accelerations, our variational
predictor performs better in terms of L2 errors.
The obtained conﬁdence scores are used to train a con-
ﬁdence estimator that produces estimated conﬁdence scores
on input data for each trajectory predictor. The conﬁdence
estimator estimates scores for the variational predictor and
the odometry predictor with an average error of 1.07 meters
and 2.14 meters, respectively. As we wish to leverage the
conﬁdence estimator to choose the better predictor, we com-
pute the percentage that it ﬁnds the correct better trajectory
predictor to be 75%.
Since the driving domain is very safety-critical, we mea-
sure the frequency at which our conﬁdence estimator un-
derestimates the uncertain cases. We deﬁne the uncertain
case as where both predictors produce errors above 2.54
meters, which is the mean error of a set of complicated
cases gathered manually from the data. The percentage of
underestimated samples out of all uncertain samples is 18%,
which means our conﬁdence estimator knows 82% of the
time when it is outputting uncertain results. This is crucial
in safety-critical systems, especially in shared-control and
parallel autonomy systems, as we can change the system’s
actions according to the certainty of its own perception
subsystem.
In comparison, in the cases where the prediction error is
less than 2.54 meters, our conﬁdence measure undershoots
the error in 94% of the cases, which means we can trust the
conﬁdence estimator 89.2% of the time among all testing
samples with 40% of uncertain cases and 60% of certain
cases.
D. Mixture Predictor
The mixture-of-experts predictor arbitrates between the
variational predictor and the odometry predictor, by gen-
erating their estimated conﬁdence scores, and picking the
prediction that has a higher score. The mixture-based errors
are distributed in green as shown in Figure 9a with an average
of 2.33 meters, which is improved by 23% compared to the
average error of the variational predictor and 25% compared
to the average error of the odometry predictor. The regret is
0.16 meters, as deﬁned in comparison to an oracle arbitrator
that knows which prediction is better at every sample.

Fig. 8: Scatter plots of the L2 error differences between our variational trajectory predictor and the odometry predictor over
3 seconds. Red means the variational predictor performs better. Blue means the odometry predictor performs better. Top:
Error differences as a function of latitudinal vehicle velocity and acceleration. Bottom: Error differences as a function of
longitudinal vehicle velocity and acceleration. For qualitative results, please refer to our video demonstration.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 9: Illustrations of predictors performances on the testing set. (a) Histograms of prediction errors for the variational
predictor, the odometry predictor, and the mixture predictor at 3 seconds. (b) Prediction errors of three predictors and
an oracle predictor, over different time horizons from 0.1 to 3 seconds. (c) Percentage of uncertain cases (cf. text) and
underestimated uncertain cases over different time horizons.
E. Temporal Behaviors
An important aspect of predictors is their behaviors as
a function of the prediction horizon. We are interested in
seeing the performance of the mixture predictor, and gather
the mean of L2 prediction errors from different predictors
over a predicting horizon from 0.1 seconds to 3 seconds
(see Figure 9b). The gap between the mixture predictor curve
and candidate predictor curves indicates that it successfully
chooses the good part from them. This can be validated
by the temporally-dependent regret as illustrated by the gap
between the mixture predictor curve and the oracle predic-
tor curve. Similar to IV-C, we compute the percentage of
uncertain cases over different time horizons (see Figure 9c).
Starting at 1.4 seconds, the number of uncertain cases starts
to increase quickly, due to the uncertainty increase in driver
actions. The percentage of underestimated uncertain cases
over total cases never exceeds 10%, which means that our
mixture predictor is aware most of the time when generating
predictions with large uncertainty. The underestimated curve
starts to fall after 2.5 seconds, as our conﬁdence estimator
tends to output larger error estimates over longer horizons
and thus is less likely to underestimate the uncertain cases.
V. CONCLUSIONS
This paper introduces an uncertainty-aware prediction
method for driver trajectory prediction by augmenting a
variational deep neural network trajectory predictor with
a physics-based predictor using conﬁdence estimates. The
variational predictor generates probabilistic predictions from
a number of aggregated children networks that process differ-
ent vehicle sensor data, and the physics-based predictor acts
as an additional expert predictor that provides more accurate
predictions in simple cases where vehicle accelerations are
small. We use a second network to estimate the uncertainty
of predictions by different candidate predictors as a function
of the predicting horizon. The uncertainty estimates not only
help the mixture predictor achieve better accuracy over a
horizon up to 3 seconds, but also provide insights on when
to use our predictor in the context of shared-autonomy. Given
the safety critical nature of autonomous driving tasks, we be-
lieve our uncertainty-aware method provides a new direction
for making a robust and trustworthy prediction system. In
the future, we would like to improve the performance of the
variational predictor by exploiting more features from the
image data.
