1
Energy-Efﬁcient Thermal Comfort Control in Smart
Buildings via Deep Reinforcement Learning
Guanyu Gao, Jie Li, Yonggang Wen
Abstract—Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning (HVAC)
is extremely energy-consuming, accounting for 40% of total
building energy consumption. Therefore, it is crucial to design
some energy-efﬁcient building thermal control policies which
can reduce the energy consumption of HVAC while maintaining
the comfort of the occupants. However, implementing such a
policy is challenging, because it involves various inﬂuencing
factors in a building environment, which are usually hard to
model and may be different from case to case. To address
this challenge, we propose a deep reinforcement learning based
framework for energy optimization and thermal comfort control
in smart buildings. We formulate the building thermal control as
a cost-minimization problem which jointly considers the energy
consumption of HVAC and the thermal comfort of the occupants.
To solve the problem, we ﬁrst adopt a deep neural network
based approach for predicting the occupants’ thermal comfort,
and then adopt Deep Deterministic Policy Gradients (DDPG) for
learning the thermal control policy. To evaluate the performance,
we implement a building thermal control simulation system and
evaluate the performance under various settings. The experiment
results show that our method can improve the thermal comfort
prediction accuracy, and reduce the energy consumption of
HVAC while improving the occupants’ thermal comfort.
Index Terms—Building thermal control, energy management,
thermal comfort, deep reinforcement learning, smart building.
I. INTRODUCTION
Building thermal control is important for providing high-
quality working and living environments, because occupants
can only feel comfortable when the temperature and humidity
of the indoor thermal condition are within the thermal comfort
zone. However, the ambient thermal condition may change
dramatically, which will lead to the ﬂuctuation of indoor
thermal condition and the discomfort of the occupants. There-
fore, building thermal control is necessary for maintaining
acceptable indoor thermal condition. Heating, Ventilation and
Air Conditioning (HVAC) systems are usually adopted for
controlling indoor thermal conditions. One main concern of
the HVAC systems is their high energy consumption, which
makes building energy consumption accounts for 20%-40% of
the total energy consumption [1]. On the other hand, occupants
may feel cold or hot if the set-points of the HVAC systems are
inappropriate, although more energy may be consumed. Thus,
it is necessary to study how to reduce the energy consump-
tion of the HVAC systems while keeping occupants comfort,
especially due to the high electricity price and the increase of
electricity consumption and environmental pollution.
G.Y. Gao, J. Li and Y.G. Wen are with the School of Computer Science and

Various factors have inﬂuences on building thermal control.
These factors can be categorized into three parts, namely,
HVAC system related factors, building thermal environment
related factors, and human related factors. The HVAC system
can control the building thermal condition by adjusting the
set-points of air temperature and humidity, which will also
change the energy consumption of the HVAC system. Building
thermal environments are determined by the structures of
buildings, the indoor and outdoor thermal conditions, and
the heat sources (e.g., bulbs, computers, etc). These factors
affect the dynamic changes of building thermal conditions.
The feelings of the occupants under given thermal conditions
are subjective and may be different from person to person [2],
however, the degrees of occupants’ satisfaction under given
thermal conditions need to be precisely estimated to select
the appropriate set-points of the HVAC system for efﬁcient
thermal control. The factors of these three parts are correlated,
and we need to consider these factors altogether for achieving
thermal comfort and reducing energy consumption.
Many approaches have been proposed for building ther-
mal control and energy optimization [3]. The model-based
approaches aimed to model the thermal dynamics with sim-
pliﬁed mathematical models, such as Proportional Integrate
Derivative (PID) [4], [5], Model Predictive Control (MPC)
[6], [7], Fuzzy Control [6], [7], Linear-Quadratic Regulator
[8]. However, the complexity of the thermal dynamics and the
various inﬂuencing factors are hard to be precisely modelled
by these methods. These methods also require customized
design for the control policy for speciﬁed environments.
Another line of works adopted the learning-based approach
for learning the optimal control policy, such as the reinforce-
ment learning approach. The reinforcement learning approach
can lean the optimal control policy by interactions with
the thermal environment. However, the plain reinforcement
learning approaches (e.g., [9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14])
cannot achieve high performance if the state-action space
is large. Deep reinforcement learning approaches (e.g., [15],
[16]) have been recently adopted to address this limitation by
using deep learning for representation of the large state-action
space. However, the methods adopted in [15], [16] require
discretization of the state-action space, which will also limit
the performance of the thermal control policy.
Different from previous works, we propose a learning-based
framework for joint energy optimization and thermal comfort
control in smart buildings. We ﬁrst design a deep neural
network method with Bayesian regularization for predicting
the occupants’ thermal comfort by considering different inﬂu-
encing factors. The method can predict the occupants’ thermal
arXiv:1901.04693v1  [cs.SY]  15 Jan 2019

2
comfort precisely, therefore, the thermal comfort prediction
results can be used as a feedback for thermal control. Then,
we adopt deep reinforcement learning approach for thermal
control to minimize the overall cost by jointly considering
energy consumption of the HVAC system and the thermal
comfort of the occupants. We adopt Deep Deterministic Policy
Gradients (DDPG) approach [17], which is a reinforcement
learning algorithm for continuous control problem, for learning
the optimal control policy. This is because in thermal control,
temperature, humidity, and some other control variables are all
continuous, therefore, DDPG is very suitable for addressing
the problem in this scenario. Compared with the methods
adopted in [15], [16], DDPG can avoid the discretization of the
control variables (e.g., temperature, humidity), which can also
improve the control precision. To evaluate the performance of
our method, we implement a thermal control simulation system
with TRNSYS and evaluate the performance under various
settings. The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
• We propose a DDPG approach for learning the control
policy for energy optimization and thermal comfort con-
trol. Our method can improve the occupants’ thermal
comfort and reduce the energy consumption of HVAC.
• We design a deep neural network method with Bayesian
regularization for predicting thermal comfort. Our method
can predict thermal comfort more accurately.
• We implement a building thermal control simulation sys-
tem with TRNSYS, and conduct extensive experiments
for evaluating the performances of our proposed method
under different experiment settings.
The rest of this paper are organized as follows. Section
II presents the background and related works. Section III
introduces the system design of the thermal control system
in smart buildings. Section IV presents the system model
and problem formulation. Section V presents the deep neural
network based method for predicting thermal comfort and the
DDPG method for learning the control policy. Section VI
evaluates the performance of our method and compare it with
the baseline methods. Section VII concludes this paper.
II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
In this section, we ﬁrst introduce the background and then
discuss the related works on building thermal control.
A. Background
1) HVAC: The HVAC system [18] is used to provide
thermal comfort and maintain indoor air quality in buildings.
The main functionalities of the HVAC system are heating,
ventilation, and air conditioning. Speciﬁcally, heating is to
generate heat to raise the air temperature in the building.
Ventilation is to exchange air with the outside and circulate
the air within the building. Air conditioning provides cooling
and humidity control. In this work, we mainly study the set-
points and the energy consumption of the HVAC system,
and we do not consider the inside mechanisms of the HVAC
system (i.e., how the set-points are achieved by the HVAC
system via its inside functioning), because different HVAC
system may have different inside mechanisms. We design the
algorithm independent of the inside mechanisms so that it can
be generally applied in different types of HVAC systems.
2) Thermal Comfort: Thermal comfort reﬂects the occu-
pants’ satisfaction with the thermal condition [19]. For quan-
titatively evaluating thermal comfort, thermal comfort models
are introduced for predicting the occupants’ satisfaction under
given thermal conditions. Because the occupants’ feelings
under given thermal conditions are subjective, thermal comfort
is assessed by subjective evaluation. Many subjects will be
invited to evaluate their degrees of satisfaction under different
thermal conditions, such as cold (-2), cool (-1), neutral (0),
warm (1), and hot (2). Then, some mathematical or heuristic
methods can be adopted for ﬁtting the data. Many models
have been developed for evaluating the thermal comfort of
the occupants under different thermal conditions [20], for
instance, Predicted Mean Vote (PMV), Actual Mean Vote
(AMV), Predicted Percentage Dissatisﬁed (PPD), etc.
3) Reinforcement Learning: Reinforcement learning is con-
cerned with how the agent should take actions in a dynamic
environment to maximize its overall rewards [21]. It can learn
the optimal control policy by trails during the interactions
with the environment. The reinforcement learning process can
be modelled as a Markov Decision Process (MDP), which
consists of State, Action, and Rewards, etc. The agent ﬁrst
observes the current state of the environment and select an ac-
tion to take according to a certain policy, followed by obtaining
the rewards for the action taken on the observed state. These
steps will be iterated during the learning stage and the control
policy will be updated until it is converged. The optimal policy
can be learned during the trails without directly modeling
the system dynamics, therefore, reinforcement learning is a
natural solution if the policy can be learnt by the interactions
with the environment and the dynamics of the system is
hard to model precisely. Deep reinforcement learning [22] is
a combination of deep learning and reinforcement learning.
It can signiﬁcantly improve the performance compared with
reinforcement learning if the dimensions of state and action is
large, because deep learning has higher capacity for learning
the representation of large space and tremendous data.
B. Related Work
The existing mathematical approaches for building ther-
mal control can be generally classiﬁed into two cate-
gories, namely, model-based approaches and learning-based
approaches. Speciﬁcally, the model-based approaches derive
the policy by modeling the dynamics of the environment; the
learning-based approaches derive the policy by learning from
the interactions with the environment.
1) Model-based Approaches: Levermore et al. [4] and Dou-
nis et al. [5] used the Proportional Integrate Derivative (PID)
method for building energy management and indoor air quality
control. Shepherd et al. [6] and Calvino [7] proposed a fuzzy
control method for managing building thermal conditions and
energy cost. Kummert et al. [23] and Wang et al. [24] proposed
the optimal control method for controlling the HVAC system.
Ma et al. [25] introduced a Model Predictive Control (MPC)
based approach for controlling building cooling systems by

3
considering thermal energy storage. Wei et al. [26] adopted
the MPC based approach for jointly scheduling HVAC, elec-
tric vehicle and battery usage for reducing building energy
consumption while keeping temperature within comfort zone.
Maasoumy et al. [8] proposed a tracking linear-quadratic
regulator for balancing human comfort and energy consump-
tion in buildings. Oldewurtel et al. [27] proposed a bilinear
model under stochastic uncertainty for building climate control
while considering weather predictions. These model-based
approaches strive to model the dynamics of the thermal envi-
ronment with some simpliﬁed mathematical models. However,
the thermal environment is affected by various factors and is
complicated in nature, and it is hard to be precisely modeled.
Moreover, the performances of the model-based approaches
are constrained by the speciﬁed building environments, and it
is hard to derive a generalized model-based approach that can
be applicable in various building environments.
2) Learning-based Approaches: Barrett et al. [9], Li et
al. [10] and Nikovski et al. [11] adopted Q learning based
approaches for the HVAC control. Zenger et al. [12] adopted
State-Action-Reward-State-Action (SARSA) for achieving the
desired temperature while reducing energy consumption.
Fazenda et al. [13] proposed a neural ﬁtted reinforcement
learning approach for learning how to schedule thermostat
temperature set-points. Dalamagkidis et al. [14] designed
the Linear Reinforcement Learning Controller (LRLC) using
linear function approximation of the state-action value function
to achieve thermal comfort with minimal energy consump-
tion. Anderson [28] proposed a robust control framework for
combined Proportional Integral (PI) control and reinforcement
learning control for HVAC of buildings. Wei et al. [15]
adopted a neural network based deep Q learning method for
the HVAC control. Wang et al. [16] adopted a Long-Short
Term Memory (LSTM) recurrent neural network based rein-
forcement learning controller for controlling air conditioning
system. The tabular Q learning approach, SARSA, and other
plain reinforcement learning approaches adopted in [9], [10],
[11], [12], [13], [14], [28] are not suitable for problems with
large state-action spaces, partly due to that plain reinforcement
learning approaches fail to achieve satisfying generalization of
the value function and policy function in large spaces. Deep
Q learning [15] and LSTM based reinforcement learning [16]
can improve the performances with neural networks, which
have better generalization capacity. However, the proposed
approaches in these works require discretization of the state-
action space, which will decrease the control precision and
the performance. To address these drawbacks in previous
works, we propose the DDPG approach for continuous control
with deep reinforcement learning in the HVAC system. Our
method also provides the capacity for customizing the thermal
comfort settings by jointly considering energy consumption
and thermal comfort. One can customize the thermal comfort
threshold according to the occupants’ thermal requirements for
reducing the energy consumption of the HVAC system.
III. SYSTEM DESIGN AND CONTROL FLOW
In this section, we present the system design and the
workﬂow for thermal control in smart buildings.
Controller
Set-Points
Temperature Humidity
Indoor and Outdoor Sensors
Thermal
State
Building 
Environment
Fig. 1.
The system design of the thermal control system. The controller
obtains the building thermal state information from the sensors and make
control actions by adjusting the set-points of the HVAC system.
A. System Design
The design of the thermal control system is illustrated in
Fig. 1. The system consists of the following components,
namely, the sensors, the controller, and the HVAC system.
The functionalities of each component are detailed as follows.
Sensors: The sensors periodically measure the thermal con-
ditions of the indoor and outdoor building environments [29],
including temperature, humidity, etc. The sensors are con-
nected with the controller via Internet of things (IoT) networks
[30], and the sensors will send the collected information to the
controller for making thermal control decisions.
Controller: The controller collects the thermal state infor-
mation of the indoor and outdoor building environment and the
energy consumption and the working state information of the
HVAC system [29]. Based on these information, the controller
will take control actions by updating the set-points of the
HVAC system periodically according to the control policy.
HVAC: The HVAC system will function according to the
set-points of the controller. For instance, if the set-point of the
temperature is lower than the current indoor temperature, the
HVAC system will start cooling until the indoor temperature
matches with the set-point temperature. If the set-point temper-
ature is higher than the current indoor temperature, the HVAC
system will start heating until achieving the speciﬁed indoor
temperature. The HVAC system may also need to constantly
keep heating, cooling, or ventilation for keeping the speciﬁed
indoor thermal condition due to the inﬂuence of the outside
building thermal environment.
B. Control Flow
We illustrate the control ﬂow of the system in Fig. 2.
We adopt deep neural network for predicting the occupants’
thermal comfort value based on the current indoor thermal
state, and we use deep reinforcement learning for making
control decisions for thermal control. The neural network
based thermal comfort predictor can be trained ofﬂine us-
ing existing thermal prediction dataset. After training, the
indoor building thermal state information will be input into
the trained thermal prediction model for predicting thermal

4
Action
State
Reward
HVAC 
System
DRL
Power Consumption
Thermal 
State
Neural
Network
Temperature
Humidity
Thermal 
Comfort
Fig. 2.
The control ﬂow of the building thermal control system. We adopt
deep neural network for thermal comfort prediction and Deep Reinforcement
Learning (DRL) for thermal control.
comfort value. The thermal comfort prediction value and the
energy consumption information of the HVAC system will be
used for calculating the reward during each time slot. The deep
reinforcement learning based thermal controller can learn the
control policy by observing the received rewards for taking
actions on different states. We train the thermal controller
using the building thermal control simulation system, which
will be detailed in Section VI-A. After training, the indoor and
outdoor building thermal state will be input into the trained
thermal control model for making thermal control actions.
IV. PROBLEM FORMULATION
In this section, we introduce the notations and formulate
the energy optimization and thermal comfort control as a cost-
minimization problem using MDP. We adopt a discrete-time
model and the time slot is denoted as t = 0, 1, 2, .... The
duration of each time slot is from several minutes to one hour.
The notations used in this paper are summarized in Table I.
A. Building Thermal State
The energy consumption of the HVAC system is affected
by both of the indoor thermal environment and the outdoor
thermal environment. For the indoor and outdoor thermal
environments, we consider the factors of air temperature and
humidity, which have the greatest inﬂuences on the energy
consumption of the HVAC system and the human thermal
comfort. We denote the indoor air temperature and humidity at
time slot t as T in
t
and Hin
t , respectively; and we denoted the
outdoor air temperature and humidity at time slot t as T out
t
and
Hout
t
, respectively. The indoor and outdoor air temperature and
humidity can be obtained from the sensors in a smart building.
B. Set-Points of HVAC System
The controller can change the set-point air temperature
and humidity of the HVAC system for controlling the indoor
thermal condition. We denote the set-point air temperature of
the HVAC system at time slot t as T set
t
, and denote the set-
point air humidity as time slot t as Hset
t
. At the beginning
of each time slot, the controller updates the set-point air
temperature and humidity of the HVAC system according
to the indoor and outdoor thermal condition for controlling
thermal comfort and energy consumption.
TABLE I
KEY NOTATION AND DEFINITION
t
the discrete time slot, t = 0, 1, 2, ...
T in
t
the indoor air temperature at time slot t
Hin
t
the indoor air humidity at time slot t
T out
t
the outdoor air temperature at time slot t
Hout
t
the outdoor air humidity at time slot t
T set
t
the set-point air temperature at time slot t
Hset
t
the set-point air humidity at time slot t
Mt
predicted thermal comfort value at time slot t
Φ
thermal comfort prediction algorithm
Pt
the energy consumption of the HVAC system at time slot t
St
the state of the MDP at time slot t
At
the action of the MDP at time slot t
Rt
the reward of the MDP at time slot t
π
the thermal control policy
γ
the discount factor for the reward
D
the threshold for thermal comfort
β
the weight of the penalty for energy consumption
α1, α2
Bayesian hyperparameters
n
the number of training samples
m
the number of weights in the neural network
wj
the j-th weight in the neural network
θQ, θµ
the parameters of the critic network and the actor network
N(t)
the exploration noise for training
τ
the discount factor for model update
C. Thermal Comfort Prediction
Thermal comfort prediction predicts the occupants’ satisfac-
tion with the thermal condition. Many factors may inﬂuence
the occupants’ thermal comfort, e.g., metabolic rate, clothing
insulation, air temperature and humidity, skin wetness, etc.
For some of the factors, they may be different from person
to person, or cannot be easily measured in real environments,
such as the occupants’ metabolic rate and skin wetness. In
this work, we mainly consider the indoor air temperature and
humidity as variables for thermal comfort prediction, and the
other factors are set as default values. The occupants’ thermal
comfort value at time slot t is predicted as
Mt = Φ(T in
t , Hin
t ),
(1)
where Mt is the predicted thermal comfort value and Φ is
the thermal comfort prediction algorithm. In this work, we
adopt the deep neural network method for predicting thermal
comfort value, which will be detailed in Section V-A.
D. Energy Consumption of HVAC system
The HVAC system will consume energy for heating, cool-
ing, and dehumidiﬁcation. The information of the energy
consumption of the HVAC system during each time slot can
be obtained from the smart meter. We assume that the energy
consumption information of the HVAC system during each
time slot is known, and we denote the energy consumption
of the HVAC system at time slot t as Pt. To make the
modeling independent of the inside mechanisms of the HVAC
system, we only consider the overall energy consumption of
the HVAC system during each time slot. The speciﬁed energy
consumptions for heating, cooling, dehumidiﬁcation, or other
inside mechanisms are considered as unknown.

5
E. Problem Formulation
We formulate the energy optimization and thermal comfort
control in the smart building as a MDP process for minimizing
the overall cost over time, the details of which are as follows.
State: The state of the MDP is the current indoor and
outdoor thermal conditions at each time slot, represented as
St = (T in
t , Hin
t , T out
t
, Hout
t
),
(2)
where St is the state of the MDP at time slot t.
Action: The action of the MDP is the set-point air temper-
ature and humidity of the HVAC system, represented as
At = (T set
t
, Hset
t
),
(3)
where At is the action of the MDP at time slot t. The action
is determined according to the control policy by observing the
current state. Mathematically, it can be represented as
At = π(St),
(4)
where π is the control policy for thermal control.
Reward: The reward of the MDP consists of two parts,
namely, the penalty for the energy consumption of the HVAC
system and the penalty for the occupants’ thermal discomfort.
Speciﬁcally, the reward should be less, if more energy is
consumed by the HVAC system or the occupants feel uncom-
fortable about the building thermal condition. The predicted
value of thermal comfort (Mt) ranges from -3 to 3, where -3
is too cold and +3 is too hot and 0 is neutral.
The occupants can feel comfort when the predicted thermal
comfort value is within an acceptable range. We denote the
range as [−D, D], where D is the threshold for thermal
comfort value. If the predicted thermal comfort value lies
within [−D, D], it will not incur penalty because the occupants
feel comfortable. Otherwise, it will incur penalty for the
occupants’ dissatisfaction with the building thermal condition.
By jointly considering the predicted thermal comfort value and
the energy consumption of the HVAC system, we calculate the
overall reward of the MDP during a time slot as
Rt(St, At) = −βPt −





0
−D < Mt < D
(Mt −D)
Mt > D
(−D −Mt)
Mt < −D
, (5)
where Rt is the overall reward for time slot t and β is
the weight of the energy consumption of the HVAC system.
The weigh, β, reﬂects the relative importance of the energy
consumption of the HVAC system compared to the occupants’
thermal comfort. If the occupants’ thermal comfort is more
important, β should be set as a smaller value. Otherwise, β
should be set as a larger value for achieving energy-efﬁciency.
Cost Minimization: Our objective is to maximize the
overall discount rewards from the current time slot by deriving
the optimal thermal control policy for energy optimization and
thermal comfort control, mathematically, the objective is
max
π
∞
X
t′=0
γt′Rt+t′(St+t′, At+t′),
(6)
where γ is the discount factor. If the precise transitions of the
system states are available, we can derive the optimal policy
Temperature
Input Layer
Hidden Layer
Output Layer
Humidity
Radiant 
Temperature
Air Speed
Metabolic Rate
Clothing 
Insulation
Predicted 
Thermal 
Comfort Value
Fig. 3.
The structure of the deep neural network for predicting thermal
comfort. The inputs of the neural network include temperature, humidity,
radiant temperature, air speed, metabolic Rate, and clothing insulation. The
output of the neural network is the predicted thermal comfort value.
ofﬂine. However, it is impossible to obtain the state transition
probabilities in such a complex system, therefore, the optimal
control policy cannot be derived directly. It motivates us to
adopt the learning algorithm to learn the optimal policy.
V. LEARNING ALGORITHM FOR THERMAL COMFORT
PREDICTION AND THERMAL CONTROL
In this section, we ﬁrst introduce the deep neural network
based method for thermal comfort prediction. Then, we intro-
duce the DDPG method for learning thermal control policy.
A. Deep Neural Network based Thermal Comfort Prediction
We adopt the feed-forward neural network for predicting
thermal comfort. The structure of the neural network that
we adopt for predicting thermal comfort is illustrated in Fig.
3. The inputs of the neural network include air temperature,
humidity, mean radiant temperature, air speed, metabolic rate,
clothing insulation, and all of these values are numerical. The
hidden layer of the neural network has two layers, and the
output layer has one neuron. The output of the neural network
is the predicted thermal comfort value. The activation function
of the hidden layer is sigmoid function, and the activation
function of the output layer is a linear function.
For training the neural network, some thermal comfort
prediction datasets should be adopted as the training data.
These datasets are labeled by the subjects for evaluating their
thermal comfort under different thermal conditions, and the
labeled data can be noisy. To interpolate the noisy data,
we adopt Bayesian regularization [31] for avoiding overﬁt-
ting. The cost function for training the neural network with
Bayesian regularization is to minimize the training error using
the minimal weights of the neural network, represented as
Cost Function = α1
n
X
i=1
(Yi −Y
′
i )2 + α2
m
X
j=1
w2
j,
(7)
where α1 and α2 are Bayesian hyperparameters for specifying
the direction of the learning process to seek (i.e., minimize
error or weights), n is the number of training samples, Yi
is the i-th labeled value by the subject, Y
′
i is the predicted
value by the neural network, m is the number of weights in
the neural network, and wj is the j-th weight. The training
algorithm is Levenberg-Marquardt backpropagation [32].

6
DQN
Thermal 
State
DDPG
Thermal 
State
…
…
Temperature, Humidity
Temperature
Humidity
(25,            50%)
(25,            60%)
(26,            50%)
(26,            60%)
…
25.4
60.5%
Fig. 4. A comparison of DQN and DDPG for thermal control. Temperature
and humidity are continuous values, DDPG can be directly applied for
continuous action control and DQN needs discretization of the action space.
B. Learning Thermal Control Policy with DDPG
1) Why DDPG?: The control variables of the HVAC system
(i.e., air temperature and humidity) take continuous values.
In Q learning and Deep Q learning, it can only handle
problems with discrete and low-dimensional action spaces
[17]. Therefore, DQN cannot be directly applied to the thermal
control problem, because it needs to ﬁnd the control action,
which is continuous, for maximizing the action-value function.
For applying DQN in thermal control, one obvious approach is
to discretize the action space. However, if one wants to achieve
ﬁner grained dicretization, it may lead to an explosion of the
number of actions. For instance, the range of humidity is from
0 to 100, if we discretize with the granularity of one, it will
turn into 101 actions. Similarly, suppose that the range of the
air temperature is from 15 to 35, and there will be 200 actions
if the granularity is 0.1. If one output of DQN represents one
possible combination of temperature value and humidity value,
the DQN network will have 20,200 outputs. Therefore, it will
lead to a large number of outputs of DQN , which may require
more training data and decrease the performance.
Compared with Q-Learning and DQN, DDPG is a natural
solution for thermal control, because the action space of
DDPG is continuous, and we can directly obtain the set-
points of the HVAC system from the outputs of DDPG. We
illustrate the comparisons of DQN and DDPG in Fig. 4. With
DDPG, the network only has two outputs, namely, the real-
valued set-points of air temperature and humidity of the HVAC
system. In contrast, DQN may require thousands of outputs,
and each output is a possible combination of the set-points of
the temperature and humidity of the HVAC system.
2) Learning Control Policy: DDPG adopts an actor-critic
framework based on Deterministic Policy Gradient (DPG)
[33]. We illustrate the network architecture of DDPG in Fig.
5. The actor network is denoted as At = µ(St|θµ), where
St is the thermal state and θµ represents the weights of the
actor network and At represents the control action. The actor
network maps the thermal state to a speciﬁc control action
(i.e., the set-points of the HVAC system). The critic network
is denoted as Q(St, At|θQ), where At is the speciﬁed control
action by the actor network and θQ represents the weights of
the critic network. The action-value function, Q(St, At|θQ),
describes the expected reward by taking action At at state
St by following the policy. The actor network and the critic
network will be trained based on Temporal Difference (TD)
𝜃"
𝜃#
𝑄(𝑠,𝑎)
S+
𝐴+
Actor Network
Critic Network
Thermal State
Control Action
Fig. 5.
The network architecture of DDPG. The actor network speciﬁes a
control action given the current thermal state and the critic network outputs
an evaluation of the action generated by the actor network.
error. The control action speciﬁed by the actor network will be
used for selecting actions during the training. After training,
only the actor network is required for making control actions.
Algorithm 1 Training Thermal Control Policy with DDPG
1: Initialize critic network Q(St, At|θQ) and actor network
µ(St|θµ) with random weights θQ and θµ
2: Initialize target network Q′(St, At|θQ′) and actor network
µ′(St|θµ′) with θQ′ ←θQ and θµ′ ←θµ
3: Initialize replay buffer B
4: for episode = 0,1,...,M do
5:
Obtain the initial thermal state S0
6:
for t = 0,1,...,T do
7:
Obtain control action At according to Eq. (8)
8:
Update the set-points of the HVAC system according
to the control action, At
9:
Obtain new thermal state St+1 and calculate reward
Rt according to Eq. (5) at the end of time slot t
10:
Store (St, At, Rt, St+1) into replay buffer B
11:
Randomly sample N transitions from replay buffer B
12:
Calculate the estimated reward for each sampled
transition using Eq. (9)
13:
Update the critic network by minimizing the MSE
over the sampled minibatch and update the actor network
using the sampled policy gradient
14:
Update target network Q′ and µ′ using Eq. (10)
15:
end for
16: end for
The training for the DDPG network is performed by in-
teracting with the building thermal environment. The training
procedure is illustrated in Algorithm 1. At the beginning of
each time slot t, we ﬁrst obtain the current indoor and outdoor
thermal state St, and input the thermal state into the policy
network, which will output the control action. During the
training, we need to explore the state space so that the policy
will not converge to local optimal solutions. Therefore, we add
a random noise to the obtained control action for exploration,
At = µ(St|θµ) + N(t),
(8)
where N(t) is the exploration noise and At is the control
action added with exploration noise. In our work, we use
an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process [34] for generating the noise,

7
TRNSYS
PyTorch
MySQL
Sensor Data 
& Set-Points
Thermal 
State
Thermal 
State
Control 
Action
Control
Action
Building HVAC
Control Agent
Fig. 6.
The implementation of the thermal control simulation system. We
adopt TRNSYS for simulating the building thermal environment and the
HVAC system, MySQL for storing sensor data and the set-points of the HVAC
system, PyTorch for implementing the control agent.
N(t), for exploration. Then, the control action At will be
applied to the HVAC system. At the end of time slot t, we will
obtain the new thermal state St+1 and calculate the overall re-
ward Rt during the time slot. The transition (St, At, Rt, St+1)
will be stored in the replay buffer B for training the policy
network and the actor network. After that, we will randomly
sample N transitions from the replay buffer for training the
network. For each transition (Si, Ai, Ri, Si+1) ∈N, the
estimated reward is calculated as follow,
R
′
i = Ri + γQ′(Si+1, µ′(Si+1|θµ′)|θQ′).
(9)
The critic network will be updated by minimizing the MSE
between the estimated reward (R
′
i calculated from Eq. (9))
and the reward predicted by the critic network (Q(Si, Ai))
over the sampled minibatch, and the actor network will be
updated using the sampled policy gradient [17]. Then, the
target networks will be updated using the following equations,
θQ′ ←τθQ + (1 −τ)θQ′, θµ′ ←τθµ + (1 −τ)θµ′,
(10)
where τ is the discount factor for model update. After training,
only the actor network is applied for making control action.
The set-points of the HVAC system will be set as the control
actions speciﬁed by the actor network.
VI. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
In this section, we ﬁrst present the implementation of the
thermal control simulation system, and then introduce the ex-
periment settings and datasets, and compare the performances
of our proposed methods with the baseline methods.
A. Implementation of Thermal Control Simulation System
We implement the thermal control simulation system for
simulating the thermal dynamics in a building and the energy
consumption of the equipped HVAC system. The main com-
ponents of the thermal control simulation system is illustrated
in Fig. 6. We use TRNSYS [35] to simulate the HVAC system
and the thermal dynamics in the building. The thermal control
algorithm and the thermal comfort prediction algorithm are
implemented with PyTorch [36], which is an open-source
machine learning library for Python. We use MySQL database
[37] as an interface for the control interactions between the
thermal control agent and TRNSYS, because TRNSYS uses
the Matlab-based programming interface for interacting with
Fig. 7. The control diagram of building thermal simulation in TRNSYS.
other programs. The control diagram of the thermal simulation
in TRNSYS is illustrated in Fig. 7.
At the beginning of each time slot, the thermal state of the
building will be read from TRNSYS and written into MySQL.
The control agent will read the thermal state information
from MySQL and make a control action, which is the new
set-points of the HVAC system. The control action will be
written into MySQL, and TRNSYS will read the control action
from MySQL and update the set-points of the HVAC system.
TRNSYS will use the new set-points of the HVAC system
and environment information (e.g., outside temperature, solar
irradiation) to calculate the energy consumption of the HVAC
system and the indoor temperature and humidity. The control
agent can improve the control policy during the iterations.
B. Experiment Settings
We simulate the building environment of a laboratory which
is 307 M 2. It has 30 occupants and 40 computers with
monitors. The heat gain from the occupants and computers will
also inﬂuence the thermal conditions in the environment. The
air change rate is 0.67/hour. The weather dataset we use for our
simulation is SG-Singapore-Airp-486980, which is collected
from Singapore. We use 10,000 hours of the simulation data
in TRNSYS for training the models, and use 5,000 hours of
data for testing the performances. In our implementation of
DDPG, the actor network and the critic network have two
hidden layers, and each layer has 128 neurons. We use the tanh
activation function and batch normalization in each layer. We
adopt Adam for gradient-based optimization and the learning
rate is 0.001. The discount factor τ for model update is 0.001
and the batch size is 128. The duration of each time slot is
30 minutes and each episode consists of 48 time slots. The
default weight of energy cost is 0.05. The initial exploration
noise scale is 0.7 and the ﬁnal noise scale is 0.1, and the
exploration noise decreases linearly over 300 episodes to 0.1.
C. Thermal Comfort Prediction Performance
We adopt the ASHRAE RP-884 thermal comfort dataset
[38] for training our deep neural network model for thermal
comfort prediction. We use 11164 samples from the dataset

8
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Training Epoch
100
101
102
Prediction Error (MSE)
Best Training Performance is 1.1668 at epoch 356
Train
Test
Best
Fig. 8.
The convergence of the deep neural network method for thermal
comfort prediction. The prediction error can converge after several epochs of
training, and the best training performance is 1.1668.
Fig. 9.
The distribution of the prediction errors of the training and test
samples. The prediction errors of most of the training samples and test samples
are within the range [-1, 1].
for training and testing, and each sample is a human subject’s
evaluation of the thermal comfort under a certain thermal
condition. The samples are randomly divided, and 80% of
the samples are used for training and 20% of the samples
are used for testing. We compare the performance of our
deep neural network based thermal prediction method with
following baseline methods, namely, Linear Regression, Sup-
port Vector Machine (SVM), Gaussian Process Regression,
Ensemble Regression. We evaluate the prediction errors of
different methods using Mean Squared Error (MSE).
We ﬁrst illustrate the prediction error of our method during
different training epochs in Fig. 8. The training error can
converge after several epochs, and the best training perfor-
mance is 1.1668 at epoch 356. The prediction error distribution
of our method is illustrated in Fig. 9. From the test, we
can observe that for most of the training samples and test
samples, the prediction error is within the range [−1, 1]. The
performance comparison of different methods is illustrated in
Fig. 10. The MSE of our method is 1.1583, and the MSEs of
Linear Regression, Support Vector Machine (SVM), Gaussian
Process Regression, Ensemble Regression are 1.3555, 1.4026,
2.1486, 1.4374, 1.8145, respectively. It can be observed that
our method can achieve smaller prediction error compared
with the baseline methods. The results verify that our method
can achieve a higher prediction accuracy, therefore, it can be
adopted for predicting the occupants’ thermal comfort more
precisely compared with the other baseline methods.
1.1583
1.3555
1.4026
2.1486
1.4374
1.8145
Deep Neural Network
Linear Regression
SVM
Regression Tree
GPR
Ensemble
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Prediction Error (MSE)
Fig. 10. The comparison of prediction errors of different methods. Our method
can achieve smaller prediction error compared with the baseline methods.
0
100
200
300
400
Episode
-250
-200
-150
Reward
Average Reward
Episode Reward
Fig. 11. The convergence of the DDPG based thermal control algorithm. The
average reward improves during the training and converges.
D. Performance under Different Experiment Settings
In this subsection, we evaluate the performances of the
DDPG based thermal control method under different settings.
Convergence of the DDPG based thermal control. We illus-
trate the rewards of the DDPG based thermal control method
during different training episodes in Fig. 11. The DDPG
algorithm updates the policy during training, and we can
observe that the received reward during each episode improves
over the training stage and ﬁnally converges. As illustrated in
Fig. 11, the reward received during each episode (Episode
Reward) ﬂuctuates during the training, this is because the
exploration noise and the varying ambient thermal conditions
in each episode affect the energy consumption and thermal
comfort, leading to the ﬂuctuant rewards in each episode. The
average reward illustrated in Fig. 11 is the averaged reward
of the past 100 episodes and reﬂects the changing trend of
the reward. We can observe that the average reward improves
stably during the training and converges.
Performance under different thermal comfort thresholds.
With our method one can set different thermal comfort thresh-
olds according to the occupants’ thermal comfort require-
ments. We evaluate the energy consumption of the HVAC
system and the distribution of the thermal comfort values
under different thermal comfort thresholds. In Fig. 12 we
illustrate the average thermal comfort values under different
prescribed thermal comfort thresholds, and it can be observed
that the average actual thermal comfort value measured from

9
0.021881
  0.2683
 0.51287
 0.77305
  1.0272
  1.2657
  1.5374
0.0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1.0
1.25
1.5
Thermal Comfort Threshold
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
Average Thermal Comfort Value
Fig. 12. The average thermal comfort values under different thermal comfort
thresholds. The average thermal comfort values are close to the thresholds.
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
1.25
1.5
Thermal Comfort Threshold
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Number of Time Slots
Fig. 13. The distribution of the thermal comfort values under different thermal
comfort thresholds. The thermal comfort value of each time slot is closely
centered around the prescribed thermal comfort threshold.
the building is close to the prescribed thresholds. In Fig. 13
we illustrate the distribution of the thermal comfort value
of each time slot under different prescribed thermal comfort
thresholds. It can be veriﬁed that the thermal comfort values
in the indoor environment are closely centered around the
prescribed thresholds. Therefore, our method can control the
indoor thermal comfort precisely, given the occupants’ thermal
comfort requirements and appropriate settings.
In Fig. 14 we illustrate the average cooling load of the
HVAC system under different thermal comfort thresholds. It
will lead to less energy consumption of the HVAC system
if the thermal comfort threshold is set to a larger value.
Therefore, if the occupants do not have stringent thermal
comfort requirement, the thermal comfort threshold can be
set to a larger value for energy efﬁciency. We illustrate
the distribution of the cooling load of the HVAC system
under different thermal comfort thresholds in Fig. 15. We can
observe that the distribution of the cooling load move towards
small values when the thermal comfort threshold is larger.
Therefore, adjusting the thermal comfort threshold can control
the energy consumption of the HVAC system.
Performance under different weights of energy cost. We can
set different weights for the cost of the energy consumption
in the reward function (Eq. 5). If one puts more interests on
the occupants’ thermal comfort, the weight can be set smaller.
On the contrary, if one puts more interests on energy cost, the
60.3694
59.2669
 58.185
56.9688
55.7862
54.6492
 53.334
0.0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1.0
1.25
1.5
Thermal Comfort Threshold
50
52
54
56
58
60
62
Average Cooling Load (Kilowatt)
Fig. 14. The average cooling load of the HVAC system under different thermal
comfort thresholds. A larger thermal comfort threshold will result in less
energy consumption of the HVAC system.
45
50
55
60
65
70
0
200
400
Threshold = 0.0
45
50
55
60
65
70
0
200
400
Threshold = 0.25
45
50
55
60
65
70
0
200
400
Threshold = 0.5
45
50
55
60
65
70
0
200
400
Number of Time Slots
Threshold = 0.75
45
50
55
60
65
70
0
200
400
Threshold = 1.00
45
50
55
60
65
70
0
200
400
Threshold = 1.25
45
50
55
60
65
70
Cooling Load (Kilowatt)
0
200
400
Threshold = 1.5
Fig. 15.
The distribution of the cooling load of the HVAC system under
different thermal comfort thresholds. The distribution of cooling load moves
to smaller values under a larger thermal comfort threshold.
weight can be set larger. We evaluate the performances of our
method under different weights, and the results are shown in
Fig. 16 and 17. In Fig. 16 we illustrate the changes of the
thermal comfort value over time under different weights of
energy cost. The thermal comfort threshold in the experiment
is 0.0. We can observe that if the weight is small, the thermal
comfort value will be close to the threshold, and the changes
of the thermal comfort value will be small. This is because the
penalty for violating the thermal comfort threshold is larger
than the energy cost, due to the smaller weight of the energy
cost. Therefore, the thermal comfort value will be kept close
to the threshold for reducing the cost incurred by violating the
thermal comfort threshold. On the contrary, if the weight of the
energy cost is large, the thermal comfort value may ﬂuctuate
largely for reducing the energy consumption. We illustrate the
cooling load of the HVAC system over time under different

10
200
400
600
800
Time Slot
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
Thermal Comfort Value
0.05
0.075
Fig. 16. The thermal comfort values under different weights of energy cost
over time. If the weight of the energy cost is small, the thermal comfort value
will be close to the threshold, and the changes of the value will be smaller.
200
400
600
800
Time Slot
55
60
65
Average Cooling Load (Kilowatt)
0.05
0.075
Fig. 17. The time-varying cooling load of the HVAC system under different
weights of energy cost. It will incur less energy consumption if the weight of
energy cost is set as a larger value.
weights of energy cost in Fig. 17. It can be observed that it will
incur less energy consumption if the weight of the energy cost
is high. This is because it will incur more cost if the HVAC
system keeps maintaining the thermal comfort value within
the threshold, which will incur high energy consumption.
E. Performance Comparison with Different Methods
We compare the performance of our thermal control method
(DDPG) with the following baseline methods, namely, Q
Learning, SARSA, and DQN. In the baseline methods, the
temperature is discretized with the granularity of one centi-
degree and the humidity is discretized with the granularity
of 5 percentages. We illustrate the convergences of different
methods in Fig. 18. It can be observed that DDPG can achieve
a faster convergence speed compared with the other baseline
methods. This is because DDPG does not need the discretiza-
tion of the action space and has fewer number of outputs of
the network. Therefore, DDPG can learn for thermal control
more efﬁciently. Moreover, DDPG can also achieve a higher
reward compared with the baseline methods. This veriﬁes
that our method can achieve higher performances compared
with the baseline methods. This is because Q learning and
SARSA adopt the tabular methods for storing and updating
the state-action values without generalization, and DQN needs
0
100
200
300
400
Episode
-180
-160
-140
Reward
DDPG
DQN
Q Learning
SARSA
Fig. 18. The convergence of different algorithms. DDPG can converge faster
and achieve a higher reward than the other baseline methods.
DDPG
DQN
Q Learning
SARSA
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
Average Cooling Load (Kilowatt)
Fig. 19. The average cooling load of different methods. DDPG can achieve
less energy consumption compared with the baseline methods.
the discretization of the action space. We illustrate the average
cooling load of different methods in Fig. 19. It can be observed
that the average cooling load of our method is lower than
the other baseline methods, therefore, our method can achieve
higher energy-efﬁciency. We illustrate the average thermal
comfort values of different methods in Fig. 20. The average
thermal comfort value of DDPG is more close to the preset
threshold 0.5 and lower than the baseline methods. Therefore,
our method can control the set-points of the HVAC system
more precisely and it can achieve a higher degree of thermal
comfort compared with the other methods.
DDPG
DQN
Q Learning
SARSA
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
Thermal Comfort Value
Fig. 20. The average thermal comfort values of different methods. DDPG can
achieve higher thermal comfort (i.e., smaller thermal comfort value) compared
with baseline methods.

11
VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a learning based optimization
framework for optimizing the occupants’ thermal comfort and
the energy consumption of the HVAC systems in smart build-
ings. We ﬁrst designed a deep neural network based method
with Bayesian regularization for thermal comfort prediction,
and then we adopted DDPG for controlling the HVAC sys-
tem for optimizing the energy consumption whiling meeting
the occupants’ thermal comfort requirements. For verifying
the effectiveness of our proposed methods, we implement a
building thermal control simulation system using TRNSYS.
We evaluated the performances of our methods under different
settings. The results show that our method can achieve better
prediction performances for thermal comfort prediction, and
it can achieve higher thermal comfort and energy-efﬁciency
compared with the baseline methods. In future works, we may
consider using transfer learning to improve learning efﬁciency
via the transfer of knowledge from different HVAC systems.
