Cut-Based Graph Learning networks to Discover Compositional Structure of
Sequential Video Data
Kyoung-Woon On,1 Eun-Sol Kim,2 Yu-Jung Heo,1 Byoung-Tak Zhang1
1Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea
2Kakao Brain, Seongnam, South Korea

Abstract
Conventional sequential learning methods such as Recurrent
Neural Networks (RNNs) focus on interactions between con-
secutive inputs, i.e. ﬁrst-order Markovian dependency. How-
ever, most of sequential data, as seen with videos, have com-
plex dependency structures that imply variable-length seman-
tic ﬂows and their compositions, and those are hard to be
captured by conventional methods. Here, we propose Cut-
Based Graph Learning Networks (CB-GLNs) for learning
video data by discovering these complex structures of the
video. The CB-GLNs represent video data as a graph, with
nodes and edges corresponding to frames of the video and
their dependencies respectively. The CB-GLNs ﬁnd composi-
tional dependencies of the data in multilevel graph forms via
a parameterized kernel with graph-cut and a message pass-
ing framework. We evaluate the proposed method on the two
different tasks for video understanding: Video theme classiﬁ-
cation (Youtube-8M dataset (Abu-El-Haija et al. 2016)) and
Video Question and Answering (TVQA dataset (Lei et al.
2018)). The experimental results show that our model efﬁ-
ciently learns the semantic compositional structure of video
data. Furthermore, our model achieves the highest perfor-
mance in comparison to other baseline methods.
Introduction
One of the fundamental problems in learning sequential
video data is to ﬁnd semantic structures underlying se-
quences for better representation learning. As most seman-
tic ﬂows cannot be modeled with simple temporal inductive
biases, i.e., Markov dependencies, it is crucial to ﬁnd the
complex temporal semantic structures from long sequences
to understand the video data. We believe there are two ingre-
dients to solving this problem: segmenting the whole long-
length sequence into (multiple) semantic units and ﬁnding
their compositional structures. In this work, we propose a
new graph-based method which can discover composite se-
mantic ﬂows in video inputs and utilize them for represen-
tation learning of videos. The compositional semantic struc-
tures are deﬁned as multilevel graph forms, which make it
possible to ﬁnd long-length dependencies and their hierar-
chical relationships effectively.
Copyright c⃝2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
In terms of modeling sequential semantic ﬂows, the re-
lated work can be summarized with the following three cat-
egories: neural networks, clustering, and self-attention based
methods.
In terms of neural network architectures, many prob-
lems involving sequential inputs are resolved by using Re-
current Neural Networks (RNNs) as the networks natu-
rally take sequential inputs frame by frame. However, as
RNN-based methods take frames in (incremental) order, the
parameters of methods are trained to capture patterns in
transition between successive frames. This makes it hard
to ﬁnd long-term dependencies through overall frames.
To consider the long-term dependency, Long Short-Term
Memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) and
Gated Recurrent Units (GRU) (Chung et al. 2014) intro-
duced switches to the RNN structures and Hierarchical
RNN (Chung, Ahn, and Bengio 2018) stacked multiple
layers to ﬁnd hierarchical structures. Even though those
methods ignore noisy (unnecessary) frames and maintain
the semantic ﬂow through the whole sequence, it is still
hard for RNN variants to retain multiple semantic ﬂows
and to learn their hierarchical and compositional relation-
ships. Interestingly, Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
based methods, such as ByteNet (Kalchbrenner et al. 2016),
ConvS2S (Gehring et al. 2017) and WaveNet (Oord et al.
2016), applied 1D convolution operator to temporal se-
quences for modeling dependencies of adjacent frames and
their compositions. However these operators hardly captured
variable-length dependencies which play a signiﬁcant role as
semantic units.
Recent researches revisited the traditional idea of clus-
tering successive frames into representative clusters. Deep
Bag of Frame (DBoF) (Abu-El-Haija et al. 2016) randomly
selects k frames from whole sequences as the representa-
tives. NetVLAD (Arandjelovic et al. 2016) divides all fea-
tures into k clusters and calculates residuals, which are dif-
ference vectors between the feature vectors and their corre-
sponding cluster center, as the new representations for each
feature vector. Even though the main idea of this type of re-
search is quite simple, it helps to understand the semantics
of long sequences by focusing on a small number of repre-
sentative frames. However, it is hard to consider the complex
arXiv:2001.07613v1  [cs.LG]  17 Jan 2020

temporal relationships.
Along with enormous interest of attention mechanism,
a number of signiﬁcant researches (Vaswani et al. 2017;
Devlin et al. 2019) have been aimed to understanding the
long (sequential) inputs relying purely on self-attention
mechanisms. With real-world applications on natural lan-
guage understanding, such as question and answering (QA)
and paragraph detection, those methods focus on meaningful
words (or phrases, sentences) among the long reading pas-
sages and ignore irrelevant words to the passage by stacking
multiple attention layers. These methods consist of a large
number of layers with a huge number of parameters and re-
quire a huge amount of training dataset.
In this paper, we propose a method to learn representa-
tions of video by discovering the compositional structure in
multilevel graph forms. A single video data input is repre-
sented as a graph, where nodes and edges represent frames
of the video and relationships between all node pairs. From
the input representations, the Cut-Based Graph Learning
Networks (CB-GLNs) ﬁnd temporal structures in the graphs
with two key operations: temporally constrained normalized
graph-cut and message-passing on the graph. A set of se-
mantic units is found by parameterized kernel and cutting
operations, then representations of the inputs are updated by
message passing operations.
We thoroughly evaluate our method on the large-scale
video theme classiﬁcation task, YouTube-8M dataset (Abu-
El-Haija et al. 2016). As a qualitative analysis of the pro-
posed model, we visualize compositional semantic depen-
dencies of sequential input frames, which are automatically
constructed. Quantitatively, the proposed method shows a
signiﬁcant improvement on classiﬁcation performance over
the baseline models. Furthermore, as an extension of our
work, we apply the CB-GLNs to another video under-
standing task, Video Question and Answering on TVQA
dataset (Lei et al. 2018). With this experiment, we show how
the CB-GLNs can ﬁt into other essential components such
as attention mechanism, and demonstrate the effectiveness
of the structural representations of our model.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. As
preliminaries, basic concepts of Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) and graph-cut mechanisms are introduced. Next, the
problem statement of this paper is described to make further
discussion clear. After that, the proposed Cut-Based Graph
Learning Networks (CB-GLNs) are suggested in detail and
the experimental results with the real datasets, YouTube-8M
and TVQA are presented.
Preliminaries
In this section, basic concepts related to graphs are summa-
rized. First, mathematical deﬁnitions and notations of graphs
are clariﬁed. Second, the normalized graph-cut method
is described. Lastly, variants of Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) are introduced.
Graph notations
A graph G is denoted as a pair (V, E) with V = {v1, ..., vN}
the set of nodes (vertices), and E ∈V × V the set of edges.
Each node vi is associated with a feature vector xi ∈Rm.
To make notation more compact, the feature matrix of graph
G is denoted as X = [x1, x2, ..., xN]⊤∈RN×m. Also, a
graph has an N-by-N weighted adjacency matrix A where
Ai,j represents the weight of the edge between vi and vj.
Normalized graph-cut algorithm
A graph G = (V, E) can be partitioned into two disjoint sets
V1, V2 by removing edges connecting the two parts1. The
partitioning cost is deﬁned as the total weight of the edges
that have been removed. In addition to the cut cost, the nor-
malized graph-cut method (Shi and Malik 2000) considers
the total edge weight connecting a partition with the entire
graph (the degree of the partition) to avoid the trivial solu-
tions which can make extremely imbalanced clusters. The
objective of the normalized graph-cut can be formally de-
scribed as follows.
Ncut(V1, V2) = cut(V1, V2)
assoc(V1, V ) + cut(V1, V2)
assoc(V2, V )
(1)
with
cut(V1, V2) =
X
v1∈V1,v2∈V2
w(v1, v2)
(2)
assoc(V1, V ) =
X
v1∈V1,v∈V
w(v1, v)
(3)
where w(v1, v2) is an edge weight value between node v1
and v2. It is formulated as a discrete optimization problem
and usually relaxed to continuous, which can be solved by
eigenvalue problem with the O(n2) time complexity. By ap-
plying the cut method recursively, an input graph is divided
into ﬁne-grained sub-graphs.
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs)
Since the ﬁrst proposed by (Gori, Monfardini, and Scarselli
2005), interest in combining deep learning and structured
approaches has steadily increased. This has led to various
graph-based neural networks being proposed over the years.
Based on spectral graph theory (Chung and Graham
1997), spectral approaches which convert the graph to the
spectral domain and apply the convolution kernel of the
graph were proposed (Bruna et al. 2013; Henaff, Bruna, and
LeCun 2015; Kipf and Welling 2016). (Gilmer et al. 2017)
suggested the message passing neural networks (MPNNs),
which encompass a number of previous neural models for
graphs under a differentiable message passing interpretation.
In detail, the MPNNs have two phases, a message pass-
ing phase and a update phase. In the message passing phase,
the message for vertex v in l-th layer is deﬁned in terms of
message function M l:
ml
v =
X
w∈N(v)
M l(hv, hw)
(4)
1V1 ∪V2 = V and V1 ∩V2 = ∅

Figure 1: (a): The overall architecture of the Cut-Based Graph Learning Networks (CB-GLNs) for a video representation
learning task. (b), (c): sophisticated illustrations of Structure Learning Module and Representation Learning Module.
where in the sum, N(v) denotes the neighbors of v in a graph
G. With the message ml
v, the representations of vertex v in
(l + 1)-th layer are obtained via the update function U l.
hl+1
v
= U l(hl
v, ml
v)
(5)
The message functions M l and the update functions U l are
differentiable so that the MPNNs can be trained in an end-
to-end fashion. As extensions, there are some attempts to
have been made to improve message passing by putting
a gating or attention mechanism into a message function,
which can have computational beneﬁts (Monti et al. 2017;
Duan et al. 2017; Hoshen 2017; Velikovi et al. 2018;
Satorras and Estrach 2018; van Steenkiste et al. 2018).
We further note other previous research for learn-
ing a structure of a graph. Neural Relational Inference
(NRI) (Kipf et al. 2018) used a Variational Autoencoder
(VAE) (Kingma and Welling 2013) to infer the connectiv-
ity between nodes with latent variables. Other generative
models based approaches also have been well studied (Bo-
jchevski et al. 2018; De Cao and Kipf 2018; Simonovsky and
Komodakis 2018). However, those suffer from availability
of structural information in training data or have complex
training procedures. To our knowledge, it is the ﬁrst time
to suggest graph-cut based neural networks to discover the
inherent structure of videos without supervision of the struc-
tural information.
Problem Statement
The problem to be tackled in this work can be clearly stated
with the notations in the previous section as below.
We consider videos as inputs, and a video is represented
as a graph G. The graph G has nodes corresponding to each
frame respectively in the video with feature vectors and
the dependencies between two nodes are represented with
weight values of corresponding edges.
Suppose that video data X has N successive frames and
each frame has an m-dimensional feature vector x ∈Rm.
Each frame corresponds to a node v ∈V of graph G, and the
dependency between two frames vi, vj is represented by a
weighted edge eij ∈E. From G = (V, E), the dependency
structures among video frames are deﬁned as the weighted
adjacency matrix A, where Aij = eij. With aforementioned
notations and deﬁnitions, we can now formally deﬁne the
problem of video representations learning as follows:
Given the video frames representations X ∈RN×m, we
seek to discover a weighted adjacency matrix A ∈RN×N
which represents dependency among frames.
f : X →A
(6)
With X and A, ﬁnal representations for video h ∈Rl are
acquired by g.
g : {X, A} →h
(7)
The obtained video representations h can be used for various
tasks of video understanding. In this paper, the video theme
classiﬁcation and the video question and answering tasks are
mainly considered.
Cut-Based Graph Learning Networks
The Cut-Based Graph Learning Networks (CB-GLNs) con-
sist of two sub-modules: a structure learning module with
the graph-cuts and a representation learning module with
message-passing operations. The key idea of the method
is to ﬁnd inherent semantic structures using the graph-cuts
and to learn feature vectors of the video with the message-
passing algorithm on the semantic structures. Stacking these
modules leads to the subsequent discovery of compositional
structures in the form of a multilevel graph. Figure 1(a) il-
lustrates the whole structure of the CB-GLNs. In the next
sections, operations of each of these modules are described
in detail.
Structure Learning Module
In the structure learning module, the dependencies between
frames ˆA are estimated via parameterized kernels and the
temporally constrained graph-cut algorithm.
As the ﬁrst step, the initial temporal dependencies over all
frames are constructed via the parameterized kernel K:
ˆAij = K(xi, xj) = ReLU(f(xi)⊤f(xj))
(8)

where f(x) is a single-layer feed-forward network without
non-linear activation.
Then, as the second step, the meaningful dependency
structure among all pairwise relationships is reﬁned by ap-
plying normalized graph-cut algorithm to the ˆA. The objec-
tive of the normalized graph-cut for CB-GLNs is:
Ncut(V1, V2)=
P
vi∈V1,vj∈V2 ˆAij
P
vi∈V1 ˆAi·
+
P
vi∈V1,vj∈V2 ˆAij
P
vj∈V2 ˆAj·
(9)
To reduce the complexity of the equation (9) and to keep
the inherent characteristics of the video data, an additional
constraint is added to the graph-cut algorithm. As the video
data is composed of time continuous sub-sequences, no two
partitioned sub-graphs have an overlap in physical time. This
characteristic is implemented by applying the temporal con-
straint (Rasheed and Shah 2005; Sakarya and Telatar 2008)
as follows.
(i < j or i > j) for all vi ∈V1, vj ∈V2
(10)
Thus, a cut can only be made along the temporal axis and
complexity of the graph partitioning is reduced to linear time
while keeping the characteristics of the video data. Also, as
the gradients can ﬂow through the surviving edges, it is end-
to-end trainable.
The graph-cut can be recursively applied to the ˆA, so
K partitioned sub-graphs can be obtained. The number of
cut operations is determined by the length of the video N,
⌊log2
√
N⌋, and we also add the constraint that sub-cluster
should not be partitioned if it is no longer than pre-speciﬁed
length. Figure 1(b) depicts the detailed operations of the
structure learning module.
Representation Learning Module
After estimating the weighted adjacency matrix ˆA, the rep-
resentation learning module updates the representations of
each frame via a differentiable message-passing frame-
work (Gilmer et al. 2017). For the message function FM, we
simply use the weighted sum of adjacent nodes’ representa-
tions after linear transformation similar to (Kipf and Welling
2016):
M = FM(X, ˆAcut) = D−1 ˆAcutXWM
(11)
where D is a degree matrix of the graph and ˆAcut is an adja-
cency matrix after cut operations.
For the update function FU, we integrate the message
with node representations by using low-rank bilinear pool-
ing B (Kim et al. 2017) followed by a position-wise fully
connected network.
H = FU(X, M) = f(B(X, M))
(12)
where f is a single-layer position-wise fully connected net-
work. We also employ a residual connection (He et al. 2016)
around each layer followed by layer normalization (Ba,
Kiros, and Hinton 2016).
Once the representations of all frames are updated, a pool-
ing operation for each partitioned sub-graph is applied. Then
we can obtain higher level representations Z ∈RK×m,
where K is the number of partitioned sub-graphs (Figure
1(c)). If we have additional information such as query (e.g.
a question feature vector in video QA setting), we can pool
the sub-graph with attentive pooling similar to (Santos et al.
2016).
In the same way, Z is fed into the new structure learning
module and we can get the video-level representation h ∈
Rm.
Experiments
In this section, the experimental results on the two differ-
ent video datasets, YouTube-8M (video theme classiﬁcation)
and TVQA (video question and answering), are provided.
Video Theme Classiﬁcation Task on YouTube-8M
Data speciﬁcation
YouTube-8M (Abu-El-Haija et al.
2016) is a benchmark dataset for video understanding, where
the main task is to determine the key topical themes of a
video. The dataset consists of 6.1M video clips collected
from YouTube. Each video is labeled with one or multiple
tags referring to the main topic of the video. Each video is
encoded at 1 frame-per-second up to the ﬁrst 300 seconds.
The volume of video data is too large to be treated in it’s
raw form. As such the input is pre-processed with pretrained
models by the author of the dataset.
Global Average Precision (GAP) is used for the evalua-
tion metric for the multi-label classiﬁcation task as used in
the YouTube-8M competition. For each video, 20 labels are
predicted with conﬁdence scores, then the GAP score com-
putes the average precision and recall across all of the pre-
dictions and all the videos.
Model setup
The frame-level visual and audio features
are extracted by inception-v3 network (Szegedy et al. 2016)
trained on imagenet and VGG-inspired architecture (Her-
shey et al. 2017) trained for audio classiﬁcation. These
features construct an input feature matrix X of video se-
quences, then X is fed into a sequence model to extract ﬁ-
nal video representation h. Including our model, all baseline
sequence models are composed of two layers and average
pooling is used for ﬁnal representations. With the represen-
tation h, a simple logistic regression is used as a ﬁnal classi-
ﬁer.
Quantitative results
Firstly, we evaluate the classiﬁcation
performance of the proposed model against four types of
representative sequential models described in the Introduc-
tion section and two state-of-the-art models (Lin, Xiao, and
Fan 2018; Mao et al. 2018) previously reported.
The results with GAP score are summarized in Table 1.
The proposed model considerably outperforms all the com-
parative models. The second best performing model is the
self-attention based approach, followed by RNNs, CNNs
and Clustering based approaches. In the “Qualitative results”
Section, automatically constructed compositional structures
are discussed for better understanding of the model.

Table 1: Comparison on classiﬁcation accuracy with the
GAP measure on validation dataset. Logistic regression is
as a classiﬁer for all of the presented methods.
Frame-level model
GAP
Average pooling
0.7824
DeepBoF (4096 clusters)
0.8079
NetVLAD (256 clusters)
0.8396
1D CNN (2 layers, kernel size 3)
0.8254
1D CNN (2 layers, kernel size 5)
0.8245
1D CNN (2 layers, kernel size 7)
0.8247
LSTM (2 layers)
0.8446
GRU (2 layers)
0.8160
BiLSTM (2 layers)
0.8410
BiGRU (2 layers)
0.8079
Self-Attention (4 heads, 2 layers)
0.8553
NeXtVLAD (Lin, Xiao, and Fan 2018)
0.8499
DCGN (Mao et al. 2018)
0.8450
CB-GLNs (2 layers)
0.8597
Table 2: An ablation study of Cut-Based Graph Learning
Networks.
Ablation model
GAP
(a) layer normalization
0.8486
(b) residual connection
0.8447
(c) residual connection with layer normalization
0.8370
(d) graph-cut after learning representations
0.8576
CB-GLNs
0.8597
For ablation studies, we selected three critical character-
istics of CB-GLNs for in-depth analysis: layer normaliza-
tion, residual connection and graph-cut after learning rep-
resentations. The GAP scores on the validation set for each
ablation experiments are shown in Table 2. As can be seen
from (a) to (c) in the Table 2, the residual connections fol-
lowed by layer normalization are crucial for the represen-
tation learning module. Also, to see the effect of sparsen-
ing an adjacency matrix via the graph-cut, reversed order of
representation learning and graph-cut is also conducted ((d)
in Table 2). By doing so, the representations of each node
are updated with ˆA obtained only using kernel K (in Equa-
tion 8) and graph-cut algorithm is used just for sub-graph
pooling. Thus, the model has to learn representations with
dense and noisy connections, degrading the performance of
the model. From this result, we can argue that the temporally
constrained graph-cut effectively reduce the noisy connec-
tions in the graph.
Qualitative results: Learning compositional dependency
structure
In this section, we demonstrate compositional
learning capability of CB-GLNs by analyzing constructed
multilevel graphs. To make further discussion clear, four
terms are used to describe the compositional semantic ﬂows:
semantic units, scenes, sequences and a video for each level.
In Figure 2, a real example with the usage of video titled
“Rice Pudding2” is described to show the results.
In Figure 2(a), the learned adjacency matrices in each
layer are visualized in gray-scale images: the two leftmost
images are from the 1st layer and the two rightmost images
are from the 2nd layer. To denote multilevel semantic ﬂows,
four color-coded rectangles (blue, orange, red and green) are
marked and those colors are consistent with Figure 2(b).
Along with diagonal elements of the adjacency matrix in
the 1st layer (Figure 2(a)-1), a set of semantic units are de-
tected corresponding to bright blocks (blue). Interestingly,
we found that each semantic unit contains highly correlated
frames. For example, the #1 and #2 are each shots introduc-
ing the YouTube cooking channel and how to make rice pud-
ding, respectively. The #4 and #5 are shots showing a recipe
of rice pudding and explaining about the various kinds of
rice pudding. The #6 and #7 are shots putting ingredients
into boiling water in the pot and bringing milk to boil along
with other ingredients. At the end of the video clip, #11 is
a shot decorating cooked rice pudding and #12 is an outro
shot that invites the viewers to subscribe.
These semantic units compose variable-length scenes of
the video, and each scene corresponds to a sub-graph ob-
tained via graph-cut (Figure 2(a)-2.). For example, #13 is
a scene introducing this cooking channel and rice pudding.
Also, #15 is a scene of making rice pudding with detailed
step by step instructions, and #16 is an outro scene wrapping
up with cooked rice pudding. The 1st-layer of the model up-
dates representations of frame-level nodes with these depen-
dency structures, then aggregates frame-level nodes to form
scene-level nodes (Layer 1 in the Figure 2(b)).
In Figure 2(a)-3 and (a)-4, the sequence-level semantic
dependencies (red) are shown. #17 denotes a sequence of
making rice pudding from beginning to end, which contains
much of the information for identifying the topical theme of
this video. Finally, the representations of scenes are updated
and aggregated to get representations of the whole video
(Layer 2 in the Figure2(b)).
Video Question & Answering Task on TVQA
Data speciﬁcation
TVQA (Lei et al. 2018) is a video
question and answering dataset on TV show domain. It con-
sists of total 152.5k question-answer pairs on six TV shows:
The Big Bang Theory, How I Met Your Mother, Friends,
Greys Anatomy, House and Castle. Also, it contains 21.8k
short clips of 60-90 seconds segmented from the original
TV show for question-answering. The provided inputs are
3 fps image frames, subtitles and multiple choice questions
with 5 candidate answers for each question, for which only
one is correct.
The questions in the dataset are localized to a speciﬁc sub-
part in the video clips by restricting questions to a composi-
tion of two parts, e.g., ”Where was Sheldon sitting / before
he spilled the milk?”. Models should answer questions us-
ing both visual information and associated subtitles from the
video.
Model setup
The input visual features were extracted by
the pooled 2048D feature of the last block of ResNet101 (He
2https://youtu.be/cD3enxnS-JY

Figure 2: An example of the constructed temporal dependency structures for a real input video in YouTube-8M, titled “Rice
Pudding” (https://youtu.be/cD3enxnS-JY) is visualized. The topical themes (true labels) of this video are {Food, Recipe, Cook-
ing, Dish, Dessert, Cake, baking, Cream, Milk, Pudding and Risotto}. (a): Learned adjacency matrices in the layer 1 and 2 are
visualized. The strength of connections are encoded in a gray-scale where 1 is white and 0 is black. (a)-1: 12 bright blocks in
layer 1 are detected (blue rectangles), each block (highly connected frames) represents a semantic unit. (a)-2: Sub-graphs of
the input are denoted by orange rectangles. It shows that semantically meaningful scenes are found by temporally constrained
graph-cut. (a)-3 and (a)-4: learned high-level dependency structures in layer 2 are revealed with red and green rectangles. (b):
The whole composite temporal dependencies are presented.
et al. 2016) trained on imagenet and the text-based fea-
tures for subtitles, questions and answers were extracted by
GloVe (Pennington, Socher, and Manning 2014). The vi-
sual features and subtitle features are manually aligned with
time-stamp and answer features also aligned with visual and
subtitle features by attention mechanism to construct input
X. Then the X is fed into the CB-GLNs to extract ﬁnal rep-
resentations h. Different from the YouTube-8M dataset case,
we use a question feature vector as a query of attentive pool-
ing, so that the representations of the sequence are pooled
via weighted sum with the attention values.
Qualitative results: Attention hierarchy with learned
compositional structure
In this section, we show how
the attention mechanism can be ﬁt into the CB-GLNs to
learn representations more effectively. Basically, the atten-
tion mechanism places more weight on important parts to
aggregate values, given a query. By virtue of the composi-
tionality, the attention mechanism can be naturally applied
to the CB-GLNs in a hierarchical fashion. Figure 3 presents
learned attention hierarchy in a real video clip of “Friends”.
In this example, The question is “What did Chandler say
he was going to get, when he got up?” and the answer for
the question is that “Chandler said he was going to get
cigarettes.”.
In Figure 3(a), we can see that scenes with high attention
values (Scene 5 and Scene 6 (coded by a red rectangle)) in
layer 2 are aligned well with localized video portions rele-
vant to a given question. Scene 4, where “Chandler is search-
ing his pocket to ﬁnd cigarettes while sitting down”, is also
in the localized section. Therefore, we can say our model
ﬁnds a sensitive portion of the video relevant to the given
question. In layer 1 (Figure 3(a)), the model gives a keener
attention to the frame-level within each scenes (coded by or-
ange rectangles), such as a moment where Chandler gets up
or Chandler yells ‘I gotta smoke‘.
Because the attention operation for each frame is con-
ducted hierarchically, we can calculate cumulative atten-
tion values by multiplying them in layer 1 and layer 2.
Figure 3(b) shows the cumulative attention values for each
frame. The most important frame in a viewpoint of the
model is the ”getting up moment” frame because the model
should answer the question by identifying the meaning of
“when he got up” in the question.
In Figure 3(c), the learned adjacency matrices in each
layer are visualized. Same color-coded rectangles with (a)
are used for cut scenes (orange rectangles in layer 1) and
scenes with high attention values (a red rectangle in layer
2). We also coded red rectangle in layer 1, which is cor-
responding to scenes with high attention values in layer 2.
Even though scene 5 and scene 6 in the frame level (layer
1) are considerably short when compared to the whole video
sequences, the CB-GLNs can ﬁnd important moments and
aggregate them in an effective way.

Figure 3: An example of the learned attention hierarchy for a real video clip of “Friends” in TVQA is visualized. The question
and answer for this clip are “What did Chandler say he was going to get, when he got up?” and “Chandler said he was going to
get cigarettes.” each. We dropped the Scene 1 and Scene 2 parts in (a) and (b), because the attention values in these scenes are
nearly identical, making them non-informative. (a): Attention maps for each layer given query. the orange rectangles in layer
1 denote the cut scenes discovered by CB-GLNs and the red rectangle in layer 2 highlights scenes with high attention values
given a question. (b): Cumulative attentions to the frame-level are visualized by multiplying attention values in layer 1 & 2. (c):
Visualization of the learned adjacency matrices in layer 1 & 2. The orange and red rectangles are consistent with (a).
Conclusion
In this paper, we proposed Cut-Based Graph Learning Net-
works (CB-GLNs) which learn not only the representations
of video sequences, but also composite dependency struc-
tures within the sequence. To explore characteristics of CB-
GLNs, various experiments are conducted on a real large-
scale video dataset YouTube-8M and TVQA. The results
show that the proposed model efﬁciently learns the repre-
sentations of sequential video data by discovering inherent
dependency structure of itself.
