ECAI 2016 - International Conference – 8th Edition  
Electronics, Computers and Artificial Intelligence  
30 June -02 July, 2016, Ploiesti, ROMÂNIA 
Considerations regarding security issues 
impact on systems availability 
Emil Pricop, Sanda Florentina Mihalache, Nicolae Paraschiv 
Automatic Control, Computers & Electronics Department 
Petroleum-Gas University of Ploiesti 
Ploiesti, Romania 

 
Jaouhar Fattahi 
Dept. of Computer Science & Software Engineering 
Université Laval 
Québec, Canada 

Florin Zamfir 
Automatic Control, Computers & Electronics Dept. 
Petroleum-Gas University of Ploiesti 
Ploiesti, Romania 

Abstract – Control systems behavior can be analyzed 
taking into account a large number of parameters: 
performances, reliability, availability, security. Each 
control system presents various security vulnerabilities 
that affect in lower or higher measure its functioning. In 
this paper the authors present a method to assess the 
impact of security issues on the systems availability. A 
fuzzy model for estimating the availability of the system 
based on the security level and achieved availability 
coefficient (depending on MTBF and MTR) is developed 
and described. The results of the fuzzy inference system 
(FIS) are presented in the last section of the paper. 
Keywords- availability, security, availability coefficient 
security level, security impact 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Control systems are key components of various 
critical infrastructures such as energy production and 
distribution 
facilities, 
petrochemical 
plants, 
pharmaceutical plants or weapons factories [1].  
Without any doubt, the control systems represent 
elements that are responsible for the good functioning 
of the critical infrastructures.  
There are many facets that should be taken into 
account when analyzing the control systems existing 
in critical infrastructures. The most significant facets, 
defined along with others in [2], are: technical 
performance, reliability, availability, maintainability, 
safety and security. These systems attributes are not 
independent, each of them affecting the others. 
The technical performances can be evaluated 
according to the concepts from systems theory and 
indicated by the overshoot and the transient time 
values. 
Reliability is defined as the system’s ability to 
perform its functions on a given time interval. In the 
current practice reliability is regarded as an integrating 
concept 
that 
includes 
both 
availability 
and 
maintainability. 
Availability, the main parameter analyzed in this 
paper, is defined in strict relation to reliability. 
Availability can be defined as the ability of the system 
to perform its functions on at a given time. 
Maintainability is a parameter that intervene in the 
estimation of achieved availability [3], showing the 
amount of effort required to restore an equipment or 
system to working state in case of a fault. 
Safety, as stated in [4] consist in the ability of the 
system to not harm people when any kind of error or 
fault occur in system functioning. 
On the other side security represent the system 
ability to not produce any type of loss or destruction 
when a deliberate malicious act occurs. The two 
concepts safety and security should be clearly 
separated and analyzed according to their differences. 
Safety and security are critical aspects impacting 
the system functioning. A system having a good safety 
and reliability levels, but lacking security will produce 
surely economic losses for its owner in care of a 
cyber-attack or related incident.  On the other side a 
security hardened system with very little reliability 
will not be useable. The main challenge for academia 
and industry is to find the equilibrium between 
functionality, security and reliability, in other words to 
assure a good security level without affecting the 
system efficiency. 
It is obvious that security incidents will affect 
negatively the system availability by interrupting its 
correct functioning. The basic security concepts 
associated with control systems will be presented in 
the second section of this paper. In the third section of 
the paper we will present the state of the art in 
estimating the system availability. The last part of the 
paper is dedicated to designing and implementing a 
fuzzy inference system for assessing the security 
incidents impact on system availability. The authors 
discuss the obtained results and define a new method 
to define the availability coefficient, starting from 
achieved availability, based on MTBF – mean time 

E. Pricop, S. Mihalache, N. Paraschiv, J. Fattahi, F. Zamfir 
 
2 
between failures – and MTR – mean time of 
reparation, and taking into account the systems’ 
security level. 
II. 
CONTROL SYSTEMS SECURITY BASICS 
 
Control systems are nowadays key components of 
industrial infrastructures. Their main role is to 
implement algorithms and methods required to 
monitor and keep at a desired level one or more 
process parameters without human intervention.  
The simplest control system comprises at least one 
controller, having processing power, one sensor and 
one actuator.  All those elements transfer information 
between them and with the external environment.    
Starting from the simplest control systems, there 
were developed more complex systems integrating 
multiple controllers in a hierarchized approach. It is 
obvious communication between controllers is critical 
in this situation. 
The recent developments in control systems allow 
connecting them to the economic and production 
planning facilities such as ERP or CRM applications. 
The economic objectives generated at a higher level 
are transposed in technical objectives that can be 
handled by control systems. Also these systems can be 
remotely operated and are connected in various 
industrial networks or even to the Internet, becoming 
targets for attackers. 
Taking into account these considerations it is 
obvious that control systems are threatened by various 
attackers that can exploit their vulnerabilities. A secure 
system lacks the vulnerability to sabotage, tampering, 
viruses, worms or informatics attacks [1], [5]. 
In order to evaluate the security level of a system a 
threat – vulnerability analysis should be completed. It 
allows identifying the threats – attackers – and 
vulnerabilities – security breaches that can be 
exploited by the attacker in order to gain access to the 
system or to interrupt its functioning. 
The main vulnerabilities associated to control 
systems are presented in [1]. Some attacker profiles 
are described in [5].  
The main security concern related to control 
systems is not data confidentiality, but it is data and 
system availability. This approach is different from 
classical 
information 
security 
where 
data 
confidentiality and integrity were critical issues and it 
is justified by the impact of an interruption in control 
system functioning. For example, a control system that 
regulate the temperature in a distillation column from 
a refinery is critical for plant functioning; its failure 
will lead in a costly controlled installation shutdown 
procedure or in a worse scenario to an accident with 
high impact on people and environment. 
The control systems availability is clearly affected 
by the security incidents and it should be related to the 
systems’ security level. In the following section, a 
state of the art in systems availability estimation taking 
into account security is presented.   
III. 
STATE OF THE ART 
 
 In reference [6] is defined the availability 
coefficient, named in this paper achieved availability, 
KD by the following relation: 
100
D
MTBF
K
MTBF
MTR
=
×
+
 (1) 
where MTBF represent Mean Time Between Failures 
and MTR is the Mean Time Reparation.  The security 
issues / attacks that produce interruption in system 
functioning are not quantified by (1).  This relation 
contain only terms related to faults that occur normally 
during the operation period of any equipment. 
It is obvious that relation (1) does not show 
explicitly the impact of security issues on systems 
availability. A cyber-attack may interrupt the system 
functioning, interruption that is not quantified nor by 
MTBF or MTR. Much more, other attack types such 
as information hi-jacking will not interrupt the system 
functioning by shutting it down, but will not permit the 
system to attain the desired state, leading to incorrect 
functioning which is equivalent to a decrease in the 
real availability of the system. 
In following paragraphs, the authors present their 
own literature study focused on estimating systems 
availability when security incidents happen. From our 
study we can conclude that the researches focus on 
wireless sensor networks – WSN node availably. 
Oreku [7] proposes in his work a mathematical 
approach based on probability for calculating the 
reliability/availability coefficients associated to WSNs 
(with different architectures). The study concludes that 
reliability for security is dependent on three elements: 
connectivity, 
network 
parameters 
and 
Data 
aggregation. 
Bandirmali and Erturk [8] create a WSN link layer 
security protocol and emphasize the role of reliability, 
usability and performance as constraints in its design. 
Reliability is a critical parameter for wireless sensor 
network based applications where data integrity and 
confidentiality should be assured. The study does not 
provide a mathematical approach for calculating the 
reliability coefficients.  
An interesting technique for evaluating the 
reliability of WSN with star, cluster and mesh type 
topologies is proposed in Distefano [9]. It is proposed 
a method to assess the system reliability through the 
dynamic 
reliability 
block 
diagrams 
modelling 
approach. The modelling approach has two parts: the 
dynamic approach of each node, taking into account 
the power consumption in standby, interference 
existence and the static part that focus on WSN 
topology. 
Mahmoud et al. [10] analyze reliability in various 
topologies and protocols for wireless sensor networks. 
The main focus of their research is proposing a 3D 
reference model. The authors do not focus specifically 
on security impact on system availability, but they 
analyze 
the 
retransmission 
issues 
in 
wireless 

Considerations regarding security issues impact on systems availability 
3 
communication, in connection-oriented and link-
oriented environments. 
The results found in Jang et al. [11] provide a 
knowledge base in the area of sensor hardware design, 
field data collection, WSN application strategy and 
network topology design. Jang et al conclude that the 
different characteristics of construction materials may 
affect the level of reliability performance in wireless 
communication. 
Stavrou and Pitsillides [12] focus on presenting the 
security impact on critical infrastructures correct 
functioning. In their research they analyze the security 
of various routing protocols for wireless sensor 
networks and concludes that the next protocols that 
will be developed and used should be designed having 
security as the main criteria. 
Ayday and Fekri present in [13] an innovative 
node to network broadcast algorithm that ensure very 
good communication system security. The proposed 
solution assure system functioning even when an 
attack is deployed and some nodes in the wireless 
network are compromised, leading to a good system 
reliability and availability. 
Parthasarathy et al. [14] present the challenges 
concerning 
reliability, 
flexibility 
and 
security 
supported by a WSN deployed in hazardous 
environments (remotely controlled WSN in a volcano 
area).  
In reference [17] Cazorla et al. focus on critical 
infrastructures security. First the authors show that 
critical infrastructures are key components of all the 
system involved in current human activity. Cazorla et 
al. highlights the threats and vulnerabilities of such 
systems and then, based on their analysis, indicate 
requirements imposed for creating a protection layer 
for 
critical 
infrastructures. 
They 
developed 
a 
framework that allow evaluation of an Intrusion 
Detection System for critical infrastructures based on 
various criteria such as impact on system availability, 
performance and specific security metrics. 
Some researchers developed fuzzy or genetic 
algorithms based methods for reliability evaluation of 
repairable systems. Such approaches are presented in 
[18], [19], [20], [21] and [22].  The fuzzy approach is 
used in order to model the failure rate (MTBF) and 
mean reparation times (MTR) instead of using 
classical methods, in order to overcome the 
complexity of the probabilistic approach. 
IV. 
FUZZY SYSTEM PROPOSAL AND RESULTS 
Estimating the system availability while taking 
into account the security incidents impact is a very 
challenging task. Since there is some vagueness level 
in the description of the system availability a fuzzy 
inference system is appropriate in order to describe 
the system behavior using a linguistic method. 
In this section of the paper, a fuzzy approach on 
modelling the security impact on system availability 
is presented.  
There are two parameters that should be taken into 
account: KD – achieved availability coefficient (1) and 
KS – security level coefficient.   
The security level coefficient shows how secure is 
a given system. If KS has a value close to 1, it 
indicates that the system is very secure and it is hard 
to be affected by attackers. If KS has a very low value, 
close to 0, it shows that the system is prone to 
attackers.  
TABLE I.  
PROPOSED RULES FOR AVAILABILITY ESTIMATION 
 
In order to implement the fuzzy inference system 
for global availability evaluation the two inputs KD 
and KS are described by 5 values: “Very small”, 
“Small”, “Medium”, “Big” and “Very big”. Given 
this linguistic description there are 25 rules that can 
be defined for the proposed fuzzy system. The rules, 
which are presented in Table 1, are constructed based 
on authors experience with security assessment of the 
systems. 
The output of the proposed fuzzy inference system 
is the global availability coefficient which shows the 
cumulative effect of common failures (indicated by 
KD value) and security issues (indicated by KS). Rule 
number 25 shows that a system with good security 
(KS – very big) and good reliability will have a very 
good global availability coefficient. 
The fuzzy inference system generates a 3D surface 
shown in Figure 1. The global availability is defined 

E. Pricop, S. Mihalache, N. Paraschiv, J. Fattahi, F. Zamfir 
 
4 
as f(KD, KS) and its value can easily be determined for 
each KD and KS values. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Global system availability 
The generated surface shows the evolution of the 
global availability when KD and/or KS modify.  
The cases of two systems with different security 
levels will be analyzed in the following paragraphs. 
In order to easily understand the FIS results in 
Figure 2 is presented the same surface as in Figure 1 
using level curves. 
 
Figure 2.  Global system availability (level curves) 
There is an ideal case when KD=1 and KS=1 lead 
to a global availability coefficient KG =1, which is 
impossible in a real situation, since such a system is 
not realizable. A value of KD=1, means that MTR 
(reparation time) is zero and this is an impossible 
situation. The case of KS=1 correspond to an 
invulnerable system from the security point of view 
which is also impossible. 
Based on the results shown in Figure 2 there can 
be built some scenarios for results analysis. The first 
case is of a system with good security. It will have a 
security level KS=0.75. The global availability will 
depend on the achieved availability as shown in 
Figure 3. 
The global availability value will not pass 0.75, 
since the security incident that may occur will 
decrease 
the 
achieved 
availability 
(KD). 
The 
dependence on system reliability is in this case almost 
linear. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Global system availability for a system with KS=0.75  
In figure 4 is presented the case of a system with a 
very vulnerable system. Its security level KS is only 
0.25, showing that there are taken only basic security 
measures such as a general firewall or a standard 
antivirus protection. 
 
Figure 4.  Global system availability for a system with KS=0.25 
Global availability coefficient varies in the case 
presented in Figure 4 between a minimum value of 
0.08 when KD is close to 0 to a maximum of 0.25 
when KD is over 0.8. The saturation present in the 
right side of the graph shows that the global 
availability coefficient is limited by the security level, 
so a system with a good achieved availability, but 
with a large number of security issues will not have a 
satisfying global availability. 
From the previous analysis of graphs shown in 
figures 1-4 it is obvious that equilibrium between 
achieved availability and security level should be 
found in order to maintain the protected system in a 
good state. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
It is obvious that security incidents should be 
quantified when analyzing the control systems 
availability. In the context of rising threats on control 
system the achieved availability, based on MTBF and 

Considerations regarding security issues impact on systems availability 
5 
MTR, is not enough for evaluating the actual system 
availability. 
In this paper the authors propose a fuzzy inference 
system that estimates the global availability taking 
into account two parameters: achieved availability 
and security level. 
The proposed fuzzy inference system permits to 
analyze the relation between achieved availability, 
defined in a conventional way, and security level of a 
given system. It is only one of the first steps 
necessary in order to build a framework for evaluation 
of control systems security. 
The main challenge is to build a framework that 
will allow both academia and industry to find the 
equilibrium between functionality, security and 
reliability, in other words to assure a good security 
level without affecting the system efficiency.
