Deep Episodic Memory: Encoding, Recalling, and Predicting
Episodic Experiences for Robot Action Execution
Jonas Rothfuss∗†, Fabio Ferreira∗†, Eren Erdal Aksoy ‡, You Zhou† and Tamim Asfour†
Abstract— We present a novel deep neural network archi-
tecture for representing robot experiences in an episodic-like
memory which facilitates encoding, recalling, and predicting
action experiences. Our proposed unsupervised deep episodic
memory model 1) encodes observed actions in a latent vector
space and, based on this latent encoding, 2) infers most
similar episodes previously experienced, 3) reconstructs original
episodes, and 4) predicts future frames in an end-to-end fashion.
Results show that conceptually similar actions are mapped
into the same region of the latent vector space. Based on
these results, we introduce an action matching and retrieval
mechanism, benchmark its performance on two large-scale ac-
tion datasets, 20BN-something-something and ActivityNet and
evaluate its generalization capability in a real-world scenario
on a humanoid robot.
I. INTRODUCTION
Humans are ingenious: We have unique abilities to predict
the consequences of observed actions, remember the most
relevant experiences from the past, and transfer knowledge
from previous observations in order to adapt to novel sit-
uations. The episodic memory which encodes contextual,
spatial and temporal experiences during development plays
a vital role to introduce such cognitive abilities in humans.
A core challenge in cognitive robotics is compact and gen-
eralizable mechanism which allow for encoding, storing and
retrieving spatio-temporal patterns of visual observations.
Such mechanisms would enable robots to build a memory
system, allowing them to efﬁciently store gained knowledge
from past experiences and both recalling and applying such
knowledge in new situations.
Inspired by infants that learn by observing and memorizing
what adults do in the same visual setting, we investigate in
this paper how to extend cognitive abilities of robots to au-
tonomously infer the most probable behavior and ultimately
adapt it to the current scene. Considering the situation of the
humanoid robot ARMAR-IIIa standing in front of a table
with a juice carton (see Fig. 1) one can ask what the most
suitable action is and how it would best be performed.
To achieve this goal, we introduce a novel deep neural
network architecture for encoding, storing, and recalling past
action experiences in an episodic memory-like manner. The
The research leading to these results has received funding from the
European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under
grant agreement No 641100 (TimeStorm) and from the German Research
Foundation (DFG: Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft) under Priority Pro-
gram on Autonomous Learning (SPP 1527).
†The authors are with the Institute for Anthropomatics and Robotics,
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany.
‡Eren E. Aksoy is with with the School of Information Technology,
Halmstad University, Sweden
∗The ﬁrst two authors contributed equally to this work.
Fig. 1: The ARMAR-IIIa humanoid robot, see [1], recalling
previous visual episodes in a kitchen scene.
proposed deep network encodes observed action episodes
in a lower-dimensional latent space. Such a formulation in
the latent space allows robots to store visual experiences,
compare them based on their conceptual similarity and re-
trieve the most similar episodes to the query scene or action.
Further, the same network leads to predict and generate the
next possible frames of a currently observed action.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst study
introducing that vision-based cognitive abilities concerning
action representing, storing, memorizing, and predicting can
be achieved in a single coherent framework. We hypoth-
esize that latent subsymbolic encodings that our network
generates from visual observations are rich and descriptive
enough to be compared with those collected from previously
experienced episodes. In this way, ARMAR-IIIa can trace
all previous observations and select the most similar episode
(e. g. “pushing the juice" or “grasping the juice") in the
latent space. The robot can further generate similar behavior
by adapting to new situations based on memorized action
representations.
Contribution: (1) We implement a new deep network to
encode action frames into a low-dimensional latent vector
space. (2) Such a vector representation is used to reconstruct
the action frames in an auto-encoder manner. (3) We show
that the same latent vectors can also be employed to predict
future action frames. (4) We introduce a mechanism for
matching and retrieving visual episodes and provide an
evaluation of the proposed method on two action datasets. (5)
Finally, we demonstrate how this meachanism can facilitate
case-based reasoning for robotic object manipulation in an
unstructured real-world scenario.
II. RELATED WORK
We discuss related work from two relevant perspectives:
the role of episodic memories in cognitive architectures and
action understanding based on deep learning approaches.
arXiv:1801.04134v3  [cs.AI]  14 Jul 2018

A. Episodic Memory and Cognitive Architectures
In contrast to working memory where the information is
temporarily stored for a ﬁnite length of time, the long-term
memory holds the innate knowledge that enables operation
of the system and facilitates learning. The episodic memory,
considered as a part of the long-term memory, persists
instances of past experiences which can be retrieved to
support planning and inference [2]. Hereby, the persisted
experiences can be represented in manifold ways.
Reinforcement learning based architectures implement
memories to store and retrieve action episodes [3], [4]. A
different approach is to persist instances of the working
memory that were involved in solving a speciﬁc problem and
subsequently retrieve previous solutions from the episodic
memory. Thereby, planning can be enhanced and even facil-
itate one-shot learning capabilities [5]–[9]. Predominantly,
instances stored in the episodic memory are symbolic high-
level representations [7], [10]. When restricted to a speciﬁc
context, symbolic representations and pre-speciﬁed percep-
tual instances stored in an episodic memory can indeed be a
powerful approach for enhancing the reasoning capabilities
of a cognitive system, as shown in Soar [5]. However, most
of the described approaches are customized to a speciﬁc
problem domain and rely on pre-deﬁned, problem speciﬁc
representations [6], [10]. In complex real world scenarios
transferring and generalizing knowledge persisted in the
episodic memory is very limited when pre-deﬁned symbolic
representations are used. Accounting for nuances and fuzzi-
ness may require interpolation between concepts, demanding
more ﬂexibility than traditional declarative memory concepts.
Our proposed episodic memory, on the other hand, derives
subsymbolic representation of actions in a data driven man-
ner and, hence, requires no pre-deﬁned information.
An approach towards an episodic-like memory of video
scenes, based on subsymbolic representations, uses Fisher
Vectors of convolutional neural network (CNN) percepts
to generate encodings of temporal video segments [11].
Although the approach is able to match conceptually related
video segments, it is not possible to reconstruct perceptual
information from the Fisher Vector representations.
B. Action Understanding with Deep Neural Nets
Many deep neural network based approaches to understand
human action videos combine CNNs and recurrent neural
networks (RNNs) [12]–[14]. CNNs capture spatial informa-
tion in each video frame and aggregate it into a higher-
level representation, which is then fed through a Long Short-
Term Memory (LSTM) that captures temporal information
throughout a sequence of frames. Instead of stacking an
LSTM on top of a CNN, Shi et al. [15] combine the ideas
of spatial weight sharing through convolution and temporal
weight sharing through recurrence into a new model called
convolutional LSTMs (convLSTM).
Overall, there are three main approaches with regard to
deep learning based action understanding: 1) Supervised
learning on activity recognition corpora [16]–[18], 2) Un-
supervised video frame prediction [19]–[22] and 3) Unsu-
pervised prediction of visual representations [23].
Aside from human action recognition, the lack of compre-
hensively labeled video datasets makes supervised training
challenging. Another approach towards learning to under-
stand videos is the future frame prediction. Given a sequence
of video frames, a deep neural network is trained to predict
the next frame(s) in a video. To successfully predict future
video frames, the network is forced to generate latent repre-
sentations of the inherent structure and dynamics of videos.
Srivastava et al. [14] present a composite model con-
sisting of three LSTM networks, conceptually combining a
sequence-to-sequence autoencoder with future frame predic-
tion. They show that the composite architecture outperforms
both a pure autoencoder and future frame prediction model.
However, since input and output space are CNN features
instead of raw video frames, their model is not able to recover
the video frames from the latent representation. Our approach
is inspired by the composite encoder-decoder architecture but
overcomes the described drawback by being able to encode
raw frames in an end-to-end fashion and also reconstruct the
raw frame sequence from the latent representation.
Subsequent work aims to predict the pixel changes be-
tween the current and the next frame [20]–[22] instead of
regressing directly into the RGB-pixel space. While such
models are shown to be useful for semantic segmentation
[21], planning robot motion [24] or generating videos [25],
they do not create a representation of an episode that can
later be reconstructed.
III. METHOD
A. The Neural Network Model
In this section, we describe our neural network model
and the methods applied for comparing and matching visual
experiences in the latent space. The network architecture is
illustrated in Fig. 2.
We were inspired by the composite encoder-decoder ar-
chitecture introduced in [14]. Our proposed model concep-
tually combines an autoencoder with future frame predic-
tion and consists of one encoder and two decoders (see
Fig. 2). Different from the model proposed by [14], we
utilize convolutional LSTM cells to capture both spatial and
temporal information. In our model, a visual experience
is represented as a sequence of consecutive video frames
X = Xr∥Xp = x1, .., xk∥xk+1, ..., xn, wherein Xr is the
ﬁrst part of the frame sequence until frame xk and Xp
represents the remaining n −k frames.
The encoder network E processes the sequence Xr =
x1, ..., xk and projects it into a latent vector space, yielding
a representation of the given frame sequence as a single latent
vector V as:
V = E(Xr)
.
(1)
Subsequently, the vector V , indicated in red in Fig. 2,
is forwarded to both decoders independently which receive
the latent vector representation as input and construct a
sequence of video frames in return. The ﬁrst decoder, i. e. the

Fig. 2: Structure of the proposed composite encoder-decoder network. It represents the shape of an unrolled network over
multiple time steps. The encoder E receives multiple video frames as input and maps them into a latent vector space. The
resulting vector representation V (highlighted in red) is forwarded to the two decoder networks. The ﬁrst decoder (Dr) is
trained to reconstruct the video frames that were provided to the encoder while the second decoder (Dp) attempts to predict
the future frames. The dashed box on the left depicts the layers of the encoder network. The label inside each layer denotes
the kernel size of the convolutional layer or the number of hidden units of the fully connected (fc) layer, respectively.
reconstruction-decoder Dr, attempts to recover the frames
Xr = x1, .., xk that were initially provided to the encoder.
Therefore, Dr is trained to output a frame sequence Yr =
y1, ..., yk that matches Xr, such that
Dr(V ) = Yr = y1, ..., yk
.
(2)
The second decoder, the so-called prediction-decoder Dp,
attempts to predict the future frames Yp = yk+1, ..., yn as,
Dp(V ) = Yp = yk+1, ..., yn
.
(3)
During training, Xp is employed as ground truth for assess-
ing how good the predictions Yp are and for also computing
the error. It is important to note that for determining the
reconstruction and prediction error during training, both
image sequences Xr and Xp are used. However, during test
time, only Xr is fed into the encoder network.
The core idea of the proposed network structure rests upon
the latent space vector V being the only linkage between
E and both Dr and Dp. The two decoder networks solely
rely on V as their only source of information to reconstruct
a given scene and predict future frames. To obtain robust
reconstructions and future frame predictions, the encoder is
forced to compress the entire video frame sequence Xr into
a comparably low-dimensional latent representation V and,
at the same time, to preserve as much relevant information
as possible. E and Dr together constitute an autoencoder
architecture, requiring that relevant information is preserved
throughout the network. However, this only involves remem-
bering the frame sequence Xr but not necessarily requires
to capture abstract concepts such as temporal dynamics of
objects or actors. By adding the frame predictor which has to
extrapolate motions into the future, the encoder must capture
higher-level concepts like the scene dynamics in Xr and
embed abstract concepts such as trajectories in V so that
Dp can properly infer possible future frames.
The input and output frames xi and yi used in this work
have a resolution of 128 × 128 pixels and 3 color channels.
Since the main task of the network is to capture spatio-
temporal concepts, we make use of convolutional LSTM cells
[15]. The encoder network E is comprised of a stack of
convolution LSTM and normal convolution layers (hence-
forth referred to as convLSTM and conv layers) in alternating
order (see Fig. 2). While the conv layers are operated with
a stride of 2 in order to reduce the spatial size of the
feature maps, the convLSTM layers preserve the spatial size
and forward information to the next time step through their
hidden state and cell state. After the alternating series of
conv and convLSTM layers in the encoder, we add a fully
connected layer, followed by a fully connected LSTM layer
(fc LSTM) to the stack.
With the fc LSTM cell being the top layer of E and as
LSTM cell connected over time, its cell state ci and hidden
state hi represent the video frame sequence until the current
time step i. Once the entire frame sequence Xr = x1, ..., xk
is processed by the encoder, the hidden state hk and cell
state ck of the fc LSTM cell at time step k are extracted and
concatenated, yielding the latent vector V = hk∥ck.
Both decoders have the inverted structure of the encoder,
meaning that transposed convolution layers are used to
increase the spatial size of the feature maps throughout
the decoding layers until the full video frame resolution of
128 × 128 is recovered.
To compute the error L during the network training, we
use a linear combination of image reconstruction loss (Lmse)

and gradient difference loss (Lgd) [19] functions as follows
L = (1 −η) Lmse + η Lgd
,
(4)
where we set η = 0.4 to trade off between the two loss
functions
Lmse = 1
n
n
X
i=1
∥yi −xi∥2
2
,
and
(5)
Lgd = 1
n
n
X
i=1
X
u,v
∥|xiu,v −xiu−1,v| −|yiu,v −yiu−1,v|∥2
2+
∥|xiu,v−1 −xiu,v| −|yiu,v−1 −yiu,v|∥2
2
.
(6)
The loss is computed over all ground truth frames xi in
X = Xr∥Xp and the output frames yi in Y = Yr∥Yp which
are produced by Dr and Dp. The reconstruction loss Lmse
compares the generated images yi and ground truth images
xi in a pixel wise manner. When solely trained with Lmse
loss, neural network models that regress on images are prone
to linear blurring and unstable to small image deformations
[12]. In contrast, the Lgd loss compares the horizontal and
vertical image gradients of xi and yi, thereby penalizing
blurriness and enforcing sharper edges [19].
The described neural network is trained with mini-batch
gradient decent using the adaptive learning rate method
ADAM [26] in conjunction with an exponentially decaying
learning rate schedule. After each network layer except the
last encoder and decoder layer (since these are the output
layers), we use layer normalization [27] and dropout with a
dropout rate between 10% and 20%. In order to force the
encoder to use the entire latent vector space and produce
distinct representations V , we add Gaussian noise N(0, σ)
with σ = 0.1 to the latent vector V during the training,
before forwarding V to the decoder networks. In all of our
experiments, the vector V has a dimension of 2000. The
speciﬁcations of the neural network model have been deter-
mined with heuristic hyper-parameter search using train/test-
splits of the original training data of the two datasets. The
source code and experimental data are publicly available on
the supplementary web page1.
B. Matching Visual Experiences in the Latent Space
One of the central contributions of our work is to compare
visual experiences based on their conceptual similarities
encoded in the latent space. Given a new visual experience,
we can retrieve the most similar episodes from the episodic
memory that holds the hidden representations Vi of episodes
experienced in the past. We use the cosine similarity to
measure the similarity of latent vectors. To ﬁnd the best
matches in the latent space, we compute the cosine similarity
between the query representation Vq and each of the Vi in
the memory. Finally, the n memory instances corresponding
to the Vi with the highest cosine similarity are retrieved from
the memory.
1h2t-projects.webarchiv.kit.edu/projects/episodicmemory
IV. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
We evaluate the hypothesis that the encoder-decoder net-
work creates latent representations that embed the inherent
dynamics and concepts of a provided visual episode.
For this purpose, we train the neural network in an
unsupervised fashion on two video datasets and analyze the
similarity structure within the latent space. We assess the
model’s abilities to reconstruct the past episode from the
latent representation and predict future frames. Subsequently,
we benchmark the proposed matching / retrieval mechanism
against other state-of-the art approaches and test its robust-
ness in a robotic application.
A. Datasets
For the evaluation of our methods we use the large-
scale labeled video datasets ActivityNet [17] and 20BN-
something-something (from now on referred to as 20BN)
[28]. We favored these two datasets over other popular
datasets like UCF-101 [16] and HMDB-51 [29] since our
emphasis is reasoning, planning and executing of robotic
tasks in indoor household environments of which the latter
two datasets contain fewer relevant scenes.
The ActivityNet dataset [17], a benchmarking corpus for
human activity understanding, consists of 10, 024 training
and 4926 validation video snippets collected from YouTube.
It is organized in 93 higher level categories that comprise
203 different activity classes involving activities such as
household work, sports and personal care.
While ActivityNet targets higher-level concepts like “vac-
uuming the ﬂoor" and “shoveling snow" that embed semantic
meaning, the 20BN dataset focuses on detailed physical
properties of actions and scenes. It contains 174 classes
such as “Pushing something from left to right" and “Putting
something into something". The core challenge of this novel
dataset is that the type of involved objects as well as the
background setting of a given scene only play a neglectable
role. Rather than recognizing familiar items and scene back-
grounds, the neural network needs to understand the physical
composition and motion within the video clips. The dataset
consists of 86, 017 training and 11, 522 validation videos in
total.
B. Training
We train the neural network on the respective training split
of the ActivityNet (actNet) and 20BN dataset. Both models
are trained with n = 10 frames per video (selected equally
spaced). The ﬁrst k = 5 frames are fed into the encoder
E to be reconstructed by Dr while the last ﬁve frames are
employed as ground truth for the future frame predictor Dp.
The choice to only use 10 frames, sampled equally spaced,
during training results from hardware constraints (i.e. GPU
RAM) while under these constraints attempting to maximize
the video length that can be captured.
C. Conceptual Similarity and Proximity in the Latent Space
To examine our hypothesis that conceptually similar
videos are mapped into the same region of the latent space,

we compute the pairwise cosine similarities (see section III-
B) of latent vectors. To measure the conceptual similarity,
we use the class labels provided in the datasets as the proxy
value and assume that videos belonging to the same class are
conceptually similar. We generate the latent representation
for each video in the validation split of both ActivityNet and
20BN datasets and subsequently compute all pairwise cosine
similarities between the latent vectors.
In Fig. 3, the results are visualized as similarity matrices
where each row and column of a matrix corresponds to
a class label and each entry represents the mean pairwise
cosine similarity between the latent vectors belonging to the
respective classes. The class labels are arranged horizontally
and vertically in the same order, ensuring that the diagonal
elements of the matrix depict intra-class similarities and off-
diagonals represent inter-class similarities. Fig. 3 shows that
in each matrix the intra-class similarity (diagonal elements)
is considerably higher than the inter-class similarity. This
is a clear indication that conceptual similarity of videos is
reﬂected by the proximity of their vector representations in
the latent space. Consequently, our proposed model captures
high-level action concepts within two different datasets,
although the model is trained in an unsupervised fashion
and thus has never seen any class labels.
Since the latent representation must embed all information
for the decoders necessary to reconstruct and predict frames,
it may also encode details (e. g. colors and shapes) in the
background that are irrelevant for describing actions. To com-
pile the information embedded in the latent representation to
a subset that is more relevant for optimally separating the
different classes within the latent space, we apply principal
component analysis (PCA) on the mean latent vectors of each
class. We assume that less important features are identically
distributed in all the classes and thus share approximately
the same mean value when averaged over the class. Hence,
transforming the latent space towards the principal compo-
nents computed on the covariance matrix of the mean vectors
emphasizes relevant features and neutralizes less important
features. Fig. 3b and 3d show that transforming the latent
representations with PCA leads to a better distribution of
latent vectors, pushing conceptually similar representations
closer together while keeping representations of different
classes farther apart.
D. Frame Reconstruction and Future Frame Prediction
By reconstructing video frames and predicting upcoming
frames, the network resembles episodic memory-like capa-
bilities. Fig. 4 depicts generated video frame sequences from
both ActivityNet and 20BN for a qualitative assessment.
To evaluate the quality of the reconstructed and predicted
frames, we compute the Peak-Signal-to-Noise-Ratio (PSNR)
between the original frames X and generated frames Y
as proposed in [19]. Fig. 5 depicts the PSNR for each of
the 5 reconstructed and predicted frames, averaged frame-
wise over the entire respective validation samples of both
datasets. We additionally compare our results to a simple
baseline by computing the PSNR between the ground truth
(a) latent vector V
(b) 200 PCA components
(c) latent vector V
(d) 200 PCA components
Fig. 3: Cosine similarity matrices for ActivityNet (top) (93×
93) and 20BN (bottom) (174 × 174). PCA (right column)
yields a more favorable distribution in the latent space. The
ﬁgures are available in full resolution and with class labels
on our website1.
frames and the mean of the input frames. Results indicate
that the reconstruction quality is signiﬁcantly higher than the
quality of the predicted frames. Also, the PSNR is roughly
constant throughout the reconstructed frames whereas for the
predicted future frames it decreases over time. The expected
decline in prediction quality is very much due to the increase
in the uncertainty about the future over successive time steps.
Moreover, the frame prediction results in Fig. 4 indicate that
the decline in PSNR is mainly caused by the increase in
blurriness while e.g. the object motions are still extrapolated
correctly into the future. Hence, this successive increase in
blurriness predominantly constitutes a general limitation of
regression into the pixel space and gives little to no indication
about the semantic richness of the latent representations.
E. Matching and Retrieving Visual Episodes
To investigate the matching and retrieval of visual episodes
introduced in section III-B, we compare our approach to
standard baselines as well as state-of-the-art action descrip-
tors. The benchmarking comprises Fisher vector encodings
of CNN, SIFT and STIP features as well as LSTM encodings
to represent and match visual experiences.
As proposed in [11], we compute Fisher Vectors based on
GMMs in order to create a visual vocabulary from CNN
features of the video frames. In particular, we select 5
equidistant frames from the videos and compute VGG-fc1
[30] as well as ResNet-50 [31] features. Furthermore, we
compare our approach against the composite LSTM network
introduced in [14]. We train their LSTM network using
VGG-FC1 and ResNet-50 features. In all our experiments
we used the default parameters coming with the publicly
available source codes.
To quantitatively benchmark our approach against the

Original
reconstruction
future prediction
Generated
Original
Generated
Fig. 4: Frame reconstruction and future frame prediction of our model compared to the original frame sequence. Top:
Validation sample from ActivityNet. Bottom: Validation sample (pulling sth. from right to left) from 20BN.
Fig. 5: Peak-Signal-to-Noise-Ratio (PSNR) for each of the 5
reconstructed (blue) and predicted (green) frames generated
by the 20BN and actNet model averaged over the entire
validation dataset. The shaded regions depict the correspond-
ing standard deviation. Additionally using the channel-wise
mean of input frames as reconstruction/prediction is reported
as simple baseline (red/orange).
baselines, we phrase the matching and retrieval of memo-
rized episodes as a document retrieval problem. Thereby,
we assume that a retrieved episode is only relevant if
it originates from the same action category as the query
episode. For evaluating the performance of retrieving relevant
visual episodes, we report the precision of the ﬁrst match
and the mean average precision (mAP). Since the setting is
purely unsupervised, the precisions reported in this context
are not to be confused with precisions for a classiﬁcation
task. Overall, we use the ActivityNet and the 20BN dataset
to train and evaluate the different methods. For computing
the performance metrics, we split the validation set of the
respective dataset into 5 shufﬂed folds. In each fold, 80% of
the videos are used as memory whereas the remaining 20%
are used to query the memory. The results illustrated in Table
I are averaged over the 5 folds.
The evaluations were conducted with various numbers of
GMM components and two different distance metrics (i.e.
Euclidean and cosine) for matching the video encodings. We
want to emphasize that we always report the best results out
of these experimental evaluations.
As the results in Table I indicate, representations of
conventional descriptors such as SIFT and STIP seemingly
lack the representational capacity to capture abstract spatio-
temporal concepts in videos such as action. In contrast, using
CNN features yields signiﬁcantly higher average matching
precision. Our proposed method has the highest precision
values and notably outperforms state of the art approaches
with substantially deeper networks such as ResNet-50. For
completeness, Table I also reports the matching precisions
with 200 PCA components. Similar to the observations dis-
cussed in section IV-C, PCA further improves the matching.
The precisions on ActivityNet are substantially higher since
it has a) fewer categories than the 20BN dataset and b) richer
features among the categories.
In addition to the quantitative benchmark, we qualitatively
examined the matching and retrieval results. The matching
appears to be conceptually consistent, predominantly yield-
ing visual episodes with closely related action types and
settings. Fig 6 (a) shows sample matching results of our
approach on the 20BN dataset. In most cases of categorical
mismatches, the retrieved episode is closely related to the
action type of the query episode, e.g. "pushing sth off of
sth" and "moving sth away of sth" or "lifting sth up" and
"moving sth away from sth". However, we also observe that
the background color biases the matching results, meaning
that videos with dark background tend to be matched to
videos in memory of the same kind. The same applies to
bright videos respectively.
All in all, our proposed model achieves the best matching
results among the compared approaches. The qualitative
study shows that, beyond the strict categorical setting im-
posed in the baseline comparison, our mechanism predom-
inantly produces consistent matches. It is also important to
note that our approach is the only one that can reconstruct
the visual episode given the encoding.
F. Robot Manipulation Learned From Episodic Memory
Results in the previous section indicate that given a query
action, our proposed network provides a robot with the ability
to remember similar scenarios from a large video corpora. In
the following, we show how our episodic memory approach

Fig. 6: The proposed matching and retrieval mechanism evaluated on different visual episodes of object manipulations. The
ﬁgure depicts three exemplary query episodes and the corresponding 3 closest matches in the latent space of our proposed
network. The latent representations are generated by the 20BN model. While (a) shows a query on the 20BN dataset, (b)
and (c) comprise human demonstrations for the ARMAR-IIIa robot (see section IV-F ).
TABLE I: Benchmark results showing the matching and
retrieving performance of our approach against the baselines.
We report the precision for the ﬁrst match and the mean
average precision (mAP) for retrieving the 3 closest matches.
Fisher Vectors are abbreviated to FV.
ActivityNet (in %)
20BN-sth.-sth. (in %)
Model and Features
Precision
mAP
Precision
mAP
SIFT FV
5.27
3.76
1.05
0.64
STIP FV [32]
5.47
3.71
3.37
2.67
ResNet-50 FV [11]
32.31
23.23
6.08
3.98
VGG-16 FV [11]
24.30
18.19
5.56
3.62
ResNet-50 LSTM [14]
36.29
26.32
10.08
7.20
VGG-16 LSTM [14]
17.18
12.16
4.51
2.82
ours (no PCA)
44.31
26.93
11.63
8.12
ours with PCA (200)
45.55
28.18
11.81
8.32
can facilitate case-based reasoning for robot manipulation in
unstructured real world environments.
For this purpose, we record 120 visual episodes in which
a human subject is demonstrating to our humanoid robot
ARMAR-IIIa [1] how to perform 10 different manipulation
actions such as “pushing two objects closer to each other"
and “putting something behind something" (see Fig. 6 (b-
c)). The reason of introducing this new dataset is twofold:
First, we attempt to evaluate the scalability of our approach
to new datasets that have much less training data. Second,
for the purpose of action execution we require the depth
cue which is missing in the ActivityNet and 20BN datasets.
We store 100 of our new visual episodes to form the
memory, whereas the remaining 20 episodes are introduced
as queries to test the matching and retrieval mechanism
with ARMAR-IIIa. The visual episodes are fed through the
encoder of the trained 20BN model, thereby receiving its
respective latent representations. The cosine similarity in the
latent space is then computed based on the ﬁrst 50 principal
components of the latent representations (see section III-B).
Fig. 6 (b-c) illustrate two exemplary query episodes and the
corresponding 3 closest matches in the latent space from our
recordings.
So far, the matching and retrieval mechanism is evaluated
on manipulation action videos where spatio-temporal cues
are implicitly embedded. We further investigate whether
static scene frames can trigger recalling of past episodes,
which is an even harder problem since effectively only
one frame is given as a cue. This gives a high chance
to robots to autonomously predict and even execute an
action that can possibly be performed in the observed scene.
Matching results for static scene queries can be viewed on
our supplementary website1 We conduct a pilot study to
explore the use of our method.
Fig. 7 illustrates a scenario where the robot ARMAR-IIIa
is observing a scene with a sponge on the table. Acquired
images of this static scene are sent to our matching and re-
trieval mechanism which returns the matched episode where
a subject is demonstrating “pushing a green cup". Next, we
apply a real-time object detector [33] to detect and track
all objects in the recalled episode. This process yields the
extracted pushing trajectory that the subject is following.
The tracked motion is then learned by dynamic movement
primitives [34] to be further processed by the robot in order
to execute the same pushing motion on the perceived sponge.
Fig. 7 depicts sample frames from the best matched episode
and detected objects together with the computed motion
proﬁle and snapshots from the robot execution of the recalled
pushing action. See the supplementary movie showing the
entire robot execution.
This experiment clearly supports our hypothesis that the
proposed network model can help robots autonomously trace
previous observations and select the one that matches best
to the currently observed scene even without necessarily
requiring any temporal cue. The robot can transfer relevant
knowledge, e. g. the motion proﬁle, from previous experi-
Fig. 7: Robot execution of a matched pushing action.

ences to further apply the remembered action to novel objects
in the scene. Learning comparable vision triggered behaviors
through reinforcement learning would require thousands of
trials, while such a case-based reasoning approach only
requires one memory-instance of a similar action. Hence,
these ﬁndings play a vital role in cognitive robotics to infer
possible actions, reason about the action consequences, and
even generate actions by transferring knowledge from the
past experiences in a data efﬁcient manner.
V. CONCLUSION
We proposed a deep neural network implementing an
episodic memory. Given a set of training data, the proposed
network ﬁrst generates subsymbolic representation of action
episodes. Such a latent encoding can be used to distinguish
actions, reconstruct memorized episodes, and predict future
frames based on the spatio-temporal features extracted by
the deep architecture. We show that conceptual similarity of
videos is reﬂected by the proximity of their vector represen-
tation in the latent space. Using this property of the latent
space, we introduce a matching and retrieval mechanism,
which enables the recollection of previously experienced
visual episodes. Benchmarking our proposed mechanism
against a variety of action descriptors, we show that our
model outperforms other state-of-the-art approaches in terms
of matching precision. We conduct various experiments
showing that the proposed framework can help extending
the cognitive abilities of a humanoid robot such as action
encoding, storing, memorizing, and predicting.
Since the memory instances in our approach are purely
visual, the adaptation of stored actions on a robot to new
scenario is not straightforward. For instance, our robot ma-
nipulation pilot study requires an auxiliary object detector for
trajectory extraction. In future work it would be desirable
to embed relevant action information such as trajectories
into the latent representation and directly use them for
action adaptation and execution. Another limitation of our
approach is the observed background bias. To make the
model less sensitive to different backgrounds it might be
promising to avoid pixel-level predictions and instead employ
segmentation masks as reconstruction targets.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst compre-
hensive study that attempts to encode visual experiences
not only for matching and retrieving purposes but also for
prediction and reconstruction in a longer time scale. Compa-
rable work such as [11], [14] can only achieve unsupervised
action matching without reconstructing the memorized video
episodes. Video prediction models, introduced in [21], [24],
can only predict a single future frame at a time. Thus,
the mentioned approaches lack key features to resemble an
episodic memory. Our model overcomes the architectural
drawback of [14] and comprises the full episodic-memory
capabilities described above. Also, we are not aware of any
previous work that extensively applies an episodic memory-
like framework to such large and complex datasets.
