Knowledge Informed Machine Learning using a
Weibull-based Loss Function
Tim von Hahn and Chris K Mechefske
Department of Mechanical and Materials Engineering
Queen’s University
Abstract
Machine learning can be enhanced through the integration of external knowledge.
This method, called knowledge informed machine learning, is also applicable
within the ﬁeld of Prognostics and Health Management (PHM). In this paper, the
various methods of knowledge informed machine learning, from a PHM context,
are reviewed with the goal of helping the reader understand the domain. In addi-
tion, a knowledge informed machine learning technique is demonstrated, using
the common IMS and PRONOSTIA bearing data sets, for remaining useful life
(RUL) prediction. Speciﬁcally, knowledge is garnered from the ﬁeld of reliability
engineering which is represented through the Weibull distribution. The knowledge
is then integrated into a neural network through a novel Weibull-based loss function.
A thorough statistical analysis of the Weibull-based loss function is conducted,
demonstrating the effectiveness of the method on the PRONOSTIA data set. How-
ever, the Weibull-based loss function is less effective on the IMS data set. The
results, shortcomings, and beneﬁts of the approach are discussed in length. Finally,
all the code is publicly available for the beneﬁt of other researchers.1
1
Introduction
Machine learning (ML) is a useful tool in developing Prognostics and Health Management (PHM)
solutions. However, many modern machine learning techniques center around the creation of data
sets, the design of neural networks, and exploiting computational power. Yet, there is much domain
knowledge, embedded in well proven equations, models, or methods, that can also be harnessed to
improve machine learning applications.
Knowledge informed machine learning is the combination of machine learning techniques with
explicit prior knowledge. The prior knowledge exists outside of a traditional machine learning
pipeline. As such, feature engineering and signal processing techniques are excluded from the
deﬁnition of knowledge informed ML. In the context of PHM, knowledge informed ML can improve
predictive performance and help overcome obstacles such as limited or poor-quality data [1].
In their survey paper, von Rueden et al. [2] provide an articulate taxonomy for knowledge informed
machine learning. They segment the different approaches within the ﬁeld by the source of the
knowledge; the method of representing that knowledge; and where the knowledge is integrated
into the machine learning process. Figure 1, below, shows various paths, through the source,
representation, and integration, by which knowledge informed machine learning can be applied. The
articles referenced in this paper, and pertaining to PHM and knowledge informed machine learning,
are highlighted.
The goal of this research is to demonstrate a new method for embedding prior knowledge in a
remaining-useful-life (RUL) task with the use of a knowledge-based loss function. To that end, and
as shown in Figure 2, the knowledge source derives from the ﬁeld of reliability engineering with
1https://github.com/tvhahn/weibull-knowledge-informed-ml
arXiv:2201.01769v1  [cs.LG]  4 Jan 2022

Scientific 
Knowledge
(natural sciences, 
engineering, etc.) 
[11]-[13], [22], [23] 
[36], [ours]
World Knowledge
(vision, linguistics, 
semantics, etc.)
Expert Knowledge
(intuition, tacit 
knowledge, etc.) 
[11], [14]-[18], [27], 
[37]
Human Feedback 
[18]
Probabilistic 
Relations
[16], [17], [ours]
Knowledge Graphs
[16], [17], [34], [37]
Logic Rules
[15], [27]
Spatial Invariances  
[14]
Simulation Results 
[13], [22]-[24]
Differential Eqn.
Algebraic Eqn.
[11], [12], [36]
Training Data 
[13], [18], [22]-[24]
Hypothesis Set
(network 
architecture, 
model structure, 
etc.) [14]-[17], [24], 
[27], [36], [37]
Learning 
Algorithm
(Regularization 
terms, loss 
functions, etc.) 
[11], [12], [ours]
Final Hypothesis
Source
What is the source of 
knowledge?
Representation
How is the knowledge 
represented?
Integration
Where is knowledge 
integrated?
Figure 1: Knowledge informed machine learning can take many paths through the source, representa-
tion, and integration of knowledge. Papers that are knowledge informed machine learning, related to
PHM, and discussed in this research, are highlighted, along with our work. (image modiﬁed from
von Rueden et al. [2] and used under CC by 4.0)
the common understanding of how machinery fail, which is represented through the probabilistic
relationship of the Weibull distribution. Finally, the knowledge is integrated into the learning
algorithm of a neural network through a Weibull-based loss function.
Knowledge informed machine learning was used in this research to predict remaining useful life (RUL)
of bearings, using the IMS [3] and PRONOSTIA [4] bearing data sets. As shown in Figure 2, the
knowledge source is derived from the ﬁeld of reliability engineering, with the common understanding
of how machinery fail. The knowledge was represented through the probabilistic relationship of
the Weibull distribution, and in particular the Weibull cumulative distribution function (CDF). The
knowledge was integrated into the learning algorithm of a neural network through a Weibull-based
loss function.
The use of the Weibull-based loss function produced statistically signiﬁcant results and was shown to
outperform most models using traditional loss functions. The method excelled on the PRONOSTIA
data set. The PRONOSTIA data is seen as less informationally rich, and thus, the machine learner
relied on the Weibull-based loss functions more heavily. The Weibull-based loss functions demon-
strated mild effectiveness on the IMS data. The IMS data set is seen as more realistic, but is also
smaller in size, which contributed to the marginal performance of the method. Further limitations,
and a discussion of results, is held in Section 4.
Although the research does not present a state-of-the-art feature engineering or neural network
approach, the methods within are straightforward and can be readily implemented on other RUL and
PHM tasks already using neural networks. Ideally, the method would be combined with regularization
techniques, advanced feature engineering, and the tuning of model parameters, to achieve the best
model for a particular task and data set. To that end, all the code and analysis has been made publicly
available, with extensive documentation, to assist other researchers in their endeavors. Readers are
also encouraged to visit one of the numerous surveys on RUL and PHM to gain a deeper understanding
of classical and modern approaches [5–10].
Overall, the goal of the research is to demonstrate the beneﬁt of a knowledge informed machine
learning technique in a PHM setting, through the novel Weibull-based loss function, and to help
readers conceptually understand knowledge informed machine learning. To the best of our knowledge,
there have been no prior papers that provide an overview of knowledge informed learning, from a
2

Figure 2: The taxonomy of knowledge informed machine learning (source, representation, and
integration) and how it relates to the present study. In this experiment, knowledge is sourced from
reliability engineering. Reliability engineering often involves the careful collection of machinery
failure data, like that of a bearing. Through careful collection of the data, the mechanics of the failures
can be understood, as in the “bathtub” curve. The knowledge from reliability engineering is then
represented through the Weibull distribution, and in particular the Weibull cumulative distribution
function (CDF). Finally, the knowledge is integrated into a neural network, during training, through a
Weibull-based loss function.
PHM perspective, as deﬁned by von Rueden. Our overview is not exhaustive but will provide the
reader with a foundation to perform further investigation.
The following introductory sections expand on the paths within knowledge informed machine learning
with a focus on how they are applied in PHM settings.
1.1
Source of Knowledge
There are three primary sources to leverage in knowledge informed machine learning; they are
scientiﬁc knowledge, world knowledge, and expert knowledge. Of these, scientiﬁc knowledge is
most pertinent to PHM. Expert knowledge is also a source relevant to PHM and has ample room for
further exploitation. World knowledge, however, is not as relevant to PHM research and will not be
covered here.
Scientiﬁc knowledge, in the context of knowledge informed machine learning, can derive from a
wide range of ﬁelds and engineering disciplines. Within PHM, Wang et al. use an empirical equation,
sourced from the tool wear discipline, to improve their neural network used for wear prediction
[11]. Yucesan et al. leverage the L10 bearing life equations, derived from mechanical engineering,
to augment their wind turbine bearing failure model [12]. Sobie et al. use high resolution bearing
dynamic simulations as a method of training their neural network, illustrating another approach of
harnessing scientiﬁc knowledge in machine learning [13].
Expert knowledge can also be a source of information to integrate into machine learning. Expert
knowledge is less formal than scientiﬁc knowledge and can exist as intuition or tacit knowledge.
Within PHM, expert knowledge was codiﬁed through a monotonicity constraint (explained further in
Section 1.3.1) for tool wear prediction [11]. Baseman et al. use expert knowledge in their research to
predict failures in high-performance-computing memory. Speciﬁcally, they use the knowledge of
spatial interdependence between memory devices [14].
Kordestani et al., in their recent survey of failure prognosis applications [6], discuss the limited use of
expert knowledge by other PHM researchers. We too note less PHM research that explicitly leverages
expert knowledge as deﬁned by von Rueden et al. However, expert knowledge can also be used in
PHM applications through fuzzy networks [15], Bayesian networks [16, 17], and active learning [18].
The source of knowledge, in this research, comes largely from the ﬁeld of reliability engineering
(scientiﬁc knowledge). The discipline, described below, has codiﬁed practices and methods for
3

Figure 3: The “bathtub” curve demonstrates the likelihood of a component failing over its life. During
each period or run-in, design life, and wearout, there is β value that corresponds to the shape factor
of its Weibull distribution.
improving equipment life and preventing failures, which can be used in a knowledge informed
machine learning framework.
1.1.1
Reliability Engineering
Reliability engineering is the process of “preventing, assessing, and managing failures” [19]. Today,
reliability engineering is practiced across a broad range of industries and is relevant wherever PHM
is employed. A reliability engineer uses tools from a range of ﬁelds, from statistics to continuous
improvement, to prevent and predict failures.
The understanding of how, and why, components fail is a regular undertaking in reliability engineering.
Common mechanical components, such as bearings, generally fail following a “bathtub curve”, as
illustrated in Figure 3, that describes the likelihood of failure as a function of time in use.
During the initial period (typically referred to as “run-in”), a bearing will have a higher likelihood
of failure due to introduced problems such as manufacturing defects or installation errors. Once the
bearing has passed its run-in stage it enters a prolonged period of its design life, where the likelihood
of failure is relatively low and constant. Finally, the bearing enters a stage of wearout when the
bearing has an increasing likelihood of failure.
Collecting failure data of components in operation, in an industrial environment or elsewhere, is
common practice in reliability engineering. Importantly, the failure data is diligently collated with a
deep understanding of failure mechanics and failure modes [20, 21]. The failure data can then be
used to parametrize a Weibull distribution, as discussed in Section 1.2.
1.2
Representation of Knowledge
Knowledge can be represented through a variety of methods, as illustrated in Figure 1. Knowledge
represented through algebraic equations is one common method seen. As noted in Section 1.1, Wang
[11] and Yucesan [12] both use algebraic equations for their PHM application of detecting tool wear
and bearing failures, respectively.
Physics-based models are often seen in PHM applications. Additionally, these physics-based models
can be used to represent knowledge in a knowledge informed machine learning context. Sobie et al.
generated their data from a three-degree-of-freedom model of bearing dynamics [13]. Similarly, Berri
et al. used a high-ﬁdelity simulation to build their machine learning model for aircraft actuator RUL
prediction [22]. Abbas et al. used standard simulation software, found in the automotive industry,
to generate data and build a prognostics system for detecting faults in car electrical systems [23].
Finally, Liao and Köttig used a lumped parameter model, a physics based model, of a lithium ion
battery to enhance their machine learner’s prediction of battery RUL [24].
Human feedback can be an effective method of representing expert knowledge in knowledge informed
ML. Active learning is a subset of human feedback whereby the machine learner selects data that is
4

0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Time (days)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Fraction Failing, F(t)
Weibull CDF
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Time (days)
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
Probability Density, f(t)
Weibull PDF
Figure 4: A Weibull CDF and its corresponding PDF. β = 2.0, η = 100 days
novel. The selected data is then labelled by a human expert [25]. Thus, the active learning system
can train its machine learner on less, and more information rich, data.
Nguyen et al. [18] use an active learning paradigm to create a partial discharge detection system,
used on industrial electrical systems, which is trainable on much less data through active learning.
Their method proves accurate with minimal degradation in performance. Active learning appears
to be an underexplored modality within PHM. The technique shifts the development focus from a
model-centric to a data-centric approach [26], which can be beneﬁcial in real-world PHM applications
where data is abundant but “messy”.
Fuzzy neural networks, and the logic rules they employ, can be used to represent expert knowledge as
well. Human knowledge is embedded through a series of “if-then” rules, which often derives from the
insights of a domain expert. Vassilopoulos and Bedi [15] employ an adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference
system (ANFIS) to model fatigue behaviour in composites and predict RUL. Wang et al. [27] use a
fuzzy neural network to provide gear wear forecasting.
A Bayesian network is a method of representing expert knowledge through probabilistic relations.
When developing a Bayesian network, experts may be involved in deﬁning the variables, establishing
conditional relationships, or setting the conditional probabilities. Kallen and Van Noortwijk [16]
enhance the risk-based-inspection process for industrial pressure vessels using a gamma process and
a Bayesian update model. The use of the Bayesian model allows experts to account for imperfect
inspection results. Weidl et al. [17] provided insight into causes of abnormalities in a complex
industrial process using a Bayesian network. Deep expert knowledge of the process, and a ﬁrm
understanding of potential failure modes, was required to build their network structure.
For the purposes of this research, the knowledge is represented through the probabilistic relationship
of the Weibull distribution, and in particular the Weibull cumulative distribution function (CDF),
described in the section below. The probabilistic relationship exists a priori from reliability engineer-
ing and failure data. Others use probabilistic relationships for RUL prediction [28], but often they
generate the probability as a part of a feature engineer process or machine learning pipeline.
1.2.1
Weibull Distribution
The likelihood of a component failing can be well represented by the Weibull distribution, which was
ﬁrst formalized by Walloddi Weibull in his seminal 1951 paper [29]. Today, the Weibull distribution
is widely used in reliability engineering due to its expressiveness and ability to model a wide range of
failure types [30]. In addition, there are multiple examples of the Weibull distribution being used in
PHM research across a variety of applications [31–33].
The two parameter Weibull cumulative distribution function (CDF) is the probability of failure, F(t),
given a time, t, as shown in Figure 4 Alternatively, it is the fraction of units failing up-to time t. The
CDF is used in this research.
5

The CDF function is deﬁned as:
F(t) = 1 −e−(t/η)β
(1)
where β is the shape parameter and η is the characteristic life. When plotted on a log-log scale β is
the slope of the line. The characteristic life, η, is the age where 63.2% of the units have failed.
The shape parameter, β, corresponds to where a component commonly fails at the end of its useful
life. As illustrated in Figure 3, a component that has a high probability of failure in its run-in period
(infant mortality) will have a β value of less-than one. A component that has a random probability of
failure during its design life will have a β value of approximately one. Finally, a component that has
a high probability of failure due to wearout will have a β value greater than one.
A reliability engineer’s job may entail creating a library of shape parameters (β) for common and
critical components. The shape parameters are created through diligent analysis of failures and a
thorough collection of history. With enough failures, a characteristic life (η) can be estimated. This
knowledge, of the β and η, exists outside of the machine learning pipeline, and can be utilized to
parametrize a Weibull distribution.
1.2.2
Using the Weibull Distribution with Insufﬁcient Failure Data
In the ideal case, as described above, the shape parameter (β) and characteristic life (η) will be
produced from the reliability engineering process through a rich history and careful analysis of
failures. The method of Reliability Centered Maintenance (RCM) codiﬁes this practice and is
commonplace in industry [20, 21]. However, in a newer manufacturing facility, for example, there
will not be sufﬁcient failure history to properly ﬁt a Weibull distribution on components of concern.
In this situation, where only a few examples of failures exist, the following equation can be used to
estimate the characteristic life given a reasonable estimate for β:
η =
"X
i=1
tβ
i
r
#1/β
(2)
where:
t = time or cycles,
r = number of failed units,
N = number of failures plus incomplete run-to-failure samples
Equation 2 is derived using the maximum-likelihood method. With the estimated values of β and η, a
Weibull distribution can be drawn. This above procedure is sometimes called the Weibayes method
[34].
In the case of the newer manufacturing facility, the estimates of the shape parameter (β) may be
derived from a sister manufacturing facility that has a similar layout, but with a longer operational
history.
We conducted simple RUL experiments on two bearing data sets in this research. Both bearing data
sets have insufﬁcient failure data to properly parametrize a Weibull distribution. As such, we used
the Weibayes equation and some generally acceptable values for bearing shape parameters [34], as
shown below in Table 1. Further limitations to this approach are discussed in Section 4.1.
Table 1: β estimates for bearings
Component Type
β Estimate
Ball bearing
2.0
Roller bearing
1.5
6

1.3
Integration of Knowledge
Knowledge integration is the ﬁnal step in knowledge informed machine learning. There are four
primary methods of knowledge integration: using training data, using hypothesis sets, using learning
algorithms, and using a ﬁnal hypothesis check.
Simulations, as shown by Sobie [13] and Berri [22], are often integrated into the training data in
knowledge informed machine learning. Creating the simulations is explicit knowledge that lives
outside the domain of machine learning. The simulations can then be used to produce data that is
used to train a machine learner.
Wang [11] and Yucesan [12] use their empirically based algebraic equations as an additional source of
information for their training data. In essence, they use the information from their algebraic equations
and fuse it with the data collected via sensors – a process called data fusion [35]. Subjectively, there
are many empirical equations across various engineering disciplines that could be integrated into the
training data in a similar way.
Pre-existing knowledge can also be used to constrain the space over which a machine learner searches;
that is, knowledge is integrated into the hypothesis set. Lu et al. [36] apply this method of integrating
knowledge into the hypothesis set in their application of electrochemical micro-machining. They
embedded several linear equations, approximated with Taylor functions, as linear activations in the
neural network. The network was then used to assess product quality.
The use of Bayesian [16, 17] and fuzzy networks [15, 27] is also an example of knowledge integrated
into the hypothesis set. As noted in Section 1.1, Baseman et al. [14] leveraged spatial interdependence
to detect failures in computing memory. The spatial interdependence is expressed through a graph
representation, also called a graph network, of the data. The use of a graph network is an effective
method of integrating knowledge, often from experts, through a hypothesis set. The method is also
used by Ruiz-Tagle Palazuelos and Droguett [37] to represent interdependence between equipment in
a chemical facility. They use the graph representation, and a convolutional neural network, to assess
the health of a chlorine dioxide generation system.
Integration of knowledge through a ﬁnal hypothesis often involves a consistency check [2]. That
is, the results from a machine learning model are checked against external knowledge, which can
be used to measure the performance of the model. To the authors’ awareness, this method is not
common in PHM.
Finally, knowledge can be integrated in a machine learner via a learning algorithm. A common
approach is to integrate the external knowledge into the loss function. The loss function is then used
in the training of a neural network. The knowledge-based loss function acts as a constraint on the
machine learner during its training. This method, and speciﬁcally, a Weibull-based loss function, is
used in this research and described below.
1.3.1
Knowledge-based Loss Functions
The training of a neural network is achieved by minimizing a loss function, in a process called back
propagation [38]. A common loss function is the mean-squared-error (MSE) loss, as shown by:
LMSE = 1
n
n
X
i=1
(yi −ˆyi)2
(3)
where y is the true label and ˆy is the predicted label.
A knowledge-based loss functions, also called a hybrid loss functions, combines domain speciﬁc
knowledge with traditional label-based loss , such as the MSE loss. The knowledge-based loss
function can be represented by:
Lhybrid = LMSE + λLdomain
(4)
where LMSE is the mean-squared-error loss function, Ldomain is the domain speciﬁc loss function, and
λ is a hyper-parameter to set the weight of the domain loss term.
7

There is a growing library of knowledge-based loss functions and methods being used in today’s
machine learning literature. Stewart and Ermon [39] used basic equations of motion to help train a
neural network to predict the trajectory of a thrown object. Importantly, they employed a label-free
method that did not require ground-truth labels during training.
Wang et al. [11] used the fact that tool wear tends to increase, monotonically, to help guide the
training of their neural network. This method, the monotonicity constraint, is embedded in the loss
function.
Another method of embedding knowledge in the loss function is through an approximation constraint.
An approximation constraint enforces a realistic upper and lower bound on the results of a neural
network during training. The bounds can be deﬁned by expertise, a probabilistic relation, or else wise.
If the results, during training, deviates from the realistic bounds the approximation constraint will
apply a corrective force on the neural network.
Muralidhar et al. [1] demonstrate the effectiveness of the approximation constraint on synthetic data.
Stewart and Ermon [39] also use the approximation constraint to predict the position of a walking
person. They assumed that a person walks at a constant velocity over short periods of time, which
they then integrate into their loss function.
1.3.2
Weibull-Based Loss Function
The Weibull cumulative distribution function, F(t), can be combined as an approximation constraint
loss function. The Weibull-based loss function is as follows:
L(t, ˆt) = 1
n
n
X
i=1
(ti −ˆti)2
|
{z
}
MSE loss
+ λ 1
n
n
X
i=1
(F(ti) −F(ˆti))2
|
{z
}
Weibull loss
(5)
where n is the number of samples in the data set. F(ti) is the true fraction failing at time i, which
is calculated with the CDF function as shown in Equation 1. F(ˆti) is the estimated fraction failing
at time i. The estimated fraction failing is calculated from the output of neural network after each
training step.
The above Weibull-based loss function can be used both with sufﬁcient or insufﬁcient failure data.
When insufﬁcient failure data exists an estimate of the shape parameter (β) must be used, in combina-
tion with the Weibayes equation, to generate an estimated characteristic life (η). The experiment in
this work uses the latter approach with the Weibayes equation.
2
Data and Model
2.1
Data Description
The Weibull-based loss function was tested on neural networks trained on the common IMS [3] and
PRONOSTIA [4] bearing data sets. Both data sets are available on the NASA Prognostics Data
Repository. Table 2 details key parameters of these data sets.
Table 2: Key attributes of the IMS and PRONOSTIA bearing data sets
IMS
PRONOSTIA
Sampling Frequency
20,480 Hz
25,600 Hz
Operating Speed
2000 RPM
1800, 1650, 1500 RPM
Static Loading
26.7 kN
4, 4.2, 5 kN
Bore Diameter
49.2 mm
20 mm
Max Runtime
34 days 12h
126 min
The IMS bearing data set is from the University of Cincinnati, and consists of three run-to-failure
experiments on a loaded shaft. The shaft, as shown in Figure 5, was supported by four roller bearings,
with the housing of each bearing instrumented with a vertical and horizontal accelerometer.
8

Figure 5: IMS layout [40]
The loading and operating speeds were constant between IMS experiments. The accelerometer data
was collected approximately every 10 minutes in each run-to-failure data set, with each sample being
one minute in length.
The PRONOSTIA bearing data set, from the FEMTO-ST Institute in France, is a set of 17 accelerated
run-to-failure experiments. Acceleration and temperature data was collected on an test-bench, as
shown in Figure 6, that exposed a bearing to variable loads and speeds.
The PRONOSTIA experiments were conducted under three operating conditions as shown in Table 2.
The acceleration data was collected every 10 seconds, with each sample being 1/10-second in length.
Only the acceleration data was used in the research presented here.
2.2
Preprocessing and Feature Engineering
The purpose of this research is to understand if a Weibull-based loss function improves the results of
a RUL estimation task. As such, minimal preprocessing and feature engineering was performed on
the data sets
The IMS and PRONOSTIA data sets underwent similar preprocessing steps. First, each accel-
eration sample was detrended and then windowed with the Kaiser function. The samples were
subsequently moved into the frequency domain with the fast-Fourier transform (FFT). Figure 7 shows
a representative time domain and frequency domain signal after preprocessing.
Finally, each FFT spectrum was segmented into 20 equally sized bins. The maximum amplitude
within each bin became a value in the ﬁnal vector, x, making a total of 20 values. As shown below,
in Figure 8-a, each FFT spectrum can be plotted over time to form a spectrogram. Figure 8-b
demonstrates the spectrogram after each FFT spectrum has been segmented into “bins”. Each
vertical “slice” of the spectrogram corresponds to one data vector, x, that would be used in a neural
network. The Appendix contains the complete IMS and PRONOSTIA training, validation, and testing
spectrograms, similar to that seen in Figure 8-b,
9

Figure 6: The PRONOSTIA experimental test-bench [4]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Time (seconds)
0.50
0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
Acceleration (g)
Time Domain
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
Frequency (Hz)
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Amplitude
1e
2
Frequency Domain
Figure 7: Time and frequency domain of an acceleration signal from the IMS data set
10

Figure 8: (a) Spectrogram from the second IMS experiment, bearing one, horizontal acceleration
channel. (b) The resulting spectrogram after taking the maximum value in each of the 20 bins.
Each acceleration sample has an associated date and time of its creation. The date and time can be
used to represent the life percentage of the bearing, as done by Ali et al. [41], given by:
Life Percentage = ti
tN
× 100
(6)
where ti is the run-time of the acceleration sample, i. tN is the total run-time of the bearing, and N is
the number of samples in the experiment. The life percentage became the label, y, for each x vector.
2.3
Model
Many feed-forward neural network architectures were tested, on both data sets, to evaluate the
Weibull-based loss functions. The neural networks were built with differing number of layers and
units per layer, as detailed in Table 3. Figure 9 demonstrates what one of the models could look like.
Table 3: The number of layer and units per layer in the feed-forward neural networks
Parameter
Selection Choice
Number of layers
Between 2 and 7
Number of units per layer
16, 32, 64, 128, 256
For this research, the focus was on demonstrating the capability of the Weibull-based loss function
without the need for complex feature engineering or neural network architecture. As such, the simple
feed-forward neural network architecture was chosen. All models, even the largest model with 7
layers and 256 units per hidden layer, can be readily trained on a low-end GPU. Likewise, model
prediction is fast, due to the simple model architecture, even without a GPU.
Finally, nine loss functions, as shown in Table 4, were tested on each unique model architecture.
The loss functions consisted of traditional loss functions, and Weibull-based loss functions. The
Weibull-based loss functions can be further segmented into Weibull only loss functions (no traditional
loss function included) and Weibull combined loss functions (the traditional loss function is included
with the Weibull portion).
3
Experiment
The data was split into two training, validation, and testing sets, as shown in Tables 5 and 6, using the
horizontal acceleration values. Only the ﬁrst six runs on the PRONOSTIA data set were used.
After the preprocessing and feature engineering steps, minimum/maximum scaling (between 0 and 1)
was performed on the training sets. The same scaling was then applied to the respective validation and
11

Figure 9: One example of a neural network architecture tested during the experiment. The network
takes a vector input of size 20 and has three hidden layers with 32 neurons in each layer. Each layer
used dropout during training as a regularization method. The rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLu) activation
was used throughout, except for the last layer which used a sigmoid activation.
Table 4: Loss functions tested
Loss Function
Equation
MSE Loss (LMSE)
1
n
Pn
i=1(ti −ˆti)2
RMSE Loss (LRMSE)
q
1
n
Pn
i=1(ti −ˆti)2
RMSLE Loss (LRMSLE)
q
1
n
Pn
i=1(log (ti + 1) −log (ˆti + 1))2
Weibull Only MSE Loss
(LWeibull-MSE)
λ 1
n
Pn
i=1(F(ti) −F(ˆti))2
Weibull
Only
RMSE
Loss (LWeibull-RMSE)
λ
q
1
n
Pn
i=1(F(ti) −F(ˆti))2
Weibull Only RMSLE
Loss (LWeibull-RMSLE)
λ
q
1
n
Pn
i=1(log (F(ti) + 1) −log (F(ˆti) + 1))2
Weibull-MSE Combined
Loss (LWeibull-MSE-Comb)
LMSE + λLWeibull-MSE
Weibull-RMSE
Loss
(LWeibull-RMSE-Comb)
LRMSE + λLWeibull-RMSE
Weibull-RMSLE
Loss
(LWeibull-RMSLE-Comb)
LRMSLE + λLWeibull-RMSLE
testing sets. The characteristic life, η, was calculated using the training data, the Weibayes equations,
and a β of 2.0, for each respective data set. Other shape parameters were brieﬂy tried in prototyping.
Anecdotally, a β of 2.0 was found to provide the most stability during training. However, this is seen
as a limitation to the experiment, further discussed in Section 4.1, and should be explored further.
A random search was used to select the hyperparameters for each model architecture. Table 7 shows
the parameters that were used in the random search. In general, a random search is more effective
than a grid search for selecting hyperparameters [42].
12

Table 5: IMS data splits. Only the horizontal channel used in each run.
Train
Validation
Test
run 2, bearing 1
run 1, bearing 3
run 1, bearing 4
run 3, bearing 3
Table 6: PRONOSTIA data splits. Horizontal channel used in each run.
Train
Validation
Test
Bearing1_1
Bearing1_2
Bearing1_3
Bearing2_1
Bearing2_2
Bearing2_3
Bearing3_1
Bearing3_2
Bearing3_3
During training, the ADAM optimizer was used to manage learning rate [43]. Early stopping, based
on the validation loss, was used to prevent overﬁtting. As an example of the early stopping, Figures 10
and 11 show where the top performing models quit training.
Figure 10: IMS learning curves for the top performing model. Early stopping was triggered at epoch
2, which became the ﬁnal model.
The mean squared error (MSE), root mean squared error (RMSE), root mean squared log error
(RSMLE), and the coefﬁcient of determination (R2) metrics were recorded for each model. R2 is a
metric that shows how well data ﬁts to a regression line and is often seen in RUL experiments for
measuring performance. R2 was used as the primary evaluation metric.
Numerous model architectures were created during the random search. For the IMS data set,
approximately 1000 architectures were tested. Each unique model architecture was used to train nine
models, one for each loss function as shown in Table 4, totaling 9,375 models. A similar number of
architectures were tested using the PRONOSTIA data set, totaling 8,495 models.
Finally, the data preprocessing was conducted in Python and the neural networks were constructed
with PyTorch. The random search and model training was performed on multiple NVIDIA P100
GPUs using approximately 8 days of combined GPU time. The reader can review all the code used in
the experiment on the author’s GitHub page1.
4
Results
A threshold, based on the RMSE and R2, was used to ﬁlter out poorly performing models from the
random search. To be classiﬁed as a well performing model, a trained neural network had to achieve
a R2 greater than 0.2 and a RMSE less than 0.35 on each of the training, validation, and testing sets,
as shown in Table 8. The thresholds were manually selected to be not overly restrictive, but effective
enough to remove erroneous models.
1https://github.com/tvhahn/weibull-knowledge-informed-ml
13

Table 7: The hyperparameters used in the random search
Parameter
Selection Choice
Batch size
32, 64, 128, 256, 512
Learning rate
0.1, 0.01, 0.001, 0.0001
Lambda
Floating point number between 0 and 3
Number of layers
Integer between 2 and 7
Number of units per layer
16, 32, 64, 128, 256
Probability of dropout
0.1, 0.2, 0.25, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6
Figure 11: PRONOSTIA learning curves for the top performing model. Early stopping was triggered
at epoch 250, which became the ﬁnal model.
After ﬁltering, 775 unique model architectures remained from the IMS data set, and 582 from the
PRONOSTIA data set. The top performing models, based on the R2 from the test data, was selected
from each of the 775 and 582 model architectures, respectively. Thus, it was found, empirically,
which loss function was most effective, as shown in Figure 12. The Weibull-RMSLE combined
loss functions performed best on the IMS data set. Interestingly, nearly all the Weibull-based loss
functions outperformed the traditional loss functions in the PRONOSTIA experiment.
Weibull-RMSLE
Combined
RMSLE
MSE
RMSE
Weibull-MSE
Combined
Weibull-RMSE
Combined
34.2 %
27.5 %
10.5 %
10.2 %
9.8 %
7.9 %
(a) IMS Most Successful Loss Function, by Percentage
Weibull-MSE
Combined
Weibull Only RMLSE
Weibull Only RMSE
Weibull Only MSE
Weibull-RMSLE
Combined
RMSLE
MSE
RMSE
Weibull-RMSE
Combined
28.2 %
15.5 %
15.1 %
10.0 %
8.8 %
7.0 %
6.2 %
5.0 %
4.3 %
(b) PRONOSTIA Most Successful Loss Function, by Percentage
Figure 12: The loss functions, ranked by how frequently they appeared in the results, after the poorly
performing models were ﬁltered out.
To further evaluate the results, the point-biserial correlation coefﬁcient of each loss function, against
the test R2, was found. Figure 13 illustrates the correlation, after ﬁltering, for both experiments. The
results were found to be statistically signiﬁcant (P-value < 0.05) for all the loss functions, except for
14

Table 8: The threshold values used to ﬁlter out poorly performing models.
Train
Val
Test
R2
> 0.2
> 0.2
> 0.2
RMSE
< 0.35
< 0.35
< 0.35
the RMSLE and Weibull-RMSE combined on the PRONOSTIA data set. The “Weibull only” loss
functions failed to produce any models that exceeded the ﬁltering threshold in the IMS experiment,
as shown in Figure 13-a. This result is further discussed in Section 4.2.
0.13
Weibull-RMSLE
Combined
0.12
RMSLE
-0.05
MSE
-0.05
RMSE
-0.06
Weibull-RMSE
Combined
-0.08
Weibull-MSE
Combined
(a) IMS Correlation of Loss Functions with Test R2
0.20
Weibull Only
RMLSE
0.13
Weibull-RMSLE
Combined
0.12
Weibull Only
RMSE
0.01
RMSLE
-0.01
Weibull-RMSE
Combined
-0.07
RMSE
-0.07
MSE
-0.10
Weibull-MSE
Combined
-0.17
Weibull Only
MSE
Not statistically significant
(b) PRONOSTIA Correlation of Loss Functions with Test R2
Figure 13: The loss functions, ranked by how frequently they appeared in the ﬁnal results, after the
poorly performing models were removed.
Table 9 shows the parameters for the single best performing models from the IMS and PRONOSTIA
experiments. Figures 14 and 15 show the prediction of these models across their respective training,
validation, and testing data sets. Plotting the results, in this way, can assist the reader in gaining an
intuitive understanding of the models’ performance.
Based on these results, the Weibull-based loss functions proves beneﬁcial on the PRONOSTIA data
set. In fact, only the Weibull-based loss functions (Weibull only RMSLE, Weibull-RMSLE combined,
and Weibull only RMSE), as illustrated in Figure 13-b, convey a positive beneﬁt to the predictive
performance of the model.
However, the results from the IMS experiment are less conclusive. The Weibull-RMSLE combined
loss functions and the RMSLE loss functions, as shown in Figure 13-a, convey positive beneﬁt to
their models. Yet, the Weibull-RMSLE combined loss function is only slightly more effective than
the RMSLE loss function. Furthermore, the Weibull only RMSLE loss function fails to produce any
models that pass the ﬁltering criteria. As such, one can conclude that the largest beneﬁt comes from
the use of the RMSLE metric, in both the Weibull-RMSLE combined and RMSLE loss functions,
15

Table 9: The threshold values used to ﬁlter out poorly performing models.
Best IMS Model
Best PRONOSTIA Model
Loss Function
Weibull-RMSE Combined
Weibull Only RMLSE
Layers
4
2
Units per Layer
32
32
Drop Prob.
0
0.25
λ
0.53
2.28
β
2
2
η
63.9 days
4.8 hours
0
2.3
4.5
6.8
Runtime (days)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Life Percentage
RMSE = 0.183
R2 = 0.597
(a) Train Results (run 2, bearing 1)
True Life Percentage
2hr Rolling Avg
Predicted Life Percentage
0
15.1
29.7
44.6
RMSE = 0.264
R2 = 0.163
(b) Train Results (run 3, bearing 3)
0
17.9
27.3
34.2
RMSE = 0.220
R2 = 0.398
(c) Val Results (run 1, bearing 3)
0
17.9
27.3
34.2
RMSE = 0.146
R2 = 0.735
(d) Test Results (run 1, bearing 4)
Figure 14: The predictions of the best performing model from the IMS experiment. The “2hr rolling
average” is an average of the predictions over a 2-hour time frame and is added in order to clearly
visualize the trend line. The “jumps” in the “True Life Percentage” line, such as in ﬁgure (c) are due
to gaps in the collection of data. Note: the y-axis (life percentage) is the same for all four ﬁgures.
rather than the inclusion of the knowledge-based loss function. Further analysis and limitations are
discussed below.
4.1
Limitations
As noted in the introduction, this research intentionally uses a simpliﬁed feature engineering and
neural network approach and this may be seen as a limitation. However, the intent of the research
is to demonstrate the effectiveness of the Weibull-based loss function as opposed to a state-of-the-
art feature engineering or RUL technique. The simpliﬁed feature engineering and neural network
approach allowed for many models to be trained, thus proving the effectiveness of the method with
statistical signiﬁcance.
The above limitation also prevents the direct comparison of this method to other RUL techniques.
However, the Weibull-based loss function would rarely be used in isolation. Rather, it would be
used with a combination of techniques, such as advanced feature engineering, state-of-the-art deep
learning networks and techniques, and data sets that are more robust. The Weibull-based loss function
thus becomes one of many techniques that are combined, and adjusted, to make a viable RUL model.
16

0
2.6
5.2
7.8
Runtime (hours)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Life Percentage
RMSE = 0.231
R2 = 0.356
(a) Train Results (Bearing1_1)
True Life Percentage
2min Rolling Avg
Predicted Life Percentage
0
0.8
1.7
2.5
RMSE = 0.236
R2 = 0.332
(b) Train Results (Bearing2_1)
0
0.5
0.9
1.4
RMSE = 0.262
R2 = 0.173
(c) Train Results (Bearing3_1)
0
0.8
1.6
2.4
RMSE = 0.235
R2 = 0.334
(d) Val Results (Bearing1_2)
0
0.7
1.5
2.2
RMSE = 0.245
R2 = 0.281
(e) Val Results (Bearing2_2)
0
1.5
3.0
4.5
RMSE = 0.261
R2 = 0.182
(f) Val Results (Bearing3_2)
0
1.7
3.3
5.0
RMSE = 0.133
R2 = 0.788
(g) Test Results (Bearing1_3)
0
1.1
2.2
3.3
RMSE = 0.168
R2 = 0.660
(h) Test Results (Bearing2_3)
0
0.3
0.6
1.0
RMSE = 0.200
R2 = 0.515
(i) Test Results (Bearing3_3)
Figure 15: The predictions of the best performing model from the PRONOSTIA experiment. The
“2min rolling average” is an average of the predictions over a 2-minute time frame and is added in
order to clearly visualize the trend line.
Another legitimate concern is the instability of the model, during training, when a shape parameter
(β) other than 2.0 was used. The instability could indicate that an assumed β of 1.5, in the case of the
IMS data set, is unrealistic due to the contrived nature of the data. The instability could also indicate
an architectural problem with the neural network. This problem may be rectiﬁed with standard
tools of gradient clipping or changes to the learning rate. Further exploration is required, and other
researchers are encouraged to modify the publicly available code to improve the methods.
Finally, there are constraints in the data sets which lead to a difference in results between the
PRONOSTIA and IMS experiments, which are discussed below.
4.2
Further Analysis
The Weibull-based loss functions is beneﬁcial in the PRONOSTIA experiments. Yet, the Weibull-
based loss function shows less beneﬁt for the IMS experiments, and only when the RMSLE metric
is used. Appreciating the challenges in the two data sets can provide possible explanations for the
divergence in results.
Bearing manufacturers have worked over many years to produce reliable and long-life bearings.
Given appropriate mechanical design and operating conditions (such as loading and lubrication), the
life of a bearing should fall within a designated range, as noted by the bearings L10 life [44]. Bearings
designed and operated in these suitable conditions will naturally fail within a well parameterized
Weibull distribution.
17

However, both the IMS and PRONOSTIA data sets are from test rigs that intentionally accelerate
bearing failures through the application of high loads and stresses. These high loadings produce
failure signatures that are abnormal from real-world applications.
In the PRONOSTIA data set, common failures signatures, such as ball pass frequencies, are not
observable due to the excessive loading, as noted by the creators of the data set [4]. The excessive
loading causes high levels of noise in the vibration signatures and a blending of many failure modes
together. As such, it is reasonable to assume that the PRONOSTIA data set carries much less useful
“information” in each of its runs than a comparable data set from a real-world application.
The lower information density in the PRONOSTIA data set makes the training of machine learning
models more challenging. Thus, the machine learning models must rely on others sources of
knowledge during training. In the case of our experiment, the knowledge derives from the introduction
of the Weibull-based loss function. As such, the Weibull-based loss functions consistently outperform
the traditional loss functions in our experiments, as shown in Figures 12-b and 13-b.
The IMS data set better simulates a real-world industrial application and is of higher data quality.
Ball pass frequencies are visible, demonstrating the superior informational quality in the data [40].
However, the data set has fewer examples of failures than in the PRONOSTIA data set, and thus, less
data for the machine learning models to learn from. Figure 16 shows the distribution of early stopping
times for both the IMS and PRONOSTIA experiments. The majority of models quit training after
six epochs in the IMS experiments. For the PRONOSTIA data set, the majority of models stopped
training between 36 and 98 epochs, depending on whether the Weibull-based loss function was
used (see Table 10 in the appendix for the summary statistics behind Figure 16). A neural network
training on fewer examples will more quickly overﬁt the data, as is the case with the IMS experiment.
Consequently, the early stopping engages sooner in the IMS experiments to prevent overﬁtting.
0
50
100
150
200
250
Early Stopping Epoch
Traditional Loss
Functions
Weibull Loss
Functions
(a) IMS Distribution of Early Stopping Times
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Early Stopping Epoch
(b) PRONOSTIA Distribution of Early Stopping Times
Figure 16: Distribution of early stopping times for both the IMS and PRONOSTIA experiments.
Each dot represents when one model quit training due to early stopping. The width of the violin
shape represents the relative frequency of early stopping times.
In addition, the limited number of runs in the IMS data set could produce a poor estimation of the
characteristic life, η. The estimation error would also be affected by the inherently stochastic nature
of bearing failures [45], which is not as present in the PRONOSTIA data set due to the blending of
failure modes. Regarding the IMS data set, Gousseau et al. [40] speculate that the failure of bearing
three, during run 3 (corresponding to Figure 14-b), is a “false-positive”; that is, no failure takes place.
Here, in opposition to Gousseau et al., we counter that the failure in this bearing likely exists. Rather,
the failure is rapid in nature, again highlighting the stochasticity in bearing failures [46].
These factors, namely the lower informational quality of the PRONOSTIA data set, the limited data in
the IMS data set, the potential error in the characteristic life, and the stochasticity in bearing failures,
could explain the divergence in results between the IMS and PRONOSTIA experiments.
18

The above discussion illustrates a pervasive problem in PHM research; that is, the limited availability
of large and high-quality data sets [47]. Regardless, we believe the method presented here, through
the Weibull-based loss function, will be useful to others. The process of integrating a Weibull-based
loss function into a neural network is simple, especially when an accurate knowledge of the shape
parameter already exists. The Weibull-based loss function, therefore, can be one of many parameters,
along with regularization techniques and model hyperparameters, that can be tuned to produce optimal
results.
4.3
Future Work
A natural path for future work is to test the Weibull-based loss functions on data from real-world
industrial environments. We suspect that applications consisting of large ﬂeets of pumps or gas
turbines, where failure modes and the associated Weibull distributions are well understood, would
beneﬁt from the use of the Weibull-based loss functions.
More broadly, we are interested in exploring other methods of knowledge informed machine learning
within PHM. The use of other constraints, such as the monotonicity and other approximation
constraints, can be readily tested in the existing experimental framework presented here. The
integration of physics-based models into the machine learner is also of interest.
5
Conclusion
Integrating external knowledge into a machine learner, called knowledge informed machine learning,
can improve the performance of PHM solutions. In this experiment, prior knowledge from the ﬁeld of
reliability engineering was used to improve the performance in a remaining useful life estimation task.
The knowledge was represented through the probabilistic relationship of the Weibull distribution.
The knowledge was integrated into the machine learning models using a Weibull-based loss function
as an approximation constraint.
The method was tested on the IMS and PRONOSTIA bearing data sets. In both experiments, the
Weibull-based loss function provided beneﬁts when compared to neural networks trained solely with
traditional loss functions. However, the beneﬁt was less signiﬁcant on the IMS data set. Subjectively,
the difference in results could derive from the lesser informational quality of the PRONOSTIA data
set, and the relatively small size of the IMS data set.
Integrating knowledge through the Weibull-based loss function shows promise. The Weibull-based
loss function is simple to implement and can be combined with other techniques to improve neural
network performance. All the code is publicly available to assist other researchers in their endeavors.
19
