Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research 35 (2009) 391– 447
Submitted 09/08; published 06/09
Learning Bayesian Network Equivalence Classes with
Ant Colony Optimization
Rónán Daly

Department of Computing Science
University of Glasgow
Sir Alwyn Williams Building
Glasgow, G12 8QQ, UK
Qiang Shen

Department of Computer Science
Aberystwyth University
Penglais Campus
Aberystwyth, SY23 3DB, UK
Abstract
Bayesian networks are a useful tool in the representation of uncertain knowledge. This paper
proposes a new algorithm called ACO-E, to learn the structure of a Bayesian network. It does this
by conducting a search through the space of equivalence classes of Bayesian networks using Ant
Colony Optimization (ACO). To this end, two novel extensions of traditional ACO techniques are
proposed and implemented. Firstly, multiple types of moves are allowed. Secondly, moves can be
given in terms of indices that are not based on construction graph nodes. The results of testing
show that ACO-E performs better than a greedy search and other state-of-the-art and metaheuristic
algorithms whilst searching in the space of equivalence classes.
1. Introduction
The task of learning Bayesian networks from data has, in a relatively short amount of time, become a
mainstream application in the process of knowledge discovery and model building (Aitken, Jirapech-
Umpai, & Daly, 2005; Heckerman, Mamdani, & Wellman, 1995). The reasons for this are many. For
one, the model built by the process has an intuitive feel – this is because a Bayesian network consists
of a directed acyclic graph (DAG), with conditional probability tables annotating each node. Each
node in the graph represents a variable of interest in the problem domain and the arcs can (with some
caveats) be seen to represent causal relations between these variables (Heckerman, Meek, & Cooper,
1999) – the nature of these causal relations is governed by conditional probability tables associated
with each node/variable. An example Bayesian network is shown in Figure 1.
Another reason for the popularity of Bayesian networks is that aside from the visual attractiveness
of the model, the underlying theory is quite well understood and has a solid foundation. A Bayesian
network can be seen as a factorization of a joint probability distribution, with the conditional
probability distributions at each node making up the factors and the graph structure making up
their method of combination. Because of this equivalence, the network can answer any probabilistic
question regarding the variables modeled.
In addition, the popularity of Bayesian networks has been increased by the accessibility of meth-
ods to query the model and learn both the structure and parameters of the network
c⃝2009 AI Access Foundation. All rights reserved.

DALY & SHEN
Figure 1: An example Bayesian network
(Daly, Shen, & Aitken, 2009). It has been shown that inference in Bayesian networks is NP-complete
(Dagum & Luby, 1993; Shimony, 1994), but approximate methods have been found to perform
this operation in an acceptable amount of time. Learning the structure of Bayesian networks is also
NP-complete (Chickering, 1996a), but here too, methods have been found to render this operation
tractable. These include greedy search, iterated hill climbing and simulated annealing (Chickering,
Geiger, & Heckerman, 1996). Recently however, other heuristics have become popular with the
problem of combinatorial optimization in high dimensional spaces. These include approaches such
as tabu search (Glover, 1989, 1990), genetic algorithms (Mitchell, 1996) and – the approach that
this paper will investigate – Ant Colony Optimization (ACO).
ACO is a fairly recent, so called metaheuristic, that is used in the solution of combinatorially hard
problems (Dorigo & Stützle, 2004). It is an iterated, stochastic technique that is biased by the results
of previous iterations (Birattari, Caro, & Dorigo, 2002). The method is modeled on the behavior of
real-life ants foraging for food.
Many ants secrete a pheromone trail that is recognizable by other ants and which positively biases
them to follow that trail, with a stronger trail meaning it is more likely to be biased towards it. Over
time this pheromone trail evaporates. When hunting for food, an ant’s behavior is to randomly walk
about, perhaps by following a pheromone trail, until it ﬁnds some food. It then returns in the direction
from whence it came. Because the strength of the trail is a factor in choosing to follow it, if an ant is
faced with two or more pheromone trails to choose from, it will tend to choose the trails with the
highest concentration of pheromone.
With these characteristics, in a situation where there are multiple paths to a food source, ants
generally follow the shortest path. This can be explained as follows. Assuming ants start from a nest
and no pheromone trails are present, they will randomly wander until they reach a food source and
then return home, laying pheromone on the way back. The ant that chooses the shortest path to the
food source will return home the quickest, which means their pheromone trail will have the highest
concentration, as more pheromone is laid per unit of time. This stronger trail will cause other ants to
392

LEARNING BAYESIAN NETWORK EQUIVALENCE CLASSES WITH ANT COLONY OPTIMIZATION
prefer it over longer trails. These ants will then leave their own pheromone on this short trail, thereby
providing a reinforcing behavior to choose this trail over others.
As a computing technique, ACO is roughly modeled on this behavior. Artiﬁcial ants walk around
a graph where the nodes represent pieces of a solution. They continue this until a complete solution is
found. At each node, a choice of the next edge to traverse is made, depending on a pheromone value
associated with the edge and a problem speciﬁc heuristic. After a number of ants have performed
a traversal of the graph, one of the best solutions is chosen and the pheromone on the edges that
were taken is increased, relative to the other edges. This biases the ants towards choosing these edges
in future iterations. The search stops when a problem speciﬁc criterion is reached. This could be
stagnation in the quality of solutions or the passage of a ﬁxed amount of time.
This paper will seek to use the ACO technique in learning Bayesian networks. Speciﬁcally, it
will be used to learn an equivalence class of Bayesian network structures. To this end, the rest of
this paper will be structured in the following fashion. Firstly, there will be a more in-depth study of
the problem of searching for an optimum Bayesian network, in both the space of Bayesian networks
themselves and of equivalence classes of Bayesian networks. Then, a new method of formulating
a search for a Bayesian network structure in terms of the ACO metaheuristic will be introduced.
This method is based in part on earlier work done on this topic (Chickering, 2002a; de Campos,
Fernández-Luna, Gámez, & Puerta, 2002). Next, results of tests against previous techniques will be
discussed and ﬁnally, conclusions and possible future directions will be stated.
2. Searching for a Bayesian Network Structure
There are, in general, three different methods used in learning the structure of a Bayesian network
from data. The ﬁrst ﬁnds conditional independencies in the data and then uses these conditional
independencies to produce the structure (Spirtes, Glymour, & Scheines, 2000). Probably the most
well known algorithms that use this method are the PC algorithm by Spirtes and Glymour (1990) and
the CI and FCI algorithms of Spirtes, Meek, and Richardson (1995) that are able to identify latent
variables and selection bias. The second uses dynamic programming and optionally, clustering, to
construct a DAG (Ott, Imoto, & Miyano, 2004; Ott & Miyano, 2003). The third method – which
is to be dealt with here – deﬁnes a search on the space of Bayesian networks. This method uses a
scoring function deﬁned by the implementer, which says relatively how good a network is compared
to others.
Although the classiﬁcation into three different methods as noted above is useful in differentiating
their applicability, the boundaries between them are often not as clear as they may seem. E.g. the
score and search approach and the dynamic programming approach are both similar in that they
use scoring functions. Indeed, there is a view by Cowell (2001) that the conditional independence
approach is equivalent to minimizing the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence (Kullback & Leibler,
1951) using the score and search approach. Before discussing how the score and search method
works, some deﬁnitions and notation will be introduced.
A graph G is given as a pair (V,E), where V = {v1,...,vn} is the set of vertices or nodes in the
graph and E is the set of edges or arcs between the nodes in V. A directed graph is a graph where all
the edges have an associated direction from one node to another. A directed acyclic graph or DAG, is
a directed graph without any cycles, i.e. it is not possible to return to a node in the graph by following
the direction of the arcs. For illustration, the graph in Figure 2 is a DAG. The parents of a node vi,
Pa(vi), are all the nodes vj such that there is an arrow from vj to vi (vj →vi). The descendants of vi,
393

DALY & SHEN
Figure 2: A directed acyclic graph
Figure 3: The skeleton of the DAG in Figure 2
D(vi), are all the nodes (not including vi) reachable from vi by following the arrows in a forwards
direction repeatedly. The non-descendants of vi, ND(vi), are all the nodes (not including vi) that are
not descendants of vi.
Let there be a graph G = (V,E) and a joint probability distribution P over the nodes in V. Let
IP (X,Y|Z) mean that each of the variables in set X is conditionally independent of each of the
variables in set Y under probability distribution P given the variables in set Z. Say also that the
following is true
∀v ∈V.IP ({v},ND(v)|Pa(v)).
That is, each node is conditionally independent of its non-descendants, given its parents. Then it is
said that G satisﬁes the Markov condition with P, and that (G,P) is a Bayesian network. Notice the
conditional independencies implied by the Markov condition. They allow the joint distribution P to
be written as the product of conditional distributions; P(v1|Pa(v1))P(v2|Pa(v2))···P(vn|Pa(vn)) =
P(v1,v2,...,vn). However, more importantly, the reverse can also be true. Given a DAG G and
either discrete conditional distributions or certain types of continuous conditional distributions (e.g.
Gaussians), of the form P(vi|Pa(vi)) then there exists a joint probability distribution
P(v1,v2,...,vn) = P(v1|Pa(v1))P(v2|Pa(v2))···P(vn|Pa(vn)).
This means that if we specify a DAG – known as the structure – and conditional probability distribu-
tions for each node given its parents, which are often parameterised, we have a Bayesian network,
which is a representation of a joint probability distribution.
In learning a Bayesian network from data, both the structure G and parameters of the conditional
probability distributions Θ must be learned, normally separately. In the case of complete multinomial
data, the problem of learning the parameters is easy given certain reasonable assumptions, with a
simple closed form formula for Θ (Heckerman, 1995). However, in the case of learning the structure,
no such formula exists and other methods are needed. In fact, learning the optimal structure with
discrete variables is an NP-hard problem in almost all circumstances and consequently enumeration
and test of all network structures is not likely to succeed (Chickering, 1996a; Chickering, Heckerman,
& Meek, 2004). With just ten variables there are roughly 1018 possible DAGs. Whilst there exist
dynamic programming methods that can handle roughly 30 variables as discussed above, in general,
non-exact and heuristic methods are possibly the only tractable solution to anything above this.
394

LEARNING BAYESIAN NETWORK EQUIVALENCE CLASSES WITH ANT COLONY OPTIMIZATION
In order to create a space in which to search through, three components are needed. Firstly all
the possible solutions must be identiﬁed as the set of states in the space. Secondly a representation
mechanism for each state is needed. Finally a set of operators must be given, in order to move from
state to state in the space.
Once the search space has been deﬁned, two other pieces are needed to complete the search
algorithm, a scoring function which evaluates the “goodness of ﬁt” of a structure with a set of data
and a search procedure that decides which operator to apply, normally using the scoring function
to see how good a particular operator application might be. An example of a search procedure is
greedy search, which at every stage applies the operator that produces the best change in the structure,
according to the scoring function. As for the scoring function, various formulæ have been found to
see how well a DAG matches a data sample.
One of these functions is given by computing the relative posterior probability of a structure G
given a sample of data D, i.e.
S(G,D) = P(G,D) = P(D|G)P(G).
The likelihood term above can take many forms. One popular method is called the Bayesian Dirichlet
(BD) metric. Here,
P(D|G) =
n
∏
i=1
qi
∏
j=1
Γ(N′
i j)
Γ(N′
i j +Ni j) ·
ri
∏
k=1
Γ(N′
i jk +Ni jk)
Γ(N′
i jk)
(1)
In this formula, there are n variables in the graph, so the ﬁrst product is over each variable. There
are qi conﬁgurations of the parents of node i, so the second product is over all possible parent
conﬁgurations, i.e. the Cartesian product of the number of possible values each parent variable can
take. Each variable i can take on one of ri possible values. The value Ni jk is the number of times
that variable i = k and the parents of i are in conﬁguration j in the data sample D. Ni j is given as
∑ri
k=1 Ni jk, i.e. the sum of Nijk over all possible values that i can take on. With N′
i j = ∑ri
i=1 N′
i jk, the
values N′
ijk are given as parameters that give different variants of the BD metric. E.g. if N′
i jk is set to 1
the K2 metric results, as given by Cooper and Herskovits (1992). With N′
i jk set to N′/(ri ·qi) (where
N′, known as the equivalent sample size is a measure of the conﬁdence in the prior network), the
BDeu metric results which was proposed by Buntine (1991) and further generalised by Heckerman,
Geiger, and Chickering (1995).
The prior value P(G) is a measure of how probable a particular structure is before any data is
seen. These values can often be hard to estimate because of the massive numbers of graphs, each
of them needing a probability. Therefore, the values are often given as uniform over all possible
network structures or possibly favouring structures with less arcs.
Other forms used for the scoring function are S(G,D) = logP(D|G, ˆΘ)−d
2 logN, known as the
Bayesian information criterion (BIC) (Schwarz, 1978) and S(G,D) = logP(D|G, ˆΘ)−d, known as
the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) (Akaike, 1974). In these models, the parameters ˆΘ give the
maximum likelihood estimate of the likelihood, d is the number of free parameters in the structure
and N is the number of samples in the data D.
Traditionally, in searching for a Bayesian network structure, the set of states is the set of possible
Bayesian network structures, the representation is a DAG and the set of operators are various small
local changes to a DAG, e.g. adding, removing or reversing an arc, as illustrated in Table 1. This type
395

DALY & SHEN
Operator
Before
After
Insert_Arc(X,Y)
Delete_Arc(X,Y)
Reverse_Arc(X,Y)
Table 1: Basic modiﬁcation operators
of search is convenient because of the decomposition properties of score functions,
S(G,D) =
n
∏
i=1
s
 vi,PaG (vi),D

,
where s is a scoring function that takes a node vi and the parents of this node in graph G, PaG (vi).
Popular scoring functions such as the BD metric are decomposable in this manner. Successful
application of the operators is also dependent on the changed graph being a DAG, i.e. that no cycle is
formed in applying the operator.
3. Searching in the Space of Equivalence Classes
According to many scoring criteria, there are DAGs that are equivalent to one another, in the sense
that they will produce the same score as each other. It has been known for some time that these DAGs
are equivalent to one another, in that they entail the same set of independence constraints as each
other, even though the structures are different. According to a theorem by Verma and Pearl (1991),
two DAGs are equivalent if and only if they have the same skeletons and the same set of v-structures.
The ‘skeleton’ is the undirected graph that results in undirecting all edges in a DAG (see Figure
3) and a ‘v-structure’ (sometimes referred to as a morality), is a head-to-head meeting of two arcs,
where the tails of the arcs are not joined. These concepts are illustrated in Figure 4. From this notion
of equivalence, a class of DAGs that are equivalent to each other can be deﬁned, notated here as
Class(G).
3.1 Representation of Equivalence Classes
Because of this apparent redundancy in the space of DAGs, attempts have been made to conduct
the search for Bayesian network structures in the space of equivalence classes of DAGs (Acid &
de Campos, 2003; Chickering, 1996b, 2002a; Munteanu & Bendou, 2001). The search set of this
space is the set of equivalence classes of DAGs and will be referred to as E-space. To represent the
members of this equivalence class, a different type of structure is used, known as a partially directed
acyclic graph (PDAG). A PDAG (an example of which is shown in Figure 5) is a graph that may
contain both undirected and directed edges and that contains no directed cycles and will be notated
396

LEARNING BAYESIAN NETWORK EQUIVALENCE CLASSES WITH ANT COLONY OPTIMIZATION
(a) (X,Y,Z) is a v-structure
(b) (X,Y,Z) is not a v-structure
Figure 4: V-Structures
Figure 5: A partially directed acyclic graph
Figure 6: A PDAG for which there exists no con-
sistent extension
herein as P. The equivalence class of DAGs corresponding to a PDAG is denoted as Class(P), with
a DAG G ∈Class(P) if and only if G and P have the same skeleton and same set of v-structures.
Related to this is the idea of a consistent extension. If a DAG G has the same skeleton and the
same set of v-structures as a PDAG P then it is said that G is a consistent extension of P. Not all
PDAGs have a DAG that is a consistent extension of itself. If a consistent extension exists, then it is
said that the PDAG admits a consistent extension. Only PDAGs that admit a consistent extension
can be used to represent an equivalence class of DAGs and hence a Bayesian network. An example
of a PDAG that does not have a consistent extension is shown in Figure 6. In this ﬁgure, directing
the edge x −y either way will create a v-structure that does not exist in the PDAG and hence no
consistent extension can exist.
Directed edges in a PDAG can be either: compelled, or made to be directed that way; or reversible,
in that they could be undirected and the PDAG would still represent the same equivalence class. From
this idea, a completed PDAG (CPDAG) can be deﬁned, where every undirected edge is reversible in
the equivalence class and every directed edge is compelled in the equivalence class. Such a CPDAG
will be denoted as as PC. It can be shown that there is a one-to-one mapping between a CPDAG
PC and Class(PC). Therefore, by supplying a CPDAG, one can uniquely denote a set of conditional
independencies. For a more in-depth look at this topic, see the papers of Andersson, Madigan, and
Perlman (1997) and Chickering (1995).
397

DALY & SHEN
3.2 Techniques for Searching through Equivalence Classes
Note that below, a move is referred to as an application of an operator to a particular state in the
search space.
To be able to conduct a search through the space of equivalence classes, a method must be able
to ﬁnd out whether a particular move is valid and if valid, how good that move is. These tasks are
relatively easy whilst searching through the space of DAGs – a check whether a move is valid is
equivalent to a check whether a move keeps a DAG acyclic. The goodness of such a move is found
out by using the scoring function, but rather than scoring each neighboring DAG in the search space,
the decomposability of most scoring criteria can be taken advantage of, with the result that only
nodes whose parent sets have changed need to be scored.
However, this task of checking move validity and move score is not as easy in the space of
equivalence classes. These classes are often represented by PDAGs, as discussed in the previous
section. For one, instead of just checking for cycles, checks also have to be made so that unintended
v-structures are not created in a consistent extension of a PDAG. Scoring a move also creates
difﬁculties, as it is hard to know what extension and hence what changes in parent sets of nodes will
occur, without actually performing this extension. Also, a local change in a PDAG might make a
non-local change in a corresponding consistent extension and so force unnecessary applications of
the score function.
These problems were voiced as concerns by Chickering (1996b). In that paper, validity checking
of moves is performed by trying to obtain a consistent extension of the resulting PDAG – if none
exists then the move is not valid. Scoring the move was achieved by scoring the changed nodes in the
consistent extension given. These methods were very generic, but resulted in a signiﬁcant slowdown
in algorithm execution, compared to search in the space of DAGs.
To alleviate this problem, authors proposed improvements that would allow move validity and
move score to be computed without needing to obtain a consistent extension of the PDAG (Acid &
de Campos, 2003; Chickering, 2002a; Munteanu & Bendou, 2001). This was done by deﬁning an
explicit set of operators, with each operator having a validity test and corresponding score change
function, that could be calculated on the PDAG. These changes led to a speedup of the execution
time of the algorithm, with the result that search in the space of equivalence classes of Bayesian
networks became competitive with search in the space of Bayesian networks. An example of one set
of these operators is given in Table 2. In this table, the variables x and y refer to nodes in a graph. As
an example, the InsertU operator takes two nodes as arguments, x and y. It can be seen that all the
operators take two arguments, except MakeV, which takes three arguments. Each operator also has a
set of validity tests that must be passed in order for the application of the operator with its particular
arguments to be valid. Finally, the score difference between the old and new PDAGs is given in the
last column.
Note that in this table:
Πx is the parent set of node x, i.e. the set of nodes that have directed arcs going to node x;
Nx is the neighbor set of node x, i.e. the set of nodes that have undirected arcs going to node x;
Nx,y is the set of shared neighbors of nodes x and y, i.e. Nx ∩Ny; and
Ωx,y is the set of parents of x that are neighbors of y, i.e. Πx ∩Ny.
398

LEARNING BAYESIAN NETWORK EQUIVALENCE CLASSES WITH ANT COLONY OPTIMIZATION
Operator
Effect
Validity Tests
Change in Score
InsertU
x−y
Add an
undirected arc
between x and y
1. Every undirected path from x
to y contains a node in Nx,y
2. Πx = Πy
s
 y,N+x
x,y ∪Πy

−s(y,Nx,y ∪Πy)
DeleteU
x−y
Delete an
undirected arc
between x and y
Nx,y is a clique
s(y,Nx,y ∪Πy)
−s
 y,N+x
x,y ∪Πy

InsertD
x →y
Add a directed
arc from x to y
1. Every semi-directed path
from y to x contains a node
in Ωx,y
2. Ωx,y is a clique
3. Πx ̸= Πy
s
 y,Ωx,y ∪Π+x
y

−s(y,Ωx,y ∪Πy)
DeleteD
x →y
Delete a directed
arc from x to y
Ny is a clique
s
 y,Ny ∪Π−x
y

−s(y,Ny ∪Πy)
ReverseD
x →y
Reverse a
directed arc from
x to y
1. Every semi-directed path
from x to y that does not
include the edge x →y
contains a node in Ωy,x ∪Ny
2. Ωy,x is a clique
s
 y,Π−x
y

+s

x,Π+y
x ∪Ωy,x

−s(y,Πy)
−s(x,Πx ∪Ωy,x)
MakeV
x →z ←y
Direct undirected
arcs from x and y
to z
Every undirected path
between x and y
contains a node in Nx,y
s

z,Π+y
z
∪N−z+x
x,y

+s
 y,Πy ∪N−z
x,y

−s
 z,Πz ∪N−z+x
x,y

−s(y,Πy ∪Nx,y)
Table 2: Validity conditions and change in score for each operator
399

DALY & SHEN
Also, as a convenience, M+x is notation for M ∪{x} and M−x is notation for M \{x}.
This notation and the set of operators in Table 2 come from those proposed by Chickering (2002a).
Other deﬁnitions include: an undirected path is a path from one node to another that only follows
undirected edges; a semi-directed path is a path from one node to another that only follows undirected
edges or directed edges from tail to head; and a set of nodes N is a clique, if it is a completely
connected subgraph of a graph, (i.e. every node is connected to every other in the subgraph).
3.3 Advantages of Searching in E-space
With this representation of equivalence classes of Bayesian network structures and a set of operators
that modify the CPDAGs which represent them (e.g. insert an undirected arc, insert a directed arc
etc.), a search procedure can proceed. However, what reasons are there for pursuing this type of
search? Chickering (2002a) gives a list of reasons, some of which are discussed here.
For one, an equivalence class can represent many different DAGs in a single structure. With a
DAG representation, time can be wasted rescoring DAGs that are in the same equivalence class. And
with a search in the space of DAGs, the connectivity of the search space can mean that the ability to
move to a particular neighboring equivalence class can be constrained by the particular representation
given by a DAG. There is also the problem given by the prior probability used in the scoring function.
Whilst searching through the space of DAGs, certain equivalence classes can be over represented by
this prior, because there are many more DAGs contained in the class. An example can be given in
the case of networks with two nodes. In B-space there are 3 possible structures, which with equal
priors give P(G) = 1/3, for each DAG G. However, the two DAGs that are connected represent the
same equivalence class, giving it an effective prior of 2/3. In E-space there are 2 possible structures,
which with equal priors give P(P) = 1/2, for each PDAG P. This is not necessarily a problem when
performing model selection, but becomes much more of an issue when performing model averaging.
These concerns have motivated researchers. In particular, recent implementations of algorithms
that search through the space of equivalence classes have produced results that show a marked
improvement in execution time and a small improvement in learning accuracy, depending on the type
of data set (Chickering, 2002a,b).
4. Ant Colony Optimization
Ant colony optimization is a global optimization technique generally used in the area of combinatorial
problems, i.e. problems where the set of solutions is discrete. Since the inception of its present form
by Dorigo (1992), ACO has been successfully applied to many combinatorially hard problems
including the sequential ordering problem (Gambardella & Dorgio, 2000), the vehicle routing
problem (Bullnheimer, Hartl, & Strauss, 1999), the bin-packing problem (Levine & Ducatelle, 2004)
and many more (Costa & Hertz, 1997; Gambardella & Dorgio, 2000; Maniezzo & Colorni, 1999;
Stützle, 1998). Such a diverse range of applications must ask the question as to what is the nature of
the system that can solve them.
The particular form of ACO is of a metaheuristic in the ﬁeld of swarm intelligence (Bonabeau,
Dorigo, & Theraulaz, 1999), that is based on the behavior of real-life ants as they forage for food.
A metaheuristic is a general purpose heuristic that guides other, more problem speciﬁc heuristics,
whilst swarm intelligence may be deﬁned as:
400

LEARNING BAYESIAN NETWORK EQUIVALENCE CLASSES WITH ANT COLONY OPTIMIZATION
‘algorithms or distributed problem-solving devices inspired by the collective be-
haviour of social insect colonies and other animal societies’ (Bonabeau, Dorigo et al.,
1999).
It is in this conceptual framework that ACO is deﬁned.
4.1 Ant Colony Optimization
Ant colony optimization is a swarm intelligence technique that is based on the foraging behavior of
real-life ants. In particular, it uses the principle of stigmergy (the indirect communication of agents
through the environment) as a communication mechanism. Real-life ants leave a chemical trail behind
them as they explore their environment. This trail is known as pheromone. In moving around, ants
are more likely to follow a path with more pheromone, than a path with less (or no) pheromone.
This behavior was investigated by Deneubourg, Aron, Goss, and Pasteels (1990), who designed an
experiment with a nest of Argentine ants, a food source and two trails between them that could be set
to different length. Ants would leave the nest, ﬁnd the food source and return back with food. When
the trails were of the same length, it was found that the ants would eventually settle on a single trail
for travel to and from the nest. This behavior can be explained as follows.
When the experiment begins, ants initially choose one of the trails at random. Whilst traversing
this trail, they deposit pheromone. This causes following ants to choose the trail the initial ants took
more often, and deposit more pheromone on that trail. Again, this causes more ants to choose the
initially chosen trail, to a greater degree than the ﬁrst set of ants. Put another way, each ant that
chooses a certain trail reinforces the probability that following ants will choose that trail. The trail
that initially gets chosen by more ants has more pheromone deposited per unit time and hence a
positive feedback or autocatalytic process is created, where eventually all ants converge to a single
trail.
When the trails start out at different lengths, it is found that ants converge on the shorter trail
more often than the longer. This can be explained by more ants being able to traverse the shorter
trail to the food source and return to the nest in the same amount of time it would take to traverse the
longer trail. With more ants traversing the trail, more pheromone is deposited, and the ants eventually
converge to that path.
It is the behavior of the ants when faced with trails of different lengths that ACO is modeled upon.
Instead of real-life ants, artiﬁcial ants are conceived as a computing unit. Instead of trails, these ants
traverse a construction graph. The paths the ants take on this graph are solutions to the problem being
looked at – the idea is to reinforce the pheromone on better solutions. However, the fundamental idea
of laying down pheromone is kept, with ants depositing it on arcs as they traverse from node to node.
Also, ants are programmed to follow arcs with stronger pheromone more often than arcs with weaker
pheromone.
Artiﬁcial ants can be more useful than real-life ants in that they can be given a memory. This
can stop ants looping around and helps when laying pheromone on the return journey. Also they
can be programmed to use problem dependent heuristics, which can guide the search towards better
solutions. All of these ideas and more will now be discussed.
4.2 The ACO Metaheuristic
Nowadays, ACO algorithms tend to be deﬁned in terms of the ACO metaheuristic (Dorigo & Di
Caro, 1999). A metaheuristic is a general purpose heuristic that guides other, more problem speciﬁc
401

DALY & SHEN
heuristics. Examples of metaheuristics include simulated annealing (Kirkpatrick, Gelatt, & Vecchi,
1983), tabu search (Glover, 1989, 1990), evolutionary computation etc.
In the ACO metaheuristic, a problem is represented by a triple (S, f,Ω), where S is a set of
candidate solutions, f : S ×T is an objective or scoring function that measures a solution’s quality at
a particular time t ∈T and Ω: T is a set of constraints at time t ∈T, used in a solution’s construction.
The range of f and Ωis dependent on the particular instance of the metaheuristic. In trying to map a
combinatorial optimization problem onto this representation, the following framework is used.
• There should be a ﬁnite set of solution components C = {c1,c2,...,cNc}. These are the building
blocks of candidate solutions.
• The problem states are represented by sequences of solution components x =

ci,cj,...

. The
set of all possible sequences is given as X.
• S – the set of candidate solutions as mentioned above – is a subset of X, i.e. S ⊆X.
• There is a set of feasible states ˜X, with ˜X ⊆X. A feasible state x ∈˜X is a state where it is
possible to add components from C to x to create a solution satisfying the constraints Ω.
• Each candidate solution s ∈S has a cost g(s,t). Normally g(s,t) ≡f(s,t), ∀s ∈˜S, where
˜S = S ∩˜X is the set of feasible candidate solutions. However, this might not always be the
case; if f is very expensive to compute, g might be an easier to compute function that is broadly
similar to f and that can be used in the generation of solutions.
• The set of optimal solutions S∗should be non-empty, with S∗⊆˜S.
• Sometimes it may also be possible to associate a cost J(x,t) to a state x ∈X that is not a
candidate solution.
With this framework, solutions to the problem (S, f,Ω) can be generated by having artiﬁcial ants
perform a random walk on the complete graph G deﬁned on the components in C. This graph G is
known as the construction graph. A random walk on a graph is a series of moves from node to node
of the graph, with each move being random to some degree. If the walk is Markovian, then the next
move is always completely random; if not then then next move is inﬂuenced by the previous moves.
Hence, using this terminology ACO is non-Markovian. The walk that the ant makes is generally
biased by two things – a heuristic value η (ηi if the heuristic is associated with the individual nodes
of G, ηi j if it is associated with the edges of G) and a pheromone trail τ (again, τi if the pheromone
is associated with the individual nodes of G, τi j if the pheromone is associated with the edges of
G). The way the heuristic and pheromone are implemented are problem dependent, but in general
the heuristic η is a measure of the ‘goodness’ of taking a particular move on the construction graph
as deﬁned by some local measure. The pheromone τ is a measure of the ‘goodness’ of taking a
particular move as deﬁned by the aggregate behavior of ants selecting that move and the quality of
solutions that these ants generate.
Finally, each artiﬁcial ant k has the following properties in order to fully specify how the random
walk will proceed:
Memory – Each ant k has a memory Mk that stores information about the path it has so far followed.
Start State – Each ant k has a start state xk
s and a non-empty set of termination conditions ek.
402

LEARNING BAYESIAN NETWORK EQUIVALENCE CLASSES WITH ANT COLONY OPTIMIZATION
Termination Criteria – When an ant is in a state x, it checks if one of the termination criteria in ek
is satisﬁed. If not, it moves to a node j ∈N k(x). N k is a function that returns the neighborhood
of a node x, i.e. all the nodes on the construction graph G that can be reached from the current
state, given the constraints Ω.
Decision Rule – An ant chooses the node j according to a probabilistic decision rule, which is a
function of the pheromone τ and the heuristic η. The speciﬁcation of these rules is problem
dependent, but is usually a random choice biased towards moves with a higher heuristic and
pheromone value.
Pheromone Update – The pheromone of a path can be modiﬁed by an ant as it is traversing it, or on
the return journey, when it returns to the start. Again, this is problem dependent, but a standard
formulation is to increase the pheromone on good solutions and decrease the pheromone on
bad solutions, good and bad being given by the speciﬁc formulation.
In terms of algorithmic actions, an ACO algorithm can normally be broken down into three parts.
These are:
ConstructAntsSolutions This part of the algorithm is concerned with sending ants around the
construction graph according to the rules given above.
UpdatePheromones This part is concerned with changing the values of the pheromones, by both
depositing and evaporating. Parts of this task might be performed during an ant’s traversal of
the graph, when an ant’s traversal is ﬁnished or after an iteration of all the ants’ traversals.
DaemonActions This part of the algorithm performs tasks not directly related to the ants. E.g. a
local search procedure might be performed after each ant ﬁnishes its traversal.
Given the above framework, multiple artiﬁcial ants are released to perform a random walk. This
procedure is repeated a number of times, with the pheromone gradually increasing on the best parts
of the solution.
There have been many implementations of the above metaheuristic. The ﬁrst was the original
ACO system designed by Dorigo, Maniezzo, and Colorni (1996) known as Ant System. This was used
to study the traveling salesman problem, with the construction graph deﬁned by the distances between
cities. Another extension to Ant System is the Ant Colony System (ACS) (Dorigo & Gambardella,
1997). Here, the search is biased towards the best-so-far path, with a pseudo-random proportional
decision rule that takes the best solution component most of the time and the normal random
proportional decision rule the rest of the time. Also, only the best-so-far ant deposits pheromone.
ACS is based on a system known as ANT-Q designed by Gambardella and Dorigo (1995), that is
itself inspired by the reinforcement learning technique of Q-learning (Sutton & Barto, 1998). The
ACS is particularly interesting in this context, as it is the system on which the new work described
in later sections has been modeled. This is because this work is inspired by a previous approach to
learning Bayesian networks using ACO (described in Section 5.1) which used ACS as its form of
ACO.
5. Using Ant Colony Optimization in Learning an Equivalence Class
To date, many state-based search algorithms that create a Bayesian network structure have relied on
simple techniques such as greedy-based searches. These can produce good results, but have the ever
403

DALY & SHEN
prevalent problem of getting caught at local minima. More sophisticated heuristics have been applied,
such as iterated hill climbing and simulated annealing (Chickering, Geiger et al., 1996), but so far,
none of these have been applied to E-space. A related approach, by Acid and de Campos (2003)
applied tabu search to a space of restricted partially directed acyclic graphs (RPDAGs), a halfway
house between the spaces given by DAGs and CPDAGs.
This paper seeks to apply the ACO metaheuristic to E-space, the space of equivalence classes of
DAGs. To this end, two extensions are made to the basic metaheuristic. The ﬁrst is to allow multiple
types of moves. This is to allow more than one operator to be used in traversing the state space. This
is needed, because in general, more than one type of operator is used whilst searching in E-space.
The second is to allow the pheromone to be accessed by arbitrary values – normally it is accessed by
a single index or two indices. Again this is needed because of the operators used in E-space – the
MakeV operator takes three nodes as arguments.
The proposed algorithm, ACO-E, is based in large part on the work of de Campos, Fernández-
Luna et al. (2002), which is described in the next section.
5.1 Other ACO Algorithms for Learning Bayesian Network Structures
Whilst ACO has been applied to many problems in the area of combinatorial optimization, to date
there has not been much research on using the technique to learn Bayesian network structures. Two
alternate methods have been deﬁned by de Campos, Fernández-Luna et al. (2002) and de Campos,
Gámez, and Puerta (2002). The ﬁrst conducts a search in the space of orderings of DAGs, whilst
the second searches in the space of DAGs. Since a main topic of this work is on this problem, a
description of both of these will be given here, in order to examine the early work done on the subject
and see how it can inform future studies.
5.1.1 ACO-K2SN
In the ﬁrst technique, known as ACO-K2SN, searching over the space of orderings of DAGs, the
various problem components, as taken from Section 4.2 can be deﬁned as follows:
Construction Graph There is one node for each attribute in the data, with an extra dummy node
from which the search starts.
Constraints The only constraints are that the tour is a Hamiltonian path.
Pheromone Trails The pheromone is associated with each arc on the graph. Each arc in the graph
is intialised to a initial small value.
Heuristic Information The heuristic on each arc is set to the inverse of the negative log likelihood
score that is explained below.
Solution Construction The ants work on a system very similar to the ACS system. Beginning at
the dummy node, the ants construct a complete path that deﬁnes an ordering of the nodes.
Pheromone Update This works exactly as in ACS, with local pheromone updates and global update
on the best-so-far solution.
Local Search A version of local search on orderings known as HCSN (de Campos & Puerta, 2001a).
This is used on the last iteration of the run.
404

LEARNING BAYESIAN NETWORK EQUIVALENCE CLASSES WITH ANT COLONY OPTIMIZATION
Given the above components, the search for an ordering proceeds as follows. Starting at the dummy
node an ant decides which node to go to next. This will be the ﬁrst node in the ordering. To choose a
node, heuristic information and pheromone is used. The heuristic for the arc from i to j is given by
ηi j =
1
f (xj,Pa(xj))
,
where f is the scoring metric being used and Pa(x j), the parents of xj are found by the K2 algorithm,
with possible parents being the nodes already visited. The initial pheromone value τ0 is given by
τ0 =
1
n|f (SK2SN)|,
where SK2SN is the structure given by the K2SN algorithm of de Campos and Puerta (2001b). The
update value for the pheromone is given by
∆τi j =
1
|f (S+)|,
where S+ is the best-so-far structure.
5.1.2 ACO-B
The second algorithm given by de Campos, Fernández-Luna et al. (2002) is the ACO-B algorithm.
The components for this algorithm are:
Construction Graph There is one node for each possible directed arc between each pair of attributes
(excluding self directed arcs). There is also a dummy node that the ants start from.
Constraints The only constraints are that the DAG must be acyclic at each step.
Pheromone Trails The pheromone is associated with each node on the graph. The pheromone at
node (i, j) corresponds to the directed arc j →i.
Heuristic Information The heuristic on each node (i, j) is the gain in score that would occur in
adding an arc j →i.
Solution Construction The ants work on a system very similar to the ACS system. Beginning at
the dummy node, the ants construct a path that deﬁnes which arcs are added to the DAG. This
process ends when there is no gain in score.
Pheromone Update This works exactly as ACS, with local pheromone updates and global update
on the best so far solution.
Local Search A standard greedy search with arc addition, deletion and reversal is carried out on the
current candidate DAG. This is done every 10 iterations.
As opposed to the ACO-K2SN algorithm given in Section 5.1.1, the search is over the space of
DAGs, not orderings of DAGs. Otherwise, there are some similarities in the deﬁnitions of parts of
the algorithm. The heuristic is given by
ηij = f
 xi,Pa(xi)∪

x j
	
−f (xi,Pa(xi)),
405

DALY & SHEN
that is, the change in score by adding an arc from j to i in the candidate DAG. The initial pheromone
is given by
τ0 =
1
n|f (SK2SN)|,
i.e. it is the same as the heuristic in ACO-K2SN. Also, the pheromone update value is the same as in
ACO-K2SN, i.e.
∆τi j =
1
|f (S+)|
5.1.3 PERFORMANCE COMPARISON
In the results given by both de Campos, Gámez et al. (2002) and de Campos, Fernández-Luna et al.
(2002), the ACO-B algorithm performs slightly better in terms of accuracy than ACO-K2SN across
the ALARM (Beinlich, Suermondt, Chavez, & Cooper, 1989) and INSURANCE (van der Putten &
van Someren, 2004) gold-standard networks. It also contains an order of magnitude less statistical
tests and so should always be faster. There are more comparisons of ACO-B against other algorithms
by de Campos, Fernández-Luna et al. (2002). Here, it is compared against ILS, an iterative local
search algorithm with random perturbations of a local maximum and two estimation of distribution
(EDA) genetic algorithms, the univariate marginal distribution algorithm (UMDA) by Mühlenbein
(1997) and the population-based incremental learning algorithm (PBIL) by Baluja (1994). Compared
across the ALARM, INSURANCE and BOBLO (Rasmussen, 1995) networks, ACO-B performed
better than the other methods.
5.2 Relation of ACO-E to the ACO Metaheuristic
The proposed algorithm, ACO-E, is based in large part, on the work of de Campos, Fernández-Luna
et al. (2002). In that work, an ACO algorithm called ACO-B was applied to learning Bayesian
networks. This current work differs in that it searches in E-space, uses more than one operator (add
an arc) and does not constrain itself to using matrices to store pheromone. The algorithm is shown in
Algorithm 1.
In this section, the relation of the various parts of the algorithm to the ACO framework will be
given. The problem of learning a Bayesian network structure can be stated as the triple (S, f,Ω),
where
• S, the set of all candidate solutions, is the set of all CPDAGs on the nodes of the Bayesian
network. This set has a massive cardinality, being super-exponential in the number of nodes.
• f, the objective function is the function used to score a candidate DAG. This function would
generally be one of the scoring criteria mentioned in Section 2.
• Ω, the set of constraints, makes sure that only PDAGs that have consistent extensions are
generated as solutions. An explanation of the idea of a consistent extension of a PDAG is given
in Section 3.1. In the formulation being presented, the constraints are implicit in the operators
that will be used to move from state to state.
Given this statement of the problem, the ACO-E algorithm can be described by the following
properties. These properties relate to the ACO metaheuristic described in Section 4.2.
406

LEARNING BAYESIAN NETWORK EQUIVALENCE CLASSES WITH ANT COLONY OPTIMIZATION
Algorithm 1 ACO-E
Input: Operators O, tmax, tstep, m, ρ, q0, β, n
Output: PDAG P+
(P+,Path+) ←GREEDY-E(Pempty,Pathempty)
τ0 ←1/n|SCORE(P+)|
for each operator o in O do
for each possible move m in o on Pempty do
τm ←τ0
end for
end for
for t ←1 to tmax do
for k ←1 to m do
 Pk,Pathk
←ANT-E(O,q0,ρ,β,τ0)
if (t mod tstep = 0) then
 Pk,Pathk
←GREEDY-E
 Pk,Pathk
end if
end for
b ←argmaxm
k=1 SCORE
 Pk
if SCORE
 Pb
> SCORE(P+) then
P+ ←Pb
Path+ ←Pathb
end if
for each move m in Path+ do
τm ←(1−ρ)τm +ρ/|SCORE(P+)|
end for
end for
return P+
5.2.1 THE CONSTRUCTION GRAPH
The construction graph in an ACO algorithm describes the mechanism by which solutions can be
assembled. It is speciﬁed as the complete graph given over the solution components. As such, these
components play a crucial part in the viability of the algorithm.
In the ACO-E algorithm, the components C of the construction graph are the various moves that
may be made, i.e. each move is an instantiation of a supplied operator; in the experiments presented
in this paper, the six operators in Table 2 are used. These operators are used as they have been veriﬁed
to work correctly and effectively by Chickering (2002a). Designing correct operators is difﬁcult, as
Chickering showed by ﬁnding counter examples to the validity of the operators of Munteanu and
Cau (2000). Each ant constructs a solution by walking the construction graph. This corresponds to
applying a sequence of moves to a CPDAG. In order for the procedure to begin, a starting state must
be speciﬁed. In ACO-E this is given as the empty graph.
As usual, the states of the problem are sequences of moves. However, because every state can be
a candidate solution, S = X in the ACO metaheuristic framework. This does not imply that all states
are feasible candidate solutions, but only that candidate solutions can be of any length. This also
means that ˜S = ˜X. Another way to view the state of an ant is to consider the empty graph P (the
407

DALY & SHEN
starting state) and the current state as a sequence of moves (components) x =

ci,...,c j

. Applying
each move c ∈x in order to P will give a CPDAG that is another representation of the current state.
It should be noted that the constraints Ωare implicitly taken care of by the operators, i.e. the
validity tests on the operators satisfy the constraint that each state is a valid PDAG. It should also be
stated that the usual deﬁnition of
g(s,t) ≡f(s,t), ∀s ∈˜S
applies, and that there is no function J(x,t), since all x are candidate solutions and adding a solution
component can decrease the cost.
5.2.2 THE PROBLEM HEURISTIC
In an ACO algorithm, the heuristic is used to guide the search to good solutions. It often does this
implicitly in terms of a cost associated with choosing a particular component to add to the current
state; adding a component with the least cost is often a useful way of proceeding in constructing a
solution.
In ACO-E, the heuristic is used in the same manner, with the addition that the cost for adding a
component can be negative, i.e. adding a component to the current state can improve the cost function
g. The heuristic is dynamic in that it depends on the current state of the ant. Also, it is associated
with each component c ∈C as opposed to the arcs ci −cj between components.
The value of the heuristic ηi is given by the score gain for each move ci ∈C that is possible given
the current state. In essence it corresponds to the change in score given by performing a particular
move on the current CPDAG. For the operators being used in this article, this means the values in
Table 2.
5.2.3 THE PROBLEM PHEROMONE
The pheromone in an ACO algorithm guides the search based on the results of previous searches. In
many instances, it is associated with the arcs on the construction graph, but in ACO-E it is associated
with the nodes of the construction graph. This gives pheromone values τi for each ci ∈C.
The pheromone for each τi is initialised to a value τ0 given by
τ0 =
1
n|SCORE(P+)|.
(2)
In this formula, n is the number of variables that are in the data, SCORE is the objective function
f, as deﬁned in Section 5.2 and P+ is the best-so-far solution. At the start of the algorithm, this is
initialised to that found by a greedy search starting from the empty graph.
In order that the pheromone may change to reﬂect the tours of ants, pheromone update rules are
given. Similar to ACS, there is a local evaporation rule, whereby pheromone is removed from a path
as an ant traverses it
τm ←(1−ρ)τm +ρτ0
This shows the effect of the parameter ρ, which is the pheromone evaporation and deposition rate.
With this formula, there are implicit bounds on how high and low the pheromone at each component
can get. Also similar to ACS, there is a global pheromone update rule that deposits new pheromone
on the best-so-far path
τm ←(1−ρ)τm +ρ/
SCORE
 P+
408

LEARNING BAYESIAN NETWORK EQUIVALENCE CLASSES WITH ANT COLONY OPTIMIZATION
This occurs at the end of a run of ants. Again, SCORE and P+ are deﬁned as in Equation 2. Also
again, this formula implements implicit limits on the values that pheromone can take.
5.2.4 PROBABILISTIC TRANSITION RULE
In choosing which component to visit next given a particular state, an ACO algorithm utilises a
probabilistic transition rule. This rule normally uses values given by the heuristic and pheromone to
inform the choice of which node to pick. The actual choice is random and is based on a distribution
given by the heuristic and pheromone of each possible choice. In ACO-E, the probabilistic choice
rule is given by a pseudo random proportional choice rule, very similar to the one used in ACS. This
type of rule allows the balance between exploration and exploitation to be varied. Being able to
change this balance is important, as it has been shown to produce quite different results (Dorigo &
Stützle, 2004). An ant chooses component cm, where m is given by
m ←
(
argmaxm∈N(x) τm [ηm]β ,
if q ≤q0
random proportional,
otherwise.
In this formula, N (x) is the set of components that an ant at state x can move to, given the problem
constraints Ω. The rule is pseudo-random proportional, because it sometimes behaves in a manner
that is not random. A random number q is drawn uniformly in the range [0,1]. If this number is
less than or equal to a parameter q0, then the rule behaves greedily; the best move possible is taken
dependent on the value of τm [ηm]β for each component cm. Here, τm and ηm are the pheromone and
heuristic as explained previously and β is a parameter that says how much to favour the heuristic
over the pheromone.
If the number q is greater than q0 than a random proportional rule is used to select which
component to visit next. The probability that the ant will visit component cm is given by pm, where
pm =
τm [ηm]β
∑µ∈N(x) τµ

ηµ
β ,
∀m ∈N(x).
(3)
It can be seen that the probability that an ant moves to component cm is directly given by τm [ηm]β,
normalised over the other possible moves so that it is in the range [0,1].
5.2.5 PROPERTIES OF ANTS
In terms of the ants used to construct solutions, the following properties of ant k should be noted:
• The memory Mk can be equated to the current state of the problem given by ant k. From this,
the current CPDAG can be constructed in order to implement the constraints Ω, compute the
heuristic values η, evaluate the current solution and lay pheromone on the tour. In practice, the
current CPDAG is normally kept in order to avoid having to recompute it at every step.
• The start state xk
s is given by the empty sequence ⟨⟩, i.e. the empty CPDAG.
• The single termination condition ek, is to stop the tour when no improvement in score is
possible.
• The neighborhood N k(x) is the set of all valid moves given the current CPDAG.
409

DALY & SHEN
5.2.6 LOCAL SEARCH PROCEDURE
As is often the case with ACO algorithms, ACO-E can use a local search procedure at intermediate
points throughout the run of the algorithm and at the end. This local search procedure can be used
to quickly bring a solution to a local maximum. With the current heuristic and the standard local
search that would be used in these circumstances – greedy search with the operators deﬁned in Table
2, known here as GREEDY-E – local search would provide no additional beneﬁt over the solution
found by an ant. Nevertheless, the local search was put in the algorithm in the case that the problem
heuristic was implemented differently. An example of this would be a static heuristic obtained by
scoring operations on an empty graph. Since this is invariant over the algorithm run, it would only
need to be calculated once at the start of the run.
5.3 Description of ACO-E
This section will focus on giving an algorithmic description of ACO-E. This is done in conjunction
with the pseudo code given in Algorithms 1 and 2. ACO-E takes as input a number of parameters and
returns the best PDAG found, according to a scoring criterion SCORE, that is deﬁned as the objective
function f. It is assumed that scoring criteria generally give negative values; the higher the value,
the better the model. This is the case of most of the standard criteria as discussed in Section 2. The
meaning of the parameters is as follows:
O This is a set of operators that can modify the current PDAG state in the search. Examples of these
are the ones given in Table 2, e.g. InsertU, DeleteU, etc. However, other operators could be
used, e.g. those of Munteanu and Cau (2000) and Munteanu and Bendou (2001).
tmax This is the number of iterations of the algorithm to run. At each iteration, a number of ants
construct solutions. Pheromone deposition happens after all the ants have ﬁnished their tours.
tstep This is the gap, in iterations, between which local search procedures are run. If set so that
tstep > tmax, then local search only happens at the end of the algorithm run.
m This is the number of ants that run at each iteration.
ρ This, a value in [0,1], is the rate at which pheromone evaporates and is deposited. It is used in
both the pheromone evaporation and pheromone deposition rules in Section 5.2.3.
q0 This, a value in [0,1], gives the preference of exploitation over exploration. It is used in the
pseudo-random probabilistic transition rule as explained in Section 5.2.4.
β This exponent gives the relative importance of the heuristic over the pheromone levels in deciding
the chance that a particular trail will be followed. It is used in the pseudo-random probabilistic
transition rule in Section 5.2.4.
n This is the number of nodes in the PDAG.
There are also other variables in the algorithm. These include:
P+ the best-so-far PDAG;
Path+ the best-so-far path;
410

LEARNING BAYESIAN NETWORK EQUIVALENCE CLASSES WITH ANT COLONY OPTIMIZATION
Algorithm 2 ANT-E
Input: Operators O, ρ, q0, β
Output: PDAG P, Path Path
Empty PDAG P, Empty path Path
while true do
M ←All possible moves from P using O
if |M| = 0 ∨maxl∈M TOTAL-SCORE(l,β) ≤0 then
return (P,Path)
end if
q ←random number in [0,1)
if q ≤q0 then
l ←argmaxl∈MTOTAL-SCORE(l)
else
l ←random according to Equation 3
end if
τm ←(1−ρ)τl +ρτ0
P ←apply l to P
Path ←append l to Path
end while
Pempty the empty PDAG; and
Pathempty the empty path, i.e. the path with no entries.
In starting the algorithm, a greedy search (called GREEDY-E) is performed. This is a search through
the space of equivalence classes using the framework and operators given by Chickering (2002a) and
shown in Table 2. It gives a starting best-so-far graph and path from which the search can proceed.
Pheromone levels for each solution component are then initialised to τ0 = 1/n|SCORE(P+)|. The
main loop of the algorithm then begins for tmax iterations. At each iteration, m ants perform a search,
given by algorithm ANT-E, shown in Algorithm 2. Also, for every tstep iterations, a local search is
performed on the PDAGs returned from ANT-E, to try and improve results. Using local search as
part of an ACO algorithm is a very common technique (Dorigo & Stützle, 2004), as it is a easy way
to obtain good results with little effort. After the m ants have traversed the graph, the best graph
Algorithm 3 TOTAL-SCORE
Input: Move l, β
Output: Score s
return s such that s =
(
τl (ηl)β
if ηl > 0
0
otherwise
and path are selected from the best-so-far graph and path and the ones found by each of the ants in
the current iteration. Finally, the global pheromone update lays and evaporates pheromone on the
best-so-far path.
The ANT-E algorithm creates a PDAG by examining the various states that may be proceeded to
from the current state, given a set of operators that may act on the current PDAG. It then selects a
411

DALY & SHEN
Figure 7: Bayesian network used in sample trace
new state based on a random-proportional choice rule. The parameters to the function have the same
description as the ones to the ACO-E function.
Starting out, the algorithm constructs an empty PDAG. Then at each stage a move is made to
a new PDAG, which can be reached by applying one of the operators in O. Initially, a number is
given to each move by TOTAL-SCORE, shown in Algorithm 3. This number represents a weight given
to each move l depending on the current pheromone associated with making that move τl, and the
heuristic associated with making the move ηl. This heuristic is given by the increase in score obtained
by taking that move, higher overall scores meaning better solutions. If there can be no increase in the
score, the ant stops and returns the solution P and the path followed. Otherwise there is a possible
move and the ant decides how to make it. Firstly a random number q is obtained. If it is less than a
speciﬁed value q0, then the best move is taken. If it is greater than q0, then a random proportional
choice is made, with the probability of better moves being higher. After this, a local pheromone
update is applied to the path just taken, the path is updated with the new location at the end and the
current state is updated to become the new state given by l. Note that applying a move to a CPDAG
to change state implies that the resulting PDAG will be extended to a DAG by a suitable method
(e.g., that of Dor & Tarsi, 1992) and this DAG be changed back to a CPDAG. Details can be found in
the article of Chickering (2002a).
5.4 Trace of Algorithm Execution
As a simple example of the execution of the ACO-E algorithm, a trace of its behavior during an
actual execution will be given during this section. Consider the Bayesian network in Figure 7. This
network is fully speciﬁed, with a DAG structure and parameters given in the form of conditional
412

LEARNING BAYESIAN NETWORK EQUIVALENCE CLASSES WITH ANT COLONY OPTIMIZATION
ρ
q0
β
tmax
m
0.1
0.1
1.0
1
2
Table 3: Parameters for sample trace
Move
τ
η
InsertU(0,1)
0.00312
-0.21565
1
InsertU(0,2)
0.00312
34.6527
InsertU(1,2)
0.00312
11.2204
InsertU(0,1)
0.00312
-0.21565
2
InsertU(1,2)
0.00312
11.2204
DeleteU(0,2)
0.00312
-34.6527
InsertU(0,1)
0.00312
0.37742
DeleteU(0,2)
0.00312
-34.6527
3
DeleteU(1,2)
0.00312
-11.2204
MakeV(0,1,2)
0.00312
0.59307
Move
τ
η
InsertU(0,1)
0.00312
-0.21565
DeleteD(0,2)
0.00312
-35.2457
4 (Ant 1)
DeleteD(1,2)
0.00312
-11.8134
ReverseD(0,2)
0.00312
-0.59306
ReverseD(1,2)
0.00312
-0.59307
DeleteU(0,1)
0.00312
-0.47742
4 (Ant 2)
DeleteU(0,2)
0.00312
-35.2457
DeleteU(1,2)
0.00312
-11.8134
Table 4: Values corresponding to the moves in Figure 8
probability tables. As can be seen, the variable 0 can take on the values a and b, the variable 1 can
take on the values c and d and the variable 2 can take on the values e, f and g.
For the purposes of this demonstration, 90 data were sampled from this Bayesian network. The
ACO-E algorithm was then started with the parameters set as in Table 3. The PDAG found from the
initial GREEDY-E run was the same as the sample Bayesian network structure. P+ was then set to
this PDAG. The score of this PDAG was 106.918. τ0 was then set to 0.00312. Because tmax was set
to 1, there was only one iteration of the algorithm. On this iteration, two ants constructed solutions
using the ANT-E procedure. The trace of how these ants proceeded is shown in Figure 8 and Table
4. In the diagram, the sequence of moves can be seen along with the value of q at each step. The
score of the ﬁnal network for each ant is also shown. In the table, the possible moves at each point
for each ant are shown, along with the pheromone τ and heuristic value η. It should be noted that
the pheromone is the same for all moves, as this was the very start of the ACO-E algorithm and no
pheromone deposition had occurred. At each move, pheromone evaporation occurs, but once more,
no difference is found because all the pheromone values are equal to τ0.
After the two ants ﬁnish their run, the best solution is chosen as variable b. In this case it is that of
Ant 1, with a score of -106.918. This is then compared to the score of P+. Because the two structures
are the same, there is no score difference and hence no change occurs. Pheromone deposition then
occurs on the moves that made up P+, i.e. the moves in Path+. In this case, the pheromone for
InsertU(0,2), InsertU(1,2) and MakeV(0,1,2) got updated to (1−0.1)·0.00312+0.1/|−106.918| =
0.00374. Since tmax was set to 1, there are no more iterations and the algorithm returns P+.
413

DALY & SHEN
Figure 8: Trace of progress in ANT-E
414

LEARNING BAYESIAN NETWORK EQUIVALENCE CLASSES WITH ANT COLONY OPTIMIZATION
5.5 Implementation Issues
In implementing the algorithms given in this paper, care must be taken to avoid long run times.
Firstly, caching the score of a node given it’s parents is a simple technique that can greatly improve
performance. Secondly, caching the results of the validity tests needed to check which moves are
applicable at a certain state, can again increase performance dramatically. However this technique is
not as easy to implement as it might appear (Daly, Shen, & Aitken, 2006).
Care must also be taken in implementing the pheromone for the moves. Traditionally, matrices of
values are used, which allow fast access and updating. However in the case of the MakeV operator,
which takes three indices, a three dimensional matrix would be needed. This would quickly become
infeasible as the problem size grew, especially as only some of the entries would be used. This would
be due to the algorithm never getting to those states. Instead a structure such as a map can store this
information. A map can scale linearly with the number of elements actually being used. If the map is
implemented as a tree, entries can be accessed in logarithmic time and if a hash table is used, access
can be in constant time.
6. Experimental Methodology
This section is concerned with testing the ACO-E algorithm presented in Section 5 and the evaluation
of the results produced. In order to facilitate understanding of the experimental methodology used,
the section will be structured as follows.
Firstly, an account will be given of the objects on which the testing will be performed. These
objects are six gold-standard Bayesian networks that are well known in the ﬁeld. The various
properties of the networks will be discussed. From these networks data can be sampled and it is this
data that can be used as input to the algorithms.
Then, experiments using the ACO-E algorithm will be shown. The methodology used in running
the experiments will be deﬁned, along with a description of the various evaluation criteria. These
involve criteria well known in the ﬁeld. Two different sets of experiments will be presented, one
focused on the comparison of ACO-E against similar algorithms, the other a comparison of ACO-E
against state-of-the-art algorithms. Also, the behavior of the ACO-E algorithm for different parameters
will be shown.
6.1 Standard Bayesian Networks
In this section a set of six gold-standard Bayesian networks will be presented. These networks will be
the basis of the testing that will be showcased later. Various properties of the networks will be given,
covering: the number of nodes of the structure, the number of edges in the structure, the average
number of in edges etc.
6.1.1 SIX GOLD-STANDARD NETWORKS
In the experiments shown in the next section, six gold-standard networks are used. These are the
ALARM (Beinlich, Suermondt et al., 1989), Barley (Kristensen & Rasmussen, 2002), Diabetes
(Andreassen, Hovorka, Benn, Olesen, & Carson, 1991), HailFinder (Abramson, Brown, Edwards,
Murphy, & Winkler, 1996), Mildew (Jensen, 1995) and Win95pts networks (Microsoft Research,
1995). These networks were chosen because they covered a wide range of domains, were easily
415

DALY & SHEN
Alarm
Barley
Diabetes
HailFinder
Mildew
Win95pts
Nodes
37
48
36
56
35
76
Edges
46
84
48
66
46
112
Mean In-Degree
1.24
1.75
1.33
1.18
1.31
1.47
V-Structures
26
66
21
37
37
135
V-Struct/Nodes
0.70
1.38
0.58
0.66
1.06
1.78
Table 5: Bayesian network properties
available and all contained discrete attributes. The last property was important because the scoring
criterion that would be used in the experiments is implemented over multinomial random variables.
Various properties of these Bayesian networks are shown in Table 5. In this table, Nodes and
Edges specify the number of nodes and edges respectively in the graph. The Mean In-Degree is the
average number of arcs coming into a node in the graph. This is equal to the Mean Out-Degree and
the number of edges divided by the number of nodes. Finally, V-Structures and V-Struct/Nodes show
the amount of v-structures in the graph and the amount of v-structures divided by the number of
nodes.
6.2 Methodology
This section contains details of the experiments performed using the ACO-E algorithm described in
Section 5. Firstly, the methodology used in running the experiments will be presented. This includes
an analysis of the needed outcomes, the design of ﬁve experimental conditions and an explanation of
the evaluation criteria.
6.2.1 EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN
In designing an experimental methodology to test the efﬁcacy of the ACO-E algorithm, three different
outcomes were desired.
• The ﬁrst was to analyze the behavior of the algorithm as a function of the parameters and
the test networks. This is needed in order to try and understand the range of values in which
parameters might be useful and to show the effect of the ACO behavior on outcomes.
• The next desired outcome was to test ACO-E against other similar algorithms. To this end,
ACO-E was tested against another ACO algorithm and algorithms that searched in the space of
equivalence classes.
• Finally the last desired outcome was to test ACO-E against state-of-the-art algorithms from
the literature. These tests would show the comparative usefulness of ACO-E against other
well-known and good-performing methods.
In order to obtain these outcomes, various experimental conditions were designed, which will be
explained below.
The Scoring Function
For these experiments, it was decided to use the BDeu criterion invented by
Buntine (1991) and described in Section 2. According to the study by Shaughnessy and Livingston
416

LEARNING BAYESIAN NETWORK EQUIVALENCE CLASSES WITH ANT COLONY OPTIMIZATION
(2005), BDeu had the best tradeoff between precision and recall of edges (confusingly BDeu is
called BAYES in their study, with BDeu in their study meaning the K2 metric). This criterion gives a
fully Bayesian score, with the assumption of Dirichlet parameter priors and a uniform prior over all
possible states of the joint distribution given the prior network.To fully specify the BDeu criterion,
two pieces of information are needed. First is a prior on structures P(G). This could be a uniform
prior, such that all structures have the same P(G). Another method shown by Heckerman, Geiger
et al. (1995) was to have an expert specify a structure, and have a method that penalises differences
between the expert’s structure and a candidate structure.
The second piece of information needed is the ‘equivalent sample size’, N′, a parameter that
encodes the conﬁdence in the prior parameters and prior structure. Selecting this value can be
troublesome (Silander, Kontkanen, & Myllymaki, 2007; Steck & Jaakkola, 2003), but ‘reasonable’
values in the range [1,10] often work well.
In recognition that simpler structures are often more appealing, the prior was speciﬁed by the
method shown by Heckerman, Geiger et al. (1995). In their formulation, two objects are speciﬁed; a
prior structure Gprior and the prior distribution given as:
P(G) = cκδ,
where c is a normalisation constant that can be ignored, κ is a parameter that needs to be speciﬁed
and δ is given by the formula
δ =
n
∑
i=1
δi,
where δi is the symmetric difference of the parent set for node i between Gprior and G.
Condition 1
Experimental condition 1 was designed to analyze the behavior of ACO-E across
different parameters and to compare against other similar algorithms. These algorithms were ACO-
B (de Campos, Fernández-Luna et al., 2002), EPQ (Cotta & Muruzábal, 2004; Muruzábal &
Cotta, 2004) and a greedy search in the space of equivalence classes using Chickering’s operators
(Chickering, 2002a) (called GREEDY-E here). A description of these will now be given.
ACO-B ACO-E is based in part on the construction of this algorithm and so there are some similari-
ties. ACO-B is an ACO based algorithm that provides a search through the space of DAGs,
with each of its moves being the addition of a directed arc to the current DAG. A more detailed
description is given in Section 5.1.2.
EPQ This method uses an evolutionary programming algorithm that performs a search over the
space of equivalence classes of DAGs. Like Chickering (2002a), they explicitly use CPDAGs
(deﬁned in Section 3.1) to represent the individuals, i.e. equivalence classes of DAGs. At each
generation, from a population of P, members of the population are selected using a binary
tournament and mutated using the operators of Chickering. The best P out of the 2P selected
are then put forward into the next round, for T rounds.
GREEDY-E This algorithm uses the operators of Chickering to perform a greedy search in the space
of CPDAGs. The results of tests performed by Chickering showed that the search generally
performed better than search in the space of DAGs.
417

DALY & SHEN
Parameter
Value
N′
4
κ
0.2
tmax
200
m
5, 7, 10, 12, 15, 20
ρ
0.0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5
q0
0.7, 0.75, 0.8, 0.85, 0.9, 0.95
β
0.0, 0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0, 2.5
Table 6: Parameter values for testing ACO-E
For the experiments in this section, testing involved the six standard networks presented in Section
6.1.1. The BDeu scoring criterion was used, and as suggested by Kayaalp and Cooper (2002) and by
Heckerman, Geiger et al. (1995), an equivalent sample size of 4 was used for the parameter priors.
Also an empty structure prior with κ as deﬁned by Heckerman, Geiger et al. (1995) was used. For
each individual run, 10,000 data were sampled from the network and used to construct the scoring
function. Then for each combination of values for the parameter settings of ρ, q0, β and m, a run of
the experiment was made for both the ACO-E and ACO-B algorithms. The range of values that these
parameters were taken from are shown in Table 6.
In total this gave 1296 runs for each algorithm, for each network. As a consequence, this gave
a total of 216 results for each setting of a parameter. In order to match this number of runs, the
EPQ and GREEDY-E algorithm were also run 216 times each. It should be stressed that each run
of ACO-E using a particular combination of parameters and each run of EPQ and GREEDY-E was
done with a different data set sampled from the network. This technique guards against overﬁtting
the parameters to a particular data set. It should also be noted that for each algorithm, a limit of 5
parents was allowed for a node, in order to speed up algorithm execution.
Condition 2
Experimental condition 2 was designed to test ACO-E against other state-of-the-art
Bayesian network structure learning algorithms. For these purposes the results found in the study
conducted by Tsamardinos, Brown, and Aliferis (2006) was used. This study produced a thorough
comparison of many different algorithms and made the results available, which allows the results
for ACO-E to be compared against all of the algorithms used in the study. The various parameters
used for ACO-E (that had equivalent parameters in other algorithms) were kept as close as possible
to those used by Tsamardinos, Brown et al. The various algorithms that were compared against
were: the max-min hill-climbing algorithm (MMHC) (Tsamardinos, Brown et al., 2006), the optimal
reinsertion algorithm (OR) (Moore & Wong, 2003), the sparse candidate algorithm (SC) (Friedman,
Nachman, & Pe’er, 1999), a greedy search using the three standard operators as in Table 1 (GS), the
PC algorithm (PC) (Spirtes, Glymour et al., 2000), the three phase dependency analysis algorithm
(TPDA) (Cheng, Greiner, Kelly, Bell, & Liu, 2002) and the greedy equivalent search algorithm
(GES) (Chickering, 2002b).
For these experiments, testing involved four of the six standard networks presented in Section
6.1.1; Alarm, Barley, HailFinder and Mildew. These networks were used as the experiments of
Tsamardinos, Brown et al. did not use the other two (Diabetes and Win95pts). The other networks
shown in the paper of Tsamardinos, Brown et al. were not used as they were not available in a usable
418

LEARNING BAYESIAN NETWORK EQUIVALENCE CLASSES WITH ANT COLONY OPTIMIZATION
Parameter
N′
κ
tmax
m
ρ
q0
β
Value
10
0.09
200
20
0.4
0.75
0.75
Table 7: Parameter values for testing ACO-E
Alarm
Barley
Diabetes
HailFinder
Mildew
Win95pts
ρ
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.2
0.4
0.2
q0
0.8
0.8
0.7
0.8
0.7
0.95
β
0.5
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.5
2.5
Table 8: Tuned parameters for ACO-E
format. For each run of the algorithm, 5000 data were generated by sampling the particular networks
in question. This was chosen as opposed to the 10,000 data in Condition 1, as this was the amount
chosen by Tsamardinos, Brown et al.
As in Condition 1, the BDeu scoring function was used. The parameter values of this function
and the ACO-E parameters are shown in Table 7. The ACO-E parameter values were chosen as they
represented reasonable values that should perform well on most instances. Each experiment was run
100 times for each network.
Condition 3
Condition 3 was designed with a number of objectives in mind. These were:
• examine the effect of different sample sizes on ACO-E output;
• use a separate test sample in scoring networks output from ACO-E; and
• examine the complexity of ACO-E by noting the number of statistics computed during a run.
In order to achieve these objectives, new experiments were run. In these experiments, the parameters
were set by examining the output of the experiments of Condition 1 – these outputs can be seen
in Section 7.1. The optimum value for the parameters was chosen by ﬁnding the best combination
from Condition 1 (note that Table 10 shows the average BDeu score for each parameter setting). The
experiments were performed across the six standard networks, with ﬁve different sample sizes – 100,
500, 1000, 5000 and 10000. The various parameters were set as in Table 8.
Each combination of network and sample size was run 100 times. The various other parameters
were set as m = 20 and tmax = 200. The BDeu scoring criterion was used, with an empty structure
prior, an equivalent sample size N′ of 4 and a value of κ = 0.05. The meaning of the BDeu parameters
has been described above.
Condition 4 – Tuned Metaheuristics
In order to be able to compare ACO-E to the other meta-
heuristics described in Condition 1, experiments were run with tuned parameters. The experiments
were performed across the six standard networks, with a sample size of 10000. For ACO-B, the
various parameters were set as in Table 9. These combination of parameters gave the best BDeu
score for ACO-B in Condition 1. GREEDY-E and EPQ have no meaningful parameters to tune.
Each experiment was run 100 times. For ACO-B, the various other parameters were set as m = 20
and tmax = 200. Similar to Condition 3, the BDeu scoring criterion was used, with an empty structure
419

DALY & SHEN
Alarm
Barley
Diabetes
HailFinder
Mildew
Win95pts
ρ
0.1
0.5
0.5
0.4
0.4
0.1
q0
0.85
0.7
0.8
0.9
0.7
0.95
β
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.5
2.5
Table 9: Tuned parameters for ACO-B
prior, and equivalent sample size N′ of 4 and a value of κ = 0.05. In these runs, a limit of 7 parents
was allowed for a node, as opposed to the 5 of Condition 1.
Condition 5 – Examining the Applicability of ACO-E
Experimental Condition 5 was designed
to test the applicability of ACO-E to given data sets. To achieve this, a simple procedure was designed
to indicate to what level the ACO-E algorithm would perform better than a simple greedy search.
This procedure is based on the GREEDY-E algorithm mentioned in Condition 1. The procedure is as
follows.
An original data set is sampled with replacement and the GREEDY-E algorithm is run. For the
purposes of these experiments, this original data set was sampled from a Bayesian network. When
the algorithm terminates, the number of v-structures in the returned structure is counted and divided
by the number of variables in the data set. This statistic is noted and the procedure starts again, with
a new set of resampled data. The whole procedure is repeated until a conﬁdent prediction of the
normalized v-structure mean can be made. The mean value obtained can be used as a measure of
the complexity of the search space. A higher value indicates more v-structures and hence a more
complicated space.
For the purposes of this paper, the BDeu scoring function with an equivalent sample size N′ of 4
and equal structure priors was used. Test were performed across each of the six standard networks
and at sample sizes of 100, 500, 1000, 5000 and 10000. 100 resamplings were used in each case.
6.2.2 EVALUATION CRITERIA
In the running of these experiments, various scoring metrics were picked to ascertain how well certain
algorithms behaved. These were: the scoring function used in running the experiments, a test scoring
function that was based on a different sample, the structural Hamming distance (SHD), the number
of scoring function evaluations and the number of distinct scoring function evaluations. These are
explained below.
The Scoring Function
For all experiments, the BDeu scoring function was used with differing
parameters, depending on the experimental condition. Because these parameters were uniform given
the condition, the score value of a Bayesian network structure could be used to compare the results
of different algorithms. In terms of the BDeu score, this means that the higher the average score
achieved, the better the results.
Test Scoring Function
As well as the scoring function used in the running of the algorithm, a
separate BDeu scoring function was deﬁned, using an independent, same-size sample from the
network being used.
420

LEARNING BAYESIAN NETWORK EQUIVALENCE CLASSES WITH ANT COLONY OPTIMIZATION
Structural Hamming Distance
In order to provide an objective measure of network structure
reconstruction behavior and to compare results against the work of Tsamardinos, Brown et al.
(2006), the value of the structural Hamming distance (SHD) metric is given. This measures the
difference between the learned network and the gold-standard generating network. Both networks
are transformed from DAG to CPDAG (if not already in this representation) and penalties are given
for the number of missing and extra edges and for incorrectly directed arcs.
Score Function Evaluations
In order to estimate the complexity of running the ACO-E algorithm,
two statistics were measured. The ﬁrst statistic is the number of times the scoring function has been
evaluated up to a particular point in time.
Distinct Score Function Evaluations
The next statistic is the number of times a distinct scoring
function evaluation has occurred, i.e. the number of times the arguments to the scoring function are
different. This statistic is often wildly different to the total number of scoring function evaluations
and is often a better measure of complexity, as caching of evaluations is a standard technique to speed
up algorithm runs.
7. Experimental Results
In this section the results of experiments performed according to the methodologies given in Section
6.2 will be presented. In 6.2, ﬁve experimental conditions were given. The ﬁrst dealt with analyzing
the behavior of ACO-E with respect to its parameters and in comparison to other metaheuristic
algorithms that shared similar behavior. The second condition dealt with comparing ACO-E to other
state-of-the-art Bayesian network structure learning algorithms. The third condition focused on the
effect of sample sizes on output quality, the behavior of a scoring function deﬁned on a separate
test set and the computational complexity of the algorithm. The fourth looked at the behavior of the
metaheuristic algorithms with tuned behavior. Finally the ﬁfth condition dealt with the situations
when ACO-E should be used. These results will be presented in this order, followed by a discussion
and interpretation of these results.
7.1 Condition 1
The results of the runs using experimental condition 1 are shown in two sets, which reﬂect how they
will be analyzed later. Firstly, detailed results for ACO-E are shown in Tables 10 and 11. In these
tables, the ﬁgures given are the results over all other parameters; e.g. the ﬁgure for ρ = 0.1 is given
by calculating the mean and standard deviation over all results with ρ = 0.1. In this case, the size
of the samples will be 216, and will be calculated over all combinations of the other parameters. It
should be noted that the speciﬁc values of ρ = 0 and β = 0 are special cases. When ρ = 0, there is no
pheromone evaporation and no pheromone deposition on the graph; i.e. pheromone plays no part in
the algorithm. With β = 0, there is no heuristic used whilst the ants traverse the construction graph.
The comparative results involving ACO-E, ACO-B, GREEDY-E and EPQ are shown in Table
12 and Figures 9 and 10. These show the behavior of ACO-E against other algorithms, both as a
function of the algorithm iteration and as a ﬁnal value. In these results, the iterations ﬁgure is that for
ACO-E and ACO-B. The EPQ iteration number is three times that of the shown iteration. As such,
whilst ACO-E and ACO-B were run for 200 iterations, EPQ was run for 600 and the results scaled
to 200. This can be done, as the concept of an iteration in one framework does not translate well in
terms of time to another framework.
421

DALY & SHEN
7.2 Condition 2
The results of the experiments conducted to experimental Condition 2 are illustrated here. The second
set of comparisons involved ACO-E against other state-of-the-art Bayesian network structure learning
algorithms.
The results of this comparison are shown in Table 13. The acronyms speciﬁed are as given by
Tsamardinos, Brown et al. (2006) and were discussed before in Section 6.2.1. Some of the results as
supplied by Tsamardinos, Brown et al. are missing and are marked by ‘N/A’ in Table 13. If a result is
out of the range of most others, it is represented as a number stating the median.
7.3 Condition 3
The results of the experiments conducted according to Condition 3 are shown here. This set of
experiments was designed to show the effects of sample size on ACO-E output and also provide a
measure of the computational complexity of the algorithm.
The SHD results of the runs after 200 iterations can be seen in Table 14, whilst the score results
after 200 iterations are in Table 15. Table 16 shows the score results from a different test sample.
The remaining results from these experiments are shown in Figures 11 and 12. These show the
total number of score evaluations and distinct number of score evaluations respectively, for runs of
the ACO-E algorithm.
7.4 Condition 4
Experimental Condition 4 was used to compare ACO-E against the metaheuristic algorithms used in
Condition 1 when the parameters had been tuned to the best combinations from Condition 1. The
other algorithms were ACO-B, EPQ and GREEDY-E. These results are consolidated into Table 17
which show the results after the runs have ﬁnished.
7.5 Condition 5
The results of the experiments under Condition 5 are shown in Table 18. With these experiments,
multiple searches were performed using the GREEDY-E algorithm, with data being resampled for
each experiment. Experiments were performed 100 times across all combination of the test networks
and sample sizes.
422

LEARNING BAYESIAN NETWORK EQUIVALENCE CLASSES WITH ANT COLONY OPTIMIZATION
ρ
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Alarm (−105)
1.0383±0.0037
1.0385±0.0036
1.0387±0.0035
1.0385±0.0037
1.0388±0.0037
1.0380±0.0038
Barley (−105)
5.0756±0.0136
5.0697±0.0039
5.0702±0.0096
5.0696±0.0039
5.0699±0.0041
5.0699±0.0041
Diabetes (−105)
1.9394±0.0032
1.9391±0.0034
1.9394±0.0029
1.9386±0.0034
1.9395±0.0034
1.9393±0.0035
HailFinder (−105)
4.9207±0.0039
4.9206±0.0038
4.9204±0.0042
4.9210±0.0034
4.9202±0.0040
4.9207±0.0037
Mildew (−105)
4.5426±0.0096
4.5412±0.0091
4.5417±0.0101
4.5401±0.0094
4.5388±0.0083
4.5395±0.0090
Win95pts (−104)
9.4322±0.0448
9.4169±0.0433
9.4086±0.0452
9.4125±0.0454
9.4154±0.0457
9.4210±0.0468
q0
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
Alarm (−105)
1.0385±0.0035
1.0388±0.0035
1.0383±0.0035
1.0382±0.0035
1.0386±0.0039
1.0383±0.0040
Barley (−105)
5.0703±0.0066
5.0704±0.0065
5.0705±0.0060
5.0708±0.0057
5.0710±0.0073
5.0720±0.0126
Diabetes (−105)
1.9391±0.0035
1.9391±0.0033
1.9393±0.0032
1.9393±0.0035
1.9393±0.0035
1.9390±0.0030
HailFinder (−105)
4.9207±0.0039
4.9208±0.0035
4.9208±0.0038
4.9205±0.0038
4.9204±0.0040
4.9204±0.0040
Mildew (−105)
4.5362±0.0069
4.5378±0.0074
4.5389±0.0084
4.5410±0.0098
4.5430±0.0097
4.5472±0.0092
Win95pts (−104)
9.4200±0.0453
9.4183±0.0441
9.4199±0.0462
9.4192±0.0481
9.4160±0.0468
9.4130±0.0439
β
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Alarm (−105)
1.0387±0.0036
1.0378±0.0038
1.0383±0.0036
1.0386±0.0035
1.0387±0.0040
1.0387±0.0034
Barley (−105)
5.0775±0.0121
5.0694±0.0043
5.0689±0.0035
5.0696±0.0040
5.0697±0.0055
5.0698±0.0097
Diabetes (−105)
1.9389±0.0033
1.9390±0.0034
1.9394±0.0034
1.9393±0.0032
1.9394±0.0032
1.9391±0.0035
HailFinder (−105)
4.9212±0.0039
4.9205±0.0037
4.9203±0.0040
4.9206±0.0038
4.9205±0.0038
4.9205±0.0040
Mildew (−105)
4.5378±0.0075
4.5371±0.0075
4.5392±0.0090
4.5404±0.0094
4.5440±0.0102
4.5456±0.0090
Win95pts (−104)
9.4515±0.0505
9.4092±0.0404
9.4135±0.0420
9.4101±0.0385
9.4116±0.0444
9.4106±0.0427
m
5
7
10
12
15
20
Alarm (−105)
1.0383±0.0036
1.0386±0.0036
1.0381±0.0037
1.0389±0.0037
1.0384±0.0039
1.0384±0.0036
Barley (−105)
5.0721±0.0120
5.0707±0.00061
5.0709±0.0083
5.0704±0.0066
5.0704±0.0061
5.0705±0.0060
Diabetes (−105)
1.9392±0.0031
1.9392±0.0036
1.9391±0.0032
1.9392±0.0032
1.9391±0.0033
1.9394±0.0034
HailFinder (−105)
4.9202±0.0041
4.9209±0.0037
4.9201±0.0039
4.9210±0.0040
4.9204±0.0036
4.9210±0.0037
Mildew (−105)
4.5440±0.0097
4.5427±0.0097
4.5409±0.0093
4.5392±0.0092
4.5386±0.0082
4.5385±0.0085
Win95pts (−104)
9.4201±0.0452
9.4190±0.0452
9.4178±0.0457
9.4188±0.0458
9.4164±0.0462
9.4145±0.0467
Table 10: Mean and standard deviation of the BDeu score for ACO-E for each parameter setting
423

DALY & SHEN
ρ
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Alarm
6.9±4.9
5.6±3.1
6.0±3.2
5.6±3.3
5.9±3.0
5.5±3.0
Barley
56.4±10.8
52.8±3.9
53.0±4.1
53.2±4.4
52.6±4.0
52.9±4.8
Diabetes
63.5±5.8
65.5±5.3
65.0±5.4
65.1±5.6
64.2±5.4
63.7±4.8
HailFinder
50.6±6.9
50.5±6.8
51.0±7.8
51.8±7.8
51.8±6.7
51.1±7.9
Mildew
25.7±5.8
22.6±5.0
22.8±5.1
22.0±4.9
21.4±4.7
21.9±4.8
Win95pts
94.6±27.7
83.3±24.3
81.7±20.3
81.9±22.9
81.9±24.2
83.5±21.9
q0
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
Alarm
5.2±2.5
5.6±3.1
5.4±3.0
6.1±3.7
6.4±4.2
6.7±4.1
Barley
53.9±5.9
53.6±5.8
53.3±5.4
53.4±5.9
53.1±5.8
53.6±7.2
Diabetes
62.1±4.8
62.6±4.9
63.4±4.9
64.7±5.4
66.1±5.3
68.1±4.7
HailFinder
52.1±7.3
51.9±7.5
51.5±8.2
50.7±7.1
50.6±7.7
50.0±5.9
Mildew
20.2±3.8
21.1±4.7
21.5±4.8
22.6±5.1
24.3±5.4
26.6±4.9
Win95pts
90.3±23.5
88.1±24.5
84.9±22.6
83.2±22.5
81.0±22.2
79.3±27.1
β
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Alarm
7.4±5.1
4.3±1.1
4.9±2.4
5.4±2.8
6.2±3.6
7.2±3.7
Barley
61.4±9.0
52.0±3.9
51.9±3.0
51.7±3.3
51.9±3.3
52.0±3.7
Diabetes
64.3±4.9
64.3±5.5
64.2±5.5
64.7±5.1
64.6±5.9
64.8±5.5
HailFinder
52.2±7.0
52.0±6.5
51.5±6.7
50.1±8.0
50.3±8.0
50.5±7.5
Mildew
20.9±4.9
20.9±4.0
21.9±5.0
22.4±5.1
24.6±5.4
25.7±5.2
Win95pts
109.1±28.6
89.6±23.9
79.8±17.9
77.0±17.2
77.1±19.3
74.4±15.5
m
5
7
10
12
15
20
Alarm
7.1±4.3
6.6±3.8
5.9±3.5
5.2±2.8
5.7±3.6
5.1±2.4
Barley
54.3±7.3
52.8±5.3
53.8±6.6
53.2±5.7
53.7±5.8
53.1±5.1
Diabetes
66.2±5.1
65.8±5.9
64.1±5.4
64.5±5.6
63.5±5.4
62.8±4.7
HailFinder
50.5±7.2
50.5±6.7
51.0±6.5
51.8±7.0
51.4±8.5
51.6±7.9
Mildew
24.6±5.3
23.9±5.6
22.7±5.5
22.2±4.9
21.6±4.7
21.4±4.7
Win95pts
83.3±23.3
83.0±21.9
85.6±26.2
85.5±22.1
85.5±25.0
84.0±25.5
Table 11: Mean and standard deviation of the SHD for ACO-E for each parameter setting
424

LEARNING BAYESIAN NETWORK EQUIVALENCE CLASSES WITH ANT COLONY OPTIMIZATION
ACO-E
GREEDY-E
ACO-B
EPQ
SHD
5.9±3.5
21.9±9.0
11.9±11.9
26.1±13.4
Alarm
Score (−105)
1.0385±0.0037
1.0389±0.0039
1.0388±0.0038
1.0415±0.0045
SHD
53.5±6.0
104.8±9.7
67.3±21.6
101.4±14.4
Barley
Score (−105)
5.0708±0.0078
5.2449±0.0124
5.0944±0.0423
5.2354±0.0628
SHD
64.5±5.4
69.2±3.0
70.7±8.5
77.2±7.1
Diabetes
Score (−105)
1.9392±0.0033
1.9394±0.0033
1.9406±0.0041
1.9457±0.0048
SHD
51.1±7.3
49.1±0.8
74.1±19.7
82.8±18.2
HailFinder
Score (−105)
4.9206±0.0038
4.9213±0.0036
4.9248±0.0058
4.9481±0.0177
SHD
22.7±5.3
29.3±0.7
36.1±14.0
50.3±13.8
Mildew
Score (−105)
4.5407±0.0093
4.5531±0.0039
4.5548±0.0170
4.6148±0.0369
SHD
84.5±24.1
104.9±15.5
178.9±58.8
220.1±31.6
Win95pts
Score (−104)
9.4178±0.0457
9.4649±0.0466
9.4589±0.0717
9.9181±0.0970
Table 12: Mean and standard deviation for metaheuristic algorithms from Condition 1 results
Alarm
Barley
HailFinder
Mildew
ACO-E
16.4±4.7
80.9±5.3
55.0±5.3
31.0±3.6
MMHC
9.6±7.0
102.6±9.2
208.0±1.6
58.4±7.4
OR1 k = 5
27.8±10.0
109.6±9.5
190.8±14.1
70.6±4.2
OR1 k = 10
31.2±11.1
113.6±15.6
183.2±14.9
75.6±6.3
OR1 k = 20
37.8±9.4
136.4±2.9
184.6±17.2
75.0±4.8
OR2 k = 5
21.2±4.6
120.0±4.5
184.6±14.5
69.2±3.3
OR2 k = 10
33.2±5.4
109.2±16.2
187.0±15.7
64.0±4.4
OR2 k = 20
39.4±6.5
116.8±18.4
200.8±9.2
67.4±3.4
SC k = 5
34.2±3.6
129.6±13.1
194.2±2.5
N/A
SC k = 10
20.4±11.8
N/A
N/A
N/A
GS
58.8±6.5
143.3±7.3
204.2±9.9
62.2±12.2
PC
15.2±1.5
610.0±10.6
385.6±12.5
421.2±10.7
TPDA
9.6±1.5
207.2±4.0
255.4±3.4
97.8±6.8
GES
N/A
159.0±0.0
154.6±54.3
38.8±0.8
Table 13: SHD mean and standard deviation for state-of-the-art algorithms
425

DALY & SHEN
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
−1.056
−1.054
−1.052
−1.05
−1.048
−1.046
−1.044
−1.042
−1.04
−1.038
x 10
5
Iterations
Score
 
 
ACO−E
ACO−B
EPQ
GREEDY−E
(a) Alarm
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
−5.55
−5.5
−5.45
−5.4
−5.35
−5.3
−5.25
−5.2
−5.15
−5.1
−5.05
x 10
5
Iterations
Score
 
 
ACO−E
ACO−B
EPQ
GREEDY−E
(b) Barley
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
−1.952
−1.95
−1.948
−1.946
−1.944
−1.942
−1.94
−1.938
x 10
5
Iterations
Score
 
 
ACO−E
ACO−B
EPQ
GREEDY−E
(c) Diabetes
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
−5.01
−5
−4.99
−4.98
−4.97
−4.96
−4.95
−4.94
−4.93
−4.92
x 10
5
Iterations
Score
 
 
ACO−E
ACO−B
EPQ
GREEDY−E
(d) HailFinder
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
−4.8
−4.75
−4.7
−4.65
−4.6
−4.55
−4.5
x 10
5
Iterations
Score
 
 
ACO−E
ACO−B
EPQ
GREEDY−E
(e) Mildew
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
−1.06
−1.04
−1.02
−1
−0.98
−0.96
−0.94
x 10
5
Iterations
Score
 
 
ACO−E
ACO−B
EPQ
GREEDY−E
(f) Win95pts
Figure 9: Scores for metaheuristic algorithm comparison
426

LEARNING BAYESIAN NETWORK EQUIVALENCE CLASSES WITH ANT COLONY OPTIMIZATION
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Iterations
Structural Hamming Distance
 
 
ACO−E
ACO−B
EPQ
GREEDY−E
(a) Alarm
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
Iterations
Structural Hamming Distance
 
 
ACO−E
ACO−B
EPQ
GREEDY−E
(b) Barley
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
64
66
68
70
72
74
76
78
80
82
Iterations
Structural Hamming Distance
 
 
ACO−E
ACO−B
EPQ
GREEDY−E
(c) Diabetes
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
Iterations
Structural Hamming Distance
 
 
ACO−E
ACO−B
EPQ
GREEDY−E
(d) HailFinder
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Iterations
Structural Hamming Distance
 
 
ACO−E
ACO−B
EPQ
GREEDY−E
(e) Mildew
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
240
260
280
300
Iterations
Structural Hamming Distance
 
 
ACO−E
ACO−B
EPQ
GREEDY−E
(f) Win95pts
Figure 10: SHD for metaheuristic algorithm comparison
427

DALY & SHEN
Network
Alarm
Barley
Diabetes
HailFinder
Mildew
Win95pts
100
49.32±8.37
145.62±2.62
78.24±5.28
98.54±7.28
84.49±1.34
164.34±17.49
500
23.30±5.32
132.25±5.32
70.95±5.92
79.99±11.60
74.84±2.46
91.45±21.75
Sample Size
1000
17.73±4.58
106.05±3.85
68.13±7.65
69.61±8.00
55.53±2.78
77.10±15.77
5000
6.45±2.71
66.30±5.15
67.15±4.30
58.50±5.99
36.68±5.21
56.29±14.53
10000
4.33±1.74
51.49±2.82
61.01±3.18
52.64±6.85
18.96±0.79
50.84±11.19
Table 14: Structural Hamming distance for different sample sizes
Network
Alarm
 −105
Barley
 −105
Diabetes
 −105
HailFinder
 −105
Mildew
 −105
Win95pts
 −104
100
0.0138±0.0005
0.0774±0.0006
0.0316±0.0009
0.0596±0.0003
0.0667±0.0006
0.1507±0.0006
500
0.0568±0.0010
0.3263±0.0041
0.1135±0.0028
0.2687±0.0012
0.2946±0.0019
0.5446±0.0012
Sample Size
1000
0.1092±0.0015
0.5833±0.0028
0.2102±0.0013
0.5189±0.0023
0.5576±0.0022
1.0198±0.0016
5000
0.5228±0.0029
2.6028±0.0024
0.9810±0.0027
2.4807±0.0027
2.4178±0.0037
4.7468±0.0035
10000
1.0388±0.0037
5.0695±0.0035
1.9399±0.0032
4.9205±0.0037
4.5338±0.0043
9.3794±0.0043
Table 15: Training score for different sample sizes
Network
Alarm
 −105
Barley
 −105
Diabetes
 −105
HailFinder
 −105
Mildew
 −105
Win95pts
 −104
100
0.0143±0.0005
0.0778±0.0007
0.0316±0.0007
0.0604±0.0004
0.0668±0.0006
0.1669±0.0007
500
0.0571±0.0009
0.3272±0.0042
0.1136±0.0028
0.2690±0.0012
0.2947±0.0015
0.5564±0.0011
Sample Size
1000
0.1092±0.0014
0.5835±0.0026
0.2104±0.0012
0.5192±0.0019
0.5581±0.0021
1.0238±0.0014
5000
0.5229±0.0027
2.6031±0.0030
0.9811±0.0025
2.4811±0.0030
2.4181±0.0038
4.7535±0.0031
10000
1.0387±0.0039
5.0702±0.0030
1.9394±0.0037
4.9214±0.0036
4.5350±0.0045
9.3883±0.0040
Table 16: Test score for different sample sizes
428

LEARNING BAYESIAN NETWORK EQUIVALENCE CLASSES WITH ANT COLONY OPTIMIZATION
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4 x 10
8
Iterations
Score Function Evaluations
 
 
100 samples
500 samples
1000 samples
5000 samples
10000 samples
(a) Alarm
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5 x 10
8
Iterations
Score Function Evaluations
 
 
100 samples
500 samples
1000 samples
5000 samples
10000 samples
(b) Barley
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16 x 10
7
Iterations
Score Function Evaluations
 
 
100 samples
500 samples
1000 samples
5000 samples
10000 samples
(c) Diabetes
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
0
1
2
3
4
5
6 x 10
8
Iterations
Score Function Evaluations
 
 
100 samples
500 samples
1000 samples
5000 samples
10000 samples
(d) HailFinder
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5 x 10
8
Iterations
Score Function Evaluations
 
 
100 samples
500 samples
1000 samples
5000 samples
10000 samples
(e) Mildew
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5 x 10
9
Iterations
Score Function Evaluations
 
 
100 samples
500 samples
1000 samples
5000 samples
10000 samples
(f) Win95pts
Figure 11: Score function evaluations for different sample sizes
429

DALY & SHEN
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
0
2
4
6
8
10
12 x 10
4
Iterations
Distinct Score Function Evaluations
 
 
100 samples
500 samples
1000 samples
5000 samples
10000 samples
(a) Alarm
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8 x 10
4
Iterations
Distinct Score Function Evaluations
 
 
100 samples
500 samples
1000 samples
5000 samples
10000 samples
(b) Barley
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5 x 10
4
Iterations
Distinct Score Function Evaluations
 
 
100 samples
500 samples
1000 samples
5000 samples
10000 samples
(c) Diabetes
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 x 10
4
Iterations
Distinct Score Function Evaluations
 
 
100 samples
500 samples
1000 samples
5000 samples
10000 samples
(d) HailFinder
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3 x 10
4
Iterations
Distinct Score Function Evaluations
 
 
100 samples
500 samples
1000 samples
5000 samples
10000 samples
(e) Mildew
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5 x 10
5
Iterations
Distinct Score Function Evaluations
 
 
100 samples
500 samples
1000 samples
5000 samples
10000 samples
(f) Win95pts
Figure 12: Distinct score function evaluations for different sample sizes
430

LEARNING BAYESIAN NETWORK EQUIVALENCE CLASSES WITH ANT COLONY OPTIMIZATION
ACO-E
GREEDY-E
ACO-B
EPQ
SHD
4.33±1.74
24.17±9.16
5.98±4.63
16.09±9.92
Score (−105)
1.0388±0.0037
1.0396±0.0038
1.0388±0.0040
1.0389±0.0037
Alarm
Test Score (−105)
1.0387±0.0039
1.0395±0.0044
1.0391±0.0038
1.0396±0.0037
Score Eval.
3.7e8±2.7e7
6.8e4±7.3e3
1.7e7±1.9e5
3.2e7±1.3e6
Dist. Score Eval.
1.2e5±5.6e3
2.9e3±2.1e2
7.2e4±2.3e3
2.7e4±2.3e3
SHD
51.49±2.82
106.58±8.95
52.95±3.71
91.18±17.36
Score (−105)
5.0695±0.0035
5.2415±0.0114
5.0698±0.0033
5.1677±0.0740
Barley
Test Score (−105)
5.0702±0.0030
5.2413±0.0116
5.0702±0.0034
5.1673±0.0734
Score Eval.
4.7e8±1.5e7
1.3e5±5.7e3
3.1e7±1.5e5
4.5e7±2.1e6
Dist. Score Eval.
6.2e4±1.3e3
4.1e3±1.3e2
5.8e4±1.0e3
4.3e4±2.7e3
SHD
61.01±3.18
68.71±3.13
66.97±4.88
77.13±7.10
Score (−105)
1.9399±0.0032
1.9397±0.0033
1.9392±0.0039
1.9451±0.0047
Diabetes
Test Score (−105)
1.9394±0.0037
1.9395±0.0030
1.9398±0.0032
1.9449±0.0044
Score Eval.
1.4e8±7.5e6
2.7e4±1.6e3
1.6e7±1.0e5
2.7e7±2.7e6
Dist. Score Eval.
4.1e4±1.8e3
2.2e3±3.1e1
3.3e4±1.0e3
1.6e4±1.6e3
SHD
52.64±6.85
49.20±0.89
61.59±11.63
78.81±16.32
Score (−105)
4.9205±0.0037
4.9212±0.0039
4.9213±0.0036
4.9293±0.0073
HailFinder
Test Score (−105)
4.9214±0.0036
4.9209±0.0038
4.9214±0.0038
4.9296±0.0080
Score Eval.
5.3e8±3.3e7
1.0e5±2.7e3
4.0e7±2.9e5
6.1e7±3.7e6
Dist. Score Eval.
8.9e4±3.2e3
5.4e3±8.7e1
6.9e4±2.2e3
5.5e4±3.9e3
SHD
18.96±0.79
29.22±0.77
19.41±3.83
43.59±11.79
Score (−105)
4.5338±0.0043
4.5527±0.0038
4.5348±0.0058
4.5982±0.0292
Mildew
Test Score (−105)
4.5350±0.0045
4.5526±0.0044
4.5350±0.0052
4.5989±0.0299
Score Eval.
2.1e8±9.8e6
4.2e4±1.1e3
1.6e7±1.6e5
2.8e7±2.4e6
Dist. Score Eval.
2.2e4±5.4e2
2.2e3±3.7e1
1.5e4±2.6e2
1.5e4±1.2e3
SHD
50.84±11.19
85.75±16.44
91.08±18.52
231.25±42.46
Score (−104)
9.3794±0.0043
9.4121±0.0043
9.3890±0.0036
9.6061±0.0075
Win95pts
Test Score (−104)
9.3883±0.0040
9.4153±0.0045
9.3897±0.0042
9.6058±0.0080
Score Eval.
2.2e9±2.4e8
5.2e5±8.9e4
8.5e7±8.6e5
1.2e8±4.6e6
Dist. Score Eval.
3.2e5±1.9e4
1.5e4±7.9e2
2.7e5±1.2e4
1.9e5±5.4e3
Table 17: Mean and standard deviation for tuned metaheuristic algorithms
Alarm
Barley
Diabetes
HailFinder
Mildew
Win95pts
100
0.25
0.01
0.06
0.06
0.00
0.53
500
0.40
0.12
0.32
0.18
0.02
1.30
Sample Size
1000
0.46
0.32
0.34
0.28
0.12
1.53
5000
0.57
0.72
0.36
0.44
0.71
1.96
10000
0.58
0.93
0.30
0.45
0.82
2.11
Table 18: Mean number of v-structures divided by number of nodes on greedy searches
431

DALY & SHEN
8. Discussion
This section will discuss the results presented in the previous section. In general, the discussion
will involve looking at the score and SHD values (as deﬁned in Section 6.2.2) obtained by the
algorithms. It should be noted that a better score does not necessarily mean a better SHD value and
vice-versa. This can occur because of small sample sizes and because of the parameters given to
the scoring function (such as the equivalent sample size and κ value), which have been shown to
produce differences in scoring function behavior (Kayaalp & Cooper, 2002). In general, different
data sets have different parameter values at which they behave optimally. There does not seem to
be a general method to ﬁnd the optimum values. This problem has been looked at in some depth by
Silander, Kontkanen et al. (2007).
The ﬁrst ﬁgures to be examined will be those in Tables 10 and 11 from Condition 1. These
presented the results of experiments that varied the parameter values of the ACO-E algorithm.
Looking at these ﬁgures, there is evidence that the ACO-E algorithm provides useful behavior for
reasonable values of the parameters.
Next, the results from experimental Condition 5 will be examined, particularly Table 18 in the
context of the Bayesian network properties given in Table 5. Along with the results which show
behavior of ACO-E as a function of sample size in Condition 3 (Tables 14, 15 and 16), this discussion
will seek to characterize ACO-E performance from the perspective of the generating network and
sample. Evidence will be presented that shows ACO-E performs better with more complicated
networks, i.e. networks with more v-structures.
The previous discussion focuses on the behavior of ACO-E as a function of its various parameters.
The next results that will be looked at are intended to provide a comparison against other Bayesian
network structure learning algorithms. These include Figures 9 and 10 and Table 12 from Condition
1 and Table 17 from Condition 4. These present ACO-E against other metaheuristic algorithms that
are similar. In these results there is strong evidence that ACO-E is performing well against the other
algorithms.
Also from a comparative perspective, the results given in Table 13 will be discussed. These
present a series of tests comparing ACO-E to other state-of-the-art Bayesian network structure
learning algorithms. Again, looking at the ﬁgures, there is strong evidence that ACO-E is competitive
in its performance.
Finally, the complexity results from Condition 3 will be shown in the form of Figures 11 and 12.
In order to perform a comparison, statistical tests will be needed. Because of the non-normality
of the distributions of some of the results, tests others than ones which rely on the normality of the
data will be used. These are mentioned below.
8.1 ACO-E Behavior
In this section the behavior of ACO-E as its parameters are varied will be analyzed. As shown in
Tables 10 and 11 there is evidence that there is a difference in the behavior of the ACO-E algorithm
depending on the input parameters. These differences will be analyzed using the two-tailed Mann-
Whitney U test or Student’s T test. The particular test used depends on the normality of the data,
which can be tested with the Jarque-Bera test.
In order to perform this comparison, the best ﬁgures from Tables 10 to 11 will be compared to
the situation where that particular part of the ACO-E algorithm has been turned off. E.g. in Table 10
on the Alarm row, the best ﬁgure is at ρ = 0.5. This is compared to the value at ρ = 0.0, as at this
432

LEARNING BAYESIAN NETWORK EQUIVALENCE CLASSES WITH ANT COLONY OPTIMIZATION
value no pheromone deposition or evaporation is occurring. The values at which the various parts
of the ACO-E algorithm have been ‘turned off’ are ρ = 0.0, q0 = 1 and β = 0.0. For the value of
q0 = 1, the algorithm behaves purely in a greedy fashion. Therefore for the purposes of testing, the
value of the GREEDY-E algorithm in Table 12 will be used for comparison, as these results would be
exactly the same as the case where q0 = 1. The results of these comparisons are shown in Table 19.
This table shows p-values for each comparison.
8.1.1 THE BEHAVIOR OF ρ
Looking at Table 19 the results for ρ that seem most certain are those for Barley, Mildew and
Win95pts. Looking at Tables 10 and 11 for these networks, the values of ρ are in the 0.2−0.4 range.
Also looking at the features of these networks in Table 5 there is a correspondence of ρ = 0.2 to
76 nodes (Win95pts), ρ = 0.3 to 48 nodes (Barley) and ρ = 0.4 to 35 nodes (Mildew). Whilst not
conclusive, this suggests that ρ behaves well in the region 0.2−0.4 (for those data sets that it works
at all). The fact that there is not much variance in this range for these networks means this range is
quite robust. There also is a suggestion that datasets with more nodes would use smaller values of ρ.
This makes sense, as larger networks would probably need to spend more time following the best
solutions, as a low value of ρ would provide.
8.1.2 THE BEHAVIOR OF q0
The parameter q0 appears to have an effect on most of the networks, with the possible exception of
HailFinder. For some of the networks (Alarm and Barley) the parameter has a large effect over a
wide range, whereas for others (Diabetes, Mildew and Win95pts), the effect depends to a large extent
on the value for q0. The largest effects from a scoring function point of view appear to be on the
Barley, Mildew and Win95pts networks.
Looking at these networks, the large variations in behavior across different values of q0 make it
difﬁcult to predict what the best value of the parameter might be for a particular data set. One rule of
thumb might be that smaller values of q0 create more exploration and so might be useful for smaller
data sets, whereas larger data sets need more exploitation in order to get to a reasonable answer.
8.1.3 THE BEHAVIOR OF β
From Table 19, the networks for which the parameter β plays the most role appear to be Alarm,
Barley and Win95pts. Because of the differences of the best values between the scoring function and
the SHD it is difﬁcult to predict the best value for β. In the case of Barley, the behavior is quite robust
to values of β in the range 0.5−2.5. However, for Alarm and Win95pts, the behavior depends on the
value of the parameter with a smaller value being better for Alarm and a larger value for Win95pts.
As a rule of thumb it appears that networks with less numbers of nodes need smaller values of β to
help avoid local minima, whereas networks with more nodes need larger values of β in order to focus
the search more effectively.
8.1.4 THE BEHAVIOR OF m
Looking at Tables 10 and 11 it can be seen that the value of m can sometimes have a small effect on
the effectiveness of ACO-E. In this case, the effect is most pronounced on the Alarm, Diabetes and
Mildew networks, with higher values of m giving a smaller SHD. Indeed in all cases, higher values
433

DALY & SHEN
of m never produce statistically worse results, as is to be expected. However, it is important to bear in
mind the increased running times with larger values of m.
8.1.5 GENERAL DISCUSSION
The reason for the strange behavior of the HailFinder results can possibly be explained by examining
it’s graphs of score function and SHD against time (Figures 9 and 10). It can be seen that as the score
is improving over iterations, the SHD value is deteriorating. This might lead one to the conclusion
that there is a problem with the scoring function for the HailFinder case, perhaps with its parameters.
Another plausible reason for the HailFinder and Win95pts results being out of sync with the others
is that they are larger networks, which might favour more aggressive exploitation of the best-so-far
solution than the smaller ones. In this case, this would correspond to lower values of ρ and higher
values of q0. Also heuristic information might be more useful with large numbers of variables, leading
to the better results with large values of β. Note that these problems with the HailFinder network
have also been seen by de Campos and Castellano (2007).
8.2 Behavior of ACO-E with Respect to Test Network and Sample
In the previous section, it was seen that ACO-E can be a useful algorithm in learning the structure
of Bayesian networks. It was also seen that the values of the parameters that produced the best
behavior depended on the network that was being tested. Some rules of thumb that consolidate the
characteristics observed in the previous section were:
• For data with more variables, have lower values of ρ, higher values of q0 and higher values of
β.
• For data with less variables, have higher values of ρ, lower values of q0 and lower values of β.
However, it was also seen that ACO-E is not always very successful in learning. This was because
little difference was seen when certain parameters were ‘turned off’ with certain networks. Looking
again at Table 19, it seems that the networks for which the effect was most felt were the Barley,
Mildew and Win95pts networks. But why is this?
Looking at Table 5 there does not seem to be any discernible pattern between the network
properties and the suitability of the algorithm. However, the values of the number of v-structures
normalised by the number of nodes in the graph show a more deﬁnite reason. The networks with
which ACO-E performed well all have a larger number of nodes that have a higher in-degree and
hence a larger number of v-structures. As a result of this, data sampled from these networks is better
going to match a similar network in the scoring function, i.e. one that is similar to the standard
network. Because the search starts from the empty graph, it is more likely that the search would get
trapped in a local minimum in trying to add enough arcs to get to the needed number. Due to ACO-E
being a stochastic algorithm, it is able to avoid these local minima.
The upshot of this is that ACO-E would be a good candidate algorithm for data sampled from
networks with a large number of v-structures. However, in the real world a generating network does
not exist. Therefore, the experiments of Condition 5 were designed to try and estimate this quantity.
The results of these experiments are shown in Table 18. It can be seen that there is some association
between the results when the number of samples is at 10000 and the average number of v-structures
per node. Indeed, the value of the correlation coefﬁcient between the values is r = 0.94, which
434

LEARNING BAYESIAN NETWORK EQUIVALENCE CLASSES WITH ANT COLONY OPTIMIZATION
indicates a linear relationship with a p-value of 0.006. However, the results are not quite the same
when the number of samples decrease. For example, at 100 samples the correlation is not visible.
This makes sense, as the low number of samples would not be able to support many v-structures. As
such, the estimate might only be valid in the large sample limit.
However, the procedure employed in Condition 5 does indicate a way in seeing how effective of
the ACO-E algorithm would be on arbitrary set of data. If the value calculated by the resampling
method was low (towards 0), then ACO-E would probably not be particularly effective and a simpler
algorithm would perform well. However, as the value rises, the probable number of v-structures also
rises and hence ACO-E (and other methods designed to avoid local maxima) would fare better.
These ideas seem to be borne out by examining Table 14. It appears that high expected values of
v-structures per node imply good performance of the ACO-E algorithm, i.e. there is an obvious large
improvement in SHD. On the contrary, low expected values of v-structures per node are associated
with small improvements in the SHD as the algorithm progresses.
8.3 Metaheuristic Algorithm Comparison
Figures 9 and 10 and Table 12 show the results of comparing ACO-E against other metaheuristic
algorithms. It can be seen that ACO-E performs better than the other algorithms shown except in the
case of the HailFinder network, where GREEDY-E gives a better result for the SHD. However, in
this case, ACO-E gives a better score value. This is the same as the problem discussed in Section 8.1,
that gave a better score for a worse structure.
These statements can be backed up by looking at Table 20 which gives p-values for a two-tailed
unpaired Mann-Whitney-U test comparing ACO-E results against the other algorithms after runs had
ended. With this statistic, the smaller the number, the more signiﬁcant the test. Since the results from
each of the runs comes from a separate sample of the network, the correct tests would be unpaired.
The data used in the tests were those from the metaheuristic algorithm comparison, i.e. over all
combinations of the parameters for ACO-E and ACO-B. It seems that in most cases, the results are
highly signiﬁcant, which supports the assumption that ACO-E performs well. In the cases where the
signiﬁcance is not so high (ACO-E score compared to GREEDY-E score with the Alarm network and
ACO-E score compared to GREEDY-E score with the Diabetes network), it should be noted that tiny
changes to the score value can lead to large structural changes as an algorithm converges towards the
optimum (generating) network. In these cases, the SHD p-values show a highly signiﬁcant difference.
Comparisons were also made between the variances of the results as seen in Table 21, which
gives p-values for Conover’s (1999) Squared Ranks one-tailed test. From this table can be seen that
ACO-E generally has a lower standard deviation in its results after ﬁnishing its run compared to
ACO-B and EPQ. Whilst the standard deviation of results compared to GREEDY-E are signiﬁcantly
lower with respect to the Alarm and Barley networks, in the other cases GREEDY-E seems to be the
most consistent with regard to its ﬁnal results.
It should be noted that non-parametric tests were used, as the results in general had non-normal
distributions. It should also be noted that some of the results in the tables might seem incorrect.
E.g. in Table 20, in the Win95pts-Score row, the test for ACO-B is more signiﬁcant than that for
GREEDY-E, even though the mean of GREEDY-E is further from ACO-E than that of ACO-B in
Table 12. This is because of the larger sample size for the ACO-B test, which had 1296 samples,
compared to the 216 samples for GREEDY-E.
435

DALY & SHEN
ρ
q0
β
SHD
8.0×10−4
4.3×10−91
1.3×10−16
Alarm
Score
1.7×10−1
2.1×10−2
9.1×10−3
SHD
1.3×10−6
4.2×10−230
6.9×10−41
Barley
Score
1.3×10−9
2.9×10−72
2.5×10−26
SHD
1.0×100
3.6×10−42
8.7×10−1
Diabetes
Score
9.2×10−3
2.8×10−1
1.0×100
SHD
9.3×10−1
3.3×10−2
5.5×10−3
HailFinder
Score
1.9×10−1
1.1×10−2
2.7×10−2
SHD
5.1×10−16
3.6×10−125
1.0×100
Mildew
Score
1.4×10−5
8.0×10−63
3.5×10−1
SHD
4.9×10−8
9.0×10−41
5.3×10−44
Win95pts
Score
1.3×10−7
2.0×10−26
2.2×10−18
Table 19: Comparisons of parameter behavior
GREEDY-E
ACO-B
EPQ
SHD
1.1×10−113
1.6×10−31
1.9×10−118
Alarm
Score
4.3×10−2
6.0×10−3
1.8×10−18
SHD
9.6×10−124
1.8×10−92
9.3×10−123
Barley
Score
5.0×10−123
5.9×10−96
7.0×10−123
SHD
3.1×10−34
4.7×10−104
1.5×10−88
Diabetes
Score
2.5×10−1
2.3×10−18
4.5×10−69
SHD
3.8×10−12
2.7×10−237
1.8×10−99
HailFinder
Score
4.4×10−3
2.2×10−93
4.6×10−113
SHD
2.3×10−50
4.7×10−160
7.5×10−115
Mildew
Score
7.4×10−62
5.7×10−114
5.3×10−118
SHD
1.5×10−42
0
4.8×10−123
Win95pts
Score
3.0×10−37
4.1×10−53
5.0×10−123
Table 20: p-values for Mann-Whitney U test, 10,000 samples
436

LEARNING BAYESIAN NETWORK EQUIVALENCE CLASSES WITH ANT COLONY OPTIMIZATION
Further results from Condition 4 conﬁrm these ﬁndings. In those experiments, the same algorithms
were run with the parameters tuned. The results of these experiments can be seen in Table 17. The
ﬁndings from these results are similar to the ones discussed above, with some differences. ACO-E
outperforms the other algorithms with the SHD and test score measures in all cases except for the
HailFinder network, where GREEDY-E is better, as above. The differences between ACO-E and
ACO-B, its main competitor, are not as pronounced, but still exist. With the Alarm, Barley and
Mildew networks the practical difference is quite small, whereas with the Diabetes, HailFinder and
Win95pts networks it is still quite large. However, even with this, ACO-E can be said to perform
better in three areas:
• ACO-E is more robust with respect to the parameter values input. Comparing the tuned-
parameter-value results to the results across all parameter values, it can be seen that ACO-E is
not as sensitive to the values as ACO-B. This implies that ACO-E could be used in a learning
problem without a long parameter optimization stage. Note that reasonable parameter values
are still important, as discussed in Section 8.1.
• ACO-E converges faster to optimum values than ACO-B, in terms of the number of iterations.
For example, in the Barley, Mildew and Win95pts cases, ACO-E reaches it’s best SHD value
in 20 iterations, whereas ACO-B takes about 200 iterations.
• ACO-E generally provides a smaller variance in output values than the other algorithms. This
can be important in situations where a robust output is needed.
8.4 State-of-the-Art Algorithm Comparison
In this section, the comparison of ACO-E against other state-of-the-art Bayesian network structure
learning algorithms will be analyzed. As shown in Table 13, ACO-E appears to have good perfor-
mance against these other algorithms. The results of statistical comparisons of ACO-E against these
algorithms are shown in Table 22.
In this table are shown p-values for individual comparisons of ACO-E against the other algorithms.
The test used for all these comparisons was the Mann-Whitney U test. This test was used, as the
distributions were found to be not normal. At the foot of the table is the combined p-value found
from the individual p-values above it. This is the total p-value for comparing ACO-E against all the
other algorithms. The method of combining these values was
pcombined = 1−
n
∏
i=1
1−pi,
where pi is the p-value of entry i in the table, there being n values in total. This method of combining
the p-values is needed because of the chance of causing a Type I error otherwise. A Type I error is a
false positive result, i.e. the null hypothesis is rejected when it should not be. This can occur in this
case because if an experiment with a small chance of failing is repeated enough times, there will be a
large chance that at least one of them will fail. It should be noted that the value at the foot of Alarm
does not combine all the p-values above it. Instead it leaves out those of ‘SC k = 10’, ‘PC’ and ‘OR2
k = 5’. This was because the median results for these ﬁgures were close to that of ACO-E and would
have pushed the p-value very high. Therefore, the overall test is only valid for the tests that do not
include the three just mentioned.
437

DALY & SHEN
GREEDY-E
ACO-B
EPQ
SHD
3.6×10−84
2.4×10−252
5.3×10−104
Alarm
ESHD
4.1×10−103
0
7.3×10−117
Score
8.0×10−2
1.3×10−1
5.0×10−5
SHD
1.3×10−61
1.5×10−274
2.3×10−66
Barley
ESHD
6.2×10−44
7.6×10−277
1.6×10−69
Score
1.5×10−66
0
4.6×10−146
SHD
1
1.5×10−3
1.0×10−4
Diabetes
ESHD
1
1.2×10−13
3.1×10−5
Score
4.8×10−1
2.1×10−4
7.3×10−8
SHD
1
2.0×10−153
2.6×10−62
HailFinder
ESHD
1
2.5×10−169
2.0×10−58
Score
9.1×10−1
4.3×10−23
1.3×10−143
SHD
1
1.5×10−111
9.3×10−54
Mildew
ESHD
1
1.3×10−77
1.9×10−49
Score
1
1.5×10−85
8.3×10−79
SHD
1
5.7×10−209
5.4×10−12
Win95pts
ESHD
1
8.7×10−210
1.4×10−13
Score
5.8×10−1
2.6×10−26
3.2×10−38
Table 21: p-values for Conover’s squared ranks test, 10,000 samples
Alarm
Barley
HailFinder
Mildew
MMHC
3.2×10−2
2.1×10−8
2.1×10−8
2.1×10−8
OR1 k = 5
5.9×10−4
2.1×10−8
2.1×10−8
2.1×10−8
OR1 k = 10
1.9×10−5
2.1×10−8
2.1×10−8
2.1×10−8
OR1 k = 20
4.1×10−8
2.1×10−8
2.1×10−8
2.1×10−8
OR2 k = 5
3.5×10−2
2.1×10−8
2.1×10−8
2.1×10−8
OR2 k = 10
1.4×10−7
1.1×10−5
2.1×10−8
2.1×10−8
OR2 k = 20
2.1×10−8
3.8×10−6
2.1×10−8
2.1×10−8
SC k = 5
2.1×10−8
2.1×10−8
2.1×10−8
N/A
SC k = 10
8.1×10−1
N/A
N/A
N/A
GS
2.1×10−8
4.3×10−7
2.1×10−8
2.1×10−8
PC
4.0×10−1
2.1×10−8
2.1×10−8
2.1×10−8
TPDA
6.5×10−4
2.1×10−8
2.1×10−8
2.1×10−8
GES
N/A
2.1×10−8
2.1×10−8
2.1×10−6
Total
3.3×10−2
1.6×10−5
2.5×10−7
2.3×10−6
Table 22: p-values comparing ACO-E against state-of-the-art algorithms
438

LEARNING BAYESIAN NETWORK EQUIVALENCE CLASSES WITH ANT COLONY OPTIMIZATION
The results given in Table 13 appear to be indicative of the results as given in Section 8.1. As
discussed there, ACO-E had some effect with learning in the Alarm network, especially against a
straight greedy search. However, most of this effectiveness appeared to come from the randomness
of the search, and did not make much use of the ρ and β parameters.
On the networks which ACO-E performed well, Barley and Mildew, this performance is reﬂected
across to the current results as it also performed well here. The results for the HailFinder network
seem odd, as the ACO-E algorithm did no better than a search using GREEDY-E. However, in this
ﬁgure, the performance of GES can also seen to be doing well. As GES works in the space of
equivalence classes of Bayesian networks, it is postulated that ACO-E performs well because of the
structure of the search space.
As ever, comparisons must be taken tentatively, especially in this case, as the results given by
Tsamardinos, Brown et al. only have ﬁve samples.
8.5 Computational Complexity of ACO-E
The results of experimental Condition 3 show two ﬁgures (11 and 12) related to the computational
complexity of ACO-E. The ﬁrst shows that total number of score function evaluations during the
algorithm run, the second shows the number of distinct score function evaluations. Both of these are
counted, as score function evaluations are usually cached in order to improve running times.
It can be surmized that in general, larger sample sizes imply more evaluations. This makes sense,
as larger samples can support networks with more arcs. Since the algorithm starts as the empty graph,
it would take more moves and hence more evaluations to get to a maximum. It can also be seen that
the total number of evaluations is in general, linear with respect to the number of iterations passed.
Looking at the plots of Figure 12, it can be seen that the number of distinct function evaluations
is many magnitudes less than the total number of evaluations. It can also be noted that most of the
distinct function evaluations take place within the ﬁrst twenty to thirty iterations and gradually tails
off in a logarithmic fashion. This is to be expected, as at the beginning, the algorithm will explore
many new paths when the pheromone is more evenly distributed. The scores for these paths will be
cached and so not have to be computed again. This means that over time, less and less new score
function applications will be needed. However, it is worthwhile noticing that in many cases the plots
do not level out. This implies that new paths are being taken and that the algorithm is not stagnating.
To ﬁnish up, it is worthwhile comparing the complexity of ACO-E to the other metaheuristic algo-
rithms that were tested. Looking at Table 17, it appears that ACO-E has a much higher computational
complexity than the other algorithms. However, it can be seen that most of these evaluations are not
distinct. Since evaluations are normally cached and cache lookup can proceed in constant time, the
total score evaluation results are not too important. Focusing instead on distinct score evaluation
results, it can be seen that there is not much difference between ACO-E and the other algorithms
in terms of actual score function evaluations. Since this is often the dominant factor in algorithm
running time, the complexity of the algorithms can be observed as quite similar.
9. Conclusions and Future Directions
The main results in this paper were on the development of the ACO-E algorithm as an implementation
of the ACO metaheuristic to the problem of learning a Bayesian network structure that provides a
good ﬁt to a set of data. In a nutshell, ACO-E performed well in reconstructing test networks, from
439

DALY & SHEN
which data was sampled. A more detailed look at the behavior of ACO-E depending on its parameters,
the type of test network and compared to other algorithms will now be given.
9.1 ACO-E Behavior as its Parameters are Varied
In analyzing the behavior of ACO-E as a function of its parameters, the best and worst performing
ﬁgures were compared, across each range of parameter. The best result was found when the parameter
setting produced either the highest score or the smallest difference from the test network. The worst
result was found when the parameter was ‘switched off’, i.e. when it had no effect on the algorithm’s
behavior.
For all parameters, there was a difference between the behavior of the best and the worst settings.
Whether this difference was signiﬁcant or not depended on the particular network being used as a
test; some networks responded better to the algorithm than others. For those networks that ACO-E
worked well with, the following trends were noticed:
• For data with more features, lower values of ρ, higher values of q0 and higher values of β
worked better; and
• For data with less features, higher values of ρ, lower values of q0 and lower values of β worked
better;
where ρ is the rate of pheromone deposition/evaporation, q0 is the balance between exploration and
exploitation and β is the power of the heuristic in the probabilistic transition rule.
9.2 The Utility of ACO-E as a Function of the Test Network and Sample
It was noticed that ACO-E performed better on some of the test networks than others. The networks
that it fared best with were Barley, Mildew and Win95pts, described in Section 6.1.1. On closer
examination of these networks it was found that they had a large average v-structure (as discussed in
Section 6.1.1) per node value.
The reason that this might make a difference is because nodes with a large number of v-structures
imply more possible local maxima in the search space. Greedy methods would run into these maxima,
whereas ACO-E is able to ﬁnd its way around them because of its stochastic nature of not always
choosing the best move. Experiments were run to estimate the average v-structure per node value and
a correspondence was found in the large sample case. In general, the method used in the experiment
could be used to estimate the usefulness of ACO-E in particular situations.
9.3 ACO-E Performance Compared to Similar Algorithms
The results of Sections 7.1 and 7.4 show that ACO-E performs well against other algorithms that are
similar in nature. These other algorithms were:
• GREEDY-E, which performs a greedy search in the space of equivalence classes of Bayesian
network structures (Chickering, 2002a);
• EPQ, which performs an evolutionary programming search in the space of equivalence classes
(Cotta & Muruzábal, 2004; Muruzábal & Cotta, 2004); and
• ACO-B, which performs a search using ACO in the space of DAGs (de Campos, Fernández-
Luna et al., 2002).
440

LEARNING BAYESIAN NETWORK EQUIVALENCE CLASSES WITH ANT COLONY OPTIMIZATION
In all cases, the BDeu score of ACO-E was better than the score of the other algorithms, at every
iteration. In the case of the structural differences, it was better in all cases, except that of the HailFinder
network, where the odd behavior of the scoring function meant better BDeu scores implied worse
structural differences. Concurring with the discussion above in 9.2, the networks for which ACO-E
performed best were the Barley, Mildew and Win95pts networks.
ACO-E was also shown to be comparable in computational complexity to the other metaheuristic
algorithms.
9.4 ACO-E Performance Compared to Alternative State-of-the-Art Algorithms
Similar to the section above, ACO-E performed well in comparison to other state-of-the-art Bayesian
network structure learning algorithms, performing better in 3 out the 4 tested: Barley, Mildew and
HailFinder. The ﬁrst two are networks in which it performed well in the self test. With the HailFinder
network it is postulated that the results are good because of the search space; good results were also
shown for the greedy equivalent search (GES) algorithm, which also searches through the space of
equivalence classes.
Whilst ACO-E did not perform best with the Alarm network, it did not perform badly either,
coming joint third in the rankings. The reasons for the performance on the Alarm network are
discussed in Section 8.2.
9.5 Extending ACO-E to Increase Performance and Scalability
Since validity checking is the slowest part of the ACO-E algorithm, it currently remains the ﬁrst issue
which must be dealt with, in order to improve running times. However, if that problem is solved then
the focus will turn back to the other parts of the algorithm, particularly the scoring function.
Reducing the Number of Scoring Function Evaluations
One very easy way in cutting down the
number of score evaluations would be to have a static heuristic deﬁned that could say, e.g. what
would be the beneﬁt of adding an arc to the empty graph. In this way, scoring functions would only
have to be evaluated once per move and hence lead to a speeding up of the algorithm. With a situation
like this, local search would become more important in order to ‘ﬁnish off’ traversals to the best
possible positions.
Pruning the Search Space
Recently, hybrid learning algorithms have shown good success in
learning Bayesian network structures, whilst cutting down on running time, sometimes dramatically.
They generally work by using a conditional independence test to discover nodes that would likely be
connected to a given node and remove the rest of them from consideration. This has the effect of
requiring less scoring function evaluations, thus speeding up the algorithm and requiring less memory
to store the results of evaluations. With no bound on the number of possible parents, the number of
cached values would grow at least quadratically with the number of variables and eventually exhaust
the computer’s memory.
Applying ACO-E with Different Search Operators to Better Avoid Local Maxima
According
to Castelo and Koˇcka (2003), there are certain operators that are able to avoid local maxima in a
search space, provided that the sample size tends to inﬁnity. An example of these are the operators
given by Chickering (2002b) that are used in a greedy search in the space of equivalence classes of
structures (GES).
441

DALY & SHEN
However, at small sample sizes these guarantees are not strictly true and search algorithms can
still get caught in maxima. An example of a method that tries to avoid these is the KES algorithm of
Nielsen, Koˇcka, and Peña (2003), which uses the operators in GES, but has a parameter that controls
how often the algorithm acts greedily; when the algorithm does not act greedily, it chooses a move
that is not necessarily the best. Experiments show that KES behaves better than GES most of the
time.
This procedure bears some similarities to ACO-E. If the randomness was augmented by pheromone
and heuristics, there is a possibility that performance would improve even more.
