Towards Resolving Unidentiﬁability in Inverse
Reinforcement Learning
Kareem Amin
University of Michigan

Satinder Singh
University of Michigan

ABSTRACT
We consider a setting for Inverse Reinforcement Learning
(IRL) where the learner is extended with the ability to ac-
tively select multiple environments, observing an agent’s be-
havior on each environment. We ﬁrst demonstrate that if
the learner can experiment with any transition dynamic on
some ﬁxed set of states and actions, then there exists an
algorithm that reconstructs the agent’s reward function to
the fullest extent theoretically possible, and that requires
only a small (logarithmic) number of experiments. We con-
trast this result to what is known about IRL in single ﬁxed
environments, namely that the true reward function is fun-
damentally unidentiﬁable. We then extend this setting to
the more realistic case where the learner may not select any
transition dynamic, but rather is restricted to some ﬁxed set
of environments that it may try. We connect the problem
of maximizing the information derived from experiments to
active submodular function maximization, and demonstrate
that a greedy algorithm is near optimal (up to logarithmic
factors). Finally, we empirically validate our algorithm on
an environment inspired by behavioral psychology.
1.
INTRODUCTION
Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL), ﬁrst introduced by
Ng and Russell ([10]), is concerned with the problem of in-
ferring the (unknown) reward function of an agent behaving
optimally in a Markov decision process. The most basic for-
mulation of the problem asks: given a known environment1
E, and an optimal agent policy π, can we deduce the reward
function R which makes π optimal for the MDP (E, R)?
IRL has seen a number of applications in the develop-
ment of autonomous systems, such as autonomous vehicle
operation, where even a cooperative (human) agent might
have great diﬃcultly describing her incentives [17, 2, 1, 5].
However, the problem is fundamental to almost any study
which involves behavioral modeling.
Consider an experi-
mental psychologist attempting to understand the internal
motivations of a subject, say a mouse, or consider a marketer
observing user behavior on a website, hoping to understand
the potential consumer’s value for various oﬀers.
As noted by Ng and Russell, a fundamental complication
to the goals of IRL is the impossibility of identifying the ex-
act reward function of the agent from its behavior. In gen-
eral, there may be inﬁnitely many reward functions consis-
tent with any observed policy π in some ﬁxed environment.
1We will use the terminology environment to refer to an
MDP without a reward function.
Since the true reward function is fundamentally unidentiﬁ-
able, much of the previous work in IRL has been concerned
with the development of heuristics which prefer certain re-
wards as better explanations for behavior than others [10,
20, 11]. In contrast, we make several major contributions to-
wards directly resolving the issue of unidentiﬁability in IRL
in this paper.
As a ﬁrst contribution, we separate the causes of this
unidentiﬁability into three classes. 1) A trivial reward func-
tion, assigning constant reward to all state-action pairs, makes
all behaviors optimal; the agent with constant reward can
execute any policy, including the observed π. 2) Any reward
function is behaviorally invariant under certain arithmetic
operations, such as re-scaling. Finally, 3) the behavior ex-
pressed by some observed policy π may not be suﬃcient to
distinguish between two possible reward functions both of
which rationalize the observed behavior, i.e., the observed
behavior could be optimal under both reward functions. We
will refer to the ﬁrst two cases of unidentiﬁability as repre-
sentational unidentiﬁability, and the third as experimental
unidentiﬁability.
As a second contribution, we will demonstrate that, while
representational unidentiﬁability is unavoidable, experimen-
tal unidentiﬁability is not. In contrast to previous methods,
we will demonstrate how the latter can be eliminated com-
pletely in some cases.
Moreover, in a manner which we
will make more precise in Section 3, we will argue that in
some ways representational unidentiﬁability is superﬁcial; by
eliminating experimental unidentiﬁability, one arrives at the
fullest possible characterization of an agent’s reward func-
tion that one can hope for.
As a third contribution, we develop a slightly richer model
for IRL. We will suppose that the learner can observe the
agent behaving optimally in a number of environments of
the learner’s choosing.
Notice that in many of our moti-
vating examples it is reasonable to assume that the learner
does indeed have this power. One can ask the operator of a
vehicle to drive through multiple terrains, while the exper-
imental psychologist might observe a mouse across a num-
ber of environments. It is up to the experimenter to orga-
nize the dynamics of the maze. One of our key results will
be that, with the right choice of environments, the learner
can eliminate experimental unidentiﬁability. We will study
our repeated experimentation for IRL in two settings,
one in which the learner is omnipotent in that there are
no restrictions on what environments can be presented to
the agent, and another in which there are restrictions on
the type of environments the learner can present. We show
arXiv:1601.06569v1  [cs.AI]  25 Jan 2016

that in the former case, experimental unidentiﬁability can
be eliminated with just a small number of environments. In
the latter case, we cast the problem as budgeted exploration,
and show that for some number of environments B, a simple
greedy algorithm approximately maximizes the information
revealed about R in B environments.
Most Closely Related Work.
Prior work in IRL has mostly focused on inferring an
agent’s reward function from data acquired from a ﬁxed en-
vironment [10, 2, 4, 20, 11, 18, 14]. We consider a setting in
which the learner can actively select multiple environments
to explore, before using the observations obtained from these
environments to infer an agent’s reward. Studying a model
where the agent can make active selections of environments
in an IRL setting is novel to the best of our knowledge.
Previous applications of active learning to IRL have con-
sidered settings where, in a single environment, the learner
can query the agent for its action in some state [8], or for
information about its reward [13].
There is prior work on using data collected from multiple
— but exogenously ﬁxed — environments to predict agent
behavior [12]. There are also applications where methods
for single-environment MDPs have been adapted to multi-
ple environments [20].
Nevertheless, both these works do
not attempt to resolve the ambiguity inherent in recovering
the true reward in IRL, and describe IRL as being an “ill-
posed” problem. As a result these works ultimately consider
the objective of mimicking or predicting an agent’s optimal
behavior. While this is a perfectly reasonable objective, we
will more be interested in settings where the identiﬁcation
of R is the goal in itself. Among many other reasons, this
may be because the learner explicitly desires an interpretable
model of the agent’s behavior, or because the learner desires
to transfer the learned reward function to new settings.
In the economics literature, the problem of inferring an
agent’s utility from behavior has long been studied under the
heading of utility or preference elicitation [3, 19, 15, 16, 13,
15]. When these models analyze Markovian environments,
they will assume a ﬁxed environment where the learner can
ask certain types of queries, such as bound queries elic-
iting whether some state-action reward r(s, a) ≥b.
We
will instead be interested in cases where the learner can
only make inferences from agent behavior (with no external
source of information), but can manipulate the environments
on which the agent acts.
2.
SETTING AND PRELIMINARIES
We denote an environment by a tuple E = (S, A, P, γ),
where S = {1, ..., d} is a ﬁnite set of states in which the
agent can ﬁnd itself, A is a ﬁnite set of actions available to
the agent, and P is a collection of transition dynamics for
each a ∈A, so that P = {Pa}a∈A. We represent each Pa
as a row-stochastic matrix, with Pa ∈Rd×d, and Pa(s, s′)
denoting the agent’s probability of transitioning to state s′
from state s when selecting action a. The agent’s discount
factor is γ ∈(0, 1).
We represent an agent’s reward function as a vector R ∈
Rd with R(s) indicating the (undiscounted) payout for ar-
riving at state s.
Note that a joint choice of Markovian
environment E with reward function R ﬁxes an MDP M =
(E, R).
A policy is a mapping π : S →A.
With slight
abuse of notation, we can represent π as a matrix Pπ where
Pπ(s, ·) = Pπ(s)(s, ·) (we take the s-row of Pπ to be the s-row
of Pa, where a is the action chosen in state s).
Let OPT(E, R) denote the set of policies that are optimal,
maximizing the agent’s expected time-discounted rewards,
for the MDP (E, R). We consider a repeated experimen-
tation setting, where we suppose that the learner is able to
select a sequence of environments2 E1, E2, ..., sequentially
observing π1, π2, ... satisfying πi ∈OPT(Ei, R), for some
unknown agent reward function R. We call each (Ei, πi) an
experiment. The goal of the experimenter is to output a re-
ward estimate ˆR, approximating the true reward function.
In many settings, the assumption that the learner can di-
rectly observe the agent’s full policy πi is too strong, and a
more realistic assumption is the learner observes only trajec-
tories T i, where T i denotes a sequence of state-action, pairs
drawn according to the distribution induced by the agent
playing policy πi in environment Ei. We will refer to the
former feedback model as the policy observation setting,
and the latter as the trajectory observation setting.
A fundamental theorem for IRL follows from rewriting
the Bellman equations associated with the optimal policy
in a single MDP, noting that the components of the vector
Pa(I −γPπ)−1R correspond to the Q-value for action a,
under policy π and reward R, for each of d states.
Theorem 1
(Ng, Russell [10]). Let E = (S, A, P, γ)
be an arbitrary environment, and R ∈Rd. π ∈OPT(E, R)
if and only if ∀a ∈A, (Pπ −Pa)(I −γPπ)−1R ≥0.3
The key take-away from this theorem is that in a pol-
icy observation setting, the set of reward functions R con-
sistent with some observed optimal policy π are precisely
those satisfying some set of linear constraints. Furthermore,
those constraints can be computed from the environment E
and policy π. Thus, an object that we will make recurring
reference to is the set of reward functions consistent with
experiment (E, π), denoted K(E, π):
K(E, π) = {R ∈Rd |∀a ∈A, (Pπ −Pa)(I −γPπ)−1R ≥0
∀s ∈S, Rmin ≤R(s) ≤Rmax}.
Since K(E, π) is an intersection of linear constraints, it de-
ﬁnes a convex polytope, a fact which will be of later algorith-
mic importance. An immediate corollary of Theorem 1, is
that given a sequence of experiments E = ((E1, π1), ..., (En, πn)),
the set of rewards consistent with E are precisely those in
K(E) ≜∩(E,π)∈EK(E, π)
We can also think of a trajectory T as inducing a partial
policy πT on the states visited by the trajectory. In particu-
lar, let D(T) denote the domain of T, D(T) = {s | ∃(s, a) ∈
T}. We say two policies π, π′ are consistent on D(T) ⊂S,
denoted π ≡D(T ) π′, iﬀπ(s) = π′(s) for all s ∈D(T). Thus,
given (E, T), the set of rewards consistent with the observa-
tion are precisely K(E, T) = {R ∈Rd | ∃π ≡D(T ) πT , ∀a ∈
A, (Pπ −Pa)(I −γPπ)−1R ≥0, Rmin ≤Ri ≤Rmax}, and
given a sequence E = {(E1, T 1), ..., (En, T n)}, we can deﬁne
K(E) in the trajectory setting.
2Deﬁned on the same state and action spaces.
3The inequality is read component-wise. That is, the rela-
tion holds if standard ≥holds for each component.

3.
ON IDENTIFICATION
In this section we will give a more nuanced characteriza-
tion of what it means to identify a reward function.
We
will argue that there are multiple types of uncertainty in-
volved in identifying R, which we categorize as represen-
tational unidentiﬁability and experimental unidentiﬁability.
Furthermore, we argue that ﬁrst type is in some ways super-
ﬁcial, and ought to be ignored, while the second type can be
eliminated.
We begin with a deﬁnition. Let R and R′ be reward func-
tions deﬁned on the same state space S. We say that R and
R′ are behaviorally equivalent if for any environment (also
deﬁned on S), the agent whose reward function is R behaves
identically to the agent whose reward function is R′.
Definition 1. Two reward vectors R, R′ ∈Rd deﬁned
on S are behaviorally equivalent, denoted R ≡R′ if for any
set of actions, transition dynamics, and discount, (A, P, γ),
deﬁning an environment E = (S, A, P, γ) we have that
OPT(E, R) = OPT(E, R′).
Behavioral equivalence deﬁnes an equivalence relation over
vectors in Rd, and we let [R] = {R′ ∈Rd | R′ ≡R} denote
the equivalence classes deﬁned in this manner. Intuitively, if
R and R′ are behaviorally equivalent, they induce identical
optimal policies in every single environment, and therefore
are not really “diﬀerent” reward functions. They are simply
diﬀerent representations of the same incentives.
We now observe that behavioral equivalence classes are in-
variant under multiplicative scaling by positive scalars, and
component-wise translation by a constant. Intuitively, this
is easy to see. Adding c reward to every state in some reward
function R does not aﬀect an agent’s decision-making. This
is simply “background” reward that the agent gets for free.
Similarly, scaling R by a positive constant simply changes
the “units” used to represent rewards. The agent does not,
and should not, care whether its reward is represented in
dollars or cents.
We prove this formally in the following
Theorem.
Theorem 2. For any c ∈Rd, let ⃗c ∈Rd denote the vector
with all components equal to c. For any α > 0, and R ∈Rd,
R ≡αR + ⃗c.
Proof. First consider ⃗c as deﬁned in the statement of
the Theorem. Fix any environment E = (S, A, P, γ), action
a ∈A and arbitrary policy π. We begin by claiming that
(Pπ −Pa)(I −γPπ)−1⃗c = ⃗0.
The Woodbury formula for matrix inversion tells us that
(I −γPπ)−1 = I + (I −γPπ)−1γPπ. Furthermore, for any
row-stochastic matrix P, P⃗c = ⃗c. Therefore:
v = (Pπ −Pa)(I −γPπ)−1⃗c
= (Pπ −Pa)(I + (I −γPπ)−1γPπ)⃗c
= (Pπ −Pa)⃗c + (Pπ −Pa)(I −γPπ)−1γPπ⃗c
= ⃗0 + (Pπ −Pa)(I −γPπ)−1γ⃗c = γv
Since γ ∈(0, 1), it must be that v = ⃗0.
Now ﬁx a reward function R ∈Rd, and arbitrary envi-
ronment E, and consider OPT(E, R). By Theorem 1, we
know that π ∈OPT(E, R) iﬀfor any a ∈A, (Pπ −Pa)(I −
γPπ)−1R ≥0, which occurs iﬀ(Pπ −Pa)(I −γPπ)−1(αR) ≥
0, since α is a positive scalar. Finally, we can conclude that
π ∈OPT(E, R) iﬀfor all a ∈A, (Pπ −Pa)(I −γPπ)−1(αR+
⃗c) ≥0, this last condition implying that π ∈OPT(E, αR +
⃗c), again by Theorem 1.
Since our choice of E was arbitrary, by Deﬁnition 1, R ≡
αR + ⃗c, concluding the proof.
Thus, we argue that one reason why reward functions can-
not be identiﬁed is a trivial one: the classic IRL problem
does not ﬁx a consistent representation for reward functions.
For any R ∈Rd there are an uncountable number of other
functions in [R], namely αR+⃗c for any α and ⃗c, all of which
are behaviorally identical to R. However, distinguishing be-
tween these functions is irrelevant; whether an agent’s“true”
reward function is (1, 2, 3, 4) or (0, 1/3, 2/3, 1)4 is simply a
matter of what units are used to represent rewards.
In light of this observation, it is convenient to ﬁx a canon-
ical element of each equivalence class [R].
For any con-
stant reward function R, we will take its canonicalized rep-
resentation to be ⃗0. Otherwise we note, by way of Theo-
rem 2, that any R can be translated and re-scaled so that
maxs R(s) = 1 and mins R(s) = 0. More carefully, for any
non-constant R, we take its canonicalized representation to
be (R −mins R(s))/(maxs R(s) −mins R(s)) ∈[R]. This
canonicalization is consistent with behavioral equivalence,
and we state the following Theorem whose proof can be
found in the appendix. As a consequence of this Theorem,
we can use the notation [R] interchangeably to refer to the
equivalence class of R, or the the unique canonical element
of [R].
Theorem 3. For any R, R′ ∈Rd, R ≡R′ if and only if
they have the same canonicalized representation.
We next consider the issue of trivial/constant rewards [⃗0].
Since the IRL problem was ﬁrst formulated, it has been ob-
served that no single experiment can ever determine that the
agent’s reward function is not a constant reward function.
The algebraic reason for this is the fact that ⃗0 is always a
solution to the linear system K(E, π), for any E and π. The
intuitive reason for this is the fact that any π on some E
is as optimal as any other policy for an agent whose reward
is ⃗0. Therefore, if we consider an agent whose true reward
is some R ∈Rd, R ̸= ⃗0, then even in the policy observation
setting, both R,⃗0 ∈K(E, π). Furthermore, this will not dis-
appear with multiple experimentation. After any sequence
of experiments E, it also remains that both R,⃗0 ∈K(E).
Consider an agent whose true reward function is ⃗0.
A
crucial consequence of the above is that if an IRL algorithm
guarantees that it will identify ⃗0, then it necessarily misiden-
tiﬁes non-trivial reward functions. This is because an agent
with a trivial reward function is allowed to behave arbitrar-
ily, and therefore may choose to behave consistently with
some non-trivial reward R. An IRL algorithm that guaran-
tees identiﬁcation of trivial rewards will therefore misidentify
the agent whose true reward is R.
This leads us to the following revised deﬁnition of iden-
tiﬁcation, which accounts for what we call representational
unidentiﬁability:
Definition 2. We say that an IRL algorithm succeeds
at identiﬁcation if for any R ∈Rd, after observing behavior
4We get (0, 1/3, 2/3, 1) from (1, 2, 3, 4) by subtracting 1 from
every state and dividing by 3

(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 1: (a) After observing an agent’s behavior in an envi-
ronment, there is some set of rewards K(E, π) consistent with
the observed behavior, depicted by the shaded region. Previous
work has been concerned with designing selection rules that pick
some point in this region, depicted here by the red circle.
(b)
No amount of experimentation can remove the representational
unidentiﬁability from the setting, depicted here by the darker
shaded region. (c) Nevertheless, adding the constraints K(E′, π′)
induced by a second experiment disproves the original selection.,
removing some experimental unidentiﬁability.
from an agent with true reward R, the algorithm outputs a
ˆR such that ˆR ≡R whenever R ̸∈[⃗0].
Notice that this deﬁnition accomplishes two things. First,
it excuses an algorithm for decisions about how R is repre-
sented. In other words, it asserts that the salient task in IRL
is computing a member of [R], not the literal R. Secondly,
if the true reward function R is not constant (i.e. R ̸∈[⃗0]),
it demands the that algorithm identify R (up to represen-
tational decisions). However, if the agent really does have
a reward function of ⃗0, the algorithm is allowed to output
anything. In other words, the Algorithm is only allowed to
behave arbitrarily if the agent behaves arbitrarily.5
We also note that Deﬁnition 2 can be relaxed to give a
notion of approximate identiﬁcation, which we state here:
Definition 3. We say that an IRL algorithm ϵ-identiﬁes
a reward function if for any R ∈Rd, after observing behavior
from an agent with true reward R, the algorithm outputs a
ˆR such that ||[R] −[ ˆR]||∞≤ϵ whenever R ̸∈[⃗0].
Even Deﬁnition 2 may not be attainable from a single
experiment, as K(E, π) may contain multiple behavioral
classes [R]. We call this phenonmenon experimental uniden-
tiﬁability, due to the fact that the experiment (E, π) may
simply be insuﬃcient to distinguish between some [R] and
[R′]. In the next section, we will observe that this source
of uncertainty in the reward function can be decreased with
multiple experimentation, as depicted in Figure 1 (see Cap-
tion for details). In other words, by distinguishing represen-
tational unidentiﬁability from experimental unidentiﬁability,
we can formally resolve the latter.
A more concrete example is given in Figure 2, which de-
picts a grid-world with each square representing a state. In
each of the ﬁgures, thick lines represent impenetrable walls,
and an agent’s policy is depicted by arrows, with a circle
indicating the agent deciding to stay at a grid location. The
goal of the learner is to infer the reward of each state. Fig-
ures 2(a) and 2(b), depict the same agent policy, which takes
the shortest path to the location labeled x from any start-
ing location. One explanation for such behavior, depicted in
5We comment that, as a practical matter, one is usually
interested in rationalizing the behavior of an agent believed
to be non-trivial.
Figure 2:
(a) An agent’s policy in a ﬁxed environment.
An
agent can move in one of four directions or can stay at a location
(represented by the black circle).
Thick purple lines represent
impassable walls. (d) An experiment revealing that if getting to
x requires 11 steps or more, and getting to y requires 4 or fewer,
the agent prefers y.
Figure 2(a), is that the agent has large reward for state x,
and zero reward for every other state. However, an equally
possible explanation is that the state y also gives positive
reward (but smaller than that of x) such that if there exists
a shortest path to x that also passes through y, the agent
will take it (depicted in Figure 2(b)). Without additional in-
formation, these two explanations cannot be distinguished.
This is an example of experimental unidentiﬁability that
can nevertheless be resolved with additional experimenta-
tion. By observing the same agent in the environment de-
picted in Figure 2(c), the learner infers that y is indeed a
rewarding state. Finally, observing the agent’s behavior in
the environment of Figure 2(d) reveals that the agent will
prefer traveling to state y if getting to x requires 11 steps or
more, while getting to y requires 4 steps of fewer. These sub-
sequent observations allow the learner to relate the agent’s
reward at state x with the agent’s reward at state y.
4.
OMNIPOTENT EXPERIMENTER
SETTING
We now consider a repeated experimentation setting in
which the environments available for selection by the exper-
imenter are completely unrestricted. Formally, each envi-
ronment E selected by the experimenter belongs to a class
U∗containing an environment (S, A, P, γ) for every feasible
set of transition dynamics P on S. We call this the om-
nipotent experimenter setting.
We will describe an algorithm for the omnipotent experi-
menter setting that ϵ-identiﬁes R, using just O(log(d/ϵ)) ex-
periments. While the omnipotent experimenter is extremely
powerful, the result demonstrates that the guarantee ob-
tained in a repeated IRL setting can be far stronger than
available in a standard single-environment IRL setting. Fur-
thermore, it clariﬁes the distinction between experimental
unidentiﬁability and representational unidentiﬁability.

Figure 3: Typical environment in the second phase of the algo-
rithm. The dotted lines represent transitions for action a1, while
the solid lines represent transitions for action a2.
4.1
Omnipotent Identiﬁcation Algorithm
The algorithm proceeds in two stages, both of which in-
volve simple binary searches. The ﬁrst stage will identify
states smin, smax such that R(smin) = Rmin and R(smax) =
Rmax. The second stage identiﬁes for each s ∈S an αs such
that R(s) = αsRmin + (1 −αs)Rmax. Throughout, the al-
gorithm only makes use of two agent actions which we will
denote a1, a2.
Therefore, in describing the algorithm, we
will assume that |A| = 2, and the environment selected by
the algorithm is fully determined by its choices for Pa1 and
Pa2. If in fact |A| > 2, in the omnipotent experimenter set-
ting, one can reduce to the two-action setting by making the
remaining actions in A equivalent to either a1 or a2.6
We ﬁrst address the task of identifying smax.
Suppose
we have two candidates s and s′ for smax. The key idea in
this ﬁrst stage of the algorithm is to give the agent an abso-
lute choice between the two states by setting Pa1(s, s) = 1,
Pa1(s′, s′) = 1, while setting Pa2(s, s′) = 1 and Pa2(s′, s) =
1.
An agent selecting π(s) = a1 reveals (for any γ) that
R(s) ≥R(s′), while an agent selecting π(s) = a2 reveals
that R(s) ≤R(s′). This test can be conducted for up to d/2
distinct pairs of states in a single experiment. Thus given k
candidates for smax, in a single experiment, we can narrow
the set of candidates to k/2, and are guaranteed that one of
the remaining states s satisﬁes R(s) = Rmax. After log(d)
such experiments we can identify a single state smax which
satisﬁes R(smax) ≥R(s) for all s. Conducting an analogous
procedure identiﬁes a state smin.
Once smin and smax are identiﬁed, take s1, ..., sd−2 to
be the remaining states, and consider an environment with
transition dynamics parameterized by α = (αs1, ..., αsd−2).
A typical environment in this phase is depicted in Figure 3.
The environment sets smin, smax to be sinks with Pa1(smin, smin) =
Pa1(smax, smax) = Pa2(smin, smin) = Pa2(smax, smax) = 1.
For each remaining si, Pa1(si, smin) = αsi and Pa1(si, smax) =
(1 −αsi), so that taking action a1 in state si represents an
αi probability gamble between the best and worst state. Fi-
nally, Pα also sets Pa2(s, s) = 1, and so taking action a2
in state si represents receiving R(si) for sure.
By select-
ing π(s) = a1, the agent reveals αsRmin + (1 −αs)Rmax ≥
R(s), while a choice π(s) = a2 reveals that αsRmin + (1 −
αs)Rmax ≤R(s). Thus, a binary search can be conducted
on each αs ∈[0, 1] independently in order to determine an
ϵ approximation of the α∗
s such that R(s) = α∗
sRmin + (1 −
α∗
s)Rmax.
The algorithm succeeds at ϵ-identiﬁcation, summarized
in the following theorem.
The proof of the theorem is a
straightforward analysis of binary search.
6Doing so is possible in this setting because transition dy-
namics can be set arbitrarily.
Theorem 4. Let ˆR be deﬁned by letting ˆR(smin) = 0,
ˆR(smax) = 1, and ˆR(s) = 1 −αs for all other s (where
smin, smax, and αs are identiﬁed as described above). For
any true reward function R ̸∈[⃗0] with canonical form [R],
||[R] −ˆR||∞≤ϵ.
The takeaway of this setting is that the problems regard-
ing identiﬁcation in IRL can be circumvented with repeated
experimentation. It is thought that even with policy obser-
vations, the IRL question is fundamentally ill-posed. How-
ever, here we see that with repeated experimentation it is in
fact possible to identify R to arbitrary precision in a well-
deﬁned sense. While these results are informative, we believe
that it is unrealistic to imagine that the learner can arbi-
trarily inﬂuence the environment of the agent. In the next
section, we develop a theory for repeated experimentation
when the learner is restricted to select environments from
some restricted subset of all possible transition dynamics.
5.
RESTRICTED EXPERIMENTER SETTING
We now consider a setting in which the experimenter has
a restricted universe U of environments to choose from. U
need not contain every possible transition dynamic, an as-
sumption required to execute the binary search algorithm of
the previous section. The best the experimenter could ever
hope for is to try every environment in U. This gives the
experimenter all the available information about the agent’s
reward function R. Thus, we will be more interested in max-
imizing the information gained by the experimenter while
minimizing the number of experiments conducted. In prac-
tice, observing an agent may be expensive, or hard to come
by, and so for even a small budget of experiments B, the
learner would like select the environments from U which
maximally reduce experimental unidentiﬁability.
Once a sequence of experiments E has been observed, we
know that R is consistent with the observed sequence if and
only if R ∈K(E). Thus, the value of repeated experimen-
tation is allowing the learner to select environments so that
K(E) is as informative as possible. In contrast, we note that
previous work on IRL has largely been focused on designing
heuristics for the selection problem of picking some R from
a ﬁxed set (of equally possible reward functions). Thus, we
will be interested in making K(E) “small,” while IRL has
traditionally been focused on selecting R from exogenously
ﬁxed K(E). Before deﬁning what we mean by “small”, we
will review preexisting methods for selecting R ∈K(E).
5.1
Generalized Selection Heuristics
In the standard (single-environment) setting, given an en-
vironment E and observed policy π, the learner must make a
selection among one of the rewards in K(E, π). The heuris-
tic suggested by [10] is motivated by the idea that for a
given state s, the reward function that maximizes the dif-
ference in Q-value between the observed action in state s,
π(s), and any other action a ̸= π(s), gives the strongest ex-
planation of the behavior observed from the agent. Thus, a
reasonable linear selection criterion is to maximize the sum
of these diﬀerences across states. Adding a regularization
term, encourages the selection of reward functions that are
also sparse. Putting these together, the standard selection
heuristic for single-environment IRL is to select the R which
maximizes:

X
s∈S

min
a̸=π(s)(Pπ(s) −Pa(s))(I −γPπ)−1R

−λ|R(s)|
(1)
There are two natural candidates for generalizing this se-
lection rule to the repeated experimentation setting, where
now instead of a single experiment, the experimenter has en-
countered a sequence of observations E. The ﬁrst is to sum
over all (environment, state), pairs, the minimum diﬀerence
in Q-value between the action selected by the agent and any
other action. The second is to sum over states, taking the
minimum over all (environment, action), pairs. While one
could make arguments motivating each of these, ultimately
any such objective is heuristic. However, we do argue that
there is a strong algorithmic reason for preferring the lat-
ter objective. In particular, the former objective grows in
dimensionality as environments are added, quickly resulting
in an intractable LP. The dimension of the objective in the
latter (Equation 2), however, remains constant.7
maximize
R∈K(E)
X
s∈S




min
(Ei,πi)∈E
a̸=πi(s)
(P i
π(s) −P i
a(s))(I −γP i
π)−1R



−λ|R(s)|
(2)
There are other selection rules for the single-environment
setting, which are generalizable to the repeated experimen-
tation setting, including heuristics for the inﬁnite state set-
ting, trajectory heuristics, as well as approaches already
adapted to multiple environments [12]. Due to space con-
straints, we discuss only the foundational approach of [10].
Our goal here is simply to emphasize the dichotomy between
adapting pre-existing IRL methods to data gathered from
multiple environments (however that data was generated),
and the problem of how to best select those environments to
begin with, this latter problem being the focus of the next
section.
5.2
Adaptive Experimentation
Given a universe U of candidate environments, we now
ask how to select a small number of environments from U so
that the environments are maximally informative. We must
ﬁrst decide what we mean by “informative.” We propose
that for a set of experiments E (either in the policy or tra-
jectory setting), a natural objective is to minimize the mass
of the resulting space of possible rewards K(E) with respect
to some measure (or distribution) µ. Under the Lebesgue
measure (or uniform distribution), this corresponds to the
natural goal of reducing the volume of the K(E) as much as
possible. Thus we deﬁne:
Volµ(K(E)) =
Z
Rd 1[R ∈K(E)]dµ(R)
= PR∼µ [R ∈K(E)]
We will ﬁnd it convenient to cast this as a maximization
problem, and therefore also deﬁne f(E) = V −Volµ(K(E)),
7Writing Equation 2 as an LP in standard form requires
translating the min into constraints, and thus the number
of constraints grows with the number of experiments, but as
we demonstrate in our experimental results, this is tractable
for most LP solvers.
where V is an upper bound on the volume of [−Rmax, Rmax]d,
and our goal to maximize f(E).
This objective has several desirable properties. First and
foremost, by reducing the volume of K(E) we eliminate the
space of possible reward functions (i.e. experimental uniden-
tiﬁability). Secondly, the repeated experimentation setting
is fundamentally an active learning setting. We can think
of the true, unknown, R as a function that labels environ-
ments E with either a corresponding policy π or trajectory
T. Thus, the volume operator corresponds to reducing the
version space of possible rewards. Furthermore, as we will
see later in this section, the objective is a monotone sub-
modular function, an assumption well-studied in the active
learning literature [7, 6], allowing us to prove guarantees for
a greedy algorithm.
Finally, we will normally think of µ as being the Lebesgue
measure, and Vol(·) as volume in d-dimensional Euclidean
space (or the uniform distribution on [−Rmax, Rmin]d). How-
ever, the choice of µ makes the objective quite general. For
example, by making µ uniform on an ϵ-net on Rd, Vol corre-
sponds to counting the number of rewards that are ϵ-apart
with respect to some metric. In many settings, R naturally
comes from some discrete space, such as the corners of the
hypercube {0, 1}d.
Again, this is readily modeled by the
correct choice of µ. In fact, µ can be thought of simply as
any prior on [−Rmax, Rmax]d.
We are now ready to describe a simple algorithm that
adaptively selects environments E ∈U, attempting to greed-
ily maximize f(·), depicted as Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Greedy Environment Selection
1: Input B
2: i := 1
3: E := ∅
4: while i ≤B do
5:
Ei := arg max
E
min
R∈K(E)
min
π∈OPT(E,R)f(E ∪(E, π)) −f(E)
6:
Observe policy πi for Ei.
7:
E := (E, (Ei, πi))
8:
i := i + 1
9: end while
10: return E
In order to state a performance guarantee about Algo-
rithm 1, we will use the fact that f(·) is a submodular, non-
decreasing, function on subsets of environment, observation
pairs, 2U×O, where O is the set of possible observations.
Lemma 1. f is a submodular, non-decreasing function.
Proof. Given a set S and component s, we use S + s
to denote the union of the singleton set {s} with S. Let O
be the set of possible observations, so that o is a trajectory
in the trajectory setting, and a policy in the policy setting.
Let U be the space of possible environments.
Fix any ˆE ⊂E ⊂2U×O, and (E, o) ̸∈E. By deﬁnition
of K(·), we have that K(E + (E, o)) = K(E) ∩K(E, o) and
K(E) ⊂K( ˆE), and so: f((E, (E, o))) −f(E) = Vol(K(E)) −
Vol(K(E, (E, o))) =
R
Rd 1[R ∈K(E), R ̸∈K(E, o)]dµ(R)
≤
R
Rd 1[R ∈K( ˆE), R ̸∈K(E, o)]dµ(R) = f(( ˆE, (E, o))) −
f( ˆE) This establishes submodularity of f. Since E is arbi-
trary and the right-hand-side of the second equality is non-
zero, f is also monotone.
The performance of any algorithm is a function of how
many experiments are attempted, and thus our analysis must

(a) Policy Observations
(b) Trajectory Observations
Figure 4: Plot (a) displays || ˆR||∞error for predicted vector ˆR in the policy observation setting, with bars indicating standard
error. Plot (b) displays the same in the trajectory setting.
take this into account. Let An be a deterministic algorithm
that deploys at most n experiments. An has a worst-case
performance, which depends on the true reward R and what
policies were observed. We say a sequence of experiments
E = ((E1, o1), ..., (En, on)) is consistent with An and R, if
An chooses environment Ej+1 after observing the subse-
quence of experiments ((E1, o1), ..., (Ej, oj)), and oj is ei-
ther a trajectory or policy consistent with (E, R). Denoting
the set of consistent experiments C(An, R), the best perfor-
mance that any algorithm can guarantee with n experiments
is: OPTn = maxAn minR minE∈C(An,R) f(E)
The submodularity of f, allows us to prove that for any n,
the Greedy Environment Selection Algorithm8 needs slightly
more than n experiments (by a logarithmic factor) to attain
f(E) ≈OPTn.
Theorem 5. E returned by the Greedy Environment Se-
lection algorithm satisﬁes f(E) ≥OPTn −ϵ when B =
n ln(OPTn/ϵ) ≤n ln(V/ϵ).
The proof of Theorem 5 uses many of the same techniques
used by Guillory et. al ([7]), in their work on interactive set
cover. For technical reasons, we cannot state our theorem
directly as a corollary of these results, which assume a ﬁnite
hypothesis class, whereas we have an inﬁnite space of pos-
sible rewards. Nevertheless, these proofs are easily adapted
to our setting, and the full proofs are given in the appendix.
Finally we note that Line (5) is not computable exactly
without parametric assumptions on the class of environ-
ments or space of rewards. In practice, and as we will de-
scribe in the next section, we approximate the exact maxi-
mization by sampling environments and rewards from K(E),
and optimizing on the sampled sets.
6.
EXPERIMENTAL ANALYSIS
We now deploy the techniques discussed in a setting, demon-
strating that maximizing f(·) is indeed eﬀective for identi-
fying R. We imagine that we have an agent that will be
8n.b. in the trajectory setting, one would replace the mini-
mization over π ∈OPT(E, R) in line 5 of the algorithm, with
a minimization over T consistent with π, π ∈OPT(E, R).
dropped into a grid world. The experimenter would like to
infer the agent’s reward for each space in the grid. We imag-
ine that the experimenter has the power to construct walls
in the agent’s environment, and so we will alternatively re-
fer to an environment as a maze. To motivate the value of
repeated experimentation, recall Figure 2.
This is a restricted environment for the learner.
The
learner cannot, for example, make it so that an action causes
the agent to travel from a bottom corner of the maze to a
top corner. However, the learner can modify the dynamics
of the environment in so far as it can construct maze walls.
We evaluate Algorithm 1 on grids of size 10 × 10.
An
agent’s reward is given by a vector R ∈R100, with ||R||∞≤
Rmax, where Rmax is taken to be 10 in all that follows. In
each simulation we randomly assign some state in R to have
reward Rmax, and assign 5 states to have reward 1.9 The
remaining states give reward 0. The agent’s discount rate is
taken to be 0.8. The goal of the learner is not just to deter-
mine which states are rewarding, but to further determine
that the latter states yield 1/10 the reward of the former.
In Figure 4a, we display our main experimental results for
four diﬀerent algorithms in the policy observation setting,
and in Figure 4b for the trajectory setting. Error represents
||R −ˆR||∞, where ˆR is an algorithm’s prediction, with error
bars representing standard error over 20 simulations.
In Figure 4a, the horizontal line displays the best re-
sults we achieved without repeated experimentation. If the
learner only selects a single environment E, observing pol-
icy π, it is stuck with whatever experimental unidentiﬁabil-
ity exists in K(E, π). In such a scenario, we can select a
K(E, π) according to a classic IRL heuristic, given by LP
(1) in Section 5.1, for some choice of λ in LP (1). Since the
performance of this method depends both on which environ-
ment is used, and the choice of λ, we randomly generated
100 diﬀerent environments, and for each of those environ-
ments selected λ ∈{0.05, .1, .5, 1, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10}. We then
evaluated each of these single-environment approaches with
9For motivation, one might think of the agent as being a
mouse, with these rewards corresponding to food pellets or
various shiny objects in a mouse’s cage.

20 simulations, the best error among these 1300 diﬀerent
single-environment algorithms is displayed by the horizontal
line. Immediately we see that the experimental unidentiﬁa-
bility from using a single environment makes it diﬃcult to
distinguish the actual reward function, with err for the best
choice of E and λ greater than 5.
The remaining algorithms — which we will describe in
greater detail below — conduct repeated experimentation.
Each of these algorithms uses a diﬀerent rule to select a new
environment on each round. Given the sequence of (environ-
ment, policy) pairs E generated by each of these algorithms,
we solve the LP (2) on K(E) at the end of each round. This
is done with the same choice of λ(= 0.5) for each of the
algorithms.
Besides the Greedy algorithm of the previous section, we
implement two other algorithms, which conduct repeated
experiments, but do so non-adaptively.
RandUniform, in
each round, selects a maze uniformly at random from the
space of possible mazes (each wall is present with probability
0.5). Note that RandUniform will tend to select mazes where
roughly half of the walls are present. Thus, we also consider
RandVaried which, in each round, selects a maze from a
diﬀerent distribution D. Mazes drawn from D are generated
by a two-step process. First, for each row r and column c, we
select numbers dr, dc i.i.d. from the uniform distribution on
[0, 1]. Then each wall along row r (column c respectively)
is created with probability dr (dc respectively). Although
the probability any particular wall is present is still 0.5, the
correlations in D creates more variable mazes (e.g. allowing
an entire row to be sparsely populated with walls).
We implement Algorithm 1, Greedy, of the previous sec-
tion, by approximating the maximization in Line 5 in Algo-
rithm 1. This approximation is done by sampling 10 environ-
ments from D, the same distribution used by RandVaried. In
the policy observation setting, 1000 samples are ﬁrst drawn
from the consistent set K(E) using a hit-and-run sampler [9],
which is an MCMC method for uniformly sampling high-
dimensional convex sets in polynomial time.
These same
samples are also used to estimate the volume f(·). In the tra-
jectory setting, we ﬁrst sample trajectories T on an environ-
ment E, then we use K(E, ˆπ) for an arbitrary ˆπ, ˆπ ≡D(T ) πT ,
as a proxy for K(E, T).
Examining the results, we see that Greedy converges sig-
niﬁcantly quicker than either of the non-adaptive approaches.
After 25 rounds of experimentation in the policy observa-
tion setting, Greedy attains error 0.2687(±0.0302), while
the best non-adaptive approach attains 0.9691(±0.24310).
Greedy only requires 16 rounds to reach a similar error of
0.9678(±0.0701).
We note further that the performance
of Greedy seems to continue to improve, while the non-
adaptive approaches appear to stagnate. This could be due
to the fact that after a certain number of rounds, the non-
adaptive approaches have received all the information avail-
able from the environments typically sampled from their dis-
tributions. In order to make progress they must receive new
information, in contrast to Greedy, which is designed to ac-
tively select the environments that will do just that.
Finally, Greedy runs by selecting a sequence of environ-
ments, resulting in observations E. It then selects R from
K(E) using LP (2). Thus, the regularization parameter λ
in LP (2) is a free parameter for Greedy that we took to be
equal to 0.5 for results (Figure 4a). We conclude by experi-
mentally analyzing the sensitivity of Greedy to the choice of
this parameter, as well as of RandUniform, and RandVaried,
which also select R according to LP (2). As λ is increased,
eventually the LP over-regularizes, and is optimized taking
R = ⃗0.
In our setting, once λ ≈1 this begins to occur,
and we begin to see pathological behavior (Figure 5a). This
problem occurs in standard IRL, and one approach ([10])
is to select a large lambda before this transition, hence our
choice of λ = 0.5. However, even for signiﬁcantly smaller λ,
the results are qualitatively similar (Figure 5b) to those in
Figure 4a. We ﬁnd that as long as λ is not too large, the
results are not sensitive to the choice of λ.
(a) λ = 1
(b) λ = 0.05
Figure 5: Result for all repeated experimentation algorithms
using large and small regularization parameter λ.
7.
CONCLUSIONS
We provide a number of contributions in this work. First,
we separate the causes of unidentiﬁability in IRL problems
into two classes: representational, and experimental.
We
argue that representational unidentiﬁability is superﬁcial,
leading us to redeﬁne the problem of identiﬁcation in IRL
according to Deﬁnition 2.
While previous work does not
distinguish between these two classes, we demonstrate that,
by doing so, algorithms can be designed to eliminate exper-
imental unidentiﬁability while providing formal guarantees.
Along the way, we derive a new model for IRL where the
learner can observe behavior in multiple environments, a
model which we believe is interesting in its own right, but
also is key to eliminating experimental unidentiﬁability. We
give an algorithm for a very powerful learner who can ob-
serve agent behavior in any environment, and show that the
algorithm ϵ-identiﬁes an agent reward deﬁned on d states,
while observing behavior on only O(log(d/ϵ)) environments.
We then weaken this learner to model more realistic settings
where the learner might be restricted in the types of envi-
ronments it may choose, and where it may only be able to
elicit a small number of demonstrations from the agent. We
derive a simple adaptive greedy algorithm which will select
a nearly optimal (with respect to reducing the volume of
possible reward function) set of environments. The value of
the solution found by this greedy algorithm will be a com-
parable to the optimal algorithm which uses a logarithmic
factor fewer number of experiments.
Finally, we implement the algorithm in a simple maze en-
vironment that nevertheless demonstrates the value of elim-
inating experimental unidentiﬁability, signiﬁcantly outper-
forming methods that attempt to perform IRL from a single
environment.
