A FORMAL APPROACH TO MODELING THE MEMORY OF A
LIVING ORGANISM
DAN P. GURALNIK
Abstract. We consider a living organism as an observer of the evolution of its en-
vironment recording sensory information about the state space X of the environment
in real time. Sensory information is sampled and then processed on two levels. On
the biological level, the organism serves as an evaluation mechanism of the subjective
relevance of the incoming data to the observer: the observer assigns excitation values
to events in X it could recognize using its sensory equipment. On the algorithmic
level, sensory input is used for updating a database – the memory of the observer
– whose purpose is to serve as a geometric/combinatorial model of X, whose nodes
are weighted by the excitation values produced by the evaluation mechanism. These
values serve as a guidance system for deciding how the database should transform as
observation data mounts.
We deﬁne a searching problem for the proposed model and discuss the model’s
ﬂexibility and its computational eﬃciency, as well as the possibility of implementing
it as a dynamic network of neuron-like units. We show how various easily observable
properties of the human memory and thought process can be explained within the
framework of this model. These include: reasoning (with eﬃciency bounds), errors,
temporary and permanent loss of information.
We are also able to deﬁne general
learning problems in terms of the new model, such as the language acquisition problem.
Dedicated to the memory of my father,
Peter J. Guralnik, and all his mice and rats.
1. Introduction
1.1. General considerations. The structure of memory in living organisms is gener-
ally perceived as extremely complex and extremely eﬃcient at the same time. Complex,
because the sheer number of physiological structure elements comprising the nervous
system of a rattus rattus, say – not to mention homo sapiens – seems to exclude the pos-
sibility of direct piece-by-piece analysis. Eﬃcient, because of the capability to respond
to unpredicted input signals in real time, frequently with desirable outcome.
Diﬀerent species seem to exhibit diﬀerent capacities for this kind of thinking, and the
reason for this remains unclear. By this we mean that, although biologists have a lot
to say about the evolution of the central nervous system, and in spite of our ability to
roughly map the brain and say which parts of it are in charge of which functions, one
major problem remains completely open: what is the algorithmic structure underlying
the phenomenon we call ‘intelligence’?
Key words and phrases. Memory, database, learning, natural language acquisition, poc-set, poc-
morphism, median graph, median morphism.
1
arXiv:1003.3821v1  [cs.AI]  19 Mar 2010

2
D. P. GURALNIK
Answering this question adequately is one of the dream goals of the ﬁeld of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, whose ultimate goal – one should na¨ıvely guess – is to construct machines
capable of humanoid reasoning, however much faster and more accurate.
Developing mathematical tools for describing the principles governing our thought
process and the development of our minds may turn out useful for improving our under-
standing of learning and teaching, and may seriously impact psychology. Describing the
relationship between language formation and acquisition, structure of memory, logical
thinking and psychology may ﬁnally be within our grasp.
Considering the wide variety of applications it becomes desirable to formulate the
answer to our main question in a way that is independent of its physical realization (e.g.
the biophysics of the brain). We will refer to this as the ‘invariance principle’.
The invariance principle deﬁnes an objective measure of adequacy for our attempted
answers. Indeed, if invariance is observed, then whenever an abstract model of the mind
is oﬀered, it becomes possible to study multiple realizations, which gives us the chance
to search for the most eﬃcient ones; if no eﬃcient realization exists, we discard the
model. On the other hand, if a model is tied to a speciﬁc physical realization, then
its predictive power is automatically limited by our understanding of that realization.
The latter usually being incomplete also puts us in jeopardy of using an intrinsically
inconsistent model for predictions.
In this work we introduce an approach based on considering memory as an algorithmic
structure: a database, where data is stored, together with a set of algorithms in charge of
maintaining the structure and retrieving stored information. By ‘memory’ we mean the
broadest possible interpretation of the term: all information observed and retained by
the living organism in the course of its lifetime, together with the procedures handling
all this data.
Though contributing to the feeling that analysis of such a ‘memory’ is hopelessly
hard, this interpretation is a necessity dictated by the invariance principle. In the case
of animals (including humans) it was Evolution that shaped our memory management
system and distributed its functions among the many scales and subsystems of our
organisms, solving this problem on the way, in the course of billions of years.
It is
then only reasonable to assume that when it comes to producing a homunculus of our
own making, we will need to face the same challenges. Therefore there is no point in
restricting our theoretical framework.
It is unclear how memory structures of living organisms are maintained and what
principles are responsible for the seeming high eﬃciency of their recording and retrieval
algorithms. In the preceding sentence, the word ‘seeming’ is used because, in contrast to
the general feeling of awed amazement at the capabilities of human and animal brains,
frequent everyday observations of humans strongly suggest that said brains possess some
rather discouraging inherent ﬂaws. For example, trouble recovering useful information
while recalling seemingly irrelevant data with ease (“what was that formula for cos 2θ?”
vs. “can not get that idiotic tune out of my head!”), failure to recognize phenomena
that are supposedly well understood (“why didn’t *I* think about that?!”), as well as
diﬃculties in processing logically complex statements (e.g. he thinks that she thinks that

A FORMAL APPROACH TO MODELING THE MEMORY OF A LIVING ORGANISM
3
he knows that she heard that he thinks she believes that he loves someone else), – are all
everyday common examples of what we normally perceive as ‘glitches’ of our memory
system. We feel that if only we could merge ourselves with a powerful computer, all
these inaccuracies will be gone.
One possible reason for this feeling is that we tend to see our memory management
structure as the result of a very successful evolutionary process. This idea makes it too
easy for us to focus only on the desirable manifestations of memory structuring when
trying to replicate nature’s achievements, while all the undesirable eﬀects we observe
on a daily basis are written oﬀas malfunctions of a complicated analog system (our
organism), occurring due to fatigue and/or some other physiological impairment.
On the other hand, one could also argue that the high frequency of malfunctions is
the manifestation of a set of principles governing the way in which our memory resources
are managed. Indeed, since any organizing principle in fact constitutes a restriction on
the set of admissible structures (that is, some database structures will never be realized
because they violate said principle), it is reasonable to expect many admissible structures
to react inadequately to some unpredictable situations presented by the environment.
Therefore, the optimist will regard all the failings of our memory storage system as hints
to how such a system is structured, and the quality of a model should be judged not
only by its computational eﬃciency, but more by its ability to explain the functional
role of errors in the system, how errors occur, which errors occur more frequently than
others, etc.
1.2. Stating the problem. It is time to state our goals in a more committing and
formal fashion. We consider the organism’s memory as a record of its observations of
the evolution of the environment (participation by the organism is not ruled out). The
environment as a whole has an associated space of states – denoted henceforth by X, –
and every organism O maintains a database Γ whose structure and content correspond
to that observer’s perception of properties of X, as determined by the available sensory
equipment. Thus, we consider the organism O as a mediator between the environment
and the database Γ.
Recall that a database normally has the structure of a graph (or network), with
nodes carrying additional information (or content). Updating the database may involve
altering the content of a node or nodes, as well as adding new nodes or erasing redundant
ones.
When an organism O with memory structure Γ makes an observation about X (re-
ceives new input from the environment), this observation will be evaluated (this means
Γ is being read), possibly resulting in an updating procedure and replacing Γ by a new
structure Γ′. Mathematically speaking, this means our model should have an underlying
structure of a category C, whose objects belong to the class of admissible databases, and
the morphisms (also known as arrows) describe the various possibilities of transforming
one structure into the other. The structure (e.g. algebraic, topological, other...) of this
category corresponds to the idea of a set of ‘governing principles’ we have just discussed.
Recall that a category C consists of a class of objects obC, a set C(A, B) of morphisms
f : A →B, deﬁned for every ordered pair of objects A, B ∈obC, and an operation

4
D. P. GURALNIK
(called composition), deﬁned for each ordered triple A, B, C of objects –

◦:
C(A, B) × C(B, C)
−→
C(A, C)
f × g
7→
g ◦f
Composable morphisms are said to be compatible. All the above must satisfy the fol-
lowing requirements:
• For every A ∈obC, the set C(A, A) contains a distinguished element denoted
idA;
• For every A, B ∈obC and any f ∈C(A, B) one has f ◦idA = idB ◦f = f;
• For every triple of compatible morphisms f, g, h, one has h ◦(g ◦f) = (h ◦g) ◦f.
Contemplating the meaning of the axioms of a category in our context, one may regard
a morphism between two objects (databases) as a means for comparing them. One may
want to measure the improvement resulting from updating Γ into Γ′ (see above), or one
could be interested in measuring the diﬀerences in how two distinct observers perceive
a common environment. Finally, one may want to measure the discrepancy between an
observer’s perception and the objective reality presented by the environment. Whether
or not these are possible in any useful sense depends on the structure of the category
underlying our modeling method.
The motivation for our construction has two sources: one is Shannon’s idea of entropy
introduced in [Sha48], and the other is the idea of spaces with walls introduced by
Haglund and Paulin in [HP98].
The marriage of the two produces the information-
theoretic approach to constructing databases based on binary observations, which we
shall describe right now.
It is natural to assume the state space X of the observed environment is a topological
space endowed with the corresponding Borel σ−algebra B and a probability measure µ,
making it possible to consider the probability of an event in X. Let us ﬁx a moment in
time and an observer O and assume that the sensory equipment available to O produces
binary output. Assume there are only ﬁnitely many sensors available to O. Imagine an
angel (as opposed to the notion of a daemon, frequently used in the literature to explain
various notions of entropy) who is in charge of recording the output from these sensors
and keeping it in order.
The angel is absolutely objective: it does not have a preference to any kind of data
generated by the sensors, and its sole and sacred responsibility is to record the data
as accurately as possible. The angel is all-knowing: for each sensor, it knows precisely
which inputs (states of the environment) produce which output for that sensor.
Thus, in the angel’s notebook, each sensor will correspond to a pair of complementary
subsets of X, while the totality of all information that O is capable of producing then
becomes a ﬁnite family H of subsets of X, which is closed under complementation. Even
angels have limited powers, so H ⊆B.
Associated with H is a partition of X: given x, y ∈X, write x
H∼y if and only if x ∈h
implies y ∈h for every h ∈H. The relation (
H∼) is then an equivalence relation whose
induced partition (denote it by P(H)) is the join (the coarsest common reﬁnement)
of the binary partitions corresponding to the individual sensors. It is important that

A FORMAL APPROACH TO MODELING THE MEMORY OF A LIVING ORGANISM
5
Figure 1. Observing a compass (1). Two versions of the system H of example 1.1.
the angel keep this partition on the record: the observer O is incapable of discerning
between two events belonging to the same element of this partition. For this reason, the
elements of P(H) will be called H-visible states.
From the point of view of the angel, it is now possible to determine the amount of
information that O has about X: this task is equivalent to computing Shannon’s entropy
of P(H). Unfortunately, this result is not meaningful for the observer O: Shannon’s
entropy is approximated by the minimum expectation of the number of arbitrary binary
questions one needs to ask in order to determine the position of a point of X with
respect to P(H), but O only has the questions from H at his disposal, so the minimum
computed by O may end up much higher than that computed by the all-knowing angel,
who is surely capable of asking any question from the list B.
Despite the diﬀerences in computational ability, both the observer and the angel
are interested in having the probabilities µ(P) of each element P ∈P(H) recorded
somewhere. Thus, we have content for our database, but no graph to put it in. This
is easily repaired. Deﬁne a graph ΓH to have P(H) for its set of vertices, where two
vertices P, Q ∈P(H) are joined by an edge if and only if there exists precisely one h ∈H
satisfying P ⊆h and Q ⊆hc (here and on, hc = X ∖h). This construction is just a
special case of the construction of the graph dual to a space with walls. Note that ΓH
is necessarily connected and bipartite. Perhaps it is time for an example:
Example 1.1 (observing a compass, part 1). Consider a person O observing a compass.
The space of states of the needle of the compass can be modeled by the unit circle X = S1,
thought of as a subset of the complex numbers C, with the number 1 corresponding to
precise North, and i corresponding to West.
Now, imagine our observer being able to ask the questions “Is the needle pointing
North/South/West/East?” (and their complements, of course), and let us model the

6
D. P. GURALNIK
Figure 2. Observing a compass (1). The graphs ΓH for the two types of the system H
from example 1.1 – compare with ﬁg. 1.
positive answer sets – denoted by N, S, W and E, respectively – by open intervals:
N
=
n
eiθ  θ ∈(−ϵ, ϵ)
o
S
=
n
eiθ  θ ∈(π −ϵ, π + ϵ)
o
W
=
n
eiθ  θ ∈(π
2 −ϵ, π
2 + ϵ)
o
E
=
n
eiθ  θ ∈(−π
2 −ϵ, −π
2 + ϵ)
o
,
where ϵ ∈(0, π/2) is a number (in some sense characterizing the quality of the obser-
vations being made: a smaller ϵ means better precision). The observer may, initially
be unaware or undecided regarding the value of ϵ, so that two types of situations may
occur: one with ϵ ≤π/4 and the other with ϵ > π/4 see ﬁgure 1. We set
H = {N, S, W, E, Nc, Sc, W c, Ec}
and ask the reader to verify the pictures of the corresponding graphs ΓH presented in
ﬁgure 2. Observe how diﬀerent the two graphs are. Does one of them resemble X more
than the other? Oddly enough, it is the lower quality observation that provided the
better picture. How come?
The preceding example illustrates an idea central to this paper: memory is (or at
least should be) a geometric/combinatorial model (here, a graph) of the state space X,
marked with additional information (content at the vertices). It seems reasonable to
also mark a point of this geometric model (in ΓH that would mean a vertex, or in other
words, an H-visible state) to represent the observer’s conjecture about the current state
of X.

A FORMAL APPROACH TO MODELING THE MEMORY OF A LIVING ORGANISM
7
The categorical point of view discussed earlier will now work as follows: adding sensors
to O corresponds to an inclusion of the list H in a longer list ˜H, creating a reﬁnement
P( ˜H) of the partition P(H) and hence a map of the graph Γ ˜H onto the graph ΓH induced
by sending every ˜H-visible state to the unique H-visible state containing it. Thus the
category C for our modeling problem may be taken to have weighted connected bipartite
graphs, and an arrow from an object Γ to an object Γ′ is a surjective graph morphism
(edges may be contracted) from Γ′ onto Γ.
A major problem standing in the way of developing this approach further is that
ΓH can be quite arbitrary on the large scale, so that searching ΓH may turn out to be
computationally unfeasible as the observer O comes to possess more and more sensors
and H grows in size accordingly.
The situation is even worse than that: we have just assumed too much. First of all, the
angel’s job is only to do the book-keeping for O. In our interpretation of memory, this
means the angel has no business representing the observer’s questions by objectively
deﬁned complementary pairs of subsets of X: O will most probably never have that
much information about any of its sensors. This angel has to go home then, and we
need to face the fact that the observer has to maintain ΓH and its content on his own,
without any prior knowledge about the structure of H and without any assurance that
the content of the vertices of ΓH is objectively correct: O is only able to sample states
from X by making repeated observations, so the probabilities recorded at the vertices
may be very diﬀerent from the objective ones.
To deliver the ﬁnal blow, consider this: even if there is a way for O to magically keep
track of the objective structure of ΓH, the observer may still be required to restructure
ΓH numerous times as time evolves.
For example, adding a vertex to ΓH where he
initially thought there was none: suppose that, up to time t = t0, O has never sampled
a state for which both questions a and b had a positive answer; as a result, up until
time t = t0, no vertex in ΓH listing a positive answer to a lists a positive answer to b;
if at time t0 the observer suddenly makes the observation that x ∈a ∩b for some state
x ∈X, then ΓH must be updated to reﬂect that observation. Can this be done quickly
and eﬃciently?
The answer is deﬁnitely negative: example 1.1 and ﬁgure 2 demonstrate the fact that
ΓH can change immensely as a result of seemingly minor adjustments of H (e.g., in the
example, if ϵ is very close to π/4, a very small change in ϵ will cause a cycle to collapse
into a tree or vice-versa). Given that ΓH may resemble practically any big graph on the
large scale, the problem of structural updating for ΓH becomes intractable very quickly.
Despite the failure of our ﬁrst attempt, we will construct a workable model using an
almost identical skeleton of ideas. After all, ΓH does have some very desirable traits one
would be happy to retain:
- ΓH encodes rudimentary logic (negation, implication),
- it seems possible to synchronize updating content with structural updating (e.g.,
erase vertices representing visible states of little interest),
- a learning goal for O can be deﬁned: have ΓH grow to be big/detailed enough,
with its content eventually close enough to objective values, in order to guarantee
the success of O.

8
D. P. GURALNIK
1.3. Results. The model of memory we propose in this paper, has an underlying cat-
egory whose objects are duals, in some sense, of graphs belonging to the well studied
family of median graphs. The interested reader should see [Rol98] for an extended bibli-
ography on the subject and a detailed treatment of duality theory for median algebras,
and median graphs in particular. A very good treatment of median graphs and their
duality theory is given in [Nic04]. We give a self-contained exposition of the relevant
notions and results in section 2, though we do focus on the current application and omit
proofs of results from the literature.
One remarkable feature of our model is that the structure of a median graph itself
provides our observers with a rudimentary sense of logic. We will discuss this formal
idea of ‘common sense’ as we progress through the next section.
Searching our databases for content and updating content is discussed in section 3.
We explain how searching our database structures essentially coincides with content
updating and discuss some of the implications regarding learning. A possible imple-
mentation of the model as a network of neuron-like elements is oﬀered as well, and we
discuss its computational eﬃciency.
Section 4 is dedicated to structural updating and a discussion of how the phenomena
of learning, language formation, forgetting and understanding are realized in the model.
As the exposition evolves, we periodically pause to look at how various natural phe-
nomena are accounted for by our model. Right now we can state, with some satisfaction,
that our model explains an overwhelming majority of the phenomena we had already
listed as curious aspects of the human thought process and human memory.
The last section discusses weaknesses of the model and possible ways to get rid of
them – a topic for future research.
Acknowledgements. The author is deeply indebted to Michael Jablonski and Vera
Tonic for proof-reading the text and for numerous useful comments on both content
and form.
Many thanks to Lucas Sabalka for the idea of replacing computationally
cumbersome examples of spaces with walls with the compass example (which is yet to
reappear in our narrative); to Kreˇsimir Josiˇc for commentary on the material of section
3 and ongoing discourse.
The author is a newcomer to the ﬁeld, and must confess
limited knowledge of existing literature. I am grateful in advance for any comments and
criticisms, and will happily acknowledge credit wherever credit is due.
2. Modeling memory using poc-sets and median graphs
2.1. Poc-sets. We consider an abstract version of a system of questions, due to Roller
[Rol98]:
Deﬁnition 2.1 (poc-set). A poc-set (P, ≤, ∗) is a partially-ordered set (P, ≤) with a
minimum (denoted by 0), endowed with an order-reversing involution a 7→a∗such that
a ≤a∗implies a = 0 for all a ∈P. The maximum 0∗∈P is denoted by 1; the elements
0, 1 ∈P are said to be trivial; all other a ∈P are proper.
Example 2.2 (standard poc-sets). The Borel σ-algebra B carries a natural poc-set
structure (B, ⊆, a 7→ac). If P is a poc-set and 0 ∈Q ⊆P satisﬁes Q∗= Q then Q is a
(sub) poc-set (of P).

A FORMAL APPROACH TO MODELING THE MEMORY OF A LIVING ORGANISM
9
For any proper a, b ∈P, it is easy to see that only one of the following may hold:
(1)
a ≤b ,
a ≤b∗,
a∗≤b ,
a∗≤b∗.
Deﬁnition 2.3 (nesting, transversality). A pair a, b of elements in a poc-set P is said
to be nested, if any one of the relations in 1 holds. Otherwise, the pair a, b is said to be
transverse (denoted a ⋔b). A subset S ⊆P is said to be nested (resp. transverse), if
the elements of S are pairwise nested (resp. transverse).
A means for relating poc-sets to each other will be required:
Deﬁnition 2.4 (morphisms). A function f : P →Q between poc-sets is a morphism if
f(0) = 0, f is order-preserving and f(a∗) = f(a)∗for all a ∈P.
We were previously considering the possibility of modeling the memory of an observer
O by a sub poc-set of B, but it works better to use a pair (P, f), with P an abstract
poc-set and f : P →B a morphism. We shall presently see that the abstract object P
gives rise to a graph Γ(P) such that: (a) P is reconstructible from Γ(P) and (b) the
graph Γ(P, f) = Γf(P) of visible states determined by f(P) (see discussion in sub-section
1.2) is canonically embedded in Γ(P). Thus, if we choose Γ(P) to represent the memory
of O while f is viewed as an interpretation of P in the reality presented by X, then the
above property of Γ(P) implies that no updating of the structure of the memory graph
Γ(P) is required so long as the implication relations among the questions available to
O (that is – the structure of P) remain unchanged. Not taking other aspects of the
modeling problem into account, properties (a) and (b) of Γ(P) should be viewed as
the main argument in favor of preferring Γ(P) over Γ(P, f): while containing complete
information about P (and hence not being ‘too big’), Γ(P) has ‘suﬃcient space’ to ac-
commodate any possible interpretation of P in X.
Perhaps it is time again for a concrete example.
Example 2.5 (Compass, part 2). We return to example 1.1. Recall the sets N, S, W, E
deﬁned there as arcs of length 2ϵ, ϵ ∈(0, π/2), on the unit circle – see ﬁgure 3 and
example 1.1. This time, deﬁne a formal poc-set P as follows:
P = {0, 1, n, s, w, e, n∗, s∗, w∗, e∗} ,
and we set f(n) = N, f(s) = S and so on, together with the relations following from
the requirement that f be a morphism.
We will compare two situations, see ﬁgure 3: (i) the one where ϵ ∈(π/4, π/2) with
(ii) the one where ϵ ∈(0, π/4).
Observe that ϵ < π/2 implies that a positive answer to n excludes a positive answer
to s and vice versa. The same is true about the pair {e, w}. We have chosen ϵ in this
way in order to enable a choice of the poc-set structure on P having the relations n ≤s∗
and w ≤e∗and all conclusions thereof. Both in this example and in its continuation
(example 2.9) P will be chosen to have these relations (and their consequences). To be

10
D. P. GURALNIK
Figure 3. Observing a compass (1). Two possible realizations of the same abstract poc-
set structure.
sure, we list the relations on P:
n < s∗,
n ⋔e,
n ⋔w,
s < n∗,
s ⋔e,
s ⋔w,
e < w∗,
w < e∗.
Note that if we had wanted to allow similar realizations of P with ϵ > π/2, we would
have been forced to change all the above relations into transversality relations, in which
situation the poc-set P on its own would not have held any information about the
observed system.
When ϵ < π/4 (see (ii) in the ﬁgure), the sets N, S, E, W are pairwise complementary.
This means that the poc-set f(P) has the relations N < Ec and N < W c although
neither n < e∗nor n < w∗hold in P.
For ϵ > π/4 though (see (i) in the ﬁgure), all the relations holding in f(P) are
accounted for already in P. In example 2.9 we will see how this diﬀerence between the
situations is visualized at the level of the corresponding graphs.
2.2. Sageev-Roller duality. The construction of Γ(P) – the graph dual to P – given
in this paragraph is originally due to Sageev [Sag95] in a special case. The presentation
we have chosen and the discussion of dual maps is due to Roller [Rol98]. However, we
have chosen to alter Roller’s original terminology to better ﬁt the intended application.
Deﬁnition 2.6 (coherence, vertices). Let (P, ≤, ∗) be a poc-set. A subset α ⊂P is said
to be coherent if a ≤b∗holds for no a, b ∈α. A maximal coherent family will be called
a vertex of the graph Γ(P).
It is easy to see that a coherent family α ⊂P lies in V Γ(P) iﬀα is a ∗-selection on
P (meaning that for all a ∈P, either a ∈α or a∗∈α, but not both).

A FORMAL APPROACH TO MODELING THE MEMORY OF A LIVING ORGANISM
11
Example 2.7. Let 2 = {0, 1} be the trivial poc-set, with the obvious relation 0 < 1.
Show that the assignment f 7→f−1(1) from the set Hom(P, 2) of all poc-morphisms of
f : P →2 to the set V Γ(P) is a bijection.
Deﬁnition 2.8 (edges). Let (P, ≤, ∗) be a poc-set and u, v ∈V Γ(P). We set {u, v} ∈
EΓ(P) iﬀu △v = {a, a∗} for some a ∈P. Here u △v denotes the symmetric diﬀerence
(u ∖v) ∪(v ∖u).
More generally, for u, v ∈V Γ(P) one has |u △v| = 2 |u ∩v∗|, which implies that the
expression ∆(u, v) = 1
2 |u △v| – the number of questions separating u from v – is a
distance function on V Γ(P). Moreover, ∆(u, v) = 1 iﬀu and v are joined by an edge in
Γ(P).
Example 2.9 (Compass, part 3). We would like to go back to the poc-set
P = {0, 1, n, s, w, e, n∗, s∗, w∗, e∗}
deﬁned in example 2.5 and endowed with the structure
n < s∗,
n ⋔e,
n ⋔w,
s < n∗,
s ⋔e,
s ⋔w,
e < w∗,
w < e∗.
In order to visualize V Γ(P), consider Γ(P) as a full simple subgraph of the cube with
vertex set 2P (where each vertex corresponds to a choice of one answer for every question,
ignoring coherence issues): Γ(P) is the result of erasing all vertices of 2P turning out to
be incoherent, together with their adjacent edges – see ﬁgure 4.
Example 2.10 (The n-cube). Let T be a set of n distinct symbols, and let P be the
poc-set generated by T with no relations, that is: P = {0, 0∗} ∪T ∪T ∗, where T ∗is the
set of symbols of the form t∗such that T ∗∩T = ∅, and no two distinct proper elements
of P are comparable.
Then any ∗-selection on P is a maximal coherent subfamily, and we conclude that
Γ(P) is the 1-dimensional skeleton of the n-dimensional cube.
The next example is based on the following recommended easy exercise:
Example 2.11. We oﬀer the following exercise to the reader. Suppose P is a ﬁnite
poc-set and let a ∈P. Prove that the following are equivalent:
(1) a is nested with every element of P,
(2) Γ(P) has one and only one edge {u, v} satisfying u △v = {a, a∗}, and this edge
is a cut-edge.
Example 2.12 (Trees and n-pompoms). The above exercise shows that if P is nested
then Γ(P) is a tree. The converse is known to be true as well (exercise). A special case
that is very easy to compute is constructed as follows: take A to be a set of n distinct
symbols and let P = {0, 0∗} ∪A ∪A∗where A and A∗are disjoint and subject to the
relations a∗
i < aj for all 1 ≤i < j ≤n. This immediately implies there are only two
kinds of vertices: the vertex v0 = {0∗} ∪A and the vertices vi = {0∗, a∗
i } ∪(A ∖{ai}).
Then Γ(P) is the tree with (n + 1) vertices and n leaves v1, . . . , vn. We will refer to this
structure as the n-pompom.

12
D. P. GURALNIK
Figure 4. Observing a compass (2). The graph Γ(P) for our model of an observer of a
compass as constructed in example 2.5
For any connected graph Γ and u, v ∈V Γ the interval between u and v is deﬁned as
(2)
I(u, v) = {w ∈V Γ | dΓ(u, w) + dΓ(w, v) = dΓ(u, v)} ,
where dΓ denotes the path distance on Γ. I(u, v) is clearly the union of the vertex sets
of shortest paths (geodesics) from u to v.
Deﬁnition 2.13 (median graph). A connected graph Γ is a median graph if, for all
u, v, w ∈V Γ the intersection I(u, v) ∩I(v, w) ∩I(u, w) contains precisely one vertex
(denoted med(u, v, w)).
An example visualizing what is going on is the standard rectangular integer grid:

A FORMAL APPROACH TO MODELING THE MEMORY OF A LIVING ORGANISM
13
Figure 5. The Integer Grid: example of computing a median in a median graph.
Example 2.14 (The Grid). Let X be the set of points (x, y) ∈R2 satisfying x ∈
[0, m + 1] and y ∈[0, n + 1] with m, n being positive integers. Let
hs =

(x, y)
 y < s + 1
2

,
vt =

(x, y)
 x < t + 1
2

,
where s ∈{1, . . . , n} and t ∈{1, . . . , m}. Then the set
P = {∅, X} ∪{hs, hc
s}n
s=1 ∪{vt, vc
t}m
t=1
is a sub poc-set of B (the Borel σ-algebra on X) with respect to inclusion (⊆) and
complementation (A 7→Ac). It is easy to see that hs ⋔vt for all s, t, while hs ⊂hs+1
and vt ⊂vt+1 for all relevant s and t. As a result, any subset of P is consistent if
and only if it is coherent, and the visible states of X with respect to P (letting P be
realized by the inclusion map) are in one-to-one correspondence with the vertices of
Γ(P). Observe that the visible states are in one-to-one correspondence with the integer
points of X, so it makes sense to use these points as representatives, joining two such
points by a straight line segment if and only if the corresponding vertices of Γ(P) are
joined by an edge. Figure 5 demonstrates the computation of a median of three vertices
of Γ(P), drawn over a diagram of Γ(P) realized in this way in the plane.
A good exercise for the interested reader will be to prove the following –
Lemma 2.15 (median operation). If (P, ≤, ∗) is a ﬁnite poc-set, then Γ(P) is a median
graph, and med(u, v, w) = (u ∩v) ∪(v ∩w) ∪(u ∩w) for all u, v, w ∈V Γ(P).
Theorem 2.16 (‘Sageev-Roller duality’, [Rol98]). If P is a ﬁnite poc-set then Γ(P) is a
connected median graph and dΓ(P) coincides with ∆. Furthermore, every ﬁnite median
graph arises in this way.
By this theorem, the construction of an arbitrary ‘memory graph’ makes it automati-
cally a median graph. Also, every median graph can be thought of as a ‘memory graph’

14
D. P. GURALNIK
Figure 6. Visualizing the dual map of f from example 2.19.
when provided with a realization map relating it to a state space of an observed system.
We conclude that the property of being a median graph can be identiﬁed as a one of the
“guiding principles” mentioned in the introduction – a principle restricting the structure
of such graphs.
We shall now proceed to demonstrate the applications of this idea using the study
of morphisms of median graphs (maps between median graphs preserving the median
structure).
An additional aspect of the above duality is that morphisms of poc-sets translate into
median morphisms of median graphs and vice versa. If A and B are median graphs,
then a morphism from A to B is a function V A →V B preserving medians.
Remark 2.17. We do not require a morphism of median graphs to preserve the adjacency
relation. In fact, imposing this additional requirement proves to be overly restrictive for
our purposes.
If f : P →Q is a morphism of ﬁnite poc-sets, then a dual morphism of median graphs
f◦: Γ(Q) →Γ(P) is deﬁned by f◦(v) = f −1(v) for v ∈V Γ(Q). Some properties of this
construction are:
Proposition 2.18 (functorial properties, see [Rol98]). If f : P →Q, g : Q →R are
morphisms of ﬁnite poc-sets then:
(1) (g ◦f)◦= f◦◦g◦;
(2) f is surjective if and only if f◦is injective;
(3) f is an embedding if and only if f◦is surjective.
(by an embedding we mean an isomorphism onto the image)
Example 2.19 (see ﬁg. 6). Let P and Q be poc-sets with 4 proper elements each
– a, a∗, b, b∗– such that a ⋔b in P but a < b in Q. In this case, the set-theoretic

A FORMAL APPROACH TO MODELING THE MEMORY OF A LIVING ORGANISM
15
Figure 7. Observing a compass (2). The two realizations from example 2.5 induce very
diﬀerent embeddings of Γ(P, f) in Γ(P): for ϵ > π/4 (left) and for ϵ < π/4 (right). Edges of
Γ(P) belonging to Γ(P, f) are marked by transparent boxes drawn on top of them.
identity map f = id : P →Q is a morphism, while its inverse is not. Γ(P) is a 4-cycle,
while Γ(Q) is a path of length 2 (having 3 vertices). While f is bijective, it is not an
embedding: though f −1 is well-deﬁned, it is not a morphism of poc-sets.
2.3. Consistent families and weights: our model of an observer. We now return
to the idea of a morphism f : P →B representing the memory of an observer at a ﬁxed
moment in time. We will henceforth refer to such f as a representation of P.
For every x ∈X, consider the maximal coherent subfamily of B:
(3)
πx = {A ∈B | x ∈A} .
One can apply f◦to πx to obtain the maximal coherent family
(4)
πP,f(x) = {a ∈P | x ∈f(a)} ∈V Γ(P).
We now have a map πP,f : X →V Γ(P) selecting precisely those vertices in Γ(P) corre-
sponding to visible states of X relative to f(P). Since πP,f is constant on every visible
state, πP,f induces an injective map from V Γ(P, f) into V Γ(P). From the deﬁnition of
edges in both graphs it is clear that this injection is an embedding of graphs, which we
denote by ¯πP,f : Γ(P, f) →Γ(P).
Deﬁnition 2.20 (consistent families). A set u ⊆P is said to be consistent relative to
a representation f, if there is a point x ∈X such that f(u) ⊆πx.
In particular, a vertex u of Γ(P) is consistent iﬀit lies in the image of Γ(P, f) under
¯πP,f. We illustrate this on the compass example (examples 2.5 and 2.9):
Example 2.21 (Compass, part 4). Figure 7 shows Γ(P, f) embedded in Γ(P). It is
important to observe that the central vertex is inconsistent for ϵ > π/4, whereas the

16
D. P. GURALNIK
same vertex becomes consistent upon reducing ϵ to a value less than π/4, with the corner
vertices becoming inconsistent in this situation.
Looking at the picture leaves one amused by the fact that, somehow, smaller precision
in answering the questions n, s, w and e (corresponding to ϵ > π/4) contributes to
a better discrete model of X (recall X was a circle) than the one obtained from more
precise answers. More than that, we consider this example as clear proof of our claim that
separating the logical structure P from its realization (resulting in making the distinction
between Γ(P) and Γ(P, f)) constitutes a signiﬁcant improvement over the simplistic
model described in the introduction: indeed, Γ(P) in this case is spacious enough to
include faithful representations of both types of realization that we had discussed, while
the separate realizations seem completely incompatible (compare the two versions of
Γ(P, f) in ﬁgure 7 again).
Now we are ready to formally deﬁne a model of an observer:
Deﬁnition 2.22. Let (X, B, µ) be a probability space. An observer of X is a quadruple
O = (P, f, p, ϵ), where P is a ﬁnite poc-set, f : P →B is a morphism of poc-sets,
p : V Γ(P) →[0, ∞) is a function on the vertices of Γ(P) and ϵ is a subset of P.
The additional data elements – p and ϵ – are new to our discussion. Ethological1
considerations seem to imply that memory is subject to prioritization: diﬀerent events
are considered relevant to diﬀerent extents depending on the type of conﬂict they create
between the individual and the environment. The types of conﬂict can be classiﬁed,
and the subjective perception of the intensity of an interaction between the individual
an the environment may be measured by observing the change in the level of physi-
ological stress resulting from the interaction [Gur]. In this context, we want p(v) to
represent an estimation that O has regarding the relevance of the event T
a∈v f(a), for
every v ∈V Γ(P), and ϵ to represent the conjecture O has regarding the current state of
the universe. Ideally, ϵ will be a vertex of Γ(P). Less ideally, ϵ is a coherent family. One
should note, however, that humans holding a completely coherent set of convictions are
rarely to be found.
We will need some new notation:
Deﬁnition 2.23 (convexity, convex hull). In a graph Γ, one says that a subset W of
V Γ is convex, if I(u, v) is contained in W for all u, v ∈W. The convex hull conv(W) of
W is deﬁned to be the intersection of all convex subsets of V Γ containing W.
Clearly, conv(W) is the smallest convex subset of V Γ containing W.
Deﬁnition 2.24. Let P be a poc-set. For a ∈P and A ⊆P we denote:
(5)
V (a) = {u ∈V Γ(P) |a ∈u} ,
V (A) =
\
a∈A
V (a) .
Observe that V (a∗) = V Γ(P)∖V (a) for all a ∈P. Thus, the family {V (a)}a∈P forms
a poc-set with respect to inclusion and complementation. In fact, it is easy to see that
this poc-set is isomorphic to P via the map a 7→V (a). For the case of a median graph,
1Ethology – a ﬁeld of Biology, studying animal behaviour.

A FORMAL APPROACH TO MODELING THE MEMORY OF A LIVING ORGANISM
17
when one can safely write Γ = Γ(P), it turns out that conv(W) = T
W⊂V (a) V (a). Thus,
W ⊂V Γ(P) is convex if and only if it equals the intersection of a family of halfspaces
of V Γ(P).
Let us now return to the discussion of the relationship between a living observer and
our notion of an observer O = (P, f, p, ϵ). We ﬁrst focus our attention on the function
p. As stated above, p should be thought of as a measure of the relevance of a vertex
u ∈V Γ(P) in the observer’s eyes: the event u is likely to be disregarded by the observer
if p(u) is negligible, while an event of the form V (A) will attract more of the observer’s
attention the higher the cumulative value p(V (A)) = P
u∈V (A) p(u).
Thus, from an
information-theoretic point of view, every event F ⊂V Γ(P) has a probability attached
to it:
(6)
PrO (F) =
p(F)
p (V Γ(P))
This should not be confused with the function taken on by the set ϵ corresponding to
the observer’s conjecture of the ‘current state of aﬀairs’: PrO (V (ϵ)) being small means
our observer is aware of no sources of stress right now; the same quantity being large
may provide a motivation for our observer to take action to change ϵ in the direction of
lowering the stressfulness of the situation.
However, one should not imagine living organisms as trying to solve some kind opti-
mization problem (with the objective being to minimize stress), but, rather, as trying to
solve an equilibrium problem. Ethological studies [Gur] show that minimization of stress
could not be regarded as a plausible goal for every observer. Our information-theoretic
interpretation of p is a convenient tool for describing this phenomenon: an observer
cannot be attracted to the idea of pushing X into a state which this same observer sees
as uninteresting.
Here are some possible combinations of f, ϵ and p to contemplate:
Example 2.25 (objectivity). Given O = (P, f, p, ϵ), choose p(u) = µ
 T
a∈u f(a)

and
ϵ = πx where x is the actual current state of the system. The resulting observer is,
in some sense, objective: his perception of events is precise (ϵ is a maximal coherent
family), up to date (V (ϵ) includes the current state) and unbiased (PrO (() ·) gives the
correct probabilities of events).
Example 2.26 (misperception). Once again, suppose P and f are given, and x is
the current state of the universe.
Consider some possible situations for an observer
O = (P, f, p, ϵ):
ϵ ⊊πP,f(x): This means that O has a question allowing it to improve its perception
of the current state of the universe.
ϵ ̸⊆πP,f(x): This means that O has a question which – had it been asked – would
have proved the observer’s view of the universe to be inconsistent with the current
state, forcing the observer to alter its structure as an observer.
p(u) = 0 with u consistent: In this situation O regards an existing state of the
universe as impossible/negligible.

18
D. P. GURALNIK
p(u) > 0 with u inconsistent: Here an impossible event (u) may attract the at-
tention of O, who considers this event as disturbing (and hence probable).
The above situations demonstrate the ﬂexibility of our model.
They also motivate
looking for a way to measure how far an observer O is from being objective.
2.4. Γ(P) as a representation of ‘common sense’. The preceding examples are
concerned with the possible relations between the content components p and ϵ of an
observer O = (P, f, p, ϵ) and its representation map. Now we would like to focus on the
structural component P and its relation to so-called ‘common sense’.
By common sense we do not mean ideas or rules common in society: ‘cannibalism is
bad’ is not an inborn common notion, but a fundamental and non-trivial cornerstone
of modern society. By common sense we mean a certain shared notion of rudimentary
logic that is inherent to all our actions. In part, this notion is embodied in our model
through the assumption that memory is structured by a poc-set, and realized by a poc-
morphism. Consider an observer O as in deﬁnition 2.22. Both the structure of P and
that of Γ(P) carry information about implication relations among events in X as those
are perceived by O. This is due to the equivalence a < b ⇔V (a) ⊂V (b) holding for all
a, b ∈P. Together with the fact that V (a∗) = V (a)c, this provides an automated tool
O can use for ‘sub-conscious’ reasoning.
Thus, all our observers share the way in which the content of their memory is ordered,
and this fact is bound to aﬀect the ways in which two observers sharing the same
environment (or territory) synchronize their actions.
When is it that we are able to demonstrate to others that we understand something
well? The pedagogical answer has always been that good understanding is deﬁned as a
state in which discussing the subject matter adequately from a logical standpoint does
not require a lot of conscious eﬀort.
However, logic as we understand it involves the ability to operate with combined
observations.
While implication and negation are inherent to observers through the
poc-set structure of the ‘atomic’ statements, conjunctions (and, dually, disjunctions)
are not taken into account directly by the poc-set structure.
To demonstrate this, ﬁx a positive integer n and consider two hypothetical observers:
- O1 with poc-set component P1 such that Γ(P1) is the n-cube (see example 2.10),
and an excitation function p1 assigning a unit value to every vertex;
- O2 with poc-set structure P2 such that Γ(P2 is the 2n-pompom (see example
2.12) with center v0, and with p2 assigning unit excitation values to all the
leaves of Γ(P2) and null excitation to v0.
Furthermore, suppose f1 realizes O1 so that the partition P(f1(P1)) induced on X is
uniform with respect to µ (in particular, O1 is objective). We do not want O2 to be at an
unfair disadvantage, so assume the partition P(f2(P2)) coincides with P(f1(P1)) so that
v0 is f2-inconsistent. Thus, O2 is objective as well, and the only way in which the two
observers diﬀer is the combinatorics each of them uses to model the same partition of X.

A FORMAL APPROACH TO MODELING THE MEMORY OF A LIVING ORGANISM
19
We will now ask the standard question an information theorist asks in situations like
this: what is the expected minimum number of observations that each observer needs to
make about the current state in order to identify the vertex in its memory correspond-
ing to this state of X? Then answers are clearly very diﬀerent: n for O1 and 2n−1 for O2.
A natural way for O2 to come closer to the optimal position of O1 is to widen the
supply of direct observations O2 is able to make. If O2 had a mechanism for expanding
P2 by adding conjunctions of elements from P2 to it, the updated version of O2 would
be able to perceive X with lower entropy.
On the other hand, it is not reasonable for O1 to maintain the strategy of keeping
P1 completely transverse (except for trivial nesting relations) over a long time: as the
number of available observation tools increases, Γ(P1) will keep growing exponentially,
without ever encoding any of the recorded information in its combinatorial structure.
The inevitable conclusion is that an approach balancing content and structure should
exist, and we expect it to become all the more eﬃcient as the particular implementa-
tion of the memory structure comes to possess tools allowing the observer to reﬁne its
observations by combining them at will.
3. Possible Implementation and Information Retrieval
3.1. The basic searching problem. The goal of this section will be to deﬁne the basic
searching problem for an observer O = (P, f, p, ϵ) and to discuss the main features of an
implementation that one may regard as eﬃcient.
Deferring updating tasks which involve altering the structure of P or the excitation
function p, one is left with the task of eﬃciently updating ϵ – the observer’s conjecture
about the current state of events – in response to an incoming observation.
The basic search/retrieval/update problem may be formulated as follows. Suppose an
observer modeled by O = (P, f, p, ϵ) has just made the observation a ∈P. Then there
is a need to (1) decide whether ϵ ∪{a} is consistent, and then (2) replace ϵ by ϵ ∪{a}
in case it is, or (3) replace ϵ by a new description of the perceived current state that is
as consistent as possible with ϵ and the new observation.
This is the point when any discussion of eﬃciency will depend on the speciﬁc imple-
mentation, that is: on how the memory structure is realized and maintained. In order
to facilitate this discussion, let us consider the diﬀerent components of an observer O
from a more practical point of view:
• Our initial assumption was that observing (and recording observations about) a
system with a given state space X may be thought of as maintaining a database
whose purpose is to mimic the geometry and topology of X, as those are revealed
through asking binary questions about X. Such a question can be very basic,
e.g. “Is neuron number 1234567 ﬁring right now?”.

20
D. P. GURALNIK
• The function f in the deﬁnition of an observer provides the connection to reality:
f essentially represents the sensors used by the observer for watching the evo-
lution of the observed system, e.g. neuron 1234567 ﬁres if and only if a certain
patch of light receptors on our retina gets hit by a suﬃcient number of photons.
• Both Γ(P) and P are maintained (stored in memory) as directed graphs, with
the vertices of Γ(P) labeled by their values under the function p and the edges
of Γ(P) labeled by elements of P.
• Finally, recording ϵ is no more than a labeling on the vertices of the graph
representing P.
This graph is nothing but a Hasse diagram with additional
edges labeled by (∗) to join every a ∈P to a∗∈P. The labeling corresponding
to ϵ works as follows: a vertex a ∈P is ‘ON’ if and only if a ∈ϵ.
3.2. Idealized searching. Let us now suppose that an implementation of P is equipped
with the following idealized features in addition to the graph structure we had just
described:
Propagating Excitation: Every node of P (we identify elements of P with the
corresponding nodes) has an excited state and a non-excited state. If a ∈P is
excited, then so is every b ∈P with b > a.
Contradiction Detection: If a ∈P is excited, and a∗is ‘ON’, then a ﬂag is
raised and the detector outputs a.
The ﬁrst feature is motivated by neurons, but very far from being a precise copy of the
same mechanism. Upon observing the algorithmic implications of the idealized feature
we will de-idealize it and discuss the consequences.
Suppose an observer modeled by O makes an observation a ∈P. The situation then
requires a reaction on the part of the observer with the aim to keep O up to date: (1)
if a ∈ϵ then ϵ is not changed; if a ̸∈ϵ, then either (2) ϵ ∪{a} is coherent and ϵ will be
replaced by ϵ ∪{a}, or (3) ϵ ∪{a} is incoherent and ϵ must be replaced by a ‘closest
approximation’ ϵ′ containing a.
The entire process begins with switching a to an excited state. The excitation prop-
agates along P. Recall that for a coherent ϵ, ϵ ∪{a} is incoherent iﬀthere exists b ∈ϵ
such that a ≤b∗. Thus, under the operative assumption that ϵ is coherent (which may
well be false), ϵ ∪{a} is proved to be coherent iﬀthe contradiction detector raises no
ﬂags as a result of our exciting a. In this case ϵ will be replaced by ϵ∪{a} – turn a on if
it was oﬀ– and we are done. In the situation when a contradiction is detected at b ∈P
(b ≥a), simply turn b∗oﬀand turn b on for all such b in order to obtain ϵ′.
To gain a better understanding of the actual meaning of this updating process, we
examine it for the special case when ϵ is a vertex of Γ(P) (that is: O is completely decided
– though not necessarily right – about the current state of the observed system). In this
case it is easy to see that ϵ′ is the unique vertex satisfying ϵ′ ∈I(ϵ, v) for all v ∈V (a).
Thus, in this case ϵ′ is, in a sense, the best possible approximation of ϵ by elements of
V (a). Intuitively, we think there is no better candidate for ϵ′.

A FORMAL APPROACH TO MODELING THE MEMORY OF A LIVING ORGANISM
21
Now, it is unrealistic to assume that the propagation process takes no time, while it
is reasonable to assume that the cells of the realization of P (the nodes of the graph)
have equal physical characteristics. Thus, the excitation signal will propagate through
P at a linear pace, implying our updating algorithm produces ϵ′ in a time linear in the
length of the longest maximal chain (in P) joining a with b, where b > a and b∗∈ϵ.
Clearly, this is as eﬃcient as one may hope for. Of course, the propagation property
plays the role of an extremely powerful parallel processor with the capacity to handle a
potentially unbounded number of parallel computation threads.
3.3. More realistic searching. The reader will have noticed by now the similarities
between our idea of propagation of excitation and the propagation of signals in a network
of neurons. Consequently, the reader will have thought of the excessive optimism em-
bodied in the assumption that the propagated signal does not dissipate: a neuron ν ﬁres
upon accumulating suﬃcient charge on its dendrites, and this charge is then distributed
along the axons into the synapses; the more neurons have their dendrites connected to
the axon of ν, the less charge will accumulate on each of them. It is therefore reasonable
to expect the signal to dissipate exponentially fast, if P is suﬃciently branched.
What does this mean for our updating algorithm?
First of all, it becomes possible for some of the elements b ∈ϵ which satisfy a < b∗
to remain in ϵ′ when the propagating excitation wave emanating from a does not reach
the corresponding nodes, thus failing to trigger the contradiction detectors.
As a result, ϵ′ will not be coherent. This is the reason why we did not require coher-
ence from ϵ in the deﬁnition of an observer, as well as our reason for emphasizing the
possibility of ϵ being incoherent throughout the preceding discussion. Perhaps this is
also the reason why we rarely observe humans with a completely coherent view of the
world.
One should not completely despair of the task of ultimately updating ϵ with all the
relevant elements of P, though. For let a < b1 < . . . < bn = b be a maximal chain in P,
where b∗∈ϵ. Assuming that the observation a remains valid for a length of time, there
is a good chance that our observer will also make some of the observations b1, . . . , bm,
thus updating ϵ′ with some of the bi. This will increase the chance of the excitation
wave propagating all the way to b over several attempts at synchronizing memory with
a recurring observation of of a. Learning requires persistence.
We want to remark that all the above does not diminish the eﬃciency of the algo-
rithm: though instead of an accurate result the de-idealized algorithm only produces an
approximation, the improvement in the quality of the recorded data is a linear function
of the running time. Finally, we would like to turn the attention of the reader to the
fact that the described updating process is, in fact, both an updating and a retrieval
process. It seems natural to identify these two aspects of database management for a
living organism.

22
D. P. GURALNIK
3.4. Other aspects of the proposed realization. We believe that the above analysis
provides suﬃcient grounds for asking the question whether it is possible to realize a
database structure as above using a neuronal network. If the answer is aﬃrmative, then
one should consider the way in which the other components of an observer O could be
realized by such a network. Here are some speculations in this direction:
Realizing the excitation function p: Here is a na¨ıve and partial approach to
encoding the excitation function p, motivated by the idea of propagation of ex-
citations through p: a neuron for a can be viewed as supplying charge (through
its axons) to every immediate successor b ∈P. In order to force b to ﬁre as a
consequence of a ﬁring, one needs to balance two parameters of this subsystem:
(1) the action potential of the neuron b and (2) the amount of charge delivered
to the dendrites of b through its connection with a. Tweaking this pair of pa-
rameters for every such pair (a, b) will aﬀect the range over which any excitation
wave can propagate. Such a realization would also provide a tool for interpolat-
ing between ‘rigid binary thinking’ and ‘probabilistic thinking’, and motivates
replacing the boolean algebra B (appearing as the range of the realization map
f in the deﬁnition of an observer) by some other algebra, realizing other kinds
of logic.
Structural updating: Neurons in brains of living organisms were observed in the
process of creating/destroying synaptic connections while the observed animal
was solving a problem. The ideas presented above poises the question about how
restructuring of P can be achieved through tweaking the excitation parameters
of the system as we had just described. The next section discusses the logical
aspects of the problem formally, but the question remains whether neuronal
networks can be used to realize the proposed database management model, and
even more importantly – which cognitive phenomena can be simulated using
such structures and how deep can one proceed with this analogy?
4. Structural Updating of Observers.
4.1. A deformation space for observers. There seem to be four components to
update in an observer O = (P, f, p, ϵ). We have already discussed possible ways for
altering ϵ in the context of the basic search problem, but that discussion required the
structural component of the database – the poc-set P – to remain constant. We must
now address the problem of updating P.
Altering P may involve the formulation of new questions, or a new realization that
certain questions should be made comparable (or even equal) after being considered
as transverse over some initial time period. Such alterations to P will result in a re-
deﬁnition of all the components of O. In just a few words, our idea is that the trigger for
restructuring P should be a signiﬁcant change in the excitation function p: over time,
some of the perceived events become negligible, and a clean-up operation is called for,
to get the observer rid of the trouble of maintaining any record of such events. Changes
in the values of the excitation function are external to the algorithmic structure of mem-
ory: these we assume to be generated by the physical organism, as a direct reaction to

A FORMAL APPROACH TO MODELING THE MEMORY OF A LIVING ORGANISM
23
observations made by the sensors it possesses.
Structural alterations should occur as a result of sensors being added, increased pre-
cision in existing sensors, communication with other observers and other observations
causing a re-evaluation of excitation levels. In other words, alterations of the poc-set
structure underlying the memory graph should correspond to a change in the natural
language used by the observer. More precisely, we note that distinct observers may share
common questions and be well aware of this fact. A formal way of expressing this in a
general context is to have all questions ‘tagged’ by symbols from a prescribed alphabet
A, and all the participating agents using the same set of tags.
It is convenient for A to be an inﬁnite set. For every subset A of A, let D(A) denote
the set of symbols A ⊔A∗⊔{0, 0∗} endowed with the complementation operator given
by a 7→a∗for all a ∈A ⊔{0} and a∗7→a for all a ∈A∗∪{0∗}. Let P (A) denote
the set of all poc-set structures of the form (D(A), ≤, ∗) for which the symbol 0 is the
minimum element. By P (A) we mean the union of P (A) over all ﬁnite subsets A of A.
For P ∈P (A), we shall say that D(A) is the support supp (P) of P.
Denote by ∆P the set of all functions q : V Γ(P) →[0, 1] satisfying P
u∈V Γ(P) q(u) = 1.
∆P is a standard Euclidean (|V Γ(P)| −1)-dimensional simplex. To any pair (P, p) with
P ∈P (A) and p : V Γ(P) →[0, ∞) non-zero, we associate the point
PrO (p) =
p
X
u∈V Γ(P)
p(u)
∈∆P .
Let us consider what happens as q ∈∆P is being moved toward the boundary of
∆P : in the eye of an observer O with underlying poc-set P and PrO (p) = q, the
events corresponding to diminishing values of q gradually become negligible; in the limit
(as p reaches a face F of ∆P ), O will ignore such events, treating them as irrelevant.
As a result, some questions may become redundant in the eyes of O or the relations
between them might change. However, we note that approaching the boundary of ∆P
from inside ∆P will never result in a pair of nested elements of P becoming transverse,
while a pair of transverse elements may transform into a nested pair or even into a
pair of equal/complementary elements. The resulting ‘degenerate’ poc-set should then
correspond to the face F. A convenient notion in this context is:
Deﬁnition 4.1 (Corners). Suppose P is a ﬁnite poc-set.
A corner of Γ(P) is the
full subgraph of Γ(P) induced by a set of vertices of the form V (a, b) for some proper
elements a, b ∈P.
Putting the preceding discussion in other words, a degeneration of P should occur
whenever PrO (p) assigns a negligible value to some corner of Γ(P). Here is a very simple
example to keep in mind:
Example 4.2. Recall example 2.19, where we had two poc-sets P and Q each generated
by a pair of distinct proper elements a, b so that a ⋔b in Q and a < b in P. Then Γ(Q)
is a 4-cycle, while Γ(P) is an interval with three vertices – see ﬁgure 8, left-hand side.

24
D. P. GURALNIK
Figure 8. A simple example of degeneration of a memory graph due to recalculation of probabilities.
Assigning equal excitation probabilities to the four vertices of Γ(Q) places the corre-
sponding weighted graph at the barycenter of ∆Q. Now consider a perturbation of those
probabilities as described in the central diagram of ﬁgure 8: the excitation probability
of the corner V (a, b∗) vanishes as ϵ approaches zero, leading to a restructuring of the
poc-set Q into the poc-set P.
Deﬁnition 4.3 (Degeneration). If P, Q ∈P (A), say that Q degenerates into P (denoted
by P ≤Q) iﬀsupp (P) ⊆supp (Q) and there exists a retraction of Q onto P: a poc
morphism r : Q →P restricting to the identity on supp (P).
Using this notion, we are now able to glue all the simplices ∆P , P ∈P (A) to obtain
a parameter space encoding the relationships among all the graphs Γ(P) supported on
A:
Deﬁnition 4.4 (The Deformation Space of Observers over A). For every P, Q ∈P (A)
satisfying P ≤Q and for each retraction r : Q →P, we deﬁne an injective map
δ = δr : ∆P →∆Q by setting
(7)
(δ(p)) (u) =

p(v)
if u = r◦(v)
0
if u /∈Im (r◦)
for every u ∈V Γ(Q). We then construct a space U = U(A) — the deformation space of
observers over A — as the quotient of the union S
P∈P(A) ∆P by the equivalence relation
generated by the relations of the form p ≡δr(p) for all p ∈∆P , all P, Q ∈P (A) and all
retractions r : Q →P.
For every p ∈U, denote by ch(p) the unique simplex of U containing p in its interior.
Equivalently, ch(p) is the top-dimensional simplex of U containing p.
Thus U is obtained from the collection of all simplices of the form ∆P by identifying
some of them along faces (gluing).
The main characteristic of the space U is that
any path in this space corresponds to a process of altering some memory graph through
introduction of questions (moving away from a face of simplex) or removal/identiﬁcations
of/among redundant questions. Also note that any two simplices ∆P and ∆Q occur as

A FORMAL APPROACH TO MODELING THE MEMORY OF A LIVING ORGANISM
25
faces of ∆R, where R is the poc-set with support supp (P) ∪supp (Q) and no relations
(every pair of proper questions is transverse). This shows that U is the result of carrying
out face identiﬁcations on one inﬁnite-dimensional simplex.
4.2. The Updating Postulate. Up till now we have not made any assumption re-
garding the way in which the updating of an observer occurs, leaving the model static:
at any point in time, an abstract observer can be associated with a real-life observer by,
say, freezing the latter and studying the poc-set structure of the contents of its memory.
Of course, it is the evolution of an observer that is of interest in relation to studying
learning processes.
Consider the postulate: If a sequence On = (Pn, fn, pn, ϵn) (n ≥0) represents consec-
utive stages in the evolution of the same observer, then, for every n ≥1, either ch(pn−1)
is a face of ch(pn) or ch(pn) is a face of ch(pn−1).
This postulate means, essentially, that, whatever the implementation of any given
observer, and whatever procedure is used for updating it, any such updating results
either in a degeneration as described above, or in an ‘inverse degeneration’.
Thus,
one could imagine the evolution of a memory graph to be an alternating sequence of
expansion/contraction moves.
The reason for stating such a postulate is that of economy: an attempt should be
made to free the observer of the burden of maintaining low-priority vertices in Γ(Pn−1)
whenever the same information can be encoded by degenerating Pn−1 into a poc-set
Pn with a smaller dual graph. Since Γ(P) tends to grow exponentially with the size of
P, this optimization becomes necessary due to its potential for conservation of resources.
The point of view described above provides a possible explanation of why humans, for
example, ﬁnd it so hard to update a set point of view (on practically any given issue),
or, more generally, why good studying of a recurring phenomenon results in automa-
tisms that often bar the student from creatively responding to an unpredicted change
of circumstances. Looking again at the example in ﬁgure 8, it is easy to imagine the
amount of destruction resulting from a more complex degeneration process (occurring
in a more complex graph). It is then stunning to see how simple it is to achieve this
kind of update (e.g., given an implementation such as the one proposed in section 3, this
kind of update can be achieved through rewriting just a few pointers and then collecting
the garbage), compared to how hard it is (algorithmically) to build a new hierarchy of
related questions, perhaps reconstructing parts of the old one, and then shaping the
graph (through continued observation leading to degenerations) so that it ﬁts a more
complete picture of the observed reality.
While the price to pay for mistakingly erasing low-priority nodes is great, the beneﬁt
of eliminating objective redundancies may outweigh this price if the threshold for erasing
a low priority vertex is low enough.
To summarize, we have just described how the updating postulate turns the processes
of updating memory, logical deduction and forgetting into diﬀerent aspects (depending

26
D. P. GURALNIK
on context) of the same principle, by restricting the eﬀect of an ‘elementary updating
process’ on the memory structure.
4.3. Structure of U vs. Natural Language. Let us discuss an additional aspect of
the idea of degeneration in the memory graph of an abstract observer. Suppose now
that ϵ > 0 is given with the property that every observer O = (P, . . .) in a given group
of observers considers a vertex u ∈V Γ(P) negligible if PrO (u) < ϵ. Once again, let A
be the alphabet of questions recognized by the members of the group.
For any n ≥0, let U(n) denote the n-skeleton of U = U(A) – the union of all simplices
of U having dimension n or less.
Then, whenever |V Γ(P)| exceeds 1
ϵ (for some P ∈P (A)), a whole ball about the bari-
center of the simplex ∆P becomes irrelevant for the discussion of this particular group
of observers. This makes the 1
ϵ-skeleton of U much more relevant to the discussion of
‘language’ in the given group than the space U itself. Moreover, replacing U by U(1/ϵ)
in the role of a ‘space of all observers’ increases its topological complexity, which may
also be relevant in the discussion of language structure and formation.
Here is a more precise formulation of what we mean by this. Consider the process
of parents teaching their newborn child. The newborn has many ‘questions’ available,
but not much can be made out of them at the very beginning: they are not ordered
yet. The environment provides a lot of input, and the role of the parents is to serve as a
ﬁlter, protecting the child from input it is yet incapable of processing. The result is that
the parent slowly synchronizes the child’s memory structure with their own, increasing
the chances that the child’s sensors carry the same meaning as analogous sensors in
the parent. As a result, the individuals in a stably evolved population will have many
common patterns in their memory structures: a vast majority of individuals will agree
on certain associations between diﬀerent inputs (consider our attaching a very speciﬁc
meaning to the sound of the word ‘green’, unless we are color-blind). Thus, for any
given population, a subset B of A exists, for which a poc-set structure is already de-
cided among the adults of that population, and all discourse and synchronization among
adults is conﬁned to the sub-complex of U(A) – denote it by U(A, B) – constructed using
only those P ∈P (A) for which the poc-set structure on supp (P) ∩B inherited from P
coincides with the poc-set structure inherited from B. The evolution of the population’s
language is then partially described by the evolution of U(A, B) over time; the learning
goal of a child in the population is to synchronize their memory structure with that
deﬁned by the parent population.
In subsection 2.4 we discussed the eﬀect of the capability for employing logical (and
perhaps other) connectives for enriching the poc-set structure of an observer by creating
‘new questions from old’. The main observation was that an observer needs to balance
between two extremes: over-using this capability leads to exponential inﬂation of the
memory structure making it impossible to maintain eﬃciently; not using it enough
prevents the memory structure from attaining a suﬃcient level of reﬁnement and blocks
the observer from capturing more subtle information about the observed system.

A FORMAL APPROACH TO MODELING THE MEMORY OF A LIVING ORGANISM
27
It is easy to see how this idea gets incorporated into the discussion of the deformation
space U(A): simply impose additional algebraic structure on {0, 0∗} ∪A ∪A∗.
For
example, here is a natural way of adding Boolean connectives to the alphabet. For each
a, b ∈A one assumes that the symbols of the form a ∧b, a ∨b (and all incident ﬁnite
formulae) are in the alphabet, together with all the ensuing relations, and we require
all admissible poc-set structures to be synchronized with these symbols – e.g., for all
a, b, c ∈P ∈P (A) require that a ∧b < a, a ∧b < b and (c < a) ∧(c < b) must imply
c < a ∧b. Yet again, the result is a sub-complex of the original U(A). The two reﬁned
constructions we had just discussed can be combined together or compared – any option
will yield an aspect of the phenomenon one can only call by the name the language
spoken by the population.
5. Discussion
We have deﬁned and, to an extent, analyzed a family of databases designed to main-
tain the memory of an arbitrary entity observing the evolution of an environment by
means of binary sensors. Motivated by the example of living organisms, we assumed the
following:
- The observer evolves with time, possibly ‘growing’ new sensors;
- The observer may interact with the environment;
- The observer has mechanisms to assign excitation levels to observed data – we
refer to these collectively as the observer’s evaluation mechanism.
Our main goal was to construct a memory system capable of dealing with arbitrary
input, given the guidance provided by the evaluation mechanism. This means input is
not treated according to its objective signiﬁcance to the observer, but rather according
to the subjective importance assigned to the input by the evaluation mechanism. When
the evaluation mechanism and reality are in tune with each other, input from the envi-
ronment contributes to a more accurate record of events in the database, and to better
decision-making on the part of the observer.
5.1. The Invariance Principle and alternate logics. A major trait of our model
is a clear separation of the algorithmic side (the database) from the physical side (the
realization). On the former side, an observer O = (P, f, p, ϵ) is required to maintain the
poc-set structure P, the (conjectural) current state ϵ and the graph Γ(P) with vertices
weighted by p. On the latter side, we have the poc-morphism f : P →B (recall B
is the Borel σ-algebra on X) objectively representing the observer’s sensors. Together,
these components produce a picture of the mind of a real-life observer, frozen in a given
moment of its evolution. The evaluation mechanism and actual physical realization of
this system are given the task of eﬀecting the transition of O from any given current
state to its next state. This is done through:
(1) Sampling sensory input. In this context, the physical realization of the observer
is considered a part of the observed environment.
(2) Updating the current state record given by ϵ to ﬁt the most recent observations
(see section 3)
(3) Re-evaluating excitation levels relevant to the current observations.

28
D. P. GURALNIK
(4) Optimizing the database structure Γ(P) to ﬁt the new excitation levels.
Note how clear cut is the division of labor between the algorithmic and physical compo-
nents of the model: stages (1) and (3) are totally dependent of the physical organism,
while stages (2) and (4) may be formulated completely in terms of the algorithmic
structure, only depending on the physical ‘shell’ for their input and execution of the
algorithmic tasks at hand.
In section 1.1 we had already mentioned the more obvious potential of such a ‘two-
lobe’ approach. In a manner of speaking, this approach achieves a separation of ‘soft-
ware’ from ‘hardware’, enabling the study of the question: what kind of hardware is
capable of supporting this software?
Note that the representation map f is the only objective component of an observer
O. The choice of range for f (the Boolean algebra B) corresponds to the assumption
that O uses binary sensors to observe its environment. As a result, a deeper aspect
of the invariance principle comes to light: one could weaken the binarity assumption
considerably by replacing the range of f by a larger algebra quantifying over X. For
example, one could use the space Ψ(X, µ) of probability distributions on (X, µ) as a range
for f. Indeed, the space Ψ(X, µ) has a fuzzy logic underlying it, while it still retains a
poc-set structure induced from B: for every ψ, ψ′ ∈Ψ(X, µ) one deﬁnes ψ∗= 1 −ψ,
and ψ ≤ψ′ iﬀψ(x) ≤ψ′(x) holds throughout X. This change opens new horizons we
have not explored yet, as it greatly alters the interpretation of the database. To be
precise: the observer O observes fuzzy phenomena, but records them as if they were
deterministic.
Quantum logics and temporal logics are of particular interest to us in this context:
replacing B by a quantum logic may be expected, according to [Kau], to enable O to
consider self-referential statements; a logic with a temporal structure could allow O to
become naturally aware of the passage of time, and consequently – aware of its own
learning processes.
At the same time, while the range of the representation map is allowed to vary, it is
not necessary to change the structure of the database itself. It is then the interpretation
of the database structure and its role in the interaction between the database and the
physical realization that changes when the binary logic of our model is replaced by
another logic. This opens the door to questions regarding the nature of our own (e.g.,
human) ‘guessing algorithms’, and motivates one to ask whether a memory structure
such as the one we are proposing in this paper can be used to enforce decision making
by an autonomous agent in non-deterministic situations.
5.2. Explanatory power of the model. The introduction strongly emphasizes the
idea that frequently observed weaknesses of the human thought process, including the
destructive process of forgetting, should serve as testing stones for any model contending
for the high title of “model of the memory of living organisms”. More precisely: any
contender must be capable of demonstrating as many such phenomena as possible to be
diﬀerent aspects of its normal operation.
Now that all the proper language has been developed and all modeling assumptions
have ﬁnally been stated, we can summarize the most notable achievements of our model

A FORMAL APPROACH TO MODELING THE MEMORY OF A LIVING ORGANISM
29
on this front. Put in our new language, the memory structure of an organism in an A-
speaking population is modeled by a sequence (On)n∈Z of observers On = (Pn, fn, pn, ϵn).
Recall that structural updating is carried out in accordance with the updating postulate
from 4.2, so for every n ≥1 we have either that ch(pn−1) is a face of ch(pn) or that
ch(pn) is a face of ch(pn−1) in the deformation space U(A).
Permanent loss of information. There are two ways in which information is lost by
our database structure. Permanent loss of information occurs whenever the transition
On →On+1 involves a degeneration of a corner V (a, b) of Γ(Pn) whose representation
in B has non-zero probability: our observer will, never the less, consider the logical
implication a < b∗as a property of X unless renewed observations somehow force a
reverse structural update. There are two important observations to make in this context:
(1) ‘Forgetting’ the event in B corresponding to the corner V (a, b) is equivalent to
committing the statement a < b∗to memory. Therefore, every act of memoriza-
tion – every act of recording a conclusion about the structure of X, if you like –
may, potentially, result in loss of information. However, structural updating is
necessary for keeping the database from blowing up, so this price has to be paid
whether we like it or not.
(2) Information lost (by the database) in this way is very hard to recover if we realize
the database in a manner such as the one described in section 3. The reason is
that – at least in the ideal implementation – recording the relation a < b∗implies
that whenever the observation a is made, propagation of excitation implies the
observation b∗is made as well. In the non-ideal implementation, it is possible
that the observation b∗will not be made if there are suﬃciently many x ∈P
satisfying a < x < b∗: dissipation of the excitation signal may cause the search
algorithm not to reach b∗at all. In either case, an incoming observation of b and
a may be simply discarded by the system unless the evaluation mechanism gives
this input an excitation value that is too high to ignore. Possibly, this issue may
be better understood in the context of a more realistic implementation of the
database by, say, a neuronal network.
Temporary loss of information. We consider situations when the information sought for
is contained in the database, but, for some reason, is hard to ﬁnd. Formally speaking,
the system is being fed an observation a ∈P (or observations a1, . . . , an ∈P), and is
expected to produce the conclusion x ∈P – to respond to the observation in a way
that provides proof (to the environment, in some sense) that it has ‘understood’ the
implication ‘a implies x’; however, the desired demonstration fails to occur.
In the context of an implementation based on propagation of excitation, these situa-
tions are easy to explain/recreate: an input, or combination of inputs, triggers a cascade
of ‘internal’ observations, due to propagation of the excitation signal(s); if the signal dis-
sipates before the node x is reached, then the observer will fail to produce the required
reaction. However, repeated queries along a path (in P) from a to x may result in the
excitation wave reaching x eventually.
Bound on parallel processing. This is a point we have hardly touched in this paper, but
would like to point it out as a motivation for future research. If the network of nodes

30
D. P. GURALNIK
realizing P can be excited at several nodes a1, . . . , an simultaneously, corresponding to
the observation a1 ∧. . . ∧an being made, then the range of reachable conclusions poten-
tially increases with n. The observation a1 ∧. . . ∧an serves as proof that {a1, . . . , an} is
a coherent family, which means V (a1, . . . , an) ⊂Γ(P) is non-empty. If there is some a
priori upper bound on n (an upper bound on the number of simultaneous observations),
then, as the set of available sensors grows, the ability of the observer to relate to spe-
ciﬁc vertices of Γ(P) diminishes unless the organism has a tool for introducing sensors
corresponding to conjunctions of families of other sensors. In any case, a bound on the
‘bandwidth’ of the implementation of the poc-set P automatically implies a restriction
on the ability of the organism to deal with complex input.
Some organisms, like modern humans, have developed tools to help them circumvent
such diﬃculties. We are able to articulate the results of our thought process and write
them down, thus creating an artiﬁcial feedback loop with its own memory capacity.
Reading our text at a later time re-excites thought processes that were abandoned
earlier, which, armed with new data, updated memory and new notions may now have
a better chance of reaching the desirable goal.
Noise. Remember that song that you cannot stop humming? The gossip information
from television that you recall with an ease igniting the envy of all the material you have
read for work and successfully forgotten? How about the dead silence, or the chirping
birds, or deafening heavy metal music that you need for concentration?
Our model explains these through ‘bandwidth’ considerations from the preceding
paragraph and through known properties of the evaluation mechanism in living or-
ganisms. For us and for many other animals, the most signiﬁcant component of our
excitation levels seems to be physiological stress.
Physiological stress plays the same role in biology as temperature in physics: when
stress is totally absent, the animal is overly docile and disinterested with its environ-
ment; when there is too much stress, metabolic reactions peak and the animal becomes
incapable of reacting to the environment due to the total chaos in the input it has to
process. Depending on the processing mechanism, some inputs (normally weak, peri-
odic, predictable) will stress an animal just enough to cause it to ignore most common
but irregular minuscule sources of stress (distractions), allowing it to use the rest of its
capacity for parallel processing for quality ‘thinking’ (this is a state of ‘calm’ for the
animal). Other inputs get evaluated so high, that they keep occupying the animal’s
computational resources for long periods of time – at least as long as the inputs persist
– which results in wasting computational resources on the evaluation and re-evaluation
of those signals and any ‘memories’ they may trigger as a result of the searching process
(as described in section 3). Reliving these memories, in turn, may result in more stress,
creating a cycle that only breaks with the introduction of a much more powerful signal
or with the disappearance of the majority of the stressing factors from the observer’s
horizon.
This is, of course, a speculative picture, but we ﬁnd the simplicity of the explanation
appealing. In particular, our model then serves as a (formal, mathematical) link between
the algorithmic and psychological aspects of learning.

A FORMAL APPROACH TO MODELING THE MEMORY OF A LIVING ORGANISM
31
5.3. Biological connections and natural language. The preceding review started
with computational aspects of information processing (as realized in the proposed model)
and ended with the biological ones. In the context of living beings (which are forced to
interact with their envirnoment), neither can be discussed separately from the notion of
a natural language. Diﬀerent organisms have evolved their information processing tools
to diﬀerent levels (diﬀerent parts of the human nervous system may be traced back to
diﬀerent stages of the planetary evolutionary process), and the same can be said about
the evolution of their means for communicating with the environment. Thus, inevitably,
the evolution of natural languages is related to the evolution of physical realizations of
memory (e.g., brains) and of the algorithmic tools maintaining the underlying database
structures.
The current textbook deﬁnition of a natural language is somewhat lacking in math-
ematical rigor. Deﬁnitions such as “by a natural language we mean human languages
such as English, Spanish, Arabic etc.” are generally accepted, but can hardly be con-
sidered rigorous.
We believe our approach has a new bearing on the formal understanding of the notion
of natural language, as well as the process of language acquisition at the level of the
individual learner. Niyogi (see [Niy06] section 1.1, p.16) provides a learnability argument
in favor of restricting the family of languages human learners are capable of producing:
“The necessary and suﬃcient conditions for successive generalization by a learn-
ing algorithm has been the topic of intense investigation by the theoretical com-
munities in computer science, mathematics, statistics and philosophy.
They
point to the inherent diﬃculty of inferring an unknown target from ﬁnite re-
sources, and in all such investigations, one concludes that tabula rasa learning
is not possible. Thus children do not entertain every possible hypothesis that is
consistent with the data they receive but only a limited class of hypotheses. This
class of grammatical hypotheses is the class of possible grammars children can
conceive and therefore constraints the range of possible languages that humans
can invent and speak.”
The mathematical nature of these constraints remains unclear unless a reasonable formal
universal model of a learner is provided. In some simpliﬁed sense, this is precisely what
our model is. Moreover, we show that it comes equipped with a tool for formally deﬁning
the learning goal for language acquisition. In what follows, we will try to substantiate
this claim using the ‘deformation spaces of observers’ we have recently considered in
section 4.
In the context of humans, the notion of a natural language is directly associated
with the use of sound for the articulation of one’s thought process. However, once the
use of signs and signals is permitted – written language, for example – one has to face
a growing number of alternatives stretching the deﬁnition far beyond the realm of the
audible. For example, where should one place sign language? by what means should one
communicate with the little green deaf visitors from Mars? If one is to take into account

32
D. P. GURALNIK
so many variations on the original notion of natural language, then surely this notion
should apply to every self-suﬃcient coherent system of signals allowing the exchange of
information among sentient beings.
Stop. At this point, it will do us good to realize our inability to discern sentient beings
from non-sentient ones. At best, we are able to distinguish solitary species from social
ones. But perhaps this is where one ﬁnds the key to solving our problem: while any
repetitive pattern of information exchange among physical entities may be considered a
language (in a broader understanding of the term), we should be seeking a notion that is
inherently linked with shared territory and ordered communication among organisms. It
is no big surprise that humans and human languages have evolved from social primates
rather than from solitary wasps, say. After all, from the evolutionary point of view,
populations of solitary species have no use for complex articulated information exchange,
while populations of social organisms may beneﬁt from this ability.
It is this last idea that motivated the construction of a deformation space U(A) of
A-speaking observers. The space U(A) is best understood in the context of a population
P of organisms sharing a set A of statements about X. The elements of A should not
be thought of as corresponding to words in the language spoken by the population, but
rather to the shared meanings of complete sentences.
An outside observer trying to
study P may initially be oblivious of the diﬀerent meanings of the elements of A, but
they could try to guess those meanings from contextual data collected while observing
the evolution of memory structures of members of P. Similarly, a new member of P –
a newborn child, say – has to observe other members of P and communicate with them
in order to uncover the actual meaning of each element of A.
Now, as we have already pointed out in section 4.3, shared meaning implies shared
logical structure, so it is reasonable to assume that the adult part of the population will
have a shared record of certain relations among elements of D(A) = {0, 0∗} ⊔A ⊔A∗,
which, inevitably will show up in their memory structures. The young of P can then be
considered as trying to restructure their memory graphs accordingly. It is also plausi-
ble to expect various connectives to appear as tools for enriching the set of statements
meaningful to the population: this introduces an algebraic structure on D(A), e.g. con-
junction and implication operators in the case of human languages. More generally, any
shared structuring of the information exchange among members of P ends up as a shared
property of the adult memory structures that has to be learned (through restructuring)
by the younger members. We have shown in 4.3 how additional structural properties
of D(A) (or subsets of the form D(B), B ⊂A) deﬁne special subspaces U(A, B) of the
the deformation space U(A) with non-trivial topology derived from the properties of B.
Mathematically speaking, studying the topology and geometry of these subspaces cor-
responds to studying the language ‘spoken’ by P, from an outsider’s viewpoint. From
an insider’s viewpoint, a learner’s goal is to have its memory structure synchronized
with that of the entire population: the population provides input consistent with B
while the learner’s evaluation mechanism provides guidance directing the evolution of
the learner’s memory structure towards U(A, B); inadequate guidance (e.g., the learner
was born autistic) may prove insuﬃcient for the learner to achieve the desired result;

A FORMAL APPROACH TO MODELING THE MEMORY OF A LIVING ORGANISM
33
inadequate pressure by the parent population (input contradicting the learner’s evalua-
tion mechanism) may result in failure to acquire the language of the population.
At the current stage, this last observation is not of much use to a linguist study-
ing a speciﬁc language. However, the novelty in our point of view is in that we have
shown how language acquisition occurs (in the framework of our model) as a result of
a learning process that is not guided by a speciﬁc pre-deﬁned problem, but by the very
general problem of the learner (e.g., a child) attempting coherent communication with
its immediate environment. The only guidance present is the subjective guidance by
the evaluation mechanism, and this can be swayed in many diﬀerent directions by an
attentive teacher.
To summarize, all the above suggests that the constraints Niyogi discussed may be
derived from two sources. The ﬁrst is an accurate description of the evaluation mecha-
nism providing the guidance for the learning process. The second is a good description
of the logic employed by the learner and the way in which it is realized by the updat-
ing algorithms of the learner’s memory structure. While our model assumed classical
Boolean logic, our discussion of the invariance principle and its realization in our model
shows how this assumption can be lifted. We leave this direction to future research.
