Benchmarking of Deep Reinforcement Learning Algorithms for
Vision-based Robotics
Swagat Kumar, Hayden Sampson and Ardhendu Behera
Abstract— This paper presents a benchmarking study of
some of the state-of-the-art reinforcement learning algorithms
used for solving two simulated vision-based robotics problems.
The algorithms considered in this study include soft actor-critic
(SAC), proximal policy optimization (PPO), interpolated policy
gradients (IPG), and their variants with Hindsight Experience
replay (HER). The performances of these algorithms are com-
pared against PyBullet’s two simulation environments known
as KukaDiverseObjectEnv and RacecarZEDGymEnv re-
spectively. The state observations in these environments are
available in the form of RGB images and the action space
is continuous, making them difﬁcult to solve. A number of
strategies are suggested to provide intermediate hindsight goals
required for implementing HER algorithm on these problems
which are essentially single-goal environments. In addition, a
number of feature extraction architectures are proposed to in-
corporate spatial and temporal attention in the learning process.
Through rigorous simulation experiments, the improvement
achieved with these components are established. To the best
of our knowledge, such a benchmarking study is not available
for the above two vision-based robotics problems making it a
novel contribution in the ﬁeld.
I. INTRODUCTION
Vision-based Robots use visual feedback to guide their
motion. The underlying problem, also known as hand-eye
coordination [17] or visual servoing [7], is considered to be
difﬁcult due to factors such as non-linearity and uncertainty
of camera and robot models, sensor noise, mathematical
complexity of extracting geometrical features from images
and difﬁculty in deriving closed-form analytical control
equations in terms of these image features etc. Traditional
model-based methods addressed some of these concerns by
adopting soft computing approaches [46] [24] [11]. The
recent success of deep learning methods in computer vision
has greatly enhanced the capabilities of these model-based
methods [5] [40] [26] [27]. In contrast, reinforcement learn-
ing (RL) offers a model-free alternative to solve this problem
directly from input-output data, thereby overcoming many
of the above problems. It has the potential to create truly
autonomous agents that can learn skills on its own without
needing human intervention. An RL agent learns the desired
behaviour, over time, through trial and error while repeatedly
interacting with its environment [47]. The agent achieves
this by taking actions to maximize the cumulative discounted
future reward for a given task while balancing exploration
(of new possibilities) and exploitation (of past experiences).
This cumulative discounted reward function, represented as
The
authors
are
with
the
department
of
Computer
Sci-
ence,
Edge
Hill
University,
Ormskirk,
UK
L39
4QP.

Q or value function, is used to evaluate a given action, and
is not known a priori. Depending on how this function is
estimated and desirable actions are derived from it, the RL-
based methods can be broadly classiﬁed into two categories:
value-based methods and policy-based methods. Value-based
methods aim at estimating the Q-function and then derive
action from this by using a greedy policy. On the other hand,
policy-based methods directly estimate the policy function
by maximizing a given objective function. The traditional
Q-learning algorithm estimates the Q function iteratively
by using an approximate dynamic programming formulation
based on Bellman’s equation starting from an initial estimate
[4]. The original Q-learning algorithm could be applied to
problems with discrete state (observation) and action spaces,
and suffer from the curse-of-dimensionality problem with
higher dimensions and range of values. This limitation can
be overcome by using a deep network to estimate Q function
from arbitrary observation inputs, thereby, greatly enhancing
the capabilities of RL algorithms. The resulting approach is
known as Deep Q Networks (DQN) [48] [45] which has
been applied successfully to a wide range of problems while
achieving superhuman level performances in a few cases,
such as ATARI video games [32], Go [18] etc. The success
of DQN has spawned a new research ﬁeld known as deep
reinforcement learning (DRL) attracting a large following
of researchers. Readers are referred to [2] for a survey of
this ﬁeld. The DQN models were subsequently extended to
continuous action spaces by using policy gradient methods
that used a parameterized policy function to maximize DQN
output using gradient ascent methods [28] [9]. This has
opened the doors for solving various robotics problems that
use continuous values such as joint angle, joint velocities or
motor torques as input. Since then, a number of methods
have been proposed to improve the performance of RL
algorithms and have been applied successfully to different
robotic problems - manipulation [14] [34], grasping [38]
[20], navigation [50] etc.
Since RL algorithms vary greatly in terms of model
complexity, choice of hyper-parameters and architectures,
it becomes necessary to benchmark them against standard
problems to assess their performances. One such effort was
made for a robotic grasp problem in [38] where authors com-
pared the performance of three off-policy methods includ-
ing DDPG [28] on a simulated Kuka environment created
using PyBullet [37]. A similar benchmarking was done for
continuous control problems in [9] where authors compared
the performance of several off-policy and on-policy methods
on several simulated environments created using MuJoCo
arXiv:2201.04224v1  [cs.RO]  11 Jan 2022

[33]. A benchmarking of reinforcement learning algorithms
on real-world robots was carried out in [30] that included
algorithms such as TRPO [41] and PPO [43].
The focus of this paper is to benchmark some of the newer
deep reinforcement learning algorithms such as Soft Actor
Critic (SAC) [16], Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [43]
and Interpolated Policy Gradients (IPG) [15] for solving
vision-based robotic problems in an end-to-end fashion. The
problems used for this study include two PyBullet [37]
simulation environment, namely, KukaDiverseObject
and RacecarZEDGym. Both environments provide obser-
vations in the form of RGB images and take continuous
action inputs which makes these two problems more difﬁcult
compared to the versions where observations are available
as ﬂoating point vectors. We then demonstrate that the
performance of these algorithms can be further improved
by using Hindsight experience replay (HER) [1] where the
problem of sparse rewards is partially addressed by providing
intermediate goals. HER is shown to be more effective for
multi-goal problems such as MuJoCo’s Fetch environment
[35] or PyBullet’s Panda robot [12]. Both of these two
environments do not provide image observations making
them unsuitable for this study. A number of strategies are
proposed to provide intermediate goals for the above two
environments to facilitate implementation of HER algorithm
and show improvement in performance achieved. Finally, a
number of architectures are presented to incorporate spatial
and temporal attention into the learning process. Attention
mechanisms [49] have been shown to improve the inference
capability of a model by focussing on relevant parts and
ignoring the irrelevant parts of the input observation. While
the application of attention in reinforcement learning is not
new, it has not been applied to the context of vision-based
robotics problems considered in this paper. The performance
improvement achieved by incorporating these concepts are
demonstrated through rigorous simulation experiments which
will be discussed later in this paper.
In short, the novel contributions made in this paper are as
follows:
• A benchmarking of three RL algorithms, namely, SAC,
PPO, IPG and their corresponding HER-variants have
been carried out for two simulated vision-based robotics
problem. This is the ﬁrst-time such an effort has been
made for these two simulated PyBullet environments.
• Several strategies are proposed to implement HER algo-
rithm on these two environments which are essentially
single-goal problems and do not provide intermediate
goals. These ideas could be easily applied to other
single-goal environments thereby extending the appli-
cability of HER algorithms.
• Several architectures are proposed for incorporating
spatial and temporal attention during the feature extrac-
tion process leading to improved learning performance.
Through experiments, it is established that stacked
frames along with attention and LSTM layers can pro-
vide superior learning performance. The application of
attention in the present context of vision-based robotics
is new and has not been reported so far.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The details
of RL model architectures, algorithms and methods are dis-
cussed in Section III. The details of experiments and analysis
of results are presented in Section IV. The conclusion and
direction of future research is provided in Section V.
II. PROBLEM ENVIRONMENTS
The objective of this work is to benchmark a few
deep reinforcement learning algorithms, namely, soft ac-
tor critic (SAC) [16], proximal policy optimization (PPO)
[43], interpolated policy gradients (IPG) [15] and hind-
sight experience replay (HER) [1] on two vision-based
robotics problem. The data intensive nature of reinforce-
ment learning necessitates use of simulated environments for
training models. Two PyBullet [37] environments namely
KukaDiverseObjectEnv and RacecarZEDGymEnv
are used for implementing different RL algorithms. In the
ﬁrst environment, a Kuka robotic arm is used to grasp
different kinds of objects from a bin. The environment gives
a reward of 1 when one of the objects is picked up beyond a
pre-deﬁned height. The maximum reward for a given episode
is 1 for the kuka environment. The second environment
consists of a robotic car in a stadium and it is expected
to reach a given target ball location by generating linear and
angular velocities. The agent receives a ﬂoating point reward
for each step in the episode. The input observation for both
environments is available in the form of RGB images and the
system accepts continuous ﬂoating point values as actions.
A snapshot of the environment rendering and corresponding
variables are shown in Figure 1. These two environments are
selected as they are freely available and fall within the scope
of vision-based robotics which is the focus of this work. Our
algorithms work equally well with other environments such
as FetchReach from Mujoco [33]. However, the results
have not been included in this study because of two reasons
- ﬁrst, they are proprietary and require purchasing license
for long-term use and secondly, image observations are not
available for this environment.
III. METHOD
This section provides the details of models, architectures
and algorithms used for this benchmarking study as described
in the following subsections.
A. The RL formulation
An RL agent in state st = s at time t takes an action
at = a according to its policy π(a|s). The state transitions
to state st+1 = s′ at t + 1 while receiving a reward
r(st, at) = r from the environment. The terminal state of
an episode is represented by a boolean variable d. The goal
of the reinforcement learning is to learn a policy that will
maximize the discounted cumulative future returns given by
J(θ) = Es,a∼π[P∞
t=0 γtr(st, at)] where γ is the discount
factor. This RL problem is solved in this paper using an actor-
critic model [13] [23] that uses two different deep networks
- an actor network for learning the policy function πθ(a|s)

(a) KukaDiverseObjectEnv
(b) RacecarZEDGymEnv
Parameters
KukaDiverseObjectEnv
RacecarZEDGymENV
Observation shape s
(48, 48, 3)
(10, 100, 4)
Action a
(3,)
(2,)
Action Range
[-1, 1]
[-1, 1]
Reward Range r
(-inf, inf)
(-inf, inf)
Max steps / episode
20
100
(c) Environment parameters
Fig. 1: PyBullet Simulation Environment used for benchmarking RL algorithms. The input observation is available in the form of RGB images and the
action input are continuous ﬂoating point values. The images for the racecar environment are resized to (40,40,3) before use.
and a critic network for estimating the value function Vw(s)
or the Q-function Qw(s, a) where θ and w are the trainable
parameters. The critic is trained to minimize the time-delay
(TD) error function (also known as mean square Bellman
error (MBSE) given by:
L(wt) = E[y −Q(s, a; wt)]
(1)
where the target signal y is obtained from the recursive
Bellman’s equation given by:
y =
E
s′∈S[r + γ max
a′∈π(s′) Q(s′, a′; wt−1)]
(2)
The training process for critic network is similar to that of
DQN [32] that uses off-policy experience replay to improve
the sample efﬁciency. The experience tuples (s, a, r, s′, d)
are stored in a replay buffer B and then sampled in mini-
batches during the training process. The actor network, on the
other hand, is trained using a policy gradient method where
the model parameters θ are updated so as to maximize the
critic output. For instance, DDPG [28] optimize a continuous
deterministic policy πθ(at|st) = δ(at = µθ(st)) by applying
the gradient ascent to the critic output directly as shown
below:
θ ←θ + α
E
s,π∼B[∇θQw(s, µθ(s))]
(3)
where α is the learning rate. DDPG uses target networks to
stabilize the learning process which are updated at a slower
rate compared to original models by using Polyak averaging
[36]. DDPG is known to be sensitive to the choices of
parameters and sometimes overestimates Q-values. This is
remedied in Twin-delayed DDPG (TD3) algorithm [8] that
uses clipped double-Q learning, delayed policy updates and
target policy smoothing to improve the learning performance.
Many other on-policy and off-policy methods have been
reported in literature to provide superior learning perfor-
mances. Some of these methods are brieﬂy discussed in the
following subsections.
B. Model Architecture
An overview of actor-critic model used in this paper is
shown in Figure 2. It consists of an actor network and a critic
network. The actor network approximates the policy function
required for producing actions for a given state observation.
The critic network, on the other hand, evaluates the actor
network by estimating the value function V (s) or the Q
function Q(s, a). Both of these networks share a common
Fig. 2: Actor-Critic Architecture used for implementing RL al-
gorithms. The feature network is shared by both actor and critic
models. Actor network approximates the policy function required
for producing actions required for transitioning to next states. The
state observations are made available in the form of RGB images.
Critic estimates value function V (s) or Q-function Q(s, a).
feature network which is used for extracting features from
the input RGB images. The feature network is essentially a
convolutional neural network (CNN). The number and size
of convolutional and dense layers may vary from problem to
problem. The feature network may include attention layers,
and LSTM layers if required as will be discussed later in this
paper. It may also be conﬁgured to receive a single image
or a stack of frames as input. The RL algorithms used for
solving the above problem is described next in this section.
C. Soft Actor-Critic Algorithm
Soft Actor Critic (SAC) [16] algorithm optimizes a
stochastic policy in an off-policy manner. It uses a concept
called entropy regularization where the policy is trained to
maximize a trade-off between expected return and entropy
in the policy. In addition, it borrows clipped double-Q trick
from TD3 for stabilizing the training process. The target
signal needed for critic update is given by
y = r + γ(1 −d)

min
i=1,2 Qtarg,i(s′, a′) −α log πθ(a′|s′)

where the action values a′ are sampled from the current
policy πθ(.|s). Hence, the critic is trained by using gradient-
descent to minimize the MSBE equation (1) over mini-
batches sampled from the replay buffer. The policy param-
eters are updated by applying gradient-ascent to maximize

the entropy-regularized value function. The corresponding
gradient term may be written as follows:
∇θ
1
|B|
X
s∈B

min
i=1,2 Qwi(s, ˜aθ(s)) −α log πθ(˜aθ(s)|s)

where ˜aθ(s) is a sample from πθ(.|s) which is differentiable
with respect to θ.
D. Proximal Policy Optimization
On-policy methods use the likelihood ratio policy gradient
given below for policy optimization:
∇θJ(θ) = E[∇θ log πθ(a|s) ˆA(s, a)]
(4)
where ˆA(s, a) is the estimate of advantage function. Prox-
imal Policy Optimization (PPO) [43], like its predecessor
TRPO [41], tries to maximize the policy improvement step
while keeping the new policy close to the old policy. It
simpliﬁes the TRPO by using a clipped version of objective
function which is much easier to implement. The policy
update equation is given by:
θk+1 = arg max
θ
1
|Dk|T
X
τ∈Dk
T
X
t=0
min
 πθ(at|st)
πθk(at|st)Aπθk (st, at), g(ϵ, Aπθk (st, at))

(5)
where
g(ϵ, A) =
 (1 + ϵ)A, A > 0
(1 −ϵ)A, A < 0
is the clipped advantage function used to constrain the new
policy.
ˆA = Aπθ is the generalized advantage estimate
(GAE) [42] obtained from the current trajectories stored in an
on-policy buffer Dk. The critic uses a gradient descent algo-
rithm to minimize the mean square Bellman error (MSBE) as
described before. Compared to off-policy methods, on-policy
gradient methods tend to be stable and relatively easier to
implement. However, on-policy methods are known to be
highly data inefﬁcient as they look into the data only once.
E. Interpolated Policy Gradient
Interpolated policy gradient (IPG) [15] combines the ben-
eﬁts of both off-policy and on-policy algorithms to provide
superior learning performance. Speciﬁcally, it mixes likeli-
hood ratio gradient ˆQ and deterministic gradient through an
off-policy ﬁtted critic Qw. It uses the parameter ν to trade-
off bias and variance directly and a control variate to further
reduce the estimator variance. The overall policy gradient
can be written as:
∇θJ(θ) ≈(1 −ν) E
ρπ,π[∇θ log πθ(at|st)( ˆA(st, at)−
Aπ
w(st, at))] + E
ρβ[∇θ ¯Qπ
w(st)]
(6)
where ρβ refers to off-policy state sampling and ρπ refers
to on-policy state sampling. Aπ
w(st, at) is the advantage
estimated with a baseline value function estimator which
acts as a control variate to reduce the overall variance of
the policy estimator.
F. Hindsight Experience Replay
Hindsight experience replay (HER) [1] solves the sparse
reward problem in RL by providing positive reward even for
failed states. In other words, it is motivated by the human
ability to learn useful things from failed attempts. Usually,
HER is applied to multi-goal environments where the agent is
provided with intermediate goals to achieve. Existing multi-
goal environments such as Mujoco’s FetchReach-v1 [10]
and PyBullet’s Panda-Gym [12] do not provide image
observations which is necessitated by the scope of this study.
Hence, we propose three strategies to provide intermediate
goals for the problem environments considered in this paper.
The ﬁrst one is the ‘success’ strategy where the hindsight
goal (gh) is selected randomly from a buffer containing
previously encountered successful next states (gh = s′ :
r = 1). The second strategy is called ‘ﬁnal’ state strategy
that uses the next state of the terminal step of the episode
(gh = s′ : d = 1) as the hindsight goal. The third strategy
is called ‘future’ state strategy where the hindsight goal is
selected randomly from future steps of the current buffer
(gh
i
= s′
k : i < k < n, n = |B|). The agent receives
an intermediate reward of 1 when the L2-norm of distance
between the current next state and hindsight goal is less than
a user-deﬁned threshold. Instead of calculating L2-distance
directly between the images, it is possible to compute the
distance between the extracted features. This is denoted by
an additional letter ‘F’ in the names used for labelling the
plots. Mathematically, the hindsight reward for a given time
step i is given by:
rh
i =

1
if ||gh
i −s′
i|| < h
0
otherwise
(7)
where h is an user-deﬁned threshold which kept at a value of
0.3 in this paper. The implemented HER strategies is shown
to provide improvement over the IPG algorithm.
G. Attention Architectures
As mentioned earlier, attention allows models to focus on
task-relevant aspects of the observations thereby providing
robustness against distractions and increased learning efﬁ-
ciency [49] [22]. The use of attention mechanisms have been
shown to improve the performance of deep reinforcement
learning algorithms [31]. For instance, authors in [31] have
suggested several attention mechanisms to improve RL per-
formance in solving Arcade video games. Similarly, authors
in [39] use attention layers along with privileged information
(environment states) to improve RL performance. Authors in
[19] have used attention along with an actor-critic model to
solve a multi-agent RL problem.
In this paper, we apply attention to two vision-based
robotics problems. Two types of attention mechanisms,
namely, Bahdanau’s additive type [3] and Luong’s dot prod-
uct type [29] are used in four different conﬁguration as
shown in Figure 3. The attention layers are used within a
feature network which is shared by both actor and critic
models. An optional LSTM layer is also used along with the
attention layer to capture the temporal relationships between

Fig. 3: Feature Network Architectures with attention layers. (a) (arch:0)
attention layer (cyan) is placed after each convolutional layer (green), (b)
(arch:1) Output of the attention layer is added to its input before being
passed to the next layer: y = x + Attention(x). (c) (arch:2) Output
of the attention layer is multiplied to its input: y = x ∗Attention(x)
(d) (arch:3) the output of architecture (c) is passed through a sigmoid
activation function: y = σ(x ∗Attention(x)).
the frames. The effect of attention layers on learning perfor-
mance of RL algorithms is discussed in the next section.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
The details of experiments carried out and the analysis of
results are presented in this section as described below.
A. Software and Hardware Conﬁgurations
The algorithms were implemented using Python 3.7 and
Tensorﬂow 2.4 on Ubuntu 20.04 GNU/Linux operating sys-
tem. The source codes are made available publicly on github
[25] for the convenience of readers and to ensure repro-
ducibility of results. The plots were drawn using wandb ma-
chine learning platform [6]. The pre-built simulation environ-
ments available with Pybullet [37] were used for generating
the results presented in this paper. The problem environments
that are included this study are KukaDiverseObjectEnv
and RaceCarZEDGymEnv. In these environments, the state
observation is available in the form of RGB images and the
action space is continuous, thereby making them suitable for
this study which concerns itself with the hand-eye coordi-
nation or vision-based robotics problem. Each run of the
program takes about 4-7 hours on a GeForce RTX 2060
GPU machine with about 6 GB of dedicated video RAM.
Various hyper-parameters used for different algorithms is
shown in Table I. Each season corresponds to 1024 time-
steps which is approximately about 140 episodes with 7-8
steps per episode in case of Kuka environment. This is also
the length of trajectory segment (denoted by |D|) which is
used for on-policy training algorithms such as PPO. Each of
the algorithm is executed at least for 5 runs with random seed
initialization to generate the statistical plots. The attention
and LSTM layers are implemented using Keras APIs.
Parameters
Value
Replay Buffer Size |B|
20,000
Batch size
128
Training epochs
20
Trajectory Length (On-policy buffer) |D|
1024
Discount factor γ
0.995
Learning rate η
0.002
Input stack size
7
Polyak averaging factor τ
0.995
Clip Factor in PPO ϵ
0.2
Discount factor in GAE λ
0.7
Entropy Coefﬁcient in SAC α
0.2
TABLE I: Hyper-parameters used for different RL algorithms.
B. Benchmarking of RL Algorithms
The performance of four state-of-the-art RL algorithms
namely, Soft Actor Critic (SAC) [16], Proximal Policy Opti-
mization (PPO) [43], Interpolated Policy Gradient (IPG) [15]
and Hindsight Experience Replay (HER) [1] is compared for
two OpenAI/Gym simulation problem environments, namely,
KukaDiverseObjectEnv and RaceCarZEDGymEnv
respectively. The outcome is shown in Figures 4 and 5
respectively. One can observe that IPG provides superior
performance compared to SAC and PPO. The HER variant
of IPG, called, IPG+HER provides better performance com-
pared to IPG. It is also shown that the performance can be
improved further by using attention layers. The results are
consistent for both the example problems.
(a) Training
(b) Validation
Fig.
4:
Performance
Comparison
of
various
RL
methods
for
KukaDiverseObject Environment. The mean episodic score average
over seasons is shown on the y-axis. Each season corresponds to 1024
time-steps or about 140 episodes. Validation involves computing rewards
for 50 episodes with deterministic action policy. The off-policy and on-
policy training steps are mapped to seasons for comparison.
Fig.
5:
Performance
Comparison
of
RL
algorithms
for
RaceCarZEDGymEnv. The maximum number of steps in an episode is
limited to 20. The input images are resized to (40,40,3) before its use in
the training. The y-axis shows the mean episodic score against the seasons
on x-axis.
C. Effect of Attention on learning performance
Figures 4 and 5 show that it is possible to obtain bet-
ter learning performance using attention layers. The effect
of various attention architectures discussed in Section III-
G is shown in Figure 6. It is seen that the architec-
tures ‘Luong:2’, ‘Bahdanau:0’, ’Bahdanau:2’

provide considerable improvement over the base algorithm
(IPG-HER) in case of KukaDiverseObjEnv.
(a) Train
(b) Validation
Fig. 6: Effect of attention mechanisms and architectures on the learning per-
formance of IPG-HER algorithm. The IPG-HER algorithm without attention
acts as a baseline for comparison (shows in dark blue). Two attention types,
namely, Bahdanau and Luong, are considered. Four architectures are shown
in Figure 3. Other hyper-parameters are: her strategy:‘future’,
stack size=1.
The output of different attention layers is visualized using
grad-CAM [44] is shown in Figure 7. The highlighted regions
in the image are the areas which were given more importance
for computing actions for that particular state.
Fig. 7: Gradient Content Activation Map attention Layers. The top row
shows the output of the second attention layer and the bottom row shows
the output of the outermost attention layer.
D. Effect of HER strategies
The effect of various strategies for selecting intermediate
goals on RL performance is shown in Figure 8. It is seen that
the ‘future’ strategy provides superior performance compared
to other strategies. Further improvement is obtained when the
extracted features are used for computing the intermediate
rewards for the agent. This is denoted by the letter ‘F’ in the
algorithm names mentioned in the legend.
E. Effect of using stacked Frames
The temporal relationships present in the state input can
be taken into consideration by stacking the frames together
and is known to overcome the partial observability problem
in a Markov decision process (MDP) [21] [31]. The effect of
using stacked frames on the learning performance is shown
in Figure 9. It is observed that stacking itself does not
improve the learning performance (blue vs brown curves).
However it improves the learning performance when used
along with attention and/or LSTM layers. The best perfor-
mance is obtained when LSTM, Attention and Stacking are
used together. It can be concluded that incorporating spatial
(a) Train
(b) Validation
Fig. 8: Effect of goal selection in HER on learning performance. The letter
‘F’ indicates that the L2-distance is computed for the extracted features of
the state and the goal images instead of using the raw images.
and temporal attention can improve the performance of RL
algorithms.
(a) Training
(b) Validation
Fig. 9: Effect of Stacking on performance of IPG-HER algorithm for
KukaDiverseObjectEnv. It is observed that attention is more effec-
tive in improving RL performance with stacked input frames. LSTM is
also found to improve the learning performance with stacking. The best
performance is obtained by combining attention with LSTM and stacking.
Hyper-parameters used are: attn arch= Luong:0, stack size=7,
her strategy=‘future’.
V. CONCLUSION
This paper presents a benchmarking study of some
of the state-of-the-art reinforcement learning algorithms
for two simulated vision-based robotics problems namely,
KukaDiverseObjectEnv and RaceCarZedGymEnv.
In both of these two environments, the observation is avail-
able in the form of RGB images and the action space
is continuous making them suitable for this study. The
algorithms considered for benchmarking include Soft Actor
Critic (SAC), Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO), Inter-
polated Policy Gradients (IPG) and Hindsight Experience
Replay (HER). A number of strategies are suggested to select
intermediate goals required for implementing HER algorithm
on these single-goal problem environments. In addition, it
is shown that the learning performance of RL algorithms
could be enhanced further by applying spatial and temporal
attention. To the best of our knowledge such a benchmarking
study for these two environments are not available in the
literature making it a novel contribution in the ﬁeld. The
future direction would be to implement these algorithms to
multi-goal environments with image inputs, which are now
becoming available recently. Another direction would be to
extend this benchmarking to other robotic problems.
