Workshop track - ICLR 2017
DEEPCLOAK:
MASKING DEEP NEURAL NETWORK
MODELS FOR ROBUSTNESS AGAINST ADVERSARIAL
SAMPLES
Ji Gao1, Beilun Wang1, Zeming Lin1, Weilin Xu1, Yanjun Qi1
1 Department of Computer Science
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22904-4740

ABSTRACT
Recent studies have shown that deep neural networks (DNN) are vulnerable to ad-
versarial samples: maliciously-perturbed samples crafted to yield incorrect model
outputs.
Such attacks can severely undermine DNN systems, particularly in
security-sensitive settings. It was observed that an adversary could easily gen-
erate adversarial samples by making a small perturbation on irrelevant feature
dimensions that are unnecessary for the current classiﬁcation task. To overcome
this problem, we introduce a defensive mechanism called DeepCloak. By identi-
fying and removing unnecessary features in a DNN model, DeepCloak limits the
capacity an attacker can use generating adversarial samples and therefore increase
the robustness against such inputs. Comparing with other defensive approaches,
DeepCloak is easy to implement and computationally efﬁcient. Experimental re-
sults show that DeepCloak can increase the performance of DNN models against
adversarial samples.
1
INTRODUCTION
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved great success in a variety of applications. Classiﬁers
based on DNN models have attained great performance on multiple security-sensitive tasks (Mi-
crosoft Corporation, 2015; Dahl et al., 2013). However, recent studies show that machine learning
classiﬁers are vulnerable to deliberate attacks. Attackers can easily generate a malicious sample by
adding a small perturbation to a normal sample. Then the malicious sample can fool the classiﬁer
and force it to yield a wrong output. Such sample is called an adversarial sample. This paper fo-
cuses on ﬁnding a defensive approach that can make DNN models perform more reliable in the face
of adversarial samples.
Many recent studies focused on adversarial samples, including Szegedy et al. (2013); Papernot et al.
(2015); Goodfellow et al. (2014); Wang et al. (2016); Papernot et al. (2016b;a). Different algorithms
for generating adversarial samples have been invented. Szegedy et al. (2013) proposed an algorithm
to generate adversarial samples using Box L-BFGS method. It also showed that same adversarial
sample could be transferred to fool different DNN classiﬁers. Goodfellow et al. (2014) purposed
fast gradient sign method, which maximizes the consequence of the attack under limited size of
L∞-norm. Papernot et al. (2015) purposed another algorithm that generates adversarial samples fol-
lowing the saliency value. A recent paper Papernot et al. (2016a) proposed a black-box attack, which
ﬁrst approximates the target classiﬁer and then generates adversarial samples to the approximated
model.
Researchers also studied how to defend attacks enforced by adversarial samples. Goodfellow et al.
(2014) showed retraining a new model using adversarial samples can improve the adversarial ro-
bustness of the model. Papernot et al. (2016b) proposed defensive distillation to make the model
less sensible to gradient change. Wang et al. (2016) showed that one cause of adversarial sample is
those redundant features that are unnecessary to classiﬁcation. A perturbation along an unnecessary
feature dimension can easily fool a classiﬁer.
1
arXiv:1702.06763v8  [cs.LG]  17 Apr 2017

Workshop track - ICLR 2017
In this paper, we introduce a new defensive approach for DNN models: DeepCloak. The motivation
of DeepCloak is to increase model robustness by removing unnecessary features. Comparing to
previous defensive approach, DeepCloak has the following beneﬁts: 1. DeepCloak doesn’t need
additional training process. Therefore it is computationally efﬁcient. 2. DeepCloak can be easily
applied to any base DNN models.
In the rest part, Section 2 brieﬂy introduces the background of adversarial samples and its relation-
ship to unnecessary features. Section 3 introduces our defense approach DeepCloak. It removes
unnecessary features in trained DNNs and thus increase the adversarial robustness. In Section 4,
experiment results show that DeepCloak works effectively for a popular DNN model.
2
BACKGROUND
2.1
ADVERSARIAL SAMPLES
For the following analysis, we denote a base DNN classiﬁer as F(·) : Rn →Y, where x ∈Rn
denotes a single sample and Y is the set of output classes.
Adversarial samples are deliberately created samples. We deﬁne of an adversarial sample x′ as:
x′ = x + ∆x, |∆x| < ϵ, x′ ∈X
F(x) ̸= F(x′)
(2.1)
We assume inputs close to each other are similar. For example, in image classiﬁcation, ∆x needs
to be small so that x and x′ are imperceptible to human eyes while the machine classiﬁer F still
classiﬁes x and x′ into two different classes.
2.2
ADVERSARIAL SAMPLES AND UNNECESSARY FEATURES
Wang et al. (2016) show that the effectiveness of adversarial samples is related to extra unnecessary
features extracted by the machine classiﬁer. If a classiﬁer extracts many unnecessary features in the
training process, it will be vulnerable to adversarial attacks.
To solve this problem, we then propose an approach that can reduce the number of unnecessary
features. Presented in Figure 2 of Appendix Section 6.2, the basic motivation is that the distance
between an adversarial sample and its seed example will be small along relevant feature dimensions
and relatively large along the unnecessary dimensions for the current task. Therefore, we propose
to remove unnecessary features for a DNN model by directly modifying its network structure.
3
METHOD: DEEPCLOAK
The basic idea of DeepCloak is to remove unnecessary features that can be used for generating
adversarial samples. To identify which feature is unnecessary, we test pairs of adversarial samples
x′ and its normal seed x, and compare the difference between the extracted features in DNN. Those
features changed rapidly are utilized by the adversary, and thus should be removed to improve the
robustness of the model.
To remove those unnecessary features, we insert a mask layer in a DNN model right before the
linear layer handling classiﬁcation. Th mask layer serves as a selector, which will keep the necessary
features and remove the unnecessary features by setting them to 0. The size of the feature vector is
kept unchanged. The proposed structure is shown in Figure 1.
2

Workshop track - ICLR 2017
Figure 1: A sketch of DeepCloak: A mask layer with weights either 0 or 1 is added right
before the classiﬁcation layers.
The input of the mask layer is the feature vector extracted by previous layers of the DNN model.
The weight of the mask layer is either 0 or 1. An element-wise multiplication is done by the mask
layer. Therefore, the output is either the input feature or 0. We remove the top n% of features with
highest sensitivity to adversarial samples.
The process is summarized in Algorithm 1. X can be a subset of the full training set, so the process
of learning the mask can be fast. No retraining of the model is needed.
Algorithm 1 DeepCloak algorithm
Input: Training set X = {x1, x2 . . . xN}, DNN classiﬁer F(), adversarial power ϵ. g() represents
feature extraction layers of F()
1: Initialize a vector v with all 0.
2: for i = 1, 2, . . . , N do
3:
Generate an adversarial sample x′
i using sample xi with power ϵ.
4:
Forward xi into the network, get the output feature vector g(xi)
5:
Forward x′
i into the network, get the output feature vector g(x′
i)
6:
Add |g(xi) −g(x′
i)| into v.
7: end for
8: Set v’s top m entries to 0 and the rest to 1.
9: Insert the mask layer v into DNN F after the inspected feature layer.
Essentially the sensitivity of are accumulated into the v vector as v = PN
i=1 |g(xi) −g(x′
i)| after
step 7 of Algorithm 1.
4
EXPERIMENTS
4.1
EXPERIMENT SETTING
• Dataset: We choose CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky & Hinton, 2009), an image dataset with 50,000 32x32
training images and 10,000 testing images.
• We choose a Residual network with 164 layers(He et al., 2016) as our target DNN model. The
model is pre-trained and achieves high performance on the corresponding dataset.
• Metric: We generate adversarial samples for every sample in the test set and test all adversarial
samples on each DNN model. The accuracy on the adversarial sample set is reported as “adver-
sarial accuracy” to measure the adversarial robustness of a DNN model.
4.2
EXPERIMENT RESULT
The result of DeepCloak against adversarial samples is displayed in Table 1. DeepCloak can reduce
the effectiveness of such adversarial samples by 10%. The adversarial perturbation is generated
using fast gradient sign method using ϵ = 10 (Appendix Section 6.1).
Nodes masked(%)
Adversarial accuracy
Relative increase
Accuracy
Relative decrease
0%
0.2961
0.00%
0.943
0.00%
1%
0.3923
32.49%
0.9372
-0.62%
2%
0.4234
42.99%
0.9132
-3.16%
3%
0.414
39.82%
0.9093
-3.57%
4%
0.4146
40.02%
0.8954
-5.05%
5%
0.4229
42.82%
0.9
-4.56%
6%
0.4173
40.93%
0.9017
-4.38%
Table 1: The result of DeepCloak on Res-net against adversarial attacks. There are totally
256 nodes in the feature output layer.
Table 1 also indicates that only a small percentage of features are important for adversarial samples.
In the table, masking 1% of features can increase the performance by 10% in the adversarial setting.
Therefore, we only need to remove a small percent of features to improve the adversarial robustness
greatly, and the model still achieves high accuracy on normal test samples.
3

Workshop track - ICLR 2017
5
CONCLUSION
In this study, we present DeepCloak, a simple and cost-efﬁcient strategy to reduce the effectiveness
of adversarial samples on DNN classiﬁers. Experiments shows that DeepCloak can increase model
performance in the adversarial setting. In the future, we will explore more approaches that can
reduce the number of feature dimensions to increase the adversarial robustness.
