Recommender System Based on Algorithm of Bicluster 
Analysis RecBi 
Dmitry Ignatov2, Jonas Poelmans1, Vasily Zaharchuk1,2 
 
1K.U.Leuven, Faculty of Business and Economics, Naamsestraat 69,  
3000 Leuven, Belgium  
5National Research University Higher School of Economics (HSE), Pokrovskiy boulvard 11  
101000 Moscow, Russia 

 
Abstract. In this paper we propose two new algorithms based on biclustering 
analysis, which can be used at the basis of a recommender system for 
educational orientation of Russian School graduates. The first algorithm was 
designed to help students make a choice between different university faculties 
when some of their preferences are known. The second algorithm was 
developed for the special situation when nothing is known about their 
preferences. The final version of this recommender system will be used by 
Higher School of Economics. 
Keywords: biclustering, recommender system, educational orientation 
1   Introduction 
Since the introduction of the so called Common State Exam in high schools of the 
Russian Federation, graduates received permission to apply to enter multiple 
universities or faculties of the same university whereas in the past they were only 
allowed to apply to one institution. Students are confronted with an ever increasing 
complexity of the educational landscape and for this purpose we developed a 
recommender system to guide them in their search. Students can indicate one or more 
faculties where they would like to study and our recommender system will make 
suggestions on alternative institutions in which they might also be interested. The 
recommender system will also use the browsing and searching history of the 
candidate student to efficiently suggest relevant universities, faculties, and 
educational directions.  
Currently on the Internet many websites make use of recommender systems, for 
example, Amazon recommends books in which the client might be interested based 
on previous items which were viewed by the user. Other examples include the 
websites http://facebook.com/ and http://twitter.com/ and for Russian companies, the 
websites http://imhonet.ru/ and http://www.ozon.ru/. 
A lot of techniques have been developed for recommender systems and the main 
principles of these algorithms are described in [5]. We can distinguish between item-

based and user-based recommender systems. In item-based recommendation relevant 
items are presented based on their similarity to items previously accessed or bought 
by the user. In user-based recommendation users with a similar profile to the current 
user are gathered and based on the items they accessed or bought relevant suggestions 
are made. These systems use different kinds of similarity measures, such as Pearson’s 
correlation, Euclidean distance, Jacquard coefficient, and Manhattan distance. 
One of the most recent innovations in recommender system research is applying 
methods based on biclustering. In [1-5] a wide range of biclustering applications has 
been described including market research, near-duplicate web-document detection, 
bioinformatics etc. Biclustering is an unsupervised learning method similar to Formal 
Concept Analysis (FCA) [7, 8, 9].   
Comparing to traditional clustering methods biclustering is not a blackbox 
technique. Comprehensibility is one of its main advantages, i.e. it is possible to 
understand why objects ended up in the same cluster. For example you might ask why 
a cucumber and a pair of boots are assigned to the same cluster. With biclustering it 
can easily be revealed that they are similar because they have the same color and skin 
surface. 
This lack of comprehensibility of traditional clustering techniques may cause 
serious problems in large data mining projects. To cope with these issues researchers 
are increasingly focusing on human-centered techniques including direct clustering 
(John Hartigan’s work [6]) and FCA [10]. In this paper we chose to use biclustering 
instead of the more famous technique FCA because of the scalability issues 
encountered with FCA. The large number of extracted concepts quickly results in an 
unreadable lattice. 
2 Algorithms 
We will use the general biclustering definition, which was given in [1, 3]. Let A be 
a matrix of size (n × m), where m represents the dimensionality of the set of objects 
and n represents the dimensionality of the set of attributes. Then X = {x1, x2, …, xn} is 
a set of objects and Y = {y1,y2,…,ym} is a set of attributes. If I  X and J  Y, then AIJ 
is a submatrix of matrix A. AIY = (I, Y) is a cluster of objects of matrix A and AXJ = (X, 
J) is a cluster of attributes of matrix A. AIJ = (I, J) is a bicluster of matrix A. Its objects 
share similar attributes and its attributes give a description of the objects in the 
cluster. 
There are different formal definitions of a bicluster available for several specific 
cases, however these are not considered in this paper.  
2.1 Algorithm variant RecBi1 
RecBi1 is based on the algorithm of Ignatov D.I., which was described in [4]. This 
algorithm takes as input two contexts and produces a list of recommendations as 
output. 

Context 1: Formal context K = (S, A, I), where S is a list of all faculties of Russian 
universities, A is a list of faculty attributes, I is a binary relation, that shows that 
faculty s from S has an attribute a from A. 
Context 2: Multi-valued context containing the history of the usage of the system 
Kw = (U, A, W, J), where U is a list of users, A is a list of faculty attributes, W is a list 
of weights, that shows how many times u from U has looked at and considered a from 
A as an interesting item, J is a ternary relation between u, a, and  w. 
 
RecBi1 
Input: Formal context of faculties K = (S, A, I),  
Multi-valued context containing history of usage Kw = (U, A, W, J), 
Visits vector V=(V1,…,V|U|), 
U0 is a target user, N is a number of recommendations. 
Output: Rec is a list of recommendations 
1. (U0, si) // initial couple 
2. For si in S ≠ Ø //si' are attributes of si 
 
 
CandidateS(cs)  (si, sj'  si') 
3. For csi in cs 
kc[cs] = 
 
4. kc = dec_sort(kc) 
5. Rec = Top(N, kc) 
Return Rec 
 
2.2 Algorithm variant RecBi2 
The second algorithm variant consists of two parts: Recbi2.1 and RecBi2.2. 
RecBi2.1 is used with so called cold start, which means that there is no previous 
usage history available. RecBi2.2 is used when the user is using this system not for 
the first time. 
RecBi2.1 takes the same contexts as input as RecBi1 and outputs a list of 
recommendations. But in the middle of the algorithm it forms a new formal context. 
Context 3: Formal context of user preferences Klp = (U, S, Z), where U is a list of 
users, S is a list of faculties, and Z is a binary preference relation between u from U 
and s from S. 
 
RecBi2.1 
Input: Formal context of faculties K = (S, A, I),  
Multi-valued context containing history of usage Kw = (U, A, W, J), 
Visits vector V=(V1,…,V|U|), 
U0 is a target user, N is a number of recommended items, lmin is a minimal index of 

interestingness. 
Output: Rec is a non-ranked list 
1. Kl = Kw·KT = (U, S, L, Y) //multiplication of multi-valued contexts as a matrix  
2. Z = Ø ; Kpl = (U, S, Z  U × S) 
3. For u in U 
 
For s in S 
 
 
If scu≥lmin then Z=(s, u)Z //reduction to formal context 
4. (U0, s) //s' is a set of all visitors of s 
5. For u in s' 
Sc=u' 
6. For sc in Sc 
V(sc)=|sc'∩S| 
7. v = dec_sort(v) 
8. Rec = Top(N,v) 
Return Rec 
 
RecBi2.2 works in a similar way as RecBi2.1, but its output is a ranked list of 
search results based on user feedback.  
 
3 Conclusion 
 
In this paper we presented two biclustering-based algorithms which will be used at 
the basis of recommender system which will guide high school students in their 
search for an educational institution. The main contribution of this paper is a 
successful application of biclustering methods to the educational domain. In the future 
we will operationalise this system at the Higher School of Economics.
