1
Fiduciary Responsibility: Facilitating Public Trust in
Automated Decision Making
Shannon B. Harper and Eric S. Weber
Abstract—Automated decision-making systems are being in-
creasingly deployed and affect the public in a multitude of
positive and negative ways. Governmental and private institutions
use these systems to process information according to certain
human-devised rules in order to address social problems or or-
ganizational challenges. Both research and real-world experience
indicate that the public lacks trust in automated decision-making
systems and the institutions that deploy them. The recreancy
theorem argues that the public is more likely to trust and
support decisions made or inﬂuenced by automated decision-
making systems if the institutions that administer them meet
their ﬁduciary responsibility. However, often the public is never
informed of how these systems operate and resultant institutional
decisions are made. A “black box” effect of automated decision-
making systems reduces the public’s perceptions of integrity
and trustworthiness. Consequently, the institutions administering
these systems are less able to assess whether the decisions are
just. The result is that the public loses the capacity to identify,
challenge, and rectify unfairness or the costs associated with the
loss of public goods or beneﬁts.
The current position paper deﬁnes and explains the role of
ﬁduciary responsibility within an automated decision-making
system. We formulate an automated decision-making system as
a data science lifecycle (DSL) and examine the implications of
ﬁduciary responsibility within the context of the DSL. Fiduciary
responsibility within DSLs provides a methodology for addressing
the public’s lack of trust in automated decision-making systems
and the institutions that employ them to make decisions affecting
the public. We posit that ﬁduciary responsibility manifests in sev-
eral contexts of a DSL, each of which requires its own mitigation
of sources of mistrust. To instantiate ﬁduciary responsibility, a
Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD) predictive policing case
study is examined. We examine the development and deployment
by the LAPD of predictive policing technology and identify
several ways in which the LAPD failed to meet its ﬁduciary
responsibility.
Index Terms—trust, artiﬁcial intelligence, automated decision
making, recreancy theorem, ﬁduciary responsibility
I. INTRODUCTION
Automated decision-making systems are being rapidly de-
ployed in the United States and internationally and affect
the public in a multitude of positive and negative ways.
Private and governmental institutions (i.e. societal institu-
tions) use these systems to process information according
to certain human-devised rules in order to address social
problems or organizational challenges. These systems are often
created using mathematical formulas or algorithms that are
processed through computers to ﬁnd commonalities among
large datasets. For example, police departments have designed
(with the assistance of data scientists) predictive policing
algorithms to analyze massive amounts of pre-existing crime
data to identify communities that have a high risk of crime; or
past arrests or victimization data to identify individuals/groups
who are likely to commit a crime or become a victim.
Some research suggests that the public lacks trust in au-
tomated decision-making systems and the institutions that
deploy them [1], [2]. The recreancy theorem [3] argues that
individuals are more likely to trust and support decisions in-
ﬂuenced by automated decision-making systems if the institu-
tions that administer them behave with integrity (i.e. ﬁduciary
responsibility) and competency. However, often, the public is
never informed of how these systems operate and resultant
institutional decisions are made. A “black box” effect re-
duces the public’s perceptions of automated decision systems’
integrity and trustworthiness. Consequently, the institutions
administering these systems are less able to assess whether the
decisions suggested are just; and the public loses the capacity
to identify and challenge unfairness, or the costs associated
with the loss of public goods or beneﬁts.
The current position paper examines ﬁduciary responsibility
[1], [3] within the context of a data science lifecycle (DSL).
There are many DSLs that affect individuals and the public
at large, thus requiring institutional ﬁduciary responsibility.
Examples of these DSLs include predictive policing [4], [5],
[6], application processing (e.g. loans, school admissions, etc),
autonomous vehicles [7] and robotics [8], and government
network surveillance and national security [1]. DSLs provide
a holistic framework for describing processes and attributes of
automated decision-making systems. A DSL has three layers:
a (1) pre-processing layer, a (2) model building layer, and
a (3) post-processing layer (see Subsection II-A). Drawing
from the recreancy theorem in quantifying the public’s trust in
automated decision-making systems, the current paper focuses
on ﬁduciary responsibility within the third layer of the DSL.
There is already a signiﬁcant body of work to substantiate
ﬁduciary responsibility within the early layers of DSLs (see
Subsection II-C). Our contribution is two-fold: (i) to analyze
the notion of ﬁduciary responsibility within the third layer of
a DSL, and (ii) assert that reducing the black box effect in
that layer is necessary for institutions to meet their ﬁduciary
responsibility (see Section III). We discuss the role of ﬁduciary
responsibility within DSLs, which provides a methodology for
addressing the public’s lack of trust in automated systems
and the institutions that employ them to make decisions
affecting the public (see Section III-C). We posit that ﬁduciary
responsibility appears in several contexts of a DSL, each
of which requires its own mitigation of sources of mistrust.
To instantiate our view of ﬁduciary responsibility within a
DSL, a Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD) predictive
policing case study is examined (see Section IV). We examine
arXiv:2301.10001v1  [cs.CY]  6 Jan 2023

2
the development and deployment by the LAPD of predictive
policing technology and identify several ways in which the
LAPD failed to meet its ﬁduciary responsibility. We further
discuss actions and mechanisms which the LAPD could have
utilized in an effort to meet its ﬁduciary responsibility.
The current position paper is situated in the relevant soci-
ological literature concerning public trust in technological in-
novations. It provides a novel and potentially impactful frame-
work to address and facilitate fairness, accountability, and
transparency in automated decision-making systems, which
spans the DSL workﬂow. Our analysis has a speciﬁc focus
on building trust in the post-processing layer/stages. We also
build on prior work to demonstrate how bias can manifest in
the data acquisition, model building, and post-processing DSL
layers/stages, requiring distinct mitigation strategies.
A. Important Terminology
We will be using several phrases to describe, more or less,
the same phenomenon that affects the public. These phrases
are: (1) automated decision-making systems, (2) artiﬁcial intel-
ligence (AI), and (3) data science lifecycles. We will be using
them interchangeably, dependent upon context, though we
acknowledge that they are not identical. “Automated decision-
making systems” is a common phrase used in sociology
literature [9], [10], [11], [12], [13] (but not exclusively [14])
and refers to institutional implementation of a mechanism–
often without a human-in-the-loop–for making a decision and
subsequently deploying an action that has an appreciable effect
upon an individual or community. From our view, this is
the best description of the systems we consider here when
viewed from the perspective of the public or stakeholders.
As we will describe in Section III, when the DSL occurs
within a black box from the public’s perspective, it is acting as
an automated decision-making system. Artiﬁcial intelligence,
for our purposes, is a methodology that (in part) mechanizes
the automated decision-making system or appears as a stage
within a DSL. As such, the AI moniker is narrower in scope
than the overall pipeline that we have in mind for examining
ﬁduciary responsibility. However, as it is very common in the
literature, we still use it, particularly when we are referring
to the work of other researchers. As emphasized in [15], AI
also often operates within a black box from the perspective
of the public. Finally, we use the phrase “data science life-
cycle.” “Data science” refers to methods and algorithms that
interact with data, typically through acquisition, management,
analysis, modeling, and reasoning [16], [17], [18]. As such,
it encompasses more than statistics or data mining [19]. The
term “lifecycle”, or “pipeline”, is becoming more common in
the literature [20], [21], [22], [23], [24], [25], [26], [16]. We
describe our usage of the phrase in Section III. To emphasize
the point here, DSL is meant to be an encompassing term
that includes both AI and automated decision-making systems.
Ultimately, using the notion of ﬁduciary responsibility, we will
demonstrate that to facilitate public trust in these systems,
much of the DSL should operate in view of stakeholders.
II. CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK: FIDUCIARY
RESPONSIBILITY
A. The Recreancy Theorem and Fiduciary Responsibility
As conceptualized by Sapp et al. [3], the recreancy theorem
argues that the public’s trust in public and private societal
institutions is explained by their perceptions of the institution’s
competence (i.e. skill, ability, experience), and their conﬁdence
that the institution will behave with integrity (i.e. honesty,
ethical standards), also known as ﬁduciary responsibility [27].
Benevolence is a third central component of public trust,
which involves the perceived extent to which the institution
is concerned about citizens’ welfare. Multiple scholars have
argued that when societal institutions (with a wide spectrum
of roles and responsibilities) fail to build trust among the
populations they serve (i.e. reﬂect recreancy), society’s ability
to function is detrimentally effected [28], [27], [29], [1]. Some
have argued that trustworthiness rather than trust signiﬁes
public opinions of societal institutions’ behaviors. [30], [31],
[1].
Sapp et al. [1] (see also [27]) deﬁne trustworthiness as insti-
tutional behaviors that give citizens reason to have conﬁdence
in their performance. Interpersonal trust is embedded in the
recreancy theorem wherein there is a perceived connection
between a societal institution and individuals in the popula-
tion they serve [1]. When the public perceives an institution
as meeting their expectations of competent, honorable, and
benevolent performance, interpersonal trust between the two
is established [32], [33], [34], [35], and recent research afﬁrms
this contention [36], [31], [37], [1]. Such perceptions inﬂuence
whether the public trusts and supports technological innova-
tions (such as automated decision-making systems) proposed
or administered by these institutions [32], [33], [38], [39], [40].
Additionally, recent research reveals that the public is more
likely to trust social institutions when their newly administered
AI does not negatively affect social justice–i.e. protects the
interests of vulnerable/marginalized populations [41], [37], [1],
[42].
The degree to which the public trusts institutions in their
administration of automated decision-making systems often
inﬂuences whether those systems are abandoned or used long-
term [3], [1]. Fiduciary responsibility [1] is an integral tenet
of the recreancy theorem and refers to public perceptions
of the integrity demonstrated by societal institutions, which
inﬂuences individuals’ trust in and support for automated
decision-making systems administered by those institutions.
In the current paper, we speciﬁcally examine ﬁduciary re-
sponsibility in societal institutions’ development and ad-
ministration of automated decision-making systems because
embedded processes of data collection, data modeling, and
prediction output inﬂuence whether the public will perceive
those institutions as having integrity. Following automated
predictions, some action typically occurs. For example, in a
system that processes loan applications, the system decides
whether to approve a loan application after making a pre-
diction on whether an applicant will likely repay the loan.
The prediction, and subsequent decision, is based on a data
collection method and a model developed by the designer of

3
the system. Such automated decision-making systems are part
of a larger group of data driven processes that are often called
DSLs or sometimes, ”data science pipelines”. Societal insti-
tutions that administer algorithm-driven automated decision-
making systems with honor–e.g. concern for and attention
toward minimizing bias/racism and privacy infringement–are
more likely to be trusted by the public [1]. We will show
that automated decision-making systems that operate within
a “black box” (where data scientists and institutional staff
make system development and administration decisions “in the
dark”) absent public technological knowledge, informational
awareness, and scrutiny, hinders an institution’s efforts to meet
ﬁduciary responsibility, and consequently establish trust.
B. Fiduciary Responsibility and Public Trust in Technical
Innovations
The recreancy theorem, as applied speciﬁcally to technical
innovations, delineates three dimensions of public acceptance
of technical innovations. As stated in [1], the recreancy theo-
rem:
complements technology adoption models in that it
focuses upon public assessments of innovations as
they are managed by societal institutions, thereby
providing conceptual congruity between technology
adoption and public assessments of institutional
competency and integrity.
To that end, [3], [43] argue that the public is more likely to
trust and accept the implementation and use of technologies
that pose a risk to their welfare or interests provided they meet
the following requirements. First, they (the technologies and/or
institutions deploying those technologies) must possess tech-
nical competency, meaning that they must have the capability
to perform the analysis and/or actions required for the intended
purpose of the technologies. Second, they must have a public
beneﬁt, meaning that these technologies should improve upon
a speciﬁc problem of public concern upon deployment. And
third, they must meet ﬁduciary responsibility, meaning that
the algorithms are designed and employed with integrity, and
are in fact performing in the way that they are intended,
without disparate impacts or misuse by agents.
Each of these dimensions warrants investigation with re-
spect to the public’s trust in AI deployment in particular.
We describe in Subsection II-C prior works that have related
themes, especially methods for formalizing, analyzing, and
quantifying technical competency. As such, we will not ad-
dress that dimension here, nor will we consider the public
beneﬁt aspect of the recreancy theorem. We will focus on
ﬁduciary responsibility, building upon recent research ﬁndings
that ﬁduciary responsibility is of particular importance among
the public, especially for the protection of vulnerable popu-
lations. Scholarship suggests that institutional administration
of technological innovations raises multiple concerns speciﬁc
to integrity, including invasion of privacy, loss of personal
health data, and unfair monitoring or targeting of particular
individuals or groups, which may sometimes involve racial
bias [44], [45], [46], [47], [48], [1].
Further, [1] discusses a conceptual understanding of public
opinions of network surveillance and empirically documents
public demand for network surveillance that fosters goals of
social justice more so than goals of self-interest. The ﬁndings
are based on a nationwide survey of adults concerning govern-
ments’ use of network surveillance. Additionally, the utiliza-
tion of a technological innovation is often perceived as socially
just when it protects the rights of marginalized/vulnerable
populations such as people of color, women, and LGBTQ+
individuals [1].
The recreancy theorem asserts that the public’s acceptance
of technical innovations depends on the public’s perception
that institutions fulﬁll ﬁduciary responsibility while deploying
those technologies. Therefore, it is incumbent upon institutions
to ensure that the public is conﬁdent that ﬁduciary respon-
sibility is met by the technologies in use. By utilizing the
formalism of a DSL, we will argue that this can best be
done through transparency at multiple stages of the lifecycle,
especially those stages that occur in the third layer identiﬁed
as interpretation and communication (see Figures 1 and 2).
C. Related Work
Public trust in automated decision making systems or arti-
ﬁcial intelligence is, prima facie, both important to establish
and difﬁcult to formalize. For example, scholars [49], [50],
[51] have put forward competing formal deﬁnitions of trust,
either interpersonal or institutional, and these deﬁnitions have
various dimensions. Several high proﬁle institutions, [52], [53]
just to name a few, acknowledge the importance of establishing
trust in AI while using the term in a colloquial sense. Early
efforts to formalize trust in various forms of digital interactions
appear in [54], [55].
Recent work has endeavored to describe trust in AI in sev-
eral different ways on a technical basis. Several authors have
posited a formal deﬁnition of trust in AI by drawing on prior
work in formalizing interpersonal and institutional trust [56],
[57]. Other authors have proposed methods for quantifying, or
establishing, trust through established legal or public policy
structures [58], [15]. Still, others have distinguished between
trust in AI versus trustworthy AI [59]. There are multiple ways
in which our use of the recreancy theorem in general, and
ﬁduciary responsibility in particular, in the context of public
trust in AI are related to these other works. We describe those
relations here.
It is well understood that public trust in AI has multi-
ple dimensions. The three facets of the recreancy theorem–
competency, beneﬁt, and ﬁduciary responsibility–are reﬂected
in others’ investigations into the question of how AI can
be trustworthy. Indeed, [56] ﬁnds similar dimensions as the
recreancy theorem:
To investigate whether a global agreement on these
questions is emerging, we mapped and analyzed the
current corpus of principles and guidelines on ethical
AI. Our results reveal a global convergence emerging
around ﬁve ethical principles (transparency, justice
and fairness, non-maleﬁcence, responsibility and pri-
vacy), with substantive divergence in relation to how
these principles are interpreted.

4
Toreini et al. [57] describe trust in AI as distinct from trustwor-
thy ML by utilizing the ABI framework–Ability, Benevolence,
and Integrity–posited by [60] to model organizational trust. We
note that Mayer’s ABI framework and the recreancy theorem
run parallel to each other in their dimensions, while Toreini
and colleagues’ notion of trustworthy as a part of trust reﬂect
the technical competency of the recreancy theorem. This is
borne out by several related notions such as trustworthy AI
and human-AI trust.
In general, trustworthy AI refers to the competence of
the AI algorithm, with competence deﬁned in terms of a
contract. This is precisely how Jacovi et. al. [59] deﬁne the
notion: “an AI model is trustworthy to some contract if it is
capable of maintaining this contract.” Similarly, [61] describes
trust facilitated through a commitment (i.e. a contract). This
commitment also involves expectations by the trustor about
the competence and willingness of the trustee. Knowles et.
al. [15] developed a foundation for trust in AI through a
transparent and understandable regulatory system. They argue
that a regulatory system can potentially bridge the gap between
trustworthy and trust. Such a regulatory system can be a
mechanism for extending the public’s trust from acceptance
that a particular AI meets the required technical competence
to meeting the required ﬁduciary responsibility as well.
Jacovi et. al. [59] further propose a formal deﬁnition of
human-AI trust via adapting the sociological deﬁnition of
interpersonal trust. The deﬁnition has several dimensions,
including trustworthiness of the algorithm and warranted trust
possessed by the human who is at risk of the AI’s actions.
They posit that an algorithm is trustworthy if it can uphold a
contract, and a human possesses warranted trust of AI if the
human has reason to accurately anticipate the impact of the
AI’s decisions. The notion of trustworthy put forth in [59] need
not require an individual to understand the inner-workings of
the algorithm.
Others have argued for facilitating public trust in AI through
an understanding of the workings of the algorithms, either
by individuals that are subject to AI or by experts who can
vouch for the competency of the algorithms. A large body of
literature discusses Explainable AI (XAI) as one method for
ensuring trust between users and AI [62], [63]. Documentation,
such as AI factsheets [58], [64] (for example the European
requirements for factsheets [53]) or declarations of conformity
[65], is a potential way to build public trust by facilitating
auditing of AI. Both of these mechanisms are designed to
meet the perception of the algorithms’ technical competency
among the public, and consequently establish trust.
Our discussion here concerns (predominantly) the public’s
trust in technological innovations as stakeholders within the
environment that the innovation is deployed. As such, the
recreancy theorem is one of multiple technology adoption
models (TAM). A TAM that centers on user acceptance was
introduced by Davis [66], [67]. In our analysis, the users
are the institutions deploying the technology, and thus the
recreancy theorem is the relevant model for understanding
public acceptance rather than user acceptance.
III. PUBLIC TRUST IN DATA SCIENCE LIFECYCLES
We seek to formalize the notion of ﬁduciary responsibility
within a DSL as a way to facilitate public trust in systems
that utilize AI. We will adapt the formal description of a
DSL as discussed in [16], which decomposes a DSL into
three layers and each layer into multiple stages. We will
argue that formalizing a common speciﬁcation of a DSL
can facilitate multiple mechanisms through which to establish
public trust. Finally, we will show how the requirements of
ﬁduciary responsibility are embedded within a DSL, and how
the common speciﬁcation of a DSL can facilitate the meeting
of those requirements by organizations and institutions that
design and deploy them.
A. DSL Formalism
Data driven processes follow varied forms and take on
many functions, but recent work has been made to accurately
describe these processes in ways that facilitate our discussion
of ﬁduciary responsibility. A recent study [16] was conducted
that comprehensively described and classiﬁed DSLs. The study
found that some DSLs have very few stages, as few as 4 or 5,
while others have as many as 11 (as suggested by [26]). Many
of the publicly available DSLs identiﬁed in the study were
used only for academic or competitive (e.g. Kaggle) purposes
and were not in fact deployed in a real-world environment.
These DSLs typically lacked the stages that form our focus,
i.e. those that occur after the prediction stage within the DSL.
Following the speciﬁcation from [16], a DSL has three
layers: a pre-processing layer, a modeling building layer, and
a post-processing layer. The pre-processing layer consists of
three stages: data acquisition, data preparation, and data stor-
age. The model building layer consists of ﬁve stages: feature
engineering, modeling, training, evaluation, and prediction.
Finally, the post-processing layer consists of interpretation,
communication, and deployment. The DSLs that we consider
should explicitly have all of the 11 stages laid out in [26],
[16] (see Subsection III-C), but our focus will be on the latter
stages within the overall process. We therefore depict the DSL
(in a reduced form from [16]) for our purposes in Figures 1
and 2.
The stages within the post-processing layer are described as
follows in [16]:
Interpret: The prediction result might not be enough
to make a decision. We often need...post-processing
to translate predictions into knowledge.
Communicate: ...we might need to communicate
with the involved parties (e.g. devices, persons,
systems) to share and accumulate information.
Deploy: The built DS solution is installed in its
problem domain to serve the application...
These descriptions of the stages within the post-processing
layer, as well as those of the stages in the other layers,
refer largely to DSLs that are fully automated. However,
in the contexts that we are considering–predictive policing,
application processing, etc.–there often is a human-in-the-loop
(as described in the Case Study presented in Section IV-A).

5
Interpret
Communicate
Deploy
Data
Model &
Predict
Pre-processing Layer   Model Building Layer
Post-Processing Layer
Fig. 1. A reduced model of a DSL. The pre-processing and model building layers operate within a black box from the perspective of the constituent/stakeholder,
while the post-processing layer operates openly from the perspective of the constituent/stakeholder.
Interpret
Communicate
Deploy
Data
Model &
Predict
Pre-processing Layer   Model Building Layer
Post-Processing Layer
Fig. 2. A reduced model of a DSL. Here, all three layers operate within a black box from the perspective of the constituent/stakeholder, while the post-processing
layer operates openly from the perspective of the agents utilizing the DSL.
Speciﬁc to the LAPD case study we describe in Section IV,
hot spots predictive policing uses an algorithm in the pre-
processing layer that attempts to predict high crime areas.
Next, police personnel interpret the prediction to deploy crime-
reducing resources, e.g. an increased number of foot-patrols in
that area. As a result, our view of the post-processing layer is
distinct from, though still related to, the view in [16]. For our
purposes, we describe the stages of the post-processing layer
as follows.
Interpret: The prediction requires evaluation by an
agent in order to make a decision or recommen-
dation. The evaluation may involve the context in
which the prediction occurs and/or additional infor-
mation that is not available to the model building
layer of the DSL. Here, the agent can be a cyber or
physical system, but is likely to be human.
Communicate: The agent(s) that evaluate the pre-
diction communicate the interpretation to other
agents for the purposes of making a decision. These
other agents can also be cyber, physical, or human.
Deploy: Based on the prediction and interpretation,
a decision is made. Subsequently, an action is taken;
usually this action is taken in the physical world and
may involve the deployment of resources.
Returning to our predictive policing example, we note
that the public perceives all layers and stages of the DSL
occurring within a black box–this occurred speciﬁcally in the
implementation by the LAPD, as we document in Section IV.
Most notably, the post-processing layer, which operates with
humans-in-the-loop, is obscured from public input, scrutiny,
or accountability.
B. Formalizing DSLs to Facilitate Public Trust
There are multiple mechanisms for facilitating public trust
in AI through formalizing DSLs. We will see shortly how
the public’s perception of institutions’ ﬁduciary responsibility
can be promoted by following a formal DSL framework.
Independent of our thesis regarding ﬁduciary responsibility,
the DSL framework can assist in establishing public trust in
the technologies that are deployed.
Establishing a common DSL format can facilitate consistent
development and maintenance, as well as the production of
useful DSL documentation when considered as a software
engineering endeavor [16]. In turn, the common DSL format
and concomitant documentation can facilitate trust in AI-as-
an-institution, as argued in [15]. The DSL framework provides
multiple speciﬁcations that can be utilized for developing
regulatory infrastructure, contract formation, fact sheets, and
other “structural assurances” for facilitating the trustworthiness
of AI deployment.
In addition, a common DSL format can also reduce the
black box effect, akin to the assertion by [68], through
providing a description of the internal workings of the black
box in order to rectify the knowledge gap. The common DSL
format decomposes a larger black box into smaller black
boxes (as depicted in Figures 1 and 2), some of which can
be open to the public, and others which can be subject to
expert auditing through declarations of conformity. While
the public may not understand the black boxes, or even the
DSL framework proposed in [16], the commonality can help
the public conceptualize the documentation requirements and
accountability to which DSLs are subject.
We have mentioned just a few elementary ways in which
a formal DSL framework can facilitate public trust in AI. We
have not fully explored this consideration and there is much
more work to do in this regard, but such work is outside the
scope of the present paper. Scholars such as Sapp et al. [1]
have used structural equation modeling to quantify public trust,
ﬁnding that considerations of technical efﬁcacy and social
justice are signiﬁcantly and equally associated with public
trust in and support for government-administered network
surveillance (see also [43]).

6
C. Fiduciary Responsibility within Data Science Lifecycles
We argue that meeting ﬁduciary responsibility within a DSL
requires the post-processing layer to operate in an open box
capacity. The purpose of opening the post-processing layer is
to provide stakeholders a context for understanding decisions
made, which may build public trust in the action(s) being
deployed/implemented. An additional potential beneﬁt of the
open box operation is that the public has a means to hold
institutions accountable for the decisions made by DSLs. We
emphasize here that the open box operation is a necessary but
not sufﬁcient condition for meeting ﬁduciary responsibility.
As described in [16], some DSLs can be fully automated,
such as bank loan application processing systems. In such a
fully automated system, from the perspective of the person
subject to the decision of that system, it operates entirely
within a black box (as depicted in Figure 2). Naturally, the per-
son is likely not provided any information or context regarding
the decision and therefore cannot understand the decision
process. Absent other mechanisms–such as documentation or
auditing by trusted experts–ﬁduciary responsibility cannot be
met in this regime, which in turn precludes the establishment
of trust by those persons subject to the DSL.
We consider here DSLs that are not fully automated, but
involve humans-in-the-loop, particularly those DSLs in which
humans appear in the post-processing layer. For example,
we re-imagine the loan application processing DSL in which
the prediction of the model is given to a (human) banking
specialist. This person will interpret the prediction, perhaps
utilizing additional information not available to the model or
placing the prediction within a larger context. The specialist
then informs (communicates) the applicant of the decision, at
which time an action (deployment) is taken, e.g. the loan is
fulﬁlled, or the application is closed.
We explore the multiple facets of ﬁduciary responsibility
with the DSLs we have just described, focusing on the instan-
tiation of ﬁduciary responsibility within the post-processing
layer. Before doing so, however, we want to acknowledge that
ﬁduciary responsibility manifests within all layers and stages
of DSLs. Much work has been done already to substantiate
ﬁduciary responsibility within the pre-processing and model
building layers of DSLs as we described in Subsection II-C,
and yet more work remains.
For the sake of context, we mention several facets of
ﬁduciary responsibility that appear within the early layers of
DSLs, while emphasizing that our comments here are not
exhaustive. At the pre-processing layer, individuals who are
subject to a DSL expect that data associated to them is accurate
and will be kept private. It is likely that informed consent
is required at this stage. Individuals also expect that data
associated to them and others collectively do not contain bias,
or put them at higher risk for adverse decisions or actions.
As part of the modeling building layer, individuals expect that
the model accurately analyzes the data without introducing
spurious effects or amplifying bias [9]. In addition, at the
prediction stage, individuals expect to be able to anticipate the
impact of the model’s prediction [59] and subsequent decision.
Moreover, the individual expects that the DSL is not being
misused or abused by the institution or its agents.
Let us now turn to the several stages within the post-
processing layer. Again, we are considering DSLs for which
these stages are an integral part, since a decision and subse-
quent action are necessary for the public to be affected by
the DSL, independent of whether they are aware of them. Our
examples of DSLs above indeed incorporate these stages in
some form or other.
The ﬁrst stage of the post-processing layer is “Interpret”, by
which we mean an actor interprets the prediction made by the
model. As mentioned previously, this actor could be cyber or
human, though we focus on a human agent here. Fiduciary
responsibility requires the agent to make an interpretation
which is honest, ethical, and just. The interpretation should
reﬂect the institution’s values, mission and goals, as well
as uphold the rights and interests of stakeholders and those
impacted by the institution’s operations. The interpretation
should be understandable to those who are subject to the
decision of the DSL, and, as we shall discuss shortly, amenable
to communication to individuals, stakeholders, auditors, etc.
Interpretations should be well-documented and archived. As
a reﬂection of these criteria, an interpretation serves dual
purposes.
The initial purpose of the interpretation is to provide the
decision-maker with a fuller understanding of the prediction.
For example, from a data science perspective, the prediction
may have an associated conﬁdence level or may indicate the
most relevant features of the input data leading to the predic-
tion. The interpreter can provide context to these additional
pieces of information for the decision-maker: as Dobbe et. al.
argue that “machine learning models should facilitate rather
than replace the critical eye of the human expert” [9, emphasis
in the original].
The subsequent purpose of the interpretation is to provide
other entities with a vested interest in the DSL [69]–such as the
individual (or community) subject to the decisions of the DSL–
with the context or the rationale for the decision. We note that
the context for the decision-maker and that for the individual
are assuredly different, (for example, see [69] which identiﬁes
function roles that inform the nature of an interpretation or
explanation) but likely have much overlap. This is because,
in both cases, ultimately a human will want to have some
understanding of the model’s prediction. An interpretation,
while it need not explain the inner workings of the algorithms
involved, does have the potential to assure individuals that the
algorithms are operating with competency, and is even able to
provide individuals a foundation for harmonizing the decision
with their anticipation of that decision [59].
Proper anticipation of the DSL’s output is a potential foun-
dation for building trust between an individual (or community)
and an institution deploying the DSL [59]. We have previously
described how XAI is one commonly identiﬁed methodology
for establishing this foundation. In our DSL, the interpretation
can be informed by XAI when utilized within the model-
building layer; conversely, a well-formulated interpretation can
counteract the lack of explainability when a model does not
utilize XAI.
We further contend that the interpretation of the DSL

7
output should be driven by values in addition to technical and
explanatory considerations. Value-laden interpretations can ad-
dress epistemological issues related to fairness, accountability,
and transparency. As Dobbe et. al. further argue, questions of
fairness
illuminate the range of places in the machine learn-
ing design process where issues of epistemology
arise: they require justiﬁcation and often value judg-
ment [9, emphasis in the original].
Interpretations, which are value-laden, that are embedded as
a formal stage of the DSL also situate the causes and effects
of the DSL within a broader context of “the human element”,
personalizing both the individual affected by and the institution
deploying the DSL.
Our formalism of DSLs, with “Interpretation” ﬁrmly embed-
ded within the overall process, contextualizes epistemological
questions, such as “Interpretable to whom?”, or “For what
purpose?” as asserted by Kohli et. al. [70]. As we have already
identiﬁed, the interpretation has several potential audiences:
(1) anyone else downstream within the DSL, and (2) those
affected by the DSL’s output. These audiences then proscribe
the purpose(s) of the interpretation: (1) to help actualize the
ultimate goal of the DSL, and (2) to assure stakeholders that
the DSL’s output are properly anticipated.
The penultimate stage of the DSL is “Communicate”, yet
from the viewpoint of ﬁduciary responsibility, communicate is
the most crucial of all stages. Indeed, as the recreancy theorem
measures the public’s perception of the integrity, honesty, and
justness of an institution and its use of DSLs, full and open
communication by the institution is of paramount importance
for meeting its ﬁduciary responsibility. Indeed, communicating
the interpretation of the DSL’s output to affected individuals or
communities actualizes the secondary purpose of the interpre-
tation, thereby establishing a potential foundation for trust. As
observed in our case study on the LAPD’s use of a predictive
policing DSL in Section IV, a lack of communication can lead
to the public not trusting in the institution’s deployment of a
DSL.
Communication opens the black box operation of the DSL
at least to the extent that, if successful, individuals and/or
the public at large can understand the rationale, if not the
mechanism, for the decision and subsequent action. This
opening of the black box is shown in Figure 1, and is premised
on the argument in [15] that
lack of public trust in AI has little to do with people’s
inability to understand how AIs work; rather it is a
response to an awareness of a lack of structural as-
surances of the trustworthiness of the AIs pervading
society.
Hence, we envision a DSL with the early layers still operating
within a black box, but the post-processing layer operating
openly. We argue that this regime of a DSL operation can
greatly advance the institution’s efforts to meet its ﬁduciary
responsibility as well as provide the potential for establishing
“structural assurances of trustworthiness” that the public will
require for accepting the implementation of a DSL.
The content of the communication by the institution that
deploys a DSL consists of multiple aspects. The form of the
communication is likely dependent upon the institution and its
values, the nature of the decision itself, and the affected party
(e.g. whether an individual or a community). We formulate the
communication in part around the rhetorical “Five W’s”. The
institution informs the affected party of (What:) the decision
made and the subsequent action that was/will be taken; (Why:)
the interpretation of the prediction within the larger context of
the DSL and the institution’s mission, the rationale for the
decision based on the model’s prediction, and the justiﬁcation
for the action based on the prediction and the decision; (How:)
what data was used to make the prediction, how the data was
utilized, how the input data as well as the model output were
interpreted, and the values that informed the interpretation of
the model output.
The ﬁnal stage of the DSL, which we have referred to as
“Deploy”, is the point at which an individual (or a community)
is ultimately affected by the DSL. This is not to say that an
individual is not ever affected in prior stages–in fact, this is
a distinct possibility, e.g. lost privacy–but this stage manifests
the ostensible raison d’etre of the DSL. We use deploy to be
consistent with [16], though our usage is distinct. Here, we
think of an institution choosing whether and how to deploy
resources–for example, manpower or ﬁnances; but at a more
basic level, this stage refers to the institution implementing an
action.
Fiduciary responsibility requires an institution and its agents
to employ honest, ethical, and just actions. In the context
of automated decision making, the actions need to be well-
founded in the model, prediction, and interpretation, meaning
that the actions are justiﬁed through accurate models, correct
predictions, and valid interpretations. The DSL formalism
provides a framework for ensuring that ﬁduciary responsibility
is met at each stage of the lifecycle, particularly through
documentation and auditing [15]. In addition, the DSL frame-
work instantiates meeting ﬁduciary responsibility through both
technical [6], [59] and ethical [56], [1] dimensions. We note
that some of the issues associated to technical and ethical
concerns are context dependent.
An institution is required to employ actions that protect
the rights of the affected individuals, particularly those of
vulnerable populations. In the course of doing so, institutions
likely need to document the history of actions that have been
taken, and ensure that the actions are just in speciﬁc and in ag-
gregate. Auditing of the actions must occur by trusted experts.
The DSL framework provides the institution with a systematic
(i.e. system-level) method for identifying issues of ﬁduciary
responsibility, and documenting the methods for addressing
the issues, both during and after implementation of the DSL.
Institutions can use several methods for this documentation as
developed by others. For example, institutions can publish for
public consumption Declarations of Conformity (DoC) [65] or
factsheets [53], giving stakeholders the opportunity to evaluate
an institution’s ﬁduciary responsibility. Likewise, institutions
can utilize contracts [59] for the beneﬁt of stakeholders as
well. This particular aspect of the theory requires additional
work beyond the scope of this article.

8
IV. PREDICTIVE POLICING DSLS: BENEFITS, RISKS, AND
PUBLIC TRUST
Over the past 14+ years, multiple urban police departments
across the United States have sought and utilized algorithm-
driven predictive policing technologies that evaluate massive
volumes of historical crime/arrest data to predict high crime
geographies/places or crime prone individuals, which help
police leadership decide where and how to deploy ofﬁcer
resources. Predictive policing DSLs were pioneered by the
Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD) in the 2000s and
quickly spread to several major cities across the U.S. [71].
There are two forms of predictive policing technology: place-
based and person-based [71]. Place-based predictive policing
is the most extensively used method and leverages pre-existing
crime data to identify places and times with a high probability
of crime. Alternatively, person-based predictive policing looks
for risk variables like previous arrests or victimization trends
to identify individuals or groups who are likely to commit a
crime or be a victim of one.
Proponents of predictive policing technology assert that
beneﬁts of the technology include assisting police in fore-
casting crimes more objectively, precisely, and effectively
than traditional policing methods and investigation techniques
[71], [4]. Predictive policing is intended as an automated
tool to reduce primary reliance on ofﬁcer instincts to forecast
crime [71], thus increasing ofﬁcer safety and the accuracy of
crime prediction. Technology designers claim that they are not
only capable of substantially reducing violent crimes such as
murder, aggravated assault, and robbery, but also of removing
bias from police decision-making [71], [72]. However, claims
that predictive policing reduces crime have been disputed [73],
[4] (see also [74], [75]).
The majority of risks associated with predictive policing
technologies are related to the black box effect described in
Section III. Predictive policing DSLs rely on previous crime
data that are often incomplete due to a large percentage of
crime being unknown or unreported, and/or racially biased
due to the disparate arrests of African American and Hispanic
people when compared to Whites across time [76], [77].
Scholarship has posited that racism and bias are systemically
entrenched in the criminal justice system (CJS), facilitating
the disproportionate mass incarceration of people of color,
and inﬂuence police practices, policies, and behaviors on
the ground [78], [79], [80]. Black, Brown, and low-income
communities have been over-policed historically due in part
to the social acceptance of racism and high crime rates that
are often related to poor structural conditions and a lack of
access to resources associated with systemic inequities in the
CJS and society at large [78]. Considering these arguments, the
methodology through which ofﬁcers collect the data impacting
the pre-processing stage of the DSL may be inﬂuenced by
systemic racism and racial bias in policing; and predictive
policing algorithms (model building layer) rely on such data
to generate place- or person-based predictions in the post-
processing stages of the DSL [79], which can perpetuate
or reinforce historical prejudices in policing practices and
policies [81], [82], [83], [71], [79] [84], [83], [71], [79].
Compounding the severity of such concerns, the manner in
which police develop and administer predictive policing DSLs
often lacks mechanisms to hold departments accountable for
the interpretation of predictions and the decisions made/actions
taken based on those predictions [81], [82], [85], [83], [71],
[86], [79]. In the same vein, algorithmic predictions (DSL
post-processing layer) can inﬂuence how police ofﬁcers view
the neighborhoods they are patrolling, and the ways in which
they perceive individuals’ criminal propensity within those
(primarily Black and Latino) communities [87], [88], which
ultimately affects probable cause for arrest decision-making.
Scholars and activists have also posited that predictive
policing DSLs facilitate increased and unjustiﬁed police stop,
search, and seizure decision-making that can violate the
Fourth Amendment of the U.S. constitution [87], [71]. Privacy
concerns of predictive policing DSLs include eroding public
anonymity through expanding webs of surveillance in the
U.S., and creating networks of personal information that
can be shared across police departments, accessed through
illegal computer hacking or system breaches, or mishandled by
ofﬁcers [89]. Arguably, these outcomes negate any potential
beneﬁts of predictive policing technology [79]. Such risks
have resulted in public (as well as data scientist) protests,
boycotting, and privacy protection activism across the U.S.
where predictive policing technology has been proposed or
used [90], [85], [91], [92], [93].
A. The Black Box Effect: A Case Study of the Los Angeles
Police Department (LAPD)
The LAPD began testing and implementing a person-
based predictive policing DSL known as ”Operation Laser”
(referred to as, LASER–Los Angeles Strategic Extraction and
Restoration) in 2011. LASER identiﬁed repeat offenders, and
produced bulletins with their photos and physical descrip-
tions so law enforcement could ﬁnd/identify those individu-
als to prevent their future criminal activity [86]. Examining
LASER’s operation within the DSL framework described in
this paper, the LASER algorithm utilized criminal history data
to identify individuals most likely to commit a violent crime
as part of the pre-processing layer of the DSL. “Chronic
offenders” were ranked using a point system where factors
like gang membership, number of perpetrated violent crimes,
and interactions with ofﬁcers were algorithmically assessed
within the model building & prediction stage (second DSL
layer) of the DSL. Subsequently, those with higher numbers of
“points” were placed on chronic offender bulletins within the
”interpret” stage of DSL post-processing that were distributed
to ofﬁcers during the DSL post-processing ”communicate”
stage. These bulletins provided law enforcement with the
identifying information necessary to speciﬁcally target (i.e.
approach) those on the list as part of the ”deploy” stage of
the DSL post-processing layer.
Andrew Ferguson, a law professor and nationally renowned
predictive policing expert explained to CBS News [94] that
“the LASER program was designed on the metaphor that
they [the LAPD] were going to, like laser surgery, remove
the tumors, the bad actors from the community...That idea,

9
offensive as it is, was an idea of using some kind of algorithm
to identify risk.” Implementation of LASER led to public
outcry speciﬁc to DSL predictions being used as a legal
veneer for police brutality, mistreatment, and racial proﬁling
against people of color [81], [95], [96]. The LAPD Inspector
General conducted an internal audit of LASER in 2019 (eight
years post-implementation), and found that Latinos/as and
African Americans made up 84% of “active” chronic offend-
ers. The audit revealed numerous inconsistencies (relevant to
the model building and interpret stages of the DSL) where
the LASER algorithm identiﬁed and labeled individuals as
“chronic offenders” [94], [97]. More speciﬁcally, 44% of
labeled “chronic” offenders had never been arrested or only
had one arrest for some type of violent crime, and nearly 10%
had no “quality interactions” with law enforcement [94], [97].
The program was discontinued in 2019 following the audit.
The LAPD also contracted with PredPol in 2011, which
utilized historical property crime data to produce “hot spot”
predictions with a high likelihood of vehicle theft and burglary
[71]. PredPol applies an “earthquake” crime prediction method
which–like earthquakes and aftershocks–smaller crimes lead
to bigger crimes and occur in near proximity to one another
[85], [98], [99]. Like LASER, PredPol was in part intended
to prevent subjective judgments and implicit bias as part of
ofﬁcer deployment decisions [100]. However, activists and
anti-predictive policing community members maintain that the
overwhelming bias of PredPol–i.e. hot spot map predictions
identifying primarily Black and Brown neighborhoods–renders
it unreliable and corrupt, and thus cannot be trusted and
must be entirely dismantled [101], [102], [103]. In relation
to the post-processing layer of the DSL, when police leader-
ship interpret PredPol’s problematic hot spot predictions and
thereafter decide to assign higher or increasing numbers of
ofﬁcers (communicate stage of the DSL) to patrol African
American and Hispanic/Latino/a/x communities (deploy stage
of the DSL), the likelihood of civil rights and civil liberties
violations increases. According to the recreancy theorem [1],
such actions within a black box do not reﬂect ﬁduciary
responsibility, which further helps to explain Los Angeles
residents’ criticisms of, and wariness about, the department
and its use of predictive policing. We envision an idealized
DSL in which a (human) policing/data specialist receives the
output of the model and interprets this output within a broader
context. This interpretation is communicated to someone with
the authority to implement policing strategies who decides how
to utilize the information and then determines the deployment
of resources.
Anti-predictive policing protests, advocacy organization mo-
bilization, and academic criticism began to escalate in 2016,
and 17 groups, including the American Civil Liberties Union
(ACLU) and the NAACP, signed a widely circulated statement
indicating their concerns about the reinforcement of racial bias
associated with predictive policing technologies [81] and the
lack of transparency about development and use of the DSLs
from the institutions that administer them [71]. PredPol was
discontinued by the LAPD in 2020; the department claimed
that this action was taken because of COVID-19 ﬁnancial
constraints [71], [104].
B. Manifesting Public Mistrust in Predictive Policing
Referring back to Section III, depending on the nature of the
predictive policing prediction output, police personnel interpret
(i.e. evaluate) the prediction, communicate the evaluation with
other personnel, and ultimately deploy (i.e. take action) police
resources accordingly. Fiduciary responsibility manifested in
the DSL framework does much to explain public mistrust
of predictive policing as implemented by the LAPD. Public
mistrust was largely associated with the LAPD’s lack of
transparency as the department developed and administered
the DSLs across the pre-processing, data modeling, and post-
processing layers of the DSL (see [71]). The LAPD began
utilizing LASER and PredPol as mechanisms of crime control
in Los Angeles neighborhoods absent disclosures to the public
about the basics, intricacies, development and administration
of, or decision-making associated with, the technologies [86],
which can be explained by the black box effect depicted in
Figure 2 rather than in Figure 1. 1
More speciﬁcally, the minimal information that the LAPD
did share with the public lacked thorough and transparent
details on the multiple layers across the DSLs, such as the
types of data utilized (i.e. pre-processing layer), how the
algorithm(s)/technologies were developed and produced pre-
dictions (i.e. model building layer), and how policing decisions
were made and actions taken based on those predictions
(i.e. post-processing layer). A search of Newsbank’s Access
World News database revealed that news stories about LAPD’s
predictive policing technologies began to show up sporadically
in the media and in LAPD press releases from 2012-2014
(e.g. see [105], [106], [107]) (2-3 years post-implementation),
which may be why protests and activism against the tech-
nologies only began to gain traction around 2016 (5-years
post-implementation). An organization known as, “Stop LAPD
Spying Coalition” requested public records about the LAPD’s
use of LASER in 2017 and 2018 due to concerns about
the unfair LAPD targeting of, and forced interactions with,
Los Angeles residents, and then ﬁled a lawsuit against the
department in 2018 when the information was not provided
[94]. As a result, the LAPD began to release many of the
records to the public, albeit slowly [94].
The public is unlikely to support departments administering
predictive policing technologies when they fail to provide
transparent, thorough, and honest information on their beneﬁts
and risks across the end stages of the DSL. The black box
effect during the post-processing stages of the LAPD’s DSLs
(i.e. decision-making/actions taken) fueled public mistrust spe-
ciﬁc to system predictions providing a covert excuse for racial-
ized enforcement of the law and institutional racism [100],
[79]. Predictive policing DSLs can enable “tech-washing”
where communities and people of color are speciﬁcally,
disproportionately, and (potentially) unjustly targeted with a
fac¸ade of data-driven ethics and objectivity [108]. Through
tech-washing, departments can operate absent sanctions or
responsibility, which can reinforce harmful stereotypes and
systemic injustice and facilitate their perpetuation. In this
1It is important to note that this argument is formulated based on the
authors’ search of media and government press release databases.

10
manner, the LAPD failed to meet its ﬁduciary responsibility
to ensure that the DSL was not misused by police.
C. Facilitating Fiduciary Responsibility: Open-box DSLs
The LAPD’s deployment of LASER and PredPol illus-
trates how a societal institution’s failure to meet ﬁduciary
responsibility [1] in its development and implementation of
DSLs resulted in the public perceiving the department as
lacking integrity–untrustworthy, dishonest, racist, and unjust
toward people and communities of color. Department actions
taken following DSL prediction output in the post-processing
stages–hidden from stakeholders–are suspected to be immoral,
discriminatory, and harmful to communities (e.g. dispropor-
tionate targeting and arrests of people of color, overpolicing
of their communities, and worsening mass incarceration). We
argue that police departments’ development and deployment
of predictive policing DSLs in secret lacks accountability and
has great potential to upset the functioning of society [1]. The
LAPD’s failure to build trust in their implementation of the
predictive policing DSLs resulted in residents losing trust in,
and support for, not only those DSLs but the LAPD overall.
Such outcomes demonstrate the necessity of assessing and
potentially altering the design, deployment, and usage of a
DSL within the pre-processing, model building, and post-
processing layers. Speciﬁcally, these outcomes show that DSLs
must operate within an open-box regime, as we depict in Fig-
ure 1. This regime provides the mechanisms for stakeholders to
be conﬁdent that the institution is meeting its ﬁduciary respon-
sibility through understanding interpretations of model outputs
and thorough communication of the DSL’s ultimate decisions.
Additionally, the open-box regime facilitates stakeholder and
expert auditing of the overall DSL.
Here are some speciﬁc examples of open-box DSL actions
police departments could take as part of the last two stages of
the post-processing layer to enhance ﬁduciary responsibility.
In the Communicate stage for example, police leadership could
provide frequent and descriptive/transparent press releases
and social media posts that indicate the need for predictive
policing, the data being used, how community members will
be affected, process and status of design and implementation,
and methods used to reduce bias. Similarly, departments could
also hold media events or town halls to answer questions from
the press and public, as well as take note of any concerns
that should be considered prior to deploying resources/actions
(i.e., decision-making) in impacted communities (i.e., last
stage of the post-processing layer). In regards to the latter,
police leadership should consider again communicating with
the public about how such concerns were or will be addressed.
Utilizing multiple methods of communication may have a
stronger effect on public perceptions of the department’s
integrity and ﬁduciary responsibility.
As part of the Deploy stage, law enforcement may want
to use a document similar to a contract (or create mandatory
procedural guidelines) that explicates the actions they will take
based on the output/prediction of the predictive policing DSL.
This document could be updated periodically to reﬂect lessons
learned (and subsequently alter or enhance communication
content and strategies) and public feedback received across
the duration of AI-based decision-making and deployment. We
do not provide suggestions here for the Interpret stage of the
DSL post-processing layer because this stage is internal to
the police department and dependent on insider (i.e., police
ofﬁcer/leadership) knowledge.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Facilitating public trust in AI, and those institutions that
deploy them, is imperative for maintaining social cohesion.
The recreancy theorem delineates three dimensions of public
support for technical innovations. In this paper, we considered
the dimension of ﬁduciary responsibility, which is the pub-
lic’s perception that a technology is designed and employed
with integrity and honesty, performs as intended, does not
create disparate impacts to vulnerable populations, and is not
misused by agents. To formalize AI ﬁduciary responsibility,
we described AI within the larger perspective of a DSL.
The DSL framework provides multiple methods to precisely
describe ﬁduciary responsibility of technologies affecting the
public welfare and how institutions can meet their ﬁduciary
responsibility. We investigated the example of the LAPD
not meeting its ﬁduciary responsibility in its deployment of
predictive policing technology.
We envision future work in at least two directions. First, the
description of ﬁduciary responsibility within the DSL frame-
work can be further reﬁned and quantiﬁed. We have introduced
multiple aspects and manifestations of ﬁduciary responsibility
within DSLs, but did not consider system dynamics in our
investigation–this consideration warrants a full, separate anal-
ysis given the complexity of dynamics involving DSLs. In
addition, our work here was only qualitative in nature, and
we did not propose mechanisms for institutions to quantify
whether they have met their ﬁduciary responsibilities. Second,
further development of the DSL framework more broadly can
be utilized in a number of potential ways to facilitate public
trust in AI through documentation, regulatory requirements,
and a technologically-aware public. This, too, warrants a full,
separate analysis from the one we have presented in this work.
The current paper uniquely situated sources/causes of mis-
trust in varying DSL contexts wherein each layer/stage has
processes through which ﬁduciary responsibility can (or can-
not) be addressed. We illustrated the importance (and neces-
sity) of embedding ﬁduciary responsibility across the DSL
workﬂow over time wherein institutions’ decisions and de-
ployment of actions in the post-processing layer can effect the
public in profound and consequential ways.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Shannon B. Harper and Eric S. Weber were supported by
the National Science Foundation and the National Geospatial
Intelligence Agency under award #1830254. Eric S. Weber
was also supported by the National Science Foundation under
award #1934884.

11
