1
Latent Hierarchical Model for Activity Recognition
Ninghang Hu, Gwenn Englebienne, Zhongyu Lou, and Ben Kr¨ose
Abstract—We present a novel hierarchical model for human
activity recognition. In contrast to approaches that successively
recognize actions and activities, our approach jointly models
actions and activities in a uniﬁed framework, and their labels
are simultaneously predicted. The model is embedded with a
latent layer that is able to capture a richer class of contextual
information in both state-state and observation-state pairs. Al-
though loops are present in the model, the model has an overall
linear-chain structure, where the exact inference is tractable.
Therefore, the model is very efﬁcient in both inference and
learning. The parameters of the graphical model are learned
with a Structured Support Vector Machine (Structured-SVM).
A data-driven approach is used to initialize the latent variables;
therefore, no manual labeling for the latent states is required.
The experimental results from using two benchmark datasets
show that our model outperforms the state-of-the-art approach,
and our model is computationally more efﬁcient.
Index Terms—Human activity recognition, RGB-D perception,
Probabilistic Graphical Models, Personal Robots.
I. INTRODUCTION
T
HE use of robots as companions to help people in their
daily life is currently being widely studied. Numerous
studies have focused on providing people with physical [1],
cognitive [2] or social [3] support. To achieve this, a funda-
mental and necessary task is to recognize human activities.
For example, to decide when to offer physical support, a
robot needs to recognize that a person is walking. To decide
whether to remind people to continue drinking, a robot needs
to recognize past drinking activities. To determine whether a
person is lonely, a robot needs to detect interactions between
people. In this paper, we propose a hierarchical approach to
model human activities.
Different types of sensors have been applied to the task of
activity recognition [4], [5]. Kasteren et al. [6] adopt a set of
simple sensors, i.e. , pressure, contact, and motion sensors, to
recognize daily activities of people in a smart home. Hu et al.
[7] use a ceiling-mounted color camera to recognize human
postures, and the postures are recognized based on still images.
Recently, RGB-D sensors, such as the Microsoft Kinect and
ASUS Xtion Pro, have become popular in activity recognition
because they can capture 2.5D data using structured light,
thereby allowing researchers to extract a rich class of depth
features for activity recognition. In this work, we equip a robot
with an RGB-D sensor to collect sequences of activity data,
from which we extract object locations and human skeleton
points, as shown in Fig. 1. Based on these observations, our
This work was supported by the EU Projects ACCOMPANY (FP7-287624)
and MONARCH (FP7-601033).
The authors are with the Informatics Institute, University of Amsterdam,

Manuscript received xx xx, 2014; revised xx xx, 2014.
(a)
Cup 
Microwave 
Cup 
Bowl 
Box 
(b)
Fig. 1.
An example that shows a robot helping people in an elderly home. (a)
Care-O-bot 3 offers water to the elderly after detecting that the elderly resident
has not drunk any water for a long time. (b) In this work, an RGB-D sensor is
used to recognize human activities. This work is built upon existing methods
in object recognition, object localization, and human skeleton tracking. Object
and human skeleton information are combined as the input of our model to
infer human activities.
task is to estimate activities as well as sequences of composing
actions.
We distinguish between activities and actions as follows.
Actions are the atomic movements of a person that relate to at
most one object in the environment, e.g. , reaching, placing,
opening, and closing. Most of these actions are completed in
a relatively short period of time. In contrast, activities refer to
a complete sequence that is composed of different actions.
For example, microwaving food is an activity that can be
decomposed into a number of actions such as opening the
microwave, reaching for food, moving food, placing food,
and closing the microwave. The relation between actions and
activities is illustrated in Fig. 2.
The recognition of actions is usually formulated as a sequen-
tial prediction problem [8] (see Fig. 2). In this approach, the
arXiv:1503.01820v1  [cs.RO]  6 Mar 2015

2
Opening 
Reaching 
Moving 
Placing 
Closing 
Microwave Food 
Actions 
Activity 
RGB-D 
Video 
Fig. 2. An illustration of the activity hierarchy. The input video is represented
as a spatial-temporal volume. The bottom layer shows a video that is
discretized into multiple temporal segments for modeling, and spatial-temporal
features are extracted from each temporal segment. In the middle layer, actions
are recognized from the input features with one atomic activity per segment. In
the second layer, the activities are described in terms of the sub-level activity
sequence. The un-directed links in the graph represent the inter-dependency
between layers. Note that the video segments may not have the same length;
thus, a segmentation method needs to be applied.
 𝑦𝑘 
 𝑦𝑘−1 
 𝑧𝑘−1 
 𝑧𝑘 
 𝑥𝑘−1 
 𝑥𝑘 
𝐴 
 𝑦𝑘+1 
 𝑧𝑘+1 
 𝑥𝑘+1 
… 
… 
… 
… 
… 
… 
 𝑥0 
Fig. 3.
The graphical representation of our model. Nodes that represent the
observations x, which are observed both in training and testing, are rendered
in black. y refers to action nodes, and A is the corresponding activity label
of the sequence. Both are in gray because they are only observed during
training and not testing. White nodes z refer to the latent variables, which
are unknown either in training or testing. They are used to represent the
hidden sub-level semantics among consecutive actions. Note that xk, yk, zk
are fully connected in our model as are the temporal transitions of action-
latent pairs. Therefore, the model enables a richer representation of a activity
hierarchy. x0 represents the set of global features.
RGB-D video is ﬁrst divided into smaller video segments so
that each segment contains approximately one action. This can
be accomplished either by manual annotation or by automated
temporal segmentation based on motion features. Spatio-
temporal features are extracted for each segment. For real-
world tasks in HRI, it is desirable to recognize activities at a
higher level whereby the activities are usually performed over
a longer duration. The combination of actions and activities
forms a sequential model with a hierarchy (Fig. 2).
Most previous work addresses activity and action recogni-
tion as separate tasks [8]–[10], i.e. , the action labels need to be
inferred before the activity labels are predicted. In contrast, in
this paper, we jointly model actions and activities in a uniﬁed
framework, where the activity and action labels are learned
simultaneously. Our experimental evaluation demonstrates that
this framework is beneﬁcial when compared to separate recog-
nition. This can be intuitively understood by considering the
case of learning actions: the activity label provides additional
constraints to the action labels, which can result in a better
estimation of the actions, and vice versa.
Fig. 3 is a graphical representation of our approach. The
proposed model of this paper is based on our previous work
[11], wherein we recognize the sequence of actions using
Conditional Random Fields (CRFs). The model is augmented
with a layer of latent nodes to enrich the model’s expressive-
ness. For simplicity, we use latent variables to refer to the
variables in the hidden layer, which are unknown both during
training and testing. Labels, in contrast, are known during
training but are latent during testing. The latent variables are
able to capture such a difference and are able to model the
rich variations of the actions. One can imagine that the latent
variables represent sub-types of the actions: e.g. , for the action
opening, we are able to model the difference between opening
a bottle and opening a door using latent variables.
For each temporal segment, we preserve the full connectiv-
ity among observations, latent variables, and action nodes, thus
avoiding making inappropriate conditional independence as-
sumptions. We describe an efﬁcient method of applying exact
inference in our graph, whereby collapsing the latent states and
target states allows our graphical model to be considered as
a linear-chain structure. Applying exact inference under such
a structure is very efﬁcient. We use a max-margin approach
for learning the parameters of the model. Beneﬁting from the
discriminative framework, our method needs not model the
correlation between the input data, thus providing us with a
natural way of data fusion.
The model was evaluated using the RGB-D data from
two different benchmark datasets [9], [12]. The results are
compared with a number of the state-of-the-art approaches
[8]–[12]. The results show that our model performs better than
the state-of-the-art approaches, and the model is more efﬁcient
in terms of inference.
In summary, the contribution of this paper is a novel Hidden
CRF model for jointly predicting activities and their sub-
level actions, which outperforms the state of the art both
in terms of predictive performance and in computational
cost. Our software is open source and freely accessible at
http://ninghanghu.eu/activity recognition.html.
In this paper, we address the following research questions:
• How important is it to add an activity hierarchy to the
model?
• How important is it to add the latent layer to the model?
• How important is it to joint model actions and activities?
• How does our model compare with state-of-the-art ap-
proaches?
• How well can the model be generalized to a new prob-
lem?
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. We
describe the related work in Section II. We formalize the
model and present the objective function in Section III. The
inference and learning algorithms are introduced in Section IV
and Section V. We show the implementation details and the
comparison of the results with the state-of-the-art approach in
Section VI.
II. RELATED WORK
The previous works can be categorized into two method-
ologies. The ﬁrst methodology divides the approaches based

3
on the hierarchical layout of the model, i.e. , whether the
model contains a single layer or multiple layers. The second
methodology is based on the nature of the learning method,
i.e. , whether the method is discriminative or generative.
A. Single-layer Approach and Hierarchical Approach
Human activity recognition is a key component for HRI,
particularly for the re-ablement of the elderly [13]. Depending
on the complexity and duration of activities, activity recog-
nition approaches can be separated into two categories [14]:
single-layer approaches and hierarchical approaches. Single-
layer approaches [15]–[23] refer to methods that are able
to directly recognize human activities from the data without
deﬁning any activity hierarchy. Usually, these activities are
both simple and short; therefore, no higher level layers are
required. Typical activities in this category include walking,
waiting, falling, jumping and waving. Nevertheless, in the
real world, activities are not always as simple as these basic
actions. For example, the activity of preparing breakfast may
consist of multiple actions such as opening a fridge, getting a
salad and making coffee. Typical hierarchical approaches [9],
[11], [24]–[26] ﬁrst estimate the sub-level actions, and then,
the high-level activity labels are inferred based on the action
sequences.
Sung et al. [12] proposed a hierarchical maximum entropy
Markov model that detects activities from RGB-D videos.
They consider the actions as hidden nodes that are learned
implicitly. Recently, Koppula et al. [9] presented an interesting
approach that models both activities and object affordance as
random variables. The object affordance label is deﬁned as
the possible manners in which people can interact with an
object, e.g. , reachable, movable, and eatable. These nodes are
inter-connected to model object-object and object-human in-
teractions. Nodes are connected across the segments to enable
temporal interactions. Given a test video, the model jointly
estimates both human activities and object affordance labels
using a graph-cut algorithm. After the actions are recognized,
the activities are estimated using a multi-class SVM. In this
paper, we build a hierarchical approach that jointly estimates
actions and activities from the RGB-D videos. The inference
algorithm is more efﬁcient compared with graph-cut methods.
B. Generative Models and Discriminative Models
Many different graphical models, e.g. , Hidden Markov
Models (HMMs) [12], [27], Dynamic Bayesian Networks
(DBNs) [28], linear-chain CRFs [29], loopy CRFs [9], Semi-
Markov Models [6], and Hidden CRFs [30], [31], have been
applied to the recognition of human activities. The graphical
models can be divided into two categories: generative models
[12], [27] and discriminative models [6], [7], [9]. The gen-
erative models require making assumptions concerning both
the correlation of data and how the data are distributed given
the activity state. This is risky because the assumptions may
not reﬂect the true attributes of the data. The discriminative
models, in contrast, only focus on modeling the posterior
probability regardless of how the data are distributed. The
robotic and smart environment scenarios are usually equipped
with a combination of multiple sensors. Some of these sensors
may be highly correlated both in the temporal and spatial
domain, e.g. , a pressure sensor on a mattress and a motion
sensor above a bed. In these scenarios, the discriminative
models provide a natural way of data fusion for human activity
recognition.
The linear-chain Conditional Random Field (CRF) is one
of the most popular discriminative models and has been
used for many applications. Linear-chain CRFs are efﬁcient
models because the exact inference is tractable. However,
these models are limited because they cannot capture the
intermediate structures within the target states [32]. By adding
an extra layer of latent variables, the model allows for more
ﬂexibility and therefore can be used for modeling more
complex data. The names of these models, including Hidden-
unit CRF [33], Hidden-state CRF [32] or Hidden CRF [31],
are inter-changeable in the literature.
Koppula et al. [9] present a model for the temporal and
spatial interactions between humans and objects in loopy
CRFs. More speciﬁcally, they develop a model that has two
types of nodes for representing the action labels of the human
and the object affordance labels of the objects. Human nodes
and object nodes within the same temporal segment are fully
connected. Over time, the nodes are transited to the nodes
with the same type. The results show that by modeling the
human-object interaction, their model outperforms the earlier
work in [12] and [34]. The inference in the loopy graph is
solved as a quadratic optimization problem using the graph-cut
method [35]. Their inference method, however, is less efﬁcient
compared with the exact inference in a linear-chain structure
because the graph-cut method requires multiple iterations
before convergence; more iterations are usually preferred to
ensure that a good solution is obtained.
Another study [36] augments an additional layer of latent
variables to the linear-chain CRFs. They explicitly model the
new latent layer to represent the durations of activities. In
contrast to [9], Tang et al. [36] solve the inference problem
by reforming the graph into a set of cliques so that the exact
inference can be efﬁciently solved using dynamic program-
ming. In their model, the latent variables and the observation
are assumed to be conditionally independent given the target
states.
Our work is different from the previous approaches in
terms of both the utilized graphical model and the efﬁciency
of inference. First, similar to [36], our model also uses an
extra latent layer. However, instead of explicitly modeling the
latent variables, we directly learn the latent variables from
the data. Second, we do not make conditional independence
assumptions between the latent variables and the observations.
Instead, we add one extra edge between them to make the local
graph fully connected. Third, although our graph also presents
many loops, as in [9], we are able to transform the cyclic
graph into a linear-chain structure wherein the exact inference
is tractable. The exact inference in our graph only requires two
passes of messages across the linear chain structure, which is
substantially more efﬁcient than the method in [9]. Finally, we
model the interaction between the human and the objects at
the feature level instead of modeling the object affordance

4
as target states. Therefore, the parameters are learned and
are directly optimized for activity recognition rather than for
making the joint estimation of both object affordance and
human activity. Because we apply a data-driven approach to
initializing the latent variables, hand labeling of the object
affordance is not necessary in our model. Our results show
that the model outperforms the state-of-the-art approaches on
the CAD120 dataset [9].
III. MODELING ACTIVITY HIERARCHY
The graphical model of our proposed system is illustrated in
Fig. 3. Let x = {x1, x2, . . . , xK|xk ∈RD} be the sequence
of observations, where K is the total number of temporal
segments in the video. Our goal is to predict the most likely
underlying action sequence y = {y1, y2, . . . , yK|yk ∈Y}
and its corresponding activity label A ∈H based on the
observations. We deﬁne x0 as the global features that are
extracted from x.
Each observation xk is a feature vector extracted from
the segment k. The form of xk is quite ﬂexible. xk can be
collections of data from different sources, e.g. , simple sensor
readings, human locations, human poses, and object locations.
Some of these observations may be highly correlated with each
other, e.g. , wearable accelerate meters and motion sensors
would be highly correlated. Because of the discriminative
nature of our model, we do not need to model such correlation
among the observations.
We deﬁne z = {z1, z2, . . . , zK|zk ∈Z} to be the latent
variables in the model. The latent variables, which are im-
plicitly learned from the data, can be considered as modeling
the sub-level semantics of the actions. For clarity, one could
imagine that yk = 1 refers to the action opening. Then, the
joint (yk = 1, zk = 1) can describe opening a microwave,
and (yk = 1, zk = 2) can describe opening a bottle. Note
that these two sub-types of opening actions differ greatly in
the observed videos. However, the latent variables allow us to
capture large variations in the same action.
Next, we will formulate our model in terms of these deﬁned
variables. For simplicity, we assume that there are in total Ny
actions and Na activities to be recognized, and let us deﬁne
Nz as the cardinality of the latent variable.
A. Potential Function
Our model contains ﬁve types of potentials that together
form the potential function.
The ﬁrst potential measures the score of making an obser-
vation xk with a joint-state assignment (zk, yk). We deﬁne
Φ(xk) to be the function that maps the input data into the
feature space. w is a matrix that contains model parameters.
ψ1(yk, zk, xk; w1) = w1(yk, zk) · Φ(xk)
(1)
where w1 ∈RY×Z×D and w1(yk, zk) is the concatenation of
the parameters that corresponds to yk and zk.
This potential models the full connectivity among yk, zk and
xk and avoids making any conditional independence assump-
tions. It is more accurate to have such a structure because zk
and xk may not be conditionally independent over a given yk
in many cases. Let us consider the aforementioned example.
Knowing that the action is opening, whether the latent state
refers to opening a microwave or opening a bottle depends on
how the opening action is performed in the observed video,
i.e. , the latent state and the observation are inter-dependent
given the action label.
The second potential measures the score of coupling yk with
zk. The score can be considered as either the bias entry of (1)
or the prior of seeing the joint state (yk, zk).
ψ2(yk, zk; w2) = w2(yk, zk)
(2)
where w2 represents the parameter of the second potential
with w2 ∈RY×Z.
The third potential characterizes the transition score from
the joint state (yk−1, zk−1) to (yk, zk). Comparing with the
normal transition potentials [31], our model leverages the
latent variable zk for modeling richer contextual information
over consecutive temporal segments. Our model not only con-
tain the transition between the action states but also captures
the sub-level context using the latent variables.
ψ3(yk−1, zk−1, yk, zk; w3) = w3(yk−1, zk−1, yk, zk)
(3)
where the potential is parameterized by w3 ∈RY×Z×Y×Z.
The fourth potential models the compatibility among con-
secutive action pairs and the activity.
ψ4(yk−1, yk, A; w4) = w4(yk−1, yk, A)
(4)
where w4 ∈RY×Y×H and w4(yk−1, yk, A) is a scalar that
reﬂects the compatibility between the transition of an action
and the activity label.
The last potential models the compatibility between the
activity label A and the global features x0.
ψ5(A, x0; w5) = w5(A) · Φ(x0)
(5)
where the parameters w5 ∈RH can be interpreted as a global
ﬁlter that favors certain combinations of x0 and A.
Summing all potentials over the entire sequence, we can
write the ﬁnal potential function of our model as follows:
F(A, y, z, x; w) =
K
X
k=1
w1(yk, zk) · Φ(xk) +
K
X
k=1
w2(yk, zk)
+
K
X
k=2
w3(yk−1, zk−1, yk, zk) +
K
X
k=2
w4(yk−1, yk, A)
+ w5(A) · Φ(x0)
(6)
The potential function evaluates the matching score between
the joint states (A, y, z) and the input (x, x0). The score
equals the un-normalized joint probability in the log space.
The objective function can be rewritten in a more general
linear form F(y, z, x; w) = w · Ψ(y, z, x). Therefore, the
model is in the class of log-linear models.
Note that it is not necessary to explicitly model the latent
variables; rather, the latent variables can be automatically
learned from the training data. Theoretically, the latent vari-
ables can represent any form of data, e.g. , time duration and
action primitives, as long as the data can be used to facilitate
the task. The optimization of the latent model, however, may

5
converge to a local minimum. The initialization of the random
variables is therefore of great importance. We compare three
initialization strategies in this paper. Details of the latent
variable initialization will be discussed in Section VI-B1.
One may notice that our graphical model has many loops,
which in general makes the exact inference intractable. Be-
cause our graph complies with the semi-Markov property, we
will now show how we beneﬁt from such a structure to obtain
efﬁcient inference and learning.
IV. INFERENCE
Given the graph and the parameters, inference is used to
ﬁnd the most likely joint state (A, y, z) that maximizes the
objective function.
(A∗, y∗, z∗) =
argmax
(A,y,z)∈H×Y×Z
F(A, y, z, x; w)
(7)
Generally, solving (7) is an NP-hard problem that requires
the evaluation of the objective function over an exponential
number of state sequences. Exact inference is preferable
because it is guaranteed to ﬁnd the global optimum. However,
the exact inference usually can only be applied efﬁciently
when the graph is acyclic. In contrast, approximate inference is
more suitable for loopy graphs but may take longer to converge
and is likely to obtain a local optimum. Although our graph
contains loops, we can transform the graph into a linear-chain
structure, in which the exact inference becomes tractable. If
we collapse the latent variable zk with yk and A into a single
factor, the edges among zk, yk and A become the internal
factor of the new node, and the transition edges collapse into
a single transition edge. This results in a typical linear-chain
CRF, where the cardinality of the new nodes is Ny×Nz×NA.
In the linear-chain CRF, the exact inference can be efﬁciently
performed using dynamic programming [37].
Using the chain property, we can write the following re-
cursion procedure for computing the maximal score over all
possible assignments of y, z and A.
Vk(A, yk, zk) =w1(yk, zk) · Φ(xk) + w2(yk, zk)
+
max
(yk−1,zk−1)∈Y×Z{w3(yk−1, zk−1, yk, zk)
+ w4(yk−1, yk, A) + Vk−1(A, yk−1, zk−1)}
(8)
The above function is evaluated iteratively across the en-
tire sequence. For each iteration, we record the joint state
(yk−1, zk−1) that contributes to the max. When the last
segment is computed, the optimal assignment of segment K
can be computed as
A∗, y∗
K, z∗
K = argmax
A,yK,zK
VK(A, yK, zK) + w5(A) · Φ(x0) (9)
Knowing the optimal assignment at K, we can track back
the best assignment in the previous time step K −1. The
process continues until all y∗and z∗have been assigned, i.e.
, the inference problem in (7) is solved.
Computing (8) once involves O(NyNz) computations. In
total, (8) needs to be evaluated for all possible assignments
of (yk, zk, NA); thus, it is computed NyNz times. The total
computational cost is, therefore, O(N 2
y N 2
z NAK). Such com-
putation is manageable when NyNz is not very large, which
is usually the case for the tasks of activity recognition.
Next, we show how we can learn the parameters using the
max-margin approach.
V. LEARNING
We use the max-margin approach for learning the parame-
ters in our graphical model. Given a set of N training examples,
⟨x(n), y(n), A(n)⟩(n = 1, 2, · · · , N), we would like to learn
the model parameters w that can produce the activity label A
and action labels y given a new test input x. Note that both
activities and action labels are observed during training. The
latent variables z are unobserved and will be automatically
inferred from the training process.
The goal of learning is to ﬁnd the optimal model parameters
w that minimize the objective function. A regularization term
is used to avoid over-ﬁtting.
min
w
(
1
2∥w∥2 + C
N
X
i=1
∆(y(i), by, A(i), bA)
)
(10)
where C is a normalization constant that is used to provide a
balance between the model complexity and ﬁtting rate.
The loss function ∆(y(i), by, A(i), bA) measures the cost of
making incorrect predictions. by and bA are the most likely
action and activity labels that are computed from (7). The loss
function in (11) returns zero when the prediction is exactly the
same as the ground truth; otherwise, it counts the number of
disagreed elements.
∆(y(i), by, A(i), bA) = λ 1(A(i) = bA) + 1
K
K
X
k=1
1(y(i)
k
= byk)
(11)
where 1(·) is an indicator function and 0 ≤λ ≤1 is a scalar
weight that balances between the two loss terms.
This object function can be viewed as a generalized form of
our previous work [11], where we recognize only the sequence
of actions. This is can be performed by simply setting λ to
0 and leaving the graphical structure unchanged. The learning
framework then only tracks the incorrectly predicted actions,
regardless of the activities.
Directly optimizing (10) is not possible because the loss
function involves computing the argmax in (7). Following [38]
and [39], we substitute the loss function in (10) by the margin
rescaling surrogate, which serves as an upper-bound of the
loss function.
min
w {1
2∥w∥2 + C
n
X
i=1
max
A,y,z[∆(y(i), y, A(i), A)+
F(x(i), y, A, z, w)] −C
n
X
i=1
max
z
F(x(i), y(i), A(i), z, w)}
(12)
The second term in (12) can be solved using the augmented
inference, i.e. , by plugging in the loss function as an extra
factor in the graph, the term can be solved in the same way

6
as the inference problem using (7). Similarly, the third term
of (12) can be solved by adding y(i) and A(i) as the evidence
into the graph and then applying inference using (7). Because
the exact inference is tractable in our graphical model, both
of the terms can be computed very efﬁciently.
Note that (12) is the summation of a convex and concave
function. This can be solved with the Concave-Convex Pro-
cedure (CCCP) [40]. By substituting the concave function
with its tangent hyperplane function, which serves as an
upper bound of the concave function, the concave term is
transformed into a linear function. Thus, (12) becomes convex
again.
We can rewrite (12) in the form of minimizing a function
subject to a set of constraints by adding slack variables
min
w,ξ {1
2∥w∥2+C
n
X
i=1
ξi}
(13)
s.t. ∀i ∈{1, 2, . . . , n}, ∀y ∈Y
F(x(i), y(i), A(i), z∗, w)−F(x(i), y, A, z, w)
≥∆(y(i), y, A(i), A) −ξi
where z∗is the most likely latent states that are inferred given
the training data.
Note that there are an exponential number of constraints in
(13). This can be solved using the cutting-plane method [41].
Another intuitive method of understanding the CCCP al-
gorithm is to consider the algorithm as one that solves the
learning problem with incomplete data using Expectation-
Maximization (EM) [42]. In our training data, the latent
variables are unknown. We can start by initializing the latent
variables. Once we have the latent variables, the data become
complete. Then, we can use the standard Structured-SVM to
learn the model parameters (M-step). Subsequently, we can
update the latent states again using the parameters that are
learned (E-step). The iteration continues until convergence.
The CCCP algorithm decreases the objective function in
each iteration. However, the algorithm cannot guarantee a
global optimum. To avoid being trapped in a local minimum,
we present three different initialization strategies, and details
will be presented in Section VI-B1.
Note that the inference algorithm is extensively used in
learning. Because we are able to compute the exact inference
by transforming the loopy graph into a linear-chain graph, our
learning algorithm is much faster and more accurate compared
with the other approaches with approximate inference.
VI. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
We implemented the proposed model, denoted as full model,
along with its three variations. Speciﬁcally, the ﬁrst model rec-
ognizes only low-level actions, the second model recognizes
high-level activities, and the third model recognizes activities
based on actions. All models were evaluated on two different
datasets. The results from the different models were compared
to gain insight into our research questions (in Section I). The
full model is also shown to outperform the state-of-the-art
methods.
A. Datasets
The methods were evaluated on two benchmark datasets, i.e.
, CAD-60 [12] and CAD-120 [9]. Both of the datasets contain
sequences of color and depth images that were collected by
a RGB-D sensor. Skeleton joints of the person are obtained
using OpenNI1.
The two datasets are quite different from each other;
therefore, they can be used to test the generalizability of
our methods. The CAD-60 dataset consists of 12 human
action labels and no activity labels. The actions include
rinsing mouth, brushing teeth, wearing contact lens, talking
on the phone, drinking water, opening pill container, cooking
(chopping), cooking (stirring), talking on couch, relaxing on
couch, writing on white board, and working on computer.
These actions are performed by 4 different subjects in 5
different environments, i.e. , a kitchen, a bedroom, a bathroom,
a living room, and an ofﬁce. In total, the dataset includes
approximately 60 videos, and each video contains one action
label. In contrast, the CAD-120 dataset [9] contains 126 RGB-
D videos, and each video contains one activity and a sequence
of actions. There are in total 10 activities deﬁned in the dataset,
including making cereal, taking medicine, stacking objects,
unstacking objects, microwaving food, picking up objects,
cleaning objects, taking food, arranging objects, and having a
meal. Fig. 4 shows various sample images of these activities.
In addition, the dataset also consists of 10 sub-level actions,
i.e. , reaching, moving, pouring, eating, drinking, opening,
placing, closing, scrubbing, and null. The objects in CAD-120
are automatically detected as in [9], and the locations of the
objects are also provided by the dataset.
The two datasets are very challenging in the following
aspects. a) The activities in the dataset are performed by four
different actors. The actors behave quite differently, e.g. , in
terms of being left or right handed, being viewed from a front
view or side view, and sitting or standing. b) There is a large
variation even for the same action, e.g. , the action opening
can refer to opening a bottle or opening the microwave.
Although both of actions have the same label, they appear
signiﬁcantly different from each other in the video. c) Partial
or full occlusion is also a very challenging aspect for this
dataset. e.g. in certain videos, the actors’ legs are completely
occluded by the table, and objects are frequently occluded by
the other objects. This makes it difﬁcult to obtain accurate
object locations as well as body skeletons; therefore, the
generated data are noisy.
A number of recent approaches [8]–[12] have been eval-
uated on these two datasets; therefore, the results can be
directly compared. To ensure a fair comparison, the same
input features are extracted following [9]. Speciﬁcally, we
have object features φo(xk) ∈R180, object-object interaction
features φoo(xk) ∈R200, object-subject relation features
φoa(xk) ∈R400, and the temporal object and subject features
φt(xk) ∈R200. For CAD-120, we extract the complete set
of features from the object locations, which are provided
by the dataset. For CAD-60 dataset, only skeletal features
are extracted because there is no object information. These
1http://structure.io/openni

7
Arranging Objects
Cleaning Objects
Having Meal
Making Cereal
Microwaving Food
Picking Objects
Stacking Objects
Taking Food
Taking Medicine
Unstacking Objects
Fig. 4.
Sample images from the CAD-120 dataset. The images illustrate 10 different activities.
features are concatenated into a single feature vector, which
is considered as the observation of one action segment, i.e. ,
Φ(xk).
B. Implemented Models
In this section, we describe the three baseline models in
detail, followed by the introduction of the full model. Note that
all of the models were ﬁrst evaluated on the CAD-120 dataset.
To test the generalizability of the model, the same experiments
are repeated using the CAD-60 dataset. Note that the CAD-60
dataset contains no activity labels, but it has additional labels to
indicate the environments. In our experiments, we treat these
additional labels as if they were activities; thus, the model
structure is left unchanged compared with the experiments on
CAD-120. The only difference is that we jointly model the
actions with the environments instead of the activities.
1) Recognize Only Low-level Actions: The ﬁrst model is
adopted from our previous work [11], which predicts action
labels based on the video sequence. This model is a single-
layer approach that only contains the low-level layer of nodes.
By setting the weight λ to zero, the model focuses only on
predicting correct action labels regardless of the activity label;
therefore, the model can be considered as a special case of the
full model. The parameters of this model are learned with the
Structured-SVM framework [38]. We use the margin rescaling
surrogate as the loss. For optimization, we use the 1-slack
algorithm (primal), as described in [43].
To initialize the latent states on CAD-120, we adopt three
different initialization strategies. a) Random initialization. The
latent states are randomly selected. b) A data-driven approach.
We apply clustering on the input data x. The number of
clusters is set to be the same as the number of latent states. We
run K-means for 10 times. Then, we choose the best clustering
results based on minimal within-cluster distances. The labels
of the clusters are assigned as the initial latent states. c)
Initialized by Object affordance. The object affordance labels
are provided by the CAD-120 dataset, which are used for
training in [9]. We apply the K-means clustering upon the
affordance labels. As the affordance labels are categorical,
we use 1-of-N encoding to transform the affordance labels
into binary values for clustering. The CAD-60 dataset do not
contain affordance labels, therefore the latent variables are
initialized only with the data-driven approach.
2) Recognize Only High-level Activities: The second model
contains only a single layer for recognizing activities, i.e. ,
we disregard the layer of actions; instead, we learn a direct
mapping from video features to activity labels. Similar to the
ﬁrst model, the parameters are learned with the Structured-
SVM, but the model contains no transition.
3) Recognize Activities Based on Action Sequences: This
approach is built upon the ﬁrst baseline. Based on the inferred
action labels, we learn a model to classify activities. We extract
unigram and bigram features based on the action sequence
as well as the occlusion features. The model parameters are
estimated with a variation of multi-class SVM, where the latent
layer is augmented in the model. In this approach, the actions
and activities are recognized in succession.
4) Joint Estimation of Activity and Actions using Hierarchi-
cal Approach (full model): This approach refers to the pro-
posed model of the paper. Instead of successively recognizing
actions and activities, our model uses a hierarchical framework
to make joint predictions over both activity and action labels.
We compare two different segmentation methods to the
videos in the CAD-120 dataset. In the ﬁrst method, we use the
ground truth segmentation, which is manually annotated. For
the second segmentation, we apply a motion-based approach,
i.e. , we extract the spatial-temporal features for all the frames,
and similar frames are grouped together using a graph-based
approach to form segments. For CAD-60, we apply uniform
segmentation as in [9] to enable a fair comparison with other
methods.
The above methods were evaluated on both the CAD-120
and CAD-60 datasets. Because the two datasets are quite
different from each other, they can be used to test how the
results can be generalized to new data. The performance of
these methods on both datasets is reported in Section VI-D.

8
C. Evaluation Criteria
Our model was evaluated with 4-fold cross-validation. The
folds are split based on the 4 subjects. To choose the hyper-
parameters, i.e. , the number of latent states and segmentation
methods, we used two subjects for training, one subject for
validation and one subject for testing. Once the optimal hyper-
parameters are chosen, the performance of the model during
testing is measured by another cross-validation process, i.e.
, training using videos of 3 persons and testing on a new
person. Each cross-validation is performed 3 times. To observe
the generalization of our model across different data sets, the
results are averaged across the folds. In this paper, the accuracy
(classiﬁcation rate), precision, recall and F-score are reported
to enable a comparison of the results. In the CAD-120 dataset,
more than half of the instances are reaching and moving.
Therefore, we consider precision and recall to be relatively
better evaluation criteria than accuracy because they remain
meaningful despite class imbalance.
D. Results and Analysis
In this section, we report the experimental results and
compare the performance of different models. Table I shows
the performance of all the models during testing on the CAD-
120 dataset. Both the performances of the action and activity
recognition are reported. For comparison, the results of both
ground-truth segmentation and motion-based segmentation are
reported. Table II shows the performance during testing on the
CAD-60 dataset.
Next, we analyze the results while referring to our research
questions posed in Section I.
Importance of hierarchical model. In Table I, Single Layer
refers to the second baseline approach, wherein we learn a
direct mapping from video-level features to activity labels.
There is no intermediate layer of labels. The Single Layer
approach achieves an average performance of over 70% in
both segmentation methods but with a large standard error
of approximately 5%. In contrast, the other hierarchical ap-
proaches outperform the Single Layer approach by at least 10
percentage points when using ground-truth segmentation and 5
percentage points when using motion-based segmentation. By
incorporating the layer of action labels, we can see signiﬁcant
improvements in terms of recognizing activities. Therefore,
temporal information, such as transitions between actions, is
a very important aspect of activity recognition.
Table II shows the results using the CAD-60 dataset under
similar experiment settings; however, the goal here is to predict
actions together with the environment. We can see that the
F-score of the environment prediction is increased by over
11 percentage points when using the hierarchical approach
(full model), which is signiﬁcantly better than the single-layer
approach. The hierarchical approaches also exhibit signiﬁcant
improvements in terms of precision and recall. The increase in
the mean is over 6 percentage points, with a reduced standard
error rate.
Importance of embedding the latent layer. To demon-
strate the importance of using latent variables, we compare
the proposed model (full model) to the model without aug-
menting latent variables (no latent). Table I shows that the
full model outperforms no latent in terms of recognition of
both actions and activities. Notably, after adding the latent
variable, the precision and recall for activity is increased by
over 4 and 5 percentage points, respectively, using ground-
truth segmentation. When using motion-based segmentation,
the performance of full model for an activity is increased by 10
percentage points in terms of precision and 6 percentage points
in terms of recall. The improvement is signiﬁcant after using
latent variables. Note that the no latent model is a special case
of the full model, i.e. , no latent is equivalent to the full model
when there is only one latent state. Here, we list these models
separately to illustrate the effect of using multiple latent states.
In contrast, Table II only shows the performance of the full
model because the model starts overﬁtting the data when more
than one latent states are applied to the model, i.e. , no latent
(latent=1) achieves the best performance. From this, we can
see that the model is quite ﬂexible and that it can be used to
ﬁt data with varying levels of complexity by simply adjusting
the number of latent states in the model.
Importance of jointly modeling activity and action. Hu
et al. [8] [11] in Table I refers to a combination of the ﬁrst and
third baseline approaches, where we used a two-step approach
to successively recognize actions and activities. This method
shows signiﬁcant improvement over the Single layer approach.
However, their approach is signiﬁcantly outperformed by our
proposed hierarchical method (full model) using both seg-
mentation methods. Notably, for activity recognition, the F-
score is increased by 3 percentage points using our proposed
model, with an increase of 4 percentage points in terms of
precision and 6 percentage points in terms of recall. For
action recognition, the performance gain in terms of F-score is
approximately 3.7 percentage points and includes signiﬁcant
improvements in both precision and recall. This is because
the full model allows the interaction between the low-level
and high-level layers during both learning and inference, and
labels with the hierarchy are jointly estimated when making
predictions. Similar results were found using the CAD-60
dataset, see Table II. We note that the performance is largely
increased when using the full model. The F-score is increased
by 3 percentage points for predicting action and environment
labels.
Comparison with the state-of-the-art approaches. The
proposed method was evaluated on both the CAD-60 and
CAD-120 datasets to provide a comparison with the state-of-
the-art methods.
To be comparable with the other approaches, following [9],
[12], we conduct similar experiments on the CAD-60 dataset,
where we group the actions based on their environment labels
and a separate model is learned and tested for each of the
groups. The results of these experiments are reported in
Table III. We note that our model outperforms [12] in all
ﬁve environments. Compared with the state of the art [9], our
model outperforms [12] and [9] on most of the environments.
On average, the precision of our model is the same as in
[9], and the recall of the model outperforms [9] by over 8
percentage points, achieving 80.8% for precision and 80.1%

9
TABLE I
PERFORMANCE OF ACTIVITY AND ACTION RECOGNITION DURING TESTING ON THE CAD-120 DATASET. THE RESULTS ARE REPORTED IN TERMS OF
ACCURACY, PRECISION, RECALL AND F-SCORE. THE STANDARD ERROR IS ALSO REPORTED.
Ground Truth Segmentation
Methods
Action
Activity
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1-Score
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F-Score
Single layer
-
-
-
-
74.2 ± 5.1
78.5 ± 4.7
73.3 ± 5.1
75.8 ± 4.9
Koppula et al. [9]
86.0 ± 0.9
84.2 ± 1.3
76.9 ± 2.6
80.4 ± 1.7
84.7 ± 2.4
85.3 ± 2.0
84.2 ± 2.5
84.7 ± 2.2
Koppula et al. [10]
89.3 ± 0.9
87.9 ± 1.8
84.9 ± 1.5
86.4 ± 1.6
93.5 ± 3.0
95.0 ± 2.3
93.3 ± 3.1
94.1 ± 2.6
Hu et al. [8] [11]
87.0 ± 0.9
89.2 ± 2.3
83.1 ± 1.2
85.5 ± 1.6
90.0 ± 2.9
92.8 ± 2.3
89.7 ± 3.0
91.2 ± 2.5
Our Model (no latent)
87.2 ± 0.8
87.4 ± 1.5
85.0 ± 1.4
86.2 ± 1.4
87.9 ± 1.5
91.9 ± 0.7
87.5 ± 1.6
89.7 ± 1.0
Our Model (full)
89.7 ± 0.6
90.2 ± 0.7
88.2 ± 0.6
89.2 ± 0.6
93.6 ± 2.7
95.2 ± 2.0
93.3 ± 2.8
94.2 ± 2.3
Motion-based Segmentation
Methods
Action
Activity
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F-Score
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F-Score
Single layer
-
-
-
-
75.0 ± 5.3
79.0 ± 4.9
74.2 ± 5.5
76.5 ± 5.2
Koppula et al. [9]
68.2 ± 0.3
71.1 ± 1.9
62.2 ± 4.1
66.4 ± 2.6
80.6 ± 1.1
81.8 ± 2.2
80.0 ± 1.2
80.9 ± 1.6
Koppula et al. [10]
70.3 ± 0.6
74.8 ± 1.6
66.2 ± 3.4
70.2 ± 2.2
83.1 ± 3.0
87.0 ± 3.6
82.7 ± 3.1
84.8 ± 3.3
Hu et al. [8] [11]
70.0 ± 0.3
70.3 ± 0.5
67.8 ± 0.2
69.0 ± 0.3
79.0 ± 6.2
86.4 ± 4.9
78.8 ± 5.9
82.4 ± 4.4
Our Model (no latent)
67.1 ± 0.4
69.1 ± 1.2
65.6 ± 1.5
67.3 ± 1.8
79.0 ± 2.0
80.4 ± 2.7
78.5 ± 2.0
79.4 ± 2.3
Our Model (full)
70.2 ± 1.2
71.1 ± 1.8
69.9 ± 1.9
70.5 ± 1.9
85.2 ± 1.4
90.3 ± 1.9
84.7 ± 1.5
87.4 ± 1.7
TABLE II
TEST PERFORMANCE ON THE CAD-60 DATASET WITH UNIFORM SEGMENTATION. THE STANDARD ERROR IS ALSO REPORTED.
Methods
Action
Environment
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F-Score
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F-Score
Single layer
-
-
-
-
50.0 ± 2.8
63.0 ± 2.5
52.8 ± 2.2
57.5 ± 2.3
Hu et al. [8] [11]
66.5 ± 4.3
71.1 ± 2.6
67.1 ± 3.7
67.7 ± 3.4
60.0 ± 1.5
71.0 ± 2.5
62.1 ± 1.8
63.0 ± 2.1
Our Model (full)
74.4 ± 4.0
80.3 ± 4.4
81.0 ± 1.6
80.7 ± 2.9
60.6 ± 0.5
74.7 ± 2.7
62.5 ± 1.0
68.6 ± 1.9
for recall. The average F-Score is over 4% percentage points
better than in [9].
Table I compares the performance of different approaches
on the CAD-120 datasets. Similar to [8], Koppula et al. [10]
use a two-step approach to infer high-level activity labels
only after the actions are estimated. Beneﬁting from the joint
estimation of action and activity, our full model outperforms
the state-of-the-art models in terms of both action and activity
recognition tasks. Notably, using ground-truth segmentation,
the F-score is improved by approximately 4 percentage points
for recognizing actions. Based on motion segmentation, the
activity recognition performance is improved by over 2 per-
centage points in terms of F-Score.
Fig. 5 shows the confusion matrix of both the action and
activity classiﬁcation results. The most difﬁcult action class is
scrubbing. This task is sometimes confused with reaching and
placing. The overall performance of the activity recognition is
very good, with most of the activities being correctly classiﬁed.
The more difﬁcult case is to distinguish between “stacking
objects” and “arranging objects”. Overall, we can see that
high values are found on the diagonal using both segmentation
methods, which demonstrates the good performance of our
system.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we present a hierarchical approach that
simultaneously recognizes actions and activities based on
RGB-D data. The interactions between actions and activities
are captured by a Hidden-state CRF framework. In this frame-
work, we use the latent variables to exploit the underlying
structures of actions. The prediction is based on the joint
interaction between activities and actions, which is in contrast
to the traditional approach, which only focuses on one of
them. Our results show a signiﬁcant improvement when using
the hierarchical model compared to using the single-layered
approach. The results also demonstrate the effectiveness of
adding a latent layer to the model and the importance of jointly
estimating actions and activities. Finally, we show that the
proposed hierarchical approach outperforms the state-of-the-
art methods on two benchmark datasets.
