Overly Optimistic Prediction Results on
Imbalanced Data: a Case Study of Flaws and
Beneﬁts when Applying Over-sampling
Gilles Vandewiele1, Isabelle Dehaene2, Gy¨orgy Kov´acs4, Lucas Sterckx1, Olivier
Janssens1, Femke Ongenae1, Femke De Backere1, Filip De Turck1, Kristien
Roelens2, Johan Decruyenaere3, Soﬁe Van Hoecke1, and Thomas Demeester1
1 IDLab, Ghent University – imec
Technologiepark-Zwijnaarde 126, Ghent, Belgium
2 Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, Ghent University Hospital
Corneel Heymanslaan 10, Ghent, Belgium
3 Department of Intensive Care Medicine, Ghent University Hospital
Corneel Heymanslaan 10, Ghent, Belgium

4 Analytical Minds Ltd.
Arpad street 5, Beregsurany, Hungary

Abstract. Information extracted from electrohysterography recordings
could potentially prove to be an interesting additional source of informa-
tion to estimate the risk on preterm birth. Recently, a large number of
studies have reported near-perfect results to distinguish between record-
ings of patients that will deliver term or preterm using a public resource,
called the Term/Preterm Electrohysterogram database. However, we ar-
gue that these results are overly optimistic due to a methodological ﬂaw
being made. In this work, we focus on one speciﬁc type of methodological
ﬂaw: applying over-sampling before partitioning the data into mutually
exclusive training and testing sets. We show how this causes the results
to be biased using two artiﬁcial datasets and reproduce results of stud-
ies in which this ﬂaw was identiﬁed. Moreover, we evaluate the actual
impact of over-sampling on predictive performance, when applied prior
to data partitioning, using the same methodologies of related studies, to
provide a realistic view of these methodologies’ generalization capabili-
ties. We make our research reproducible by providing all the code under
an open license.
Keywords: preterm birth risk estimation · over-sampling · electrohysterogra-
phy
1
Introduction
Giving birth before 37 weeks of pregnancy, which is referred to as preterm birth,
has a signiﬁcant negative impact on the expected outcome of the neonate. Ac-
cording to the World Health Organization (WHO), preterm birth is one of the
arXiv:2001.06296v2  [eess.SP]  28 Nov 2020

leading causes of death among young children, and its prevalence ranges from
5% to 18% globally [1]. As preterm labor is currently not yet fully understood, a
gynecologist experiences diﬃculties to assess whether a patient presenting with
symptoms suggestive for preterm labor, will actually deliver preterm or not. In
order to support these experts in their assessment, several studies have already
investigated the added value of a predictive model [2,3,4,5,6]. These models are
based on a large number of variables extracted from clinical sources, such as the
electronic health record, including the gestational age, results of a biomarker,
cervical length, clinical history.
One interesting alternative that could be used as an additional source of valu-
able information for preterm birth risk prediction is electrohysterography (EHG).
EHG is a technique that measures the electronic potentials of the uterine muscle
by attaching patches around the abdomen of the woman. The technique can be
seen as a new and better alternative to measuring uterine activity. As opposed
to the intrauterine pressure catheter (IUPC), it is non-invasive and has no in-
fection, perforation or hemorrhage risk [7]. Moreover, EHG possesses a higher
signal-to-noise ratio than tocography, especially in certain groups, such as obese
women [8,9].
This paper analyzes a large set of studies providing results using a public re-
source, further detailed in Section 2, called the ‘Term/Preterm ElectroHystero-
Gram DataBase’ (TPEHGDB) [10]. While the problem of predicting preterm
birth is far from solved in reality, many of these studies report near-perfect
prediction results. After carefully considering the presented machine learning
methodologies, we argue that speciﬁc subtle, yet critical, choices in the data
pre-processing setup may lead to information leakage from the held-out eval-
uation set into the training set. In particular, we often observed the incorrect
application of over-sampling techniques to circumvent data imbalance issues [11],
which often arise in medical applications as the number of healthy (negative)
cases often greatly exceeds the number of cases with a certain disorder or dis-
ease (positive). As a consequence, the evaluation results no longer represent an
evaluation on actually unseen data. Other studies have already discussed, on
a conceptual level, the danger of applying over-sampling before data partition-
ing [12,13]. In those studies, these dangers have been demonstrated on several
benchmark datasets from the UCI Repository [14]. In this work, we focus on the
studies using that same dataset, which we suspect of incorrect data handling. In
contrast to prior studies, we reproduce each of the suspected studies to provide
empirical evidence that over-sampling was applied before data partitioning
As one of the reviewers of this work noted, the methodological errors pointed
out in this work are quite obvious. However, the main value in analyzing these
errors in the underlying work, comes from the fact that so many studies were
eventually published in high-proﬁle journals with an obvious ﬂaw not detected
despite rigorous reviewing. We aim to raise awareness, but we do not intend to

point the ﬁnger at any individual study or methodology. However, in order to
provide clear insights into the potential pitfalls in data pre-processing and model
evaluation, we try to divide the referred works according to diﬀerent potential
issues, to the best of our ability (see Section 2). After a short discussion on the
use of over-sampling techniques (Section 3), the remainder of the paper (Sec-
tion 4) is devoted to reporting our own results on the TPEHGDB dataset for the
various models, engineered features, and over-sampling techniques available in
literature. Moreover, we investigate the actual impact of applying over-sampling,
when performed correctly, and the added value of tuning the over-sampling al-
gorithm and its corresponding hyper-parameters.
The contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
– We provide an exhaustive overview of studies using the TPEHGDB dataset
of EHG recordings which tackle the challenge of preterm birth risk esti-
mation. We elaborate on three types of potential issues in the evaluation
methodology of studies reporting near-perfect prediction results. We then
focus on one speciﬁc issue, i.e. applying over-sampling before partitioning
the data into a mutually exclusive training and testing set.
– We explore the individual quality of each of the features discussed in these
studies by measuring their capability to distinguish between term and preterm
recordings.
– We experimentally point out the consequences of incorrectly applying over-
sampling (i.e., before data partitioning).
– We discuss the actual impact of existing over-sampling techniques to counter-
act data imbalance, when applied prior to data partitioning, using the same
methodologies as related studies in order to provide a realistic view of the
performance of their proposed methodologies. Moreover, we study whether
tuning the over-sampling algorithm and its corresponding hyper-parameters
can result in an increase in the predictive performance.
This work extends Vandewiele et al. [15], where we ﬁrst pointed out the potential
issues of the studies reporting near-perfect results on the TPEHGDB dataset.
In our previous work, we discussed these potential issues to then reproduce only
one of the studies that we suspected of applying over-sampling before data par-
titioning. The reason for reproducing that speciﬁc study was that it only used
features that were already provided by the owners of the TPEHGDB dataset. In
contrast, we reproduce eleven suspected studies in this study to then compare the
predictive performance when sampling is applied before partitioning to the per-
formance when sampling is applied after partitioning. As such, we implemented
over ﬁfty diﬀerent features that were discussed in those works. In addition to
reproducing these studies, we also study the capability of each of those features
individually to discriminate between term and preterm records and assess the
impact of algorithm selection and hyper-parameter tuning of over-sampling tech-
niques. We provide the source code for the feature extraction and experiments
to serve as a basis for future research endeavours5.
5 https://github.com/GillesVandewiele/EHG-oversampling/

Fig. 1. The number of weeks till birth expressed as a function of the gestational age
in weeks at the time of recording. All data points within the red area correspond to
preterm deliveries, while the ones within the green area correspond to term deliveries.
2
Studies estimating preterm birth risk using the
TPEHGDB
In 2008, a public dataset called TPEHGDB (Term/Preterm ElectroHysteroGram
DataBase), containing 300 records that correspond to 300 diﬀerent patients and
pregnancies, was released on PhysioNet [10,16]. Each record consists of three
raw bipolar signals that express the diﬀerence in electric potentials, measured
by four electrodes placed on the abdomen. In addition, each record is accompa-
nied by clinical variables, such as the gestational age at recording time, the age
and weight of the mother, and whether or not an abortion had occurred in the
patient’s medical history. The recordings can be categorized as being captured at
an earlier stage in pregnancy (gestational age of 23.11±0.77 weeks) or at a later
stage (31.09 ± 1.05 weeks). Recordings were captured at a frequency of 20 Hz
for about 30 minutes. In Figure 1 the number of weeks till birth is shown as a
function of the gestational age at the time of recording and displayed according
to term or preterm delivery. A clear imbalance is present in the dataset with
signiﬁcantly more term deliveries (262 in total, green area) than preterm ones
(38, red area).
We now review machine learning studies using the TPEHGDB dataset. Screen-
ing for the term ‘machine learning’, we selected a subset of 82 studies from the

160 citations, present in Google Scholar on January 2020, to the original pa-
per. These studies were then manually double-checked on whether they were
a machine learning study and presented clear prediction results on the TPE-
HGDB dataset. In total 24 studies were identiﬁed using machine learning on
the TPEGHDB. While many of these studies are reporting near-perfect results,
these should be interpreted very cautiously as a ﬂaw may be present in their
methodology, leading to biased and overly optimistic reported metrics.
We can categorize these ﬂaws into three diﬀerent categories. First, studies often
apply cross-validation on a subset of data subsampled from the original dataset.
Performing this kind of preprocessing, in a machine learning context, without
any kind of argumentation, raises doubts as it drastically increases the variance
of the obtained results and avoids the problem of imbalanced data, which does
not reﬂect reality in terms of potential applications [17,18,19,20,21,22,23,24].
Second, there are a few studies that extract segments from the EHG signals
and use these for classiﬁcation. When doing this, it is very important to ensure
that segments extracted from the same original signal are not divided into both
training and testing set [25,26]. Finally, there are many studies applying over-
sampling before partitioning the data into two mutually exclusive sets in order to
make the distribution of classes more uniform [27,28,29,30,31,32,33,34,35,36,37].
In this work, we focus on reproducing the results from the ﬁnal category of ﬂaws.
At the time of writing (January 2020), out of the 160 citations to the original
paper which introduced the TPEHGDB dataset, we have found three machine
learning studies that were accessible, tackled preterm birth risk estimation and,
to the best of our knowledge, had a sound evaluation methodology [38,39,40]. In
the study of Sadi-Ahmed et al. [40], all records taken before 26 weeks of gesta-
tion were ﬁltered from the dataset, resulting in a dataset of 138 recordings taken
after the 26th week of gestation. All of these signals were processed in order to
detect contractions through Auto-Regressive Moving Averages (ARMA). From
the detected contractions, features were extracted such as the total number of
contractions, average duration and average time between contractions. An ac-
curacy score of 0.89 to distinguish between term and preterm pregnancies was
achieved within this study. This makes it hard to assess the clinical use of such
a model, since an accuracy score of 0.86 can be achieved by always predicting
term birth on this ﬁltered dataset. Janjarasjitt et al. [39] proposed a feature type
based on a wavelet decomposition of the signals. This feature was evaluated by
tuning a threshold on a single feature in a leave-one-out cross-validation scheme.
A sensitivity and speciﬁcity of 0.6842 and 0.7133 were achieved. While these
scores are promising, they might be rather optimistic due to the fact that the
evaluation happened in a leave-one-out scheme. As such, the performance of the
sample entropy feature, provided along with the original data, closely matches,
and sometimes even outperforms, that of the proposed feature. Nevertheless, the
wavelet-based feature may be an interesting and complementary addition to the
feature set. In the work of Ryu et al. [38] a similar study was performed in which

they proposed a feature based on Multivariate Empirical Mode Decomposition
(MEMD). They evaluated the added value of their feature, by subsampling a
balanced dataset of 38 term and 38 preterm records, 100 times, from the origi-
nal dataset. They found that the AUC improved from 0.5698 to 0.6049 by adding
their feature to the dataset. While this subsampling strategy again avoids the
problem of imbalanced data, which is reﬂected in the original dataset, it does
show an improvement in AUC and thus indicates that adding the MEMD-based
feature to the dataset could be beneﬁcial for the predictive performance. More-
over, due to the many repetitions of the experiment, the sample mean better
reﬂects the real mean.
3
Imbalanced learning and the impact of over-sampling
prior to data partitioning
As illustrated in Figure 1, the TPEHGDB dataset is highly imbalanced. An im-
balance in the number of samples can make the majority class overly represented
in the loss function, leading to a poor generalization of the minority class. In
order to tackle this, many authors apply imbalanced learning [11] techniques
to improve the performance of TPEHGDB classiﬁcation. One of the most pop-
ular imbalanced learning approach is over-sampling which generates artiﬁcial
training samples for the minority class by making relatively mild assumptions
on the local distribution of the data. The popularity of over-sampling can be
illustrated by the numerous variants and successful applications summarized in
a recent review [41], and can be attributed to the fact that it is agnostic to the
model being used since it is a preprocessing technique. Although over-sampling
techniques are popular and easy to use, there are many pitfalls to avoid when
they are applied. Special care must be taken when over-sampling is used in cross-
validation to avoid information leakage. As the sample generation is based on the
entire dataset, the generated artiﬁcial samples contain information about many
(in some cases all) original samples. Thus, carrying out over-sampling before
splitting into training and testing sets might leak information from the original
testing samples to the artiﬁcially generated training samples, leading to overly
optimistic validation scores. It is therefore of key importance to carry out the
over-sampling after selecting a training and testing set.
Further, we emphasize that the correct number of artiﬁcial instances to be added
depends on the distribution of the data and the subsequent data processing
pipeline and should thus be tuned. For example, the performance of local clas-
siﬁers (like k-Nearest Neighbors) clearly depends on the density of samples near
the decision boundary, if the density of positive and negative samples diﬀers, the
classiﬁer will be biased towards the class with more samples in a unit volume [11].
However, the local density of positive and negative samples near the decision
boundary is independent from the total number of samples. Even if a dataset is
severely imbalanced, kNN can operate ideally if the density of points near the
decision boundary is approximately equal. Similarly, balancing a dataset with-

out checking the local densities near the decision boundary can lead to highly
imbalanced local densities near the decision boundary, thus, deteriorating the
performance of the classiﬁer.
We highlight the impact of applying over-sampling prior to the data partitioning
on an artiﬁcially generated dataset. We generated a binary classiﬁcation prob-
lem with 100 samples. Twenty samples were marked positive (red circles), and
the others negative (blue squares). The generated dataset is depicted on the left
of Figure 2 (step 0). We now compare the eﬀect of over-sampling data prior to
partitioning with the eﬀect of over-sampling after partitioning. In the former
approach, we over-sample the data prior to partitioning, which introduces data
leakage by generating training samples that are highly correlated with original
data points that will end up in the testing set (step 1). Moreover, some of the
generated artiﬁcial samples will be distributed to the testing set as well (step 2).
This causes highly optimistic results that merely reﬂect the model’s capability to
memorize samples seen during training, rather than its predictive performance
if it were applied in a real-world setting on unseen data. In the latter, we ﬁrst
partition our data into two mutually exclusive sets (step 1). Then, we create
artiﬁcial samples (red, unﬁlled circles) that are highly correlated to the training
samples of the minority class (step 2) in order to have a similar number of sam-
ples for both classes in our training set.
4
Results
In this section, we re-evaluate the related studies mentioned above by assessing
the predictive power of the features proposed in those works, and by reproducing
the results of their methodology. Afterwards, we study the true impact of over-
sampling on the models’ predictive performance.
4.1
EHG Signal Preprocessing
We used the EHG signals provided by the original authors [10,16], that were
ﬁltered using a Butterworth digital ﬁlter with cutoﬀfrequencies 0.08 to 4.0 Hz.
The ﬁrst and last 150 seconds (corresponding to 3,000 measurements) of the
recording, which could contain noise caused by the installation or removal of
the recording setup, were removed. Two signals were discarded due to the fact
that the recording length was shorter than 30 minutes. In total, this results in a
dataset of 298 recordings each containing 3 signals of 30,000 measurements.
4.2
Predictive power of features
For reproducing the results from the aforementioned studies, we re-implemented
all necessary features, provided they were described in suﬃcient detail to allow
for reconstruction. Missing details were ﬁlled in as optimistically as possible.

Data
Data
Oversample
STEP 1
STEP 2
STEP 1
STEP 2
BEFORE PARTITIONING
STEP 0
STEP 0
train
test
Partition
Oversample
test
Partition
train
train
test
AFTER PARTITIONING
Fig. 2. Comparing the impact of applying over-sampling prior to data partitioning to
applying over-sampling after data partitioning on an artiﬁcial two-dimensional classi-
ﬁcation problem.

If hyper-parameters were missing, we picked those that resulted in an optimal
predictive performance, according to a tuning phase. For the study of Ahmed
et al. [31], the sample entropy was used instead of the discussed fuzzy entropy
technique, as the latter was not described clearly. It should further be noted that
although it is possible that there are minimal diﬀerences between the original
studies and our reproduction, it is very unlikely that these diﬀerences resulted
in actual near-perfect predictive performances when over-sampling would have
been applied correctly.
In order to evaluate the capability to distinguish term from preterm signals of
each feature individually, we measure the AUC by applying 10,000 bootstrap-
ping iterations and report mean and corresponding standard deviation. This is
done by varying a threshold over the full range of a feature for each of the re-
samplings of the entire dataset. We report this for each of the three channels,
each corresponding to a bipolar signal, separately using (i) all samples, (ii) the
samples with early recording times (≤26 weeks) and (iii) the samples with late
recording times (> 26 weeks). As there are a few thousand features per signal,
we report only the 10 top performing features. As informative features can result
in either high or low AUC scores (i.e. when the feature values of the positive
samples are lower than the negative samples), we deﬁne top performing as the
maximal diﬀerence between the measured AUC, using all samples, and 0.5, which
resembles random guessing. The AUC scores, their standard deviations and the
corresponding channel of these top features can be found in Table 1. For a more
detailed explanation on the reported features, and how to extract them, we re-
fer readers to the corresponding related work. A large number of features are
extracted from a spectral representation, obtained by applying Empirical Mode
Decomposition (EMD) and/or Wavelet Packet Decomposition (WPD). In those
cases, we mention how many times the EMD has been applied and mention the
level (number of A) and the type of the ﬁnal coeﬃcient (A or D) of the WPD.
Note that this uni-variate analysis only measures the discriminative capability
of individual features, and not that of combinations of features. Yet, for brevity,
we have chosen to limit ourselves to this ﬁrst-order analysis.
From these results, we see that performing EMD and/or WPD often results in
more informative features, as many of the top features come from these cate-
gories. Moreover, we see that the EHG signal from channel 3 is the most infor-
mative one. Nevertheless, the informativeness of the individual features is rather
limited, with a maximal AUC ranging roughly between 0.60 and 0.65, with high
standard deviations, obtained by extracting the Higuchi Fractal Dimension after
performing WPD on the output of the EMD.
4.3
The impact of over-sampling
In this section, we demonstrate the impact of applying over-sampling before
data partitioning. We ﬁrst show how near-perfect predictive performance can

Feature
emd
wpd
From Ch.
All
Early
Late
Sample Entropy
2
aaa
[33]
3
69.0 ± 4.2 72.6 ± 6.8 63.35 ± 5.6
Standard Deviation
2
aaaa
[33]
3
36.2 ± 4.4 36.7 ± 6.3 36.4 ± 6.2
Teager-Kaiser Energy
2
aaaa
[33]
3
35.5 ± 4.4 34.8 ± 6.3 36.0 ± 6.3
Interquartile Range
9
aaaad
[33]
1
34.4 ± 4.9 33.0 ± 6.3 36.0 ± 8.0
Higuchi Fractal Dim.
3
ad
[33]
3
67.6 ± 4.7 62.8 ± 7.1 73.0 ± 6.2
Sampen (m=4, s=5)
×
×
[31]
3
34.0 ± 4.6 25.2 ± 5.9 43.4 ± 7.3
1st Yule-Walker coef
2
a
[35]
3
68.4 ± 4.6 69.5 ± 7.0 66.2 ± 6.4
Median Frequency
×
×
[34]
3
62.7 ± 4.2 65.5 ± 5.9 59.2 ± 6.5
Wavelet Log Var Diﬀ
×
aaad
[42]
3
37.4 ± 4.2 29.3 ± 5.6 48.1 ± 6.6
FWL Peak Power
7
×
[23]
1
34.6 ± 4.9 36.5 ± 7.9 32.9 ± 6.1
Table 1. The ability of the reproduced features from channel 1 to distinguish be-
tween term and preterm samples, expressed as the average AUC and its corresponding
standard deviation, measured using 10,000 bootstrap iterations. When EMD has been
applied, we mention the number of iterations. When WPD has been applied, we provide
the level (number of A) and the type of the ﬁnal coeﬃcient (A or D).
be achieved on randomly generated data with no predictive signal at all. Af-
terwards, we reproduce eleven studies, mentioned in Section 2 and measure the
predictive performance when over-sampling is applied either before or after data
partitioning.
Artiﬁcial dataset experiment To exemplify the eﬀect of bias, introduced
by over-sampling before partitioning the data, we artiﬁcially generate 10,000
ﬁve-dimensional points, with each variable sampled from a uniform distribu-
tion (Xi ∼U(0, 1) for i ∈{1, . . . , 5}). We then create an imbalanced binary
classiﬁcation problem by randomly labeling 90% of the data as negative and
the remaining 10% as positive. As the data is randomly generated, we expect
the predictive performance of a classiﬁer to be as good as random guessing.
Nevertheless, due to applying the Synthetic Minority over-sampling Technique
(SMOTE) before data partitioning, an Area Under the receiver operating char-
acteristic Curve (AUC) of 0.95 on a ‘held-out’ testing set can be achieved. This
in contrast to an AUC of 0.49 and 0.48 when applying no SMOTE or SMOTE
after data partitioning respectively, which closely resembles random guessing.
Reproducing studies using TPEHGDB In this section, we re-implement
the methodologies of studies mentioned in Section 2, which report near-perfect
results and that use an over-sampling algorithm within their pipeline, to conduct
two experiments. On the one hand, we apply over-sampling before data parti-
tioning to show that only then we are able to come close to the performance men-
tioned in the corresponding studies. On the other hand, we investigate the added
value of tuning the over-sampling algorithm and the diﬀerent hyper-parameters,
when applied after data partitioning. We further clarify that in this experiment
we merely want to reproduce the results of the published methodologies and do
not intend to outperform previous solutions as no feature subset selection or
advanced classiﬁcation techniques have been applied.

In Table 2, we report the classiﬁcation technique, the over-sampling algorithm
used, the reported evaluation metric and the reproduced evaluation metric when
applying over-sampling before data partitioning for each of the studies. A fea-
ture set as similar as possible to the original study was used. In Table 3 we
use these methodologies to compare the AUC of the following cases (i) when
no over-sampling is applied, (ii) when the same over-sampling algorithm as in
the corresponding studies is used (with default hyper-parameters) and correctly
applied after data partitioning, (iii) when the hyper-parameters of the same
over-sampling algorithm are tuned, and (iv) when the algorithm itself, and its
hyper-parameters are tuned. In order to tune the over-sampling algorithm it-
self (i.e. pick the optimal one), 19 diﬀerent algorithms from the smote-variants
library [43] are used. These algorithms were shown to achieve the best predic-
tive performances according to an experiment with a large number of diﬀerent
datasets having varying properties [44]. All results are generated using 10-fold
stratiﬁed cross-validation.
Table 2 shows that we are able to rather closely approximate the reported pre-
dictive performances of the related works. Unfortunately, this could only be
achieved by performing over-sampling before data partitioning. In Section 3,
we elaborated on how this causes leakage and results in overly optimistic per-
formances. More realistic results of those methodologies can be found in the
‘Default’ column of Table 3. As can be seen, the discrepancy between those two
is immense. It should also be noted that only AUC scores are reported in Ta-
ble 3, to allow for comparison between studies. While this makes the comparison
for studies only reporting accuracy more diﬃcult, we argue that accuracy is not
an ideal metric to assess the predictive performance. Despite it being very com-
prehensible, it can give a skewed view in the context of imbalanced data. As an
example, a naive model always predicting ‘term’ on this dataset would achieve
a rather high accuracy of 87.25%.
The results in Table 3 show a positive eﬀect when correctly applying over-
sampling (i.e., after data partitioning), as the AUC increases roughly 3 to 10%
when compared using no over-sampling. Moreover, we often notice an increase in
the AUC when the hyper-parameters of the over-sampling algorithm are tuned.
Tuning the number of generated minority samples seems to have the most im-
pact, as we notice increases up to roughly 6% in the AUC scores between the
‘Default’ and ‘Tuned’ column. This is in contrast with the reproduced studies,
where the data was merely balanced. Additional improvements can be achieved
by tuning the over-sampling algorithm itself, which is similar to the model se-
lection phase when creating a machine learning pipeline, as the diﬀerences be-
tween the ‘Tuned’ and ‘Best’ columns show. It should, however, be noted that
these improvements are often rather marginal. Nevertheless, from these results,
we can conclude that using SMOTE, or one of its variants, with its default-
hyper-parameters often results in good performances, but that diﬀerent hyper-
parameter conﬁgurations or other over-sampling algorithms such as NEATER

or CBSO are worth investigating as well. Finally, we would like to highlight that
the improvements in AUC scores achieved by the over-sampling techniques are
aligned with the ﬁndings of Kov´acs [44], who evaluated the same over-sampling
techniques on 104 imbalanced datasets comparable to TPEHGDB in size: the
average improvements achieved in terms of AUC fall in the range 4%-10%. There-
fore, improving the AUC by a range of 40%-50% by simply using over-sampling
techniques, as reported in some previous works, is highly unlikely.
Study Classiﬁer Over-sampler
Metric
Report. Reprod.
[27]
SVM
SMOTE
AUC
92.0
96.57
[28]
AB
SMOTE
AUC
98.6
96.13
[30]
RF
SMOTE
AUC
94.0
96.40
[31]
SVM
ADASYN
AUC
99.0
99.13
[32]
NN
SMOTE
AUC
94.0
95.63
[34]
QDA
ADASYN
AUC
99.44
99.28
[37]
RF
ADASYN
AUC (Early)
88.8
91.72
[29]
RF
min/max
Accuracy
83.0
85.58
[33]
SVM
ADASYN
Accuracy
97.1
98.46
[35]
SVM
ADASYN
Accuracy
96.25
93.65
[36]
SVM
ADASYN
Accuracy
95.5
98.65
Table 2. Comparing the AUC results (column ‘Report’) reported in published works
(reference in column ‘Study’) with our own implementation that uses a similar feature
set, the same classiﬁcation technique (‘Classiﬁer’) and over-sampling algorithm (‘Over-
sampler’), applied (incorrectly) before data partitioning (column ‘Reprod.’). SVM =
Support Vector Machine, QDA = Quadratic Discriminant Analysis, RF = Random
Forest, AB = AdaBoost, NN = Neural Network.
5
Conclusion and Future Work
In light of a signiﬁcant body of recent literature reporting near-perfect results
on the TPEHGDB dataset, we showed how subtle details in the methodology
can introduce label leakage, which results in overly optimistic results. One of
these potential pitfalls is over-sampling for data-augmentation purposes per-
formed prior to partitioning data into training and evaluation sets. In order to
investigate the actual impact of over-sampling, we re-implemented the features
proposed in recent work and extracted them from the TPEHGDB dataset. We
reproduced the results of 11 studies that reported near-perfect results and used
an over-sampling algorithm in their pipeline. We demonstrated that we can only
approximate their reported results when over-sampling is applied before data
partitioning. Next, we assessed what the actual impact of over-sampling would
be in their methodologies, when applied after data partitioning. Moreover, we

Study Classif. Over-samp. None Default Tuned
Best
[27]
SVM
SMOTE
49.54
60.75
60.75
60.85 (NEATER [45])
[28]
AB
SMOTE
46.38
57.43
57.54
58.23 (Cluster SMOTE [46])
[29]
RF
min/max
42.68
46.79
52.89
54.34 (CBSO [47])
[30]
RF
SMOTE
43.78
46.97
52.31
52.31 (SMOTE [48])
[31]
SVM
ADASYN
50.81
54.28
56.04
57.47 (NEATER [45])
[32]
NN
SMOTE
49.10
50.74
50.74
52.11 (LVQ SMOTE [49])
[33]
SVM
ADASYN
54.80
56.54
57.75
58.65 (NEATER [45])
[34]
QDA
ADASYN
57.51
62.36
63.86
65.33 (SMOTE Tomek [50])
[35]
SVM
ADASYN
47.85
49.45
49.68
56.03 (CBSO [47])
[36]
SVM
ADASYN
54.72
56.46
57.07 57.17 (Selected SMOTE [51])
[37]
RF
ADASYN
48.40
51.85
51.85
55.05 (Polyn. SMOTE [52])
Table 3. The achieved AUC scores, using the methodologies of related works, but
with over-sampling applied after data partitioning. We compare the AUC of (i) when
no over-sampling is used (‘None’), (ii) using the same over-sampling technique as the
corresponding work with default hyper-parameters (‘Default’), (iii) using the same over-
sampling technique with tuned hyper-parameters (‘Tuned’), and (iv) using the best-
performing over-sampling algorithm that is optimally tuned (‘Best’). SVM = Support
Vector Machine, QDA = Quadratic Discriminant Analysis, RF = Random Forest, AB
= AdaBoost, NN = Neural Network.
investigated the added value of tuning the over-sampling algorithm and its hyper-
parameters. Our results indicate that further research endeavours are required
before preterm birth risk estimations based on EHG signals in a clinical setting
might become useful in practice.
To support further research in this area, and in order to stimulate the correct
use of over-sampling techniques in general, we make all code used for this study
publicly available. We envision diﬀerent research directions to be very promis-
ing. First, the collection of a larger dataset, with more uniform recording times
and containing an important fraction of preterm cases will be required to build
clinically useful models. Second, predicting entire curves of probabilities of a
patient being pregnant at a certain point in time through the use of survival
analysis instead of single-point predictions as in previous studies may increase
the usefulness of a predictive model. Finally, deep learning could be an interest-
ing future research approach as it is able to automatically learn representations
of the EHG signals, as opposed to feature engineering.
Conﬂict of interest statement
The authors declare no competing interests.
