Task Weighting in Meta-learning with Trajectory Optimisation
Cuong Nguyen∗1, Thanh-Toan Do†2 and Gustavo Carneiro‡3
1School of Computer Science, University of Adelaide, Australia
2Department of Data Science and AI, Monash University, Australia
3Centre for Vision, Speech and Signal Processing, University of Surrey, United Kingdom
Abstract
Developing meta-learning algorithms that are un-biased toward a subset of training tasks often requires
hand-designed criteria to weight tasks, potentially resulting in sub-optimal solutions. In this paper, we
introduce a new principled and fully-automated task-weighting algorithm for meta-learning methods. By
considering the weights of tasks within the same mini-batch as an action, and the meta-parameter of
interest as the system state, we cast the task-weighting meta-learning problem to a trajectory optimisation
and employ the iterative linear quadratic regulator to determine the optimal action or weights of tasks.
We theoretically show that the proposed algorithm converges to an ϵ0-stationary point, and empirically
demonstrate that the proposed approach out-performs common hand-engineering weighting methods in
two few-shot learning benchmarks.
1
Introduction
Meta-learning has been studied from the early 1990s (Schmidhuber, 1987; Naik and Mammone, 1992;
Thrun and Pratt, 1998) and recently gained a renewed interest with the use of deep learning methods that
achieves remarkable state-of-art results in several few-shot learning benchmarks (Vinyals et al., 2016; Finn
et al., 2017; Snell et al., 2017; Nichol et al., 2018; Ravi and Beatson, 2019; Allen et al., 2019; Khodak
et al., 2019; Baik et al., 2020; Flennerhag et al., 2020). However, the majority of existing meta-learning
algorithms simply minimise the average loss evaluated on validation subsets of training tasks, implicitly
assuming task-balance (analogous to class balance in single-task learning). This assumption is hardly true
in practice, and potentially biases the trained meta-learning models toward tasks observed more frequently
during training, and consequently, resulting in a large variation of performance when evaluating on diﬀerent
subsets of testing tasks as shown in (Dhillon et al., 2019, Figure 1) and (C. C. Nguyen et al., 2021, Figure 1).
One way to address such issue is to exploit the diversity of training tasks, so that the trained meta-learning
models can generalise to a wider range of testing tasks. In fact, various studies in task relatedness or task
similarity have shown that learning from certain tasks may facilitate the generalisation of meta-learning
models (Thrun and O’Sullivan, 1996; Zamir et al., 2018; Achille et al., 2019; C. C. Nguyen et al., 2021). This
suggests the design of a re-weighting mechanism to diversify the contribution of each training task when
training a meta-learning model of interest. Existing re-weighting methods mostly rely on either hand-crafted
criteria to determine those weights (Collins et al., 2020), or additional validation tasks to learn the re-weighting
factors of interest (Z. Xu et al., 2021). Such ad-hoc development of re-weighting mechanisms motivates us to
design a more principled approach to re-weight tasks for meta-learning. We note that there are also studies
learning to balance the contribution of each training task, e.g., learning to balance (H. B. Lee et al., 2020).
However, such method focuses on the task-adaptation step (also known as inner loop), while our interest is to
explicitly weight the contribution of each task at the meta-learning step (also known as outer-loop).
In this paper, we present a new principled and fully-automated task-weighting algorithm, called trajectory
optimisation based task weighting for meta-learning (TOW). We note that TOW is not a meta-learning method,
but a task weighting framework that can be integrated into existing meta-learning algorithms to circumvent
the problematic assumption about the even distribution of training tasks. Our contributions can be summarised
as follows:

1
arXiv:2301.01400v1  [cs.LG]  4 Jan 2023

• We propose to cast the task-weighting problem in meta-learning to a ﬁnite-horizon discrete-time
trajectory optimisation with state denoted by the meta-parameter and action by the re-weight factors of
tasks, and solve such problem using the iterative linear quadratic regulator.
• We prove that under the conditions of boundedness and smoothness of the loss function used, TOW
converges to a particular ϵ0-stationary point.
• We demonstrate TOW’s functionality by incorporating it into two common meta-learning algorithms,
namely MAML (Finn et al., 2017) and Prototypical Networks (Snell et al., 2017), and showing that
TOW enables meta-learning methods to converge with fewer number of iterations and achieves higher
prediction accuracy than some common task re-weighting mechanisms in the literature.
2
Background
2.1
Trajectory optimisation
Given continuous state x ∈RD and action u ∈RM, the objective of a trajectory optimisation is to ﬁnd an
optimal sequence of actions {u∗
t }T
t=1 that minimises the total cost:
min
{ut}T
t=1
T
X
t=1
c(xt, ut)
s.t. xt+1 = f(xt, ut),
(1)
where c(xt, ut) and f(xt, ut) are the cost function and the state-transition dynamics at time step t, respectively.
These functions are assumed to be twice diﬀerentiable. In addition, the initial state x1 is given, and trajectory
optimisation means ﬁnding the optimal sequence of actions {u∗
t }T
t=1 for a particular x1, not for all possible
initial states.
In trajectory optimisation, the ﬁnite-horizon discrete-time problem shown in (1) can be solved approxi-
mately by iterative methods, such as diﬀerential dynamic programming (DDP) (Jacobson and Mayne, 1970)
or iterative linear quadratic regulator (iLQR) (Todorov and W. Li, 2005; Tassa et al., 2012). These methods
rely on a local approximation of the state-transition dynamics and cost function using Taylor series about a
nominal trajectory {ˆxt, ˆut}T
t=1. In DDP, both the state-transition dynamics and cost function are approximated
to the second order of their Taylor series, while in iLQR – a “simpliﬁed” version of DDP, the state-transition
dynamics is approximated up to the ﬁrst order. In a loose sense, DDP is analogy to the Newton’s method,
while iLQR is analogous to a quasi-Newton’s method.
The main idea of iLQR is to cast a general non-linear trajectory optimisation problem shown in (1) to
a linear quadratic problem (LQP) in which the state-transition dynamics is linear and the cost function is
quadratic. The approximate LQP can then be solved exactly by the linear quadratic regulator (LQR) (Anderson
and Moore, 2007). Subsequently, the newly obtained trajectory is used as the nominal trajectory for the
next iteration. This process is repeated until the cost function is converged. The detailed derivation of iLQR
can be found in Appendix E. Further details of iLQR can be referred to (Todorov and W. Li, 2005; Tassa
et al., 2012). To our best knowledge, there are no previous works that provide a proof on the convergence
of iLQR. Therefore, for a complete analysis, we provide the proof of convergence for iLQR adopted from
DDP (Sidney Yakowitz and Rutherford, 1984) in Appendix F.
2.2
Meta-learning
The setting of the meta-learning considered in this paper follows the task environment (Baxter, 2000), where
tasks are i.i.d. sampled from an unknown distribution p(T ) over a family of tasks. Each task Ti is associated
with two data subsets: training (or support) subset S(s)
i
= {(s(s)
ij , y(s))
ij }
m(s)
i
j=1 , where s(s)
ij denotes a training
input and y(s)
ij denotes the corresponding training label, i ∈{1, . . . , M}, and validation (or query) subset
S(q)
i
which is similarly deﬁned. For training tasks {Ti}M
i=1, both data subsets have labels, while for testing
tasks TM+1, only the data in S(s)
M+1 is labelled. The aim is to learn a meta-parameter x ∈RD shared across
all tasks, so that x can be eﬃciently ﬁne-tuned on S(s)
i
to produce a task-speciﬁc model that can predict
accurately the unlabelled data in S(q)
i
. One of the simplest forms of meta-learning is analogous to an extension
2

of hyper-parameter optimisation in single-task learning, where the shared meta-parameter x is learnt from
many tasks. The objective of meta-learning can be expressed as:
min
x
1
M 1⊤
Mℓ(x),
(2)
where 1M is an M-dimensional vector with all elements equal to 1, and ℓ(x) ∈RM is a vector containing M
validation losses induced by evaluating the meta-parameter x on each data subset S(q)
i
of M training tasks.
Each element of ℓ(x) can be expressed as:
ℓi(x) =
1
m(q)
i
m(q)
i
X
j=1
ℓ

s(q)
ij , y(q)
ij ; φi(x)

, ∀i ∈{1, . . . , M},
(3)
where ℓ(.) is the loss function that is non-negative and twice diﬀerentiable, φ(x) is the parameter ﬁne-tuned
on task Ti:
φi(x) = x −
γ
m(s)
i
m(s)
i
X
k=1
∇x
h
ℓ

s(s)
ik , y(s)
ik ; x
i
,
(4)
and γ is the step size or learning rate for the task adaptation step (also known as inner-loop).
Note that the gradient-based task adaptation step in (4) is a special case of meta-learning in which x is
considered as the initialisation of the neural network of interest (Finn et al., 2017). In metric-based meta-
learning (Snell et al., 2017), the task adaptation step in (4) is slightly diﬀerent where the class prototypes of
training data are embedded into a latent space by the meta-model, and the validation loss is based on the
distance between the class prototypes to each data-point in S(q)
i
. There are also other extensions of (2) using
probabilistic approaches (Yoon et al., 2018; Ravi and Beatson, 2019; C. Nguyen et al., 2020). Nevertheless,
our approach proposed in Section 3 can be integrated into any of these meta-learning algorithms with a slight
modiﬁcation.
2.3
Task-weighting meta-learning
The minimisation of the average validation loss over M tasks in (2) implicitly implies that those tasks are
balanced (similar to class balance in single-task learning). This assumption is, however, hardly true in practice,
and consequently, makes the trained meta-model perform poorly for testing tasks that are rarely observed
. To address such issue, a task-weighting factor is introduced to diversify the contribution of each training
task, allowing the trained meta-model to generalise better to unseen tasks even if those tasks are rare. The
objective of such meta-learning problem can be written as:
x∗= arg min
x u⊤ℓ(x)
s.t. u ∈U ⊆RM,
(5)
where u is an M-dimensional vector that re-weights the inﬂuence of M training tasks, and U is the set of
feasible weights, i.e., as deﬁned by some weighting criterion.
Note that the task-weighting problem in (5) is carried out at the meta level (often known as “outer-loop”).
It is, therefore, diﬀerent from some recent meta-learning methods (Khodak et al., 2019; Baik et al., 2020;
Flennerhag et al., 2020; H. B. Lee et al., 2020) that design diﬀerent learning strategies for φi(x) at the task
adaptation step (often known as “inner-loop”) to estimate the meta-parameters with the same outer-loop
objective shown in (2).
The objective in (5) is more ﬂexible than (2), since it allows one to select diﬀerent weighting criteria
to train the meta-learning model of interest. The most widely-used weighting criterion is uniform: ui =
1/M, ∀i ∈{1, . . . , M}, making the objective in (5) resemble the one in (2). Another popular criterion is to
select diﬃcult tasks – tasks that have the largest validation losses – for training to optimise the performance
on the worst-case scenarios (Collins et al., 2020). However, such diﬃcult tasks may not always be preferred
when outliers and noise are present. That leads to another weighting approach which favours the most
familiar data-points in single-task learning (Kumar et al., 2010; Bengio et al., 2009; Wang et al., 2017) –
often referred as curriculum learning. The two latter task-weighting approaches can be considered as the
“exploration” and “exploitation” strategies used in reinforcement learning (RL), respectively. Similar to the
exploration and exploitation dilemma in RL, we hypothesise that the optimality for task weighting is formed
3

by a balance between these two approaches. In the following section, we propose a principled approach to
automate re-weighting tasks through an optimisation on a sequence of many mini-batches rather than relying
on manually-designed criteria as the previous papers.
3
Methodology
3.1
Task-weighting as a trajectory optimisation
In practice, the optimisation in (5) is often carried out using a gradient-based optimiser where the next
meta-parameter x∗is obtained from the current meta-parameter x and its corresponding u via the function f.
Such update can be considered as a state-transition dynamics where the meta-parameter x is the state and
the weighting vector u is the action. Given this observation, we explicitly replace the weighting criterion in
(5) by a trajectory optimisation to formulate the task-weighting meta-learning problem as follows:
x∗
t+1 = f(x∗
t , u∗
t ) ∀t ∈{1, . . . , T}
s.t. {u∗
t }T
t=1 = arg min
{u}T
t=1
T
X
t=1
c(xt, ut)
s.t. xt+1 = f(xt, ut) ∀t ∈{1, . . . , T}, and x1is given
x∗
1 = x1,
(6)
where f(., .) corresponds to the formulation of an optimiser such as stochastic gradient descent (SGD) (Robbins
and Monro, 1951) or Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2014), c(., .) is a cost function representing the weighting
criteria, x1 is the initialisation of the meta-learning parameter, and the subscript denotes the time step.
To solve for an optimal re-weighting vector u in the constraint of (6), the cost function needs to be deﬁned.
Since our interest is the convergence speed and the generalisation of the learnt meta-model, we deﬁne the cost
function as an un-discounted sum of uniformly-weighted validation losses of tasks belonging to a sequence of
T mini-batches plus a penalisation on the action u. For simplicity, the penalty on the action u is assumed to
follow a Gaussian prior with mean µu and precision βu. In particular, the cost function can be expressed as:
c(xt, ut) = 1⊤
Mℓ(xt) + βu
2 ∥ut −µu1M∥2,
(7)
where ∥.∥denotes the ℓ2-norm.
Note that the action ut is not necessarily normalised to 1. We argue that imposing such constraint might not
work well in some cases, for example, a mini-batch containing all familiar tasks, and another one containing
all unfamiliar tasks. Our hypothesis is to have small weights for familiar tasks in the former mini-batch,
while setting large weights for unfamiliar tasks in the latter mini-batch to diversify the learning. Normalising
ut to 1 will, however, be undesirable since the contribution of the tasks in both mini-batches would be the
same, making the meta-learning model even biased further toward the familiar tasks in the ﬁrst mini-batch.
Hence, we allow the weights to be determined automatically by the optimisation in (6) with a Gaussian prior.
Nevertheless, one can also implement ut being normalised to 1 by simply replacing it by softmax(ut) in the
state-transition dynamics f.
In general, the constraint in (6) cannot be solved exactly, but approximately using iterative methods such
as DDP or iLQR. Given the state-transition dynamics f follows the formulation of a ﬁrst-order gradient-based
optimiser (refer to Eq. (90) in Appendix G.1 and Eq. (97) in Appendix G.2 for the explicit form of f using SGD
and Adam, respectively), f consists of the ﬁrst derivatives of the weighted loss u⊤
t ℓ(xt) w.r.t. x. Hence, applying
DDP will result in an intractable solution since DDP requires the second derivatives of f, corresponding to the
third derivatives of the weighted loss u⊤
t ℓ(xt). In contrast, iLQR needs only the ﬁrst derivatives of f, which
corresponds to the second derivatives of the weighted loss u⊤
t ℓ(xt). Although this means that iLQR no longer
exhibits the quadratic convergence rate as DDP, in the context of meta-learning, the signiﬁcant reduction in
computation out-weights the speed of convergence for the task weighting vector u. In this paper, we use iLQR
to solve the constraint in (6). The locally-optimal actions obtained is then used to re-weight the tasks in each
mini-batch to train the meta-learning model of interest.
The approximation using Taylor’s series on the state-transition dynamics and cost function is shown in
Appendix G and Appendix H, respectively. This approximation leads to the calculation of two Hessian matrices:
one for the sum of weighted loss, u⊤
t ℓ(xt), in the dynamics, denoted as Fxt, and the other for the sum of
4

Algorithm 1 Task-weighting for meta-learning
1: procedure train
2:
deﬁne total loss J in Eq. (73)
3:
deﬁne iLQRbackward( ) in Algorithm 2 (Appendix I)
4:
initialise x1
5:
while x is not converged do
6:
get T mini-batches, each consists of M tasks
7:
generate a random sequence of action {ˆut}T
t=1
8:
obtain the corresponding state {ˆxt}T
t=1
9:
while iLQR cost is not converged do
10:
{Kt, kt}T
t=1, θ1 ←iLQRbackward({ˆxt, ˆut}T
t=1)
11:
ε = 2
12:
repeat
▷Backtracking line search
13:
ε ←1
2ε
14:
for t = 1 : T do
▷iLQR forward pass
15:
ut = Kt (xt −ˆxt) + εkt + ˆut
16:
xt+1 = f(xt, ut)
17:
until J(u1:N) −J(ˆu1:N) ≤1
2εθ1 and uti ≥0
18:
{ˆxt}T
t=1 ←{xt}T
t=1
▷Update nominal state
19:
{ˆut}T
t=1 ←{ut}T
t=1
20:
x1 ←xT
▷Update meta-parameter
21:
return x1
non-weighted loss, 1⊤
Mℓ(xt), in the cost function, denoted as Cxt,xt. In addition, while performing recursive
backward iLQR, we need to calculate another intermediate matrix of the cost-to-go in (61) (please refer to
Appendix E), denoted as Vt, which has the same size as the Hessian matrix. Naively calculating these Hessian
matrices comes at the quadratic complexity O
 D2
in terms of running time and storage, resulting in an
intractable solution for large-scaled models. To address such issue, the two Hessian matrices Fxt and Cxt,xt may
be approximated by their diagonals which can be eﬃciently computed using the Hutchinson’s method (Bekas
et al., 2007). However, as the size of the model increases, using a few samples from the uniform Rademacher
distribution produces noisy estimations of the Hessian diagonals, resulting in a poor approximation (Yao et al.,
2021). Instead of calculating the Hessian diagonals, we use the Gauss-Newton diagonals as replacements.
As the Gauss-Newton matrix is known to be a good approximation of the Hessian matrix (Martens, 2010;
Botev et al., 2017), this, therefore, results in a good approximation for the Hessian operator. In addition,
Gauss-Newton diagonals can be eﬃciently calculated using a single backward pass (Dangel et al., 2020). For
the matrix Vt, we approximate it by its diagonal matrix. In fact, matrix Vt is analogous to the inverse Hessian
matrix in Newton’s method. Thus, approximating matrix Vt by its diagonal means performing Newton’s
method separately for each coordinate, which holds when the diagonal of Vt is dominant. We also provide
some additional results using full matrix Vt in Appendix B. In general, we do not observe any signiﬁcant
diﬀerence in terms of accuracy evaluated on the validation set between the diagonal approximation and
the one with full Gauss-Newton matrix. Nevertheless, these approximation increases the tractability of our
proposed method, allowing to implement the proposed method for very large models, such as deep neural
networks.
The whole procedure of the proposed approach can be described as follows: ﬁrst, a meta-parameter x1 is
initialised as the initial state, and then, iLQR is employed to solve the constraint in (6) to determine a locally-
optimal action {u∗
t }T
t=1 about an arbitrary-but-feasible trajectory {(ˆxt, ˆut)}T
t=1 with ˆx1 = x1. The obtained
weighting vectors {u∗
t }T
t=1 are then used to weight tasks in each mini-batch to train the meta-parameter x∗
t+1
in (6). The newly calculated state at the end of the T time steps, x∗
T+1, is then used as the initial state for the
next iteration. This process is repeated until the weighted validation loss u⊤ℓ(x) converges to a local minima.
In the implementation, we observe that this optimisation converges after less than 10 iterations. The complete
algorithm of the proposed task-weighting meta-learning approach is outlined in Algorithm 1.
To simplify the implementation and convergence analysis, we select the nominal actions that coincide
with the uniform weighting, meaning that: ˆuti = 1/M, ∀t ∈{1, . . . , T}, i ∈{1, . . . , M}. In addition, we
constrain that all elements of the weighting vector or action u are non-negative since each task would
5

either contribute more or less or even not contribute to the learning for x. This constraint is incorporated
into the stopping condition for iLQR shown in step 17 of Algorithm 1. If there is at least one element
uti, t ∈{1, . . . , T}, i ∈{1, . . . , M} being negative, the backtracking line search will iterate one more time with
ε decaying toward 0, forcing ut to stay close to the nominal ˆut. Thus, in the worst-case, ε is reduced to 0,
making ut coincide with ˆut, which is the uniform weighting.
3.2
Complexity analysis
The downside of TOW is the overhead due to the linearisation and quadraticisation for the state-transition
dynamics and cost function, and the calculation to obtain the controller Kt and kt shown in Algorithm 1. If
O(T0) is the time complexity to train a meta-learning method following a uniform weighting strategy, then
the time complexity required by TOW will consist of the following:
• nominal trajectory: O(T0)
• linearisation and quadraticisation using Gauss-Newton matrices: O(niLQRm0ηD)
• iLQR backward: O(niLQRMD)
• iLQR forward with back-tracking line search: O(niLQRnlsT0),
where niLQR is the number of iterations in iLQR, m0 = m(q)
i , i ∈{1, . . . , M}, is the total number of validation
samples within a task, η is the number of arithmetic operations in the model of interest, and nls is the number
of back-tracking line search. Thus, the ﬁnal complexity of TOW is: O((niLQRnls + 1)T0 + niLQR(m0η + M)D))
comparing to O(T0) in the conventional meta-learning.
3.3
Convergence analysis
This subsection proves that the training process for MAML using TOW to weight tasks converges to an ϵ0-
stationary point where ϵ0 is greater than some positive constant. Before analysing the convergence of TOW,
we state a lemma bounding the norm of the weighting vector (or action) ut obtained from iLQR:
Lemma 1. If ut is a stationary action of a nominal action ˆut obtained from iLQR, then:
∃δ > 0 : ∥ut −ˆut∥≤δ.
Proof. Please refer to Appendix A.2.1 for the detailed proof.
To analyse the convergence of a general non-convex function, one typically assumes that the loss function,
its ﬁrst derivative and second derivative are bounded and Lipschitz-continuous as shown in Assumptions 1
to 3, respectively (Collins et al., 2020; Fallah et al., 2020).
Assumption 1. The loss function of interest ℓmentioned in (3) is B-bounded and L-Lipschitz.
Formally, Assumption 1 means that the loss function ℓhas the following properties:
• Boundedness: ∃B > 0 : ∀x ∈RD, |ℓ(sij, yij; x)| ≤B,
• Lipschitz continuity: ∃L > 0 : ∀ex, x ∈RD, |ℓ(sij, yij; ex) −ℓ(sij, yij; x)| ≤L∥ex −x∥.
The boundedness assumption is to bound the second moment of the loss function, while the Lipschitz-
continuity assumption of the loss function ℓimplies that the gradient norm of ℓw.r.t. x is bounded above (see
Lemma 8 in Appendix A.4):
∥∇xℓ(s, y; x)∥≤L.
(8)
The bounded gradient norm in (8) also implies that the variance of gradient of the loss function w.r.t.
training samples is bounded as shown in Lemma 2.
Lemma 2. If Assumption 1 holds, then the variance of gradient of the loss function is σ2-bounded:
∃σ > 0 : ∀x ∈RD, E(sij,y)∼Di


∇xℓ(sij, yij; x) −E(sij,y)∼Di [∇xℓ(sij, yij; x)]

2
≤σ2.
6

Proof. Please refer to Appendix A.2.2 for the detailed proof.
The result in Lemma 2 also leads to the boundedness of the variance of the weighted validation loss as
shown in Lemma 3.
Lemma 3. Given the result in Lemma 2, the variance of ∇xu⊤
t ℓ(xt) is bounded above by eσ2 = σ2  δ + M−0.52.
Proof. Please refer to Appendix A.2.3 for the detailed proof.
Assumption 2. The gradient of the loss function ℓ(s, y; x) w.r.t. x is S-Lipschitz.
Assumption 2 means that:
∃S > 0 : ∀ex, x ∈RD, ∥∇xℓ(sij, yij; ex) −∇xℓ(sij, yij; x)∥≤S∥ex −x∥.
Assumption 3. The Hessian matrix ∇2
xℓ(s, y; x) is ρ-Lipschitz.
Assumption 3 implies that:
∃ρ > 0 : ∀ex, x ∈RD,

∇2
xℓ(sij, yij; ex) −∇2
xℓ(sij, yij; x)

 ≤ρ∥ex −x∥.
These assumptions are used to bound the gradient of the “true” validation loss of task Ti, which is deﬁned
as follows:
¯ℓi(x) = ED(q)
i
h
ℓ

s(q)
ij , y(q)
ij ; φ(x)
i
,
(9)
where ED(q)
i
indicates the expectation over all data pairs {(s(q)
ij , y(q)
ij )}+∞
j=1 sampled from the true (validation)
probability distribution D(q)
i .
Lemma 4. If the conditions in Assumptions 1 to 3 hold, then the gradient of the true validation loss ¯ℓi(x) deﬁned
in Eq. (9) is eS-Lipschitz, where: eS = S(1 + γS)2 + γρL.
Proof. Please refer to Appendix A.2.4 for the detailed proof.
Given the above assumptions and lemmas, the convergence of TOW can be shown in Theorem 5. We also
provide some examples of loss functions and analyse whether they satisfy Assumptions 1 to 3 in Appendix J.
Theorem 5. If Assumptions 1 to 3 hold, the learning rate α < 2/eS(δ
√
M+1), and z is randomly sampled from
{xt}Titer
t=1 returned by Algorithm 1, then:
Ez∼{xt}Titer
t=1

ED(q) t
1:M


∇zu⊤
t ¯ℓ1:M (z)

2
≤ϵ0 +
κ
Titer
,
where:
ϵ0 =
4δB
√
M + α2eσ2 eS

δ
√
M + 1

α
h
2 −αeS

δ
√
M + 1
i
> 0
(10)
κ =
2u⊤
1 ¯ℓ1:M (x1)
α
h
2 −αeS

δ
√
M + 1
i,
(11)
with Titer as the number of gradient-update for the meta-parameter (or the number of mini-batches of tasks used),
and ED(q) t
1:M as the expectation taken over all data sampled from t mini-batches {D(q)
i }t
i=1, each D(q)
i
has M tasks.
Proof. Please refer to Appendix A.3 for the detailed proof.
Theorem 5 shows that the expectation of squared gradient norm of the weighted validation loss is upper-
bounded by a monotonically reducing function w.r.t. the number of iterations Titer. This implies that Algorithm 1
converges in expectation to an ϵ0-stationary point.
7

Remark 1. The result in Theorem 5 agrees with some previous works on task-weighting for meta-learning,
e.g. Collins et al., 2020, Ineq. (75) where the gradient norm is bounded above by some positive constant. The
tightness of the bound in Theorem 5 mostly depends on how small the value of ϵ0 is. In fact, we can observe that
limδ→0 ϵ0 = 0. Thus, to ensure that ϵ0 is small, δ needs to be small. We can make δ small by imposing a strong
prior of u by setting a large value of βu in Eq. (7), e.g. βu = 10 in our experiments presented in Section 5. In
addition, we integrate the backtracking line search in Algorithm 1 to force u to stay close to the uniform weighting
ˆu, making δ very small. Another factor contributes to the small value of ϵ0 is the inverse of the number of tasks in
a mini-batch, 1/M, as seen in (10). In practice, M cannot be too large and often in the range of 5 to 10. And since
we can impose constraints to make δ tiny, we can guarantee to obtain a small ϵ0 to make the bound in Theorem 5
tight.
4
Related work
Our work directly relates to re-weighting tasks in meta-learning. One notable recent work is TR-MAML (Collins
et al., 2020) which places higher weights on tasks with larger validation losses to optimise performance
for worst-case scenarios. However, when the number of training tasks is very large, e.g. there will be
 1000
5

≈8.25 × 1012 5-way classiﬁcation tasks formed from 1000 characters in Omniglot dataset (Lake et al.,
2015), learning weight for each training task is intractable. TR-MAML circumvents such issue by clustering
tasks into a small number of clusters based on some ad-hoc intuition and learn the weight for each cluster.
This, however, reduces the practicability of TR-MAML. Another work, α-MAML (Cai et al., 2020), provides an
upper-bound on the distance between the weighted risk evaluated on training tasks to the expected risk on
testing tasks. The re-weight factors can then be obtained to minimise that upper-bound, reducing the variance
between training and testing tasks. In reinforcement learning (RL), MWL-MAML (Z. Xu et al., 2021) is recently
proposed to employ meta-learning to learn the local optimal re-weight factor of each trajectory using a few
gradient descent steps. The downside of MWL-MAML is the need of validation trajectories (or validation tasks
in meta-learning) that are representative enough to learn those weights. Furthermore, TR-MAML, α-MAML
and MWL-MAML rely on a single mini-batch of tasks to determine the weights without considering the eﬀect
of sequence of mini-batches when training a meta-model, potentially rendering sub-optimal solutions. In
contrast, our proposed method does not need to cluster tasks nor require additional set of validation tasks. In
addition, our proposed method automates the calculation of task-weighting through an optimisation over
a sequence of mini-batches, allowing to obtain better local-optimal solutions outside of a single mini-batch
of tasks. There are also other studies about task balancing, such as Learn to Balance (L2B) (H. B. Lee et al.,
2020). However, L2B introduces additional parameters in the task adaptation step (inner-loop), while our
method explicitly introduces a weighting vector at the meta-parameter update step (outer-loop).
Our work is also similar to task-weighting in multi-task learning (Chen et al., 2018; Sener and Koltun,
2018; Guo et al., 2018; L. Liu et al., 2021) where the goal is to obtain an optimal re-weighting vector u for all
tasks. Such modelling can, therefore, work well with a small number of tasks, but potentially fall short when
the number of tasks is very large, e.g. in the magnitude of 1012 training tasks for 5-way Omniglot classiﬁcation,
due to the poor scalability of the computational and storage complexities of that modelling. In comparison,
our proposed approach does not explicitly learn the weighting vector for all training tasks, but determines the
weighting vector for tasks in current and some following mini-batches via a trajectory optimisation technique.
In a loose sense, the multi-task learning approaches can be considered as an analogy to a “batch” learning
setting w.r.t. the weighting vector u, while ours is analogous to an “online” learning setting which can scale
well to the number of training tasks. At the time of writing this paper, we were not aware of a concurrent work
– Auto-Lambda (S. Liu et al., 2022) – that is designed to use meta-learning to learn how to weight tasks in the
multi-task setting. Auto-Lambda is similar to TR-MAML, which is designed for a ﬁxed number of tasks in the
multi-task learning, while being intractable when the number of tasks is large. Furthermore, Auto-Lambda is
also similar to MWL-MAML since Auto-Lambda employs validation subsets of training tasks to meta-learn the
weighting of tasks.
This paper is motivated from the observation of large variation in terms of prediction performance made
by meta-learning algorithms on various testing tasks (Dhillon et al., 2019, Figure 1), implying that the trained
meta-model may be biased toward certain training tasks. Such observation may be rooted in task relatedness
or task similarity which is a growing research topic in the ﬁeld of transfer learning. Existing works include
task-clustering using k-nearest neighbours (Thrun and O’Sullivan, 1996) or using convex optimisation (Jacob
et al., 2009), learning task relationship through task covariance matrices (Y. Zhang and Yeung, 2012), or
8

0
5
10
15
20
80
85
90
95
№of iterations (×1,000)
Accuracy (%)
uniform
exploration
exploitation
TOW
(a) MAML on Omniglot
0
2
4
6
8
90
92
94
96
98
№of iterations (×1,000)
Accuracy (%)
(b) Protonet on Omniglot
10
20
30
40
36
38
40
42
44
№of iterations (×1,000)
Accuracy (%)
(c) MAML on mini-ImageNet
10
20
30
№of iterations (×1,000)
(d) Protonet on mini-ImageNet
20
40
№of iterations (×1,000)
(e) MAML with Resnet-10
Figure 1: Validation accuracy exponential moving average (with smoothing factor 0.1) of diﬀerent task-weighting
strategies evaluated on: (a) and (b) Omniglot, and (c), (d) and (e) mini-ImageNet.
theoretical guarantees to learn similarity between tasks (Shui et al., 2019). Recently, a large-scale empirical
study, known as Taskonomy (Zamir et al., 2018), investigated the relationship between 26 computer vision
tasks. Another promising direction to quantify task similarity is to employ task representation, notably
Task2Vec (Achille et al., 2019), which is based on Fisher Information matrix to embed tasks into a latent
space. One commonality among those studies is that learning from certain training tasks may be beneﬁcial to
generalise to unseen tasks. This suggests the design of a mechanism to re-weight the contribution of each
training task to improve the performance of the meta-model of interest.
Furthermore, our work is related to ﬁnite-horizon discrete-time trajectory optimisation or open-loop
optimal control which has been well studied in the ﬁeld of control and robotics. The objective is to minimise
a cost function that depends on the states and actions in many consecutive time steps given the state-
transition dynamics. Exact solution can be obtained for the simplest problem where the cost is quadratic
and the dynamics is linear using linear quadratic regulator (Anderson and Moore, 2007). For a general
non-linear problem, approximate solutions can be found via iterative approaches, such as diﬀerential dynamic
programming (Jacobson and Mayne, 1970; Murray and SJ Yakowitz, 1984; Sidney Yakowitz and Rutherford,
1984) and iterative LQR (iLQR) (Todorov and W. Li, 2005; Tassa et al., 2012).
5
Experiments
5.1
N-way k-shot classiﬁcation
In this section, we empirically compare the performance of the proposed trajectory optimisation task weighting
(TOW) approach with three baselines: one with uniform weighting, denoted as uniform, one with higher
weights on diﬃcult tasks (or tasks with higher losses), denoted as exploration, and the other one with higher
weights on easier tasks (or tasks with lower losses), denoted as exploitation. The experiments are based
on n-way k-shot classiﬁcation setting used in few-shot learning with tasks formed from Omniglot (Lake
et al., 2015) and mini-ImageNet (Vinyals et al., 2016) – the two most widely used datasets to evaluate the
performance of meta-learning algorithms.
Naively implementing the two baselines, exploration and exploitation, will easily lead to trivial solutions
9

Table 1: The classiﬁcation accuracy averaged on 1,000 random testing tasks generated from Omniglot and 600 tasks
from mini-ImageNet with 95 percent conﬁdent interval; the bold numbers denote their statistically diﬀerences from the
ones in the same column.
Weighting
method
Omniglot
Mini-ImageNet
4 layer CNN
Resnet-10
MAML
Uniform
94.86 ±0.43
48.70 ±1.841
49.12 ±0.76
Exploration
92.64 ±0.52
48.80 ±0.72
48.72 ±0.74
Exploitation
95.34 ±0.42
49.22 ±0.74
48.44 ±0.76
TOW
95.94 ±0.40
51.55 ±0.75
52.32 ±0.80
Protonet
Uniform
95.21 ±0.37
49.42 ±0.782
_
Exploration
94.57 ±0.38
48.56 ±0.77
_
Exploitation
95.78 ±0.40
48.39 ±0.79
_
TOW
96.84 ±0.37
51.05 ±0.80
_
where only the task with largest or smallest loss within a mini-batch is selected. Thus, only one task in each
mini-batch is used for learning, and consequently, making the learning noisy and unstable. We, therefore,
introduce a prior, denoted as p(u), as a regularisation to prevent many tasks within the same mini-batch from
being discarded. The objective to determine the weights for these two baselines can be written as follows:
u∗=



arg min
u −u⊤ℓ(x) −ln p(u)
for exploration
arg min
u u⊤ℓ(x) −ln p(u)
for exploitation.
(12)
In general, the prior p(u) can be any distribution that has support in (0, +∞) such as Beta, Gamma or
Cauchy distribution. For simplicity, p(u) is selected as a Dirichlet distribution with a concentration κ > 1
to constrain the weight vector within a probability simplex. One can then use a non-linear optimisation
solver to solve (12) to obtain an optimal u∗for one of the two baselines. In the implementation, we use
Sequential Least SQuares Programming (SLSQP) to obtain u∗. Note that the deﬁnition of the exploration
baseline above resembles TR-MAML (Collins et al., 2020), but is applicable for common few-shot learning
benchmarks where the number of tasks is large. Similarly, the exploitation is an analogy to robust Bayesian
data re-weighting (Wang et al., 2017) or curriculum learning in single-task learning.
For Omniglot dataset, there are a total of 1,623 diﬀerent handwritten characters from 50 diﬀerent
alphabets. Each of characters was drawn online via Amazon’s Mechanical Turk by 20 diﬀerent people (Lake
et al., 2015). Conventionally, 1,000 randomly-sampled characters are used for training and the remaining is
used to testing. Such train-test split might, however, be inadequate since the characters in one alphabet can
be present in both training and testing sets, and learning a character in that alphabet might help to classify
easily from that same alphabet. To make the classiﬁcation more challenging, we follow the original train-test
split (Lake et al., 2015) by using 30 alphabets for training and 20 alphabets for testing. We also utilise the
hierarchy structure of alphabet-character to form ﬁner-grained classiﬁcation tasks to make the classiﬁcation
more diﬃcult than the random train-test split. Furthermore, we follow the convention from previous work to
re-size all those gray images to 28-by-28 pixel2 to have a fair evaluation.
For mini-ImageNet, the dataset consists of 100 classes, each class has 600 colour images sampled from
1,000 classes of the ImageNet dataset (Deng et al., 2009). We follow the standard train-test split that uses 64
classes for training, 16 classes for validation and 20 for testing (Ravi and Larochelle, 2017) in our evaluation.
To be consistent with previous work, we pre-process all images by resizing them to 84-by-84 pixels2 before
carrying out any training or testing.
The base model used across the experiments is the 4 CNN module network that is widely used in few-shot
image classiﬁcation (Vinyals et al., 2016; Finn et al., 2017). Each module of the base network consists of 32
ﬁlters with 3-by-3 kernel, followed by a batch normalisation, activated by the Rectiﬁed Linear Unit (ReLU)
and pooled by a 2-by-2 max-pooling layer. The output of the last CNN module is ﬂattened before performing
classiﬁcation. Two common meta-learning algorithms considered in this section include MAML (Finn et al.,
2017) and Prototypical Networks (Snell et al., 2017). In MAML, the ﬂattened features are passed to a linear
1reported in (Finn et al., 2017)
2reported in (Snell et al., 2017)
10

Table 2: Running time (in GPU-hour) of diﬀerent task-weighting methods based on MAML.
Omniglot
mini-ImageNet
CNN
Resnet-10
Exploration
1.55
5.24
7.18
Exploitation
1.55
5.24
7.18
Uniform
1.35
5.03
7.16
TOW
7.50
38.12
67.78
fully-connected layer to classify, while in Prototypical Networks, the classiﬁcation is based on Euclidean
distances to the prototypes of each class.
For all experiments, the learning rate γ of task adaptation (also known as inner-loop) shown in Eq. (4) is 0.1
for Omniglot and 0.01 for mini-ImageNet with 5 gradient updates. The learning rate for the meta-parameters,
α, is set at 10−4 for all the setting. The mini-batch size is M = 10 tasks for Omniglot and M = 5 tasks for mini-
ImageNet. For the Dirichlet concentration of the prior in the exploration and exploitation baselines, we try three
values of κ ∈{0.2, 1.2, 5}, and found that a too small value of κ leads to noisy learning since only the easiest
or hardest task is selected, while too large value of κ makes both the baselines identical to uniform weighting.
Hence, we select κ = 1.2 that balances between these two strategies. Note that κ = 1 results in a random
prior, leading to a trivial solution. For the trajectory optimiser iLQR, the state-transition dynamics f follows
the formula of Adam optimiser since Adam provides a less noisy training as in SGD. The nominal trajectory is,
as mentioned in Section 3.1, selected with uniform actions: ˆutj = 1/M, ∀j ∈{1, . . . , M}, t ∈{1, . . . , T}. The
number of iterations used in iLQR is 2 to speed up the training, although higher number of iterations can be
used to achieve better performance by trading oﬀthe running time. We also provide an ablation study with
two diﬀerent numbers of iterations in iLQR in Appendix D, where the larger number of iterations in iLQR
slightly improves the prediction accuracy on the validation set of mini-ImageNet. The number of time steps
(or number of mini-batches) is T = 10 for Omniglot and 5 for mini-ImageNet. The parameters of the prior
on the action ut are µu = 1/M and βu = 10. As we do not observe any major diﬀerence between diﬀerent
conﬁguration of M and T used in this experiment, we report the result for the case M = 10 and T = 5. Each
experiment is carried out on a single NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPU with 32 GB memory following the conﬁguration
of NVIDIA DGX-1.
Figures 1a to 1d plot the testing accuracy evaluated on 100 validation tasks drawn from Omniglot and
mini-ImageNet following the 5-way 1-shot setting. The validation accuracy curves along the training process
show that TOW can achieve higher performance comparing to the three baselines on various datasets and
meta-learning methods. We also carry out an experiment using Resnet-10 (He et al., 2016) on mini-ImageNet
to demonstrate the scalability of TOW. The results on Resnet-10 in Figure 1e shows a a similar observation that
TOW out-performs other task-weighting methods. We note that the validation accuracy curves of Resnet-10
ﬂuctuates due to our injected dropout to regularise the network from overﬁtting since it is known that larger
networks, such as Resnet-10 or Resnet-18, severely overﬁt in the few-shot setting (C. Nguyen et al., 2020). For
the evaluation on testing sets, we follow the standard setting in few-shot learning by measuring the prediction
accuracy on 1,000 and 600 testing tasks formed from Omniglot and mini-ImageNet, respectively (Vinyals
et al., 2016; Finn et al., 2017). The results in Table 1 show that TOW can be at least 2 percent more accurate
than the best baseline among Uniform, Exploration, and Exploitation. Note that there a diﬀerence between
the results shown in Figure 1 and Table 1 due to their diﬀerences in terms of (i) the tasks form: one from
validation set, while the other from testing set, and (ii) the number of tasks evaluated. Despite the promising
results, the downside of TOW is the overhead caused by approximating the cost and state-transition dynamics
over T mini-batches of tasks to determine the locally-optimal {u∗
t }T
t=1. As shown in Table 2, TOW is about 7
to 9 times slower than the three baselines. We also provide a visualisation of the weights ut in Appendix C.
5.2
Any-shot classiﬁcation
We also follow the realistic task distribution (H. B. Lee et al., 2020) to evaluate further the performance of
TOW. The new setting is mostly similar to N-way k-shot, except k is not ﬁxed and might be diﬀerent for each
class within a task. Speciﬁcally, with a probability of 0.5, the number of shots for each class is sampled from
a uniform distribution: k ∼Uniform(1, 50) to simulate class imbalance. With the other 0.5 probability, the
11

0
20
40
60
80
50
55
60
65
70
№of training tasks (×10,000)
Accuracy (%)
uniform
exploration
exploitation
TOW
(a) MAML
0
5
10
15
20
25
55
60
65
70
№of training tasks (×10,000)
Accuracy (%)
(b) Protonet
Figure 2: Exponential moving average with smoothing factor 0.1 of the prediction accuracy evaluated on validation
tasks formed from the any-shot setting of mini-ImageNet dataset mentioned in Section 5.2 where the base model is a
4-module CNN.
Table 3: Prediction results on any-shot classiﬁcation evaluated on 3,000 testing tasks with 95 percent conﬁdent interval;
the bold numbers denote the results that are statistically signiﬁcant. The results of previous methods are reported in
(H. B. Lee et al., 2020).
Training set
mini-ImageNet
Testing set
mini-ImageNet
CUB
MAML (Finn et al., 2017)
66.64 ±0.22
65.77 ±0.24
Meta-SGD (Z. Li et al., 2017)
69.95 ±0.20
65.94 ±0.22
MT-net (Y. Lee and Choi, 2018)
67.63 ±0.23
66.09 ±0.23
ABML (Ravi and Beatson, 2019)
56.91 ±0.19
57.88 ±0.20
Protonet (Snell et al., 2017)
69.11 ±0.19
60.80 ±0.19
Proto-MAML (Triantaﬁllou et al., 2020)
68.96 ±0.18
61.77 ±0.19
Bayesian TAML (H. B. Lee et al., 2020)
71.46 ±0.19
71.71 ±0.21
TOW-MAML
70.02 ±0.24
68.34 ±0.25
TOW-Protonet
72.12 ±0.21
64.79 ±0.25
same number of shots k ∼Uniform(1, 50) is used for all classes within that task. The number of validation (or
query) samples is kept at 15 samples per class.
Similar to the experiments carried out in Section 5.1, TOW demonstrates a higher performance compared
to the three baselines: exploitation, exploration and uniform along the training process, as shown in Figure 2.
In general, TOW can achieve the state-of-the-art results when evaluating on 3,000 testing tasks formed from
mini-ImageNet, as shown in Table 3, compared to common meta-learning methods. To further evaluate
TOW, we follow the same setting and use the models trained on mini-ImageNet to test on 50 classes of bird
images split from CUB dataset. The results in the last column of Table 3 show that TOW can also work well
on out-of-distribution tasks formed from CUB compared to most of the methods in the literature. The main
reason that explains the worse performance of TOW, compared with Bayesian TAML, is that the meta-learning
based methods used by TOW are MAML and Protonet, which have a smaller number of meta-parameters to
model tasks than Bayesian TAML.
6
Discussion and conclusion
We propose a principled approach based on trajectory optimisation to mitigate the issue of non-uniform
distribution of training tasks in meta-learning. The idea is to model the training process in meta-learning
by trajectory optimisation with state as meta-parameter and action as the weights of training tasks. The
local optimal weights obtained from iLQR – a trajectory optimiser are then used to re-weight tasks to train
the meta-parameter of interest. We demonstrate that the proposed approach converges with less number of
training tasks and has a ﬁnal prediction accuracy that out-performs some common hand-crafted task-weighting
12

baselines.
Our proposed method also has some limitations that could be addressed in future work. TOW relies
on iLQR which is not ideal for large-scale systems with high dimensional state space such as deep neural
networks. Despite the approximation of Hessian matrices to use only diagonals as mentioned in Section 3.1, the
linearisation of the state-transition dynamics and quadraticisation of the cost function are still time-consuming,
and consequently, reduce TOW’s eﬃciency. Future work might ﬁnd a faster approximation to optimise the
running time for TOW as well as evaluate on large-scaled datasets, such as meta-dataset (Triantaﬁllou et al.,
2020).
Furthermore, our method is local in nature due to the Taylor’s series approximation about a nominal
trajectory used in iLQR. One way to improve further is to deﬁne a “global” or “stationary” policy πθ(xt, ut),
which is similar to Guided Policy Search (Levine and Koltun, 2013; Levine and Koltun, 2014). This policy
can then be trained on multiple local optimal trajectories obtained from iLQR. While this approach may
oﬀer a superior generalisation for the policy, scalability is an issue since the policy needs to process the
high-dimensional state xt. As a result, a very large model may be required to implement such policy.
