Knowledge Integration of Collaborative Product Design 
Using Cloud Computing Infrastructure 
Mahdi Bohlouli#1, Alexander Holland#2, Madjid Fathi#3 
#Department of Science and Engineering, University of Siegen 
Hoelderlinstr. 3, D-57076 Siegen, Germany 

 
Abstract— The pivotal key for the success of manufacturing 
enterprises is sustainable and innovative product design and 
development. 
In 
collaborative 
design, 
stakeholders 
are 
heterogeneously distributed chain-like. Due to the growing 
volume of data and knowledge, an effective management of the 
knowledge acquired in the product design and development is 
one of the key challenges facing most manufacturing enterprises. 
Opportunities for improving efficiency and performance of IT-
based product design applications through centralization of 
resources such as knowledge and computation have increased in 
the last few years with maturation of technologies such as SOA, 
virtualization, grid computing, and/or cloud computing.  The 
main focus of this paper is the concept of ongoing research in 
providing the knowledge integration service for collaborative 
product design and development using cloud computing 
infrastructure. Potentials of the cloud computing to support the 
Knowledge integration functionalities as a Service by providing 
functionalities such as knowledge mapping, merging, searching, 
and transferring in product design procedure are described in 
this paper. Proposed knowledge integration services support 
users by giving real-time access to knowledge resources. The 
framework has the advantage of availability, efficiency, cost 
reduction, less time to result, and scalability. 
 
Keywords— Cloud Computing, Product Knowledge Integration, 
Knowledge Reuse, Product Design Knowledge, Collaborative 
Product Design 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Changes made during the early design stage do not cause 
the significant increase in costs, while during the production 
stage, sharp increase in costs will occur since many blueprints, 
design documents or components would require re-work and 
re-design [5]. Today’s research is focused on optimising the 
development methodologies to enable shorter time, lower 
costs and higher quality of the systems [2]. The pivotal key for 
the success of manufacturing enterprises is sustainable and 
innovative product design and development. In order to 
achieve this goal, it is required to have a real and deep 
knowledge of former and current procedures in the 
manufacturing enterprise [4] and future needs as well as 
customer feedbacks and various stages of production chain 
activities. Realization of an efficient knowledge transfer 
between different stakeholders of product development 
process such as linking customers and suppliers proactively 
throughout the entire value chain, and collaborating across 
boundaries in distributed enterprises is reinforcing this trend. 
Due to the growing volume of data, information and 
knowledge, an effective management of the knowledge gained 
in the product development is one of the key challenges facing 
most enterprises [5]. In addition, organizations are more 
successful that are considering not only using the acquired 
knowledge but also innovating based on knowledge and 
managing knowledge-driven ideas. 
Opportunities for improving efficiency and performance of 
IT-based product design applications through centralization of 
computation and resources such as knowledge and 
information using maturation of technologies like SOA, 
virtualization, grid computing, and cloud computing have 
been increased in the last few years.   
Cloud Computing [6, 9] is an elastic execution environment 
of resources involving multiple stakeholders. It provides a 
scalable, reliable, and highly cost effective service at multiple 
granularities for a specified level of quality (of service) [8]. 
Enterprises can create new services by dynamically 
provisioning of compute, storage, and application services and 
offer as their own isolated or composite cloud services to 
users [9]. Depending on the use case, security, and financial 
issues: services can be deployed in public, private or hybrid 
clouds. Enterprises may use cloud functionalities from others 
for their internal computing or to offer their own services to 
users outside of the company based on provisioned resources 
of public clouds. In private clouds whereby enterprises set up 
cloud-like, centralized shared infrastructure with automated 
capacity adjustment that internal departmental costumers 
utilize in a self-service manner. Hybrid clouds [8] consist of a 
mixed employment of a public and private cloud to achieve a 
maximum of cost reduction through outsourcing whilst 
maintaining the desired degree of control over e.g. sensitive 
data by employing local private clouds.  
A collaborative product design [10] environments have two 
common 
capabilities: 
distribution 
and 
collaboration. 
Distribution means that system consists of geographically 
dispersed members who are working to fulfil a global design 
objective. The act of working together means collaboration. 
Applying new IT technologies such as Web 2.0, cloud-based 
solutions and so on would increase the efficiency and 
effectiveness 
of collaboration in product design. In 
collaborative design, centralization of resources such as 

 
enterprise global knowledge plays fundamental role to get 
higher efficiency and smarter collaboration.  
Knowledge integration (KI) [5] consists of identification, 
acquisition, evaluation and utilization of external knowledge. 
It is different from Knowledge Management (KM).  
Identification is about knowing the type of knowledge which 
is needed. If user knows what knowledge he needs, the way to 
get it is acquisition process of KI. Knowledge utilization 
means making the acquired external knowledge in the form of 
usable for internal aims. KI consists of tools and techniques to 
help the system to identify, acquire, and utilize external and 
internal knowledge.  
The main focus of this paper is the concept of ongoing 
research in providing the knowledge integration service for 
collaborative product design and development using cloud 
computing infrastructure. The potential of cloud computing to 
support the Knowledge Integration as a Service (KIaaS) by 
providing functionalities such as knowledge mapping, 
merging and some other knowledge services such as search, 
and transfer in product design procedure are studied in this 
paper. Product design knowledge is firstly raw and scattered 
data located in different distributed parts of the design chain. 
It could be explicit or tacit. Related works and research 
projects are studied at the next section. Product knowledge 
sources, collaborative design process and classification of 
product knowledge are then described.  
II. RELATED WORKS 
Y.J. Chen and Y.M. Chen [11] proposed a distributed 
product knowledge service model based on product lifecycle 
and its supply chain. The proposed model is distributed, 
modular, flexible and product-oriented. It includes three 
different layers: Physical Knowledge Layer, Business Logic 
Layer and User Layer. Business Logic layer itself covers 
Product Knowledge Service Functional Module, System 
Management & Control Functional Management Module and 
Collaborative Organization Formation Functional Module. 
These modules afford services such as product knowledge 
query, representation, reasoning, navigating, acquiring, 
merging, mapping, managing and so on. It can be applied to 
other 
knowledge-intensive 
systems 
such 
as 
medical 
diagnostics.  
Y. Jiang et al [1] proposed an ontology-based framework of 
knowledge integration to support business process in 
collaborative manufacturing. They defined the ontology for 
product knowledge, which is composed of product design, 
process planning and manufacturing knowledge. These stages 
include some related sub-concepts; ontology schema is then 
designed. Similarity matching method has been applied in 
order to achieve ontology integration. Concept name, essential 
information and relationship similarity calculation is used in 
the mapping process. The framework supposed to effectively 
integrate an individual enterprise’s knowledge by providing 
comprehensive concepts and knowledge connections, and 
increase reuse ratio of product knowledge and reduce product 
development cost and cycle time.  
E. M. Kern and W. Kersten [13] introduced a framework 
for 
internet 
supported 
inter-organizational 
product 
development. The factor which has been highlighted in this 
study is efficiency. The efficiency and effectiveness of their 
framework is based on choosing the appropriate level of 
partner integration. They used internet as a basis for 
collaboration between partners.  
E. Revilla and T. Curry [14] developed a framework to test 
the impact of customer and supplier knowledge integration in 
product development performance. They highlighted the 
positive effects of customer in product innovation. As a result, 
trust and learning culture influence knowledge integration 
capability in product development. Survey methodology is 
used in this research. Product development performance is 
then measured through two distinct components: Teamwork 
values process outcomes and value to customer expresses 
product outcomes.  
Jian and colleagues [17] developed a knowledge search 
mechanism using autonomous, intelligent agents to transform 
passive search and retrieval engines into active, personal 
assistants of multi-agent product development systems.  That 
aims to facilitate knowledge retrieval in order to prompt right 
knowledge 
for 
design 
and 
analysis. 
Improving 
the 
performance of short-term information retrieval in existing 
search or retrieval engines is the result of this project.  
Toussaint et al [15] proposed a methodology to capture 
manufacturing knowledge and its application towards the 
design verification and validation of new engineering designs. 
They outlined that capturing proper knowledge methodology 
could decrease the time of new product development and 
increase its quality.  The approach is implemented into web-
based PLM prototype and Computer Aided Design (CAD) 
system. The PLM system chosen for implementing the 
proposed approach is a web-based PLM prototype called 
ACSP. This PLM system allows experts to transcribe their 
knowledge and users to operate independently throughout the 
methodology. 
Mahesh et al [16] studied a collaborative tool for virtual 
manufacturing. They provided the framework to relay 
Computer Aided Manufacturing (CAM) information and 
knowledge between all manufacturing chains. The internal 
structure of each functional agent is modularized into several 
components to ensure the compatibility and upgradeability of 
the system. In this project, different functional agents of 
geographically distributed and collaborative manufacturing 
agents can interact coherently. With specific agents having 
unique functionalities, a Manufacturing Managing Agent 
(MMA) acts as the centre of this distributed manufacturing 
system. 
Consideration of scalability in IT supported services of 
product design and development process is important due to 
the growing volume of product knowledge and information. In 
addition, existing knowledge of manufacturing enterprise 
should always be available and accessible to the users of 
system all over the world through different types of platforms 
such as computers, PDAs, manufacturing machineries and so 
on. None of above studied projects considered scalability, 

 
availability and accessibility. The use of cloud computing 
could benefit these factors. As a result, manufacturing 
enterprises will be able to support peak times processing 
without any need to buy further hardware or software 
solutions. They can provision (rent) resources provided in the 
cloud and release them after finishing the usage in order to 
have the advantage of scalability. Since cloud services support 
different 
platforms 
through 
virtualization 
and 
other 
techniques, the use of cloud as a service sources could also 
benefit accessibility of KI service. 
III. PRODUCT KNOWLEDGE AND DESIGN PROCESS 
To study the product knowledge and related processes, it is 
required to have an understanding of what knowledge is. In 
practice, the terms knowledge, information and data are often 
used interchangeably, but giving a correct definition of 
knowledge is possible by distinguishing among knowledge, 
information and data [20]. A commonly held view including 
minor variants is that data is raw numbers and facts, 
information is processed data [20, 21], and knowledge is the 
result of learning and reasoning. In fact Data is unclassified 
and unprocessed values, a static set of transactional elements 
such as 211102345, or structured records of transactions. 
Information is meaningful context-related collection of data 
which has been processed and organized. As an example 
knowledge is a set of understandings and the state of knowing 
acquired through experience or study to use in decision 
making activities [22] which includes facts, opinions, ideas, 
theories, principles, models, ignorance, awareness, familiarity, 
understanding,  and so on. Knowledge can be explicit and/or 
tacit. Explicit knowledge is a type of knowledge that can be 
articulated, codified or stored, and/or represented in the 
media. Tacit knowledge emphasizes understanding the kinds 
of knowledge that individuals in an organization have. 
Information Systems (IS) can convert data into information by 
making them meaningful and context-related, but they are not 
capable of converting information to knowledge. Gathering, 
storing, providing effective search, retrieval mechanisms for 
locating relevant information, transferring knowledge, and to 
provide link among sources of knowledge are supported with 
IT in Knowledge Based Systems (KBSs) [19]. KBSs are tools 
to make intelligent and rule-based decisions based on an 
inference engine with justifications to support human 
decision-making, learning and action.  
In collaborative design environments, engineers and 
designers can share their experience and knowledge with 
globally distributed colleagues via provided services. They 
can closely work with customers, manufacturers and other 
related users to get for instance their requirements and 
feedback to apply directly into design chain. This is very 
important to apply changes in the design step rather than 
manufacturing. It is possible to get active or passive feedback 
as well as customer and market needs for future products and 
other data and knowledge using provided services to optimise 
next generation products design and development. Figure 1 
shows general view of collaborative product design and 
development over internet. 
Operating principles, normal configurations, judgment 
skills, ways of doing and thinking, general product-specific 
design competence, and best practices are instances of 
captured knowledge in product design procedure. Table 1 
shows the most related knowledge resources to product design 
and development.  
 
 
Fig. 1 Collaborative Product Design and Development [10] 
In 
collaborative 
product 
design 
and 
development, 
knowledge resources can be internal or external. Internal ones 
are located inside of an enterprise. Employees and personal 
archives are a type of internal knowledge. External knowledge 
resources are located outside of an enterprise such as the 
knowledge came from partners or acquired through cloud 
services. In proposed framework knowledge could be local or 
global. Local knowledge is the knowledge stored inside of an 
agent. Knowledge which is located outside of an agent, but 
has been acquired through cloud services and stored in local 
servers is considered as a local knowledge. Global knowledge 
is the knowledge stored on the cloud and shared to agents and 
development phases as a public service.  
TABLE 1  
SOURCES OF NEW PRODUCT DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT KNOWLEDGE [5] 
Rank 
Source 
1 
Customer (most important) 
2 
Specialized Magazines 
3 
Production Employees 
4 
Staff 
5 
Suppliers 
6 
Sellers 
7 
Brochures and catalogues 
8 
Industrial fairs 
9 
Commercial fairs 
10 
Business fairs (less important) 
 
Product Knowledge includes all activities of product life 
cycle. These activities are not only production procedure 
activities, but also pre and post production activities such as 
idea generation, product design, customer feedback, support, 
and recycling activities. Reuse of acquired knowledge and 
expertise will cut re-experimenting costs and time, but 
optimum knowledge reuse needs the proper selection of the 

 
resources in right time and place for appropriate aim and 
target. Considering the large mass of activities, product 
knowledge increases gradually along with manufacturing 
procedure. Figure 2 shows the general classification of 
product knowledge into 3 subgroups: Product Specifications 
Knowledge (PSK), Product Technical Knowledge (PTK), and 
Product Processes Knowledge (PPK). 
A. Product Specifications Knowledge (PSK) 
Product Specifications Knowledge (PSK) includes general 
identifications of the product such as name, type, owner 
information, product items, and history. This group of 
knowledge is defined with production manager and product 
planner. The knowledge captured in this group is a type of 
explicit knowledge. Information such as series of product 
generations and first generation date and identification of the 
previous and next generations of the product are known as 
PSK. 
 
 
Fig. 2 Product Knowledge Classification  
B. Product Technical Knowledge (PTK) 
Product Technical Knowledge (PTK) is the most 
knowledge intensive and useful part in product development. 
Knowledge acquired from different sources such as research 
phase, design process, idea generation and product sale and 
market analysis are PTK sources. Each phase and step has 
different types and large volume of knowledge. For instance, 
research institute consists of the knowledge about product 
testing procedures, computer simulation results, research 
instrumentalities, and specialized research competences.  
Idea generation stage itself consists of close collaboration 
between partners and product planners.  Knowledge-based 
innovation in this stage affects the whole production and the 
success of an enterprise. It is about new product ideas using 
active feedbacks, requirement analysis, market monitoring, 
and so on. The knowledge sources of this step could be 
internal or external. Companies with an external orientation 
alongside internal bearings are more likely to innovate. 
Marketing and sale department should monitor market 
developments to support creative idea generation. Customers, 
suppliers, distributors, and competitors are instances for 
external knowledge resources to be used in idea generation 
phase. Customers can benefit both product improvement and 
future product developments.  Trends, needs and demands of 
market segments, new product/market combinations, cultural 
factors, and policy changes are some other instances of 
knowledge sources as PTK specially in idea generation phase. 
General information of product users, territorial demands and 
interests of products, available products and services, market 
demands and distribution activities are some prevalent 
resources of product knowledge in sale phase. PTK can be 
explicit or tacit. Product design knowledge which has been 
described earlier distinguished as PTK.  
C. Product Process Knowledge (PPK) 
Product Process Knowledge (PPK) is acquired knowledge 
from manufacturing, quality control, failure analysis, and 
support activities. Properties of natural and artificial materials, 
ability to manufacture, logistics, capacity, production process 
and related activities are some instances of PPK during 
manufacturing. Competence in pilot production/ scale up, 
production scheduling and timing, and equipment layout are 
some other sources of manufacturing knowledge.  
Quality Control and performance indicators are effective 
product knowledge resources in production system to improve 
the quality of current and future products. Performance of 
components or materials in pilot, production quality control, 
failures reported during the production and their analysis, 
preventive activities details, condition monitoring data and 
gathered data from different monitoring sensors during the 
production are all quality related knowledge sources. In case 
that manufacturing processes and devices are being monitored 
using different types 
of sensors such as 
cameras, 
thermometers, ultrasonic detectors, temperature and pressure 
sensors, the gathered data and information from detectors and 
their analysis is important in product process KI.  In addition, 
corrective activities to prevent machinery downtimes and 
detailed documentation of such experiences could benefit 
knowledge reuse in future preventive activities. Reported 
failures via diagnostic systems and relevant solutions, history 
and log files of all corrective activities are some other 
knowledge sources of PPK which could benefit current and 
future product and service development procedures.  
Customer support and service activities result useful 
knowledge as PPK. As mentioned earlier they are used in 
different product development phases such as idea generation 
and so on. Feedback from customer, faced difficulties during 
support procedure, made service tickets, guarantee and 
warrantee information, time duration of reported failures and 
relevant solutions and all other information are support and 
service related knowledge sources. This step is in close 
connection to design and development process, while the 
change and reports of this process can make dramatic 
optimizations in next generation products. This type of 
knowledge is mostly explicit.  
As mentioned in table 1 the most important knowledge 
about products is related to customers. [5] Manufacturing 
enterprises use mainly the knowledge of their close partners 

 
such as customers, employees, and suppliers. In collaborative 
design and development (especially in cloud supported 
environments) enterprises can acquire knowledge from 
partners. It is very important to reuse partner knowledge and 
information to benefit the whole production process.  
IV. CLOUD-BASED DESIGN KNOWLEDGE INTEGRATION 
Knowledge and data integration of product design and 
development is data intensive processing; such applications 
need reliable and scalable services. To handle the problem, 
enterprises need to have powerful servers, storage and 
computing resources. They need to be aware of peak times 
processing and provide appropriate resources, but so far these 
resources will be mostly idle and will be used just in peak 
time processing. They have to pay for some additional costs 
such as installation, maintenance and administration overhead, 
cooling and power, upgrade, software licenses and software 
update costs and etc. Also it is time consuming to plan a 
suitable hardware and software infrastructure and to provide 
appropriate solutions. Any assignment/project signed up by 
the enterprise can kick-start quickly as the biggest head-ache 
of due-diligence in procuring database, hardware, software 
license are all taken care of by the cloud computing provider. 
Provided real-time KI services are preconfigured, ready to 
use and accessible all over the world. As mentioned earlier, 
services have the advantage of scalability. Users can demand 
resources for peak time processing, this is significantly cost 
and time-effective; they could release resources after finishing 
the processing. In addition they could provide their own and 
customized services to third-party users based on provisioned 
services. As a result SMEs will have the advantage of using 
services with lower costs and shorter time to result. There is 
the possibility of knowledge sharing between different 
enterprises based on provided and standardized services. This 
will benefit knowledge transfer of inter and intra enterprises. 
Proposed 
framework 
supports 
high 
availability 
and 
dependability which are necessary engineering features for 
global always-on, always-available systems.  
The architecture of proposed framework in this paper  
exists four layers: Cloud Presentation Layer (CPL), Cloud 
Knolwedge 
integration 
Service 
Layer 
or 
Knowledge 
integration as a Service (KaaS), Cloud Physical Layer (CPhL) 
and Security Layer (SL). (Fig. 3) Each agent of the 
collaborative design enterprise has a GateKeeper (GK) which 
is the type of server(s) to recieve requests from local users and 
provide proper solutions. The solution could be based on local 
knolwedge resources stored in GK or provisioned resources of 
cloud. The knowledge base of the GK is updated periodically 
and replicated into the cloud. GKs have local knowledge bases 
of the most used knowledge for local agent. There is a firewall 
between GKs and CPL because of security issues. GK is at the 
top of the architecture, which is set of computer hardware and 
software that is required to connect to the layers of the cloud. 
GK ideally includes the users of the cloud computing services.  
 
Fig. 3 Cloud Based Product Design Knowledge Integration Architecture 
A. Cloud Presentation  Layer  
Cloud Presentation Layer (CPL) is the most visible layer to 
the end-users of the system. Users access the services 
provided by this layer through web-portals. Manufacturing 
Engineers (MEs), customers,  developers and manufacturers 
can reach assigned software and hardware resources via this 
layer for developing and deploying their applications on the 
cloud. CPL is secure and used for comminucating lower layers 
and outside world. This layer provides access to Knwoledge 
Engineers (KEs) to refresh, validate and verificate knowledge 
bases and do some other knowledge based processing. Design 
engineers (DEs) can access to online information of ongoing 
design activities and relevant knowledge to be informed about 
the state of the design. This includes a full application, 
customization options, meeting enterprises requirements, etc.  
B. Cloud Knowledge Integration Service  Layer 
Cloud knowledge integration service layer or KKnowledge 
integration as a Service Layer(KaaS) provides the knowledge 
based services to the users of the sytem such as customers, 
manufacturers, KEs, MEs and developers. KaaS is the part 
that all KEs apply their knowledge based activities and 
process data. This layer is an interface between users (via 
CPL) and cloud physical layer including knowledge bases and 
servers. Users can request to get an access to DataWare 
Houses (DWH) and Knowledge Bases (KBs) and other 
deployed services and applications in the cloud after getting 
authenticated using cloud security layer. It is from this 
perspective that individuals, IT operations, experts and KEs 
deploy knowledge capabilities running on top of the CPL. 
KaaS includes knowledge integration and search services. 
Integration service of this layer supports knowledge mapping 
and merging. KI service for design process depends on the 

 
type of the knowledge (Tacit or Explicit). A. Jetter et al [5] 
described KI components clearly based on the type of 
knowledge: 
explicit 
knowledge 
integration 
includes 
codification, detection, assessment and transfer of knowledge. 
Codification [5] is articulation and transit of explicit 
knowledge from human source to any type of media such as 
texts, voices, videos. After codification, the knowledge is 
detached and could be transferred easily. This stage can be 
done automatically by KaaS. Detection process defines the 
location and importance of the knowledge.  
We are supposed to give different values as an importance 
to the knowledge such as: Secure, High Priority, Normal, and 
Low Priority. Access control of users and knowledge 
requesters could be defined based on these importance values. 
Definition of such values will help us in providing knowledge 
sharing services. Detection step is important because it defines 
the source and location of the knowledge. This will help us in 
improving the functionality of knowledge search service. The 
most effective step of KI to the search process is assessment. 
Knowledge Assessment step is validating and weighing the 
knowledge. It is attaching credibility, value, significance, 
weight to the explicit knowledge. The weight values of the 
knowledge which is very important for search process 
includes three dimensions: Geographically Significance, 
Usability, popularity. All these values will be improved 
through usage of the system and knowledge.  
Usability is the value which will be initialized by 
knowledge users. Each user whenever requests the knowledge 
and receives the proper solution, after the process of 
knowledge reuse, he will give the value of usability for given 
knowledge to his request in percents. Because of the different 
tasks of each stage in collaborative design, it is clear that the 
knowledge of one section may not be so useful for another 
section 
located 
somewhere 
else. 
In 
such 
situations 
geographical significance value has the key role in assigning 
the proper knowledge. As an example, when we have two 
types of knowledge with same or similar popularity and 
usability values, the knowledge with closer (higher) 
geographical significance to the requested place is more 
related to the request. The last step of product design explicit 
knowledge integration is transfer and includes two steps: first 
in the local enterprise resources and then replication of the 
knowledge and data into the cloud for security, backup and 
sharing issues.  
Integration of tacit knowledge is difficult. It can only be 
captured when it is found. The key of successful integration of 
such knowledge is to accurately find the right expert or 
knowledge source to solve the specific problem. Enterprises 
can, by automatically capturing interactions such as 

expand the scope of reusable knowledge to include data like 
the following: 
 
What content is helpful 
 
what processes have worked best for  
 
which type of issues 
 
what experts were involvedwhat pitfalls to avoid 
This tacit knowledge is automatically captured, stored in 
the cloud knowledge base and immediately usable. So, the 
next time there is a similar critical situation in manufacturing 
enterprise, knowledge workers can use knowledge search 
service of the proposed method to find the exact source and 
can tap into time-saving, relevant information to increase the 
quality of resolution while reducing resolution time. Because 
partners are also able to deploy knowledge into the 
collaborated knowledge base, the selection range of 
knowledge source in this method is wider than traditional 
ones.  
To integrate product design knowledge and effectively 
reuse it in future, first product knowledge ontology has been 
made based on section 3. This ontology is 2 levels: local 
ontology and global ontology. Local ontology is stored 
knowledge in GK of each stakeholder in distributed 
enterprise. This is because sometime required knowledge can 
be found at local sources and it is not required to use cloud 
services. Each GK whenever receives the request for 
knowledge first checks the local ontology. Global ontology is 
the one which has been deployed inside the cloud; it includes 
the local ontology of all connected gatekeepers and other 
partners.  
Global ontology is much more complete than locals, it is 
cloud based service. The next step of integration is knowledge 
mapping. The method of mapping is based on [1] with some 
modifications. Similarity calculation of knowledge essentials 
has been used. The most important task in this step is use of 
history and wider knowledge domain. The accuracy of 
matching method depends on the size of KB. Because in 
collaborative design and cloud based services, the source is 
centralized and is a collection of acquired knowledge from 
whole system and partners, search and selection domain is 
greater. As a result accuracy is higher than traditional one. 
C. Cloud Physical Layer 
Cloud Physical Layer (CPhL) is the base layer which works 
mainly for clouding. As its name suggests in this layer are all 
physical devices that run on the cloud, halls and corridors with 
thousands of computers stacked on top of each other. Some of 
the computers will be used to store data, others to process 
information, to store other files, etc. It runs state-of-the-art 
hardware that can be multiplexed by the virtual infrastructure 
level to make the physical virtual. CPhL has the basic 
computing resources and machines, operating systems, and 
storage. A current example of this layer is Amazon Elastic 
Compute Cloud (EC2). Knowledge Bases, DBs, Application 
servers, mainframes, grids, clusters, storages, are included in 
this layer. CPhL may use virtualization technologies such as 
Xen, KVM, VMWare to scale more and support multi-
platform possibility.  
Data of the different cloud users, which would be available 
in various geographical locations, is backed up on a regular 
basis as a preventive mechanism against crisis situations. 
Cloud computing can further be enhanced to deliver the 
virtual middleware level as a service on top of the Physical 
layer. A virtual machine that can be spun up within a couple 
of minutes is a key to the ability to provide for the demand. 

 
Virtualization also forces the removal of specialized 
equipment on which software may depend by providing a 
baseline, non-specialized, machine abstraction. Multi-tenancy 
is a further concept in this layer, where multiple customers 
can share a single physical resource at the same time.  Virtual 
machines running on the same physical hardware are an 
example of multi-tenancy. In order to make all of these 
shared, virtualized resources available on demand, some 
automation tools need to set between the request for a 
resource and the fulfilment of the request.  
Databases in this layer are distributed, replicated, and 
largely transactional. These can be separated from the rest of 
the cloud stack through RESTful APIs between different 
vendors but there is a definite latency advantage to coupling 
of data and its interpreter. 
D. Cloud Security layer 
Any of the cloud layers can be subjected to security attacks. 
To increase the degree of dependability and ensure that there 
is no loss, data and infrastructure are hosted on mirror sites 
and have a replicated copy at all times. Enterprise’s data is 
stored in locations close to its competitor’s data. The security 
layer takes care that all data stored in the cloud are encrypted 
and has limited access to authorized users. This layer has a 
risk management plan in place for each layer. To support 
information 
security, 
public 
key 
encryption, 
X.509 
certificates, and the Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) is used to 
enable secure authentication and communication. For 
credential management, system stores and manages the 
credentials for a variety of systems and users can access them 
according to their needs. Secure and safe storage of 
credentials is equally important.  
V. CONCLUSIONS 
We expect a growing importance for knowledge based 
distributed and collaborative product design using cloud 
computing. This means that enterprises are interested to use 
their design services with more flexibility and scalability. In 
addition to these factors reduction in costs and time can be 
achieved through the use of cloud based services. Knowledge 
based activities are data intensive and they need powerful 
resources. In this paper we studied general classification of 
product knowledge as three groups: Product Specification 
knowledge, Product Technical Knowledge and Product 
Process Knowledge. We discussed different types of product 
knowledge which is included in these groups such as 
operating principles, normal configurations, judgment skills, 
ways of doing and thinking, general and product-specific 
design competence, and best practices. We studied 
collaborative product design process and activities. General 
cloud based architecture is then proposed. This framework 
includes four different layers: Cloud Presentation Layer, 
Cloud Knowledge Integration Service Layer, Cloud Physical 
Layer, and Cloud Security Layer. Cloud Presentation layer is 
the gate which users can have an access to cloud services and 
lower layers. Knowledge service layer includes different 
components based on the type of knowledge and finally 
knowledge mapping and merging. Knowledge Integration 
layer also includes intelligent knowledge search functionality. 
Both services are able to read and write in the knowledge 
allocation table to help better knowledge search and 
classification.  
Physical layer is the most important layer of cloud based 
framework, in fact it is the most cloud related layer. 
Enterprises may use virtualization techniques to benefit multi 
platform supports. Load balancing between different servers is 
also supposed in this layer. Data of the different cloud users, 
which would be available in various geographical locations, is 
backed up on a regular basis as a preventive mechanism 
against crisis situations. As a result, proposed framework 
points following advantages described earlier:  
 
 
Reduce Production Cost and Time  
 
Providing the meta-knowledge model 
 
Increase the level of customization 
 
Further integration of customer needs and 
feedback into manufacturing activities specially 
design process 
 
Availability of large number of quantities of 
design knowledge in real-time and from multiple 
sources 
 
Increased degree of dependability using replicated 
copy of data and knowledge all times 
 
Increased accessibility across many platforms 
including mobile 
 
Improved efficiency from high utilization of 
sharing physical servers 
 
Improved reliability with replication of data within 
the system and higher level of fault tolerant 
In future, virtual objects such as manufacturing robots, 
sensors and machinery will be able to connect provisioned 
servers of cloud computing directly without any need to 
human interactions and engineering activities. In fact future 
objects will connect together using internet computing and 
there will not be any distance between geographically 
distributed factories.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to thank Shelley Smith and Amir Tabatabae 
for their constructive comments on an earlier version of this 
paper.
