Giulio Chiribella, Peter Selinger (Eds.): 15th International
Conference on Quantum Physics and Logic (QPL 2018).
EPTCS 287, 2019, pp. 85–105, doi:10.4204/EPTCS.287.5
c⃝A. Fagan & R. Duncan
Optimising Clifford Circuits with Quantomatic
Andrew Fagan1
Ross Duncan1,2

1Department of Computer and Information Sciences
University of Strathclyde
26 Richmond Street, Glasgow, United Kingdom
2Cambridge Quantum Computing Ltd
9a Bridge Street, Cambridge, United Kingdom
We present a system of equations between Clifford circuits, all derivable in the ZX-calculus, and
formalised as rewrite rules in the Quantomatic proof assistant. By combining these rules with some
non-trivial simpliﬁcation procedures deﬁned in the Quantomatic tactic language, we demonstrate the
use of Quantomatic as a circuit optimisation tool. We prove that the system always reduces Clifford
circuits of one or two qubits to their minimal form, and give numerical results demonstrating its
performance on larger Clifford circuits.
1
Introduction
Remarkable advances in the past two years have seen quantum computing hardware reach the point where
the deployment of quantum devices for non-trivial tasks is now a near-term prospect. However, these
machines still suffer from severe limitations, both in terms of memory size and the coherence time of their
qubits. It is therefore of paramount importance to extract the most useful work from the fewest operations:
a poorly optimised quantum program may not be able to ﬁnish before it is undone by noise.
In this paper we study the automated optimisation of Clifford circuits. Clifford circuits are not universal
for quantum computation – they are well known to be efﬁciently simulable by a classical computer [2] –
however adding any non-Clifford gate to the Cliffords yields a set of approximately universal operations
hence it is likely that the vast majority of operations in any quantum program will be Clifford operations,
and hence reducing the Clifford depth and gate count of a circuit will have substantial beneﬁt.
A secondary reason to focus on Cliffords is that the corresponding subtheory of quantum mechanics
is well-understood in terms of the ZX-calculus [7]. Backens [3] has shown that the ZX-calculus is sound
and complete for stabilizer quantum theory – that is the fragment of quantum mechanics containing only
the Clifford operations and states which can be produced from them. While recent extensions to the
ZX-calculus have been proposed which are complete for the Clifford+T fragment [16] and for the full
qubit theory [22], both these extensions are signiﬁcantly larger and more complex than the stabilizer
subtheory, and both axiomatisations are undergoing rapid development. Clifford circuits therefore provide
a stable platform to develop techniques which could later be extended to a universal language.
In this work we present a circuit optimiser which can transform a Clifford circuit into an equivalent
circuit with reduced depth and total number of operations. The system always reduces Clifford circuits of
one or two qubits to their minimal form, and yields signiﬁcant size reductions for larger circuits.
The optimiser has been developed as a simpliﬁcation procedure in the graphical proof-assistant
Quantomatic [17, 18]. By working inside the proof-assistant we obtain an important beneﬁt: alongside
the optimised circuit our optimiser produces a formal proof certifying the correctness of its circuit
transformations.

86
Optimising Clifford Circuits
Quantomatic is a ﬂexible graph rewrite engine which is especially well-adapted to working with the
ZX-calculus. It is designed for interactive use, and a typical session involves interleaving automated
tactics1, backtracking, and manually choosing rewrites. However, our circuit optimiser is designed to
operate without user intervention, and we have necessarily made extensive use of the Quantomatic’s
powerful tactic combinators and its built-in Python interpreter. In doing so, we have constructed the
largest and most sophisticated Quantomatic development to date.
As a graph rewriting engine, Quantomatic normally inspects only the local subgraph structure of a
term while searching for a rewrite to apply. However, quantum circuits have a global causal structure
which must be maintained to preserve the property of “being a circuit”. A key contribution of this work is
the development of techniques to infer the global structure and use it to guide the rewrite process.
Selinger [25] presented generators and relations for all the n-qubit Clifford groups as a rewrite system
over string diagrams. This work has some similarities to that: most notably, we also treat Clifford circuits
as a free PROP subject to an equivalence relation deﬁned on small subgraphs. However Selinger’s
approach is based on transforming circuits to a standard form which is often larger than the smallest
equivalent circuit, whereas we aim for minimal forms. Selinger’s rewrite system has a much larger number
of rules than the axioms of the ZX-calculus. Maslov and Roetteler [21] demonstrate that all Clifford
unitaries can be implemented in depth no more than 7 stages deep, using the ∧Z as the only two-qubit
gate. The ∧Z has formal disadvantages in ZX-calculus, so in our development we have used the CNOT and
swap gates instead. In the examples we have tested, our optimiser usually attains similar depth over our
gate set; however on some examples it halts while some simpliﬁcations are still possible. Quantomatic
has previously been used to produce mechanised correctness proofs for quantum error correcting codes
[14, 6, 11], and many of the techniques used in these works are applied here.
We assume that the reader is at least somewhat familiar with both the ZX-calculus and the Quantomatic
system; an accessible introduction to both is found in the earlier formalisation effort [14].
