Combining Reinforcement Learning and Inverse Reinforcement Learning for
Asset Allocation Recommendations
Igor Halperin 1 Jiayu Liu 1 Xiao Zhang 1
Abstract
We suggest a simple practical method to combine
the human and artiﬁcial intelligence to both learn
best investment practices of fund managers, and
provide recommendations to improve them. Our
approach is based on a combination of Inverse
Reinforcement Learning (IRL) and RL. First, the
IRL component learns the intent of fund managers
as suggested by their trading history, and recov-
ers their implied reward function. At the second
step, this reward function is used by a direct RL
algorithm to optimize asset allocation decisions.
We show that our method is able to improve over
the performance of individual fund managers.
1. Introduction
Portfolio management is a quintessential example of stochas-
tic multi-period (dynamic) optimization, also known as
stochastic optimal control. Reinforcement Learning (RL)
provides data-driven methods for problems of optimal con-
trol, that are able to work with high dimensional data.
Such applications are beyond the reach of classical meth-
ods of optimal control, which typically only work for low-
dimensional data. Many of the most classical problems of
quantitative ﬁnance such as portfolio optimization, wealth
management and option pricing can be very naturally for-
mulated and solved as RL problems, see e.g. (Dixon et al.,
2020).
A critically important input to any RL method is a reward
function. The reward function provides a condensed formu-
lation of the agent’s intent, and respectively it informs the
optimization process of RL. The latter amounts to ﬁnding
policies that maximize the expected total reward obtained
in a course of actions by the agent. One simple example
of a reward function for RL of portfolio management is
1AI Center of Excellence for Asset Management, Fi-
delity
Investments.

Igor
Halperin,
JiayuLiu,
Xiao
Zhang

Under Review
provided by the classical Markowitz mean-variance objec-
tive function applied in a multi-period setting ((Dixon et al.,
2020)). However, there might exist other speciﬁcations of
the reward function for portfolio management that might be
more aligned with the actual practices of active portfolio
managers.
Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) is a sub-ﬁeld of RL
that addresses the inverse problem of inferring the reward
function from a demonstrated behavior. The behavioral data
are given in the form of sequences of state-action pairs per-
formed either by a human or AI agent. IRL is popular in
robotics and video games for cases where engineering a
good reward function (one that promotes a desired behavior)
may be a challenging task on its own. The problem of dy-
namic portfolio optimization arguably belongs in such class
of problems. Indeed, while the ’best’ objective function to
be used for portfolio optimization is unknown, we can try to
use IRL to learn it from the investment behavior of active
portfolio managers (PMs).
In this paper, we propose a combined use of IRL and RL
(in that sequence) to both learn the investment strategies of
portfolio managers, and reﬁne them, by suggesting tweaks
that improve the overall portfolio performance. Our ap-
proach can be viewed as a way to develop a ‘collective
intelligence’ for a group of fund managers with similar in-
vestment philosophies. By using trading histories of such
funds, our algorithm learns the reward function from all
of them jointly in the IRL step, and then uses this reward
function to optimize the investment policy in the second, RL
step.
We emphasize that our approach is not intented to replace
active portfolio managers, but rather to assist them in their
decision making. In particular, we do not re-optimize the
stock selection made by PMs, but simply change allocations
to stocks that were already selected. As will be explained
in more details below, data limitations force us to work
with a dimensionally reduced portfolio optimization prob-
lem. In this work, we choose to aggregate all stocks in a
given portfolio by their industry sector. This provides a
low-dimensional view of portfolios held by active managers.
Respectively, the optimal policy is given in terms of alloca-
tions to industrial sectors, and not in terms of allocations to
arXiv:2201.01874v1  [cs.LG]  6 Jan 2022

Combining Reinforcement Learning and Inverse Reinforcement Learning for Asset Allocation Recommendations
2
individual stocks. However, given any portfoﬂio-speciﬁc se-
lection of stocks for a given sector, a recommended optimal
sector-level allocation can be achieved simply by changing
positions in stocks already selected.1
Our paper presents a ﬁrst practical example of a joined ap-
plication of IRL and RL for asset allocation and portfolio
management that leverages human intelligence and transfers
it, in a digestible form, to an AI system (our RL agent).
While we use speciﬁc algorithms for the IRL and RL steps
(respectively, the T-REX and G-learner algorithms, see be-
low), our framework is general and modular, and enables
using of other IRL and RL algorithms, if needed. We show
that a combined use of IRL and RL enables to both learn
best investment practices of fund managers, and provide
recommendations to improve them.
The paper is organized as follows. In Sect. 1.1 we overview
previous related work. Sect. 2 outlines the theoretical frame-
work of our approach, presenting the parametric T-REX
algorithm for the IRL part, and the G-learner algorithm for
the RL part. Sect. 3 shows the results of our analysis. The
ﬁnal Sect. 4 provides a summary and conclusions.
1.1. Related Work
Our approach combines approaches developed separately
in the research community focused on RL and IRL prob-
lems. For a general review of RL and IRL along with their
applications to ﬁnance, see (Dixon et al., 2020).
In its reliance on a combination of IRL and RL for optimiza-
tion of a ﬁnancial portfolio, this paper follows the approach
of (Dixon & Halperin, 2021). The latter uses a continuous
state-action version of G-learning, a probabilistic extension
of Q-learning (Fox et al., 2016), for the RL step, and an
IRL version of G-learning called GIRL for the IRL step. In
this work, we retain the G-learner algorithm from (Dixon
& Halperin, 2021) for the RL step, but replace the IRL step
with a parametric version of a recent algorithm called T-
REX (Brown et al., 2019) which will be presented in more
details in Sect. 2.1.
2. The method
In this section, we describe our proposed framework for
asset allocation recommendations as a sequence that com-
bines IRL and RL in a two-step procedure. The framework
is designed to be generic enough to accommodate various
IRL and RL methods. In this work, we focus on an ex-
tension of the approach of (Dixon & Halperin, 2021) that
incorporates portfolio performance ranking information into
1This assumes that stocks from all sectors are already present
in the portfolio, and that changes of positions in individual stocks
do not produce a considerable price impact.
its policy optimization algorithm. This extension is inspired
by a recently proposed IRL method called T-REX (Brown
et al., 2019). Here we ﬁrst provide a short overview of
T-REX and G-learner methods, and then introduce our IRL-
RL framework. In its IRL step, our proposed parametric
T-REX algorithm infers PMs’ asset allocation decision rules
from portfolio historical data, and provides a high quality
reward function to evaluate the performance. The learned
reward function is then utilized by G-learner in the RL step
to learn the optimal policy for asset allocation recommenda-
tions. Policy optimization amounts to a recursive procedure
involving only linear algebra operations, which can be com-
puted within seconds.
2.1. The IRL step with parametric T-REX
IRL deals with recovering reward functions from the ob-
served agents’ behavior as a way of rationalizing their intent.
The learned reward function can then be used for evalua-
tion and optimization of action policies. The IRL approach
reduces the labor of deﬁning proper reward functions in
RL for applications where their choice is not immediately
obvious.
Many traditional IRL methods try to learn the reward func-
tion from demonstrations under the assumption that the
demonstrated history corresponds to an optimal or near-
optimal policy employed by an agent that produced the data,
see e.g. (Pomerleau, 1991; Ross et al., 2011; Torabi et al.,
2018). These IRL methods therefore simply try to mimic
or justify the observed behavior by ﬁnding a proper reward
function that explains this behavior. This implies that by
following their approach, the best one can hope for IRL
for investment decisions is that it would be able to imitate
investment policies of asset managers.
However, the assumption that the demonstrated behavior is
already optimal might not be realistic, or even veriﬁable,
for applications in quantitative ﬁnance. This is because,
unlike robotics or video games, the real market environment
cannot be reproduced on demand. Furthermore, relying on
this assumption for inferring rewards may also have a side
effect of transferring various psychological biases of asset
managers into an inferred ‘optimal’ policy.
Instead of simply trying to mimic the observed behavior
of asset managers, it would be highly desirable to try to
improve over their investment decisions, and potentially
correct for some biases implicit in their decision-making. A
principled way towards implementing such a program would
be to infer the intent of asset managers from observing
their trading decisions without the assumption they their
strategies were fully or partially successful. With such an
approach, demonstrated trajectories would be scored by how
well they succeed in achieving a certain goal. This is clearly
very different from seeking a reward function that would

Combining Reinforcement Learning and Inverse Reinforcement Learning for Asset Allocation Recommendations
3
simply rationalize the observed behavior of asset managers.
Such inference of agents’ intent is made possible using a re-
cently proposed IRL algorithm called T-REX, for Trajectory-
based Reward Extrapolation (Brown et al., 2019). The T-
REX method ﬁnds the reward function that captures the
intent of the agent without assuming a near-optimality of
the demonstrated behavior. Once the reward function that
captures agent’s intent is found, it can be used to further
improve the performance by optimizing this reward. This
could be viewed as extrapolation of the reward beyond the
demonstrated behavior, thus explaining the ‘EX’ part in the
name T-REX.
To overcome the issue of potential sub-optimality of demon-
strated behavior, T-REX relies on certain extra information
that is not normally used in other IRL methods. More specif-
ically, T-REX uses rankings of all demonstrated trajectories
according to a certain ﬁnal score. The ﬁnal score is assigned
to the whole trajectory rather than to a single time-step. The
local reward function is then learned from the condition that
it should promote the most desirable trajectories according
to the score. In this work, we score different portfolio tra-
jectories by their total realized returns, however, we could
also use risk-adjusted metrics such as the Sharpe or Sortino
ratios.
Let O : {S, A} be a state-action space of an MDP envi-
ronment, and ˆrθ(·) with parameters θ be a target reward
function to be optimized in the IRL problem. Given M
ranked observed sequences {om}M
m=1 (oi ≺oj if i < j,
where “≺” indicates the preferences, expressed e.g. via a
ranking order, between pairwise sequences), T-REX con-
ducts reward inference by solving the following optimiza-
tion problem:
max
θ
X
oi≺oj
log
e
P
{s,a}∈oj ˆrθ(s,a)
e
P
{s,a}∈oi ˆrθ(s,a) + e
P
{s,a}∈oj ˆrθ(s,a)
(1)
This objective function is equivalent to the softmax nor-
malized cross-entropy loss for a binary classiﬁer, and can
be easily trained using common machine learning libraries
such as PyTorch or TensorFlow. As a result, the learned opti-
mal reward function can preserve the ranking order between
pairs of sequences.
The original T-REX algorithm is essentially a non-
parametric model that encodes the reward function into
a deep neural network (DNN). This might be a reasonable
approach for robotics or video games where there is a plenty
of data, while the reward function might be highly non-
linear and complex. Such setting is however ill-suited for
applications to portfolio management where the amount of
available data is typically quite small. Therefore, in this
work we pursue a parametric version of T-REX, where the
reward function is encoded into a function with a small
number of parameters, which is then optimized using Eq.(1).
A particular model of the reward function that will be pre-
sented in the next section has only 4 tunable parameters,
which appears to be about the right order of model complex-
ity given available data. The added beneﬁt in comparison to
the original DNN-based implementation of T-REX is that a
parametric T-REX is much faster to train.
2.2. The RL step with G-learner
G-learner is an algorithm for the direct RL problem of port-
folio optimizaiton that was proposed in (Dixon & Halperin,
2021). It relies on a continuous state-action version of G-
learning, a probabilistic extension of Q-learning designed
for noisy environments (Fox et al., 2016). G-learner solves
a ﬁnite-horizon direct RL problem of portfolio optimiza-
tion in a high-dimensional continuous state-action space
using a sample-based approach that operates with available
historical data of portfolio trading. The algorithm uses a
closed-form state transition model to capture the stochastic
dynamics in a noisy environment, and therefore belongs in
the class of model-based RL approaches. In this work, we
employ G-learner as a RL solver for the sequential portfo-
lio optimization, while deﬁning a new reward function to
evaluate portfolio managers’ performance.
Unlike (Dixon & Halperin, 2021) that considered G-learning
for a portfolio of individual stocks held by a retail investor,
here we consider portfolios typically held by professional
asset managers. Due to data limitations, it is unfeasible to
estimate models that track the whole investment universe
counting thousands of stocks, and maintain individual stocks
holdings and their changes as, respectively, state and action
variables. A viable alternative is is to aggregate individ-
ual stock holdings into buckets constructed according to
a particular dimension reduction principle, and deﬁne the
state and action variables directly in such dimensionally
reduced space. In this paper, we choose to aggregate all
stocks in the PM’s portfolio into N = 11 sectors of the
standard GICS industry classiﬁcation, effectively mapping
the portfolio into portfolio of sector exposures. The state
vector xt ∈RN is respectively deﬁned as a vector of dollar
values of stock positions in each sector at time t. The action
variable ut ∈RN is given by the vector of changes in these
positions as a result of trading at time step t. Furthermore,
let rt ∈RN represent the asset returns as a random vari-
able with the mean ¯rt and covariance matrix Σr. As in our
approach we identify assets with sector exposures, ¯rt and
Σr will be interpreted as expected sector returns and sector
return covariance, respectively.
The state transition model is deﬁned as follows:
xt+1 = At(xt + ut), At = diag(1 + rt)
(2)
In this work we use a simpliﬁed form of the reward from

Combining Reinforcement Learning and Inverse Reinforcement Learning for Asset Allocation Recommendations
4
(Dixon & Halperin, 2021), which we write as follows:
Rt(xt, ut|θ) = −Et

ˆPt −Vt
2
−λ ·
 1T ut −Ct
2 −ω · uT
t ut
(3)
where Ct is a money ﬂow to the fund at time step t minus the
change of a cash position of the fund at the same time step,
λ and ω are parameters, and Vt and ˆPt are, respectively, the
values of asset manager’s and reference portfolios, deﬁned
as follows:
Vt = (1 + rt)T (xt + ut)
ˆPt = ρ · Bt + (1 −ρ) · η · 1T xt
(4)
where η and ρ are additional parameters, and Bt is a bench-
mark portfolio, such as e.g. the SPX index portfolio, prop-
erly re-scaled to match the size of the PM’s portfolio at the
start of the investment period.
The reward function (3) consists of three terms, each en-
coding one of the portfolio managers’ trading insights. In
the ﬁrst term, ˆPt deﬁnes the target portfolio market value
at time t. It is speciﬁed as a linear combination of a refer-
ence benchmark portfolio value Bt and the current portfolio
growing with rate η according to Eq.(4), where ρ ∈[0, 1]
is a parameter deﬁning the relative weight between the two
terms. Vt gives the portfolio value at time t + ∆t, after the
trade ut is made at time t. The ﬁrst term in (3) imposes a
penalty for under-performance of the traded portfolio rel-
ative to its moving target. The second term enforces the
constraint that the total amount of trades in the portfolio
should match the inﬂow Ct to the portfolio at each time
step, with λ being a parameter penalizing violations of the
equality constraint. The third term approximates transaction
costs by a quadratic function with parameter ω, thus serving
as a L2 regularization. The vector θ of model parameters
thus contains four reward parameters {ρ, η, λ, ω}.
Importantly, the reward function (3) is a quadratic function
of the state and action. Such a choice of the reward func-
tion implies that the value- and action-value functions are
similarly quadratic functions of the state and action, with
time-dependent coefﬁcients. Respectively, with a quadratic
reward functions such as (3), a G-learning algorithm should
not engage neural networks or other function approxima-
tions, which would invariably bring their own parameters
to be optimized. In contrast, with the quadratic reward
(3), learning the optimal value and action-value functions
amounts to learning the coefﬁcients of quadratic functions,
which amounts to a small number of linear algebra oper-
ations (Dixon et al., 2020). As a result, an adaptation of
the general G-learning method for the quadratic reward (3)
produces a very fast policy optimization algorithm called
G-learner in (Dixon & Halperin, 2021).
G-learner is applied to solve the proposed RL problem with
our deﬁned MDP model in Eq.(2) and reward function in
Eq.(3). Algorithm 1 demonstrates the entire optimization
solving process. It takes the model parameters as inputs,
along with discount factor γ. In addition, it uses a prior
policy π(0) which usually encodes domain knowledge of
real world problems. G-learner (and G-learning in general)
control the deviation of the optimal policy πt from the
prior π(0) by incorporating the KL divergence of πt and
π(0) into a modiﬁed, regularized reward function, with a
hyperparameter β that controls the magnitude of the KL
regularizer. When β is large, the deviation can be arbitrarily
large, while in the limit β →0, πt is forced to be equal
to π(0), so there is no learning in this limit. Furthermore,
Ft(xt) is the value function, and Gt(xt, ut) is the action-
value function. The algorithm is initialized by computing
the optimal terminal value and action-value functions F ∗
T
and G∗
T . They are computed by ﬁnding the optimal last-step
action aT that achieves the highest one-step terminal reward,
i.e. solves the equation ∂Rt(xt,ut)
∂ut
|t=T = 0. Thereafter, the
policy associated with earlier time steps can be derived
recursively backward in time as shown in the for loop of
Algorithm 1. For a detailed derivation of V alue Update
and ActionV alue Update steps, we refer to Section 4 in
(Dixon & Halperin, 2021).
Algorithm 1 G-learner policy optimization
Input
:λ, ω, η, ρ, β, γ, {¯rt, xt, ut, Bt, Ct}T
t=0, Σr, π(0)
Output :π∗
t = π(0) · eβ(G∗
t −F ∗
t ), t = 0, · · · , T
Initialize: F ∗
T , G∗
T
while not converge do
for t ∈[T-1, -1, 0] do
Ft ←Value Update(Ft+1, Gt+1)
Gt ←ActionValue Update(Ft, Gt+1)
end
end
return {F ∗
t , G∗
t, π∗
t }T
t=0
Once the optimal policy π∗
t = π∗
t (ut|xt) is learned, the
recommended action at time t is given by the mode of the
action policy for the given state xt.
2.3. A uniﬁed IRL-RL framework
Figure 1 illustrates the overall workﬂow of our proposed
IRL-RL framework. We apply this framework to provide
portfolio allocation recommendations to improve fund re-
turns.
It takes the observed M state-action sequences
(om : {xt, ut}T
t=0) from multiple funds as input training
data. As cumulative funds’ returns can be used to measure
the overall PM’s performance over a given observation pe-
riod, we use the realized total returns in the train dataset
as a ranking criterion for the IRL step with the parametric
T-REX. As an alternative, we could rely on risk-adjusted

Combining Reinforcement Learning and Inverse Reinforcement Learning for Asset Allocation Recommendations
5
metrics such as e.g. the Sharpe or Sortino ratios.
With the chosen ranking criterion, the T-REX IRL module
ﬁnds the optimal parameters of the reward function deﬁned
in Eq.(3). The optimal reward function parameters are then
passed to the RL module which optimizes the action pol-
icy. Both modules operate in the ofﬂine learning mode,
and do not require an online integration with the trading
environment.
Figure 1. The ﬂowchat of our IRL-RL framework
The IRL module can also work individually to provide be-
havioral insights via analysis of inferred model parameters.
It is designed to be generalizable to different reward func-
tions, if needed. Ranking criteria need to be rationally
determined to align with the logic of rewards and depict
the intrinsic behavioral goal of demonstrations. The human-
provided ranking criterion based on the performance on
different portfolio paths thus informs a pure AI system (our
G-learner agent). As a result, our IRL/RL pipeline im-
plements a simple human-machine interaction loop in the
context of portfolio management and asset allocation.
We note that by using T-REX with the return-based scoring,
our model already has a great starting point to hope for
success. Indeed, as our reward function and ranking are
aligned with PMs’ own assessment of their success, this
already deﬁnes a ‘ﬂoor’ for the model performance. This
is because our approach is guaranteed to at least match
individual funds’ performance by taking the exact replica
of their actions. Therefore, our method cannot do worse,
at least in-sample, than PMs but it can do better - which is
indeed the case as will be shown below.
Another comment due here is that while in this work we
use the aggregation to the sectors as a particular scheme
for dimension reduction, our combined IRL-RL framework
could also be used with other ways of dimension reduction,
for example we could aggregate all stocks by their exposure
to a set of factors.
3. Experiments
This section describes our experiments. First, we explain
data pre-processing steps. Once the state and action vari-
ables are computed, we sequentially apply the parametric
T-REX and G-Learning algorithms according to Eq.(1) and
Algorithm 1, respectively. We then show how portfolio
managers’ insights can be inferred using T-REX, and then
demonstrate that G-learner is able to outperform active man-
agers by ﬁnding optimal policies for rewards inferred at the
ﬁrst stage.
3.1. Data Preparation
In our experiments, two sets of mutual funds are chosen
based on their benchmark indexes. To anonymize our data,
we replace actual funds’ names by single-letter names. The
ﬁrst set includes six funds ({Si}6
i=1) that all have the S&P
500 index as a benchmark. The second set includes twelve
funds that have the the Russell 3000 index as a benchmark.
The second group is further divided into growth and value
fund groups ({RGi}7
i=1 and {RVi}5
i=1). Each fund’s trad-
ing trajectory covers the period from January 2017 to De-
cember 2019, and contains its monthly holdings and trades
for eleven sectors (i.e., xt, ut) as well as monthly cashﬂows
Ct. The ﬁrst two years of data are used for training (so that
we choose T=24 months), and the last year starting from
January 2019 is used for testing. At the starting time step we
assign each fund’s total net asset value to its corresponding
benchmark value (i.e., Bt=0) in order to align their size and
use the actual benchmark return at each time step to calcu-
late their values afterwards (i.e., t > 0). The resulting time
series {xt, ut, Bt, Ct}T
t=0 are further normalized by divid-
ing by their initial values at t = 0. In the training phase, the
canonical ARMA model (Hannan, 2009) is applied to fore-
cast expected sector returns rt, and the regression residue
is then used to estimate the sector return covariance matrix
Σr. The prior policy π(0) is ﬁtted to a multivariate Gaussian
distribution with a constant mean and variance calculated
from sector trades in the training set.
3.2. Parametric T-REX with portfolio return rankings
The pre-processed fund trading data is ranked based on
funds’ overall performance realized over the training pe-
riod. T-REX is then trained to learn the four parameters
{ρ, η, λ, ω} that enter Eq.(3). The training/test experiments
are executed separately for all three fund sets (i.e. funds

Combining Reinforcement Learning and Inverse Reinforcement Learning for Asset Allocation Recommendations
6
with the S&P 500 benchmark, Russell 3000 Growth funds,
and Russell 3000 Value funds).
Recall that the loss function for T-REX is given by the cross-
entropy loss for a binary classiﬁer, see Eq.(1). Figure 2
shows the classiﬁcation accuracy in the training (91.1%)
and test phases (83.2%) for the S&P 500 fund set. The plots
in the two sub-ﬁgures show that the learned reward function
preserves the fund ranking order. Correlation scores are
used to measure their level of association, producing the
values of 0.988 and 0.954 for the training and test sets,
respectively. The excellent out-of-sample correlation scores
gives a strong support to our chosen method of the reward
function design.
Figure 2. T-REX: classiﬁcation accuracy and ranking order preser-
vation measured by correlation scores
Fund managers’ investment strategies can be analyzed using
the inferred reward parameters. Figure 3 shows the parame-
ter convergence curve using the S&P 500 fund group. The
values converge after about thirty iterations, which suggests
adequacy of our chosen model of the reward to the actual
trading data. The optimized benchmark weight ρ∗= 0.951
captures the correlation between funds’ performance and
their benchmark index. Its high value implies that portfolio
managers’ trading strategy is to target an accurate bench-
mark tracking. The value η∗= 1.247 implies funds are
in the growing trend with prospective rate at 24.7% from
fund managers’ view. Since the sum of trades are close
enough to the fund cashﬂows in our dataset, the introduced
penalty parameter λ converges to a very small value at 0.081.
The estimated average trades’ volatility ω∗is around 10%,
which measures the level of consistency across trades in the
S&P 500 fund group.
The experimental results of our proposed parametric T-REX
are summarized in Table 1. Our model achieved high clas-
siﬁcation accuracy (acc) and correlation scores (cor) on
all three fund groups in both training and test phases. The
optimal values of reward function parameters are listed in
the table as well. Small values of λ∗verify the holding of
equality constraint over the sum of trades in our dataset.
Comparing across different fund groups, we can identify dif-
ferent trading strategies of portfolio managers. Funds in the
S&P500 group are managed to track their benchmark very
closely with correlation ρ∗= 0.951. On the other hand,
Figure 3. T-REX: reward parameter learning curve
correlation ρ∗reduces signiﬁcantly to 0.584 and then to
0.186 for fund groups {RGi}7
i=1 and {RVi}5
i=1 which have
the same benchmark index Russell 3000, while being seg-
mented based on their investment approaches (i.e., growth
vs. value). For the bucket denoted {Si}6
i=1, growth and
blend funds are combined. As shown in the table, funds in
the segmented groups show very limited variations of their
trading amounts compared to those combined in a single
group. This can be seen as an evidence of fund managers’
consistency in their investment decisions/policies. Growth
funds in {RG}7
i=1 with η∗= 1.532 produce the highest
expected growth rates as implied by their trading activities.
This result is in line with the fact that growth investors se-
lect companies that offer strong earnings growth while value
investors choose stocks that appear to be undervalued in the
marketplace.
Table 1. Inferred reward parameter values and T-REX model accu-
racy from all three fund groups
Fund Group
{Si}6
i=1
{RGi}7
i=1
{RVi}5
i=1
ρ∗
0.951
0.186
0.584
η∗
1.247
1.532
1.210
λ∗
0.081
0.009
0.009
ω∗
0.100
0.012
0.009
acc (train/test)
0.911/0.832
0.878/0.796
0.906/0.832
cor (train/test)
0.988/0.954
0.925/0.884
0.759/0.733
The four reward parameters can be used to group different
fund managers or different trading strategies into distinct
clusters in the space of reward parameters. While the present
analysis in this paper suggests pronounced patterns based
on the comparison across three fund groups, including more
fund trading data from many portfolio managers might be
able to bring further insights into fund managers’ behavior.

Combining Reinforcement Learning and Inverse Reinforcement Learning for Asset Allocation Recommendations
7
This is left here for a future work.
3.3. G-learner for allocation recommendation
Once the reward parameters are learned for all groups of
funds, they are passed to G-learner for the policy optimiza-
tion step. The pre-processed fund trading data in year 2017
and 2018 is used as inputs for policy optimization (see Fig-
ure 1). Trading trajectories were truncated to twelve months’
long in order to align with the length of the test period (year
2019). The optimal policy π∗
t = π∗
t (ut|xt) is learned using
the train dataset, and then applied to the test set throughout
the entire test period. Differently from the training phase,
where we use expected sector returns in the reward function,
in the test phase we use realized monthly returns to derive
the next month’s holdings xt+1 after trades ut was made
for the current month with xt. At the start time of the test
period, the holdings xt=0 coincide with actual historical
holdings. We use this procedure along with the learned
policy π∗
t (ut|xt) onward from February 2019 to create
counterfactual portfolio trajectories for the test period. We
will refer to these RL-recommended trajectories as the AI
Alter Ego’s (AE) trajectories.
Figures 4, 5, 6 show the outperformance of our RL policy
from PM’s trading strategies (i.e, AE −PM) for all three
fund groups for both the training and test sets for forward
period of 12 months, plotted as functions of their time ar-
guments. We note that both curves for the training and test
sets follow similar paths for at least seven months before
they started to diverge (the curves for Russell 3000 value
group diverged signiﬁcantly after the eighth months’ trades
and thus were truncated for a better visualization effect).
In practice, we recommend to update the policy through a
re-training once the training and test results start to diverge.
In general, our results suggest that our G-learner is able to
generalize (i.e. perform well out-of-sample) up to 6 months
into the future.
Analysis at the individual fund level for all three groups is
presented in Figures 7, 9, 11 for the training set, and Figures
8, 10, 12 for the test set. Our model outperformed most of
PMs throughout the test period except funds RG5 and RV5.
It is interesting to note that the test results outperformed the
training ones for the S&P 500 fund group. This may be due
to a potential market regime drift (which is favorable to us,
in the present case). More generally, a detailed study would
be desired to address the impact of potential market drift or
a regime change on optimal asset allocation policies. Such
topics are left here for a future research.
4. Conclusion and Future Work
In this work, we presented a ﬁrst practical two-step pro-
cedure that combines the human and artiﬁcial intelligence
Figure 4. G-learner: overall trading performance with funds bench-
marked by S&P500
Figure 5. G-learner: overall trading performance with growth
funds benchmarked by Russell 3000
Figure 6. G-learner: overall trading performance with value funds
benchmarked by Russell 3000
for optimization of asset allocation and investment portfo-

Combining Reinforcement Learning and Inverse Reinforcement Learning for Asset Allocation Recommendations
8
Figure 7. G-learner:
trading performance of individual funds
benchmarked by S&P500 on the training set
Figure 8. G-learner:
trading performance of individual funds
benchmarked by S&P500 on the test set
Figure 9. G-learner: trading performance of individual growth
funds benchmarked by Russell 3000 on the training set
lios. At the ﬁrst step, we use inverse reinforcement learning
(IRL), and more speciﬁcally the parametric T-REX algo-
Figure 10. G-learner: trading performance of individual growth
funds benchmarked by Russell 3000 on the test set
Figure 11. G-learner: trading performance of individual value
funds benchmarked by Russell 3000 on the training set
Figure 12. G-learner: trading performance of individual value
funds benchmarked by Russell 3000 on the test set
rithm, to infer the reward function that captures fund man-
agers’ intent of achieving higher returns. At the second step,

Combining Reinforcement Learning and Inverse Reinforcement Learning for Asset Allocation Recommendations
9
we use the direct reinforcement learning with the inferred
reward function to improve the investment policy. Our ap-
proach is modular, and allows one to use different IRL or
RL models, if needed, instead of the particular combination
of the parametric T-REX and G-learner that we used in this
work. It can also use other ranking criteria, e.g. sorting
by the Sharpe ratio or the Sortino ratio, instead of ranking
trajectories by their total return as was done above.
Using aggregation of equity positions at the sector level,
we showed that our approach is able to outperform most
of fund managers. Outputs of the model can be used by
individual fund managers by keeping their stock selection
and re-weighting their portfolios across industrial sectors
according to the recommendation from G-learner. A practi-
cal implementation of our method should involve checking
the feasibility of recommended allocations and controlling
for potential market impact effects and/or transaction costs
resulting from such rebalancing.
Finally, we note that while in this work we choose a par-
ticular method of dimensional reduction that aggregates all
stocks at the industry level, this is not the only available
choice. An alternative approach could be considered, where
all stocks are aggregated based on their factor exposure.
This is left here for a future work.
