Edge Computing Performance Amplification
Vivek Basavegowda Ramu*
* Independent Researcher, Connecticut, USA.

Abstract
Edge computing can be defined as an emerging
technology that uses cloud computing to
leverage edge data centers to process, store,
and analyze data close to the source. Traditional
cloud computing architectures are not designed
for latency-critical applications such as AI
(Artificial Intelligence) and IoT (Internet Of
Things) because they rely on low data volumes
generated by applications running near
highly-populated areas. When volume grows
beyond 50 miles from the population center,
networks experience higher latency and packet
loss rates which impacts application
performance. Since everyone's life is equipped
with more and more IoT devices by the day,
decisions should be made at a split second in
edge computing. It is really crucial to perform at
optimum level, some devices specially the
medical wearables deal with patient life and any
delay in decision making will result in disaster.
Similarly, modern day autonomous self driving
vehicles where late decisions can endup in
accidents and really there is no room for any
errors.
This paper provides a new approach to improve
performance of the edge computing by having
two identical computing systems in which one
system will act as primary and another as
reserved or secondary, this system will be
available at the local environment of the IoT
device and not in cloud. The secondary system
will be reserved for mission critical requests and
whenever the primary system breaches latency
threshold for response only then the request will
be re-routed to the secondary system. Both the
systems will sync data on background and can
also serve as backup computing systems in case
of any failure to one of the systems.
Traditional edge computing systems will have a
singular computing system on the device and
low capability to process data or user requests
since it still relies on transferring data to the
cloud to compute and make decisions. With
multiple high capacity computing systems on the
device and with automatic rerouting and
balancing of the requests, edge computing
performance will be more reliable and it will also
ensure high availability, low latency and a highly
dependable edge computing architecture. This
method is scalable, based on the volume and
complexity the architecture can be extended to
additional sub systems to add more computing
power and to handle additional requests on
demand. The proposed method of multiple
computing systems at the local environment or
device will result in a highly responsive system
and provide the much needed support to
process data or user requests in a fraction of a
second and result in life saving decisions. This
solution also opens the door to multiple
possibilities like tagging multiple IoT devices to
the same computing system, ability to include AI
(Artificial Intelligence)/ML (Machine Learning)
models and processing locally and to learn from
previous decisions to enhance future computing,
self troubleshooting and healing process etc
which will further advance the existing
technology.
* Corresponding Author

1

Keywords: Edge Computing, Performance
Testing, Performance Engineering, Cloud
Computing, Edge computing infrastructure, IoT
1.
Introduction
When Akamai introduced CDN`s which stands
for content delivery networks in the late 1990s to
increase web performance and speed, this is
when edge computing first emerged. To cache
and prefetch the internet contect, CDN utilized
nodes at the edge which are located near to the
end users. The information can be changed in a
variety of ways by these edge nodes, for as by
inserting localized advertising. For video content,
CDNs are especially helpful because caching
can dramatically reduce bandwidth usage.
(Satyanarayanan, M., 2017). The way Edge
computing revolutionizes the public cloud is by
introducing distributed and decentralized
infrastructure, elevating it. By bringing them
closer to the target applications, it provides the
fundamental foundations of the cloud, including
computing, memory, and the network. The
latency needed to reach conventional cloud
structures is drastically decreased with just one
tag to the information center. Edge computing
improves the user experience since it reduces
the need for a full journey to the cloud.
(Janakiram MSV., Jun. 2017)
There is a misunderstanding that edge
computing is designed mainly for the IoT. But
edge computing is all set to turn into the most
desirable structure for running data-driven,
sophisticated intelligence based applications.
Though edge computing is perfect for loT
solutions, it provides enormous value for the
departmental and conventional position of
business applications. (Janakiram MSV., Feb.
2017). As the amount of information we are
processing continues to expand, we have
understood the limitations of cloud technology in
some places. Edge computing is introduced to
rectify most of these issues by resolving the
slowness incurred by computing in the cloud and
transporting information to be processed in the
data center. It will  reside "on the edge" which is
near to where the computing needs to be
performed. Because of which, edge computing
may best suit to work with time-critical
information in remote places which have no
reliable connectivity or very limited connectivity
to the centralized position. In such places, edge
computing in itself will be like mini datacenters.
Even though edge computing has a great
reputation in industry for being really fast, the
current architecture does have limitations.
Sometimes external factors such as computing
capacity, software glitch, high-volume processing
off request will add high additional overhead on
the computing process which will deteriorate the
overall response time. In this study an alternative
approach for computing which results in better
performance is presented. By adding additional
system to compute critical requests for the
infrastructure we will be able to distribute load
and  improve performance drastically, second
system will be reserved for only mission critical
requests and also serves as disaster recovery
system incase of primary system failure.
To provide a better understanding of this topic,
the goal of this study is to present the
infrastructure enhancement for edge computing
which will increase the performance and system
stability. This will further give rise to more
advancement in IoT devices and computing
mechanisms as high volume processing and
decision making will be made possible which is
the key element for developing new capabilities.
The remaining sections of this paper are
organized as follows. Section 2 outlines how
cloud and edge computing infrastructure are
hosted. Section 3 explains the proposed
enhanced edge infrastructure for better
performance. Section 4 concluding remarks and
summarization of the study. Finally, Section 5
provides limitations and directions for future
research.
2

2.
Theory/Methodology
A device that is located outside of a data center
is referred to as an edge device. Edge
computing, because of which, "is a new
paradigm in which large processing and storage
capabilities are placed at the edge of the
Internet, in close proximity to mobile devices or
sensors" (the source). Your current mobile
phone could be considered an edge gadget.
Security cameras may be located across the city
and banks. Also regarded as edge devices are
self-driving automobiles, thus they don't even
need to be small. These gadgets make it simpler
and more common to capture real-time and
location-based information. In addition, a lot of
these gadgets produce actual data like pictures
and movies. The enormous volume of data being
produced is one of the issues with the
proliferation of edge computing devices.
Consider a security camera for example, with a
10 Hz frame rate that can transmit data upward
of 250MegaBytes each second. An standard
airliner with an Internet connection creates data
as high as 5 TeraBytes per day. Each day, a
self-driving car produces data worth 4TeraBytes
and they are only for single devices. Consider
the volume of traffic that would result from
several of these devices attempting to deliver
their unprocessed data to a single server.
According to Gartner by year 2025, In contrast to
centralized data centers, 75% of data generated
by enterprises will be generated elsewhere. The
cloud structure is impractical due to issues with
bandwidth and latency for devices that need
near real-time processing. Energy use is still
another issue, a single bit traveling across the
Internet uses 500 microjoules of energy, with
edge computing this energy usage can be
significantly decreased.
As shown in Figure 1, a report from
grandviewresearch predicts that the market for
edge computing on a global scale was assessed
in 2021 for USD 7.43 billion, it is projected to
further increase by 38.9% CAGR from the year
2022-2030 (Grand View Research, 2022).
Figure 1: U.S. Edge Computing Market Report
(Source: Grand View Research, 2022)
2.1 How Edge Computing Differs from Cloud
Computing
It is really important to understand how edge
computing is different from cloud computing
before effective performance enhancement is
presented. Traditionally software applications
always had all infrastructure (servers) on
premises and most of the time the infrastructure
was under utilized, not easily scalable, and
incurred high cost of maintenance. Cloud
computing solves this problem by centralizing
the infrastructure in a distributed model where
one can rent or reserve the required space for
operation and only pays based on utilization or
for reserved standalone space, this resulted in
easy scalability, high uptime and reduction in
cost. Due to the longer journey to the server, the
likelihood of attacks on the data is greater in
cloud computing than in edge computing. The
top cloud service providers currently are Amazon
Web Services(AWS), Azure from Microsoft and
the Google Cloud. Edge computing on the other
hand is introduced because of the rise of
IoT(Internet of things) devices which requires
faster processing, data security and minimum
latency, an additional layer of edge node is
installed closer to the device which processes
requests and controls the device. Table 1 shows
the comparison between cloud computing and
edge computing (J. Pan and J. McElhannon,
2018).
3

Characteri
stics
Cloud
Computing
Edge Computing
Major
applications
Mainstream
applications
IoT, VR(Virtual
Reality,
AR(Augmented
Reality), Smart
Homes, Smart
Vehicles, Smart
Devices etc
Proximity of
services
and
resources
for data
processing
Far from
end user, in
remote
location
Closer to user, at
the edge
Network
bandwidth
High, high
amount of
data
transfer is
needed
Low, as data
processing is
done on edge
node
Availability
A small
count of
data
centers
which are
large sized
A large count of
data centers
which are large
sized
Slowness/
Latency
High,
because of
the
distance
Low, because of
the proximity
Security
Low
High
Scalability
Scalable at
data
centers in
the cloud
Scalable at data
centers, at the
edge
Table 1: Cloud computing characteristics
comparison to edge computing (J. Pan and J.
McElhannon, 2018)
2.2 Edge Computing Infrastructure
Privacy and security are crucial factors to take
into account when using cloud services.
Because user privacy must be protected,
institutions like hospitals cannot transfer raw
data straight to their cloud platforms due to the
rising frequency of data breaches. There must
be some kind of edge-level preprocessing
involved. A simplified 3tier edge computing
infrastructure is showcased in Figure 2.
As shown in Figure 3 a typical Edge computing
has 3 layers.
●
Edge Devices: These are devices used
at base level which can be any device
like smartphone, smart watch,
thermostat, smartplug etc
●
Edge Nodes: These are the devices
which controls base devices and also
collects and processes data like routers,
small base stations or data centers which
is installed closer to the device
●
Cloud: Even though Edge nodes can
independently control local devices,
when additional communication is
required from different parts of the world
or to process and analyze data which is
not critical, or to update software or
security then cloud will be used.
Figure 2: Edge Computing Infrastructure
4

Figure 3: Edge Computing Layers (B. Varghese
et al., 2016)
As it is evident from the infrastructure setup any
disruption on the edge node will result in failure
on IoT system and it is not equipped to handle
such situation, this clearly indicated there is a
need for infrastructure modification which will
enable higher availability and performance for
edge computing which is the exact goal of this
study and explained in detail in next section.
2.3 Enhanced Edge Computing Infrastructure
As we have established the limitation with
current edge computing infrastructure, the
proposal is to have an additional computing
system or edge node which will co-exist with the
current computing system or edge node. We will
consider the existing edge node to be the
primary node and newly added node to be
secondary node. Whenever the primary node
fails, is not available or has high latency, the
secondary node will be active and will process
mission critical requests to ensure the IoT device
can continue the operation.
In Figure 4 it is showcased that each of the IoT
device will talk only to the primary node for
regular requests and processing and critical
requests are either directly sent to secondary
node or when the primary node fails or is
non-responsive. Both the edge nodes will be
in-sync with near zero latency if there is any
need of data sharing for request processing.
This can be achieved by tagging the request as
critical so that when routed it can appropriately
be sent to the primary or secondary node.
Figure 4: Enhanced Edge Computing
Infrastructure
3. Results
To elaborate on the proposed enhanced
infrastructure advantage, we will consider 3
different scenarios. Response time numbers
used are not actual tested numbers and it is for
the purpose of better demonstration of the
proposed method. In general for interactive
applications, reaction delays of less than 150 ms
are typically regarded as acceptable; however,
fast-paced engagements cannot tolerate delays
of more than 70 ms (Premsankar, G. et al.,
2018).
3.1 Scenario 1 : Primary Node is Active
This is the happy path, as shown in Figure 5
when the primary node is actively processing all
requests and does not have any latency impact.
In this scenario, the primary node will continue to
process requests and the secondary node will be
in stand-by mode. Only when the latency
threshold is breached by the primary node the
request is killed and resent to the secondary
edge node for processing. Latency threshold is a
variable value and can be set based on the
criticality of the process, as a ballpark number
any request which does not receive response
5

beyond 100ms can be considered to be
redirected.
Figure 5: Scenario 1 - Primary Node is Active
3.2 Scenario 2 : Primary Node and Secondary
Node is Active
As shown in Figure 6, in this scenario we will
balance the requests for enhanced performance
by routing critical requests only to secondary
node and all other majority of non-critical
requests will be sent to primary edge node. By
doing this we will ensure the mission-critical
requests are always served without any latency
which will drive customer satisfaction and
prolonged service to the devices. This is a better
approach compared to Scenario-1 because we
will be utilizing both the nodes for optimal
performance.
Figure 6: Scenario 2 - Primary Node and
Secondary Node is Active
3.2 Scenario 3 : Primary Node is Inactive
When Primary node fails to process any
requests, this could be due to many reasons like
memory issues, software glitches, security or
software updates processing etc. Then the
secondary edge node will act as a disaster
recovery system, meaning it will take the burden
of processing all the requests to serve the IoT
device to have no impact on the service. Here
the secondary node will in turn become the
primary node till the actual primary node is
available to process requests again, this
scenario is shown in Figure 7.
6

Figure 7: Scenario 3 - Primary Node is Inactive
In Table 2, the different scenarios are listed
mapping to the status of primary and secondary
nodes along with the type of request which is
expected to be processed by the secondary
node. This gives a comprehensive view of the
edge nodes' expected activity when proposed
infrastructure is implemented.
Scenario
Primar
y Node
Status
Secon
dary
Node
Status
Secondary
Node
Request
Process
Type
Scenario 1 :
Primary
Node is
Active
Active
Inactive
Critical
requests on
demand only
Scenario 2 :
Primary
Node and
Secondary
Node is
Active
Active
Active
Critical
requests only
Scenario 3 :
Primary
Node is
Inactive
Inactive
Active
All requests
Table 2: Edge Node status and Secondary node
request process type
4.
Conclusion
Now that we have IoT, we have reached the
post-Cloud age, when there will be a lot of edge
apps deployed and a lot of high-quality data
generated by devices that are part of our daily
lives (Shi, W. et al., 2016). IoT will be the most
crucial component of big data production
because it is the supply of enormous amounts of
data. IoT must therefore upload vast amounts of
data to edge or cloud storage. Of course, the
quick upload time is one advantage of using
edge-based storage (Yu, W. et al., 2017).
Incorporating edge computing with 5G
technology has the potential to be extremely
beneficial for the healthcare industry, as it will
promote advancements in remote operations
and diagnostics as well as the tracking of patient
’s vital signs and statistics. Doctors can operate
surgical instruments remotely from a location
where they feel secure and comfortable in order
to save lives (Hassan, N. et al., 2019). On the
other hand, edge systems do create a lot of data
which may not be required to be stored or
transferred to cloud, consider medical devices
which continuously monitor patients vitals, most
of the time the stable measurement can be
ignored and only when the readings are at
critical level are most important.
With the way edge computing is booming it is
really crucial to design effective infrastructure
which can handle any circumstances, work
under network limitations, intelligently routes
requests on-demand, minimize the dependency
on large cloud computing systems and can be
highly reliable, with the current infrastructure
setup for most of the IoT devices it is nearly
7

impossible to completely rely on one edge node
or computing system to serve all requests
effectively and in majority of the cases the
increased latency will have significant impact. In
this study we identified the limitations in current
edge computing infrastructure and have
successfully presented an enhanced
infrastructure which will have additional edge
node to compute critical requests or serve as
backup computing system incase of any disaster
to ensure no disruption to the way IoT devices
operate. If effectively implemented this
enhanced infrastructure will showcase a lot of
benefits in terms of fast response, high uptime
and reliability. This will also give rise to future
sets of new innovations in the edge computing
ecosystem by the invention of new devices and
highly processing units which can make
concepts like metaverse a reality much sooner.
5.
Discussion
Edge computing is considered to be the key
transformer for a number of developing
technologies, such as augmented reality, 5G,
vehicle-to-vehicle communications and the
Internet of Things (IoT) by connecting the end
users to cloud computing resources and services
(Khan, W.Z. et al., 2019). Eventhough enhanced
infrastructure will have higher edge computing
capacity there are some limitations related to
additional cost involved to setup secondary edge
node, data sync between both primary and
secondary edge nodes at near zero latency can
be challenging, actual setup and testing is
required to solidify the proposed solution. One
other aspect of edge computing which cannot be
ignored is the physical maintenance. Unlike
cloud, the edge systems which do computing
close to the devices should be maintained
physically overtime. Security of physical devices
is also another area of edge computing which is
vulnerable. In General, there is an increase in
data breach incidents and more hackers are
coming into play day-by-day, be it On-prem,
Cloud, Hybrid or Edge Infrastructure. In one
such incident, recently Uber company data was
hacked (Vivek Basavegowda Ramu, 2022 ).
An interesting future research direction would be
to test secondary and additional edge nodes.
Such a study could consider, for instance, setting
up additional edge nodes to find the optimal cost
to performance ratio, connect multiple devices to
edge node clusters etc. We hope that this paper
will encourage further research in this direction.
6.
