arXiv:1901.08334v1  [stat.ML]  24 Jan 2019
Overcomplete Independent Component Analysis via SDP
Anastasia Podosinnikova
Amelia Perry
Alexander S. Wein
MIT
MIT
Courant Institute, NYU
Francis Bach
Alexandre d’Aspremont
David Sontag
INRIA, ENS
CNRS, ENS
MIT
Abstract
We present a novel algorithm for over-
complete independent components analysis
(ICA), where the number of latent sources
k exceeds the dimension p of observed vari-
ables.
Previous algorithms either suﬀer
from high computational complexity or make
strong assumptions about the form of the
mixing matrix. Our algorithm does not make
any sparsity assumption yet enjoys favor-
able computational and theoretical proper-
ties.
Our algorithm consists of two main
steps: (a) estimation of the Hessians of the
cumulant generating function (as opposed to
the fourth and higher order cumulants used
by most algorithms) and (b) a novel semi-
deﬁnite programming (SDP) relaxation for
recovering a mixing component.
We show
that this relaxation can be eﬃciently solved
with a projected accelerated gradient de-
scent method, which makes the whole al-
gorithm computationally practical.
More-
over, we conjecture that the proposed pro-
gram recovers a mixing component at the
rate k < p2/4 and prove that a mixing com-
ponent can be recovered with high probabil-
ity when k < (2 −ε)p log p when the original
components are sampled uniformly at ran-
dom on the hypersphere.
Experiments are
provided on synthetic data and the CIFAR-
10 dataset of real images.
Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Ar-
tiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS) 2019, Naha,
Okinawa, Japan. PMLR: Volume 89. Copyright 2019 by
the author(s).
1
Introduction
Independent component analysis (ICA) models a p-
dimensional observation x as a linear combination of
k latent mutually independent sources:
x = Dα,
(1)
where α := (α1, . . . , αk)⊤and D ∈Rp×k.
The
linear transformation D is called the mixing ma-
trix and is closely related to the dictionary matrix
from dictionary learning (see, e.g., Chen and Donoho,
1994; Chen et al., 1998).
Given a sample X
:=
{x(1), . . . , x(n)} of n observations, one is often inter-
ested in estimating the latent mixing matrix D and
respective latent representations, α(1), . . . , α(n), also
known as sources, of every observation.
A classical motivating example for ICA is the cock-
tail party problem, where one is interested in sepa-
rating individual speakers’ voices from noisy record-
ings.
Here, each record is an observation and each
speaker is an independent source.
In general, ICA
is a simple single-layered neural network and is
widely used as an unsupervised learning method in
machine learning and signal processing communities
(see, e.g., Hyv¨arinen et al., 2001; Comon and Jutten,
2010).
There are three conceptually diﬀerent settings of the
ICA problem: (a) complete, or determined, where the
dimension of observations coincides with the number
of sources, i.e., p = k; (b) undercomplete, or overde-
termined, with fewer sources than the dimension, i.e.,
k < p; and (c) overcomplete, or underdetermined, with
more sources than the dimension, i.e., k > p. While
the ﬁrst two cases are well studied, the last one is more
diﬃcult and we address it here.
In the complete setting, where k = p, ICA is usu-
ally solved via pre-whitening of the data so that
the whitened observations, z
:= Wx, are uncor-
related and all have unit variance, i.e., cov(z) =

Overcomplete Independent Component Analysis via SDP
Wcov(x)W ⊤= I, where W denotes the whitening ma-
trix. Substituting x = Dα, we get (WD)(WD)⊤= I
which implies that the matrix Q := WD is orthog-
onal and therefore the problem of ﬁnding the mix-
ing matrix D boils down to ﬁnding the “correct” or-
thogonal matrix Q.
Numerous “correctness” crite-
ria, such as maximizing non-Gaussianity of sources,
were proposed and respective algorithms for complete
ICA are well known (see, e.g., Hyv¨arinen et al., 2001;
Comon and Jutten, 2010).
The most widely known
complete ICA algorithms are possibly the FastICA al-
gorithm by Hyv¨arinen (1999) and the JADE algorithm
by Cardoso and Souloumiac (1993). This naturally ex-
tends to the undercomplete setting where one looks for
an orthonormal matrix, where columns are orthogonal,
instead. However, although nothing prevents us from
whitening data in the overcomplete setting, the or-
thogonalization trick cannot be extended to the over-
complete setting, where k > p, since the mixing matrix
D has more columns than rows and therefore cannot
have full column rank.
Improvements in feature learning are among the ad-
vantages of overcomplete representations: it has been
shown by Coates et al. (2011) that dense and overcom-
plete features can signiﬁcantly improve performance of
classiﬁcation algorithms. However, advantages of over-
complete representations go far beyond this task (see,
e.g., Bengio et al., 2013).
Originally, the idea of overcomplete representations
was developed in the context of dictionary learn-
ing, where an overcomplete dictionary, formed by
Fourier, wavelet, Gabor or other ﬁlters, is given
and one is only interested in estimating the la-
tent representations α.
Diﬀerent approaches were
proposed for this problem including the method
of
frames
(Daubechies,
1988)
and
basis
pursuit
(Chen and Donoho, 1994; Chen et al., 1998).
Later
in sparse coding,
the idea of estimating a dic-
tionary matrix directly from data was introduced
(Olshausen and Field, 1996, 1997) and was shortly
followed by the ﬁrst overcomplete ICA algorithm
(Lewicki and Sejnowski, 2000).1 Further overcomplete
ICA research continued in several fairly diﬀerent direc-
tions based on either (a) various sparsity assumptions
(see, e.g., Teh et al., 2003) or on (b) prior assumptions
about the sources as by Lewicki and Sejnowski (2000)
or (c) instead in a more general dense overcomplete
setting (see, e.g., Hyv¨arinen, 2005; Comon and Rajih,
2006; De Lathauwer et al., 2007; Goyal et al., 2014;
Bhaskara et al., 2014a,b; Anandkumar et al., 2015;
1 Recall the close relation between ICA and sparse cod-
ing: indeed, the maximum likelihood estimation of ICA
with the Laplace prior on the sources (latent representa-
tions α) is equivalent to the standard sparse coding formu-
lation with the ℓ1-penalty.
Ma et al., 2016).
Since we focus on this more gen-
eral dense setting, we do not review or compare to the
literature in the other settings.
In particular, we focus on the following problem: Es-
timate the mixing matrix D given an observed sam-
ple X :=

x(1), . . . , x(n)	
of n observations. We aim
at constructing an algorithm that would bridge the
gap between algorithms with theoretical guarantees
and ones with practical computational properties. No-
tably, our algorithm does not depend on any prob-
abilistic assumptions on the sources, except for the
standard independence and non-Gaussianity, and the
uniqueness of the ICA representation (up to permuta-
tion and scaling) is the result of the independence of
sources rather than sparsity. Here we only focus on the
estimation of the latent mixing matrix and leave the
learning of the latent representation for future research
(note that one can use, e.g., the mentioned earlier dic-
tionary learning approaches).
Diﬀerent approaches have been proposed to address
this problem. Some attempt to relax the hard orthogo-
nality constraint in the whitening procedure with more
heuristic quasi-orthogonalization approaches (see, e.g.,
Le et al., 2011; Arora et al., 2012). Other approaches
try to speciﬁcally address the structure of the model
in the overcomplete setting (see, e.g., Hyv¨arinen,
2005; Comon and Rajih, 2006; De Lathauwer et al.,
2007; Goyal et al., 2014; Bhaskara et al., 2014a,b;
Anandkumar et al., 2015; Ma et al., 2016) by con-
sidering higher-order cumulants or derivatives of the
cumulant generating function.
The algorithm that
we propose is the closest to the latter type of ap-
proach.
We make two conceptual contributions: (a) we show
how to use second-order statistics instead of the fourth
and higher-order cumulants, which improves sample
complexity, and (b) we introduce a novel semi-deﬁnite
Algorithm 1 OverICA
1: Input:
Observations X := {x1, . . . , xn} and
latent dimension k.
Parameters: The regularization parameter µ and
the number s of generalized covariances, s > k.
2: STEP I. Estimation of the subspace W:
Sample vectors t1, . . . , ts.
Estimate matrices Hj := Cx(tj) for all j ∈[s].
3: STEP II. Estimation of the atoms:
Given G(i) for every deﬂation step i = 1, 2, . . ., k:
Solve the relaxation (12) with G(i).
(OR: Solve the program (9) with G(i).)
Estimate the i-th mixing component di from B∗.
4: Output: Mixing matrix D = (d1, d2, . . . , dk).

Podosinnikova, Perry, Wein, Bach, d’Aspremont, Sontag
programming-based approach, with a convex relax-
ation that can be solved eﬃciently, for estimating the
columns of D. Overall, this leads to a computation-
ally eﬃcient overcomplete ICA algorithm that also
has theoretical guarantees.
Conceptually, our work
is similar to the fourth-order only blind identiﬁca-
tion (FOOBI) algorithm (De Lathauwer et al., 2007),
which we found to work well in practice.
However,
FOOBI suﬀers from high computational and memory
complexities, its theoretical guarantee requires all kur-
toses of the sources to be positive, and it makes the
strong assumption that certain fourth-order tensors
are linearly independent. Our approach resolves these
drawbacks. We describe our algorithm in Section 2
and experimental results in Section 3.
2
Overcomplete ICA via SDP
2.1
Algorithm overview
We focus on estimating the latent mixing matrix D ∈
Rp×k of the ICA model (1) in the overcomplete setting
where k > p. We ﬁrst motivate our algorithm in the
population (inﬁnite sample) setting and later address
the ﬁnite sample case.
In the following, the i-th column of the mixing ma-
trix D is denoted as di and called the i-th mixing
component. The rank-1 matrices d1d⊤
1 , . . . , dkd⊤
k are
referred to as atoms.2
Our algorithm, referred to as OverICA, consists of
two major steps: (a) construction of the subspace W
spanned by the atoms, i.e.,
W := Span

d1d⊤
1 , . . . , dkd⊤
k
	
,
(2)
and (b) estimation of individual atoms did⊤
i , i ∈[k],
given any basis of this subspace.3 We summarize this
high level idea4 in Algorithm 1. Note that although the
deﬁnition of the subspace W in (2) is based on the la-
tent atoms, in practice this subspace is estimated from
the known observations x (see Section 2.3). However,
we do use this explicit representation in our theoretical
analysis.
In general, there are diﬀerent ways to implement
these two steps.
For instance, some algorithms im-
plement the ﬁrst step based on the fourth or higher
order cumulants (see, e.g., De Lathauwer et al., 2007;
Goyal et al., 2014). In contrast, we estimate the sub-
space W from the Hessian of the cumulant generat-
ing function which has better computational and sam-
ple complexities (see Section 2.3). Our algorithm also
2 We slightly abuse the standard closely related dictio-
nary learning terminology where the term atom is used for
the individual columns di (see, e.g., Chen et al., 1998).
3 The mixing component is then the largest eigenvector.
4 The deﬂation part is more involved (see Section 2.4.3).
works (without any adjustment) with other implemen-
tations of the ﬁrst step, including the fourth-order cu-
mulant based one, but other algorithms cannot take
advantage of our eﬃcient ﬁrst step due to the diﬀer-
ences in the second step.
In the second step, we propose a novel semi-deﬁnite
program (SDP) for estimation of an individual atom
given the subspace W (Section 2.4.1). We also provide
a convex relaxation of this program which admits eﬃ-
cient implementation and introduces regularization to
noise which is handy in practice when the subspace W
can only be estimated approximately (Section 2.4.2).
Finally, we provide a deﬂation procedure that allows
us to estimate all the atoms (Section 2.4.3). Before
proceeding, a few assumptions are in order.
2.2
Assumptions
Due to the inherent permutation and scaling unidenti-
ﬁability of the ICA problem, it is a standard practice
to assume, without loss of generality, that
Assumption 2.1. Every mixing component has unit
norm, i.e., ∥di∥2 = 1 for all i ∈[k].
This assumption immediately implies that all atoms
have unit Frobenius norm, i.e.,

did⊤
i

F = ∥di∥2
2 = 1
for all i ∈[k].
Since instead of recovering mixing components di as in
(under-) complete setting we recover atoms did⊤
i , the
following assumption is necessary for the identiﬁability
of our algorithm:
Assumption 2.2. The matrices (atoms) d1d⊤
1 , d2d⊤
2 ,
. . . , dkd⊤
k are linearly independent.
This in particular implies that the number of sources k
cannot exceed m := p(p + 1)/2, which is the latent di-
mension of the set of all symmetric matrices Sp. We
also assume, without loss of generality, that the obser-
vations are centred, i.e., E(x) = E(α) = 0.
2.3
Step I: Subspace Estimation
In this section, we describe a construction of an or-
thonormal basis of the subspace W. For that, we ﬁrst
construct matrices H1, . . . , Hs ∈Rp×p, for some s,
which span the subspace W. These matrices are ob-
tained from the Hessian of the cumulant generating
function as described below.
Generalized Covariance
Matrices.
Introduced
for complete ICA by Yeredor (2000), a generalized co-
variance matrix is the Hessian of the cumulant gener-
ating function evaluated at a non-zero vector.
Recall that the cumulant generating function (cfg) of

Overcomplete Independent Component Analysis via SDP
a p-valued random variable x is deﬁned as
φx(t) := log E(et⊤x),
(3)
for any t ∈Rp. It is well known that the cumulants
of x can be computed as the coeﬃcients of the Taylor
series expansion of the cgf evaluated at zero (see, e.g.,
Comon and Jutten, 2010, Chapter 5). In particular,
the second order cumulant, which coincides with the
covariance matrix, is then the Hessian evaluated at
zero, i.e., cov(x) = ∇2φx(0).
The generalized covariance matrix is a straight-
forward extension where the Hessian of the cgf is eval-
uated at a non-zero vector t:
Cx(t) := ∇2φx(t) = E(xx⊤et⊤x)
E(et⊤x)
−Ex(t)Ex(t)⊤,
(4)
where we introduced
Ex(t) := ∇φx(t) = E(xet⊤x)
E(et⊤x) .
(5)
Generalized Covariance Matrices of ICA.
In
case of the ICA model, substituting (1) into the ex-
pressions (5) and (4), we obtain
Ex(t) = DE(αeα⊤y)
E(eα⊤y)
= DEα(y),
Cx(t) = DCα(y)D⊤,
(6)
where we introduced y := D⊤t and the generalized
covariance Cα(y) := ∇2φα(y) of the sources:
Cα(y) = E(αα⊤eα⊤y)
E(eα⊤y)
−Eα(y)Eα(y)⊤,
(7)
where Eα(y) := ∇φα(y) = E(αey⊤α)/E(ey⊤α).
Importantly, the generalized covariance Cα(y) of the
sources, due to the independence, is a diagonal ma-
trix (see, e.g., Podosinnikova et al., 2016). Therefore,
the ICA generalized covariance Cx(t) is:
Cx(t) =
k
X
i=1
ωi(t)did⊤
i ,
(8)
where ωi(t) := [Cα(D⊤t)]ii are the generalized variance
of the i-th source αi. This implies that ICA generalized
covariances belong to the subspace W.
Construction of the Subspace.
Since ICA gener-
alized covariance matrices belong to the subspace W,
then the span of any number of such matrices would
either be a subset of W or equal to W. Choosing suf-
ﬁciently large number s > k of generalized covariance
matrices, we can ensure the equality. Therefore, given
a suﬃciently large number s of vectors t1, . . . , ts, we
construct matrices Hj := Cx(tj) for all j ∈[s]. Note
that in practice it is more convenient to work with vec-
torizations of these matrices and then consequent ma-
tricization of the obtained result (see Appendices A.1
and B.2). Given matrices Hj, for j ∈[s], an orthonor-
mal basis can be straightforwardly extracted via the
singular value decomposition.
In practice, we set s
as a multiple of k and sample the vectors tj from the
Gaussian distribution.
Note that one can also construct a basis of the sub-
space W from the column space of the ﬂattening of
the fourth-order cumulant of the ICA model (1). In
particular, this ﬂattening is a matrix C ∈Rp2×p2
such that C = (D ⊙D)Diag(κ)(D ⊙D), where ⊙
stands for the Khatri-Rao product and the i-th el-
ement of the vector κ ∈Rk is the kurtosis of the
i-th source αi.
Importantly, matricization of the i-
th column ai of the matrix A := D ⊙D is exactly
the i-th atom, i.e., mat(ai) = did⊤
i . Therefore, one
can construct the desirable basis from the column
space of the matrix A (see Appendix B.2 for more
details).
This also intuitively explains the need for
Assumption 2.2, which basically ensures that A has
full column rank (as opposed to D). In general, this
approach is common in the overcomplete literature
(see, e.g., De Lathauwer et al., 2007; Bhaskara et al.,
2014a; Anandkumar et al., 2015; Ma et al., 2016) and
can be used as the ﬁrst step of our algorithm. However,
the generalized covariance-based construction has bet-
ter computational (see Section 3.3) and sample com-
plexities.
2.4
Step II: Estimation of the Atoms
We now discuss the recovery of one atom did⊤
i , for
some i ∈[k], given a basis of the subspace W (Sec-
tion 2.4.1). We then provide a deﬂation procedure to
recover all atoms did⊤
i (Section 2.4.3).
2.4.1
The Semi-Deﬁnite Program
Given matrices H1, H2, . . . , Hs which span the sub-
space W deﬁned in (2) we formulate the following
semi-deﬁnite program (SDP):
B∗
sdp := argmax
B∈Sp
⟨G, B⟩
B ∈Span {H1, H2, . . . , Hs} ,
Tr(B) = 1,
B ⪰0.
(9)
We expect that the optimal solution (if it exists and
is unique) B∗
sdp coincides with one of the atoms did⊤
i
for some i ∈[k]. This is not always the case, but we
conjecture based on the experimental evidence that
one of the atoms is recovered with high probability
when k ≤p2/4 (see Figure 1) and prove a weaker re-
sult (Theorem 2.1). The matrix G ∈Rp×p determines
which of the atoms did⊤
i is the optimizer and its choice
is discussed when we construct a deﬂation procedure
(Section 2.4.3; see also Appendix C.1.4).

Podosinnikova, Perry, Wein, Bach, d’Aspremont, Sontag
Intuition.
Since generalized covariances H1,. . . ,Hs
span the subspace W, the constraint set of (9)
is:
K := {B ∈W : Tr(B) = 1, B ⪰0} .
(10)
It is not diﬃcult to show (see Appendix C.2.2) that un-
der Assumption 2.2 the atoms did⊤
i are extreme points
of this set K:
Lemma 2.4.1. Let the atoms d1d⊤
1 , d2d⊤
2 , . . . , dkd⊤
k
be linearly independent. Then they are extreme points
of the set K deﬁned in (10).
If the program (9) has a unique solution, the optimizer
B∗
sdp must be an extreme point due to the compact-
ness of the convex set K.
If the set (10) does not
have other extreme points except for the atoms did⊤
i ,
i ∈[k], then the optimizer is guaranteed to be one of
the atoms. This might not be the case if the set K con-
tains extreme points diﬀerent from the atoms. This
might explain why the phase transition (at the rate
k ≤p2/4) happens and could potentially be related
to the phenomenon of polyhedrality of spectrahedra5
(Bhardwaj et al., 2015).
Before diving into the analysis of this SDP, let us
present its convex relaxation which enjoys certain de-
sirable properties.
2.4.2
The Convex Relaxation
Let us rewrite (9) in an equivalent form.
The con-
straint B ∈W := Span

d1d⊤
1 , . . . , dkd⊤
k
	
is equivalent
to the fact that B is orthogonal to any matrix from the
orthogonal complement (null space) of W. Let the ma-
trices {F1, F2, . . . , Fm−k}, where m := p(p+1)/2, form
a basis of the null space N(W).6 Then the program (9)
takes an equivalent formulation:
B∗
sdp := argmax
B∈Sp
⟨G, B⟩
⟨B, Fj⟩= 0,
for all
j ∈[m −k],
Tr(B) = 1,
B ⪰0.
(11)
In the presence of (e.g., ﬁnite sample) noise, the sub-
space W can only be estimated approximately (in the
ﬁrst step). Therefore, rather than keeping the hard
ﬁrst constraint, we introduce the relaxation
B∗:= argmax
B∈Sp
⟨G, B⟩−µ
2
X
j∈[m−k]
⟨B, Fj⟩2
Tr(B) = 1, B ⪰0,
(12)
5 The spectrahedron is a set formed by an intersection of
the positive semi-deﬁnite cone with linear constraints, e.g.
the set K.
Importantly, all polyhedra are spectrahedra,
but not all spectrahedra are polyhedra.
6 Note that a basis of N(W ) can be easily computed
given matrices H1, . . . , Hs.
where µ > 0 is a regularization parameter which
helps to adjust to an expected level of noise. Impor-
tantly, the relaxation (12) can be solved eﬃciently,
e.g.,
via the fast iterative shrinkage-thresholding
algorithm (FISTA;
Beck and Teboulle,
2009)
and
the majorization-maximization principle (see, e.g.,
Hunter and Lange, 2004). See Appendix C.1 for de-
tails.
2.4.3
Deﬂation
The semi-deﬁnite program (9), or its relaxation (12),
is designed to estimate only some one atom did⊤
i . To
estimate all other atoms we need a deﬂation procedure.
In general, there is no easy and straightforward way
to perform deﬂation in the overcomplete setting, but
we discuss possible approaches below.
Clustering.
Since the matrix G determines which
atom is found, it is natural to repeatedly resample this
matrix a multiple of k times and then cluster the ob-
tained atoms into k clusters. This approach generally
works well except in the cases where either (a) some of
the atoms, say did⊤
i and djd⊤
j , are relatively close (e.g.,
in terms of angle in the space of all symmetric matri-
ces) to each other, or (b) one or several atoms were
not properly estimated. In the former case, one could
increase the number of times G is resampled, and the
program is solved, but that might require very high
number of repetitions. The latter issue is more diﬃ-
cult to ﬁx since a single wrong atom could signiﬁcantly
perturb the overall outcome.
Adaptive
Deﬂation.
Alternatively,
one
could
adapt the constraint set iteratively to exclude from
the search all the atoms found so far. For that, one
can update the constraint set so that the subspace W
is replaced with the subspace that is spanned by all the
atoms except for the ones which were already found.
The most natural way to implement this is to add the
found atoms to a basis of the null space of W, which is
straightforward to implement with the relaxation (12).
Similar to other deﬂation approaches, a poor estimate
of an atom obtained in an earlier deﬂation step of such
adaptive deﬂation can propagate this error leading to
an overall poor result.
Semi-Adaptive Deﬂation.
We found that taking
advantage of both presented deﬂation approaches leads
to the best result in practice. In particular, we com-
bine these approaches by ﬁrst performing clustering
and keeping only good clusters (with low variance over
the cluster) and then continuing with the adaptive de-
ﬂation approach. We assume this semi-adaptive de-
ﬂation approach for all the experiments presented in
Section 3.

Overcomplete Independent Component Analysis via SDP
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Figure 1: Phase transition of the program (13).
2.4.4
Identiﬁability
In general, there are two types of identiﬁability of
probabilistic models: (a) statistical and (b) algebraic.
The statistical identiﬁability addresses whether the
parameters of the model can be identiﬁed for given
distributions.
In particular, it is well known that
the ICA model is not identiﬁable if (more than one
of) the sources are Gaussian (Comon, 1994) and is-
sues also arise when the sources are close to Gaussian
(Sokol et al., 2014). These results also extend to the
overcomplete case that we consider. However, we do
not address these questions here and assume that the
models we work with are statistically identiﬁable. In-
stead, we are interested whether our approach is alge-
braically identiﬁable, i.e., whether our algorithm cor-
rectly recovers the parameters of the model. In partic-
ular, we address the following question: When is the
solution B∗
sdp of the program (9) is one of the atoms
did⊤
i , i ∈[k]?
We address this question in theory and in practice and
focus on the population (inﬁnite number of samples)
case, where we assume that an exact estimate of the
subspace W is given and, therefore, one can use the
representation W := Span

d1d⊤
1 , . . . , dkd⊤
k
	
without
loss of generality. Therefore, for the theoretical anal-
ysis purposes we assume that atoms did⊤
i are known,
we consider the following program instead
B∗
sdp := argmax
B∈Sp
⟨G, B⟩
B ∈Span

d1d⊤
1 , d2d⊤
2 , . . . , dkd⊤
k
	
,
Tr(B) = 1,
B ⪰0.
(13)
Phase Transition.
In Figure 1, we present the
phase transition plot for the program (13) obtained
by solving the program multiple times for diﬀerent
settings. In particular, for every pair (p, k) we solve
the program nrep := 50 times and assign to the re-
spective point the value equal to the fraction of suc-
cessful solutions (where the optimizer was one of the
atoms).
Given a ﬁxed pair (p, k), every instance of the pro-
gram (13) is constructed as follows. We ﬁrst sample
a mixing matrix D ∈Rp×k so that every mixing com-
ponent is from the standard normal distribution as
described in Appendix D.1; and we sample a matrix
G ∈Rp×p from the standard normal distribution. We
then construct the constraint set of the program (13)
by setting every matrix Hi = did⊤
i
for all i ∈[k],
where s = k. We solve every instance of this problem
with the CVX toolbox (Grant et al., 2006) using the
SeDuMi solver (Sturm, 1999).
We consider the observations dimensions p from 10 to
50 with the interval of 5 and we vary the number of
atoms from 10 to 1000 with the interval of 10. The
resulting phase transition plots are presented in Fig-
ure 1. The blue line on this plot corresponds to the
curve k = p(p + 1)/2, which is the largest possible la-
tent dimension of all symmetric matrices Sp. The red
line on this plot corresponds to the curve k = p2/4.
Since above the red line we observe 100% successful re-
covery (black), we conjecture that the phase transition
happens around k = p2/4.
Theoretical Results.
Interestingly, an equivalent
conjecture, k < p2/4, was made for the ellipsoid ﬁtting
problem (Saunderson et al., 2012, 2013) and the ques-
tion remains open to our best knowledge.7 In fact, we
show close relation between successful solution (recov-
ery of an atom) of our program (13) and the ellipsoid
ﬁtting problem.
In particular, a successful solution
of our problem implies that the feasibility of its La-
grange dual program is equivalent to the ellipsoid ﬁt-
ting problem (see Appendix C.2.3). Moreover, using
this connection, we prove the following:
Theorem 2.1. Let ε > 0. Consider a regime with
p tending to to inﬁnity, and with k varying according
to the bound k < (2 −ε)p log p. As above, let the di
be random unit vectors and let G = uu⊤for a ran-
dom unit vector u. Then with high probability8, the
matrix did⊤
i
for which d⊤
i Gdi is largest is the unique
maximizer of the program (13).
3
Experiments
It is diﬃcult to objectively evaluate unsupervised
learning algorithms on real data in the absence of
ground truth parameters. Therefore, we ﬁrst perform
comparison on synthetic data.
All our experiments
can be reproduced with the publicly available code:
https://github.com/anastasia-podosinnikova/oica.
7 In Appendix C.2.1, we recall the formulation of the
ellipsoid ﬁtting problem and slightly improve the results of
Saunderson et al. (2012, 2013).
8Throughout, “with high probability” indicates proba-
bility tending to 1 as p →∞.

Podosinnikova, Perry, Wein, Bach, d’Aspremont, Sontag
5 
10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60
0
0.5
1
5 
10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60
0
0.5
1
5 
10
15
20
25
5
10
15
20
25
5 
10
15
20
25
5
10
15
20
25
Figure 2: A proof of concept in the asymptotic regime. See explanation in Section 3.1.
1
3
5
7
9
0
0.5
1
1
3
5
7
9
0
0.5
1
10 30 50 70 90 110 130 150 170 190
0
0.5
1
10 30 50 70 90 110 130 150 170 190
0
0.5
1
10 30 50 70 90 110 130 150 170 190
5
10
15
20
25
30
10 30 50 70 90 110 130 150 170 190
5
10
15
20
25
30
10 30 50 70 90 110 130 150 170 190
5
10
15
20
25
30
10 30 50 70 90 110 130 150 170 190
5
10
15
20
25
30
Figure 3: Comparison in the ﬁnite sample regime. See explanation in Section 3.2.
3.1
Synthetic Data: Population Case
As a proof of concept, this simple experiment (Fig-
ure 2) imitates the inﬁnite sample case.
Given a
ground truth mixing matrix D, we construct a basis of
the subspace W directly from the matrix A := D ⊙D
(see Appendix B.2). This leads to a noiseless estimate
of the subspace. We then evaluate the performance of
the second step of our OverICA algorithm and com-
pare it with the second step of FOOBI. We ﬁx the
observed dimension p = 10 and vary the latent dimen-
sion from k = 5 to k = 60 in steps of 5. For every
pair (p, k), we repeat the experiment nrep = 10 times
and display the minimum, median, and maximum val-
ues. Each time we sample the mixing matrix D with
mixing components from the standard normal distri-
bution (see Appendix D.1.1). Note that we tried diﬀer-
ent sampling methods and distributions of the mixing
components, but did not observe any signiﬁcant dif-
ference in the overall result. See Appendix D.1.2 for
further details on this sampling procedure.
The error metrics (formally deﬁned in Appendix D.2)
are: (a) f-error is essentially the relative Frobenius
norm of the mixing matrices with properly permuted
mixing components (lower is better); (b) a-error mea-
sures the angle deviations of the estimated mixing
components vs the ground truth (lower is better);
and (c) “perfect” recovery rates, which show for ev-
ery i ∈[k] the fraction of perfectly estimated i com-
ponents.
We say that a mixing component is “per-
fectly” recovered if the cosine of the angle between
this component di and its ground truth equivalent
dπ(i) is at least 0.99, i.e., cos(di, bdπ(i)) ≥0.99. Note
that the respective angle is approximately equal to 8.
Then the black-and-white perfect recovery plots (in
Figure 2) show if i ≤k (on the y-axis) components
were perfectly recovered (black) for the given latent
dimension k (x-axis). These black vertical bars can-
not exceed the red line i = k, but the closer they
approach this line, the better.
The vertical green
lines correspond to k = p = 10, k = p2/4 = 25,
k = p(p −1)/2, and k = p(p + 1)/2.
Importantly,
we see that OverICA works better or comparably to
FOOBI in the regime k < p2/4. Performance of Over-
ICA starts to deteriorate near the regime k ≈p2/4
and beyond, which is in accord with our theoretical
results in Section 2.4.4. Note that to see whether the
algorithms work better than random, we display the
errors of a randomly sampled mixing matrix (RAND;
see Appendix D.1.1).
3.2
Synthetic Data: Finite Sample
Case
With these synthetic data we evaluate performance of
overcomplete ICA algorithms in the presence of ﬁnite
sample noise but absence of model misspeciﬁcation. In
particular, we sample synthetic data in the observed
dimension p = 15 from the ICA model with uniformly
distributed (on [−0.5, 0.5]) k = 30 sources for diﬀer-
ent sample sizes n taking values from n = 1, 000 to
n = 10, 000 in steps of 1, 000 (two left most plots in
the top line of Figure 3) and values from n = 10, 000 to
n = 210, 000 in steps of 10, 000 (two right most plots in
the top line of Figure 3; see also Figure 6 in Appendix

Overcomplete Independent Component Analysis via SDP
Table 1: Computational complexities (n is the sample size,
p is the observed dimension, k is the latent dimension, s is
the number of generalized covariances, usually s = O(k)).
Procedure
Memory
Time
GenCov
O(p2s)
O(snp2)
CUM
O(p4)
O(np4 + k2p2)
FOOBI
O(p4k2 + k4)
O(np4 + k2p4 + k6)
OverICA
O(sp2)
O(nsp2)
OverICA(Q)
O(p4)
O(np4 + k2p2)
Fourier PCA
O(p4)
O(np4)
for log-linear scale). Note that the choice of dimen-
sions p = 15 and k = 30 corresponds to the regime
k < p2/4 ≈56 of our guarantees. We repeat the ex-
periment nrep := 10 times for every n where we every
time resample the (ground truth) mixing matrix (with
the sampling procedure described in Appendix D.1.1).
See further explanation in Appendix D.1.3.
We compare the Fourier PCA algorithm (Goyal et al.,
2014), the FOOBI algorithm (De Lathauwer et al.,
2007), OverICA from Algorithm 1, and a version of
the OverICA algorithm where the ﬁrst step is replaced
with the construction based on the fourth-order cumu-
lant, a.k.a.
quadricovariance (OverICA(Q); see Ap-
pendix B.2). Note that we can not compare with the
reconstruction ICA algorithm by Le et al. (2011) be-
cause it estimates the de-mixing (instead of mixing)
matrix.9
Similarly to Section 3.1, we measure the
Frobenius error (f-error), the angle error (a-error), and
the perfect recovery for the angle of 8. We observe
that the generalized covariance-based OverICA algo-
rithm performs slightly better which we believe is due
to the lower sample complexity. Fourier PCA on the
contrary performs with larger error, which is probably
due to the higher sample complexity and larger noise
resulting from estimation using fourth-order general-
ized cumulants.
3.3
Computational Complexities
In Table 1, we summarize the timespace complexi-
ties of the considered overcomplete ICA algorithms
and two sub-procedures they use: generalized covari-
ances (GenCov; used by OverICA) from Section 2.3
and the forth-order cumulant (CUM; used by Over-
ICA(Q) and FOOBI; see Appendix B.2) (see Ap-
pendix D.3). Importantly, we can see that our Over-
ICA algorithm has a signiﬁcantly lower complexity.
In Appendix D.3, we present runtime comparisons of
these algorithms.
9 In the complete invertible case, the de-mixing matrix
would be the inverse of the mixing matrix. In the overcom-
plete regime, one cannot simply obtain the mixing matrix
from the de-mixing matrix.
Figure 4:
Mixing components obtained from 7-by-7
patches, i.e., p = 49, of the CIFAR-10 dataset (k = 150,
i.e., overcomplete). ICA does not preserve non-negativity
and the signs of ICA mixing components can be arbitrar-
ily ﬂipped due to the scaling unidentiﬁability; here black
and white correspond to the extreme positive and extreme
negative values.
The colorbar limits of every image are
the same and the signs are alligned to have positive scalar
product with the ﬁrst component.
3.4
Real Data: CIFAR-10 Patches
Finally, we estimate the overcomplete mixing matrix
of data formed of patches of the CIFAR-10 dataset
(see, e.g., Krizhevsky et al., 2014). In particular, we
transform the images into greyscale and then form 7-
by-7 patches for every interior point (at least 3 pixels
from the boundary) of every image from the train-
ing batch 1 of the CIFAR-10 dataset. This results in
6, 760, 000 patches each of dimension p = 49. We per-
form the estimation of the mixing matrix for k = 150
latent mixing components. The resulting atoms are
presented in Figure 4. Note that since ICA is scale
(and therefore sign) invariant, the sign of every compo-
nent can be arbitrary ﬂipped. We present the obtained
components in the scale where black and white corre-
sponds to the extreme positive or negative values and
we observe that these peaks are concentrated in rather
pointed areas (which is a desirable property of latent
components). Note that the runtime of this whole pro-
cedure was around 2 hours on a laptop. Due to high
timespace complexities (see Section 3.3), we cannot
perform similar estimation neither with FOOBI nor
with Fourier PCA algorithms.
4
Conclusion
We presented a novel ICA algorithm for estimation
of the latent overcomplete mixing matrix. Our algo-
rithm also works in the (under-)complete setting, en-
joys lower computational complexity, and comes with
theoretical guarantees, which is also conﬁrmed by ex-
periments.

Podosinnikova, Perry, Wein, Bach, d’Aspremont, Sontag
