Leveraging Usage Data for Linked Data Movie Entity
Summarization
Andreas Thalhammer, Ioan Toma, Antonio J. Roa-Valverde, Dieter Fensel
Semantic Technology Institute
University of Innsbruck
Technikerstraße 21a
6020 Innsbruck, Austria

ABSTRACT
Novel research in the ﬁeld of Linked Data focuses on the
problem of entity summarization. This ﬁeld addresses the
problem of ranking features according to their importance
for the task of identifying a particular entity. Next to a more
human friendly presentation, these summarizations can play
a central role for semantic search engines and semantic rec-
ommender systems. In current approaches, it has been tried
to apply entity summarization based on patterns that are
inherent to the regarded data.
The proposed approach of this paper focuses on the movie
domain. It utilizes usage data in order to support measuring
the similarity between movie entities. Using this similarity
it is possible to determine the k-nearest neighbors of an en-
tity. This leads to the idea that features that entities share
with their nearest neighbors can be considered as signiﬁcant
or important for these entities. Additionally, we introduce
a downgrading factor (similar to TF-IDF) in order to over-
come the high number of commonly occurring features. We
exemplify the approach based on a movie-ratings dataset
that has been linked to Freebase entities.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.1.2 [User/Machine Systems]: Human factors—Usage
Data Mining; H.3.5 [On-line Information Services]: Data
sharing—Linked Open Data
General Terms
Human Factors, Experimentation
Keywords
linked data, entity summarization, ranking, item similarity
1.
INTRODUCTION
Linked Data, which connects diﬀerent pieces of machine-
readable information (resources) via machine-readable rela-
tionships (properties) has rapidly grown in the past years,
changing the way data is published and consumed on the
Web. Data referring to real-world entities is being linked re-
sulting into vast network of structured, interlinked descrip-
tions that can be used to infer new knowledge. The rapid
growth of Linked Data (LD) introduces however a set of new
challenges. One in particular becomes very important when
it comes to characterizing real world entities: their LD de-
scriptions need to be processed and understood quickly and
eﬀectively. The problem known as entity summarization [5]
is concerned with identifying the most important features of
lengthy LD or Linked Open Data (LOD)1 descriptions. So-
lutions to this problem help applications and users of LD to
quickly and eﬀectively understand and work with the vast
amount of data from LOD cloud.
In this paper we propose a novel approach that leverages
usage data in order to summarize entities in the LOD space.
More precisely, we perform data analysis on LD in order
to identify features of entities that best characterize them.
Our approach is simple and eﬀective. We ﬁrst measure sim-
ilarities between entities and identify a set of nearest neigh-
bors for each entity. For each feature of the entity we then
count the number of entities having the same feature in the
nearest neighbors group as well as in the set of all entities.
Based on this we compute a weight for each entity, order
the entities descending and select the top-n features as the
summarization for each entity.
To validate our approach
we run a set of experiments using two datasets, namely the
HetRec2011 MovieLens2k dataset [4] and data crawled from
Freebase.2 Results obtained from these datasets show that
our approach is capable to identify relevant features that
are shared with similar entities and thus provide meaningful
summarizations.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion 2 details our approach on leveraging usage data for
linked data movie entity summarization. Section 3 presents
the related work in the areas of entity summarization, usage
mining and semantic representation of user proﬁles.
Sec-
tion 4 introduces the datasets used in our experiments while
Section 5 discusses the preliminary results obtained, focus-
ing more on the neighborhood formation and neighborhood-
based entity summarization results. Finally, Section 6 con-
cludes the paper and Section 7 outlines future work that we
plan based on the approach presented in this paper.
Please note, we use the terms item and entity interchange-
able in this paper.
2.
PROPOSED APPROACH
The main idea introduced in this work is that property-
value pairs - consecutively also called features - that an en-
tity shares with its k-nearest neighbors are more relevant
than features that are shared with entities that are not in
the k-nearest neighbors range. Figure 1 visualizes this situ-
1http://www.w3.org/wiki/SweoIG/TaskForces/
CommunityProjects/LinkingOpenData
2http://freebase.com/
arXiv:1204.2718v1  [cs.AI]  12 Apr 2012

Figure 1:
Visualization of shared features (strong
lines and dark gray nodes) between k-nearest neigh-
bors (green and blue nodes).
ation. Two nodes (green and blue) of the same type (M) are
in each other’s neighborhood. The features shared with each
other (strong lines and dark gray nodes) are considered to be
more important for their idendity than features they share
with a node (light gray M) that is not in their respective
neighborhood. The neighborhood formation of each node is
based on usage data.
A detailed problem statement of entity summarization is
given in [5]. The authors of this paper deﬁne the summa-
rization of an entity e as follows:
“Given FS(e) and a positive integer k < |FS(e)|,
the problem of entity summarization is to select
Summ(e) ⊂FS(e) such that |Summ(e)| = k.
Summ(e) is called a summary of e.”3
FS(e) denotes the feature set of a given entity e.
More
informally, the feature set of an entity e is deﬁned as the
property-value pair set of e. An example for such a property-
value pair for the entity fb : en.toy story4 is:
(fb:film.film.production_companies, fb:en.pixar)
In the following, E denotes the set of all entities.
Our
approach to provide a summarization of a given entity e ∈E
is based on usage data and includes six steps:
1. Generate the user-item matrix.
2. Measure the similarity between e and other items and
identify a set Nk,e ⊆E of k-nearest neighbors of e.
3. For each feature f ∈FS(e) collect the items Ae,f ⊆
Nk,e that share the same feature.
3In our approach, k is already used for the k-nearest neigh-
bors method. Therefore, we refer to the cardinality of the
summarization as n.
4fb
denotes
the
Freebase
namespace:
http://rdf.
freebase.com/ns/
4. For each feature f ∈FS(e) collect the items Be,f ⊆E
that share the same feature.
5. The weight w of f is the following ratio:
we(f) = |Ae,f| × log
|E|
|Be,f|
6. Order the features f ∈FS(e) descending according to
their given weight we(f). Select the n most relevant
features as a summarization of e.
The concept of a user-item matrix (step 1) is a well-known
principle in the ﬁeld of recommender systems. Each column
of the matrix represents a single item and each row repre-
sents a single user. The entries of the matrix are either the
ratings (a numerical score) or empty if a user has not rated a
particular item (which is the standard case). The column or
row vectors can be used to compare items or users amongst
each other respectively. For this, several similarity measures
have been introduced of which cosine similarity and Pear-
son correlation (comparing the vectors with regard to their
angular distance) are the most common techniques [1].
In our current implementation, we apply the log-likelihood
ratio score [8] for computing item similarity (step 2). In the
context of item similarity, the ratio takes into account four
parameters: the number of users who rated both items, the
number of users who rated the ﬁrst but not the second item
and vice versa, and the number of users who rated none of
the two items. Note that this similarity measure does not
consider the numerical values of the ratings and therefore
also works with binary data like web site visits.5
Finally,
with the similarity scores it is easy to identify a set of k-
nearest neighbors (kNN) for a given item.
Listing 1 states a SPARQL6 query that is used for the
retrieval of common features (property-value pairs) between
the item (fb:movie.uri) and its 20 nearest neighbors (step
3). For measuring the similarity to all items in the dataset
(step 4), the same query can be executed but without line
3. For each of the two result sets, the property-value pairs
can be counted by occurrence. The ﬁlter rule (line 7) ﬁlters
out property-value pairs that stem from the given entity
(fb:movie.uri).
Additionally, we also ﬁlter out the com-
monality of similar nearest neighbors because those features
were added in the course of applying the approach and do
not contribute to the summarization of the given entity.
In the result set of the nearest neighbors, a lot of features
are frequently occurring; such as the following property-
value pair:
(fb:film.film.country, fb:en.united_states)
If the weighting involved only counting, features like the
above would be considered as highly relevant for many movies.
However, as these features do not only occur often in the
neighbors set but also in the overall set, they can be down-
graded (step 5). As for the downgrading technique, we use
the idea of the classic information retrieval method term fre-
quency - inverse document frequency (TF-IDF). In our case
5This is the reason why we refer to the term “usage data”
rather than “rating data”: we conclude usage from the pro-
cess of giving a rating. We do not consider the numerical
values of the ratings.
6SPARQL W3C Recommendation - http://www.w3.org/
TR/rdf-sparql-query/

Listing 1:
SPARQL query:
retrieving property-
value pairs shared with at least one of the 20-nearest
neighbors.
1
select ?p ?o where {
2
fb:movie.uri ?p ?o.
3
fb:movie.uri knn:20 ?s.
4
?s ?p ?o.
5
?s rdf:type fb:film.film.
6
FILTER((?s != fb:movie.uri) && (?p != knn:20))
7
}
a “term” is stated by a single feature and the term frequency
is the frequency of the feature in the nearest neighbors set.
After this step, every feature that is shared with at least one
of the k-nearest neighbors has an assigned weight.
Finally, in step 6, we select the n most relevant property-
value pairs in accordance to their weight.
3.
RELATED WORK
In the ﬁeld of entity summarization, initial work has been
presented in [5], where an approach called RELIN is intro-
duced. The authors apply an adapted version of the random
surfer model7 - called goal directed surfer - in order to com-
bine informativeness and relatedness for the ranking of fea-
tures. In the conclusion, it is stated that a “user-speciﬁc no-
tion of informativeness (...) could be implemented by lever-
aging user proﬁles or feedback”in order to mitigate the issue
of presenting summarizations that help domain experts but
not average users. Our approach can be considered as a ﬁrst
step into this direction as it focuses on leveraging usage data
for providing summarizations. Our summarizations are not
adapted to each user individually but present a consensus
that has been reached by similar behavior in the past.
[7] uses combines hierarchical link analysis with weighted
link analysis. For the latter, the authors suggest to combine
PageRank with a TF-IDF-related weighting scheme. In this
work, usage or feedback data is not considered as an addi-
tional source of information.
In the ﬁeld of recommender systems, [9] propose an ap-
proach based on Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) [2] for
discovering hidden semantic relationships between items. This
includes the extraction of what is considered to be the most
important feature of an item (e.g. genre: adventure). The
approach is exempliﬁed on a movie and a real estate dataset.
In the ﬁeld of user modeling, there exist several approaches
for leveraging (weighted) semantic knowledge about items
[6, 11, 10]. The approach presented in [6] proposes an aggre-
gated presentation of user proﬁles by extracting and com-
bining the domain knowledge of diﬀerent items. [11] mod-
els users and items each as a feature matrix. For feature
weighting in the user proﬁle, an adapted version of TF-IDF
is introduced. In the recommendation approach, the authors
form neighborhoods of users based on the user-feature ma-
trix. [10] introduces an impact measure that indicates the
inﬂuences on user behavior by item features modeled as a
domain ontology. The approach is presented with examples
from the movie domain.
7See also PageRank [3].
Table 1:
20-nearest neighbors:
Beauty and the
Beast
Score
Neighbor
0.999
fb:en.aladdin_1992
0.999
fb:en.the_lion_king
0.998
fb:en.the_little_mermaid_1989
0.998
fb:en.home_alone
0.998
fb:en.snow_white_and_the_seven_dwarfs
0.998
fb:en.toy_story
0.998
fb:en.mrs_doubtfire
0.998
fb:en.the_mask_1994
0.998
fb:en.e_t_the_extra_terrestrial
0.998
fb:en.a_bugs_life_1998
0.998
fb:en.babe
0.997
fb:en.willy_wonka_the_chocolate_factory
0.997
fb:en.honey_i_shrunk_the_kids
0.997
fb:en.men_in_black_1997
0.997
fb:en.jumanji_1995
0.997
fb:en.batman_forever
0.997
fb:en.toy_story
0.997
fb:en.the_wizard_of_oz
0.997
fb:en.santa_claus_the_movie
0.997
fb:en.who_framed_roger_rabbit
4.
DATASET
For the preparation of ﬁrst tests, we combined the us-
age data of the HetRec2011 MovieLens2k dataset [4] with
Freebase.8 The usage dataset extends the original Movie-
Lens10M dataset9 by additional metadata: directors, ac-
tors, countries, and locations have been added to the orig-
inal dataset. Although this dataset already contains valu-
able material to perform our tests without making use of
LOD (i.e.
Freebase), the search space for properties and
objects is very restricted. In particular, 26 properties (the
four mentioned above plus 22 other properties such as the
genre, year, Spanish title, rotten tomatoes10 rating etc.) are
opposed to more than 240 Freebase properties. Also, the
range in Freebase is much broader as - for example - more
than 380 diﬀerent genres (fb:film.film.genre) are covered
in contrast to 20 ﬁxed genres contained in the HetRec2011
MovieLens2k dataset.
The HetRec2011 MovieLens2k dataset includes IMDb11
identiﬁers for each movie. This makes the linking to Free-
base easy as querying12 for the IMDb identiﬁer is simple
(see listing 2). Given only this query, we were able to match
more than 10000 out of 10197 movies.13
For performance reasons, we crawled the RDF-XML14
representation from Freebase15 and stored it to a local triple
store. Using the usage data, we computed the 20-nearest
neighbors for each movie and stored the results also in the
8http://freebase.com
9http://www.grouplens.org
10http://www.rottentomatoes.com/
11http://www.imdb.com/
12Freebase uses a special query language called Metaweb
Query Language (MQL).
13Unmatched items are mostly TV series that do not match
the pattern "type"="film/film/".
14http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-rdf-syntax/
15http://rdf.freebase.com/

Listing 2: MQL query: retrieving the Freebase iden-
tiﬁers given an IMDb identiﬁer.
1
{
2
"id"= null,
3
"imdb_id"="ttIMDb_ID",
4
"type"= "/film/film"
5
}
triple store; like in the following example:
(fb:en.pulp_fiction, knn:20, fb:en.reservoir_dogs)
Using SPARQL queries (like in listing 1) we are able to
retrieve common properties between single movies and their
neighbors. The results of ﬁrst tests with this setup are dis-
cussed in the following section.
5.
PRELIMINARY RESULTS
With the created dataset, we were able to identify and
rank features that connect an entity to one of their nearest
neighbors. We do not plan to conduct a separate evaluation
at the level of neighborhood quality but we are currently in
the process of performing comparisons on the level of quality
of summarizations. In this analysis, we are also conducting
diﬀerent similarity measures as well as estimating the opti-
mal size of the neighborhood. At the current stage of our
work, statistics for the presentation of these results have not
been produced.
We will discuss our ﬁndings regarding the neighborhood
formation in section 5.1. Moreover, preliminary results of
the entity summarization approach are presented in section
5.2.
5.1
Neighborhood formation
One of the most important steps is the neighborhood for-
mation dependent solely on usage data. An example for such
a neighborhood is presented in table 1. In general the pre-
sented neighborhood of the movie “Beauty and the Beast”
ﬁts the perception of most observers and also overlaps with
related movies presented in IMDb.16 The scores presented
in table 1 are all very close to each other and every score is
also close to a perfect match (1.0). In this respect, the ques-
tion arises whether the k-nearest neighbor approach makes
sense with such dense scores. An alternative could be to in-
troduce a threshold rather than just selecting a ﬁxed amount
of neighbors (e.g. all movies that have a similarity higher
than 0.95). As a matter of fact, the runtime of the SPARQL
queries would turn into a gambling game as it can not be
decided in advance whether there are 10 or 500 neighbors
that cross the threshold. Another approach to address this
question would be to introduce diﬀerent or additional sim-
ilarity measures that improve the result set while - at the
same time - widens the range of the scores. Finally, the op-
timal neighborhood size is still due for evaluation. As such,
the current size of 20 was selected to serve for the creation
of ﬁrst results.
A particularity about the neighborhood is that one movie
(fb:en.toy_story) occurs twice in the list. This is due to
16http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0101414/, as of February
2012
the HetRec2011 MovieLens2k dataset that contains several
duplicates with diﬀerent identiﬁers. We suppose that these
duplicates occur due to an automatic processing that has
been conducted in the course of enriching the original Movie-
Lens10M dataset with additional data.
5.2
Neighborhood-based entity summarization
After the neighborhood formation step we are able to ex-
tract the 10 most important features for each entity. Tables
2 to 5 each provide an example for a movie entity summa-
rization.
In general, most of the presented examples have genre
as one of the strongest components. In this realm, one of
the real advantages of LOD can be exempliﬁed, i.e. data
richness: genres such as “costume drama”, “crime ﬁction”
or “parody” are missing in the HetRec2011 MovieLens2k
dataset and can not be circumscribed. It is interesting to
see that the property fb:film.film.written_by aﬀects all
of the presented movies. In the results, the movie “Bridget
Jones’s Diary” shares with its neighbors that the scene plays
in the United Kingdom while Walt Disney as the production
company is surely important for the movie “Beauty and the
Beast”. It is also worth to mention that, according to our re-
sults, “Pulp Fiction” is under heavy inﬂuence by its director
Quentin Tarantino.
The mindful reader will surely notice that not a single
actor inﬂuences the presented movies. At least “The Naked
Gun - From the Files of Police Squad” should have as an
important feature the main actor Leslie Nielsen. This is due
to the fact that - in Freebase - the actors are hidden behind
another node that connects movies, actors, and characters.
Queries that deal with such “two-hops-each” relationships
(see listing 3) are hard to resolve for triple stores and yet, we
were not able to produce a result set from the triple store.17
However, for the near future we consider ways to circumvent
this issue that does not only aﬀect the actor feature and also
help to improve the “hop-radius” of such queries.
Another issue that is visible in the results is the problem of
data quality and the constant evolution of the data. Newly
added property-value pairs like
(fb:user.robert.(...).ew_rating, 92)
are shared with one or two neighbors but - at this stage
- have not been assigned to a suﬃcient amount of entities
to be downgraded with the weighting method introduced in
section 2.
6.
CONCLUSION
In the following we will summarize the key ﬁndings of this
early stage of research.
We have presented an approach that tries to leverage us-
age data in order to summarize movie entities in the LOD
space. This part of Semantic Web research is connected to
a variety of ﬁelds, including semantic user modeling, user
interfaces, and information ranking.
The goal of our research is to provide meaningful summa-
rizations of entities. This is the task of identifying features
that“not just represent the main themes of the original data,
but rather, can best identify the underlying entity” [5]. Our
17We currently employ Sesame with the Native Java Store
(see also http://www.openrdf.org/)

Table 2: Top-10 features: Beauty and the Beast
Score
Property
Value
39.56
fb:film.film.genre
fb:en.fantasy
29.40
fb:film.film.rating
fb:en.g_usa
19.23
fb:film.film.production_companies
fb:en.the_walt_disney_company
16.89
fb:film.film.music
fb:en.howard_ashman
13.31
fb:film.film.music
fb:en.alan_menken
12.86
fb:film.film.subjects
fb:en.fairy_tale
9.14
fb:film.film.film_casting_director
fb:en.albert_tavares
8.04
fb:film.film.written_by
fb:en.linda_woolverton
7.75
fb:film.film.produced_by
fb:en.don_hahn
7.30
fb:film.film.genre
fb:en.costume_drama
Table 3: Top-10 features: The Naked Gun - From the Files of Police Squad!
Score
Property
Value
27.77
fb:film.film.written_by
fb:en.jim_abrahams
26.00
fb:film.film.written_by
fb:en.pat_proft
22.59
fb:film.film.written_by
fb:en.jerry_zucker
22.04
fb:film.film.written_by
fb:en.david_zucker
18.92
fb:film.film.music
fb:en.ira_newborn
18.44
fb:media_common.netflix_title.netflix_genres
fb:en.comedy
16.89
fb:film.film.film_series
fb:m.0dl08h
16.38
fb:film.film.featured_film_locations
fb:en.los_angeles
16.12
fb:film.film.genre
fb:m.02kdv5l
15.97
fb:film.film.genre
fb:en.parody
Listing 3:
SPARQL query:
retrieving property-
value pairs shared with at least one of the 20-nearest
neighbors.
1
select ?p ?q ?t where {
2
fb:movie.uri ?p ?o.
3
fb:movie.uri knn:20 ?s.
4
?o ?q ?t.
5
?s ?p ?r.
6
?r ?q ?t.
7
?s rdf:type fb:film.film.
8
FILTER((?s != fb:movie.uri) && (?p != knn:20))
9
}
approach can be considered as a further step to this direc-
tion. Properties such as rdf:label or fb:type.object.name
are currently missing as they are usually not shared with
any other entity. With regard to this issue, the approach
can easily be combined with another feature ranking strat-
egy. The question whether strong weights for features that
are shared with a usage-data-based neighborhood enhance
the state of the art is subject to an extensive evaluation that
is currently in progress of being conducted.
Additionally, we want to discuss the fact that the pre-
sented approach is restricted to a single domain and whether
it can work for multiple domains or even cross-domain. Con-
sider a electronics web shop that includes semantic meta-
information about the items to be sold. Users that search a
for product that fulﬁlls their requirements (whatever those
are) provide usage data that can be used to compare two
products on the basis of whether they have been browsed
by a same set of users (each user has watched a set of items
within a given time-frame). Utilizing this information with
the proposed approach can lead to a ranked list of features
that a product has (e.g. 12 mega pixels in the case of digi-
tal cameras). This may help to provide meaningful product
summarizations rather than listing all features that it has.
However, for data hubs like DBpedia and Freebase, ﬁltering
mechanisms (like restricting to rdf:type ﬁlm) have to be
applied for not to compare apples with pears.
7.
FUTURE WORK
Considering the simplicity of our current approach and the
subjective quality that has already been reached, we plan to
follow this track of research. In our next contributions we
plan the following enhancements:
• An extensive evaluation of the approach will be con-
ducted: the analysis is will include an intrinsic as well
as an extrinsic evaluation with user surveys.
• Features that are speciﬁc to an entity (and not shared
with others) will be considered in future versions of
this approach. It has to be evaluated whether usage
data can help with this task.
• The problem of intermediate nodes needs to be ad-
dressed in order to provide a scalable solution. This
could be done with a ﬁxed set of important property-
value pairs (like actors and characters). Another solu-
tion would be to set up triple store indexes.
• The ideas of diversifying the results as well as a pos-
sible adaption to user proﬁles and context state inter-
esting challenges.

Table 4: Top-10 features: Bridget Jones’s Diary
Score
Property
Value
29.67
fb:film.film.genre
fb:en.romantic_comedy
29.39
fb:film.film.written_by
fb:en.richard_curtis
19.40
fb:film.film.country
fb:en.united_kingdom
18.43
fb:film.film.film_casting_director
fb:en.michelle_guish
16.75
fb:film.film.produced_by
fb:en.eric_fellner
16.50
fb:film.film.produced_by
fb:en.tim_bevan
13.05
fb:user.robert.default_domain.rated_film.ew_rating
69
12.79
fb:film.film.film_format
fb:en.super_35_mm_film
12.51
fb:film.film.production_companies
fb:en.universal_studios
9.140
fb:film.film.story_by
fb:en.helen_fielding
Table 5: Top-10 features: Pulp Fiction
Score
Property
Value
21.58
fb:film.film.directed_by
fb:en.quentin_tarantino
19.75
fb:film.film.genre
fb:en.crime_fiction
19.10
fb:user.robert.default_domain.rated_film.ew_rating
92
16.94
fb:film.film.rating
fb:en.r_usa
16.38
fb:film.film.featured_film_locations
fb:en.los_angeles
14.12
fb:film.film.written_by
fb:en.quentin_tarantino
13.72
fb:film.film.film_collections
fb:en.afis_100_years_100_movies
13.48
fb:film.film.edited_by
fb:en.sally_menke
13.31
fb:film.film.film_production_design_by
fb:en.david_wasco
12.39
fb:film.film.produced_by
fb:en.lawrence_bender
• With enhanced versions of the presented approach we
want to move forward to the direction of user interfaces
and user interaction in the context of Linked Data; also
in combination with Social Media such as Twitter and
Blogs.
