Decoy Bandits Dueling on a Poset
Julien Audiffren
CMLA, ENS Cachan, CNRS
Paris Saclay University
94235 Cachan France

Liva Ralaivola
QARMA, LIF, CNRS
Aix Marseille University
F-13289 Marseille cedex 9, France

Abstract
We adress the problem of dueling bandits deﬁned on partially ordered sets, or
posets. In this setting, arms may not be comparable, and there may be several
(incomparable) optimal arms. We propose an algorithm, UnchainedBandits, that
efﬁciently ﬁnds the set of optimal arms of any poset even when pairs of compa-
rable arms cannot be distinguished from pairs of incomparable arms, with a set
of minimal assumptions. This algorithm relies on the concept of decoys, which
stems from social psychology. For the easier case where the incomparability infor-
mation may be accessible, we propose a second algorithm, SlicingBandits, which
takes advantage of this information and achieves a very signiﬁcant gain of per-
formance compared to UnchainedBandits. We provide theoretical guarantees and
experimental evaluation for both algorithms.
1
Introduction
Chasing the optimal set for cold-start recommendation. Today’s recommendation systems heav-
ily rely on machine learning. Dedicated techniques may indeed be designed to extract statistical
regularities from a set of collected behaviors and provide users with relevant recommendations. One
of the main challenges a recommendation system has to deal with is cold-start, i.e. the situation
where recommendations must be computed for a user for whom no information has been collected.
A common strategy to get around this problem is to have at hand a set of default items to recommend
to any new customer. The design of such a set is then paramount to the user experience with the
recommendation system and to his willingness to rely on it for future movie suggestions. A natural
goal is therefore to try to form a set of best movies. Identifying the best movies is a task that re-
quires a proper handling of two features: a) the variety of existing ﬁlm genres (documentary, drama,
comedy...) and b) the uncertainty with which one ﬁlm may be considered better than another. The
variety of genres induces the issue of incomparability: there are pairs of movies —comparison of
pairs is evidently at the core of the best movie selection process— that cannot be compared such as,
e.g., a documentary and a horror movie. This means that movies are only partially ordered and it
suggests that the set of best movies must contain incomparable movies. Said otherwise, each movie
from the set is the best in its category. The uncertainty issue mentioned above then arises within a
single genre as it might be complex to assert that a ﬁlm is better than another. A way to bypass this
difﬁculty is to rely on a committee of critics and to aggregate the (noisy) opinions of its members on
pairs of comparable movies. This might be implemented as follows: for each pair of ﬁlms, commit-
tee members are chosen at random and asked which of the two movies is the better, and the movie
that wins the most among the random probes is decided to be the best. This introduction provides
a practical motivation for the present paper where we study the question of deriving strategies for
dueling bandits deﬁned on partially ordered sets, or posets. We are in particular interested in being
able to ﬁnd the set of best arms among all the (possibly incomparable) arms at hand.
Dueling Bandits on Posets. Dueling bandits were introduced by Yue et al. [2012]. The setting, per-
taining to the K-armed bandit framework, assumes there is no direct access to the reward provided
1
arXiv:1602.02706v2  [cs.LG]  9 Jun 2016

by any single arm and the only information that can be gained is through the simultaneous pull of
two arms: when such a pull is performed the agent gets access to the winner of the two arms, thus the
name of dueling bandits. Here, we extend the framework of dueling bandits to the situation where
there exist pairs of arms that are not comparable, that is, we study the case where there might be
no natural order that could help decide the winner of a duel between two arms. A problem induced
by such a framework is then to identify among the set of all available K arms the set of maximal
incomparable arms, or the Pareto front, through a minimal number of pairwise pulls. To carry out
our study, we propose to make use of tools from the theory of posets and we take inspiration from
works dedicated to selection and sorting on posets Daskalakis et al. [2011].
Keys: Indistinguishability and Decoys. We make the assumption that the underlying poset or,
more precisely, the incomparability structure, is not known. A pivotal issue that we have to face in
this case is that of indistinguishability. In the bandit setting we assume, the draw of two arms that
are comparable and that have close values —and hence a probability for either arm to win a duel
close to 0.5— is essentially driven by the same random process, i.e. an unbiased coin ﬂip, as the
draw of two arms that are not comparable. Hence, if we denote by ε the distances between those
two processes, we can have ε arbitrary small, and thus this pairs of arms cannot be distinguished
from an incomparable pair of arm on the sole basis of pulls and a well-thought strategy. Such pair
of arm will be referred as ε-indistinguishable. This problem has led us to make use of decoy arms.
The idea of decoy originates from social psychology, and was originally intended to ’force’ an agent
(e.g., a customer) towards a speciﬁc good/action (e.g. a product) by presenting her a choice between
the targetted good and a degraded version of it. Here, we use decoys to help solve the problem of
indistinguishability
Contributions. Our main contribution, the UnchainedBandits algorithm, implements a strategy
based on decoys and a peeling approach that ﬁnds the Pareto front1 of a poset S with probability at
least 1−δ after at most T ≤O

K width(S)
∆2
log(NK2/δ)

pairwise pulls, while incurring a regret
upper bounded by
R ≤2K
γ2 log
2NK2
δ
 K
X
i=1
1
∆i
Cα,γ(Ni) + Kwidth(S) log
2NK2
δ

X
i,∆i<εN−1,i/∈P
1
∆i
,
where ∆is the parameter of the decoys, ∆i the regret associated with arm i, K is the size of the
poset, width(S) its width, N is the number of peeling iterations, γ is the peeling rate, εN−1 is the
maximum peeling and Cα,γ(Ni) ≤1 deﬁned in Section 3 encodes the complexity of the poset with
respect to arm i.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the setting of dueling bandits on posets and
formally states the problem we address. In Section 3, we formally introduce the notion of decoys
and show how they can be constructed, both mathematically and practically, we then present our
algorithm, UnchainedBandits, which relies on decoys, to ﬁnd the exact Pareto front of the poset and
we provide theoretical guarantees on their performances. In Section 4, we discuss how the present
work relates to recent papers from the dueling bandits literature. Section 5 reports results on the
empirical performances of our algorithm in different settings.
2
Problem Statement: Dueling Bandits on Posets
2.1
Reminders on Posets
We here recall base notions and properties about posets that are relevant to the present contribution.
Deﬁnition 2.1 (Poset). Let S be a set of elements. (S, ≽) is a partially ordered or poset if ≽is a
reﬂexive, antisymmetric and transitive binary relation on S: ∀a, b, c ∈S
• a ≽a (reﬂexivity);
• if a ≽b and b ≽a then a = b (antisymmetry);
1 We discuss in the supplementary material the easier setting where the incomparability information is
known and we provide a dedicated algorithm, SlicingBandits, that takes advantage of this addiditional infor-
mation.
2

• if a ≽b and b ≽c then a ≽c (transitivity).
Remark 2.2. In the following, we will use S to denote indifferently the set S or the poset (S, ≽),
the distinction being clear from the context. We make use of the additional notation: ∀a, b ∈S
• a ∥b if a and b are incomparable (i.e. neither a ≽b nor b ≽a);
• a ≻b if a ≽b and a ̸= b;
Throughout, we limit our study to ﬁnite posets, i.e., posets such that |S| < +∞.
Deﬁnition 2.3 (Maximal element and Pareto front). An element a ∈S is said to be a maximal
element of S if ∀b ∈S, a ≽b or a ∥b. We denote by
P(S) .= {a : a ≽b or a ∥b, ∀b ∈S},
the set of maximal elements or Pareto front of the poset.
Since there is no intrinsic reason to favor a particular maximal element, throughout this work we
chose to focus on the task of ﬁnding the entire Pareto front P(S) or P, for short. To this end, the
notions of chain and antichain are key.
Deﬁnition 2.4 (Chain and antichain). C ⊂S is a chain (resp. an antichain) if ∀a, b ∈C, a ≽b or
a ≽b (resp. a ∥b). C is said to be maximal if ∀a ∈S \ C, C ∨a is not a chain (resp. an antichain).
Note that P is by deﬁnition a maximal antichain. Finally, the notion of width and height of a poset
are important to characterize (the complexity of) a poset.
Deﬁnition 2.5 (Width and height). The width (resp. height) of a poset S is the size of its longest
antichain (resp. chain).
2.2
Dueling Bandits on Posets
K-armed Dueling Bandit. The K-armed dueling bandit problem [Yue et al., 2012] assumes the
existence of K2 parameters {γij}1≤i,j≤K, with γij ∈(−1/2, 1/2) and the following sampling pro-
cedure. At each time step, the agent pulls a pair of arms (i, j) and she gets in return the value of an
independent realization of Bij, a Bernouilli random variable with expectation E(Bij) = 1/2 + γij
where Bij = 1 means that i is the winner of the duel between i and j and, conversely, Bij = 0
means that j is the winner. The objective of the agent is to ﬁnd the Condorcet winner c—the arm
such that γcj > 0, ∀j ̸= c— among the K arms, whose existence is assumed, while minimiz-
ing the accumulated regret, deﬁned for a sequence ((i1, j1), . . . , (iT , jT )) of T pairs of pulls by
1
2
PT
t=1(γcit + γcjt).
Remark 2.6. Note that: ∀i, j, Bji = 1 −Bij and, thus, γji = −γij and γii = 0.
The implicit assumption of traditional dueling bandits is that the set S = {1, . . . , K} of arms is
totally ordered: for any pair i, j ∈S of arms, i and j must be comparable and γij unequivocally
says which of the two is better.
Issues induced by working on posets. Now consider a dueling bandit problem deﬁned on a poset S.
Compared to the usual setting where a total order on the arms exists, there are two main differences
which arise when S is a poset: ﬁrst, the situation where the agent pulls a pair of arms that are not
comparable has to be handled with care and, second, there might be multiple maximal elements.
Working on bandits with a poset S = {1, . . . , K} of arms might be formalized as follows. For
all chains {i1, . . . , im} of m arms there exist a family {γipiq}1≤p,q≤m of parameters such that
γij ∈(−1/2, 1/2); the pull of a pair of arms (ip, iq) from the same chain provides the realization
of a Bernoulli random variable Bipiq with expectation E(Bipiq) = 1/2 + γipiq. Regarding the
incomparability, i.e. the situation where the pair of arms (ip, iq) selected by the agent correspond
to arms such that ip ∥iq, then there are two frameworks we propose to consider: one the one hand,
the fully observable posets, where the draw from an incomparable pair of arms provides the agent
with the information regarding the comparability of the arms2. On the other hand, that of partially
2This easier setting is analysed in depth in the supplementary materials.
3

observable posets, where such a draw is modeled as the toss of an unbiased coin ﬂip—as we shall
discuss, this framework poses the problem of indistinguishability mentioned in the introduction.
Regret on posets. In order to extend the notion of regret associated to an arm i, ∆i, in the poset
setting, we use the notion of distance to the Pareto front, noted d(i, P) deﬁned as follows :
∆i = d(i, P) = min{γij, ∀j ∈P such that j ≽i}.
We then deﬁne the regret occurred by comparing two arms i and j by d(i, P) + d(j, P). It is
important to remark that the regret of a comparison is zero if and only if the agent is comparing two
element of the Pareto front.
Problem statement. Given the issues induced by working on a poset S of arms, we may state that
the problem that we want to tackle is to identify the Pareto front P(S) of S as efﬁciently as possible.
More precisely, we want to devise pulling strategies for both poset observability frameworks such
that for any given δ ∈(0, 1), we are ensured that the agent is capable, with probability 1 −δ to
identify P(S) with controlled number of pulls and regret.
Assumption 1 (Order Compatibility).
∀i, j ∈S,
(i ≻j) if and only if γij > 0.
We will not require any further hypothesis on how the γij relate to each other and, therefore, no
assumption on strong stochastic transitivity [Yue et al., 2012] is required.
2.3
Poset Observability
We consider the following setting, where the uncomparability information is not accessible.
Partially observable posets. A K-armed Dueling bandits on a partially observable poset S =
{1, . . . , K} is a dueling bandit problem such that if i ∥j, then γij = 0. This property is referred as
Partial Observability.
This property reﬂects the fact that neither of the two incomparable arms has a distinct advantage
over the other: when the agent asks to compare two intrinsically incomparable arms, the results
will only depend upon circumstances independent from the arms (like luck or personal tastes). Our
encoding of such framework makes us assume that when considered over many pulls, the effects of
those circumstances cancel out, so that no speciﬁc arm is favored, whence γij = 0.
Consequences of partial observability. Note that partial observability entails the problem of in-
distinguishability evoked previously. Indeed, given two arms i and j, regardless of the number of
comparisons, an agent may never be sure if either the two arms are very close to each other (γij ≈0
and i and j are comparable) or if they are not comparable (γij = 0). Since all the elements of
the Pareto set must be incomparable with each other, this renders the problem of identifying P
intractable as well if no additional information is provided.
This problem motivates the following deﬁnition, which quantiﬁes the notion of indistinguishability
:
Deﬁnition 2.7 (ε−indistinguishability). Let a, b ∈S and ε > 0.
a and b are said to be ε-
indistinguishable, noted a ∥ε b, if |γab| ≤ε.
As the notation ∥ε implies, the ε−indistinguishability of two arms can be seen as a weaker form of
incomparability, and note that as ε-decreases, previously indistinguishable pairs of arms become dis-
tinguishable, and the only 0−indistinguishable pair of arms are the incomparable pairs. The classical
notions of a poset related to incomparability can easily be extended to ﬁt the ε−indistinguishability
:
Deﬁnition 2.8 (ε-antichain, ε-width and ε-approximation of P). Let ε > 0. C ⊂S is called an
ε-antichain if ∀a ̸= b ∈C, we have a ∥ε b. Additionally, P′ ⊂S is called an ε−approximation of
P if P ⊂P′ and P′ is an ε-antichain. Finally we denote by widthε(S) the size of the largest ε−
antichain of S.
Interestingly, to ﬁnd a ε−approximation of P, it is only needed to remove the elements of S which
are ε−distinguishable from P. Thus, while P cannot be recovered in the partially observable setting,
4

Algorithm 1 Direct comparison
Given (S, ≻) a poset, δ, ε > 0, a, b ∈S
Initialisation Maintains pab the average number of victory of a over b and Iab its 1 −δ conﬁ-
dence interval,
Direct comparison:
while 0.5 + ε ∈I or 0.5 −ε ∈I do
Compare a and b, Update pab and I.
If 0.5 /∈Iab and pab > 0.5, Return a ≻b; Else If 0.5 /∈Iab and pab < 0.5, Return b ≻a.
end while
Return a ∥ε b
a ε−approximation of P can be obtained. Consequently, if the agent knows the minimum distance
of any arm to the Pareto set, deﬁned as d(P) = min{γij, ∀i ∈P, j ∈S \ P, such that i ≻j}, she
can recover the Pareto front, since for any ε < d(P), the unique ε−approximation of P is P itself.
This information is however unavailable in practice and we choose not to rely on external informa-
tion to solve the problem at hand. In the case where an ε approximation of the Pareto front is not
enough, and the exact Pareto front is required, we devise an alternative strategy which rests on the
idea of decoys, already mentioned in the introduction and fully developed in Section 3.
3
Contributions
Here, we introduce our algorithm, UnchainedBandits, that solves the problem of dueling bandits on
partially observable posets, and we provide theoretical performance guarantees.
3.1
Decoys and Posets
As said in Section 2, deciding if two arms are incomparable or very close is intractable in the partially
observable poset, and so is that of ﬁnding the exact Pareto front.
Still, without any additional device, the agent is able to ﬁnd if two arms a and b, are ε-
indistinguishable. using the direct comparison process provided by Algorithm 1. Yet, as previously
discussed, this only produces an ε-approximation of the Pareto front, of whom P is only guaranteed
to be a subset. To evade this shortcoming, we introduce a new tool, decoys, inspired by works from
social psychology [Huber et al., 1982]. We formally deﬁne decoys for posets, and we prove that it
is a sufﬁcient tool to solve the incomparability problem (Algorithm 2). We also present methods for
building those decoys, both for the purely formal model of posets and for real-life problems.
Deﬁnition 3.1 (∆-decoy). Let a ∈S. Then b ∈S is said to be a ∆-decoy of a if :
1. a ≽b and γa,b ≥∆
2. ∀c ∈S, a ∥c implies b ∥c
3. ∀c ∈S such that c ≽a, γc,b ≥∆
Interestingly, when S satisﬁes the strong stochastic transitivity hypothesis, the third point of the
previous deﬁnition in an immediate consequence of the ﬁrst. The following proposition illustrates
how decoys can be used to determine the incomparability of two arms.
Proposition 3.2 (Decoys and incomparability). Let a and b ∈S. Let a′ (resp. b′) be a ∆-decoy of
a (resp. b). Then a and b are comparable if and only if max(γb,a′, γa,b′) ≥∆.
Proof. Let us assume than a ≽b. The transitivity of ≽implies that a ≽b′, and the third point of
Deﬁnition 3.1 implies that γa,b′ ≥∆. The rest follows from point 2 of Deﬁnition 3.1.
Algorithm 2 is derived from this result. The next proposition, an immediate consequence of Propo-
sition 3.2, gives a theoretical guarantee on its performances.
5

Algorithm 2 Decoy comparison
Given (S, ≻) a poset, δ, ε > 0, a, b ∈S
Initialisation Create a′, b′ the respective ε- decoy of a, b. Maintains pab the average number of
victory of a over b and Iab its 1 −δ/2 conﬁdence interval,
Decoy comparisons:
while 0.5 + ε ∈I do
Compare a and b′, b and a′, Update p, and I.
If 0.5 /∈Iab′ and pab′ > 0.5, Return a ≻b. Else If 0.5 /∈Iba′ and pba′ > 0.5, Return b ≻a.
end while
Return a ∥b
Proposition 3.3. Algorithm 2 returns the correct incomparability result with probability at least
1 −δ after at most n comparisons, where n = 4log(4/δ)/∆2.
Adding decoys to a poset. A poset S may not contain all the necessary decoys. To alleviate this,
the following proposition states that it is always possible to add relevant decoys to a poset.
Proposition 3.4 (Extending a poset with a decoy.). Let (S, ≽, γ) be a dueling bandit problem on a
partially observable poset, and a ∈S. Deﬁne a′, S′, ≻′, γ′ as follows:
• S′ = S ∪{a′}
• ∀b, c ∈S, b ≽c i.f.f. b ≽′ c,, and γ′
b,c = γb,c
• ∀b ∈S, if b ≽a then b ≽a′ and γ′
b,a′ = max(γb,a, ∆). Otherwise, b ∥a′.
Then (S′, ≽′) is a poset and (S′, ≽′, γ′) deﬁnes a dueling bandit problem on a partially observable
poset, γ′
|S = γ, and a′ is a ∆-decoy of a.
Proof. The result naturally follows from the deﬁnition of a poset and Deﬁnition 3.1.
Decoys in real-life problems. The intended goal of a decoy a′ of a is to have at hand an arm that is
known to be lesser than a. Creating such a decoy in real-life can be done by using a degraded version
of a: for the case of a movie, a decoy can be obtain by e.g. decreasing the resolution of a ﬁlm. Note
that while for large values of the ∆parameter of the decoys Algorithm 2 requires less comparisons
(see Proposition 3.3), in real-life problems, the second point of Deﬁnition 3.1 tends to becomes
false: the new option is actually so worse than the original that the decoy becomes comparable (and
inferior) to all the other arms, including previously non comparable arms (example: the decoy of a
ﬁlm for a very large ∆> 0 could be in very low resolution such as 32 × 24; this ﬁlm cannot be
actually seen and is clearly worse than all the others, regardless of the genre). In that case, the use
of decoys of arbitrarily large ∆can lead to erroneous conclusions about the Pareto front and should
be avoided.
3.2
UnchainedBandits
We now present our algorithm, UnchainedBandits, that uses decoys to efﬁciently ﬁnd the Pareto
front of S. UnchainedBandits is inspired by the ideas developed by Daskalakis et al. [2011], who
address the problem of sorting a poset in a noiseless environment.
By Proposition 3.3, Algorithm 2 can be used to establish the exact relation between two arms. But
this process can be very costly, as the number of required comparison is proportional to 1/∆2,
even for strongly suboptimal arms. To avoid this possibility,
UnchainedBandits implements a
peeling technique: given N > 0 and a decreasing sequence (εi)N−1
i=1
it computes and reﬁnes an
εi-approximation of the Pareto front bPi, using a subroutine (Algorithm 4), which considers εi-
indistinguishable arms as incomparable. Then, at the N-th epoch, it uses Algorithm 4 one ﬁnal time
where it uses Algorithm 2 with ∆-decoys for comparisons, and then returns the Pareto front.
Algorithm subroutine. Algorithm 4 called on bS with parameter ε > 0, δ > 0 and A works as fol-
lows. It chooses a single initial pivot—an arm to which other arms are compared—and successively
6

Algorithm 3 UnchainedBandits
Given S = {s1, . . . , sK} a poset, δ > 0, ∆> 0, N > 0, (εi)N−1
i=1 ∈RN
+
Initialisation Set S1 = S, εN = ∆.
Peel bP for t = 1 to N −1 do St+1 = UBS Routine (St, εt, δ/N, A = Algorithm 3). end for
Use decoys bP = UBS Routine (SN, ∆, δ/N, A = Algorithm 2).
RETURN bP
Algorithm 4 UBS Routine
Given St a poset, εt > 0 a precision criterion, δ′ an error parameter, A a comparison algorithm
Initialisation Choose p ∈St at random. Deﬁne bP = {p} the set of pivots.
Construct bP
for c ∈St \ {p} do
for c′ ∈bP do
Compare c and c′ using A(δ = δ′/|St|2, ε = εt). If c ≻c′, Then remove c′ from bP.
end for
If ∀c′ ∈bP, c ∥c′, Then add c to bP
end for
Return ˆP
examines all the elements of bS. Each of the examined element p is compared to all the pivots. Each
pivot that is dominated by p is removed from the pivot set. Then if after being compared to all the
pivots, p was dominated by none, it is added to the pivot set. At the end, the set of remaining pivot
is returned. During the ﬁrst N −1 epochs, the comparisons are done with Algorithm 1. In the last
epoch, the agent uses Algorithm 2 to get exact information on the relations between the remaining
arms.
Reuse of informations. To optimize the efﬁciency of the peeling process, UnchainedBandits reuses
previous comparison results. At the beginning of each direct comparison process between arms a
and b, the empirical estimate pab and its conﬁdence interval Iab are initialized using the results of
the previous direct comparisons of a and b. However, no information can be reused in the last epoch
for the remaining arms, as the indirect comparison algorithm does not compare a to b directly.
The following theorem gives a high probability bound on the performances of UnchainedBandits.
Theorem 1. The UnchainedBandits algorithm applied on S with parameters δ, ∆,N and with a
decreasing sequence (εi)N−1
i=1 lower bounded by ∆
q
K
width(S), returns the Pareto front P of S with
probability at least 1 −δ after at most T comparisons, with
T ≤O
 Kwidth(S)log(NK2/δ)/∆2
(1)
This is a consequence of the following intermediate result, whose proof can be found in the supple-
mentary materials.
Proposition 3.5. Algorithm 4 called on St with parameter εt > 0, δ′ > 0 and A = Algorithm 2
returns the Pareto front of St with probability at least 1 −δ′ after at most
T ≤4|St|width(St)log(4|St|2/δ′)/∆2
comparisons.
Alternatively,
when Algorithm 4 uses A = Algorithm 1,
it returns an
εt−approximation of the Pareto front of St with probability at least 1 −δ′ after at most
T ≤2|St|widthεt(St)log(2|St|2/δ′)
 1
ε2
t
−1t>1
1
ε2
t−1

additional comparisons, where 1 is the indicator function.
Proof of Theorem 1. Note that ∀S′ ⊂S such that P ⊂S′, P(S′) = P. The result is obtained
by summing the upper bound in Proposition 3.5 over the different epochs, rearranging the sum and
using the fact that |St|widthεt(St)log(N|St|2/δ) is decreasing in t while 1/ε2
t is increasing in t.
The detailed proof can be found in the supplementary materials.
7

Peeling rate. Note that even if width(S) is unknown, it sufﬁces to choose
εN−1 ≥∆
√
K
(2)
to satisfy the hypotheses of Theorem 1. Although the previous result is valid for any decreasing
sequence of (εt) satisfying (2), we focus on geometrically decreasing sequences, i.e. ∃γ > 0 such
that εt = γtε0. For the sake of simplicity, we set ε0 = 0.5 but all the following results can easily be
extended for any ε0 > 0.
Before we present our regret upper bound, we need to introduce a few notations. In order to charac-
terise the efﬁciency of the peeling approach associated to γ, we deﬁne α(γ, ε0, N) ∈]0, 1], or α for
short, as follows :
α = inf

a ∈[0, 1], s.t. ∀1 ≤t ≤N, ∀St ⊂S an ε0γt-approximation of P, |St| ≤at|S|
	
.
(3)
It is important to note that the previous inequality is always true for a = 1, so α is always deﬁned.
α characterise how efﬁcient is the peeling for the chosen parameters by quantifying the reduction in
size between the successive St. We can now introduce the following Theorem which gives an upper
bound on the regret incurred by Unchained Bandit.
Theorem 2. Let R0 (resp. R1) be the regret generated by Algorithm 3 applied on S with parameters
δ, ∆,N and with a decreasing sequence (εi)N−1
i=1 such that εN−1 ≤∆
√
K during the peeling phase
(resp. the decoy phase). Let α as deﬁned by (3). Then R = R0 + R1 and with probability at least
1 −δ,
R0 ≤2K
γ2 log(2NK2
δ
)
K
X
i=1
1
∆i
Cα,γ(Ni)
(4)
R1 ≤Kwidth(S) log(2NK2
δ
)
X
i,∆i<εN−1,i/∈P
1
∆i
,
(5)
where
Ni = min

⌈log(∆i)
log(γ) ⌉, N −1

and
Cα,γ(n) =



nαn−1 if α = γ,
γ2n(1 −α) + αn(γ2 −1)
γ2 −α
otherwise.
In the previous theorem, Ni represent the number of peeling step where the arm i is present, while
Cα,γ(Ni) represent the cost of doing the peeling for arm i. It is worth noting that Cα,γ(n) ≤1 and
is increasing in α. This reﬂect the fact that small α are representative of an efﬁcient pruning (many
arms removed at each step).
Opposite constraints on ε. Theorem 1 is an upper bound on the number of comparisons required
to ﬁnd the Pareto front. This bound is tight in the (worst-case) scenario where all the arms are ∆-
indistinguishable, i.e. peeling cannot eliminate any arm. In that case, any comparison done during
the peeling is actually wasted, and the lower bound on εt (2) allows to upper bound the number of
comparisons made during the peeling step to recover a Kwidth(S) dependency in the upper bound,
instead of K2. On the other hand, a signiﬁcant amount of peeling is required to obtain a reasonable
upper bound on the incurred regret: the number of comparisons using decoys is very high (≈1/∆2)
and is the same for every arm, regardless of its regret. So it is important that only near-optimal arms
remain during the decoy step, hence the upper bound on εt. In order to satisfy both constraints, εN
must be chosen in
hp
K/width(S)∆,
√
K∆
i
.
4
Related Works
There is an actual connection between our work and studies from social psychology. In partic-
ular, Tversky and Kahneman [1981] issued one of the reference papers on the choice problem—
which pertains to comparisons, in our framework— for real-life problems; they introduced the idea
that alternatives may inﬂuence the perceived value of items. This idea had been taken one step
further by Huber et al. [1982], who introduced and formalized the idea of decoys. They speciﬁ-
cally argued that introducing dominated alternatives, i.e. decoys, may increase the probability of
8

Figure 1: Time necessary to reach a conclusion for SlicingBandits and UnchainedBandits compared
to UniformSampling, when the structure of the poset varies. Dependence on (left:) width of the poset,
(center:) height of the poset and (right:) size of the Pareto front. Don’t talk about SlicingBandits.
the original item to be selected: if A, B and A′ are alternatives, then P (select A among A, B) <
P (select A among A, A′, B). This generated an abundant literature (see Ariely and Wallsten [1995],
Sedikides et al. [1999] and references therein) on works that studied the effect of decoys and their
uses in various ﬁelds.
From the computer science literature, we must mention the work of Daskalakis et al. [2011], which
addresses the problem on selection and sorting on posets and provides relevant data structures and
accompanying analyses for computing on posets. Their results come down to classical results when
totally ordered sets are used. Also, there might be yet other connections to draw between our work
and that of Feige et al. [1994] who tackle the problem of sorting with noisy comparisons; note
however that they assume there is a total order on the items they work on and the connection to
be made with the present work would be to identify how this assumption may be weakened, if not
removed.
Finally, we must discuss how our contribution separates from papers on dueling bandits. If the
seminal paper of Yue et al. [2012] promotes algorithms, namely the Interleaved Filter algorithms,
that exhibit optimal information-theoretic regret bounds, the authors assume the existence of a total
order between the arms together as strong stochastic transitivity and (relaxed) stochastic triangle
inequality. Since then, numerous methods have been proposed to relax those additional assumptions,
including [Yue and Joachims, 2011, Ailon et al., 2014, Zoghi et al., 2014, 2015b]. Other approaches
exist that do not assume the existence of a Condorcet winner, such as [Urvoy et al., 2013, Busa-
Fekete et al., 2013, Zoghi et al., 2015a] but, to the best of our knowledge, we provide the ﬁrst
contribution that studies the framework where arms may be incomparable.
5
Numerical Simulations
In this section we experimentally evaluate UnchainedBandits. We did not compare our algorithm
to dueling bandits algorithms from the literature, as a) they fail to consider the incomparability
information and b) they are generally designed to return only one best element. Instead, we studied
the performances of UnchainedBandits on simulated data (Section 5.1), and we applied it to an
existing ﬁlm rating database (Section 5.2).
5.1
Simulated Poset
First we confront UnchainedBandits with randomly generated posets, with different sizes, widths
and heights. In order to give a baseline value, we use a simple algorithm, UniformSampling inspired
from the successive elimination algorithm Even-Dar et al. [2006], which simultaneously compares
all possible pairs of arms until one of the arms appears suboptimal, at which point it is removed from
the set of selected arms. When only ∆-indistinguishable elements remain, it uses ∆-decoys.
Given the size p > 0 of the Pareto front, the desired width w ≥p and the height h > 0, the posets
are generated as follows: ﬁrst, a Pareto front of size p is created. Then w chains of length h−1 with
no common elements are added. Finally, the top of the chains are connected to a random number
of elements of the Pareto front. This creates the structure of the poset (i.e. the partial order ≻).
Finally, the exact values of the γij’s are obtained from a uniform distribution, conditioned to satisfy
9

Pareto Front
Highest average score
Pulp Fiction
Pulp Fiction
Fight Club
The Usual Suspect
The Shawshank Redemption
The Shawshank Redemption
The Godfather
The Godfather
Star Wars Episode V
The Godfather: Part II
Figure 2: Comparison between the ﬁve ﬁlms with the highest average score (right column) and the
ﬁve ﬁlms of the ε−pareto set (left column)
the partially (or fully) observable framework. When needed, ∆-decoys are created according to
Proposition 3.4. For each experiment reported on Figure 1, we changed the value of one parameter,
and left the other to their default values (p = 5, w = 2p, h = 10). The results are averaged over
ten runs. By default, we use δ = 1/1000 and ∆= 1/100. We also set γ = 0.9, ε0 = 0.5 and
εN =
√
K∆.
We note that for partially observable posets, UnchainedBandits produces much better results than
UniformSampling and its advantage increases with the complexity of the problem.
5.2
MovieLens Dataset
To illustrate the example of the ﬁlms recommendation system developed in the introduction, we
chose to apply UnchainedBandits to the 20 millions items MovieLens dataset (Harper and Konstan
[2015]).
To simulate a dueling bandit on a poset we proceed as follows: we remove all ﬁlms with less than
50000 evaluations, thus obtaining 159 ﬁlms, represented as arms. Then, when comparing two arms,
we picke at random a user which has evaluated both ﬁlms, and compare those evaluations (ties
are broken with an unbiased coin toss). Since the decoy tool cannot be used in an already existing
dataset, we restrict ourselves to ﬁnding an ε-approximation of the Pareto front, with ε = 0.05. Then,
UnchainedBandits is run with parameters γ = 0.9, ε0 = 0.5, εN = ε, δ = 0.001.
There is no known ground truth for this experiments, so no regret estimation can be provided. In-
stead, the resulting Pareto front, which contains 5 ﬁlms, is listed in Table 5.2, and compared to the
ﬁve ﬁlms among the original 159 with the highest average score. It is interesting to note that three
ﬁlms are present in both list, which reﬂects the fact that the best ﬁlms in term of average score have
a high chance of being in the Pareto Front. On the other hand, the ﬁlms contained in the Pareto
front are more diverse in term of genre, which is expected of a Pareto front. For instance, the sequel
of the ﬁlm ”The Godfather” (hence very close to the original regarding genre) has been replaced
by a a ﬁlm of a totally different genre. It is important to remember that UnchainedBandits does
not have access to any information about the genre of a ﬁlm and its results are based solely on the
pairwise evaluation of the user, and thus this result illustrates the effectiveness of our approach for
the learning of the hidden poset.
6
Conclusion
We studied an extension of the dueling bandit problem to the poset framework, which raised the
problem of ε-indistinguishability. We presented a new algorithm, UnchainedBandits, which tackles
the partially observable settings, and we provided theoretical performance guarantee for its ability
to identify the Pareto front. Future work might include the study of the inﬂuence of additional
hypothesis on the structure of the poset, such as when the poset is actually a lattice or upper semi-
lattice. In this case, different strategies of sampling might lead to even more efﬁcient algorithms.
10
