International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)  
Volume 61– No.17, January 2013 
 
 
 
 
English Sentence Recognition using Artificial Neural  
Network through Mouse-based Gestures 
 
Firoj Parwej 
Research Scholar Ph. D (Computer Science) 
 Department of Computer Science & Engineering, 
CMJ University, Shilong, Meghalaya, India 
ABSTRACT  
Handwriting is one of the most important means of daily 
communication. Although the problem of handwriting 
recognition has been considered for more than 60 years there 
are still many open issues, especially in the task of 
unconstrained handwritten sentence recognition. This paper 
focuses on the automatic system that recognizes continuous 
English sentence through a mouse-based gestures in real-time 
based on Artificial Neural Network. The proposed Artificial 
Neural 
Network 
is 
trained 
using 
the 
traditional 
backpropagation algorithm for self supervised neural network 
which provides the system with great learning ability and thus 
has proven highly successful in training for feed-forward 
Artificial Neural Network. The designed algorithm is not only 
capable of translating discrete gesture moves, but also 
continuous gestures through the mouse.  In this paper we are 
using the efficient neural network approach for recognizing 
English sentence drawn by mouse. This approach shows an 
efficient way of extracting the boundary of the English 
Sentence and specifies the area of the recognition English 
sentence where it has been drawn in an image and then used 
Artificial Neural Network to recognize the English sentence. 
The proposed approach English sentence recognition (ESR) 
system is designed and tested successfully. Experimental 
results show that the higher speed and accuracy were 
examined. 
Keywords 
Recognition, Artificial Neural Network, Feature Extraction, 
Normalization, Preprocessing, English Word. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The Handwriting recognition refers to the identification of 
written characters. Handwriting recognition has become an 
acute research area in recent years for the ease of access of 
computer applications. Numerous approaches have been 
proposed for character recognition and considerable successes 
have been reported [1]. Traditional handwritten character 
recognition techniques enable a computer to receive and 
interpret intelligible handwritten input from sources such as 
papers, documents, touch-screens or pictures. During the last 
years, many popular studies and applications merged for bank 
check processing, mailed envelops  reading ,  and   
handwritten   text   recognition  in  documents and videos [2]. 
Until now, it is still a difficult task for a machine to recognize 
human handwritings with significant accuracy,     especially    
under    variable    circumstances  such as variations in 
writings, variable sizes, and different patterns for different 
people etc. The English comprises of 26 basic alphabets 
which are simple to write and recognize but becomes very 
complex when they are handwritten. In this paper we are 
using a supervised neural network to do the work of 
classification of basic alphabets and have trained it using 
Back-Propagation algorithm. The mouse-based interaction, 
we decided to simplify the definition, while still keeping the 
notion usable a mouse gesture is a continues, directed 
sequence of the mouse cursor movements with the clearly 
distinguished start and end [3]. In this paper First of all the 
image database was created consisting of 26 alphabets each 
dynamically hand drawn and stored after that English 
sentence to be recognized is drawn with a mouse. This image 
is then normalized, followed by feature extraction. The 
extracted features are then fed as input to the Artificial Neural 
Network 
for 
recognition. 
Artificial 
Neural 
network 
approaches have been used in many classification problems 
[4]. The traditional classifiers which tend to test competing 
hypotheses sequences, neural networks test the competing 
hypotheses in parallel, thus providing high computation rates.  
2. ENGLISH  WRITTEN 
CHARACTERISTICS 
The English language belongs to the West Germanic branch 
of the Indo-European family of languages. The closest 
undoubted living relatives of English are Scots and Frisian. 
Frisian is a language spoken by approximately half a million 
people in the Dutch province of Friesland, in nearby areas of 
Germany, and on a few islands in the North Sea. The history 
of the English language has traditionally been divided into 
three main periods: Old English (450-1100 AD), Middle 
English (1100-circa 1500 AD) and Modern English (since 
1500). Over the centuries, the English language has been 
influenced 
by 
a 
number 
of 
other 
languages. 
 
Old English (450 - 1100 AD): During the 5th Century AD 
three Germanic tribes (Saxons, Angles, and Jutes) came to the 
British Isles from various parts of northwest Germany as well 
as Denmark. These tribes were warlike and pushed out most 
of the original, Celtic-speaking inhabitants of England into 
Scotland, Wales, and Cornwall. One group migrated to the 
Brittany Coast of France where their descendants still speak 
the Celtic Language of Breton today [5]. 
Middle English (1100-circa 1500 AD): After William the 
Conqueror, the Duke of Normandy, invaded and conquered 
England in 1066 AD with his armies and became king, he 
brought his nobles, who spoke French, to be the new 
government. The Old French took over as the language of the 
court, administration, and culture. Latin was mostly used for 
writing the language, especially that of the Church. 
Meanwhile, The English language, as the language of the now 
lower class, was considered a vulgar tongue. 
Modern English (1500 to the present): Modern English 
developed after William Caxton established his printing press 
at Westminster Abbey in 1476. Johann Gutenberg invented 
the printing press in Germany around 1450, but Caxton set up 

International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)  
Volume 61– No.17, January 2013 
 
34 
England's first press. The Bible and some valuable 
manuscripts were printed. The invention of the printing press 
made books available to more people. The books became 
cheaper and more people learned to read. Printing also 
brought standardization to English. Since around the 9th 
century, English has been written in the Latin script, which 
replaced Anglo-Saxon runes. The modern English alphabet 
contains 26 letters of the Latin script. Early Modern English 
and Late Modern English vary essentially in vocabulary. Late 
Modern English has many more words, arising from the 
Industrial Revolution and the technology that created a need 
for new words as well as international development of the 
language [6]. 
The Britain was an Empire for 200 years between the 18th 
and 20th centuries and English language continued to change 
as the British Empire moved across the world - to the USA, 
Australia, New Zealand, India, Asia and Africa. They sent 
people to settle and live in their conquered places and as 
settlers interacted with the natives, new words were added to 
the English vocabulary. The British Empire at its height 
covered one quarter of the Earth's surface, and the English 
language adopted foreign words from many countries. British 
English and American English, the two major varieties of the 
language, are spoken by 400 million persons. Received 
Pronunciation of British English is the prestige variety, while 
General American English is more influential. The total 
number of English speakers worldwide may exceed one 
billion. 
3. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
Artificial neural networks (ANN) have been developed as 
generalizations of mathematical models of biological nervous 
systems. A first wave of interest in neural networks (also 
known as connectionist models or parallel distributed 
processing) emerged after the introduction of simplified 
neurons by McCulloch and Pitts (1943).The basic processing 
elements of neural networks are called artificial neurons [7], 
or simply neurons or nodes. In a simplified mathematical 
model of the neuron, the effects of the synapses are 
represented by connection weights that modulate the effect of 
the associated input signals, and the nonlinear characteristic 
exhibited by neurons is represented by a transfer function [4]. 
The neuron impulse is then computed as the weighted sum of 
the input signals, transformed by the transfer function. The 
learning capability of an artificial neuron is achieved by 
adjusting the weights in accordance with the chosen learning 
algorithm. The learning situations in neural networks [8] may 
be classified into three distinct sorts. These are supervised 
learning, unsupervised learning, and reinforcement learning. 
The English sentence recognition system is constructed 
around     the   modular   architecture   of  preprocessing,    
feature extraction and recognition [9]. Mainly the prototype of 
the system focuses on two concepts first of all testing , a 
model is built from the sentence drawn by a mouse and 
recognizing the sentence enforce the Back-Propagation 
algorithm and after that then displaying the recognized 
English sentence character. Figure 1 shown the English 
sentence recognition system. 
 
 
 
Fig 1: The Mouse-Based English Sentence Recognition 
System 
3.1 The Pre-Processing  
The preprocessing phase normally includes many techniques 
applied for binarization, thinning (skeletonization), noise 
removal, skew detection, slant correction, normalization, and 
contour making like processes to make character image easy 
to extract relevant features and efficient recognition. These 
techniques include segmentation to isolate individual 
characters, thinning (skeletonization), contour marking, 
normalization, thinning, filtration etc. Which types of pre-
processing techniques will suite; it highly depends on our 
requirements and is also influenced by mechanism adopted in 
later steps. However many [10] other basic techniques are 
commonly applied to all applications, for example, noise 
removal, because that makes image ease to process and 
recognize in further steps.  
       
  
 

International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)  
Volume 61– No.17, January 2013 
 
35 
      
 
 
Fig  2: The framework of an Element in Thinning 
Algorithm 
Thinning is a morphological operation that is used to remove 
selected foreground pixels from binary images, somewhat like 
erosion or opening. It can be used for several applications, but 
is particularly useful for skeletonization. In this mode it is 
commonly used to tidy up the output of edge detectors by 
reducing all lines to single pixel thickness. Thinning is 
normally only applied to binary images, and produces another 
binary image as output. The skeleton obtained must have the 
following properties: must be as thin as possible, connected 
and centered. When these properties are satisfied, the 
algorithm must stop. In this paper the Pre-processing phase 
[11] is comprised of Normalization and Thinning. Before the 
sentences were presented to artificial neural networks for 
recognition, they were normalized and thinned and then their 
feature vector was extracted. The sentence was normalized so 
that the size of all characters is standardized in order to match 
the extracted patterns. The thinning algorithm used transforms 
a picture to a set of simple digital arcs, which false intractable 
along the measurement axis. It is mainly a search and 
removing process that removes only those border pixels 
whose deletion if first case does not change connectivity of 
their vicinal spot, and second case does not change the length 
of already thinned capture picture. The thinning algorithm 
first segregates the border points for each pass. In an alone 
pass removing of border points are done from four sides in a 
North, East, South and West sides respectively. If the vicinal 
of the considered border pixel i.e. “Firoj”, match to any of the 
framework elements shown in figure 2, it is removed and this 
process goes on until no change takes place on all boundaries. 
3.2 The Feature Extraction 
Feature extraction is used to extract relevant features for 
recognition of characters based on these features. First 
features are computed and extracted and then most relevant 
features are selected to construct feature vector which is used 
eventually for recognition. The computation of features is 
based 
on 
structural, 
statistical, 
directional, 
moment, 
transformation 
like 
approaches. 
Feature 
extraction 
is 
extracting information from raw data which is most relevant 
for classification  purpose  and that minimizes the variations 
within a class and maximizes the variations between classes 
[12].  Selection of a feature extraction method is probably the 
single most important factor in achieving high recognition 
performance in character recognition systems. Different 
feature extraction methods are designed for different 
representations of the characters, such as solid binary 
characters, character contours, thinned (skeletons sentence) or 
gray-level sub images of each individual character. On feature 
extraction stage each character is represented by a feature 
vector, which becomes its identity [13]. The major goal of 
feature extraction is to extract a set of features, which 
maximizes the recognition rate with the least amount of 
confusion.    
The capture picture is normalized and thinned, it’s distinct 
features are extracted using the Pixel delivery method. The 
pixel segmentation method is statistical in nature and uses the 
block method. The centroid of the script is calculated on the 
basis of pixel delivery. The entire image is divided into 12 
blocks of 30o (i.e. Orientation, θ n) each with the centroid as 
the center of the “circle”. In each block, based on the pixel 
segmentation, the pixel segmentation percentage is calculated 
with floating-point precision. The slope is calculated for each 
block first. And then each pixel position is coinciding relative 
to the slope it is assigned to belong to that distinct block. 
n 1 
n      
n
n 1
n
A
A
tan
B
B










 
Where, n= 1,2,3,……..,N-1 and  N represents the length of the 
mouse based gesture. 
4.THE PROPOSD APPROCH FOR 
GENRAL   FRAMWORK ENGLISH 
SENTENCE RECOGINATION SYSTEM 
There are many tradeoffs in designing a handwriting 
recognition system. At one extreme, the designer puts no 
constraints on the user and attempts to recognize the user's 
normal writing [14]. This paper proposes an English sentence 
recognition system for mouse-based written English sentence 
in real-time based on Artificial Neural Network. The input of 
the system is the images of the English sentence through a 
taken by the mouse-based gestures. In this paper, the neural 
network technique is used to do the task. The network has 
been trained with a set of true English sentence. If the feature 
points are close enough to the trained specimen then the script 
is regarded as a correct one otherwise an incorrect one. The 
proposed multilayer feed-forward network structure contains 
three layers firstly the input layer, secondly hidden layer and a 
thirdly output layer as shown in figure 3.  
The input layer neurons are fully connected [15] to the hidden 
neurons which in turn are fully connected to the output 
neurons. The input layer has ANi = 12 neurons corresponding 
to 12 feature points of each sentence. The hidden layer has 
ANh = 200 neurons (ANh was determined through 
experiment) and the output layer has No = 26 neurons 
corresponding to the different English sentence. Thus, the 
proposed neural network has total ANi + ANh + No = 12 + 
200 + 26 = 238 neurons . Though  the   network  was trained 
for 4000 epochs, it actually took 10000 iterations for its 
training. The learning rate and the momentum were set to 0.10 
for the network. 
 
 
 

International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)  
Volume 61– No.17, January 2013 
 
36 
 
Fig  3: The Inter connections between neurons of various 
layers with Artificial Neural Network Structure 
In this paper we are proposing a neural network serving as 
network classifier, can be using a two  types of process the 
first Back-Propagation training process and the second 
verification process has done [16]. The Artificial neural 
network was trained to recognize the English sentence by 
using the following procedure. The network is produced with 
training specimens, which consists of a pattern of activities of 
the input units together with the desired pattern of activities 
for the output units. After that arbitrate how closely the right 
output of the network matches the required output. The 
change weight of each connection so that the network presents 
a good approximation of the required output. After that we are 
discovering a set of weights that will enable a given network 
to compute a given function is usually a nontrivial process. 
An analytical solution exists only in the normal case of pattern 
association i.e. When the network is linear and the goal is to 
map a set of orthogonal input vectors to output vectors and the 
weights are given by below  
 
Where, iv is an input vector tv is the target vector and pi is the 
pattern index. 
The Backpropagation algorithm is used to learn the weights of 
a multilayer neural network with a fixed architecture. It 
performs gradient descent to try to minimize the sum squared 
error between the network’s output values and the given target 
values [17]. The train a  neural  network  to perform some 
task, we are must  adjust the weights of each monad in such a 
way that the error between the required output and the actual 
output is decreased. This process requires that the neural 
network compute the error derivative of the weights. After 
that it must calculate how the error changes as each weight is 
increased or decreased slightly. The backpropagation 
algorithm is the most widely used method for determining the 
error derivative of the weights. 
 
The back-propagation algorithm consists of many steps first 
of all it computes how fast the error transformation as the 
activity of an output unit are transformed. This error 
derivative is the difference between the real and the required 
activity. 
Secondly 
it 
Compute 
how 
fast 
the 
error 
transformation as the total input received by an output monad 
is changed. Thirdly it computes how fast the error changes as 
a weight on the connection into an output monad [18] are 
changed. This quantity error derivative of the weights is the 
answer from step secondly multiplied by the activity level of 
the monad from which the connection emanates. Lastly it 
Compute how fast the error changes as the activity of a monad 
in the previous layer is transformed. This crucial step allows 
back-propagation to be applied to multilayer networks [19]. 
When the activity of a monad in the previous layer changes, it 
affects the activities of all the output monad to which it is 
connected. So to compute the overall effect on the error, we 
are adding together all these separate impacts on output 
monads. But each impact is simple to infer. It is the answer in 
step secondly multiplied by the weight on the connection to 
that output monad. 
 
 
Fig  4: The Using Artificial Neural Network Screen with 
Input and Through Mouse-Based Gestures Output 
Finally secondly and lastly steps, we can convert the error 
derivatives of one layer of units into error derivatives for the 
former layer [20]. This procedure can be repeated until to get 
the error derivatives for as many former layers as required. 
After we know the error derivative of a monad, we can use 
these steps secondly and thirdly to compute the error 
derivative of the weights of its incoming connections. 
If the feature points are close enough to the trained specimen 
then the sentence is regarded as a correct one otherwise an 
incorrect one. The snapshot in figure 4 explains the 
verification for the mouse drawn English sentence in the 
English sentence recognition system.  In this figure the Input 
area is first horizontal half of the below given Screen-shot and 
the input is drawn using the mouse. After that output area in 

International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)  
Volume 61– No.17, January 2013 
 
37 
this figure second horizontal half the recognized Sentence is 
displayed by finally pressing the result button. 
5.  EXPRIMENTAL RESULTES 
The experimental results have proven to show excellent 
recognition rate for both discrete and continuous mouse drawn 
English sentence. The English sentence recognition system 
achieves an average recognition rate of 94.1% for isolated 
English sentence i.e. The sample data collected from 10 
persons for 5 English sentences each as given in table 1. The 
manner in which the graphical representations for table 1 is 
shown in figure 5 and 6 in five different people as well as 
similar figure 7 in four different people. The results were 
generated with Microsoft Visual Basic 2000. The results 
environment has been established under Windows XP 
operating system. The hardware included Intel Pentium core 2 
duo processor 2.40 GHz, with 2 GB DDR2 RAM, and 320 
GB Hard Disk. 
Table 1: The Using Artificial Neural Network Recognition 
Rate of English Sentence 
 
 
 
  
Fig 5: The Recognition Rate of English Sentence and five 
different people 
 
 
 
Fig 6:  The Recognition Rate of English Sentence and five 
different people 
 
    
Fig 7 : The Recognition Rate of English Sentence and four 
different people 
 
6. CONCLUSION 
The Handwriting recognition has been a popular area of 
research for a few decades under the purview of pattern 
recognition and image processing. English is a West 
Germanic language that was first spoken in England and is 
now the most widely used languages in the world. It is spoken 
as a first language by a majority of the inhabitants of several 
nations, including the UK, USA a number of Caribbean 
nations and other country. Approximately 400 million people 
speak English as their first language. English today is 
probably the third largest language by number of native 
speakers, after Mandarin Chinese and Spanish. It is widely 
learned as a second language and is an official language of the 
European Union, many Commonwealth countries and the 
United Nations, as well as many world organizations. Finally, 
in this paper we are proposing an English sentence 
recognition system using Artificial Neural Network through 
Mouse-Based Gestures, is implemented in Microsoft Visual 
Basic 2000 and is capable of providing recognition of mouse 
drawn English sentence in all their forms. The system presents 
better results for discrete sentence than the continuous one. It 
should be noted that some of the errors are due to the style of 
drawing the English sentence mouse and are difficult to be 
avoided even by a human. Even more, the run time behavior 
allows the use in real time dynamic applications with a simple 
personal computer. Though, Back Propagation Algorithm 
suffers from the drawback of taking too much time for 
training the neural net still it makes the  system  provide  the  
most  accurate  results  and  hence, more aptly suitable for the 
94.8
93
95.2
94.3
93.2
92.5
93
93.5
94
94.5
95
95.5
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
94.8
93
95.2
94.3
93.2
92.5
93
93.5
94
94.5
95
95.5
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
94.8
93
95.2
94.3
92.5
93
93.5
94
94.5
95
95.5
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)  
Volume 61– No.17, January 2013 
 
38 
kind of multilayer feed forward neural network used for the 
English sentence recognition system. 
7. REFERENCES 
[1]  R. Plamondon and S.N. Srihari., 2000, “Online and off-
line handwriting recognition: a comprehensive survey.”, 
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, IEEE 
Transac-tions on, vol. 22(1), pp 63–84. 
[2]  A. L. Bianne-Bernard, F. Menasri, R. A. H. Mohamad, C. 
Mokbel, C. Kermorvant, and L. Likforman-Sulem., 2011 
,      ” Dynamic and contextual information in hmm 
modeling for handwritten word recognition”, Pattern 
Analysis and Machine Intelligence, IEEE Transactions 
on, vol. 33(10), pp 2066–2080. 
[3]   T. Yang, Y. Xu , 1994, “Hidden Markov Model for 
Gesture Recognition”,  CMU-RI-TR-94 10 , The 
Robotics 
Institute 
Carnegie 
Mellon 
University 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, pp 1-23. 
[4]    Yusuf Perwej , November  2012,  “ Recurrent Neural 
Network Method in Arabic Words  Recognition System” 
,International 
Journal 
of 
Computer 
Science 
and 
Telecommunications (IJCST), published by Sysbase 
Solution (Ltd), UK, London (http://www.ijcst.org) , vol. 
3, Issue 11, pp 43-48. 
[5]   Baugh, C. Albert , and C. Thomas, 1978, “A History of 
the English  Language”,   2nd ed. Englewood Cliffs, 
New Jersey: Prentice-Hall. 
[6]    Algeo, and John, 2010, “The Origins and Development 
of the English Language”,  Boston, MA: Wadsworth. pp. 
182-187. 
[7]   M. Schuster and K. K. Paliwal, November 1997 , 
“Bidirectional recurrent neural  networks”, IEEE 
Transactions on Signal Processing,vol 45, pp 2673–2681. 
[8]  L. Fausett , 1994, “Fundamentals of Neural Networks” , 
Prentice Hall,   Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey. 
[9]   N. Arica, and Yarman Vural, F. T., 2001, “An overview 
of 
character 
recognition 
focused 
on 
off-line 
handwriting”, IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and 
Cybernetics, Part C: Applications and Reviews, vol. 31, 
No. 2, pp 216–233. 
[10] S. Jaeger, S. Manke, J. Reichert, and A. Waibel, 2001, 
“Online 
handwriting 
recognition: 
the 
NPen++ 
recognizer”,  Int. Journal on Document Analysis and 
Recognition, vol. 3(3) , pp169–180 . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[11] M. Liwicki and H. Bunke , 2006, “HMM-based on-line 
recognition of handwritten whiteboard notes”,  In Proc. 
10th Int. Workshop on Frontiers in Handwriting 
Recognition, pp 595–599. 
[12] O. D. Trier, A. K. Jain and T. Taxt, 1996, ”Feature 
Extraction Methods for Character Recognition A 
Survey”, Pattern Recognition, vol. 29, pp. 641-662. 
[13] S. V.  Rajashekararadhya, and P. VanajaRanjan , 2005, 
“Efficient zone based feature extraction algorithm for 
handwritten numeral recognition of four popular south-
Indian scripts”, Journal of Theoretical and Applied 
Information Technology, pp 1171- 1181 
[14] A. Graves, M. Liwicki, S. Fernandez, R. Bertolami, H. 
Bunke, and J. Schmidhuber, May 2008, “A Novel 
Connectionist System for Unconstrained Handwriting 
Recognition,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis 
and Machine Intelligence, vol. 31, no. 5, pp. 855–868 . 
[15] M. Keller, H. Tahani, 1992 , “Backpropagation neural 
network for fuzzy logic” , Inform. Sci. , vol. 62 , pp 205-
221. 
[16]  S. Abid , F. Fnaiech , M. Najim , (2001), “A fast 
feedforward training algorithm using a modified form of 
the standard backpropagation algorithm,” IEEE Trans. 
Neural Networks , vol. 12,  pp 424-430 . 
[17] M. Zhihong  , H. Ren Wu, S. Liu, X. Yu , 2006 , “ A new 
adaptive backpropagation algorithm based on Lyapunov 
stability thory for neural networks”, IEEE Transactions 
on Neural Networks , vol.  17, pp 1580-1591 . 
[18] Yahya H. Zweiri, 2006,  “ Optimization of a three term 
backpropagation algorithm used for neural network 
learning “, International journal of Computational 
Intelligence, vol. 3, pp 322 – 327. 
[19] K. Hornik, M. Stinchcombe, and H. White, 1989,  
"Multilayer 
feedforward 
networks 
are 
universal 
approximators," Neural Netw., vol. 2, pp. 359-366 . 
[20]  A. Krenker , M. Volk, U. Sedlar , J.  Bešter , and A. Kos, 
Feb 2009, “Bidirectional artificial neural networks for 
mobile-phone fraud detection”, ETRI Journal , vol. 31, 
no. 1,  pp. 92-94.
