Finding undetected protein associations in cell
signaling by belief propagation
M. Bailly-Bechet ∗, C. Borgs †, A. Braunstein ‡, J. Chayes † , A. Dagkessamanskaia §, J.-M. Fran¸cois § and R. Zecchina ¶
∗LBBE, CNRS UMR 5558, Universit´e Lyon 1, Villeurbanne, France,†Microsoft Research New England, One Memorial Drive, Cambridge, USA,‡Human Genetics Foundation,
Via Nizza 52, 10126 Torino, Italy & Politecnico di Torino, C.so Duca degli Abruzzi 24, Torino, Italy,§Universit´e of Toulouse, UMR CNRS-INSA 5504 & INRA 792, Toulouse,
France, and ¶Politecnico di Torino, C.so Duca degli Abruzzi 24, Torino, Italy & Human Genetics Foundation, Via Nizza 52, 10126 Torino, Italy
Submitted to Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
External information propagates in the cell mainly through signal-
ing cascades and transcriptional activation, allowing it to react to a
wide spectrum of environmental changes. High-throughput exper-
iments identify numerous molecular components of such cascades
which however may interact through other undetected molecules.
Some of these interactions may be detected using data coming from
the integration of a protein-protein interaction network and mRNA
expression proﬁles. This inference problem can be mapped onto the
one of ﬁnding appropriate optimal connected sub-graphs of a network
deﬁned by these datasets. The optimization procedure turns out to
be computationally intractable in general. Here we present a new
distributed algorithm for this task, inspired from statistical physics,
and apply this scheme to alpha factor and drug perturbations data
in yeast. We identify the role of the COS8 protein, a member of a
gene family of previously unknown function, and validate the results
by genetic experiments.
The algorithm we present is specially suited for very large data sets,
can run in parallel and can be adapted to other problems in systems
biology. On renowned benchmarks it outperforms other algorithms
in the ﬁeld.
COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY |
BELIEF PROPAGATION |
STEINER TREES
|
PHEROMONE PATHWAY
Introduction
S
ignaling cascades, an exemplar of which is the phospho-
rylation MAPK kinase pathways, consist in sequential re-
actions starting at receptor proteins and transmitted through
protein interactions to eﬀector proteins. Activation of these
eﬀectors leads to cellular changes, notably at the transcrip-
tional level, and results in the adaptation of the cell to its
surroundings [1]. Identifying signaling pathways is particu-
larly important for medical studies since their malfunction is
responsible for many diseases, such as cancer [2], or Alzheimer
[3].
From an engineering point of view, signaling cascades
present interesting properties: they provide signal ﬁltering [4]
and ampliﬁcation [5]. Their global interconnected organiza-
tion equip the cell with an integrated sensor network where
pathways can modulate one another through cross-talk and
retroactions.
In this complex system, signal speciﬁcity is
maintained by scaﬀold proteins [6, 7] acting as connectors of
particular reactions. Finally, the output of the information
carried by the transduction network allows for another layer
of regulation, namely combinatorial control in gene expression
[8]. A purely experimental approach to the identiﬁcation of
all components of a pathway, or all components of a functional
gene module, would need long and costly experiments. Such
process would greatly beneﬁt from the extraction of indirect
information about pathways from producible large-scale data,
such as expression, sequencing and protein interaction data.
Indeed, even if the correlation between signaling pathway ac-
tivity and expression data may be weak (although this may be
case-dependent, see [9] as an interesting example), expression
data are available in shear quantity.
By introducing a pa-
rameter weighting the relative importance given to expression
data with respect to reliable protein-protein interaction data
or in general established pathways knowledge, we hope to be
able to enrich the existing knowledge by the small amount of
information needed to reveal unknown interactions. To this
scope, important aspects like the varying reliability of inter-
action data and the proliferation of alternative paths which
need to be compared, require the development of heuristic al-
gorithmic techniques which need to be eﬃcient on large scale
data sets.
Here we propose a new method for the inference of hid-
den components of functional networks and signaling path-
ways, from large-scale transcriptomics and protein interaction
data. Such functional networks, composed of proteins acting
together in given environmental conditions, are an integrated
way of describing information processes in the cell. This prob-
lem has enormous potential applications and has already been
addressed in several works [10, 11, 12, 13], leading to inter-
esting theoretical predictions. In these works, the underlying
methodology consists in separately identifying single signaling
pathways, and then collecting them in an aggregated network.
The methodology proposed here attempts instead to extract
information on an entire network, deﬁned as a connected sub-
graph of the full protein interaction network. This technique
was roughly sketched in a biological inference context[14].
Here we present a complete, in-depth description and anal-
ysis of the approach, including in particular algorithmic and
experimental validations, and comparison with results from
a previous work along the same lines. We also give full de-
tails of the algorithmic framework we use, which may allow
implementation of the same ideas to similar systems biology
problems.
We state the functional network inference problem in a
rather simple and general graphical form.
Given a graph
G = (V, E) – the protein interaction network (PIN) – with
positive costs over edges {ce : e ∈E} and positive prizes over
vertices {bi : i ∈V }, ﬁnd a connected sub-graph G′ = (V ′, E′)
that minimizes the following function:
min
E′ ⊆E, V ′ ⊆V
(E′, V ′) connected
X
e∈E′
ce −λ
X
i∈V ′
bi
[1]
Reserved for Publication Footnotes
www.pnas.org — —
PNAS
Issue Date
Volume
Issue Number
1–6
arXiv:1101.4573v1  [q-bio.MN]  24 Jan 2011

To our purpose the costs of edges ce are chosen so that high
conﬁdence interactions (protein interactions veriﬁed in small-
scale experiments or found in many large-scale datasets) have
lower value with respect to low conﬁdence ones (interactions
experimentally shown only once in a large-scale experiment).
The node prizes are computed by bi = −log pi, where pi is
the p-value of diﬀerential expression of node i in the corre-
sponding microarray. The parameter λ regulates the tradeoﬀ
between the edge costs and vertices prizes, and its value indi-
rectly controls the size of the sub-graph G′.
In spite of its apparent simplicity, the problem of solv-
ing Eq.
[1], known as Prize-collecting Steiner Tree prob-
lem (PCST), is computationally intractable (NP-Hard) and
heuristic algorithms need to be developed in order to solve
instances arising from large datasets. Satisfying the connec-
tivity constraint on the optimization task constitutes a ma-
jor computational diﬃculty. The problem remains intractable
even in the case in which bi ∈{0, L} for a large L > 0, as this
limit case corresponds to the better known Minimum Steiner
Tree problem (MSTT) on graphs, which is also NP-Hard.
Modeling ideas related to our work are discussed in
[15, 16, 17, 18]. These studies rely on diﬀerent algorithmic
techniques, namely on a combination of linear programming
relaxation solvers, branch and bounds optimization methods
and preprocessing of the underlying biological network. A de-
tailed comparison shows essentially that the diﬀerence in per-
formance between LP-based methods and the one presented
here increases dramatically with the problem size. Addition-
ally, the computational cost of our approach scales roughly
linearly with the size of the problem and the algorithm is fully
parallelizable. These two facts suggest that the method pro-
posed here may be particularly well-suited to study problems
deﬁned on large networks.
The paper is organized as follows: First we present the
general problem of identifying optimal subgraphs as a tech-
nique for integrating diﬀerent data types. Then we discuss
a new algorithmic approach based on belief propagation: we
provide benchmark performances together with a speciﬁc ap-
plication to pheromone response data in yeast.
Finally we
describe in detail the experimental validation of the predic-
tions relative to the functional role of a family of genes (COS).
Complete details are given in the Supporting Information.
Fig. 1. An example of a prize-collecting Steiner tree. Larger nodes mean larger
prizes, thickness of the edges is proportional to their cost. A prize collecting Minimum
Steiner Tree (right) picks as many as possible of the larger nodes while simultaneously
picking the thinnest links and maintaining connectivity. The analyzed yeast protein
network has approximately 5000 nodes and 22,000 edges
Results
A Message-Passing algorithm for PCST. In [19], a statistical
physics analysis of the properties of Steiner Trees on diﬀerent
ensembles of large random graphs. Here we generalize this
work and introduce a new algorithm which can be used to
identify signaling pathways in transduction PINs. A detailed
discussion is given in the Supporting Information (SI). Mini-
mizing equation (1) gives access to connected networks which
include reliable edges and, at the same time, nodes which
are signiﬁcantly diﬀerentially expressed (see Fig 1). This cost
function could easily be generalized to other type of interac-
tions, e.g. gene-based information such as results of knock-out
experiments. Biological priors such as the relative position of
proteins (nodes) along the tree or their expected degree could
also be easily included in the same scheme.
One main diﬃculty with an optimization over connected
sub-graphs is that the connectivity condition is global rather
than local, i.e.
can not be veriﬁed by a set of simple lo-
cal checks over the graph. This problem is dealt with here
by switching to a richer description of the sub-graph that in-
cludes an extra variable for each graph node, which essentially
denotes when (if ever) nodes would be visited by an algorithm
that explores the sub-graph from a given starting “root” node.
While such representations are in one-to-one correspondence
to connected sub-graphs, the connectivity condition does have
an expression as a set of simple local conditions for the new
variables.
The proposed algorithm consists in a set of functional
equations for estimating the probabilities that individual links
belong to the optimal sub-graph at a given distance from the
starting node. Such equations can be written in a computa-
tionally eﬃcient form that is solved by iteration in a so–called
message–passing procedure. The general derivation and other
details are given in SI text, whereas the source code is avail-
able for download [20]. The proof that in certain limit cases
the algorithm provides optimal results can be found in [21].
Tests and data analysis. In order to assess the general eﬃcacy
of the algorithm, it was tested against the collection of MSTT
benchmark problems in the SteinLib data set [22] which de-
ﬁnes the state of the art in the ﬁeld. Though the benchmarks
problems are not of biological nature, they are both large and
diﬃcult to solve, and therefore particularly useful for compar-
ing performance of diﬀerent algorithms.
Quite surprisingly
the best known cost of almost all of the open problems could
be improved in a fraction of the computational time (details
and complete Tables in SI text).
Most of the heuristic al-
gorithms with the previously best known performance are
based on Linear Programming (LP) relaxations complemented
with preprocessing of the underlying graph and a branch-and-
bound strategy, e.g. [15] (details also in SI). Further direct
comparisons between such methods and our approach suggest
that already for moderate size networks the LP-based meth-
ods become highly ineﬃcient (details in SI).
As a second preliminary test, on biological data, we have
compared our technique to another method for the inference
of linear signaling pathways based on color-coding [11], the
optimization criterion of which is a restriction of ours to the
edge cost part. We have assessed our algorithm performance
relative to [11] with the same data and optimization crite-
rion. Essentially, the same pathways were found much more
eﬃciently (due to the fact that the computational cost does
grow only linearly with the chain length and not exponentially
as in [11]), and it was possible to recover their variability by
adjusting the chain length (details in SI text), thereby proving
the capacity of our algorithm to recover known biology.
2
www.pnas.org — —
Footline Author

Pheromone response data.Finally, we have applied the al-
gorithm to analyze pheromone sensing on a yeast protein
network built by fusion of the MIPS[23] and DIP[24] net-
works, using 56 large-scale expression datasets created to re-
construct the pheromone pathway experimentally by studying
the expression of strains deleted for key genes in the pathway
[25].
This system was chosen as a case study in virtue of
a pre-existing good theoretical understanding of its function-
ing. The pheromone response system is in fact a well-studied
MAPK kinase cascade, which permits communication previ-
ous to mating in haploid yeasts. Upon sensing a pheromone,
cell cycle is arrested, cytoskeleton and membrane structure
are modiﬁed, and ﬁnally mating occurs by fusion of two cells
of opposite sexual type.
The identiﬁcation of optimal sub-networks was done for a
range of λ values, giving us variable structures going from the
backbone of the network to a very detailed picture of each sub-
pathway. The root of the trees was deﬁned to be STE2, the
α-pheromone receptor and entrance of the entire pheromone
pathway [26, 27].
The biological coherence of our results was assessed by
showing that the average number of GO Slim annotations
shared between neighbors in the inferred trees is signiﬁcantly
superior to those of random trees (t-test, p < 5.10−7, see SI).
The results obtained from each one of the 56 expression pat-
ters have been merged, leading to a ﬁnal network with links
which are weighted by their frequency of appearance. For each
identiﬁed tree there is also a direction associated to each link
toward the chosen root (not displayed in Fig. 3 for clarity).
The network we found (see Fig 3) contains known path-
ways, whose completeness depends on λ.
It shows signal-
ing going from STE2, to the cell cycle module (starting from
CDC28), proteins involved in cell polarity and cytoskeleton
reorganization (RVS161 and RVS167), and another branch
containing essentially PRM proteins and proteins involved in
sphingolipid synthesis (ELO1) or cell wall (CHS1). A closer
look at the structure of the inferred sub-network shows that
it is constituted of two types of proteins: proteins diﬀeren-
tially expressed during pheromone response, already discov-
ered by transcriptomic studies, and protein bridging between
sub-parts of the network, while having a stable expression level
in these conditions. These proteins, that will be called herein
Steiner proteins in reference to Steiner nodes in the MSTT,
are not detected by classical transcriptomics, but may have
an informative or signaling role nonetheless: they allow signal
propagation between modules of the transduction network,
and can be discovered only through a combined analysis of
the protein interaction and transcriptomics data.
One such protein we found is COS8, a gene of unknown
function, which appear at the head of the third main branch
starting from STE2, linking between the standard pheromone
pathway and a group of proteins related to membrane struc-
ture. To ensure that COS8 frequent occurrence is not due to a
bias of our optimization criterion to predilect proteins having
high connectivity[12], we assessed the statistical signiﬁcance
of the Steiner proteins by bootstrap experiments with noisy
costs and prizes. Interestingly, the COS8 protein appears fre-
quently enough to be considered as signiﬁcant and biologically
relevant. Given the interest in uncovering a role for a mem-
ber of a large gene family in yeast (the COS family contains
11 highly similar members), we therefore attempt to infer its
biological role using its neighborhood in the inferred trees.
COS8 is suggested to be the target of the STE2-GPA1-
SST2-SHO1 cascade. As SHO1 is also a sensor involved in the
ﬁlamentous growth and osmolarity pathway, COS8 could be
an actor of more than just the pheromone system, and could
provide cross-talks between these diﬀerent pathways. Out of
48 proteins experimentally shown to interact with it, a small
subset appear in most simulations, composed of the membrane
protein PRM10, the fatty acid elongases ELO1, SUR4 and
FEN1 – involved in the ﬁrst steps of sphingolipid synthesis–,
and other components of the secretion pathway and ceramide
synthesis such a AUR1, LAC1 and IFA38. Such homogeneity
in the uncovered interactions of COS8, relative to the diver-
sity in the 48 interactants set, allows us to putatively predict
both localization and role of COS8: it should be an endoplas-
mic reticulum (ER) protein involved in sphingolipid synthesis.
Concerning localization, these predictions precise the results
of a previous study using GFP ﬂuorescence, that localized
COS8 either in the ER or the nucleus[28]. Moreover, the sin-
gle hint about COS8 function, uncovered in a large-scale tran-
scriptomic experiment, and not experimentally veriﬁed, is an
undetermined role in the unfolded protein response, a process
occurring in the ER[29], in agreement with our results.
As for COS8 role, sphingolipids are an essential com-
ponents of the membrane, being part of the lipid rafts mi-
crodomains [30]. To check the relevance of COS8 for the sph-
ingolipid synthesis, and more generally for membrane struc-
ture, we analyzed with the same algorithm another large-
scale dataset [31] testing for response to caﬀeine or rapamycin
stress, which are also known to inhibit TOR pathway [32] and
therefore to disrupt membrane structure. Consistently with
the pheromone results, COS8 was also detected as a Steiner
protein, and was signiﬁcantly enriched in the resulting sub-
graphs, with the same interacting partners. We therefore de-
cided to check experimentally our predictions about COS8
interactions and putative role.
∆SUR4
∆SUR4 ∆COS8
∆FEN1
∆FEN1 ∆COS8
Rapamycin
wt 
∆COS8
YPD medium
FEN1
ELO1
SUR4
TSC13
IFA38
VLCFA elongation
      +
DHS/PHS
C26-CoA
Ceramide
∆IRE1
∆IRE1 ∆COS8
Caffeine
wt
∆COS8
COS8
TOR Pathway
Unfolded Protein 
Response
A)
C)
B)
∆YCR061W
∆YCR061W ∆COS8
wt
wt +pCOS8
wt 
∆COS8
Fig. 2. A) The main proteins interacting with COS8 in our signaling tree. Squares
stand for membrane proteins. The dotted lines show that many protein interactions
are never found in our tree. B) A global scheme of the putative negative regula-
tory role of COS8, at the interface between very long chain fatty acid elongation
(VLFCA), TOR signaling and the unfolded protein response (See text). C) A subset
of the genetic experiments showing i) the rescue of ∆YCR061W, ∆SUR4, ∆FEN1,
and ∆IRE1 by ∆COS8 in rapamycin medium; ii) the eﬀects of either the disruption
or the over-expression of COS8 in a caﬀein medium
Strain
control
0.1 mM myriocin
wt
20
1.9
∆COS8
20.8
6.7
Footline Author
PNAS
Issue Date
Volume
Issue Number
3

Experimental validation. We proceeded to genetic experiments
in strains with disrupted COS8 or containing a plasmid over-
expressing (Fig 2 ).
We tested interactions with the main
components of sphingolipid synthesis, in various conditions
(full experimental details in SI text).
We made the ∆COS8 strain for this study, by replacing
the chromosomal copy of this gene by cos8::LEU2 deletion
cassete. For the overexpression study, we cloned COS8 gene
in multicopy plasmid pRS426(with URA3 marker).
To ob-
tain double mutants used in this study cos8::LEU2 deleted
BY4741 strain was crossed with a strain from YKO collection
(ORF::KAN). Resulted diploid was dissected and segregants
having KAN and LEU2 markers were selected and used for
further experiments. Details concerning all the experiments
are given in SI.
We found that deleting COS8 rescue completely the phe-
notype of ∆FEN1 and ∆YCR061W strains in rapamycin
medium – as well as caﬀein –, and partially the phenotype
of ∆SUR4 in the same conditions. Oppositely, a strain over-
expressing COS8 is hypersensitive to caﬀein and presents the
same phenotype as FEN1 deletion. This shows a clear interac-
tion between TOR signaling, COS8 and long chain fatty acid
elongation, and hints at a negative regulation of very long
chain fatty acid (VLCFA) elongation by COS8. As a control
experiment, we checked for genetic interactions with IRE1, the
master regulator of unfolded protein response, which is the an-
notated role of COS8[29], and we also found this interaction
(See Fig. 2). Finally, we tested for growth defect in ∆COS8
strains in media containing myriocin. Myriocin is a very po-
tent inhibitor of serine palmitoyltransferase [33], the ﬁrst step
in sphingosine biosynthesis, and slow sphingolipid synthesis.
We compared the sensitivity of ∆COS8 and wt strains to this
antibiotic. After 36 hours of incubation in liquid YPD media
with 0.1 mM of myriocin we observed a transient but clear
positive eﬀect of COS8 deletion on cell growth (See Table ).
Weak but reproducible increase of myriocin resistance for
∆COS8 could also be seen on solid YPD media.
This can
be interpreted if COS8 indeed regulates negatively the sph-
ingolipid production, via VLCFA synthesis : in these condi-
tions the cell growth rate should become dependent on the
eﬃciency of VLCFA elongation, which is less restricted in
∆COS8 strains, therefore leading to smaller eﬀects of myri-
ocin.
We therefore conclude that the function of COS8 is
indeed related to sphingolipid metabolism, and probably reg-
ulates negatively the VLCFA synthesis and therefore the sph-
ingolipid production.
Discussion
Algorithmic predictions and genetic experiments show inter-
actions between sphingolipid synthesis, particularly ceramide,
pheromone response and TOR signaling. Sphingolipids have
recently been involved in the TOR-regulated network[34, 35]:
TOR is able to activate the reaction of synthesis of ceramide
from dihydrosphingosine. The molecular mechanisms of this
regulation are still unknown, but are coherent with our ex-
perimental results about a negative role of COS8 in VLCFA
elongation, as ∆COS8 strains are resistant to caﬀein and ra-
pamycin – two components known to inhibit the TOR path-
way. As sphingolipids are now discovered to be both essential
membrane components and signaling molecules, understand-
ing the regulation of their synthesis by various pathways, and
the potential cross-talk they could provide, is a crucial is-
sue. Here, regulation of sphingolipid synthesis by COS8 would
provide the cell with the ability to integrate signal from the
pheromone pathway, the osmolarity pathway, and the TOR
pathway in order to modify its membrane structure. Finally,
COS8 is a member of a gene family of 11 highly similar mem-
bers. Further investigations would be needed to identify the
functional role of other members of the family, considering
that both our predictions and experiments seem to indicate
that COS8 has a major eﬀect, among all members of the COS
family.
Conclusions
We have presented a new computational technique, inspired
from statistical physics, which can eﬃciently extract new use-
ful information about interactions in signaling pathways (from
gene expression and protein-protein data) by solving an ap-
propriately deﬁned optimization problem on graphs.
Our
method not only provides candidate networks linking proteins
of known function; the method also suggests new roles for
proteins of previously unknown function. As a test case we
speciﬁcally predict a functional role for the COS8 protein (a
member of a large gene family with yet unknown functional
role) both in sphingolipid synthesis and in the TOR pathway
in S. cerevisiae. We have validated the prediction by provid-
ing experimental evidence showing that COS8 is involved in a
regulatory loop at the level of ceramide synthesis. Our new al-
gorithmic technique has several properties which should make
it of signiﬁcant value to optimization problems in systems bi-
ology: eﬃciency (nearly linear time complexity), simplicity
(it is based on a ﬁxed point equation), parallelizability, and
the ability to include other biological priors, such as synthetic
lethal interactions or phosphoproteomics data. Moreover, the
technique outperforms the best-known techniques in the ﬁeld:
we tested it on unsolved instances of the best-known library
(SteinLib), and it achieved better optima than were known
previously. Finally, it is relatively easy to adapt the technique
to a large class of network reconstruction problems, including
many which arise in systems biology.
Materials and Methods
Full methods are in SI Text. They include: (1) Algorithm design (the model, deriva-
tion of the message-passing cavity equations, the max-sum limit, computation of
marginals, iterative dynamics and reinforcement, a note on directness), (2) Numerical
results on benchmark problems and direct comparison with LP-based techniques, (3)
Data source and results (including data concerning GO annotation enrichment), (4)
Experimental protocols (Strains, media and culture conditions, Construction of multi-
copy plasmid with COS8 chromosomal allele, Construction of the COS8 deleted strain,
Construction of double mutants, Drug sensitivity assays), (5) Algorithm comparison
with previous data.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. This work has been supported by a Microsoft Research
External Activities grant.
1. T.C. Elston (2008) Probing pathways periodically. Sci Signal 1, pe47.
2. A.J. King, D. R. Patrick, R. S. Batorsky, M. L. Ho, H. T. Do, S. Y. Zhang, R. Ku-
mar, D. W. Rusnak, A. K. Takle, D. M. Wilson, E. Hugger, L. Wang, et al., (2006)
Demonstration of a genetic therapeutic index for tumors expressing oncogenic BRAF
by the kinase inhibitor SB-590885. Cancer Res 66, 11100.
3. J.-J. Pei and J. Hugon (2008) mTOR-dependent signalling in Alzheimer’s disease. J
Cell Mol Med 12, 2525.
4. M. Thattai, and A. van Oudenaarden (2002) Attenuation of noise in ultrasensitive
signaling cascades. Biophys J 82, 2943.
5. B.N. Kholodenko (2006) Eﬀects of sequestration on signal transduction cascades. Nat
Rev Mol Cell Biol 7, 165.
6. J.W. Locasale and A. K. Chakraborty (2008) Regulation of signal duration and the
statistical dynamics of kinase activation by scaﬀold proteins. PLoS Comput Biol 4,
e1000099.
4
www.pnas.org — —
Footline Author

7. C.J. Bashor, N. C. Helman, S. Yan, and W. A. Lim (2008) Using engineered scaﬀold
interactions to reshape MAP kinase pathway signaling dynamics. Science 319, 1539.
8. B.A. Benayoun, and R. A. Veitia (2009) A post-translational modiﬁcation code for
transcription factors: sorting through a sea of signals. Trends Cell Biol 19, 189.
9. B. Souﬁ, C. D. Kelstrup, G. Stoehr, F. Fr¨oihlich, T. C. Walther, and J. V. Olsen (2009)
Global analysis of the yeast osmotic stress response by quantitative proteomics. Mol
Biosyst 5, 1337-1346.
10. M.S. Scott, T. Perkins, S. Bunnell, F. Pepin, D. Y. Thomas, and M. Hallett (2005)
Identifying regulatory subnetworks for a set of genes. Mol Cell Proteomics 4, 683.
11. J. Scott, T. Ideker, R. M. Karp, and R. Sharan (2006) Eﬃcient algorithms for detecting
signaling pathways in protein interaction networks. J Comput Biol 13, 133.
12. A. White, and A. Mayan (2008) Connecting seed lists of mammalian proteins using
Steiner trees . Nature Precedings.
13. X.-M. Zhao, R.-S. Wang, L. Chen, and K. Aihara (2008) Uncovering signal transduc-
tion networks from high-throughput data by integer linear programming. Nucleic Acids
Res 36, e48.
14. M. Bailly-Bechet, A. Braunstein and R. Zecchina (2009) A prize-collecting Steiner
tree approach for transduction network inference. P. Degano and R. Gorrieri (Eds.):
CMSB 2009, LNBI 5688.
15. I. Ljubic, R. Weiskircher, U. Pferschy, G. Klau, P. Mutzel, and M. Fischetti (2006)
An algorithmic framework for the exact solution of the prize-collecting Steiner tree
problem. Mathematical Programming, B 105, 427.
16. M. Dittrich, G. Klau, A. Rosenwald, T. Dandekar, and T. Muller (2008) Identify-
ing functional modules in protein-protein interaction networks: an integrated exact
approach. Bioinformatics 24, 223.
17. S.-S.C. Huang, and E. Fraenkel (2009) Integrating proteomic, transcriptional, and in-
teractome data reveals hidden components of signaling and regulatory networks. Sci
Signal 2, ra40.
18. N. Yosef, L.Ungar, E. Zalckvar, A. Kimchi, M. Kupiec, E.Ruppin, and R. Sharan (2009)
Toward accurate reconstruction of functional protein networks. Molecular Systems Bi-
ology 5, 248.
19. M. Bayati, C. Borgs, A. Braunstein, J. Chayes, A. Ramezanpour, and R. Zecchina
(2008) Statistical Mechanics of Steiner Trees. Phys Rev Lett 101, 037208.
20. www.polito.it/cmp
21. M. Bayati, A. Braunstein, and R. Zecchina (2008) A rigorous analysis of the cavity
equations for the minimum spanning tree. J. Math. Phys. 49, 125206.
22. T. Koch, A. Martin, and S. Voss (2000), SteinLib: An Updated Library on Steiner
Tree Problems in Graphs, Technical Report ZIB-Report 00-37, Konrad-Zuse-Zentrum
f¨ur Informationstechnik Berlin, Takustr. 7, Berlin.
23. U G¨uldener, M M¨unsterk¨otter, M Oesterheld, P Pagel, A Ruepp, H-W Mewes, and
St¨umpﬂen (2006) Mpact: the mips protein interaction resource on yeast.Nucleic Acids
Res, 34 (Database issue), D436.
24. I Xenarios, D W Rice, L Salwinski, M K Baron, E M Marcotte, and D Eisenberg
(2000) Dip: the database of interacting proteins. Nucleic Acids Res, 28(1), 289.
25. C.J. Roberts, B. Nelson, M. J. Marton, R. Stoughton, M. R. Meyer, H. A. Bennett,
Y. D. He, H. Dai, W. L. Walker, T. R. Hughes, M. Tyers, C. Boone, et al. (2000)
Signaling and circuitry of multiple MAPK pathways revealed by a matrix of global
gene expression proﬁles. Science 287, 873.
26. D. D. Jenness, A. C. Burkholder, and L. H. Hartwell (1983) Binding of alpha-factor
pheromone to yeast a cells: chemical and genetic evidence for an alpha-factor receptor.
Cell 35, 521–529.
27. A. C. Burkholder and L. H. Hartwell (1985) The yeast alpha-factor receptor: struc-
tural properties deduced from the sequence of the STE2 gene. Nucl Acids Res 13,
8463–8475.
28. I. Spode, D. Maiwald, C. P. Hollenberg, and M. Suckow (2002) ATF/CREB sites
present in sub-telomeric regions of Saccharomyces cerevisiae chromosomes are part of
promoters and act as UAS/URS of highly conserved COS genes. J Mol Biol 319, 407.
29. K.J. Travers, C. K. Patil, L. Wodicka, D. J. Lockhart, J. S. Weissman, and P. Walter
(2000) Functional and genomic analyses reveal an essential coordination between the
unfolded protein response and ER-associated degradation. Cell 101, 249.
30. R.C. Dickson, and R. L. Lester (2002) Sphingolipid functions in Saccharomyces cere-
visiae. Biochim Biophys Acta 1583, 13.
31. K. Kuranda, V. Leberre, S. Sokol, G. Palamarczyk, and J. Fran¸cois (2006) Functional
and genomic analyses reveal an essential coordination between the unfolded protein
response and ER-associated degradation. Mol Microbiol 61, 1147.
32. X.F. Zheng, D. Florentino, J. Chen, G. R. Crabtree, and S. L. Schreiber (1995) TOR
kinase domains are required for two distinct functions, only one of which is inhibited
by rapamycin. Cell 82, 121.
33. Y. Miyake, Y. Kozutsumi, S. Nakamura, T. Fujita, and T. Kawasaki (1995) Serine
palmitoyltransferase is the primary target of a sphingosine-like immunosuppressant,
ISP-1/myriocin. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 211, 396.
34. S. Aronova, K. Wedaman, P. A. Aronov, K. Fontes, K. Ramos, B. D. Hammock, and
T. Powers (2008) Regulation of ceramide biosynthesis by TOR complex 2. Cell Metab
7, 148.
35. C.J. Mousley, K. Tyeryar, K. E. Ile, G. Schaaf, R. L. Brost, C. Boone, X. Guan, M.
R. Wenk, and V. A. Bankaitis (2008) Trans-Golgi network and endosome dynamics
connect ceramide homeostasis with regulation of the unfolded protein response and
TOR signaling in yeast. Mol Biol Cell 19, 4785.
Footline Author
PNAS
Issue Date
Volume
Issue Number
5

!"!#$
%&'($
!)*+
,-' +
!.%/
01*+/2
3 ' 0(
-04+
-045
,.*+
**.#
-04/
-04$
678+
9*:+
&;*+
' !.+
&;*#
0 1 *+/+
!8*$
& ; *(
&%,+
,7 3 +
&%,#
*.6+#
*)8+
&'0+
-! 7 #
*.6#
. 6 !+
!%3+
-04 +<
Fig.
3. This graph is a sub-network of the protein-protein interaction map, obtained by
including nodes that appear more than 30% of the times on the 56 inferred Steiner trees for
λ = 0.2, with link intensity proportional to the number of times the speciﬁc connection was
found, and node size is proportional to average prize.
The layout was decided in order to
minimize crossings with the Graphviz suite. Afterward, colors were added denoting the main
GO annotation: Actin (light green), Cell Cycle (yellow), Chromatin structure (blue), Spindle
Checkpoint (dark green), Cell wall (cyan) and Pheromone sensing (magenta). The annotations
were obtained from the SGD project ”Saccharomyces Genome Database” .
6
www.pnas.org — —
Footline Author
