PROGRESSIVE LABEL DISTILLATION: LEARNING
INPUT-EFFICIENT DEEP NEURAL NETWORKS
A PREPRINT
Zhong Qiu Lin ∗
University of Waterloo
Waterloo, ON, Canada
Alexander Wong †
University of Waterloo
Waterloo, ON, Canada
January 29, 2019
ABSTRACT
Much of the focus in the area of knowledge distillation has been on distilling knowledge from a larger
teacher network to a smaller student network. However, there has been little research on how the
concept of distillation can be leveraged to distill the knowledge encapsulated in the training data itself
into a reduced form. In this study, we explore the concept of progressive label distillation, where
we leverage a series of teacher-student network pairs to progressively generate distilled training
data for learning deep neural networks with greatly reduced input dimensions. To investigate the
efﬁcacy of the proposed progressive label distillation approach, we experimented with learning a
deep limited vocabulary speech recognition network based on generated 500ms input utterances
distilled progressively from 1000ms source training data, and demonstrated a signiﬁcant increase in
test accuracy of almost 78% compared to direct learning.
Keywords machine learning · deep learning · distillation · label distillation · deep neural networks · semi-supervised
learning
1
Introduction
Deep learning has been widely adapted to many different problems, such as image classiﬁcation [1], speech recogni-
tion [2] and natural language processing [3], and has demonstrated state-of-the-art results for these problems. Despite
the promises, deep neural networks (DNNs) remain challenging to deploy in on-device edge scenarios such as mobile
and other consumer devices.
Due to the limited computational resources available in such on-device edge scenarios, many recent studies [4, 5, 6, 7]
have put greater efforts into designing small, low-footprint deep neural network architectures that are more appropriate
for embedded devices. A particularly interesting approach for enabling low-footprint deep neural network architectures
is the concept of knowledge distillation [8], where the performance of a smaller network is signiﬁcantly improved by
leveraging a teacher-student strategy where the smaller network is trained to mimic the behaviour of a larger teacher
network. With much of the research around distillation focused on distilling knowledge from larger networks to smaller
networks, there is little research focused on leveraging the concept of distillation for distilling knowledge encapsulated
in the training data itself into a reduced form. By producing data with reduced data dimension, one can achieve
input-efﬁcient deep neural networks with signiﬁcantly reduced computational costs.
In this study, we explore a concept we will call progressive label distillation, where a series of teacher-student network
pairs are leveraged to progressively generate distilled training data. The proposed approach enables the learning of
∗Vision and Image Processing Research Group, Department of System Design Engineering, University of Waterloo, Waterloo,
ON, Canada; DarwinAI Corp., Waterloo, ON, Canada;
†Vision and Image Processing Research Group, Department of System Design Engineering, University of Waterloo, Waterloo,
ON, Canada; Waterloo Artiﬁcial Intelligence Institute, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada; DarwinAI Corp., Waterloo,
ON, Canada
arXiv:1901.09135v1  [cs.NE]  26 Jan 2019

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 29, 2019
computationally efﬁcient DNNs with greatly reduced input dimensions without the need for collecting and labeling new
data. The proposed strategy can be used in conjunction with any efﬁcient deep neural network architecture to further
reduce computational costs and memory footprint.
2
Related Work
The proposed concept of label distillation stems from the notion of teacher-student learning, where a student network is
learned using a teacher deep neural network or an ensemble of teacher deep neural networks. A number of different
teacher-student learning strategies have been explored in past literature [8, 9, 10, 11, 12]. For example, in [9], the
authors explore the learning of a shallow student deep neural network to mimic the behaviour of a deeper teacher
deep neural network. In [8], the authors introduced the concept of a distillation loss for learning a student deep
neural network from an ensemble of teacher deep neural networks. Both [9] and [8] illustrate the promising results
of leveraging teacher-student learning where the teacher-student pair have heterogeneous network architectures but
leverage identical training data. Meanwhile, teacher-student learning has also been adapted for the purpose of training
data transformations, such as for the purpose of expanding the quantity of training data as well as for the purpose of
domain adaptation. In [10], the authors explored using an ensemble of networks to generate synthetic data for learning
shallow neural networks. In [11], the authors demonstrated the concept of data distillation, which leverages a large
quantity of unlabelled real data and ensembles the outputs of a neural network on multiple transformations of the
unlabelled data for "self-training". In [12], the authors leveraged teacher-student learning for transferring knowledge
learned in the source data domain to the target data domain. All these related teacher-student approaches focus on
exploiting deep neural networks with identical input dimensions using training data with ﬁxed dimensions, as well as
focusing on leveraging a one single step of teacher-student learning. As discussed previously, the notion of leveraging a
series of teacher-student network pairs in a progressive manner for distilling the knowledge encapsulated in the training
data itself into a reduced form has not been previously explored.
3
Method
The goal of the proposed progressive label distillation approach is to distill knowledge from a teacher network with a
large input dimension to a student network with a small input dimension, which in effect reduces computational costs
signiﬁcantly. This is achieved by leveraging a series of teacher-student network pairs to progressively generate distilled
data for training subsequent networks.
An overview of the progressive label distillation strategy can be described as follows. First, we train a teacher network
using an original training data with dimensions greater than the target input dimension. Second, a new training data
with reduced dimensions is generated from the original training data (e.g., in the case of limited vocabulary speech
recognition, one can generate short audio samples by randomly cropping segments from longer audio samples), with
the associated labels generated using the prediction results of the teacher network for these dimension-reduced samples.
Since the labels are generated based on the knowledge of the teacher network, we will refer to these generated labels
as distilled labels. Third, a student network with reduced input dimensions is trained with the new input data and the
distilled labels generated using the teacher network. This process is repeated in a progressive manner until the desired
target input dimension is reached. Details of these steps are described below.
3.1
Label Distillation
Let us ﬁrst describe the proposed concept of label distillation. Given a dataset D = {(Xi, Yi)}, we wish to generate
a new dataset ˜D = {(f(Xi), Yi)}, where f is a stochastic function that generates the new data based on a random
process. In this study, the goal is to learn deep neural networks with reduced input dimensions without the need for
collecting and labeling new training data, which in effect reduces computational costs signiﬁcantly.
One can generate a new set of training data by randomly cropping the original training data to a target dimension, which
is formally represented as { ˜
Xi} = {f src→tgt
crop
(Xi)} where f src→tgt
crop
is a stochastic function that randomly crops from
a source sample Xi of dimension src to produce a target sample ˜
Xi of dimension tgt. Thus, the dimension-reduced
training data is ˜D = {( ˜
Xi, Yi)} = {(f src→tgt
crop
(Xi), Yi)}. However, leveraging the original class label of the original
source sample Xi directly as the class label of the target samples ˜
Xi derived from Xi can lead to a poor reﬂection of
the underlying content in ˜
Xi. For example, in the case of limited vocabulary speech recognition, a random crop from an
audio sample with a label of ’yes’ may actually contain no verbal utterance in it, and as such should really have a label
of ’silence’ assigned to it. Similarly, in the case of image classiﬁcation, random crops of an image labeled as ’desk’ may
2

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 29, 2019
contain predominantly a cup, a water bottle, a pen, a mouse, etc., and thus the label ’desk’ is not reﬂective of these
crops.
We address the aforementioned problem by generating new training data ˜D by leveraging a teacher network trained on
the original training data D to generate distilled labels for the reduced-dimension training data ˜D. More speciﬁcally,
we modify { ˜
Xi} to match the input dimension of the teacher network (in this study, by padding the reduced-dimension
training data { ˜
Xi}). Let us denote the padded reduced-dimension training data as { ˘
Xi} = {f src←tgt
pad
( ˜
Xi)}, where
f src←tgt
pad
is a deterministic function that pads ˜
Xi of size tgt to the size of src. Hence, the newly generated training data
˘D for training a student network with reduced input dimensions can be deﬁned as
˘D = {( ˜
Xi, Csrc( ˘
Xi)}
= {(f src→tgt
crop
(Xi), Csrc(f src←tgt
pad
(f src→tgt
crop
(Xi)))}
(1)
In this study, the teacher network Csrc is trained using the cross-entropy loss against the ground-truth labels {Yi}
provided in the original training data D, with the student network Ctgt for tgt < src trained by minimizing the
cross-entropy loss between its output and the distilled label generated by the teacher network Csrc.
Letting psrc
c
(˜x)
∆= Csrc(˘x)[c] be the probability assigned to class c in the output of the teacher network Csrc on the
padded dimension-reduced training data ˘x, the loss function deﬁned for the student network Ctgt is formally represented
in equation 2. It is worth noting that the student network is not exposed to the ground-truth labels {Yi} from the original
training data.
Ltgt(f src→tgt
crop
(Xi)) = −
X
c
ptgt
c ( ˜
Xi) log(psrc
c
( ˘
Xi))
(2)
We formally represent our label distillation as a function, shown in equation 3, that outputs a new student network Ctgt
with input dimension tgt, given a teacher network Csrc with input dimension src and a dataset D.
Ctgt = Distillsrc→tgt(D, Csrc)
(3)
Hard Label vs. Soft Label
Similar to [8], one can train a network with soft labels by using the class probability
output of the teacher network, psrc
c
(˜x)
∆= Csrc(˘x)[c] as the label. We, thus, minimize the KL-divergence between
the student network’s output and the teacher network’s output. On the other hand, we can also leverage the teacher
network’s output as the "ground-truth" hard label, and minimize the cross-entropy loss between the student model’s
output and the mutual exclusive label, argmax∀c∈C(Csrc(˘x)[c]). In this study, we evaluate the efﬁcacy of both a hard
label and a soft label approach for label distillation.
3.2
Progressive Label Distillation
For the purpose of learning an input-efﬁcient deep neural network with an input dimension of tgt, the proposed concept
of label distillation can be leveraged in two different ways: i) direct, and ii) progressive. In the direct label distillation
approach, a teacher network Csrc is used to produce distilled labels for a newly generated training data of dimension
tgt, and a student network Ctgt is then trained on the newly generated training data and the corresponding distilled
labels. This direct approach is encapsulated by Distillsrc→tgt (Eq. 3).
In the progressive label distillation approach, a series of teacher-student network pairs are leveraged to progressively
generate distilled labels for a series of generated training data with progressively lower dimensions until the target
dimension tgt is reached. Furthermore, an interesting by-product of this progressive label distillation process is a series
of student networks with progressively lower input dimensions, with the ﬁnal student network being an input-efﬁcient
deep neural network possessing the target input dimension.
Letting int ∈(tgt, src) denote a number of intermediate dimensions between tgt and src, the progressive label
distillation process can be expressed by
Ctgt = Distillint→tgt(D, Distillsrc→int(D, Csrc))
(4)
For illustration purposes, we deﬁne a convenient notation for representing the student networks produced via label
distillation. We denote a student network with an input dimension of tgt that is learnt via direct label distillation from a
teacher network with an input dimension of src as Ctgt ↙(src). In addition, we denote a student network with an input
dimension of tgt that is learnt via progressive label distillation from a teacher networks with input dimensions of int
and src as Ctgt ↙(int,src).
3

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 29, 2019
Figure 1: (left) Audio signal; (middle) MFCC representation; (right) deep residual network architecture (res15) proposed
in [13].
4
Experiments and Discussion
To better investigate and explore the efﬁcacy of the introduced notions of label distillation and progressive label
distillation, a number of experiments were performed for the task of limited vocabulary speech recognition [14, 13, 6],
where the underlying goal is to identify which word from a limited vocabulary was spoken based on an input audio
utterance recording. In general, we will ﬁrst explore direct label distillation for learning student networks with
various input dimensions. We will then investigate the effectiveness of progressive label distillation through different
teacher-student network pair conﬁgurations.
4.1
Experimental Setup
As mentioned previously, we will leverage the task of limited vocabulary speech recognition to investigate the efﬁcacy
of label distillation for producing student input-efﬁcient deep neural networks from teacher networks with larger input
dimension. Here, we will describe the experimental setup used in this study.
4.1.1
Dataset
In this study, the Speech Command dataset [15] was used for experimental purposes. The Speech Command dataset
consists of 105,829 one-second utterances of 35 different words spoken by 2618 speakers, categorized into 12 different
classes: silence, an unknown word, "yes", "no", "up", "down", "left", "right", "on", "off", "stop", and "go".
4.1.2
Feature Extraction and Input Pre-processing
Based on the past literature [2], a very effective strategy for leveraging deep neural networks for limited vocabulary
speech recognition is to ﬁrst transform the input audio signal into mel-frequency cepstrum coefﬁcient (MFCC)
representations (see Figure 1). For reducing audio signal noise, a band-pass ﬁlter of 20Hz/4kHz is applied to the input
audio. Inspired by [14], the input feature is forty dimensional MFCC frames stacked using a 30ms window and 10ms
frame shift. Substantially, the MFCC representation of the audio signal is used as the input to the deep neural network.
4.1.3
Model Architecture
In this study, we leveraged the deep residual network architecture proposed by [13], which they refer to as res15
and was shown to provide state-of-the-art accuracy when it was ﬁrst published. In particular, Tang et al. proposed
to use a residual block architecture where the ﬁrst layer of the block is a bias-free convolutional layer with weights
W ∈R(m×r)×(ni−1×ni), where m and r are the width and height of convolutional kernel, and ni−1 and ni are the
number of channels for the previous convolutional layer and the current convolutional layer, respectively. After the
convolutional layer, a ReLU activation and batch normalization [16] is appended in the residual block. In addition,
convolutional dilation, (dw, dh), is used to increase the receptive ﬁeld of the network. Increasing reception ﬁelds in
deeper layers allow the network to consider the input entirely without the need of very deep layers.
The details of the network architecture is shown in table 1, and Fig. 1 (right) shows the overall architecture and the detail
of one of the residual blocks. For the teacher network, we constructed a network based on this network architecture
with an input dimension for an 1000ms MFCC representation of the audio signal. To explore direct and progressive
label distillation strategies for learning student networks with various input dimensions, we modify the input layer to
construct a series of input-efﬁcient networks with input dimension for MFCC representations of audio signals with the
following lengths: 900ms, 800ms, 700ms, 600ms, and 500ms.
4

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 29, 2019
Table 1: res15 network architecture proposed in [13]
Type
m
r
n
dw
dh
conv
3
3
45
-
-
res×6
3
3
45
2⌊i
3 ⌋
2⌊i
3 ⌋
conv
3
3
45
16
16
bn
-
-
45
-
-
avg-pool
-
-
45
-
-
softmax
-
-
12
-
-
Table 2: Accuracy of the student networks produced using direct distillation. Computed based on the average predictions
of three random crops.
Test Acc (%)
soft
hard
C1000
N/A
95.8
C500
N/A
12.03
C500 ↙(1000)
85.82
83.81
C600 ↙(1000)
90.12
89.79
C700 ↙(1000)
92.58
92.36
C800 ↙(1000)
93.81
94.01
C900 ↙(1000)
94.91
95.23
4.1.4
Training
All networks used in this study were trained using TensorFlow [17] on a single Nvidia GTX 1080 Ti GPU with batch
size of 64 for 25 epochs to ensure convergence. The number of random crops used to train the student networks are
identical for all tests in the study. The learning rate is constant with the initial learning being 0.1 for the ﬁrst 6000
iterations. It is divided by 10 after 6000 iterations, and again divided by 10 after 12000 iterations. We use SGD with
momentum of 0.9, and the decay steps and decay rate are set to 1000 and 0.9, respectively. Weight decay regularization
is also imposed with strength of 0.00001.
4.2
Performance Evaluation
As the input dimension of the student networks in this study does not match the dimensions of the original dataset D, it
is no longer feasible to evaluate the accuracy of these networks using the test dataset in its original form. To facilitate
for a fair and consistent evaluation of the learnt student networks with differing input dimensions, three random crops
with dimensions equal to that of the student network being tested are extracted from each 1000ms audio sample in
the test dataset, and passed into the student network to obtain prediction outputs. Given the predictions made by the
student network on the three random crops, a ﬁnal prediction is calculated as the average of three predictions. This ﬁnal
prediction is evaluated against the ground-truth label for assessing the accuracy of the student network.
The offset values used to extract random crops from the original sample follow a uniform distribution between zero and
the difference between the original test sample length and the input dimension of the student network, which can be
expressed as {Toffset} = {⌊0.5
3 (src −tgt)⌋, ⌊1.5
3 (src −tgt)⌋, ⌊2.5
3 (src −tgt)⌋}.
4.3
Experiment 1: Direct Label Distillation
In the ﬁrst experiment, we evaluate the efﬁcacy of direct label distillation of learning input-efﬁcient student net-
works via soft labels and hard labels for a set of student networks with ﬁve different input dimensions (i.e.,
{500ms, 600ms, 700ms, 800ms, 900ms}) by computing their respective test accuracies. For comparison purposes,
we also evaluate the test accuracy of a student network with input dimension corresponding to MFCC representations of
a 500ms audio signal learnt directly from random crops without label distillation (referred to here as C500). Finally,
as a baseline reference, the test accuracy of the teacher network with full-length input dimension (referred to here as
C1000) is also evaluated.
The test accuracies for the aforementioned student networks learned via direct label distillation, along with C500
and C1000, are shown in Table 2. A number of interesting observations can be made. First, it can be observed that
the network with input dimension of 500ms trained directly from random crops without label distillation (i.e., C500)
5

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 29, 2019
Figure 2: Test accuracy difference between using soft labels and hard labels for label distillation. It can be observed that
the test accuracy difference increases monotonically as the target input dimension decreases, with the biggest jump in
test accuracy difference between using soft labels and hard labels occurring when the target input dimension decreases
from 600ms to 500ms (i.e., C600 ↙(1000) vs. C500 ↙(1000)).
Table 3: Test accuracy of networks learnt using progressive label distillation: each column shows the test accuracy of
networks that have the same input dimension. Each row shows the number of progressive label distillation steps. Each
network in the occupied cell is learnt via label distillation from the network in the ﬁrst occupied cell to its left.
# Steps
C900
C800
C700
C600
C500
1
85.82
2
90.12
86.71
2
92.58
87.92
2
93.81
89.22
2
94.91
88.94
3
92.58
91.18
84.98
3
93.81
90.97
88.24
3
94.91
93.07
86.12
4
93.81
93.38
90.96
84.90
4
94.91
94.34
92.85
84.25
5
94.91
94.34
92.85
89.15
79.50
was able to achieve a test accuracy of just 12.03%, while the student networks with input dimension of 500ms (i.e.,
C500 ↙(1000)) learnt using label distillation via soft labels and hard labels was able to achieve test accuracies of 85.82%
and 83.81%, respectively. The signiﬁcant increase in test accuracy when using direct label distillation compared to
direct learning clearly illustrates the effectiveness of label distillation for learning input-efﬁcient deep neural networks.
Secondly, it can be observed that while the use of hard labels for direct label distillation achieves higher accuracies than
the use of soft labels for student networks with larger input dimensions, the opposite is true for student networks with
smaller input dimensions. This is more evident when we study the test accuracy difference between the use of soft labels
and hard labels (see Figure 2), where the test accuracy difference increasing gradually as the target input dimension
decreases, with the biggest jump in test accuracy difference between using soft labels and hard labels occurring when
the target input dimension decreases from 600ms to 500ms (i.e., C600 ↙(1000) vs. C500 ↙(1000)). As such, the use
of soft labels in label distillation improves the test accuracy over using hard labels when the difference between the
source input dimension src of the teacher network and the target input dimension tgt of the student network is larger.
Intuitively, the use of soft labels provides more information on the shared characteristics between classes, and this
additional "soft" class information can help the student network learn when the input information is more limited.
6

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 29, 2019
Figure 3: Impact on test accuracy for different number of steps of progressive label distillation
4.4
Experiment 2: Progressive Label Distillation
In the second experiment, we evaluate the efﬁcacy of progressive label distillation of learning input-efﬁcient student
networks for different combinations of series of teacher-student networks with progressively smaller input dimensions.
More speciﬁcally, we evaluate the test accuracies achieved by the student networks without a progressive label
distillation framework with different number of distillation steps, {#Steps} = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}. The test accuracy of the
student networks learnt using progressive label distillation is shown in Table 3. Each network in the occupied cell of
Table 3 is learnt using distilled labels generated by the network in the ﬁrst occupied cell to its left. For example, the
student network with 500ms input dimension with a test accuracy of 89.22% (shown in bold) (i.e., C500 ↙(800,1000)),
is learnt using distilled labels generated by a network with 800ms input dimension, which itself was learnt using distilled
labels generated by a network with 1000ms input dimension. By performing label distillation in a progressive manner,
the student network C500 ↙(800,1000) achieves a signiﬁcant boost in test accuracy of +3.40% when compared to the
student network C500 ↙(1000) which was learnt via direct label distillation. This improvement in test accuracy is
not unique to C500 ↙(800,1000), as progressive label distillation improves test accuracy for a wide range of different
teacher-student conﬁgurations when compared to direct label distillation. Figure 3 shows that for all target dimensions
tgt = {500, 600, 700, 800}, progressive label distillation achieved higher test accuracy when compared to direct label
distillation.
While signiﬁcant increases in accuracy was observed when using the proposed progressive label distillation approach to
learn input-efﬁcient networks, it can also be observed that too many steps for progressive label distillation does not yield
better test accuracy. More speciﬁcally, as shown in Figure 3, while two-step progressive label distillation improved
the performance across all target input dimensions, the test accuracy of student networks starts to drop as more steps
are leveraged for progressive label distillation. In fact, four-step and ﬁve-step progressive label distillation results in
test accuracies below that of direct label distillation. In addition, we observed that what intermediate teacher-student
network pair conﬁguration is chosen has noticeable impact on the ﬁnal target student network. As such, it is very much
worth further investigation on how best to determine the appropriate series of teacher-student network pairs for optimal
performance.
4.5
Computational Cost of Input-Efﬁcient Networks
With reduced input dimension, the computational cost of the student networks are greatly reduced. Table 4 shows the
number of FLOPs of different operations for the student networks with different input dimensions. It can be observed
that the number of FLOPs for C500 is less than half of the number of FLOPs for C1000. As such, the use of progressive
label distillation can allow for the creation of input-efﬁcient networks with low computational costs while still providing
reasonable test accuracies.
7

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 29, 2019
Table 4: FLOPs for input-efﬁcient networks with different input dimensions. The teacher network (C1000) is provided
as a reference for comparison.
Model
Conv
Add
Pool
Total
Factor
C500
775M
472k
3.78k
776M
0.47
C600
951M
575k
6.48k
952M
0.58
C700
1.13B
677k
9.18k
1.13B
0.69
C800
1.29B
780k
11.9k
1.29B
0.79
C900
1.47B
882k
14.6k
1.47B
0.90
C1000
1.64B
985k
17.3k
1.64B
1.00
5
Conclusions and Future Work
In this study, we show that progressive label distillation can be leveraged for learning deep neural networks with reduced
input dimensions without collecting and labeling new data. This reduction in input dimension results in input-efﬁcient
networks with signiﬁcant reduction in the computation cost. Experiment results for the task of limited vocabulary
speech recognition show that the use of progressive label distillation can lead to an input-efﬁcient student network with
half the input dimension with a test accuracy of 89.22%, compared to just 12.03% without using label distillation.
Future work involves investigate the effectiveness of progressive distillation for a broader range of tasks such as video
action recognition and video pose estimation. Furthermore, it would be worth exploring and expanding progressive
label distillation to teacher-student network pairs with heterogeneous network architectures.
Acknowledgment
The authors would like to thank the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada, the Canada
Research Chairs program, and DarwinAI Corp.
