arXiv:1007.3159v1  [cs.AI]  19 Jul 2010
Under consideration for publication in Theory and Practice of Logic Programming
1
Logic-Based Decision Support for Strategic
Environmental Assessment
MARCO GAVANELLI, FABRIZIO RIGUZZI
ENDIF - Universit`a di Ferrara

MICHELA MILANO
DEIS - Universit`a di Bologna

PAOLO CAGNOLI
ARPA Emilia-Romagna

submitted 7 February 2010; revised ; accepted 20 March 2010
Abstract
Strategic Environmental Assessment is a procedure aimed at introducing systematic as-
sessment of the environmental eﬀects of plans and programs. This procedure is based on
the so-called coaxial matrices that deﬁne dependencies between plan activities (infrastruc-
tures, plants, resource extractions, buildings, etc.) and positive and negative environmen-
tal impacts, and dependencies between these impacts and environmental receptors. Up
to now, this procedure is manually implemented by environmental experts for checking
the environmental eﬀects of a given plan or program, but it is never applied during the
plan/program construction. A decision support system, based on a clear logic semantics,
would be an invaluable tool not only in assessing a single, already deﬁned plan, but also
during the planning process in order to produce an optimized, environmentally assessed
plan and to study possible alternative scenarios. We propose two logic-based approaches
to the problem, one based on Constraint Logic Programming and one on Probabilistic
Logic Programming that could be, in the future, conveniently merged to exploit the ad-
vantages of both. We test the proposed approaches on a real energy plan and we discuss
their limitations and advantages.
KEYWORDS: Strategic Environmental Assessment, Regional Planning, Constraint Logic
Programming, Probabilistic Logic Programming, Causality
1 Introduction
Computational Sustainability (Gomes 2009) is a very recent, interdisciplinary re-
search ﬁeld that aims to apply techniques from computer science, information sci-
ence, operations research, applied mathematics, and statistics to the problem of
balancing environmental, economic, and societal needs for sustainable development.

2
M. Gavanelli, F. Riguzzi, M. Milano and P. Cagnoli
Among the many possible applications of information technology to sustainable
development, decision support systems represent a very important topic. Currently,
environmental experts take decisions, perform evaluations and build plans manually,
simply relying on experience, with little or no support from automated tools.
We believe the main reason why decision support systems are not widely applied
in this ﬁeld is twofold: ﬁrst, despite signiﬁcant advances in algorithmic research,
the current state of decision support systems still faces severe diﬃculties or cannot
cope at all with the highly complex structure of sustainability problems. Second,
there is a lack of appropriate models for sustainability related applications. These
models should be developed in tight collaboration between computer scientists and
environmental scientists, economists and biologists that can provide not only models
and data, but also feedback on system solutions.
Computational Logic can play a very important role in the design and implemen-
tation of decision support systems in this setting. First it enables a very intuitive and
expressive representation of reality, and second it provides a number of reasoning
mechanisms that can be successfully applied to the many aspects of sustainabil-
ity problems: logical inference, constraint reasoning and probabilistic reasoning. In
addition, Computational Logic tools rely on a well-deﬁned semantics, and one can
reason on the program to give explanations of the obtained results (or failure).
Sustainable development encompasses three pillars: society, economy and the en-
vironment. In this paper, we focus particularly on the environment. We address
the problem of deﬁning a logic-based decision support system for Strategic Envi-
ronmental Assessment (SEA), a legally enforced procedure aimed to introduce sys-
tematic evaluation of the environmental eﬀects of plans and programs. It typically
applies to development, waste, transport, energy and land use plans, both regional
and local, within the European Union. In this paper, we consider as a case study
the assessment of Emilia Romagna regional plans. SEA is based on the so-called
coaxial matrices that quantify dependencies between activities (e.g. infrastructures
and plants) contained in a plan and positive and negative environmental impacts
(e.g., alteration of woods, water pollution), and dependencies between impacts and
environmental receptors (e.g., quantity of CO2 in the atmosphere).
We propose two alternative logic-based approaches: one exploits Constraint Logic
Programming on Real Numbers CLP(R), and models coaxial matrices as sets of
linear equations and inequations; this is a simple, eﬃcient model, that presumes
the available information to be precise, and assumes that inﬂuences can be summed
up. The second approach is based on Logic Programs with Annotated Disjunction
(LPADs) where activities and impacts are combined using the laws of probability.
We apply the two approaches on coaxial matrices referring to eleven types of plans
that legally require the SEA. Experiments are performed on a real energy regional
plan.
The structure of the paper is as follows: section 2 describes regional planning and
Strategic Environmental Assessment along with coaxial matrices. Section 3 recalls
the main concepts behind constraint logic programming and probabilistic logic pro-
gramming along with its causal interpretation. Section 4 shows the implementation
of the coaxial matrices in CLP(R) while section 5 describes the approach based on

Logic-Based Decision Support for Strategic Environmental Assessment
3
LPAD. Section 6 presents experimental results on a real energy plan. A discussion
and a description of open issues conclude the paper.
2 Strategic Environmental Assessment
Regional planning is the science of eﬃcient placement of land use activities and
infrastructures for the sustainable growth of a region. Our case study is the Emilia
Romagna region of Italy, and we developed this work on real data provided by the
environmental regional agency. Regional plans are classiﬁed into types; the SEA
is legally required for eleven types of plans (namely Agriculture, Forest, Fishing,
Energy, Industry, Transport, Waste, Water, Telecommunication, Tourism, Urban
and Environmental plans), those addressed in this work. Each plan deﬁnes activities
that should be carried out during the plan’s implementation. Activities are roughly
divided into six types:
• infrastructures and plants;
• buildings and land use transformations;
• resource extraction;
• modiﬁcations of hydraulic regime;
• industrial transformations;
• environmental management.
Before any implementation, these plans have to be environmentally assessed, un-
der the Strategic Environmental Assessment Directive. SEA is a method for in-
corporating environmental considerations into policies, plans and programs that is
prescribed by European Union policy.
One of the instruments used for assessing a regional plan in Emilia Romagna
are the so-called coaxial matrices, that are a development of the network method
(Sorensen and Moss 1973).
One matrix M deﬁnes the dependencies between the above-mentioned activities
contained in a plan and positive and negative impacts (also called pressures) on the
environment. Each element mi
j of the matrix M deﬁnes a qualitative dependency
between the activity i and the negative or positive impact j. The dependency can be
high, medium, low or null. Examples of negative impacts are energy, water and land
consumption, variation of water ﬂows, water and air pollution and so on. Examples
of positive impacts are reduction of water/air pollution, reduction of greenhouse gas
emission, reduction of noise, natural resource saving, creation of new ecosystems
and so on.
The second matrix N deﬁnes how the impacts inﬂuence environmental recep-
tors. Each element ni
j of the matrix N deﬁnes a qualitative dependency between
the negative or positive impact i and an environmental receptor j. Again the de-
pendency can be high, medium, low or null. Examples of environmental receptors
are the quality of surface water and groundwater, quality of landscapes, energy
availability, wildlife wellness and so on.
The matrices currently used in Emilia Romagna contain 93 activities, 29 negative
impacts, 19 positive impacts and 23 receptors and refer to the above-mentioned 11
plans.

4
M. Gavanelli, F. Riguzzi, M. Milano and P. Cagnoli
The coaxial matrices are currently used by environmental experts that manually
evaluate a single, already deﬁned, plan. A plan basically deﬁnes the so-called mag-
nitude of each activity: magnitudes are real values that intuitively express “how
much” of an activity is performed. The unit is diﬀerent for each activity: for exam-
ple, for activity Thermoelectric power plants the magnitude says how many MW of
electric power will be produced by thermoelectric plants, while the magnitude of
Oil/gas/steam pipelines gives the number of kilometers of pipes installed. A manual
evaluation of alternatives and what-if queries are very diﬃcult to consider. In addi-
tion, planning is now carried out without a rigorous consideration of environmental
aspects contained in the coaxial matrices.
In this paper, we propose two logic-based approaches for the design of a decision
support system that can be used to assess a single, already deﬁned plan, to evaluate
diﬀerent scenarios during the planning phase or to optimize the deﬁnition of land
use activities and infrastructures.
In both cases, we convert the qualitative values into real numbers in the interval
[0, 1]. The environmental expert suggested the values to be 0.25 for low, 0.5 for
medium, and 0.75 for high.
The ﬁrst approach is based on Constraint Logic Programming on Real num-
bers (CLP(R)), that is extremely eﬃcient when dealing with linear equations. On
the other hand, this approach does not take into consideration the subjective and
stochastic nature of the available data: each value in the matrices is simply used as
a coeﬃcient in a linear equation, so we assume that positive and negative impacts
derived from planned activities can be summed. While in general, impacts can in-
deed be summed, in some cases a mere summation is not the most realistic relation
and more sophisticated combinations should be considered.
For this reason, we also evaluate a Causal Probabilistic Logic Programming ap-
proach that is grounded on the well-established theory of probability and causality.
The same coeﬃcients are now interpreted as probabilities, that will be combined
through probability laws to provide the likelihood of a given receptor being aﬀected.
The price to be paid is a higher computation time. A realistic decision support sys-
tem should merge the two approaches and this is a subject of the current research
activity.
3 Background
We provide some preliminaries on the two logic-based techniques used in this paper.
3.1 Constraint Logic Programming
Constraint Logic Programming (CLP) (Jaﬀar and Maher 1994) is a class of pro-
gramming languages which extend classical Logic Programming. Variables can be
assigned either terms (as in Prolog), or interpreted values, taken from a sort, that
is a parameter of the speciﬁc CLP language. For example, we can have CLP(R)
(Jaﬀar et al. 1992), on the sort of real values, or CLP(FD), in which variables range
on ﬁnite domains. The sort also contains interpreted functions (that, in numerical

Logic-Based Decision Support for Strategic Environmental Assessment
5
domains, can be the usual operations +, -, ×, etc.) and predicates (e.g., <, ̸=, ≥,
etc.), which are called constraints. The declarative semantics gives the intuitive in-
terpretation of the speciﬁc sort to constraints and interpreted terms: e.g., 1.3+2 < 5
is true in CLP(R). The operational semantics resembles that of Prolog for atoms
built on the usual predicates (i.e., those predicates deﬁned by a set of clauses), but
stores the interpreted ones, the constraints, to a special data structure, called the
constraint store. The store is then interpreted and modiﬁed by an external machin-
ery, called the constraint solver. The solver is able to check if the conjunction of
constraints in the store is (un)satisﬁable, and is also able to modify the store, possi-
bly simplifying it to a reﬁned state. Usually, the constraint solver does not perform
complete propagation: if it returns false, then there is deﬁnitely no solution, but in
some cases it may fail to detect infeasibility even if no solution exists.
CLP(R) is the instance of CLP in which variables range on the reals. The avail-
able constraints are linear equalities and inequalities, and the solver is usually im-
plemented through the simplex algorithm, which is very fast and is complete for
linear (in)equalities (it always returns true or false). Also, the user can communi-
cate an objective function to the solver: a linear term that should be minimized or
maximized while satisfying all constraints.
Many implementations of CLP(R) exist nowadays (De Koninck et al. 2006), and
many Prolog ﬂavours (Zhou et al. 1996; Hermenegildo et al. 2008) have their own
CLP(R) library. We decided to adopt ECLiPSe, that features a library called Eplex
(Shen and Schimpf 2005). This library interfaces ECLiPSe to an external mixed
integer linear programming solver, which can be either a state-of-the-art commercial
one (like CPLEX or Xpress-MP), or an open source solver. By default, Eplex hides
most of the details of the solver, but nevertheless, when required, the user can trim
various parameters to boost the performance, and also inspect the internals of the
solver. This feature becomes very useful in practical applications, and will be used
to provide additional valuable information to the user, as detailed in Section 4.
3.2 Causal Probabilistic Logic Programming
In this section we ﬁrst present Probabilistic Logic Programming and then we discuss
how to model causation with it.
3.2.1 Probabilistic Logic Programming
The integration of logic and probability has been widely studied in Logic Program-
ming and various languages semantics have been proposed, such as Probabilistic
Logic Programs (Dantsin 1991), Independent Choice Logic (Poole 1997), PRISM
(Sato and Kameya 1997), pD (Fuhr 2000), CLP(BN) (Santos Costa et al. 2003) and
ProbLog (De Raedt et al. 2007).
Logic Programs with Annotated Disjunctions (LPADs) (Vennekens et al. 2004)
are particularly suitable for reasoning about causes and eﬀects (Vennekens et al. 2009).
They extend logic programs by allowing clauses to be disjunctive and by annotating
each atom in the head with a probability. A clause can be causally interpreted by

6
M. Gavanelli, F. Riguzzi, M. Milano and P. Cagnoli
supposing that the truth of the body causes the truth of one of the atoms in the
head non-deterministically chosen on the basis of the annotations.
An LPAD theory T consists of a ﬁnite set of annotated disjunctive clauses. These
clauses have the following form
(H1 : α1) ∨(H2 : α2) ∨. . . ∨(Hh : αh) : −B1, B2, . . . Bb
where the His are logical atoms, the Bis are logical literals and the αis are real
numbers in the interval [0, 1] such that Ph
i=1 αi ≤1. If Ph
i=1 αi < 1, the head of
the clause implicitly contains an extra atom null that does not appear in the body
of any clause and whose annotation is 1−Ph
i=1 αi. If C is the clause above, H(C, i)
is Hi, α(C, i) is αi and body(C) is B1, B2, . . . Bb.
The semantics of a non-ground theory T is deﬁned through its grounding g(T )
and Vennekens et al. (2004) require that g(T ) is ﬁnite.
An atomic choice χ is a triple (C, θ, i) where C ∈T , θ is a substitution that
grounds C and i ∈{1, . . . , n} where n is the number of atoms in the head of
C. (C, θ, i) means that, for the ground clause Cθ, the head H(C, i) : α(C, i) was
chosen. A selection σ is a set of atomic choices such that for each clause Cθ in g(T )
there exists one and only one atomic choice (C, θ, i) in σ. We denote the set of all
selections of a program T by ST .
A selection σ identiﬁes a normal logic program Tσ = {(H(C, i) : −body(C))θ|
(C, θ, i) ∈σ} that is called an instance of T . A probability distribution is de-
ﬁned over the space of instances by assuming independence among the choices
made for each clause, thus the probability Pσ of an instance Tσ is given by Pσ =
Q
(C,θ,i)∈σ α(C, i).
The meaning of the instances of an LPAD is given by the well-founded semantics.
For each instance Tσ, we require that its well-founded model WF(Tσ) is total, since
we want to model uncertainty only by means of disjunctions.
The probability of a formula Q is given by the sum of the probabilities of the
instances in which the formula is true according to the well-founded semantics:
P(Q) =
X
σ∈ST ,WF (Tσ)|=Q
Pσ
An LPAD T can be translated into a Bayesian network β(T ) that has a Boolean
random variable for each ground atom plus a random variable choiceCθ for each
grounding Cθ of each clause C of T whose values are the atoms in the head of Cθ
plus null.
choiceCθ assumes value H(C, i)θ with probability α(C, i) if the conﬁguration of
its parents makes the body true, while it assumes value null with probability 1 if
the conﬁguration makes the body false. The parents of ground atom A are all the
choiceCθ variables such that A appears in the head of Cθ. A assumes value true
with probability 1 if one of the parent choice variables assumes value A, otherwise
it assumes value false with probability 1.
Various approaches have been proposed for computing the probability of queries
from an LPAD. Riguzzi (2008) discusses an extension of SLG resolution, called SL-
GAD, that is able to compute the probability of queries by repeatedly branching on

Logic-Based Decision Support for Strategic Environmental Assessment
7
disjunctive clauses. A diﬀerent approach was taken by Meert et al. (2009), where an
LPAD is ﬁrst transformed into its equivalent Bayesian network and then inference is
performed on the network using the variable elimination algorithm. Riguzzi (2007)
presents the cplint system that ﬁrst ﬁnds explanations (sets of atomic choices) for
queries and then computes the probability by means of Binary Decision Diagrams,
as proposed in (De Raedt et al. 2007) for the ProbLog language. cplint was used
in the experiments in Section 6.2 because of its speed (Riguzzi 2009).
3.2.2 Causal Models
Determining when an event causes another event is very important in many do-
mains, take for example science, medicine, pharmacology or economics. Causality
has been widely debated by philosophers and statisticians: often it has been con-
fused with correlation, while they are in fact distinct concepts, since two events
may be correlated without one causing the other. Recently, Pearl (2000) helped to
clarify the concept of causation by discussing how to represent causal information
and how to perform inference from it. He illustrates two types of causal models:
causal Bayesian networks and structural equations.
Causal Bayesian networks diﬀer from standard Bayesian networks because the
edge from variable X to variable Y means that X is a cause for Y , while in standard
Bayesian networks it simply means that there is a statistical dependence.
Pearl (2000) proposed an approach for computing the probability of eﬀects of
actions and suggested to use the notation P(y|do(x)) to indicate the eﬀect of the
action of setting the variable X to value x on the event of variable Y taking value
y. P(y|do(x)) is diﬀerent from the probability of y given x (P(y|x)) because we do
not simply observe X = x but we intervene on the model by making sure X = x is
true.
The technique proposed in (Pearl 2000) for computing P(y|do(x)) consists of
removing the parents of X from a causal Bayesian network, setting X to x and
computing P(y) in the obtained network.
This approach can be applied to probabilistic logic languages that can be trans-
lated to Bayesian networks, such as LPADs. In order to compute the probability
of a ground atom Y of being true given an intervention that consists of making
a ground atom X true from an LPAD T , we need to remove X from the head of
all the clauses that contain it and add X as a fact to T . The probability of Y can
then be computed from the resulting LPAD T ′ by using standard inference, i.e., by
computing P(Y ).
4 Coaxial Matrices in CLP(R)
The coaxial matrices can be simply interpreted as a linear programming model.
Amongst the many ways to invoke a linear programming solver, we decided to use
CLP(R); in this way the model is written as a knowledge base in a computational
logic language, that could be easier to integrate with the probabilistic approach in
Section 5.

8
M. Gavanelli, F. Riguzzi, M. Milano and P. Cagnoli
In more detail, the environmental impacts caused by activity i (with magnitude
ai) can be estimated with the system of linear equations
∀j ∈{1, . . ., Np}
pj = mi
jai.
When considering a whole regional plan, we sum up the contributions of all the
activities and obtain the estimate of the inﬂuence on each environmental impact:
∀j ∈{1, . . ., Np}
pj =
Na
X
i=1
mi
jai.
(1)
In the same way, given the vector of environmental impacts P = (p1, . . . , pNp), one
can estimate the inﬂuence on the environmental receptor ri by means of the matrix
N, that relates impacts with receptors:
∀j ∈{1, . . . , Nr}
rj =
Np
X
i=1
ni
jpi.
(2)
The system of equations (1-2) are imposed as constraints in a CLP(R) program;
thanks to this formalisation, a number of queries of high interest both for the
planner and for the evaluator of the environmental policy can be posed to the
system as CLP(R) goals.
The ﬁnal goal for the evaluator of the environmental policy is computing the
environmental footprint of a devised plan. The plan is given as a set of values
representing the magnitude of each of the activities. In other words, given the set
of values A = (a1, . . . , aNa), we can compute the environmental footprint R =
(r1, . . . , rNr), simply by applying equations (1) and (2).
Another query studies the impact of a single unit (in a standardized format) of
activity ai; for example, we are interested to know what the environmental foot-
print is of producing 1 MW of electric power through a thermoelectric plant. We
instantiate the vector of activities to a unary vector with ai = 1 if i = therm and
ai = 0 otherwise:
A = (0, 0, . . . , 1, . . . , 0)
In this way, one can ﬁnd out, by looking at the resulting vector R, which of the
receptors are (positively or negatively) inﬂuenced by the devised activity. Also, one
can get an estimate of those receptors that are more heavily inﬂuenced, and those
that are only marginally inﬂuenced. This query can also be used by experts to cal-
ibrate the numbers in the coaxial matrices, by considering each activity singularly.
Another important query for the ﬁnal user is asking which of the possible activ-
ities (always in normalized form) has a major impact on some given receptor ri.
In fact, in CLP(R), one can maximize or minimize some objective function, so the
model becomes
max(ri)
s.t.
(1)(2)
P
j aj = 1
∀j, aj is integer
Finally, if there are laws imposing limits on some receptors (limits for CO2 emis-

Logic-Based Decision Support for Strategic Environmental Assessment
9
sions, for example) one can very easily impose constraints on receptors (e.g., rCO2 ≤
limitCO2), and ﬁnd if an activity can either be performed at all, or if it requires
some compensation (e.g., another activity that improves on the receptor, like refor-
estation for CO2), or if it can be done in association with other activities.
In cases where there are two or more alternative activities that cater for the same
need, the regulations prescribe that alternatives should be studied, and compared.
For example, the need for additional electrical power is satisﬁed by building a new
plant; however one can choose the type of plant, depending on the environmental
conditions. In an area with highly polluted air, a thermoelectric plant could raise the
pollution over the law limit, so a diﬀerent type of plant could be devised, like a solar
power plant. On the other hand, a solar plant could be too expensive, and make
other activities that are necessary in the area (e.g., building a school, a hospital,
etc.) unaﬀordable. In this case, the planner can impose a constraint stating that
there is a regional need for at least k MW of electrical power; he/she imposes
X
i∈P owerP lants
ai ≥k
(where PowerPlants is the set of indices in the vector A corresponding to those
plants that provide electrical power) and then can optimize for one of the receptors,
e.g., rCO2, or some weighted sum of receptors of interest. Or, the planner may ask
what the maximum power is that can be generated in the region without violating
the law limits on the receptors
max P
i∈P owerP lants ai
s.t.
(1)(2)
∀i ∈{1, . . ., Nr}
ri ≤limiti
In this way, we ﬁnd the maximum number of MW that can be produced, as well as
the electrical power produced by each type of plant. Note that in this way the solver
could ﬁnd an assignment that imposes the execution of compensation activities, as
hinted earlier. If there are not enough resources for compensation, we can impose
that such activities must not be performed (e.g., by assigning value 0 to all these
activities), or we can impose that, given a vector C with the cost of each activity,
the total cost of the activities should not be higher than the allotted ﬁnances F:
Na
X
i=1
ciai ≤F
(3)
In the same way, other types of resources, like time, person-months, energy, can be
taken into consideration.
We are currently improving the model to take into account the fact that diﬀerent
activities can have diﬀerent impacts on the environment depending on the type of
zone they are placed. For example, if we build a power line within a natural park,
its impact is deﬁnitely higher than building it near a city. An additional feature we
are studying is the fact that, depending on the zone we are considering, diﬀerent
receptors might have diﬀerent weights. For instance, the water quality is extremely

10
M. Gavanelli, F. Riguzzi, M. Milano and P. Cagnoli
important on a river delta, where the whole ecosystem relies on the river water,
while it is less important in an industrialized area.
4.1 Sensitivity Analysis
The simplex algorithm provides the optimal value of the objective function, the
optimal assignment to the decision variables, and also other information that is of
high interest for the decision maker. In particular, it provides the so-called reduced
costs, and the dual solution. These indicators provide precious information on the
sensitivity of the found solution to the parameters of the constraint model.
The dual solution is a set of values that correspond to the constraints. It can
be thought of as the derivatives of the objective function with respect to the right
hand side (RHS) of the constraints. This means that we immediately see, in the
dual solution, which of the constraints are tight, i.e., which would change the value
of the objective function if the RHS coeﬃcient changes. For example, if we are
optimizing the number fMW of MW of electric power and we have a constraint
rCO2 ≤limitCO2, the corresponding dual value dCO2
∂fMW
∂limitCO2 in the optimal so-
lution answers the question: “How much would the production of energy decrease
in case the limit of CO2 lowers one point?” This is important information, since
regulations change, and tend to become more strict.
The same analysis can be performed on the problem of optimizing some (weighted
sum of) receptors, given a total number of plants (or required MW). In this case, the
dual value associated to a constraint represents how much the receptor will improve
if that constraint is partially relaxed (if the RHS becomes less strict). For example,
suppose we are optimizing the emissions of nitrogen oxides (NOx), and we have
the constraint (3) stating a limit on the total cost of the activities, for example,
in euro. After obtaining the optimal value, the planner could ask: “Suppose now
that we had more money: if I add one euro, how much would the emissions of NOx
decrease?” The answer is the dual value de of the constraint (3). This analysis is
very attractive for the evaluator.
5 A Causal Model for Coaxial Matrices
In this section we consider an interpretation of Coaxial Matrices that diﬀers from the
one in Section 4. Instead of associating a real number to each activity, impact and
receptor, we associate a Boolean random variable to each of them and we consider
the interaction levels expressed in the matrix as probabilistic causal dependencies.
In this approach, we assume that an activity is either carried out or not, an impact
is either present or not and a receptor is either achieved or not. In other words, we
do not consider the magnitude or level of the variables under analysis. We used this
approximation to get useful insights on the probabilistic modeling of the problem.
In the future, we plan to consider more reﬁned approximations with multivalued
random variables or even continuous random variables.
Activities, impacts and receptors are represented by LPAD atoms (propositions)

Logic-Based Decision Support for Strategic Environmental Assessment
11
and the eﬀects of activities on impacts and of impacts on receptors are expressed
by means of LPAD rules that represent the Coaxial Matrices.
The model thus contains rules that express the eﬀect of the activities on the
negative impacts (where mi
j is an element of the M matrix):
negative impactj : mi
j :- activityi.
Also, there are rules expressing the eﬀect of the activities on the positive impacts:
positive impact j : mi
j :- activityi.
For example, the model contains the rule
’Dispersion of dangerous materials’:0.75 :-
’External movements of dangerous materials’.
that relates an activity and a negative impact, and the rule
’Creation of work opportunities’:0.5 :-
’External movements of dangerous materials’.
that relates an activity and a positive impact.
Negative impacts reduce the probability of receptors, while positive impacts in-
crease it. However adding a clause with a certain atom in the head can only increase
the probability of the atom. To model the fact that negative impacts lower the prob-
ability of receptors, we use, for each receptor receptork, two auxiliary predicates
receptor posk and receptor negk that collect the evidence in favor or against the
achievement of the receptor.
The rules that express the negative eﬀect of the negative impacts on the receptors
take the form:
receptor negk : nj
k :- negative impactj.
while the rules that express the positive eﬀect of the positive impacts on the recep-
tors take the form:
receptor posk : nj
k :- positive impact j.
where nj
k is an element of the N matrix. For example, the rule
’Human health/wellbeing_neg’:0.25:-
’Dispersion of dangerous materials’.
expresses a negative eﬀect of a negative impact on a receptor, and the rule
’Human health/wellbeing_pos’:0.75:-’Creation of work opportunities’.
expresses a positive eﬀect of a positive impact on a receptor.
Finally, the positive and negative evidence regarding the receptor are combined
with the following rules:
receptor : 0.1
:-
\+ receptor pos, receptor neg.
receptor : 0.5
:-
\+ receptor pos, \+ receptor neg.
receptor : 0.5
:-
receptor pos, receptor neg.
receptor : 0.9
:-
receptor pos, \+ receptor neg.

12
M. Gavanelli, F. Riguzzi, M. Milano and P. Cagnoli
For example, the model contains the rules
’Human health/wellbeing’:0.1 :- \+ ’Human health/wellbeing_pos’,
’Human health/wellbeing_neg’.
’Human health/wellbeing’:0.5 :- \+ ’Human health/wellbeing_pos’,
\+ ’Human health/wellbeing_neg’.
’Human health/wellbeing’:0.5 :-
’Human health/wellbeing_pos’,
’Human health/wellbeing_neg’.
’Human health/wellbeing’:0.9 :-
’Human health/wellbeing_pos’,
\+ ’Human health/wellbeing_neg’.
that collect positive and negative eﬀects on the receptor “Human health/wellbeing”.
These rules express the fact that “Human health and wellbeing” is unlikely if
there is no positive evidence on it and there is negative evidence on it (ﬁrst rule).
It is very likely if there is positive evidence on it and no negative evidence on it
(last rule). In the other cases, the probability of “Human health and wellbeing” is
in between (second and third rule).
All the parameters were subjectively estimated and validated by the expert.
6 Experiments
6.1 Experimental results of CLP(R)
The agency for the environment of the Emilia-Romagna region (Italy) kindly pro-
vided us with the coaxial matrices used for assessing eleven types of plans (that we
translate into the CLP model) and the data of a regional energy plan: for each of
the activities, we have a “magnitude” value. Thanks to the CLP model described
earlier, we are able to compute the corresponding values of impacts and receptors.
Initially the results were counterintuitive: the considered plan concerned energy
(aimed at raising the available electrical power in the region), while the receptor
energy availability had a lower value than the previous year. These types of results
may be partially due to the qualitative information contained in the matrices, but
also highlight possible human mistakes in the data of the matrices. Indeed, a ﬂaw
was found (and ﬁxed) in the matrices, showing how logic-based decision support
can contribute to increase the reliability of the environmental assessment.
Once the human mistakes had been corrected, we reran the experiments. The
new results were highly appreciated by the evaluator: the decision support system
foresaw strong decrease of quality of air (mainly due to the boost on thermoelectric
plants), and water availability (since thermoelectric plants need refrigeration).
As the plan had a large impact on some receptors, we tried to improve it from
an environmental viewpoint: the magnitude of each of the activities was allowed to
deviate up to 1% with respect to the original plan, and we optimized the quality of
air receptor. We had an improvement of about 20.3% on this receptor, which shows
that even by allowing small variations one can get signiﬁcant improvements. On
the other hand, we had a decrease of industrial indicators, such as the availability
of productive resources or the availability of energy.

Logic-Based Decision Support for Strategic Environmental Assessment
13
We also tried two dual goals. The ﬁrst considers the given plan, keeps all activities
constant except the building of (various types of) power plants, ﬁxes the amount of
produced energy, and tries to optimize on the quality of air. The second, instead,
maximizes the electrical power supply without sacriﬁcing any of the environmental
receptors, i.e., none of the receptors could worsen with respect to the original plan.
The ﬁrst query gave a positive result: by producing electricity with environmental
friendly power plants (wind-powered aerogenerators) we could produce the same
amount of energy but have a 57% improvement on the quality of air.
The second, instead, had a negative result: we could not improve the produced
electrical power without worsening at least one receptor. These seemingly contra-
dictory results actually have an interesting explanation. The receptors taken into
account by the environmental assessment range on all aspects inﬂuenced by a hu-
man activity, spanning, e.g., from value of cultural heritage to stability of riverbeds,
from quality of underground water to visual impact on the landscape. Aerogenera-
tors, recommended in the previous optimization, have a signiﬁcant visual impact,
so they are not implementable unless we relax the visual requirement.
Computing time for this analysis was hardly measurable: all times were far less
than a fraction of second on a modern PC. Thanks to such a fast computation, we
could comment the results of the queries online with the experts of the regional
agency, identify errors in the provided data, and try variations of the parameters.
6.2 Causal Model
Given the causal model presented in Section 5, we can ask various what-if queries
1. if these activities are performed, what is the probability of a certain impact
of appearing?
2. if these works are performed, what is the probability of a certain receptor
being satisﬁed?
Queries of type 2 are more interesting because they relate the works directly with
their ﬁnal eﬀects of interest. However, they are also more complex to compute.
Moreover, the queries above can be generalized to the case in which the activities
are performed with a certain probability.
We can answer the queries above by following the approach described in 3.2.2:
we add a fact for each activity that is carried out and we ask for the probability of
the query from the modiﬁed program.
We report on a number of queries together with their execution times on Linux
machines with an Intel Core 2 Duo E6550 (2333 MHz) processor and 4 GB of RAM.
The probability of the negative impact “Dispersion of Dangerous Materials” per-
forming the activities “External movements of dangerous materials” and “Internal
movements of dangerous materials” is 0.937500. The CPU time was below 10−6
seconds.
The probability of the receptor “Human health/wellbeing” given that we perform
the activities “External movements of dangerous materials” and “Internal move-
ments of dangerous materials” is 0.546915 and the query took 22.713 seconds.

14
M. Gavanelli, F. Riguzzi, M. Milano and P. Cagnoli
Fig. 1. Scatter plot of linear vs probabilistic values
If we perform the activity “Industrial processing and transformation” the prob-
ability of the receptor “Human health/wellbeing” is 0.474918, computed in 84.453
seconds. This query takes longer than the previous ones because the work “In-
dustrial processing and transformation” has an inﬂuence on many more impacts
than “External movements of dangerous materials” and “Internal movements of
dangerous materials” and all these inﬂuences must be combined to ﬁnd the eﬀect
on “Human health and wellbeing”. To give the reader an idea of the complexity of
this query, there are 655,660 explanations, 12,847,036 atomic choices appear in the
explanations and 42 random variables are involved.
The probability of receptor “Atmosphere quality, microclimate” given the action
“Industrial processing and transformation” is 0.360851. The CPU time was 0.02s.
If we add the activity “Oil and gas extraction plants” the probability of the
receptor “Atmosphere quality, microclimate” lowers to 0.326481, computed in 6.852s
By adding the activity “Fire extinguishing plants” the probability of the receptor
“Atmosphere quality, microclimate” rises to 0.454471, due to the positive eﬀects of
the last activity. The CPU time was 92.67 seconds.
As can be seen from the last three cases, increasing the number of activities
increases the computation time, since we have to combine the eﬀects of the diﬀerent
causes. The last query has 606,726 explanations, 10,973,022 atomic choices appear
in the explanations and 36 random variables are involved.
6.3 Comparison
As hinted earlier, we developed two models with the ﬁnal aim to integrate the two.
Before such an ambitious goal can be reached, we need to identify strengths and
weaknesses of the two. In order to have a systematic comparison, we produced two
tables (one for each approach) in which each cell contains the eﬀect of a single
activity on a single receptor. One table reports the results of the linear model and
the other those of the causal model. The tables are thus of size Na×Nr = 93×23 =
2139.
In the scatter plot of Figure 1 we draw the results of the causal model against
those of the linear model: the linear model results are on the x-axis, while in the

Logic-Based Decision Support for Strategic Environmental Assessment
15
causal model results are on the y-axis. As we can see, most of the point are clustered
along a simple curve, which seems to indicate a close relationship between the two
models that we are going to investigate in the near future. Moreover, whenever the
linear value is positive, the probability of improving the receptor is greater than 0.5
and vice-versa, showing that the two models may disagree on the values, but they
agree on the direction of the eﬀect on the receptor.
To better investigate the results, we considered the points farthest from the curve
that are highlighted in Figure 1. Since these are the points for which the linear and
causal model diﬀer the most, we asked the expert to evaluate the results for those
points, to understand which model gave the best result. For the points shown as
triangles in Figure 1, the expert was unable to state which answer is better. For
the points with a diamond symbol, the CLP(R) approach gave a better result. In
the point shown as a star, both approaches failed to give a correct result.
From these results, we can say that often the eﬀects can be summed up, although
in some cases other combinations could be necessary. In future work, we plan to
try other techniques, such as fuzzy logic, and to use probabilities to model the
uncertainty of the parameters of the matrices.
7 Conclusions
The environmental assessment is now becoming a systematic procedure imposed by
the laws, and its importance is doomed to increase year after year. In this paper,
we proposed how two technologies taken from computational logic can successfully
address practical problems of the environmental assessment. The work was con-
ducted using the real data used in previous years for the environmental assessment
of Emilia Romagna plans.
Constraint Logic Programming showed an eﬃcient management of large models
and provides useful sensitivity analysis that can be used by planners and evaluators
to assess multiple alternative scenarios. The drawback is that contributions from
diﬀerent activities and diﬀerent impacts are merely summed, while in some cases
more sophisticated combinations are required. We plan to investigate the use of
other CLP languages, like CLP(FD), that allow for more general constraints.
On the other hand, the probabilistic model takes into consideration the subjective
and stochastic nature of the provided data, paying the cost of a higher computa-
tional eﬀort. In addition, some activity contributions and impacts should indeed be
summed, while others are conveniently merged through probability laws.
We believe that computational logics can have a big impact in this ﬁeld. One
future work will be trying to merge the two models into a single component: in
CL and AI, formalisms have been proposed that take constraints and probabili-
ties under a same umbrella, like the Valued CSP model (Schiex et al. 1995) or the
semiring framework (Bistarelli et al. 1997).

16
M. Gavanelli, F. Riguzzi, M. Milano and P. Cagnoli
