Deep Learning Reconstruction for 9-View Dual
Energy CT Baggage Scanner
Yoseob Han
KAIST, Daejeon, Korea

Jingu Kang
GEMSS Medical Co. Seongnam, Korea

Jong Chul Ye
KAIST, Daejeon, Korea

Abstract—For homeland and transportation security appli-
cations, 2D X-ray explosive detection system (EDS) have been
widely used, but they have limitations in recognizing 3D shape
of the hidden objects. Among various types of 3D computed
tomography (CT) systems to address this issue, this paper is
interested in a stationary CT using ﬁxed X-ray sources and
detectors. However, due to the limited number of projection
views, analytic reconstruction algorithms produce severe streak-
ing artifacts. Inspired by recent success of deep learning approach
for sparse view CT reconstruction, here we propose a novel image
and sinogram domain deep learning architecture for 3D recon-
struction from very sparse view measurement. The algorithm
has been tested with the real data from a prototype 9-view dual
energy stationary CT EDS carry-on baggage scanner developed
by GEMSS Medical Systems, Korea, which conﬁrms the superior
reconstruction performance over the existing approaches.
Index terms— Explosive detection system (EDS), sparse-
view X-ray CT, convolutional neural network (CNN)
I. INTRODUCTION
In homeland and aviation security applications, there has
been increasing demand for X-ray CT EDS system for carry-
on baggage screening. A CT-EDS can produce an accurate
3D object structure for segmentation and threat detection,
which is often not possible when a 2D-EDS system captures
projection views in only one or two angular directions. There
are currently two types of CT EDS systems: gantry-based CT
and stationary CT. While gantry-based CT EDS is largely the
same as medical CT, baggage screening should be carried out
continuously, so it is often difﬁcult to continuously screen
carry-on bags because of the possible mechanical overloading
of the gantry system. On the other hand, a stationary CT EDS
system uses ﬁxed X-ray sources and detectors, making the
system suitable for routine carry-on baggage inspection.
For example, Fig. 1 shows source and detector geometry of
the prototype stationary CT-EDS system developed by GEMSS
Medical Systems, Korea. As shown in Fig. 1(a), nine pairs
of X-ray source and dual energy detector in the opposite
direction are distributed at the same angular interval. For
seamless screening without stopping convey belt, each pair
of source and detectors are arranged along the z-direction as
shown in Fig. 1(b) so that different projection view data can
be collected while the carry-on baggages moves continuously
on the conveyor belt. Then, 9-view fan beam projection data
is obtained for each z-slice by rebinning the measurement
data. This type of stationary CT system is suitable for EDS
Fig. 1. X-ray source positions in our prototype 9 view dual energy CT EDS:
(a) x −y direction and (b) θ −z direction, respectively.
applications because it does not require a rotating gantry, but
with only 9 projection views it is difﬁcult to use a conventional
ﬁltered backprojection (FBP) algorithm due to severe streaking
artifacts. Therefore, advanced reconstruction algorithms with
fast reconstruction time are required.
For sparse-view CT EDS, model-based iterative reconstruc-
tion (MBIR) with the total variation (TV) penalty have been
extensively investigated [1], [2]. Inspired by the recent success
of deep learning approach for sparse view and limited angle
CT [3], [4], [5], [6] that outperform the classical MBIR
approach, this paper aims at developing a deep learning
approach for real-world sparse view CT EDS. However, neural
network training using the retrospective angular subsampling
as in the existing works [3], [4], [5], [6] is not possible for
our prototype system, since there are no ground-truth data for
the real world sparse view CT EDS. We therefore propose a
novel deep learning approach composed of image domain and
sinogram domain learning that compensate for the imperfect
label data.
II. THEORY
A. Problem Formulation
Recall that the forward model for sparse view CT EDS
system can be represented by
gΘ = PΘRf
(1)
where R denotes the 3D projection operator from an x−y−z
volume image to a s −θ −z domain sinogram data with s, θ
and z denoting the detector, projection angle, and the direction
arXiv:1801.01258v1  [cs.CV]  4 Jan 2018

Fig. 2. Sinogram interpolation ﬂow for the proposed method. The ﬁnal reconstruction is obtained by applying the FBP for the interpolated sinogram data.
of the conveyor belt travel, respectively. See Fig. 2 for the
coordinate systems. In (1), PΘ denotes the view sampling
operator for the measured angle set Θ, and gΘ refers to the
measured sinogram data. For each projection view data, we
use the notation gθ and Pθ, where θ denotes the speciﬁc view.
The main technical issue of the sparse view CT recon-
struction is the non-uniqueness of the solution for (1). More
speciﬁcally, there exists a null spacce NΘ such that
PΘRh = 0,
∀h ∈NΘ,
which leads to inﬁnite number of feasible solutions. To avoid
the non-uniqueness of the solution, constrained form of the
penalized MBIR can be formulated as :
min
f∈R3 ∥Lf∥1,
subject to
gΘ = PΘR ,
(2)
where L refers to a linear operator and ∥· ∥1 denotes the l1
norm. For the case of the TV penalty, L corresponds to the
derivative. Then, the uniqueness of (2) is guaranteed that if
the NL ∩NΘ = {0}, where NL denotes the null space of the
operator L.
Instead of designing a linear operator L such that the
common null space of NΘ and NL to be zero, we can design
a frame W, its dual ˜
W, and shrinkage operator Sλ such that
˜
W⊤W = I and
˜
W⊤SλW(f ∗+ g) = f ∗
∀g ∈NΘ
for the ground-truth image f ∗. This frame-based regulariza-
tion is also an active ﬁeld of research for image denoising,
inpainting, etc [7]. One of the most important contributions
of the deep convolutional framelet theory [8] is that W
and
˜
W⊤correspond to the encoder and decoder structure
of a convolutional neural network (CNN), respectively, and
the shrinkage operator Sλ emerges by controlling the num-
ber of ﬁlter channels and nonlinearities. More speciﬁcally,
a convolutional neural network can be designed such that
Q = ˜
W⊤SλW and
Q(f ∗+ h) = f ∗,
∀h ∈NΘ
.
(3)
In other word, (3) directly removes the null space component.
Eq. (3) is the constraint we use for training our neural network.
B. Derivation of Image and Projection Domain CNNs
More speciﬁcally, our sparse view reconstruction algorithm
ﬁnds the unknown f ∈R3 that satisfy both data ﬁdelity and
the so-called frame constraints [8]:
gΘ = PΘRf,
QI(f) = f ∗
,
(4)
where QI is the image domain CNN that satisﬁes (3) and f ∗
denotes the ground-truth images that are available for training
data. Now, by deﬁning M as a right-inverse of PΘR, i.e.
(PΘR)MgΘ = gΘ, ∀gΘ, we have
MgΘ = f ∗+ h
for some h ∈NΘ, since the right inverse is not unique due to
the existence of the null space. Thus, we can show that MgΘ
is the feasible solution for (4), since we have
QIMgΘ = QI (f ∗+ h) = f ∗
,
(5)
for the training data, and
PΘRMgΘ = PΘR(f ∗+ h) = gΘ
.
(6)
Therefore, the neural network training problem to satisfy (4)
can be equivalently represented by
min
QI
N
X
i=1
∥f ∗(i) −QIMg(i)
Θ ∥2
(7)
where {(f ∗(i), g(i)
Θ )}N
i=1 denotes the training data set com-
posed of ground-truth image an its sparse view projection.
Since a representative right inverse for the sparse view pro-
jection is the inverse Radon transform after zero padding to
the missing view, Mg(i)
Θ in (7) can be implemented using the
standard FBP algorithm. In fact, this is the main theoretical
ground for the success of image domain CNN when the
ground-truth data is available [3], [4], [5], [6]. Moreover, the
fan-beam rebinning makes the problem separable for each z
slices, so we use the 2D FBP for each slice as shown in Fig. 2.
However, the main technical difﬁculties in our 9-view CT
EDS system is that we do not have ground-truth image
{f ∗(i)}N
i=1. One could use physical phantoms and atomic
number to form a set of ground-truth images, but those data

set may be different from the real carry-on bags, so we need a
new method to account for the lack of ground-truth for neural
network training. Thus, to overcome the lack of the ground-
truth data, the approximate label images are generated using
an MBIR with TV penalty. Then, using MBIR reconstruction
as label data {f ∗(i)}N
i=1, an 2D image domain network QI is
trained to learn the mapping between the artifact-corrupted 2D
image and MBIR reconstruction in x −y domain.
One downside of this approach is that the network training
by (7) is no more optimal, since the label data is not the
ground-truth image. Thus, the generated sinogram data from
the denoised 3D volume may be biased. Thus, we impose
additional frame constraint to the sinogram data in addition to
(4):
g∗
θ = QS (gθ) ,
(8)
for the measured angle θ, where QS is the s −z sinogram
domain CNN and g∗
θ denotes the ground-truth sinogram data
measured at θ. Then, Eq. (8) leads to the following network
training:
min
QS
X
θ∈Θ
N
X
i=1
∥g∗(i)
θ
−QS 
PθRQIMg(i)
Θ

∥2
(9)
More speciﬁcally, as shown in Fig. 2, 3D sinogram data is
generated in the s −θ −z domain by applying the forward
projection operator along 720-projection views after stacking
the image domain network output over multiple slices to form
3D reconstruction volume in the x−y−z domain. Next, a 2D
sinogram domain network QS is trained so that it can learn the
mapping between the synthetic s−z sinogram data and the real
projection data in the s −z domain. Since the real projection
data is available only in 9 views, this sinogram network
training is performed using synthetic and real projection data
in the measured projection views. The optimization problems
(7) and (9) can be solved sequentially or simultaneously, and
in this paper we adopt the sequential optimization approach
for simplicity.
After the neural networks QI and QS are trained, the
inference can be done simply by obtaining x −y −z volume
images from the 9 view projection data by slice-by-slice FBP
algorithm, which are then fed into QI to obtain the denoised
3D volume data. Then, by applying projection operator, we
generate 720 projection view data in s −θ −z domain,
which are fed into the QS to obtain denoised sinogram data
for each θ angle. Then, the ﬁnal reconstruction is obtained
by applying FBP algorithms. One could use post-processing
using additional TV-based denosing. This algorithmic ﬂow is
illustrated in Fig. 2.
III. METHODS
A. Real CT EDS data Acquisition
We collected CT EDS data using the prototype stationary
9 view dual energy CT-EDS system developed by GEMSS
Medical Systems, Korea as shown in Fig. 1. the distance from
source to detector (DSD) and the distance from source to
Fig. 3. CNN architecture for our image and singoram domain networks.
object (DSO) are 1202.6mm and 648.2mm, respectively. The
number of detector is 384 with a pitch of 1.5mm. The region
of interest (ROI) is 256 × 256 and the pixel size is 2mm2.
The detectors collect low and high energy X-ray at 80KVp
and 120KVp, respectively.
We collect 47 sets of projection data from the prototype
CT EDS baggage scanner. Among the 47 sets, 32 dataset are
simple-objects and the other set are realistic carry-on bags.
The 47 set of 28 simple- and 13 baggage-objects was used
during the training phase, and the validation was performed
by two simple- and one baggage-object. The other set was
used for test.
B. Network Architecture and Training
Fig. 3 illustrates modiﬁed the U-Net structure [9] for the
image domain and the sinogram domain networks. To account
for the multi-energy image and sinogram data, the input for
the network is two channel multi-energy image and sinogram
data. The proposed network consists of convolution layer,
batch normalization, rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU) [10], and
contracting path connection with concatenation [9]. A detail
parameters are illustrated as shown in Fig. 3.
The proposed networks were trained by stochastic gradient
descent (SGD). The regularization parameter was λ = 10−4.
The learning rate has been set from 10−3 to 10−5, which
has been reduced step by step in each epoch. The number
of epoch was 200. The batch size was 12 and the patch
size for image and projection data are 256 × 256 × 2 and
768 × 384 × 2, respectively. The network was implemented
using MatConvNet toolbox (ver.24) [11] in the MATLAB
2015a environment (MathWorks, Natick). Central processing
unit (CPU) and graphic processing unit (GPU) speciﬁcation
are i7-7700 CPU (3.60 GHz) and GTX 1080 Ti GPU, respec-
tively.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
To evaluate the performance of the proposed method, we
perform image reconstruction from real 9-view CT EDS pro-
totype system. Fig. 4 illustrates image reconstruction results
of bag using various methods such as FBP, MBIR with
TV penalty, image domain CNN [3], [5], and the proposed
method. The FBP reconstruction results suffered from severe
streaking artifacts, so it was difﬁcult to see the threats in the
tomographic reconstruction and 3D rendering. The MBIR and
image domain CNN were slight better in their reconstruction
quality, but the detailed 3D structures were not fully recovered
and several objects were not detected as indicated by the red
arrow in Fig. 4. Moreover, the 3D rendering results in Fig.

Fig. 4. Reconstruction results by various methods from 9-views CT-EDS..
4 correctly identify the shape of grenade and knife as well
as the frame of the bag, which was not possible using other
methods.
Because we do not have the ground-truth in the image
domain, we perform quantitative evaluation using normalized
mean squares error (NMSE) in the sinogram domain. More
speciﬁcally, after obtaining the ﬁnal reconstruction, we per-
form the forward projection to generate the sinogram data in
the measured projection view and calculated the normalized
mean square errors. Table I showed that the proposed method
provides the most accurate sinogram data compared to the
other methods. Moreover, the s −z projection data in Fig. 5
showed that the projection data from the proposed method is
much closer to the ground-truth measurement data.
TABLE I
NMSE VALUE COMPARISON OF VARIOUS METHODS.
Energy level
FBP
MBIR-TV
Image CNN
Ours
80 kvP
1.6647e+1
5.8247e-1
3.3207e-1
0.6845e-1
120 kvP
1.0536e+1
6.0440e-1
3.2249e-1
0.5450e-1
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a novel deep learning recon-
struction algorithm for a prototype 9-view dual energy CT
EDS for carry-on baggage scanner. Even though the number
of projection view was not sufﬁcient for high equality 3D
reconstruction, our method learns the relationships between
the 2D tomographic slices in x −y domain as well as the 2D
projections in s −z domain such that the artifact-corrupted
image and sinogram data can be successively reﬁned to obtain
Fig. 5. A s −z domain sinogram data from (a) measurement, (b) 9-views
FBP (c) MBIR, (d) image CNN, and (e) the proposed method. The number
written in the images is the NMSE value. Yellow and red arrows indicate
grenade and knife, respectively.
high quality images. Using real data from our prototype 9-view
CT EDS system, we demonstrated that the proposed method
outperforms the existing algorithms, delivering high quality
three reconstruction for threat detection.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is supported by Korea Agency for Infrastructure
Technology Advancement, Grant number 17ATRP-C071164-
05-000000.
