Hidden Agenda: a Social Deduction Game with
Diverse Learned Equilibria
Kavya Kopparapu
∗Harvard University

Edgar A. Duéñez-Guzmán
DeepMind

Jayd Matyas
DeepMind

Alexander Sasha Vezhnevets
DeepMind

John P. Agapiou
DeepMind

Kevin R. McKee
DeepMind

Richard Everett
DeepMind

Janusz Marecki
DeepMind

Joel Z. Leibo
DeepMind

Thore Graepel
DeepMind

Abstract
A key challenge in the study of multiagent cooperation is the need for individual
agents not only to cooperate effectively, but to decide with whom to cooperate.
This is particularly critical in situations when other agents have hidden, possibly
misaligned motivations and goals. Social deduction games offer an avenue to
study how individuals might learn to synthesize potentially unreliable information
about others, and elucidate their true motivations. In this work, we present Hidden
Agenda, a two-team social deduction game that provides a 2D environment for
studying learning agents in scenarios of unknown team alignment. The environment
admits a rich set of strategies for both teams. Reinforcement learning agents trained
in Hidden Agenda show that agents can learn a variety of behaviors, including
partnering and voting without need for communication in natural language.
1
Introduction
Interacting and partnering with other agents offers substantial beneﬁts [27]. It also carries considerable
risk: though agents often share goals, they can also hold conﬂicting motives [7, 8]. Multiagent
research often studies the challenges of conﬂicting goals by assuming perfect information, but in real
life interactants can conceal their goals and motivations [32]. As a result, a critical facet of social
intelligence is the ability to infer or deduce others’ motivations from behavior [3, 15]. This centrality
has led game designers [21] and multiagent researchers to develop a speciﬁc class of games to study
intent inference: social deduction games.
Social deduction games are team-based games that aim to model the scenario of cooperation under
uncertain intentions. These games, especially variants such as Maﬁa, One Night Werewolf, and The
Resistance: Avalon, are widely popular [17], and have been leveraged to study and teach human
∗Work done while at DeepMind
Cooperative AI Workshop, 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).
arXiv:2201.01816v1  [cs.AI]  5 Jan 2022

behaviors [24, 31, 33, 36] as well as to study artiﬁcial agent behavior [9, 13]. In social deduction
games, groups of players attempt to decipher each others’ hidden roles [10]. At the start of the game,
every player is assigned to one of two teams, one of which has a numerical advantage and the other
has an information advantage. These games generally have two phases (a situation phase and a voting
phase) and communication between players is limited to one of the phases. During gameplay, players
need to observe other players’ actions to deduce their roles while simultaneously trying to keep
their own role hidden. This means that successful players need to learn to meaningfully integrate
information from a variety of sources, some of which are unreliable and even adversarial. Ultimately,
social deduction games are about situations where cooperation within teams is required to better
compete across teams, but where team membership is not a priori obvious.
Previous literature studying agents in social deduction games includes exploration into algorithms
for successful play [29, 30, 35], communication to supplement deduction of player roles [5, 16], and
study of agent commitment when participating with human players [9]. In prior research, social
deduction games are generally represented as turn-based matrix games, whose limited action and
observation spaces result in a limited complexity of cooperation and deception strategies.
The introduction of complex environments to study agent strategies and communication was a key
advance in multiagent reinforcement learning research [18, 19, 22, 26]. Speciﬁcally, there has been
a signiﬁcant body of work on temporally-extended games to understand interesting social aspects
of interactions [12, 26], agents [34], social dilemmas [19], cooperative games [6], and competitive
games [2]. However, there is no current work at the intersection of spatially and temporally extended
environments and gameplay with hidden roles characteristic of social deduction games.
In this paper, we contribute Hidden Agenda, a new environment to study multiagent cooperation
inspired by various social deduction games, including Among Us. Hidden Agenda is a social deduction
game where players can move around and interact in a 2D environment. Suspicion and strategies
for deducing a players’ hidden role are grounded on the behaviors of other players. Voting, which
occurs during an explicit voting phase, is temporally extended and is the only explicit method of
communication between players. We show that Hidden Agenda admits a rich strategic space where
behaviours like camping, chasing, pairing, and voting emerged during co-training of a population of
reinforcement learning agents.2
2
Hidden Agenda Environment
Hidden Agenda is an n-player environment, where nc players are Crewmates (the team with numerical
advantage), ni are Impostors (the team with information advantage), and nc > ni, nc + ni = n
(Figure 1). The Crewmates are unaware of the roles of the other players, while the Impostor knows
the roles of all players. For all the experiments presented here, we used ﬁve players: ni = 1 Impostor
and nc = 4 Crewmates. The Crewmates’ goal is to refuel their ship by collecting energy fuel cells
that are scattered around the ship, and depositing them in a central location. The Impostor’s aim is to
prevent the Crewmates from achieving their goal by freezing them with a short-range freezing beam.
The environment was implemented in Lab2D [4] using the component system described in Melting
Pot [20].
At the beginning of an episode, each player is randomly assigned a role and color for their avatar
in the environment and initialized to a location near the center of the game map. Note, there is no
correlation between color and role.
2.1
Overview of Gameplay
Like other social deduction games, Hidden Agenda has two alternating phases: a situation phase and
a voting phase (Figure 2).
Situation Phase.
During the situation phase, players can move around, pick up the green fuel cells
found in the rooms at the corners of the map, and add it to their inventory. The inventory can hold
up to 2 fuel cells at any given time. Players can deposit the fuel down the grate in the center of the
2Videos of trained reinforcement learning agents exhibiting the aforementioned behaviors are available here:
https://youtu.be/k2POZTLONvk
2

Figure 1: The Hidden Agenda environment, illustrating key game dynamics including tasks, freezing,
and voting. The environment is a 2D world consisting of a grid of 40 × 31 sprites. The environment
is roughly organised in rooms, with rooms near the four corners of the grid containing fuel cells that
can be picked up and a central room where the fuel cells can be deposited. The central-upper room
is where deliberation happens. This deliberation room is only accessible during voting phases and
includes a jail where voted out agents remain for the rest of the episode.
Figure 2: The anatomy of an episode: Hidden Agenda is split between the situation and voting phases.
During the situation phase, all players can move around the environment collecting or depositing fuel
cells and the impostors can ﬁre a freezing beam. During the voting phase, players can cast public
votes and observe the votes of everyone in the previous time step.
map, clearing their inventory of fuel and increasing a global progress bar counting the amount of fuel
deposited against a goal necessary for the Crewmates to win.
The Impostor have access to a special action that ﬁres a freezing beam. If the beam hits a Crewmate,
it freezes them in place for the remainder of the game. Frozen players are thus inactivated and cannot
take any further actions. This is the main mechanism by which the Impostor prevents Crewmates
from winning the game.
Voting Phase.
The voting phase is initiated whenever the Impostor’s freeze action is witnessed
by an active Crewmate who was not within the freeze radius, or when 200 timesteps have elapsed
since the end of the last voting phase or the beginning of the episode. At the start of the voting phase,
players are teleported to a voting room where their only available actions are to vote for a player
or abstain from voting. The voting phase lasts 25 timesteps and players can see the votes of all the
players from the previous voting timestep. In the ﬁrst voting timestep of the phase, all active players
are considered to have abstained. At the last step of the voting phase, the ﬁnal votes are tallied. If a
player receives at least half of the ﬁnal votes from active players (where active players are deﬁned as
all players who have not been previously inactivated), they are teleported to jail, where they cannot
take any further actions and are inactivated for the rest of the game.
Win Conditions.
The game ends when one of the following conditions is reached:
• Crewmates collect and deposit enough fuel cells to power their ship (Crewmates win).
• The Impostor is voted out during a voting round (Crewmates win).
3

• All Crewmates but one are either frozen or voted out (Impostor wins). This win condition is
split into two scenarios: one where the last Crewmate to be inactivated is frozen and one
where the last Crewmate to be inactivated was voted out during a voting round.
• 3000 timesteps have elapsed (a draw).
2.2
Environment Details
Observations.
At every timestep, players receive as observations:
• an RGB image of their local view of the game map (with shape (88, 88, 3)),
• the percent of their personal inventory occupied with fuel cells (a scalar between 0 and 1),
• a global progress bar indicating the percent of required fuel that has been deposited (a scalar
between 0 and 1),
• and a global matrix of votes (of shape (5, 7)).
Each player’s local view represents a 11 × 11 square with visibility of 5 sprites to the left and right, 9
sprites in front, and 1 behind. Sprites are 8 × 8 pixels.
The global vote matrix is a 5 × 7 matrix where rows index players, and columns are a one-hot
of 7 possibilities: a vote for the corresponding player (positions 0–4), abstention (position 5), or
ineligibility to vote due to being inactivated (position 6). When the game is not in a voting phase, all
active players’ votes are set to abstention and inactive players’ votes are set to inactive.
Actions.
At every timestep of the situation phase, active players can move in each cardinal direction
or turn to the left or right by 90 degrees. The Impostor also has an action corresponding to a freeze
beam that can be ﬁred at any timestep. When ﬁred, the freeze beam covers 1-sprite to the left and
right of the agent and has a forward span of 2-sprites in the direction the agent is facing. Once the
freeze action has been taken, it may not be used for a certain number of timesteps (due to a required
freeze beam cooldown). During this cooldown period ﬁring the beam is a no-op.
During the voting phase, players can take any of the 6 voting actions and all other actions are
temporarily inactivated. Players who have been inactivated, either by being voted out or frozen by an
Impostor, cannot take any action, including voting.
Rewards.
Agents receive a team-based reward at the conclusion of each episode (game) corre-
sponding to a win (+4 for each agent on the winning team) or a loss (−4 for each agent on the
losing team). We also provide several shaping rewards to encourage agent interaction with different
elements of the environment: +0.25 for Crewmates picking up fuel cells, +0.25 for Crewmates
depositing fuel cells, +1 for the Impostor successfully freezing a Crewmate, and −1 for a Crewmate
being frozen by an Impostor.
Game Parameters.
The Hidden Agenda environment has several hyperparameters that can be
modiﬁed to make the game favor the Crewmates or the Impostors. For example, increasing the
player inventory size and decreasing the number of fuel cells to be deposited makes the environment
more favourable for the Crewmates. On the other hand, decreasing the freezing beam cooldown
and increasing the size of the beam confer an advantage to the Impostor. We performed a large
hyperparameter sweep to determine which set of parameters over a range of possibilities would best
elicit the greatest diversity of agent strategies.
3
Reinforcement learning model
In this section we present the performance of two RL agent architectures on Hidden Agenda.
The ﬁrst agent architecture (Figure 3, within the shaded region) is a standard asynchronous advantage
actor-critic (A3C) architecture [23]. The A3C agent consists of a two-layered convolutional network
(CNN) with output channels 16, and 32 respectively. The CNN is followed by a fully-connected
feed-forward network (MLP for multi-layer perceptron) with two layers of size 64 each. Then, the
output of the MLP is passed through an LSTM with hidden state size 128 and using an unroll length
of 100. Finally, the baseline (estimating the value) and policy (choosing actions via a softmax)
4

RGB
MLP
LSTM
V
MLP
Inventory,
Progress Bar,
Voting Matrix
Player 
identity
CNN
Representation 
loss
Player 
identity, 
Player 
distance
𝞹
Figure 3: The Hidden-Agenda Agent architecture as used for training and evaluation. During training,
the agent has access to player identities and distances, which are used in hindsight. The shaded dotted
box encompasses the components present at evaluation time in the actor. No privileged information,
such as player identities and distances, are available during evaluation.
are predicted using linear layers. Our A3C agent includes augmentations that are standard in the
literature: The use of importance sampling on the experience via V-Trace [11] and the addition of a
contrastive predictive coding loss [25], which promotes discrimination between nearby timepoints
via LSTM state representations. The loss function is a linear combination of the policy gradient
(using the baseline to calculate advantages), entropy cost (with coefﬁcient 0.003, used to encourage
exploration of actions), baseline loss (with coefﬁcient 0.5, as a sum of squares of advantages), and the
contrastive predictive coding loss (with coefﬁcient 10.0, with 20 steps and a latent space of size 64).
The agent optimises the loss function with mini-batches of size 16, using an RMSProp optimizer with
learning rate 0.0004, without momentum, and with decay of 0.99. The agent incorporated non-RGB
observations (personal inventory, global progress bar, and global voting matrix) by concatenating
them to the output of the CNN, as the input to the MLP.
The second agent architecture (Figure 3, parts outside the shaded area) is an extension of A3C that
incorporates our environment-speciﬁc intuitions, as described below. We call this the Hidden-Agenda
Agent.
3.1
Hidden-Agenda Agent
The ﬁrst addition is to additionally condition the critic on the player identity (i.e. the player’s hidden
roles) and their distance from the agent. Player identity is a 5-element vector where the Impostor
is encoded as 1 and Crewmates as 0. Player distance is a 5-element vector where each element
corresponds to the distance of that player from the agent. This extra conditioning reduces the variance
in policy gradient [28].
The second addition is an auxiliary prediction loss [14]. We use an MLP (two layers with 32, 16
units, respectively) to predict player identity (i.e. the hidden role) from the LSTM state, and then
use cross-entropy as the auxiliary loss function. This loss, which we refer to as the representation
loss, encourages the network to develop a representation of player role from observations, which we
expect to be useful to the behavior policy. The representation loss is added to the total loss with a
coefﬁcient of 1.0.
Both modiﬁcations use hidden information about other players, which is not available to the agent
during the episode. However, this information is not used to generate behavior—it is only used to
train the representation in hindsight [28] (see Figure 3). The role-conditioning and auxiliary loss that
shape behavior during training are not present during evaluation, which only includes the actor.
3.2
Co-training and evaluation of agents
The training scheme involves ﬁve agents training together (i.e., co-training) in multiple episodes of
Hidden Agenda. We train agents to play only a single role: one agent always plays the Impostor, and
four agents always play Crewmates. As stated previously, at the start of each episode, the agents are
randomly assigned to colored avatars in the environment. All agents play in each match. Thus each
agent adapts to the same ﬁxed set of co-players with the same ﬁxed roles. However, these co-players
learn as it does, making learning a dynamic interaction between agents. The Impostor agent must
learn to make its behavior (including any idiosyncrasies) similar to that of the Crewmate agents while
5

hindering their objective. The Crewmate agents must thwart this by adapting their behavior to achieve
their objective.
To be able to evaluate these behavioral dynamics, we take snapshots of agents’ parameters throughout
every training run. We then use the snapshots from a given time-point to run episodes and compute
the distribution of various metrics. This allows us to “go back in time” to analyse the behavioral
dynamics at a given point in training. In particular, we measure the following metrics over the course
of training:average episode return obtained by the Impostor, average episode return obtained by a
Crewmate, relative frequency of the episode win conditions (Crewmate-win-by-task, Crewmate-win-
by-vote, Impostor-win-by-freeze, Impostor-win-by-vote, or draw-by-timeout), and representation
loss (for Hidden-Agenda agents).
4
Experiments
4.1
Game parameter sweep
Using the co-training protocol previously described, we performed a hyperparameter sweep across
various game parameters. This sweep was not exhaustive over all parameters; with the lens of
balancing the game between Crewmates and Impostors, we ﬁx several parameters with reasonable
values (the size of the Impostor’s freeze beam, size of the players’ personal fuel inventory, etc) and
search over other parameters to balance the game. Due to resource constraints, each hyperparameter
was only run across a single random seed.
The speciﬁc values attempted for various Hidden Agenda hyperparameters are listed below (with the
ultimately chosen value in bold):
• Game parameters: Fuel cells to Crewmate win (32, 40), Voting round frequency (150, 200)
• Impostor parameters: freezer cooldown (50, 75)
• Shaping rewards: fuel collection (0, 0.25), fuel deposit (0, 0.25), freezing and being frozen
(0, ±1), voting off a player successfully or unsuccessfully (0, ±1)
4.2
Experimental setup
Fixing the hyperparameters of the Hidden Agenda environment to those previously described, we run
two experiments, each repeated 10 times with different random seeds, for 1 billion timesteps. The
ﬁrst experiment evaluates the performance of the standard A3C agent as a baseline for the strategic
richness achievable without agent modiﬁcations. The second experiment focuses on the performance
of the Hidden-Agenda Agent in a co-training scenario.
4.3
Co-training of agents converges to three distinct equilibria
Through simultaneous training of both Crewmates and Impostors in the Hidden Agenda environment,
three distinct equilibria emerged following convergence of agent rewards. The three equilibria can
be best explained by their dominating win conditions: where Crewmates win by vote (3/10 runs),
Crewmates win primarily by task (2/10 runs), and the Impostor wins by freezing (5/10 runs). In
each of these equilibria, the losing team does not receive enough signal to effectively learn a counter
strategy due to the efﬁciency with which the winning team reaches a win condition. These observed
equilibria are not equilibria in the game theoretic way (e.g. Nash equilibria), but instead can be best
understood as basins of attractions of the co-play learning dynamics of reinforcement learning agents.
Figure 4 depicts a progression of common evolved behaviors (left) as well as a sample of the unique
behaviors characteristic of each equilibrium (right).
6

Crewmates pick up 
and deposit gems
Crewmates distance 
from other players
Crewmates partner 
together for tasks
Impostor isolates 
Crewmates
Crewmates abandon 
tasks in favor of voting
Crewmates Task
Crewmates Vote
Impostor Freeze
Impostor guards 
deposit
Common Behaviors
Equilibrium-specific Behaviors
Figure 4: Hidden Agenda presents a progression of interesting social behaviors, achievable through
the collective cooperation between teams and the deduction of agent identity. Agents learn basic
behaviours relevant for their role, like Cremates learning to collect and deposit fuel cells, the
Impostor learning to freeze Crewmates, and Cremates learning to distance from other players. In
addition, some equilibrium-dependent strategies emerge, including: pairs of Crewmates partnering
together, Crewmates learning to accurately vote for the impostor; and Impostor freezing only isolated
Crewmates.
Figure 5 shows examples of the development of each equilibrium during the co-training process.
Despite starting from a similar distribution of win conditions, the different equilibria were quickly
established and appear stable.
Crewmates Task
Crewmates Vote
Impostor Freeze
Baseline Agent
Figure 5: Distribution of the ﬁve win conditions over co-training for the baseline A3C agent (leftmost)
and each of the three co-training equilibria for the Hidden-Agenda agent.
A distinguishing factor between the three equilibria is the rate at which the Crewmates learned a
representation in the LSTM state capturing information about player roles. This learning can be most
easily quantiﬁed by the magnitude of the representation loss across training episodes. As shown
in Figure 6, equilibria in which the Crewmates more frequently win show a signiﬁcant decrease in
representation loss early in training (i.e. better identiﬁcation of the Impostor). However, by the end
of training, all three equilibria have converged to a similar representation loss, presumably due to the
increased performance of the co-trained Impostor agent.
To validate the necessity of the extra conditioning and representation loss for enabling strategy
richness, we trained and evaluated the standard A3C agent with non-RGB observations in the
environment using the same training protocol as the co-training of the Hidden-Agenda agents. All 10
replicas of the experiment converged to the same equilibrium, shown in Figure 5 following the 1B
timesteps of agent training: where the Impostor-win-by-freeze dominates. The distribution across win
conditions resembles the Impostor freeze equilibrium from the Hidden Agenda agent with a greater
percent of win conditions coming from voting (both in favor of the Crewmate and the Impostor). The
lack of Crewmate-win-by-task and multiple equilibria across the random seeds points to the fact that
without modiﬁcations to the agent, the strategy richness for the Crewmates is signiﬁcantly reduced.
4.4
Partnered Crewmates also vote together
Partnering behavior is a hallmark of one of the most effective strategies for Crewmates in Among Us:
by explicitly associating with another player in the game through a “buddy” system and working on
the tasks together, both partners can protect themselves from getting removed from the game by the
Impostor [1]. If the Impostor were to remove one of the partners, the other would out the Impostor to
7

0
200
400
600
800
Training Steps (in M)
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
Representation loss
Equilibrium
Crewmates Vote
Crewmates Task
Impostor Freeze
Figure 6: Average value of the representation prediction loss for the Crewmate agents across the
10 random seeds for the co-training experiment, grouped by equilibrium. Equilibrium in which
Crewmates dominate the win conditions have a characteristic early decrease in representation loss.
the remainder of the group during the voting phase. In Hidden Agenda, this would not only require
the agents to partner together for the situation phase, but also develop a method of communicating
observations and conveying their information to others solely through the sequence of votes enacted
during the voting phase.
In the task equilibrium, where Crewmates learned both the task and voting behaviors, we observed a
tendency for players to remain spatially close together while collecting and depositing fuel cells. To
understand whether these players were truly partnering (and whether their voting choices were more
closely tied together as a result of this proximity), we aggregated the position and voting information
across 10 simulated episodes with the converged agents. As per the normal training protocol, agents
were randomized across player colors. The matrix of player-player distance (in units of the map) and
voting similarity (for each voting round, 1 if the players had the same ﬁnal vote, 0 if the players had
differing ﬁnal votes) was computed, and reordered such that the Impostor is placed in slot 0, the two
closest Crewmates in slots 1 and 2, and the remaining Crewmates in slots 3 and 4.
Figure 7: Aggregated average distance between players and voting similarity across 10 simulated
episodes of gameplay between converged Hidden-Agenda agents in the equilibrium where Crewmates
win by task.
As Figure 7 shows, there are two clear groups of Crewmate partners (highlighted with orange and
pink squares), and those partner pairs also tend to have the same vote at the end of each voting round
as compared to other players (right).
4.5
Voting round richness
As previously described, players in Among Us use the voting round to communicate belief of player
identity and to acquire more information about the locations and intent of each player in the game.
While the voting round of Hidden Agenda lacks the same natural language richness, the 25-timestep
8

duration of the voting phase serves as a method for players to communicate with each other, allowing
players to cast and change their votes as they integrate votes from the other players. From Figure 5,
it’s clear that the trained Crewmate agents are more than randomly correct in voting the Impostor in
both the Task and Vote equilibria.
Player 0: Crewmate
Player 1: Crewmate
Player 2: Impostor
Player 3: Crewmate
Player 4: Crewmate
Figure 8: Voting decisions at each of the 25 timesteps for the two rounds of voting in an example
episode. Player identities for the episode are listed on the left, corresponding to the color of the
agent voted for at each timestep in the voting rounds on the right. Grey represents abstain and black
represents an inactivated agent.
We present a representative example of single episode to illustrate this concept (video of the relevant
episode: https://youtu.be/cImPUBvmIq0) with accompanying post-hoc interpretation. Prior to
the ﬁrst voting round, the Impostor (player 2, orange) stayed within close physical proximity to the
pink Crewmate (player 4), eventually unsuccessfully attempting to freeze them. As a result, there
is general ambiguity as to whether player 2 or player 4 was the one who triggered the voting round
through witnessing a freeze beam, resulting in a predominance of votes for these two players during
the voting round. Eventually, the group forms a majority consensus to vote out the pink Crewmate,
who is subsequently inactivated.
In the situation phase following the ﬁrst voting round, the Impostor follows the green Crewmate
(player 3) and also unsuccessfully attempts to freeze them. The green Crewmate immediately votes
for the Impostor, maintaining this vote at almost every timestep of the voting phase. The Impostor
initially votes for the green Crewmate, eventually switching their vote to the blue Crewmate, who
is clearly voting incorrectly (for a player who has already been inactivated: the pink Crewmate).
Eventually, the purple Crewmate switches to voting for the Impostor and the Crewmates win by
inactivating the Impostor through a majority vote.
5
Conclusion
In this work, we’ve described Hidden Agenda, a new multiagent environment inspired by social
deduction games. Hidden Agenda is a spatially and temporally extended game without natural
language communication that nonetheless admits a rich set of strategies and counter-strategies. What
makes Hidden Agenda different from other spatially and temporally extended team games like Capture
The Flag is the presence of hidden motivations and the need for players to integrate information
from unreliable sources. We have shown that with small modiﬁcations, traditional reinforcement
learning agents can learn to play this game, and exhibit distinct behaviors, characterised by three
equilibria: where the Crewmates win mainly by completing tasks; Crewmates win mainly by voting
out the Impostor; and the Impostor wins by freezing or voting out all but one of the Crewmates. Our
Hidden Agenda Agent showed strategic behaviors like partnering and co-voting that are similar to
those exhibited by humans playing a similar game. We hope Hidden Agenda will enable further
research in multiagent reinforcement learning scenarios bringing social deduction to 2D worlds.
