UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
89 
Bayesian Classification and Feature Selection from Finite Data Sets 
Frans M. Coetzee 
NEC Research Institute 
4 Independence Way 
Princeton, NJ 08540 
Steve Lawrence 
NEC Research Institute 
4 Independence Way 
Princeton, NJ 08540 
C. Lee Giles 
NEC Research Institute 
4 Independence Way 
Princeton, NJ 08540 
Abstract 
Feature selection aims to select the smallest subset of 
features for a specified level of performance. The opti­
mal achievable classification performance on a feature 
subset is summarized by its Receiver Operating Curve 
(ROC). When infinite data is available, the Neyman­
Pearson (NP) design procedure provides the most effi­
cient way of obtaining this curve. In practice the design 
procedure is applied to density estimates from finite 
data sets. 
We perform a detailed statistical analysis 
of the resulting error propagation on finite alphabets. 
We show that the estimated performance curve (EPC) 
produced by the design procedure is arbitrarily accu­
rate given sufficient data, independent of the size of the 
feature set. 
However, the underlying likelihood rank­
ing procedure is highly sensitive to errors that reduces 
the probability that the EPC is in fact the ROC. In 
the worst case, guaranteeing that the EPC is equal to 
the ROC may require data sizes exponential in the size 
of the feature set. These results imply that in theory 
the NP design approach may only be valid for charac­
terizing relatively small feature subsets, even when the 
performance of any given classifier can be estimated 
very accurately. 
We discuss the practical limitations 
for on-line methods that ensures that the NP proce­
dure operates in a statistically valid region. 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
Intense interest in data mining and web searching has 
renewed interest in the problem of feature selection. In 
feature selection, the objective is to select the small­
est subset of features that meet classification perfor­
mance requirements, thereby reducing computational 
complexity and ensuring generalization [1-3]. 
Feature selection methods summarize the achievable 
classification performance on a possible subset of fea­
tures, and use this information to guide the search 
through the feature power set. In contrast to most 
analyses, we consider the most general problem where 
performance summarization depends only on the sta­
tistical structure of the data, not the classifier architec­
ture (as occurs in wrapper approaches), a specific op­
erating point cannot be assumed, and data is assumed 
finite. Such problems usually arise when features are 
selected in advance of complete knowledge of the ap­
plication, or when data will be collected for use in a 
range of applications and risk functions, an example 
being data selection for futures risk assessment. 
Theoretically, the minimal representation of classifica­
tion performance on a feature subset meeting the above 
requirements is the Receiver Operating Curve (ROC) 
[4,5]. The ROC curve is important since it summarizes 
in a one-dimensional function the optimal classification 
performance achievable by all possible classifiers, inde­
pendent of the dimension of the feature space. There­
fore, all cost functions can be optimized when this curve 
is known. 
When the class conditional statistics are 
known, the Neyman-Pearson1 (NP) design procedure 
found in any classification textbook is the standard way 
for calculating the ROC. 
In practice, ROC calculations are performed by apply­
ing the NP design procedure to density estimates ob­
tained on finite data sets. The performance estimates 
obtained for each feature subset are subject to error. 
As a result, the user might incorrectly rank different 
feature subsets, causing the search procedure to fail 
and yielding substantially inferior feature subsets and 
classifiers. 
In this paper we derive quantitative bounds relating 
the size of the subset, the amount of data and the con­
fidence in the performance estimates of the ROC curve 
that can be obtained using NP design. We show that 
estimates of performance for a classifier do not depend 
on the size of the feature set. However, the NP design 
procedure itself is subject to severe error as the size of 
the feature sets increase; therefore, its efficiency at re­
moving suboptimal classifiers from consideration is im­
paired. As a result, the user might incorrectly conclude 
that the performance differences between different fea­
ture subsets is statistically insignificant simply because 
of an inability to find the optimal set of classifiers. Our 
analysis points to methods for making the NP proce­
dure more robust, by quantifying the confidence in the 
NP design procedure on-line. 
1The NP procedure is often inaccurately simply called Bayesian 
design. 

90 
UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
Our work complements previous work [1, 6] that an­
alyzed estimation errors in the search across feature 
subsets. These researchers noted that finding the opti­
mal classifier on a feature subset imposes limitations on 
feature selection; our analysis quantifies this problem 
for probably the most fundamental design approach. 
We also show that this difficulty in finding the optimal 
classifier on a subset may fundamentally limit the size 
of the feature subsets that can be absolutely ranked. 
The outline of the paper is as follows. In Section 2 we 
formalize and analyze the NP design procedure given 
the class probabilities (or infinite data). Section 3 ad­
dresses the problem of NP design on finite data sets. 
Section 4 discusses the propagation of error in typical 
problems. Section 5 describes data-adaptive methods 
for performing feature selection in a statistically valid 
way. 
2 
ROCs FROM INFINITE DATA 
This section considers two class classification when the 
class conditional densities are known to arbitrary preci­
sion, as might be the case when densities were obtained 
from infinite cooperating data sets. While the theory 
is well known, the formalization of the Bayesian design 
process as a search procedure is somewhat uncommon. 
However, this perspective clarifies the error propaga­
tion in the procedure. 
2.1 
BAYESIAN DESIGN AS SEARCH 
Assume that we are given N possible features, Q* 
{x(i,xi, ... xj¥_1}. For simplicity, we assume that the 
features are binary, that is xi E {0, 1}. The anal­
ysis carries over in a straightforward manner when 
xi assume values in any finite alphabet. We assume 
two hypotheses H0 (false class) and H1 (true class) 
on the input space x( Q*) = rrf=-/ { 0, 1} with class 
conditional probabilities P { x* I H0} and P { x* I Hi} 
respectively. 
For a given subset Q h Q* consist­
ing of l features, we obtain a set of possible inputs 
x(Q) = {x = (xo, x1, ... x1-1)lx; E Q*}. Each sam­
ple x E x(Q) can be denoted by a bit string of length 
l. We adopt the convention of denoting vectors us­
ing symbols without subscripts, with vector elements 
indicated by subscripts. We further frequently asso­
ciate the bit string x with its integer mapping, e.g. 
x = (xa,xd = (1,0) = 2. 
Given a feature subset Q, a classifier function r : 
x(Q) --+ {0, 1} assigns labels, either 0 or 1, to every 
element in the binary sequence space x(Q), thereby 
forming decision regions £(f)0 and C(fh in x( Q) for 
the two classes respectively. 
The set of all inputs 
x E x(Q) consists of 21 possible bit strings. There 
I 
are therefore 22 distinct different classification rules 
rj,j = 0, 1, ... 221 
- 1 for separating the two classes. 
The classifiers r i can be ordered so that the labeling 
induced by rj on x(Q) is the binary expansion of the 
integer j. Each of these decision rules yield a probabil­
ity of false alarm P1(r) and of detection Pd(r), defined 
by 
L P{x I Ho} 
(1) 
xEL:(r)! 
L P{xiHd 
(2) 
xEL:(r)! 
The set AOS = {(P1(rj),Pd(rj))} of the operating 
points defined by the 221 binary mappings on a feature 
set is referred to as the Achievable Operating Set. By 
switching between the outputs of two classifiers with 
some fixed probability, any operating point (P1, Pd) on 
the line connecting the operating points of the two clas­
sifiers can be produced [5]. Hence, any operating point 
within the convex hull of the AOS can be obtained. 
For each feature set, the function ROC = { (P1, Pd)} 
where PJ is the false alarm rate and Pd is the maxi­
mal probability of detection achievable over all possible 
sampled combinations of functions r j at that value of 
P1 is called the Receiver Operating Curve (ROC). The 
ROC efficiently summarizes the inherent difficulty in 
separating the two classes on a given subset. The sub­
set of the 221 classifiers ri lying on the ROC will be 
referred to as the ROC support classifiers. 
Naively searching for the ROC requires finding all 221 
operating points and calculating the convex hull. This 
approach is infeasible due to the rapid growth in the 
value of 221 as l increases. For example, when l = 
4 221 
I 
, 
= 65536, while when l = 5, there are 22 
:::: 4.3 x 
109 functions to consider. The Neyman-Pearson (NP) 
design procedure provides a solution to the problem of 
efficiently obtaining the ROC. According to this theory 
the likelihood ratio function ( : x --+ Z+ 
((x) 
= 
P {x I Hl}/P {xI Ho} 
(3) 
transforms the bit string x into a scalar random vari­
able for which the decision regions are contiguous and 
are separable by a single threshold on (, as determined 
by the false alarm rate. Since the feature space x is 
countable, there are at most 21 unique decision region 
allocations maximizing the probability of detection for 
the associated level of false alarm. In particular, each 
of these optimal classifiers (denoted rm) is associated 
with one of the thresholds in the finite set 
z 
{(I(= P{x I Hl}/P{x I Ho} X E x} (4) 
The values ((x) obtained from p(xiHl) and p(xiHo) 
on the elements of x ( Q) are sorted and a function o: is 
defined that associates with each value of the alphabet 
the rank of the threshold (in decreasing order), 
o:(x) = I{((x)} 
(5) 

UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
91 
where I denotes the index of the element after sorting. 
The ROC curve is then traced by the set of assignments 
rm(x) 
{ 1 
o:(x) < m 
0 else 
(6) 
form= 0, 1, ... 21. In other words, the ROC support 
classifiers are produced by successively changing the 
labeling of an additional bit in the classifier integer 
expansion in the order specified by the likelihood ratio 
ranking. 
To make the above abstraction more intuitive we 
present a brief example for characterizing a simple two­
feature test subset. The true density functions are 
X 
p(xiH1 
p(xiHo) 
0 
1 
0.30 
0.35 
0.15 
0.25 
2 
3 
0.20 
0.15 
0.40 
0.20 
The complete list of all 222 decision region assignments 
for this subset, and the associated Pf and Pd values; 
are 
r(o) 
r(1) 
r(2) 
r(3) 
Pr 
pd 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0.00 
0.00 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0.15 
0.30 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0.25 
0.35 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0.40 
0.65 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0.40 
0.20 
1 
0 
1 
0 
0.55 
0.50 
0 
1 
1 
0 
0.65 
0.55 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0.80 
0.85 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0.20 
0.15 
1 
0 
0 
1 
0.35 
0.45 
0 
1 
0 
1 
0.45 
0.50 
1 
1 
0 
1 
0.60 
0.80 
0 
0 
1 
1 
0.60 
0.35 
1 
0 
1 
1 
0.75 
0.65 
0 
1 
1 
1 
0.85 
0.70 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1.00 
1.00 
These 16 operating points (AOS) are also shown in Fig­
ure 1. The ROC classifiers are produced sequentially 
by changing one bit in the binary expansion based on 
the likelihood sort o:: 
X 
0 
1 
2 
3 
Pf 
pd 
(\XY 
2.00 
1.40 
0.50 
0.75 
a(x) 
0 
1 
3 
2 
r0(x) 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0.00 
0.00 
r1(x) 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0.15 
0.30 
r2(x) 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0.40 
0.65 
r3(x) 
1 
1 
0 
1 
0.60 
0.80 
r4(x) 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1.00 
1.00 
Neyman-Pearson design can therefore be viewed as a 
search procedure whereby the classifier functions rm 
that support the ROC curve can be obtained sequen­
tially in order of increasing probability of false alarm. 
The problem of finding the function that maximizes the 
Pd at a given value of P1 is reduced from searching a 
space of dimension 221 to one of searching a space of 
dimension 21, an enormous reduction in complexity. 
2.2 
MAXIMAL ERRORS IN ROC CURVE 
There is a one-to-one relationship between the rank­
ing o: and the set of classifiers {rm} that will be pro­
duced. When two bins are interchanged in the ranking 
procedure, the true performance achieved is inferior to 
the ROC operating curve. This error exists over the 
range of false alarm corresponding to the two classi­
fiers where neither bin is selected, and where both bins 
are selected. The true operating curve moves down 
in detection rate and up in false alarm rate. Assume 
that for two bins Xa and Xb, there are real numbers 
'fll and 'flo such that P{xa I HI} = TJ1P{xb I HI}, and 
P {xa I Ho} = 'floP {xb I Ho}, and 'fll > 'flo· Then it 
follows that Xa should be ranked higher than Xb on the 
true ROC curve. If samples are obtained such that the 
estimated ranking of Xa and Xb are reversed, then the 
true operating point will move relative to the estimated 
operating point by tl.Pd = P {xa I HI} (1 - ryl)/ryl, 
6.P1 = P {xa I Ho} (1- rJo)/rJo· Interchanging two op­
erating points does not necessarily result in a change in 
the ROC, however. An appropriate metric capable of 
measuring the deviation of the curve must be used. A 
simple metric is the change in slope of the ROC curve 
at the point where the two bins are incorporated (the 
slope of the true ROC curve at a value of P1 is always 
maximal): 
It can be verified that this change reflects a major shift 
from the convex curve spanned by the true ROC when 
(i) the bin sort orders are reversed, (ii) there is a sig­
nificant difference in the true likelihood ratios of the 
two histogram bins and (iii), there is a large absolute 
difference in the magnitude of the two class histograms 
for the respective bins. 
3 
ROCs FROM FINITE DATA 
In practice, the class conditional distributions have to 
be estimated from a finite labeled data set. Formally, 
we consider the set of all possible class conditional den­
sities as a sample space e. Each classification problem 
is generated by sampling two elements from e, yielding 
the values ()iiHi = p(x = jiHi),j = 0, 1, ... L- 1, i = 
0, 1 where L = 21 corresponding to the bin probabilities 
of the class histograms. We assume the histograms for 
the two class distributions to be independent, i.e. given 
the class, the features of two different samples will be 
independent (there may be dependence amongst the 
features for a given sample). 
A finite data set is then drawn independently from 
each of these class conditional distributions, with ni 
samples yielding kiiHi successes (occurrences) of sym­
bol Xj for class Hi, i = 0, 1. We assume the class 

92 
UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
data is labeled correctly. From this data set we gener­
ate class conditional histograms (or density estimates 
BjiHi = kjiHdn;), and likelihood ratio estimates 
(8) 
The NP procedure in Section 2 is then performed us­
ing these estimates, yielding a set of classifiers and an 
estimated ROC curve. 
There are then two sources of error: (i) errors in the 
estimates Pd and P1 for a given classifier r, and (ii), 
errors due to searching the wrong set of classifiers be­
cause the likelihood ranking was incorrect. As an il­
lustration of the problem, consider the simplest case 
where we wish to separate the two classes in the exam­
ple above. In this case we obtained 40 samples for 
each of the two classes from the true distributions, 
calculated the class-conditional histograms, and per­
formed the Neyman-Pearson procedure using the esti­
mated data. The number of samples for each feature 
vector were as follows: 
j 
0 
1 
2 
3 
kjiHl 
18 
10 
5 
7 
k;IHO 
6 
13 
12 
9 
The true operating curve (TOC) and the estimated per­
formance curve (EPC) that would be achieved using 
the five classifiers generated by the NP procedure were 
also calculated. The effect of the two types of errors 
can clearly be seen in Figure 1. 
We now proceed to quantify how errors in the density 
estimates influence the ROC computation. 
3.1 
HIS TOGRAM S TATISTICS 
It is well known that the bins of each class histogram 
satisfy the multinomial distribution [7, 8]: 
P { koiHi• 
· 
· 
· kL-1IHi I OoiHi• 
· 
· 
· OL-1IH;} 
I 
L-1 
= 
n;. 
IT (OjiHi)kiiHi 
koiHi, 
· 
· 
· kL-liHi j=O 
(9) 
where L = 21• This distribution is a generalization of 
the binomial distribution; every marginal is also multi­
nomial, and each variable is binomially distributed. 
Note that the variables are correlated; this correlation 
becomes small for relatively flat distributions as l in­
creases. 
Since the class distributions are independent, we can 
analyze the statistics of each histogram independently. 
For notational simplicity, we do not explicitly indicate 
the class unless necessary. 
Our first objective is to be able to bound the error in 
the estimate of performance for each classifier, when 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
Pf 
0.8 
Fig. 1. 
Set of achievable operating points {AOS), th ROC 
curve, naive estimated performance curve {NEPC) based on 
frequency counts, and true operating curve {TOC) achieved 
by the set of classifiers selected using the Neyman-Pearson 
procedure on the sample estimated data. 
the true values (} are unknown. We arp thesefore inter­
ested in obtaining the distribution P l 0 I B )• i.e., once 
we have observed the data, what do we know about 
the true class distributions based on which samples 
were generated? To establish valid confidence regions, 
a prior on (} has to be assumed2. We select the max­
imum entropy prior, where 0 is uniformly distributed 
over the probability simplex a(L) ` [0, 1]L , and con­
sider a neighborhood C(B) centered on e. Given an ob­
servation B, we can then obtain the following Bayesian 
inversion: 
fro,l]L\C(O) P { B I 0} '1/J(O) dO 
fro,1]L P { B I 0} '1/J(O) dO 
r 
IJL-1 0o;n dO 
Ju(L)\C(o) j=O j 
(10) 
From this integral it can be recognized that the pos­
terior distribution for BIB is a generalized multivari­
ate beta density [9]. Note that the density is continu­
ous, conditioned on a discrete variable. The marginals 
p(OjiOj) for a single bin j is given by a beta(n,kj) dis­
tribution where kj = nBj, denoted by 
f3(kj + 1, n-kj + 1) 
(11) 
where f3(p, q) denotes the normalizing (beta) function. 
2It can be shown that without a prior, no finite amount of data 
can produce a non-trivial bound on (} given only {J 

UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
93 
The mean, mode, and variance are given by 
(JX 
J 
/-Lj 
kj 
n 
kj + 1 
n+2 
(kj + 1)(n- ki + 1) 
(n + 2)2(n + 3) 
(12) 
(13) 
(14) 
When n 2: 1 and n - k1 2: 1 the function is unimodal 
with a bell shape. When k1 = 0 or (k1 = n), the dis­
tribution is one-sided decaying to the right (left) from 
0 (1). Figure 2 shows the exact width w90 f 2v of 
the interval starting at the 5% percentile, and ending 
at the 95% percentile of various beta distributions. A 
Chebychev bound on the tails of the distribution using 
the variance estimate exist, 
< 
1 
<
-­
- 4nv2 
(15) 
with a 1/n convergence rate (Chernoff bounds giving 
exponential convergence exist - the Chebychev bound 
is sufficient for our purposes). 
0.35 
0.3 
0.25 
w 
0.2 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
e 
Fig. 2. Plot of the width wgo of the [0.05, 0.95] percentile interval 
of the beta distribution for various values of 0 and number 
of samples N. 
3.2 
INFLUENCE OF SAMPLE SIZE ON 
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 
The results above can be used to quantify how accu­
rately the operating point of a classifier can be esti­
mated. Assume that we are given a particular clas­
sifier r, i.e. labels have been assigned to each of the 
histogram bins. Given independent sample data sets 
from the two classes, from (2) we estimate the detection 
rate by adding all the histogram entries corresponding 
to the positive decision region of the classifier: 
?d 
= 
:L ejiHl 
(16) 
jE.C(r), 
From (9) and (16), the estimated Pd is therefore given 
by the sum of #.C(fh of L multinomial variables. 
Comparison with the formulation of Section 3 will con­
vince the reader that the estimated statistics of Pd 
is the same as that of a histogram with two bins, 
where the first bin has a count equal to the sum of 
the counts of the bins in .C(fh, and the second bin 
contains the sum of the bins in .C(f)0. The estimate 
n1Pd is therefore distributed binomially with param­
eter LjE.C(r), Bj 
= Pd. 
The posterior distribution 
P { Pd I Pd} f 
beta(n1, n1Pd)· The estimated false 
alarm rate Pf can be analyzed in a similar fashion, 
yielding P { P1 I Pf} f beta( no, noPJ ). 
The importance of this result is that for a given clas­
sifier r' bounding the location of the true operating 
point (P1 (f), Pd(r)) around the estimated operating 
point (P1(r), Pd(f)) can be done to arbitrary confi­
dence levels purely as a function of the number of data 
samples n0 and n1 used for evaluation. This follows di­
rectly from the Chebychev variance bound (15) which 
does not involve the size of the alphabet (number oi 
features). For example, localization of over 90% prob­
ability of the posterior probability occurs in the interval 
Pd ± 2.5% when n1 = 1024. This result is consistent 
with more general theories of generalization such as 
PAC-learning theory. 
We caution the user that the result in this section 
is conditioned on independence of the design regions 
.C(f) j, j = 0, 1 and the data samples used to evaluate 
performance. Using the design data inappropriately 
to generate an estimated performance curve (a curve 
which we will call NEPC - Naive Estimated Perfor­
mance Curve) can yield bizarre performance results. 
We discuss this question further in the next section. 
3.3 
INFLUENCE OF ERROR ON 
IDENTIFYING THE ROC 
The above result that highly accurate performance esti­
mation of a classifier is possible for arbitrarily large fea­
ture sets once a certain number of samples has been ob­
tained appears to be counterintuitive. As the number 
of features increase, the number of feature vectors that 
can occur grows exponentially. Whenever l > log2 ( ni) 
there is not even one sample for each histogram bin in 
the density estimate for class Hi; how can the estimate 
be accurate? Can we really expect that using a few 
finite data sets we can keep characterizing the ROC 
curve for larger and larger feature subsets? 
The resolution of this conundrum lies in the fact that 
while the average performance of each possible classi­
fier can in fact be accurately estimated, the NP sorting 
procedure is affected by the alphabet sizes. If we ig­
nore the NP design procedure and evaluate the perfor-

94 
UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
A 
A 
#Q 
mance (P1, Pd) of all 22 
classifiers for every subset 
Q £ Q* using a few independent data sets of sufficient 
size n0 and ni, we can then locate the ROC curves 
for every subset Q with arbitrary probability and ac­
curacy, and find the optimal subset of ROC support 
classifiers. However, NP design requires the evalua­
tion of the performance of only a subset of the set of 
classifiers (an exponentially small fraction). By using 
Neyman-Pearson design, the possibility of evaluating a 
set of sub-optimal classifiers will increase. We discuss 
this problem in detail in the next section. 
3.4 
STATIS TICS ON THE LIKELIHOOD 
RATIO RANKING 
An error in the set of classifiers produced by the NP 
design results when the sort is incorrect. To quantify 
this error requires specifying 
P { (o W (I . . .   (L-I I Co ...  CL-I, Co, .. · CL-I} (17) 
The joint statistics on the likelihoods required for this 
calculation are intractable. We proceed to bound the 
error from above using the marginal likelihood in each 
bin, essentially by pairwise comparison of likelihood 
estimates. Let :F = { (o  (I . . .   (L-d, be an event 
on the joint space and set the following events on the 
marginals, corresponding to the value of ( falling in a 
specific interval Vj = {(j E ['Yj,/'i+I]}, 'Vj: /'j  /'j+l· 
Then it follows that if /'j  /'i+I 'Vj, that 
v 
= nf==lVi £ :F 
* P {:F} 2: P {V} 
* 
p {:Fe} p {Ve} = p { (nf==-oiVJ)e} = p {uf==-oivT} 
* 
P {:Fe} L=I P {vn 
(18) 
The above expression allows us to bound the error E 
on the sort by selecting a set of separating thresholds 
between the modes of the posterior likelihood distribu­
tions, and calculating for each posterior likelihood ratio 
the probability that it violates its bounding thresholds 
using the posterior marginal distribution: 
L-I 
< 
min 2::: P { (j cf_ [/'j,/'i+d I Cj }(19) 
"Y j=O 
where /'j  /'j+I,j = 0, 1, . .
. L- 1. 
To calculate the marginal distribution in each bin, as­
sume that a total of kjiHi successes were obtained in 
n; samples for bin j in class H;. By assumption the 
two bin probabilities (}jiHI and (}jiHO are independent, 
hence the density of the ratio (j = (}jiHl /BiiHO is given 
using the beta densities (11) of the bin counts. Abusing 
notation slightly, 
p((jiCj) 
= /_: lxl Po,1o,,H1 (x)Po,lfi,,Ho ((jx) dx 
(20) 
Closed form bounds for the ratio of two beta densities 
can be obtained in certain cases [9](p259), but these 
are complicated. In practice, the posterior density of 
the ratio ( is more easily calculated numerically using 
(20). 
Examples of the beta distributions and the posterior 
distributions on the likelihood ratios for each of the 
bins in the example problem are shown in Figure 3. 
In general, when n; > > 1 and n; - kjiHi > > 1 the 
density of the beta distribution for bin j for class H; 
near zero is negligible. The beta distribution can then 
be approximated by a Gaussian with a mean J.ljiHi and 
variance a;1Hj' It is further possible to approximate 
the beta variables' ratio by the ratio of two Gaussian 
distributions one-sided to zero [10]: 
p((IC) 
(a6J.LI + aiJ.Lo() 
{ 
(J.Lo- J.LI() } 
.;21r(a5 + ar(2)3/2 exp - 2(a5 + ar(2) 
(21) 
(where we neglected the explicit bin index j and used 
the subscript for the class). When both kjiHO and kjiHI 
becomes small relative to n0 and ni respectively, this 
approximation fails. The ratio distribution becomes 
wide and flat, and significant skew is introduced by the 
division operator. 
	
· 
I 
0 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1 
I: I 
0 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1 
I 
0 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Fig. 3. 
Top: 
four beta densities for four bins in the class 0 
estimate, with forty samples available for each class. Mid­
dle: four beta densities for the bins in the class 1 estimate. 
Bottom: densities for the likelihood ratios(. 
4 
CURSE OF DIMENSIONALITY 
The probability of a sort error depends on the exact 
form of the underlying distributions BjiHI and BjiHO 
and general tools for analysis are not available for the 
discrete case3. We restrict our discussion to identifying 
3In the continuous case, some bounds are possible by placing 
restrictions on the derivatives of the density functions and as­
suming bounded variations in pointwise estimation error. 

UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
95 
conditions under which the correct sort, or a sort with 
equivalent performance, will be performed with high 
probability. 
From (19) correct sorting of the bins can be guaranteed 
when the posterior likelihood distributions for the bins 
do not overlap. This can be guaranteed at some spec­
ified level of confidence by ensuring the beta distribu­
tions for the two classes in each bin are bounded away 
from zero, and requiring that the number of samples 
n be large enough so that via (15) and (21) the pos­
terior distribution spread is substantially less than the 
distance between the two closest likelihood estimates. 
In general, using this argument depends on there be­
ing a minimum number of samples in every bin of the 
estimated class distributions where the true probabil­
ity is non-zero. In the absence of further information 
about the class distributions, one has to assume that 
the minimum true bin probability ()j will be inversely 
proportional to 21, the dimension of the space. Hence, 
guaranteeing the optimal sort may in the worst case 
require data exponential in the size of the feature set. 
In practice, we can argue that two regions of perfor­
mance occur: a region where performance will degrade 
slowly with increasing l up to some limit, and a region 
beyond which the above argument will not apply. 
We note that sort errors can be tolerated if the differ­
ence of the TOC relative to the ROC is small. When 
the number of histogram bins with small counts con­
tain only a fraction of the total probability, errors in 
sorting these will have a limited impact relative to the 
optimal classifier performance. Neglecting these bins, 
the remaining beta distributions and their likelihood 
posterior distributions will be sharply localized. The 
relative order of bins with large differences in true like­
lihood can be forced to be correct with high probability, 
from (19). Bins whose true likelihood values are close 
may be confused but any resulting shift of the TOC 
will be small (from (7)). Therefore, in this case either 
the correct set of classifiers will be found, or classifiers 
with equivalent performance. 
If most of the mass of the distributions remains con­
centrated in a few bins as the feature dimension in­
crease, the above argument applies and performance 
should degrade slowly. However, intuitively, when we 
add irrelevant or weakly correlated features, we expect 
a randomization effect such that in general most bins 
will contain only a few samples, and the estimated den­
sities cannot be distinguished from samples from uni­
form class densities. The posterior distributions for 
these near-empty bins will be one-sided beta distribu­
tions overlapping at zero (or infinity). As a result, the 
probability of all sorts a that differ only due to per­
mutations of these bins will be equally likely. In this 
case the sort will effectively perform random assign­
ment of labels, and we expect to find classifiers whose 
true performance approaches the P1 = Pd curve. 
In general, therefore, we expect the difficulty of finding 
the optimal ROC support classifiers to increase with 
the fraction of the true overall class probability that is 
found in bins with posterior (beta) distributions near 
zero. For most distributions when l 2: log2(n) most 
bins will be empty and reflect low confidence estimates. 
Hence, it is extremely likely that one would obtain a 
classifier set whose TOC is shifted from the true ROC 
curve in Pd (P1) corresponding to the density of class 1 
(0) in the low-count bins, which can reflect a substan­
tial error. 
We now illustrate these results by extending our simple 
example. We add features x2, x3, x4 ... Xt-l, where for 
both classes the additional features are uniformly dis­
tributed, white variables. The ROC curve for each of 
the subsets containing (xo,XI , ... Xt-d where l >= 2 
is therefore equal to the ROC on subset (xo, xi), as 
shown in Fig 1. 
For every subset (xo,xi, ... Xt-d we obtained 1024 
samples from each of the two classes. A complete NP 
design was performed using the data set, yielding 21 
estimated ROC support classifiers. For each support 
classifier, we calculated the naive estimated perfor­
mance curve using this data set (NEPC). In addition, 
we obtained an additional independent 2048 samples 
from each class, and calculated the estimated perfor­
mance of each classifier (denoted EPC for independent 
estimated performance curve). 
The procedure above was repeated 4000 times, for ev­
ery value of l. The results are shown in Figure 4. The 
first striking result is that as l increases, the EPC and 
NEPC diverge. Second, the NEPC and EPC curves are 
well localized at each value of P1 for a fixed l. Third, 
the NEPC increasingly exceeds the true achievable per­
formance (by comparison to Figure 1). Fourth, the 
EPC approaches the Pd = PJ diagonal as l increases. 
Using the result of Section 3.2 we find that the num­
ber of data samples n0 and n1 is in principle suffi­
cient to sharply concentrate the posterior distributions 
of the histogram bins around performance estimates 
computed with independent sample sets. An ill consid­
ered interpretation of the results of Section 3.2 would 
cause one to also expect the NEPC curves to cluster 
around the true classifier performance points. How­
ever, in evaluating the NEPC, we used one data set to 
both design, and evaluate the classifiers. The design 
regions .C(f)j,j = 0,1 and the sample distribution are 
not independent; the NP design procedure finds the bin 
labeling that correlates the class labels with the sam­
ple likelihood ratio; this biases the NEPC (a sample 
estimate) to exceed the true achievable performance 
obtained by the classifier. One expects the NEPC to 
show improved performance as l increases, since the 

96 
UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
probability that corresponding bins in the two class 
histograms both contain samples will decrease with l, 
which ultimately results in perfect classification of the 
sample. 
The bias in the NEPC can be bounded in terms of 
the width of the posterior bin distributions; for exam­
ple, the expected bias is less than the the sum of the 
expected width of the beta distributions around the 
mean. When the density estimates are accurate, the 
NEPC will be close to the true operating point. This 
bound is unfortunately only useful when the classifier 
has few active bins, and the posterior bin distributions 
are highly localized. 
0.8 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
Pt 
0.8 
Fig. 4. Estimated operating points (EPC) and Naive Estimated 
Operating Points (NEPC) obtained as the number of dimen­
sions l increases. 
The correct interpretation of the posterior distribution 
bounds on the estimated performance (15) is that on 
average, if a fixed classifier is evaluated on multiple, in­
dependent samples of size n, then the average distance 
from the estimated operating point, to the true operat­
ing point, can be made small. Since the true operating 
point is unique, the estimated performance curves will 
cluster. The procedure used to evaluate the EPC re­
flects the correct interpretation of (15) to localize the 
true operating curve. While we do not discuss this is­
sue further, we note that cross-validation procedures 
can trade off computational cost to reduce the data 
requirements for further estimation. 
A more subtle point to explain is why the EPC and 
NEPC curves are well localized over all 4000 classi­
fier design procedures. While the operating point for 
a given classifier can be located accurately, we cannot 
guarantee (nor in fact are) the same classifiers produced 
by the NP procedure for each 1024 sample batch. One 
would therefore expect each NP design to produce radi­
cally different EPC and NEPC curves. The explanation 
for this behavior is that the fraction and location of bins 
that are well estimated (having collected sufficient sam­
ples) remain relatively constant across designs. These 
bins provide a baseline performance, while the remain­
ing bins are classified essentially randomly and do not 
contribute in a net way to movement away from the 
diagonal. We note that other search procedures might 
not have the same property. 
5 
DATA-ADAPTIVE NP DESIGN 
The results in the previous sections can be used to de­
fine more statistically sensitive NP-type search proce­
dures. The simplest approach simply randomly classi­
fies histogram bins where the confidence in the class­
conditional estimates is too low. The error relative to 
the true performance curve is limited to the fraction of 
the overall class probabilities in these bins, and can be 
estimated. However, this approach does not scale well 
when the probability mass function does not remain 
concentrated as the problem dimension increases. 
Better results are obtained by using adaptive his­
tograms that merge bins with low confidence estimates, 
or whose position in the sort is uncertain. By merging 
bins, small numbers of samples are combined into a 
bin with a larger effective bin count, concentrating the 
posterior bin and likelihood distributions. 
While we have selected bins on the basis of improving 
the bound (19) this equation involves pairwise com­
parisons, and is therefore computationally impractical. 
More practically, bins have to be selected based only on 
criteria that can be calculated rapidly for an individual 
bin. A useful scoring function based on individual bin 
statistics is 
t(j) 
(22) 
where w90(0jiH1) denotes the width of the center 90% 
interval of the beta distribution for the bin j. This 
scoring function measures the theoretical separation 
achievable for the two classes using only the class con­
ditional counts for the single bin j. 
Figure 5 shows the result of using this approach where 
the two lowest scoring bins are merged until some con­
fidence threshold is reached for every bin. For this 
problem we used l = 7 and n0 = n1 = 1024. The 
adaptive procedure merged 42 of the histogram bins, 
significantly improving the sort confidence and the con­
fidence in each of the histogram bins. Due to the in­
creased confidence in the bin counts, the NEPC is much 
less biased, and the bias can be bounded. When the 
probability remains concentrated even as the number of 
features increase, it may be possible to use the NEPC 
to estimate performance, which could substantially re­
duce computational requirements over cross-validation 

UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
97 
approaches. Further exploitation of the statistical re­
sults by algorithm design remains an open problem; 
in particular, using biased performance estimates for 
searching, as opposed to expensive cross-validation, has 
not been adequately investigated. 
0.8 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
Pf 
0.8 
Fig. 5. Estimated operating points (EPC) and Naive Estimated 
Operating Points (NEPC) obtained with adapting merging 
of histogram bins. (Pd and Pf are reflected around the di­
agonal for the 256 bin case to improve clarity). 
The above approaches focus on improving the design 
procedure by improving ROC estimation on a single 
feature set. It is also possible to use the structure across 
feature subsets appropriately. 
Consider two feature subsets Q1 and Q2• For some sets, 
an ordering called uniform preferability can be estab­
lished on the ROC curves denoted V, where Q1 V Q2 
if V(Pd, P1) E ROC(Qz)3(P¤, Pj) E ROC(QI) where 
P¤;::: Pd and Pj ::; P1. Graphically, the ROC curve for 
feature subset Q1 lies above the ROC curve for feature 
subset Q2• We use two properties of U. First U always 
defines a filter structure (directed set ordering) on the 
power set by Q1 2 Q2 --t Q1 V Qz, since any features 
not present in the subset will at worst be ignored by 
the Bayesian fusion procedure (for infinite data or ac­
curately estimated performance curves). Second, given 
two subsets Q1 and Q2, the ROC of Q1 U Q2 has to 
be uniformly preferable to the convex hull of the two 
ROCs, corresponding to sampling classifier structures 
on Q1 and Qz. 
Because of the two properties above, it is possible to 
define forward feature selection procedures that auto­
matically try to determine the size of the maximal fea­
ture subset that can be ranked. By comparing the sets 
Q1 and Q2 of sizes l1 and lz respectively, the convex 
hull of ROC(QI) U ROC(Q2) can be compared against 
the ROC estimate obtained on Q1 UQ2 until on average 
no statistically significant improvement occurs for the 
larger sets. 
Finally, we note that the plethora of existing ap­
proaches to future selection (see [3] for an overview) 
can still be reliably used when the size of the sub­
set under consideration is kept below the threshold re­
quired for statistical significance. In particular, back­
ward elimination of irrelevant features from reasonably 
sized subsets is still indicated [2, 11], although in high­
dimensional cases, not enough data may be available 
to consider all features simultaneously. 
6 
CONCLUSIONS 
We presented an analysis of the Neyman-Pearson de­
sign procedure when applied to finite data sets of dis­
crete variables. The analysis shows that while the per­
formance of a particular classifier assignment can be 
evaluated independent of the size of the feature set, 
the probability that the correct sort will be performed 
by the Neyman-Pearson design procedure decreases as 
the size of the feature sets increase. Therefore, compar­
ing the ROCs obtained on larger feature subsets with 
those on smaller feature subsets may not be meaning­
ful; while the operating points for the classifiers span­
ning the ROC may in each case be almost exact, a 
sub-optimal set of classifiers will have been found for 
the larger subset. Therefore, it makes little sense to 
rank subsets beyond some size, and feature selection 
procedures should only search a subset of the feature 
power set.
