417 
Solving POMDPs by Searching the Space of Finite Policies 
Nicolas Meuleau, Kee-Eung Kim, Leslie Pack Kaelbling and Anthony R. Cassandra 
Computer Science Dept, Box 1910, Brown University, Providence, RI 02912-1210 

Abstract 
Solving partially observable Markov decision 
processes (POMDPs) is highly intractable in gen­
eral, at least in part because the optimal policy 
may be infinitely large. In this paper, we ex­
plore the problem of finding the optimal policy 
from a restricted set of policies, represented as 
finite state automata of a given size. This prob­
lem is also intractable, but we show that the com­
plexity can be greatly reduced when the POMDP 
and/or policy are further constrained. We demon­
strate good empirical results with a branch-and­
bound method for finding globally optimal deter­
ministic policies, and a gradient-ascent method 
for finding locally optimal stochastic policies. 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
In many application domains, the partially observable 
Markov decision process (POMDP) [1, 22, 23, 5, 9, 4, 13] is 
a much more realistic model than its completely observable 
counterpart, the classic MDP [11, 20]. However, the com­
plexity resulting from the lack of observability limits the 
application ofPOMDPS to dramatically small decision prob­
lems. One of the difficulties of the optimal-Bayesian­
solution technique is that the policy it produces may use 
the complete previous history of the system to determine 
the next action to perform. Therefore, the optimal policy 
may be infinite and we have to approximate it at some level 
to be able to implement it in a finite machine. Another 
problem is that the calculation requires reformulating the 
problem in the continuous space of belief functions, and 
hence it is much harder than the simple finite computation 
that is sufficient to optimize completely observable MDPs. 
What can we do if we have to solve a huge POMDP? Since 
it may be impossible just to represent the optimal pol­
icy in memory, it makes sense to restrict our search to 
policies that are reasonable in some way (calculable and 
storeable in a finite machine). Knowing that any policy 
is representable as a (possibly infinite) state automaton, 
the first constraint we would want to impose on the pol­
icy is to be representable by a finite state automaton, or, 
as we will call it, a finite "policy graph". Many previous 
approaches implicitly rely on a similar· hypothesis: Some 
authors [ 14, 12, 2, 27] search for optimal reactive (or mem­
ory less) policies, McCallum [15, 16] searches the space 
of policies using a finite-horizon memory, Wiering and 
Schmidhuber's HQL [26] learns finite sequences of reactive 
policies, and Peshkin et al. [19] look for optimal fiuite­
extemal-memory policies. All these examples are particu­
lar cases of finite policy graphs, with a set of extra structural 
constraints in each case (i.e., not every node-transition and 
action choice is possible in the graph). Note that in general, 
finite policy graphs can remember events arbitrarily far in 
the past. They are just limited in the number of events they 
can memorize. 
In this paper we study the problem of finding the best policy 
representable as a finite policy graph of a given size, pos­
sibly with simple constraints on the structure of the graph. 
The idea of searching explicitly for an optimal finite pol­
icy graph for a given POMDP is not new. In the early 70s, 
Satia and Lave [21] proposed a heuristic approach for find­
ing <-optimal decision trees. Hansen [6, 7, 8] proposed a 
policy iteration algorithm that outputs an <-optimal con­
troller. These solution techniques work explicitly in the 
belief space used in the classical-Bayesian-optimal so­
lution of POMDPs, and they output policy-graphs which are 
not more than c from this optimal solution. Another ap­
proach uses EM to find controllers that are optimal over a 
finite horizon [10]. 
A characteristic property of our algorithms is that they scale 
up well with respect to the size of the problem. Their draw­
back is that their execution time increases quickly with the 
size of the policy graph, i.e., with the complexity of the 
policy we are looking for. In general, they will be adapted 
to large POMDPs where relatively simple policies perform 
near optimally. Another characteristic of our approach is 
that we do not refer to the value of the optimal Bayesian 

418 
Meuleau, Kim, Kaelbling, and Cassandra 
solution anymore, we just want the best graph given the 
constraint imposed on the number of nodes. Note that the 
optimality criterion used is the same as in the Bayesian ap­
proach, i.e., the expected discounted cumulative rewards 
(the expectation being relative to the prior belief on the 
states). However, since we do not evaluate the solution 
produced relative to the optimal peiformance, the problem 
may be solved without using the notion of belief-space. 
Our development relies on a basic property of finite-state 
controllers that has already been stressed by Hansen [6], 
and that is also very close to Parr and Russell's HAM theo­
rem [18]. Namely, given a PO MOP and a finite policy graph, 
the sequence of pairs (state of the PO MOP, node of the pol­
icy graph) constitutes a Markov chain. Going farther, we 
define a new MOP on the cross product of the state-space 
and the set of nodes, where a decision is the choice of an 
action and of a next node (conditioned on the last obser­
vation). Working in this cross-product MOP presents many 
advantages: it allows us to calculate and then differentiate 
the value of a fixed policy, to calculate upper and lower 
bounds on the value attainable by completing a given par­
tial policy, and also to establish some complexity results. 
We use these properties to develop implementations of two 
classic search procedures (one global and one local) where 
the majority of the computation consists of solving some 
Bellman equations in the cross-product MOP. An important 
point is that the structure of both the POMOP and the pol­
icy graph (if there is one) is reflected in the cross-product 
MOP. It can be used to accelerate the solution of Bellman 
equations [3], and hence the execution of the solution tech­
niques. In other words, the algorithms we propose can ex­
ploit the structure of the PO MOP to find relatively quickly 
the best general finite policy graph of a given size. If this 
leverage is not sufficient, we may limit further the search 
space by imposing some structure on the policy graph, and 
then using this structure to speed up the solution of the 
cross-product MOP (for instance, we can limit ourselves to 
one of the finite-memory architectures mentioned above). 
The paper is organized as follows. First we give a quick 
introduction to POMOPs and policy graphs, and define the 
cross-product MOP. Then we show that finding the best 
deterministic finite policy graph is an NP-hard problem. 
There is then no really easy way to solve our problem. In 
this paper, we propose two possible approaches: a global 
branch and bound search for finding the best determinis­
tic policy graph, and a local gradient descent search for 
finding the best stochastic policy graph. These two algo­
rithms are based on solving some Bellman equations in the 
cross-product MOP. Therefore, they can take full advan­
tage of any preexisting structure in the POMOP or in the 
policy graph. 'JYpically, these algorithms will be adapted 
to very structured POMOPs with a large number of states, 
a small number of observations, and such that some sim­
ple policies perform well. In the end of the paper, we give 
empirical evidence that our approach allows the solution of 
some POMDPs whose size is far beyond the limits of clas­
sical solutions. 
2 
POMDPS AND FINITE POLICY 
GRAPHS 
2.1 
POMDPS 
A partially observable Markov decision process (POMOP) 
is defined as a tuple ( S, 0, A, B, T, R) where: 
• Sis the (finite) set of states; 
• 0 is the (finite) set of observations; 
• A is the (finite) set of actions; 
• B(s, o) = Pr(ot = o I st = s) for all t; 
• T(s, a, s') = Pr(st+1 = s' I st = s, at =a) for all t; 
• rt = R(s, a, s') if st = s, at = a and st+l = s', for 
all t. 
The 
underlying 
Markov 
decision 
process 
(MOP) 
( S, A, T, R) is optimized is the following way [ 11, 20]: 
given an initial state s0, the aim is to maximize the 
expected discounted cumulative reward 
where 'Y E [0, 1) is the discount factor. The optimal so­
lution is a mapping p* : S -+ A that specifies the action 
to perform in each possible state. The optimal expected 
discounted reward, or "value function", is defined as the 
unique solution of the set of Bellman equations: 
V*(s) = m ax [2::: T(s, a, s') (R(s, a, s') + -yV*(s'))] , 
aEA 
•'ES 
for all s. It is a remarkable property of MOPs that there 
exists an optimal policy that always executes the same ac­
tion in the same state. Unfortunately, this policy cannot be 
used in the partially observable framework, because of the 
residual uncertainty on the current state of the process. 
In the PO MOP framework, a policy is in general a rule spec­
ifying the action to perform at each time step as a function 
of the whole previous history, i.e., the complete sequence of 
observation-action pairs since time 0. A particular kind of 
policy, the so-called reactive policies (RPs ), condition the 
choice of the next action only on the previous observation. 
Thus, they can be represented as mappings p : 0 -+ A. 
Given a probability distribution 1r0 over the starting state, 

Solving POMDPs by Searching the Space of Finite Policies 
419 
igure : .structure of the policy graphs representing reac­
tive policies (101 = 3). The only degrees of freedom are 
the choices of the action in the 101 nodes. 
each policy p. (reactive or not) realizes an expected cumu­
lated reward: 
(1) 
The classical-Bayesian-approach allows us to determine 
the policy that maximizes this value. It is based on updating 
he state distribution (or belief) at each time step, depend­
Ing on the most recent observations [5, 9, 4, 13]. The prob­
lem is re-formulated as a new MDP using belief-states in­
stead of the original states. Generally, the optimal solution 
is not a reactive policy. It is a sophisticated behavior with 
optimal balance between exploration and exploitatio. Un­
fortunately, the Bayesian calculation is highly intractable 
as it searches into the continuous space of beliefs and con­
siders every possible sequence of observations. 
2.2 
FINITE POLICY GRAPHS 
A policy graph for a given POMDP is a graph where the 
nodes are labeled with actions a E A, the arcs are labeled 
with observations o E 0, and there is one and only one 
arc emanating from each node for each possible observa­
tion. W hen the system is in a certain node, it executes the 
action associated with this node. This implies a state transi­
tion in the POMDP and eventually a new observation (which 
depends on the arrival state of the underlying MDP). This 
observatioo itsplf conditions a transition in the policy graph 
to the destmatlon node of the arc associated with the new 
observation. Every policy has a representation as a possi­
bly (countably) infinite policy graph. A policy that chooses 
a different action for each possible previous history will be 
repreqented by an infinite tree with a branch for each possi­
ble history. Reactive policies correspond to a special kind 
of finite policy graph with as many nodes as there are ob­
servations in the POMDP, and where all arcs labeled with 
the same observation go to the same node (figure 1). 
Ir a stochastic policy graph there is a probability distribu­
tloo over actions attached to each node instead of a single 
actlon, and transitions from one node to another are ran­
dom, the arrival node depending only on the starting node 
sd the last observation. We will use the following nota­
tion: 
• N is the set of nodes of the graphs, 
• n1 E N is the current node at timet, 
• .,P(n, a) is the probability of choosing action a in node 
nEN: 
.,P(n, a) tr Pr(a1 =a I n1 = n), for all t, 
• TJ( n, o, n') is the probability of moving from node n E 
N to node n' E N, after observation o E 0: 
TJ(n, o, n') tr Pr(n1+1 = n' I n1 = nl\o1+1 = o), for all t. 
• 7]0 is the probability distribution of the initial node n° 
conditioned on the first observation o0: 
TJ0(o, n) tr Pr(n° = n I o0 = o). 
In some cases, we will want to impose extra constraints on 
the policy graph. In most of this paper, we will limit our­
selves to "restriction constraints" which consist in restrict­
ing the set of possible actions executable in some nodes, 
and/or restricting the set of possible successors of some 
nodes under some observations. Note that forcing the graph 
to implement an RP represents a set of restriction constraint 
as defined here. We consider more sophisticated sets of 
constraints in section 4. 
2.3 
THE CROSS-PRODUCT MDP 
One advantage of representing the policy as a policy graph 
is that the cross-product of the POMDP and the policy graph 
is itself a finite MDP. Another interesting point is that all the 
structure of both the POMDP and the policy graph (if there 
is some) is represented in this cross-product MDP. It will 
allow us to develop relatively fast implementations of some 
classical techniques to solve our problem. 
Calculating the value of a policy graph 
The following 
theorem has been used by Hansen [6, 8, 7], and his closely 
related to Parr and Russell's HAM theorem [18]. 
Theorem 1 Given a policy graph p. = ( .,P, TJ) and a 
POMDP (S, 0, A, B, T, R), the sequence of node-state 
pairs ( n1, s
t) generated constitutes a Markov chain. 
The influence diagram of figure 2 proves this property: 
(n1+8, s1+1) depends only on (n1, s1). The transition ma­
trix TJJ. of this Markov chain is given by 
TP.((n, s) , (n', s')) 
= L 1/l(n, a)T(s, a, s') L B(s', o)7J(n, o, n'). (2) 
aEA 
oEO 

420 
Meuleau, Kim, Kaelbling, and Cassandra 
Figure 2: Influence diagram proving the Markov property 
of the cross-product MOP. Dotted arrows represent depen­
dencies that we did not take into account in this work, but 
that are sometimes represented in other formulations. As 
shown, theorem 1 is still valid in this more general frame­
work. 
In the same way, we can calculate the expected immediate 
reward C\-' associated with each pair ( n, s): 
C\-'(n, s) = L ,P(n, a) L T(s, a, s')R(s, a, s'). 
(3) 
aEA 
11ES 
Then the value function of the policy J.l is found by solving 
the fundamental equation (in matrix form): 
(4) 
Since T9-' is a stochastic matrix and 1 < 1, the matrix (I -
1T]-') is invertible and we have: 
(5) 
Finally, the value of the policy, independent of the starting 
node and state, is 
(6) 
where 7r0 is the joint probability distribution on n° and s0: 
ir0(n, s) = 1r0(s) L B(s, o)1J0(o, n). 
oeo 
Differentiating this value with respect to the parameters of 
the graph will enable us to climb its gradient. 
Solving the cross-product MDP. 
A complete MOP is de­
fined on S = N x S. In each pair (n, s), we have to choose 
an action a, wait for the new observation, and then chose 
the next node. It is equivalent to choosing an action and 
a mapping T)n : 0 -+ N which determines the next node 
as a function of the next observation. Therefore, the action 
space of the cross-product MOP is A = A x N°. 
Theorem 2 The tuple (S, A, T, R) is a finite stationary 
Markov decision process, where S = N x S, A = Ax N°, 
T((n, s), (a, 1Jn), (n', s)) = T(s, a, s') 
oEO s.t. 
qn(o)=n' 
and R( (n, s), (a, 1)" ), (n', s')) = R(s, a, s'). 
B(s', o) 
The fundamental equation of the MDP is, in matrix form: 
v· =max max [c + 1f'v•], 
aEA qneNo 
where the maximization is applied row by row. When we 
expand this equation, the maximization over 1Jn E N° can 
be replaced by a maximization over n' E N and moved to 
the end of the equation: 
V*(n, s) = Tea.f[L T(s, a, s') ( R(s, a, s') 
11ES 
+ 1 f B(s', o) max V*(s', n'l)] . 
L...ti 
n'EN 
oEO 
(7) 
The expected optimal reward, independent of the starting 
state and node, is E* = 7r0 v•. The stationary optimal 
policy of the cross-product MOP is a mapping [I* : S -+ 
A. Note that this optimal policy is generally not imple­
mentable in the policy graph, since it may associate two 
different actions with the same node, depending on the state 
with which the node is coupled. In other words, we need to 
know the current state to use this policy. The agent using 
a policy graph is basically embedded in the cross-product 
MOP, but it has only partial observability of its product state 
(nt, st): it sees nt but not st. The cross-product MDP is in 
fact a PO MOP (S, 0, A, B, T, R) where 0 = N and B is 
the projection of N x S on N. However, the solution of the 
fundamental equation (7) is useful in some algorithms, be­
cause it represents an upper-bound of the performance at­
tainable by any implementable policy. We will use this in a 
branch-and-bound algorithm for finding the optimal deter­
ministic policy graph. Note that the addition of restriction 
constraints on the policy, as defined in section 2.2, does not 
invalidate theorem 2. It just limits the set of possible ac­
tions in some states of the cross-product MOP, and then it 
reduces the complexity of its solution. As a consequence, 
the branch-and-bound algorithm will also be able to find 
the best graph under some restriction constraints. 
Computational leverage. 
It is a very important point 
that most of the computation performed by the algorithms 
that will follow consists of solving a Bellman fundamen­
tal equation with a fixed policy as in ( 4 ), or for the sake of 
finding the optimal deterministic policy as in (7). This can 
be done by successive approximations, the algorithm being 
called "value iteration" in the case of (7). The complexity 
of the algorithm is O(ISI2IOIIAI) = O(INI2ISI2IOIIAI) 
(times the number of iterations, which can be O(ISI)). The 
important point is that any structure in the transition matrix 
T can be exploited while executing these back-ups. The 
structure ofT has two components: 
the structure of the POMOP: A sparse transition matrix 
T of the POMOP provides leverage that allows the 
speed-up of successive-approximation iterations [3]. 
If K < lSI is the branching factor of the PO MOP (i.e., 

Solving POMDPs by Searching the Space of Finite Policies 
421 
the average number of possible successors of a state) 
then the complexity can be reduced to O(INI2 KISI). 
For instance, deterministic transitions reduce the com­
plexity by a factor of lSI. In the same way, a sparse 
observation matrix is exploitable. For instance, deter­
ministic observations reduce the complexity by a fac­
tor of 101. 
the structure of the policy graph: If the leverage gained 
from the structure of the POMDP is not sufficient, 
then one can choose to restrict further the search 
space by imposing structural constraints on the graph, 
and using this structure to speed up the calculation. 
An extreme, but often adopted, solution is to look 
for the best RP. 
In this case, the gain is a factor 
of 101 (the complexity is O(IOI2ISI2IAI) instead of 
O(INI2ISI2IOIIAI) = O(IOI3ISI2IAI)). We will say 
more about constraining the policy graph in section 4. 
When both the problem and the policy are structured, the 
leverage gained can be bigger than just the addition of the 
effect of the two structures. For instance, evaluating a 
RP in a completely deterministic problem can be done in 
O(ISIIAI) instead of O(INIISIIAI) = O(IOIISIIAI). 
3 
FINDING THE OPTIMAL POLICY 
GRAPH 
In this paper, we consider the problem of finding the best 
policy graph of a given size for a POMDP. Littman [14) 
showed that finding the best RP for a given POMDP is an 
NP-hard problem. First, we generalize this result to any 
finite policy graph with a given number of nodes and any 
set of restriction constraints. 
Theorem 3 Given a POMDP and a set of restriction con­
straints, the problem of finding the optimal deterministic 
policy graph satisfying the constraints is NP-hard. 
The proof is straightforward: Finding the best deterministic 
policy graph is equivalent to finding the best deterministic 
RP of the cross-product POMDP. Then the result follows 
from Littman's theorem. 
The techniques for solving NP-hard problems may be clas­
sified into three groups: global search, local search and 
approximation algorithms. In this paper, we will use two 
classic techniques, a global search (section 3.1) and a local 
search (section 3.2). We will consider a possible approxi­
mation algorithm in section 3.3. 
3.1 
GLOBAL SEARCH 
A heuristically guided search is used to find the best deter­
ministic policy graph of a given size, whatever the restric­
tion constraints imposed on 1/J (actions) and 7J (structure). 
It is a branch-and-bound algorithm; i.e., it systematically 
enumerates the set of all possible solutions using bounds 
on the quality of partial solutions to exclude entire regions 
of the search space. If the lower bound of one partial policy 
is greater than the upper bounds of others, then it is useless 
explore these partial policies. Otherwise, each possible ex­
tension of them will considered in time. Therefore, the al­
gorithm is guaranteed to find the optimal solution in finite 
time. Note that this approach is a generalization of a pre­
vious algorithm proposed by Littman [14]. His algorithm 
is limited to policy graphs representing RPs and to POMDPs 
with a very particular structure: state-transitions and obser­
vations are deterministic, and the problem is an achieve­
ment task (i.e., there is a given goal state that must be 
reached as soon as possible). The formalism proposed here 
handles any kind of POMDP and any kind of policy graph 
with restriction constraints. However, Littman gives more 
details on some aspects of the algorithm, and the reader can 
refer to his paper to complete the brief description that we 
give here. 
Ordering of free parameters. 
The tree of all possible 
policies is expanded (in depth-first, breadth-first, or in a 
best-first way) by picking the free parameters of the pol­
icy one after the other, and considering all possible assign­
ment values for each of them. The game of pruning some 
branches based on upper bound/lower bounds comparison 
is added onto that. The size of the tree that is actually ex­
panded in this process strongly depends on the order in 
which the free parameters are picked. In our case, it is 
important that the free values of 1/; come before the free 
values of 1). In other words, when building a solution, we 
assign actions to the nodes first, and then we fix the struc­
ture of the graph. Otherwise, no pruning is possible before 
all possible structures have been expanded (this is due to 
the nature of the upper-bound that we use, see below). In 
our implementation, the parameter 7]0 is expanded after 1/J 
but before 1). There is also an issue with the symmetry of 
the policy-graph space. For instance, in the absence of re­
striction constraints, we can permute the role played by the 
different nodes without changing the policy. Each policy 
graph is then represented by IN I! leaves of the tree. We can 
avoid enumerating equivalent graphs by imposing some ar­
bitrary rule when expanding the tree. For instance we can 
impose that the index of the action attached to a node i al­
ways be greater or equal to the index of the action of node 
i + 1, for all i. This simple trick can improve greatly the 
performance of the heuristic search, merely dividing the 
execution time by IN I!. 
Upper bounds. 
A partial solution is a general finite pol­
icy graph with more restriction constraints than initially 
(each time we specify an action or a node-transition, we 
add a constraint). Then we can get an upper bound by solv­
ing the cross-product MDP, as explained in the second part 

422 
Meuleau, Kim, Kaelbling, and Cassandra 
of section 2.3, and taking the product ir0V*. A completely 
specified policy graph corresponds to an RP of the cross­
product (PO )MDP, so no policy graph can do better than 
the optimal solution of the cross-product MDP. Note that 
this upper bound has a nice monotonicity property: it does 
not increase when we fix a free parameter, and it is equal to 
the true value of the policy graph when the graph is com­
pletely specified. On the other hand, as long as no value 
of 1j; is specified, the optimal policy found by solving the 
cross-product MDP is equivalent to the optimal policy of the 
original MDP (S, A, T, R): the choice of the action in each 
(n, s) is independent of nand depends only on s. Hence, 
the calculated upper bound is always equal to the value of 
the optimal policy of the cross-product MDP. This is why 
no pruning can be done as long as no value of 1j; has been 
specified and this parameter must be the considered first 
when expending the tree. 
Lower bounds. 
If the algorithm searches in depth-first 
order, then we can use the values of the complete poli­
cies already expanded to determine lower bounds on the 
best performance attainable by extending each partial pol­
icy. Otherwise, we can find a lower bound for a given par­
tial policy by completing it at random and calculating the 
value of the resulting complete policy. An improvement 
consists of performing a simple local optimization after 
having completed the policy [14]. In our implementation, 
we also used a heuristic technique based on the solution of 
the cross-product MOP to complete the partial policy. We 
calculate the performance of a complete policy by solving 
equation (4) in the cross-product MDP. 
Complexity. 
The calculation of the upper and lower 
bounds of each node of the expanded tree requires solving 
some Bellman equations in the cross-product MDP. Hence 
it can be done in O(INI2ISI2), or less if there is some 
structure in the POMDP or the policy. To reduce the num­
ber of iterations of successive approximation executed dur­
ing this calculation, one can store, with each partial policy, 
the value function found when calculating its upper bound. 
Then we can start the computation of the upper bound of 
a child partial policy starting from the value of its parent. 
Since they are often not very different, we can gain a lot of 
time with this trick. However, the memory space needed in­
creases dramatically. Even if we can calculate the bounds 
relatively quickly, the real problem is how many nodes it 
will be necessary to expand before reaching the optimum. 
In the worst case, the complete tree of all possible solu­
tions will be expanded, which represents a complexity ex­
ponential in the number of degrees of freedom of the policy 
graph. In practice, our simulations showed that many fewer 
nodes are actually expanded. Note that adding simple con­
straints on the policy reduces not only the complexity of 
the solution of the cross-product MDP, but also the size of 
the search space and hence the number of nodes expanded. 
3.2 
LOCAL SEARCH 
In this approach, we try to find the best stochastic policy 
graph by treating this problem as a classical non-linear nu­
merical optimization problem. Since the value of a policy 
graph is continuous and differentiable with respect to the 
policy parameters, we can calculate its gradient and climb 
it in many different ways. We will not develop all the pos­
sibilities for climbing the gradient here, but we will rather 
focus on the calculation of the gradient, and then just de­
pict a simple implementation of gradient ascent. Note that 
since the gradient may be calculated exactly, this approach 
is guaranteed to converge to a local optimum. The topology 
of the search space, and hence the number of local optima, 
depends on two things: the structure of the POMDP at han<i, 
and the constraints imposed on the policy. By introducing 
constraints on the policy, we can hope not only to reduce 
the execution time of the algorithm, but also to change the 
"landscape" for a less multimodal one. 
Calculating the gradient. 
The value Ev' of a policy 
graph I' is given by equation (6). For each policy parameter 
x we have oEv' fox= ir08Vv' fox. The value function Vv' 
is given by (5). Hence we have 
We are interested in the gradient with respect to the pol­
icy parameters, i.e., we will consider x = 1/;(n, a) and 
x = I)( n, o, n'). The partial derivative ofTŀ' and C[' with 
respect to these variables can be calculated easily starting 
from (2) and (3). The main difficulty in the calculation of 
the gradient is inverting the matrix (I- 7Tv'). If we want 
to exploit the structure of Tv', we can do it by successive 
approximation, the basic update rule being: 
(8) 
where W is an IN I lSI x IN I lSI matrix. Without any useful 
structure in 'f'J.I, the complexity of a complete back up is 
then in O(ISI3IOIIAI). Once the matrix is inverted, the 
inverse can be used to calculate the gradient with respect to 
any parameter x. A minor acceleration can be obtained by 
using the value of (I -7Tv') -1 at the previous point to start 
the iterative computation of this value at the new point. It 
can reduce the number of iterations of (8) at each step, but 
it is still a matrix-wise DP with a complexity in O(ISI3), 
and hence in O(ISI3). 
There is another way of computing the gradient with a com­
plexity only in O(ISI2). Instead of performing the matrix­
wise DP to calculate (I - 7Tv')-1 explicitly, we perform 
several (classical) vector-wise DPs for which complexity 
is in O(ISI2), or less if there is some structure in N or 
S. First we compute Vw' by solving (4), which implies a 
vector-wise DP with complexity in O(ISI2IOIIAI). Then 

--; 
Solving POMDPs by Searching the Space of Finite Policies 
423 
we calculate 
v er 8CZ' 
81'Z' VZ' 
1-
8x +i 8x 
· 
At last, we get 8V JJ I 8x = (I - ;TJJ) -1 v1 by iterating 
v2 r- v1 + ,tZ' v2, 
which is also a vector-wise, square-complexity DP. The 
total complexity of this calculation is 0(2ISI2IOIIAI) (ne­
glecting the calculation of V2). Unfortunately, the calcula­
tion must be re-done for each policy parameter X, since V1 
and V2 depend On X. Thus, we have divided the complex­
ity by a factor of lSI, but multiplied it by the number of 
free variables of the graph. However, this approach will be 
useful in most cases, since there are often many fewer free 
variables in the policy graph than "cross-product states". 
For instance, if we are looking for the best reactive policy, 
then the indirect calculation allows us to gain a factor of 
ISIIIAI-
Climbing tbe gradient. 
Climbing the gradient consists 
of updating each free value x with the rule x f-- x + 
{38 E I 8x, where f3 is the step-size parameter. In our case 
the problem is somewhat more complicated since all the 
parameters that we optimize are probabilities and we have 
to ensure that they stay valid (i.e., inside of the simplex) 
after each update. There are numerous ways for doing that, 
including renormalizing and using the soft-max function. 
In our implementation, we chose to project the calculated 
gradient on the simplex, and then apply it until we reach an 
edge of the simplex. If we reach an edge and the gradient 
points outside of the simplex, then we project the gradient 
on the edge before applying it. 
Related work. 
The idea of using a gradient algorithm for 
solving POMDPs has already been pursued by several au­
thors [2, 12, 27]. The main difference between this work 
and ours is that these authors use a Monte-Carlo estima­
tion of the gradient instead of an exact calculation, and that 
they limit themselves to RPs, which is much less general 
than our approach. Moreover, Jaakkola et al. do not use the 
exponentially discounted criterion (I), but the average re­
ward per time step. In a companion paper [ 17], we propose 
a stochastic gradient descent approach for learning finite 
policy graph during a trial-based interaction with the pro­
cess. 
3.3 
OI'HER APPROACHES 
A Monte-Carlo approach based on Watkins'Q-learning 
[25, 24] is also applicable to our problem. For instance, we 
can an use Q-learning based on observation-action pairs to 
find (with no guarantee of convergence) the optimal RP for 
a POMDP [14]. Another instance is Wiering and Schmid­
huber's HQL [26], which learns finite sequences of RPs. 
lui 
Figure 3: The load/unload problem with 8 locations: the 
agent starts in the "Unload" location (U) and receives a re­
ward each time it returns to this place after passing through 
the "Load" location (L). The problem is partially observ­
able because the agent cannot distinguish the different lo­
cations in between Load and Unload, and because it can­
not perceive if it is loaded or not (lSI = 14, 101 = 3 and 
IAI = 2). 
This Monte-Carlo approach works only if there are strong 
structural constraints on the graph, and thus cannot be ap­
plied for finding general finite policy graphs. Note also that 
Littman reported observing a great superiority (in terms of 
execution time) of the global branch-and-bound search over 
the Monte-Carlo approach, in the case where the graph is 
constrained to encode a simple RP. Our simulations with 
other architectures (sets of structural constraints) showed 
similar results: in general, the Monte-Carlo approach can­
not compete with the two others. 
4 
INTRODUCING STRUCTURAL 
CONSTRAINTS 
Because the majority of their computation is to perform 
Bellman back-ups in the cross-product MDP, the algorithms 
outlined above can take advantage of any preexisting struc­
ture in the POMDP. However, this leverage can be insuffi­
cient if the problem is too big or too difficult for the two 
techniques. In this case, one may whish to restrict further 
the search space by imposing structural constraints on the 
policy graph. For instance, a simple solution consists of 
defining a neighborhood for the nodes of the graph, and 
allowing transitions only to a neighboring node. This cor­
responds to a set of restriction constraints ( 7J is forced to 
take the value zero in many points), and hence the algo­
rithm above can still be applied. A somehow extreme so­
lution consists of limiting the search to reactive policies 
(then 7J is completely fixed in advance). More complex sets 
of constraints can also be used, for instance, we can limit 
the search to policy representable as a finite sequence of 
RPs (with particular rules governing the transition from one 
RP to another), as in Wiering and Schmidhuber's HQL [26]. 
Other instances include the finite-horizon memory policies 
used by McCallum [15, 16], or the external-memory poli­
cies used by Peshkin et al. [19]. Although these architec­
tures cannot be described only in terms of restriction con­
straints (there are also equality constraints between differ­
ent parameters of the graph), the previous results and al­
gorithm can be extended to each of them in particular. In 
other words, we can use the previous algorithm to find 
• the best RP-sequence of a given length, 

424 
Meuleau, Kim, Kaelbling, and Cassandra 
1200 
1000 
3 
800 
c 
., 
0 
600 
0 
., 
0 
y 
v 
"' 
400 
200 
0 
Load/Unload problem 
ga 
dfh 
--
-::::. ::d---------------------------------fh 
.-. .-:";-:::; ....... . 
100 
200 
300 
Number of states 
400 
500 
Figure 4: Simulations results obtained with the load/unload 
problem: execution time of the algorithms as a function of 
the size of the problem (ga: gradient ascent, dfh: depth first 
heuristic search, bfh: breadth first heuristic search). 
• the best policy using a given finite-horizon memory, 
• the best policy using an external-memory of a given 
size. 
(we can also show that it is NP-hard to solve these prob­
lems). 
What do we gain and what do we lose when we impose 
a structure on the policy graph? 
In general, imposing 
structural constraints reduces the number of parameters per 
node (which should help both techniques), and modifies the 
topology of the search space (which influences the gradi­
ent descent approach). Another point is that the best graph 
without the constraints can be better than the best graph 
with the constraints, i.e., the constraints can decrease the 
value of the best solution. Even if this does not happen, 
more nodes may be required to reach the best performance 
with the constraints than without. Consider, for instance, 
the load/unload problem represented in figure 3. This sim­
ple problem is solved optimally with a two-node policy 
graph, or with a sequence of two RPs as used in HQL. As an 
RP is encoded with an IOI-node graph, any sequence of two 
RPs will be encoded by at least 2101 = 6 nodes. However, 
the number of parameters per node will be smaller than in 
the unconstrained case. In general, adding structure will be 
interesting if we choose an architecture that fits the prob­
lem at hand. Hence, it is a question of previous knowledge 
about the problem at hand and its optimal solution. 
5 
SIMULATION RESULTS 
In our first experiments, we used the simple load/unload 
problem of figure 3 with an increasing number of loca­
tions, to see how both algorithms scale up to increasing 
problem-size, and how they compare. Since it is a very 
G 
s 
Figure 5: A partially observable stochastic maze: the agent 
must go from the starting state marked with an "S"to the 
goal marked with an "G". The problem is partially observ­
able because the agent cannot perceive its true location, but 
only its orientation and the presence or the absence of a 
wall on each side of the square defining its current state. 
The problem is stochastic because there is a non-zero prob­
ability of slipping, so that the agent does not always know 
if its last attempt to make a move had any consequence on 
its actual position in the maze. 
easy POMDP, the results obtained represent a kind of upper 
bound on the performance of the algorithms. It is unlikely 
that they will perform better on another (harder) problem. 
During this experiment IN I was set to its optimal value of 
2 and the gradient algorithm always started from the center 
of the simplex (i.e., the policy graph is initialized with uni­
form distributions).1 We measured the time of execution of 
each algorithm, as a function of lSI. In the case of gradient 
ascent, we stopped when we reached 99% of the optimal. 
When the heuristic search uses a stochastic calculation of 
upper bounds, we average the measure over 50 runs. -y was 
set to 0.996 (a big value is necessary to accommodate big 
state-spaces), and the learning rate of gradient descent was 
optimized. The results are given in figure 4. They show 
that the heuristic search clearly outperforms the gradient 
algorithm, which becomes numerically unstable when the 
number of states increases in this kind of geometrically­
discounted absorbing problem. 
In the second set of experiments, we wanted to measure 
how far our algorithms can go in terms of problem size, 
in a problem more difficult than the simple load/unload. 
We used the a set of partially observable mazes with the 
regular structure represented in figure 5, and whose size 
varies from 9 to 989 states (101 = 9 and lA I = 4). These 
mazes are not particularly easy, since they have only two 
different optimal paths. The minimal number of nodes for 
solving them is 4, one per action (although the policy is not 
reactive). The time required for the (depth first) branch­
and-bound algorithm to find the optimal solution with this 
optimal number of nodes is shown in figure 6. We see that 
1We used a simpler version of the algorithms where the start­
ing node is fixed. Otherwise, the policy using only uniform dis­
tributions is a (very unstable) local optimum. 

Solving POMDPs by Searching the Space of Finite Policies 
425 
Maze Problem 
3w>,----------------. 
200 
400 
600 
Number of states 
800 
Figure 6: Performance of the branch-and-bound algorithm 
on the maze problem: execution time as a function of the 
number of states. 
we can solve a partially observable maze with almost 1000 
states in a less than 6 hours. It represents a performance 
far above the capacities of classic approaches for solving 
POMDPs. Note also that, as the number of states grows, 
the measured complexity is almost linear in the number of 
states. 
6 
CONCLUSION 
We studied the problem of finding the optimal policy rep­
resentable as a finite state automaton of a given size, pos­
sibly with some simple structural constraints. This ap­
proach by-passes the continuous and intractable belief-state 
space. However, we showed that we end up with a NP­
hard problem anyway. Then we proposed to use two classic 
search techniques, and developed efficient implementations 
of them that allow using the structure of the problem to ac­
celerate the computation. If this is not sufficient, bigger 
leverage can be gained by imposing structure on the policy. 
However, our algorithms are limited by necessity to enu­
merate at least once per iteration, the complete state space 
of the POMDP. In a companion paper [17], we propose an 
indirect learning algorithm that avoids this bottleneck.
