1
A Little More, a Lot Better: Improving Path Quality
by a Path Merging Algorithm
Barak Raveh, Angela Enosh and Dan Halperin
Abstract—Sampling-based motion planners are an effective
means for generating collision-free motion paths. However, the
quality of these motion paths (with respect to quality measures
such as path length, clearance, smoothness or energy) is often
notoriously low, especially in high-dimensional conﬁguration
spaces. We introduce a simple algorithm for merging an arbitrary
number of input motion paths into a hybrid output path of
superior quality, for a broad and general formulation of path
quality. Our approach is based on the observation that the
quality of certain sub-paths within each solution may be higher
than the quality of the entire path. A dynamic-programming
algorithm, which we recently developed for comparing and
clustering multiple motion paths, reduces the running time of
the merging algorithm signiﬁcantly. We tested our algorithm in
motion-planning problems with up to 12 degrees of freedom. We
show that our algorithm is able to merge a handful of input
paths produced by several different motion planners to produce
output paths of much higher quality.
I. INTRODUCTION
F
OR several decades, extensive efforts have been devoted
to research of deterministic and probabilistic methods for
ﬁnding collision-free paths for moving objects among obsta-
cles, with applications in diverse domains such as robotics,
graphical animation, surgical planning, computational biology
and computer games [1]–[4]. Probabilistic sampling-based
methods for motion planning were shown to be particularly
useful when the conﬁguration space of the moving body has
a large number of degrees of freedom [1], [4]–[8]. In many
applications, it is also relevant to ﬁnd a path that is better
than other alternative paths. However, ﬁnding an optimal path
with respect to various quality measures is often NP-hard,
even in low-dimensional cases where an arbitrary path can be
found efﬁciently [9]–[11]. Finding high-quality paths in higher
dimensions is even harder.
A. Manuscript Outline
In Sections II and III we discuss related work and outline the
contribution of this study. In Section IV we introduce the basic
concept of merging multiple motion paths into a hybrid-path
with improved quality. We outline three variants of the algo-
rithm, from a na¨ıve implementation, to an asymptotically faster
variant, which makes use of our recently introduced dynamic-
programming edit-distance algorithm for matching pairs of
motion pathways. In Section V we report on experiments of
B. Raveh is with the Department of Microbiology and Molecular
Genetics, Hadassah Medical School, The Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel
B. Raveh, A. Enosh and D. Halperin are with School of Computer Sci-

increasing difﬁculty, in which we compare the performance of
our approach to exisiting motion planners, for problems with
up to 12 degrees of freedom, where our method is particularly
effective.
II. RELATED WORK
We make a distinction between ﬁnding an optimal path
with respect to the entire (continuous) conﬁguration space, as
opposed to the restricted formulation, where we look for the
optimal path in a discrete graph of conﬁgurations. The latter
is generally much easier1. In fact, all common deterministic
and sampling-based algorithm aim to capture the topological
connectivity of the free space (Cfree) by a discrete graph struc-
ture (the roadmap graph), and the ﬁnal solution is extracted
by searching in this graph using Dijkstra’s algorithm [13] or
one of its variants (such as a maximal bottleneck-clearance
path, retrieved by minute modiﬁcations to Dijkstra’s algorithm
or by efﬁcient alternatives [14]). Kim et al. [15] devised
an augmented version of Dijkstra’s algorithm for ﬁnding the
optimal path in a graph, where diverse optimality criteria can
be combined in a ﬂexible manner. Hence, a major challenge
remains to build a representative graph structure that contains
high-quality paths in Cfree to begin with.
Finding optimal paths for instances of many motion plan-
ning problems is NP-hard [12], and efﬁcient analytic solutions
were devised only for extremely simple ones, such as trans-
lating objects among polygonal obstacles in the plane using
the shortest path [16]–[18] or the highest-clearance path [19].
Already for translating polyhedra, ﬁnding the shortest possible
path was shown to be NP-hard [9], [12]. Approximation algo-
rithms have been devised for several NP-hard motion-planning
problems; see, e.g., [10], [12], [20]. As an alternative to exact
solutions, sampling-based algorithms record the connectivity
of Cfree in a discrete graph structure by connecting random
landmarks, and were shown to be probabilistically complete.
Nonetheless, we usually cannot hope to completely cover the
space in reasonable running time using these methods. In
particular, for conﬁguration spaces of high dimension, it might
be difﬁcult to retrieve even a single feasible motion path, not
to mention a high-quality one.
a) Improving path quality by modifying the sampling
algorithm: Wilmarth et al. [21] improved the local clearance
of sampled conﬁgurations by sampling closer to the medial
axis. Nieuwenhuisen et al. [22] improved the optimal path
length in probabilistic roadmaps by closing cycles only when
1Although some speciﬁc graph-search formulations are also NP-hard, and
call for pseudo-polynomial-time algorithms or appropriate heuristics [12]
arXiv:1001.2391v2  [cs.RO]  4 Apr 2010

2
they signiﬁcantly reduce the (graph) path length between con-
ﬁgurations, and Geraerts et al. [23] combined both approaches.
In contrast to the above techniques, the approach we present
below is not tailored for any speciﬁc criterion of path quality,
and is designed to allow general formulations of path quality.
b) Improving path quality by post-processing: Two paths
are said to be homotopy equivalent if one path can be
continuously deformed into the other, without introducing any
collisions along the way. Often the output path of a roadmap
is homotopy equivalent to another higher-quality path. In
this case, post-processing procedures ignore the roadmap that
originally created the path, and focus on small perturbations
that improve the path within its homotopy class. Path pruning
and shortcut heuristics are common post-processing techniques
for creating shorter and smoother paths, with little chance
of switching between homotopy classes. Geraerts et al. [24]
locally improved path clearance using a retraction schemes
that resembles the approach taken by Wilmarth et al. [21],
and more recently [25], improved both path length and path
clearance simultaneously (but not other criteria of path qual-
ity). Geraerts et al. [26] locally improved path quality within
a corridor (an inﬂated path) by applying a force-ﬁeld to the
moving body within that corridor. In this case, the output path
is restricted by construction to the selected corridor. In the
Appendix, we discuss some more related work that deals with
the very formulation of path-quality measures.
III. CONTRIBUTION
We observe that sampling-based algorithms like Probabilis-
tic Roadmaps [6], Rapidly-exploring Random Trees [7] and
Expansive Space Trees [5] tend to generate different solutions
in different runs, depending on the random decisions made
at each run. Output solution paths may differ by continuous
homotopic deformations, but they can also come from different
homotopy classes. See, for example, Figure 1a, where three
different paths are shown, produced by three runs of the PRM
(Probabilistic Road-Maps) algorithm.
Planning arbitrary motion-paths is often easier than ﬁnding
high-quality paths [12], and a common practice in opti-
mization theory is to integrate existing solutions into a new
and improved solution, as is done, for example, in genetic
algorithms [27]. Following this line of thought, we observe
that even if the entire path has low quality, some shorter
subsegments within the path might be of high quality.
In this study, we describe a simple and efﬁcient post-
processing approach for improving the quality of the mo-
tion paths by hybridizing high-quality sub-paths from initial
solutions to the motion query. The initial solutions can be
generated using any standard single-query or multi-query
algorithm for motion planning (Figure 1). We integrate these
solution paths within a graph data-structure, which we call
the Hybridization-Graph, or H-Graph. We present several
approaches for efﬁciently merging multiple motion paths into a
single high-quality paths, and show how this simple paradigm
can efﬁciently produce high-quality paths under various qual-
ity measures, in a general and uniform manner, and without
the need for ad-hoc optimization. This allows for particular
ﬂexibility and improved running time in multi-query settings
where the type of quality criterion may vary between queries,
and we avoid recomputing the entire query each time.
IV. ALGORITHM
A. Hybridization Graph between Multiple Motion Paths
Intuitively, sampling-based algorithms (that were not tuned
towards a speciﬁc quality measure) are more likely to sample
short high-quality path segments than full length high-quality
paths. We are interested in generating a high-quality output
path by post-processing a set of l collision-free motion paths
π1, π2, ..., πl, which were generated by some arbitrary motion
planner, all sharing the same start and end conﬁguration. The
input paths are assumed to be given as a linear chain of discrete
nodes. A graph H (the Hybridization-Graph, or H-Graph) is
initialized from the union of these paths: the vertices VH are
the disjoint union of intermediate nodes from each path, in
addition to the start and end conﬁgurations. Likewise, the
edges EH are the original edges taken from the l motion
paths. After the initialization of H, we use a local-planner to
connect certain pairs of conﬁgurations that originate from the
various paths2, creating new ’bridges’ between or within paths.
We elaborate on the choice of those pairs of conﬁgurations
below. The resulting bridging edges create new paths in H
that contain sub-segments from different input paths. These
hybrid paths may have higher quality than any of the input
paths. The pseudo-code for constructing a general H-Graph is
outlined in Algorithm 1. Once H is constructed, we ﬁnd the
optimal solution with respect to H for any quality measure
of choice, using Dijkstra’s algorithm or one of its variants, as
described in the ﬁrst part of Section II.
Algorithm 1 Building a Hybridization Graph from l input
paths
Build-H-Graph(PathsList)
PathsList: a set of l input solution paths from initial to
goal conﬁguration
G : an output H-Graph
initialize-H-Graph(PathsList)
for all π1, π2 ∈PathsList do
potentialBridgeEdges = a list of potential bridg-
ing edges between π1 and π2
for all e ∈potentialBridgeEdges do
πlocal = localPlanner(e.from →e.to)
if valid(πlocal) then
G.addWeightedEdge(e)
end if
end for
end for
return G
2The local-planner can be considered as a black box for our purposes,
but it typically involves systematic collision detection of intermediate conﬁg-
urations between a pair of end conﬁgurations

3
Randomly generate  
multiple motion paths
using any motion planning 
algorithm
I
Construct the 
H-Graph
local-planner ; path-
matching algorithm
II
Find high-
quality path
graph path-search 
algorithm
III
A hybrid output 
path with higher 
quality:
π1 π2π3
start
end
Fig. 1.
An illustration of using hybridization-graphs to improve path quality in the Grid scene (extended from [22]). We visualize the trace of a elongated
rectangle that moves with both translation and rotation in a grid of obstacles: (I) We look for a short path that traverses the grid by ﬁrst generating l paths
using any standard-motion planner, either multi-query or single-query (PRM in this example). Standard techniques often tend to generate lengthy zigzagging
motion paths. (II) For constructing the H-Graph, we invoke a local-planner between certain pairs of conﬁgurations. The running time may depend on the
number of pairs, see Section IV. (III) The speciﬁc choice of a graph-search algorithm depends on the quality measure of interest (output path in magenta).
Images and PRM paths were generated using the OOPSMP motion-planning package [28]. The ﬁgure is best viewed in color.
B. H-Graph Variants
A particularly time consuming step in the process of path
hybridization is the invocation of the local-planner, due to
expensive computation such as collision detection queries. We
now discuss several variants of the hybridization algorithm,
which aim to heuristically or asymptotically reduce the number
of calls to the local-planner.
1) Exhaustive all-pairs formulation: In this na¨ıve approach
we apply the local planner between all the vertices VH of H
(all originating from the l original paths). If each path consists
of at most n nodes, the local-planner is invoked O(l2n2)
times, for every pair of conﬁgurations and in each pair of
paths. The n2 term is reﬂected in the list of potential bridge
edges in Algorithm 1. Since in this variant we test all pairs
of potential bridging edges, the resulting path quality will
be higher or equal compared to the other H-Graph variants
presented below, at the cost of possibly much longer running
time due to exhaustive invocation of the local-planner.
2) Neighborhood H-Graph: A simple saving in running
time is achieved by invoking the local-planner only between
close-by conﬁgurations in H. The neighborhood of a con-
ﬁguration can be set by a threshold distance D, using an
appropriate distance function on the conﬁguration space. This
straightforward approach can signiﬁcantly reduce the running
time (but also the resulting path quality), depending on the
selected threshold distance D, and the speciﬁcs of the motion
planning problem at hand.
3) Edit-Distance H-Graphs: As mentioned above, in a
na¨ıve formulation, the local-planner is invoked O(l2n2) times.
We are now interested in reducing the O(n2) term by connect-
ing fewer edges. For practical purposes (as it emerges from
our experiments) we can assume that the number of paths l
is small. The Neighborhood H-Graph heuristic, suggested in
the previous section, reduces this number of potential edges
but it is heavily dependant on a neighborhood-size parameter.
Another alternative (which we did not test in the experiments
section of this manuscript) is to invoke the local-planner
only for the Φ nearest neighbours of each node, resulting in
an asymptotic reduction in the number of calls to the local
planner from O(l2n2) to O(lnΦ), but possibly missing many
useful connections. In this section, we take a more structured
view and bound the number of calls to the local-planner
for each pair of paths by O(n), using a recently introduced
path matching algorithm. For completeness of the exposition
we brieﬂy describe the edit-distance algorithm for matching
motion paths [29].
Algorithm 2 outlines the details of the dynamic program
for ﬁnding an optimal match between discrete motion paths p
and q of lengths m and n, respectively.. Let p1, p2, . . ., pm
and q1, q2, . . ., qn denote the conﬁgurations along the two
paths. We regard each path as a string with the constituting
conﬁgurations as letters. A valid matching between the paths
p and q is obtained by aligning the two respective strings one
on top of the other. Here are examples of valid ﬁttings of
p = {p1, p2, p3} and q = {q1, q2, q3, q4}.
p1
p2
p3
-
p1
-
-
p2
p3
q1
q2
q3
q4
q1
q2
q3
-
q4
Formally, in edit-distance string matching we are trying to
edit one string to another string by using legal operations of
character replacement and character insertion / deletion [30].
We pay a certain price for each of these operations, and the
objective is to ﬁnd a set of edit operations where we pay
the minimal price. In order to align matching subpaths, we
give a higher penalty for matching (“replacing”) dissimilar
conﬁgurations. We also pay a price for opening a gap in the
alignment (“deleting/inserting”), for mismatching subpaths. In
this case, we align a letter against a space character (denoted
above as a dash), but we need to pay a penalty as well. The
edit operations induce a natural pairwise alignment between
the two paths, with gaps in regions of mismatch.
Let ∆(pi, qj) be the price we pay for replacing conﬁguration
i of path p with conﬁguration j of path q. As stated, we pay

4
less for replacing similar conﬁgurations, in order to match
similar regions. In addition, we pay a price GAPext for
extending gaps (and optionally, a price GAPinit for initiating a
new gap in the match3). A large GAPext penalty prevents gaps
and favors the matching of subsegments even if they are not
very similar, whereas a small GAPext penalty forces a more
selective matching. The GAPinit penalty favors a small overall
number of non-consecutive gaps (regardless of the length of
consecutive gap stretches).
The matrix C contains the optimal costs of matching
subsegments from p and q. The entry Cij is the suboptimal
cost of matching the ﬁrst i conﬁgurations from p to the ﬁrst
j conﬁgurations from q. We ﬁll it in by deciding whether to
match the conﬁgurations pi and qj or to open a gap. We record
this decision in the trace-back matrix TB. In the last iteration,
the cost of the alignment is in the last entry of Cmn, and the
trace-back matrix records the set of edit operations that leads
to an optimal matching. Thus, the alignment between motion
paths can be easily recovered from the TB matrix.
Algorithm 2 Dynamic-Programming Algorithm for Matching
Two Paths
MatchPaths(p,q)
C: a cost matrix ∈ℜm×n
{For i < 0 or j < 0, we deﬁne Ci,j = ∞}
TB: a symbolic trace-back matrix
for i=0 to m do
for j=0 to n do
Match⇐Ci−1,j−1 + ∆(pi, qj)
Up⇐Ci−1,j + GAPext
Left⇐Ci,j−1 + GAPext
Ci,j ⇐min (Match, Up, Left, 0)
TBi,j ⇐



” ↖”
for Match
” ↑”
for Up
” ←”
for Left
end for
end for
return matrices C and TB
Although the asymptotic running time is clearly O(mn),
the practical running time is negligible compared to calls to
the local-planner between two conﬁguration, where expensive
collision checks are performed.
Using Path Matching to Speed Up the Construction of H-
Graphs. We now show how the alignment algorithm is used
to reduce the number of calls to the local-planner during the
construction of H. Intuitively, matched subsegments tend to
come from close-by regions of the conﬁguration space (this
is reﬂected in the ∆cost function). We observe that gaps
between matched regions point to possible alternative routes.
Therefore, we use the path matching algorithm to bound the
number of tested hybridization-edges by O(n) as follows. In
gap regions, we try to connect the “deleted” conﬁgurations
in path p to the two boundary conﬁgurations of the gap in
3For simplicity, in Algorithm 2 below we ignore the GAPinit price, the
price for initiating a new gap. This term is incorporated by a minor technical
modiﬁcation.
the matched path q, using the local-planner. In addition, we
also try to connect matching conﬁgurations, in order to obtain
local improvements for the matched region. Since the size of
the alignment is clearly O(n) (where n is the number of nodes
in the longest input path), we try to connect at most O(n) pairs
of conﬁgurations for each pair of input paths, in contrast to
O(n2) conﬁgurations in All-Pairs H-Graphs.
As in the previous section, a heuristic speed-up in perfor-
mance can be achieved by connecting only close-by conﬁgura-
tion in the neighborhood of the match. The combined approach
beneﬁts from both the asymptotic speed-up of O(n) achieved
using path matching, and from the heuristic speed-up achieved
by bounding the neighborhood size. We call this version Edit-
Distance Neighborhood H-Graphs.
V. EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we benchmark the effectiveness of hybridiz-
ing multiple input paths from short runs of sampling-based
algorithms, in a set of 2D, 3D, 6D and 12D conﬁguration
spaces. The advantage of using H-Graphs becomes apparent
in the 6D and 12D spaces, where exhaustive sampling is not
feasible.
We implemented the H-Graph algorithm and the path
matching algorithm within the OOPSMP open-source package
for motion planning [28], and used the package’s internal
implementation of PRM, RRT and subdivision local-planner.
The described algorithms can be readily subjected to paral-
lelization. However, for the performance analysis, we have run
all tests on a single processor of a dual-core 2.67Ghz AMD
Athlon machine. Our example scenes are mostly borrowed
from Geraerts et al. [25].
test
test2
A. 2D Maze: Trading Off Path Length and Path Clearance
The maze scene is an illustrative toy-example for the
ﬂexibility with which H-Graphs accommodate diverse types of
quality measures in a uniform manner. The scene comprises a
small square robot that is translating in a 2D maze (Figure 2)
through a corridor ﬂanked by branching paths that all lead to
dead-ends. In Figure 2 we see ﬁve paths from different PRM
runs, hybridized using various quality measures. In solutions
generated by PRM, the clearance from the maze walls ﬂuctu-
ated considerably (second column of Figure 2). We used the
Integrated k-Inverse Clearance (the path length weighted by
the exponentiated inverse clearance Cl−k of conﬁgurations ;
see Appendix for further details). Setting k to 3 gives a fairly
high penalty for regions of low clearance, whereas for k = 1
4
path-length also plays an important factor. Indeed, for k = 3
we get a high-clearance path. We compare to the path-length
measure, where the output path closely resembles the optimal
path. We also experimented with the average-clearance and the
maximal bottleneck clearance (see Appendix for deﬁnition of
both quality measures; results not shown). In all cases, the
objective quality measure was improved signiﬁcantly, using a
very small number of input paths, demonstrating the ﬂexibility
of the path hybridization scheme.

5
The Input Paths
Overlaid Input Paths
Output Path
Integrated 
k-inverse clearance 
[k=3]
Integrated 
k-inverse clearance 
[k=0.25]
Path Length
Quality Measure
k
Fig. 2.
Improvement of various quality measures with H-Graphs in the 2D-Maze scene taken from Geraerts et al. [25]. Here we integrated ﬁve random
runs of PRM. Although each input path is already the highest-quality path within its roadmap, the output path shows signiﬁcant improvement in path quality.
For instance, in the top rows we try to improve the path length weighted by clearance with different weights (See Appendix for more information about the
integrated k-inverse clearance measure). Note that when the clearance is given a high weight (top row), our output hybrid-path is far from the obsacles (right
column) although all the input paths from which it was made graze the obstacles (left column). As expected, when the clearance is given a lower weight
(middle row), the integrated k-inverse clearance measure behaves similarly to the path-length measure (bottom row), but the path clearance is higher (right
column), illustrating the tradeoff between the two. Input PRM paths (left column) were generated using the OOPSMP motion-planning package [28].
Performance tradeoff with Edit-Distance H-Graphs As de-
scribed in the previous section, the edit-distance path matching
algorithm bounds the number of calls to the local-planner,
but the quality of the path might be compromised because
less hybridization-edges are created. For the 2D-maze envi-
ronment, we compared the post-processing time and the clear-
ance quality for hybridizing ﬁve paths of Neighborhood H-
Graphs and Neighborhood Edit-Distance H-Graphs using the
Integrated k-Inverse Clearance measure (path length weighted
by clearance) with k = 3. Importantly, the running time of the
edit-distance variant dropped by 75% (Figure 3), while the
quality of output paths was similar between the two variants,
although slightly lower for the Edit-Distance variant. It is
interesting to note that similar results were obtained for RRT
inputs (results not shown), demonstrating the modular nature
of the H-Graph algorithm, and its independence from the
source of input.
B. Elongated Rectangle in a 2D Grid: Rotation and Transla-
tion
In the grid scene, inspired by a scene in Nieuwenhuisen
et al. [22], we move an elongated rectangle with rotation
and translation, from the top of the workspace to the bottom
through a grid of rectangles (Figure 1). In each row of
obstacles, the elongated rectangle is forced to squeeze through
one of four narrow passages. In order to make it harder for the
robot to cross two consecutive passages, we distort the grid
slightly such that passages at every second row are shifted
with respect to odd rows. Standard sampling-based algorithms
tend to move the robot in a lengthy zigzagging motion.
We generated three input paths with PRM for the grid scene,
and hybridized them using the Neighborhood H-Graph variant,
as illustrated in Figure 1. For measuring path length, we give
a relatively large weight to the translational component of the
motion4. In the output path of the H-Graph, the average path
length was 1.08 ± 0.12 units. In comparison, the input paths
generated with PRM have been well over three times longer
(3.85 ± 0.75 units on average) and the the hybridized output
path shown in Figure 1 is 0.85 units long.
C. Comparison of H-Graphs to Long Runs of Various Motion-
Planners
We showed how H-Graphs can improve the output of a
few short runs of PRM. But if we allow inﬁnite time for each
PRM run, then due to its probabilistic completeness, we would
eventually cover the space and ﬁnd the approximate shortest
path in the roadmap. We now compare the performance of
H-Graphs based on several short runs of PRM, to a single
longer run of PRM. We show that H-Graphs are particularly
4We deﬁne the translational weight to 1 and the rotational weight of
0.00005 in the OOPSMP software . Note the the units for rotation and
translation are incomparable, and in practice, rotation weights in the order
of 10−3 −10−4 are considered extremely high.

6
0
1
2
3
4
H-Graphs
Edit Distance 
H-Graphs
Running Time [sec]
Running Time
0
50
100
H-Graphs
Edit Distance 
H-Graphs
Path Inverse-Quality
k-Inverse Clearance
[arbitrary units]
Fig. 3.
Performance comparison of the Neighborhood Edit-Distance vs. the
Neighborhood Edit-Distance variants for hybridizing ﬁve input PRM paths,
in the 2D maze scene. The Integrated k-Inverse Clearance is computed with
k = 3 (weighting the path length by the clearance of conﬁgurations - a lower
value means better quality; see Appendix for details on quality measures).
effective for high-dimensional conﬁguration spaces, in which
exhaustive runs of PRM and RRT are not feasible.
PRM without cycles: In the grid environment described
above, which has three degrees of freedom, we hybridize three
PRM input paths. We allocate 1 second for preprocessing each
PRM, and together with 0.4 seconds for constructing the H-
Graph on average, the total running time ttotal is 3.4 seconds.
In comparison, we let PRM run for ttotal = 3.4 seconds.
In the long PRM run, the average path length is still very
long compared to exhaustively long runs that ﬁnd near-optimal
paths (Figure 4). Strikingly, even if we more than double the
running time of PRM to 8 seconds, the shortest path in the
roadmap is still much longer than in H-Graphs (2.67 ± 0.37).
Short-cutting Heuristics: It is worth noting that our method
differs signiﬁcantly from the common short-cutting post-
processing heuristics in which the local planner is applied in-
ternally within the path (described in, e.g., Geraerts et al. [25]).
While this heuristics may be useful for getting rid of certain
loops and “bumps” in a motion path, it is generally unsuitable
for transforming between different homotopy classes (except
for simple instances of motion planning problems devoid of
narrow passages). Our results conﬁrm this, as PRM paths
in the grid scene that were post-processed with the standard
short-cutting heuristics are over twice longer than hybridized
motion paths (Figure 4).
PRM with cycles: A common practice in PRM is to refrain
from adding cycles to the roadmap, since they promote a
quadratic increase in the number of edges, impairing perfor-
mance [22]. However, the poor quality of paths in long PRM
runs described above, compared to H-Graphs, can be attributed
to the lack of cycles. Indeed, in the same example of the
elongated rectangle that is translating and rotating through the
grid, long runs of PRM with cycles result in slightly shorter
paths compared to H-Graphs (Figure 4). We also implemented
and compared our method to the useful-cycles extension of
PRM by Nieuwenhuisen et al. [22], where a cycle is closed
if the connecting edge provides a signiﬁcant short-cut, by a
factor γ (we used γ = 3). In this case, for the same running
time we also get a slightly better path length (Figure 4). While
in this very simple example with three degrees of freedom, we
might be better-off running PRM with cycles for a long time
instead of using H-Graphs, we now demonstrate the advantage
0
1
2
3
4
5
Path Length
[arbitrary units]
Fig. 4.
Comparison of output path lengths for the grid scene (three
degrees of freedom) between different motion planners and the Hybridization-
Graphs approach. Identical running times (3.4 seconds) were allocated for
each motion planner. The dashed line indicates the approximate optimal path
length (estimated by extremely long runs of PRM with cycles).
of using H-graphs for problems of higher dimensions.
D. H-Graphs
are
Effective
in
6-dimensional
and
12-
dimensional conﬁguration spaces
The Single-Wrench scene [25] requires a ﬁnely synchro-
nized rotational and translational motion of a free-ﬂying
wrench moving through 13 axis-aligned beams (see the left
hand side of Figure 5). The Double-Wrench scene extends
this problem to two wrenches moving simultaneously. In
this six and twelve dimensional problems, the advantage of
using H-Graphs becomes evident. The inverse clearance of the
wrenches from the beams was optimized by hybridizing three
paths generated by PRM without cycles (using the Neighbor-
hood H-Graphs variant and the Integrated k-Inverse Clearance
measure with k = 3, as deﬁned in the Appendix), where each
run was allocated a total of 35 seconds for the Single-Wrench
and 900 seconds for the Double-Wrench scene..
For both the Single-Wrench and Double-Wrench scenes,
the inverse-clearance measure was improved dramatically with
respect to PRM without cycles (Figure 5). More importantly,
PRM with cycles has become prohibitively slow in 30%-40%
of the cases, failing to ﬁnd any solution path in the allocated
time frame (Figure 5). In contrast, our H-Graphs approach
resulted in high-clearance motion paths in all runs. And while
for a single wrench, PRM with cycles outputs paths with
marginally better quality (when it ﬁnds a solution path to begin
with), in the Double-Wrench scene our hybridization scheme
dramatically outperforms PRM with or without cycles, with
respect to both path quality and the percent of successful runs
(Figure 5). Our typical output paths allowed a good safety
distance of 10%-20% of the wrench width at any point through
the motion, compared to zero clearance for PRM, the latter
outputting non-realistic motion paths for practical purposes.

7
100%
71%
100%
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
0
300
600
900
1200
% Succesful Runs
k-Inverse Clearance
[ arbitrary units]
k-Inverse Clearance
% Succesful Runs
100%
60%
100%
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
1.E+00
1.E+05
1.E+10
1.E+15
% Succesful Runs
k-Inverse Clearance
[arbitrary units]
k-Inverse Clearance
Succesful Runs %
Single-Wrench Scene (6 DoFs)
Double-Wrench Scene (12 DoFs)
Wrench Workspace
Fig. 5.
The Single and Double-Wrench Scenes (6 and 12 degrees of freedom ; adapted from Geraerts et al. [25]). Results for the Single-Wrench scene are
averaged over 20 runs. We weighted the path length by clearance using the k-Inverse Clearance measure with k = 3 (a lower value means better quality; see
Appendix for details on quality measures). PRM with cycles failed to ﬁnd a valid solution for 30%-40% of the cases in the given time. For the Double-Wrench
scene the median was taken instead of average in order to avoid the effect of outliers (the error-bars mark the 0.15 and 0.85 percentile quality in each case).
Note that the results for this scene are shown on a logarithmic scale.
E. Further Applications of H-Graphs
In this study we introduced and thoroughly benchmarked a
path hybridization scheme in various 2D and 3D workspaces
with up to 12 degrees of freedom. In a recent study [29]
we describe a biological example involving the coordinated
motion of a protein with 104 backbone degrees of free-
dom, where we applied a preliminary version of the path-
hybridization algorithm to multiple runs of RRT. We note
that in Enosh et al. [29], the emphasis was put on the
biological problem at hand, and not on the computational
methodology. In that work, we were able to obtain a low
energy motion path between the initial and goal states. This
example is particularly encouraging as it shows the applica-
bility of H-Graphs to complex problems with many degrees
of freedom, where it is very hard to optimize the quality of
motion paths. In a recent student workshop in motion plan-
ning, students used path hybridization to signiﬁcantly improve
motion paths of a non-holonomic moving body, originally
generated with C-PRM [31], extending H-Graphs to motion
planning under kino-dynamic constraints. See movie and more
details in http://acg.cs.tau.ac.il/courses/workshop/spring-2009/
ﬁnal-projects/non-holonomic-motion-planner-project.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
We have reported here on a simple algorithm for hybridizing
a set of input paths into an improved output solution. We treat
different quality measures in a uniform manner, and allow
modular usage of any standard motion-planning algorithm. We
show experimental results on 2D, 3D, 6D and 12D conﬁgu-
ration spaces, indicating that this new method is particularly
useful for such high-dimensional problems, and offers uniform
treatment for various optimality criteria and motion-planning
algorithms.
APPENDIX A
FORMULATION OF PATH QUALITY MEASURES
The quality of a motion path can be formulated by human
intuition about what a good or convenient path is. It is natural
to choose a short path that keeps a certain distance from the
obstacles. We may also bound the curvature of the path, or add
dynamic time-derivative constraints regarding the velocity of
the moving object. In molecular biology, we often require a
low-energy path. In this paper we mainly describe experiments
that improve the length or clearance of motion paths, and
combinations thereof. However, we note that our algorithm
is readily applicable to other measures of path quality as well.
1) Short paths: In a shortest path we minimize the length
L(π) of the path π. For translating rigid bodies, measuring
distance is quite straightforward, but the addition of rotation
complicates matters. Choosing a proper distance metric using
either conﬁguration-space parameters or workspace geometry
is discussed for example in [32], [33]. In molecular biology,
distances are often deﬁned over the workspace, using the root
mean square deviation (RMSD) of atom centers between con-
ﬁgurations. Following a standard practice, we use the weighted
Euclidean L2 norm over the conﬁguration-space parameters.
For a translating object, this is simply the workspace distance
between a ﬁxed reference point of the object in its different
locations. For bodies that move with rotation, we consider the
distance between quaternion parameters, measured using a bi-
invariant distance metric in the SO(3) topology [34] (see [33],
[35] for further notes on distance metrics in SO(3)).
2) Path clearance: In order to account for safety distance
from workspace obstacles, we may maximize the clearance
at the narrowest passage point along the path, so-called the
bottleneck-clearance BCl(π). In a graph, the path with the
maximal bottleneck edge is retrieved by a minor adaptation
of Dijkstra’s algorithm (or faster alternatives such as [14].
If we are interested in an estimate of the behavior over the
entire path, we can maximize the average clearance ACl(π)
along the entire path. Another option is to locally maximize
the clearance by walking along the medial-axis of the free
space [19].
3) Tradeoff between length and clearance: High-clearance
is unfortunately contradictory to short paths, since the shortest
path often grazes the obstacles [4]. Therefore, we may relax
the requirement for maximal clearance, and instead seek the
shortest path that obeys a certain safety distance C from the
obstacles [36]. Another appealing option is to use the Weighted

8
Length or Integrated k-Inverse Clearance measure with param-
eter k, which also implicitly bounds the path curvature [37].
Small clearance is assigned a high penalty by exponentiating
its inverse by some coefﬁcient k. The exponentiated inverse
clearance Cl−k is integrated (or summed for discrete paths),
and shorter paths with high average clearance are favored.
The coefﬁcient k sets the tradeoff between path length and
path clearance. Clearly, if k = 0 we get the length of the
path. Interestingly, if k →∞, the optimal path is the one with
maximal bottleneck-clearance, since Cl−k is then dominated
by conﬁgurations with small clearance.
