REVIEW ARTICLE
Quantum Machine Learning: from physics to software engineering
Alexey Melnikova and Mohammad Kordzanganeha and Alexander Alodjantsb and
Ray-Kuang Leec,d,e,f
aTerra Quantum AG, 9000 St. Gallen, Switzerland; bITMO University, 197101 St.
Petersburg, Russia; cInstitute of Photonics Technologies, National Tsing Hua University,
Hsinchu 300, Taiwan; dDepartment of Physics, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu 300,
Taiwan; ePhysics Division, National Center for Theoretical Sciences, Taipei 10617, Taiwan;
fCenter for Quantum Technology, Hsinchu 30013, Taiwan
ARTICLE HISTORY
Compiled March 7, 2023
ABSTRACT
Quantum machine learning is a rapidly growing ﬁeld at the intersection of quan-
tum technology and artiﬁcial intelligence. This review provides a two-fold overview
of several key approaches that can oﬀer advancements in both the development
of quantum technologies and the power of artiﬁcial intelligence. Among these ap-
proaches are quantum-enhanced algorithms, which apply quantum software engi-
neering to classical information processing to improve keystone machine learning
solutions. In this context, we explore the capability of hybrid quantum-classical
neural networks to improve model generalization and increase accuracy while reduc-
ing computational resources. We also illustrate how machine learning can be used
both to mitigate the eﬀects of errors on presently available noisy intermediate-scale
quantum devices, and to understand quantum advantage via an automatic study of
quantum walk processes on graphs. In addition, we review how quantum hardware
can be enhanced by applying machine learning to fundamental and applied physics
problems as well as quantum tomography and photonics. We aim to demonstrate
how concepts in physics can be translated into practical engineering of machine
learning solutions using quantum software.
KEYWORDS
Quantum information and computing, machine learning, quantum technologies,
quantum and quantum-inspired algorithms, variational quantum circuits, quantum
neural networks, quantum walks, graph theory, quantum tomography, photonic
quantum computing.
1. Introduction
Nowadays due to exponential grows of information, computational speedup, acceler-
ation of information transmission and recognition, many key global interdisciplinary

Please check the published version, which includes all the latest additions and corrections:
Alexey
Melnikov,
Mohammad
Kordzanganeh,
Alexander
Alodjants,
Ray-Kuang
Lee
(2023)
Quan-
tum
machine
learning:
from
physics
to
software
engineering,
Advances
in
Physics:
X,
8:1,
DOI:
10.1080/23746149.2023.2165452
arXiv:2301.01851v2  [quant-ph]  6 Mar 2023

Figure 1.
Interdisciplinary paradigm of quantum machine learning that is based on current classical infor-
mation, quantum technologies, and artiﬁcial intelligence, respectively (the details are given in the text).
problems for modern societies emerge [1]. In everyday life we face a problem of big data
everywhere. Classical information science and relevant technological achievements in
communication and computing enable to move our society from Internet of computers
to the Internet of Things (IoT), when humans interact with spatially distributed smart
systems including high precision sensors, various recommendation systems based on
huge amount of on-line information processing and its recognition [2]. Artiﬁcial in-
telligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) drive the progress in this movement of
our society. These tasks and facilities require online information recognition that is
actually possible only on the basis of the parallel information processing.
Today, a number of areas have formed in information science, physics, mathematics
and engineering which propose to solve these problems by means of various approaches
of parallel processing of information by spatially distributed systems. Our vision of the
problem we establish schematically in Fig. 1 that reﬂects content of this paper. Nowa-
days AI predominantly focuses on ML approach that provides solutions for Big data
problem, data mining problem, explainable AI, and knowledge discovery. As a result,
in our everyday life we can ﬁnd distributed intelligent systems (DIS) which represent
networks of natural intelligent agents (humans) interacting with artiﬁcial intelligence
agents (chatbots, digital avatars, recommendation systems, etc. ), see e.g. [3] and ref-
erences therein. Such systems require new approaches to data processing that may
be described by means of cognitive computing which possess human cognitive capa-
bilities, cf. [4]. At the same time such a system operates within a lot of uncertainties
which may provide new complexities. But, how about quantum approach and quantum
technologies which can help us in this way?
Certainly, quantum approach and relevant quantum technologies are one of the
drivers of current progress in development of information sciences and artiﬁcial intel-
ligence, which have common goals of designing eﬃcient computing, as well as fast and
secure communication and smart IoT. The mutual overlapping of the three seminal
disciplines are bearing meaningful fruits today. Within left halve of ellipsis in Fig. 1
we establish some crucial topics of quantum technologies studies which are interdisci-
plinary right now. In particular, quantum computing opens new horizons for classical
software engineering, see e.g. [5]. Especially it is necessary to mention quantum inspired
algorithms and quantum inspired approaches which utilize quantum probability and
quantum measurement theory for classical computing [6].
Quantum computers as physical systems, biological neurons and human brain are
2

capable for parallel information proceeding in natural way. However, suﬃcient criterion
for speedup information processing is still unknown in many cases.
A qubit which is minimal tool of quantum information science, is established by
superposition of well distinguished two quantum states deﬁned in Hilbert space and
represents indispensable ingredient for parallel information processing [7]. Quantum
algorithms (software) which are proposed many years ago utilize qubits quantum
superposition and entanglement power for achieving so-called quantum supremacy
and speedup in solution of NP-hard problems which unattainable with classical algo-
rithms [8]. Quantum computers (hardware) as physical devices ﬁrstly was proposed
by Richard Feynman, deals with simple two-level systems as physical qubits perform-
ing quantum computation [9,10]. Despite the fact that a lot of time has passed since
the successful demonstration of the ﬁrst quantum gates and the simplest operations
with them (see e.g. [11]), there exists a large gap between the quantum information
theory, quantum algorithms, and quantum computers designed to execute them. Ex-
isting quantum computers and simulators are still very far from quantum supremacy
demonstrations in solving real problems related to our daily life. This can be partly
explained by the modern noisy intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ) era of the devel-
opment of quantum technologies [12]. Currently, quantum computers are restricted
by small number of qubits, and relatively high level of various noises which include
decoherence processes that completely (or, partially) destroy the eﬀects of interference
and entanglement. In this regard, the problem of quantum supremacy for speciﬁc tasks
represents the subject of heated debates [13–15].
Surface codes and creation of logical qubits are purposed for signiﬁcant reduction
of computation errors [16,17]. In particular, such a codes presume mapping of some
graph of physical qubits onto the logical qubit. Typically, special network-like circuits
are designed for quantum processor consisting of logical qubits. However, it is unclear
how this mapping is unique and how such a networks is optimal and universal for
various computation physical platforms?
As an example, minor embedding procedure is supposed for quantum annealing
computers which are based on superconductor quantum hardware [18]. Obviously,
various physical platforms examined now for quantum computation can use diﬀerent
mapping procedures and relay to design of speciﬁc networks of qubits accounting
speciﬁc noises and decoherence. Thus, the choosing of appropriate network architecture
represent keystone problem for current quantum computing and properly relays to
demonstration of quantum supremacy.
Clearly, the solution of this problem is connected not only with the properties of
quantum systems, but also with the ability of networks to parallel and robust infor-
mation processing. An important example that we refer here is a human brain as a
complex network comprising from biologically active networks which exhibit fast infor-
mation processing. Noteworthy, the architecture of such a computations is a non-von
Neumann. In order, human brain capable for pattern retrieving by means of associa-
tion. A long time ago, Hopﬁeld introduced simple neural network model for associative
memory [19]. As time evolves, neural networks have represented an indispensable tool
for parallel classical computing. Artiﬁcial intelligence and machine learning paradigm,
cognitive and neuromorphic computing, use neural network some speciﬁc peculiarities
represent vital approach proposed to explore the full power of parallel character of
computation [1,20].
Quantum machine learning (QML) is a new paradigm of parallel computation where
quantum computing meets network theory for improving computation speed-up and
current, NISQ-era quantum technology facilities, by means of quantum or classical
3

Figure 2. Timeline with milestones of quantum machine learning achievements.
computational systems and algorithms [21–24]. In Fig. 2 we represent a timeline of
the appearance and development of some important algorithms [25–45] which are able
to improve computational complexity, accuracy and eﬃciency within various type of
hardware available now. In this work we are going to discuss most of them in details.
In more general, nowadays QML disciplines occur at the border of current quantum
technologies and artiﬁcial intelligence and includes all their methods and approaches
to information processing, see Fig.1. The rapidly growing number of publications and
reviews in this discipline indicates an increasing interest in it from the scientiﬁc com-
munity, see e.g. [46–53]. In particular, seminal problems in algorithm theory which
are capable to enhancement of quantum computing by means of ML approach we
can ﬁnd in [21,46,50,53]. Some applications of ML approach to solve timely problems
in material science, photonics, physical chemistry reader can ﬁnd in [47–49,51,52],
respectively.
It is important to notice that ML approach is closely connecting with knowledge
discoveries in modern fundamental physics which closely connected with a problem of
big data and their recognition. In order, we talk about automated scientiﬁc discovery
which can signiﬁcantly expand our knowledge of Nature, cf. [54,55]. In particular, it
is worth to mention research of the Large Hadron Collider (LHC), where data mining
can contribute to new discoveries in the ﬁeld of fundamental physics [56]. Another im-
portant example constitutes network researches on registration of gravitational waves
and extreme weak signals in astronomy, see e.g. [57]. Clearly, further discoveries in
this area require improvement of sensitivity of network detectors (which are interfer-
ometers) and obtained data mining where ML approach can signiﬁcantly promote, cf.
[58].
Despite the fact that previous review papers [21,22,46,47,49–53] theoretically sub-
stantiates and discusses the eﬀectiveness of quantum approaches and quantum algo-
rithms in ML problems, in practice there are many problems that do not allow to
see quantum supremacy in experiment. Within the NISQ era of modern quantum
computers and simulators, their capabilities are not yet enough to achieve quantum
supremacy, cf. [12]. In this regard, hybrid information processing algorithms that take
into account the sharing of quantum and classical computers come forward. Quantum-
classical variational, quantum approximate optimization (QAOA) algorithms are very
useful and eﬀective in this case, see e.g. [59–62]. In this review work we are going to
discuss various approaches which are use for QML paradigm within current NISQ-era
4

Machine learning models   2.1
Quantum neural networks   2.2
Quantum learning theory   2.3
Hybrid quantum neural networks   2.4
Applications and realisations   2.5
Open questions   2.6
QUANTUM COMPUTING
Figure 3.
Quantum technologies help in improving machine learning. Sections that discuss a particular topic
are labeled.
realities. Unlike previous work [21,22,46,47,49–53], below we will focus on methods
and approaches of ML that can be eﬀective, especially for hybrid (quantum-classical)
algorithms, see Fig. 2.
In its most general form, current work can be divided into two large parts which
we establish as Sections 2 and 3, respectively. In particular, in Sec. 2 we consider a
variety of problems where the ML approach may be enhanced by means of quantum
technologies, as it is presented in Fig. 1. In general, we speak here about speed-up of
data processing by quantum computers and/or quantum simulators which we can use
for classical ML purposes, see Fig. 3. An important part of these studies is devoted
to optimal encoding, or embedding of classical data set into the quantum device [63],
and recognition of data set from quantum state readout. We establish comprehensive
analysis of quantum neural networks (QNN) features as a novel models in QML whose
parameters are updated classically. We discussed how such a model may be used in
timely hybrid quantum-classical variational algorithms.
On the contrary, in Sec. 3 we establish currently developing QML hot directions
where classical ML approach can help to solve NISQ-era quantum computing and
quantum technology tasks, cf. Fig.1. In particular, it is necessary to mention automa-
tion of quantum experiments, quantum state tomography, quantum error correction,
etc. where classical ML technique may be applied. Especially, we note here ML al-
gorithms which can be useful in recognition of quantum speedup problem of ran-
dom (classical, or quantum) walks performed on various graphs. The solution of this
problem proposed by us plays essential role for both of current quantum computing
hardware and software development.
2. Machine learning enhanced by quantum technologies
In this section an impact that quantum technologies make in machine learning is
discussed. The outline of the topics is given in Fig. 3.
2.1. Machine learning models
At its roots, machine learning is a procedural algorithm that is augmented by the
provision of external data to model a speciﬁc probability distribution. The data could
consist of only environment variables (features), x ∈X - unsupervised learning -
features and their associated outcomes (labels), y ∈Y - supervised learning - or
environment variables and a reward for speciﬁc actions, R(a) - reinforcement learning.
5

2.1.1. Unsupervised learning
The point of unsupervised learning is to infer attributes about a series of data points,
usually to ﬁnd the aﬃnity of data points to a clustering regime. A popular method of
unsupervised learning is known as the K-means clustering [64] where data points are
assigned to a chosen number of clusters, and the position of the centres of these clusters
could be trained. Unsupervised learning is applied to many real-world problems, from
customer segmentation in diﬀerent industries [65] to criminal activity detection [66].
2.1.2. Supervised learning
In contrast, supervised learning endeavours to infer patterns in the provided data. The
goal of such models is to generalise this inference to previously-unseen data points. In
a linear regression setting, this is often done by linear interpolation [67], but for an a-
priory problem where some degree of non-linearity is plausible, supervised learning can
train non-linear regression models and provide better alternatives. Supervised learning
is also used for logistical learning, where instead of a regression model, a categorical
probability distribution is to be learned. Supervised learning has seen considerable
success in many areas, from credit-rating models [68] to scientiﬁc ﬁelds [69].
2.1.3. Reinforcement learning
Finally, reinforcement learning is the optimisation of a set of actions (policy) in an en-
vironment. The environment allows actions and provides rewards if certain conditions
are met. An agent is made to explore this environment by investigating the outcomes
of certain actions given its current state and accordingly optimise its model variables.
Reinforcement learning often attracts signiﬁcant attention from the gaming industry
[70] but it has also contributed to real-life scenarios such as portfolio management [71].
2.1.4. Exponential growth of practical machine learning models
A recurring theme in all three modes of ML is the high complexity of their models.
This could be caused by a high-dimensional input size like classifying a high-resolution
image database [72], or a complex problem like image segmentation [73]. A commonly-
used - but known to be inaccurate [74,75] - measure of complexity is the parameter-
count of an ML model. It is simply the number of trainable parameters of a model. Most
familiarly in neural networks, the parameters are the weights and biases associated
with each neural layer. For smaller problems, the parameter-count could be as small
as hundreds [76,77], but cutting-edge AI models such as DALL-E 2 [78], Gopher [79],
and GPT-3 [80] are models that have tens or hundreds of billions of parameters and
is increasing [81,82]. This level of high-dimensionality comes at a great ﬁnancial and
environmental cost. Ref. [83] assessed the Carbon emission and the ﬁnancial cost of
ﬁne-tuning and training several large ML models in 2019. They found that in some
cases these models emitted more CO2 than the entire lifetime of an average American
car, and could cost over $3m. In addition to this great cost, there are concerns regarding
the scalability, namely that the exponential-growth in computing power - known as
Moore’s law [84], revisited in [85] - is growing at a slower rate than ML research [86,87].
6

2.1.5. Quantum-enhanced machine learning
The idea behind the ﬁeld of quantum machine learning is to use the capabilities of
quantum computers to provide scalable machine learning models that can provide
machine learning capabilities beyond what classical models can be expected to deliver,
at a healthier cost.
Quantum computers oﬀer an exponential computational space advantage over classi-
cal computers by representing information in quantum binary digits or qubits. Where
classical computers work in the Boolean space, B⊗n, qubits form an exponentially
growing, special unitary space, SU(2n). This means that while a classical register with
n bits can hold an n-digit binary string, a quantum register of the same size holds all
possible strings of such size, providing an exponential number of terms in comparison
to its classical counterpart [7].
In addition to addressing the scalability concerns, classical machine learning models
operate within the realm of classical statistical theory, which in some cases seems to
diverge from human behavioural surveys. Ref. [88] introduced the sure thing princi-
ple, which shows how unrelated uncertainties could aﬀect a human’s decision, which a
classical statistical model would deem as unrelated and remove. In Refs. [89,90] it is
showed that in some cases people tend to give higher credence to two events occurring
in conjunction than either happening individually, which is contrary to the classical
statistical theory picture. In Ref. [6,91] it is argued that that these problems could be
addressed by using a quantum statistical formulation. In addition, other similar issues
like the problem of negation [92] and others listed in Ref.[93] are also shown to have a
resolution in the quantum theory. The distributional compositional categorical (Dis-
CoCat) model of language [94] could be addressed as the ﬁrst theoretically successful
attempt at harnessing this advantage of quantum machine learning.
2.2. Quantum neural networks
For a given data provision method, e.g. supervised learning, a host of diﬀerent machine
learning architectures could be considered. A machine learning architecture has a set of
trainable parameters θ that can be realised based on an initial probability distribution.
Any speciﬁc realisation of the parameters of a machine learning architecture is a
model. The quest of machine learning is to train these parameters and achieve a
nearer probability distribution to that of the problem in question. The fully trained
version of each architecture yields a diﬀerent model with diﬀerent performance, and
generally, the architectures that can spot and infer existent patterns in the data are
said to be of superior performance. It is also important to avoid models that ﬁnd
non-existent patterns, models that are said to over-ﬁt their pattern-recognition to the
provided data, and when evaluated on previously-unseen data fail to perform as well.
A model that can spot existent patterns without over-ﬁtting to the provided data is
said to have a high generalisation ability. This metric establishes a platform for model
selection1 [96].
For any given problem, there are a variety of architecture classes to choose from.
Some of the most commonly-used architectures are multi-layered perceptrons (neural
networks), convolutional networks for image processing, and graph neural networks
for graphically-structured data. QML contributes to this list by introducing quantum
models such as QNN [97].
1Sometimes referred to as Occam’s factor [95].
7

Quantum neural networks are models in QML whose parameters are updated classi-
cally. The training pipeline includes providing data to the quantum model, calculating
an objective (loss) value, and then adapting the QNN parameters in such a way as
to reduce this objective function. The speciﬁc approach to providing the data to the
quantum model is known as the data encoding strategy, and it can have a drastic eﬀect
on the functional representation of the model. Sec 2.2.1 covers the various approaches
to data encoding, and Sec 2.2.4 oﬀers a review of the theoretical advances in exploring
the analytical form of this representation. In QNNs, the objective function is (or in-
cludes) the expectation value of a parametrised quantum circuit (PQC) [98]. PQCs are
quantum circuits that make use of continuous-variable group rotations. Fine-tuning
the architecture of the PQC can have a direct eﬀect on the performance of the resul-
tant QNN model. Sec 2.2.2 reviews the various PQC parametrisations suggested in
the literature.
The consequences of the choice of the loss function are outlined in Sec 2.3.1. After
making this choice, one could evaluate the PQC, and pass the result to the loss function
to obtain a loss value. To minimise the loss value, it is important to tune the trainable
parameters in such a way to maximally minimise this value. This is achieved - in both
classical and quantum ML - by calculating the gradient of the loss function with respect
to the model parameters2. The gradient vector of a function points to the direction of
maximal increase in that function, and to maximally reduce the loss function one could
ﬁnd the gradient and step in the opposite direction. Sec 2.2.3 reviews the literature
concerning QNN gradient computation.
2.2.1. Data encoding strategies
There are three over-arching data encoding strategies [100]:
• State embedding: the features are mapped to the computational bases. This
is often used for categorical data, and as the number of bases grows, the number
of data points needs to follow the same trend, otherwise, the encoding will be
sparse [97].
• Amplitude embedding: when the features of the dataset are mapped to am-
plitudes of the qubit states. This embedding could be repeated to increase the
complexity of the encoding. For n qubits, this method allows us to encode up to
2n+1 features onto the quantum system.
• Observable embedding: the features are encoded in a Hamiltonian with re-
spect to which the quantum system is measured. This encoding is typically used
in quantum native problems - see Sec 2.5.2 - namely variational quantum eigen-
solvers (VQE) [30] and quantum diﬀerential equation solvers [101,102].
It is important to recognise that state embedding is the only discrete-variable encoding
with a strong resemblance to classical ML, whereas the other two are continuous-
variable methods and can be considered analogue machine learning3.
Amplitude embedding could be sub-divided into sub-categories: angle embedding,
state amplitude embedding, squeezing embedding, and displacement embedding [103,
104]. Ref. [100] provides an expressivity comparison between these encoding methods.
Eﬀective encoding strategies were analysed in [101,105–107].
2Some alternative approaches exist known as gradient-free optimisation methods [99].
3This is subject to the input methodology. Normally, a digital computer is used to set up the quantum circuit,
in which case the learning is still fully digital.
8

2.2.2. Parametrised architecture
The speciﬁc parametrisation of the network could dramatically change the output of
a circuit. In classical neural networks, adding parameters to a network improves the
model expressivity, whereas, in a quantum circuit, parameters could become redundant
in over-parametrised circuits [108]. Additionally, the architecture must be trainable,
whereas it was shown that this cannot be assumed in an a-priori setting [109] - see Sec
2.2.5. Many architectures have been suggested in the literature, and many templates
are readily available to choose from on QML packages [110–112].
Ref. [113] introduced a family of hardware-eﬃcient architectures and used them
as variational eigensolvers - see Sec 2.5.2. These architectures repeated variational
gates and used CNOT gates to create highly-entangled systems. Based on the discrete
model in Ref. [114] and made continuous in Ref. [115] a model was devised using RZZ
quantum gates that was shown to be computationally expensive to classically simulate
[116,117], named the instantaneous polynomial-time quantum ansatz (IQP).
Another approach to creating quantum circuits is to take inspiration from tensor
networks [118]. Famous architectures in this class are the tensor-tree network (TTN),
matrix product state (MPS), and the quantum convolutional neural networks (QCNN)
[34,119–121].
2.2.3. Gradient calculation
Despite its excessive memory usage [122], the most prominent gradient calculation
method in classical ML is the back-propagation algorithm [123]. This method computes
the gradient of every function that trainable parameters are passed through alongside
its output and employs the chain rule to create an automatically diﬀerentiable ML
routine. The back-propagation method can (and has been [124]) implemented for QML,
but as it requires access to the quantum state-vector, it can only be used on a simulator
and not a real quantum processing unit (QPU). As quantum advantage can only occur
in the latter setting, it is important to seek alternatives that can operate on QPUs.
The ﬁrst proposed algorithm is known as the ﬁnite-diﬀerence diﬀerentiation method
[125]. As its name suggests, it calculates the gradient by using the ﬁrst principles of
taking derivatives, i.e. adding a ﬁnite diﬀerence to the trainable parameters one at a
time, and observing the change that this action makes. This method is prone to error
in the NISQ era.
As an alternative, a discovery was made in [126] known as the parameter-shift rule
that suggested an exact, analytic derivative could be calculated by evaluating the
circuit twice for each trainable parameter. The suggestion was that the derivative
of a circuit with respect to a trainable parameter θ is half of the evaluation of the
circuit with θ shifted by π
2 subtracted from the circuit when it is shifted by −π
2 . This
suggestion initially worked only on trainable parameters applied to Pauli rotations, but
later works [127–134] expanded to its current form, applicable to any parameterisation.
The parameter-shift rule is the state-of-the-art gradient computation method and is
compatible with QPUs, but, one of its major problems is its scalability. As mentioned,
the number of circuit evaluations for this method increases linearly with the number
of trainable parameters, and this poses a challenge to how complex the quantum
models can get. A notable eﬀort to mitigate this eﬀect was by parallelising the gradient
computation, which is now natively provided when using PennyLane on AWS Braket
[135].
As a transitional gradient computation method for QNNs, Ref. [136] introduced the
adjoint algorithm. Similar to the back-propagation method, adjoint can only be run
9

on a simulator and calculates the entire gradient vector using a single evaluation of
the circuit. However, its memory usage is superior to the former. It works by holding
a copy of the quantum state and its adjoint in the memory, and in turn applying the
gates in reverse order, calculating the gradients wherever possible. This means that
two overall evaluations of the circuit are made, ﬁrst to evaluate the output, and second
to compute the gradient.
Alternative suggestions have also been made to optimise QML models following
the geometry of their group space. Ref. [137] suggested a Riemannian gradient ﬂow
over the Hilbert space, which through hardware implementation showed its favourable
optimisation performance.
2.2.4. Quantum neural networks as universal Fourier estimators
Ref. [107] explored the eﬀects of data encoding on the expressivity of the model.
It proved that the data re-uploading technique suggested by Ref. [138] created a
truncated Fourier series limited by the number of repetitions of the encoding gates.
Ref. [139] also showed that QNNs can be universal Fourier estimators - an analogue
to the universality theorem in classical multi-layered perceptrons [140]. Another point
proven by Refs. [107,138] was that by repeating the encoding strategy (in amplitude
embedding and more speciﬁcally the angle embedding) more Fourier bases are added
to the ﬁnal functional representation of the circuit. This was true if the repetitions
were added in parallel qubits or series. This sparked a question about the accessibil-
ity of these Fourier bases, i.e. whether their coeﬃcients can independently be altered
which remains an open question at the time of this publication.
2.2.5. Barren plateaus and trainability issues
QNNs could suﬀer from the problem of vanishing gradients. This is when during train-
ing, the gradient of the model tends to zero in all directions. This could severely aﬀect
the eﬃciency of the training or even bring it to a halt. This is known as the barren
plateau (BP) problem.
BPs are not usually at the centre of attention in classical ML, but their domi-
nance in quantum architectures makes them one of the most important factors in
choosing a circuit. Ref. [109] showed that the expectation value of the derivative of
a well-parametrised4 quantum circuit is equal to zero, and that its variance decays
exponentially with the number of qubits. Ref. [142] conﬁrmed that barren plateaus
also exist in gradient-free optimisation methods. In addition, Ref. [143] showed that in
the NISQ era, using deep circuits ﬂattens the overall loss landscape resulting in noise-
induced BPs.These are mathematically diﬀerent kinds of Barren plateaus that ﬂatten
the landscape as a whole. The illustrations in Fig 4 summarise these phenomena.
These two ﬁndings painted a sobering picture for the future of QNNs, namely that
they need to be shallow and low on qubit-count to be trainable, which contradicts the
vision of high-dimensional, million-qubit QML models.
Many remedies have been proposed: Ref. [144] suggested that instead of training all
parameters at once, the training could be done layer-wise and Ref. [145] showed that
if the depth of the variational layers of the QNN is of the order O(log(n)), n being
the number of qubits, and that only local measurements are made, the QNN remains
trainable. This was tested on circuits with up to 100 qubits and no BPs were detected.
Other remedies included introducing correlations in the trainable parameters [146,147]
4Formally when the variational architecture of a quantum circuit nears a 1-design[141].
10

loss
more qubits
deeper circuit
loss
loss
Figure 4. Visualisation of the barren plateau phenomenon in (a) noise-free and (b) noise-induced settings.
and speciﬁc initialisations of the parameters [148] of the circuit by applying adjoint
operators of certain variational gates.
More analysis was done on speciﬁc architectures: Ref. [149] showed that under
well-deﬁned weak conditions, the TTN architecture was free from the BP problem;
and Ref. [150] showed that the quantum convolutional neural network architecture
introduced in Ref. [34] was also free from BPs. Ref. [151] developed a platform based
on ZX calculus 5 to analyse whether a given QNN is subject to suﬀering from BPs.
In addition to conﬁrming the results from the two earlier contributions, it also proved
that the matrix product state [155] and hardware eﬃcient, strongly-entangling QNNs
suﬀered from BPs. Furthermore, Ref. [156] related the barren plateau phenomenon to
the degree of entanglement present in the system.
2.3. Quantum learning theory
2.3.1. Supervised QML methods are kernel methods
In Refs. [100,157] the similarities between the QNNs and kernel models were brought
to focus. First introduced in Ref. [158], kernel methods are well-established ML tech-
niques with many applications. In conjunction with support vector machines (SVM),
the way they work is by mapping the features of a dataset into a high-dimensional
space through a function φ(x) and then using a kernel function, K(x1, x2), as a dis-
tance measure between any two data points in this high-dimensional space. This is
exactly the behaviour observed in QNNs: the features are ﬁrst embedded into a high-
dimensional quantum state-vector, and by overlapping one encoded state with another
we can ﬁnd the level of similarity between two points in this space. In this high-
dimensional space, one hopes to ﬁnd better insight into the data - usually expressed
as a decision boundary in the form of a hyperplane in classiﬁcation tasks. Ref. [159]
used this link and developed a framework for searching for possible quantum advan-
tages over classical models. It also showed that large models could scatter the data so
far apart that a distance measure becomes too large for optimisation purposes, and
proposed that an intermediate step be added to map the high-dimensional space into
a lower-dimensional hyperplane to improve its training performance.
5ZX calculus is a graphical language in quantum information theory [152–154].
11

2.3.2. Bayesian inference
Bayesian inference is an alternative approach to the statistical learning theory where
Bayes’ theorem [160] is used to adapt an initial assumption about the problem (prior
distribution) based on newly-found data (evidence) to get a posterior distribution.
Bayesian learning is when this logic is applied to ML. This is done by applying a
distribution to every parameter in the network and updating the distributions when
training. Calculating the posterior distribution is generally computationally expensive,
but it is possible to approximate it using a trick known as variational inference [161,162]
successfully demonstrated an approximate back-propagation algorithm on a Bayesian
neural network (BNN), referred to as Bayes-by-backprop.
The ﬁrst implementations of Bayesian QNNs were in Refs. [163–165] which at-
tempted to make quantum circuits into an exact Bayesian inference machine. Ref. [166]
introduced two eﬃcient, but approximate methods - one from kernel theory and an-
other using a classical adversary - to use QNNs to perform variational inference. The
work consists of a quantum circuit that can be modelled to produce the probability
distribution of a phenomenon by exploiting the probabilistic nature of quantum me-
chanics - known as a Born machine [167,168] or quantum generative models [155,169–
174]. This could also be used later to quantify the prediction error for a single data
point, as it has been done classically in Ref. [175].
2.3.3. Model complexity and generalisation error bounds
Intuitively, complex phenomena require complex modelling, but quantifying the com-
plexity of a given model is non-trivial. There are multiple ways of deﬁning the
model complexity: Vapnik-Chervonenkis (VC) dimension [176], Rademacher complex-
ity [177], and eﬀective dimension [178]6. The complexity measures are also connected
to the generalisation error because when the model becomes too complex for the prob-
lem, the generalisation is expected to worsen.
Much work has been done to quantify the complexity and the generalisation error
of quantum neural networks: Ref. [179] explored a generalisation error bound through
the Rademacher complexity that explicitly accounted for the encoding strategy; and
Ref. [180] used the eﬀective dimension - a measure dependent on the sample size -
to bound the generalisation error of QNNs as well as prove their higher expressivity
given the same number of trainable parameters. Other attempts were also made to
quantify the complexity (also referred to as the expressivity) of QNNs in Refs. [181–
185]7. Notably, Ref. [187] theoretically proved that the generalisation error of a QNN
grew as O(
p
T/N) where T was the number of parametrised quantum gates in the
QNN, and N was the number of data samples in the dataset. The latter work implies
that QML models are better at generalising from fewer data points.
2.4. Hybrid quantum neural networks
Just as there are classical and quantum models, one could also combine the two to
create hybrid models – see Fig. 5. It is conceivable that in the NISQ era, one could
use the understanding of QML described in Sec. 2.3 to ﬁnd a regime where quantum
models cover some bases that classical models do not. Ref. [41] developed a platform
6For an exhaustive list of complexity measures see [75]
7It is noteworthy that Ref. [186] showed that some models have a higher generalisation ability despite over-
ﬁtting.
12

Figure 5.
An example of a hybrid quantum-classical ML model. In this case, the inputs are passed into a
fully connected classical multi-layered perceptron, and its outputs are fed into the embedding of a quantum
circuit. Depending on the setting, some measurements of this quantum circuit are taken and then passed into
another fully-connected layer, the output of which can be compared with the label.
for hybrid quantum high-performance computing (HQC) cloud and it was deployed
on the QMware hardware [188,189]. It showed that for high-dimensional data, a com-
bination of classical and quantum networks in conjunction could oﬀer two advantages:
computational speed and the quality of the solution. The data points were, ﬁrst, fed
to a shallow8 quantum circuit composed of 4 qubits, two of which were measured and
their corresponding values were passed onto a neural network. Two classical datasets
were chosen to explore the eﬀectiveness of a hybrid solution and to compare it when
the quantum part is removed, leaving only a classical network: the sci-kit circles’
dataset [190] and the Boston housing dataset [191]. The former is a synthetic geomet-
rical dataset that consists of two concentric circles in a 2-dimensional square of side
x = 2π, and the latter is about the distribution of the property value given its pop-
ulation status and the number of rooms. In both cases, it was shown that the hybrid
network generalises better than the classical and this diﬀerence is most visible at the
extremes of problems with very small training sample sizes. However, this diﬀerence
became smaller as the number of samples grew.
In continuation, Ref. [44] suggested a hyperparameter optimisation scheme aimed
at architecture selection of hybrid networks. This work also implemented a hybrid
network for training, but in two new ways: 1) using a real-world, image recognition
dataset [192], and 2) the quantum part of the hybrid network was inserted in the
middle of the classical implementation. Additionally, the architecture of the quantum
part was a subject of hyper-parameter optimisation, namely the number of qubits used
and the number of repetition layers included were optimised. Training this network
showed that the hybrid network was able to achieve better quality solutions albeit by
a small margin. It is notable that because of this architecture optimisation, a highly
improved quantum circuit was achieved. The performance of this circuit was theoret-
ically measured by applying analysis methods such as ZX reducibility [152], Fourier
analysis [107], Fisher information [108,193,194], and the eﬀective dimension [178,180].
2.5. Applications and realisations
QML automatically inherits all classical ML problems and implementations, as it
is simply a diﬀerent model to apply to data science challenges. In addition to this
inheritance, QML research has also provided novel, quantum-native solutions. In both
cases, QML has so far been unable to provide a deﬁnite, practical advantage over
classical alternatives, and all the suggested advantages are purely theoretical.
8Apart from performance considerations, this also provided an eﬀective way to avoid barren plateaus described
in Sec 2.2.5.
13

2.5.1. Solving classical problems
QML is employed in many classical applications. Some notable contributions are in
sciences [195–201], in ﬁnance [42,202–204], pharmaceutical [43,45], and automotive
industries [44]. In many cases, these models replaced a previously-known classical set-
ting [205–208]. Quantum generative adversarial networks were suggested in Ref. [209]
and followed by Refs. [210–217]. Similarly, quantum recurrent neural networks were
investigated in [218,219] and two approaches to image recognition were proposed in
Refs. [34,220]. Ref. [221] looked at a classical-style approach to quantum natural lan-
guage processing. The applications of QML in reinforcement learning were also ex-
plored in Refs. [38,222–224]9. Finally, a celebrated application is the quantum auto-
encoder, where data is compressed and then re-constructed from less information, a
notable suggestion was made in Ref. [226].
2.5.2. Quantum-native problems
Native problems are novel, quantum-inspired ML problems that are speciﬁcally de-
signed to be solved by a QML algorithm.
Perhaps the most known QML algorithm is the variational quantum eigensolver
(VQE). The problem formulation is that the input data is a Hamiltonian and we are
required to ﬁnd its ground state and ground-state energy. The VQE solution consists
of preparing a PQC of trainable parameters and taking the expectation value of the
Hamiltonian. This yields the energy expectation of the prepared state, and the idea is
that by minimising this expectation value, we can achieve the ground-state energy, at
which point the prepared state will represent the ground state of the problem. This
was ﬁrst implemented to ﬁnd the ground-state energy of He −H+ [30] and was then
substantially extended in Ref. [59]. VQE remains one of the most promising areas of
QML.
Ref. [25] showed that PQCs can be used to solve a linear system of equations
(LSE). They proposed a commonly known as the Harrow, Hassidim, and Lloyd (HHL).
Refs. [227–234] improved this algorithm and Ref. [235] extended it to also include
non-linear diﬀerential equations. Ref.[102] showed that it is possible to use a quantum
feature map to solve non-linear diﬀerential equations on QNNs. This is also an exciting
and promising area of QML.
An important QML formulation is known as the quadratic unconstrained binary
optimisation (QUBO) [236,237]. This is generally a classical problem, but using the
Ising model - see [238] - this can be solved on a quantum computer [239,240]. A
common demonstration of the latter is the max cut problem [241] - see Fig 6. There
are solutions for the QUBO problem on both gate-based quantum computers and
quantum annealers [242–244], and this general concept has seen use in many sectors
[245].
Lastly, another quantum-native formulation is in natural language processing.
Ref. [94] developed a platform for turning grammatical sentences into quantum cate-
gories using J. Lambek’s work [246]. Refs. [247–249] tested this algorithm on quantum
hardware, and later a full QNLP package was developed [250]. The initial value propo-
sition of QNLP in this way is that this algorithm is natively grammar-aware, but given
that large classical language models are shown to infer grammar [80], the real advan-
tage of this approach could lie in other avenues, such as a potential Grover-style [251]
speed-up in text classiﬁcation.
9Notably the ﬁrst photonic continuous-variable policy network was introduced in Ref. [225].
14

Figure 6.
The max cut problem. The abstract manifestation of this problem is a general graph, and we are
interested in ﬁnding a partition of its vertices such that the number of edges connecting the resultant graph to
the complimentary graph is maximal.
2.6. Open questions
2.6.1. Quantum advantage
Despite the theoretical ﬁndings in Sec 2.3.3, there is limited demonstrable success in
using QML in real-life problems, and this is not purely due to hardware shortcomings.
Ref. [252] showed that there exists a class of datasets that could showcase quantum
advantage, and Ref. [159] found a mathematical formulation for where we can expect
to ﬁnd such an advantage. In Refs. [253–255] attempts were also made to devise a set
of rules for potential quantum advantage. However, Ref. [256] argued that a shift of
perspective from quantum advantage to alternative research questions could unlock
a better understanding of QML. The suggested research questions were: ﬁnding an
eﬃcient building block for QML, ﬁnding bridges between statistical learning theory
and quantum computing, and making QML software ready for scalable ML10.
2.6.2. Optimal parametrisation
In Sec 2.2.2, we encountered various QNN parametrisations with speciﬁc properties.
An open question is how to optimally parametrise a circuit to avoid barren plateaus,
be as expressive as possible, and be free of redundancy. A potential characteristic of
such parametrisation is a high level of Fourier accessibility as mentioned in Sec 2.2.4,
potentially requiring a quantiﬁable measure of this accessibility.
2.6.3. Theory for hybrid models
Despite the successes outlined in Sec 2.4, the theoretical grounding for such models
is limited. We saw that hybrid networks performed well if the quantum section was
introduced at the beginning of the model architecture [41] or in the middle [44]. From
an information-theoretic perspective, this needs to be investigated in more detail to
shed light on the eﬀect of hybridisation. Such investigation could identify if there exist
areas where the application of a quantum part could complement a classical circuit
by either introducing an information bottle-neck to prevent over-ﬁtting or by creating
high-dimensional models.
10Other examples of include quantum federated (distributed) learning (QFL) [257]. Notably for the latter,
Ref. [258] proposed the ﬁrst model of distributed secure quantum machine learning
15

MACHINE LEARNING
Quantum computing   3.1.1
Quantum communication   3.1.2
Quantum walks with decoherence   3.2.1
Fundamental and applied physics   3.1
Random walks problems   3.2
Quantum tomography   3.3
Photonic quantum computing   3.4
Figure 7.
Machine learning helps in solving problems in fundamental and applied quantum physics. Sections
that discuss a particular problem are labeled.
2.6.4. An eﬃcient optimisation method
The current gradient calculation methods are either only available on simulators or
require a linearly-growing number of circuit evaluations - see Sec. 2.2.3. Neither of these
can accommodate a billion-parameter, million-qubit setting. This poses a barrier to
the future of QML, and thus an eﬃcient optimisation method is needed for the long
term.
3. Quantum technologies enhanced by machine learning
In this section an impact that machine learning makes in quantum technologies is
discussed. The outline of the topics is given in Fig. 7. Today machine learning is
used to realize algorithms and protocols in quantum devices, by autonomously learn-
ing how to control [35,259–262], error-correct [36,263–265], and measure quantum de-
vices [266]. Given experimental data, ML can reconstruct quantum states of physical
systems [267–270], learn compact representations of these states [271,272], and vali-
date the experiment [273]. In this section we discuss the impact of machine learning on
fundamental and applied physics, and give speciﬁc examples from quantum computing
and quantum communication.
3.1. Machine learning in fundamental and applied quantum physics
Since its full development in the mid-1920s, a century later quantum mechanics is
still considered as the most powerful theory, modeling a wide range of physical phe-
nomena from subatomic to cosmological scales with the most precise accuracy. Even
though the measurement problem and quantum gravity had led many physicists to
conclude that quantum mechanics cannot be a complete theory, the spooky action of
entanglement in the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen pair [274], has provided the resources
for quantum information processing tasks. With machine learning, one may be able to
model diﬀerent physical systems (e.g., quantum, statistical, gravitational) using arti-
ﬁcial neural networks, which might lead to the development of a new framework for
fundamental physics.
Even without a precise description of a physical apparatus and solely based on
measurement data, one can prove the quantumness of some observed correlations by
the device-independent test of Bell nonlocality [275]. In particular, by using generative
algorithms to blend automatically many multilayer perceptrons (MLPs), a machine
16

Environment
Analyzer
Optical
table
optical
setup
optical
element
reward
Agent
optical setups
placings of an optical element
...
...
...
...
...
...
Figure 8.
A reinforcement learning algorithm that designs a quantum experiment. An experiment on an
optical table is shown as an example. (a) The learning scheme depicts how an agent, the reinforcement learning
algorithm, learns to design quantum experiments. (b) Representation of the reinforcement learning algorithm,
projective simulation, as a two-layered network of clips.
learning approach may allow the detection and quantiﬁcation of nonlocality as well as
its quantum (or postquantum) nature [276–278].
3.1.1. Machine learning in quantum computing
Machine learning has also became an essential element in applied quantum infor-
mation science and quantum technologies. ML that was inspired by the success of
automated designs [31], was demonstrated to be capable of designing new quantum
experiments [32].
Quantum experiments represent an essential step towards creating a quantum com-
puter. More speciﬁcally, for example, three-particle photonic quantum states represent
a building block for a photonic quantum computing architecture. In Ref. [32] ML al-
gorithm used is a reinforcement learning algorithm based on the projective simulation
model [279–284]. An agent, the reinforcement learning algorithm, puts optical elements
on a (simulated) optical table. Each action adds an optical element to an existing setup.
In case the resulting setup achieves the goal, e.g., creates a desired multiphoton en-
tangled state, the agent receives a reward. The described learning scheme is depicted
in Fig. 8(a).
The initial photonic setup is an output of a double spontaneous parametric down-
conversion (SPDC) process in two nonlinear crystals. Neglecting these higher-order
terms in the down-conversion, the initial state |ψ(0)⟩can be written as a tensor product
of two orbital angular momentum entangled photons,
|ψ0⟩= 1
3
 
1
X
m=−1
|m⟩a |−m⟩b
!
⊗
 
1
X
m=−1
|m⟩c |−m⟩d
!
,
(1)
where the indices a, b, c and d specify four arms in the optical setup. The actions
available to the agent consist of beam splitters (BS), mirrors (Reﬂ), shift-parametrized
holograms (Holo), and Dove prisms (DP). The ﬁnal photonic state |ψf⟩is obtained
by measuring the arm a, and post-selecting the state in the other arms based on the
measurement outcome in a.
The reinforcement learning algorithm that achieves the experimental designs is
shown in Fig. 8(b). It is the projective simulation agent represented by a two-layered
network of clips. The ﬁrst layer corresponds to the current state of the optical setup,
17

whereas the second layer is the layer of actions. The connectives between layers deﬁne
the memory of the agent, which changes during the learning process. The connectiv-
ities correspond to the probabilities of reaching a certain action in a given state of a
quantum optical setup. During the learning process the agent automatically adjusts
the connectivities, and thereby prioterize some actions other the other. As shown in
Ref. [32] this leads to a variety of entangled states of improved eﬃciency of their
realization.
3.1.2. Machine learning in quantum communication
In addition to designing new experiments, ML helps in designing new quantum algo-
rithms [285] and protocols [286]. Designing new algorithms and protocols has similar-
ities to experiment design. In particular, similar to experiment design, every protocol
can be broken down into individual actions. In the case of the quantum communica-
tion protocol, these actions are, e.g: apply T-gate to the second qubit, apply H-gate to
the ﬁrst qubit, send the third qubit to the location B, and measure the ﬁrst qubit in
the Z-basis. Because of the combinatorial nature of the design problem, the number
of possible protocols grows exponentially with the number of available actions. For
that reason, a bruteforce search of a solution is impossible for an estimated number of
possible states of a quantum communication environment 0.6 × 1012 [286].
A reinforcement learning approach to quantum protocol design, ﬁrst proposed
in Ref. [286], is shown to be applicable to a variety of quantum communication
tasks: quantum teleportation, entanglement puriﬁcation, and a quantum repeater. The
scheme of the learning setting is shown in Fig. 9. The agent perceives the quantum
environment state, and chooses an action based on the projective simulation delibera-
tion process. The projective simulation network used in this work is similar to the one
in Fig. 8(b), with addition of hierarchical skill acquisition. This skill is of particular
importance in the long-distance quantum communication setting, which has to include
multiple repeater schemes.
With the help of projective simulation, it was demonstrated that reinforcement
learning can play a helpful assisting role in designing quantum communication proto-
cols. It is shown that the use of ML in the protocol design is not limited to rediscovering
existing protocols. The agent ﬁnds new protocols that are better than existing proto-
cols in case optimal situations lack certain symmetries assumed by the known basic
protocols11.
3.2. Machine learning in random walks problems
Random walks paradigm plays important role in many scientiﬁc ﬁelds related to the
transfer of charge, energy, or information transport [288–292]. Random (classical)
walks on graphs represent indispensable tool for many subroutines in computational
algorithms [293–295]. Quantum walks (QW) represent generalization of classical walks
to quantum domain and use quantum particle instead of classical one [296,297]. Re-
sulting quantum interference pattern which governs QW physics fundamentally diﬀers
form the classical one [298]. For quantum information science crucially important that
quantum particle exhibits quantum parallelism which appear as a result of various
paths interference and entanglement. It was shown that quantum particle propagates
11Ref. [287] uses reinforcement learning (DPPO) to design the optimal path of quantum imaginary time
evolution, which can always achieve an eﬃcient ﬁnd an eﬃcient quantum circuit.
18

Figure 9.
A reinforcement learning algorithm that designs a long-distance quantum communication protocol.
The algorithm is based on projective simulation with episodic and compositional memory (ECM). Given the
state of the quantum communication environment, the algorithm chooses how to modify this state by acting on
the environment. The goals of the PS agent are: (a) teleportation protocol (b) entanglement puriﬁcation protocol
(c) quantum repeater protocol (d) quantum repeater protocol for long-distance quantum communication.
quadratically faster than classical one on certain graphs which are line
[299], cycle
[300,301], hypercube
[302,303], and glued trees graphs [304], respectively. It is ex-
pected that algorithms based on QW should demonstrate quadratic speedup that is
O(
√
N). Such parallelism may be useful for quantum information processing and quan-
tum algorithms purposes [304–306]. It is especially important to note that QW are
explored in quantum search algorithms which represent important tools for speedup
of QML algorithms [21,307–309].
Noteworthy, QW speedup demonstration with arbitrary graphs represents open
problem [310]. Standard approach would be to simulate quantum and classical dy-
namics on given graph, which provides an answer in which case a particle would arrive
a target vertex faster. However, this approach may be diﬃcult (and costly) to use
in computations for the graphs possessing large number of vertices; the propagation
time scales polynomially in the size of the graph. Second, we usually interested in a
set of graphs for which obtained results of the simulations cannot reveal some general
features of quantum advantage.
In a number of works we attacked this problem by means of ML approach [39,40,311].
We explore a supervised learning approach to predict a quantum speedup just by
looking at a graph. In particular, we designed a classical-quantum convolutional neural
network (CQCNN) that learns from graph samples to recognize the quantum speedup
of random walks.
The basic concept of CQCNN that we use in Ref. [39,40,311] is shown in Fig. 10 and
Fig. 11, respectively. In particular, we examined in Ref. [39,40,311–313] continuous-
time random walks and suppose that classical random walk representing stochastic
(Markovian) process deﬁned on a connected graph. It starts at the time t = 0 from
initial node i and hits target vertex t. Unlike the classical case, a quantum particle due
to interference phenomenon will be “smeared” across all vertices of the graphs. Thus,
in the quantum case we propose an additional (sink) vertex s that is connected to the
target vertex and provides localization of the quantum particle due to energy relaxation
from t to s vertices which happen with the rate γ. In other words, the quantum
particle may be permanently monitored in the sink vertex. Mathematically graph
is characterized by it weighted adjacency matrix A that is relevant to Hamiltonian
H = ℏA. Notice, for chiral QW time asymmetry may be obtained by using complex-
valued adjacency matrix elements [311]. We characterize quantum transport by means
of Gorini–Kossakowski–Sudarshan–Lindblad equation that look like (cf. [314]):
19

Figure 10.
A schematic representation of considered in Refs. [39,40] random walks on (a) connected random
graph, (b) cycle graph. The labels (i), and (t) specify initial and target vertices, respectively; s is a sink vertex
which is require to localize and detect quantum particle. The γ is coupling parameter between target and sink
vertices, respectively.
dρ(t)
dt
= −i
ℏ(1 −p) [H, ρ(t)] + p
X
mk

Lmkρ(t)L†
mk −1
2
n
L†
mkLmk, ρ(t)
o
+ γ

Lsρ(t)L†
s −1
2
n
L†
sLs, ρ(t)
o
,
(2)
where ρ(t) is time dependent density operator, Lmk = Tmk |m⟩⟨k| and Ls = |s⟩⟨t|
operators characterize transitions from vertices k to m and from t (target) to s (sink),
respectively; γ is coupling parameter between target and sink vertices. The parameter
p lies 0 ≤p ≤1 condition and determines the decoherence; the value p = 0 is relevant
to purely quantum transport, while p = 1 determines completely classical random
walks.
Solution of Eq. (2) speciﬁes quantum probability Pq(t) ≡ρ(n+1)(n+1)(t) (n is the
total number of vertices), which is relevant to QW on a chosen graph. The classical
random walk may be established by the probability distribution
P(t) = e−IteTtP(0),
(3)
where P(t) is a vector of probabilities Pv(t) of detecting a classical particle in vertices
v ∈V of the graph; I is the identity matrix of size n × n. The transition matrix T is
a matrix of probabilities Tvu for a particle to jump from u to v. In this case the sink
vertex is not needed and we can assume γ = 0. We are interested in the probability of
ﬁnding a particle in the target (or, in the sink) vertex which is described by solutions
of Eqs. (2) and (3).
Then, one possible to compare Pq(t) ≡ρ(n+1)(n+1)(t) and Pc(t) ≡Pn(t) against
Pth = 1/ log n that determines threshold value of probability for a given graph. If this
probability is larger than Pth, we can conclude that the particle occurs at the target.
The time at which one of inequalities Pq(t) > Pth, Pc(t) > Pth fulﬁlled, is called the
hitting time for quantum or classical particle, respectively. Hence, by comparing the
solutions to Eqs. (2) and (3), we can deﬁne the particle transfer eﬃciency: it is 1 if
the quantum particle reached the target ﬁrst, and 0 otherwise.
In Fig. 11 we schematically summarize proposed CQCNN approach for detection of
QW speedup. In order, the architecture of CQCNN is shown in Fig.11(a). It consists of
a two-dimensional input layer that takes one graph represented by an adjacency matrix
A. This layer is connected to several convolutional layers, the number of which depends
20

labeled graph
convolutional layers
fully connected layers
forward pass
backward pass
adjacency
matrix
“edge-to-edge”
filtering
“edge-to-vertex”
filtering
quantum        classical
CQCNN
CQCNN
prediction on
quantum advantage
prediction on
quantum advantage
evaluation metrics:
accuracy, precision, recall
graph
example
test
graph
loss
Figure 11.
Schematic representation of CQCNN approach which is used for predicting the quantum speedup
on the graphs represented in Fig. 10. (a) - scheme of the CQCNN architecture. The neural network takes a
labeled graph in form of an adjacency matrix A as an input. The A then processed by convolutional layers
with ﬁlters of graph-speciﬁc “edge-to-edge” and “edge-to-vertex”, respectively. These ﬁlters act as functions of
a weighted total number of neighboring vertices of each vertex. The convolutional layers are connected with
fully-connected layers which classify the input graph. Data and error propagation are shown with arrows. (b)
and (c) demonstrates processes of CQCNN training and testing, respectively.
on the number of vertices n of the input graph. The number of layers is the same for
all graph sizes. CQCNN has a layout with convolutional and fully connected layers,
and two output neurons that specify two possible output classes. The convolutional
layers are used to extract features from graphs, and decrease the dimensionality of the
input.
Empirically we ﬁnd out that relevant features are in the rows and columns of adja-
cency matrices. The ﬁrst convolutional layer comprises six ﬁlters (or, feature detectors)
which deﬁne three diﬀerent ways of processing the input graph. These three ways are
marked by green, red, blue colors in Fig. 11(a), respectively. The constructed ﬁlters
are form ‘crosses’ which are shown in Fig. 11(a) and capture a weighted sum of col-
umn and row elements. These ﬁlters act as functions of a weighted total number of
neighboring vertices of each vertex. Thus, the cross ‘edge-to-edge’ and ‘edge-to-vertex’
ﬁlters crucially important in designed CQCNN; they are capable for prediction of the
quantum advantage by QW.
Fig. 11(b) shows schematically training procedure by using some graphs samples
which are established by adjacency matrices A as an input. CQCNN made prediction
at the output determining classical or quantum classes depending on the values of two
output neurons. The predicted class is determined by means of the index of a neuron
with the largest output value class = argmaxmy(m). Having a correct label, the loss
value is computed.
The ﬁlters that we constructed in CQCNN play an essential role in the success of
21

learning. CQCNN learns by stochastic gradient descent algorithm that takes the cross
entropy loss function. The loss on a test example i is deﬁned relative to the correct
class classi (classical or quantum, 0 or 1) of this example:
lossi = −κ(classi) log

ex(classi)
ex(0) + ex(1)

,
(4)
where we deﬁned the values of the output neurons as x(0) and x(1); κ(classi) is the
total fraction of examples from this class in the dataset. As we have shown in Ref. [39]
CQCNN constructed a function that generalizes over seen graphs to unseen graphs, as
the classiﬁcation accuracy (which may be deﬁned as the fraction of correct predictions)
goes up.
CQCNN testing procedure is not principally diﬀerent from the training process how
it is seen in Fig. 11(c), cf. Fig. 11(b). The CQCNN does not receive any feedback on
its prediction in this case and the network is not modiﬁed.
We apply the described ML approach to diﬀerent sets of graphs. In particular, to
understand how our approach works in a systematic way, we ﬁrst analyze the CQCNN
on line graphs with up to 10 vertices. CQCNN was trained over 2000 epochs with a
single batch of 3 examples per epoch.
Then, we simulated CQCNN’s learning process for random graphs, each sampled
uniformly from the set of all possible graphs with n vertices and m edges. The learning
performance results in the absence of decoherence (p = 0) are shown in Fig. 12 for
n = 15, 20, 25; the m is chosen uniformly from n −1 to (n2 −n)/2. Our simulations
shows that the loss after training is vanishing; it is below 3×10−3 for all these random
graphs. In Fig. 12(a) we see that both recall and precision are about 90% for the
“classical” part of the set, and is in the range of 25 −35% for the “quantum” one.
n12 Thus, one can see that CQCNN helps to classify random graphs correctly much
better than a random guess without performing any QW dynamics simulations. In
Fig. 12(b)-(c) we represent samples of correctly classiﬁed graphs.
number of vertices, n
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
“classical” class
“quantum” class
learning
 performance
recall
precision
Figure 12.
(a) CQCNN learning performance. Dataset consists of random graphs with n = 15, 20 and 25
vertices, 1000 examples for each n, and the corresponding classical and quantum labels. CQCNN was simulated
during 3000 epochs, 100 mini batches each with the batch size of 3 examples. The neural network was tested
on 1000 random graphs for each n. (b), (c) establish random graph examples taken from the test set which
were correctly classiﬁed by CQCNN (initial and target vertices are marked in yellow and red, respectively).
The classical particle is faster on (b), whereas the quantum one is faster on graph (c).
3.2.1. Quantum walks with decoherence
In the presence of decoherence, i.e. for p > 0 physical picture is getting richer. In
Fig. 13 we demonstrate results of QW dynamics simulation on cycle graph consisting
12Recall quantiﬁes the fraction of correct predictions in a particular class, whereas precision identiﬁes the
fraction of a particular class predictions that turned out to be correct.
22

0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
- 200
- 100
0
100
200
Figure 13.
Prediction of transfer eﬃciency (violet curve) for a 6-cycle graph versus decoherence parameter
p. The activation values of output neurons are shown in blue and green. The results obtained by averaging of
5 CQCNN networks. Standard deviations are marked by shaded regions.
of 6-vertices; the eﬃciency of transport is measured between opposite vertices of the
graph as it is shown in Fig. 10(b). Simulations performed for 1000 randomly sampled
values of the decoherence parameter p and used to train CQCNN. After the training
procedure we suggest CQCNN to predict if the QW can lead to an advantage for a
new given parameter p. In Fig. 13 we represent the results of the transfer eﬃciency
predictions as a violet line. From Fig. 13 clearly seen that at the value of decoherence
parameter p ≃0.34 abrupt crossover from quantum (p ≃1) to classical (p ≃0) regime
transport occurs. Thus, one possible to expect QW advantage in transport in domain
of p < 0.34. Physically, such an crossover may be relevant to quantum tunneling
features in the presence of dissipation, cf.
[315,316]. Notice that the parameter p
is temperature-dependent in general, cf.
[317]. In this case we can recognize the
established crossover as a (second-order) phase transition from quantum to classical
(thermal activation) regime that happens for a graph at some ﬁnite temperature.
The Fig. 13 demonstrates predictions of CQCNN which are based on the learned
values of the output neurons; they are shown in Fig. 13 as a classical (blue) and
quantum (green) classes, respectively. CQCNN made decision about the class by using
the maximum value of the output neurons activation. From Fig. 13 it is clearly seen
that the “vote” for the quantum class grows up to the maximum value p ≃0.2,
which corresponds to the highest conﬁdence for the quantum class. Simultaneously,
the conﬁdence in the classical class grows with increasing of decoherence parameter p.
Separation between classes become more evident after the crossover point of p ≃0.34.
Thus, obtained results play signiﬁcant role in creation of soft- and hardware systems
which are based on the graph approach at their basis. CQCNN that we proposed
here allows to ﬁnd out which graphs, and under which conditions on decoherence, can
provide a quantum advantage. This is especially relevant to NISQ era quantum devises
development.
3.3. Machine learning in quantum tomography
With the capability to ﬁnd the best ﬁt to arbitrarily complicated data patterns with
a limited number of parameters available, machine learning has provided a power-
ful approach for quantum tomography. Here, quantum tomography or quantum state
tomography (QST) refers to the reconstruction about a quantum state with its com-
prehensive information by using measurements on an ensemble of identical quantum
states [318–324]. However, the exponential growth in bases for a Hilbert space of N-
qubit states implies that exact tomography techniques require exponential measure-
23

Average
pooling
Flattening
Convolutional
layers
Quadrature
sequence
Density
matrix
Shortcut
Normalization
Predicted
matrix
Figure 14.
Schematic of machine learning enhanced quantum state tomography with convolutional neural
network (CNN). Here, the noisy data of quadrature sequence obtained by quantum homodyne tomography in a
single-scan are fed to the convolutional layers, with the shortcut and average pooling in the architecture. Then,
after ﬂattening and normalization, the predicted matrices are inverted to reconstruct the density matrices in
truncation.
ments and/or calculations. In order to leverage the full power of quantum states and
related quantum processes, a well characterization and validation of large quantum
systems is demanded and remains important challenge [325].
Traditionally, by estimating the closest probability distribution to the data for any
arbitrary quantum states, the maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) method is used
in quantum tomography [326,327]. However, MLE method requires exponential-in-
N amount of data as well as an exponential-in-N time for processing. Albeit deal-
ing with Gaussian quantum states, unavoidable coupling from the noisy environment
makes a precise characterization on the quantum features in a large Hilbert space
almost unattackable. Moreover, MLE also suﬀers from the over-ﬁtting problem when
the number of bases grows. To make QST more accessible, several alternative algo-
rithms are proposed by assuming some physical restrictions imposed upon the state in
question, such as the adaptive quantum tomography [328], permutationally invariant
tomography [329], quantum compressed sensing [330–333], tensor networks [334,335],
generative models [336], feed-forward neural networks [337], and variational autoen-
coders [338].
To reduce the over-ﬁtting problem in MLE, the restricted Boltzmann machine
(RBM) [339–342] has provided a powerful solution in QST. With the help of two layers
of stochastic binary units, a visible layer and a hidden layer, the RBM acts as a univer-
sal function approximator. For qubits on an IBM Q quantum computer, quantum state
reconstructions via ML were demonstrated with four qubits [343]. For continuous vari-
ables, the convolutional neural network (CNN) has been experimentally implemented
with the quantum homodyne tomography for continuous variables [269,344,345].
As illustrated in Fig. 14, the time sequence data obtained in the optical homodyne
measurements share the similarity to the voice (sound) pattern recognition [346,347].
Here, the noisy data of quadrature sequence are fed into a CNN, composited with
30 convolutional layers in total. In applying CNN, we take the advantage of good
generalizability to extract the resulting density matrix from the time series data [346].
In our deep CNN, there are four convolution blocks used, each containing 1 to 9
convolution layers (ﬁlters) in diﬀerent sizes. Five shortcuts are also introduced among
the convolution blocks, in order to tackle the gradient vanishing problem. Instead
of max-pooling, average pooling is applied to produce higher ﬁdelity results, as all
the tomography data should be equally weighted. Finally, after ﬂattening two fully
connected layers and normalization, the predicted matrices are inverted to reconstruct
the density matrices in truncation.
Here, the loss function we want to minimize is the mean squared error (MSE);
24

while the optimizer used for training is Adam. We take the batch size as 32 in the
training process. By this setting, the network is trained with 70 epochs to decrease
the loss (MSE) up to 5 × 10−6. Practically, instead of an inﬁnite sum on the photon
number basis, we keep the sum in the probability up to 0.9999 by truncating the
photon number. Here, the resulting density matrix is represented in photon number
basis, which is truncated to 35 × 35 by considering the maximum anti-squeezing level
up to 20 dB.
As to avoid non-physical states, we impose the positive semi-deﬁnite constraint into
the predicted density matrix. Here, an auxiliary (lower triangular) matrix is introduced
before generating the predicted factorized density matrix through the Cholesky decom-
position. During the training process, the normalization also ensures the trace of the
output density matrix is kept as 1. More than a million data sets are fed into our CNN
machine with a variety of squeezed (ρsq), squeezed thermal (ρsq
th), and thermal states
(ρth) in diﬀerent squeezing levels, quadrature angles, and reservoir temperatures, i.e.,
ρsq = ˆSρ0 ˆS†;
(5)
ρsq
th = ˆSρth ˆS†.
(6)
Here, ρ0 = |0⟩⟨0| with the vacuum state |0⟩, ρth = P
n P(n) |n⟩⟨n| with the probability
distribution function P(n) =
1
¯n+1(
¯n
¯n+1)n, deﬁned with the mean-photon number ¯n =
1
exp[ℏω/kBT]−1 at a ﬁtting temperature T, and ˆS(ξ) = exp[1
2ξ∗ˆa2 −1
2ξˆa†2] denotes the
squeezing operator, with the squeezing parameter ξ ≡r exp(iφ) characterized by the
squeezing factor r and the squeezing angle φ. All the training is carried out with the
Python package tensorﬂow.keras performed in GPU (Nvidia Titan RTX).
The validation of ML-enhanced QST is veriﬁed with simulated data set, through
the average ﬁdelity obtained by MLE and CNN by calculating the purity of quantum
state, i.e., purity ≡tr(ρ2). Compared with the time-consuming MLE method, ML-
enhanced QST keeps the ﬁdelity up to 0.99 even taking 20 dB anti-squeezing level
into consideration. With prior knowledge in squeezed states, such a supervised CNN
machine can be trained in a very short time (typically in less than one hour), enabling
us to build a speciﬁc machine learning for certain kinds of problem. When well-trained,
an average time of about 38.1 milliseconds (by averaging 100 times) costs in a stan-
dard GPU server. One unique advantage of ML-enhanced QST is that we can precisely
identify the pure squeezed and noisy parts in extracting the degradation information.
By directly applying the singular value decomposition to the predicted density ma-
trix, i.e., ρ = σ1 ρsq + c1 ρsq
th + d1 ρth, all the weighting ratio about the ideal (pure)
squeezed state, the squeezed thermal state, and thermal state can be obtained. With
this identiﬁcation, one should be able to suppress and/or control the degradation at
higher squeezing levels, which should be immediately applied to the applications for
gravitational wave detectors and quantum photonic computing.
Toward a real-time QST to give physical descriptions of every feature observed in the
quantum noise, a characteristic model to directly predict physical parameters in such a
CNN conﬁguration is also demonstrated [348]. Without dealing with a density matrix
in a higher dimensional Hilbert space, the predicted physical parameters obtained by
the characteristic model are as good as those generated by a reconstruction model.
One of the most promising advantages for ML in QST is that only fewer measure-
ment settings are needed [349]. Even with incomplete projective measurements, the
resilience of ML-based quantum state estimation techniques was demonstrated from
partial measurement results [350]. Furthermore, such a high-performance, lightweight,
25

and easy-to-install supervised characteristic model-based ML-QST can be easily in-
stalled on edge devices such as FPGA as an in-line diagnostic toolbox for all possible
applications with squeezed states.
In addition to the squeezed states illustrated here, similar machine learning concepts
can be readily applied to a speciﬁc family of continuous variables, such as non-Gaussian
states. Of course, diﬀerent learning (adaptation) processes should be applied in dealing
with single-photon states, Schr¨odinger’s cat states [351,352], and Gottesman-Kitaev-
Preskill states for quantum error code corrections [353]. Alternatively, it is possible to
use less training data with a better kernel developed in machine learning, such as the
reinforce learning, generative adversarial network, and the deep reinforcement learning
used in the optimization problems [268,354–360]. Even without any prior information,
informational completeness certiﬁcation net (ICCNet), along with a ﬁdelity prediction
net (FidNet), have also been carried out to uniquely reconstruct any given quantum
state [361].
Applications of these data-driven learning and/or adaptation ML are not limited to
quantum state tomography. Identiﬁcation and estimation of quantum process tomogra-
phy, Hamiltonian tomography, and quantum channel tomography, as well as quantum
phase estimation, are also in progresses [362–365]. Moreover, ML in quantum tomogra-
phy can be used for the quantum state preparation, for the general single-preparation
quantum information processing (SIPQIP) framework [366].
3.4. Photonic quantum computing
In addition to classical information processing, photonic quantum computing is also
one of the possible technologies to demonstrate quantum advantage [14,367,368], i.e.,
in which a quantum system has been shown to outperform a classical one on some
well-deﬁned information processing task. Even though the computational task on the
implementation of photonic Boson sampling is non-universal [369], meaning that it
cannot perform arbitrary quantum operations, whether any useful applications exist
within the heavily restricted space of non-universal photonic systems is an open ques-
tion. Nevertheless, the advantages of photonics as a quantum technologies platform
compared to other platforms are a high degree of integration with mature classical pho-
tonic technologies, and the fact that the photonic circuits involved can be operated at
room temperature [370,371].
Reviews on the recent advances of machine learning, in particular deep learning, for
the photonic structure design and optical data analysis, as well as the challenges and
perspectives, can be found in Refs. [48,372–374]. Inverse designs and optimization on
the photonic crystals, plasmonic nano-structures, programmable meta-materials, and
meta-surfaces have been actively explored for high-speed optical communication and
computing, ultrasensitive biochemical detection, eﬃcient solar energy harvesting, and
super-resolution imaging [375]. By utilizing adaptive linear optics, quantum machine
learning is proposed for performing quantum variational classiﬁcation and quantum
kernel estimation [376].
Towards the goal of realization of on-chip quantum photonics, silicon-based mate-
rials have been actively explored due to their compatibility with conventional CMOS
fabrication processes. Instead of using photons or entangled photons pairs from optical
parametric process, which suﬀers from the low probabilities and rare success events
in post-selection, quantum optical microresonator on a chip employs the Kerr non-
linearity has the advantage over the photonic qubit-based approach [377–381]. Unlike
26

Figure 15.
Quantum machine learning ecosystem for the next decade. Please check the references in the
published paper version: Alexey Melnikov, Mohammad Kordzanganeh, Alexander Alodjants, Ray-Kuang Lee
(2023) Quantum machine learning: from physics to software engineering, Advances in Physics: X, 8:1, DOI:
10.1080/23746149.2023.2165452
all gate-based quantum computing, which are based on single-qubit and entangling
gates, photonic quantum computing does not rely on any physical gates during the
computation, but on the preparation of quantum modes, e.g., cluster states, with the
time-domain and/or frequency-domain multiplexings [382,383].
Regarding the integrated quantum photonics, as well as the progress of the hybrid
quantum devices, machine-learning methodology has also been widely applied in order
to oﬀer an eﬃcient means to design photonic structures, as well as to tailor light–matter
interaction [384]. For the emerging ﬁeld of machine learning quantum photonics, we
need not ML for automated design of quantum optical experiments [385], such as the
quantum walk with graph states illustrated in Sec. 3.2, but also quantum technolo-
gies enhanced by machine learning, such as ML in quantum tomography illustrated
in Sec. 3.3 to have ML-assisted quantum measurements. Along this direction, quan-
tum optical neural network (QONN) was introduced to leverage advances in integrated
quantum photonics [386]. With the newly developed protocols such as quantum optical
state compression for quantum networking and black-box quantum simulation, many
thousands of optoelectronic components should be integrated in monolithically inte-
grated circuits. It is expected to see the combination of quantum measurements, quan-
tum metrology, and optimization of on-chip and free-space meta-devices for photonic
quantum computing as a promising route for automatization of quantum experiments.
4. Conclusions
Artiﬁcial intelligence and machine learning are currently key factors in the progress of
modern society in the world. Now it is quite diﬃcult to ﬁnd an area of our life where
achievements in the ﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence would not be used. However, this
success is largely ensured by the development of classical information technologies in
terms of hardware, which possess natural limitations. The creation of quantum com-
puters and quantum networks can bypass these limitations in diﬀerent ﬁelds. Quantum
machine learning is a rapidly developing new ﬁeld of research at the border of artiﬁcial
intelligence, quantum information science and quantum technology.
The ecosystem of QML, which has developed to date and will be in demand for
27

the next decade, is depicted in Fig.15. Here we proceed from the fact that in the near
future, the main role in our daily life will be played by various (tensor) network systems
of transmission, processing, and intelligent recognition of large amounts of information.
In this regard, we are conﬁdent that practically signiﬁcant quantum computers will be
embedded into large distributed intelligent systems environment that will surround us
everywhere.
In this review, we outlined the hot topics of interplay between promising artiﬁ-
cial intelligence methods and modern quantum computing. These topics are predom-
inantly associated with the limited capabilities of NISQ era quantum computers and
use variety of variational algorithms such as variational eigensolver and quantum ap-
proximate optimisation algorithm, respectively. A special place in our review is given
to so-called quantum neural networks which represent new QML models whose pa-
rameters are updated classically and may be used within quantum-classical training
algorithms for variational circuits. In this sense we discussed promising hybrid informa-
tion processing methods that use both classical ML algorithms and quantum devices.
The training procedure proposes data providing to the quantum model, calculating
an objective (loss) value, and then adapting the QNN parameters. Thus, the whole
procedure represents a hybrid quantum-classical algorithm. In this work we discuss
another possible application for hybrid computation, that may use classical-quantum
convolutional neural network designed for resolving speedup of random walks on cho-
sen graphs. Our approach is based on training CQCNN, which learns to extract feature
vectors from graph adjacency matrices combined with a decoherence parameter. We
have shown that even without any decoherence in generally the speedup of random
walks essentially depends on topological properties of the graph, i.e. on adjacency ma-
trix peculiarities. Our ﬁndings open new perspectives in quantum-classical algorithms
which explore random walks as subroutines.
5. Acknowledgements
A.P.A acknowledges support from the Goszadanie No. 2019-1339 project of Ministry
of Science and Higher Education of Russian Federation. R.-K.L. is partially supported
by the National Science and Technology Council of Taiwan (No. 110-2123-M-007-002).
