Modularization of End-to-End Learning:
Case Study in Arcade Games
Andrew Melnik
CITEC
Bielefeld University
Bielefeld, Germany

Sascha Fleer
CITEC
Bielefeld University
Bielefeld, Germany

Malte Schilling
CITEC
Bielefeld University
Bielefeld, Germany

Helge Ritter
CITEC
Bielefeld University
Bielefeld, Germany

Abstract
Complex environments and tasks pose a difﬁcult problem for holistic end-to-end
learning approaches. Decomposition of an environment into interacting control-
lable and non-controllable objects allows supervised learning for non-controllable
objects and universal value function approximator learning for controllable objects.
Such decomposition should lead to a shorter learning time and better generalisation
capability. Here, we consider arcade-game environments as sets of interacting
objects (controllable, non-controllable) and propose a set of functional modules
that are specialized on mastering different types of interactions in a broad range
of environments. The modules utilize regression, supervised learning, and rein-
forcement learning algorithms. Results of this case study in different Atari games
suggest that human-level performance can be achieved by a learning agent within
a human amount of game experience (10-15 minutes game time) when a proper
decomposition of an environment or a task is provided. However, automatization
of such decomposition remains a challenging problem. This case study shows
how a model of a causal structure underlying an environment or a task can beneﬁt
learning time and generalization capability of the agent, and argues in favor of ex-
ploiting modular structure in contrast to using pure end-to-end learning approaches.
Keywords: Arcade Games; Causal Learning; Hierarchical Reinforcement Learn-
ing; End-to-End Learning.
1
Introduction
The priors that we put into the machine and the techniques we use for optimization are essential
ingredients of learning. People can learn a new concept from a few examples, yet machine learning
algorithms typically require thousands of examples to perform similarly [11, 12]. The compound
nature of arcade-game environments leads to an exponentially increasing learning time with the
increasing complexity of an environment or a task for end-to-end learning approaches. End-to-end
learning without priors requires a large number of interactive steps to attain human-level performance
even in seemingly straightforward game environments [14].
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.
arXiv:1901.09895v1  [cs.LG]  27 Jan 2019

Figure 1: We tested our framework on the OpenAI-Gym-Atari environments: Breakout, Pong, and
Pinball. The trained framework predicts a future trajectory of a ball (white dotted lines) and controls
a paddle to bring these objects to a hit superposition that maximizes an expected reward. Video:
https://rebrand.ly/ataridemo
Biological agents do not learn by a single, global optimization principle within a uniform neural
network. Rather, their brains are modular, with distinct but interacting subsystems working in parallel
and contributing to an overall emergent behavior [6, 1, 16]. In our framework, we use a simpliﬁed
representation of such functional subsystems and call them functional modules. Each functional
module allows an artiﬁcial agent to learn a speciﬁc type of interaction primitive in an environment.
We assume, that there is a moderate number of such interaction primitives required to fully describe
interactions in any physical environment. Therefore, only a moderate number of functional modules
is required for optimization of agent’s behaviour in an environment.
In the current study, we describe a set of functional modules for speciﬁc types of interaction primitives,
which are common to a broad range of arcade environments. Our goal is to come up with a reusable
toolset of functional modules which can adapt their predeﬁned functionality to a speciﬁc environment
using a minimal number of observation samples. This will allow shifting the learning problem to a
higher level of disentangling rewarding interactions in an environment.
2
Framework
We tested our framework on three OpenAI-Gym-Atari [3] environments: Breakout, Pong, and Pinball
(Fig. 1). While these game-environments share some generic interaction primitives which can be
learned by the general-purpose functional modules we proposed (Fig. 2), they still are very different
in appearance and in-game dynamics.
The framework uses object based representation. Each object (e.g. ball, paddle, wall, etc.) has a data
structure containing information about the shape of the object, object type, and previous positions and
velocities. Additionally the framework stores the area in which the object was observed throughout
the gameplay and set of available actions for controllable objects.
The exact techniques for extracting object-related information from the pixel-based input are not in
the focus of the current study. Therefore, we do not provide a general approach for extraction of
objects and their features from a pixel representation of arcade-game environments. For the given
environments (Breakout, Pong, Video Pinball) we apply adapted ﬁlters, like color selection, difference
between sequential frames, and shape matches to extract object-related information from screens.
Such information can also be provided by a simulation engine, as seen in other studies [8, 9].
Interaction primitives are processed by a set of functional modules (Fig. 2), which were the same for
all three game-environments in the study. Input-output relationships in the modules are formed by
regression, supervised learning, or reinforcement learning algorithms.
2

Functional module 
Functional module’s product 
Framework engine 
Information flow 
Controllable 
object
Action
Non-controllable 
object
Predicted 
trajectory
Reward-events 
regression
Hit 
events
Reward 
events
B.  Trajectory prediction 
trj = [] 
pos = framework.get_obj_pos() 
for i in range(n): 
s = sensor(pos) 
squeue = squeue.update(s) 
v = f(vqueue, squeue) 
vqueue = vqueue.update(v) 
pos = pos + v 
trj.append(pos)
A.  Framework
Figure 2: A. Overview. B. Trajectory-prediction pseudo code of the non-controllable-object module.
n - number of recursive prediction steps; pos - anterior position of a predicted trajectory at the
prediction step i; s - observation from the sensor at the step i; v - predicted velocity vector at the step
i.
2.1
Module 1: Non-controllable object
One important and general property of non-controllable objects in arcade-game environments is their
movement trajectories. It is necessary, for example, to predictively chase an object, avoid a collision,
etc. Therefore, we designed a functional module which predicts the future movement trajectory of an
object. In each game-environment, the functional module uses supervised learning to train a neural
network on past trajectories to predict a future trajectory of the object by rolling out a sequence of
n recursive prediction steps (Fig. 2B). The network has two hidden layers followed by a split into
two streams, one for Vx and one for Vy velocity output dimensions, with one hidden layer each. All
hidden layers use the ReLu activation function.
We added a sensor to predict outcomes of interactions with other objects (e.g. collisions) at the
trajectory path of the non-controllable object. The sensor detects overlapping of m neighboring pixels
with other objects (0 - no overlapping; 1 - overlapping detected) at each recursive prediction steps.
The information from the sensor is represented as a vector of m binary values. Therefore, the module
learns to predict a trajectory while taking into account interaction outcomes with other objects.
The neural network input is a vector containing a queue of k previous velocity vectors and sensor
observations concatenated and ﬂattened in a 1-D vector. At each recursive step the neural network
outputs a predicted velocity vector of two values (Vx, Vy). And the framework updates the velocity
queue, updates the anterior position point of the trajectory, appends it to the stack of trajectory
positions of the non-controllable object, and updates the sensor queue (Fig. 2B).
2.2
Module 2: Reward-events regression
Shape is an important property of an object that inﬂuences interaction with other objects. In the
framework, objects have a bitmap representation of their shapes. The framework produces an event
for overlapping of controllable and non-controllable objects’ shapes (e.g., ball-paddle hit event). The
reward-events regression module (Fig. 2) collects statistics on contact points with the controllable
object and delayed rewards, and builds the reward regression for contact points, relative to the
center of the controllable object’s shape. Points of the shape associated with higher reward values
are selected with a higher probability as the intersection point for the predicted trajectory of an
non-controllable object.
For example, in the Pong game, a contact point at the middle of the paddle (with a ball) is associated
with the zero expected reward value according to the collected statistics, as reﬂecting the ball at the
middle of the paddle never leads to score points for any of the players. A potential hit event farther
3

Figure 3: Learning curves of the framework in Atari-arcade-game environments.
than the edge of the paddle has a negative expected reward value, as it leads to missing a ball. A hit
event at the edge of the paddle has the highest expected reward value, as reﬂection of the ball at the
edge of the paddle leads to a steep attack angle and a high probability of scoring.
2.3
Module 3: Controllable object
The controllable-object module (Fig. 2A) operates a directly-controllable object in a game environ-
ment (e.g. a paddle) by specifying the goal position for the controllable object in the environment [10].
When a predicted trajectory of a non-controllable object (e.g. a ball) intersects the area accessible
by the controllable object, the module utilizes the intersection position as the goal position for
the controllable object. The center of the controllable object’s shape is the current position of the
controllable object. The reward-events regression module speciﬁes the point on the controllable
object’s shape that should intersect with the goal position. The module also utilizes k previous actions
applied to the controllable object to take into account the dynamics of the object. In every time step,
the module outputs an action for the controllable object, leading to approaching the goal according to
a learned universal-value policy [15]. The module uses Hindsight Experience Replay [2] to minimize
a number of experience samples required for convergence.
3
Performance
Our framework achieves human-level control in less than 25 000 steps (frame skip = 2) (Fig. 3) in
such Arcade Games as Breakout, Pong, and Pinball. This is approximately equal to 10-15 min of
real-time human play (60 Hz), which is close to how fast human players are mastering these games. In
contrast, classic end-to-end reinforcement learning models with pixel- or object-based representations
without modularization require about 25 million steps [7] or more to achieve similar performance.
4
Discussion
In the current case study, we proposed several general-purpose functional modules applicable to a
broad range of arcade-game environments. The modules can adapt their predeﬁned functionality
to a speciﬁc environment using a minimal number of observation samples. We demonstrated that
the framework is capable of acquiring human-level performance within a human amount of game
experience (10-15 minutes game time).
A number of possible interaction primitives of physical objects is limited and moderate. Extending
the framework with additional general-purpose functional modules, covering a broader range of
interaction primitives, will allow for human-level control in a broader range of arcade environments.
Following up on this line of research will allow to shift the scaling challenges of reinforcement
learning to the question of how the number of to-be-covered interaction primitives of physical objects
compares to the complexity of the environment. Most likely, there are different ways of deﬁning
such interaction primitives, serving different trade-offs between, e.g., minimal number, generalization
capability and speed of learning. To gain deeper insights into the structure of these trade-offs would
be an ambitious longer-term goal, both for a comprehensive theory of reinforcement learning and for
a principled tailoring of practical learning architectures [13].
4

We assume a taxonomy of complexity of interaction primitives required for mastering arcade-game
environments. This means that some arcade-game environments may require more functional modules
than others for a successful mastering with the framework. The inﬂuential study by Mnih et al. [14]
demonstrated the performance of pixel based DQN with respect to a professional human games tester,
where, “Video Pinball” and “Breakout” environments were mastered by the DQN approach at the
considerably higher level than the professional human games tester (>1000 %); “Pong” near the
human level (132 %); and “Montezuma’s Revenge” at the random play level (0 %). Their comparison
provides a ﬁrst approximation for such a taxonomy of complexity of games.
In the study, we converted pixel-based representation of the environments into object-based repre-
sentation. Such composable object-based representations and a neural network architecture allow
factorizing object dynamics into pairwise interactions, as seen in other learning approaches [4, 5]. We
also expect good generalization properties of the framework for subtle changes in the environment,
such as paddle offset, middle wall, etc. [8].
This work proposes a case study where Atari games are modularized into parts (controllable, non-
controllable objects). Such a modular approach may allow shifting the learning problem to a higher
level of disentangling rewarding interactions in an environment. This case study shows how a model
of a causal structure underlying an environment or a task can beneﬁt learning time and generalization
capability of the agent, and argues in favor of exploiting modular structure in contrast to using pure
end-to-end learning approaches.
