arXiv:1204.3221v1  [cs.NE]  14 Apr 2012
Neuroevolution Results in Emergence of
Short-Term Memory for
Goal-Directed Behavior⋆
Konstantin Lakhman and Mikhail Burtsev
Neuromorphic Cognitive Systems Lab,
Department of Neuroscience, Kurchatov NBIC-Centre,
National Research Center “Kurchatov Institute”, Moscow, Russia

Abstract. Animals behave adaptively in the environment with multi-
ply competing goals. Understanding of the mechanisms underlying such
goal-directed behavior remains a challenge for neuroscience as well for
adaptive system research. To address this problem we developed an evo-
lutionary model of adaptive behavior in the multigoal stochastic envi-
ronment. Proposed neuroevolutionary algorithm is based on neuron’s
duplication as a basic mechanism of agent’s recurrent neural network
development. Results of simulation demonstrate that in the course of
evolution agents acquire the ability to store the short-term memory and,
therefore, use it in behavioral strategies with alternative actions. We
found that evolution discovered two mechanisms for short-term memory.
The ﬁrst mechanism is integration of sensory signals and ongoing inter-
nal neural activity, resulting in emergence of cell groups specialized on
alternative actions. And the second mechanism is slow neurodynamical
processes that makes possible to code the previous behavioral choice.
Keywords: adaptive behavior, neuroevolution, alternative behavior, re-
current neural networks, short-term memory
1
Introduction
Understanding the mechanisms of learning and maintenance of eﬀective behavior
in stochastic environments with complex hierarchy of goals is one of key issues in
the study of neural processing and for the development of bio-inspired artiﬁcial
intelligence. However, these mechanisms are better understood if history of their
development is taken into account.
Fields of machine learning and adaptive behavior have been rapidly develop-
ing in the recent decades. One of the most popular approaches in these areas is
reinforcement learning (RL) [1] and its modiﬁcations. It can be eﬀectively used
for learning of autonomous agents in many domains. However, problem spaces
⋆Manuscript was submitted to the 12th International Conference on the Simulation
of Adaptive Behavior, 27–31 August 2012, Odense, Denmark

2
Konstantin Lakhman and Mikhail Burtsev
with multiple goals require execution of alternative behavioral strategies that
are not possible for RL algorithms, since the behavior of the agent is determined
by the single value function. Also, it is not always possible to deﬁne appropriate
value function a priori. To address this issue approaches for the generation of
reinforcement values using evolutionary algorithms are currently under develop-
ment [2].
Other algorithms are also unable to produce eﬀective solution for the en-
vironments with hierarchy of goals [3]. The various methods designed for the
generation of behavioral sequences [4,5] in most cases cannot eﬀectively work in
situations with a large number of goals present in the environment and when an
agent has to autonomously explore them. Neuroevolutionary approaches have
been successfully used for the synthesis of autonomous agent’s controllers in
low-formalized tasks [6,7].
To solve the problem of alternative behaviors the algorithm should imple-
ment non-Markov decision process in opposite to reinforcement learning [8]. In
other words for selection of diﬀerent actions at the same state of the environment
an agent should have memory of previous actions. Short-term memory (STM)
is extensively covered in the area of recurrent neural networks research in terms
of the signal reverberation [9] and serial order recall [10]. Theorists suggested
reverberation phenomenon as signiﬁcant mechanism for STM [11]. Nevertheless
neural principles underlying generation of the behavior as a non-linear integra-
tion of the sensory information and internal state of the network are not yet
discovered. As well the question of the role STM plays in the adaptive behavior
with alternative actions is still underexplored.
In this paper we present a model of an agent situated in an environment
with hierarchy of goals. The behavior of the agent is controlled by recurrent
neural network. We simulated evolution of agents in the model world and studied
emergence of short-term memory and its role in adaptive behavior.
2
Environment with Hierarchy of Goals
In the current study a state of an environment in which an autonomous agent
“lives” is represented by binary vector:
E (t) = (e1 (t) , · · · , enenv (t)) , ei (t) ∈{0, 1} .
(1)
At any discrete time step the agent may change a single bit of this vector
to the opposite. Thus, environmental structure is a nenv-dimensional hypercube.
Every dimension of this hypercube might be interpreted as some feature of the
real environment, for instance temperature, pressure, etc. Competing goals of
diﬀerent complexity are prespeciﬁed in the environment as an ordered set of
single bit changes of the environmental state vector:
gi = ((n1, q1) , · · · , (nki, qki)) ,
(2)
where nj is a number of target bit of the state vector, qj is target value of the
bit, ki is a complexity of the goal. Goals of varying complexity are deﬁned in

Neuroevolution Results in Emergence of Short-Term Memory
3
the environment, together forming a branched hierarchical structure. We have
generated structure of the environment by, ﬁrstly, composing hierarchy of full
goals and then each goal was divided into sequence of subgoals. To determine
the complexity of a particular environment we introduce occupancy based on a
probabilistic approach:
CO =
NA
X
i=1
2ki−k
′
i

1
2nenv
ki
,
(3)
where NA is the number of goals in an environment, k
′
i is the number of unique
bits of the state vector, changed during the process of achieving a goal (single bit
can be changed several times). The value, which is opposite to the occupancy,
we shall call the diﬃculty of the environment:
CD =
1
CO
.
(4)
Reward is associated with each goal in the environment and directly propor-
tional to the complexity of corresponding goal. After the agent reached goal, level
of accruing reward associated with this goal is reset and then linearly recovers
to the original value over the time Trec.
Environment can be either deterministic or non-deterministic. In the later
changes of the state vector occur not only when the agent performs actions, but
also stochastically according with a ﬁxed probability.
3
Agent’s Behavior and Evolutionary Algorithm
Agent’s behavior in the environment is controlled by artiﬁcial neural network
(ANN) of arbitrary topology, which develops through the evolutionary process.
ANN is divided into input, output and number of hidden layers. The network
consists of McCulloch-Pitts neurons with nonnegative logistic activation func-
tion. Signal passes through the synapse only when output value of a presynaptic
neuron is above a certain activation threshold (was set to 0.5 in all simulations).
Thus, we introduce two possible states for each neuron: active (when output
is above a threshold) and inactive (otherwise). The current state vector of the
environment is directly fed to the neurons of input layer of the network. Hidden
layers allow existence of recurrent connections with delayed transmission. Pair
of the most active neurons of output layer encodes agent’s action at the current
time step. Each pair stands for a particular bit of the state vector and target
value. Thereby transfers of a bit from 0 to 1 and vice versa are encoded by dif-
ferent pairs of the output neurons. The agent could produce ineﬀective actions,
when attempts to change a state of a bit to one in which it already is.
Population of agents evolves in the hypercube environment described in pre-
vious section. Every individual is separately placed in the environment to eval-
uate ﬁtness. For a given time the agent operates in the environment, reaching

4
Konstantin Lakhman and Mikhail Burtsev
goals and accumulating reward. Value of accumulated reward is inaccessible to
the agent and total reward aﬀects its reproductive success.
To evolve agents’ ANNs we used neuroevolutionary algorithm based on du-
plication of neurons. This algorithm is similar to well-known NEAT [12] as it
makes possible evolution of neural network topology but in more natural way
by duplicating neurons with attached connections. Speciﬁcally we use neuron’s
duplication mutation when duplicated neuron inherits from parent the whole
synaptic structure instead of add node mutation of NEAT. Incoming connec-
tions of the descendant and parent neurons retain its previous weights, while
weights of outgoing connections divided in half for both neurons. Thus, two
neurons in the aggregate perform the former function, but later in evolution the
descendant neuron could diverge into a separate structure. To optimize evolution
by dynamically reducing dimensionality of the search space we also introduced
delete connection mutation, which performed in the same manner as add con-
nection mutation. Neurons that lost all their connections are being deleted from
the network. We did not use any crossover algorithm, since preliminary results
of comparison between two versions of evolutionary algorithm (with crossover
and without) have not showed signiﬁcantly diﬀerence.
The structure of the agents’ networks in initial population consists of input
and output layers and one additional interneuron, which will be an ancestor for
all future interneurons. This initial interneuron is fully connected to input layer
(by incoming connections) and to output layer, herewith there are no initial
direct connections between input and output neurons.
We used the following parameters of the artiﬁcial environment in all simula-
tions: dimensionality of the hypercube environment nenv – 8 bits; agent lifetime
duration Tlife – 250 time steps; reward’s recovery time Trec – 30 time steps;
probability of random change of the state vector’s bit Pstoch – 0.0085 (for each
bit). Evolutionary algorithm was running with parameters: population Np – 250
agents; period of evolution Tev – 5000 generations; probability of the synaptic
weight mutation Pm – 0.6 (for each synapse); variance of the synaptic weight
mutation Dm – 0.08; probability of adding the synapse Paddsyn – 0.1 (for whole
network); probability of deleting the synapse Pdelsyn – 0.05 (for whole network);
probability of neuron’s duplication Pdup – 0.007 (for whole network).
4
Behavioral Evolution
As the ﬁrst step we studied how occupancy of the environment aﬀects eﬃciency
of evolved behavior in deterministic and stochastic environments. As expected
the simulation results show the growth of an average cumulative reward with
increase of the occupancy, reﬂecting that a task is easier when the environment
is more densely populated with goals (Fig. 1).
Agents evolved in non-deterministic environments behave signiﬁcantly more
successfully (Fig. 1) in terms of average accumulated reward and in most cases
have richer repertoires of behavior. Such phenomenon can be explained by the
fact that during the “life” in an environment which could suddenly change the

Neuroevolution Results in Emergence of Short-Term Memory
5
agent with a wider spectrum of behavioral policies should be more successful.
Thus stochasticity of the environment contributes to the selection of agents with
more ﬂexible and robust behavior, allowing them to reach greater number of goals
from diﬀerent initial position. However, with increasing probability of random
changes in the environment one can observe a sharp decline in the eﬃciency of
the evolution (data not shown) due to the destabilization of all policies caused
by excessively frequent changes in the environment.
We then analyzed evolution of behavioral sequences of the agents in the
environment of intermediate goal occupancy. Typical evolved behavior usually
consists of two phases: preliminary phase of converging to the main behavioral
cycle and then residing on it. In a particular behavioral run both of these phases
depend on the initial state of the environment, from which the agent has been
started. We shall call the main behavioral cycle (sequence of actions or attained
goals) a behavioral strategy.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
0
0,1
0,2
0,3
0,4
0,5
0,6
Average cummulative reward
Occupancy of the environment
Non-deterministic environment
Deterministic environment
Fig. 1. Dependence of the average cumulative reward on the occupancy of the envi-
ronment (each dot is averaging over 20 environments and 10 runs of the evolution in
each environment, ∗- t-test with p = 0.01).
Results of simulations demonstrate that sharp increase in the average cumu-
lative reward among the population usually coincides with emergence of a large
number of new cycles and their dynamic competition. Corresponding periods are
the most interesting in the study of behavioral evolution. On the Fig. 2 we give
an example of such period.
One can observe competition between diﬀerent behavioral strategies during
a very limited evolutionary period. Herewith new strategies are appearing as an
extension of previously evolved cycles. Extension can be implemented not only
as simple addition of a new part to an old one, but also as complex compilation
of two strategies. Eventually one of the strategies wins the competition and
dominates in the behavior of the most of the population. Then evolution occurs
through increase in number of states, from which it could be implemented.

6
Konstantin Lakhman and Mikhail Burtsev
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
Number of behavioral cycle of goals
161  162 86 28 29 30 117 126 127 161 28  31 32
161 162   86 28  29 30
86 28   29   30 
86   28   29   30 117 126 127 161
161  162  86  28  29 30 161 28 31 32
0
1000
2000
3000
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
2200
2400
2600
Reward 
Generation
 
Average
Max
Fig. 2. Emergence and selection of behavioral strategies in the evolution. Sequences
of goals for the most successful strategies are labeled. Each dot represents behavioral
strategy; light arrows indicate moments of corresponding cycle’s ﬁxation in the evolu-
tion; black boxes indicate inclusion of old cycles into a new one.
5
Alternative Behavior and Short-Term Memory
The analysis of behavioral strategies emerging in the simulated evolution shows
that the agents acquire ability to store short-term memory due to reverberation
in the neural network by recurrent connections. The evidence for short-term
memory comes from the fact that agents can implement policies based on al-
ternative actions. Agents usually can perform diﬀerent actions from one state
of the environment depending on the previous history of behavior. State tran-
sition diagram for the exemplar evolved behavior with three alternative actions
is shown on the Fig. 3. Such phenomenon would not been possible in the case
of reactivity work of the neural network. Corresponding behavior is generated

Neuroevolution Results in Emergence of Short-Term Memory
7
by a neural network consists of 30 neurons with only 15 interneurons and 611
synaptic connections.
Only a small number of neurons signiﬁcantly change output and aﬀect the
decision making at states associated with alternative situations. This group of
neurons is specialized on particular alternative actions. The majority of neurons
remain at the same level of activity, while neurons which determine a behavior
change their activity from zero to maximum level.
1 
4 
13
1
2
3
4 
5
2
3
8
4
5
6 
7
9
10 
11 
12
13
0
0
Action №
Activity 
of interneurons 
B
A
1
Fig. 3. A) An example of alternative behavior (states are marked as circles; transi-
tions/actions are marked as arrows and numbered sequentially). B) Activity of in-
terneurons during performance of three alternative actions (black color - maximum
activity level of corresponding neuron; white - zero activity)
Based on the various behavioral policies the deepest short-term memory we
found was at least 4 past states (lower bound). Such conclusion was made after
considering situations in which alternative actions are performed with the same
history of behavior and, thus, the lower bound can be determined as the ﬁrst
diﬀerent action of the two behavioral sequences.
The ability to use short-term memory makes possible implementation of much
more complex behavior and accumulation of more reward during the agent’s
“life”. Example of a behavioral strategy, based on the alternation of two cycles
of actions, is shown on the Fig. 4. Since after the goal is reached it restores the
reward for a ﬁxed number of time steps, such a strategy allows goals that were
reached on the ﬁrst cycle to restore their value, while the agent passes the second
cycle. Behavior on the Fig. 4 can be implemented using short-term memory with
depth of two states.
Primitive alternative behavior in the model could also be supported by slow
neurodynamical process (Fig. 5). In this case the “memory”, required to perform
alternative actions, could be up to 30 previous states. The mechanism underling
this type of behavior is oscillatory dynamic of the neuron’s output. While output

8
Konstantin Lakhman and Mikhail Burtsev
of a neuron is above threshold, and therefore transmitted by outgoing connec-
tions, agent performs the ﬁrst part of behavior. At some point output falls below
the transmission threshold and the neuron no longer inhibits the other neuron,
which activity is essential for the second branch of behavior.
states
intermediate
10 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
7
8
9
10
5 intermediate
states 
 
Fig. 4. Behavioral strategy consisting of two cycles of actions
0
1
2
3
4
 
 
7
8
9
37
38
39
40
0,4
0,5
0,6
0,7
0,8
0,9
1
7
12 17 22 27 32 37 42
17th 
Time step
B
neuron activity
A
...
...
Fig. 5. An alternative behavior based on slow neurodynamical process. A) Example
of alternative behavior with “memory”. B) Dynamics of neuron’s output responsible
for realization of the ﬁrst part of behavior (consecutive transitions between ﬁrst and
second states)

Neuroevolution Results in Emergence of Short-Term Memory
9
15
20
25
30
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
# of neuron
Time
Fig. 6. Raster plot of a network’s activity during behavior
In the records of neural network activity (Fig. 6) during the entire period
of autonomous agent’s behavior one can identify both neurons, that are active
while performing most of the actions, and neurons, that are active only in a very
limited number of states of the environment (sometimes even in a single state).
6
Conclusion
In our study we have explored possibility of evolutionary emergence of short-
term memory in recurrent neural networks controlling agents’ behavior in multi-
goal environments. On the ﬁrst stage we analyzed overall dynamics of a model.
As expected, performance of agents was worse when the number of goals in
environment was smaller. On the other hand it turned out surprisingly that in
stochastic environments agents with more ﬂexible and stable behavioral policies
evolve and able to accumulate more reward in comparison to agents in the same
environment but without noise. This phenomenon is quite unusual for machine
learning algorithms [8], since in the case of non-deterministic environment the
performance is usually worse.
Detailed investigation of evolutionary dynamics revealed that the evolution
of agents consisted of two stages: rapid emergence/development of new behav-
ioral strategies and their propagation among the population. Formation of new
strategies was usually manifested as complex integration of few already existed.
On the level of individual behavior we found that evolution develops strate-
gies, which are based on alternative actions. That happens due to acquisition
of ability to operate with short-term memory and, therefore, to select actions
taking into account previous history of behavior.
Evolution discovered two diﬀerent neuronal mechanisms for implementation
of alternative actions: ﬁrst one is based on integration of sensory information
and internal signal, which is reverberating through recurrent connections; and
the second is based on slow neurodynamical oscillatory processes. In fact, there
is no need to recruit synaptic plasticity during the agent’s “life” to have an
eﬀective use of short-term memory. It is important to notice that emergence of

10
Konstantin Lakhman and Mikhail Burtsev
the ability to operate with short-term memory in our model occurs without any
artiﬁcial prerequisites in the structure of an evolutionary algorithm.
The next stage of presented study is introduction of learning during agent’s
“life”, since it makes signiﬁcant contribution into development of adaptive behav-
ior. The main mechanism of learning algorithm is detection on the neuronal level
of problems for the whole organism situated in environment. Possible approach
to the construction of such algorithm is the use of research in the theoretical
neuroscience [13,14].
Acknowledgments. This research was partially supported by Russian Foun-
dation for Basic Research (RFBR) project 11-04-12174-oﬁ-m-2011.
