Explainable AI and Adoption of Financial Algorithmic Advisors:
an Experimental Study
Daniel Ben David

The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Finance Department
Intuit Inc.
Yehezkel S. Resheff∗
Department of Computer Science,
Holon Institude of Technology
Talia Tron
Intuit Inc.
ABSTRACT
We study whether receiving advice from either a human or algo-
rithmic advisor, accompanied by five types of Local and Global
explanation labelings, has an effect on the readiness to adopt, will-
ingness to pay, and trust in a financial AI consultant. We compare
the differences over time and in various key situations using a
unique experimental framework where participants play a web-
based game with real monetary consequences. We observed that
accuracy-based explanations of the model in initial phases leads
to higher adoption rates. When the performance of the model is
immaculate, there is less importance associated with the kind of
explanation for adoption. Using more elaborate feature-based or
accuracy-based explanations helps substantially in reducing the
adoption drop upon model failure. Furthermore, using an autopilot
increases adoption significantly. Participants assigned to the AI-
labeled advice with explanations were willing to pay more for the
advice than the AI-labeled advice with a No-explanation alternative.
These results add to the literature on the importance of XAI for
algorithmic adoption and trust.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Human-centered computing →User studies; Usability test-
ing; Empirical studies in HCI;
KEYWORDS
HCI, Explainable AI, Financial Advice, Trust, Algorithm Adoption,
Experiment
ACM Reference Format:
Daniel Ben David, Yehezkel S. Resheff, and Talia Tron. 2021. Explainable AI
and Adoption of Financial Algorithmic Advisors: an Experimental Study.
In Proceedings of the 2021 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society
(AIES ’21), May 19–21, 2021, Virtual Event, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
13 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3461702.3462565
∗The bulk of the research was conducted while at Intuit Inc.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a

AIES ’21, May 19–21, 2021, Virtual Event, USA
© 2021 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-8473-5/21/05...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3461702.3462565
1
INTRODUCTION
The use of machine learning and other automation methods is
becoming overwhelmingly popular and increasingly available in
different facets of everyday life. From basic research these methods
have made their way into medicine, transportation, business pro-
cesses, retail, customer service, and diverse financial services. At
times these methods are utilized to do work for individuals, driving
down costs of previously labour intensive products and services.
Other times the same methods are utilized to automatically make
decisions about individuals.
When algorithms take part in decision making with significant
impact to individuals, there is a burden of explainability that nat-
urally falls on the providers of the system. In some cases there
are regulations that imposes obligatory explanation of decisions
as an integral part of their output (for example, the recent GDPR
legislation by the European Union which requires the maker of AI
algorithms which “significantly affect” decisions to explain how
any output was obtained [9]). In other cases, a deep understand-
ing of how an output was generated is crucial for human based
decision making in interaction with the automatic process (e.g. in
some medical, and security applications). However, in many other
cases, and in various fields, the importance of explanations is first
and foremost in the effect on the perceived trustworthiness of the
system [13, 21, 28], and hence on the readiness of consumers to
adopt (RTA) the AI service, and pay for it.
In recent years, the field of explainable AI (XAI) has seen a boost
in interest from the community, with many new approaches and
ideas. Most of the effort is on the technological and algorithmic
side – borrowing ideas from game theory, statistics, and machine
learning, to develop fast and accurate techniques which explain
black-box or opaque models [15, 20, 22], or train AI which is more
interpretable by nature [1, 19]. Another part of the literature deals
with the independently important question of evaluating explana-
tions based on their attributes, and with user evaluation of expla-
nations and the consequent effect on behavior.
1.1
Attributes of AI Explanations
The first important attribute when considering what explanation to
generate is the type of information the explanation should convey.
We find in the literature three main approaches to explanations: (1)
Global Explanations, (2) Local explanations and (3) what might be
called Social Influence Explanations.
Global explanation techniques provide an overview of what an
algorithm is doing as a whole. The aim of this type of explanation
is to convey to a human what the algorithm is doing rather than ex-
plain the process that lead to a specific prediction or decision. These
arXiv:2101.02555v3  [cs.HC]  9 Jun 2021

methods often include summarized information about how a model
uses features to produce prediction (some popular approaches in-
clude various notions of feature importance, dependence plots,
and global Shapley values), prototype example predictions, or a
simplified, interpretable approximation of a black-box model (aka
surrogate models) [10, 15, 22, 26].
Another type of global explanation that is completely indepen-
dent of the algorithm used is the presentation of any type of meta-
information that sheds light about the process. This includes trans-
parency around how the model was trained, the type of data that
was used, or even simply reporting model performance statistics.
Global explanations are for the most part less costly to produce in
real-world systems, compared to the alternatives, and are readily
available in most cases, making them appealing in practise.
Local explanation techniques, on the other hand, provide a more
detailed description of how the model came up with a specific pre-
diction. These may include information about how a model uses
features to generate a specific output [2, 10, 20, 23, 24, 26], how a
perturbation in input will influence the output [4, 27], or a compar-
ison of the specific input-output pair at hand to the model’s output
on similar input data [14]. In general, local explanation techniques
are more costly in time and resources since they must be computed
on a case-by-case basis rather than globally for the entire system.
Furthermore, local explanations are inherently only available once
the system is being used, and not applicable when the aim is to
convince a user beforehand and build a-priori trust and consent
that is independent of actual experience with the system.
Social Influence Explanations techniques contain a type of infor-
mation which relates to the way socially relevant others behave.
These methods are typically discussed in the context of recommen-
dation systems; a system using this sort of explanation may show
a report on model adoption statistics, or the ranking of a specific
item or of the entire system by users with a similar profile or shared
characteristics [12, 25]. We will not use this technique in our study,
and it is only briefly discussed here for the completeness of the
attributes review.
An additional factor which should be taken into account is the
way explanations are presented. The amount of information pro-
vided, phrasing, and choice of specific words may all affect what
individuals perceive [6, 12]. In parallel with the textual message,
the literature on explanations explores the visual interface, and
which visual method is the more effective way to present a recom-
mendation (e.g. star ranking, histograms, neighbors ranking tables,
pies, word cloud) [25].
With the multitude of methods that currently exist, it is not
clear how to choose for a specific case. What constitutes a good
explanation, and is it constant or individual and context dependant?
1.2
Evaluating explanations
Unlike the well defined metrics used to evaluate machine learning,
such as accuracy and precision for model performance, the defi-
nition of a good explanation of the output or nature of a model
is somewhat vague. The definition is presumably not universal,
but rather highly dependent on what we are trying to achieve by
augmenting an algorithm with an explanation. Objectives may vary
dramatically for different use-cases, ranging for instance from help-
ing the user understand how a decision was made, to attempting to
convince a user to adopt the system or take a recommendation. As a
result, the evaluation approaches and methodologies vary between
different domains.
Explanation evaluation can be conceptually divided into qualita-
tive and quantitative evaluation techniques. Within the quantitative
measures, one can find lines of work that focus on evaluating the
mathematical (or statistical) attributes of the explanation that is
generated. For example, when the explanation is presented as a
report of feature importance (i.e. a list or raking of the features that
were instrumental in making the decision), statistical properties
such as local accuracy [20] help determine the quality of the list.
This type of evaluation completely avoids the question of what is
useful or leads to adoption and trust. In some cases the truthfulness
of explanations takes precedence over all else, justifying this view.
Other times it makes sense to sacrifice on this front in order to
achieve the actual goal of the system.
Much of the relevant literature from the field of recommendation
systems focuses on measuring usage indicators to evaluate effec-
tiveness – the extent to which the system assists the user in making
better decisions compared to previous behaviour, and efficiency –
the extent to which it helps users make faster decisions [12, 25].
The qualitative measurement literature is focused mostly on
user understanding and reaction to the explanations. This line of
research uses various questionnaires. Many measures have been
suggested to reflect the different aspects of what is important when
designing explanations. These include transparency (the level of
detail provided), scrutability (the extent to which users can give
feedback to alter the AI system when it’s wrong), trust (the level of
confidence in the system), persuasiveness (the degree to which the
system itself is convincing in making users buy or try recommen-
dations given by it), satisfaction (the level to which the system is
enjoyable to use) and user understanding (the extent a user under-
stands the nature of the AI service offered, or alternatively the level
of similarity of an explanation generated by the automatic method
to explanations produced by a human being) [12, 17, 18, 23, 25].
In our study, we attempt to form a synergy between explainable
AI and the multiple fields that have previously studied algorithmic
adoption, and machine-human relations. We use the quantitative
measure of Readiness to Adopt (RTA), simply defined as the fraction
of users that use the AI system when presented with the choice,
and later the Willingness to Pay (WTP) to explore acceptance and
its relations to trust and user satisfaction. We study the impact of
the explanation type (both global and local) on the adoption of
and payment willingness towards an AI financial decision-making
advisor. We do so in a unique experimental framework, in a con-
trolled environment with real money consequences, and repeating
interactions which evolve over time. In addition, we relate the
Readiness To Adopt (RTA) and the Willingness to Pay (WTP) in
the different treatments to known constructs from the literature
on trust [7, 16, 21], and perceived quality of explanations [13, 16]
. This innovative framework allows us to examine whether there
are differences in adoption and payment when the advice is labeled
as human advisor compare to AI based algorithm, what are the
effects of types of explanations on initial adoption, adoption over
time, algorithm aversion when the model fails, fully autonomous

decision-making services, and willingness to pay. The research
questions we aim to explore include: whether different types of ex-
planations are important for adoption of an financial AI algorithm,
when all else is equal (actual advice is the same)? Will providing
more detailed information (via local explanations) increase trust,
RTA? How will this effect change after multiple interactions with
the model? How will a failure in model performance effect the way
people perceive financial algorithms with different explanations?
Do explanations influence the RTA autonomous advice or have
an effect when the advice is costly? Do explanations influence the
consumer of the advice WTP?
To the best of our knowledge, this study is the first to compare
the effect of different types of textual explanations of AI advice in
term of RTA over time and in different situations. Our approach
stems from the conjecture that the model-consumer interaction
has a dynamic nature, which is reference dependent, and it may be
influenced by various factors such as familiarity, past performance,
and potential cost. This implies that one explanation can be optimal
to make a good sense of trustworthiness, and gain initial trust and
understanding, while a different one could be better fitting after
a period of using the model, or in a such a case when it fails. In
addition, and to our knowledge, this study is the first that explores
the affect of explanation on customers Willingness to Pay (WPT)
for the AI advice.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: in the next section
we provide a detailed description of experiment methodology and
design, we discuss the choice of experimental treatments and game
flow and relate it to the existing literature from the field of explain-
able AI and algorithmic trust respectively. Next, we present the
results from an online experiment showing how explanations affect
adoption and trust in the different phases of human-AI interactions,
as well as the consequences for participants’ willingness to pay
for the service. Finally, we discuss the finding from this study, and
suggest future directions with the potential to broaden the scope
of the current work and generalize to other domains.
2
METHODS
2.1
Study Design
The study consistent of a 3 parts as follow:
(1) Pre-game quantitative questionnaire. participants had a time
limit of 3 minutes to answer 3 simple mathematical questions
(addition and subtraction). Upon completing this part, par-
ticipants earned 20 initial game coins that were used in the
main part of the study. Each game coin during the game was
worth 2 U.S. cents. The purpose of this stage was twofold:
The first was to ensure participants’ attention during the
experiment. The second relates to the mental accounting
literature [11]. We wanted participants to treat the game
coins account as money that they earned while investing
effort, rather than money that they obtained as a "reward".
(2) The main part of the study. A fun, interactive, decision-
making game – The Lemonade Stand (see full description
below). In this part participants could gain more coins de-
pending on their decisions, and potentially use an advisor,
that was labeled differently with several explanation, in do-
ing so.
(3) A post-game questionnaires about trust, engagement, expla-
nation satisfaction and personal demographic details 1.
Figure 1 illustrates the lemonade stand game. In the beginning
of the game participants were instructed as followed: “You own a
lemonade stand, your goal is to make as much money as you can
in 2 weeks by selling lemonade. Decide how many cups you want
to make, per day, based on the price of lemons and the weather
forecast.” At the beginning of each day, a weather forecast (sunny,
cloudy, or rainy) was displayed together with the varying price
of lemons (0.45-0.55 coins per cup). The lemonade selling price
was fixed (1 coin). Participants had to decide how many cups of
lemonade they wanted to manufacture (1 - 10 cups) based on the
information provided to them. At the end of each day, participants
were given a short summary of the actual weather that occurred,
the demand for lemonade (in cups), and how much they were able
to sell (the minimum of the number produced and the demand). In
case more lemonade was made than the actual demand that day,
cups were not rolled over to the next day.
The weather for each day was sampled uniformly for each par-
ticipant, and the weather forecast was generated randomly such
that the forecast was accurate 80% of the time (and uniformly one
of the remaining two options the rest of the time). The demand
for lemonade was only a (albeit stochastic) function of the actual
weather each day (see table 2) for ranges.
2.2
Game flow
2.3
Experimental Conditions
The game starts with a short learning session (3 days) designed to
verify participants understanding. These days are not counted in
the day numbering used throughout the analysis. After training,
participants play the game for 14 game-days for real game coins.
The complete game flow is described in the bottom graphic in Figure
1.
Initial adoption – At day 3, after completing 2 days of playing
for real game money, participants were given the option to take
recommendations from a so-called "advisor". Each recommendation
by the advisor was accompanied with a short explanation which
varied between experimental conditions (details below). To avoid
an anchoring effect, recommendations were always displayed after
participants already decided how many cups to make. They then
could change their decision based on the recommendation (a "Take
Advice" button allowed them to switch to the number prescribed
by the advisor. No other change to the the amount of lemonade
production was allowed at this stage); alternatively, they could
stay with their original choice. Initial adoption following the first
impression was measured by the Readiness To Adopt (RTA) in
this phase, the percent of users that took the advice each day, and
was compared between the different explanation treatments (see
table 22.3). Adoption gain – during the first days of the experiment
(between days 3 and 7) the advice in all explanation treatments was
set to perform perfectly (i.e. the advice given is precisely the actual
demand that will occur). During this period we test how confidence
in the algorithm advice is gained upon exposure to the accurate
1The questionnaires about Trust and explanation satisfaction are based on [7, 13, 16, 21].
The metrics and the questionnaires can be found in appendix A.

Condition
Explanation Type
Human Expert
The human advisor recommendation is to make 6 cups of lemon-
ade.
No explanation
The algorithm recommendation is to make 6 cups of lemonade.
Global explanation
Based on data from lemonade stands over several years, the
algorithm recommendation is to make 6 cups of lemonade.
Feature-based
Based on data from lemonade stands over several years, your
previous sales, and market demand, the algorithm recommen-
dation is to make 6 cups of lemonade.
Performance-Based
Based on data from lemonade stands over several years, the
algorithm recommendation, with 90 percent certainty, is to
make 6 cups
Table 1: The text presented to users in each experimental treatment. The recommended number presented changed by the
specific day advice and varied between 1-10
Learning 
session
Start 
playing
For real 
coins
Advice is now 
available
Recommendations 
from an advisor 
DAY 11
Auto-pilot is now 
available
Let the advisor 
decide for you
DAY 14
Advice is no 
longer free
How much are you 
willing to pay?
DAY 3
(Model fails)
You sold no 
lemonade cups!
DAY 7
0.5 Coins
20 Coins
The algorithm recommendation is to make 3 cups of
lemonade”
Weather forecast: Sunny
Cash: 21 Coins
Cost to make lemonade: 0.5
5
DAY 3
You sold 3 cups of lemonade and 
earned 3 coins !
END OF DAY 3
It was a cloudy day
You made 5 cups of lemonade but there was 
only demand for 3.
Figure 1: Illustration of one day at the lemonade stand (top), and the general flow of the lemonade stand game (bottom). Each
day the player is given the weather forecast and asked how many cups of lemonade they would like to produce. After selecting
the desired amount, advice is presented and the user can either accept the advice or produce the amount previously stated.
Finally, the day is concluded with a screen that summarizes the events of the day, including the amount produced, demand,
and earnings.
advisor, and specifically we compare the different conditions on
day 7 after 4 rounds of exposure.
Advice failure and algorithm aversion – On day 7, The weather
forecast was sunny for all participants, and the recommendation
drastically fails, with a recommendation to produce the maximal

Weather
Demand
Rainy
0-2
Cloudy
3-7
Sunny
8-10
Table 2: The ranges of demand level conditioned on weather.
The demand for lemonade cups is sampled uniformly from
the range associated with the actual weather each day.
amount of lemonade (10 cups) and actual demand for the minimal
amount for a rainy day(0 cups). We explore the effect of experi-
mental treatment (different explanations) on RTA the next day (i.e.
day 8). From day 9 and until day 10 we look at the accumulation of
renewed trust, as the algorithm returns to its accurate predictions.
Automatic adoption – starting from day 11, "Auto-pilot" mode is
made available. Namely, participants are able to request the model
to decide how many cups to make, without ever seeing its recom-
mendations, or entering their decision manually ("Decide for me").
By using this, users get the option not to think about amounts of
production, and this makes sense for them if they know they are
going to take the advice of the model anyway. The RTA here is
measured as the number of participants who adopt the algorithm
either automatically or manually as in the previous days.
Willingness to pay – During the last day of the game (day 13),
participants are told that advice will no longer be free, and are asked
how much they are will to pay to keep receiving recommendations
in the following days. The purpose of this part is to check whether
the adoption rate is affected by the algorithm not being free and
to explore whether there are differences in the willingness to pay
between the different mechanisms [3].
Participants were randomly assigned to 5 experimental condi-
tions, which differ only in the explanations for the advice that is
given (See Table 1 for the full text of the explanations provided for
each group). Each subject participated was consistently shown only
one type of advice throughout the experiment. Participants in the
Human Expert group were informed that advice is being generated
by a so called human expert in the field of lemonade stand opera-
tions. This condition was designed to asses whether the mere usage
of a computer algorithm has an effect on trust and adoption, and
whether there is an algorithmic aversion as previously found by
[5]. In all other groups, participants were told that the suggestions
are based on a so called computer algorithm. In the No Explanation
condition, participants were given no information about how the
algorithm generates the predictions. This condition was used as
baseline against which all other algorithm explanation treatments
are compared.
In the Global Explanation condition, participants were given very
general information about how the model operates, namely the type
and extent of data it uses (sales data from many lemonade stands
over several years). This condition simulates a very prevalent real-
world scenario where we aim to increase model transparency with
minimal cost in computation time and resources. In the "Feature-
based" condition, on the other hand, participants were given a
fully detailed account about the features that were used to gen-
erate the specific prediction, similar to using local explanations
in a real world scenario. To test the additive value of this infor-
mation, it was attached to the baseline global explanation. Finally,
to test the potential effect of reporting model performance, in the
Performance-Based condition information regarding performance
("with 90 percent certainty") was also attached to the baseline global
explanation (we note that the performance observed by participants
during the experiment is indeed statistically consistent with the 90
percent accuracy value mentioned to them).
To clarify, all participants faced the same game phases and pro-
cess with only one difference, the label on the advice offered. Given
that the only difference was the "label" of the advice, and the fact
that participants were randomly assigned to the conditions, no
significant difference in RTA and WTP should be observed. Any
observe differences serve as an indication of prior perceptions and
preferences relates to the given label.
2.4
Participants
The study was conducted via the online Amazon Mechanical Turk
platform (AMT). The total time participants had to complete the
experiment was 25 minutes. The average time of experiment com-
pletion were 12.66 Minutes. There were initial 514 respondents to
the experiment. We decided to add a screening mechanism and
added a minimal length of time of 6 minutes for completing the
experiment in order to filter out individuals who did not play the
game with sufficient attention and engagement.2 65 participants
who finished in non-realistic time of less than 6 minutes were
excluded. Our final sample consist of 449 subjects. These were ran-
domly distributed between five explanations conditions, 84 of the
participants received the Human Expert treatment, 104 received the
Algorithm with No Explanation, 89 of the participant were allocated
to the algorithmic advice with Global Explanation, 87 received the
Feature-based explanation the the rest of 85 participants received
the Performance-Based. All participants were located in the U.S.,
with an average age of 36.6 (Std 11.2), 58.8% Male, 68% report work-
ing full time, 21.3% part time, and the rest unemployed. 55% of our
participants report having an academic degree, 12% an associate
degree, and the rest a high school education or below.
3
RESULTS
3.1
Evolution of Adoption
We compare the Readiness to Adopt (RTA) for the different experi-
mental condition groups throughout the experiment "two weeks"
game duration. We start by describing the results with descriptive
statistics and t-tests, followed by providing a Probit multivariate
model regressions on the RTA while controlling for several rele-
vant variables such as gender, age, trust and explanation perceived
goodness indexes as measured by the questionnaires. Regression
tables include the exact values for statistics reported throughout
this section.
Figure 2 summarizes the overall adoption rate (RTA) for differ-
ent experimental conditions. The overall model adoption changed
throughout the game, supporting our reference-dependent approach.
On the very first day when the model was introduced (day 3) we see
an average of 60% adoption when averaging over all participants
2Based on our simulations, it seems that a lower experiment duration is not feasible
by an attentive individual.

40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Adoption Rate
Human advisor
No exlanation
Global Explanation
Global with features
Global with accuracy
Day
**
**
**
**
Human Advisor
No Explanation
Global Explanation
Feature-based
Performance-based
**
Figure 2: The average acceptance rate of model advise per game-day in each of the treatment groups. See Figure 1 for the
description of the flow of the game.
and all experimental conditions. Over the next few days, during
which the algorithmic performance was good, overall adoption in-
creased leading to an average adaption of 85.5% on day 7. Following
the model failure on day 7, adoption plummeted, returning approx-
imately to the initial level with 61% on day 8, this was followed by
a slow recovery up until day 10 (66%). With the introduction of the
auto-pilot option on day 11 adoption soared and reached the peak
value of 94%. Finally, when participants were told advice will no
longer be free, and were asked about willingness to pay, we see an
overall decrease in adoption on the final day (77%).
Next, we break down the effect of the experimental explanation
treatments and provide results of the RTA for each group.
3.2
Algorithm aversion (Human expert v.s.
Algorithmic advice)
First, we examine the effect of human versus algorithmic origin of
advice with no further explanation. Results show no evidence of
algorithm aversion– namely there is no significant difference in
the initial adoption of the Human Advisor (RTA of 56%) as opposed
to the computer algorithm No Explanation conditions (with an
RTA of 57.7%). However, over the first few days, the algorithmic
advice with No Explanation showed significantly gains in adoption
as compared to the Human Advisor leading to a 16.3% percent gap
on day 7 (P-value = 0.0129, t = 2.5114). Following model failure
on day 7, adoption and RTA levels fell back to around the initial
values in both cases (54% and 56% for No explanation and Human
Advisor, respectively). Recovery in the next few days is slightly
and not significantly more favorable for the AI-based advisor (65%
compared to 58% by day 10), and this trend remains throughout
the experiment. The decline in adoption following the probe of
willingness to pay is significantly larger in the Human Advisor
condition with 79% compared to 63% for algorithmic No Explanation
and the Human advisor, respectively (P-value = 0.0169, t = 2.4104).
For the regression analysis we proceed by conducting a Probit
multivariate model regressions. The base specification is
𝑅𝑇𝐴𝑖,𝑡= 𝛼+ 𝛽𝑇𝑖,𝑡+ 𝛿· T_E𝑖,𝑡+ 𝛾· X𝑖,𝑡+ 𝜖𝑖
(1)
where RTA is the outcome variable associated with individual
𝑖with time difference of 𝑡game "days" of the experiment. T is a
dummy variable for the type of investment advice: "Human Advi-
sor" (where the underlying condition is the "AI-No explanation"
alternative). 𝑇_𝐸is a vector of the Trust and Explanation satisfac-
tion dummies for indicating if an individual is above the median on
the index based on questionnaires developed by [7, 13, 16, 21]. 3 X
is the vector of age and gender variables. Table 1 shows the Probit
analysis results. We observe similar results when including the
range of the control variables. For detailed regression specification,
see Appendix A.
The absence of algorithm aversion observed in our study may
be the result of using the Mturk platform, an online platform that
may lead to the more technological orientation of individuals using
it, compared to the general population.
3.3
The effect of explanation type on RTA
Next, we considered the effect of the type of explanations provided
by the algorithmic advisor on RTA during the different phases of the
game. As before, we start with descriptive statistics and continue
with a multivariate regression analysis. For the analysis, we are
3The questionnaires can be found in appendix A

Day 3
Day 7
Day 8
Day 10
Day 13
Day 14
Performance-Based
0.343*
-0.452*
0.373*
0.108
0.19
-0.0317
(0.195)
(0.239)
(0.192)
(0.194)
(0.392)
(0.213)
Feature-Based
-0.106
-0.286
0.354*
0.367*
0
0.229
(0.189)
(0.247)
(0.193)
(0.2)
(.0)
(0.227)
Global Explanation
-0.0324
-0.147
0.222
-0.0109
-0.28
-0.168
(0.189)
(0.253)
(0.188)
(0.192)
(0.335)
(0.208)
Trust index
0.0976
0.103
0.376**
0.331**
0.15
0.153
(0.15)
(0.191)
(0.151)
(0.156)
(0.318)
(0.171)
Explanation_goodness index
0.374**
-0.159
-0.0393
-0.304*
0.288
0.274
(0.153)
(0.193)
(0.154)
(0.159)
(0.336)
(0.175)
constant
-0.154
1.543***
0.173
0.612*
2.215***
0.680**
(0.31)
(0.39)
(0.307)
(0.328)
(0.608)
(0.342)
N
365
365
365
365
278
365
Table 3: Notes: Probit regressions, robust standard errors are in parentheses. The dependent variable is the RTA over the
different days. The Algorithmic with No explanation is the underlying condition where other treatments are dummy variables.
Trust index is a dummy variable that receives 1 for individuals whose index score of all seven trust questions (see appendix 2
for the trust questions) is above the median; Explanation goodness index is a dummy variable that receives 1 for individuals
that their index score of all perceived explanation goodness index questions is above the median (see appendix 2 for the
perceived explanation goodness questions). The estimation includes constant and control vector X that consist of age, gender,
and age exponent ("∗𝑝< 0.10 ∗∗𝑝< 0.05 ∗∗∗𝑝< 0.01").
conducting a Probit, 4 cross-section multivariate model regressions,
on the different treatments while controlling for gender, age, trust
antecedents index and Explanation satisfaction index with two
approaches: (A) between conditions analysis as in model (1) on
the different experiment days, and (B) on the change in adoption
between the different experiment phases. The base specifications
are:
𝑅𝑇𝐴𝑖,𝑡= 𝛼+ 𝛽𝑇𝑖,𝑡+ 𝛿· T_E𝑖,𝑡+ 𝛾· X𝑖,𝑡+ 𝜖𝑖
(2)
𝑅𝑇𝐴Δ
𝑖,𝑡= 𝛼+ 𝛽𝑇𝑖,𝑡+ 𝛿· T_E𝑖,𝑡+ 𝛾· X𝑖,𝑡+ 𝜖𝑖
(3)
For model (2), the outcome variable is the RTA for individual i in
the different 𝑡"days" of the experiment and the rest is identical to
the specified above in model (1). Table 3 shows the Probit analysis
results. For model (3), the analysis is done on the change in adop-
tion between the experiment phases. The outcome variables are as
follows: RTA day 7 minus RTA day 3 (as gaining trust), RTA day
7 minus RTA day 8 (as loss of trust), RTA day 10 minus RTA day
8 (as a Recovery), RTA day 13 minus RTA day 11 (as auto advice
available), RTA day 14 minus RTA day 13 (as willingness to pay).
The explanatory variables are similar to as specified above in model
(1). Table 4 shows the Probit analysis results for these models.
3.3.1
Initial adoption (day 3). When comparing the Global Expla-
nation with No explanation we find no significant difference in
initial adoption. When we attach to the Global explanation the
4The results are not sensitive to the choice of regression models such as OLS or Logit.
more detailed feature-Based explanation, we again find no signifi-
cant difference. However, attaching the accuracy of the model to
the explanation created a significant difference and created the
highest initial adoption rates, with RTA of 73% for the Accuracy
compared to an RTA average of 57% for the other explanation types
(P-values = 0.0293, t = 2.1963). From the regression with controls,
we find similarly that adding the explanation of Performance-Based
had significantly more adoption compare to No-explanation. In ad-
dition, when Explanation satisfaction was perceived as high (above
median), the initial adoption was significantly higher as well.
3.3.2
Gaining confidence and trust (day 7). During these first four
days, the advice provided in all experimental conditions allowed
participants to make the highest possible profit (i.e. perfect predic-
tions and advice). In line with this, all advice treatment alternatives
gained user confidence, and adoption raised significantly by an
average of 42.5%. When comparing the different experimental con-
ditions, we find no significant differences except the Performance-
Based explanation which gained less adoption compare to the no
explanation alternative (P-value = 0.0403, t = 2.0652). From the
regressions with controls, we find, similarly to above, that only
the Performance-Based gained less adoption compare to the no-
explanation. This result was found in both regression approaches.
These results suggest that when advice performance is immacu-
late, the type of explanation presented with it is less important to
individuals.

Gained Trust
Lost Trust
Recovery
Auto Advice
No Longer Free
Tobit - WTP
Performance-Based
-1.240***
-0.501**
0.0986
0.492
0.149
0.840**
(0.458)
(0.214)
(0.317)
(0.567)
(0.217)
(0.344)
Feature-Based
-0.519
-0.419**
0.426
0
-0.115
0.537*
(0.454)
(0.208)
(0.312)
(.0)
(0.23)
(0.318)
Global Explanation
-0.606
-0.262
0.0886
-0.0565
0.166
0.788**
(0.459)
(0.201)
(0.299)
(0.453)
(0.215)
(0.38)
Human_advisor
0.454
-0.286
Trust index
-0.0615
-0.323**
0.628**
-0.0154
-0.101
-0.046
(0.317)
(0.162)
(0.266)
(0.481)
(0.175)
(0.241)
Explanation_goodness index
-0.613*
0.15
-0.417
0.57
-0.337*
0.213
(0.325)
(0.168)
(0.269)
(0.486)
(0.179)
(0.258)
N
135
318
137
97
365
449
Table 4: Notes: columns 1-5: Probit regressions, robust standard errors are in parentheses. The dependent variable is the RTA
differences over the experiment phases. Gained Trust - RTA day 7 adopters minus RTA day 3, Lost Trust - RTA day 7 adopters
minus RTA day 8 ,Recovery - RTA day 10 adopters minus RTA day 8 , Auto Advice Available - RTA day 13 minus RTA day 11,
No Longer Free - RTA day 14 minus RTA day 13. The Algorithmic with No explanation is the underlying variable where other
treatments are dummy variables. Trust index is a dummy variable that receives 1 for individuals whose index score of all seven
trust questions (see appendix 2 for the trust questions) was above the median; Explanation Goodness index is a dummy variable
that receives 1 for individuals that their Index score of all perceived explanation goodness index questions is above the median
(see appendix 2 for the perceived explanation goodness questions). Column 6: Tobit regression, robust standard errors are in
parentheses. The dependent variable is the WTP on the last day of the game. Other variables are as columns 1-5. The estimation
includes constant and control vector X that consist of age, gender, and age exponent ("∗𝑝< 0.10 ∗∗𝑝< 0.05 ∗∗∗𝑝< 0.01").
3.3.3
Advice fails and algorithm aversion (days 8-10). Following
algorithm failure on day 7, we find an average adoption drop of 28%
on day 8. When we explore the different explanations we find the
following: the two more elaborate explanations, the Performance-
Based (P-value = 0.0445, t = -2.0225) and the Feature-Based (P-value
=0.0498, t = -1.9741) prove to be more resistant to the effect of algo-
rithm error. The adoption drop was significantly lower compared
to the No explanation alternative with 16% and 21% reduction for
the Feature-Based and the Performance-Based ,respectively and 41%
reduction for the advice with No explanation. We find no significant
differences between the Global Explanation and the other alterna-
tive explanations. When we explore the adoption recovery, during
the next few days and until day 10, we find that the Performance-
Based explanation had a marginally significant (P-value = 0.0633,
t = 1.8691) tendency to recover better than the global explanation
(12% compared to only 2% for the Feature-Based and the Global
Explanation, respectively).
In the regressions with controls, we find both in model (2) and
(3) that the Feature-Based and Performance-Based have significantly
lower adoption drop compare to the alternative with No explanation.
In addition, when the trust was perceived as higher, it lowered the
drop rates and increased the recovery from the failure. Lastly, on
day 10, we observe a marginally significant higher adoption rate
for the Feature-Based condition compare to the No-explanation
alternative.
3.3.4
Auto take advice and trust (days 11-13). On day 11, subjects
have an option to select auto advice before starting the day. The
new instrument that enables the participants to avoid deciding
by themselves has a major impact. We observe adoption jump
of 40% on average to a mean RTA of 95% on day 11 and up to
97% on day 13 (For the algorithmic treatment alternatives that
included explanations (Global, Feature-Based, Performance-Based).
Among the alternative explanations, we find that the Feature-Based
explanation achieved the highest adoption rates and that they are
marginally significant compare to the No explanation alternative
(P-value = 0.0651, t = 1.8557) and significantly compared to the
Global explanation (P-value = 0.0249, t = 2.2627). In the regressions,
we find similarly to above, no significant differences between the
experimental conditions to the no explanation alternative.
Concerning the adoption jump, we relate our results to the fact
that making financial decisions is a challenging task that people
reluctantly enter [8]. The way the advice is now offered enables the
participants to transfer the responsibility for the decision making to
the advisor and avoid making it by themselves. Also, the relatively
low stakes of the game (winning several U.S dollars at the end of

the experiment) can serve as an explanation of why participants
transfer responsibility and avoid effort.
3.3.5
Advice is no longer free (day 14). On the last day we intro-
duced a new situation where the advisor is no longer free and asked
participants whether they want the advice and if so, how much they
are willing to pay for it. During this round we observe adoption
drop of 21% for the algorithmic alternatives. This was despite the
fact that we allowed the subjects to self-determine the value (the
price) of the advice. The Feature-Based condition showed a tendency
for lower adoption reduction (only 14.5% RTA drop). This result was
significant compare to the Global Explanation (P-value = 0.0398, t =
-2.0712). No other significant difference were observed between the
other algorithmic alternatives. From the regression analyses, we
find, no significant differences between the experimental conditions
to the no explanation alternative.
3.4
Willingness to pay
The Willingness to Pay measurement, as specified above, can fur-
ther attest to way participants perceive the advice given by the
different advice mechanisms. We find that participants assigned to
the No-explanation alternative were willing to pay the least for the
use of the advice with mean payment of 1.005 game coins, compared
to a mean payment of 1.774 game coins for all other "AI advice"
alternatives – A 76.5% gap. The difference in willingness to pay
was significant for Global Explanation and Performance-Based con-
ditions ((P-value = 0.0150, t = 2.4535), (P-value = 0.0063, t = 2.7621),
respectively) and marginally significant for Feature-Based condi-
tion (P-value = 0.0566, t = 1.9181). No significant differences were
observed between the other alternatives. In addition, we observe
positive marginal significant difference in the willingness to pay
for the Human-expert compared to the No-explanation ((P-value
= 0.0611, t = 1.8836). This result is in contrast to what we observe
with respect to the RTA over the same day.
For the regression analysis, we conduct a Tobit, 5 cross-section
multivariate model regressions, on the different treatments while
controlling for gender, age, trust antecedents index, and Explanation
satisfaction index. The base specifications is:
𝑊𝑇𝑃𝑖= 𝛼+ 𝛽𝑇𝑖+ 𝛿· T_E𝑖+ 𝛾· X𝑖+ 𝜖𝑖
(4)
The outcome variable is the Willingness to Pay (WTP) for indi-
vidual i. T is a dummy variable for the type of investment advice:
Global Explanation and Performance-Based and Feature-Based and
Human-Expert (where the underlying condition is the "AI-No ex-
planation" alternative). The rest is identical to the specified above
in model (1). Regression analysis results are as described above and
specified as part of model (4) in Table 4 (columns 6).
From the regression analyses, we find that the willingness to
pay for Global Explanation and Performance-Based conditions were
significantly different and positive compared to the No-explanation
alternative as observed by the t-tests and the same marginal signif-
icant tendency toward higher payment for Feature-Based condition
compare to the No-explanation. In addition, we find a significant age
U shape for the willingness to pay. Consisting with [3] results. For
the comparison of the Human-Expert vs. No-Explanation, we find
5The results are not sensitive to OLS regression
that with the controls, the effect observed is not significant. Mean-
ing that we don’t find a willingness to pay significant differences
between those advice alternatives.
Our results imply that adding explanations increases the willing-
ness to pay for the advice. Also, it seems that using "keep it simple
and short" explanations with Global or Performance-Based, had the
highest impact on the participant’s willingness to pay. We refer our
results to [8] theory in which people are willing to pay more for an
advisor that they trust more. It seems that adding WPT in addition
to RTA had an additional dimension of trust relating to algorithmic
advice.
3.5
Explanations, trust, and satisfaction
To reinforce our measure of adoption, and validate the relation to
trust, we examined the effect of trust antecedents questions which
were found as relevant in the literature [7, 16, 21], on the adoption
of the advice alternatives using within treatment analysis, over the
various days. We used a validated index including 7 trust questions
as the measure. We find that on day 8 and day 10, after the algorithm
failed, individuals who indicated that they trust the advice more in-
deed adopt it more. In particular, individuals who trusted the advice
more with Feature-Based explanation and Performance-Based based
explanation by our index, showed higher adoption rates. In addi-
tion to the trust index, when we explore the explainable goodness
questionnaire index, we find that it was significantly influential
on day 3 adoption. Individuals who valued the explanation more,
adopt the advice more. Regression analysis results are as described
above and specified as part of model (2) and (3).
4
CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION
Machine learning has become a prevalent technology, especially
over the last decade, with applications and implications in many
aspects of everyday life. In order to promote a much needed coop-
eration between human and machine, one of the research goals in
the field of explainable AI is to find the most successful ways of
explaining and presenting AI-based decisions to individuals. The
majority of this line of work is focused on algorithmic methods
to produce explanations for complex machine learning methods.
However, the complimentary question of whether different types
of explanations are important to create trust and adoption is for
the most part still open. To this end, we constructed a decision
making game framework to test adoption, trust, and willingness to
pay for financial machine learning models. Unlike questionnaire
based paradigms, the lemonade stand game allows us to test these
issues quantitatively, based on actual behavior in the presence of
real financial stakes.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to directly
evaluate the behavior of users in response to varying types of
textual global and local explanations of AI over time in different sit-
uations. Our experimental paradigm allows testing initial adoption
in several experimental conditions (defined by the different types
of explanations), as well as the evolution of the relations over time
when the AI advice proves to be useful, or after it fails. Post-game
questionnaires further allow integration of measures common in
the behavioral sciences for additional validation of our findings.

We find that attaching different explanations created a signif-
icant difference. We observed no algorithm aversion, and, in our
experiment, participants were more inclined to adopt so-called AI-
given advice compared to so-called Human advice. We find that
an accuracy-based explanation of the model in initial phases led
to higher adoption rates. When the performance is immaculate,
there is less importance associated with the kind of explanation for
adoption. In addition, in cases of failure, using more elaborating
feature-based or accuracy-based explanations helps substantially
in reducing the adoption drop, and the negative influence on trust
towards the algorithm.
Furthermore, using an autopilot increased adoption significantly,
a finding which we relate to the unwillingness to make decisions
if possible. Presenting a feature-based explanation partially miti-
gate the adoption drop caused by the question about willingness
to pay. Participants which were assigned to "AI-advice" with ex-
planations were willing to pay more for the advice compare to the
No-explanation alternative. We find a correlation between trust
antecedents and our measurement of RTA. When levels of trust
were high, we observed mitigation in adoption drop when failure
occurs, and a correlation with gaining recovery after this failure.
We observe positive correlation between Explanation satisfaction
perceptions with initial adoption levels as well. Lastly, we find that
age is negatively correlated with auto-take advice and a tendency
(not significant) of age and lower adoption rates.
We contribute to the literature in three key ways:
(1) First, we document that there is no single best explanation
that fits all. The type of explanation that is best suited to pro-
mote trust is time and situation dependent. Namely, the "What" we
should explain depends on the "when". Interestingly, participants
were more inclined overall to adopt AI-given advice than follow a
human expert. The effect of the model (and human advice) failure
on subsequent advice taking is remarkable, with a single failure
causing adoption rates to plunge.
(2) Second, our results suggest that often the end-user doesn’t
need to know more than very general facts to accept the system.
Our study shows that such general explanations yield good results
in terms of RTA and WTP compared to the alternative of no expla-
nations, and especially after AI failure. Moreover, stating accuracy
statistics about the algorithm can further strengthen the aforemen-
tioned effect. Furthermore, explanations increased the participants
willingness to pay for the advice. Results of the current study high-
light the potential utility of simple explainability solutions in these
aspects.
(3) Third, our experimental paradigm of the lemonade stand
game applies the RTA measurement in different and evolving situ-
ations into the explainable AI literature. This framework may be
utilized to answer other questions in the field of explainable AI
and trust in AI. Future work can investigate the effect of different
explanation types in broader conditions such as, but not limited
to: varying reported accuracy values of the algorithm and over
more extended periods. Whether Willingness to Pay changes over
time with different situations? Will using additional experimental
methods such as a more controlled lab experiment or a field ex-
periment on a live system show the same results? Some of the key
components can be implemented in research studies on different
explainability techniques, such as visual explanations. Answering
these questions in addition to our study will help bridge the gap
between the immense technical success we see in machine learn-
ing, and the difficulty often faced when trying to understand and
amplify adoption and trust among users.
