Planning and Scheduling in Hybrid Domains Using
Answer Set Programming
Sandeep Chintabathina
University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, Pine Bluff AR 71601, USA

Abstract. In this paper we present an Action Language-Answer Set Program-
ming based approach to solving planning and scheduling problems in hybrid do-
mains - domains that exhibit both discrete and continuous behavior. We use action
language H to represent the domain and then translate the resulting theory into
an A-Prolog program. In this way, we reduce the problem of ﬁnding solutions
to planning and scheduling problems to computing answer sets of A-Prolog pro-
grams. We cite a planning and scheduling example from the literature and show
how to model it in H. We show how to translate the resulting H theory into an
equivalent A-Prolog program. We compute the answer sets of the resulting pro-
gram using a hybrid solver called EZCSP which loosely integrates a constraint
solver with an answer set solver. The solver allows us reason about constraints
over reals and compute solutions to complex planning and scheduling problems.
Results have shown that our approach can be applied to any planning and schedul-
ing problem in hybrid domains.
1
Introduction
In this paper we are interested in modeling intelligent agents capable of planning, acting
and reasoning in a dynamic environment. We are primarily interested in hybrid domains
- domains that exhibit both discrete and continuous behavior. Many real world situations
such as a robot in a manufacturing plant, a decision control system of a space shuttle etc.
deal with both discrete change as well as continuous change. For example, a decision
control system in a space shuttle is capable of opening and closing valves of fuel tanks
to supply fuel to some jets. The actions open and close change positions of valves.
The valves will remain in a certain position as long as no open or close actions occurs.
The change of position of valves is, therefore, discrete. However, the fuel level in the
tank can change continuously with time when the valve is open or there is an incoming
supply of fuel to the tank. This type of continuous change coupled with discrete change
makes this domain hybrid. We are not only interested in modeling such domains but
also to solve planning and scheduling problems in such domains. A simple planning
and scheduling problem in the above example would be to ﬁre a jet within 10 seconds.
This would require opening and closing the appropriate valves and delivering fuel to
the jet in time to achieve the goal.
To model intelligent agents we need to provide the agent with knowledge about
its environment and its own capabilities and goals. There are several approaches to
representing and reasoning about such knowledge. In this paper, we use action language
arXiv:1301.1389v1  [cs.AI]  8 Jan 2013

68
S. Chintabathina
H - a high level language for representing and reasoning about actions and their effects.
We chose this language mainly because it is capable of representing and reasoning
about hybrid domains. A description written in H describes a transition diagram whose
states correspond to possible physical states of the system and whose arcs are labeled by
actions. A transition, ⟨σ,a,σ′⟩, of a diagram denotes that action a is possible in state σ
and that after the execution of a the system may move to state σ′. The diagram consists
of all possible trajectories of the system.
Language H [4] was developed by extending the signature of action language A L
[2] with a collection of numbers for representing time, a collection of functions of
time, and ﬂuents 1 with non-boolean values including ﬂuents deﬁned by functions of
time (process ﬂuents). It also allows triggers which speciﬁes conditions under which
actions are triggered. The semantics of A L is based on the McCain-Turner equation
[9]. A slightly modiﬁed version of this equation deﬁnes the semantics of H. Thus, both
languages are based on the same underlying intuition. However, in A L a state of the
transition diagram is a snapshot of the world, whereas in H, a state is a snapshot of the
world over a time interval. Process ﬂuents are deﬁned over this time interval. Prior to H,
logic-based formalisms such as Situation Calculus [13] and Event Calculus [14] were
extended to reason about process ﬂuents. Both approaches demonstrate via examples
how their approach can be used for reasoning about process ﬂuents. However, in both
approaches, it is difﬁcult to express causal relations between ﬂuents.
To solve planning and scheduling problems in hybrid domains, we use an action
language-logic programming approach. We begin by representing the domain in H. To
this extent, we come up with a theory of H (also called action description) to describe
actions and their effects. We implement this theory by translating it into an Answer Set
Prolog (A-Prolog) program, a class of logic programs under answer set semantics [7,8],
and computing answer sets (models) of the resulting program. In this way, we reduce
the problem of ﬁnding solutions to the planning and scheduling problem to computing
answer sets of the A-Prolog program. In [5] we show that there is a one-to-one corre-
spondence between models of A-Prolog programs and models of our speciﬁcation.
The paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we revisit the syntax and seman-
tics of H as described in [4]. In section 3, we cite a planning and scheduling example
from [12] and come up with a theory of H to model it. In section 4, we present the
main contribution of this paper which is the translation of the resulting H theory into
an A-Prolog program. The example from [12] was run using ZENO, a least commit-
ment planner that supports continuous change. After ZENO, researchers have come up
with several efﬁcient solvers. One signiﬁcant contribution is the Planning Domain De-
scription Language (PDDL) which was exclusively developed for planning purposes. A
variant of this language, PDDL+ [6] is capable of modeling continuous change through
the use of processes and events. Like H, the semantics of this language is deﬁned using
a labeled transition diagram. The language has been shown to represent a number of
complex time dependent effects. However, one major limitation of the language is that
it does not support derived predicates - predicates deﬁned in terms of other predicates
for eg. above(x,y) from the blocks world domain. There are no such limitations in H.
1 functions whose values depend on a state and may change as a result of actions

Planning and Scheduling in Hybrid Domains Using Answer Set Programming
69
2
Preliminaries
In this section we revisit the syntax and semantics of H as described in [4].
2.1
Syntax
By sort we mean a non-empty countable collection of strings in some ﬁxed alphabet.
A sorted signature Σ is a collection of sorts and function symbols. A process signature
is a sorted signature with special sorts time, action, and process. Sort time is normally
identiﬁed with one of the standard numerical sorts with the exception that it contains
an ordinal ω such that for any x ∈time \ {ω}, ω > x. No operations are deﬁned over
ω. If time is discrete, elements of time\{ω} may be viewed as non-negative integers,
otherwise they can be interpreted as either rational numbers, constructive real numbers,
etc.
Sort process contains strings of the form λT.f(T) where T is a variable ranging over
time and f(T) is a mathematical expression (possibly) containing T. A string λT.f(T)
represents a function deﬁned over time. The λ is said to bind T in f(T). If the expres-
sion, f(T), does not contain any variables for time then λT.f(T) is said to denote a con-
stant function. For e.g. λT.0 denotes the constant function 0. For simplicity we assume
that all functions from process have the same range denoted by the sort range(process).
An example of a function from sort process is λT.h−(g/2)∗(T −t)2 which deﬁnes the
height in meters, at time T, of a freely falling object dropped from a height h, T −t sec-
onds before. The symbol g denotes the Earth’s average gravitational acceleration which
is equal to 9.8 meters/sec2.
Sort action is divided into subsorts agent and exogenous. Members of agent denote
(unit) actions performed by an agent and members of exogenous denote non-agent ac-
tions. Both agent and exogenous actions will be referred to as actions. A compound
action is a set of unit actions performed at the same time.
The collection of function symbols includes names for ﬂuents and standard numerical
functions. Each ﬂuent name is associated with an arity - a number indicating the number
of arguments. Intuitively, ﬂuents are properties that may change as a result of actions.
For example, the height of a brick held at a certain position above the ground could
change when it is dropped. Every process signature contains reserved ﬂuents start and
end of sort time.
A term of sort s is deﬁned as follows:
1. A string y ∈s is a term of sort s;
2. If t1,...,tn are terms of sorts s1,...,sn respectively and f : s1 × ... × sn →s is a
function symbol then f(t1,...,tn) is a term of sort s.
Notice that if f(¯x) is a term of sort process and t is a term of sort time then f(¯x)(t)
is a term of sort range(process). For example, to represent the height of brick b we
can introduce a ﬂuent height(b) of sort process. Then by height(b)(10) we denote the
height of b at time 10. Similarly, λT.200 −(g/2) ∗(T −5)2(10) denotes the value of
the function at T = 10 which is equal to 77.5.
An atom of Σ is a statement of the form t = y where t is a term of some sort s and y ∈s.
Examples of atoms are end = 10, 2+3 = 5 etc. If t is a term built from ﬂuent symbols

70
S. Chintabathina
then such an atom is called a ﬂuent atom. Examples of ﬂuent atoms are height(b) =
λT.100−(g/2)∗(T −5)2, height(b)(5) = 100, end = 10, etc.
A literal of Σ is an atom t = y or its negation ¬(t = y) . Negation of = will be often
written as ̸=. If t is a term of Boolean sort then t = true (t ̸= false) is often written as t
and t = false (t ̸= true) is often written as ¬t. For example, the atom 4 < 5 = true will
be written as 4 < 5.
Language, H, is parameterized by a process signature Σ with standard interpretations
of numerical functions and relations (such as +,<,≤,̸=, etc).
Deﬁnition 1. An action description of H(Σ) is a collection of statements of the form:
l0 if l1,...,ln.
(1)
e causes l0 if l1,...,ln.
(2)
impossible e1,...,em if l1,...,ln. (3)
l1,...,ln triggers e.
(4)
where e’s are elements of action, l0’s are ﬂuent atoms and l1,...,ln are literals of the
signature of H. l0 is referred to as the head of a statement and l1,...,ln are referred to
as the body of a statement. A statement of the form (1) is called a state constraint. It
guarantees that any state satisfying l1,...,ln also satisﬁes l0. A statement of the form
(2) is called a dynamic causal law and it states that if action e were executed in a state
satisfying literals l1,...,ln then any successor state would satisfy l0. A statement of the
form (3) is called an executability condition and it states that actions e1,...,em cannot
be executed in a state satisfying l1,...,ln. If n = 0 then if is dropped from statements
(1), (2) and (3). A statement of the form (4) is called a trigger and it states that action e
is triggered in any state satisfying l1,...,ln.
By ground instantiations of a variable of sort s, we mean the elements of s. From
the description of the syntax, the only variable that appears in the statements of H is the
variable T ranging over time. However, variables ranging over other sorts are allowed in
the statements as long as those statements are viewed as a shorthand for the collection
of statements obtained by replacing each occurrence of a variables other than T by its
corresponding ground instantiations.
2.2
Semantics
The semantics of language H is based on a slightly modiﬁed McCain-Turner equation
[9]. An action description, AD, of H(Σ) describes a transition diagram, TD(AD), whose
nodes correspond to possible physical states of a system and whose arcs are labeled by
actions. A transition ⟨s,a,s′⟩of the diagram denotes that action a is possible in s and as
a result of execution of a the system may move to state s′. It is important to note that
an action description of H can be either deterministic (i.e. for any state-action pair there
is at most one successor state [2]) or non-deterministic (i.e. there is a state-action pair
with more than one successor state). In this section we will give a formal deﬁnition for
a state and a transition of TD(AD). We begin with interpreting symbols of Σ.
Deﬁnition 2. Given an action description AD of H(Σ), an interpretation I of Σ is a
mapping deﬁned as follows.

Planning and Scheduling in Hybrid Domains Using Answer Set Programming
71
– for every non-process sort, s, and every string y ∈s, I maps y into itself i.e. yI = y.
– standard interpretation is used for the sort process and other standard numerical
functions and relations.
– I maps every ﬂuent into a properly typed function.
Often an interpretation I of Σ is identiﬁed with a collection, s(I), of atoms of the form
t = y such that tI = y where t and y are terms of some sort. In other words, s(I) = {t =
y | tI = y}.
Before we give the deﬁnition of a state of TD(AD) let us consider the following deﬁni-
tions.
A set, s, of atoms is said to be consistent if for every atom t = y1 ∈s, ̸ ∃y2 such that
t = y2 ∈s and y1 ̸= y2.
Let us deﬁne what it means for a literal to be true w.r.t a set of atoms of Σ.
Deﬁnition 3. Given a consistent set, L, of atoms of Σ
– An atom t = y is true in L (symbolically L |= t = y) iff t = y ∈L.
– A literal t ̸= y is true in L (L |= t ̸= y) iff L |= t = y0 and y ̸= y0.
We will now deﬁne what it means for a set of atoms to be closed under state constraints
of AD.
Deﬁnition 4. A set L of atoms is closed under the state constraint
l0 if l1,...,ln
of AD if, whenever L |= li for every i, 1 ≤i ≤n, L |= l0.
A set L of atoms is closed under state constraints of AD if L is closed under every state
constraint of AD.
Next, we deﬁne what it means for a set of atoms to satisfy a trigger of AD.
Deﬁnition 5. A set L of atoms of H satisﬁes a trigger
l1,...,ln triggers e
of AD iff L |= li for every i such that 1 ≤i ≤n.
Intuitively, if a set of atoms satisﬁes a trigger it means that the corresponding action
will take place at some time point. The next deﬁnition characterizes sets of atoms which
“end” before any triggered action takes place.
Deﬁnition 6. A set L of atoms of H is closed under triggers of AD iff ̸ ∃L′ such that L′
satisﬁes at least one trigger of AD and L\L′ = {end = t2} and L′ \L = {end = t1} and
t1 < t2.
Intuitively, a state of TD(AD) can be viewed as a collection of functions of time deﬁned
over an interval. The endpoints of the interval are implicitly deﬁned by the reserved
ﬂuents start and end. The domain of each function is the set {t | start ≤t ≤end ∧t <
ω}. We say that a state is deﬁned over an interval of the form [start,end] iff end ̸= ω.
There is at least one arc labeled by an action leading out of such a state. We say that
a state is deﬁned over an interval of the form [start,end) iff end = ω. There is no arc
leading out of such a state. States that begin at time 0 are called initial states. They
deﬁne the initial conditions of a domain. Here is the formal deﬁnition of a state.

72
S. Chintabathina
Deﬁnition 7. Given an interpretation I of Σ, s(I) is a state of TD(AD) if each of the
following holds.
– s(I) is a collection of atoms of the form t = y such that tI = y where t and y are
terms of the same sort.
– s(I) is closed under the state constraints of AD.
– If s(I) |= start = t1 and s(I) |= end = t2 then t1 ≤t2 ∧t1 < ω.
– s(I) is closed under the triggers of AD.
– If s(I) |= p = λT.f(T) where p is a ﬂuent of sort process then λT.f(T) is deﬁned
over the domain {t | startI ≤t ≤endI ∧t < ω}.
– If p is a ﬂuent of sort process and t is a term of sort time then s(I) |= p(t) = x iff
s(I) |= p = λT.f(T) and λT.f(T)(tI) = x.
By deﬁnition of interpretation every symbol is mapped uniquely. Therefore, states of
TD(AD) are complete and consistent. Whenever convenient the parameter I will be
dropped from s(I). Next, we will deﬁne what is means for an action to be possible in a
state.
Deﬁnition 8. Action a is possible in state s if for every non-empty subset a0 of a, there
is no executability condition
impossible a0 if l1,...,ln.
of AD such that s |= li for every i, 1 ≤i ≤n.
Given a state s and action e let us deﬁne what are the direct effects of executing e in s.
Deﬁnition 9. Let e be an elementary action that is possible in state s. By Es(e) we
denote the set of all direct effects of e w.r.t s.
Es(e) = {l0 | e causes l0 if l1,...,ln ∈AD∧s |= li for every i,1 ≤i ≤n}
If a is a compound action then Es(a) = S
e∈a Es(e).
The following deﬁnition allows us to identify sets of atoms with adjacent intervals.
Deﬁnition 10. Let x,y, and z be elements of sort time such that x ≤y ≤z∧y < ω and
s and s′ be sets of atoms of H. We say that s′ follows s iff s |= {start = x,end = y} and
s′ |= {start = y,end = z}.
Given two sets of atoms s and s′, the function Ts(s′) is deﬁned as follows.
Ts(s′) =

{start = t1,end = t2} if s′ follows s∧{start = t1,end = t2} ⊆s′.
/0 otherwise.
In other words, the function returns the interval of s′ if s′ follows s; otherwise it returns
an empty set.
The consequences of a set of atoms w.r.t a set of state constraints is deﬁned as follows.
Deﬁnition 11. Given a set S of atoms and a set Z of state constraints of AD the set,
CnZ(S), of consequences of S under Z is the smallest set of atoms (w.r.t set theoretic
inclusion) containing S and closed under Z.

Planning and Scheduling in Hybrid Domains Using Answer Set Programming
73
Deﬁnition 12. Action a is complete w.r.t a set of atoms s if for every trigger r ∈AD of
the form
l1,...,ln triggers e
e ∈a iff s satisﬁes r.
We know that a state contains arbitrary atoms of Σ. However, for the next deﬁnition we
focus only on ﬂuent atoms including those formed from start and end. All other atoms
such as 2+3 = 5 which is always true will be ignored.
Deﬁnition 13. A transition diagram TD(AD) is a tuple ⟨φ,ψ⟩where
– φ is the set of states.
– ψ is the set of all transitions ⟨s,a,s′⟩such that each of the following holds.
• a is complete w.r.t s
• a is possible in s
• s′ is closed under the triggers of AD
•
s′ = CnZ(Es(a)∪(s∩s′)∪Ts(s′))
(1)
where Z is the set of state constraints of AD.
The set, Es(a), consists of direct effects of a while the set, s ∩s′, consists of facts pre-
served by inertia. Ts(s′) projects the start and end of s′. The application of CnZ to the
union of these sets adds the indirect effects. From the deﬁnition, it is evident that con-
current actions such as dropping two balls from different heights at the same time can
be handled in H.
3
A planning and scheduling example
In this section we will visit a planning and scheduling example from [12] and demon-
strate how to model it in H. Consider a toy world in which a single plane moves passen-
gers between cities. Slow ﬂying travels at 400 miles per hour and consumes 1 gallon of
fuel every 3 miles, on average. Fast ﬂying travels at 600 miles per hour and consumes 1
gallon of fuel every 2 miles. Passengers can be boarded in 30 minutes and deplaned in
20 minutes. Refueling gradually increases the fuel level to a maximum of 750 gallons,
taking one hour from an empty tank. Boarding, deplaning, and refueling must all occur
while the plane is on the ground. The distance between city-a and city-b is 600 miles,
the distance between city-a and city-c is 1000 miles, the distance between city-b and
city-c is 800 miles and the distance between city-c and city-d is 1000 miles. Suppose
that Dan and Ernie are at city-c, but the empty plane and Scott are at city-a. If the plane
only has 500 gallons of fuel, how can we ensure that Scott and Ernie get to city-d in
less than ﬁve and a half hours? [12]
A solution to this problem requires reasoning about effects of (concurrent) actions in
the presence of continuous time. There are properties of the domain that change contin-
uously with time such as the fuel level of the plane, the distance covered by the plane
etc. With proper planning and scheduling, the plane will make its tight schedule with-
out running out of fuel. Hence, the problem is a planning and scheduling problem in the
presence of continuous change. We begin with the representation of the domain in H.

74
S. Chintabathina
3.1
Representation in H
We begin with the description of the signature. It consists of several objects - persons
scott, ernie, and dan and locations a,b,c, and d. We will use another location called
enroute to denote that the plane is in the air. We will use (possibly indexed) vari-
ables P and L to denote persons and locations respectively. We are given the constants
distance(a,b,600), distance(a,c,1000) and so on. We are also given the fuel consump-
tion rates for different speeds. For example, when ﬂying at 400 mph the mileage is
3 miles per gallon. We can encode this information in the form of constants fc(400)
and fc(600) which denote 3 miles per gallon and 2 miles per gallon respectively. For
modeling purposes we will use minutes as our unit of time.
We know that there are several durative actions in the domain, for example, board-
ing which takes 30 minutes. We will use the approach used by Reiter [13] to model
durative actions. We introduce the action start boarding(P,L) which denotes that per-
son P is boarding at location L and end boarding(P,L) which denotes that person P
has ﬁnished boarding at location L. So instead of one action we have two actions
start boarding(P,L) and end boarding(P,L) which make the ﬂuent boarding(P,L) true
and false respectively. In our model, the end boarding(P,L) action will be triggered 30
minutes from the time start boarding(P,L) is executed. We will use the same approach
for all durative actions. We introduce the action start flying(L1,L2,S) to denote that
the plane has started ﬂying from location L1 to location L2 with speed S. The variable S
ranges over {400,600}. The remaining actions in the domain are start deplaning(P,L),
end deplaning(P,L), start refueling, end refueling, and end flying(L1,L2).
The signature consists of the boolean ﬂuents boarding(P,L), deplaning(P,L), on boa-
rd(P) and refueling. We also have non-boolean ﬂuents location(P) and location(plane)
which range over {a,b,c,d,enroute}. We have process ﬂuents time left board(P,L) and
time left deplane(P,L) which are clock functions to count down the time left for person
P to board and deplane at location L respectively. We have process ﬂuent distance
left(L1,L2) to denote the distance that is yet to be covered to reach L2 from L1. Finally,
the process ﬂuent fuel level denotes the fuel level in the plane’s tank. We proceed with
deﬁning the effects of each action. The effects of start boarding(P,L) are deﬁned using
dynamic causal laws
start boarding(P,L) causes boarding(P,L).
start boarding(P,L) causes time left board(P,L) = λT.max(0,30−(T −T0))
if end = T0.
The following executability condition says that person P cannot start boarding if he or
she is already boarding.
impossible start boarding(P,L) if boarding(P,L).
The following are causal laws involving end boarding(P,L).
end boarding(P,L) causes ¬boarding(P,L).
end boarding(P,L) causes on board(P).
impossible end boarding(P,L) if ¬boarding(P,L).

Planning and Scheduling in Hybrid Domains Using Answer Set Programming
75
The following are causal laws involving actions start deplaning(P,L) and end depla
ning(P,L).
start deplaning(P,L) causes deplaning(P,L)
start deplaning(P,L) causes
time left deplane(P,L) = λT.max(0,20−(T −T0))
if end = T0.
impossible start deplaning(P,L) if deplaning(P,L).
end deplaning(P,L) causes ¬deplaning(P,L).
end deplaning(P,L) causes ¬on board(P).
impossible end deplaning(P,L) if ¬deplaning(P,L).
The following are direct effects of refueling. Instead of assuming that it takes 1 hour to
ﬁll up from an empty tank we will assume that the rate of refueling is 20 gallons per
minute. When we start refueling, we add fuel to the existing level and the level increases
at the rate of 20 gallons per minute.
start refueling causes fuel level = λT.max(750,X +20∗(T −T0))
if end = T0, fuel level(end) = X.
start refueling causes refueling.
impossible start refueling if refueling.
impossible start refueling if location(plane) = enroute.
end refueling causes ¬refueling.
impossible end refueling if location(plane) = enroute.
impossible end refueling if ¬refueling.
Next, we deﬁne the direct effects of start flying(L1,L2,S).
start flying(L1,L2,S) causes location(plane) = enroute.
start flying(L1,L2,S) causes distance left(L1,L2) = λT.max(0,X −S∗(T −T0)/60)
if distance(L1,L2,X), end = T0.
start flying(L1,L2,S) causes fuel level = λT.max(0,X −S∗(T −T0)/(60∗fc(S)))
if fuel level(end) = X, end = T0
impossible start flying(L1,L2,S) if location(plane) = enroute.
impossible start flying(L1,L2,S) if location(plane) ̸= L1.
impossible start flying(L1,L2,S) if boarding(P,L1),
location(P) = L1.
The following are causal laws involving action end flying(L1,L2).
end flying(L1,L2) causes location(plane) = L2.
impossible end flying(L1,L2) if location(plane) ̸= enroute.
The following causal laws specify conditions under which each “ending” action is trig-
gered.
time left board(P,L,end) = 0 triggers end boarding(P,L).
time left deplane(P,L,end) = 0 triggers end deplaning(P,L).
fuel level(end) = 750 triggers end refueling.
distance left(L1,L2,end) = 0 triggers end flying(L1,L2).

76
S. Chintabathina
The following state constraint encodes common sense knowledge. It states that a person
on board a plane is at the same location as the plane.
location(P) = L if location(plane) = L,on board(P).
The following executability condition states that ﬂying to a location without enough
fuel is not allowed. A rational reasoner who wants to reach his or her destination safely
will not violate this constraint.
impossible start flying(L1,L2,S) if fuel level(end) = X,
distance(L1,L2,Y),
X < Y/ fc(S).
This concludes the representation of the domain in H.
4
Translation into logic program
We solve the planning and scheduling problem by translating the above theory into an
Answer Set Prolog program and computing answer sets of the resulting program. Thus,
we reduce the problem of ﬁnding solutions to the planning and scheduling problem to
computing answer sets of the resulting program. The translation that was provided in
[5] is a theoretical translation from statements of H into rules of A-Prolog. However, in
this paper we are going to provide a translation that adheres to the syntax of a speciﬁc
ASP solver. Since we are dealing with continuous functions we chose a solver that, in
addition to computing answer sets, is capable of reasoning about constraints over reals.
Here is a brief summary of solvers that are available at our disposal.
In the past few years researchers [1,10] have focused on integrating Answer Set
Programming(ASP) and Constraint logic programming(CLP). They came up with new
systems that achieve signiﬁcant improvement in performance over existing ASP solvers.
The following such systems are available: ACsolver[10] (and it’s successor Luna[11]);
EZCSP 2; and Clingcon3. Each solver couples a constraint solver with an answer set
solver. However, the coupling varies. In Luna (ACsolver) and Clingcon the coupling
is tight whereas in EZCSP the coupling is loose. We considered using Luna for our
purposes but we found out that there are some implementation issues. Besides, the
underlying answer set solver is less efﬁcient than the one used by EZCSP. We also
considered using Clingcon, however, the underlying constraint solver only deals with
ﬁnite domains which is a limitation when dealing with continuous functions. We chose
EZCSP as it allows us to reason about constraints over reals.
In EZCSP, the A-Prolog programs are written in such a way that their answer sets
encode a constraint satisfaction problem. The system calls the answer set solver, uses
the resulting answer sets to pose a constraint satisfaction problem in the input language
of the constraint solver, then calls the constraint solver and combines the solutions re-
turned by both solvers. The constraint solver can use the results from the answer set
2 http://marcy.cjb.net/ezcsp/index.html
3 http://www.cs.uni-potsdam.de/clingcon/

Planning and Scheduling in Hybrid Domains Using Answer Set Programming
77
solver to solve new constraints but the answer set solver cannot use results from the
constraint solver to make new inferences. The current version uses gringo+clasp4 by
default as the ASP solver and SICSTUS Prolog as the constraint solver. Both solvers
are very fast.
The translation that we present here will be in the input language of EZCSP. Before
we begin the translation there are some modeling decisions to be made. These decisions
are necessary to overcome some of the implementation issues. One of the main issues
is the implementation of functions. The input language of EZCSP will allow us to rep-
resent constants and variables but it is not possible to represent functions of time. For
example, we can translate statements such as velocity = 5 directly into the input lan-
guage of EZCSP but it is not possible to translate a statement such as height = λT.T 2 .
The reason is that there is no representation for functions in this language. The alterna-
tive is to provide a value for T and obtain the value of the function for that instance. So it
is possible to translate the statement height(5) = λT.T 2(5) = 25. The constraint solver
may obtain the value for T from other constraints and then use that value to evaluate
height(5).
Sorts, actions, boolean ﬂuents and ﬂuents ranging over ﬁnite domains will be trans-
lated as atoms in the input language of EZCSP. All other ﬂuents ranging over inﬁnite
or large domains will be represented as constraint variables. Every constraint involv-
ing a constraint variable will appear in an atom called required. For example, we write
required(height > 5) to denote the variable height must be greater than 5. Process ﬂu-
ents will be represented by constraint variables. For each process ﬂuent we can use two
constraint variables - one to denote the initial value and one to denote the ﬁnal value in
a given state.
Let us look at some statements from our example and see how they are translated
into EZCSP rules. Consider the following statement from our example.
start refueling causes fuel level = λT.max(750,X +20∗(T −T0))
if end = T0, fuel level(end) = X.
Since we cannot encode functions in EZCSP we are going to expand the signature to
include a boolean ﬂuent called refueling, a real-valued ﬂuent called f time to denote
the time at which fueling began and two new real-valued ﬂuents - f initial and f final
to denote the initial and ﬁnal fuel level in a state. We then replace the above causal law
with the following causal laws.
start refueling causes f initial = X if f final = X.
start refueling causes f time = T if end = T.
start refueling causes refueling.
f final = max(750,X +20∗(T −T0)) if f initial = X, f time = T0,
end = T,refueling.
The ﬁrst two dynamic causal laws say that executing start refueling initializes f initial
to the current fuel level and f time to the end time of the current state. The next dy-
namic law says that start refueling begins the refueling process. Next, we have a state
4 http://potassco.sourceforge.net/

78
S. Chintabathina
constraint which deﬁnes f final in terms of f initial, f time and end of a state in
which refueling is true. We consider ﬂuents f initial, f time and refueling to be in-
ertial. These ﬂuents will retain their values until an action causes them to change. For
example, f initial will be reset by actions end refueling, start flying(L1,L2,S) and
end flying(L1,L2) because each action has a bearing on the fuel level. So we will add
dynamic causal laws encoding the effects of these actions on f initial. The relationship
between the process ﬂuent fuel level in the original action description and f final in
the modiﬁed action description is that for any given state, f final = fuel level(end).
To translate the above statements into EZCSP we have to ﬁrst deﬁne the various
constraint variables. All the real-valued ﬂuents will be translated as constraint variables.
Since ﬂuents are dependent on state, we have to consider state as one of its parameters
during translation. It is important to note that with the assignment of time intervals
to states, each state in a transition diagram is unique. Our approach is to assign (non-
negative) integers to each state in the order it appears in the trajectory of a transition
diagram. This is done in the language of EZCSP as follows.
#const n = 10.
step(0..n). #domain step(I;I1).
Here n denotes the length of the trajectory and the #domain declaration says that vari-
ables I and I1 range over [0,n] . Next, we will deﬁne the various constraint variables
parameterized by step.
cspvar(f time(I),0,400). cspvar(f initial(I),0,750).
cspvar(f final(I),0,750). cspvar(end(I),0,400).
The numbers in each declaration specify the range of that variable. Next, the boolean
ﬂuent refueling will be translated into the atom v(X,refueling,I) where X ranges over
{true, false}. It says that X is the value of refueling in step I. The action start refueling
is translated as occurs(start refueling,I) which says that start refueling occurred in
step I. Finally, here are the EZCSP rules obtained by translating the above causal laws.
required(f initial(I1) == f final(I)) : −occurs(start refueling,I),I1 = I +1.
required(f time(I1) == end(I)) : −occurs(start refueling,I),I1 = I +1.
v(true,refueling,I +1) : −occurs(start refueling,I).
required(f final(I) == max(750, f initial(I)+20∗(end(I)−f time(I)))) : −
v(true,refueling,I).
The rest of the dynamic causal laws are translated using a similar approach. As men-
tioned before, in EZCSP the answer set solver does not receive any input from the con-
straint solver to make new inferences. This poses a problem especially when translating
triggers. A trigger mentions the conditions under which an action will be executed. It
is possible that these conditions are constraints over time. Even if these constrains are
evaluated, since there is no feedback to the answer set solver, it is not possible to know
when an action is triggered. The author of EZCSP, Marcello Balduccini, has suggested
a solution to overcome this problem. Suppose that we have the following trigger.
fuel level(end) = 750 triggers end refueling.

Planning and Scheduling in Hybrid Domains Using Answer Set Programming
79
Since we have replaced process ﬂuent fuel level with other real valued ﬂuents, this
trigger is really
f initial = X, f time = T,refueling,end = (750−X)/20+T triggers end refueling
Given the initial fuel level X and the refuel rate of 20 gallons per minute, the expression
(750−X)/20 gives the number of minutes it takes to ﬁll up the tank. The trigger states
that if a state ends at a time when the tank is full then end refueling is triggered. Of
course, refueling must be also be true in that state. A direct translation of this trigger is
occurs(end refueling,I) : −required(end(I) == (750−f initial(I))/20+ f time(I)),
v(true,refueling,I).
This rule will be ﬁred if the body is satisﬁed. The atom v(true,refueling,I) is a direct
consequence of start refueling. However, the constraint atom in the body of the rule
is not obtained from other rules of the program. Balduccini suggested that it can be
generated by adding the rules
1{p(I),q(I)}1 : −v(true,refueling,I).
required(end(I) == (750−f initial(I))/20+ f time(I)) : −p(I).
required(end(I) < (750−f initial(I))/20+ f time(I)) : −q(I).
The choice rule will allow us to generate one of the two constraints. If no action takes
place before the tank ﬁlls up then end refueling is triggered. We use the same approach
to translate other triggers in the domain. Currently, there is no formal proof stating that
this solution will always work. However, the solution is based on answer set program-
ming methodology and EZCSP uses a state-of-the-art answer set solver. We rely on the
solver to give us the correct solutions.
In our example, the goal is to have Scott and Ernie in city d in less than ﬁve and a
half hours (330 minutes). We encode this goal in EZCSP as follows
goal(I) : −v(d,location(scott),I),v(d,location(ernie),I),
required(start(I) < 330).
where start(I) is a constraint variable denoting the start time of a step. The constraint
says that the goal state must be achieved in less than ﬁve and a half hours. It is generated
by adding the rules
1{g(I),ng(I)}1.
required(start(I) < 330) : −g(I).
required(start(I) >= 330) : −ng(I).
We add the following rules to say that failure is not an option.
success : −goal(I).
: −not success.
Next, we will talk about the planning component of the program. As in the case of non-
continuous domains, we will use Answer Set Programming techniques for generating

80
S. Chintabathina
and testing plans. A plan is a sequence of actions. We will be generating all possible
sequences of actions that will lead us to our goal. In the process of generating these
plans we use the constraints in our program to test these plans and discard the ones that
violate the constraints. A simple way to generate plans is to use the choice rule
{occurs(A,I) : action(A)} : −step(I),I < n.
where n is the length of the plan. Note that we are going to generate only the initiating
actions for example, start refueling etc. This is because all the terminating actions have
triggers associated with them and there is no need to generate them again. Since we are
dealing with continuous time, in addition to computing the sequences of actions, we
will also determine when these actions will take place. This is the reason why planning
in hybrid domains also involves scheduling. According to the problem speciﬁcation, we
have a constraint that speciﬁes the time within which the goal has to be achieved i.e.
ﬁve and a half hours. We can specify this constraint in EZCSP as follows.
required(end(I) < 330) : −occurs(A,I),action(A).
The rules states that all action occurrences must take place before ﬁve and a half hours.
This constraint gives a very broad range of scheduling possibilities. The times during
which actions will take place could now range over intervals of time. For example, in
order to achieve our goal it may be required that Scott has to board the plane within
the ﬁrst 50 minutes and that the plane has to depart city c no later than three hours
and 45 minutes into the trip. Dealing with time intervals is an issue because it does not
allow us to compute values of ﬂuents at speciﬁc time points. More issues arise when
ﬂuents are deﬁned in terms of other ﬂuents whose values are unknown. To overcome
these issues we decided to assign speciﬁc times to the initiating actions. The times for
the terminating actions were determined by our triggers. Here is a solution given by
EZCSP to our planning and scheduling problem.
occurs(start boarding(scott,a),0) end(0) = 5.0
occurs(end boarding(scott,a),1) end(1) = 35.0
occurs(start flying(a,c,400),2)
end(2) = 40.0
occurs(end flying(a,c),3)
end(3) = 190.0
occurs(start refueling,4)
end(4) = 195.0
occurs(start boarding(ernie,c),5) end(5) = 197.0
occurs(end refueling,6)
end(6) = 224.16
occurs(end boarding(ernie,c),7) end(7) = 227.0
occurs(start flying(c,d,600),8)
end(8) = 229.0
occurs(end flying(c,d),9)
end(9) = 329.0
It is necessary to refuel in city c because there is not enough fuel to travel to city d.
A shorter plan can be obtained by allowing concurrent actions. For example, refueling
and boarding can start at the same time. The running times and the performance of the
solver will be discussed in a longer version of the paper.

Planning and Scheduling in Hybrid Domains Using Answer Set Programming
81
5
Conclusions and Future Work
In this paper, we presented an Action Language-Answer Set Programming based ap-
proach to solving planning and scheduling problems in hybrid domains. We used action
language H to model a planning and scheduling example and translated the resulting
theory into an A-Prolog program. We used a hybrid solver called EZCSP to compute
the answer sets of the resulting program. Our approach overcomes the limitations of
existing formalisms such as PDDL+. We believe that our approach can be applied to
any planning and scheduling problem in hybrid domains.
In the future, we would like to model several benchmark examples and compare the
performance of EZCSP with existing planners. Some of the planners used for industry-
sized problems are domain-speciﬁc [3]. It will be useful to investigate why some of
these planners work really well. There are areas for improvement including the efﬁ-
ciency of solvers, the expressiveness of the input language and so on.
