Stochastic Backpropagation and Approximate Inference
in Deep Generative Models
Danilo J. Rezende, Shakir Mohamed, Daan Wierstra

Google DeepMind, London
Abstract
We marry ideas from deep neural networks
and approximate Bayesian inference to derive
a generalised class of deep, directed genera-
tive models, endowed with a new algorithm
for scalable inference and learning. Our algo-
rithm introduces a recognition model to rep-
resent an approximate posterior distribution
and uses this for optimisation of a variational
lower bound.
We develop stochastic back-
propagation – rules for gradient backpropa-
gation through stochastic variables – and de-
rive an algorithm that allows for joint optimi-
sation of the parameters of both the genera-
tive and recognition models. We demonstrate
on several real-world data sets that by using
stochastic backpropagation and variational
inference, we obtain models that are able to
generate realistic samples of data, allow for
accurate imputations of missing data, and
provide a useful tool for high-dimensional
data visualisation.
1. Introduction
There is an immense eﬀort in machine learning and
statistics to develop accurate and scalable probabilistic
models of data. Such models are called upon whenever
we are faced with tasks requiring probabilistic reason-
ing, such as prediction, missing data imputation and
uncertainty estimation; or in simulation-based analy-
ses, common in many scientiﬁc ﬁelds such as genetics,
robotics and control that require generating a large
number of independent samples from the model.
Recent eﬀorts to develop generative models have fo-
cused on directed models, since samples are easily ob-
tained by ancestral sampling from the generative pro-
cess. Directed models such as belief networks and sim-
ilar latent variable models (Dayan et al., 1995; Frey,
1996; Saul et al., 1996; Bartholomew & Knott, 1999;
Proceedings of the 31 st International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning, Beijing, China, 2014. JMLR: W&CP vol-
ume 32. Copyright 2014 by the author(s).
Uria et al., 2014; Gregor et al., 2014) can be easily sam-
pled from, but in most cases, eﬃcient inference algo-
rithms have remained elusive. These eﬀorts, combined
with the demand for accurate probabilistic inferences
and fast simulation, lead us to seek generative models
that are i) deep, since hierarchical architectures allow
us to capture complex structure in the data, ii) al-
low for fast sampling of fantasy data from the inferred
model, and iii) are computationally tractable and scal-
able to high-dimensional data.
We meet these desiderata by introducing a class of
deep, directed generative models with Gaussian la-
tent variables at each layer. To allow for eﬃcient and
tractable inference, we use introduce an approximate
representation of the posterior over the latent variables
using a recognition model that acts as a stochastic en-
coder of the data. For the generative model, we de-
rive the objective function for optimisation using vari-
ational principles; for the recognition model, we spec-
ify its structure and regularisation by exploiting recent
advances in deep learning. Using this construction, we
can train the entire model by a modiﬁed form of gra-
dient backpropagation that allows for optimisation of
the parameters of both the generative and recognition
models jointly.
We build upon the large body of prior work (in section
6) and make the following contributions:
• We combine ideas from deep neural networks and
probabilistic latent variable modelling to derive a
general class of deep, non-linear latent Gaussian
models (section 2).
• We present a new approach for scalable varia-
tional inference that allows for joint optimisation
of both variational and model parameters by ex-
ploiting the properties of latent Gaussian distri-
butions and gradient backpropagation (sections 3
and 4).
• We provide a comprehensive and systematic eval-
uation of the model demonstrating its applicabil-
ity to problems in simulation, visualisation, pre-
diction and missing data imputation (section 5).
arXiv:1401.4082v3  [stat.ML]  30 May 2014

Stochastic Backpropagation in DLGMs
hn,2
hn,1
vn
n = 1 . . . N
θg
(a)
generative
recognition
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
µ
C
µ
C
. . .
µ
C
. . .
. . .
. . .
(b)
Figure 1. (a) Graphical model for DLGMs (5).
(b) The
corresponding computational graph. Black arrows indicate
the forward pass of sampling from the recognition and gen-
erative models: Solid lines indicate propagation of deter-
ministic activations, dotted lines indicate propagation of
samples. Red arrows indicate the backward pass for gra-
dient computation: Solid lines indicate paths where deter-
ministic backpropagation is used, dashed arrows indicate
stochastic backpropagation.
2. Deep Latent Gaussian Models
Deep latent Gaussian models (DLGMs) are a general
class of deep directed graphical models that consist of
Gaussian latent variables at each layer of a process-
ing hierarchy. The model consists of L layers of latent
variables. To generate a sample from the model, we
begin at the top-most layer (L) by drawing from a
Gaussian distribution. The activation hl at any lower
layer is formed by a non-linear transformation of the
layer above hl+1, perturbed by Gaussian noise. We
descend through the hierarchy and generate observa-
tions v by sampling from the observation likelihood
using the activation of the lowest layer h1. This pro-
cess is described graphically in ﬁgure 1(a).
This generative process is described as follows:
ξl ∼N(ξl|0, I),
l = 1, . . . , L
(1)
hL = GLξL,
(2)
hl = Tl(hl+1) + Glξl,
l = 1 . . . L −1
(3)
v ∼π(v|T0(h1)),
(4)
where ξl are mutually independent Gaussian variables.
The transformations Tl represent multi-layer percep-
trons (MLPs) and Gl are matrices.
At the visible
layer, the data is generated from any appropriate dis-
tribution π(v|·) whose parameters are speciﬁed by a
transformation of the ﬁrst latent layer. Throughout
the paper we refer to the set of parameters in this gen-
erative model by θg, i.e. the parameters of the maps
Tl and the matrices Gl. This construction allows us to
make use of as many deterministic and stochastic lay-
ers as needed. We adopt a weak Gaussian prior over
θg, p(θg) = N(θ|0, κI).
The joint probability distribution of this model can be
expressed in two equivalent ways:
p(v,h)=p(v|h1,θg)p(hL|θg)p(θg)
L−1
Y
l=1
pl(hl|hl+1,θg) (5)
p(v,ξ)= p(v|h1(ξ1...L), θg)p(θg)
L
Y
l=1
N(ξ|0, I).
(6)
The conditional distributions p(hl|hl+1) are implic-
itly deﬁned by equation (3) and are Gaussian dis-
tributions with mean µl = Tl(hl+1) and covariance
Sl = GlG⊤
l .
Equation (6) makes explicit that this
generative model works by applying a complex non-
linear transformation to a spherical Gaussian distribu-
tion p(ξ) = QL
l=1 N(ξl|0, I) such that the transformed
distribution tries to match the empirical distribution.
A graphical model corresponding to equation (5) is
shown in ﬁgure 1(a).
This speciﬁcation for deep latent Gaussian models
(DLGMs) generalises a number of well known mod-
els. When we have only one layer of latent variables
and use a linear mapping T(·), we recover factor anal-
ysis (Bartholomew & Knott, 1999) – more general
mappings allow for a non-linear factor analysis (Lap-
palainen & Honkela, 2000). When the mappings are
of the form Tl(h) = Alf(h) + bl, for simple element-
wise non-linearities f such as the probit function or
the rectiﬁed linearity, we recover the non-linear Gaus-
sian belief network (Frey & Hinton, 1999).
We de-
scribe the relationship to other existing models in sec-
tion 6.
Given this speciﬁcation, our key task is to
develop a method for tractable inference. A number
of approaches are known and widely used, and include:
mean-ﬁeld variational EM (Beal, 2003); the wake-sleep
algorithm (Dayan, 2000); and stochastic variational
methods and related control-variate estimators (Wil-
son, 1984; Williams, 1992; Hoﬀman et al., 2013). We
also follow a stochastic variational approach, but shall
develop an alternative to these existing inference algo-
rithms that overcomes many of their limitations and
that is both scalable and eﬃcient.
3. Stochastic Backpropagation
Gradient descent methods in latent variable mod-
els
typically
require
computations
of
the
form
∇θEqθ [f(ξ)], where the expectation is taken with re-
spect to a distribution qθ(·) with parameters θ, and f
is a loss function that we assume to be integrable and
smooth. This quantity is diﬃcult to compute directly
since i) the expectation is unknown for most problems,
and ii) there is an indirect dependency on the param-
eters of q over which the expectation is taken.
We now develop the key identities that are used to
allow for eﬃcient inference by exploiting speciﬁc prop-

Stochastic Backpropagation in DLGMs
erties of the problem of computing gradients through
random variables.
We refer to this computational
strategy as stochastic backpropagation.
3.1. Gaussian Backpropagation (GBP)
When the distribution q is a K-dimensional Gaussian
N(ξ|µ, C) the required gradients can be computed us-
ing the Gaussian gradient identities:
∇µiEN(µ,C) [f(ξ)] = EN(µ,C) [∇ξif(ξ)] ,
(7)
∇CijEN(µ,C) [f(ξ)] = 1
2EN(µ,C)
h
∇2
ξi,ξjf(ξ)
i
,
(8)
which are due to the theorems by Bonnet (1964) and
Price (1958), respectively. These equations are true
in expectation for any integrable and smooth func-
tion f(ξ). Equation (7) is a direct consequence of the
location-scale transformation for the Gaussian (dis-
cussed in section 3.2). Equation (8) can be derived
by successive application of the product rule for in-
tegrals; we provide the proofs for these identities in
appendix B.
Equations (7) and (8) are especially interesting since
they allow for unbiased gradient estimates by using a
small number of samples from q. Assume that both
the mean µ and covariance matrix C depend on a
parameter vector θ. We are now able to write a general
rule for Gaussian gradient computation by combining
equations (7) and (8) and using the chain rule:
∇θEN(µ,C)[f(ξ)]=EN(µ,C)

g⊤∂µ
∂θ + 1
2Tr

H∂C
∂θ

(9)
where g and H are the gradient and the Hessian of the
function f(ξ), respectively. Equation (9) can be inter-
preted as a modiﬁed backpropagation rule for Gaus-
sian distributions that takes into account the gradients
through the mean µ and covariance C. This reduces
to the standard backpropagation rule when C is con-
stant. Unfortunately this rule requires knowledge of
the Hessian matrix of f(ξ), which has an algorithmic
complexity O(K3). For inference in DLGMs, we later
introduce an unbiased though higher variance estima-
tor that requires only quadratic complexity.
3.2. Generalised Backpropagation Rules
We describe two approaches to derive general back-
propagation rules for non-Gaussian q-distributions.
Using the product rule for integrals. For many
exponential family distributions, it is possible to ﬁnd
a function B(ξ; θ) to ensure that
∇θEp(ξ|θ)[f(ξ)]== −Ep(ξ|θ)[∇ξ[B(ξ; θ)f(ξ)]].
That is, we express the gradient with respect to the
parameters of q as an expectation of gradients with
respect to the random variables themselves. This ap-
proach can be used to derive rules for many distribu-
tions such as the Gaussian, inverse Gamma and log-
Normal. We discuss this in more detail in appendix
C.
Using suitable co-ordinate transformations.
We can also derive stochastic backpropagation rules
for any distribution that can be written as a smooth,
invertible transformation of a standard base distribu-
tion. For example, any Gaussian distribution N(µ, C)
can be obtained as a transformation of a spherical
Gaussian ϵ ∼N(0, I), using the transformation y =
µ+Rϵ and C = RR⊤. The gradient of the expectation
with respect to R is then:
∇REN(µ,C) [f(ξ)] = ∇REN(0,I) [f(µ + Rϵ)]
= EN(0,I)

ϵg⊤
,
(10)
where g is the gradient of f evaluated at µ + Rϵ and
provides a lower-cost alternative to Price’s theorem
(8).
Such transformations are well known for many
distributions, especially those with a self-similarity
property or location-scale formulation, such as the
Gaussian, Student’s t-distribution, stable distribu-
tions, and generalised extreme value distributions.
Stochastic backpropagation in other contexts.
The Gaussian gradient identities described above do
not appear to be widely used. These identities have
been recognised by Opper & Archambeau (2009) for
variational inference in Gaussian process regression,
and following this work, by Graves (2011) for param-
eter learning in large neural networks. Concurrently
with this paper, Kingma & Welling (2014) present an
alternative discussion of stochastic backpropagation.
Our approaches were developed simultaneously and
provide complementary perspectives on the use and
derivation of stochastic backpropagation rules.
4. Scalable Inference in DLGMs
We use the matrix V to refer to the full data set of
size N × D with observations vn = [vn1, . . . , vnD]⊤.
4.1. Free Energy Objective
To perform inference in DLGMs we must integrate out
the eﬀect of any latent variables – this requires us to
compute the integrated or marginal likelihood. In gen-
eral, this will be an intractable integration and instead
we optimise a lower bound on the marginal likelihood.
We introduce an approximate posterior distribution
q(·) and apply Jensen’s inequality following the varia-
tional principle (Beal, 2003) to obtain:

Stochastic Backpropagation in DLGMs
L(V) = −log p(V) = −log
Z
p(V|ξ, θg)p(ξ, θg)dξ
= −log
Z q(ξ)
q(ξ)p(V|ξ, θg)p(ξ, θg)dξ
(11)
≤F(V)=DKL[q(ξ)∥p(ξ)]−Eq [log p(V|ξ,θg)p(θg)] .
This objective consists of two terms:
the ﬁrst is
the KL-divergence between the variational distribution
and the prior distribution (which acts a regulariser),
and the second is a reconstruction error.
We specify the approximate posterior as a distribution
q(ξ|v) that is conditioned on the observed data. This
distribution can be speciﬁed as any directed acyclic
graph where each node of the graph is a Gaussian
conditioned, through linear or non-linear transforma-
tions, on its parents.
The joint distribution in this
case is non-Gaussian, but stochastic backpropagation
can still be applied.
For simplicity, we use a q(ξ|v) that is a Gaussian dis-
tribution that factorises across the L layers (but not
necessarily within a layer):
q(ξ|V, θr) =
N
Y
n=1
L
Y
l=1
N
 ξn,l|µl(vn), Cl(vn)

,
(12)
where the mean µl(·) and covariance Cl(·) are generic
maps represented by deep neural networks.
Param-
eters of the q-distribution are denoted by the vector
θr.
For a Gaussian prior and a Gaussian recognition
model, the KL term in (11) can be computed ana-
lytically and the free energy becomes:
DKL[N(µ,C)∥N(0,I)]= 1
2

Tr(C)−log |C|+µ⊤µ−D

,
F(V) = −
X
n
Eq [log p(vn|h(ξn))] +
1
2κ∥θg∥2
+ 1
2
X
n,l

∥µn,l∥2+Tr(Cn,l)−log |Cn,l|−1

, (13)
where Tr(C) and |C| indicate the trace and the deter-
minant of the covariance matrix C, respectively.
The speciﬁcation of an approximate posterior distri-
bution that is conditioned on the observed data is the
ﬁrst component of an eﬃcient variational inference al-
gorithm. We shall refer to the distribution q(ξ|v) (12)
as a recognition model, whose design is independent
of the generative model. A recognition model allows
us introduce a form of amortised inference (Gershman
& Goodman, 2014) for variational methods in which
we share statistical strength by allowing for generali-
sation across the posterior estimates for all latent vari-
ables using a model. The implication of this general-
isation ability is: faster convergence during training;
and faster inference at test time since we only require a
single pass through the recognition model, rather than
needing to perform any iterative computations (such
as in a generalised E-step).
To allow for the best possible inference, the speciﬁca-
tion of the recognition model must be ﬂexible enough
to provide an accurate approximation of the poste-
rior distribution – motivating the use of deep neu-
ral networks.
We regularise the recognition model
by introducing additional noise, speciﬁcally, bit-ﬂip
or drop-out noise at the input layer and small addi-
tional Gaussian noise to samples from the recognition
model. We use rectiﬁed linear activation functions as
non-linearities for any deterministic layers of the neu-
ral network. We found that such regularisation is es-
sential and without it the recognition model is unable
to provide accurate inferences for unseen data points.
4.2. Gradients of the Free Energy
To optimise (13), we use Monte Carlo methods for
any expectations and use stochastic gradient descent
for optimisation. For optimisation, we require eﬃcient
estimators of the gradients of all terms in equation
(13) with respect to the parameters θg and θr of the
generative and the recognition models, respectively.
The gradients with respect to the jth generative pa-
rameter θg
j can be computed using:
∇θg
j F(V) = −Eq
h
∇θg
j log p(V|h)
i
+ 1
κθg
j .
(14)
An unbiased estimator of ∇θg
j F(V) is obtained by
approximating equation (14) with a small number of
samples (or even a single sample) from the recognition
model q.
To obtain gradients with respect to the recognition
parameters θr, we use the rules for Gaussian back-
propagation developed in section 3.
To address the
complexity of the Hessian in the general rule (9), we
use the co-ordinate transformation for the Gaussian to
write the gradient with respect to the factor matrix R
instead of the covariance C (recalling C = RR⊤) de-
rived in equation (10), where derivatives are computed
for the function f(ξ) = log p(v|h(ξ)).
The gradients of F(v) in equation (13) with respect to
the variational mean µl(v) and the factors Rl(v) are:
∇µlF(v) = −Eq
h
∇ξl log p(v|h(ξ))
i
+ µl,
(15)
∇Rl,i,jF(v) = −1
2Eq

ϵl,j∇ξl,i log p(v|h(ξ))

+ 1
2∇Rl,i,j [Tr Cn,l −log |Cn,l|] ,
(16)
where the gradients ∇Rl,i,j [Tr Cn,l −log |Cn,l|] are
computed by backpropagation. Unbiased estimators
of the gradients (15) and (16) are obtained jointly

Stochastic Backpropagation in DLGMs
Algorithm 1 Learning in DLGMs
while hasNotConverged() do
V ←getMiniBatch()
ξn ∼q(ξn|vn) (bottom-up pass) eq. (12)
h ←h(ξ) (top-down pass) eq. (3)
updateGradients() eqs (14) – (17)
θg,r ←θg,r + ∆θg,r
end while
by sampling from the recognition model ξ ∼q(ξ|v)
(bottom-up pass) and updating the values of the gener-
ative model layers using equation (3) (top-down pass).
Finally the gradients ∇θr
j F(v) obtained from equa-
tions (15) and (16) are:
∇θrF(v)=∇µF(v)⊤∂µ
∂θr +Tr

∇RF(v) ∂R
∂θr

.
(17)
The gradients (14) – (17) are now used to descend
the free-energy surface with respect to both the gen-
erative and recognition parameters in a single optimi-
sation step. Figure 1(b) shows the ﬂow of computa-
tion in DLGMs. Our algorithm proceeds by ﬁrst per-
forming a forward pass (black arrows), consisting of a
bottom-up (recognition) phase and a top-down (gener-
ation) phase, which updates the hidden activations of
the recognition model and parameters of any Gaussian
distributions, and then a backward pass (red arrows)
in which gradients are computed using the appropriate
backpropagation rule for deterministic and stochastic
layers. We take a descent step using:
∆θg,r = −Γg,r∇θg,rF(V),
(18)
where Γg,r is a diagonal pre-conditioning matrix com-
puted using the RMSprop heuristic1.
The learning
procedure is summarised in algorithm 1.
4.3. Gaussian Covariance Parameterisation
There are a number of approaches for parameterising
the covariance matrix of the recognition model q(ξ).
Maintaining a full covariance matrix C in equation
(13) would entail an algorithmic complexity of O(K3)
for training and sampling per layer, where K is the
number of latent variables per layer.
The simplest approach is to use a diagonal covariance
matrix C = diag(d), where d is a K-dimensional vec-
tor.
This approach is appealing since it allows for
linear-time computation and sampling, but only allows
for axis-aligned posterior distributions.
We can improve upon the diagonal approximation by
parameterising the covarinace as a rank-1 matrix with
1Described by G. Hinton, ‘RMSprop: Divide the gradi-
ent by a running average of its recent magnitude’, in Neural
networks for machine learning, Coursera lecture 6e, 2012.
a diagonal correction. Using a vectors u and d, with
D = diag(d), we parameterise the precision C−1 as:
C−1 = D + uu⊤.
(19)
This representation allows for arbitrary rotations of
the Gaussian distribution along one principal direction
with relatively few additional parameters (Magdon-
Ismail & Purnell, 2010). By application of the matrix
inversion lemma (Woodbury identity), we obtain the
covariance matrix in terms of d and u as:
C = D−1 −ηD−1uu⊤D−1,
η =
1
u⊤D
−1u+1,
log |C| = log η −log |D|.
(20)
This allows both the trace Tr(C) and log |C| needed in
the computation of the Gaussian KL, as well as their
gradients, to be computed in O(K) time per layer.
The factorisation C = RR⊤, with R a matrix of the
same size as C and can be computed directly in terms
of d and u. One solution for R is:
R = D−1
2 −
 1 −√η
u⊤D−1u

D−1uu⊤D−1
2 .
(21)
The product of R with an arbitrary vector can be com-
puted in O(K) without computing R explicitly. This
also allows us to sample eﬃciently from this Gaussian,
since any Gaussian random variable ξ with mean µ
and covariance matrix C = RR⊤can be written as
ξ = µ + Rϵ, where ϵ is a standard Gaussian variate.
Since this covariance parametrisation has linear cost
in the number of latent variables, we can also use it to
parameterise the variational distribution of all layers
jointly, instead of the factorised assumption in (12).
4.4. Algorithm Complexity
The computational complexity of producing a sample
from the generative model is O(L ¯K2), where ¯K is the
average number of latent variables per layer and L is
the number of layers (counting both deterministic and
stochastic layers). The computational complexity per
training sample during training is also O(L ¯K2) – the
same as that of matching auto-encoder.
5. Results
Generative models have a number of applications in
simulation, prediction, data visualisation, missing data
imputation and other forms of probabilistic reason-
ing. We describe the testing methodology we use and
present results on a number of these tasks.
5.1. Analysing the Approximate Posterior
We use sampling to evaluate the true posterior
distribution for a number of MNIST digits using
the binarised data set from Larochelle & Murray

Stochastic Backpropagation in DLGMs
(a) Diagonal covariance
(b) Low-rank covariance
Rank1
Diag
Wake−Sleep
FA
84
88
92
96
100
104
Test neg. marginal likelihood
(c) Performance
Figure 2. (a, b) Analysis of the true vs. approximate posterior for MNIST. Within each image we show four views of the
same posterior, zooming in on the region centred on the MAP (red) estimate. (c) Comparison of test log likelihoods.
Table 1. Comparison of negative log-probabilities on the
test set for the binarised MNIST data.
Model
−ln p(v)
Factor Analysis
106.00
NLGBN (Frey & Hinton, 1999)
95.80
Wake-Sleep (Dayan, 2000)
91.3
DLGM diagonal covariance
87.30
DLGM rank-one covariance
86.60
Results below from Uria et al. (2014)
MoBernoullis K=10
168.95
MoBernoullis K=500
137.64
RBM (500 h, 25 CD steps) approx.
86.34
DBN 2hl approx.
84.55
NADE 1hl (ﬁxed order)
88.86
NADE 1hl (ﬁxed order, RLU, minibatch)
88.33
EoNADE 1hl (2 orderings)
90.69
EoNADE 1hl (128 orderings)
87.71
EoNADE 2hl (2 orderings)
87.96
EoNADE 2hl (128 orderings)
85.10
(2011). We visualise the posterior distribution for a
model with two Gaussian latent variables in ﬁgure 2.
The true posterior distribution is shown by the grey
regions and was computed by importance sampling
with a large number of particles aligned in a grid
between -5 and 5.
In ﬁgure 2(a) we see that these
posterior distributions are elliptical or spherical in
shape and thus, it is reasonable to assume that they
can be well approximated by a Gaussian.
Samples
from the prior (green) are spread widely over the
space and very few samples fall in the region of
signiﬁcant posterior mass, explaining the ineﬃciency
of estimation methods that rely on samples from the
prior. Samples from the recognition model (blue) are
concentrated on the posterior mass, indicating that
the recognition model has learnt the correct posterior
statistics, which should lead to eﬃcient learning.
In ﬁgure 2(a) we see that samples from the recognition
model are aligned to the axis and do not capture
the posterior correlation. The correlation is captured
using the structured covariance model in ﬁgure 2(b).
Not all posteriors are Gaussian in shape, but the
recognition places mass in the best location possible to
provide a reasonable approximation. As a benchmark
for comparison, the performance in terms of test
log-likelihood is shown in ﬁgure 2(c), using the same
architecture, for factor analysis (FA), the wake-sleep
algorithm, and our approach using both the diagonal
and structured covariance approaches.
For this ex-
periment, the generative model consists of 100 latent
variables feeding into a deterministic layer of 300
nodes, which then feeds to the observation likelihood.
We use the same structure for the recognition model.
5.2. Simulation and Prediction
We evaluate the performance of a three layer latent
Gaussian model on the MNIST data set. The model
consists of two deterministic layers with 200 hidden
units and a stochastic layer of 200 latent variables.
We use mini-batches of 200 observations and trained
the model using stochastic backpropagation. Samples
from this model are shown in ﬁgure 3(a).
We also
compare the test log-likelihood to a large number of
existing approaches in table 1.
We used the bina-
rised dataset as in Uria et al. (2014) and quote the
log-likelihoods in the lower part of the table from this
work. These results show that our approach is com-
petitive with some of the best models currently avail-
able. The generated digits also match the true data
well and visually appear as good as some of the best
visualisations from these competing approaches.
We also analysed the performance of our model on
three high-dimensional real image data sets.
The
NORB object recognition data set consists of 24, 300
images that are of size 96 × 96 pixels. We use a model
consisting of 1 deterministic layer of 400 hidden units
and one stochastic layer of 100 latent variables. Sam-
ples produced from this model are shown in ﬁgure
4(a). The CIFAR10 natural images data set consists
of 50, 000 RGB images that are of size 32 × 32 pix-
els, which we split into random 8 × 8 patches. We use
the same model as used for the MNIST experiment
and show samples from the model in ﬁgure 4(b). The
Frey faces data set consists of almost 2, 000 images of
diﬀerent facial expressions of size 28 × 20 pixels.
5.3. Data Visualisation
Latent variable models are often used for visualisa-
tion of high-dimensional data sets.
We project the
MNIST data set to a 2-dimensional latent space and
use this 2D embedding as a visualisation of the data –
an embedding for MNIST is shown in ﬁgure 3(b). The
classes separate into diﬀerent regions, suggesting that
such embeddings can be useful in understanding the
structure of high-dimensional data sets.

Stochastic Backpropagation in DLGMs
(a) Left: Training data. Middle: Sampled pixel probabilities. Right: Model samples
(b) 2D embedding.
Figure 3. Performance on the MNIST dataset. For the visualisation, each colour corresponds to one of the digit classes.
(a) NORB
(b) CIFAR
(c) Frey
Figure 4. Sampled generated from DLGMs for three data sets: (a) NORB, (b) CIFAR 10, (c) Frey faces. In all images,
the left image shows samples from the training data and the right side shows the generated samples.
5.4. Missing Data Imputation and Denoising
We demonstrate the ability of the model to impute
missing data using the street view house numbers
(SVHN) data set (Netzer et al., 2011), which consists
of 73, 257 images of size 32 × 32 pixels, and the Frey
faces and MNIST data sets. The performance of the
model is shown in ﬁgure 5.
We test the imputation ability under two diﬀerent
missingness types (Little & Rubin, 1987): Missing-at-
Random (MAR), where we consider 60% and 80% of
the pixels to be missing randomly, and Not Missing-at-
Random (NMAR), where we consider a square region
of the image to be missing. The model produces very
good completions in both test cases. There is uncer-
tainty in the identity of the image and this is reﬂected
in the errors in these completions as the resampling
procedure is run (see transitions from digit 9 to 7, and
digit 8 to 6 in ﬁgure 5 ). This further demonstrates
the ability of the model to capture the diversity of the
underlying data. We do not integrate over the missing
values, but use a procedure that simulates a Markov
chain that we show converges to the true marginal dis-
tribution of missing given observed pixels. The impu-
tation procedure is discussed in appendix F.
6. Discussion
Directed Graphical Models.
DLGMs form a
uniﬁed family of models that includes factor analy-
sis (Bartholomew & Knott, 1999), non-linear factor
analysis (Lappalainen & Honkela, 2000), and non-
Figure 5. Imputation results: Row 1, SVHN. Row 2, Frey
faces.
Rows 3–5, MNIST. Col.
1 shows the true data.
Col. 2 shows pixel locations set as missing in grey. The
remaining columns show imputations for 15 iterations.
linear Gaussian belief networks (Frey & Hinton, 1999).
Other related models include sigmoid belief networks
(Saul et al., 1996) and deep auto-regressive net-
works (Gregor et al., 2014), which use auto-regressive
Bernoulli distributions at each layer instead of Gaus-
sian distributions. The Gaussian process latent vari-
able model and deep Gaussian processes (Lawrence,
2005; Damianou & Lawrence, 2013) form the non-
parametric analogue of our model and employ Gaus-

Stochastic Backpropagation in DLGMs
sian process priors over the non-linear functions be-
tween each layer. The neural auto-regressive density
estimator (NADE) (Larochelle & Murray, 2011; Uria
et al., 2014) uses function approximation to model con-
ditional distributions within a directed acyclic graph.
NADE is amongst the most competitive generative
models currently available, but has several limitations,
such as the inability to allow for deep representations
and diﬃculties in extending to locally-connected mod-
els (e.g., through the use of convolutional layers), pre-
venting it from scaling easily to high-dimensional data.
Alternative latent Gaussian inference.
Few of
the alternative approaches for inferring latent Gaus-
sian distributions meet the desiderata for scalable in-
ference we seek. The Laplace approximation has been
concluded to be a poor approximation in general, in
addition to being computationally expensive. INLA is
restricted to models with few hyperparameters (< 10),
whereas our interest is in 100s-1000s. EP cannot be
applied to latent variable models due to the inability
to match moments of the joint distribution of latent
variables and model parameters. Furthermore, no re-
liable methods exist for moment-matching with means
and covariances formed by non-linear transformations
– linearisation and importance sampling are two, but
are either inaccurate or very slow. Thus, the the varia-
tional approach we present remains a general-purpose
and competitive approach for inference.
Monte Carlo variance reduction.
Control vari-
ate methods are amongst the most general and ef-
fective techniques for variance reduction when Monte
Carlo methods are used (Wilson, 1984). One popu-
lar approach is the REINFORCE algorithm (Williams,
1992), since it is simple to implement and applicable
to both discrete and continuous models, though con-
trol variate methods are becoming increasingly popu-
lar for variational inference problems (Hoﬀman et al.,
2013; Blei et al., 2012; Ranganath et al., 2014; Sali-
mans & Knowles, 2014). Unfortunately, such estima-
tors have the undesirable property that their variance
scales linearly with the number of independent random
variables in the target function, while the variance of
GBP is bounded by a constant: for K-dimensional la-
tent variables the variance of REINFORCE scales as
O(K), whereas GBP scales as O(1) (see appendix D).
An important family of alternative estimators is based
on quadrature and series expansion methods (Honkela
& Valpola, 2004; Lappalainen & Honkela, 2000).
These methods have low-variance at the price of in-
troducing biases in the estimation. More recently a
combination of the series expansion and control vari-
ate approaches has been proposed by Blei et al. (2012).
A very general alternative is the wake-sleep algorithm
(Dayan et al., 1995). The wake-sleep algorithm can
perform well, but it fails to optimise a single consistent
objective function and there is thus no guarantee that
optimising it leads to a decrease in the free energy (11).
Relation to denoising auto-encoders.
Denois-
ing auto-encoders (DAE) (Vincent et al., 2010) intro-
duce a random corruption to the encoder network and
attempt to minimize the expected reconstruction er-
ror under this corruption noise with additional reg-
ularisation terms.
In our variational approach, the
recognition distribution q(ξ|v) can be interpreted as a
stochastic encoder in the DAE setting. There is then a
direct correspondence between the expression for the
free energy (11) and the reconstruction error and reg-
ularization terms used in denoising auto-encoders (c.f.
equation (4) of Bengio et al. (2013)). Thus, we can see
denoising auto-encoders as a realisation of variational
inference in latent variable models.
The key diﬀerence is that the form of encoding ‘corrup-
tion’ and regularisation terms used in our model have
been derived directly using the variational principle
to provide a strict bound on the marginal likelihood
of a known directed graphical model that allows for
easy generation of samples. DAEs can also be used as
generative models by simulating from a Markov chain
(Bengio et al., 2013; Bengio & Thibodeau-Laufer,
2013). But the behaviour of these Markov chains will
be very problem speciﬁc, and we lack consistent tools
to evaluate their convergence.
7. Conclusion
We
have
introduced
a
general-purpose
inference
method for models with continuous latent variables.
Our approach introduces a recognition model, which
can be seen as a stochastic encoding of the data, to al-
low for eﬃcient and tractable inference. We derived a
lower bound on the marginal likelihood for the genera-
tive model and speciﬁed the structure and regularisa-
tion of the recognition model by exploiting recent ad-
vances in deep learning. By developing modiﬁed rules
for backpropagation through stochastic layers, we de-
rived an eﬃcient inference algorithm that allows for
joint optimisation of all parameters. We show on sev-
eral real-world data sets that the model generates real-
istic samples, provides accurate imputations of missing
data and can be a useful tool for high-dimensional data
visualisation.
Appendices can be found with the online version of the pa-
per. http://arxiv.org/abs/1401.4082
Acknowledgements. We are grateful for feedback from
the reviewers as well as Peter Dayan, Antti Honkela, Neil
Lawrence and Yoshua Bengio.

Stochastic Backpropagation in DLGMs
