Sciduction: Combining Induction, Deduction, and Structure
for Veriﬁcation and Synthesis∗
Sanjit A. Seshia
University of California, Berkeley

Abstract
Even with impressive advances in automated formal methods, certain problems in system veriﬁcation
and synthesis remain challenging. Examples include the veriﬁcation of quantitative properties of software
involving constraints on timing and energy consumption, and the automatic synthesis of systems from
speciﬁcations. The major challenges include environment modeling, incompleteness in speciﬁcations, and
the complexity of underlying decision problems.
This position paper proposes sciduction, an approach to tackle these challenges by integrating inductive
inference, deductive reasoning, and structure hypotheses. Deductive reasoning, which leads from general
rules or concepts to conclusions about speciﬁc problem instances, includes techniques such as logical
inference and constraint solving. Inductive inference, which generalizes from speciﬁc instances to yield a
concept, includes algorithmic learning from examples. Structure hypotheses are used to deﬁne the class of
artifacts, such as invariants or program fragments, generated during veriﬁcation or synthesis. Sciduction
constrains inductive and deductive reasoning using structure hypotheses, and actively combines inductive
and deductive reasoning: for instance, deductive techniques generate examples for learning, and inductive
reasoning is used to guide the deductive engines.
We illustrate this approach with three applications: (i) timing analysis of software; (ii) synthesis of
loop-free programs, and (iii) controller synthesis for hybrid systems. Some future applications are also
discussed.
1
Introduction
Formal veriﬁcation has made enormous strides over the last few decades. Veriﬁcation techniques such as
model checking [12, 45, 14] and theorem proving (see, e.g. [26]) are used routinely in computer-aided design
of integrated circuits and have been widely applied to ﬁnd bugs in software. However, certain problems in
system veriﬁcation and synthesis remain very challenging, stymied by computational hardness or requiring
signiﬁcant human input into the veriﬁcation process. This position paper seeks to outline these challenges and
presents an approach for tackling them along with some initial evidence for the utility of the approach.
Let us begin by examining the traditional view of veriﬁcation is as a decision problem, with three inputs
(see Figure 1):
1. A model of the system to be veriﬁed, S;
2. A model of the environment, E, and
3. The property to be veriﬁed, Φ.
∗This is a revised version of a previously-published technical report [51].
1
arXiv:1201.0979v1  [cs.LO]  4 Jan 2012

The veriﬁer generates as output a YES/NO answer, indicating whether or not S satisﬁes the property Φ in
environment E. Typically, a NO output is accompanied by a counterexample, also called an error trace, which
is an execution of the system that indicates how Φ is violated. Some formal veriﬁcation tools also include a
proof or certiﬁcate of correctness with a YES answer.
S
E
Φ
Compose
Verify
Property
System
Environment
YES
[proof]
NO
counterexample
M
Figure 1: Formal veriﬁcation procedure.
The ﬁrst point to note is that this view of veriﬁcation is somewhat high-level and idealized. In practice,
one does not always start with models S and E — these might have to be generated from implementations.
To create the system model S, one might need to perform automatic abstraction from code that has many low-
level details. For this, techniques such as predicate abstraction [21] have proved useful (e.g., in software model
checking [4]). Additionally, the speciﬁcation Φ is rarely complete and sometimes inconsistent, as has been
noted in industrial practice (see, e.g., [6]). Indeed, the question “when are we done verifying?” often boils
down to “have we written enough properties (and the right ones)?” Finally, the generation of an environment
model E is usually a manual process, involving writing constraints over inputs, or an abstract state machine
description of the environment of S. Bugs can be missed due to incorrect environment modeling. In systems
involving commercial-off-the-shelf components or third-party IP blocks, not all details of the environment
might even be available. As an example of the challenge of environment modeling, consider the veriﬁcation
of quantitative properties, such as bounds on timing and power. Such analysis is central to the design of
reliable embedded software and systems, such as those in automotive, avionics, and medical applications.
However, the veriﬁcation of such properties on a program is made difﬁcult by their heavy dependence on the
program’s environment, which includes (at a minimum) the processor it runs on and characteristics of the
memory hierarchy. Current practice requires signiﬁcant manual modeling, which can be tedious, error-prone
and time consuming, taking several months to create a model of a relatively simple microcontroller.
The second point we note is that Figure 1 omits some inputs that are key in successfully completing
veriﬁcation. For example, one might need to supply hints to the veriﬁer in the form of inductive invariants or
pick an abstract domain for generating suitable abstractions. One might need to break up the overall design
into components and construct a compositional proof of correctness (or show that there is a bug). These
tasks requiring human input have one aspect in common, which is that they involve a synthesis sub-task of
the overall veriﬁcation task. This sub-task involves the synthesis of veriﬁcation artifacts such as inductive
invariants, abstractions, environment assumptions, input constraints, auxiliary lemmas, etc. One often needs
human insight into at least the form of these artifacts, if not the artifacts themselves, to succeed in verifying
the design.
Finally, it has been a long-standing goal of the ﬁelds of electrical engineering and computer science to
automatically synthesize systems from high-level speciﬁcations. Automatic synthesis shares much in common
with automatic veriﬁcation. It is interesting to note that the genesis of model checking lies in part in the
automatic synthesis problem; the seminal paper on model checking by Clarke and Emerson [12] begins with
this sentence:
“We propose a method of constructing concurrent programs in which the synchronization skeleton
2

of the program is automatically synthesized from a high-level (branching time) Temporal Logic
speciﬁcation.”
In automatic synthesis, one starts with a speciﬁcation Φ of the system to be synthesized, along with a model
of its environment E. The goal of synthesis is to generate a system S that satisﬁes Φ when composed with
E. Figure 2 depicts the synthesis process. Modeled thus, the essence of synthesis can be viewed as a game
E

Synthesis
Engine
Property
Environment
S
System
(S || E  ² )
Figure 2: Formal synthesis procedure.
solving problem, where S and E represent the two players in a game; S is computed as a winning strategy
ensuring that the composed system S∥E satisﬁes Φ for all input sequences generated by the environment
E. If such an S exists, we say that the speciﬁcation (Φ and E) is realizable. Starting with the seminal
work on automata-theoretic and deductive synthesis from speciﬁcations (e.g. [33, 42]), there has been steady
progress on automatic synthesis. In particular, many recent techniques (e.g. [57, 59]) leverage the progress
in formal veriﬁcation in order to perform synthesis. However, there is a long way to go before automated
synthesis is practical and widely applicable. One major challenge, shared with veriﬁcation, is the difﬁculty of
obtaining complete, formal speciﬁcations from the user. Even expert users ﬁnd it difﬁcult to write complete,
formal speciﬁcations that are realizable. Often, when they do write complete speciﬁcations, the effort to
write these is arguably more than that required to manually create the design in the ﬁrst place. Additionally,
the challenge of modeling the environment, as discussed above for veriﬁcation, also remains for synthesis.
Finally, synthesis problems typically have greater computational complexity than veriﬁcation problems for
the same class of speciﬁcations and models. For instance, equivalence checking of combinational circuits is
NP-complete and routinely solved in industrial practice, whereas synthesizing a combinational circuit from
a ﬁnite set of components is Σ2-complete and only possible in very limited settings in practice. In some
cases, both veriﬁcation and synthesis are undecidable, but there are still compelling reasons to have efﬁcient
procedures in practice; a good example is hybrid systems — systems with both discrete and continuous state
— whose continuous dynamics is non-linear, which arise commonly in embedded systems and analog/mixed-
signal circuits.
To summarize, there are two main points. First, the core challenges facing automatic veriﬁcation are very
similar to those facing automatic synthesis: the key to efﬁcient veriﬁcation is often in the synthesis of artifacts
such as inductive invariants or abstractions, and synthesizers employ veriﬁers, at a minimum to verify that the
systems they generate are correct. Second, the three main challenges facing formal veriﬁcation and synthesis
are: (i) system and environment modeling, (ii) creating good speciﬁcations, and (iii) the complexity of under-
lying decision problems. Some of these challenges — such as dealing with computational complexity — can
be partially addressed by advances in computational engines such as Binary Decision Diagrams (BDDs) [9],
Boolean satisﬁability (SAT) [32], and satisﬁability modulo theories (SMT) solvers [5]. However, these alone
are not sufﬁcient to extend the reach of formal methods for veriﬁcation and synthesis. New methodologies are
also required.
In this position paper, we present one such methodology that, in our experience so far, appears promising.
The central idea of this approach, which we term sciduction,1 is to tightly integrate induction, deduction, and
1sciduction stands for structure-constrained induction and deduction.
3

structure hypotheses. Induction is the process of inferring a general law or principle from observation of par-
ticular instances. Machine learning algorithms are typically inductive, generalizing from (labeled) examples
to obtain the learned concept or classiﬁer [38, 2]. Deduction, on the other hand, involves the use of rules and
axioms to logically infer conclusions about particular problem instances. Traditional approaches to formal
veriﬁcation and synthesis, including those in model checking and theorem proving, tend to be deductive. In
formal veriﬁcation and synthesis (see Figures 1 and 2), given a particular speciﬁcation Φ, environment E,
and system S, a veriﬁer typically uses a combination of search and logical inference designed for that class of
Φ, E, and S to determine if S∥E |= Φ. On the other hand, inductive reasoning may seem out of place here,
since typically an inductive argument only ensures that the truth of its premises make it likely or probable
that its conclusion is also true. However, we argue in this paper that one can combine inductive and deductive
reasoning to obtain the kinds of guarantees one desires in formal veriﬁcation and synthesis. The key is the use
of structure hypotheses. These are mathematical hypotheses used to deﬁne the class of artifacts to be synthe-
sized within the overall veriﬁcation or synthesis problem. The sciductive approach constrains inductive and
deductive reasoning using structure hypotheses, and actively combines inductive and deductive reasoning: for
instance, deductive techniques generate examples for learning, and inductive reasoning is used to guide the
deductive engines. We describe the methodology in detail, with comparison to related work, in Section 2.
Let us reﬂect on the combined use of induction and deduction for veriﬁcation and synthesis. Automatic
techniques for veriﬁcation and synthesis are typically deductive. However, one can argue that humans often
employ a combination of inductive and deductive reasoning while performing veriﬁcation or synthesis. For
example, while proving a theorem, one often starts by working out examples and trying to ﬁnd a pattern in
the properties satisﬁed by those examples. The latter step is a process of inductive generalization. These
patterns might take the form of lemmas or background facts that then guide a deductive process of proving
the statement of the theorem from known facts and previously established theorems (rules). Similarly, while
creating a new design, one often starts by enumerating sample behaviors that the design must satisfy and
hypothesizing components that might be useful in the design process; one then systematically combines these
components, using design rules, to obtain a candidate artifact. The process usually iterates between inductive
and deductive reasoning until the ﬁnal artifact is obtained. It is this combination of inductive and deductive
reasoning that we seek to formalize using the notion of sciduction.
We demonstrate the sciductive approach to automatic veriﬁcation and synthesis using three applications:
1. Timing analysis of software (Section 3);
2. Synthesis of loop-free programs (Section 4), and
3. Synthesizing switching logic for control of hybrid systems (Section 5).
The ﬁrst application of the sciduction approach addresses the problem of environment modeling; the second,
the problem of inadequate speciﬁcations, and the third tackles the problem of high computational complexity.
Some future applications are also explored in Section 6.
2
Sciduction: Formalization and Related Work
We begin with a formalization of the sciductive approach, and then compare it to related work. This section
assumes some familiarity with basic terminology in formal veriﬁcation and machine learning — see the
relevant books by Clarke et al. [14], Manna and Pnueli [34], and Mitchell [38] for an introduction.
2.1
Veriﬁcation and Synthesis Problems
As discussed in Section 1, an instance of a veriﬁcation problem is deﬁned by a triple ⟨S,E,Φ⟩, where S
denotes the system, E is the environment, and Φ is the property to be veriﬁed. Here we assume that S, E, and
4

Φ are described formally, in mathematical notation. Similarly, an instance of a synthesis problem is deﬁned
by the pair ⟨E,Φ⟩, where the symbols have the same meaning. In both cases, as noted earlier, it is possible in
practice for the descriptions of S, E, or Φ to be missing or incomplete; in such cases, the missing components
must be synthesized as part of the overall veriﬁcation or synthesis process.
A family of veriﬁcation or synthesis problems is a triple ⟨CS,CE,CΦ⟩where CS is a formal description of a
class of systems, CE is a formal description of a class of environment models, and CΦ is a formal description
of a class of speciﬁcations. In the case of synthesis, CS deﬁnes the class of systems to be synthesized.
2.2
Elements of Sciduction
An instance of sciduction can be described using a triple ⟨H ,I,D⟩, where the three elements are as follows:
1. A structure hypothesis, H , encodes our hypothesis about the form of the artifact to be synthesized,
whether it be an environment model, an inductive invariant, a program, or a control algorithm (or any
portion thereof);
2. An inductive inference engine, I, is an algorithm for learning from examples an artifact h deﬁned by H ,
and
3. A deductive engine, D, is a lightweight decision procedure that applies deductive reasoning to answer
queries generated in the synthesis or veriﬁcation process.
We elaborate on these elements below. The context of synthesis is used to explain the central ideas in
the sciductive approach. While the application of these ideas to veriﬁcation is symmetric, we will note points
speciﬁc to veriﬁcation or synthesis as they arise.
2.2.1
Structure Hypothesis
The structure hypothesis, H , encodes our hypothesis about the form of the artifact to be synthesized.
Formally H is a (possibly inﬁnite) set of artifacts. H encodes a hypothesis that the system to be synthe-
sized falls in a subclass CH of CS (i.e., CH ⊆CS). Note that H needs not be the same as CH , since the artifact
being synthesized might just be a portion of the full system description, such as the guard on transitions of a
state machine, or the assignments to certain variables in a program. Each artifact h ∈H , in turn, corresponds
to a unique set of primitive elements that deﬁnes its semantics. The form of the primitive element depends on
the artifact to be synthesized.
More concretely, here are two examples of a structure hypothesis H :
1. Suppose that CS is the set of all ﬁnite automata over a set of input variables V and output variables U
satisfying a speciﬁcation Φ. Consider the structure hypothesis H that restricts the ﬁnite automata to be
synchronous compositions of automata from a ﬁnite library L. The artifact to be synthesized is the entire
ﬁnite automaton, and so, in this case, H = CH . Each element h ∈H is one such composition of automata
from L. A primitive element is an input-output trace in the language of the ﬁnite automaton h.
2. Suppose that CS is the set of all hybrid automata [1], where the guards on transitions between modes can
be any region in Rn but where the modes of the automaton are ﬁxed. A structure hypothesis H can restrict
the guards to be hyperboxes in Rn — i.e., conjunctions of upper and lower bounds on continuous state
variables. Each h ∈H is one such hyperbox, and a primitive element is a point in h. Notice that H deﬁnes
a subclass of hybrid automata CH ⊂CS where the guards are n-dimensional hyperboxes. Note also that
H ̸= CH in this case.
A structure hypothesis H can be syntactically described in several ways. For instance, in the second example
above, H can deﬁne a guard either set-theoretically as a hyperbox in Rn or using mathematical logic as a
conjunction of atomic formulas, each of which is an interval constraint over a real-valued variable.
5

2.2.2
Inductive Inference
The inductive inference procedure, I, is an algorithm for learning from examples an artifact h ∈H .
While any inductive inference engine can be used, in the context of veriﬁcation and synthesis we expect
that the learning algorithms I have one or more of the following characteristics:
• I performs active learning, selecting the examples that it learns from.
• Examples and/or labels for examples are generated by one or more oracles. The oracles could be imple-
mented using deductive procedures or by evaluation/execution of a model on a concrete input. In some
cases, an oracle could be a human user.
• A deductive procedure is invoked in order to synthesize a concept (artifact) that is consistent with a set of
labeled examples. The idea is to formulate this synthesis problem as a decision problem where the concept
to be output is generated from the satisfying assignment.
2.2.3
Deductive Reasoning
The deductive engine, D, is a lightweight decision procedure that applies deductive reasoning to answer
queries generated in the synthesis or veriﬁcation process.
The word “lightweight” refers to the fact that the decision problem being solved by D must be easier, in
theoretical or practical terms, than that corresponding to the overall synthesis or veriﬁcation problem.
In theoretical terms, “lightweight” means that at least one of the following conditions must hold:
1. D must solve a problem that is a strict special case of the original.
2. One of the following two cases must hold:
(i) If the original (synthesis or veriﬁcation) problem is decidable, and the worst-case running time of the
best known procedure for the original problem is O(T(n)), then D must run in time o(T(n)).
(ii) If the original (synthesis or veriﬁcation) problem is undecidable, D must solve a decidable problem.
In practical terms, the notion of “lightweight” is fuzzier: intuitively, the class of problems addressed by D
must be “more easily solved in practice” than the original problem class. For example, D could be a ﬁnite-
state model checker that is invoked only on abstractions of the original system produced by, say, localization
abstraction [28] — it is lightweight if the abstractions are solved faster in practice than the original concrete
instance. Due to this fuzziness, it is preferable to deﬁne “lightweight” in theoretical terms whenever possible.
D can be used to answer queries generated by I, where the query is typically formulated as a decision
problem to be solved by D. Here are some examples of tasks D can perform and the corresponding decision
problems:
• Generating examples for the learning algorithm.
Decision problem: “does there exist an example satisfying the criterion of the learning algorithm?”
• Generating labels for examples selected by the learning algorithm.
Decision problem: “is L the label of this example?”
• Synthesizing candidate artifacts.
Decision problem: “does there exists an artifact consistent with the observed behaviors/examples?”
2.2.4
Discussion
We now make a few remarks on the formalization of sciduction introduced above.
In the above description of the structure hypothesis, H only “loosely” restricts the class of systems to
be synthesized, allowing the possibility that CH = CS. We argue that a tighter restriction is often desirable.
One important role of the structure hypothesis is to reduce the search space for synthesis, by restricting the
class of artifacts CS. For example, a structure hypothesis could be a way of codifying the form of human
6

insight to be provided to the synthesis process. Additionally, restricting CH also aids in inductive inference.
Fundamentally, the effectiveness of inductive inference (i.e., of I) is limited by the examples presented to it as
input; therefore, it is important not only to select examples carefully, but also for the inference to generalize
well beyond the presented examples. For this purpose, the structure hypothesis should place a strict restriction
on the search space, by which we mean that CH ⊊CS. The justiﬁcation for this stricter restriction comes from
the importance of inductive bias in machine learning. Inductive bias is the set of assumptions required to
deductively infer a concept from the inputs to the learning algorithm [38]. If one places no restriction on the
type of systems to be synthesized, the inductive inference engine I is unbiased; however, an unbiased learner
will learn an artifact that is consistent only with the provided examples, with no generalization to unseen
examples. As Mitchell [38] writes: “a learner that makes no a priori assumptions regarding the identity of
the target concept has no rational basis for classifying any unseen instances.” Given all these reasons, it is
desirable for the structure hypothesis H to be such that CH ⊊CS. This is the case in the three applications
demonstrated in Sections 3, 4, and 5.
Another point to note is that it is possible to use randomization in implementing I and D. For example, a
deductive decision procedure that uses randomization can generate a YES/NO answer with high probability.
Next, although we have deﬁned sciduction as combining a single inductive engine with a single deductive
engine, this is only for simplicity of the deﬁnition and poses no fundamental restriction. One can always view
multiple inductive (deductive) engines as a being contained in a single inductive (deductive) procedure where
this outer procedure passes its input to the appropriate “sub-engine” based on the type of input query.
Finally, in our deﬁnition of sciduction, we do not advocate any particular technique of combining inductive
and deductive reasoning. Indeed, we envisage that there are many ways to “conﬁgure” the combination
of H , D, and I, perhaps using inductive procedures within deductive engines and vice-versa. Any mode
of integrating H , I, and D that satisﬁes the requirements stated above on each of those three elements is
admissible. We expect that the particular requirements of each application will deﬁne the mode of integration
that works best for that application. We present illustrative examples in Sections 3, 4, and 5.
In Section 2.4, we discuss several examples of related work, to differentiate the sciductive approach from
other methods.
2.3
Soundness and Completeness Guarantees
It is highly desirable for veriﬁcation or synthesis procedures to provide soundness and completeness guaran-
tees. In this section, we discuss the form these guarantees take for a procedure based on sciduction.
A veriﬁer is said to be sound if, given an arbitrary problem instance ⟨S,E,Φ⟩, the veriﬁer outputs “YES”
only if S∥E |= Φ. The veriﬁer is said to be complete if it outputs “NO” when S∥E ̸|= Φ.
The deﬁnitions for synthesis are similar. A synthesis technique is sound if, given an arbitrary problem
instance ⟨E,Φ⟩, if it outputs S, then S∥E |= Φ. A synthesis technique is complete if, when there exists S such
that S∥E |= Φ, it outputs at least one such S.
Formally, for a veriﬁcation/synthesis procedure P, we denote the statement “P is sound” by sound(P).
Note that we can have probabilistic analogs of soundness and completeness. Informally, a veriﬁer is
probabilistically sound if it is sound with “high probability;” we will leave a more precise discussion of this
point to a later stage in this paper when it becomes relevant. In this section, we also use sound(P) to denote
probabilistic soundness.
2.3.1
Validity of the Structure Hypotheses
In sciduction, the existence of soundness and completeness guarantees depends on the validity of the structure
hypothesis. Informally, we say that the structure hypothesis H is valid if the artifact to be synthesized, if one
exists, is guaranteed to be an element of the class CH .
7

Let us elaborate on what we mean by the phrase “the artifact to be synthesized”:
• In the context of a synthesis problem, this is relatively easy: one seeks an element c of CS that satisﬁes a
speciﬁcation Φ. If Φ is available as a formal speciﬁcation, the above phrase is precisely deﬁned. However,
as noted earlier, one of the challenges with synthesis can be the absence of good formal speciﬁcations. In
such cases, we use Φ to denote a “golden” speciﬁcation that one would have in the ideal scenario.
• For veriﬁcation, there can be many artifacts to be synthesized, such as inductive invariants, abstractions, or
environment assumptions. Each such artifact is an element of a set CS. The “speciﬁcation” for each such
synthesis “sub-task”, generating a different kind of artifact, is different. For invariant generation, CS is the
set of candidate invariants, and the speciﬁcation is that the artifact c ∈CS be an inductive invariant of the
system S. For abstractions, CS deﬁnes the set of abstractions, and the speciﬁcation is that c ∈CS must be a
sound and precise abstraction with respect to the property to be veriﬁed, Φ; here “precise” means that no
spurious counterexamples will be generated. We will use Ψ to denote the cumulative speciﬁcation for all
synthesis sub-tasks in the veriﬁcation problem.
Thus, for both veriﬁcation and synthesis, the existence of an artifact to be synthesized can be expressed as the
following logical formula:
∃c ∈CS .c |= Ψ
where, for synthesis, Ψ = Φ, and, for veriﬁcation, Ψ denotes the cumulative speciﬁcation for the synthesis
sub-tasks, as discussed above.
Similarly, the existence of an artifact to be synthesized that additionally satisﬁes the structure hypothesis
H is written as:
∃c ∈CH .c |= Ψ
Given the above logical formulas, we deﬁne the statement “the structure hypothesis is valid” as the validity
of the logical formula valid(H ) given below:
valid(H ) ≜(∃c ∈CS .c |= Ψ) =⇒(∃c ∈CH .c |= Ψ)
(1)
In other words, if there exists an artifact to be synthesized (that satisﬁes the corresponding speciﬁcation Ψ),
then there exists one satisfying the structure hypothesis.
Note that valid(H ) is trivially valid if CH =CS. Indeed, one extremely effective technique in veriﬁcation,
counterexample-guided abstraction reﬁnement (CEGAR), can be seen as a form of sciduction where typically
CH = CS. (Sec. 2.4 has a more detailed discussion of the link between CEGAR and sciduction.) However, in
some cases, valid(H ) can be proved valid even without CH = CS; see Sec. 5 for an example.
2.3.2
Conditional Soundness
A veriﬁcation/synthesis procedure following the sciduction paradigm must satisfy a conditional soundness
guarantee: procedure P must be sound (or probabilistically sound) if the structure hypothesis is valid.
Without such a requirement, the sciductive procedure is a heuristic, best-effort veriﬁcation or synthesis
procedure. (It could be extremely useful, nonetheless.) With this requirement, we have a mechanism to
formalize the assumptions under which we obtain soundness — namely, the structure hypothesis.
More formally, the soundess requirement for a sciductive procedure P can be expressed as the following
logical expression:
valid(H ) =⇒sound(P)
(2)
Note that one must prove sound(P) under the assumption valid(H ), just like one proves unconditional
soundness. The point is that making a structure hypothesis can allow one to devise procedures and prove
soundness where previously this was difﬁcult or impossible.
Where completeness is also desirable, one can formulate a similar notion of conditional completeness.
We will mainly focus on soundness in this paper, since in our experience it is the more valuable property.
8

2.4
Comparison with Related Work
In both ancient and modern philosophy, there is a long history of arguments about the distinction between
induction and deduction and their relationship and relative importance. This literature, although very interest-
ing, is not directly relevant to the discussion in this paper.
Within computer science and engineering, the ﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) has long studied in-
ductive and deductive reasoning and their connections (see, e.g., [49]). As mentioned earlier, Mitchell [38]
describes how inductive inference can be formulated as a deduction problem where inductive bias is provided
as an additional input to the deductive engine. Inductive logic programming [40], an approach to machine
learning, blends induction and deduction by performing inference in ﬁrst-order theories using examples and
background knowledge. Combinations of inductive and deductive reasoning have also been explored for syn-
thesizing programs (plans) in AI; for example, the SSGP approach [19] generates plans by sampling examples,
generalizing from those samples, and then proving correctness of the generalization.
Our focus is on the use of combined inductive and deductive reasoning in formal veriﬁcation and synthesis.
While several techniques for veriﬁcation and synthesis combine subsets of induction, deduction, and structure
hypotheses, there are important distinctions between many of these and the sciduction approach. We present
below a representative sample of related work.
2.4.1
Closely Related Work
We ﬁrst survey prior work in veriﬁcation and synthesis that has provided inspiration for formulating the
sciductive approach. We note that many of these prior techniques can be formulated as instances of sciduction.
Indeed, sciduction can be seen as a “lens” through which one can view the common ideas amongst these
techniques so as to extend and apply them to new problem domains.
Counterexample-Guided Abstraction Reﬁnement (CEGAR).
In CEGAR [13], depicted in Fig. 3, an
abstract model is synthesized so as to eliminate spurious counterexamples. CEGAR solves a synthesis sub-
Generate 
Abstraction
Invoke 
Model 
Checker
Spurious 
Counterexample
Refine 
Abstraction 
Function
Abstraction 
Function
Done
Check 
Counterexample: 
Spurious?
Counter-
example
Design 
+Property
Abstract Model        
+ Property
New 
Abstraction 
Function
Done
Valid
YES
NO
Figure 3: Counterexample-guided abstraction reﬁnement (CEGAR).
task of generating abstract models that are sound (they contain all behaviors of the original system) and precise
(any counterexample for the abstract model is also a counterexample for the original system). The synthesized
artifact is thus the abstract model. One can view CEGAR as an instance of sciduction as follows:
9

• The abstract domain, which deﬁnes the form of the abstraction function and hence the abstract model, is the
structure hypothesis. For example, in verifying digital circuits, one might use localization abstraction [28],
in which abstract states are cubes over the state variables.
• The inductive engine I is an algorithm to learn a new abstraction function from a spurious counterexample.
Consider the case of localization abstraction. The traditional approach in CEGAR is to walk the lattice of
abstraction functions, from most abstract (hide all variables) to least abstract (the original system); this is
an instance of learning based on version spaces [38]. However, alternative learning algorithms (such as
induction on decision trees) can also be used, as demonstrated by Gupta [22].
• The deductive engine D, for ﬁnite-state model checking, comprises the model checker and a SAT solver.
The model checker is invoked on the abstract model to check the property of interest, while the SAT solver
is used to check if a counterexample is spurious.
As observed earlier, since the original system is a valid abstract model, CH = CS in the case of CEGAR. Thus,
the structure hypothesis is valid, and the notion of soundness reduces to the traditional notion.
Learning for Assume-Guarantee Reasoning and Compositional Veriﬁcation.
The use of learning algo-
rithms has been investigated extensively in the context of synthesizing environment assumptions for composi-
tional veriﬁcation. Most of these techniques are based on Angluin’s L∗algorithm and its variants; see [16] for
a recent collection of papers on this topic. These techniques are an instance of sciduction, similar to CEGAR,
in which typically no restrictive structure hypothesis is made (i.e., CH = CS). For example, for techniques that
target ﬁnite-state model checking, the synthesized environment assumptions can be any ﬁnite-state machine
that interfaces with the system. The L∗algorithm is a learning algorithm based on queries and counterexam-
ples. The counterexamples are generated by the model checker, which forms the deductive procedure in this
case. One possible restriction on the structure hypothesis would be to limit the input or output alphabets for
the learning algorithm.
Invariant Generation.
One of the important steps in veriﬁcation based on model checking or theorem prov-
ing is the construction of inductive invariants. (Here “inductive” refers to the use of mathematical induction.)
One often needs to strengthen the main safety property with auxiliary inductive invariants so as to succeed at
proving/disproving the property.
In recent years, an effective approach to generating inductive invariants is to assume that they have a
particular structural form, use simulation/testing to prune out candidates, and then use a SAT/SMT solver
or model checker to prove those candidates that remain. This is an instance of sciduction, and can be very
effective. For example, these strategies are implemented in the ABC veriﬁcation and synthesis system [8]
and described in part in Michael Case’s PhD thesis [11]. The structure hypothesis H deﬁnes the space of
candidate invariants as being either constants (literals), equivalences, implications, or in some cases, random
clauses or based on k-cuts in the and-inverter graph. The inductive inference engine is very rudimentary: it
just keeps all instances of invariants that match H and are consistent with simulation traces. The deductive
engine is a SAT solver. Clearly, in this case, the structure hypothesis is restrictive in that the procedure does
not seek to ﬁnd arbitrary forms of invariants. However, the veriﬁcation procedure is still sound, because if a
suitable inductive invariant is not found, one may fail to prove the property, but a buggy system will not be
deemed correct.
This idea has also been explored in software veriﬁcation, by combining the Daikon system [17] for gen-
erating likely program invariants from traces with deductive veriﬁcation systems such as ESC/Java [18].
Software Synthesis by Sketching.
Programming by sketching is a novel approach to synthesizing software
by encoding programmer insight in the form of a partial program, or “sketch” [56, 57, 55]. One of the
main algorithmic approaches to sketching can be viewed as an instance of sciduction. The partial program
10

imposes a structure hypothesis on the synthesis problem. An algorithmic approach central to this work is
counterexample-guided inductive synthesis (CEGIS) [57, 55], which operates in a manner similar to CEGAR.
The inductive and deductive procedures are just as those in CEGAR. Since CEGIS repeatedly calls a veriﬁer
in its main loop, it is effective for systems where the veriﬁcation problem is signiﬁcantly easier than the
synthesis problem for the same class of systems and speciﬁcations. For example, in the synthesis of ﬁnite
(bit-vector) loop-free programs [57], the veriﬁer solves SAT, whereas the synthesis problem is expressible as
a 2-QBF problem (satisﬁability of quantiﬁed Boolean formulas with one alternation).
Discussion.
Techniques such as CEGAR, CEGIS, learning-based compositional veriﬁcation, and dynamic
invariant generation have proved very successful and inﬂuential in their respective domains. However, the
reader may note that the problems addressed in Sections 3, 4, and 5 are all problems that are difﬁcult to tackle
using techniques such as CEGIS or CEGAR for the reasons described in Section 1 — the lack of a precise
speciﬁcation or environment model, or the high computational complexity of veriﬁcation that makes it difﬁcult
to repeatedly invoke a veriﬁer within a synthesis loop. Our goal at formalizing the notion of sciduction is to
provide a common framework to build upon existing successes, such as CEGAR, and go beyond the problems
addressed by these methods.
2.4.2
Other Related Work
We now highlight some other related work and their distinctions with sciduction.
Veriﬁcation-Driven Synthesis.
Srivastava et al. [59] have proposed a veriﬁcation-driven approach to syn-
thesis (called VS3), where programs with loops can be synthesized from a scaffold comprising of a logical
speciﬁcation of program functionality, and domain constraints and templates restricting the space of synthe-
sizable programs. The latter is a structure hypothesis. However, the approach is not sciduction since the
synthesis techniques employed are purely deductive in nature. More recently, Srivastava et al. [58] have
proposed a path-based inductive synthesis approach. An inverse of a program is synthesized by exploring a
carefully-chosen subset of that program’s paths — the inductive generalization is that the program synthesized
to yield the inverse for the chosen subset of paths is also deemed to yield the correct inverse for all other paths.
In contrast with sciduction, there is no guarantee that under a valid structure hypothesis, the synthesis routine
will yield the correct program, if one exists.
Boolean Satisﬁability (SAT) Solving.
Modern SAT solvers use the conﬂict-driven clause learning (CDCL)
approach [31]. In a CDCL SAT solver, whenever the solver explores a partial assignment that leads to a
conﬂict (i.e., the formula evaluates to false), it “learns” a new clause that captures a reason for that conﬂict.
This learned clause can exclude not only this falsifying partial assignment, but potentially also other similar
assignments. Thus, one can view CDCL SAT solving as using a subroutine (clause learning) that generalizes
from experiments, each experiment being a partial assignment explored by the SAT solver. However, note that
the form of generalization employed is not inductive. Clause learning is, in fact, a deductive procedure: using
the clause database as background facts, a particular CDCL clause learning strategy can be seen as a way
of applying the resolution proof rule to clauses involved in implications generated by the falsifying partial
assignment. Additionally, no structure hypothesis is made. Therefore, although there appear to be similarities
with sciduction, the CDCL approach to SAT solving also has important differences.
Program Analysis Using Relevance Heuristics.
McMillan [37] describes the idea of veriﬁcation based on
“relevance heuristics”, which is the notion that facts useful in proving special cases of the veriﬁcation problem
are likely to be useful in general. This idea is motivated by the similar approach taken in (CDCL) SAT solvers.
11

A concrete instance of this approach is interpolation-based model checking [36], where a proof of a special
case (e.g., the lack of an assertion failure down a certain program path) is used to generate facts relevant
to solving the general veriﬁcation problem (e.g., correctness along all program paths). Although this work
generalizes from special cases, the generalization is not inductive, and no structure hypothesis is involved.
Automata-Theoretic Synthesis from Linear Temporal Logic (LTL).
One of the classic approaches to
synthesis is the automata-theoretic approach for synthesizing a ﬁnite-state transducer (FST) from an LTL
speciﬁcation, pioneered by Pnueli and Rosner [42]. The approach is a purely deductive one, with a ﬁnal
step that involves solving an emptiness problem for tree automata. No structure hypothesis is made on the
FST being synthesized. Although advances have been made in the area of synthesis from LTL, for exam-
ple in special cases [41], some major challenges remain: (i) writing complete speciﬁcations is tedious and
error-prone, and (ii) the computational complexity for general LTL is doubly-exponential in the size of the
speciﬁcation. It would be interesting to explore if inductive techniques can be combined with existing de-
ductive automata-theoretic procedures to form an effective sciductive approach to some class of systems or
speciﬁcations.
3
Quantitative Analysis of Sofware
The analysis of quantitative properties, such as bounds on timing and power, is central to the design of reliable
embedded software and systems, such as those in automotive, avionics, and medical applications. Fundamen-
tally, such properties depend not only on program logic, but also on details of the program’s environment.
The environment includes many things — the processor, characteristics of the memory hierarchy, the operat-
ing system, the network, etc. Moreover, in contrast with many other veriﬁcation problems, the environment
must be modeled with a relatively high degree of precision. Most state-of-the-art approaches to worst-case
execution time (WCET) analysis require signiﬁcant manual modeling, which can be tedious, error-prone and
time consuming, even taking several months to create a model of a relatively simple microcontroller. See [50]
for a more detailed description of the challenges in quantitative analysis of software.
3.1
The Problem
For simplicity, we will consider the following representative timing analysis problem:
⟨TA⟩Given a terminating program P, its platform (environment) E, and a ﬁxed starting state of E, is the
execution time of P on E always at most τ?
If the execution time can exceed τ, it is desirable to obtain a test case (comprising a state of P) that shows how
the bound of τ is exceeded.
The main challenge in solving this problem, as noted earlier, is the generation of a model of the environ-
ment E. We illustrate this challenge brieﬂy using a toy example. The complexity of the timing analysis arises
from two dimensions of the problem: the path dimension, where one must ﬁnd the right computation path in
the task, and the state dimension, where one must ﬁnd the right (starting) environment state to run the task
from. Moreover, these two dimensions interact closely; for example, the choice of path can affect the impact
of the starting environment state.
Consider the toy C program in Fig. 4(a). It contains a loop, which executes at most once. Thus, the
control-ﬂow graph (CFG) of the program can be unrolled into a directed acyclic graph (DAG), as shown in
Fig. 4(b). Suppose we execute this program on a simple processor with an in-order pipeline and a data cache.
Consider executing this program from the state where the cache is empty. The ﬁnal statement of the program,
*x += 2, contains a load, a store, and an arithmetic operation. If the left-hand path is taken, the load will
12

flag != 0
flag != 0
flag=1; (*x)++;
(b) CFG unrolled to a DAG
*x += 2;
while(!flag) 
{
flag = 1;
(*x)++;
}
*x += 2;
flag == 0
(a) Original Program
Figure 4: Simple Illustrative Example
suffer a cache miss; however, if the right-hand path is taken, there is a cache hit. The difference in timing
between a cache hit and a miss can be an order of magnitude. Thus, the time taken by this statement depends
on the program path taken. However, if the program were executed from a state with the data in the cache,
there will be a cache hit even if the left-hand path is taken.
Thus, even with this toy program and a simple processor, one can observe that a timing analysis tool
must explore the space of all possible program paths and all possible environment states – both potentially
exponentially-large search spaces. Most WCET tools assume a known starting environment state, and attempt
to predict worst-case timing by inferring worst-case environment states at basic block boundaries. For this,
they must (i) model the platform precisely to predict timing at basic block boundaries, and (ii) search an
exponentially-large environment state space at these boundaries. If the starting environment state is unknown,
the problem is even harder!
We show in the next section that sciduction offers a promising approach to address this challenge of
environment modeling.
3.2
Our Approach: GAMETIME
Automatic inductive inference of models offers a way to mitigate the challenge of environment modeling. In
our approach, termed GAMETIME, a program-speciﬁc timing model of the platform is inferred from obser-
vations of the program’s timing that are automatically and systematically generated. The program-speciﬁcity
is an important difference from traditional approaches, which seek to manually construct a timing model that
works for all programs one might run on the platform. GAMETIME only requires one to run end-to-end
measurements on the target platform, making it easy to port to new platforms.
The central idea in GAMETIME is to view the platform as an adversary that controls the choice and
evolution of the environment state, while the tool has control of the program path space. The problem is then
a formulated as a game between the tool and the platform. GAMETIME uses a sciductive approach to solve
this game based on the following elements:
• Structure hypothesis: The platform E is modeled as an adversarial process that selects weights on the edges
of the control-ﬂow graph of the program P in two steps: ﬁrst, it selects the path-independent weights w,
and then the path-dependent component π. Formally, w cannot depend on the program path being executed,
whereas π is drawn from a distribution which is a function of that path. Both w and π are elements of Rm,
where m is the number of edges in the CFG after unrolling loops and inlining function calls. We term w as
13

the weight and π as the perturbation, and the structure hypothesis as the weight-perturbation model.
More speciﬁcally, one structure hypothesis H used by GAMETIME is to deﬁne a space of environment
models as a set of processes that select a pair (w,π) every time the program P runs, where additionally the
pair satisﬁes the following constraints (see [54] for details):
1. The mean perturbation along any path is bounded by a quantity µmax.
2. (for worst-case analysis) The worst-case path is the unique longest path by a speciﬁed margin ρ.
• Inductive inference: The inductive inference routine is a learning algorithm that operates in a game-
theoretic online setting. The task of this algorithm is to learn the (w,π) model from measurements. The
idea in GAMETIME is to measure execution times of P along so-called basis paths, choosing amongst these
basis paths uniformly at random over a number of trials. A (w,π) model is inferred from the end-to-end
measurements of program timing along each of the basis paths. See [54] for further details.
• Deductive reasoning: An SMT solver forms the deductive engine for GAMETIME. The basis paths con-
stitute the examples for the inductive learning algorithm. These examples are generated using SMT-based
test generation — from each candidate basis path, an SMT formula is generated such that the formula is
satisﬁable iff the path is feasible.
The GAMETIME approach, along with an exposition of theoretical and experimental results, including com-
parisons with other methods, is described in existing papers [53, 54, 52]. We only give a brief overview
here.
Figure 5 depicts the operation of GAMETIME. As shown in the top-left corner, the process begins with the
generation of the control-ﬂow graph (CFG) corresponding to the program, where all loops have been unrolled
to a maximum iteration bound, and all function calls have been inlined into the top-level function. The CFG
is assumed to have a single source node (entry point) and a single sink node (exit point); if not, dummy source
and sink nodes are added. The next step is a critical one, where a subset of program paths, called basis paths
are extracted. These basis paths are those that form a basis for the set of all paths, in the standard linear algebra
sense of a basis. A satisﬁability modulo theories (SMT) solver — the deductive engine — is invoked to ensure
that the generated basis paths are feasible. For each feasible basis path generated, the SMT solver generates
a test case that drives program execution down that path. Thus a set of feasible basis paths is generated that
spans the entire space of feasible program paths, along with the corresponding test cases.
PROGRAM
CONTROL-FLOW
GRAPH (DAG)
i1
i2
i3
PREDICT 
TIMING 
PROPERTIES 
(worst-case, 
distribution, etc.)
LEARNING 
ALGORITHM
i1
i2
i3
…
42
75
101
…
online
Generate Control-Flow 
Graph, Unroll Loops, Inline 
Functions, etc.
Extract FEASIBLE           
BASIS PATHS with 
corresponding Test Cases
SMT SOLVER
Compile Program 
for Platform
TEST 
SUITE
Measure timing on 
Test Suite directed by 
Learning Algorithm
Figure 5: GAMETIME overview
The program is then compiled for the target platform, and executed on these test cases. In the basic
GAMETIME algorithm (described in [53, 54]), the sequence of tests is randomized, with basis paths being
14

chosen uniformly at random to be executed. The overall execution time of the program is recorded for each
test case. From these end-to-end execution time measurements, GAMETIME’s learning algorithm generates
the (w,π) model that can then be used for timing analysis. In contrast with most existing tools for timing
analysis (see, e.g., [46]), GAMETIME can not only be used for WCET estimation, it can also be used to
predict execution time of arbitrary program paths, and certain execution time statistics (e.g., the distribution
of times). For example, to answer the problem ⟨TA⟩presented in the preceding section, GAMETIME would
predict the longest path, execute it to compute the corresponding timing τ∗, and compare that time with τ: if
τ∗≤τ, then GAMETIME returns “YES”, otherwise it returns “NO” along with the corresponding test case.
3.3
Guarantees and Results
Assuming the structure hypothesis holds, GAMETIME answers the timing analysis question ⟨TA⟩with high
probability. In other words, if the structure hypothesis is valid, GAMETIME is probabilistically sound and
complete in the following sense:
Given any δ > 0, if one runs a number of tests that is polynomial in ln 1
δ, µmax, and the program pa-
rameters, GAMETIME will report the correct YES/NO answer to Problem ⟨TA⟩with probability
at least 1−δ.
See the theorems in [53, 54] for details.
Experimental results indicate that in practice GAMETIME can accurately predict not only the worst-case
path (and thus the WCET) but also the distribution of execution times of a task from various starting envi-
ronment states. As a sample result, we used GAMETIME to estimate the distribution of execution times of a
modular exponentiation function function for an 8-bit exponent (256 program paths) by testing only (9) basis
paths. The experiments were performed for the StrongARM-1100 processor – which implements the ARM
instruction set with a 5-stage pipeline and both data and instruction caches – using the SimIt-ARM cycle-
accurate simulator [44]. Fig. 6 shows the predicted and actual distribution of execution times – we see that
 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
1580
1600
1620
1640
1660
1680
1700
1720
1740
1760
1780
1800
1820
1840
1860
1880
1900
Frequency
Execution time (cycle count)
Predicted and measured distributions of path lengths for modexp
Predicted distribution
Measured distribution
Figure 6: Actual (striped) and Predicted (shaded) Execution Times for Modular Exponentiation Code.
GAMETIME predicts the distribution perfectly. Also, GAMETIME correctly predicts the WCET (and produces
the corresponding test case: the 8-bit exponent is 255).
15

4
Component-Based Program Synthesis
Automatic synthesis of programs has long been one of the holy grails of software engineering. In this section,
we focus on a particular application of synthesis to program understanding — viz., program deobfuscation
with a focus on malicious programs. The need for deobfuscation techniques has arisen in recent years, espe-
cially due to an increase in the amount of malicious code (malware) that tends to be obfuscated [60]. Currently,
human experts use decompilers and manually reverse engineer the resulting code (see, e.g., [43]). Clearly,
this is a tedious task that could beneﬁt from automated tool support.
4.1
The Problem
Our idea is to view the malware deobfuscation problem as a program (re-)synthesis problem [23]. The focus is
on re-synthesizing fragments of the original malicious program where each such fragment, though it may con-
tain loops, is essentially equivalent to a loop-free program. The main challenge for this synthesis problem is
the lack of a good formal speciﬁcation — in fact, the only available “speciﬁcation” is the obfuscated malicious
program itself. This is not an ideal speciﬁcation to work with; not only might it contain maliciously-inserted
constructs that make static analysis and satisﬁability solving hard, its translation to a logical speciﬁcation is
likely to generate a large, complex formula.
Our approach to this problem is to view the obfuscated program as an I/O oracle that maps a given
program input (starting state) to the desired output (ending state).2 The problem is then to synthesize the
program using a small number of queries to the I/O oracle.
An important advantage of this I/O oracle view is that the complexity of the synthesis procedure (e.g., the
number of queries to the I/O oracle) required is a function of the intrinsic functionality of the program, not of
the syntactic obfuscations applied to it.
4.2
Our Approach
Our sciductive approach to this synthesis problem has the following ingredients:
• Structure Hypothesis: Programs are assumed to be loop-free compositions of components drawn from a
ﬁnite component library L. Each component in this library implements a programming construct that is
essentially a bit-vector circuit — the outputs are bit-vector functions of a set of input bit-vectors. Condi-
tional statements are allowed, but loops are disallowed. Thus, CH is the set of all programs that can be
synthesized as syntactically legal compositions of components from L.
• Inductive Inference: The inductive inference routine is an algorithm that learns a program from distinguish-
ing inputs — those inputs that can distinguish between non-equivalent programs in CH which are consistent
with past interaction with the I/O oracle. The inductive routine starts with one or more randomly chosen
inputs and their outputs obtained from the I/O oracle. On each iteration, the routine constructs an SMT
formula whose satisfying assignment yields a program consistent with all input-output examples seen so
far. It also queries the SMT solver for another such program which is semantically different from the ﬁrst,
as well as a distinguishing input that demonstrates this semantic difference. If no such alternative program
exists, the process terminates. Otherwise, the process is repeated until a semantically unique program is
obtained.
Our algorithm is motivated by the characterization of the optimal teaching sequence by Goldman and
Kearns [20]. In that paper, the authors introduce the concept of teaching dimension of a concept class as
the minimum number of examples a teacher (oracle) must reveal to uniquely identify any target concept
from that class. They show that the generation of an optimal teaching sequence of examples is equivalent
2This view of a speciﬁcation as an I/O oracle applies to many other contexts, including programming by demonstration and
end-user programming, where the I/O oracle may be a human user.
16

to a minimum set cover problem. In the set cover problem for a given target concept, the universe of ele-
ments is the set of all incorrect concepts (programs) and each set Si, corresponding to example xi, contains
concepts that are differentiated from the target concept by this example xi. Our algorithm computes such
a distinguishing example in each iteration, and terminates when it has computed a “set cover” that distin-
guishes the target concept from all other candidate concepts (the “universe”). In practice, our algorithm has
required only a small number of iterations, indicating that the deobfuscation examples we consider have
small teaching dimension.
• Deductive Reasoning: This engine is an SMT solver that performs two functions as noted above: (i) it
generates candidate programs consistent with generated input-output examples; and (ii) it generates new
inputs that distinguish between two non-equivalent programs in CH consistent with the generated input-
output examples.
The above instance of sciduction, although motivated by the malware deobfuscation problem, can be applied
in other program synthesis settings as well.
4.3
Theoretical Guarantees and Sample Results
The structure hypothesis is valid if the library of components deﬁnes a space of target programs CH containing
one that is equivalent to the obfuscated program. If the structure hypothesis is valid, the sciductive approach
sketched above and presented in [23] is sound. The program it generates is guaranteed to be the correct
program (equivalent to the obfuscated program we start with). See Theorem 4 in [23] for details.
If, however, the structure hypothesis is invalid, then our approach could either report that the problem is
unrealizable (i.e., there is no program synthesizable with the component library that matches the input-output
examples) or it could output a program that is consistent with all seen input-output examples, but which is not
the correct program. Figure 7 depicts the possible cases.
Library of components 
is sufficient ?
Correct 
program
I/O pairs show 
infeasibility ?
YES
Infeasibility 
reported
Incorrect 
program
YES
NO
NO
Figure 7: Theoretical Guarantees for Program Synthesis Technique.
In practice a range of heuristics are used to compute a sufﬁcient component library L. Figure 8 shows two
obfuscated programs and their deobfuscations computed using our approach. Both programs were deobfus-
cated in less than half a second.
5
Switching Logic Synthesis
Cyber-physical systems, which integrate physical dynamics and computational systems, are often conve-
niently modeled as multi-modal dynamical systems (MDSs). An MDS is a physical system (also known as a
“plant”) that can operate in different modes. The dynamics of the plant in each mode is known, and is usually
17

P1: Interchange the source and destination addresses.
interchangeObs(IPaddress* src, IPadress* dest)
{ *src = *src ˆ *dest;
if (*src == *src ˆ *dest)
{ *src = *src ˆ *dest;
if (*src == *src ˆ *dest)
{ *dest = *src ˆ *dest;
if (*dest == *src ˆ *dest)
{ *src = *dest ˆ *src;
return;
}
else
{ *src = *src ˆ *dest;
*dest = *src ˆ *dest;
return;
}
}
else
*src = *src ˆ *dest;
}
*dest = *src ˆ *dest;
*src = *src ˆ *dest;
return;
}
interchange(IPaddress* src, IPadress* dest)
{
*dest = *src ˆ *dest;
*src =
*src ˆ *dest;
*dest = *src ˆ *dest;
return;
}
P2: Multiply by 45
int multiply45Obs(int y)
{ a=1; b=0; z=1; c=0;
while(1) {
if (a == 0) {
if (b == 0) {
y=z+y; a =˜a; b=˜b;c=˜c;
if (˜c) break;
}
else {
z=z+y; a=˜a; b=˜b; c=˜c;
if (˜c) break;
}
}
else {
if (b == 0) { z=y<<2; a=˜a; }
else {
z=y << 3;
a=˜a; b=˜b;
}
}
}
return y;
}
multiply45(int y)
{
z = y << 2;
y = z + y;
z = y << 3;
y = z + y;
return y;
}
Figure 8: Some deobfuscation benchmarks presented in [23]. For both benchmarks (a) and (b), the original obfus-
cated program is shown at the top and the resynthesized program generated by our system at the bottom.
speciﬁed using a continuous-time model such as a system of ordinary differential equations (ODEs). How-
ever, to achieve safe and efﬁcient operation, it is typically necessary to switch between the different operating
modes using carefully construced switching logic: guards on transitions between modes. The MDS along
with its switching logic consitutes a hybrid system. Manually designing switching logic so as to ensure that
the hybrid system satisﬁes its speciﬁcation can be tricky and tedious.
While several techniques for switching logic synthesis have been proposed (see, e.g., [3, 62, 27, 35, 39,
15, 61]), it remains quite challenging to handle systems with a combination of rich discrete structure (in the
form of multiple modes) and complex non-linear dynamics within modes. We discuss one such representative
switching logic synthesis problem below.
18

5.1
The Problem
We consider the switching logic synthesis problem for safety. See [24] for formal deﬁnitions; an informal and
more intuitive presentation is made here. A safety property can be viewed as a subset of evaluations to the n
continuous state variables (i.e., a subset of Rn); each evaluation is a safe state. A hybrid system is safe from
a set of initial states if every reachable state is a safe state.
The problem of interest is as follows:
Given a safety property, a multimodal dynamical system (MDS), and a set of initial states, syn-
thesize switching logic for the MDS so that the resulting hybrid system is safe.
We impose no constraints on the intra-mode continuous dynamics in the MDS, other than it be deterministic
and locally Lipschitz at all points [24].
In this article, we model hybrid systems using the hybrid automaton formalism [1]. An example switching
logic synthesis problem is the 3-gear automatic transmission system depicted in Figure 9 [30]. This example
Neutral(N)
˙ω = 0
˙θ = 0
˙θ = ω
˙θ = ω
˙θ = ω
G1U
G2U
G3U
gN1U
g1ND
g12U
g23U
G1D
G2D
G3D
˙θ = ω
˙θ = ω
˙ω = η2(ω)d
˙ω = η1(ω)u
˙ω = η2(ω)u
˙ω = η3(ω)u
g22U
g33U
g32D
g21D
˙ω = η3(ω)d
g11U
g11D
g22D
g33D
˙θ = ω
˙ω = η1(ω)d
Figure 9: Automatic Transmission System
has seven modes. The transitions between modes are labeled with guard variables: gi j labels the transition
from Mode i to Mode j. Such a guard is termed an entry guard for Mode j and an exit guard for Mode i.
Note that for this example, the dynamics in each mode are non-linear differential equations. u and d
denote the throttle in accelerating and deaccelerating mode. The transmission efﬁciency η is ηi when the
system is in the ith gear, given by:
ηi = 0.99e−(ω−ai)2/64 +0.01
where a1 = 10,a2 = 20,a3 = 30 and ω is the speed. The distance covered is denoted by θ. The acceleration
in mode i is given by the product of the throttle and transmission efﬁciency.
For simplicity, suppose that u = 1 and d = −1. Also, let the initial state be θ = 0,ω = 0. Suppose that
the system must be designed to reach θ = θmax = 1700 with ω = 0. The synthesis problem is to ﬁnd the
guards between the modes such that the efﬁciency η is high for speeds greater than some threshold, that is,
ω ≥5 ⇒η ≥0.5. Also, ω must be less than an upper limit of 60. So, the safety property φS to be enforced
would be
(ω ≥5 ⇒η ≥0.5)∧(0 ≤ω ≤60)
We will additionally assume that we know an initial overapproximation of the guards. Since the speed must
reduce to 0 on reaching θmax, the guard g1ND is initialized to φS ∧θ = θmax ∧ω = 0. All the other guards are
initialized to 0 ≤ω ≤60. Clearly every switching state must be a safe state.
19

Note that for the class of hybrid automata with nonlinear dynamics within modes, even reachability anal-
ysis is undecidable. Synthesizing safe switching logic is therefore undecidable too, unless additional as-
sumptions are imposed. While we cannot expect to have a synthesis procedure that works in all cases, our
experience is that it is possible to develop an approach that handles many cases arising in practice.
5.2
Our Approach
We adopt once again a sciductive approach to the controller synthesis problem, with the following elements:
• Structure Hypothesis: The essence of the structure hypothesis is to impose a particular syntactic form on
the guards of the hybrid system: that the guards are hyperboxes. More precisely, the structure hypothesis
includes the following two properties:
1. The safe switching logic, if one exists, has all guards as n-dimensional hyperboxes with vertices lying
on a known discrete grid.3
2. For each mode, if all exit guards and all but one entry guard are ﬁxed as hyperboxes, then for the
remaining entry transition to that mode, the safe switching states constitute a hyperbox on the above-
mentioned discrete grid.
Since the set of initial states is also a particular kind of guard (on the “transition” that initializes the hybrid
system), the structure hypothesis will also apply to the set of initial states.
While the above structure hypothesis may not be valid for general multi-modal dynamical systems, it can
be proved valid under two additional properties: (i) the continuous dynamics within a mode is such that
state variables vary monotonically within a mode [24], and (ii) the discrete grid reﬂects the ﬁnite-precision
with which values of continuous system variables can be recorded.
To summarize, CH is the set of all hybrid automata in which the guards satisfy the above structure hypoth-
esis.
• Inductive Inference: This routine is an algorithm to learn hyperboxes in Rn from labeled examples. An
example is a point in Rn. Its label is positive if the point is inside the box, and negative otherwise.
More speciﬁc to our problem context, the learning problem is as follows. We are given a mode with its as-
sociated entry and exit guards. These guards are assumed to be overapproximate hyperboxes — the guards
of a safe switching logic, if one exists, are subsets of the corresponding overapproximate guards. Given an
entry guard, which could contain both safe and unsafe switching states, we want to infer a hyperbox that
contains only the safe switching states and none of the unsafe switching states.
If the structure hypothesis is valid, such an entry guard exists and our inductive inference routine can ﬁnd
it. The idea is to view safe switching states as positive examples and unsafe switching states as negative
examples. The diagonally opposite corners of this hyperbox can then be found using binary search from
the corners of the starting overapproximate hyperbox, assuming points in the hyperbox can be labeled as
safe/unsafe (positive/negative). The search terminates when we have found the lower and upper diagonal
corners as positive examples with their “immediate outer neighbours” as negative examples; for further
details, see the hyperbox learning problem discussed by Goldman and Kearns [20].
The positive/negative labels on states, required by the inductive routine, are generated by a deductive en-
gine, as described below.
• Deductive Reasoning: In order to label a switching state s for a mode m as safe or unsafe, we need a
procedure to answer the following question: if we enter m in state s and follow its dynamics, will the
trajectory visit only safe states until some exit guard becomes true?
3Recall that a hyperbox corresponds to a conjunction of interval constraints over the continuous variables. The requirement for the
vertices of the hyperbox to lie on a discrete grid is equivalent to requiring the constant terms in the hyperbox to be rational numbers
with known ﬁnite precision.
20

This is a reachability analysis problem for purely continuous systems modeled as a system of ordinary
differential equations (ODEs) with a single initial condition. This problem is known to be undecidable in
general [48].
However, in practice, this reachability problem can be solved for many kinds of continuous dynamical sys-
tems (including the intra-mode dynamics for the example shown in Fig. 9) using state-of-the-art techniques
for numerical simulation (see, e.g., [47]). Thus, the deductive engine in our sciductive approach is a nu-
merical simulator that can handle the dynamics in each mode of the multi-modal dynamical system. The
numerical simulator must be ideal, in that it must always return the correct YES/NO answer to the above
reachability question.
The reader might wonder why a numerical simulator is termed as a deductive engine. Indeed, on the
surface a numerical simulator seems quite different from a deductive theorem prover. However, on closer
inspection one ﬁnds that both procedures employ similar deductive reasoning: they both solve systems of
constraints using axioms about underlying theories or rules of inference, and they both involve the use of
rewrite and simpliﬁcation rules.
Our overall approach to switching logic synthesis for safety properties [24] operates within a ﬁxpoint com-
putation loop that initializes each guard with an overapproximate hyperbox, and then iteratively shrinks entry
guards using the hyperbox learning algorithm that selects states, queries the simulator for labels, and then
infers a smaller hyperbox from the resulting labeled states.
5.3
Theoretical Guarantees
If the structure hypothesis is valid and we have an ideal numerical simulator, our approach to switching
logic synthesis for safety properties [24] is sound and complete. This follows from three aspects: (i) the
initialization of each guard with an overapproximate hyperbox; (ii) the structure hypothesis that ensures that
the safe switching states in each iteration will form a hyperbox, and (iii) the learning algorithm that yields a
hyperbox for each guard at each iteration that excludes all negative examples (unsafe switching states) and
includes all positive examples (safe switching states).
However, if the structure hypothesis is not valid, or if the numerical simulator is non-ideal, then our
approach cannot be guaranteed to be sound or complete. For this reason, if one cannot prove or otherwise
reasonably assume the structure hypothesis to hold for the class of systems of interest, and the simulator to be
ideal, then one must separately formally verify that the synthesized system satisﬁes the safety property. The
numerical simulator could also be replaced by an alternative reachability oracle.
5.4
Sample Result
We present here a sample result obtained for the automatic transmission example of Fig. 9. Our procedure
combines learning hyperboxes (intervals, in this example) with a Matlab-based numerical simulator within an
overall ﬁxpoint computation loop. The outer loop starts with all guards set to the safety property φS (deﬁned
above) and iteratively shrinks each guard using the binary search-based inductive procedure described above.
The ﬁnal set of guards obtained after ﬁxpoint computation are as follows.
gN1U,g11U : 0 ≤ω ≤16.70
g12U,g22U : 13.29 ≤ω ≤26.70
g23U,g33U : 23.29 ≤ω ≤36.70 , g33D : 23.29 ≤ω ≤36.70
g32D,g22D : 13.29 ≤ω ≤26.70
g21D,g11D : 0 ≤ω ≤16.70 , ; g1ND : θ = θmax ∧ω = 0
(3)
21

0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
0.5
1
Efficiency
Time
 
 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
1000
20
40
Speed
Efficiency η
Speed ω
G1U
G2U
G3U
G3D
G2D
G1D
Figure 10: Transmission efﬁciency and speed with changing gears
Slightly modifying the safety property to require that the system spends at least 5 seconds in each of the
six gear modes, we obtain the following modiﬁed set of guards:
gN1U : ω = 0 , g11U : ω = 0
g1ND : θ = θmax ∧ω = 0 , g12U : 13.29 ≤ω ≤23.42
g11D : 1.31 ≤ω ≤16.70 , g23U : 26.70 ≤ω ≤33.42
g22D : ω = 26.70 , g33D : ω = 36.70
g32D : 16.58 ≤ω ≤26.70 , g33U : 23.29 ≤ω ≤33.42
g21D : 1.31 ≤ω ≤16.70 , g22U : 13.29 ≤ω = 23.42
(4)
The plot of the behavior of the transmission system when it is made to switch from Neutral mode through
the six gear modes and back to the Neutral mode is shown in Figure 10. The efﬁciency η is always greater
than 0.5 when the speed is higher than 5 and we spend atleast 5 seconds in the six gear modes. Starting from
θ = 0,ω = 0, the synthesized system reaches θ = θmax with ω = 0.
6
Conclusions and Future Directions
This paper posits that sciduction, a tight integration of induction and deduction with structure hypotheses,
is a promising approach to addressing challenging problems in formal veriﬁcation and synthesis. We have
demonstrated some initial results in this regard, summarized in Table 1.
We conclude with some thoughts on further work on the sciductive approach and its applications.
Structure Hypothesis Testing/Veriﬁcation.
Recall that the soundness guarantees of sciduction only hold
when the structure hypothesis is valid. A limitation of the current demonstrations of sciduction is that we
currently do not have a systematic and general approach for checking the validity of the structure hypothesis.
For example, in the program synthesis application of Sec. 4, how can we be sure that the library of components
is sufﬁcient to synthesize the program? As noted in Fig. 7, if the structure hypothesis does not hold, it
22

Application
H
I
D
Timing analysis
w+π model
Game-theoretic
SMT solving for
(Sec. 3)
& constraints
online learning
basis path generation
Program synthesis
Loop-free programs
Learning from
SMT solving for
(Sec. 4)
from component library
distinguishing inputs
input/program generation
Switching logic synthesis
Guards as
Hyperbox learning
Numerical simulation
(Sec. 5)
hyperboxes
from labeled points
as reachability oracle
Table 1: Three Demonstrated Applications of Sciduction. For each application, we brieﬂy describe the structure
hypothesis H , the inductive inference engine I, and the deductive procedure D.
is possible to output an incorrect program. In this case, testing the structure hypothesis requires checking
equivalence of the generated program against the speciﬁcation, which may be expensive. More effective and
generally-applicable methods for testing the structure hypothesis are required.
Integrating Induction and Deduction.
Sciduction offers ways to integrate inductive reasoning into deduc-
tive engines, and vice-versa. It is intruiging to consider if SAT and SMT solvers can beneﬁt from a sciductive
approach — for example, using inductive reasoning to guide the solver for speciﬁc families of SAT/SMT
formulas. Similarly, how can one effectively use deductive engines as oracles in learning algorithms? Are
there new concept learning problems that can be effectively solved using this approach?
New Applications.
An interesting direction is to take problems that have classically been addressed by
purely deductive methods and apply the sciductive approach to them. For example, consider the problem
of synthesis from LTL speciﬁcations. One practical challenge for this problem is in writing complete and
consistent speciﬁcations, of which the environment assumptions are a large part. In recent work, we have
demonstrated that environment assumptions can be mined from traces and counter-strategies [29]. It would
be interesting to see if the synthesis algorithms themselves can be made more scalable using sciduction.
Sciduction can be used in generating abstractions or inductive invariants for veriﬁcation. For example,
we have recently used a combination of induction on decision trees (see [38]) and SMT-based (“term-level”)
model checking using UCLID [10] to perform conditional term-level abstraction of hardware designs [7].
Much remains to be explored in this area.
Controller synthesis for hybrid systems also remains an important domain with several applications. We
have obtained some initial results on synthesizing switching logic for optimality, rather than just safety [25].
Another direction is to generalize the ideas used for timing analysis to other quantitative properties of
cyber-physical systems, and also for veriﬁcation problems at the hardware-software interface (“hardware-
software veriﬁcation”). In both settings, generating environment models can be quite challenging, and, from
our experience with timing analysis, it appears that sciduction can be effectively brought to bear on these
problems.
