MengeROS: a Crowd Simulation Tool for Autonomous Robot Navigation
Anoop Aroor1, Susan L. Epstein1,2 and Raj Korpan1
Department of Computer Science
The Graduate Center1 and Hunter College2 of The City University of New York
New York, NY 10065

Abstract
While effective navigation in large, crowded environments
is essential for an autonomous robot, preliminary testing
of algorithms to support it requires simulation across a
broad range of crowd scenarios. Most available simulation
tools provide either realistic crowds without robots or real-
istic robots without realistic crowds. This paper introduces
MengeROS, a 2-D simulator that realistically integrates mul-
tiple robots and crowds. MengeROS provides a broad range
of settings in which to test the capabilities and performance
of navigation algorithms designed for large crowded environ-
ments.
Robots are increasingly deployed in crowded indoor envi-
ronments, such as museums, shopping malls, and conference
centers (Tsui et al. 2011). Before such a deployment, the
robot’s navigation control must be tested extensively, partic-
ularly to prevent collision. It is challenging, however, to de-
sign and execute appropriate, large-scale, real-world testing
for robots across the broad range of crowd conditions that
arise in service areas. A shopping-mall crowd, for example,
varies with the time, the day of the week, and irregularly
scheduled events, and each permutation deﬁnes a different
test. A ﬂexible, accurate crowd simulator is thus essential
before a robot is deployed in a crowded environment. Such
a simulator can also support the evaluation of different navi-
gation algorithms under comparable crowd conditions. This
paper introduces a novel tool, MengeROS, that integrates a
ﬂexible, open-source crowd simulator called Menge (Curtis,
Best, and Manocha 2016) with ROS, the standard operating
system for robots that navigate.
Specialized robot simulators (e.g., Gazebo (Koenig and
Howard 2004) or Stage (Gerkey, Vaughan, and Howard
2003)) do not simulate realistic crowds. Moreover, most
crowd simulators (e.g., PedSim1, OpenSteer (Reynolds
1999), Menge, and Continuum (Treuille, Cooper, and
Popovi´c 2006)) do not simulate robots. Only two known
crowd simulators include robots: PedSim ros2, which is re-
stricted to one collision avoidance model, and a ROS version
of Continuum, which is not freely available for research.
Copyright c⃝2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1http://pedsim.silmaril.org
2https://github.com/srl-freiburg/pedsim ros
In contrast, MengeROS is a ﬂexible, open-source 2-D
crowd simulator. MengeROS is not meant to simulate so-
phisticated full-body human simulation such as gestures and
expressions, it is designed to facilitate research in multi-
robot path planning problems in large crowded environ-
ments. To the best of our knowledge, MengeROS is the only
open-source simulator that supports the movement of multi-
ple robots through a broad range of crowd scenarios.
The Menge Crowd Simulator
Menge’s crowd scenario includes a map of the environ-
ment’s static elements (e.g., walls, furniture), the number
of simulated people (pedestrians) in the crowd, their ini-
tial locations, along with one decision-making strategy and
one collision-avoidance strategy applied to all pedestrians.
Menge describes how each pedestrian determines its goals,
and how all of them select their next moves and avoid col-
lisions with one another. A location in Menge is either a
pair of coordinates (x,y) or a delineated area in the envi-
ronment (e.g., the kitchen). Goal selection speciﬁes a tar-
get sequence (locations to visit) for each pedestrian. Plan
computation speciﬁes how Menge calculates the next loca-
tion for all pedestrians as they move toward their targets.
Both implemented methods, A* and potential ﬁelds, gener-
ate and assign a velocity vector (direction and distance) to
each pedestrian. A* pursues an optimal shortest path; poten-
tial ﬁelds uses an attractor mechanism. Collision avoidance
adjusts each pedestrian’s intended velocity vector to prevent
collisions with the other pedestrians.
Menge currently has six collision avoidance models, out
of which four are based on social force model (Helbing and
Molnar 1995), where nearby objects or pedestrians attract or
repel a pedestrian, whose revised velocity vector reﬂects the
result of all those forces. Remaining two models, ORCA and
PedVO are based on velocity obstacles. The velocity obsta-
cle (VO) of a pedestrian is the set of all velocity vectors that
will result in collision. Collision-free motion requires that
every pedestrian have a velocity vector outside its VO. To
prevent livelock and ﬁnd an optimal solution, ORCA shares
this responsibility equally among all pedestrians. PedVO
adapts ORCA to behave more similarly to people.
In Menge, users can select among precoded options for
goal selection, plan computation, and collision avoidance, or
implement their own. As a result, Menge can simulate many
arXiv:1801.08823v1  [cs.RO]  26 Jan 2018

Figure 1: (top left) Aerial view of a simple world with 1
robot and 14 pedestrians. (top right) Robot range scanner
readings. (bottom) A trade show world with 1000 pedestri-
ans and 20 robots in a row at the lower right.
different kinds of crowd scenarios. This ﬂexibility is a sig-
niﬁcant improvement over earlier crowd simulators, which
hardcoded a single approach. Nonetheless, Menge is not
available through ROS and does not simulate robots.
MengeROS
A typical ROS-based robot navigation framework uses a
simulator node. This node accepts as input a velocity com-
mand in a ROS-speciﬁed format, and returns simulated sen-
sor readings (e.g., laser range scans) at a speciﬁed frequency.
To determine the robot’s motion, a controller node generates
velocity commands based on the most recent sensor reading
it has received from the simulator node.
MengeROS simulates both robots and pedestrians in a sin-
gle node. MengeROS controls pedestrian behavior just as
Menge does. It also allows multiple robots to be introduced,
each with its own external controller. A robot in MengeROS
executes the velocity commands received from its external
ROS controller. This is similar to the way other robot simu-
lators (e.g., Gazebo or Stage) interface with ROS. Pedestri-
ans avoid the robot and one another with the collision avoid-
ance option speciﬁed in the Menge control ﬁles. A robot,
however, is completely dependent on the external commands
from its own controller for collision avoidance.
MengeROS can simulate a laser scanner mounted on a
robot. The top of Figure 1 shows two aerial views of a simple
world. On the left is the ground truth, with 1 blue robot and
14 green pedestrians. On the right is the robot’s view when
it is located at the arrow’s tail and oriented toward its head.
Distances to obstacles are reported by a simulated laser with
a (conﬁgurable) 220◦ﬁeld of view with maximum (conﬁg-
urable) range of 25 meters. MengeROS returns the positions
of all pedestrians and robots in ROS-compatible format, for
use by all other ROS nodes.
Results and Discussion
MengeROS readily simulates large crowds, including 1000
pedestrians that move simultaneously in Menge’s complex
trade show environment, shown at the bottom of Figure 1.
Each decision cycle computes and assigns a new velocity
vector to every pedestrian. On an 8-core, 1.2 GHz worksta-
tion, 100 decision cycles without robots average 51ms each.
Because each robot’s range sensors must be processed sep-
arately, robots slow performance. This slowdown appears to
be linear in the number of robots. Average decision cycle
times with 5, 10, 15, and 20 robots were 437ms, 824ms,
1204ms and 1568ms, respectively.
Currently, MengeROS assumes that all robots are circu-
lar (with a conﬁgurable radius) and that the laser scan data
and the robot’s actions are noise-free. Future work will intro-
duce noise, simulate robots of different shapes, process data
from sensors other than range ﬁnders, reduce decision cycle
time, and introduce personalized human reactions to robots.
Code for MengeROS along with documentation, examples,
and demos are hosted on GitHub3.
Recent work to improve navigation in a crowded envi-
ronment utilized MengeROS to simulate robot movement
through up to 90 pedestrians (Aroor and Epstein 2017). In
this work, a robot learned a crowd density map of the moving
pedestrians from the simulated 2-D laser scan data. Multi-
ple simulations with MengeROS also allowed for easy com-
parison of traditional A* with the proposed method, CSA*,
which uses crowd density maps to improve navigation per-
formance.
In summary, robots in crowded indoor environments ex-
perience new challenges as their navigation algorithms con-
front dynamic obstacles. Research costs to develop algo-
rithms in realistic scenarios can be signiﬁcantly reduced by
simulation. MengeROS is an efﬁcient, ﬂexible and extensi-
ble new tool for such work. It builds on the Menge crowd
simulator, and allows robotics researchers to test their algo-
rithms in realistic crowds before deployment.
