Cluster-based Approach to Improve Affect Recognition from
Passively Sensed Data
Mawulolo K. Ameko1, Lihua Cai1, Mehdi Boukhechba1, Alexander Daros2,
Philip I. Chow3, Bethany A. Teachman2, Matthew S. Gerber1, Laura E. Barnes1
Abstract—Negative affect is a proxy for mental health in
adults. By being able to predict participants’ negative affect states
unobtrusively, researchers and clinicians will be better positioned
to deliver targeted, just-in-time mental health interventions via
mobile applications. This work attempts to personalize the
passive recognition of negative affect states via group-based
modeling of user behavior patterns captured from mobility,
communication, and activity patterns. Results show that group
models outperform generalized models in a dataset based on two
weeks of users’ daily lives.
I. INTRODUCTION
The extent to which individuals experience positive and
negative affect on a daily basis is associated with mental
health outcomes [1]. Higher levels of negative affect are asso-
ciated with increased vulnerability to many mental disorders,
including depression and anxiety disorders, two of the most
common types of mental disorders in U.S. adults [2]. Mental
health research typically relies on self-report questionnaires
that assess negative affect at a moment in time. Repeated
administration of these measures, such as in an ecological
momentary assessment (EMA) framework, is resource inten-
sive and susceptible to retrospective bias when participants
are asked to recall their mood over a previous duration [3].
Ideally, negative affect would be recognized without asking
participants, thereby reducing burden, improving compliance
among participants, and allowing for continuous modeling of
affect change. To aid recognition of negative affect, unobtru-
sive mobile sensing of location, texts and calls, and activity
levels could also be used to enrich the information provided
by participants’ responses to questionnaires assessing negative
affect and measures of mental health (e.g., social anxiety,
depression).
Current affect recognition approaches are based primarily
on generalized or individualized approaches [4]. In generalized
approaches, the recognition model learns global patterns that
the majority of participants followed during the experiment.
These patterns are then used for prediction. Since user be-
haviors vary substantially, generalized models may fail to
predict variations in affect for an individual person. In con-
trast, individualized models are designed to learn participants’
patterns on a case-by-case basis, thus they are expected to
be more accurate. However, individualized models require a
1Department of Systems and Information Engineering, University of Vir-
ginia, Charlottesville, VA 22904, USA
2Department of Psychology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA
22904, USA
3Department of Psychiatry and Neurobehavioral Sciences, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22904, USA
certain number of observations for each individual to obtain
robust prediction performance. In short-term studies involving
human subjects (e.g., two weeks), individual models may fail
to adequately capture individual affective patterns because of
a small pool of observations [5].
In our work, we propose a new group-based approach
that integrates generalized and personalized models. We ﬁrst
propose a method for clustering multimodal behavioral pro-
ﬁles that groups participants based on their mental states,
activity levels, communications, and mobility patterns. We
then apply several prediction algorithms to investigate whether
group models using multimodal user proﬁles outperform the
generalized or population-based model.
II. RELATED WORK
Smartphone usage can be used as an indirect marker of
mood. Passively sensed location information has been used
to predict depressive symptoms [6]. Individuals with higher
social anxiety levels were more likely to report negative affect
during the day, which in turn was predictive of spending more
time at home at subsequent measurements [7]. Self-reported
stress and mental health indices were also successfully pre-
dicted in a 10-week long study design in college students with
both passively and actively sensed data [8].
Prediction of affect from mobile sensing appears to be
more difﬁcult to replicate. In a feasibility study, LiKamWa et
al. [5] explored a personalized feature selection approach to
predict changes in mood from unobtrusively sensed indices of

GPS), and general mobile phone use (e.g., application use,
web browsing). The study relied on two months of data
collected from 32 participants. Results indicated high levels
of accuracy in predicting mood using personalized models.
The personalized modeling also produced better accuracy
compared to a generalized model using data from all users.
A follow-up study in which a personalized feature selec-
tion approach was used to predict affect ratings from 27
participants over 42 days found no clear beneﬁts of using
this approach [9]. However, these studies did differ in length,
participant variability (e.g., depressive symptoms), and unob-
trusive features assessed. It remains possible that personalized
feature selection requires an intensive level of data collection
that participants may perceive as burdensome. Given these
ﬁndings, we use an intermediate approach between general-
ized and personalized models to recognize affect in a given
situation.
arXiv:1802.00029v1  [cs.HC]  31 Jan 2018

III. STUDY DESIGN
Sixty-ﬁve undergraduate students were recruited for a two-
week study period to understand dynamics of emotional, cog-
nitive, and interpersonal processes associated with depression
and social anxiety. University students provide a relatively
homogeneous sample in terms of life phase and common
psychological stressors, thereby mitigating the impact of a
wide variety of potential nuance factors. Pre-study surveys
were given to the students at enrollment, and one of these
surveys measured students’ social anxiety (SIAS) [10]. The
study contained an ecological momentary assessment (EMA)
phase that requests self-report data on psychological affect
throughout the day. A customized mobile app (Sensus) [11]
was installed on participants’ personal Android smartphones
and was programmed to deliver 6 EMAs throughout the
day (each survey contained 12 questions), randomly scheduled
in each 2-hour block from 9 a.m. to 9 p.m. (e.g., once between
9-11 a.m., once between 11 a.m.-1 p.m., etc.). Sensus was
also conﬁgured to deliver an end-of-day survey at 10 p.m.
each day. Prompts concerning affect ﬁrst asked participants
to rate how positive they were feeling from 1 (not at all)
to 100 (very positive). The second question asked participants
to rate how negative they were feeling from 1 (not at all)
to 100 (very positive). In addition to these active assessments,
Sensus also passively collected GPS coordinates every 150
seconds and accelerometer data at 1 Hz, in addition to call
and text logs. All data were transmitted wirelessly to a secure
Amazon Web Services server, where data were stored for
further analysis (see Figure 1).
Fig. 1. Passive and affect data collection using smartphones.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
A. Data Preprocessing
We ﬁrst processed participants’ raw GPS data into semantic
locations (e.g., leisure, education, and home) by combining a
spatiotemporal clustering algorithm [12] and OpenStreetMap
(OSM) geodatabase
[13]. Our label taxonomy includes the
following types: Education (e.g., university and libraries),
Leisure (e.g., restaurants and cinemas), Out of town, In transi-
tion (e.g., going from one place to another), Home, and Other
houses. Our algorithm has been trained to recognize Home as
the place having a house OSM-tag (e.g., apartment, dormitory,
house, etc. See [13] for more details about OSM tags) where
a subject stayed the most between 10 p.m. and 9 a.m.
For accelerometer data, we used statistical measures (mean,
minimum, maximum, standard deviation, median and vari-
ance) on the 1-minute sliding window to extract several
features of phones’ motion around affect assessment moments.
These features aim to represent the physical activity levels of
the participants, and we used them to predict momentary neg-
ative affect. Note that our accelerometer features are extracted
from the magnitude of acceleration
q
x2+y2+z2
3
to make them
orientation free, since the phones were used in participants’
natural environments.
Individuals’ affect may be associated with the degree to
which they interact with others. Thus, we included commu-
nication events in our models. For each EMA we collected
the number of text messages and phone calls as long as their
duration overlapped with epochs prior to the EMA prompt.
Here we chose 1 hour prior to the EMA prompt as the time
window to record the number of text messages and phone
calls.
B. Proﬁling Users
After preprocessing the data, we clustered the participants
based on their behavioral proﬁles. There are different ways
to cluster participants. For instance, a clustering strategy can
be based on time spent at home to cluster people having
depressive symptoms, drawing on the hypothesized correlation
between home staying and affect ﬂuctuation patterns. The
following four passively sensed proﬁle features were used to
drive the clustering process.
1) Location: For location data, we considered ﬁve common
point-of-interest classes consisting of {‘out of town’, ‘educa-
tion’, ‘friends’ houses’, ‘home’, ‘leisure’}. Then we calculated
the proportion of time spent in each of these locations over
the study period for each participant.
2) Activity: From the accelerometer data, we chose thresh-
olds of 0.2 and 0.3 between the minimum and maximum to
deﬁne three levels of activity (e.g., {Low, Medium, High} in
acceleration). We chose these cutoffs based on the observed
distribution of the acceleration values. Then for each partic-
ipant, we calculated the proportion of time being in these
activity levels (e.g., proportion of time being in the high level).
3) Short-Message Service (SMS): From the SMS data,
we aggregated the number of text messages sent and
received
within
each
1-hour
window
during
the
study
period.
From
this,
we
deﬁned
5
text
messaging
lev-
els
based
on
text
message
frequencies
(e.g.,
‘Very-
Low’,‘Low’,‘Medium’,‘High’,‘VeryHigh’) with intermediary
cutoffs at 1, 10, 20 and 30 messages per hour based on their
observed distribution.
4) Phone Calls: Similarly, we computed the proportion
of calls occurring at each level of call activity deﬁned as
‘Low’,‘Medium’,‘High’,‘VeryHigh’ using thresholds of 1, 3
and 6 calls per 2-hour window. We used a 2-hour window
to accommodate the lower hourly frequency of phone calls
compared with text messages.

Formally, for the design matrix X
∈
RN×d
with
X = {xi}N
i , the feature vector for each participant is xi =
{xi1, xi2, · · · , xip1
|
{z
}
M1
, xi1, xi2, · · · , xip2
|
{z
}
M2
, · · · , xi1, xi2, · · · , xipn
|
{z
}
Mn
}.
Note that Mi (i ∈[1, n]) represents the ith modality and pi
the number of levels in the ith modality.
With the above, we determine different clusters based on
various combinations of these four passively sensed modalities
in addition to SIAS using the G-means (Gaussian Means) [14]
algorithm. The G-means algorithm is an extension of K-
means where number of clusters is automatically determined
by iteratively selecting k such that the data assigned to each
cluster follows a Gaussian distribution.
C. Predictive Models
We used 4 algorithms to test the predictability of negative
affect: Gaussian process, SVM, linear lasso, and random for-
est. Each of these models has merit with respect to the issues
that may ensue from constraints of data availability for model
training, which is the case in this study. Although random
forest, SVM, and Lasso regression are well-studied, Gaussian
processes have demonstrated promising performance in e-
health applications [15] mostly because they enable experts
to encode their beliefs about smoothness or periodicity using
covariance functions. In addition, the complexity of the model
is inherently regulated (see chapter 5 of [16]) and provides
uncertainty over predicted values. In our case, we used the
squared-exponential covariance function [16]:
K(x, x′) = θ2
sexp
−||x −x′||2
2θ2
ℓ

(1)
where θt = {θs, θℓ}, with θs and θℓbeing the hyperparameters
of the covariance function regulating the y-scale and x-scale,
respectively.
V. RESULTS
Figure 2 presents the performance of various clustering
strategies compared with generalized models using the pre-
dictive algorithms presented earlier. Before analyzing perfor-
mance, we will present a brief interpretation of each grouping
strategy. Using data from SMS, four groups were discovered as
presented in Table I. The group labeled freq are most actively
engaged with text messaging on their phones, while reg1 and
reg2 fall in the middle with reg2 being more frequent than
reg1. The most inactive group is labeled by infreq. In the
proﬁles learned using the phone call logs, two groups were
discovered: an active group and an inactive group in terms of
their phone call level distributions. Notice that for the majority
of time prior to EMAs, phone calls were rarely made by
our study participants, and thus we see high percentages in
the ‘low’ level. Using acceleration as a proxy to characterize
participants’ activity level, we found two: one active group
and one inactive group. Again notice that the differences in
the acceleration level distribution between the two learned
groups are minor and only relative between them. With respect
to locations, in the ﬁrst group, the participants split most of
TABLE I
CLUSTERING BASED ON COMMUNICATION, LOCATION, AND
ACCELERATION DATA USING G-MEANS CLUSTERING ALGORITHM.
Group Proﬁle (%)
Gp
Label
#Part
Low+ Low
Med
High
High+
SMS
1
reg1
22
80.5
16.8
2.0
0.5
0.2
2
reg2
12
68.6
25.9
4.3
0.7
0.4
3
infreq
9
93.7
5.9
0.3
0.1
0.0
4
freq
19
49.1
36.1
8.6
3.5
2.7
Call
1
inactive
54
89.5
9.1
1.3
0.1
2
active
8
65.7
29.2
4.4
0.7
Acc
0
active
25
83.1
4.6
12.3
1
inactive
37
91.2
2.7
6.1
Out
Edu
Friend Home Leisure
Loc
1
school-
home
34
2.0
49.2
4.4
38.7
5.8
2
school
18
3.0
83.0
2.7
4.9
6.5
3
out
10
20.9
43.7
8.3
9.3
17.8
their time between school and home; in the second group,
the participants spent over 80% of their time at school at
the expense of other places; and in the third group, the
participants spent the majority of their time away from home
(e.g., traveling out of town, visiting friends, and at leisure place
of interests).
We also used cutoffs of 34 and 43 in SIAS scores to
divide participants into low, medium, and high social anxiety
groups [17]. In total, we experimented with 10 grouping
approaches based on location, activity level, communica-
tions (SMS and phone calls), and SIAS scores as shown in
Figure 2. Speciﬁcally, DailyActivity applies a combination
of location, activity level, communications proﬁles; commu-
nication is based on the combination of phone calls and
SMS (re-grouped into active and inactive) producing three
groups (active in both SMS and calls, only active in either
SMS or calls, inactive in both SMS and calls).
From Figure 2, using most of the grouping strategies,
we were able to obtain better overall performance in lower
weighted RMSE in our group models when compared to the
generalized model. Speciﬁcally, our generalized models using
four different algorithms achieved a RMSE of 21.58 (random
forest), 22.05 (Gaussian processes), 21.87 (linear lasso),
and 22.31 (SVM), respectively. For each grouping strategy
on Gaussian processes model, we were able to obtain average
reductions
of
RMSE
0.8722
(Location),
0.6310
(ac-
tivity
level),
0.045
(SMS),
1.2330
(calls),
1.4505
(SIAS),
1.9268
(DailyActivity),
0.4264
(communica-
tion), 1.2675 (SIAS+communication), 2.1326 (All features -
communication), 1.9231 (All features - SIAS), respectively.
Note from Figure 2 that the DailyActivity grouping strategy
consistently performed better than most other grouping strate-
gies, and this strategy is also closest to the individual model
approach (65 individual models for 65 participants) because it
resulted in the most (25) subgroups among all these strategies,
thus we used it to further investigate whether there are any

Fig. 2.
The performance of each grouping strategy compared with the
generalized model’s performance (black horizontal line). The y-axis is the
weighted root mean square error (WRMSE). The error bars represent 2
standard deviations of each grouping strategy.
speciﬁc patterns with respect to sample size to guide future
design of group-level modeling approaches.
From Figure 3, we can see that there is a nonlinear relation-
ship between sample size of groups and their performances.
Groups with small sample size tend to perform either ex-
tremely poorly or extremely well. This signals potential weak
generalizability of proﬁling strategies that forms many small
groups. So the ideal situation will be to form groups with
proﬁling strategies that evenly distribute the samples across
different subgroups.
Fig. 3. The impact of sample size on the performance of groups formed by
DailyActivity strategy.
VI. CONCLUSION
The focus of the present investigation was to provide a
framework for accurately predicting negative affect from pas-
sively sensed data concurrent with individuals’ affect ratings.
Given that two weeks may be too short for algorithms to learn
personalized models, we developed a method for predicting
negative affect using a group-level approach. We ﬁrst clustered
participants using multimodal behavioral proﬁling, then we
predicted negative affect from passively sensed data. The
results indicate that proﬁling users based on their behavior
improves the performance of the predictive model compared to
generalized models. Future work will study the predictability
levels among the different groups using validated questionnaire
measures of personality and depression. The present study
contributes to a body of research that aims to use passively
sensed data to recognize user affect and launch interventions
when and where they are most needed.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was supported by the Hobby Postdoctoral and
Predoctoral Fellowships in Computational Science, and NIMH
R34MH106770 and NIMH R01MH113752 grants.
