Belief Approach for Social Networks
Salma Ben Dhaou, Mouloud Kharoune, Arnaud Martin and Boutheina Ben
Yaghlane
Abstract Nowadays, social networks became essential in information exchange be-
tween individuals. Indeed, as users of these networks, we can send messages to other
people according to the links connecting us. Moreover, given the large volume of
exchanged messages, detecting the true nature of the received message becomes a
challenge. For this purpose, it is interesting to consider this new tendency with rea-
soning under uncertainty by using the theory of belief functions. In this paper, we
tried to model a social network as being a network of fusion of information and de-
termine the true nature of the received message in a well-deﬁned node by proposing
a new model: the belief social network.
1 Introduction
Social networks appeared long before the birth of Internet. A social network can be
deﬁned as a group of persons or organizations connected between them by relations
and social exchanges which they maintain. However, with the evolution of connec-
tion rates and collaborative technologies which are continuously changing, Internet
provides access to new networks that are wider, and more playful social but also less
easily recognizable.
Furthermore, an important volume of incomplete and imperfect information are
spreading on the network. Therefore, the management of the uncertainty is funda-
mental in several domains, especially in social networks. In fact, belief functions
Salma Ben Dhaou

Mouloud Kharoune, Arnaud Martin

Boutheina Ben Yaghlane

1
arXiv:1501.04795v1  [cs.AI]  20 Jan 2015

2
Salma Ben Dhaou, Mouloud Kharoune, Arnaud Martin and Boutheina Ben Yaghlane
theory allows, not only the representation of the partial knowledge, but also the fu-
sion of information. In the case of social networks, this theory allows to attribute
mass functions to the nodes which represent, for example, persons, associations,
companies and places as well as links that can be friendly, family and professional
and on messages that can be of type for example: personal commercial, personal not
commercial, impersonal commercial and impersonal not commercial. Therefore, we
will have a global view on exchanges made on the network and this will lead us to
make a better decision.
In addition, by using uncertainty, we can better monitor the behaviour of the
social network. Thus, extending the work on the real plane, we can predict such a
terrorist act or assess the quality of a product or follow a buzz...
In this context, previous works have focused on models and methods devoted to
the analysis of social network data [12] [2] while others have interested in informa-
tion fusion in order to have a global information about the network [13].
The aim of this paper is to propose a new model, a belief social network which is
a network supplied by the masses. In fact, we attribute a mass function to the nodes,
edges and messages.
This paper is structured as follows. In section 2, we brieﬂy recall some concepts
related to the theory of belief functions. We propose in section 3 our model: the
belief social network. In section 4, we present the fusion of the masses on belief
social network. Finally, section 5 is devoted to illustrate the belief social network
and section 6 concludes the paper.
2 Basic concepts of belief functions
In this section, we will remind the basic concepts of the theory of belief functions
used to instrument our model, the belief social network. Let Ωbe a ﬁnite and ex-
haustive set whose elements are mutually exclusive, Ωis called a frame of dis-
cernment. A mass function is a mapping m : 2Ω→[0,1] such that ∑
X∈2Ω
m(X) = 1
and m(/0) = 0. The mass m(X) expresses the amount of belief that is allocated to
the subset X. In order to deal with the case of the open world where decisions are
not exhaustive, Smets [10] proposed the conjunctive combination rule. This rule as-
sumes that all sources are reliable and consistent. Considering two mass functions
m1 and m2 for all A ∈2Ω, this rule is deﬁned by:
m ∩
⃝(A) = ∑
B∩C=A
m1(B)∗m2(C)
(1)
We will also consider the normalized conjunctive rule, the Dempster rule, given
for two mass functions m1 and m2 for all x ∈2Ωby:
m⊕(A) =
m ∩
⃝(A)
1−m ∩
⃝(/0)
(2)

Belief Approach for Social Networks
3
The coarsening corresponds to a grouping together the events of a frame of dis-
cernment Θ to another frame compatible but which is more larger Ω[10, 11]. Let
Ωand Θ be two ﬁnite sets. The reﬁnement allows the obtaining of one frame of
discernment Ωfrom the set Θ by splitting some or all of its events [8].
In order to make a decision, we try to select the most likely hypothesis which
may be difﬁcult to realize directly with the basics of the theory of belief functions
where mass functions are given not only to singletons but also to subsets of hypoth-
esis. Some solutions exist to ensure the decision making within the theory of belief
functions. The best known is the pignistic probability proposed by the Transferable
Belief Model (TBM). Other criteria exists like the maximum of credibility and the
maximum of plausibility [1].
The TBM is based on two level mental models: The “credal level” where beliefs
are entertained and represented by belief function and the “pignistic level” where
beliefs are used to make decision and represented by probability functions called
the pignistic probabilities. When a decision must be made, beliefs held at the credal
level induce a probability measure at the pignistic measure denoted BetP [9]. The
link between these two functions is achieved by:
BetP(A) = ∑
B⊆Θ
|A∩B|
|B|
m(B)
1−m(/0),∀A ⊆Θ
(3)
To focus on the type of relationship between two different frames of discernment,
we may use the multi-valued mapping introduced by Hyun Lee [5]:
mΓ (Bj) =
∑
Γ (ei)=Bj
m(ei)
(4)
with ei ∈Ωand B j ⊆Θ. Therefore the function Γ is deﬁned as follow Γ : Ω→2Θ.
The vacuous extension, being a particular case of multi-valued mapping has the
objective to transfer the basic belief assignment of a frame of discernment Ωto-
wards the Cartesian product of frames of discernment Ω×Θ. The operation of
vacuous extension, noted ↑, is deﬁned by:
mΩ↑Ω×Θ(B) =

mΩ(A) if B = A×Θ
0
otherwise
(5)
The marginalization allows, from a basic belief assignment deﬁned on a space
produced to ﬁnd the basic belief assignment on one of the frames of discernment of
the produced space. This operation, noted ↓is deﬁned by:
mΩ×Θ↓Ω(A) = ∑
B⊆Ω×Θ
mΩ×Θ(B)
∀A ⊆Ω
(6)
where A is the result of the projection of B on Ω.

4
Salma Ben Dhaou, Mouloud Kharoune, Arnaud Martin and Boutheina Ben Yaghlane
3 Belief Social Network
Several works have focused on the representation of networks with graphs. A clas-
sical graph is represented by G = {V;E} with: V a set of type’s nodes and E a set of
type’s edges. This representation does not take into account the uncertainty of the
nodes and edges.
In fact, graphical models combine the graph theory with any theory dealing with
uncertainty like probability [6], [3] or possibility or theory of belief functions to
provide a general framework for an intuitive and a clear graphical representation of
real-world problems [4]. The propagation of messages in networks has been mod-
elled using the theory of belief functions combined with other theories such as hid-
den Markov chains [7].
In this context, we introduce our model: the belief social network which has the
role of representing a social network using the theory of belief functions. Indeed,
we will associate to each node, link and message an a priori mass and observe the
interaction in the network to determine the mass of the message obtained in a well-
deﬁned node. To do this, we consider an evidential graph G = {V b;Eb} with: V b a
set of nodes and Eb a set of edges. We attribute to every node i of V b a mass mΩN
i
deﬁned on the frame of discernment ΩN of the nodes. Moreover, we attribute also
to every edge (i, j) of Eb a mass mΩL
ij deﬁned on the frame of discernment ΩL of the
edges. Therefore, we have:
V b = {Vi,mΩN
i
}
(7)
and
Eb = {(V b
i ,V b
j ),mΩL
ij }
(8)
This evidential graph structure is given by Fig 1. In social network, we can have for
example the frame of the nodes given by the classes Person, Company, Association
and Place. The frame of discernment of the edges can be Friendly, Professional or
Family. Moreover we note: ΩN = {ωn1,...,ωnN} and ΩL = {ωl1,...,ωnL}.
In social network, many messages can transit in the network. They can be cate-
gorized as commercial, personal, and so on.The class of the message is also full of
uncertainty. Therefore to each message, we add a mass function in the considered
frame of discernment ΩMess = {ωM1,...,ωMk}.
4 Fusion of masses on belief social network
In social network, we can receive the same information from different users. But,
can we have the conﬁdence to this information? Moreover, the information can be
contradictory. We propose here to take into account the structure of belief social
network presented in the previous section to analyse the messages received by one
node.

Belief Approach for Social Networks
5
Fig. 1: Evidential graph structure for social network.
In order to integrate the belief on the nodes and on the edges, we ﬁrst make a
vacuous extension on ΩN ×ΩL for each mass for the nodes of V b and on each mass
for the edge of Eb. Therefore, we obtain on each node V b
i a mass: mΩN×ΩL
i
and
on each edge Ei j = (V b
i ,V b
j ) between the nodes V b
i and V b
j a mass: mΩN×ΩL
ij
. If we
consider a coming message from the node V b
i to the node V b
j through the edge Eij,
the belief of the network mΩN×ΩL
R
is given by the mass function on the node Vi and
the edge Ei j:
mΩN×ΩL
R
= mΩN↑ΩN×ΩL
Vi
⊕mΩL↑ΩN×ΩL
Eij
(9)
Here, the index R denotes the resulted belief network from the nodes and the link
between them regardless of the message.
We use the multi-valued operation to combine mass functions on different frames
of discernment. In fact, a multi-valued mapping Γ describes a mapping function:
Γ : ΩN ×ΩL →ΩMess
(10)
We can calculate these equations by using the formula (4):
Γ : mΩMess
Γ
(Bj) =
∑
Γ (ei)=Bj
mΩN×ΩL(ei)
(11)
with ei ∈ΩN ×ΩL and B j ⊆ΩMess. From the function Γ , we can combine the mass
given by the network mΩMess
Γ
and the mass of the message to obtain the mass of the
message considering the network:
mΩMess
R
= mΩMess ∩
⃝mΩMess
Γ
(12)
Now, if we consider n messages coming from n different nodes V b
i1,...,V b
in to the
same node V b
j . We can merge the obtained results from the equation (12) for the n
nodes. The goal is to obtain a more precise information on an event describe by the

6
Salma Ben Dhaou, Mouloud Kharoune, Arnaud Martin and Boutheina Ben Yaghlane
n messages. We then take into account the local network mΩMess
Ri
of the node V b
j . A
local network is deﬁned as a branch of the global network composed of many nodes
linked to a same node, the connecting links and the received messages. For example,
we can have two nodes which send two messages simultaneously to a third node.
We obtain the mass of the global network mΩMess
GR
:
mΩMess
GR
= mΩMess
R1
∩
⃝mΩMess
R2
∩
⃝... ∩
⃝mΩMess
Rn
(13)
Then, we will be able to take a decision on the nature of the resulting message
with the pignistic probability using equation (3).
5 Illustrations
In this section, we will present various experiments conducted to validate our model.
We consider three frames of discernment of the nodes, the links and the messages:
ΩN = {Person,Company,Association,Place}, ΩL = {Friendly,Family,Prof.},
(Prof. for professional), ΩMess = {PC,PNC,IC,INC}, with PC for Personal Com-
mercial, PNC for Personal Not Commercial, IC for Impersonal Commercial and
INC for Impersonal Not Commercial. We used the passage function Γ given in Ta-
ble 1 which allows.
Γ
Person
Association Company
Place
Friendly
PNC
PNC ∪INC PC ∪IC INC ∪IC
Family
PNC ∪INC PNC ∪INC PC ∪IC INC ∪IC
Professional PNC ∪IC
IC
IC
IC
Table 1: Deﬁnition of the function Γ given the correspondences between ΩN ×ΩL
and ΩMess.
For the purposes of our model, we will evaluate three cases. For the ﬁrst one, we
consider a mass function associated to:
• a node with: mΩN(Person) = 0.75 and mΩN(ΩN) = 0.25
• a link with: mΩL(Friendly) = 0.75 and mΩL(ΩL) = 0.25
• a message with: mΩMess
1
(PNC) = 0.6 and mΩMess
1
(ΩMess) = 0.4
Following our proposed procedure, ﬁrst, we calculate the vacuous extension of mΩN
and mΩL on ΩN ×ΩL and we combine both mass functions. We obtain:

Belief Approach for Social Networks
7
mΩN×ΩL
R
({Person,Friendly}) = 0.5625
mΩN×ΩL
R
({Person,Friendly},{Person,Family},{Person,Prof.}) = 0.1875
mΩN×ΩL
R
({Person,Friendly},{Association,Friendly},
{Company,Friendly},{Place,Friendly}) = 0.1875
mΩN×ΩL
R
(ΩN ×ΩL) = 0.0625
(14)
Then, we use the Γ function to calculate the passage from ΩN × ΩL to ΩMess.
We obtain:
mΩMess
Γ
(PNC) = 0.5625
mΩMess
Γ
(ΩMess) = 0.4375
(15)
Then, we make the conjunctive combination of mΩMess
Γ
and mΩ
Mess:
mΩMess
R
(PNC) = 0.8250
mΩMess
R
(ΩMess) = 0.1750
(16)
Finally, to make a decision, we calculate the pignistic probability:
BetP(PC) = 0.0438
BetP(IC) = 0.0438
BetP(PNC) = 0.8687
BetP(INC) = 0.0438
(17)
If we consider the results, we note that the pignistic probability on Personal Not
Commercial is 0.8687. This pignistic probability was equal to 0.7 before considered
the network. Hence, we show that considering the network we can reinforce our
belief for a given message.
In the second case, we consider the same network, with the same masses mΩN
and mΩL, but we consider a mass function associated to a message with:
mΩMess
2
(PC) = 0.6 and mΩMess
2
(ΩMess) = 0.4
In this case the mass is on the Personal Commercial instead of Personal Non Com-
mercial. As the network is the same we obtain the same mass mΩN×ΩL
R
given by
equation (14) as before and also using the Γ function the same mass given by the
equation (15).
However the result of the conjunctive combination mΩMess
Γ
and mΩMess is now:
mΩMess
R
(/0) = 0.3375
mΩMess
R
(PC) = 0.2625
mΩMess
R
(PNC) = 0.2250
mΩMess
R
(ΩMess) = 0.1750
(18)

8
Salma Ben Dhaou, Mouloud Kharoune, Arnaud Martin and Boutheina Ben Yaghlane
In this case there is a conﬂict between the information of the network and the mes-
sage, therefore a mass come out the empty set. The pignistic probability gives:
BetP(PC) = 0.4623
BetP(IC) = 0.0660
BetP(PNC) = 0.4057
BetP(INC) = 0.0660
(19)
We note that in the ﬁrst example, the highest pignistic probability is associated
with the Personal Not Commercial message that had the larger mass function at the
beginning. While in the second example, we ﬁnd ourselves faced with almost equal
probability of Personal Not Commercial and Personal Commercial types where the
need for a second decision on the type of message received.
Now we consider the fusion of the two examples cited above that come on the
same node. We obtain the results given in Table 2. We note that by combining the
two examples, we get the message Personal Not Commercial that has the highest
pignistic probability.
Focal Mass
/0
0.5541
PNC 0.3694
PC
0.0459
ΩMess 0.0306
Message BetP
PC
0.1202
IC
0.0172
PNC
0.8455
INC
0.0172
Table 2: Fusion of the two examples: the mass function and the pignistic probability
Working on real data, we can assign the mass functions to the nodes, edges and
messages by evaluating certain parameters, for example, the type of contacts that
are related to the proﬁle in question as well as the type of publications produced
(case of facebook).
6 Conclusion
In this work we presented in the ﬁrst section a general introduction in which we
reviewed the notion of social networks and the interest of the proposed method to
respond to the expectations for reasoning under uncertainty. In the second section,
we brieﬂy introduced the basic concepts used in the theory of belief functions. Then
we focused on the introduction of our model and the different notation used. Indeed,
we treated step by step development of the construction of the graph. Finally, we
detailed the process of merging the information ﬂowing through the network. We
also showed how the process is carried out of the fusion and explained how we
can make a decision on the nature of the messages received by using the pignistic
probability. In fact, in many cases, we can take a new decision on the nature of the

Belief Approach for Social Networks
9
message received by a well-deﬁned node. This idea was explained in the second
example in the illustration part. In future work, we aim to represent the update of
the elements composing the network as well as to scale.
