A New Tensioning Method using Deep Reinforcement Learning for
Surgical Pattern Cutting
Thanh Nguyen1, Ngoc Duy Nguyen1, Fernando Bello2, Saeid Nahavandi1
1Institute for Intelligent Systems Research and Innovation, Deakin University, Australia
2Department of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College London, UK

Abstract
Surgeons normally need surgical scissors and tissue grippers to cut through a deformable surgical tissue. The
cutting accuracy depends on the skills to manipulate these two tools. Such skills are part of basic surgical skills
training as in the Fundamentals of Laparoscopic Surgery. The gripper is used to pinch a point on the surgical
sheet and pull the tissue to a certain direction to maintain the tension while the scissors cut through a trajectory.
As the surgical materials are deformable, it requires a comprehensive tensioning policy to yield appropriate
tensioning direction at each step of the cutting process. Automating a tensioning policy for a given cutting
trajectory will support not only the human surgeons but also the surgical robots to improve the cutting accuracy
and reliability. This paper presents a multiple pinch point approach to modelling an autonomous tensioning
planner based on a deep reinforcement learning algorithm. Experiments on a simulator show that the proposed
method is superior to existing methods in terms of both performance and robustness.
1
Introduction
Manipulation of soft tissues is among the problems of interests of many researchers in the surgical robotics ﬁeld [1-3].
Surgical scissors are an eﬃcient tool that is normally used to cut through soft tissues [4]. For deformable substances,
the deformation behaviours are highly nonlinear and thus present challenges for manipulation and precise cutting
[5]. Other surgical tools, e.g. robotic grippers [6, 7], are needed to pinch and tension the soft tissues to facilitate
the cutting. The tensioning direction and force need to be adjusted adaptively when cutting proceeds through a
predeﬁned trajectory [8, 9].
Surgical pattern cutting skill is one of the requirements for surgical residents, as listed in the Fundamentals
of Laparoscopic Surgery (FLS) training suite [10] and for robotic surgery, as included in the Fundamental Skills
of Robotic Surgery (FSRS) [11-13]. Automation of surgical tasks can be helpful as it mitigates surgeon load and
errors, reduces time, trauma and expenses. Diﬀerent levels of surgical automation have been studied broadly in the
literature [14-19].
Speciﬁcally, Shamaei et al. [20] introduced a teleoperated architecture that facilitates the cooperation between
human surgeon and autonomous robot to execute complicated laparoscopic surgical tasks. Human surgeon can
supervise and intervene the slave robot any time during the operation of surgical tasks. Findings from that study
showed the reduction of surgical time when having the collaboration between human and robot compared with
performance of a human operator alone. Osa et al. [21] introduced a framework to address two problems of surgical
automation in robotic surgery, including the online trajectory planning and the dynamic force control. By learning
both spatial motion and contact force simultaneously through leveraging demonstrations, the framework is able to
plan trajectory and control force in real time. Experiments with cutting soft tissue and tying knots showed the
robustness and stability of the framework under dynamic conditions.
Machine learning in general or reinforcement learning (RL) [22, 23] in particular has been involved in a number
of studies for automation of surgical tasks [24, 25]. The ability of RL to solve sequential decision-making problems
makes it suitable for automating complicated tasks [26]. Recent development of deep learning [27-29] has made RL as
a robust tool to deal with high-dimensional problems [30]. Chen et al. [31] combined programming by demonstration
and RL for motion control of ﬂexible manipulators in minimally invasive surgical performance. Experiments on tube
2019 IEEE International Conference on Industrial Technology (ICIT), Melbourne, Australia.
1
arXiv:1901.03327v1  [cs.RO]  10 Jan 2019

insertion in 2D space and circle following in 3D space showed the eﬀectiveness of the RL-based model. Recently, Baek
et al. [32] proposed the use of probabilistic roadmap and RL for optimal path planning in dynamic environment.
The method was able to perform resection automation of cholecystectomy by planning a path that avoids collisions
in a laparoscopic surgical robot system.
Notably, Thananjeyan et al. [9] investigated a method to learn the tensioning force using deep reinforcement
learning (DRL), namely trust region policy optimization (TRPO) [33] for soft tissue cutting [34]. The tensioning
problem is modelled as a Markov decision process where action set includes 1mm movements of the tensioning arm
in the 2D space. The proposed method is evaluated using a simulator that models a planar deformable sheet as
a rectangular mesh of point masses [35]. The performance of the proposed method and its competing models is
measured by computing the symmetric diﬀerence between the predeﬁned pattern and actual cut. The performance
obtained from the experiments on multilateral surgical pattern cutting in 2D orthotropic gauze is superior to those of
conventional models, e.g. ﬁxed tensioning and analytic tensioning. The method automatically learns the tensioning
policy by choosing a ﬁxed pinch point during the entire cutting process regardless of the cutting pattern complexity.
This approach has a disadvantage when the cutting pattern is complex as it requires multiple pinch points as cutting
proceeds.
In this study, we propose a multiple pinch point approach based on DRL to learn the tensioning policy eﬀectively
for surgical gauze cutting. Through this paper, we will analyse and highlight the advantages of our approach
compared to existing methods, i.e. no-tension, ﬁxed, analytic, and single pinch point DRL [9]. To facilitate the
unbiased comparisons, we use the same simulator as in [9] to model the deformable surgical gauze for experiments.
The next section describes in detail the deformable sheet simulator. Section 3 presents the proposed multiple pinch
point approach to tensioning policy learning using DRL. Experimental results and discussions are presented in
Section 4, followed by conclusions and future work in Section 5.
2
Deformable Sheet Simulator
We use a ﬁnite-element simulator to test the proposed algorithm and its competing methods, as with Thananjeyan
et al. [9]. The deformable gauze is modelled as a square planar sheet of mesh points whose locations comprise the
state of the gauze. When the gauze is tensioned at a pinch point, the mesh points are moved and therefore their
coordinates are observed as a new state of the sheet.
The sheet is initialized with equally spaced mesh points, deﬁned as P, and locations of these points are denoted
as P(G) in the global coordinate frame, Gx,y,z ⊂R3. Thus, the state of the sheet at time point t is deﬁned as P(G)
t
.
Movements of the tensioning arm are assumed to be within the Gx,y plane, and therefore the initial state of the
sheet P(G)
0
∈Gx,y. The state is then repeatedly updated through the simulation as:
P(G)
t+1 ←−sim(P(G)
t
)
(1)
To simulate the state of the sheet when tensioning, the location of each mesh point p ∈Z is updated at each
time step [9]:
pt+1 = αpt + δ(pt −pt−1)−P
(p′∈neightbors∧cut) τ(p′
t −pt) + Ft,
(2)
where α and δ are time-constant parameters that specify the rate at which the sheet reacts to an applied external
force Ft, τ is a spring constant, τ(p′
t −pt) is a model that characterizes the interactions between vertices [9]. Cutting
is modelled as removing the vertices on the trajectory from the mesh so that these vertices no longer aﬀect their
neighbors.
For a pinch point s ∈Z, the tensioning problem is speciﬁed as constraining location of this pinch point to a
position u ∈Gx,y,z : T =< s, u >. The tensioning policy π is deﬁned as:
π : P(G)
t
−→∆u
(3)
where δu = ut+1 −ut.
Fig. 1 exhibits the simulation sheets with four diﬀerent tensioning directions and the reaction of mesh points on
the tensioning. Tensioning is required to be adaptive to the deformation of the sheet at each time step of cutting
process. In this study, we present a multiple pinch point tensioning approach where the cutting contour is segmented,
and each pinch point is used for an individual segment to improve the cutting accuracy.
2

Fig. 1: Simulation of the deformable sheet for tensioning policy learning.
Fig. 2: The contour is separated into several segments and each segment is cut with a diﬀerent starting point (notch
point) [9].
3
Multiple Pinch Points DRL Tensioning Method
Cutting with scissors can only proceed in the pointing direction of the scissors. In some cases, scissors are required
to be rotated all 360◦degrees to complete a complex contour in a single cut. This may not be possible in cases of
robotic surgery where cutting arms are constrained to a rotation limit. Therefore, the cutting contours are normally
broken into several segments with each segment is cut with a diﬀerent starting point, namely a notch point (Fig. 2).
We ﬁrst divide the entire cutting trajectory into several segments and choose a suitable pinch point for each
segment. The ﬁnal number of pinch points is therefore equal to the number of segments. We then implement the
3

Fig. 3: Tensioning policy learning by deep RL algorithm with multiple pinch points.
TRPO algorithm to learn the tensioning policy for each segment based on the corresponding candidate pinch points.
Once this step is complete for every segment, we deploy a ﬁnal aggregate learning step to systematically choose
the best pinch point and its corresponding policy for each segment. This is to ensure the whole contour is cut
continuously with a smooth transition between segments. This is important because tensioning causes the movement
of vertices of the mesh and when each segment is treated separately, the termination point of the previously cut
segment need to be matched with a notch point of the next segment. Our approach is diagrammed in detail in Fig.
3.
3.1
Dynamic Multiple Pinch Point Selection
Selection of multiple pinch points for multiple segments for tensioning consists of four continuous steps outlined as
follows.
Step 1: Select candidate pinch points – We ﬁrst divide the contour into N diﬀerent segments based on local
minima and maxima using directional derivatives. We then list all candidate pinch points ∆satisfying the condition
that two arms of the robot (cutting and pinch arms) are not conﬂicting. These candidate pinch points are grouped
into N groups ∆i (i=1,2,...,N) (where N is the number of segments) with the following constraint. Given a trajectory
Ti of the i–th segment of the contour, a pinch point p in ∆can serve as a candidate for Ti if:
min{|p −tk||∀tk ∈Ti} ≤δ
(4)
where |a −b| denotes the Euclidean distance between points a and b, tk is a point belongs to segment Ti, and δ
denotes a distance threshold. In the simulation, we select δ=50 if a contour has more than 2 segments and δ=100 if
the contour has no more than 2 segments.
Step 2: Pruning pinch points – To improve the quality of selected pinch points, we prune the redundancy pinch
points as follows:
• All direct neighbors of a pinch point are removed.
• We randomly select 30 pinch points for each segment (10 pinch points if the number of segments is greater
than 2). This approach is more robust than the previous study [9] as we only select quality pinch points. It
means that we select pinch points that are close to the contour and we prevent multiple pinch points from
distributing in the same local area by pruning neighbor pinch points. Therefore, the selected pinch points are
uniformly distributed in all areas that are closest to the contour.
4

Step 3: Local training – Train a tensioning policy for each selected pinch point in each segment. This is only a
local training, i.e., the policy is trained for cutting only one individual segment. We modify the simulator so that
the training is conducted within a designated segment instead of the whole contour in the previous work [9]. This
approach signiﬁcantly reduces the total training time for all candidate pinch points.
Step 4: Find optimal set of pinch points – Find the best order of segments so that the cutting error is minimum.
Given a set of segments, there is an optimal order of cutting that minimizes the cutting error. We ﬁnd the best
order of segments by using brute-force search [36]. We go through all segment permutations and perform a cut for
each permutation. This is reasonable as the number of segments is normally limited. We assume there is no selected
pinch point during the cutting process. The best order will be selected.
Using that order, go through all possible permutations of candidate pinch points to perform the experiment
(cutting the entire contour), and select the permutation that provides the best score. We separate the training
and evaluate into two steps. This signiﬁcantly reduces the total time to ﬁnd the optimal pinch points because it is
impossible to train all permutations of selecting pinch points. Therefore, this approach is practical in real-world
application. For each pinch point, we have two possible actions: ﬁxed or tensioning. In this study, to reduce the
number of conﬁgurations, we only apply DRL tensioning for the last pinch point in a permutation while other pinch
points are kept with the ﬁxed action. For example, in a set of 4 pinch points (for a contour of 4 segments) of a
permutation, [p1, p2, p3, p4], p1, p2, p3 are ﬁxed pinch points, while p4 uses a DRL tensioning policy.
3.2
Tensioning Policy Learning with DRL
For unbiased comparisons with existing methods, we propose the use of TRPO algorithm to learn a policy for the
tensioning arm. The goal of learning is to minimize the cutting error between the desired contour and the actual cut
trajectory. The tensioning problem is modelled as a Markov decision process:
M =< S, A, ξ, R, T >,
(5)
where S is the state space, A is 1mm movement actions of the tensioning arm in the x and y directions, ξ is unknown
dynamics model, R is the reward structure and T is the ﬁxed time horizon. The robot is given zero reward at all
time steps except the last step where it receives a reward equivalent to symmetric diﬀerence between the marked
contour and the actual contour. The reinforcement learning policy πθ is learned to optimize the expected reward [9]:
R(θ) = E(st,at)∼πθ[PT
t=0 R(s, a)]
(6)
We use the TRPO implementation in the rllab framework [37] to optimize θ. The state space is conﬁgured as a
vector combining the time index of the trajectory t, the location of ﬁducial points selected randomly on the sheet
and the displacement vector from the original pinch point ut. The number of ﬁducial points chosen is 12 for our
experiments. This vector is assumed to represent the state of the sheet P(G)
t
at any time point t. A multi-layer
perceptron neural network is implemented to map the vector state to a movement action. The network includes two
hidden layers with 32 nodes in each layer.
4
Simulation Results and Discussions
4.1
Cutting Accuracy
We use 17 contour shapes with diﬀerent complexity levels as in [9] for cutting experiments for ease of comparisons.
Cutting accuracy is evaluated based on the symmetric diﬀerence between the actual cut contour and the desired
contour. We compare our method with four existing methods, including no-tensioning, ﬁxed, analytic and single
pinch point DRL [9]. Descriptions of these methods are below:
• No-Tensioning: Cutting proceeds with no assisted tension. The gauze is only suspended with clips at four
corners while being cut.
• Fixed Tensioning: The gauze is pinched at a ﬁxed point when cutting proceeds through the entire contour.
• Analytic Tensioning: The tension is planned based on the direction and magnitude of the error of the cutting
tool and the nearest point on the marked contour.
• Single Pinch Point DRL: A tensioning policy is learned based on DRL uses a single pinch point for the entire
contour. This method was proposed in [9].
5

Table 1: Experimental results of multiple pinch points DRL versus existing methods.
• Multiple Pinch Point DRL (MDRL): The contour is broken into several segments and each segment is cut
using a tensioning policy with a corresponding pinch point. This method is described in detail in Section 3.
The total time to ﬁnd the optimal policy using MDRL is reasonable and can be controlled by the parameter
δ, which is the distance threshold in Eq. (4). Depending on the number of segments, number of selected
pinch points, and the value of δ, the whole process takes 6 to 15 hours to ﬁnd the optimal set of pinch points.
Because we separate the training and evaluation into two steps, it is possible to accelerate the process by
scheduling them running in parallel.
We learn a policy by 20 iterations with a batch size of 500 for each contour shape. After training, each shape is
tested 20 times with the learned policy and the results in terms of average accuracy are reported. The simulation
results of ﬁve competing tensioning methods on 17 contours are presented in Table 1. The red dots on each shape
represent the optimal pinch points chosen by our algorithm. Each segment has a corresponding pinch point, which is
diﬀerent to the single pinch point method where the entire contour has only one pinch point. The no-tensioning
method is chosen as a baseline where its results are presented in terms of symmetric diﬀerence between marked
contour and actual cut contour. Results of other methods are reported as the improvement percentage against this
baseline method. The proposed MDRL outperforms all existing methods in terms of average accuracy. It achieves
6

Fig. 4: Average performance of four competing methods.
the improvement of 50.6% against the baseline method whilst the single pinch point DRL obtains the improvement
of 43.3%. The standard deviation of the MDRL method at 4.1 is smaller than that of the DRL method at 6.3.
This demonstrates that the proposed multiple pinch point method is more stable than the single pinch point DRL
method. The last four shapes demonstrate the equivalent performance between single pinch point DRL and multiple
pinch point DRL because there is only one segment is created for each of these contours. Therefore, there is only
one single pinch point is generated for the entire contour and thus our proposed method is diminished to the single
pinch point method.
Fig. 4 shows the graphical comparisons of four competing methods where MDRL dominates all other methods in
terms of average performance. On average, the analytic method is the worst performer while the single pinch point
DRL method is the most unstable method as its standard deviation is the greatest among the competing methods.
4.2
Robustness Testing
Learning an autonomous policy based on DRL using a simulation environment would be vulnerable to overﬁtting.
Thananjeyan et al. [9] checked the robustness of the single pinch point DRL tensioning method on diﬀerent resolutions
of the simulated sheet, which were characterized by the number of vertices representing the sheet. The test results
on six diﬀerent resolutions from 400 to 4000 vertices showed that policies on low resolutions can still yield good
performance and suggested the use of 625 (25x25) vertices to obtain the greatest cutting accuracy. Therefore, in this
study, we use this resolution setting, i.e. 25x25 vertices, to evaluate our algorithm and test the robustness of the
competing methods on varying process noise and gravity force.
Fig. 5: Robustness of tensioning methods to the process noise.
7

Fig. 6: Robustness of tensioning algorithms to the gravity force.
Diﬀerent noise levels are added into the mesh point update formula, i.e. Eq. (2), with the Gaussian noise N(0, δ)
is used for simulation. We run 10 trials for each of 10 values of δ. The eﬀect of noise on performance score of diﬀerent
methods applied on shape 11 is presented in Fig. 5. It is shown that the MDRL is superior to other methods in
terms of improvement over the no-tensioning method. This dominance demonstrates the robustness of the MDRL
against the process noise injected into the simulation environment.
We use f(t) = 2500 to learn tensioning policies for the single pinch point DRL and MDRL methods. All
competing methods are then tested on diﬀerent force magnitudes, ranging from 0 to 3800. The results in terms of
improvement over the no-tensioning method using shape 11 are presented in Fig. 6. Clearly, the proposed MDRL
method outperforms all other methods as it achieves the best performance over the entire testing range of gravity
force. The single pinch point DRL method is the second-best algorithm whilst the analytic tensioning technique is
completely dominated by the remaining methods.
5
Conclusions
This paper presents a dynamic multiple pinch point approach to learning eﬀectively a time-varying tensioning
policy based on DRL for cutting a deformable surgical tissue. The proposed MDRL algorithm has been tested on a
deformable sheet simulator and its performance has been compared to several existing methods. Simulation results
demonstrate the signiﬁcant superiority of our method against its competing methods. Diﬀerent process noise levels
and external gravity forces were added to the simulation environment to test the robustness of the proposed MDRL
method. Experimental results show that MDRL is robust to noise and external force and its robustness level is
superior to its competing methods. The current method has a disadvantage regarding the number of tensioning
directions, which limit at four in this study. A future work would be to increase the number of tensioning directions
to improve the cutting accuracy of robot. This would be a necessary natural extension because tensioning in practice
would extend to an arbitrary direction depending on the trajectory complexity and the deformation level of the
tissue.
