Tunneling Neural Perception and Logic Reasoning through
Abductive Learning
Wang-Zhou Dai†, Qiu-Ling Xu†, Yang Yu†, Zhi-Hua Zhou∗
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China
Abstract
Perception and reasoning are basic human abilities that are seamlessly connected as part of human
intelligence. However, in current machine learning systems, the perception and reasoning modules
are incompatible. Tasks requiring joint perception and reasoning ability are diﬃcult to accom-
plish autonomously and still demand human intervention. Inspired by the way language experts
decoded Mayan scripts by joining two abilities in an abductive manner, this paper proposes the
abductive learning framework. The framework learns perception and reasoning simultaneously
with the help of a trial-and-error abductive process. We present the Neural-Logical Machine as
an implementation of this novel learning framework. We demonstrate that—using human-like ab-
ductive learning—the machine learns from a small set of simple hand-written equations and then
generalises well to complex equations, a feat that is beyond the capability of state-of-the-art neu-
ral network models. The abductive learning framework explores a new direction for approaching
human-level learning ability.
Key words:
Machine Learning, logic, neural network, perception, abduction, reasoning
Mayan scripts were a complete mystery to modern humanity until its numerical systems and cal-
endars were ﬁrst successfully deciphered in the late 19th century. As described by historians, the
number recognition was derived from a handful of images that show mathematical regularity [16].
The decipherment was not trivial because the Mayan numerical system is vigesimal (base twenty),
totally diﬀerent from the decimal system currently in common use. The successful deciphering

†These authors contributed equally to this work
Preprint submitted for review
February 7, 2018
arXiv:1802.01173v2  [cs.AI]  6 Feb 2018

of Mayan numbers reﬂects two remarkable human intelligence capabilities: 1) visually perceiving
individual characters from images and 2) reasoning symbolically based on mathematical back-
ground knowledge during perception. These two abilities function at the same time and aﬀect
each other. Moreover, the two abilities are often joined subconsciously by humans, which is key
in many real-life learning problems.
Modern artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) systems exhibit both these abilities—but only in isolation.
Deep neural networks have achieved extraordinary performance levels in recognizing human
faces [44], objects [25, 43], and speech [13]; meanwhile, logic-based AI systems have achieved
human-level abilities in proving mathematical theorems [33, 5] and in performing inductive rea-
soning concerning relations [31]. However, recognition systems can hardly exploit complex domain
knowledge in symbolic forms, perceived information is diﬃcult to include in reasoning systems,
and a reasoning system usually requires semantic-level knowledge, which involves human in-
put [35].
Even in recent neural network models with enhanced memories [12], the ability to
focus on relations [36], and diﬀerentiable knowledge representations [14, 17, 10, 2], full logical
reasoning ability is still missing—as an example, consider the diﬃculties of understanding natural
language [19]. To glue together perception and reasoning, it is crucial to answer the question:
How should perception and reasoning aﬀect one another in a single system?
Mayan Hieroglyph Decipherment
In a quest for the answer, we return to the process by which Charles P. Bowditch deciphered
Mayan numbers, which were inscribed as the heads of gods (now known as head variants of num-
bers) [3]. Figure 1 illustrates this process. Figure 1(A) displays parts of three tablets discovered
at Palenque. The ﬁrst tablet (columns I—II) uses standard hieroglyphs to represent Mayan time
units, e.g., “Tun” (360 days) at II5 and as parts of the initials in row 2 on all three tablets.
Columns IV and VI draw the units in a totally diﬀerent way, but Bowditch conjectured that they
were identical to column II based on their positions. Moreover, although the Mayan numeral
system is vigesimal, the unit “Tun” is just 18 times its predecessor, “Winal” (row 6 in all the
even columns), making the decipherment even more diﬃcult. Bowditch veriﬁed this through
calculations and by evaluating the consistency of the relationships in these tablets. Then, he
started to decipher the numbers in column III. As illustrated in Figure 1(B), by mapping the
2

C. variated Mayan hieroglyphs of numbers
B. decipherment of column III by Charles P. Bowditch
A. initial series of tablets in the Temples at Palenque
ONE
EIGHT
NINE
Figure 1: Illustration of Mayan hieroglyph decipherment. (A) In rows 3—9, the odd columns represent
numbers and the even columns represent calendar time units. Column II shows the standard representations for the
units; columns IV and VI are identical unit representations but in diﬀerent drawings. Rows 1—2 are initials, rows
3—6 represent time spans, and rows 8—9 are dates computed from the time spans. The hieroglyphs marked by
boxes correspond to the numbers and units in the same colored boxes in subﬁgure (B). (B) Column 1 lists possible
interpretations from Column III of subﬁgure (A), and Column 2 lists the results calculated from the numbers in
Column 1. Bowditch ﬁrst identiﬁed the hieroglyphs at III4, III5, III7 and III9 in (A) and then conﬁrmed that III3
and III9 represent the same numbers. Initially, he abduced III3 as 9 based on his past experience with Mayan
calendars; however, that was impossible because the calculated results were inconsistent with the dates. Then,
he tried substituting those positions with numbers that have similar hieroglyphs. Finally, he conﬁrmed that the
interpretation “1.18.5.4.0 1 Ahau 13 Mac” (in the green box) should be correct. It is very unusual for 1 to be
attached to the unit in row 3, but its presence there is conﬁrmed by its consistency with subsequent passages in the
same tablet. (C) The highly varied character representations and unusual calendar system cause the decipherment
of Mayan hieroglyphs to require both sensitive vision and a logical mind. Credits: subﬁgure (A) is reproduced
from [42]; subﬁgures (B) and (C) are reproduced from [3].
3

hieroglyphs to diﬀerent numbers and checking whether these numbers were consistent under the
mathematical rules, Bowditch ﬁnally decoded the numbers and proved their correctness [3].
Bowditch’s decipherment of the Mayan hieroglyphs explicitly illustrates the key aspect of joint
visual perception and logical reasoning: in this case, a tunnel between perception and reasoning
was established through a trial-and-error process of the hieroglyphic interpretations as shown
in Column 1 in Figure 1(B). The trial step perceives, interprets the picture, and passes the
interpreted symbols for consistency checking, while the error step evaluates the consistency,
uses reasoning to ﬁnd errors in the interpretation, and provides error feedback to correct the
perception.
This problem-solving process was called “abduction” by Charles S. Peirce [34] and termed “retro-
production” by Herbert A. Simon [39]; it refers to the process of selectively inferring certain facts
and hypotheses that explain phenomena and observations based on background knowledge [30,
20]. In Bowditchs Mayan number decipherment, the background knowledge involved arithmetic
and some basic facts about Mayan calendars; the hypotheses involved a recognition model for
mapping hieroglyphs to meaningful symbols and a more complete understanding of the Mayan
calendar system. Finally, the validity of the hypotheses was ensured by trial-and-error searches
and consistency checks.
Overview of the Abductive Learning Framework
Inspired by the human abductive problem-solving process, we propose the Abductive Learning
framework to enable knowledge-involved joint perception and reasoning capability in machine
learning.
Generally, machine learning is a process that involves searching for an optimal model within a
large hypothesis space. Constraints are used to reduce the search space. Most of the machine
learning algorithms exploit constraints expressed explicitly through mathematical formulations.
However, as was the case with the domain knowledge used in Mayan language decipherment, many
complex constraints in real-world tasks take the form of symbolic rules. Moreover, such symbolic
knowledge can be incomplete or even inaccurate. Abductive Learning uses logical abduction [20]
to handle the imperfect symbolic inference problem. Given domain knowledge written as ﬁrst-
order logical rules, Abductive Learning can abduce multiple hypotheses as possible explanations
4

to observed facts, just as Bowditch made guesses about the unknown hieroglyphs based on his
knowledge of arithmetic and Mayan language during his “trial” steps.
To exploit domain knowledge written as ﬁrst-order logical rules, traditional logic-based AI uses
the rules to make logical inferences based on input logical groundings, which are logical facts
about the relations between objects in the domain. This, in fact, implicitly assumes the absolute
existence of both the objects and the relations. However, as Stuart Russell commented, “real
objects seldom wear unique identiﬁers or pre-announce their existence like the cast of a play” [35].
Therefore, abductive learning adopts neural perception to automatically abstract symbols from
data; then, the logic abduction is applied to the generalized results of neural perception.
The key to abductive learning is to discover how logical abduction and neural perception can be
trained together. More concretely, when a diﬀerentiable neural perception module is coupled to
a non-diﬀerentiable logical abduction module, learning system optimization becomes extremely
diﬃcult: the traditional gradient-based methods are inapplicable. In analogy to Bowditchs de-
cipherment, abductive learning combines the two functionalities using a heuristic trial-and-error
search approach.
Logical abduction, as a discrete reasoning system, can easily address a set of symbolic inputs. The
neural layers involved in perception should output symbols that make the symbolic hypotheses
consistent with each other. When the hypotheses are inconsistent, the logical abduction module
ﬁnds incorrect output from the neural perception module and corrects it. This process is exactly
the trial-and-error process that Bowditch followed in Figure 1(B). The corrections function as
the supervised signals to train the neural perception.
To verify the eﬀectiveness of abductive learning, we implemented a Neural Logical Machine (NLM)
as a demonstration of the abductive learning framework. The architecture of an NLM for classi-
fying handwritten equations is shown in Figure 2. The equations consist of sequential pictures
of characters, as in the examples shown in Figure 4. An equation is associated with a label
(positive or negative) that indicates whether the equation is correct or incorrect. A machine is
tasked with learning from a training set of labeled equations, and the trained model is expected
to predict future equations correctly. This task simulates Mayan hieroglyph decipherment: the
machine does not know the meaning of the character pictures or the calculation rules in advance.
5

perception 
neural layers 
perception 
neural layers 
perception 
neural layers 
perception 
neural layers 
perception 
neural layers 
decision
neural layers
logical layer
neural-logical tunnel
Prolog module
Positive
Negative
error
symbol C
revise B
symbol B
symbol C
symbol D
symbol C
revise A
revise D
A
B
C
Figure 2: The architecture of a neural-logical machine. (A) Perception neural layers (such as convolutional
layers) accomplish the perception task.
(B) The perception results are the input for the logical layer, which
consists of the neural-logical tunnel, Prolog module, and relational features. The Prolog module checks the input
consistency and produces relational features; the neural logical tunnel corrects the perception output based on
consistency with the hypotheses; and the relational features expose the logical process outcomes. (C) The decision
neural layers transform the relational features into the ﬁnal output.
Thus, this task demands the same ability as a human jointly utilizing perceptual and reasoning
abilities.
Deep neural networks have been demonstrated to have incomparable perception performance on
images [25]. Our implementation of NLM employs a convolutional neural network (CNN) [28] as
the perception neural layers. The CNN takes image pixels as input and is expected to output
the symbols in the image. The symbol output forms the input to the logical layer. To process
the symbols logically and eﬃciently, the core of the logical layer is a Prolog module. Prolog is
a powerful general-purpose logic programming language rooted in ﬁrst-order logic. A common
limitation of logic-based learning is its lack of ﬂexibility when dealing with the uncertainty (such
as noise and system errors) that exists in the real-world. Thus, we do not require the logical
layer to output the ﬁnal prediction directly.
Instead, the logical layer outputs the values of
some relational features that reﬂect the deductions made inside the Prolog module.
Finally,
the relational feature values are fed into the decision neural layers, which are implemented as
a fully-connected multilayer feedforward neural network. The decision neural layers handle the
uncertainty that exists between the logical outcomes and the labels.
The heuristic trial-and-error search is implemented using derivative-free optimization [47] in the
neural-logical tunnel. Although the logical layer can ﬁnd inconsistencies between the logic rules
and the perceived symbols, it cannot ﬁnd the positions of the incorrectly perceived symbols.
6

NLM employs a derivative-free optimization method [47] to intelligently guess the positions at
which the symbols appear incorrectly. For each guess, the Prolog module runs the abductive
logical programming (ALP) [21] process that abduces whether the correct symbols appear at the
indicated positions, making the logical hypotheses more consistent. We further accelerate the
NLM by feeding it only a sample of the available training data during each training iteration.
From a dataset sample, we can obtain only locally consistent hypotheses.
Finally, the NLM
transforms the locally consistent hypotheses into relational features using the propositionalization
technique [24].
As an analogy to human abductive problem-solving, NLM works as follows. Before training,
domain knowledge—written as a ﬁrst-order logic program—is provided to the Prolog module.
In our implementation, this background knowledge involves only the logic structure rules, as
shown in Figure 5. After training starts, a sample of the training data will be interpreted to
candidate primitive symbols pre-deﬁned in the neural-logical tunnel.
Because the perception
neural layer is initially a random network, the interpreted symbols are typically wrong and form
inconsistent hypotheses. The logical layer starts to revise the interpreted symbols and search
for the most consistent logical hypothesis in the training data sample.
The hypotheses are
stored as relational features in the logical layer, while the symbol revisions are used to train the
perception neural layer in a straightforward supervised manner. When the training of these two
subparts is complete (e.g., the perception layer converges or reaches an iteration limit), all the
training examples are processed again by the NLM to obtain their feature vectors with regard to
the abduced relational features. Finally, the decision neural layer is trained with these feature
vectors from the whole dataset. The decision neural layer learning process will automatically
ﬁlter ill-performing perception neural layer, hypotheses, and relational features. Moreover, due
to the high complexity of symbolic abduction, we adopt the curriculum learning paradigm for
training NLM (i.e., it begins learning from easier examples, and the diﬃculty of the learning
tasks is gradually increased [1].
Preliminaries
Logic Programming is a type of programming paradigm that is largely based on formal logic.
It is designed for symbolic computation and is especially well suited for solving problems that
involve objects and the relations between them [22].
7

One of the most widely used logic programming language is Prolog [4], which is designed based
on ﬁrst-order logic. A Prolog program consists of a set of logical facts and rules. For example,
the fact that “Adam is the father of Bob” can be written in Prolog as:
father(adam, bob).
Here the father is the name of a property, called as predicate; adam and bob are its arguments.
A Rule stating that “if father of B is A, then A is also a parent of B” can be written as:
parent(A, B) :- father(A, B).
Here the “:-” denotes logical implication; A and B are logical variables.
By using Selective Linear Deﬁnite (SLD) clause resolution [23], Prolog can perform ﬁrst-order
logical inferences. For example, given the above facts and rules as a logical program, the following
question could be asked of the Prolog system:
?- parent(X, bob).
Having access to the previously asserted fact, Prolog will answer:
X = adam.
However, if the query is:
?- parent(eve, bob).
Prolog will answer
false.
because the previous program does not specify any relation between eve and bob.
Owing to its comprehensibility and the power of performing ﬁrst-order logical inferences, logic
programming is widely used in symbolic AI systems such as expert systems [5], inductive logic
programming [31], abductive logic programming [21], and so on.
Derivative-free optimization, as a counterpart of gradient-based optimization methods, solves
optimization tasks without requiring the derivative information of the optimization function.
Instead, it uses sampling methods to draw samples from the solution space and learns a potential
region from which further samples will be drawn. Recent studies have shown that derivative-free
optimization algorithms can solve a range of sophisticated optimization functions at a guaranteed
level [32, 37, 47]. This work thus employs a state-of-the-art derivative-free optimization approach
to solve the raised non-diﬀerentiable functions.
8

Problem Setting
The input of abductive learning consists of a set of labeled training data X = {⟨x1, y1⟩, . . . , ⟨xn,
yn⟩} about target concept C and domain knowledge T, where xi ∈Rm is a raw feature space,
yi ∈{0, 1} is the label for xi on target concept C, and T is a logical theory expressed by a set of
ﬁrst-order logical formulas.
In contrast to ordinary statistical machine learning problems, the target concept C describes a
certain relationship between a set of primitive concepts P = {p1, . . . , pr} in the domain; thus, it
can hardly be directly induced from the raw feature space Rm using statistical models. Therefore,
learning the target concept requires symbolic reasoning based on the set of primitive concepts
P in the logical theory T. However, although the primitive concepts P are deﬁned in T, the
mapping of p(x) : Rm 7→P from the raw feature space to the primitive concepts is unknown.
Furthermore, the domain knowledge in T is incomplete, i.e., it is some missing logic formulas ∆C
that describe the relations between primitive concepts P that are required as complements to T
to deﬁne the target concept. The target output of abductive learning is to learn the mapping for
p(x) and the symbolic knowledge ∆C simultaneously from the data X, where p(x) and ∆C are
respectively called the perception model and the reasoning model in this paper.
For example, in the binary additive equation learning problem in Figure 4: X consists of images
of equations and their labels; T contains basic arithmetic knowledge but no speciﬁc calculation
rules for calculating “addition”; the primitive concepts of P are the digit and operator symbols
{0, 1, +, =}. The goal is to learn a perception model p mapping images to the symbols, and a rea-
soning model ∆C of addition rules for calculating “+” operations, such as arithmetic calculations
or logical exclusive-or operations.
Neural-Logical Machine Implementation
Abductive logic programming. Abduction refers to a reasoning process of forming a hypoth-
esis that explains given observed phenomena according to domain knowledge [34]. For example,
9

Logical Layer
Perception Neural Layer
[0,=,0,0,0]  [0,=,0,0,1]
Neural Logical Tunnel
[0,_,0,_,0]  [0,_,0,_,1]
[0,+,0,=,0]  [0,+,0,=,1]
[0,+,0,=,0]  [0,+,_,=,1]
[0,+,0,=,0]  [0,+,1,=,1]
P
P
Optimizer
Retrain
Figure 3: Example of using logical abduction to correct the perception layer. First, the perception neural
layer incorrectly interprets the two images of positive examples and feeds them to the neural logical tunnel (the
downward black arrows). Then, the logical layer ﬁnds them inconsistent (red arrows) and makes a request to the
derivative-free optimization to substitute some digits into blank variables (green arrows). Finally, the logical layer
successfully abduces a consistent interpretation for the two images (the blue arrow) and uses them as labels of the
two images to retrain the perception neural layer (the upward black arrow).
consider the following knowledge written as ﬁrst-order logical formulas:
wet grass :- rain last night.
(1)
wet grass :- sprinkler was on.
(2)
wet shoes :- wet grass.
(3)
false :- rain last night,sprinkler was on.
(4)
where the ﬁrst three formulas state the causes for grass and shoes being wet, and the last formula
speciﬁes that the given two conditions cannot be true at the same time. When an observation of
wet shoes is true, formula 3 is regarded as an explanation, indicating wet grass should also be
true. Continuing this process, both rain last night and sprinkler was on are other possible
explanations. If it is observed that no rain occurred last night, according to the constraint in
Formula 4, sprinkler was on would be the only explanation.
A declarative framework in Logic Programming that formalizes this process is Abductive Logic
Programming (ALP) [21]. In this framework, an abductive logic theory T is a triple (KB, A, IC),
where KB is a knowledge base of domain knowledge, A is a set of abducible predicates or
propositions, and IC is the integrity constraints of the theory. The logic program KB consists of
a set of ﬁrst-order logic formulas that describes the domain, including complete deﬁnitions for a
10

set of observable predicates or propositions, and a set of abducible predicates or propositions A
that have no deﬁnitive rules in T. For the above example, KB involves Formulas 1 to 3, A consists
of the two propositions without any deﬁnitive formula: {rain last night, sprinkler was on},
and Formula 4 is the integrity constraint. Formally, an abductive logic program can be deﬁned
as follows [21]:
Deﬁnition 1 Given an abductive logic theory T = (KB, A, IC), an abductive explanation for
observed data X, is a set, ∆, of ground abducibles of A, such that:
• KB ∪∆|= X
• KB ∪∆|= IC
• KB ∪∆is consistent.
where |= denotes the logical entailment relation.
Intuitively, the abductive explanation ∆serves as a hypothesis that explains how an observation
X could hold according to the logical theory T.
In the binary additive learning tasks shown in Figure 4, the abductive theory T contains a set of
ﬁrst-order logical rules for parsing symbol lists into equations and performing bitwise calculations,
as shown in Figure 5. Speciﬁcally, the components are listed as follows.
The domain knowledge KB ﬁrst contains rules for parsing a list of symbols to an equation. By
assuming that all the equations in the data have the form X+Y=Z, this piece of domain knowledge
can be expressed with a Prolog DCG formula:
eq --> digits,[+],digits,[=],digits.
(5)
where eq is a list of symbols such as [1,+,1,0,1,=,1,1,0], digits represents a list of digital
symbols, for example [0] and [1,0,0,1]. This parser can parse the list eq into a Prolog term
calc(X,Y,Z), where the variables correspond to the parsed digits.
To enable arithmetic calculation in logical layer, the domain knowledge KB also include certain
rules for calculating a parsed equation, e.g., calc(X,Y,Z). We implemented it using a bitwise
11

additive calculator with the following Prolog formula:
calc(X,Y,Z) :- op rules(R),bitwise calc(R,X,Y,Z).
(6)
where op rules is a predicate that declares a list of unknown bitwise operations as addition rules
that can be applied to bitwise calc to perform calculations.
One type of abducibles is the bitwise operations described with the predicate my op(D1,D2,
[D3]), which represents a bitwise addition rule D1+D2=D3. For example, a logical exclusive-or
operation can be deﬁned with a list of bitwise operations[my op(0,0,[0]),my op(1,0,[1]),
my op(0,1,1),my op(1,1,[0])], and the carry rule for arithmetic addition can be written
as my op(1,1,[1,0]). Note that these bitwise addition rules are not included in the domain
knowledge—they will be abduced as explanatory hypotheses for the training data during learn-
ing process.
Another type of abducibles involves the lists of symbols eq in Formula 5, which are the input to the
logic layer through the neural-logical tunnel. Typically, the original eq0=[l1,. . .,ls] interpreted
by initial perception model would contain mistakes and cause failures when attempting to abduce
consistent hypotheses. Therefore, the neural-logical tunnel will try to substitute some li with
a Prolog variable “ ” as blanks in the equation.
ALP will then abduce symbols that satisfy
the consistency constraints to ﬁll in these blanks. For example, when the perception model is
under-trained, the neural-logical tunnel is highly likely to receive an eq0=[1,1,1,1,1], i.e., the
perception model interprets the image of the equation as “11111”, which is deﬁnitely inconsistent
with any arithmetic rules. Observing that ALP cannot abduce a consistent hypothesis, the neural
logical tunnel will begin substituting some of the values in eq0 with blank Prolog variables,
e.g., eq1=[1, ,1, ,1]. Then, ALP can abduce a consistent hypothesis involving the additive
rulemy op(1,1,[1]) and eq′
1=[1,+,1,=,1]. Finally, the abduced eq′
1 can be used as a supervised
signal to train the perception model, helping it distinguish images of “+” and “=” from other
symbols. An example of this process is illustrated in Figure 3.
The abduced answer ∆contains hypotheses of the previous two abducibles (i.e., a list of my op
rules for the op rules predicate in Formula 6 as the reasoning model ∆C, and a list of (modiﬁed)
digit and operator symbols eq′ for retraining the perception model).
The integrity constraint IC simply addresses the consistency of the abduced hypotheses. For
12

example, the bitwise operations my op(1,0,[1]) and my op(1,0,[0]) cannot be valid bitwise
addition rules at the same time; my op(1,0,[0]) and eq′=[1,+,0,=,1] cannot be both be ab-
duced output as an explanatory hypothesis.
The observed fact X is the entire training dataset, which consists of all the images of equations and
the labels indicating their correctness. However, in ﬁrst-order logic, evaluating the consistency of
a set of formulas on given facts is NP-hard. Hence, during the abduction process it will be diﬃcult
to evaluate the consistency of an abduced hypothesis on the entire training set. Therefore, NLM
performs abduction on subsampled data over multiple iterations, where each subsample contains
only 5—10 equation images. The abduced locally consistent hypotheses in each subsample are
saved as relational features.
Optimization. The learning target of NLMs abduction is to ﬁnd a hypothesis ∆that maximizes
its consistency Con(∆, X) on a set of observed examples X = {x1, . . . , xn}. This objective can
be written as follows:
arg max
∆
Con(∆, X)
(7)
where the consistency Con(∆, X) is deﬁned by the size of the maximum consistent subset XC ⊆X
derived from ∆, which can be formalized as follows:
arg max
Xc⊆X
|Xc|
(8)
s.t.
KB ∧∆|= Xc.
P ∧∆|= IC.
where KB and IC are the domain knowledge and integrity constraints, respectively, deﬁned in
the abductive logic program of the logical layer. The optimization problem in objective 8 is a
subset-selection problem, which is also generally NP-hard. Therefore, we approximately solve
objectives 7 an 8 with greedy algorithms.
As shown in Figure 3, when the perception model is under-trained, the perceived symbols eq0
from X might contain mistakes, causing the abduction of suﬃciently consistent hypotheses to
fail. NLM tries to solve this problem by substituting some possibly incorrectly perceived symbols
in eq0 to blank variable “ ” and lets ALP abduce a symbol list eq′
1 that ensures a maximally
13

consistent ∆on dataset X; then, it retrains the perception model. The substitution vector can
be represented by S = {0, 1}l, where l is the length of the interpreted symbol list eq0 from X.
When Si = 1 then the i-th interpreted symbol in eq0 will be replaced with a blank variable
“ ”. When abducing hypotheses that are too far away from the perceived symbols and obtaining
trivial solutions, the number of substituted variables should be constrained. Thus, the objective
can be formalized as follows:
max
S∈{0,1}l max
∆(S)
Con(∆(S), X)
(9)
s.t.
∥S∥0 ≤k, k > 1.
where ∆(S) is a hypothesis abduced by ALP whose symbolic interpretations eq0 are modiﬁed
with the substitution vector S, and k is the limit on the number of modiﬁed perceived symbols.
In the experiments we set k = 2.
The optimization problem in 9 is a binary vector optimization problem in an extremely complex
hypothesis space, popular gradient-based optimization techniques can hardly be applied to this
scenario. Therefore, we adopt a derivative-free optimization technique, RACOS [47], to solve
it. RACOS is a randomized derivative-free optimization method implemented by a classiﬁcation
model that discriminates good solutions from bad ones, and it achieves good performance on
complex optimization problems.
Making decisions. The high complexity of the optimization objective in Equation 9 makes
it infeasible for the NLM to evaluate the entire training set X during optimization. Therefore,
NLM performs abduction and optimization for T times, using a small observed dataset Xt ⊆X
subsampled from the original dataset X each time. While the perception model p is iteratively
trained from t = 1 to T, the locally consistent reasoning model ∆t
C in each iteration cannot
be simply replaced or merged to construct the ﬁnal output reasoning model ∆C. Because the
training data in each iteration Xt ̸= X, there is no guarantee that ∆t
C will be consistent for
all training examples x ∈X. In fact, some sets of examples (such as the arithmetic equations
“1+10=11, 11+100=111”) can achieve maximum consistency using just one bitwise addition rule
my op(1,0,[1]), which results in an incomplete ∆t
C for deﬁning the target concept. Moreover,
when the perception model pt in the t-th turn is under-trained, ALP might abduce incorrect
bitwise addition rules.
14

To solve this problem, inspired by the propositionalization technique in Inductive Logic Program-
ming [24], we retain the reasoning models abduced in each iteration as a relational feature. Before
the perception model is well-trained, NLM uses a buﬀer that retains only the latest R-learned
∆t
C, and—based on their performances—some of these will be discarded during the training of
the decision neural layer.
When an equation xi is input into NLM, its symbolic interpretation eqt mapped by the perception
model will be evaluated by all the relational features to produce a binary vector ri = [ri1, . . . , riR],
where
rij =





1,
KB ∧∆j
C |= xi,
0,
KB ∧∆j
C ̸|= xi.
(10)
This vector of relational features transforms the original dataset X = {⟨xi, yi⟩} into a new dataset
X′ = {⟨ri, yi⟩}, from which a decision model is learned by the decision layer in Figure 2.
On one hand, the retained relational features are still ﬁrst-order logical rules serving as a reasoning
model with good human comprehensibility. On the other hand, using the propositionalization
technique in the decision learning process reduces the impact of the noise introduced by the
random subsampling of the training data.
Experiment: Handwritten Equations Decipherment
We constructed two image sets of symbols to build the equations shown in Figure 4. The Digital
Binary Additive (DBA) equations were created with images from benchmark handwritten char-
acter datasets [29, 46], while the Random Binary Additive (RBA) equations were constructed
from randomly selected character sets and shared isomorphic structure with the equations in the
DBA tasks. Each equation is input as a sequence of raw images of digits and operators. As an
analogy to the Mayan hieroglyph decipherment by historians, we provided NLM with background
domain knowledge of arithmetic structure rules as shown in Figure 5(A) and 5(B). Note that this
knowledge does not specify the type of calculation in the equations; instead, NLM needs to learn
that from the data. Examples appear in Figure 5.
In the NLM implemented for this task, the perception layers consist of a two-layer CNN and a two-
layer multiple-layer perceptron (MLP) followed by a softmax layer; the logical layer will abduce
15

A. samples of characters
B. samples of training equation sets
C. samples of test equations
Positive
Negative
Positive
Positive
Negative
Positive
DBA
RBA
DBA
RBA
DBA
RBA
equation instance
label
equation instance
label
equation instance
label
?
?
?
equation instance
label
?
?
?
Figure 4: Dataset illustrations. Our datasets are constructed from images of symbols (“0”, “1”, “+” and “=”).
(A) Samples of the two types of characters corresponding to those symbols: The Digital Binary Additive (DBA)
set and the Random Binary Additive (RBA) set. (B) Samples of training equation sets of length 5, where each
equation is associated with a label: positive or negative. A learning algorithm is required to learn from a set of
equations and their labels and then predict the labels of testing equations with diﬀerent lengths. (C) Samples of
test equations of length 17, where labels are not shown to the algorithms; the labels are used only to calculate the
accuracy of the predictions.
16

20 bitwise operations set as relational features; The decision neural layer is a two-layer MLP. We
test the learning performance of NLM by comparing it with the Bidirectional Long Short-Term
Memory network (BiLSTM) [15] and the Diﬀerentiable Neural Computer (DNC) [12], because
both are state-of-the-art benchmark models capable of solving tasks from sequential input such
as arithmetic equations. In particular, the DNC has shown its potential on symbolic computing
tasks [12] because it is associated with memory. To handle the image inputs, BiLSTM and DNC
also use a CNN as their input layers. The training data prepared for BiLSTM and DNC contains
equations with lengths from 5 to 26, but for NLM, we used only equations with lengths from 5
to 8, where each length contains 300 random sampled equations. In the testing stage, all the
methods are tasked with predicting 6,600 equations whose lengths range from 5 to 26, where each
length contains 300 examples.
Figure 6(A) shows that on both tasks, the NLMs signiﬁcantly outperform the compared methods
while using far fewer training equations with lengths of at most 8. All the methods performed
better on the DBA task than on the RBA task, because the symbol images in the DBA task are
more easily distinguished. The performance of BiLSTM and DNC degenerates quickly toward the
random-guess line as the length of the testing equations grows, while the performance of NLM
degenerates much more slowly and maintains an accuracy above 80%. These results verify that
NLM has learned the correct rules from the data. The logical layer beneﬁts considerably from
its ability to handle ﬁrst-order logic; thus, it naturally exploits the deﬁnitions of the symbolic
primitives and the background knowledge when solving the task.
Note that the background
knowledge exploited by NLM in this task involves no more than the logic structure rules, which
alone cannot deﬁne the target concept; however, only the symbolic rules must be learned from
data. The learned rules are shown in Figure 5(C). As a result, NLM generalizes well from the
training data distribution, exhibiting a learning ability closer to that of humans.
Inside the learning process of NLM, although no labels exist for the images of digits and opera-
tors, the perception accuracy did increase during the learning process, as shown by Figure 6(B).
The results veriﬁed that logic consistency can be very useful for providing a surrogate super-
vised signal and that, through logical abduction, NLM can correct incorrect neural perceptions.
Figure 6(C) shows the relationship between the overall equation classiﬁcation accuracy and the
image perception accuracy during NLM training on the RBA tasks, where each dot in the ﬁgure
represents a trial of abducing a consistent hypothesis from a subsample of equations; the red dots
17

% predicate for parsing symbol list
parse_eq(X, Y, Z, Eq) :- phrase(eq(X, Y, Z), Eq).
% definition of “digits” and “equation”
digit(0).
digit(1).
digits([D]) --> [D], { digit(D) }.
digits([D | T]) --> [D], !, digits(T), { digit(D) }.
eq(X, Y, Z) --> digits(X), [+], digits(Y), [=], digits(Z).
digits(X) :- phrase(digits(X), X).
A. domain knowledge for parsing equations
% rule for calculation when bitwise addition rules available
calc(X, Y, Z) :- op_rules(R), bitwise_calc(R, X, Y, Z).
% bitwise calculation that handles carrying
bitwise_calc(R, X, Y, Z) :-
reverse(X, X1), reverse(Y, Y1), reverse(Z, Z1), 
bitwise_calc_r(R, X1, Y1, Z1), !.
bitwise_calc_r(_, [], Y, Y).
bitwise_calc_r(_, X, [], X).
bitwise_calc_r(R, [D1 | X], [D2 | Y], [D3 | Z]) :-
Op_Rule = my_op(D1, D2, Sum),
member(Op_Rule, R),
((Sum = [D3], Carry = []); (Sum = [C, D3], Carry = [C])),
bitwise_calc_r(R, X, Carry, X_carried),
bitwise_calc_r(R, X_carried, Y, Z).
B. domain knowledge for bitwise calculation
C. symbolic models learned in experiments
% symbolic hypothesis abduced from arithmetic addition tasks.
R_art = [my_op(0, 0, [0]), my_op(1, 0, [1]), 
my_op(0, 1, [1]), my_op(1, 1, [1, 0])].
% symbolic hypothesis abduced from exclusive-or tasks.
R_xor = [my_op(0, 0, [0]), my_op(1, 0, [1]), 
my_op(0, 1, [1]), my_op(1, 1, [0])].
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Figure 5:
Domain knowledge as Prolog programs used in the logical layer.
The blue and green
words are user-deﬁned and system predicates, respectively, while the yellow words are abducibles that can be
derived from the observed data. (A) A Prolog program that can parse and abduce a list of symbols as equa-
tions. For example, when Eq=[1, ,1, ,1] (the “ ” is a Prolog “blank” variable that can be ﬁlled with an ab-
duced symbol), using ALP “parse eq” can abduce “X=Y=Z=1” and “Eq=[1,+,1,=,1]”. (B) A Prolog program
for making bitwise calculations and abducing bitwise operations as learned reasoning models. When a positive
example perceived as “[1,1,+,1,=,1,0,0]” is provided, using ALP it can abduce two bitwise addition rules
”op rules([my op(1,1,[1,0]),my op(1,0,[1])])”). (C) Examples of output reasoning models (relational fea-
tures) abduced by NLM from data; diﬀerent hypotheses can be learned from diﬀerent tasks.
18

indicate successful abductions and the green dots signify failures. From the results, it is apparent
that a better perception accuracy indeed contributed to better equation classiﬁcation accuracy.
Experiment: Cross-task Transfer
Just as when Bowditch used his past knowledge about Mayan hieroglyphs and calendar units
to decipher unknown scripts, human learning features the ability of cross-domain transfer. We
further investigate whether NLM, with its improved learning ability, also has an improved transfer
capability. The ﬁrst task investigates the transferability of the perception model to domains with
diﬀerent symbolic structures.
We created logical exclusive-or equations as training examples
using the DBA characters; the size of the dataset was equal to that used for the binary additive
equation learning tasks.
To transfer the perception model to the exclusive-or domain, the perception layers used in the
NLM are a direct copy of those trained on the DBA task.
During the learning process, the
parameters of those layers are ﬁxed, ensuring that the NLM learns only reasoning models. As
a comparison, another NLM was trained on the exclusive-or task from scratch. The results are
shown in Figure 6(D), and the learned reasoning model is shown in Figure 5(C). As we can
observe from the result, the ﬁnal performances of NLMs with and without perception transfer
are comparable. However, the convergence of the NLM with perception transfer is much faster
than that without the transfer. This is consistent with the results in Figure 6(C) and shows that
a good perception model dramatically reduces the diﬃculty of learning reasoning models.
The second task attempted to evaluate the capability of NLMs for transferring learned symbolic
knowledge. We did this by setting the source and target domain as the RBA and DBA tasks,
respectively. The knowledge transferred is in the form of both the logical layer and the decision
neural layer. The NLM with knowledge transfer copied the relational features and the decision
MLP parameters from a well-trained RBA NLM, therefore it only needed to train its perception
CNN, in which the list of symbols abduced by the logical layer are regarded as labels to the input
images. Similar to the previous experiment, the compared NLM learns the entire model from
scratch. From the results depicted in Figure 6(E), we can observe that the NLMs eventually reach
the same level of accuracy; however, the NLM with knowledge transfer converged signiﬁcantly
faster than the compared method. This result veriﬁes that well-built domain knowledge makes
19

NLM with Knowledge Transfer
NLM without Knowledge Transfer
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Iteration
Accuracy
NLM with Perception Transfer
NLM without Perception Transfer
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Iteration
Accuracy
Perception Acc. in DBA Tasks
Perception Acc. in RBA Tasks
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Iteration
Accuracy
A. results on DBA and RBA equation learning tasks.
RBA
B. perception accuracy in DBA and RBA tasks.
C. perception accuracy vs equation accuracy.
DBA
NLM
CNN+DNC
CNN+BiLSTM
Random Guess
5
10
15
20
25
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Equation Length
Accuracy
NLM
CNN+DNC
CNN+BiLSTM
Random Guess
5
10
15
20
25
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Equation Length
Accuracy
Consistent Trials
Inconsistent Trials
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Perception Accuracy
Equation Accuracy
D. results on perception transfer task.
E. results on knowledge transfer task.
Figure 6: Experimental results: (A) Performances of the NLM and the compared methods on the DBA and
RBA equation classiﬁcation tasks, respectively. The values on the x-axis show the lengths of the test equations; the
shadowed areas represent standard deviations. (B) The average training accuracy of the perception neural network
vs. the number of iterations on the DBA and RBA tasks. (C) The relationship between the accuracy of character
perception and equation classiﬁcation during training. Each dot represents an abductive problem-solving trial with
subsampled data: the red dots are trials where the NLM successfully found consistent symbolic hypotheses. (D)
and (E) Performances of the NLMs on the perception and knowledge transfer tasks.
20

learning easier.
However, comparing the results between knowledge transfer and perception
transfer, we can see that providing the learning perception model without explicitly providing the
labels is considerably more diﬃcult—which indeed caused considerable trouble when historians
were trying to decipher the Mayan language.
Conclusion and Discussion
The experimental results veriﬁed that abductive learning can perform human-like abductive
problem-solving that combines neural perception and symbolic reasoning. Abductive learning
works even when the given symbolic background knowledge is incomplete for learning the target
concepts. The proposed NLM approach can exploit symbolic domain knowledge while processing
sub-symbolic data such as raw pixel images. In our experiments, the only supervision exploited
by NLM involves labels of high-level concepts such as the “correctness of an equation”.
For
mid-level concepts such as the digits and operator symbols that serve as primitives for high-level
reasoning, NLM learns a recognition model without requiring image labels.
To the best of the authors’ knowledge, abductive learning is the ﬁrst framework designed for
simultaneously learning both reasoning and perception models. To accomplish this goal, the AI
system must be able to simultaneously manipulate symbolic learning and sub-symbolic learning.
In past AI research, these two abilities have been developed only separately.
Symbolic AI has been considered as a fundamental solution to artiﬁcial intelligence since the
dawn of AI. Symbolic AI refers to a set of methods based on high-level “symbolic” problem rep-
resentations and its goal is to deﬁne intelligent systems in an explicit way that is understandable
by humans. In this branch of AI research, a series of important steps has been achieved, e.g.,
automatic theorem proving [33, 5], propositional rule learning [9], expert systems [18], automated
planning [8] and inductive logic programming [31], and so on.
By formalizing the problem-solving process using symbolic representations such as a ﬁrst-order
logic language, symbolic AI imitates human reasoning through symbolic computation—based
mainly on heuristic and selective search.
Owing to the computers high eﬃciency in solving
searching problems, symbolic AIs can deal with many tasks that are diﬃcult for humans [40].
For example, recent progress in playing the game of Go veriﬁed that learning algorithms taught
21

by heuristically searched examples perform even better than those trained from demonstrations
involving human expertise [38]. In fact, the success of symbolic AI over the last century has
already shown the advantages of using computers to solve many symbolic reasoning tasks as
compared to humans.
Most of the current mainstream machine learning methods, such as statistical learning and deep
neural networks, focus on problems that have continuous and sub-symbolic hypothesis space
representations to which gradient-based optimization techniques can be easily applied. Conse-
quently, these methods have achieved great success on perception-like tasks such as image recog-
nition [25, 43], speech recognition [13] and so on. However, due to the limited expressive power of
sub-symbolic representation, most of these machine learning methods are incapable of performing
secondary reasoning on learned data. For example, although deep neural networks have achieved
near-human performance on some simple natural language processing tasks, a recent empirical
study noted that they cannot address reading comprehension problems [19]. Moreover, the gap
between symbolic and sub-symbolic representations causes them to fail to make use of domain
knowledge that can only be expressed through ﬁrst-order logic; thus, they miss an opportunity
for exploiting the great inventions in the fruitful symbolic AI research.
A natural approach to ﬁx these problems is to combine symbolic and sub-symbolic AI systems.
Fuzzy logic [48], probabilistic logic programming [7] and statistical relational learning [11] have
been proposed to empower traditional logic-based methods to handle probability distributions;
however, most of them still require human-deﬁned symbols as input similar to traditional symbolic
AI systems. Probabilistic programming is then proposed as an analogy to human cognition to
enable probabilistic reasoning with sub-symbolic primitives [45, 27, 26], yet the correspondence
between the sub-symbolic primitives and their symbolic representations used in programming is
assumed to already exist rather than assuming that it should be automatically learned [27, 26].
Diﬀerential programming methods such as DNC attempt to emulate symbolic computing using
diﬀerentiable functional calculations [12, 10, 2], but they can hardly reproduce genuine logical
inferences, and they require large amounts of training data to learn even simple logical operations.
LASIN is a work that also uses logical abduction to introduce general human knowledge into
statistical learning [6]; however, the exploited symbolic knowledge is required to be complete and
correct. In short, few AI systems exist that can perform symbolic and sub-symbolic learning at
the same time.
22

As shown in the Mayan digits decipherment example, humans can easily combine knowledge-
based symbolic reasoning and sensory-based sub-symbolic perception, and these two components
aﬀect each other simultaneously [41]. This fact has been veriﬁed in cognitive psychology. The
most representative evidence is visual illusions, which illustrate that the way we understand
the world is greatly inﬂuenced by the complicated interactions between our sensations and our
past knowledge that lend abundant meaning to sensed stimuli [41]. It has been suggested that
abduction is the key to the entangled relationship between sub-symbolic perception and symbolic
reasoning connections [30]. In a sense, we believe that the proposed abductive learning can be
regarded as a veriﬁcation of this theory.
Inspired by the trial-and-error approach of Bowditch’s decipherment (Figure 1(B)), abductive
learning connects symbolic reasoning with sub-symbolic perception.
Owing to the expressive
power of ﬁrst-order logic, abductive learning is capable of directly exploiting general domain
knowledge. The diﬀerentiable structure of neural perception enables abductive learning to con-
veniently create the mappings between raw data and its symbolic representations. Finally, the
background knowledge based heuristic search allows abductive learning to automatically infer the
existence of primitive objects from raw data.
Many improvements can be made to abductive learning in the future. Ideally, an AI system
should be able to learn the background knowledge by itself; in addition, the learned knowledge
should be reusable in other tasks. In this work, we veriﬁed that both perception model and
reasoning model can be directly reused in diﬀerent but similar tasks; however, a general paradigm
for reusing more complicated knowledge is required. Moreover, loss of the learning system is
currently back-propagated through its logical module by searching, abduction and optimization
in a naive way. Methods for improving the eﬃciency of these operations are worth studying and
can make abductive learning more practical for real applications.
