STUDENT, PROF, COLLABORATOR: BMVC AUTHOR GUIDELINES
1
Pose Flow: Efﬁcient Online Pose Tracking
Yuliang Xiu

Jiefeng Li

Haoyu Wang

Yinghong Fang

Cewu Lu

Machine Vision and Intelligence Group
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai, China
Abstract
Multi-person articulated pose tracking in unconstrained videos is an important while
challenging problem. In this paper, going along the road of top-down approaches, we
propose a decent and efﬁcient pose tracker based on pose ﬂows. First, we design an on-
line optimization framework to build the association of cross-frame poses and form pose
ﬂows (PF-Builder). Second, a novel pose ﬂow non-maximum suppression (PF-NMS) is
designed to robustly reduce redundant pose ﬂows and re-link temporal disjoint ones. Ex-
tensive experiments show that our method signiﬁcantly outperforms best reported results
on two standard Pose Tracking datasets ( [12] and [8]) by 13 mAP 25 MOTA and 6 mAP
3 MOTA respectively. Moreover, in the case of working on detected poses in individual
frames, the extra computation of pose tracker is very minor, guaranteeing online 10FPS
tracking. Our source codes are made publicly available1.
1
Introduction
Motivated by its extensive applications in human behavior understanding and scene analy-
sis, human pose estimation has witnessed a signiﬁcant boom in recent years. Mainstream
research ﬁelds have advanced from pose estimation of single pre-located person [6, 14] to
multi-person pose estimation in complex and unconstrained scenes [3, 7]. Beyond static hu-
man keypoints in individual images, pose estimation in videos has also emerged as a promi-
nent topic [17, 22]. Furthermore, human pose trajectory extracted from the entire video is
a high-level human behavior representation [19, 20], naturally providing us with a power-
ful tool to handle a series of visual understanding tasks, such as Action Recognition [5],
Person Re-identiﬁcation [18, 24], Human-Object Interaction [9] and numerous downstream
practical applications, e.g., video surveillance and sports video analysis.
To this end, multi-person pose tracking methods are developed, whose dominant ap-
proaches can be categorized into top-down [8] and bottom-up [11, 12]. Top-down methods,
c⃝2018. The copyright of this document resides with its authors.
It may be distributed unchanged freely in print or electronic forms.
1https://github.com/YuliangXiu/PoseFlow
arXiv:1802.00977v2  [cs.CV]  2 Jul 2018

2
STUDENT, PROF, COLLABORATOR: BMVC AUTHOR GUIDELINES
also known as two steps scheme, ﬁrst detect human proposals in every frame, estimate key-
points within each box independently, and then track human boxes over the entire video in
terms of similarity between pairs of boxes in adjacent frames, and that is the reason why it
is also referred to as Detect-and-Track method [8]. By contrast, bottom-up methods, also
known as jointing scheme, ﬁrst generate a set of joint detection candidates in every frame,
construct the spatio-temporal graph, and then solve an integer linear program to partition this
graph into sub-graphs that correspond to plausible human pose trajectories of each person.
Currently top-down methods have largely outperformed bottom-up methods both in ac-
curacy (mAP and MOTA) and tracking speed, since bottom-up approaches lose a global pose
view due to the mere utilization of second-order body parts dependence, which directly cause
ambiguous assignments of keypoints, like Figure 1 a). Furthermore, joint schemes are com-
putationally heavy and not scalable to long videos, making it unable to do online tracking.
Therefore, top-down methods may be a more promising direction. Following this direction,
however, there remains many challenges. As shown in Figure 1 b) c) d), due to frame de-
generation (e.g. blurring due to fast motion), truncation or occlusion, pose estimation in an
individual frame can be unreliable. To tackle this problem, we need to associate cross-frame
detected instances to share temporal information and thus reduce uncertainty.
Figure 1: Failure cases of previous pose estimation methods, ground-truth in green and false cases in
red. a) Ambiguous assignment. b) Missing detection. c) Human truncation. d) Human occlusion.
In this paper, we propose an efﬁcient and decent method to achieve online pose track-
ing. Apart from applying an improved RMPE[7] as pose estimator, our proposed method
includes two novel techniques, namely Pose Flow Building (PF-Builder) and Pose Flow
NMS(PF-NMS). First, we associate the cross-frame poses that indicate the same person. To
achieve that, we iteratively construct pose ﬂow from pose proposals within a short video clip
picked by a temporal video sliding window. Instead of employing greedy match, we design
an effective objective function to seek a pose ﬂow with maximum overall conﬁdence among
potential ﬂows. This optimization design helps to stabilize pose ﬂows and associate discon-
tinuous ones (due to missing detections). Second, unlike conventional schemes that apply

STUDENT, PROF, COLLABORATOR: BMVC AUTHOR GUIDELINES
3
NMS in frame-level, PF-NMS takes pose ﬂow as a unit in NMS processing. In this way,
temporal information will be fully considered in NMS process and thus stabilization can be
largely improved. Our approach is general to different pose estimators and only takes minor
extra computation for tracking. Given detected poses in individual frames, our method can
track poses at 10 FPS.
To verify the effectiveness of proposed framework, we conduct extensive experiments
on two standard pose tracking datasets, PoseTrack Dataset [12] and PoseTrack Challenge
Dataset [2]. Our proposed approach signiﬁcantly outperforms the state-of-the-art method
[8], achieving 58.3% MOTA and 66.5% mAP in PoseTrack Challenge validation set, 51.0%
MOTA and 63.0% mAP in testset.
2
Related Work
2.1
Multi-Person Pose Estimation in Image
In recent years, multi-person pose estimation in images has experienced large performance
advancement. With respect to different pose estimation pipelines, relevant work can be
grouped into graph decomposition and multi-stage techniques. Graph decomposition meth-
ods, such as DeeperCut [10], re-deﬁne the multi-person pose estimation problem as a parti-
tioning and labeling formulation and solve this graph decomposition problem by an integer
linear program. These methods’ performance depends largely on strong parts detector based
on deep visual representations and efﬁcient optimization strategy. However, their body parts
detector always performs vulnerably because of the absence of global context and structural
information. OpenPose [3] introduces Part Afﬁnity Fields (PAFs) to associate body parts
with individuals in an image, but ambiguous assignments still occur in crowds.
To address this limitation, multi-stage pipeline [4, 7] handles multi-person pose estima-
tion problem by separating this task into human detection, single person pose estimation and
post-processing stages. The main difference among dominant multi-stage frameworks lies in
different choices of the human detector and single person pose estimator network. With the
remarkable progress of object detection and single person pose estimator over the past few
years, the potentials of multi-stage approaches have been greatly exploited. Now multi-stage
framework has been in the epicenter of the methods above, achieving the state-of-the-art
performance in almost all benchmark datasets, e.g., MSCOCO[13] and MPII[1].
2.2
Multi-Person Articulated Tracking in Video
Based on the multi-person pose estimators described above, it is natural to extend them
from still image to video. PoseTrack [12] and ArtTrack [11] in CVPR’17 primarily intro-
duce multi-person pose tracking challenge and propose a new graph partitioning formulation,
building upon 2D DeeperCut [10] by extending spatial joint graph to spatio-temporal graph.
Although plausible results can be guaranteed by solving minimum cost multicut problem,
hand-crafted graphical models are not scalable for long clips of unseen types of scenes. It
is worth noting that optimize this sophisticated IP requires tens of minutes per video, even
implemented with state of the art solvers.
Hence, another line of research tends to explore more efﬁcient and scalable top-down
method by ﬁrst operating multi-person pose estimation on each frame, and then link them
in terms of appearance similarity and temporal relationship between pairs of boxes. Yet
some issues should be dealt with properly: 1) how to ﬁlter redundant boxes correctly with

4
STUDENT, PROF, COLLABORATOR: BMVC AUTHOR GUIDELINES
the fusion of information from adjacent frames, 2) how to produce robust pose trajectories
by leveraging temporal information, 3) how to connect human boxes with the same identity
meanwhile keeping away from disturbance of scale variance.
Although one latest work, 3D Mask R-CNN[8], which is designed for correcting the
location of keypoints by leveraging temporal information in 3D human tubes, tries to give
their solution to these problems, it do not employ pose ﬂow as a unit. Besides, the tracker
just simplify tracking problem as a maximum weight bipartite matching problem and solve
it with greedy or Hungarian Algorithm. Nodes of this bipartite graph are human bounding
boxes in two adjacent frames. This conﬁguration did not take motion and pose information
into account, which is essential in tracking the occasional truncated human. To address this
limitation, meanwhile maintaining its efﬁciency, we put forward a new pose ﬂow generator,
which combines Pose Flow Builder and Pose Flow NMS.
Figure 2: Overall Pipeline: 1) Pose Estimator. 2) Pose Flow Builder. 3) Pose Flow NMS. First, we
estimate multi-person poses. Second, we build pose ﬂows by maximizing overall conﬁdence and purify
them by Pose Flow NMS. Finally, reasonable multi-pose trajectories can be obtained.
3
Our Proposed Approach
In this section, we present our pose tracking pipeline. As mentioned before, pose ﬂow means
a set of pose indicating the same person instance in different frames. As Figure 2 shows, our
framework includes two steps: Pose Flow Building and Pose Flow NMS. First, we build pose
ﬂow by maximizing overall conﬁdence along the temporal sequence. Second, we reduce
redundant pose ﬂows and relink disjoint pose ﬂows by Pose Flow NMS.

STUDENT, PROF, COLLABORATOR: BMVC AUTHOR GUIDELINES
5
3.1
Preliminary
In this section, we introduce some basic metrics and tools that will be used in our framework.
Intra-Frame Pose Distance
Intra-frame Pose distance is deﬁned to measure the similarity
between two poses P1 and P2 in a frame. We adopt the pose distance deﬁned in [7]. We
denote pn
1 and pn
2 as the nth keypoints of pose P1 and P2 respectively, n ∈{1,2,...,N}, N is
keypoint number of one person, B(pn
1) is box that centers at pn
1, cn
1 is score of pn
1. The tanh
function is to suppress the low score keypoints.
The soft matching function is deﬁned as
KSim(P1,P2|σ1) =





∑
n
tanh cn
1
σ1
·tanh cn
2
σ1
if pn
2 is within B(pn
1)
0
otherwise
(1)
The spatial similarity among keypoints written as
HSim(P1,P2|σ2) = ∑
n
exp[−(pn
1 −pn
2)2
σ2
]
(2)
The ﬁnal similarity combining Eqs. 1 and 2 is written as
df (P1,P2|Λ)
= KSim(P1,P2|σ1)−1 +λHSim(P1,P2|σ2)−1
(3)
where Λ = {σ1,σ2,λ}. These parameters can be determined in a data-driven manner.
Inter-frame Pose Distance
Inter-frame pose distance is to measure distance between a
pose P1 in one frame and another pose P2 in the next frame. We need to import temporal
matching to measure how likely two cross-frame poses indicate the same person. Bounding
boxes surrounding pn
1 and pn
2 are extracted and denoted as Bn
1 and Bn
2. The box size is 10%
person bounding box size according to the standard PCK [1]. We evaluate the similarity of
Bn
1 and Bn
2. Given f n
1 DeepMatching feature [16] points extracted from Bn
1, we can ﬁnd f n
2
matching points in Bn
2. The matching percentage f n
2
f n
1 can indicate the similarity of Bn
1 and Bn
2.
Therefore the inter-frame pose distance between P1 and P2 can be expressed as:
dc(P1,P2) = ∑
n
f n
2
f n
1
(4)
3.2
Improved Multi-Person Pose Estimation
We adopt RMPE [7] as our multi-person pose estimator, which uses Faster R-CNN[15] as
the human detector and Hourglass Network with PRMs [21] as single person pose estimator.
Our pipeline is ready to adopt to different human detectors and pose estimators.
Data Augmentation
In video scenoria, human always come and leave video capturing
region, resulting in truncation problem. To handle truncation of humans, we propose an
improved deep proposal generator (iDPG) as a data augmentation scheme. iDPG aims to
produce truncated human proposals using random-crop strategy during training. Speciﬁcally,
we randomly crop human instance region into quarter or half person. Thus, those random-
crop proposals will be used as augmented training data. We observe an improvement of
RMPE when it applies to the video frames

6
STUDENT, PROF, COLLABORATOR: BMVC AUTHOR GUIDELINES
Motion-Guided Box Propagation
Due to motion blur and occlusion, missing detection
happens frequently during human detection phrase. This will increase person id switches
(IDs↓), like in Table 4.1, dramatically degrading ﬁnal tracking MOTA performance. Our idea
is to propagate box proposals to previous and next frames by crossing frame matching tech-
nique. That is, the box proposals triple. In this way, some missing detected proposals have
high channce to be recovered and largely improve the recall (redundant boxes will be ﬁlter
out by following step). The cross-frame matching technique we used is deepmatching[16].
3.3
Pose Flow Building
We ﬁrstly perform pose estimation for each frame. Pose ﬂows are built by associating poses
that indicate the same person across frames. The straight-forward method is to connect
them by selecting closest pose in the next frame, given metric dc(P1,P2). However, this
greedy scheme would be less effective due to recognition error and false alarm of frame-
level pose detection. On the other hand, if we apply the graph-cut model in spatial and
temporal domains, it will lead to heavy computation and non-online solution. Therefore, in
this paper, we propose an efﬁcient and decent method for high-quality pose ﬂow building.
We denote P j
i as the ith pose at jth frame and its candidate association set as
T (P j
i ) = {P|dc(P,P j
i ) ≤ε},
s.t.P ∈Ωj+1
(5)
where Ωj+1 is the set of pose at (j +1)th frame. In paper, we set ε = 1
25 by cross-validation.
T (P j
i ) means possible corresponding pose set in next frame for Pj
i . Without loss of general-
ity, we discuss tracking for Pt
i and consider pose ﬂow building from tth to (t +T)th frames.
To optimize pose selection, we maximize the following objective function
F(t,T) =
max
Qt,...,Qt+T
t+T
∑
i=t
s(Qi),
s.t. Q0 = Pt
i ,
s.t. Qi ∈T (Qi−1)
(6)
where s(Qi) is a function that outputs conﬁdence score of Qi, which is deﬁned as
s(Qi) = sbox(Qi)+mean(spose(Qi))+max(spose(Qi))
(7)
where sbox(P), mean(spose(P)) and max(spose(P)) are score of human box, mean score
and max score of all keypoints within this human proposal, respectively. The optimum
{Qt,...,Qt+T} is our pose ﬂow for Pt
i from tth to (t +T)th frame.
Analysis
We regard the sum of conﬁdence scores (∑t+T
i=t s(Qi)) as objective function. This
design helps us resist many uncertainties. When a person is highly occluded or blurred,
its score is quite low because the model is not conﬁdent about it. But we can still build a
pose ﬂow to compensate it, since we look at the overall conﬁdence score of a pose ﬂow, but
instead of a single frame. Moreover, the sum of conﬁdence score can be calculated online.
That is, F(t,T) can be determined by F(t,T −1) and s(QT).
Solver
Eq. 6 can be solved in an online manner since it is a standard dynamic programming
problem. At (u −1)th frame, we have mu−1 possible poses and record mu−1 optimum pose
trajectories (with sum of scores) to reach them. At uth frame, we compute the optimum paths
to mu possible poses based on previous mu−1 optimum pose trajectories. Accordingly, mu
trajectories are updated. F(u) is the sum of scores of best pose trajectories.

STUDENT, PROF, COLLABORATOR: BMVC AUTHOR GUIDELINES
7
3.3.1
Stop Criterion and Conﬁdence Uniﬁcation
We process video frame-by-frame with Eq. 6 until it meets a stop criterion. Our criterion
doesn’t simply check conﬁdence score in a single frame but looks at more frames to resist
sudden occlusion and frame degeneration (e.g. motion blur). Therefore, a pose ﬂow stops
at u when F(t,u+r)−F(t,u) < γ, where γ is determined by cross-validation. It means the
sum of scores within the following r frames is very small. Only in this way, we can make
sure a pose ﬂow really stops. In our paper, we set r = 3. After a pose ﬂow stops, all keypoint
conﬁdence are updated by average conﬁdence scores. We believe pose ﬂow should be the
basic block and should use single conﬁdence value to represent it. This process is referred
to as conﬁdence uniﬁcation.
3.4
Pose Flow NMS
We hope our NMS can be performed in the spatio-temporal domain instead of individual
frame processing. That is, we take poses in a pose ﬂow as a unit in NMS processing, reducing
errors by both spatial and temporal information. The key step is to determine the distance
between two pose ﬂows that indicate the same person.
Pose Flow Distance
Given two pose ﬂows Ya and Yb, we can extract their temporal over-
lapping sub-ﬂows. The sub-ﬂows are denoted as {P1
a ,...,PN
a } and {P1
b ,...,PN
b }, where N is
the number of temporal overlapping frames. That is, Pi
a and Pi
b are two poses in the same
frame. The distance between Ya and Yb can be calculated as,
dPF(Ya,Yb) = median[{df (P1
a ,P1
b ),...,df (PN
a ,PN
b )}]
(8)
where df (·) is the intra-frame pose distance deﬁned in Eq. 3. The median metric can be
more robust towards outliers, such as miss-detection due to occlusion and motion blur.
Pose Flow Merging
Given dPF(·), we can perform NMS scheme as convection pipeline.
First, the pose ﬂow with the maximum conﬁdence score (after conﬁdence uniﬁcation) is se-
lected as reference pose ﬂow. Making use of dPF(·), we group pose ﬂows closed to reference
pose ﬂow. Thus, pose ﬂows in the group will be merged into a more robust pose ﬂow repre-
senting the group. This new pose ﬂow (pose ﬂow NMS result) is called representative pose
ﬂow. The 2D coordinate of ith keypoint xt,i and conﬁdence score st,i of representative pose
ﬂow in tth frame are computed by
ˆxt,i = ∑j sj
t,ixj
t,i
∑s j
t,i
and
ˆst,i =
∑j sj
t,i
∑1(sj
t,i)
(9)
where xj
t,i and sj
t,i are the 2D coordinate and conﬁdence score of ith keypoint in jth pose
ﬂow in the group in tth frame. If jth pose ﬂow does not have any pose at tth frame, we set
sj
t,i = 0. In Eq. 9, 1(sj
t,i) outputs 1, if input is non-zero, otherwise it outputs 0. This merging
step not only can reduce redunant pose ﬂow, but also re-link some disjoint pose ﬂows into a
longer and completed pose ﬂow. Details of cross-frame pose merging (keypoint-level) can
be refered to Figure 3.
We redo this process until all pose ﬂows are processed. This process is computed in
sliding temporal window (the window length is L = 20 in our paper). Therefore, it is an
online process. The whole pipeline shows in Figure 2.

8
STUDENT, PROF, COLLABORATOR: BMVC AUTHOR GUIDELINES
Figure 3: Pose Flow Merging
4
Experiments and Results
4.1
Evaluation and Datasets
For comparison with both state-of-the-art top-down and bottom-up approaches, we evalu-
ate our framework on PoseTrack and PoseTrack Challenge dataset separately. PoseTrack
Dataset was introduced in [12], which is used to evaluate the spatio-temporal graph-cut
method. Labeled frames in this dataset come from consecutive unlabeled adjacent frames
of MPII Multi-Person Pose dataset[1]. These selected videos contain multiple persons and
cover a wide variety of activities of complex cases, such as scale variation, body truncation,
severe occlusion and motion blur. For a fair comparison, we train improved RMPE on 30
training videos and test it on the rest 30 videos like PoseTrack [12] did. Table 4.1 presents
tracking results in PoseTrack dataset, and pose estimation results in Table 3. It shows that
our method outperforms best reported graph-cut approach by 13.5 mAP and 25.4 MOTA.
Method
Rcll↑
Prcn↑
MT↑
ML↓
IDs↓
FM↓
MOTA↑
MOTP↑
Iqbal et al. [12]
63.0
64.8
775
502
431
5629
28.2
55.7
Ours
65.9
83.2
949
623
202
3358
53.6
56.4
Table 1: Multi-person pose tracking results on PoseTrack dataset
PoseTrack Challenge Dataset is released in [2]. Selected and annotated like PoseTrack
Dataset, it contains more videos. The testing dataset evaluation includes three tasks, but
we only join Task2-Multi-Frame Person Pose Estimation, evaluated by mean average preci-
sion (mAP) and Task3-Pose tracking, evaluated by multi-object tracking accuracy (MOTA)
metric. Tracking results of validation set and the test set of PoseTrack Challenge Dataset
are presented in Table 2. Our method can achieve state-of-the-art results on validation and
comparable results on test set. Some qualitative results are shown in Figure 4.

STUDENT, PROF, COLLABORATOR: BMVC AUTHOR GUIDELINES
9
Method
Dataset
MOTA
Head
MOTA
Shou
MOTA
Elb
MOTA
Wri
MOTA
Hip
MOTA
Knee
MOTA
Ankl
MOTA
Total
MOTP
Total
Prcn
Rcll
Girdhar et al. [8]
validation
61.7
65.5
57.3
45.7
54.3
53.1
45.7
55.2
61.5
88.1
66.5
Ours
59.8
67.0
59.8
51.6
60.0
58.4
50.5
58.3
67.8
87.0
70.3
Girdhar et al. [8]
*(Mini)Test v1.0
55.9
59.0
51.9
43.9
47.2
46.3
40.1
49.6
34.1
81.9
67.4
Ours
testset
52.0
57.4
52.8
46.6
51.0
51.2
45.3
51.0
16.9
78.9
71.2
Table 2: Multi-person pose tracking results on PoseTrack Challenge dataset, * Note that this result was
computed by online server on a subset of testset, and 51.8 MOTA is Girdhar et al. [8] got on full testset.
Method
Dataset
Head
mAP
Shoulder
mAP
Elbow
mAP
Wrist
mAP
Hip
mAP
Knee
mAP
Ankle
mAP
Total
mAP
Iqbal et al. [12]
PoseTrack
56.5
51.6
42.3
31.4
22.0
31.9
31.6
38.2
Ours
64.7
65.9
54.8
48.9
33.3
43.5
50.6
51.7
Girdhar et al. [8]
PoseTrack Challenge(valid)
67.5
70.2
62
51.7
60.7
58.7
49.8
60.6
Ours
66.7
73.3
68.3
61.1
67.5
67.0
61.3
66.5
Girdhar et al. [8]
*(Mini)Test v1.0
65.3
66.7
59.7
51.2
58.6
55.8
48.8
58.5
Ours
PoseTrack Challenge(test)
64.9
67.5
65.0
59.0
62.5
62.8
57.9
63.0
Table 3: Multi-person pose estimation results on all PoseTrack dataset,* Note that this result was
computed by online server on a subset of test set, 59.6 mAP is Girdhar et al. [8] got on full testset.
Time Performance
Our proposed pose tracker is based on resulting poses in individual
frames. That is, it is ready to apply in different multi-person pose estimators. The extra
computation by our pose tracker is very minor, requiring 100ms per frame only. Therefore,
it will not be the bottleneck of whole system, comparing to the speed of pose estimation.
4.2
Training and Testing Details
In this paper, we use ResNet152 based Faster R-CNN as human detector. Due to the absence
of human proposal annotations, we generate human boxes by extending human keypoints
boundary 20% along both height and width directions, which are used for ﬁne-tuning human
detector. In the phrase of single person pose estimation training, we employed online hard
example mining (OHEM) to deal with hard keypoints like hips and ankles. For each itera-
tion, instead of sampling the highest B/N losses in mini-batch, k highest loss hard examples
are selected. After selection, the SPPE update weights only from hard keypoints. These
procedures increase slight computation time, but notably improve estimation performance
of hips and ankles.
4.3
Ablation Studies
We evaluate the effectiveness of four proposed components: Deepmatching based Motion-
guided box propagation (DMGP), improved deep proposal generator (iDPG), Pose Flow
Builder (PF-Builder) and Pose Flow NMS (PF-NMS). The ablative studies are conducted on
the validation of PoseTrack Challenge dataset, by removing these modules from the pipeline
or replacing them with naive solvers, i.e., we replace the PF based tracker with box IoU
based maximum weight bipartite matching tracker (IoU-tracker) used by [8].
PF-Builder and PF-NMS
PF-Builder is responsible for constructing pose ﬂow. Due to its
a global optimum solution, like Table 4 shows, it can guarantee better tracking performance
than IoU-Tracker even without PF-NMS. PF-NMS can robustly merge redundant pose ﬂows
and re-link temporal disjoint ones, thus it can simultaneously polish pose estimation and
tracking results by 1.9 mAP and 2.5 MOTA.

10
STUDENT, PROF, COLLABORATOR: BMVC AUTHOR GUIDELINES
Method
mAP
MOTA
MOTP
Prcn
Rcll
PoseFlow, full
66.5
58.3
67.8
87.0
70.3
w/o PF-NMS
64.6
55.8
66.0
82.2
90.3
IoU-Tracker
64.6
52.1
61.2
82.2
90.3
w/o DMGP
62.2
53.7
63.4
89.2
62.3
w/o iDPG
65.4
57.8
66.9
87.0
70.3
Table 4: Ablation comparison. “IoU-Tracker” means naive box IoU based matching tracker used by
[8]. “w/o PF-NMS” means only using PF-Builder without PF-NMS. “w/o DMGP” means removing
motion-guided box propagation. “w/o iDPG” means without improved deep proposal generator.
DMGP and iDPG
DMGP is used for propagating adjacent boxes bidirectionally to recover
missing boxes, so this module can improve tracking performance 4.6 MOTA by decreasing
IDs dramatically. Because high recall of detections can fully exploit the power of PoseNMS
module in RMPE framework [7], 4.3 mAP is also increased thanks to this high recall. iDPG
aims mainly to locate hard keypoints more accurately, because pose information is also lever-
aged during tracking, iDPG ultimately improve results by 1.1 mAP and 0.5 MOTA.
Figure 4: Some ﬁnal posetracking results in videos
5
Conclusion
We have presented a scalable and efﬁcient top-down pose tracker, which mainly leverages
spatio-temporal information to build pose ﬂow to signiﬁcantly boost pose tracking task. Two
novel techniques, Pose Flow builder and Pose Flow NMS were proposed in this paper. In
ablation studies, we prove that the combination of PF-Builder, PF-NMS, iDPG, and DMGP
can guarantee a remarkable improvement in pose tracking tasks. Moreover, our proposed
pose tracker that can process frames in a video at 10 FPS (excluding pose estimation in
frames) has great potential in realistic applications. In the future, we would like to analyze
long-term action recognition and scene understanding based the proposed pose tracker.

STUDENT, PROF, COLLABORATOR: BMVC AUTHOR GUIDELINES
11
