PLATO DIALOGUE SYSTEM∗: A FLEXIBLE CONVERSATIONAL AI
RESEARCH PLATFORM
A PREPRINT
Alexandros Papangelis, Mahdi Namazifar, Chandra Khatri, Yi-Chia Wang, Piero Molino, and Gokhan Tur
Uber AI

January 20, 2020
ABSTRACT
As the ﬁeld of Spoken Dialogue Systems and Conversational AI grows, so does the need for tools and
environments that abstract away implementation details in order to expedite the development process,
lower the barrier of entry to the ﬁeld, and offer a common test-bed for new ideas. In this paper,
we present Plato, a ﬂexible Conversational AI platform written in Python that supports any kind of
conversational agent architecture, from standard architectures to architectures with jointly-trained
components, single- or multi-party interactions, and ofﬂine or online training of any conversational
agent component. Plato has been designed to be easy to understand and debug and is agnostic to the
underlying learning frameworks that train each component.
Keywords Conversational AI · Spoken Dialogue System · Natural Language Processing
1
Introduction
Conversational AI systems traditionally comprise multiple modules such as Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR), Lan-
guage Understanding (LU), Dialogue State Tracking (DST), Dialogue Management (DM), Language Generation (LG),
and Text To Speech (TTS). While a full-ﬂedged spoken dialogue system typically incorporates all these components
(depicted in Figure 1), most research studies have been performed in a domain-centric and somewhat isolated fashion in
sub-areas such as speech synthesis and recognition, language understanding, dialogue state tracking, turn taking and
dialogue management, etc. This has resulted in limited dissemination of knowledge between these ﬁelds and while this
phenomenon is being mitigated by the universality of deep learning underlying most recent advances in all of these
areas, conversational AI platforms that provide proper infrastructure to support model training and evaluation can be a
strong catalyst for research and development in the ﬁeld.
With advancements in joint and end-to-end learning [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7] along with widely used out of the box ASR
and TTS solutions [8, 9, 10], several platforms and toolkits [11, 12, 13, 14, 15, among others] have recently been
proposed for building Conversational AI systems. Each toolkit is largely designed around speciﬁc use-cases, with some
being centered around research and others designed for scalability and use in production as described later. For this
reason and others, for example unacceptable performance (e.g. occasional toxic or irrelevant output [16, 17]) or lack of
toolkits that can support both research and prototyping, there has been a disconnect between state-of-the-art research
and its applications in the production systems. However, as conversational AI agents become more and more capable,
new toolkits are needed that can bridge the gap between research and production and support quick prototyping of
full conversational experiences with ASR, LU, DST/DM, LG, and TTS capabilities. There are only a few toolkits
such as RASA [13], which have been recently proposed and support both modeling and prototyping of an end-to-end
experience. Most existing toolkits are centered around speciﬁc modules (e.g. LU) at the expense of other components
(e.g. LG). Section 1.1 provides an overview of existing state-of-the-art toolkits.
∗https://github.com/uber-research/plato-research-dialogue-system
arXiv:2001.06463v1  [cs.HC]  17 Jan 2020

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 20, 2020
Figure 1: Depiction of a typical Dialogue System
To address the challenges mentioned above, we propose the Plato Research Dialogue System 2, a ﬂexible conversational
AI research, experimentation, and prototyping platform. By following theoretical and well founded aspects of Spoken
Dialogue Systems, Plato is designed in a manner which makes it easy to understand for people with different levels of
expertise in conversational AI, researchers and developers. Plato’s architecture and component-driven design supports
statistical dialogue systems, multi-agent training (e.g. learning via agent-to-agent interaction[18, 19, 20, 21]), joint
learning of modules [1, 2, 3], and end-to-end learning of conversational agents [4, 5, 6, 7], while being ﬂexible enough
for quick prototyping and demonstration system development. Plato is agnostic to statistical learning frameworks, and
developers and researchers can use any Python library (e.g. any Deep Learning or Reinforcement Learning library, etc.)
they choose. As such, Plato seamlessly works with Ludwig [22] for code-less training of Deep Learning models and
quick prototyping.
Plato is designed to be modular, i.e. each conversational agent is composed of a number of modules that can run
sequentially, in parallel, or in any combination of sequential and parallel. Each module can be a “standard" component
such as LU, DM, LG, or anything that ﬁts the application’s purpose (a part of speech tagger, a topic classiﬁer, a joint
model, etc.). This modular design helps make Plato more extensible and scalable, and allows several developers to
build and experiment with individual modules simultaneously. Internally, each component of a conversational agent can
be anything from a statistical model (trained online or ofﬂine) to a set of rules (e.g. using pattern matching for LU or
templates for LG). Moreover, each component can call an API or service such as Google Cloud [8], Amazon Transcribe
[23], or Polly [9] for speech recognition, speech synthesis, or any other function. Besides building full conversational
AI applications, Plato can be used to evaluate and experiment with various kinds of Natural Language Processing (NLP)
tasks such as Sentiment Analysis, Topic Modeling, Dialogue State Tracking, Social Language Generation, and others.
1.1
Existing Publicly Available Conversational AI Systems
Several toolkits and conversational AI platforms have been proposed recently. The following are some state-of-the-art
and widely adopted platforms:
• PyDial [11] is a toolkit for statistical modeling of multi-domain Dialogue Systems that supports Reinforcement
Learning (RL) and Deep RL models. It is modular and supports customization of modules, however it
is primarily designed for research rather than production and therefore requires deep knowledge of the
conversational AI ﬁeld.
• ParlAI [12] is a dialogue research framework which contains popular baselines and state-of-the-art models
corresponding to a variety of tasks such as SQuAD [24], bAbi [25], and visual question answering. It
2https://github.com/uber-research/plato-research-dialogue-system
2

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 20, 2020
provides integration with Amazon Mechanical Turk [26] for data collection and with Facebook Messenger
for applications. Although ParlAI is rich in terms of models and tasks, it is not modular and the design is not
centered around standard Dialogue System architectures, containing modules such as Language Understanding,
Policy, Dialogue State Tracking and Language Generation, and therefore custom code may be required to build
each component for a new task. Similar to ParlAI, DeepPavlov [27] provides models (and corresponding
code) for various tasks. However, the agent class provided in both frameworks needs extensions in order to be
applicable to new tasks.
• Rasa [13] is a rich set of libraries for building Dialogue Systems. It is developer-friendly and supports training
of LU and dialogue policy (action) models with very little code. Rasa also supports model-based dialogue
policies and provides wrappers to easily train various models through conﬁguration ﬁles (similar to Plato).
Rasa supports online learning, that is users can interact with the agent to assess its behaviour and for other
debugging purposes. It also supports learning conversations and corresponding actions through examples
by deﬁning the conversations in the form of stories. Although Rasa is quite robust in terms of functionality,
its architecture is quite different from standard module-based Dialogue System architectures. That being
said, custom code can be written along with existing modules (such as the Agent) to extend functionalities of
Rasa. On the other hand, even though Rasa provides functionalities to experiment with various state-of-the-art
models, it is primarily designed for scalability.
• Neural Modules (NeMo) [14] is a toolkit supporting speech recognition and NLP models such as named
entity recognition, and intent and slot ﬁlling. Even though NeMo has integrations with state-of-the-art models
such as BERT [28] and Transformers [29], it currently does not support all the building blocks of a Dialogue
System. Several modules such as LG, policy, DST, and DM are missing. Hence, it does not provide an
end-to-end conversational experience.
• ConvLab [15] is a multi-domain dialogue research platform whose objective is to enable researchers to
quickly set up experiments with reusable components and modules to compare across different approaches.
ConvLab provides evaluation modules (leveraging humans or algorithms) for comparing and evaluating
different policies or models. Even though it supports most standard dialogue system components (except
ASR and TTS modules), ConvLab is primarily designed for research and evaluation of various state-of-the-art
implementations.
Other frameworks such as SimDial [30], OpenDial [31], and Olympus [32] (among others) seem to be less active in
terms of support for state of the art models and learning frameworks when compared to the aforementioned toolkits.
The goal we try to achieve with Plato, is to develop a conversational AI platform that is one abstraction level above
the aforementioned platforms3, is easy to understand and debug and that is agnostic to the underlying libraries that
implement each component’s statistical models or APIs. Plato can support any kind of Python module such as PyTorch
[33], TensorFlow [34], or Keras [35], and can integrate with code-free Deep Learning libraries such as Ludwig [22], so
that users at any level of experience can build a quick prototype and experiment with state-of-the-art ideas, while expert
users can dive deeper and build custom and more scalable systems. Plato supports continuous and code-free training of
each component and can be used to implement agent architectures that consist of a single module (e.g. an end-to-end
network) or many serial or parallel modules. Several Deep Learning and Reinforcement Learning based examples are
provided, as well as integrations with standard datasets such as DSTC [36] and MetalWoz [37] to guide the users in
leveraging the full capabilities of Plato. Lastly, Plato supports multi-agent interaction, where several agents can interact
with each other and train any of their components online.
2
Plato Architecture
Plato Research Dialogue System is a platform that can be used to create, train, and evaluate conversational AI agents. It
has four main components, namely: 1) dialogue which deﬁnes and implements dialogue acts and dialogue states; 2)
domain which includes the ontology of the dialogue and the database that the dialogue system queries; 3) controller
which orchestrates the conversations; and 4) agent which implements different components of each conversational
agent. These four major components are shown in Figure 2 and are described in detail in the following sections. In
Plato, each of these components is instantiated using conﬁgurations that are described in a YAML ﬁle (see Appendix 5
for an example).
Plato is designed to be modular and ﬂexible and supports standard conversational agents, such as the ones depicted
in Figure 3, as well any customized conversational agent architecture, for example joint LU and DST via the generic
conversational agent that operates as shown in Figure 4. At the highest level of abstraction, Plato supports agents
3Therefore, each of the use cases supported by these platforms can be supported by Plato.
3

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 20, 2020
Figure 2: Major components of Plato: Domain, Dialogue, Controller, and Agent.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3: (a) Plato with humans. (b) Plato with Simulated Users.
communicating with other agents while adhering to some dialogue principles (Figure 5). These principles deﬁne what
each agent can understand (an ontology of entities, or meanings e.g. price, location, user preferences, cuisine types) and
what it can do (ask for more information, provide some information, call an API, etc.). The agents can communicate
over speech, text, or structured information (e.g. dialogue acts) and each agent has its own conﬁguration. In the rest of
this section we will go over the major components of Plato.
2.1
Dialogue
Plato facilitates conversations between agents via well-deﬁned concepts in dialogue theory, such as dialogue states and
dialogue acts. A Plato agent, however, may need to perform actions not directly related to dialogue (e.g. call an API) or
actions that communicate information in modalities other than speech (e.g. show an image). Therefore, Plato models
Actions and States as abstract containers out of which Dialogue Acts and Dialogue States are created. If needed for
speciﬁc applications (e.g. multi-modal conversational agents) we may have task-speciﬁc Dialogue Acts and States.
2.2
Domain
For implementing a slot-ﬁlling 4 task-oriented dialogue system in Plato, we need to specify two elements that constitute
the domain of the dialogue system:
1. Ontology of the dialogue system. In task-oriented applications, the ontology determines informable slots (user
provides that information), requestable slots (user requests that information), and system requestable slots
4Slot-ﬁlling systems are dialogue systems whose primary purpose is to provide a natural language interface to an API, for
example ﬂight booking, information retrieval, etc.
4

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 20, 2020
Figure 4: Communication between two Plato Generic Conversational Agents. Each module performs a function such as
joint language understanding and state tracking.
Figure 5: Communication between two Plato Conversational Agents. Grayed out components are external to Plato. The
Agents can communicate via structured information (sets of Dialogue Acts: Dialogue Policy to State Tracking), via text
(Language Generation to Language Understanding), or via Speech (Speech Synthesis to Speech Recognition).
(system requests that information) for the conversation, thereby reﬂecting the schema of the database that the
agent queries to get the right information to be sent out.
2. Database of items (restaurants, dishes, answers to questions, etc.). While the database could already exist,
Plato provides utilities to construct the domain and the database of a dialogue system from data.
For instance, in the case of a conversational agent for restaurant reservation, the cuisine could be thought of as
an informable slot and the database could contain information about restaurants of different cuisines, their price
range, address, etc. For non-slot-ﬁlling applications, Plato ontologies and databases can be extended to meet task- or
domain-speciﬁc requirements.
Domain creation
Plato provides a utility that makes it easy to generate an ontology (a .json ﬁle) and a database
(SQLite) from a .csv ﬁle, with columns representing item attributes and rows representing items (for an example,
see plato/example/data/flowershop.csv ). The main purpose of this utility is to help quick prototyping of
conversational agents. The command plato domain –config <PATH/TO/CONFIG.YAML> calls the utility and
generates the appropriate .db and .json ﬁles that deﬁne the domain. In the YAML conﬁguration ﬁle, the user
speciﬁes details such as the path to the input .csv ﬁle, the columns that represent informable slots, etc.
5

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 20, 2020
2.3
Controller
In Plato, controllers are objects that orchestrate the conversations between the agents. A controller instantiates the
agents, initializes them for each dialogue, passes input and output appropriately, and keeps track of statistics. Note that
it is each agent’s responsibility to interact with the world if needed (listen to the microphone, call an API, etc.).
Figure 6: Main functions of Plato’s basic controller.
Running the command plato run --config <PATH/TO/CONFIG.YAML> runs Plato’s basic controller, shown in
Figure 6. This command receives a value for the --config argument which points to a Plato application conﬁguration
YAML ﬁle. In this conﬁguration ﬁle, details of the agent(s) involved in the dialogue, paths to the ontology and database
of the dialogue, along with other parameters and options are speciﬁed.
Plato also has a controller that comes with a Graphical User Interface (GUI). This controller can be started by running
plato gui --config <PATH/TO/CONFIG.YAML> . This controller is very similar to Plato’s basic controller except
that the user is prompted through a GUI as opposed to interacting via the terminal.
2.4
Agent
Every conversational application in Plato could have one or more agents. Each agent has a role (assistant, user, tourist,
tutor, etc) and a set of components such as NLU, DM, DST, dialogue policy, and NLG 5. An agent could have one
explicit module for each one of these components or alternatively, some of these components could be combined
into one or more modules (e.g. joint or end-to-end agents) that can run sequentially or in parallel (Figure 4). All
components inherit from conversational_module , as shown in Figure 7, which facilitates communication between
any component via conversational_frames . Each one of these modules could be either rule-based or trained. In
the next subsections, we will describe how to build rule-based and trained modules for agents.
2.4.1
Rule-based modules
Plato provides rule-based versions of all components of a slot-ﬁlling conversational agent: slot_filling_nlu ,
slot_filling_dst , slot_filling_policy , slot_filling_nlg , and the default version of the Agenda-
Based User Simulator [38] agenda_based_us . These can be used for quick prototyping, baselines, or sanity checks.
Speciﬁcally, all of these components follow rules or patterns conditioned on the given ontology and sometimes on the
given database and should be treated as the most basic version of what each component should do.
5Plato supports external API calls for automatic speech recognition (ASR) and text to speech synthesis (TTS).
6

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 20, 2020
Figure 7: Agent components in Plato inherit from Conversational Module, which facilitates communication with other
components via Conversational Frames.
2.4.2
Trained modules
Plato supports training of agents’ components in an online (during the interaction) or ofﬂine (from data) manner, using
any machine learning framework. Virtually any model can be loaded into Plato as long as Plato’s Input/Output interface
is respected. For example, if a model is a custom NLU, it simply needs to inherit from Plato’s NLU abstract class
( plato.agent.component.nlu ), implement the necessary functions and pack/unpack the data into and out of the
custom model.
Plato internal experience
To facilitate online learning, debugging, and evaluation, Plato keeps track of its internal
experience using a utility called the dialogue_episode_recorder , which stores information about previous
dialogue states, actions taken, current dialogue states, utterances received and utterances produced, rewards received,
and a few other constructs including a custom ﬁeld that can be used to track anything else that cannot be contained
by the aforementioned categories. At the end of a dialogue or at speciﬁed intervals, each conversational agent will
call the train() function of each of its internal components, passing the dialogue experience as training data. Each
component then picks the parts it needs for training.
To use learning algorithms that are implemented inside Plato, any external data, such as DSTC2 data, should be parsed
into this Plato experience so that they may be loaded and used by the components currently under training. Alternatively,
users may parse the data and train their models outside of Plato and then load the trained model when they want to use
it for a Plato agent.
Parsing data with Plato
Plato provides parsers for DSTC2, MetaLWOZ, and Taskmaster data sets. These parsers
can be used to create training data for different components of the agent based on these well known data sets. For other
data sets the user should implement custom parsers to convert the data into Plato-readable format. Users can then load
the data into Plato (via options in the conﬁguration ﬁle) and train or ﬁne-tune the desired components.
Training components of conversational agents
There are two main ways to train each component of a Plato agent:
online, as the agent interacts with other agents, simulators, or users and ofﬂine, from data. For online training users can
determine the train schedule via hyper-parameters (train after how many dialogues, for how many epochs, how large
is the experience pool and the minibatch, etc.). Moreover, users can use algorithms implemented in Plato or external
frameworks such as TensorFlow, PyTorch, Keras, Ludwig, etc.
Model Training with Plato
Besides supervised models, Plato also provides some implementations of reinforcement
learning algorithms, such as Q-Learning or REINFORCE. Such algorithms can be used to train for example the agent’s
dialogue policy online, as the agent interacts with its environment. Plato provides the ﬂexibility to train after each
7

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 20, 2020
dialogue or at certain intervals. Note that while the reinforcement learning implementations are geared towards dialogue
policies, Plato and Ludwig support online training of any component.
Training with Ludwig
Although virtually any modeling framework could be used in Plato, for building and training
deep learning models for different components of conversational agents, Ludwig is a good choice when the aim is
quick prototyping or for educational purposes, as Ludwig allows users to train models without writing any code. Users
need to parse their data into .csv ﬁles, create a Ludwig conﬁguration YAML ﬁle that describes the architecture, which
features to use from the .csv and other parameters and then run a command in a terminal. This allows Plato to integrate
with Ludwig models, i.e. load or save the models, train and query them. The trained models could be loaded into the
modules through conﬁguration ﬁles. In the tutorial of Plato we provide examples of building and training language
understanding, generation, dialogue policy, and dialogue state tracking models for Plato using Ludwig.
Training with other frameworks
To use other learning frameworks (TensorFlow, PyTorch, Keras, etc.) users simply
need to write a class that interfaces with the trained model (i.e. parses the input Plato provides and processes the model’s
response into structures that Plato understands).
3
Plato Settings
As mentioned in the previous section, Plato supports interaction between a conversational agent and human agents,
simulated users, or other conversational agents. In this section we discuss the details of each conﬁguration.
3.1
Single Agent
A single Plato conversational agent can interact with a) human users, via text or speech, command line or graphical
interface; b) simulated users, via dialogue acts or text; and c) data (loading data into Plato in order to train components
or generating simulated data). The speciﬁcs of each interaction are speciﬁed in YAML conﬁguration ﬁles, which have
three main sections:
• GENERAL deﬁnes the mode of the interaction (e.g. with a simulator, via speech or text, etc), the number of
agents to spawn, paths to experience logs, and global arguments (passed to all components of each agent, for
convenience).
• DIALOGUE deﬁnes dialogue-speciﬁc settings, such as number of dialogues to run for, domain, etc.
• AGENT_i deﬁnes each agent’s settings, such as role, and component-speciﬁc settings, such as model paths,
learning rates, or other arguments each component needs. Note that the global arguments from the GENERAL
section are also passed to each component of each agent.
For an example, see Appendix A.5 or in the Plato codebase:
plato/example/config/application/CamRest_user_simulator.yaml
3.2
Multiple Agents
The basic controller plato.controller.basic_controller provides support for two agents interacting with each
other. Similar to the single agent conﬁguration, this can be done in dialogue acts or in free text. Interaction through
speech is also possible of course, for example the agents can exchange .wav ﬁles instead of text.
In this setting, it is possible to train all components of each agent on-line and concurrently or following any
desired schedule, e.g. alternating training, training in batches, etc. These options can be deﬁned in the yaml
conﬁguration ﬁle, which is very similar to the single agent case but deﬁnes multiple AGENT sections (see
plato/example/config/application/MultiAgent_train.yaml ). Plato provides some example multi-agent
reinforcement learning algorithm implementations, for concurrent dialogue policy learning.
Example use cases of multiple conversational agents include
• General Sum Games such as negotiations, where the agents’ objectives are not completely aligned (but are
not completely opposite either).
• Multi-party interactions, where one or more conversational agent interact with groups of other agents, for
example family dinner ordering, playing board games, etc.
8

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 20, 2020
• Smart Home, where a conversational agent is a point of contact between human agents, conversational agents,
and non-conversational agents.
To support complex use cases, a new controller may be necessary, to make sure that information is passed correctly
between the agents.
3.3
Graphical User Interface
Plato provides a dedicated controller to handle the GUI. In its current implementation it supports interaction between
two agents, as shown in Figure 8. This interface is just an example based on PySimpleGUI, a ﬂexible and easy to use
package.
Figure 8: Plato’s PySimpleGUI-based Graphical User Interface.
4
Conclusion
We have introduced the Plato Research Dialogue System, a ﬂexible platform for research and development of con-
versational AI agents. With an easy-to-understand extensible design, Plato provides the infrastructure required by
virtually any conversational AI agent architecture and supports any Python machine learning framework for the agent’s
components. As Plato continues to grow, more models, algorithms, and metrics will be integrated as well as more
examples, tutorials and data parsers to publicly available datasets.
Plato can be obtained from: https://github.com/uber-research/plato-research-dialogue-system
5
