Transfer Meets Hybrid: A Synthetic Approach for
Cross-Domain Collaborative Filtering with Text
Guangneng Hu, Yu Zhang, and Qiang Yang
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

ABSTRACT
Collaborative filtering (CF) is the key technique for recommender
systems (RSs). CF exploits user-item behavior interactions (e.g.,
clicks) only and hence suffers from the data sparsity issue. One
research thread is to integrate auxiliary information such as product
reviews and news titles, leading to hybrid filtering methods. Another
thread is to transfer knowledge from other source domains such as
improving the movie recommendation with the knowledge from the
book domain, leading to transfer learning methods. In real-world
life, no single service can satisfy a user’s all information needs. Thus
it motivates us to exploit both auxiliary and source information for
RSs in this paper. We propose a novel neural model to smoothly
enable Transfer Meeting Hybrid (TMH) methods for cross-domain
recommendation with unstructured text in an end-to-end manner.
TMH attentively extracts useful content from unstructured text via a
memory module and selectively transfers knowledge from a source
domain via a transfer network. On two real-world datasets, TMH
shows better performance in terms of three ranking metrics by com-
paring with various baselines. We conduct thorough analyses to
understand how the text content and transferred knowledge help the
proposed model.
KEYWORDS
Recommender Systems; Transfer Learning; Hybrid Filtering; Deep
Learning; Neural Networks; Collaborative Filtering;
ACM Reference Format:
Guangneng Hu, Yu Zhang, and Qiang Yang. 2019. Transfer Meets Hybrid: A
Synthetic Approach for Cross-Domain Collaborative Filtering with Text. In
Proceedings of ACM Conf (www’19). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 11 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
1
INTRODUCTION
Recommender systems are widely used in various domains and e-
commerce platforms, such as to help consumers buy products at
Amazon, watch videos on Youtube, and read articles on Google
News. Collaborative filtering (CF) is among the most effective ap-
proaches based on the simple intuition that if users rated items
similarly in the past then they are likely to rate items similarly in
the future. Matrix factorization (MF) techniques which can learn the
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a

www’19, 2019, SF
© 2019 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
latent factors for users and items are its main cornerstone [25, 35].
Recently, neural networks like multilayer perceptron (MLP) are used
to learn the interaction function from data [10, 17]. MF and neural
CF suffer from the data sparsity and cold-start issues.
One solution is to integrate CF with the content information,
leading to hybrid methods. Items are usually associated with con-
tent information such as unstructured text, like the news articles
and product reviews. These additional sources of information can
alleviate the sparsity issue and are essential for recommendation
beyond user-item interaction data. For application domains like rec-
ommending research papers and news articles, the unstructured text
associated with the item is its text content [1, 51]. Other domains
like recommending products, the unstructured text associated with
the item is its user reviews which justify the rating behavior of con-
sumers [33, 61]. Topic modelling and neural networks have been
proposed to exploit the item content and lead to performance im-
provement. Memory networks are widely used in question answering
and reading comprehension to perform reasoning [46]. The memo-
ries can be naturally used to model additional sources like the item
content [19], or to model a user’s neighborhood who consume the
common items with this user [11].
Another solution is to transfer the knowledge from relevant do-
mains and the cross-domain recommendation techniques address
such problems [3, 27, 39]. In real life, a user typically participates
several systems to acquire different information services. For exam-
ple, a user installs applications in an app store and reads news from a
website at the same time. It brings us an opportunity to improve the
recommendation performance in the target service (or all services)
by learning across domains. Following the above example, we can
represent the app installation feedback using a binary matrix where
the entries indicate whether a user has installed an app. Similarly, we
use another binary matrix to indicate whether a user has read a news
article. Typically these two matrices are highly sparse, and it is ben-
eficial to learn them simultaneously. This idea is sharpened into the
collective matrix factorization (CMF) [45] approach which jointly
factorizes these two matrices by sharing the user latent factors. It
combines CF on a target domain and another CF on an auxiliary
domain, enabling knowledge transfer [38, 59]. In terms of neural
networks, given two activation maps from two tasks, cross-stitch
convolutional network (CSN) [34] and its sparse variant [21] learn
linear combinations of both the input activations and feed these
combinations as input to the successive layers’ filters, and hence
enabling the knowledge transfer between two domains.
These two threads motivate us to exploit information from both
the content and cross-domain information for RSs in this paper. To
capture text content and to transfer cross-domain knowledge, we
propose a novel neural model, TMH, for cross-domain recommen-
dation with unstructured text in an end-to-end manner. TMH can
arXiv:1901.07199v1  [cs.AI]  22 Jan 2019

www’19, 2019, SF
Guangneng Hu, Yu Zhang, and Qiang Yang
attentively extract useful content via a memory network (MNet) and
can selectively transfer knowledge across domains by a transfer net-
work (TNet), a novel network. A shared layer of feature interactions
is stacked on the top to couple the high-level representations learned
from individual networks. On real-world datasets, TMH shows the
better performance in terms of ranking metrics by comparing with
various baselines. We conduct thorough analyses to understand how
the content and transferred knowledge help TMH.
To the best of our knowledge, TMH is the first deep model that
transfers cross-domain knowledge for recommendation with unstruc-
tured text in an end-to-end learning. Our contributions are summa-
rized as follows:
• The proposed TMH exploits the text content and transfers
the source domain using an attention mechanism which is
trained in an end-to-end manner. It is the first deep model that
transfers cross-domain knowledge for recommendation with
unstructured text using attention based neural networks.
• We interpret the memory networks to attentively exploit the
text content to match word semantics with user preferences.
It is among a few recent works on adopting memory networks
for hybrid recommendations.
• The transfer component can selectively transfer source items
with the guidance of target user-item interactions by the atten-
tive weights. It is a novel transfer network for cross-domain
recommendation.
• The proposed model can alleviate the sparsity issue including
cold-user and cold-item start, and outperforms various base-
lines in terms of ranking metrics on two real-world datasets.
The paper is organized as follows. We firstly introduce the prob-
lem formulation in Section 3. Then we present the memory com-
ponent to exploit the text content in Section 5.1 and the transfer
component to transfer cross-domain knowledge in Section 5.2 re-
spectively. We propose the neural model TMH for cross-domain
recommendation with unstructured text in Section 5, followed by its
model learning (Section 5.4) and complexity analyses (Section 5.5).
In Section 6, we experimentally demonstrate the superior perfor-
mance of the proposed model over various baselines (Sec. 6.2). We
show the benefit of both transferred knowledge and text content
for the proposed model in Section 6.3. We can reduce the amount
of cold users and cold items that are difficult to predict accurately
(Section 6.4) and hence alleviate the cold-start issues. We review
related works in Section 2 and conclude the paper in Section 7.
2
RELATED WORKS
Collaborative filtering Recommender systems aim at learning user
preferences on unknown items from their past history. Content-based
recommendations are based on the matching between user profiles
and item descriptions. It is difficult to build the profile for each user
when there is no/few content. Collaborative filtering (CF) alleviates
this issue by predicting user preferences based on the user-item
interaction behavior, agnostic to the content [9]. Latent factor models
learn feature vectors for users and items mainly based on matrix
factorization (MF) [25] which has probabilistic interpretations [35].
Factorization machines (FM) can mimic MF [43]. To address the
data sparsity, an item-item matrix (SPPM) is constructed from the
user-item interaction matrix in the CoFactor model [28]. It then
simultaneously factorizes the interaction matrix and the SPPMI
matrix in a shared item latent space, enabling the usage of co-click
information to regularize the learning of user-item matrix. In contrast
with our method, We use independent unstructured text and source
domain information to alleviate the data sparsity issue in the user-
item matrix.
Neural networks are proposed to push the learning of feature
vectors towards non-linear representations, including the neural
network matrix factorization (NNMF) and multilayer perceptron
(MLP) [10, 17]. The basic MLP architecture is extended to reg-
ularize the factors of users and items by social and geographical
information [56]. Other neural approaches learn from the explicit
feedback for rating prediction task [5, 61]. We focus on learning
from the implicit feedback for top-N recommendation [55]. CF mod-
els, however, suffer from the data sparsity issue.
Hybrid filtering Items are usually associated with the content infor-
mation such as unstructured text (e.g., abstracts of articles and re-
views of products). CF approaches can be extended to exploit the con-
tent information [1, 51, 52] and user reviews [16, 20, 33]. Combining
matrix factorization and topic modelling technique (Topic MF) is
an effective way to integrate ratings with item contents [2, 29, 33].
Item reviews justify the rating behavior of a user, and item ratings
are associated with their attributes hidden in reviews [14]. Topic MF
methods combine item latent factors in ratings with latent topics in
reviews [2, 33]. The behavior factors and topic factors are aligned
with a link function such as softmax transformation in the hidden
factors and hidden topics (HFT) model [33] or an offset deviation
in the collaborative topic regression (CTR) model [51]. The CTR
model assumes the item latent vector learnt from the interaction data
is close to the corresponding topic proportions learnt from the text
content, but allows them to be divergent from each other if necessary.
Additional sources of information are integrated into CF to alleviate
the data sparsity issues including knowledge graph [53, 60]. Con-
volutional networks (CNNs) have been used to extract the features
from audio signals for music recommendation [49] and from image
for product [16] and multimedia [6] recommendation. Autoencoders
are used to learn an intermediate representations from text [52, 58].
Recurrent networks [1] and convolutional networks [5, 23, 61] can
exploit the word order when learning the text representations.
Memory networks can reason with an external memory [46]. Due
to the capability of naturally learning word embeddings to address
the problems of word sparseness and semantic gap, a memory mod-
ule can be used to model item content [19] or the neighborhood of
users [11]. Memory networks can learn to match word semantics
with the specific user. We follow this research thread by using neural
networks to attentively extract important information from the text
content.
Cross-domain recommendation Cross-domain recommendation [3]
is an effective technique to alleviate sparse issue. A class of methods
are based on MF applied to each domain. Typical methods include
collective matrix factorization (CMF) [45] approach which jointly
factorizes two rating matrices by sharing the user latent factors and
hence it enables knowledge transfer. CMF has its heterogeneous [39]
variants, and codebook transfer [27]. The coordinate system trans-
fer can exploit heterogeneous feedbacks [40, 57]. Multiple source
domains [32] and multi-view learning [13] are also proposed for
integrating information from several domains. Transfer learning

Transfer Meets Hybrid: A Synthetic Approach for Cross-Domain Collaborative Filtering with Text
www’19, 2019, SF
(TL) aims at improving the performance of the target domain by
exploiting knowledge from source domains [38]. Similar to TL, the
multitask learning (MTL) is to leverage useful knowledge in multiple
related tasks to help each other [4, 59]. The cross-stitch network [34]
and its sparse variant [21] enable information sharing between two
base networks for each domain in a deep way. Robust learning is
also considered during knowledge transfer [15]. These methods treat
knowledge transfer as a global process with shared global parameters
and do not match source items with the specific target item given
a user. We follow this research thread by using neural networks to
selectively transfer knowledge from the source items. We introduce
a transfer component to exploit the source domain knowledge.
3
PROBLEM FORMULATION
For collaborative filtering with implicit feedback, there is a binary
matrix R ∈Rm×n to describe user-item interactions where each
entry rui ∈{0, 1} is 1 (called observed entries) if user u has an
interaction with item i and 0 (unobserved) otherwise:
rui =
 1,
if user-item interaction (u,i) exists;
0,
otherwise.
Denote the set of m-sized users by U and n items by I. Usually
the interaction matrix is very sparse since a user u ∈U only con-
sumed a very small subset of all items. Similarly for the task of item
recommendation, each user is only interested in identifying top-K
items. The items are ranked by their predicted scores:
ˆrui = f (u,i|Θ),
(1)
where f is the interaction function and Θ denotes model parameters.
For MF-based CF approaches, the interaction function f is fixed
and computed by a dot product between the user and item vectors.
For neural CF, neural networks are used to parameterize function f
and learn it from interaction data (see Section 4):
f (xui |P,Q,θf ) = ϕo(...(ϕ1(xui))...),
(2)
where input xui = [PT xu,QT xi] ∈R2d is concatenated from that
of user and item embeddings, which are projections of their one-hot
encodings xu ∈{0, 1}m and xi ∈{0, 1}n by embedding matrices
P ∈Rm×d and Q ∈Rn×d, respectively. The output and hidden
layers are computed by ϕo and {ϕl } in a neural network.
Similarly, for cross-domain recommendation, we have a target do-
main (e.g., news domain) user-item interaction matrix RT ∈Rm×nT
and a source domain (e.g., app domain) matrix RS ∈Rm×nS where
m = |U| and nT = |IT | (nS = |IS |) is the size of users U and target
items IT (source items IS). Note that the users are shared and hence
we can transfer knowledge across domains. We use u to index users,
i to target items, and j to source items. Let [j]u = (j1, j2, ..., js) be
the s-sized source items that user u has interacted with in the source
domain. Neural CF can be extended to leverage the source domain
and then the interaction function has the form of (see Section 5.2):
f (u,i, [j]u |Θ).
(3)
Usually, for hybrid filtering, the (target) domain also has the con-
tent information (e.g., product reviews). Denote by dui the content
text corresponding to user u and item i. It is a sequence of words
dui = (w1,w2, ...,wl) where each word w comes from a vocabulary
V and l = |dui | is the length of the text document. Neural CF can
be extended to leverage text and then the interaction function has the
form of (see Section 5.1):
f (u,i,dui |Θ).
(4)
For the task of item recommendation, the goal is to generate a
ranked list of items for each user based on her history records, i.e.,
top-N recommendations. We hope improve the recommendation
performance in the target domain with the help of both the content
and source domain information.
A synthetic model of transfer and hybrid estimates the probability
of his/her each observation conditioned on this user, the content text,
and the interacted source items:
ˆrui ≜p(rui = 1|u,dui, [j]u).
(5)
The equation sharpens the intuition behind the synthetic model, that
is, the conditional probability of whether user u will like the item i
can be determined by three factors: 1) his/her individual preferences,
2) the corresponding content text (dui), and 3) his/her behavior in a
related source domain ([j]u). The likelihood function of the entire
matrix RT is then defined as:
p(RT ) = ΠuΠip(rui |u,dui, [j]u).
(6)
We propose a novel neural model to learn the conditional proba-
bility in an end-to-end manner (see Section 5):
ˆrui = f (u,i,dui, [j]u |Θf ),
(7)
where f is the network function and Θf are model parameters.
The model consists of a memory network oui = fM(u,i,dui |ΘM)
to model unstructured text (Sec. 5.1) and a transfer network cui =
fT (i, [j]u |ΘT ) to transfer knowledge from the source domain (Sec. 5.2).
A shared feature interaction layer fS(oui, zui, cui |ΘS) where zui is
the non-linear representations of the (u,i) interaction, is stacked on
the top of the learned high-level representations from individual
networks (Sec. 5).
4
A BASIC NEURAL CF NETWORK
We adopt a feedforward neural network (FFNN) as the base neural
CF model to parameterize the interaction function (see Eq. (2)). The
basic network is similar to the Deep model in [7, 8] and the MLP
model in [17]. The base network consists of four modules with the
information flow from the input (u,i) to the output ˆrui as follows.
Input: (u,i) →1u, 1i This module encodes user-item interaction
indices. We adopt the one-hot encoding. It takes user u and item
i, and maps them into one-hot encodings 1u ∈{0, 1}m and 1i ∈
{0, 1}n where only the element corresponding to that index is 1 and
all others are 0.
Embedding: 1u, 1i →xui This module firstly embeds one-hot en-
codings into continuous representations xu = PT 1u and xi = QT 1i
by embedding matrices P and Q respectively, and then concatenates
them as xui = [xu,xi], to be the input of following building blocks.
Hidden layers: xui ⇝zui. This module takes the continuous repre-
sentations from the embedding module and then transforms through
several layers to a final latent representation zui = (...(ϕ1(xui)...).
This module consists of hidden layers to learn nonlinear interaction
between users and items.
Output : zui →ˆrui. This module predicts the score ˆrui for the given
user-item pair based on the representation zui from the last layer
of multi-hop module. Since we focus on one-class collaborative

www’19, 2019, SF
Guangneng Hu, Yu Zhang, and Qiang Yang
Table 1: Model Parameters of TMH.
Parameter
Dimension
Description
P
m × d
User embedding matrix
Q
nT × d
Target item embedding matrix
H
nS × d
Source item embedding matrix
A
L × 2d
Internal memory matrix
C
L × 2d
External memory matrix
W ,b
2d × d, d
Linear mapping weight and bias
for the user-item interaction
Wo,Wz,Wc
d × d
Linear mapping for outputs
of individual networks
h
3d
Weight of the shared layer
filtering, the output is the probability that the input pair is a positive
interaction. This can be achieved by a softmax layer: ˆrui = ϕo(zui) =
1
1+exp(−hT zui), where h is the parameter.
5
THE PROPOSED TMH MODEL
We describe the proposed Transfer Meet Hybrid (TMH) model
in this section. TMH models user preferences in the target do-
main by exploiting the text content and transferring knowledge
from a source/auxiliary domain. TMH learns high-level represen-
tations for unstructured text and source domain items such that the
learned representations can estimate the conditional probability of
that whether a user will like an item. This is done with a memory
network (Sec. 5.1) and a transfer network (Sec. 5.2), coupled by
the shared embeddings on the bottom and an interaction layer on
the top (Sec. 5.3). The entire network can be trained efficiently to
minimize a binary cross-entropy loss by back-propagation (Sec. 5.4).
We begin by describing the recommendation problem and the model
formulation before introducing the network architecture.
5.1
Matching Word Semantics with User
Preferences
We adapt a memory network (MNet) to integrate unstructured text
since it can learn to match word semantics with user preferences.
Memory networks have been used in recommendation to model
item content [22], model users’ neighborhood [12], and learn latent
relationships [48]. The local and centralized memories recommender
(LCMR) [19] uses a local memory module (LMM) to exploit the
text content by using MNet. We use memory networks (MNet) to
attentively extract important information from the text content via
the attention mechanism which can match word semantics with the
specific user and determine which words are highly relevant to the
user preferences.
MNet is a variant of memory augmented neural network which
can learn high-level representations of unstructured text with respect
to the given user-item interaction. The attention mechanism inherent
in the memory component can determine which words are highly
relevant to the user preferences.
The MNet consists of one internal memory matrix A ∈RL×2d
where L is the vocabulary size (typically L = 8, 000 after process-
ing [51]) and 2d is the dimension of each memory slot, and one
external memory matrix C with the same dimensions as A. The
function of the two memory matrices works as follows.
Target item
User
Q
P
Ƹ𝑟𝑢𝑖
𝑟𝑢𝑖
Loss 
𝒙𝑢𝑖
ReLU
𝒛𝑢𝑖
Source items
Softmax
i
u
H
…
𝒙𝑢
𝒙𝑖
Shared layer
MNet
C
A
Softmax
𝒎𝑘
𝑝𝑘
𝒄𝑘
Sum
𝒐𝑢𝑖
𝑑𝑢𝑖
Dot prod.
TNet
𝑗1
𝒙𝑗1
𝒙𝑗s
𝑗𝑠
Dot prod. 
α1
αs
H
ReLU
Doc
𝐖𝑜
𝐖𝑐
𝐖𝑧
Lin. 
map
Sum
𝒄𝑢𝑖
…
Figure 1: The Architecture of TMH. The memory net (MNet) is
to model unstructured text. The transfer net (TNet) is to trans-
fer cross-domain knowledge. The CF net is to learn the user-
item interaction function. The shared layer is to learn feature
interactions from the outputs of three individual networks.
Given a document dui = (w1,w2, ...,wl) corresponding to the
(u,i) interaction, we form the memory slots mk ∈R2d by mapping
each word wk into an embedding vector with matrix A, where k =
1, ...,l and the length of the longest document is the memory size. We
form a preference vector q(ui) corresponding to the given document
dui and the user-item interaction (u,i) where each element encodes
the relevance of user u to these words given item i as:
q(ui)
k
= xT
u m(u)
k
+ xT
i m(i)
k , k = 1, ...,l
(8)
where we split the mk = [m(u)
k ,m(i)
k ] into the user part m(u)
k
and
the item part m(i)
k . The xu and xi are the user and item embeddings
obtained by embedding matrices P ∈Rm×d and Q ∈RnT ×d respec-
tively. On the right hand of the above equation, the first term captures
the matching between preferences of user u and word semantics,
for example, the user is a machine learning researcher and he/she
may be more interested in the words such as “optimization” and
“Bayesian” than those of “history” and “philosophy”. The second
term computes the support of item i to the words, for example, the
item is a machine learning related article and it may support more the
words such as “optimization” and “Bayesian” than those of “history”
and “philosophy”. Together, the content-based/associative address-
ing scheme can determine internal memories with highly relevance
to the target user u regarding the words dui given the specific item i.
Actually we can compact the above two terms with a single vector
dot product by concatenating the embeddings of the user and the item
into xui = [xu,xi]: q(ui)
k
= xT
uimk . The neural attention mechanism
can adaptively learn the weighting function over the words to focus
on a subset of them. Traditional combination of words predefines a
heuristic weighting function such as average or weights with tf-idf
scores. Instead, we compute the attentive weights over words for a
given user-item interaction to infer the importance of each word’s

Transfer Meets Hybrid: A Synthetic Approach for Cross-Domain Collaborative Filtering with Text
www’19, 2019, SF
unique contribution:
p(ui)
k
= Sof tmax(q(ui)
k
) =
exp(βq(ui)
k
)
Í
k′ exp(βq(ui)
k′ )
,
(9)
which produces a probability distribution over the words in dui.
The neural attention mechanism allows the memory component to
focus on specific words while to place little importance on other
words which may be less relevant. The parameter β is introduced to
stabilize the numerical computation when the exponentials of the
softmax function are very large and it also can amplify or attenu-
ate the precision of the attention like a temperature [18] where a
higher temperature (i.e., a smaller β) produces a softer probability
distribution over words. We set β = d−1
2 by scaling along with the
dimensionality [50].
We construct the high-level representations by interpolating the
external memories with the attentive weights as the output:
oui =
Õ
k p(ui)
k
ck,
(10)
where the external memory slot ck ∈Rd is another embedding vec-
tor for word wk by mapping it with matrix C. The external memories
allows the storage of long-term knowledge pertaining specifically
to each word’s role in matching the user preference. In other words,
the content-based addressing scheme identifies important words in
a document acting as a key to retrieval the relevant values stored in
the external memory matrix C via the neural attention mechanism.
The attention mechanism adaptively weights words according to the
specific user and item. The final output oui represents a high-level,
summarized information extracted attentively from the text content
involved with relations between the user-item interaction (u,i) and
the corresponding words dui.
A more detailed discussion on Eq. (8) is in order. One alternative
to form the memory slotmk is to use the pre-trained word embedding
ek for word wk. If the dimensions of ek and mk are different, then
a matrix A can be used to build the connection between them as:
mk = Aek. We, however, compute the attentions on words using
the embeddings of the corresponding user and item, rather than the
pre-trained word embeddings themselves. The reason is as follows.
Though some sentimental words like ‘good’ and ‘bad’ are somewhat
important, they also depend on who wrote the reviews [47]. Some
people are critical and hence when they give a ‘good’ word in the
reivew, it means that the product is really good. While some people
are very kind, they usually give ‘good’ words to all products. We
address this issue by taking the user information into account when
computing the attention weights, as motivated by [47]. Moreover,
the sentimental words only exist in review-related corpus, and they
do not exist in non-emotional datasets like scientific articles. As
a result, our way of computing attentions on words is general and
applicable to many settings.
Remark I MNet attentively extracts useful content to match the
word semantics with specific user where different words in the text
document have different weights in the semantic factor. Memory
networks[54] are firstly proposed to address the question answering
(QA) task where memories are a short story and the query is a
question related to the text in which the answer can be reasoned by
the network. We can think of the recommendation with text as a QA
problem: the question to be answered is to ask how likely a user
prefers an item. The unstructured text is analogue to the story and
the query is analogue to the user-item interaction.
5.2
Selecting Source Items to Transfer
We introduce a transfer component to exploit the source domain
knowledge. A user may participate several systems to acquire dif-
ferent information needs, for example, a user installs apps in an
app store and reads news from other website. Cross-domain rec-
ommendation [3] is an effective technique to alleviate sparse issue
where transfer learning (including multitask learning) [4, 38, 59] is
a class of underlying methods. Typical methods include collective
matrix factorization (CMF) [45] approach which jointly factorizes
two rating matrices by sharing the user latent factors and hence it
enables knowledge transfer. The cross-stitch network [34] and its
sparse variant [21] enable information sharing between two base
networks for each domain in a deep way. These methods treat knowl-
edge transfer as a global process (shared global parameters) and do
not match source items with the specific target item given a user.
We propose a novel transfer network (TNet) which can selectively
transfer source knowledge for specific target item. Since the rela-
tionships between items are shown to be important in improving
recommendation performance [26, 36, 37, 41] for single domain, we
want to capture relationships between target item and source items
of a user. The central idea is to learn adaptive weights over source
items specific to the given target item during the knowledge transfer.
Given the source items [j]u = (j1, j2, ..., js) with which the user
u has interacted in the source domain, TNet learns a transfer vector
cui ∈Rd to capture the relations between the target item i and
source items given the user u. The underlying observations can be
illustrated in an example of improving the movie recommendation
by transferring knowledge from the book domain. When we predict
the preference of a user on the movie “The Lord of the Rings,”
the importance of her read books such as “The Hobbit,” and “The
Silmarillion” may be much higher than those such as “Call Me by
Your Name”.
The similarities between target item i and source items can be
computed by their dot products:
a(i)
j
= xT
i xj, j = 1, ...,s,
(11)
where xj ∈Rd is the embedding for the source item j by an em-
bedding matrix H ∈RnS ×d. This score computes the compatibility
between the target item and the source items consumed by the user.
For example, the similarity of target movie i = “The Lord of the
Rings,” with the source book j = “The Hobbit” may be larger than
that with the source book j′ = “Call Me by Your Name” (given a
user u).
We normalize similarity scores to be a probability distribution
over source items:
α(i)
j
= Sof tmax(a(i)
j ),
(12)
and then the transfer vector is a weighted sum of the corresponding
source item embeddings:
cui = ReLU (
Õ
j α(i)
j xj),
(13)
where we introduce non-linearity on the transfer vector by activation
function rectified linear unit (ReLU). Empirically we found that

www’19, 2019, SF
Guangneng Hu, Yu Zhang, and Qiang Yang
the activation function ReLU (x) = max(0,x) works well due to its
non-saturating nature and suitability for sparse data. The transfer
vector cui is a high-level representation, summarizing the knowledge
from the source domain as the output of the TNet. TNet can selec-
tively transfer representations from the corresponding embeddings
of source items with the guidance of the target user-item interaction.
A more detailed discussion on Eq. (13) is in order. Eq. (13) sharp-
ens the idea that the transfer component can selectively transfer
source items with the guidance of target user-item interactions. This
is achieved by attentive weights α(i)
j
(or a(i)
j ). When the source item j
is highly relevant to the target item i given useru, then the knowledge
from the source domain is easily flowing into the target domain with
a high influence weight. When the source item j is irrelevant to the
target item i given user u, then the knowledge from source domain is
hard to flow into the target domain with a small effect weight. This
selection is automatically determined by the transfer component, but
this is not easily achieved by the existing cross-domain recommen-
dation techniques like the multitask models such as collective matrix
factorization [45] and collaborative cross networks [21] (a variant of
cross-stitch networks [34]) which have multi-objective optimization.
Besides, we implicitly use the label information from the source
domain when generating the source items for a user, while CMF and
CSN explicitly exploit label information by learning to predict the
labels. As a result, the transfer component benefits from the source
domain knowledge in two-step: selecting instances (source items) to
transfer via source domain labels and re-weighting instances with
attentive weights.
Remark II The computational process of MNet and TNet is similar.
We firstly compute attentive weights over a collection of objects
(words in MNet and items in TNet). Then we summarize the high-
level representation as the output (the text representation oui in
MNet and the transfer vector cui in TNet), weighted by the attentive
probabilities which are computed by a content-based addressing
scheme.
5.3
TMH
The architecture for the proposed TMH model is illustrated in Fig-
ure 1 as a feedforward neural network (FFNN). The input layer
specifies embeddings of a user u, a target item i, and the correspond-
ing source items [j]u = (j1, ..., js). The content text dui is modelled
by the memories in the MNet to produce a high-level representation
oui. The source items are transferred into the transfer vector cui
with the guidance of (u,i) in the TNet. These computational pathes
are introduced in the above Sec. 5.1 and Sec. 5.2 respectively.
Firstly, we use a simple neural CF model (CFNet) which has one
hidden layer to learn a nonlinear representation for the user-item
interaction:
zui = ReLU (Wxui + b),
(14)
where W and b are the weight and bias parameters in the hidden
layer. Usually the dimension of zui is half of that xui in a typical
tower-pattern architecture.
The outputs from the three individual networks can be viewed
high-level features of the content text, source domain knowledge,
and the user-item interaction. They come from different feature space
learned by different networks. Thus, we use a shared layer on the
top of the all features:
ˆrui =
1
1 + exp(−hTyui),
(15)
where h is the parameter. And the joint representation:
yui = [Wooui,Wzzui,Wccui],
(16)
is concatenated from the linear mapped outputs of individual net-
works where matricesWo,Wz,Wc are the corresponding linear map-
ping transformations..
5.4
Learning
Due to the nature of the implicit feedback and the task of item rec-
ommendation, the squared loss (ˆrui −rui)2 may be not suitable since
it is usually for rating prediction. Instead, we adopt the binary cross-
entropy loss:L = −Í
(u,i)∈S rui log ˆrui +(1−rui) log(1−ˆrui), where
the training samples S = R+
T ∪R−
T are the union of observed target
interaction matrix and randomly sampled negative pairs. Usually,
|R+
T | = |R−
T | and we do not perform a predefined negative sampling
in advance since this can only generate a fixed training set of neg-
ative samples. Instead, we generate negative samples during each
epoch, enabling diverse and augmented training sets of negative
examples to be used.
This objective function has a probabilistic interpretation and
is the negative logarithm likelihood of the following likelihood
function: L(Θ|S) = Î
(u,i)∈R+
T ˆrui
Î
(u,i)∈R−
T (1 −ˆrui), where the
model parameters are: Θ = {P,Q,H,A,C,W ,b,Wo,Wz,Wc,h}.
Comparing with Eq. (6), instead of modeling all zero entries (i.e.,
the whole target matrix RT ), we learn from only a small subset
of such unobserved entries and treat them as negative samples by
picking them randomly during each optimization iteration (i.e., the
negative sampling technique). The objective function can be opti-
mized by stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and its variants like
adaptive moment method (Adam) [24]. The update equations are:
Θnew ←Θold −η∂L(Θ)/∂Θ, where η is the learning rate. Typical
deep learning library like TensorFlow (https://www.tensorflow.org)
provides automatic differentiation and hence we omit the gradient
equations ∂L(Θ)/∂Θ which can be computed by chain rule in back-
propagation (BP).
5.5
Complexity Analysis
In the model parameters Θ, the embedding matrices P, Q and H
contain a large number of parameters since they depend on the
input size of users and (target and source) items, and their scale
is hundreds of thousands. Typically, the number of words, i.e., the
vocabulary size is L = 8, 000 [51]. The dimension of embeddings
is typically d = 100. Since the architecture follows a tower pattern,
the dimension of the outputs of the three individual networks is also
limited within hundreds. In total, the size of model parameters is
linear with the input size and is close to the size of typical latent
factors models [45] and one hidden layer neural CF approaches [17].
During training, we compute the outputs of the three individual
networks in parallel using mini-batch stochastic optimization which
can be trained efficiently by back-propagation. TMH is scalable to
the number of the training data. It can easily update when new data
examples come, just feeding them into the training mini-batch. Thus,
TMH can handle the scalability and dynamics of items and users

Transfer Meets Hybrid: A Synthetic Approach for Cross-Domain Collaborative Filtering with Text
www’19, 2019, SF
Table 2: Datasets and Statistics.
Dataset
Domain
Statistics
Amount
Mobile News
Shared
#Users
15,890
Target
#News
84,802
#Reads
477,685
Density
0.035%
#Words
612,839
Avg. Words Per News
7.2
Source
#Apps
14,340
#Installations
817,120
Density
0.359%
Amazon Product
Shared
#Users
8,514
Target
#Clothes (Men)
28,262
#Ratings/#Reviews
56,050
Density
0.023%
#Words
1,845,387
Avg. Words Per Review
32.9
Source
#Products (Sports)
41,317
#Ratings/#Reviews
81,924
Density
0.023%
like in an online fashion. In contrast, the topic modeling related
techniques have difficulty in benefitting from these advantages to
this extent.
6
EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we conduct empirical study to answer the following
questions: 1) how does the proposed TMH model perform compared
with state-of-the-art recommender systems; and 2) how do the text
content and the source domain information contribute each to the
proposed framework. We firstly introduce the evaluation protocols
and experimental settings, and then we compare the performance of
different recommender systems. We further analyze the TMH model
to understand the impact of the memory and transfer component.
We also investigate that the improved performance comes from the
cold-users and cold-items to some extent.
6.1
Experimental Settings
Dataset We evaluate on two real-world cross-domain datasets. The
first dataset, Mobile1, is provided by a large internet company, i.e.,
Cheetah Mobile (http://www.cmcm.com/en-us/) [30]. The informa-
tion contains logs of user reading news, the history of app instal-
lation, and some metadata such as news publisher and user gender
collected in one month in the US. We removed users with fewer than
10 feedbacks. For each item, we use the news title as its text content.
Following the work [51], we filter stop words and use tf-idf to choose
the top 8,000 distinct words as the vocabulary. This yields a corpus
of 612K words. The average number of words per news is less than
10. The dataset we used contains 477K user-news reading records
and 817K user-app installations. There are 15.8K shared users which
enable the knowledge transfer between the two domains. We aim to
improve the news recommendation by transferring knowledge from
app domain. The data sparsity is over 99.6%.
The second dataset is a public Amazon dataset (http://snap.stanford.
edu/data/web-Amazon.html), which has been widely used to evalu-
ate the performance of collaborative filtering approaches [16]. We
1An anonymous version can be released later.
use the two categories of Amazon Men and Amazon Sports as the
cross-domain [16, 20]. The original ratings are from 1 to 5 where
five stars indicate that the user shows a positive preference on the
item while the one stars are not. We convert the ratings of 4-5 as
positive samples. The dataset we used contains 56K positive rat-
ings on Amazon Men and 81K positive ratings on Amazon Sports.
There are 8.5K shared users, 28K Men products, and 41K Sports
goods. We aim to improve the recommendation on the Men domain
by transferring knowledge from relevant Sports domain. The data
sparsity is over 99.7%. We filter stop words and use tf-idf to choose
the top 8,000 distinct words as the vocabulary [51]. The average
number of words per review is 32.9.
The statistics of the two datasets are summarized in Table 2. As
we can see, both datasets are very sparse and hence we hope improve
performance by transferring knowledge from the auxiliary domain
and exploiting the text content as well. Note that Amazon dataset
are long text of product reviews (the number of average words per
item is 32), while Cheetah Mobile is short text of news titles (the
number of average words per item is 7).
Evaluation Protocol For item recommendation task, the leave-one-
out (LOO) evaluation is widely used and we follow the protocol
in [17]. That is, we reserve one interaction as the test item for each
user. We determine hyper-parameters by randomly sampling another
interaction per user as the validation/development set. We follow
the common strategy which randomly samples 99 (negative) items
that are not interacted by the user and then evaluate how well the
recommender can rank the test item against these negative ones.
Since we aim at top-K item recommendation, the typical evaluation
metrics are hit ratio (HR), normalized discounted cumulative gain
(NDCG), and mean reciprocal rank (MRR), where the ranked list
is cut off at topK = {5, 10, 20}. HR intuitively measures whether
the reserved test item is present on the top-K list, defined as: HR =
1
|U |
Í
u ∈U δ(pu ≤topK), where pu is the hit position for the test
item of user u, and δ(·) is the indicator function. NDCG and MRR
also account for the rank of the hit position, respectively defined
as: NDCG =
1
|U |
Í
u ∈U
log 2
log(pu+1), and MRR =
1
|U |
Í
u ∈U
1
pu . A
higher value with lower cutoff indicates better performance.
Baselines We compare with various baselines, categorized as sin-
gle/cross domain, shallow/deep, and hybrid methods.
Baselines
Shallow method
Deep method
Single-Domain
BPRMF [44]
MLP [17]
Cross-Domain
CDCF [31], CMF [45]
MLP++, CSN [34]
Hybrid
HFT [33], TextBPR [16, 20]
LCMR [19]
Cross + Hybrid
CDCF++
TMH (ours)
• BPRMF, Bayesian personalized ranking [44], is a latent fac-
tor model based on matrix factorization and pair-wise loss. It
learns on the target domain only.
• HFT, Hidden Factors and hidden Topics [33], adopts topic
distributions to learn latent factors from text reviews. It is a
hybrid method.
• CDCF, Cross-domain CF with factorization machines (FM) [31],
is a cross-domain recommender which extends FM [43]. It is
a context-aware approach which applies factorization on the
merged domains (aligned by the shared users). That is, the
auxiliary domain is used as context. On the Mobile dataset,
the context for a user in the target news domain is his/her

www’19, 2019, SF
Guangneng Hu, Yu Zhang, and Qiang Yang
Table 3: Comparison Results on the Amazon Dataset. The best baselines are marked with asterisks and the best results are boldfaced.
Method
topK = 5
topK = 10
topK = 20
HR
NDCG
MRR
HR
NDCG
MRR
HR
NDCG
MRR
BPRMF
.0810
.0583
.0509
.1204
.0710
.0561
.1821
.0864
.0602
CDCF
.1295
.0920
.0797
.2070
.1167
.0897
.3841
.1609
.1015
CMF
.1498
.0950
.0771
.2224
.1182
.0863
.3573
.1521
.0957
HFT
.1077
.0815
.0729
.1360
.0907
.0767
.2782
.1252
.0854
TextBPR
.1517
.1208
.1104
.1777
.1291
.1138
.2268
.1414
.1171
CDCF++
.1314
.0926
.0800
.2102
.1177
.0901
.3822
.1605
.1016
MLP
.2100
.1486
.1283
.2836
.1697
.1371
.3820
.1899
.1426
MLP++
.2263
.1626
.1417
.2992
.1862
.1514
.3810
.2069
.1570
CSN
.2340*
.1680*
.1462*
.3018*
.1898*
.1552*
.3944*
.2091*
.1605*
LCMR
.2024
.1451
.1263
.2836
.1678
.1356
.3951
.1918
.1420
TMH
.2575
.1796
.1550
.3490
.2077
.1666
.4443
.2311
.1727
Improvement of TMH
10.04%
6.90%
6.01%
15.63%
9.43%
7.34%
12.65%
10.52%
7.60%
history of app installations in the source app domain. The
feature vector for the input is a sparse vector x ∈Rm+nT +nS
where the non-zero entries are as follows: 1) the index for
user id, 2) the index for target news id (target domain), and
all indices for his/her installed apps (source domain).
• CDCF++: We extend the above CDCF model to exploit the
text content. The feature vector for the input is a sparse vector
x ∈Rm+nT +nS +L where the non-zero entries are augmented
by the word features corresponding to the given user-item
interaction. In this way, CDCF++ can learn from both the
source domain and unstructured text information.
• CMF, Collective matrix factorization [45], is a multi-relation
learning approach which jointly factorizes matrices of indi-
vidual domains. Here, the relation is the user-item interaction.
On Mobile, the two matrices are A = “user by news” and
B = “user by app” respectively. The shared user factors P
enable knowledge transfer between two domains. Then CMF
factorizes matrices A and B simultaneously by sharing the
user latent factors: A ≈PTQA and B ≈PTQB. It is a shallow
model and jointly learns on two domains. CMF is a multi-
objective shallow model for cross-domain recommendation.
This can be thought of a non-deep transfer/multitask learning
approach for cross-domain recommendation.
• TextBPR extends the basic BPRMF model by integrating text
content. It computes the prediction scores by two parts: one
is the standard latent factors, same with the BPRMF; and the
other is the text factors learned from the text content. It has
two implementations, the VBPR model [16] and the TBPR
model [20] which are the same in essence.
• MLP, multilayer perceptron [17], is a neural CF approach
which learns the nonlinear interaction function using neural
networks. It is a deep model learning on the target domain
only.
• MLP++: We combine two MLPs by sharing the user embed-
ding matrix, enabling the knowledge transfer between two
domains through the shared users. It is a naive knowledge
transfer approach applied for cross-domain recommendation.
• CSN, Cross-stitch network [34], is a deep multitask learn-
ing model originally proposed for visual recognition tasks.
We use the cross-stitch units to stitch two MLP networks. It
learns a linear combination of activation maps from two net-
works and hence benefits from each other. Comparing with
MLP++, CSN enables knowledge transfer also in the hidden
layers besides the lower embedding matrices. CSN optimizes
a multi-objective problem for cross-domain recommendation.
This is a deep transfer learning approach for cross-domain
recommendation.
• LCMR, Local and Centralized Memory Recommender [19],
is a deep model for collaborative filtering with unstructured
Text. The local memory module is similar to our MNet except
that we only have one layer. LCMR is corresponding to the
MNet component of our model. This is a deep hybrid method.
Implementation For BPRMF, we use LightFM’s implementation2
which is a popular CF library. For CDCF and CDCF++, we adapt the
official libFM implementation3. For CMF, we use a Python version
reference to the original Matlab code4. For HFT and TextBPR, we
use the code released by their authors5. The word embeddings used
in the TextBPR are pre-trained by GloVe [42]6. For latent factor
models, we vary the number of factors from 10 to 100 with step
size 10. For MLP, we use the code released by its authors7. The
MLP++ and CSN are implemented based on MLP. The LCMR model
is similar to our MNet model and thus implemented in company.
Our methods are implemented using TensorFlow. Parameters are
randomly initialized from Gaussian N(0, 0.012). The optimizer is
Adam with initial learning rate 0.001. The size of mini batch is
128. The ratio of negative sampling is 1. The MLP and MLP++
follows a tower pattern, halving the layer size for each successive
higher layer. Specifically, the configuration of hidden layers in the
base MLP network is [64 →32 →16 →8] as reference in the
original paper [17]. For CSN, it requires that the number of neurons
in each hidden layer is the same and the configuration is [64] ∗4
(equals [64 →64 →64 →64]). We investigate several typical
configurations {16, 32, 64, 80} ∗4 . The dimension of embeddings is
d = 75.
2https://github.com/lyst/lightfm
3http://www.libfm.org
4http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~ajit/cmf/
5http://cseweb.ucsd.edu/~jmcauley/
6https://nlp.stanford.edu/projects/glove/
7https://github.com/hexiangnan/neural_collaborative_filtering

Transfer Meets Hybrid: A Synthetic Approach for Cross-Domain Collaborative Filtering with Text
www’19, 2019, SF
Table 4: Comparison Results on the Mobile Dataset. The best baselines are marked with asterisks and the best results are boldfaced.
Method
topK = 5
topK = 10
topK = 20
HR
NDCG
MRR
HR
NDCG
MRR
HR
NDCG
MRR
BPRMF
.4380
.3971
.3606
.4941
.4182
.3694
.5398
.4316
.3730
CDCF
.5066
.3734
.3293
.5325
.4089
.3441
.5452
.4374
.3519
CMF
.4789
.3535
.3119
.5846
.3879
.3263
.6662
.4086
.3320
HFT
.4966
.3617
.3175
.5580
.4093
.3365
.6547
.4379
.3445
TextBPR
.4948
.4298
.3826
.5466
.4499
.3913
.6123
.4682
.3958
CDCF++
.4981
.3693
.3267
.6055
.4041
.3411
.6244
.4335
.3491
MLP
.5380
.4121
.3702
.6176
.4381
.3810
.6793
.4529
.3851
MLP++
.5524
.4284
.3871
.6319
.4535
.3976
.6910
.4691
.4019
CSN
.5551*
.4323*
.3920*
.6327*
.4574*
.4025*
.6908
.4732*
.4068*
LCMR
.5476
.4189
.3762
.6311
.4460
.3874
.6927*
.4619
.3918
TMH
.5664
.4427
.4018
.6438
.4680
.4124
.6983
.4820
.4163
Improvement of TMH
2.04%
2.42%
2.51%
1.75%
2.32%
2.47%
0.81%
1.86%
2.34%
6.2
Comparison Results
In this section, we report the recommendation performance of dif-
ferent methods and discuss the findings. The comparison results are
shown in Table 4 and Table 3 respectively on the Mobile and Ama-
zon datasets where the last row is the relative improvement of ours
vs the best baseline. We have the following observations. Firstly, we
can see that our proposed neural models are better than all baselines
on the two datasets at each setting, including the base MLP network,
shallow cross-domain models (CMF and CDCF), deep cross-domain
models (MLP++ and CSN), and hybrid methods (HFT and TextBPR,
LCMR). These results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
neural model.
On the Mobile dataset, the differences between TMH and other
methods are more pronounced for small numbers of recommended
items including top-5 or top-10 where we achieve average 2.25%
relative improvements over the best baseline. This is a desirable
feature since we often recommend only a small number of top ranked
items to consumers to alleviate the information overload issue.
Note that the relative improvement of the proposed model vs. the
best baseline is more significant on the Amazon dataset than that on
the Mobile dataset, obtaining average 9.56% relative improvements
over the best CSN baseline, though the Amazon is sparser than the
Mobile (see Table 2). We show the benefit of combining text content
by comparing with CSN. One explanation is that the relatedness of
the Men and Sports domains is closer than that between the news and
app domains. This will benefit all cross-domain methods including
CMF, CDCF, MLP++, and CSN, since they exploit information
from both two domains. Another explanation is that the text content
contains richer information on the Amazon dataset. As it is shown in
Table 2, the average words in the product reviews are longer that in
the news titles. This will benefit all hybrid methods including HFT,
TextBPR, and LCMR. We show the benefit of transferring source
items by comparing with LCMR.
The hybrid TextBPR model composes a document representation
by averaging the words’s embeddings. This can not distinguish the
important words to match the user preferences. This may explain
that it has difficulty in improving the recommendation performance
when integrating text content. For example, it can not consistently
outperform the pure CF method, MLP. The cross-domain CSN model
transfers every representations from the source network with the
same coefficient. This may have a risk in transferring the noise
and harm the performance, as pointed out in its sparse variant [21].
On the Amazon dataset, it loses to the proposed model by a large
margin (though TMH leverages content information). In contrast, the
memory and transfer components are both selective to extract useful
information based on the attention mechanism. This may explain
that our model is consistently the best at all settings.
There is a possibility that the noise from auxiliary domain and
some irrelevance information contained in the unstructured text pro-
pose a challenge for exploiting them. This shows that the proposed
model is more effective since it can select useful representations
from the source network and attentively focus on the important
words to match preferences of users.
In summary, the empirical comparison results demonstrate the
superiority of the proposed neural model to exploit the text content
and source domain knowledge for recommendation.
6.3
Impact of Unstructured Text and Auxiliary
Domain
We have shown the effectiveness of the two memory and transfer
components together in the proposed framework. We now investigate
the contribution of each network to the TMH by eliminating the
impact of text content and source domain from it in turn:
• TMH\M\T: Eliminating the impact of both content and
source information from TMH. This is a collaborative fil-
tering recommender. Actually, it is equivalent to a single
hidden layer MLP model.
• TMH\M: Eliminating the impact of content information
(MNet) from TMH. This is a novel cross-domain recom-
mender which can adaptively select source items to transfer
via the attentive weights.
• TMH\T: Eliminating the impact of source information (TNet)
from TMH. This is a novel hybrid filtering recommender
which can attentively match word semantics with user prefer-
ences.
The ablation analyses of TMH and its components are shown in
Figure 2. The performance degrades when either memory or trans-
fer modules are eliminated. This is understandable since we lose

www’19, 2019, SF
Guangneng Hu, Yu Zhang, and Qiang Yang
HR
NDCG
MRR
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6

TMH\M\T
TMH\M
TMH\T
TMH
HR
NDCG
MRR
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65

TMH\M\T
TMH\M
TMH\T
TMH
HR
NDCG
MRR
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3

TMH\M\T
TMH\M
TMH\T
TMH
HR
NDCG
MRR
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35

TMH\M\T
TMH\M
TMH\T
TMH
Figure 2: Contributions from Unstructured Text (MNet) and
Cross-Domain Knowledge (TNet) on the Mobile (Top) and Ama-
zon (Bottom) Datasets.
some information. In other words, the two components can extract
useful knowledge to improve the recommendation performance. For
example, TMH\T and TMH\M respectively reduce 1.1% and 4.3%

Mobile dataset (they are 8.5% and 16.1% on Amazon), suggesting
that both memory and transfer networks learn essential knowledge
for recommendation. On the evaluated two datasets, removing the
memory component degrades performance worse than that of re-
moving the transfer component. This may be due to that the text
content contains richer information or the source domain contains
much more noise or both.
6.4
Improvement on Cold Users and Items
The cold-user and cold-item problems are common issues in recom-
mender systems. When new users enter into a system, they have no
history that can be exploited by the recommender system to learn
their preferences, leading to the cold-user start problem. Similarly,
when latest news are released on the Google News, there are no read-
ing records that can be exploited by the recommender system to learn
users’ preferences on them, leading to the cold-item start problem.
In general, it is very hard to train a reliable recommender system
and make predictions for users and items that have few interactions.
Intuitively, the proposed model can alleviate both the cold-user and
cold-item start issues. TMH alleviates the cold-user start issue in the
target domain by transferring his/her history from the related source
domain. TMH alleviates the cold-item start issue by exploiting the
associated text content to reveal its properties, semantics, and topics.
We now investigate that TMH indeed improves the performance
over the cold users and items by comparing with the pure neural
collaborative filtering method, MLP.
We analyse the distribution of missed hit users (MHUs) of TMH
and MLP (at cutoff 10). We expect that the cold users in MHUs of
MLP can be reduced by using the TMH model. The more amount we
0
50
100
150
200
Num of Training Examples
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Num of Missed Users
TMH
MLP
0
10
20
30
40
Num of Training Examples
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Num of Missed Users
TMH
MLP
Figure 3: The Missed Hit Users Distribution (not normalized)
Over the Number of Training Examples on the Mobile (Left)
and Amazon (Right) Datasets.
can reduce, the more effective that TMH can alleviate the cold-user
start issues. The results are shown in Figure 3 where the number of
training examples can measure the “coldness” of a user. Naturally,
the MHUs are most of the cold users who have few training examples.
As we can see, the number of cold users in MHUs of MLP is higher
than that of TMH. If the cold users are defined as those with less
than seven training examples, then TMH reduces the number of cold
users from 4,218 to 3,746 on the Amazon dataset, achieving relative
12.1% reduction. On the Mobile dataset, if the cold users are those
with less than ten training examples (Mobile is denser than Amazon),
then TMH reduces the number of cold users from 1,385 to 1,145
on the Mobile dataset, achieving relative 20.9% reduction. These
results show that the proposed model is effective in alleviating the
cold-user start issue. The results on cold items are similar and we
omit them due to the page limit.
7
CONCLUSION
It is shown that the text content and the source domain knowledge
can help improve recommendation performance and can be effec-
tively integrated under a neural architecture. The sparse target user-
item interaction matrix can be reconstructed with the knowledge
guidance from both of the two kinds of information, alleviating
the data sparse issue. We proposed a novel deep neural model,
TMH, for cross-domain recommendation with unstructured text.
TMH smoothly enables transfer meeting hybrid. TMH consists of a
memory component which can attentively focus important words to
match user preferences and a transfer component which can selec-
tively transfer useful source items to benefit the target domain. These
are achieved by the attentive weights learned automatically. TMH
shows better performance than various baselines on two real-world
datasets under different settings. The results demonstrate that our
combine model outperforms the baseline that relies only on memory
networks (LCMR [19]) and outperforms the baseline that relies only
on the transfer networks (CSN [34]). Additionally, we conducted
ablation analyses to understand contributions from the two memory
and transfer components, showing the necessity to combine transfer
and hybrid. We quantify the amount of missed hit cold users (and
items) that TMH can reduce by comparing with the pure CF method,
showing that TMH is able to alleviate the cold-start issue.
In real world services, data sources may belong to different
providers (e.g. product reviews provided by Amazon while social re-
lations provided by Facebook). The data privacy is a big issue when

Transfer Meets Hybrid: A Synthetic Approach for Cross-Domain Collaborative Filtering with Text
www’19, 2019, SF
we combine the multiple data sources. In future work, it is worth de-
veloping new learning techniques to learn a combined model while
protecting user privacy.
