Applying Transfer Learning for Improving Domain-Specific 
Search Experience Using Query to Question Similarity  
Ankush Chopra 
 Artificial Intelligence, CoE 
 Fidelity Investments 
 Bengaluru, Karnataka, India 

Shruti Agrawal 
 Artificial Intelligence, CoE 
 Fidelity Investments 
 Bengaluru, Karnataka, India 

Sohom Ghosh 
 Artificial Intelligence, CoE 
 Fidelity Investments 
 Bengaluru, Karnataka, India 

 
ABSTRACT 
Search is one of the most common platforms used to seek 
information. However, users mostly get overloaded with results 
whenever they use such a platform to resolve their queries. 
Nowadays, direct answers to queries are being provided as a part of 
the search experience. The question-answer (QA) retrieval process 
plays a significant role in enriching the search experience. Most 
off-the-shelf Semantic Textual Similarity models work fine for 
well-formed search queries, but their performances degrade when 
applied to a domain-specific setting having incomplete or 
grammatically ill-formed search queries in prevalence. In this 
paper, we discuss a framework for calculating similarities between 
a given input query and a set of predefined questions to retrieve the 
question which matches to it the most. We have used it for the 
financial domain, but the framework is generalized for any domain-
specific search engine and can be used in other domains as well. 
We use Siamese network [6] over Long Short-Term Memory 
(LSTM) [3] models to train a classifier which generates un-
normalized and normalized similarity scores for a given pair of 
questions. Moreover, for each of these question pairs, we calculate 
three other similarity scores: cosine similarity between their 
average word2vec embeddings [15], cosine similarity between their 
sentence embeddings [7] generated using RoBERTa [17] and their 
customized fuzzy-match score. Finally, we develop a meta-
classifier using Support Vector Machines [19] for combining these 
five scores to detect if a given pair of questions is similar. We 
benchmark our model’s performance against existing State Of The 
Art (SOTA) models on Quora Question Pairs (QQP) dataset1 as 
well as a dataset specific to the financial domain. After evaluating 
its performance on the financial domain specific data, we conclude 
that it not only outperforms several existing SOTA models on F1 
score but also has decent accuracy. 
 
CCS CONCEPTS 
• Computing methodologies • Artificial intelligence • Natural 
Language Processing 
KEYWORDS 
Deep learning, Natural language processing, Question similarity, 
Semantic textual similarity, Syntactic text similarity 
ACM Reference format: 
Ankush Chopra, Shruti Agrawal and Sohom Ghosh. 2020. Applying 
Transfer Learning for improving Domain-Specific Search Experience using 
Query to Question Similarity: In Proceedings of 2020 3rd International 
Conference on Algorithms, Computing and Artificial Intelligence 
(ACAI’20). Sanya, China, 8 pages.  
1 INTRODUCTION 
Enterprise search platforms usually cater to the needs of users who 
look for information relating to a certain domain. A lot of work 
relating to text-similarity has been done in recent times. However, 
most of these works are generic. Let’s think of an instance where a 
user searches for “poa”. What he means, in the financial domain is 
“What is power of attorney?”. The generic models do not perform 
well in these kinds of scenarios. They are not able to effectively 
measure the similarity between search queries and underlying 
content. For a given domain, the search space is limited. In general, 
novel search queries are not seen very often. However, there is a lot 
of variability in how the same information need is expressed in the 
form of actual search queries. For instance, “how to open an 
Individual Retirement Acc.?” and “Tell me the steps that I need to 
follow for opening an IRA account” carry the same sense but are 
presented differently. Languages are ever evolving. They are the 
means to express one’s thoughts and emotions. Thus, they are used 
very creatively. Users looking for answers to their queries use 
variations of sentences which are semantically similar, but they 
may be syntactically different (such as short and misspelt queries). 
We already have answers for the queries which are frequently 
searched. A model capable of mapping a new variation of a 
question to those in the pre-existing question corpus enables us in 
providing direct answers to users’ queries. For developing such a 
model, a lot of domain-specific data is needed. Due to the 
unavailability of such a huge corpus, we use transfer learning. 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full 
citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others 
than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, 
or republish,to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific 

ACAI’20, December 24-26, 2020, Sanya, China 
© 2020 Association for Computing Machinery. 
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-8811-5/20/12 …$15.00 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3446132.3446403
This is the author's version.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3446132.3446403

ACAI’20, December, 2020, Sanya, China 
A. Chopra et al. 
 
 
 
Firstly, we use the publicly available QQP dataset 1 to build a 
baseline model and then fine-tune it further using the limited 
domain-specific data that we have. The data mentioned latter 
consists of the logs of searches and chats which were done on 
Fidelity.com. This data relates to the financial domain. 
In this model, we use Siamese [6] LSTM [3] architecture which 
takes two sentences as input and detects if they are similar. It uses 
readily available 300-dimensional word2vec embedding [15] 
trained on Google News corpus to represent the inputs numerically. 
Its final layer learns cosine similarities between vector 
representations of the sentences. While implementing this, we 
realize that users do not always write search queries in the form of 
questions. Moreover, most of them are not grammatically correct. 
Analyzing the instances which were misclassified by this model, 
we discover that short, mistyped and grammatically incorrect 
queries degrade its performance. Thus, it is essential to come up 
with a framework which is capable of dealing with these 
shortcomings present in the search queries of the domain-specific 
data. To overcome these shortcomings, we propose a model which 
ensembles normalized and un-normalized scores generated by the 
baseline model along with a novel fuzzy-match score and a cosine 
similarity score between their average word2vec embedding [15].  
Recent advancements in NLP using deep learning have resulted in 
several pre-trained transformer-based embedding models like 
BERT [11]. These models outperform existing embedding-based 
models like word2vec [15] and GloVe [20] in most of the NLP 
tasks. Thus, as an enhancement, we perform several experiments 
using cosine similarities between sentence embedding [7] of input 
queries generated using XLNet [1], BERT [11], DistillBERT [16] 
and RoBERTa [17]. We observe that by including RoBERTa, the 
precision of the final classification model is the best for our 
domain-specific dataset. 
Since this model uses five similarity scores, it would take a lot of 
time to scan through the entire set of curated questions for finding 
out that question which matches the most to the input query. Thus, 
we have also come up with an efficient retrieval system that can 
return the best-matched question for any incoming customer query 
in real-time. 
 
Our main contributions are as follows: 
• 
Proving that off-the-shelf SOTA models do not perform 
well on domain specific data 
• 
Presenting a novel architecture for measuring similarity 
between search query and questions 
• 
Using transfer learning to enhance its performance on 
data specific to the financial domain 
• 
Successfully deploying it in production for providing 
direct answers to searches done by users in real-time 
 
This paper is structured into seven major sections. This section 
introduced readers to the journey which led us to come up with this 
novel framework. This framework improves users’ search 
experience using semantic and syntactic textual similarity. In the 
 
1 https://data.quora.com/First-Quora-Dataset-Release-Question-Pairs 
next section, we extensively explore the related frameworks which 
are already existing. The third section states our problem statement 
formally. It also familiarizes everyone with the datasets being used. 
We narrate the methodologies used to develop the new 
framework/model in the fourth section. In the fifth section, we 
elucidate several experiments which we have conducted and their 
results. The section after that states how we have effectively put 
this into production. We conclude and reveal our plans to improve 
this model in the last section. 
2 RELATED WORKS 
This section discusses the works which are relevant for us and have 
been done previously along with their performances on standard 
semantic textual similarity tasks. Siamese Recurrent Neural 
architectures have been used by Mueller et. al in their paper [6]. 
They propose Manhattan LSTM Model which gives Pearson 
correlation of 0.8822 and Spearman’s correlation of 0.8345 on 
SICK semantic textual similarity task [9]. In [2], Chali et al. 
describe how they re-define existing SOTA by using deep learning-
based architectures like LSTM [3], LSTM with attention [10], Bi-
directional LSTM stacking with attention and stacked Bi-
directional LSTM with attention which includes a Convoluted 
Neural Network (CNN) with max-pooling over it. The latter one 
provides the best accuracy i.e. 88.8% while detecting duplicate 
questions in the QQP dataset1. Their work specifically focuses on 
online forums. Tan et al. in their paper [5] illustrate how they use 
Multi-way Attention Networks for developing a classifier capable 
of detecting duplicate questions, identifying paraphrases, inferring 
natural language and selecting an answer from a given text corpus. 
Yang et al. [14] propose a hierarchical attention network for 
representing text documents. It consists of two parts: word encoder 
followed by word attention. The second part consists of sentence 
encoder followed by sentence attention. Although they focus 
mainly on classification, their method of combining word vectors 
is quite innovative. Wang et al. in their paper [13] have shown how 
similarity between texts can be calculated using lexical 
decomposition and composition. Their model consists of 5 parts: 
word 
representation, 
semantic 
matching, 
decomposition, 
composition and similarity assessing. Its performance is better for 
the task of question answering than for identification of paraphrases. 
Wang et al. in [12] deal with the Natural Language Sentence 
Matching (NLSM) task in two phases. Firstly, they develop a model 
consisting of 5 layers: word representation layer, context 
representation layer, matching layer, aggregation layer and 
prediction layer. Their main novelty lies in the second phase where 
they propose four different matching perspectives: full matching, 
max-pooling matching, attentive matching and max-attentive 
matching. They evaluate this bilateral multi-perspective matching 
model (BiMPM) on three different NLSM tasks namely answer 
selection for questions, natural language inference and paraphrase 
identification. BiMPM’s performance redefines the state-of- the-art 
benchmark in detecting paraphrase on the QQP dataset1 and 
inferring natural language on the SNLI dataset2. Devlin et. al in 
their 
paper 
Bidirectional 
Encoder 
Representations 
from 
Transformers (BERT) [11] introduce a novel concept of masking 
to create language models and elucidate how they do the 
bidirectional training using Transformers [10]. This model for 
2 https://nlp.stanford.edu/projects/snli/ 

Applying Transfer Learning for Improving Domain-Specific 
Search Experience Using Query to Question Similarity 
ACAI’20, December, 2020, Sanya, China 
 
 
detecting duplicate questions, achieves an accuracy of 89.30% and 
F1 score (un-weighted, macro average) of 0.721 on QQP dataset1 
as per the GLUE3 [21] leaderboard. Two variants of BERT [11] 
namely RoBERTa [17] and DistilBERT [16] were proposed by Liu 
et al. and Sanh et al. respectively. In the paper RoBERTa [17], Liu 
et al. narrate how they change the masking pattern of BERT [11] 
dynamically, remove the objective of the next sentence prediction 
and train it for more time on longer text sequences. It gives an 
accuracy of 90.20% and F1 score of 0.743 on QQP1 dataset as 
mentioned in the GLUE3 [21] leaderboard. The DistilBERT [16] 
model uses knowledge distillation process while pre-training. They 
use three kinds of loss functions: cosine-distance loss, the triple loss 
(which occurs when language models are combined) and 
distillation loss. On QQP dataset1, they achieve an accuracy of 
88.5%. Yang et al. in their paper [1], propose XLNet which is based 
on [8] Transformer-XL. It uses auto-regressive methods and auto-
encoding methods with the objective of permutation language 
modelling. It overcomes the shortcomings of BERT [11] model like 
neglecting dependency between masked positions. As per the 
GLUE3 [21] leaderboard, the ensemble of XLNet models for 
detecting duplicate questions achieves an accuracy of 90.4% and 
F1 score of 0.747 on QQP1 dataset. In [4] Sakata et al. discuss how 
they use question-question similarity (by TSUBAKI) and question-
answer relevance using BERT [11] to retrieve Frequently Asked 
Questions effectively. Reimers et al. in [7] discuss Sentence-BERT. 
They create it by modifying siamese architecture and adding a 
triplet network with pre-trained BERT. They experiment with three 
kinds of objective functions: classification, regression and triplet. 
They perform the evaluation on Semantic Text Similarity tasks and 
SentEval transfer tasks. This Sentence-BERT outperforms existing 
ways of creating sentence embedding. However, none of the 
models described here is fine-tuned for search queries specific to a 
given domain like finance. 
3 PROBLEM STATEMENT 
3.1 Task Definition 
For a given input query r and a pre-existing curated set of questions 
{q1, q2..., qn, qn+1}, we need to develop an algorithm which selects 
one question q ∈ {q1, q2...,qn, qn+1} such that the similarity between 
r and q is the maximum. The supervised learning-based re-
formulation of the problem is as follows:  
Given a set of question-question pairs and their corresponding 
labels {(q1, q2, l(1,2)) , (q3, q4, l(3,4)) ... (qn, qn+1, l(n,n+1))} where each 
label l(i,j) ∈ {0,1} denotes whether qi and qj is identical (when equal 
to 1) or not (when equal to 0). We develop a model which is capable 
of detecting if a given question pair (qx, qy) means the same. It also 
returns a score which states the similarity between qx and qy. 
 
3.2 Understanding the data set 
We have primarily used two datasets. The first one consists of the 
QQP dataset1 which is available publicly. It has 404,290 question-
question pairs out of which 149,263 instances are duplicate. It has 
total 537,361 distinct questions. Out of the entire dataset, 323,479 
question pairs have been used for training the initial Siamese [6] 
LSTM [3] model. Its event rate is 37%. 
 
3 https://gluebenchmark.com/leaderboard (as on 28th September 2020) 
The other dataset is internal to our organization, Fidelity 
Investments. It is from the financial domain. It comprises of queries 
frequently asked or searched by users. Furthermore, questions 
raised by them while chatting with customer representatives are 
also used. 6,391 question pairs are randomly picked. Each of them 
is assigned a label manually. It has a total of 6,419 unique 
questions. It is used for initial training of this Siamese [6] LSTM 
[3] model as well as for the training of Support Vector Machine 
based meta-classifier [19]. Out of these 6,391 instances, 5,196 
instances are used for training and 1,195 instances are used for 
validation. The event rate in each case is 67%. There is no instance 
which is common to both of these datasets. 
4 METHODOLOGIES 
We initiate by describing an important component of the proposed 
ensemble model, the Siamese [6] LSTM [3] network. LSTM [3] 
models are a special case of Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs). 
They can remember the things which are essential and forget the 
rest. This makes them more useful and provides a longer memory. 
There are two LSTM [3] networks to process one question each. 
Siamese [6] network is a type of neural network where weights of 
the network are shared between different intermediate layers. This 
can be understood as more than one sub-network which have the 
same configurations and weights of parameters. As the networks’ 
weights for both the inputs are same, this network performs well on 
the tasks like the comparison of texts or finding similarity between 
input vectors. These input vectors are created using word2vec [15]. 
It takes two questions as input and returns their similarity score. It 
is tuned to produce better precision of the positive class. Its 
hyperparameters are mentioned in Figure 1. We use this component 
to generate the un-normalized and normalized scores. We also 
calculate cosine similarity scores using the average embedding of 
input texts. Furthermore, we use customized fuzzy-match score and 
cosine similarity based on sentence embedding [7] generated using 
RoBERTa [17]. We describe each of these five scores in detail in 
the subsequent parts of this section. For combining these scores, we 
use a support vector machine [19] based meta-classifier. It is 
elaborated at the end of this section. The proposed architecture 
consists of the following 5 features (similarity scores): 
 
4.1 Un-normalized score 
This similarity score is computed using the Siamese model trained 
on un-normalized question pairs. Some pre-processing steps are 
involved before sending the input to the Siamese [6] LSTM [3] 
architecture to compute the un-normalized score. These pre-
processing steps are as follows:  
Basic cleaning: This includes common pre-processing steps like 
converting to lower case, removal of extra spaces, removal of 
punctuation marks and other regex-based replacements. 
Contractions replacements: This replaces the contractions with 
their expanded form. E.g. “I’ve” gets changed to “I have” and 
“hadn’t’ve” gets replaced by “had not have”. 
 
Apart from the above-mentioned steps, we also did the following 
pre-processing which is specific to our internal dataset from the 
financial domain:                                                                                       

ACAI’20, December, 2020, Sanya, China 
A. Chopra et al. 
 
 
 
Product variation normalization: Variations of common product 
entities get normalized into one token using this module. This 
normalization happens using a predefined mapping of the 
variations of different product and service names. E.g. 401(K) gets 
mapped to 401k.                                                                                      
Acronym identification and replacement: It helps in identifying 
the presence of an acronym and replaces it with its appropriate 
expansion. It also uses a predefined mapping of acronyms and their 
definitions. E.g. “What is an IRA?”, “what is an Individual 
retirement account (IRA)?” and “What are IRAs?” are treated the 
same and they become “What is/are individual retirement 
account?”. 
 
Figure 1:Siamese LSTM Model Hyper-parameters 
4.2 Normalized score 
This similarity score is computed using the Siamese model on 
normalized question pairs. The normalized score generation 
process includes the following pre-processing steps in addition to 
the steps mentioned above: 
Lemmatization: It uses Spacy’s4 Part of Speech (PoS) tagger and 
converts all the words which are identified as verbs to their base 
forms.                                                                                              
Singularization: It converts plural common nouns to their singular 
form. Spacy4 PoS tagger is used to identify the candidate words to 
be passed through this submodule.  
The above normalization of the query helps in sending the de-
noised and base forms of possible variations of the inputs to the 
model. We keep the un-normalized score along with this to make 
sure that we don’t lose any useful information and let the ensemble 
model assign a weight to each of these. 
4.3 Average embedding similarity score 
This score is useful in the cases where the input query is 
grammatically incorrect. Users often tend to write incomplete 
search queries making it difficult for models to identify meaningful 
features related to sentence structure. For example: “eft routing 
number” and “what is the routing number for electronic fund 
transfer” don’t seem similar to the model. We get the embedding 
for each word from the embedding matrix of the Siamese [6] LSTM 
[3] model. The 300-dimensional embedding vector for each word 
of the sentence is added and divided by the total number of words 
to get the resultant average embedding vector representation for the 
sentence. The average embedding based similarity score is then 
calculated using the dot product of the input query vector with that 
of each question in the QA corpus. 
 
4 https://spacy.io/ 
4.4 Customized fuzzy-match score 
Often users performing search inadvertently misspell words. The 
deep learning model we trained takes care of semantic matching 
between the sentences. However, it fails when misspelt words 
occur because it treats such words as words which are not present 
in its vocabulary. This brings in the need for a fuzzy-match score. 
This score helps in taking care of misspelt query inputs and returns 
the similarity score that represents the extent to which a query 
matches a question syntactically. Details of this novel method are 
mentioned in Algorithm 1. This algorithm demonstrates the 
computation of the customized fuzzy-match score for 2 sentences. 
We tokenize the sentences after basic cleaning and replacements 
and check for overlap/intersection of tokens between them. If there 
is no overlap, the custom fuzzy-match score is 0. In cases with 
overlap, for each word exclusive to sentence 1, we check how 
similar is it with words exclusive to sentence 2. To calculate this 
similarity, we follow 2 ways: 
Syntactic match: This uses the normalized Levenshtein distance 
which ranges from 0 to 1 to compute the syntactic difference 
between a given pair of words. The syntactic match score (1 – 
normalized Levenshtein distance) is compared to the pre-defined 
threshold (0.6). If the score fails to cross the threshold, implying 
that the two words are not syntactically similar, then we move on 
to the next step to check semantic similarity. 
Semantic match: We compute the cosine similarity between the 
two word vectors and scale it to get the semantic score between 0 
to 1. This is compared with a threshold (0.55) which is estimated 
empirically. 
As both the scores denote the similarity scaled between 0 to 1, these 
are added and used further in computation of the final custom score. 
The final score is the ratio between the total overlap/similarity 
between the tokens and the total number of unique meaning tokens 
considering both the sentences. The thresholds for the syntactic and 
semantic score were defined after experimentation with a grid of 
values on a small subset of training data. 
 
 For example, a customer types “What is cost for factonal trading?” 
and we have a question in QA bank “What are fees or charges for 
fractional trading?”. After basic pre-processing, words exclusive to 
sentence1 are [“cost”, “factnol”] and sentence2 are [“fees”, 
“charges”, “fractional”]. The algorithm would first check for the 
syntactic score of (“cost”, “fees”). As this would fail to cross the 
pre-defined threshold, it would then compute the semantic score of 
the pair. Since the semantic score would cross the threshold to 
imply that the words have a similar meaning, we would then move 
on to the next word pair and so on. The customized fuzzy-match 
score will thus take care of pairs (“cost”,”charges”) and 
(“cost”,”fees”) using its semantic score and it would take care of 
(“factnol”,”fractional”) using the syntactic score. 
Any off-the-shelf syntactic match model would return a lower score 
for the above two sentences considering the syntactic difference 
between “fees”/“charges” and “cost”. But, this custom fuzzy-match 
score takes care of any such instances by bringing in the semantic 
similarity feature as well. The novelty of the algorithm lies in the 
fact that it uses word2vec [15] similarity to calculate custom fuzzy 
scores and thus, performs better than off-the-shelf syntactic 
similarity models. 

Applying Transfer Learning for Improving Domain-Specific 
Search Experience Using Query to Question Similarity 
ACAI’20, December, 2020, Sanya, China 
 
 
4.5 RoBERTa based score 
Recently, there have been major advancements in the field of NLP. 
Using pre-trained embeddings is the new normal. We’ve many 
BERT [11] like Transformer [10] based models that outperform the 
existing embeddings like word2vec [15] and GloVe [20] for many 
NLP tasks like question answering, text summarization and so on. 
So, as an enhancement, we include cosine similarity between 
sentence embedding [7] of questions generated using RoBERTa 
[17] large model as one more feature to the meta-classifier. This 
universal sentence embedding is created by using mean token 
pooling. It has been trained on SNLI2 and MultiNLI5 dataset. By 
including this score, the accuracy improves on the internal test set. 
   To combine these scores, we trained a support vector machine 
[19] based meta-classifier model. This is outlined in Figure 2. The 
hyper-parameters of this model, producing the best output are: 
degree = 2, kernel type = polynomial and regularization (C) = 0.2. 
    
To summarize, the proposed architecture computes the similarity 
between a search query and the questions present in a QA corpus 
by providing these five scores as inputs to the meta-classifier 
(SVC). 
5 EXPERIMENTATION AND RESULTS 
In this section, we describe various experiments which we have 
done and their results. For representing input texts numerically, we 
use word2vec [15] embedding. We train a Siamese [6] LSTM [3] 
network to compute the similarity score between questions using 
the QQP dataset1. We tune it to produce the best precision for the 
positive class. While evaluating this Siamese LSTM [3] network, 
we find that although it works fine on QQP dataset1, it fails at 
various places on domain-specific search queries. As our use-case 
is specific to the financial domain, we use the transfer learning 
approach to enable the model to generalize on the domain-specific 
vocabulary. We add our internal financial domain-specific data to 
the training process and tune it to improve the precision of the 
positive class. Furthermore, we calculate the similarity score using 
Siamese [6] LSTM [3] network after normalizing the search 
queries. Even then the model’s performance does not improve 
significantly. 
Analysing 
the 
misclassified 
instances, 
we 
comprehend that the failure is due to incomplete, misspelt and 
grammatically incorrect queries. 
Some examples are as follows:  
“select sell all shares instead” and “do i choose just sell or sell all 
shares” 
“can you explain to me what a mutual fund is” and “and i also want 
to know about mutual funds” 
“Fractional Trading” and “What does Factnol Trding means”  
 
To tackle these issues, we experiment with different similarity 
scores like fuzzy-match score and cosine similarity based on 
average embedding. We combine these four scores (un-normalized,  
 
 
5 https://cims.nyu.edu/~sbowman/multinli/ 
Algorithm 1: Calculate customized Fuzzy Intersection Ratio 
between two questions 
 
 
normalized, average embedding and fuzzy-matching based) using 
a Support Vector Machine [19] based meta-classifier (SVC). When 
compared to the best performing SOTA model (RoBERTa 
mentioned in Table : I), M1 (SVC on 4 scores) shows an 

ACAI’20, December, 2020, Sanya, China 
A. Chopra et al. 
 
 
 
improvement of 0.09 and 0.25% on F1-score (un-weighted, macro 
average) and Accuracy respectively on our internal test set. For 
improving its performance further, we try to combine one more 
score. It is the cosine similarity score between sentence embeddings 
[7] of questions generated using pre-trained transformer-based 
models like XLNet [1], BERT [11], DistillBERT [16] and 
RoBERTa [17]. The improvements in performances after including 
the scores generated using these transformer-based embeddings is 
comparable. However, we decide to use the RoBERTa [17] based 
score as the fifth input to the SVC model as it performs the best on 
our internal test dataset. After performing a grid search, we decide 
to use 0.7 as the threshold for classification as it gives the best 
precision value for the positive class. All the training iterations 
have been performed on a Nvidia DGX GPU environment. It has 
32 Nvidia Tesla V100 GPUs. It is made up of over 160,000 CUDA 
Cores and over 20,000 Tensor Cores. 
 
We present the results of the SOTA models (like XLNet [1], BERT 
[11], DistillBERT [16] and RoBERTa [17] ) as separate rows in 
Table I. Its columns represent F1 score (unweighted, macro 
averaged) and Accuracy (as a percentage) for QQP1 and internal 
test dataset. The cells under QQP SOTA is populated by referring 
to GLUE3 [21] leader-board and DistillBERT [16] paper. The 
numbers (denoted by *) for internal test (Int. Test) domain specific 
set have been obtained using cosine similarity of sentence 
embeddings [7] generated using the models mentioned in the 
corresponding rows. We use a threshold of 0.7 which is obtained 
empirically. It proves the fact that off-the-self SOTA models fail 
miserably when applied as it is on domain specific data. 
The results we obtain using the models we experiment with are 
mentioned in Table II. It consists of two main columns which are 
divided into two sub-columns each.  
Table I: 
PERFORMANCE OF SOTA MODELS ON QQP AND 
INTERNAL TEST SET 
 
QQP SOTA 
Int. Test 
Model 
F1 
Acc% 
F1* 
Acc*% 
XLNet Ensemble (Multi-task ensemble) 
0.747 
90.40 
0.53 
70.96 
BERT (24-layers, 16-heads, 1024-hidden) 
0.721 
89.30 
0.58 
72.05 
DistillBERT 
- 
88.50 
0.61 
72.47 
RoBERTa (Multi-task ensemble) 
0.743 
90.20 
0.65 
74.56 
 
 
6https://github.com/UKPLab/sentence-transformers/blob/master/docs/pretrained- 
models/nli-models.md 
Table II: 
PERFORMANCE OF THE MODELS DEVELOPED BY US 
M1 = SVC (4 scores), M2 = SVC (4 scores + XLNet), M3 = SVC 
(4 scores + BERT), M4 = SVC (4 Scores + DistillBERT), M5 = 
SVC (4 Scores + RoBERTa) 
 
QQP Test 
Int. Test 
Model 
F1 
Acc% 
F1 
Acc% 
M1 
0.80 
81.17 
0.74 
74.81 
M2 
0.80 
81.29 
0.74 
75.23 
M3 
0.80 
81.36 
0.74 
75.23 
M4 
0.80 
81.22 
0.74 
75.15 
M5 
0.80 
81.18 
0.75 
75.65 
These two main columns state the performances of our models on 
the holdout QQP1 dataset and internal test set respectively. The 
sub-columns represent F1 score (unweighted, macro averaged) and 
Accuracy (as a percentage) respectively. The rows represent the 
models we tried out. M1 is the SVC model which uses four scores 
(un-normalized, normalized, average embedding and fuzzy-
match). Details relating to these scores have been described in 
section 4. Models M2, M3, M4 and M5 represent SVC models 
trained using five scores where four scores are the same as before. 
The fifth score is the cosine similarity score between sentence 
embedding [7] of each of the two input question. This sentence 
embedding [7] is generated either using XLNet (M2) or BERT 
(M3) or DistillBERT (M4) or RoBERTa (M5). To create these 
sentence embeddings [7], the models mentioned here have been 
trained on SNLI2 and MultiNLI5 dataset. In each case, mean tokens 
pooling has been used. More details relating to the creation of 
sentence embedding from a text corpus can be found here6.  
6 DISCUSSION 
In this section, we discuss the results we presented in the last 
section. We also narrate how we have put this system into 
production. 
 
6.1 Discussion 
On carefully examining Table I and II, we see that variants of 
transformer model work very well on the QQP dataset1 but not on 
our domain specific internal test set. Comparing the performance 
of SOTA models with the models presented in this paper we 
observe that, although SOTA models outperform all the proposed 

Applying Transfer Learning for Improving Domain-Specific 
Search Experience Using Query to Question Similarity 
ACAI’20, December, 2020, Sanya, China 
 
 
models on QQP dataset1 when evaluating on accuracy the presented 
models perform better in terms of F1 score. Models presented in 
the paper outperform SOTA models both on accuracy and F1-score 
for our internal test set. This leads us to conclude that trade-off 
exists between the performances when measured against QQP 
dataset1 versus our internal dataset. Thus, we decide to compromise 
a bit with the performance on the QQP dataset1 to get better 
performance for our specific use-case, that is for search queries 
which appear in the financial domain.  
SVC with RoBERTa (M5) having a F1 score of 0.75 and accuracy 
of 75.65% performs the best for our internal test dataset. Thus, we 
select SVC with RoBERTa (M5) model as our final model and 
move forward to put it in production. Its precision for the positive 
class is 0.93, accuracy is 75.65% and F1 score (un-weighted, macro 
average) is 0.75 on the internal test set. It captures intricacies 
present in the financial search queries as well as general search 
queries. This ensures that even if queries differ semantically over 
time, SVC with RoBERTa model (M5) will be able to comprehend 
it. Some instances are as follows: 
“is there anyway to contribute to my previous employer’s fund” 
and “is it still possible to contribute to my previous employer 
sponsored plan”                                                                      “what 
do we need to do to transfer these roth accounts” and “how to move 
roth accounts” 
 
Moreover, we compare the final model’s (M5 : SVC with 
RoBERTa) performance to that of the SOTA models (Table I). We 
conclude that on QQP dataset1, its accuracy is less than SOTA 
models by 7% to 9%, but its F1 score is more than these models by 
at least 0.079. Although the test set for the SOTA models is 
different from that of ours, we still move ahead with the comparison 
as the latter is a random holdout set (having 80,872 question pairs) 
created from the entire QQP dataset1 (having 404,290 question 
pairs). 
6.2 Implementation 
The proposed framework has been implemented using Python. We 
have used Keras7 with TensorFlow8 at the backend for modelling 
and Spacy4 for pre-processing (Parts of Speech tagging and 
Lemmatization) the input text. This framework is modular, and it is 
capable of retrieving the most relevant QA pair for the user query 
in real-time. In production, we aim to match a query coming from 
a user to one of the questions present in the curated QA corpus 
which is in production. 
This means that the incoming query has to be compared with all the 
questions in the QA corpus which is computationally expensive. 
Furthermore, the time required for generating the similarity scores 
tends to increase when the size of QA corpus increases. Thus, this 
process is not usable here. To enhance performance, we divide it 
into two parts:                       
Embedding creation: We pre-calculate different kinds of 
embeddings (normalized, un-normalized, average and sentence 
embeddings using RoBERTa) for every question present in the QA 
corpus only once and store them in a Numpy 9  array. Only 
embeddings for the incoming question is calculated in production. 
 
7 https://keras.io/ 
8 https://www.tensorflow.org/ 
We pass these embedding (both normalized and un-normalized) 
through one of the arms of the Siamese network [6] and use the 
corresponding output from the pre-final layer. 
 
Figure 2: Flowchart 
                        
Similarity calculation: Once we have the output from the pre-final 
layer in hand, we calculate the similarity scores (normalized and 
un-normalized). This is done using vectorized operations with the 
pre-computed embeddings. Similar vectorized operations are 
performed to obtain similarity scores using word2vec (averaged) 
[15] and RoBERTa [17]. These similarity scores along with the 
fuzzy-match score are passed to the SVC classifier [19] to predict 
the final similarity score. Finally, the question having the highest 
similarity score along with its corresponding answer is returned. 
This whole framework is designed to enhance the users’ search 
experience. It can easily be generalized to other domains as well 
without compromising much on the performance. 
7 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
After comparing performances of all the models, we conclude that 
our final model (M5) does 0.1 and 1% better than best SOTA 
models in terms of F1 and accuracy respectively. Performance 
comparison and error analysis on internal test set points to the fact 
that the proposed model/framework is better suited for search 
setting and would perform better for domain specific applications. 
In future, we want to test how Hierarchical Attention Networks [14] 
perform if they are used to combine words to represent sentences. 
We would like to try out different kinds of matching mentioned in 
[12] in future. Moreover, we would like to incorporate Named 
9 https://numpy.org/ 

ACAI’20, December, 2020, Sanya, China 
A. Chopra et al. 
 
 
 
Entity identifier and BERT embedding [11] which has been 
customized specifically for queries searched on the web and mobile 
platforms of Fidelity. In one of the papers, recently released by 
Google [18], Raffel et al. narrate how they used a single model 
referred to as Text-to-Text Transfer Transformer (T5) to 
accomplish a wide variety of NLP tasks like question answering, 
translation, sentence similarity calculation and so on. We are 
considering to explore this model’s method of calculating semantic 
textual similarity. We shall try replacing the word2vec embedding 
layer [15] in the model proposed by other embeddings like XLNet 
[1], BERT [11] and so on. This may improve the model’s 
performance further. Finally, we shall be evaluating this model on 
stack-exchange data10. This will enable us to benchmark our model 
better.
