Unsupervised Automated Event Detection using an Iterative
Clustering based Segmentation Approach
Deepak K. Gupta∗, Rohit K. Shrivastava, Suhas Phadke and Jeroen Goudswaard
Shell Technology Centre, Bengaluru, KA, India
January 23, 2019
Abstract
A class of vision problems, less commonly studied, consists of detecting objects in imagery obtained
from physics-based experiments. These objects can span in 4D (x, y, z, t) and are visible as disturbances
(caused due to physical phenomena) in the image with background distribution being approximately
uniform. Such objects, occasionally referred to as ‘events’, can be considered as high energy blobs in the
image. Unlike the images analyzed in conventional vision problems, very limited features are associated
with such events, and their shape, size and count can vary signiﬁcantly. This poses a challenge on the
use of pre-trained models obtained from supervised approaches.
In this paper, we propose an unsupervised approach involving iterative clustering based segmentation
(ICS) which can detect target objects (events) in real-time. In this approach, a test image is analyzed
over several cycles, and one event is identiﬁed per cycle.
Each cycle consists of the following steps:
(1) image segmentation using a modiﬁed k-means clustering method, (2) elimination of empty (with
no events) segments based on statistical analysis of each segment, (3) merging segments that overlap
(correspond to same event), and (4) selecting the strongest event. These four steps are repeated until all
the events have been identiﬁed. The ICS approach consists of a few hyper-parameters that have been
chosen based on statistical study performed over a set of test images. The applicability of ICS method
is demonstrated on several 2D and 3D test examples.
1
Introduction
Machine learning can be used to detect ‘irregularities’ in a provided dataset, and this process has been
referred in the literature as anomaly detection [14]. In the context of real-time monitoring, an anomaly,
referred to as ‘event’, would be a disturbance observed in space and time for measurements done as a part
of a certain experiment. Examples of automated event detection include identifying unusual human actions
in a video [17], detection of intrusion in internet traﬃc [26] and automated picking of events in time-series
seismic data [21]. Several algorithms exist in the literature that can be used to detect such anomalies. For
an overview of such methods, see the review works presented in [6, 14].
In event detection problems, the event itself can be considered as an anomaly compared to the rest of
the data. For example, earthquakes are seismic events that show up as anomalous points on the seismogram
[12]. These seismograms can be converted to 4D images (x, y, z, t) of the subsurface, and machine learning
can provide real-time information of these earthquakes from the images.
Fig. 1 shows two examples of
synthetic 2D images containing 5 and 4 events. The events are characterized as high amplitude zones, and
the background has low amplitudes. The goal of this paper is to develop an automated approach to eﬃciently
pick these events.
The problem of event detection as described above can be categorized under anomaly detection techniques
dealing with images [4, 28]. Thus, we interchangeably use ‘anomaly’ and ‘event’ to refer to the class of
problems described in this paper.
The problem of event detection has been studied in the past using
supervised as well as unsupervised methods [6]. The primary challenge with supervised learning approaches

1
arXiv:1901.07222v1  [cs.CV]  22 Jan 2019

(a) 5 events
(b) 4 events
Figure 1: Schematic two-dimensional (2D) images containing (a) 5 energy events, and (b) 4 energy events.
Each energy event is characterized by its source location in 2D space, origin amplitude, and spreading of the
event.
is to prepare the extensive training data that can make the trained model robust enough. Unsupervised
methods partition the data into event and non-event classes. However, events in general are rare compared
to the normal data, and due to this imbalance, the traditional unsupervised approaches suﬀer from high
false alarm rates [6].
Among the various unsupervised methods, clustering has widely been used to detect anomalous features
in an image [25]. Without the need of any prior training, clustering methods group similar instances into
groups, separating the non-event data from the events. For problems involving point or conceptual anomalies,
clustering can easily identify the events [6]. However, for the type of problems considered in this paper,
although a certain data point might not be an anomaly, a collection of data points lying together in (x, y, z, t)
can constitute an event in the context of background values.
Along this line, the traditional clustering
algorithms can separate high amplitude points from the background (non-event) parts, however, the events
themselves cannot be identiﬁed uniquely. Moreover, several other inherent drawbacks of these methods make
them unsuited for the class of event detection problems dealt in this paper.
We propose an iterative clustering based segmentation approach for the eﬃcient identiﬁcation of events
in images. The unsupervised ICS approach decomposes an event detection problem into sub-problems: (1)
image segmentation and (2) statistical interpretation of each segment. For segmentation purpose, clustering
methodology is employed. We present a modiﬁed k-means clustering approach tailored to our image seg-
mentation problem. Further, the amplitude distribution within each cluster is analyzed to decide whether a
segment corresponds to an event or not. Details related to the proposed ICS methodology are discussed in
Sections 3.1 and 3.2. The applicability of ICS method is demonstrated on 2D and 3D synthetic test images.
Further, ICS is used to identify earthquake-events from a real 3D dataset. Related results are presented in
Section 4, and a brief discussion on ICS method is presented in Section 5.
2
Related Work
Event (anomaly) detection problems, in general, have widely been studied in the ﬁeld of computer vision.
For an overview of the methods used to handle this problem, see the surveys presented in [14, 6]. These can
primarily be divided into two categories: supervised methods and unsupervised methods. In the context
of image processing, methods have been presented to identify events distributed in space and time., e.g.
satellite imagery [4], spectroscopy [7] and mammographic image analysis [27]. Some of the earliest methods
used for automated event detection are mixture of models [27], regression methods [7], Bayesian networks
[11], support vector machines [10], neural networks [4], clustering [25] and nearest neighbor based techniques
[23]. Recently, several deep learning methods have also been proposed that can be used for detection (e.g.
[29, 9, 22]).
In general, the supervised algorithms can outperform the unsupervised algorithms in terms of speed,
however, they are fragile to event detection problems [15]. There exist several semi-supervised algorithms
2

Figure 2: Flowchart for the detection of events using iterative clustering based segmentation (ICS) approach.
Here, Nk denotes the number of clusters used in the respective cycle. For clustering purpose, a variant of
k-means clustering is used.
Figure 3: Initial centroids obtained using k-means++ (left) and their optimized locations (right) for a
synthetic 2D image containing 5 events.
that can help to circumvent this issue, but, the unsupervised methods are still preferred due to their gen-
eralizability in identifying a wide-variety of events. Several unsupervised methods have been used in the
past for event detection (e.g. [8, 1]). Based on the methodology employed, these can be categorized into
divisions: nearest-neighbor based [24], clustering based [16], statistical [2], subspace based [19] and classiﬁer
based [13].
The nearest-neighbor algorithms such as k-NN approach perform well for classiﬁcation problems, however,
these are not very robust for an unsupervised setting [14]. Local variants such as local outlier factor (LOF)
and local outlier probability (LoOP) approaches present a relative measure where the distance to k-nearest
neighbors is compared to a reference value obtained for the entire data [5, 18]. However, most of these
algorithms suﬀer from the setback of choosing k [14]. Cluster-based detection algorithms such as CBLOF
[16] and CMGOS use clustering to identify dense areas in the data, and in the next step, outliers are identiﬁed
based on density estimates obtained for each cluster. However, for problems studied in this paper, data points
are distributed almost uniformly, and the traditional clustering approach cannot be deployed to identify the
events.
Overall, to the best of our knowledge, the existing anomaly detection methods are not directly applicable
to our event detection problems, and a tailored approach has been missing. In this work, we propose an
iterative clustering based segmentation (ICS) approach to deal with these problems.
3

(a) Identiﬁed events
(b) Optimized clusters
Figure 4: Results obtained from modiﬁed k-means clustering during the ﬁrst cycle of ICS, showing (a) the 5
synthetic events and the optimized locations of 8 cluster centers, and (b) the 8 segments with their centers
marked using ‘×’.
(a) Identiﬁed events
(b) Optimized clusters
Figure 5: Results obtained after the elimination of empty clusters in Fig. 4, showing (a) a synthetic 2D
image with 5 events overlapping with the remaining cluster-centers and (b) the remaining partitions.
3
Iterative clustering based segmentation
3.1
Description
The iterative clustering based segmentation (ICS) method analyzes the data over several cycles, and identiﬁes
one event per cycle. Fig. 2 provides a schematic description of the ICS approach. During every cycle, ICS
employs spatial clustering schemes with tailored assignment function, followed by statistical analysis of the
data contained within each cluster. The statistical distribution within every cluster is studied and the cluster
containing the strongest event is identiﬁed. The associated event is selected and the data related to this
cluster is deleted. The whole process of event search is then repeated to ﬁnd the next event. This process is
continued till no more event can be identiﬁed in the remaining dataset.
For the purpose of clustering, a variant of the traditional k-means clustering has been used [20], and
cluster centroids are initialized using the k-means++ algorithm [3]. Fig. 3 shows an example of a synthetic
2D test case, where the initial cluster centroids (obtained using k-means++) as well as their optimized
locations are shown. The hyper-dimensions for clustering comprise spatial (as well as temporal dimensions
in 4D) and the amplitude feature weighted by a power term p. Including the eﬀect of amplitudes in clustering
forces the centroids to lie close to centers of the events in the optimized segmentation, and ths impact is
controlled by p. An example of event-centers and the associated partitions for a 2D problem is shown in Fig.
4. More details on this aspect as well as the mathematical formulation are presented in Section 3.2.
4

(a) Noisefree data
(b) Noisy data, Gaussian (µ = 0.1Amax, σ = 0.1Amax)
Figure 6: Frequency distribution of amplitudes within 4 out of 8 partitions for (a) the noisefree image with 5
events shown in Fig. 1, and (b) its noisy variant with added Gaussian noise. For the partitions that contain
an event, αR is relatively higher.
After the data domain has been divided into a number of segments, there exist certain segments having
cluster-centroids (approximately) aligned with the event-centers, and other segments with no events. As
a next step, the segments which do not encompass an event, need to be discarded. For this purpose, the
statistical distribution of amplitudes is studied within every segment, and based on a certain mathematical
criterion deﬁned by αR, the respective segment is accepted or discarded. Fig. 6a shows the distribution of
amplitudes for the various segments shown in Fig. 4. Here, it is straightforward to identify the partitions
that correspond to an event (Clusters 4 and 7) and the partitions which are empty (3 and 8). However, for
noisy data, isolating the empty clusters is not easy (Fig. 6b). More details associated with the elimination
criterion are discussed in Section 3.2.
Next, the remaining segments are studied to identify whether there are partitions that correspond to the
same event. Fig. 5 shows the segments that are left after elimination of empty clusters in Fig. 6a. It can
be seen that there are two clusters which are formed around the same event, and these need to be merged.
This is done by analyzing the ‘span’ of each event, where span refers to the space in which the disturbance
in amplitude has been created by the event. If the center of one event lies within the span of another one,
both the events are merged as a single event. Thus, in Fig. 5, clusters 2 and 7 get merged.
The process from clustering to merging the common partitions constitutes one cycle of ICS process.
Among the identiﬁed events, the strongest event is selected, and the data corresponding to its segment is
deleted from the data domain. For the events identiﬁed in Fig. 5, Segment 1 is identiﬁed to be containing
the strongest event. Thus, the data for this segment is removed from the domain, and the second cycle of
ICS is executed to identify the next event. Fig. 7 shows the identiﬁed events and segments obtained from
clustering during Cycle 2 of ICS. In this manner, the ICS process is repeated over several cycles, till no more
event can be identiﬁed. From Cycle 2, every new event selected at the completion of the ICS process, is
checked with the already selected events for possible overlap.
3.2
Method
The process of iteratively identifying the events can be broken down into 4 steps, and these have brieﬂy been
discussed in Section 3.1. Below, we discuss the details related to each of these steps.
Modiﬁed k-means clustering. During every cycle of ICS methodology, the domain is segmented using
a clustering approach.
Since only circular (spherical) events are studied in this paper, a modiﬁed form
of k-means clustering has been implemented. The choice of k here depends on a priori knowledge of the
5

(a) Identiﬁed events
(b) Optimized clusters
Figure 7: Results obtained from modiﬁed k-means clustering during Cycle 2 of ICS, showing (a) the remaining
4 synthetic events and the optimized locations of 7 cluster centers, and (b) the 7 segments with their centers
marked using ‘×’.
problem that we are dealing with. However, we have observed that the algorithm itself is not very sensitive
to the choice of k. As a rule of thumb, we choose k to be approximately 2-3 times the maximum number of
events that can generally be expected to occur in the domain. This can be further lower for data where the
amplitude of background noise is signiﬁcantly lower than that of the event. For example, for the synthetic
test cases shown in Fig. 3, even k = 8 is found to be suﬃcient. A brief discussion on the initial choice of k
is presented in Section 5.
For the modiﬁed k-means clustering, the locations of the initial centroids are chosen using the k-means++
approach [3]. Let the amplitude distribution be represented by a set of N data points X ⊂Rd, where d
refers to dimensions of the data. In the k-means++ approach, the cluster centroid c1 is chosen uniformly
at random from X. The centroids c2, c3, . . . , ck are then iteratively chosen, and for every next centroid ci,
any point x′ ∈X can be chosen with probability
D(x′)2
P
x∈X D(x)2 . Here, D(x) denotes the distance of data
point x to the nearest amongst cluster centroids c1, c2, . . . , ci−1. The process is continued until all the k
cluster-centroids have been chosen.
Based on k-means++, X gets partitioned into k segments denoted as S = S1, S2, . . . , Sk. Next, a variant
of the traditional k-means clustering method is applied to optimize the cluster-centroids C = {c1, c2, . . . , ck}.
This involves solving a zeroth order optimization problem which is stated as
min
C
RN(C) =
N
X
j=1
min
1≤i≤k φ(A(x))∥xj −ci∥2,
(1)
where φ(·) denotes an amplitude functional and A(x) denotes amplitude-value of data point x. Each iteration
of the clustering method involves two updates which are as follows:
1. Assignment step: Each data point x ∈X needs to be mapped to one of the clusters in C to obtain
a new set of partitions S.
Mathematically, data point xj is mapped to partition Si, where i =
arg min
e∈[1,k]
φ(A(x))∥x −ce∥2.
2. Update step: After each data point has been assigned to one of the partitions in S, the locations of
centroids in C are updated as
ci =
P
x∈Si φ(A(x))∥x −ci∥2x
P
x∈Si φ(A(x))∥x −ci∥2 .
(2)
These two steps are repeated until the value of objective RN(C) goes below a certain minimum threshold,
or some other stopping criterion is reached. Note that unlike the initial assignment done using k-means++,
the amplitude of data points has been taken into account during the assignment as well as update steps of
ICS.
6

(a) p = 0
(b) p = 3
(c) p = 5
Figure 8: Synthetic 2D images, each containing one event, showing the location of cluster-centroids obtained
for the 3 cases using modiﬁed k-means clustering (φ(A(x)) = A(x)p) with diﬀerent values of p.
𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑥
ҧ𝐴𝑚𝑎𝑥
Amplitude (𝐴)
𝐴𝑚𝑖𝑛
frequency
𝐴𝑚𝑎𝑥
med(𝐴(𝐱))
Figure 9: Schematic representation for the distribution of amplitude-values inside a partition obtained from
clustering. The symbols fmax, med(·) and ¯Amax refer to highest frequency value for a partition, median
functional, and the maximum value of amplitude obtained after the elimination of 0.1% of the amplitudes
from the right-tail of the distribution. For an event deﬁned using Gaussian distribution or a linear decay
from the center, the distribution of amplitudes resembles the distribution shown here.
A better understanding on the role of φ(A(x)) can be obtained from Fig. 8. For simplicity let us assume
that φ(A(x)) = A(x)p, where p is a power term used to adjust the weight on amplitude values. For this
example, A(x) > 1 ∀x ∈X. In Fig. 8, we have one event in a 2D image, and the goal of ICS approach
is to identify the event-center. The data points are assumed to be uniformly distributed in the domain.
With p = 0, the clustering approach is independent of amplitude-values, due to which the cluster centroid is
identiﬁed at approximately the geometric center of the image. With p = 1, amplitudes are provided certain
weight, due to which the cluster centroid shifts towards the event. Adding more weight with p = 5, the
cluster centroid overlaps with the event. Thus, when p is chosen properly, the modiﬁed clustering approach
can detect the event.
However, the formulation for φ mentioned above will be sensitive to the values of A, and we formulate it
diﬀerently for our problems to make it more robust. The amplitudes are normalized between 0 and 1, and
φ(A(x)) = epA(x), where p is a exponential scaling term. For the examples shown in this paper, p is set to
16 based on observations from a set of numerical experiments.
Elimination of empty clusters. After the data has been divided into partitions S, the empty partitions
need to be separated from those that contain the events. As stated earlier in Section 3.1, this is achieved by
analyzing the statistical distribution of amplitude-values inside every partition, and comparing them against
a certain threshold. Unlike the traditional approach of choosing a certain value of A(x) for thresholding,
functional φ(A(x)) is analyzed.
Fig. 9 shows a schematic histogram plot for the amplitude values observed in a certain partition Si.
7

Ideally, for an event characterized by a Gaussian distribution of amplitudes or a linear decay away from the
event-center, the distribution of amplitudes is expected to resemble a right skewed distribution with very
low values of frequency at the right tail. To decide whether the distribution shown in Fig. 9 corresponds to
an event or not, the rejection factor αR needs to be deﬁned. Mathematically, this term is deﬁned as
α(i)
R =
fmax
med(A(x))
¯A(x)2 ∀x ∈Si,
(3)
where, superscript i is an index term used to refer to partition Si, fmax denotes the maximum value of
frequency for the distribution of amplitudes discretized into 100 bins, and med(·) denotes the median func-
tional. Further, ¯A(x) calculates the maximum value of amplitude in Si by setting statistical signiﬁcance
level at 0.999, which means 0.1% of the values at the right tail of the distribution in Fig. 9 are ignored.
To understand the motivation for choosing the expression in Eq. 3, we refer back to Fig. 9. Here, the
maximum value of amplitude (Amax) plays role in deciding whether the distribution corresponds to an event
or not (as in Fig. 6a). For partitions which do not contain an event, Amax is expected to be equal to the
maximum noise-level in the data, and for partitions with event, it corresponds to that of the event. There
is a possibility that random noise-spikes are contained in the data whose amplitudes are higher than the
event amplitude itself. To avoid capturing these spikes as event, 0.1% of the data on the right tail side
of the distribution is categorized as statistically insigniﬁcant, and Amax is replaced by ¯Amax. Here, ¯Amax
characterizes the strength of the event, and ranks it against other events in the iterative selection criterion.
In this sense, it can be considered as a global criterion for event detection.
For weak events, ¯Amax is low, which reduces αR for that partition. For such partitions,
fmax
med(A(x)) helps
to diﬀerentiate an event from background noise. Unlike an actual event, the amplitudes in background noise
are uniformly distributed over a range of values, due to which its fmax is expected to be lower than that of
an event. A better understanding of this can be obtained from Fig. 6b. This ﬁgure shows the histogram
plots for partitions obtained using ICS for one of the examples shown in Fig. 3, but with added Gaussian
noise (µ = 0.1Amax, σ = 0.1Amax). Among the 4 clusters shown in Fig. 6b, Clusters 5 and 6 correspond to
partitions containing events, thus clearly have higher values of fmax. Also, for partitions in S that contain
an event (e.g. Clusters 5 and 6), median of the distribution will be shifted more towards left compared to
that in partitions that contain only background noise. In this manner,
fmax
med(A(x)) together with ¯Amax deﬁnes
αR which is further used to eliminate the empty partitions.
Partition Si is then rejected if α(i)
R < α(c)
R , where α(c)
R
refers to a cut-oﬀthreshold. The value of α(c)
R
is chosen based on numerical experiments, and in this paper, it is set to 0.1. Further discussion on the
sensitivity of this parameter as well as on how to choose it, is presented in Section 5. With the partitions
left after eliminating the empty ones, the next step is to merge the overlapping partitions.
Merge overlapping clusters. Partitions which share the same event need to be identiﬁed. For this
purpose, the distribution of amplitudes in space (for 2D and 3D) and time (for 4D) needs to be studied
and the extent of overlap has to be identiﬁed. Fig. 10 shows the schematic representation of amplitude
distribution for 1D space, and an approximate Gaussian distribution is assumed. Next, we deﬁne the term
span radius βr, which denotes the distance from the center of an event up to which the event is considered
to span. Here, βc ∈(0, 1] is a fractional term used to control the span. For example, to assume that the
event is signiﬁcant up to the point where A(x) decays to 40% of its maximum, βc = 0.4. Thus, in simple
terms, βr can be deﬁned as the distance from the center of an event, where A decays to βc fraction of Amax.
Although from Fig. 10, it seems very straightforward to compute βr, the distributions are not perfectly
Gaussian and frequently contain noise. Thus, there will be multiple values of βr that satisfy the requirement.
Moreover, for robustness, we need to search for values within the range (βcAmax −ϵ, βcAmax + ϵ) rather
than βcAmax. Here, ϵ is a parameter that deﬁnes an amplitude interval for calculating the span, and in this
study, it has been set to 0.01. More discussions on choosing βc and ϵ follow in Section 5. Thus, for the ith
partition, β(i)
r
is deﬁned as
β(i)
r
= ∥β(t)
r ∥2 ∀{t : t ∈[1, N], x(t) ∈X,
βcAmax −ϵ ≤A(x(t)) ≤βcAmax + ϵ}.
(4)
Once βr has been calculated for all the partitions, partition p is merged to partition q, if:
∥cp −cq∥2 ≤β(q)
r , ∀p, q ∈[1, k], p ̸= q, ¯A(p)
max < ¯A(q)
max.
(5)
8

𝐴𝑚𝑎𝑥
𝛽𝑐𝐴𝑚𝑎𝑥
Amplitude
𝛽𝑟
𝐱
𝐱= 0
Figure 10: Schematic representation for a one-dimensional distribution of amplitude values. Here, span
radius βr denotes the distance from the center of the event to the point where amplitude reduces to βr times
Amax. The span radius deﬁnes the extent of signiﬁcance for the event, and any other event-center that lies
within the span is constituted as a part of this event.
Accordingly, Sq = Sq ∪Sp and Sp = φ. Further, β(q)
r
is updated based on the new set of data points in Sq.
Select the strongest event. After the overlapping partitions have been merged, each of the partitions
Si ∈S is expected to contain an event. As deﬁned earlier, our ICS methodology selects only one event
per cycle. To understand the motivation for doing so, we look at Eq. 1. Since the objective functional
here depends on A as well, there would be a preference to form clusters around the stronger events. In this
scenario, if there is an outlier event which is far stronger than the rest of the events, most of the partitions
will be clustered around it, and the weaker events of the data will be shadowed.
The iterative scheme in ICS selects the strongest event during the ﬁrst cycle, and the corresponding
partition is then removed from S for the next ICS cycle. This facilitates improved clustering around the
weaker events during the later cycles. Eventually, most of the events can be identiﬁed over a series of cycles.
Let Sl denote the partition selected during the lth cycle. Assuming that the stopping criterion has been
reached after m cycles of ICS, the centroids cl ∀l ∈[1, m], l ∈Z+ corresponding to partitions Sl correspond
to the identiﬁed events.
4
Applications
To demonstrate the applicability of ICS, we consider examples of 2D and 3D images. For 2D cases, a total
of 140 synthetic images (noisefree as well as containing certain noise) have been considered, and average
accuracies are reported in Fig. 13 for several values of Nc. An example application of ICS on 2D noisefree
images has been demonstrated in Fig. 4.
Fig. 11 further demonstrates the potential of ICS under diﬀerent noise levels for uniform random, uniform
normal and periodic noises. Details related to types and levels of the added noise are described in the caption
of Fig. 11. For all the cases, it is observed that ICS can resolve all the major events observed in the images.
However, for high levels of noise (as in Figs 11e), one of the weak events cannot be identiﬁed. For rest of
the cases, we observe that a correct number of events have been identiﬁed. At low noise-levels, the identiﬁed
event locations are correct. However, for the cases of Gaussian noise considered here (Figs. 11 c and d), the
identiﬁed locations of Event 5 seem to deviate from the actual value. This happens primarily because for
any partition, we assume the point with highest amplitude value to be the event centroid. However, in the
presence of noise, this assumption might not be true, and a direction of improvement would be to correctly
identify the event location within the active partition.
Further, two 3D test cases have been considered as shown in Fig.
12, and here, only amplitude values
above 0.5Amax have been displayed. The synthetic image shown in Fig. 12a consists of 5 events with no
added noise. Using ICS method, all the 5 events could been identiﬁed successfully. Fig. 12b shows the
application of ICS method on a real dataset of earthquake-events. Based on manual interpretation, 3 events
9

(a) Random
(b) Normal
(c) Normal
(d) Periodic
(e) Periodic
Figure 11: Synthetic 2D images showing 5 events each and locations of the events identiﬁed using ICS
method. The types of noise are: (a) uniform random noise (Anoise
max = 0.1Amax), (b) uniform normal noise
(µ = 0.1Amax, σ = 0.1Amax), (c) uniform normal noise (µ = 0.1Amax, σ = 0.2Amax), (d) sinusoidal noise
(λ = (L2
x + L2
y)1/2 and Anoise
max = 0.25Amax), and (e) sinusoidal noise (λ = (L2
x + L2
y)1/2 and Anoise
max = Amax).
In (b) and (c), although the centroid of Cluster 5 does not overlap with the nearby event, both of them fall
within the same partition.
10

(a) Synthetic (5 events)
(b) Real (3+ events)
Figure 12: Examples of 3D images with events and the event-centroids identiﬁed using ICS method. For
the real dataset, 3 events had previously been marked manually. For visualization purpose, only amplitudes
above 0.5Amax have been shown.
had been identiﬁed in the past for this case. Using ICS, we identiﬁed 4 events, and further manual analysis
conﬁrmed that the additional event identiﬁed by ICS is indeed a real event. Clearly, in 3D or higher, human
interpretations are limited due to visual constraints, and this numerical example demonstrates that such a
limitation can be overcome using ICS.
5
Discussions
There are a few parameters that control the performance of the proposed ICS methodology. These include
initial number of clusters Nc, amplitude power p, rejection factor α(c)
R , decay factor βc and ϵ. These pa-
rameters have been chosen statistically, and their optimal values have been chosen through a number of
simulations on 2D datasets. Due to constraint on the length of this paper, we discuss only one of these
parameters.
Fig. 13 shows the aﬀect of Nc/Ne, where Ne refers to number of events in the simulated data. A total of
20 test cases of 2D synthetic images were used, each containing between 3 and 6 events of varying strength.
Each of these images was duplicated 6 times with diﬀerent noise types and levels to generate 120 noisy cases.
Further, for every case, 10 simulations have been run, and the average ICS accuracies are reported in Fig. 13.
A general observation is that suﬃciently good accuracies are obtained for Nc/Ne values in between 2 and 3.
For higher values, the domain is analyzed using too many partitions, which leads to insuﬃcient information
being contained in every partition, and this leads to loss in accuracy.
Similar tests have been carried out for other parameters, and here we only report the optimal choices
observed. For amplitude power p, a value between 13 and 17 works well. Similarly for α(c)
R , βc and ϵ, the
recommended values are 0.05-0.15, 0.3-0.5, 0.1-0.2, respectively. While the other two parameters are not so
important, α(c)
R is very critical since it plays an important role in deciding whether a partition contains an
event or not. To some extent, its value depends on the noise level in the data, and in future we aim to look
into this aspect.
6
Conclusion and Future work
In this paper, we presented ICS, an iterative clustering based segmentation approach for the detection of
events in image data. Over a sequence of cycles, ICS partitions an image and analyzes whether each partition
contains an event or not. Aiming at automated real time detection of events in continuously streaming data,
11

1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Clusters-to-events ratio (Nc/Ne)
Accuracy (%)
2D, noisefree
2D, Gaussian, µ = 0.05Amax, σ = 0.05Amax
2D, Gaussian, µ = 0.1Amax, σ = 0.1Amax
2D, Gaussian, µ = 0.1Amax, σ = 0.2Amax
2D, periodic, Anoise
max = Amax, λ = 0.5LD
2D, periodic, Anoise
max = Amax, λ = 1.0LD
2D, periodic, Anoise
max = 0.25Amax, λ = 1.0LD
Figure 13: Accuracy versus clusters-to-events ratio (Nc/Ne) for several synthetic test cases. Here, Nc denotes
the number of clusters chosen for the ﬁrst cycle of ICS and Ne refers to the number of events in the data. For
the datasets containing periodic noise, sinusoidal noise has been added to the data, and λ and LD denote
the wavelength used and length of the major diagonal for the data domain.
12

the applicability of ICS has been demonstrated on 2D and 3D datasets.
In the future work, we aim at exploring the application for higher dimensions. Further, we look forward to
using ICS on microseismic data for the automated real time detection of earthquakes.
