I 
16 
ANGELOPOULOS & CUSSENS 
UAI2001 
Markov Chain Monte Carlo using Tree-Based Priors on Model Structure 
Nicos Angelopoulos 
James Cussens 
Department of Computer Science, University of York 
Heslington, York, YOlO 5DD, UK 
{nicos,jc}®cs.york.ac.uk 
Abstract 
We present a general framework for defining 
priors on model structure and sampling from 
the posterior using the Metropolis-Hastings algo­
rithm. The key ideas are that structure priors are 
defined via a probability tree and that the pro­
posal distribution for the Metropolis-Hastings al­
gorithm is defined using the prior, thereby defin­
ing a cheaply computable acceptance probabil­
ity. We have applied this approach to Bayesian 
net structure learning using a number of priors 
and proposal distributions. Our results show that 
these must be chosen appropriately for this ap­
proach to be successful. 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
This paper extends and empirically evaluates a general 
framework for Bayesian modelling which was briefly 
sketched in (Cussens, 2000). Our primary goal is to imple­
ment a practical method of incorporating prior information 
about model structure. The current lack of such a method 
is noted by Friedman and Koller (2000) in their paper on 
Bayesian learning of Bayesian network structure which is 
closely related to this paper 
. . . relatively little attention has been paid to the 
choice of structure prior, and a simple prior is of­
ten chosen largely for pragmatic reasons .... The 
standard priors over network structure are often 
used not because they are particularly appropri­
ate for a task, but rather because they are simple 
and easy to work with. 
Although our approach is very general-for example, in 
(Cussens, 2000) it was applied to a model space com­
posed of logic programs-the experiments here are fo­
cused exclusively on learning Bayesian network (BN) 
structure from data and prior knowledge. 
In many ap­
plications we are likely to have at least some knowledge 
about network structure which we are willing to model 
as hard constraints, for example, that X is/is not a par­
ent/child/ancestor/descendant of Y, that X andY are inde­
pendent/dependent, that no family has more than k parents, 
etc. We may also wish to express softer prior beliefs, for 
example, encoding a preference for sparsely connected net­
works. Both hard and soft prior information are expressible 
in our method. 
2 
TREE-BASED PRIORS ON MODEL 
STRUCTURE 
Our approach to defining priors on a finite or countably infi­
nite space of models is best understood in terms of the sam­
pling process which selects a model from the model space. 
The sampling process is a series of independent choices 
where for each choice-point there is a multinomial distribu­
tion over the choices available. Some sequences of choices 
are defined as successful and these determine (or yield) a 
model in the space. Sequences of choices can be repre­
sented as distinct branches in a probability tree. Figure 5 
(see last page) presents ENTREE, an example of such 
a probability tree for the very small model space of all 25 
Bayesian networks consisting of the random variables B, 
L and S. At each choice point in this tree we choose how 
to connect a particular pair of variables where the pairs are 
considered in the following order: (B, L), (L, S), (B, S) . 
BNT REE is very simple in that each choice-point has the 
same multinomial distribution. If (X, Y) is the pair of ran­
dom variables under consideration then there is probability 
Pl that Y is chosen to be a parent of X, probability P2 that 
Y is chosen to be a child of X, and probability p3 that there 
is to be no direct connection between X and Y. In general, 
we could have many multinornials, with the Pi depending 
on (X, Y), thus giving a very detailed prior specification. 
Two branches, or derivations as we shall now call them, 
in BNT REE lead to cyclic graphs at leaves 2 and 13-
which are not in the model space of Bayesian nets. These 

UA12001 
ANGELOPOULOS & CUSSENS 
17 
are therefore labelled as failure derivations and correspond 
to failed attempts to sample a Bayesian net. If a derivation 
is not a failure derivation then it is a successful derivation. 
ENTREE defines three probability distributions: 1/J>.., f>. 
and P>.. 
.\ denotes the log versions of the parameters, 
so for ENTREE,.\ = (logp1,logp2,logp3). For any 
derivation x, 1/J>. (x) is the product of the probabilities at­
tached to the choices that constitute x. 
For example if 
x2 is the derivation leading to leaf 2 in ENTREE, then 
1/J>. (xz) = PiP2. !>. (x) is simply 1/J>. (xlx is successful), so: 
f>.(x) 
= { ZJ:11/J>-.(X) 
if X SUİCessful 
0 
otherwise 
where Z >. is the normalising constant: 
Z>. = 
L 
¢>.(X) 
x is successful 
From a sampling point of view, Z>-. is the probability that 
the next attempt at sampling will be successful. f>. is es­
sentially a log-linear distribution (also know as a Gibbs 
distribution, or, in the computational linguistics literature, 
a MAXENT distribution). 
To see this let the frequency 
Of a choice Ci in a SUCCeSsful derivation X be L'i(X), then 

= Z):1 exp(L:;i .\iv,(x)). In the 
language of log-linear modelling, the Vi are the 'features' 
of derivations. Here the features are integer-valued but this 
is not generally the case for log-linear models. 
In the particular case of ENTREE there is only one 
derivation for each BN, so there is a bijection between mod­
els and successful derivations. In general, this is not the 
case. To see this, consider the probability tree CGT REE 
in Figure 1 which defines a distribution J>. over 4 successful 
derivations and a distribution, which we will call P>., over 
the model space which consists of 3 chain graphs. At each 
choice point we choose between either an edge from A to 
E or an edge from E to A. An undirected edge corresponds 
to an edge in both directions. Two derivations, x2 and X3, 
yield the undirected graph MA-B· We define P>. so that 
P>.(MA-B) = f>.(x2) + f>.(x3) = P1P2 + P2Pl = 2PIP2· 
In general, P>.(M) is just the distribution over models de­
fined by marginalising derivations away: 
P>.(M) = 
L f>.(x) 
(1) 
x yields M 
To get a feel for the distributions defined by ENTREE, 
suppose we set PI = P2 
= p3 
= 1/3. 
This means 
Vx1/J>.(x) = 1/27. Z>. = 25/27, so f>.(x) = 1/25 for all 
successful x and P>.(M) = 1/25 for all BNs. Increasing 
P3 at the expense of p1 and P2 expresses a preference 
for sparsely connected BNs and would make BN27 (the 
xl 
x2 
x3 
x4 
Figure 1: CGT REE probability tree 
BN at leaf 27 in Fig 5) the mode of the prior. Setting 
PI = 0 almost surely removes each leftmost choice from 
each choice-point effectively reducing the model space to 
(BN14, EN1s, BN11, BN1s, ENz3, EN24, EN2s, BNz1 ), 
the BNs consistent with the variable ordering (E,L,S). 
Setting P3 
= 
0 effectively reduces the model space to 
(BNl,EN4,EN5,BN10,BN11,BN14), 
the 6 
totally 
connected BNs. 
3 
MCMC USING THE 
METROPOLIS-HASTINGS 
ALGORITHM 
In the Bayesian approach to statistical inference we do not 
'learn' or 'induce' a single best model from the data D. In­
stead a posterior distribution P(MID) is derived from the 
prior distribution P(M) using Bayes theorem. This poste­
rior distribution is then used to compute the expected values 
of various quantities of interest. 
Unfortunately, we know of no way of updating the prob­
ability trees representing our· priors into (practical) trees 
representing posteriors. Worse still, we have no way of 
even sampling directly from the posterior. This is a com­
mon problem in complex Bayesian modelling and can 
be addressed by employing Markov chain Monte Carlo 
(MCMC) methods (Gilks, Richardson, & Spiegelhalter, 
1996). Given a target distribution (e.g. a posterior) from 
which we would ideally like to sample but cannot, an 
MCMC algorithm constructs a Markov chain whose sta­
tionary distribution is the target distribution. If we run the 
chain for long enough then estimates of features of the tar­
get distribution produced by sampling this chain will con­
verge to their true values, under fairly weak conditions. 
We use the Metropolis-Hastings (MH) algorithm to con­
struct a Markov chain M0, M1, M2, .
•
. . When the target 
density is a posterior P(M\D) = P(M)P(DIM)/P(D), 
MH is defined as follows (where the initial model M0 is 
sampled from the prior). 
1. Generate a candidate value M* with proposal proba­
bility distribution q(Mi, M*). 

18 
ANGELOPOULOS & CUSSENS 
UAI2001 
2. Set Mi+1 = M* with probability 
; 
* 
. { q(M*, Mi) P(DJM*)P(M*) } 
o:(M 'M ) = rnm 
q(Mi, M*) P(DJMi)P(Mi) '1 
(2) 
else set Mi+1 = Mi 
As long as the Markov chain is ergodic (Gilks et a!., 1996), 
the proposal distribution q can have any form and the sta­
tionary distribution will be P(MJD). 
4 
CHOOSING A PROPOSAL 
DISTRIBUTION FOR TREE-BASED 
PRIORS 
Our proposal mechanism uses the same probability tree that 
we used to define the prior. We use MH to construct a 
Markov chain of derivations with stationary distribution 
fA(xJD). 
This gets us to our target posterior distribu­
tion P>.(MJD) by marginalisation similarly to (1). In our 
MCMC samples, we do not even record which derivation 
we are visiting, just the model associated with it. (Failure 
derivations never appear in the Markov chain.) Given this 
close connection between f>..(xJD) andp>.(MJD) we will 
switch freely between talking about sequences of deriva­
tions and sequences of models. 
The basic idea is to 'bounce' around the tree by backtrack­
ing from the current leaf to an interior node and then going 
down the tree to a new leaf by choosing branches using 
the probabilities which define the prior distribution. Note 
that there is a one-one correspondence between leaves and 
derivations, so we can describe the algorithm in terms of 
visiting leaves. The only caveat is that when we stop back­
tracking we may not choose the branch up which we have 
just backtracked-such branches are temporarily blocked. 
This ensures that there is a unique path between any two 
leaves. Using the prior distribution to construct the pro­
posal distribution is also done in (Philps & Smith, 1996; 
Chipman, George, & McCulloch, 1998; Denison, Mallick, 
& Smith, 1998) and has the advantage that many of the 
terms in (2) cancel out. In particular the Z>. normalising 
constant, which is particularly difficult to compute for large 
trees, disappears. 
Our proposal distribution is parameterised by a backtrack 
probability Pb which controls the sizes of jumps. A can­
didate leaf M* is generated from a current leaf Mi as fol­
lows. 
1. Backtrack one step to the most recent choice point in 
the probability tree. 
2. We then probabilistically backtrack as follows: If at 
the top of the tree go to step 3. Otherwise with prob­
ability Pb backtrack one more step to the next choice 
point and repeat step 2, or with probability 1 - Pb go 
to step 3. 
3. Once we have stopped backtracking choose a new leaf 
M* from the choice point by selecting branches ac­
cording to their probabilities attached to them. How­
ever, in the first step down the tree we may not choose 
the branch that leads back to Mi. 
To illustrate this, consider some leaf pairs in BNT REE 
(the numbers refer to nodes in BNT REE): 
q(BN1,BN2) 
q(BN1,BN3) 
q(BNt,BNs) 
(1 - Pb)·P2·(1- pl)-1 (via 28) 
(1- Pb)·P3·(1- Pt)-1 (via 28) 
= 
Pb(I- Pb)·P3P2·(1- pl)-1 
(via 28,37,30) 
q(BNt, BN10) 
PJ·P2PtPdi- P1)-1 
(via 28,37 ,40,38,31) 
q(BN10, BNl) 
= 
PK·PtP1Pd1- P2)-1 
(via 31,38,40,37 ,28) 
Each proposal probability has three factors (separated by 
'.' above): a backtrack factor, a factor from the prior and a 
factor for the temporarily blocked branch. 
To define the acceptance probability o:(Mi, M*) we need 
some more notation. Let Mi have depth ni and M* depth 
n*. Let Node(Mi , M*) be the deepest common ancestor 
of Mi and M*, this is the internal node we reach when we 
stop backtracking from Mi. Let Ci be the choice from 
Node(Mi, M*) that leads to Mi, and define C* analo­
gously. Let pi and p* be the probabilities attached to Ci 
and C*, respectively. Then, as proven in (Cussens, 2000), 
if M* is a leaf at the end of a successful derivation: 
(M; M*) = 
. { (n'-n;) 1- pi P(DJM*) I} 
a: 
' 
rnm Pb 
1- p* P(DIMi) ' 
(3) 
If M* is a failure (for example, BN2 or BN13 in 
ENTREE) then o:(Mi, M*) = 0. 
It is easy to see that our Markov chain is ergodic, i.e. pos­
itive recurrent and aperiodic. (See (Roberts, 1996) for the 
basic definitions and theorems regarding ergodicity.) For 
any leaves M; and Mi, it is clear that the probability P;i ( t) 
of moving from M; to Mi in t steps, is positive, for all 
t > 0. So a fortiori the Markov chain is irreducible and, 
since we are doing MCMC, also positive recurrent. The 
chain is also obviously aperiodic and so we have ergodic­
ity. 
5 
BAYES FACTORS FOR BAYESIAN 
NETS 
The 
data 
only 
affects 
MH 
via 
the 
quantity 
P(DJM*)/ P(DJMi) the ratio of marginal likelihoods for 

UAI2001 
ANGELOPOULOS & CUSSENS 
19 
the proposed and current model. This ratio is known as 
a Bayes factor. In all but deterministic non-probabilistic 
models the full likelihood requires not just a determination 
of model structure but also of the model parameters. 
In the case of a BN network structure M, these are 
the conditional probability distributions () x, ]u, for the 
random variables Xi and each instantiation u; of their 
parents PaM(X;). To calculate the Bayes factor we need 
to marginalise away (i.e. integrate away) these model 
parameters. 
Here we make the standard assumptions to allow this inte­
gration to have a closed form. Firstly, we assume a Dirich­
let prior over () x, 1 u; for all X; and u;. We also assume 
global parameter independence and parameter modular­
ity. The former says that the total density over the com­
plete parameter set is the product of the individual Ox,]u; 
densities and the latter that Bx;ǣu; is the same for any two 
network structures where Xi has the same parents. Our fi­
nal assumption is that the data is complete, each data point 
contains an observation for each random variable. 
Given all these convenient assumptions we have from 
(Heckerman, 1996) that the marginal likelihood is a prod­
uct of 'scores' for each family in the BN M: 
Let N;jk be the count in the data for X; taking value k 
when its parents have instantiation j. Let a;jk be the corre­
sponding Dirichlet parameter. Let Dom(Xi) be set of pos­
sible values of X;. Define N;j = L:kEDom(X;) Niik and 
a;i = L:kEDom(X;) Gijk· Then score(X;, PaM(X;)JD) is 
If Xi has the same parents in Mi and M• then the score 
for X; cancels out in the Bayes factor making it quick 
to compute the Bayes factor for similar BNs. 
We also 
cache scores. 
All our computations are done by taking 
logs and using the log r function from the c maths library. 
Everything else is done in Prolog including the definition 
of the Oijk. 
Setting the Gijk to informative values ex­
presses prior knowledge about likely conditional probabil­
ity values, but in our current artificial experiments we set 
Gijk = 1, Vi,j, k. 
6 
DEFINING TREE-BASED PRIORS 
USING STOCHASTIC LOGIC 
PROGRAMS 
Our tree-based MCMC approach is implemented using 
stochastic logic programs (SLPs). This is because the logic 
bn( [], [], []). 
bn([RVjRVs] ,BN,AncBN) 
bn(RVs,BN2,AncBN2), 
connect_no_cycles(RV,BN2,AncBN2,BN,AncBN). 
%RV parent of H, p_l=l/3 
1/3 :: which edge( [H]T] ,RV, [H-RV]Rest]) 
choose edges(T,RV,Rest). 
tRV child of H, p 2=1/3 
l/3 :: which edgel[H]TI ,RV, [RV-H!Rest]) 
choose edges(T,RV,Reat). 
\no edge¶ p_3=1/3 
l/3 
:: which edge([ HjT] ,RV,Rest) 
choose_edges(T,RV·Rest). 
Figure 2: The predicates bn/3 and which_edge/3, part 
of SEN, an SLP defining priors over BN structure 
programming paradigm gives us a number of facilities for 
free: 
1. Easy declarative representation of the model space 
and constraints on models using a subset of first-order 
logic; 
2. Implicit definition of the tree structure (by a logic pro­
gram and goal); 
3. Automatic construction of models as we move down 
the tree (building first-order terms via successive uni­
fications; 
4. Backtracking concepts which could be extended to in­
corporate sampling over SLPs; 
5. A built-in notion of failure (unification failure). 
In most of our experiments we used variants of the prior 
defined by the SLP SEN in Fig 2. The predicate bn/3 
in Fig 2 says that EN is a Bayesian net constructed from 
the variables in the list [RV I RVs] if BN2 is a Bayesian 
net constructed from the list RVs and RV is connected to 
BN2 without introducing any cycles. The Prolog operator 
':-' should be read as ·Ç·. BNs are represented as ordered 
lists of families, for example BNs is represented as [b­
[ l] , l- [] , s- [b) ) . This is a natural representation and 
one that allows us to use utility predicates from the Sics­
tus Pro log ugraphs library. The third argument in bn/ 3 
represents the ancestor sets for each node, so for BNs it 
would be [b- [1] , 1- [] , s- [b,l]]. The ancestor sets 
allow quick checking for cycles and allow us to easily put 
constraints on ancestor relationships. 
A logic program P together with a goal G, defines an SLD­
tree each branch of which is a refutation of G using P. 
For example, given the SLP SEN parts of which are given 
in Fig 2 and the goal VBN-..,bn([s,l,b],BN) ("there are 
no ENs with s, l and b as nodes") we (essentially) get 
BNT REE as an SLD-tree. 
Each successful branch re­
futes our goal and provides an instantiation of BN as a 
counterexample. In other words, each branch is a construc­
tive proof that there exists a particular B N. 

20 
ANGELOPOULOS & CUSSENS 
UA12001 
It is important to understand that the SLD-tree is never ac­
tually constructed, it is just a representation of Prolog's 
search space (standard Prolog explores it deterministically: 
depth-first, leftmost-first). This means we can define very 
large, even infinite trees, with a logic program. 
To define a prior over models using an SLP, one takes a 
logic program P and associates probabilities with some of 
the clauses in the logic program. For example, in SBN the 
three clauses defining which_ edge/ 3 are the only prob­
abilistic ones. Denote the resulting SLP by S and let the 
(logs of) the probabilities added be>. = (>.1, >.2, . . . , An). 
For any goal G, S has an associated SLD-tree: the one for 
its underlying logic program P. Each choice in the SLD­
tree is associated with a choice of clause, so some choices 
will have associated probabilities. Construct a probability 
tree by deleting all choices from the SLD-tree which have 
no associated probability. The SLP defines three distribu­
tions 1/J(>.,S,G)• !(>.,S,G) and P(>.,S,G) (usually abbreviated 
to 1/J>., f>. and P>.) via this probability tree exactly as de­
scribed in Section 2. For a more detailed account of how 
SLPs define distributions see (Cussens, 2001). 
7 
EXPERIMENTS 
7.1 
A PRELIM:INARY EXPERIMENT 
For our first experiment we sampled 10,000 data points 
from the 3-node BN constructed from the S, LandE nodes 
of the well-known 'Asia' network given in Fig 3. This is 
BN19 in Fig 5. We then used a uniform prior over the set 
of 25 BNs with three nodes and did MCMC as described 
above with 106 iterations and a burn-in of 5000. The results 
are in Table 1. The BNs in Table 1 fall into two Markov 
equivalence classes divided by a horizontal line. Note that 
the BN that generated the data (ENt9) has much lower pos­
terior probability than EN22• Although the posterior prob­
abilities estimated by MCMC are eventually close to the 
true values, convergence is very slow. 
Figure 3: 'Asia' Bayesian net 
M 
EN4 
ENs 
EN1 
EN14 
ENw 
ENn 
P4 
0.668 
0.176 
0.144 
0.007 
0.002 
0.001 
0 
0.001 
0 
0.690 
0.150 
0.152 
0.005 
0.001 
0.001 
0 
0 
0 
0.704 
0.145 
0.143 
0.005 
0.002 
0.001 
0 
0 
0 
p 
0.702 
0.146 
0.145 
0.005 
0.002 
0.001 
0 
0 
0 
Table 1: Estimated Cfti) and actual (p) posterior probabili­
ties for the nine most probable 3-node BNs in ENTREE 
rounded to 3 d.p. Pi is the estimated probability after lQi 
iterations. The other sixteen highly improbable BNs were 
never visited, so for them Vi : Pi = 0. 
7.2 
IMPROVING MCMC 
To address the issue of slow convergence and hence pro­
duce reasonable estimates in bigger model spaces we made 
a number of improvements over the basic approach de­
scribed above. One of the key issues in MCMC is to strike 
a balance between local jumps to 'neighbouring' candi­
date models and big jumps to distant ones. With a bias 
towards local jumps there is a risk that the chain will re­
main stuck in a particular neighbourhood, perhaps failing 
to visit areas of high posterior probability. This is less of 
a problem if we can move a big distance via a sequence 
of local jumps. Unfortunately, this is not the case with the 
trees, such as BNT REE, associated with priors defined 
by S8N in Fig 2. Since all the leaves are of equal depth 
(this depth is 28 for the 8-node BN model space) we can 
only reach a leaf on the 'other side' of the root node by do­
ing one big jump via this root node-there are no shallower 
leaves that can help us reach the root node by a sequence 
of small jumps. Even with Pb = 0.98 our chains get stuck, 
very rarely proposing distant candidates and rejecting them 
when they are proposed. 
Solving this problem by going for big jumps brings its own 
problems. Sooner or later the chain should find its way to a 
model with a posterior probability higher than the vast ma­
jority of other models, including the vast majority of dis­
tant models. This will mean that many candidate models 
will be rejected-the chain will be stuck-unable to find 
other models of high posterior probability from amongst 
the mass of low probability models. Indeed, the rationale 
for local jumps is that we should give ourselves the oppor­
tunity to visit neighbouring models, since if a model has 
high probability then maybe so will many of its neighbours, 
since they are, in some way, similar. 
In our approach the neighbourhoods are defined by the 
topology of the tree, and the distance between them is 
regulated by Pb• the backtrack probability. 
We effect a 

UAI2001 
ANGELOPOULOS & CUSSENS 
21 
compromise between local and big jumps by implement­
ing a cyclic transition kernel. We cycle through the values 
Pb == 1 - z-n, for n 
== 1, . . . , 28, so that on every 28th 
iteration, there is a high probability of backtracking all the 
way to the top of the tree. 
We have also found it effective where possible to manually 
re-write our SLPs so that they are failure-free. If there are 
lots of failure points in the probability/SLD tree, then many 
candidates will be failures. Since we never jump to a fail­
ure leaf this can lead to poor mixing, particularly when we 
include many constraints so that successful branches are 
surrounded by many failures. 
7.3 
RESULTS 
We generated 2295 data points from the entire 'Asia' BN 
and constructed Markov chains over the space of all 8-
node BNs. There are 783,702,329,343 BNs in this model 
space. Firstly we used an SLP which defined a prior over 
all 8-node BNs consistent with a particular variable order­
ing (one consistent with the 'Asia' BN). We also did experi­
ments with the added constraints that the number of parents 
for a node is limited to k 
== 2 and k = 3. The first-order 
framework makes it easy to add constraints. However care 
is needed to write SLP priors which allow reasonable con­
vergence. 
For each setting of the constraints, we did two runs each 
of 500,000 iterations. We then used the sample so created 
to estimate the posterior probability that xi is a parent of 
Xi for all i, j consistent with the ordering. There are 28 
of these features. Plotting the estimates from the two runs 
against each other produced the results in Fig 6. In Fig 6 we 
also have results when only half of the data was used (1124 
data points). We then ran the same set of experiments but 
did not impose an ordering on the variables, and in one case 
removed the limit on the number of parents. The results of 
these experiments are in Fig 7. For each pair of runs, Figs 6 
and 7 contain runtimes in seconds for a Pentium III I GHz 
running SICStus 3.8.5 under Linux. 
Ideally, all points in Figs 6 and 7 would be on the diago­
nal, showing that estimates produced from the two different 
runs were equal. Basically, we get points near the diagonal 
if either the estimates are near 0 or 1 (there are lots of these 
and they are not easily visible on the plots) or the model 
space is constrained, particularly if constrained by an or­
dering. In the totally unrestricted case (rightmost plot of 
Fig 7), we get a few really bad points. In the worst case 
A was almost always the parent of D in the first run, but 
this was almost never the case in the second. These results 
fit our expectations, the "near 0 or 1" phenomenon follows 
from basic sampling theory, and it is no surprise that esti­
mates are more reliable in constrained settings. One sur­
prise is that we expected better results using only half the 
data, since then the shape of the posterior is less spiky, how-
ever the results are essentially the same. 
To see whether we could use the child-parent probability 
estimates to get a partial picture of the 'true' BN we con­
structed a BN where there was a link from Xi to Xi when­
ever that link had estimated probability greater than 95%. 
We did this for (i) the totally unconstrained case, (ii) when 
only a maximum of k = 3 parents were allowed and (iii) 
when only a maximum of k = 3 parents were allowed, but 
the parents of E were forced to be T and L. This last con­
straint seems reasonable since E is defined to be "either 
Tor L". The resulting BNs are Fig 8. As expected, we 
get spurious links in the unconstrained case with A and T 
parents of B, even though A and T are marginally inde­
pendent of B in the data generating 'Asia' network. For 
the two cases with k = 3 constraints on the parents, we get 
no links that are not in 'Asia'. It is surprising that we never 
have either ofT or L the parent of E even though E is a 
function ofT and L. 
8 
DISCUSSION 
Friedman and Koller (2000) state that "different runs of 
MCMC over networks lead to very different estimates in 
the posterior probabilities of structural features". Although 
a number of our experiments have this problem it is not 
always the case (although, unlike Friedman and Koller 
(2000), we have yet to work with variable sets as large as 
37). The consistency of the probability estimates depends 
on how constrained the model space is (as well as how well 
designed our MCMC strategy is). The stronger our prior 
knowledge the better the estimates. We see our main con­
tribution as providing a framework for incorporating prior 
knowledge in a declarative and practical manner. One ad­
vantage of working directly on network structure is that 
it makes it easier to actually write down the sort of prior 
knowledge we might have. 
It is instructive to compare our approach with the Markov 
chain Monte Carlo model composition (MC3) approach in­
troduced by Madigan and York ( 1995). The MC3 algorithm 
moves through the model space by altering only one edge 
at a time. The proposal distribution is not based upon the 
prior, and so the ratio of the priors of the current and pro­
posed models is computed to find the acceptance probabil­
ity, in contrast to our (3). Priors are used where this ratio 
is easily found and MC3 has been successfully applied to a 
number of datasets. 
Madigan, Andersson, Perlman, and Volinsky (1996) point 
out that there are strong computational and statistical ar­
guments in favour of using a model space each element 
of which is a Markov-equivalence class of BNs, rather 
than a single BN. Surprisingly, each class has on average 
only about 4 members-a significant proportion have only 
one member (Gillespie & Perlman, 2001). Each Markov­
equivalence class [D] is uniquely represented by a unique 

22 
ANGELOPOULOS & CUSSENS 
UAI2001 
chain graph D*, the essential graph. 
It is easy to de­
fine a prior over essential graphs and hence over Markov­
equivalence classes using an SLP. These can be extended 
to define a prior over BNs if desired. SEa, a fragment 
of which is given in Fig 4, does this and is most eas­
ily understood by looking at the steps used to sample 
from the prior it defines. Given a set of random variables 
RVs, skeleton/2 first probabilistically chooses an undi­
rected graph Skel, then essential_graph/3 proba­
bilistically chooses an essential graph EG with immoralities 
Imms by adding arrows to Skel. bn/3 is then defined to 
probabilistically choose a particular BN from the equiva­
lence class of BNs defined by EG. It is more natural to de­
fine a prior over essential graphs, but we extended the prior 
to be over BNs to compare with our previous experiments. 
bn(RVs,BN) 
:-
skeleton(RVs,Skel), 
essential_graph(Skel,Imms,EG), 
bn (EG, Imms,BN), 
top_sort(BN,_). 
%check for cycles 
Figure 4: 
Fragment of SEa. an SLP prior based on 
Markov-equivalence classes 
Although it was easy to define the prior, the associated 
probability tree had far too many failure derivations to 
be useful. A similar problem occurred when, in a sepa­
rate experiment, we used a prior with constraints enforcing 
marginal independence between pairs of nodes. 
Although all the experiments here are for BNs our approach 
is general. Our SLP implementation, which works by trans­
lating a human-readable SLP as in Fig 2 to Prolog, does 
not 'know' that the first-order terms are BNs. If we want 
to apply our method to different models, we just write the 
appropriate SLP priors and write code to compute the ap­
propriate Bayes factors. 
Our final conclusion is that further work is required to fully 
understand the advantages and limitations of our approach. 
There are many methods in the literature for improving 
MCMC and we have only tried one of them (the use of a 
cyclic transition kernel). One big problem was that natural 
ways of defining priors generally led to inefficient MCMC 
due to the existence of many failures. The same problem 
arises in logic programming where it is addressed using 
source-to-source program transformation. We expect pro­
gram transformation to be necessary for real applications, 
where, if we can exploit prior information using our frame­
work, substantial benefits are possible.
