arXiv:2101.02011v1  [cs.CY]  6 Jan 2021
Towards an Abolitionist AI: the role of Historically
Black Colleges and Universities
Charles C. Earl ∗
Automattic.com

Abstract
Abolition is the process of destroying and then rebuilding the structures that im-
pede liberation. This paper addresses the particular case of Black folk in the
United States, but is relevant to the global decolonization movement.
Using
notions of abolition and infrastructures of feeling developed by Ruth Wilson
Gilmore, I view Historically Black Colleges and Universities ( HBCUs ) as a
particular kind of abolitionist project, created for the explicit purpose of nurturing
and sustaining Black excellence particularly within the sciences. I then examine
how artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) in particular and computing in general have con-
tributed to racial oppression and the further conﬁnement and diminishing of Black
existence. I conclude by examining how the space held by HBCUs in computing
might contribute to a reimagining of AI as a technology that enhances the possi-
bility and actualization of Black life.
1
Introduction
As a child, I attended the nursery school of Spelman College, a historically Black women’s college
located in Atlanta. One of my earliest memories is of witnessing a protest taking place on the campus.
The young women of Spelman, in their proud deﬁant afros, were protesting the visit of Nelson
Rockefeller. They were demanding that the Rockefeller family – a major funder of the college –
divest from all assets invested in the South African apartheid regime. Rockefeller’s grandfather,
John D Rockefeller, had given the college its ﬁrst major endowment, and what had been the Atlanta
Baptist Female Seminary had been renamed in honor of John Rockefeller’s wife, Laura Spelman.
In an age that demands resistance and the abolition of structures that continue to oppress Black
people, what is the role of historically Black institutions like Spelman College? And in particular
what should be the role of those institutions in deﬁning how Black people interact with and deﬁne
the development of AI? Given the outsize role these institutions play in the development of Black
computing professionals – 9% of Black undergrads attend HBCUs, yet HBCUs produce 37% of the
Black STEM graduates in the United States – it is important to assess how these graduates are pre-
pared to address the inequities in computing that exacerbate these harms. Further, these institutions
continue to receive signiﬁcant funding from sources whose aims are at odds with liberation. In this
paper, my hope is to raise questions and initiate dialog about how these institutions might contribute
to liberatory computing.
2
Abolition and the geographies of freedom
The geographer Ruth Wilson Gilmore has been one of the most eloquent and incisive voices ar-
ticulating what abolition means in 2020. Her book The Golden Gulag Gilmore (2007) is both a
∗All opinions and analysis in this work are the author?s alone.
Resistance AI Workshop

meditation on the campaign to slow the growth of state and private prisons in California as well as
an exploration of the harm done by removing scores of people from society for the sake of retribu-
tion. In the speciﬁc case of prisons, Gilmore is asking us to confront what we think prisons are for –
punishment? rehabilitation? justice? – and the reality of what they actually accomplish.
Though Gilmore’s work focuses primarily on prison abolition, she articulates a broad, encompassing
vision of liberation, developed out of her geographer’s view of the world. In her essay Abolition
Geography and the Problem of Innocence Gilmore (2017) she writes Abolition geography starts
from the homely premise that freedom is a place (Gilmore, 2017, pg. 227). Abolition then is overall
the afﬁrming of life out of places intended for domination, exploitation, and ultimately spiritual,
intellectual and physical death:
If unﬁnished liberation is the still-to-be-achieved work of abolition, then at the
bottom what is to be abolished isn’t the past or its present ghost, but rather the
process of hierarchy, dispossession, and exclusion that congeal in and as group-
differentiated vulnerability to premature death. (Gilmore, 2017, pg. 228)
It is then this process of dispossession of life itself – epitomized by prisons – that is the enforcement
of the inequality necessitated by capitalism. The central tenet of Gilmore’s work is the examination
of these qualities of existence. The carceral landscape of capitalism that demands an extractive
hierarchy on the one hand, and the afﬁrming alternate reality that the exploited imagine and create
in real time and in real spaces on the other.
But Wilson’s work sees liberation as a dual of abolition. Referencing W.E.B. DuBois’s classic
Black Reconstruction 1998 she makes clear that the formerly enslaved were always creating free
spaces in which they could exist as whole human beings. For Wilson, this continuous building
creates an infrastructure of feeling (Gilmore, 2017, pg. 236-7) – an emotional, spiritual practices
that connect the present generation to the love and aspirations of ancestors that struggled and dream
of independence.
HBCUs exemplify a place of freedom in Gilmore’s conception – most having been birthed in during
Reconstruction. HBCUs provide havens in which Black scholars can exist without fear of think-
ing/coding while Black. In his study of the afﬁrming environment at Florida A&M University (one
of the largest producers of Black CS grads) Allen concludes that HBCUs "provide a relief from the
burdens of oppressive articulations and experiences of society and space" Allen (2020).
The impact that this space cannot be overstated. There are 102 HBCUs in the U.S. Despite the
fact that 9% of Black undergrads students attend these institutions, they account for 37 percent of
the degrees awarded to Black people in STEM disciplines. 33 percent of the Black recipients of
doctoral degrees in computing earned their ﬁrst degree from a HBCU, and 12 % of the Black PhDs
in computing receive their doctorate from an HBCU. Over the nine year period 2007 - 2017, the
HBCUs Spelman College, Howard University, and North Carolina A&T State University had the
highest yield of doctorates (Black CS or Math doctorates per 100 Bachelors degrees in STEM) of
any institutions in the United States Gasman and Nguyen (2014). Beyond the CS discipline, two of
the most impactful thinkers on abolition – Dr. Ruha Benjamin and Dr. Tressie McMillan Cottam –
themselves received undergraduate degrees from HBCUs – respectively Spelman College and North
Carolina Central University.
3
The need for abolition in AI
If capitalism requires inequity, and if racism enshrines it Gilmore (2017), then the hyper proﬁt
motive of AI applied to platform capitalism has been a successful effort to optimize racism. The
uses of AI – particularly in platforms that derive value from manipulative practices – are necessarily
not in the interest of Black people. Benjamin (2019), Buolamwini and Gebru (2018) and others
have documented how AI has been used to enforce racial hierarchies of power. Cottom (2020)
further discuses how the logic of racial capitalism has been ensconced into the logic of all web scale
platforms – it is at this point core to Internet economy.
From above work we can distill a few kinds of technologies and practices that reinforce racial op-
pression:
2

• Carceral technologies: for example predictive policing and algorithmic sentencing are used
explicitly for the purposes of capturing, isolating, and destroying Black life.
• Discriminatory resource allocation existing technologies are used to limit the access of
Black people to resources from health care to credit, often optimizing for proﬁt over well-
being.
• Surveillance technologies are used explicitly for expropriation of behavioral surplus and
circumscribing autonomy by predictively tracking and controlling the behavior of the
surveilled.
• Racialized hiring and software engineering practices practices of recruiting, advancement,
and project management within software organizations that enable the reproduction of
racial harms.
• Militarization of AI particularly in the secretive use of technology to further colonialist
agendas on the global south – the use of this technology upon the civilian Black and Indige-
nous population of the U.S. is particularly concerning.
On the other hand, there are tools that Benjamin identiﬁes as being able to dismantle these tech-
nologies, mitigate their harm, or even better create the spaces that allow free spaces to come into
being.
• Creating space for and voice to the marginalized, the practice of centering marginalized
voices by enabling full participation, contribution, and equitable control of the development
process.
• Algorithmic and process audits that identify the harms caused by algorithmic decision mak-
ing and also identify the systemic issues in the software development process that allow
them to go unchecked.
• Racial abuse protection and mitigation technologies that intercept racial attacks and miti-
gate harm (e.g. micro-aggression classiﬁers)
• Liberatory design practices which enable the development of software products center the
aspirations and requirements of marginalized community members.
• Equitable work practices that recognize and reward the contribution of data annotators, con-
tent moderators, and other "gig" workers whose value is extracted and erased by racialized
platform capitalism.
4
Abolition and the reproduction of oppression at HBCUs
We can get some understanding of the degree to which abolitionist computing within HBCUs occurs
by looking at the research funding. The major U.S. federal agencies – among them Department of
Defense (DoD), National Institutes of Health (NIH), and National Science Foundation (NSF) – allo-
cate large grants speciﬁcally targeted to improve the research and teaching capacity of HBCUs. The
NSF annually funds the HBCU Excellence in Research (EiR) program ($10 million per year), and
the Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP) ($55 million
per year).
A close look at research activity at Howard University raises the other question of to what degree
Black computing scholars are being trained to participate in the reproduction of racist technology. At
Howard, approximately $15 million awarded in computing research for 2020 (excluding on-going
grants), 50% were from department of defense grants in bio-metrics and cyber defense (e.g. Howard
was awarded $7.5 million for a DoD Center for Excellence in AI/ML CoE-AIML (2020) ), 4%
from educational awards for development of retention and STEM curricula, while 1% was awarded
to research speciﬁcally aimed at addressing online abuse directed toward Black people (e.g. "Deep
Learning of Sentiment Analysis and Codeswitching for Identiﬁcation of Harmful Technologies" and
other initiatives from Dr. Gloria Washington’s Affective Biometrics Lab ). Similar patterns emerge
when looking at other HBCUs like North Carolina A & T State University.
That is, with heavy DoD and platform capitalism support Black students and researchers must navi-
gate being participants in the reproduction of what Mohamed et al. (2020) refers to as colonizing AI
especially with respect to surveillance and military technology. This is concerning especially given
the potential harms for Black folk in the U.S. and global south Garcia (2019).
3

5
Abolitionists agendas for HBCUs
To begin in earnest the development of abolitionist approaches to AI within the HBCU landscape
requires a return to the source. Tapping into the infrastructure of feelings that already permeates
these institutions and enables their success in nurturing so many impactful people. Within available
resources already devoted to capacity development, there could be informal meetups, conferences,
gatherings across schools, across disciplines to explore the implications of abolitionist approaches
to computing. The signiﬁcant number of students involved in BLM actions combined with resources
already devoted to making computing accessible could be a powerful accelerator. The development
of conferences and centers to promote tools for community audits and interrogation of software
platforms is another approach that could have wide adoption and immediate impact given the mil-
lions of Black people are impacted daily by racialized ad targeting and unfair pricing experiments
by software platforms. Lastly, the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) has long acknowl-
edged the dearth of adequate ethics education in computing. For AI in particular, this is especially
necessary given the potential for harm. Perspectives on ethics that would explore methodologies
for assessing what should and should not be built would be an important preparation for students.
Engagement with scholars of the social sciences, law, and healthcare – present at so many HBCUs
– that could collectively work on the development of archives and models capable of addressing
community needs is also important.
6
Conclusion
I have attempted to consider the current state of affairs in AI viewed from the perspective of abolition
as articulated by Ruth Wilson Gilmore. Viewing AI as a carceral space that replicates and accelerates
inequity I have attempted to look at the way in which HBCUs might chart a new course for it. There
remains much to be done.
