T-SKIRT: Online Estimation of Student Proﬁciency in an Adaptive Learning
System
Chaitanya Ekanadham

Knewton, Inc., 100 5th Avenue., New York, NY 10011 USA
Yan Karklin

Knewton, Inc., 100 5th Avenue., New York, NY 10011 USA
Abstract
We develop T-SKIRT: a temporal, structured-
knowledge, IRT-based method for predicting stu-
dent responses online. By explicitly accounting
for student learning and employing a structured,
multidimensional representation of student pro-
ﬁciencies, the model outperforms standard IRT-
based methods on an online response prediction
task when applied to real responses collected
from students interacting with diverse pools of
educational content.
1. Introduction
Accurately predicting student responses is an important
task for adaptive learning systems. Better predictions en-
able more efﬁcient diagnosis and remediation of student
deﬁciencies. When reported as analytics, these predictions
can also provide the student or teacher with actionable in-
formation to improve student outcomes. Traditional ap-
proaches mostly consider single-session assessments (e.g.,
a standardized examination), but to work in learning envi-
ronments, adaptive systems must deal with signiﬁcant chal-
lenges:
• student knowledge states are constantly ﬂuctuating,
due to online or ofﬂine learning, forgetting, and vary-
ing levels of engagement with the content
• lack of control over the user experience: students
may do different, unrelated, assignments on their own
schedule, and at different paces
• student paths through content are often heavily cor-
related for pedagogical reasons (contrary to an ideal
Proceedings of the 31 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copy-
right 2015 by the author(s).
randomized controlled trial) and may include repeat
attempts and/or be subject to selection bias
• up-to-date predictions must be available as soon as a
new response is made (imagine a student aces a quiz
and submits, then gets recommended similar material)
• accurate inferences and sensible recommendations
must be made even at the beginning of a session, when
little data about the student is available
• the pool of content is very diverse: ﬁtting a model of
student responses to one set of content may not gen-
eralize to another set. Furthermore, relationships be-
tween content are difﬁcult to establish and represent
in the model, even given expert labels (Lindsey et al.,
2014).
Bayesian Knowledge Tracing (BKT) is a framework that
explicitly models student learning (Corbett & Anderson,
1994) but it accounts for diversity in neither students nor
content. On the other hand, Item Response Theory (IRT)
is a framework for modeling responses by estimating both
student and content properties (Rasch, 1960; Lord, 1980),
but it does not account for student learning. Several re-
cent efforts have attempted to combine the complemen-
tary beneﬁts of these two frameworks, with some success
(Gonz´alez-Brenes et al., 2013; Khajah et al., 2014; Sohl-
Dickstein, 2013; Lan et al., 2014). However, a few gaps
remain: First, the way in which these models are evalu-
ated is not consistent with the requirements of an adaptive
learning system, which has access to all previous responses
and is tasked with predicting the outcome of one or more
prospective pairings of students and questions.
Instead,
model performance is gauged by predicting randomly held
out chunks of responses (which is not a realistic task even
if these responses are in the future and contiguous in time)
for each student, or all responses for a randomly chosen
subset of students (an approach that does not leverage cur-
rently available information). Second, the beneﬁt of tem-
arXiv:1702.04282v1  [cs.AI]  14 Feb 2017

T-SKIRT: Online Estimation of Student Proﬁciency in an Adaptive Learning System
poral methods over standard IRT methods has not been em-
pirically observed. This could be due to high correlation in
student paths through the content (observed in some of our
data as well). Third, previous models either do not account
for multiple dimensions of knowledge, or assume they can
be modelled independently. Finally, data are typically col-
lected via a highly instrumented and standardized system
(intelligent tutoring system), which is unlike several other
online learning environments.
We develop a uniﬁed IRT-based model that allows for stu-
dent and item parameters, temporal ﬂuctuation of student
abilities, and content diversity.
We compare this model
with standard IRT models on an evaluation task identical
to that performed in a production setting: predicting the
next response given all previous responses to date. Our
ﬁndings are twofold: First, incorporating temporality into
our model yields a signiﬁcant performance boost. Second,
modeling multiple dimensions of knowledge along with the
connections between them (based on labels from subject
matter experts) provides additional improvement in perfor-
mance.
2. Background
2.1. Knowledge tracing
Knowledge tracing (Corbett & Anderson, 1994) (KT) is a
framework for modeling the process of students mastering
one or more skills while completing a sequence of assess-
ments. At each time t, Zt is an unobserved binary vari-
able indicating whether the student has mastered the skill
or not, and Xt is an observed binary variable indicating the
correctness value of the completed assessment. A Hidden
Markov Model is used to capture the statistical relation-
ships between these. Emission probabilities govern how
likely a correct response is given each hidden state. Transi-
tion probabilities govern how a student transitions between
the hidden states. Several KT variants have been proposed
to individually handle student abilities, multiple skills, as-
sessment difﬁculty, and external aids (see (Khajah et al.,
2014) and the references therein).
In (Gonz´alez-Brenes
et al., 2013; Khajah et al., 2014), a unifying framework for
these is proposed where the probabilities are parameterized
in terms of these observed features.
2.2. Item response theory
Item response theory (IRT) (Lord, 1980; Rasch, 1993) is a
framework for modeling binary student responses on a set
of assessments. In the two-parameter formulation the prob-
ability that a student s answers an assessment q correctly is
given by:
psq = f(αq(θs −βq))
(1)
where θs is the student proﬁciency, βq is the assessment
difﬁculty, and αq is the assessment discrimination which
governs how sensitive the correctness probability is to the
students proﬁciency. The function f(.) is known as the item
response function and increases monotonically from 0 to
1. We choose f(x) = Φ(x), the cumulative distribution
function of the normal distribution. This model is known
as the two-parameter ogive, or 2PO model (Rasch, 1993).
An underlying assumption of this model is that student abil-
ities (θs) remain constant over time, making this more ap-
plicable to responses from an examination rather than a
learning experience over an extended period of time. In
(Gonz´alez-Brenes et al., 2013) and (Sohl-Dickstein, 2013),
the IRT framework is augmented to handle temporal ﬂuctu-
ations in student proﬁciencies. However, the beneﬁts over
standard IRT were not empirically realized in the former,
while the latter required considerable amount of comput-
ing resources and time to ﬁt.
Note also that none of the models in the KT or IRT fami-
lies have been rigorously evaluated on the online prediction
task.
3. T-SKIRT
3.1. Temporality
We extend the 2PO model by modeling the student proﬁ-
ciencies over time as a Wiener process. Under this model,
the conditional relationships are given by
P(θt+τ|θt) = φθt,ν2τ(θt+τ)
(2)
where φµ,σ2(.) is the probability density function of the
normal distribution with mean µ and variance σ2.
The
proportionality constant ν2 on the conditional variance is
a model parameter, tuned to maximize prediction accuracy
on a separate dataset). Under this model, the joint proba-
bility over responses and proﬁciencies for a single student
is given by:
P(r1:t, θ1:t) = P(r1:t|θ1:t)P(θ1:t)
(3)
= P(θ1)
tY
i=2
P(θi|θi−1)
tY
i=1
P(ri|θi)
= φµ0,σ2
0(θ1)
tY
i=2
φθi−1,ν2(θi)
tY
i=1
pri
i (1 −pi)1−ri
where pi = Φ(αqi(θi −βqi)) is the probability of cor-
rect on the i′th response to question qi, as per Eq. 1. The
primary task is to infer the posterior distribution over the
current proﬁciencies θt given all past responses. We as-
sume that item parameters have been learned previously

T-SKIRT: Online Estimation of Student Proﬁciency in an Adaptive Learning System
and are ﬁxed. Let r1:n and θ1:n denote sequences of bi-
nary responses and real-valued proﬁciencies, respectively.
The posterior is then given by:
P(θt|r1:t) ∝P(r1:t|θt)P(θt)
(4)
To evaluate the ﬁrst term on the right-hand side, it is neces-
sary to integrate out all possible paths θ1:t−1:
P(r1:t|θt) =
Z
P(r1:t, θ1:t−1|θt)dθ1:t−1
However, computing this integral is expensive, especially
in an online setting. For computational efﬁciency, we make
the following approximation:
P(r1:t|θt) ≈
tY
i=1
P(ri|θt)
=
tY
i=1
Z
P(ri, |θi)P(θi|θt)dθi
=
tY
i=1
Z
pri
i (1 −pi)1−riφθt,ν2(t−i)(θi)dθi
(5)
Using the deﬁnition of pi and the fact that
R
Φ(α(x −
β))φµ,σ2(x)dx = Φ

α(β−µ)
√
1+α2σ2

, we can simplify this to:
P(r1:t|θt) ≈
tY
i=1
˜pri
i (1 −˜pi)1−ri
(6)
where:
˜pi = Φ(˜αi(θt −βqi))
˜αi =
αqi
q
1 + α2qiν2(t −i)
(7)
Note that this formulation is exactly the same as the likeli-
hood under a non-temporal IRT model, with αqi replaced
by ˜αi. Therefore, we refer to ˜αi as the “effective discrim-
ination” of the i’th response on the student’s current proﬁ-
ciency θt. Note that the further back in time the response,
the lower the effective discrimination and thus the smaller
effect it has on the posterior over θt in Eq. 4. Finally, we
can substitute Eq. 6 into Eq. 4 and take the log to get the
approximate log-posterior:
log P(θt|r1:t)
≈
log P(θt) +
t
X
i=1
ri log(˜pi)
(8)
+
(1 −ri) log(˜pi)
(9)
3.2. Structured, multidimensional prior over student
proﬁciencies
When the content pool is very diverse, summarizing stu-
dent proﬁciency with a single number (varying over time)
may not be enough to capture the student response patterns.
Content can be organized into groups against which student
proﬁciency is measured. These groups have been referred
to as knowledge components (Corbett et al., 1997) or skills
(Lindsey et al., 2014; Lan et al., 2014). The content used in
our experiments has been grouped by subject matter experts
into groups called concepts. Each student’s proﬁciency at a
single time is now represented by a vector of proﬁciencies
in each concept, ⃗θt ∈RC where C is the total number of
concepts. The IRT likelihood (Eq. 1) can then be rewritten
as:
psq = f(αq(θscq −βq))
(10)
where cq is the concept assessed by question q.
Experts also identify prerequisite relationships between
concepts indicating that content in one concept cannot be
mastered without having mastered content in another con-
cept. For more details see (Wilson & Nichols, 2014). These
concepts and prerequisite relationships deﬁne a directed
acyclic graph, and from this we can deﬁne a prior distri-
bution over ⃗θt that captures the conceptual relationships
(similar to how expert labels were used in (Lindsey et al.,
2014)). We employ a speciﬁc multivariate Gaussian prior
whose log-probability is given by:
log P(⃗θt) = −λ
N
X
n=1
θ2
tn −γ
X
n,m:n≺m
(θn −θm)2
(11)
where θtn is the n’th element of the vector ⃗θt, n ≺m in-
dicates that concept n is prerequisite to concept m, and the
parameters λ and γ control the overall variance and relative
correlations, respectively. Note that the precision matrix
has non-zero entries along the diagonal and only for pairs
of concepts that have a prerequisite relationship. This de-
ﬁnes a prior over proﬁciencies at any ﬁxed point in time. In
order to incorporate this into the temporal model, we make
the following approximation for computational tractability:
P(⃗θi|⃗θt) ≈
Y
n
P(θin|θtn)
(12)
which allows us to have a multivariate analog of Eq. 9:

T-SKIRT: Online Estimation of Student Proﬁciency in an Adaptive Learning System
log P(⃗θt|r1:t) ≈log P(⃗θt) +
t
X
i=1
ri log(˜pi)
(13)
+ (1 −ri) log(˜pi)
(14)
Substituting Eq. 11 into Eq. 14 gives:
log P(⃗θt|r1:t) ≈−λ
N
X
n=1
θ2
tn
(15)
−γ
X
n,m:n≺m
(θn −θm)2
+
t
X
i=1
ri log(˜pi) + (1 −ri) log(˜pi)
4. Experimental setup
Data was collected from a variety of educational prod-
ucts integrated with Knewton’s adaptive learning platform
and used in various classroom settings across the world.
These products vary with respect to the educational con-
tent used (disciplines spanned math, science, and English
language learning) as well as the way in which students
are guided through the content. For example, students may
take an initial assessment and then be remediated on ar-
eas needing improvement. In other products, student start
from the beginning and work toward a predeﬁned goal set
by the teacher. In all of these settings, Knewton receives
data about each interaction (anonymized student id, con-
tent module id, correctness, and timestamp).
We utilized approximately 1M responses of 6.3K randomly
sampled students on 105.6K questions spanning roughly 4
months. Students who worked on fewer than 5 questions
total were excluded. For each student/question pair, only
the most recent 4 responses were used to avoid long strings
of multiple attempts on questions. After pre-processing,
student history lengths ranged from 5 to 3.2K responses,
including repeat attempts (see Fig 1). The overall percent
correct of these responses is 54.6%.
Figure 1. Data set student statistics.
5. Results
We compare the following student response models:
Figure 2. Data set item statistics.
• student percent-correct (SPC): predict correct if and
only if the majority of previous responses for the stu-
dent are correct.
• 2PO IRT: standard ogive model, equivalent to Eq. 9
with ν = 0 and λ = 1.0.
• 2PO temporal IRT: same as above but with ν = 10.0.
• Factorial MVN 2PO IRT: factorial multivariate Gaus-
sian prior on proﬁciencies per concept (labelled by ex-
perts), using Eq. 15 with ν = 0, γ = 0 and λ = 1.0.
• Correlated MVN 2PO IRT: same as above but with
γ = 0.5.
• Correlated MVN temporal 2PO IRT (T-SKIRT): same
as above but with γ = 0.5, ν = 0.1.
To compare model performance in a task relevant for on-
line adaptive learning systems, we measured the accuracy
of predicting each student response given only the previous
history of that student. For the SPC model this amounts to
predicting correct if the majority of previous interactions
are correct. For models with latent student abilities, this en-
tails estimating θt (or ⃗θt for multi-dimensional proﬁciency
models) by maximizing the logarithm of the (approximate)
posterior probability (Eq. 9 for single-dimensional, Eq. 15
for multi-dimensional). Note that both of these objective
functions are convex w.r.t. the proﬁciencies and are easily
optimized using ﬁrst- or second-order gradient-based meth-
ods. We use this estimate to predict the correctness of the
next interaction via Eq. 10, and record the fraction of pre-
dictions that matched the observed responses.
The data was split into two parts. The ﬁrst was used to
estimate item difﬁculties (βq’s) and discriminations (αq’s)
using a standard 2PO IRT model with normal priors (βq ∼
N(0, 1), αq ∼N(1, 0.5)). The parameters λ, β, ν2 were
also tuned to optimize prediction accuracy on this data set.
The second data set was used to evaluate and compare the
models.
The results are summarized in Table. 5. Adding a tempo-
ral component to the standard 2PO IRT model (using the
effective discriminations in Eq. 7) yields a 2% increase in

T-SKIRT: Online Estimation of Student Proﬁciency in an Adaptive Learning System
Figure 3. Performance of T-SKIRT (red) compared with running student percent-correct (blue) and 2PO IRT (green), as a function of
the student’s overall percent correct, with respect to prediction accuracy (left), AUC (middle), and average log-likelihood (right).
accuracy. Using multidimensional proﬁciencies based on
conceptual groupings identiﬁed by experts gives a 1.6% in-
crease. Adding information about conceptual relationships
(using a correlated multivariate prior) brings this improve-
ment to 1.9%. Combining the multidimensional prior with
the temporal component yields a total of 2.8% improve-
ment over standard 2PO IRT.
Figure 3 plots the improvement per student as a function
of the student’s overall fraction of correct responses, illus-
trating that the majority of the improvement comes from
responses for students that are most difﬁcult to predict. T-
SKIRT does slightly worse than 2PO IRT for students who
are doing very well or very poorly, and we are investigating
why it underperforms in this regime.
Model
Accuracy ± 1 SEM
AUC
SPC
0.7085 ± 0.0021
n/a
2PO IRT
0.7201 ± 0.0018
0.7954
2PO temporal IRT
0.7420 ± 0.0018
0.8119
Spherical MVN 2PO IRT
0.7362 ± 0.0016
0.8056
Correlated MVN 2PO IRT
0.7390 ± 0.0016
0.8110
T-SKIRT
0.7478 ± 0.0016
0.8194
6. Conclusions
We developed a model, T-SKIRT, for predicting student re-
sponses that addresses two major challenges faced by an
adaptive learning system: accounting for student learning
and handling diversity in student ability and content prop-
erties. We evaluated this model on a task required in a pro-
duction environment (predicting the next response of a stu-
dent given all previous responses) and found that it gives
superior predictions over standard IRT-based models when
applied to real student data despite the large variability in
content discipline, grade level, and learning environment.
In contrast to (Gonz´alez-Brenes et al., 2013), incorporat-
ing temporality into the model yielded signiﬁcant beneﬁts
over standard IRT. We also found that conceptual group-
ings and prerequisite relationships provided by experts also
yielded signiﬁcant improvement in contrast with (Lindsey
et al., 2014) where expert labels did not yield better predic-
tions.
Our model can be improved or extended in several ways.
For example, the temporal model can be augmented to
account for observable events where learning is likely to
occur (e.g., completing a lesson, using learning aids or
hints).
The model can also be extended to account for
more gradual learning or forgetting of material by incor-
porating drift terms into the Wiener process prior. Another
area of active research focuses on whether concept-module
and inter-concept relationships can be automatically de-
termined from data within this framework (e.g., (Lindsey
et al., 2014; Lan et al., 2014)) and encoded in a struc-
tured prior over student proﬁciencies. Finally, our infer-
ence method makes an approximation of conditional in-
dependence for the sake of tractability – we ﬁnd that this
yields improved performance, but are also investigating the
theoretical validity of this approximation.
