Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
Nessrine Trabelsia, Lamia Chaari Fouratib and Chung Shue Chenc

cNokia Bell Labs, 12 Rue Jean Bart, Paris-Saclay, France
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
5G and Beyond Mobile Networks
Interference Management
Survey
Inter-Cell Interference
Multi-User Interference
Inter-Beam Interference
Cross-Link Interference
Remote Interference
Inter-Numerology Interference
Self Interference
A B S T R A C T
During the last decade, wireless data services have had an incredible impact on people’s lives in
ways we could never have imagined. The number of mobile devices has increased exponentially
and data traﬃc has almost doubled every year. Undoubtedly, the rate of growth will continue to be
rapid with the explosive increase in demands for data rates, latency, massive connectivity, network
reliability, and energy eﬃciency. In order to manage this level of growth and meet these require-
ments, the ﬁfth-generation (5G) mobile communications network is envisioned as a revolutionary
advancement combining various improvements to previous mobile generation networks and new
technologies, including the use of millimeter wavebands (mm-wave), massive multiple-input multiple-
output (mMIMO) multi-beam antennas, network densiﬁcation, dynamic Time Division Duplex (TDD)
transmission, and new waveforms with mixed numerologies. New revolutionary features including
terahertz (THz) communications and the integration of Non-Terrestrial Networks (NTN) can further
improve the performance and signal quality for future 6G networks. However, despite the inevitable
beneﬁts of all these key technologies, the heterogeneous and ultra-ﬂexible structure of the 5G and
beyond network brings non-orthogonality into the system and generates signiﬁcant interference that
needs to be handled carefully. Therefore, it is essential to design eﬀective interference management
schemes to mitigate severe and sometimes unpredictable interference in mobile networks. In this
paper, we provide a comprehensive review of interference management in 5G and Beyond networks
and discuss its future evolution. We start with a uniﬁed classiﬁcation and a detailed explanation of
the diﬀerent types of interference and continue by presenting our taxonomy of existing interference
management approaches. Then, after explaining interference measurement reports and signaling, we
provide for each type of interference identiﬁed, an in-depth literature review and technical discussion
of appropriate management schemes. We ﬁnish by discussing the main interference challenges that
will be encountered in future 6G networks and by presenting insights on the suggested new interference
management approaches, including useful guidelines for an AI-based solution. This review will
provide a ﬁrst-hand guide to the industry in determining the most relevant technology for interference
management, and will also allow for consideration of future challenges and research directions.
1. Introduction
Over the last decade, mobile technology has greatly trans-
formed and shaped our daily lives. According to the Eric-
sson mobility report published in November 2021 [1], the
deployment of 4G networks has generated more than 5.5
billion new smartphone subscriptions worldwide since 2011
and a nearly 300 times growth in mobile data traﬃc. This
explosive growth will probably continue and be even faster,
with the deployment of 5G networks, than for any previous
mobile generation. 5G, which is on track to become the fastest
deployed mobile network ever, has already accounted for 660
million subscriptions at the end of 2021 and is forecasted to
cover about 75 percent of the world’s population in 2027 with
4.4 billion subscriptions globally.
Compared to previous mobile generations, 5G and beyond
networks are aimed to be a revolutionary leap forward to meet
the demands of diﬀerent users for higher data rates, lower la-
tency, and increased reliability [2]. To fulﬁll the ambitious re-
quirements, 5G New Radio (NR), which development started
in 3GPP Release 15, relies on several key technologies includ-
ing the use of higher frequency bands (mm-wave bands) [3]
oﬀering larger bandwidths, the massive use of multiple beams
antennas [4], new waveforms [5] with multiple numerologies,
network densiﬁcation [6, 7] and dynamic time division duplex
[8], etc. Unlike the one-size-ﬁts-all 4G network, the 5G and
beyond network is expected to be ultra-ﬂexible to dynamically
adapt to the various emerging use cases [2]. However, this
ﬂexibility comes at a cost, as the increasing deployment
of heterogeneous network infrastructure and the design of
disparate technology models generate unprecedented levels
of interference that can severely limit network performance.
Therefore, the design of eﬀective interference management
schemes is undoubtedly a hot research topic.
Prior to this work, there were several survey papers which
presented the interference management for 4G or/and 5G
networks. Some recent surveys include new approaches for
6G networks. To begin with, we use Table 1 to list and provide
a quick comparison. We will introduce each of them in the
following.
In [9, 10], inter-cell interference management schemes in
Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiple Access (OFDMA)-
based cellular networks were considered with a focus, espe-
cially in the latter study on Inter-Cell Interference Coordina-
tion (ICIC) avoidance approaches in the Downlink (DL). In
[9], diﬀerent interference management techniques in OFDMA
femto cell networks to cope with co-tier and cross-tier inter-
ference were presented and qualitatively compared. In [10],
various ICIC avoidance schemes were classiﬁed into static
and dynamic schemes and extensively reviewed. Y. Zhou et
Page 1 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
Nomenclature
3GPP
3rd Generation Partnership
Project
ABS
Almost Blank Subframe
ACI
Adjacent Channel Interfer-
ence
AI
Artiﬁcial Intelligence
AP
Access Point
BER
Bit Error Rate
BLER
BLock Error Rate
BS
Base Station
BWP
BandWidth Part
CA
Carrier Aggregation
CC
Component Carrier
CCI
Co-Channel Interference
CF mMIMO Cell-Free massive MIMO
CLI
Cross-Link Interference
CoMP
Coordinated Multi Point
CP
Cyclic Preﬁx
CRE
Cell Range Extension
CS
Coordinated Scheduling
CSI
Channel State Information
D-TDD
Dynamic TDD
D2D
Device-to-Device
DL
DownLink
DRL
Deep Reinforcement Learn-
ing
eICIC
enhanced ICIC
eMMB
enhanced
Mobile
Broad-
band
eNB
eNodeB
FD
Full-Duplex
FDD
Frequency Division Duplex
FeICIC
Further enhanced ICIC
FFR
Fractional Frequency Reuse
FR
Frequency Reuse
FR1
Frequency Range 1
FR2
Frequency Range 2
GB
Guard Band
gNB
gNodeB
HetNets
Heterogeneous Networks
IA
Interference Alignment
IBFD
In-Band-Full-Duplex
IBI
Inter-Beam Interference
IC
Interference Cancellation
IC-IBI
Inter-Cell Inter-Beam Inter-
ference
ICI
Inter-Cell Interference
ICIC
Inter-Cell Interference Coor-
dination
INI
Inter-Numerology
Interfer-
ence
IoT
Internet of Things
IRS
Intelligent Reﬂecting Sur-
face
ISAC
Integrated
Sensing
And
Communication
ITU
International Telecommuni-
cation Union
IW
Interference Whitening
LTE
Long Term Evolution
LTE-A
LTE-Advanced
MA
Multiple Access
MARL
Multi-Agent Reinforcement
Learning
MC
Macro Cell
MDP
Markov Decision Process
MIMO
Multiple Input Multiple Out-
put
mm-wave
millimeter wave
mMIMO
massive MIMO
MMSE
Minimum Mean Square Er-
ror
mMTC
massive
Machine
Type
Communications
ms
millisecond
MUI
Multi-User Interference
NGMA
Next Generation Multiple
Access
NOMA
Non-Orthogonal
Multiple
Access
NR
New Radio
NSA
Non-Stand-Alone
NTN
Non-Terrestrial Networks
OFDM
Orthogonal Frequency Divi-
sion Multiplexing
OFDMA
Orthogonal Frequency Divi-
sion Multiple Access
OMA
Orthogonal Multiple Access
PC
Power Control
PHY
PHYsical layer
QoS
Quality of Service
RAN
Radio Access Networks
RB
Resource Block
RF
Radio Frequency
RI
Remote Interference
RIM
Remote Interference Man-
agement
RRM
Radio
Resource
Manage-
ment
RS
Reference Signal
RSMA
Rate Division Multiple Ac-
cess
RSRP
Reference Signal Received
Power
SA
Stand-Alone
SC
Small Cell
SC-FDM
Single
Carrier
Frequency
Division Multiplexing
SC-FDMA
Single
Carrier
Frequency
Division Multiple Access
SCMA
Sparse Code Multiple Ac-
cess
SCS
SubCarrier Spacing
SDN
Software-Deﬁned Network
SFR
Soft Frequency Reuse
SI
Self Interference
SIC
Successive
Interference
Cancellation
SINR
Signal-to-Interference-plus-
Noise Ratio
SRS
Sounding Reference Signal
STIN
Space-Terrestrial Integrated
Network
TD-LTE
Time Division LTE
TDD
Time Division Duplex
THz
TeraHertz
UAV
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle
UDN
Ultra Dense Network
UE
User Equipment
UL
Uplink
URLLC
Ultra Reliable Low Latency
Communications
ZF
Zero Forcing
al., in [12], overviewed the principal inter-cell interference
management techniques used in multiple generations from
2G to 4G and introduced some advanced schemes for 5G
systems. In [13, 14], ICIC techniques applied in LTE/LTE-
A networks were surveyed. In the former study, the focus was
on traditional frequency reuse schemes. Simulations were per-
formed to compare the performance of various methods with
Page 2 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
[REF] +
YEAR
NETWORK ENVIRONMENT
SCOPE
[9] 2012
OFDMA femto cell networks
Interference scenarios and resource management
[10] 2013
OFDMA-based cellular networks
ICIC avoidance schemes in the downlink
[11] 2014
Multi-tier networks
Cell association and power control schemes
[12] 2014
From 2G to 4G networks + Insights on 5G
networks
ICI management schemes in 2G-4G networks and
promising schemes for 5G networks
[13] 2015
LTE networks
A comprehensive survey on ICIC techniques and their
performance study compared to frequency reuse-1
system
[14] 2015
LTE/LTE-A HetNets
An extensive survey on ICIC management techniques
[15] 2019
LTE HetNets
eICIC standardization and time-domain eICIC schemes
[16] 2019
5G HetNets and D2D communications
Interference management techniques (ICIC, CoMP, CS)
[17] 2019
SDN-5G/6G networks
Partly about interference management schemes and a
general software-deﬁned based framework for
interference control
[18] 2020
D-TDD networks
Cross-link interference mitigation
[19] 2020
5G HetNets
Radio resource management schemes
[20] 2020
LTE-A and 5G
A comprehensive survey on self interference
[21] 2020
4G and 5G networks
Radio resource management schemes
[22] 2021
FDD LTE-A and 5G
Self interference cancellation
[23] 2021
5G HetNets
Resource allocation (models, algorithms)
[24] 2021
5G and Beyond (HetNets, Relay Nodes,
D2D, IoT
Interference management
[25] 2023
SDN-5G and Beyond networks
Routing-based interference mitigation with diﬀerent
SDN-based architectures
[26] 2023
5G networks and IoT
Study on interference impact and possible optimization
techniques
[This survey
paper] 2023
5G and Beyond (with a focus on HetNets)
+ Insights on 6G networks
A comprehensive survey on interference classiﬁcation
and interference management schemes for each
interference type
Table 1: Most Recent Survey Papers Related to Interference Management in Mobile Networks
frequency reuse 1. The second survey investigated the evo-
lution of inter-cell interference management schemes from
ICIC to enhanced ICIC (eICIC) and Further eICIC (FeICIC)
to more advanced techniques such as Coordinated Multi-
Point (CoMP) in LTE-A Heterogeneous Networks (HetNets).
Resource allocation based on Carrier Aggregation (CA) was
also highlighted as an eﬃcient inter-cell interference manage-
ment scheme. While in [14], the author overviewed several
standardized ICIC techniques, the study in [15] focused on
time domain eICIC schemes and their joint optimization with
other RRM methods such as user association and power
control (PC) in LTE HetNets.
While in [11], interference management was discussed
from the perspective of user cell association and power con-
trol mechanisms in multi-tier networks, the authors in [16] re-
viewed interference mitigation techniques such ICIC, CoMP,
and Coordinated Scheduling (CS) in the context of Device-to-
Device (D2D) communications and 5G HetNets. The authors
in [19] and [23] also focused on 5G Heterogeneous Networks.
In [23], resource allocation models and algorithms were in-
vestigated thoroughly, whereas, in [19], an overview of radio
resource management (RRM) issues including spectrum al-
location and interference mitigation was presented. T. Akhtar
et al. also provided in [21] an extensive review of the key
Page 3 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
challenges of RRM and the diﬀerent proposed approaches in
LTE and 5G networks.
The surveys in [18, 20, 22] focused on a single type of
interference. On one hand, in [18], cross-link interference
mitigation schemes in dynamic TDD (D-TDD) networks were
classiﬁed and intensively discussed through academic work
and 3GPP speciﬁcations. On the other hand, in [20] and
[22], the authors provided insight into Self Interference (SI)
perceived in LTE and 5G transceivers, and on SI mitigation
architectures and mechanisms. In one of the most recent sur-
veys related to interference management in 5G networks, the
authors presented in [24] various types of interference, their
eﬀects, and management schemes, with a focus on HetNets,
Relay Nodes, D2D, and IoT.
While all mentioned surveys focused on interference man-
agement in 4G or/and 5G networks, [17] considered 5G
and 6G software-deﬁned network (SDN) frontier technology,
including system architecture, mobility management, and cur-
rent interference management techniques in SDN-5G/6G-
based wireless networks [27]. The study classiﬁed interfer-
ence as a negative or positive factor, according to whether we
can avoid or exploit it, and presented a general software-based
framework for the management of interference. SDN-based
interference mitigation was also studied in [25], where the
authors analyzed the potential of SDN by evaluating current
solutions for routing-based interference mitigation in B5G
networks. In [26], the impact of interference on diﬀerent IoT
services was studied, as well as the most important factors
to take into account in assessing the performance of these
services in the face of interference.
Most of the mentioned studies dealt with inter-cell inter-
ference without studying the intra-cell interference [9, 10].
Many surveys focused on one interference type [18, 20, 22],
such as self interference or cross-link interference. No survey
from the above-listed studied remote interference or inter-
numerology interference. Some survey papers only consid-
ered one or a few interference management categories [13,
15]. Although many research works considered interference
management in recent years, there is no available survey
that summarizes all interference types with corresponding
management schemes.
In this review paper, we seek to provide a uniﬁed clas-
siﬁcation of the main types of interference that can degrade
the performance of 4G/5G and beyond networks, as well as a
taxonomy and the most recent research work addressing ad-
vanced interference management schemes. To the best of our
knowledge, no previous survey has so broadly and compre-
hensively investigated and reviewed interference management
schemes for 5G and beyond networks. The main contributions
of this paper are listed below:
• Section 2 provides an overview of the major 5G technolo-
gies and their potential impact on interference generation.
The principal diﬀerences with 4G LTE are also highlighted.
• A uniﬁed classiﬁcation and nomenclature of the prominent
interference types in 4G/5G networks, along with a detailed
description and explanation of each interference, i.e., when
it occurs and its eﬀects on the network, are given in Section
3. In the same section, we also provide a comprehensive
taxonomy to describe and categorize various interference
management approaches.
• Section 4 explains the interference measurements reports
and signaling in 5G NR according to the newest 3GPP
speciﬁcations.
• From Section 5 to Section 11, we present for each pre-
viously identiﬁed interference type, a survey of recent
research work on appropriate management schemes.
• Section 12 highlights the open issues and future research
directions in 5G networks and beyond. Envisioned key
features of 6G networks and related interference chal-
lenges are thoroughly discussed, along with the main novel
paradigms for advanced interference management.
The structure of this paper is presented in Figure 1.
2. 5G NR: An Overview
5G New Radio is the new radio access technology speci-
ﬁed by 3GPP to be the global standard for a high-performance
uniﬁed radio interface of 5G mobile networks to meet the
International Telecommunication Union (ITU) requirements
set in International Mobile Telecommunications-2020 (IMT-
2020). 5G NR technical work was launched in 3GPP in early
2016 based on a kick-oﬀmeeting in the autumn of 2015.
The ﬁrst NR speciﬁcations were published in 2018 as part
of Release 15, followed by Release 16 in 2020 and Release
17 which was frozen in mid-2022. The 3GPP RAN plenary
recently agreed on a work package for Release 18, which
is considered to be the ﬁrst release of 5G Advanced. The
extensive 5G research and studies carried out over the past
years and the continuous speciﬁcations development eﬀorts
reveal several pivotal technologies that have enabled the am-
bitious network and service requirements to be met. In the
following, we overview the major 5G enabling technologies
and their potential impact on interference generation. The
main diﬀerences with 4G LTE are also emphasized.
2.1. Network Architecture & Targeted Use Case
Classes
To fulﬁll the stringent requirements of the mobile net-
works, the 5G NR is envisioned to support diﬀerent use cases
in three main categories [28, 29, 2]:
• Enhanced Mobile Broadband (eMBB): eMBB aims for
services with high data rates. It is an evolution of 4G LTE
to have higher spectral eﬃciency and improved throughput
performance. The usage covers a great variety of applica-
tion scenarios, including wireless wide area networks and
hotspots.
• Massive Machine Type Communications (mMTC): mMTC
aims for machine-type devices and supports wireless de-
vices interconnected as a part of the Internet of Things
(IoT). Devices are usually of low cost and low power
consumption for long battery life.
Page 4 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
1. Introduction
2. 5G NR: An overview
3. Classiﬁcation of Interference & Interference Management Techniques
4. Interference Measurements and Signaling in 5G NR
5. Intra-mode Inter-Cell Interference Management
6. Inter-Cell Inter-Beam Interference Management
7. Cross-Link Interference Management
8. Remote Interference Management
9. Self Interference Management
10. Intra-Cell Multi-User Interference Management
11. Inter-Numerology Interference Management
12. Research Challenges and Future Research Directions
13. Conclusion
2.1 Network Architecture & Targeted Use Case Classes
2.2 Frequency Bands & Spectrum
2.3 Densiﬁcation
2.4 Duplex Scheme
2.5 Waveform, Numerology & Frame Structure
2.6 Multiple Access Schemes, massive MIMO & Beamforming
3.1 Interference Classiﬁcation
3.2 Taxonomy of Interference Management Techniques
4.1 5G NR Signaling
4.2 5G NR Measurements and Reporting
4.3 Cross-link Interference - Signaling and Measurements
4.4 Remote Interference - Signaling and Measurements
12.1 Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks: Open
Challenges
12.2 Interference Management Challenges in 6G and beyond
Networks
12.3 Novel Interference Management Paradigms and Future Research
Directions
Figure 1: Paper Structure.
• Ultra-Reliable Low Latency Communications (URLLC):
URLLC aims for low latency communications between de-
vices under high network availability and reliability (very
low packet error rate). Examples of use cases include
autonomous driving, remote surgery, and public safety.
5G networks are ﬁrst deployed in a Non-Stand-Alone
mode (NSA)1[30] using 4G LTE mobile core network for the
1They are not 5G standalone due to the use of 4G LTE control plane and
are considered as the transition towards 5G NR.
control plane, while 5G NR is used for the user plane. It is
expected that 4G LTE and 5G NR will co-exist for a long
time before the maturation of the Stand-Alone (SA) mode
[31] of 5G core network (See Figure 2). The SA mode is the
end-to-end full 5G network with its own dedicated 5G Packet
Core. The full 5G is envisaged to have lower cost, and higher
eﬃciency and to cater to a wide range of new usage scenarios.
Page 5 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
Figure 2: 5G Deployment NSA and SA Modes.
2.2. Frequency Bands & Spectrum
Millimeter wave is considered a key 5G technology and
also an enabler for eMBB user access. The reasons can be
summarized as follows:
• Deployed mobile networks are using microwave bands
(below 6 GHz) in which the spectrum resources are almost
exhausted. In contrast, the frequency bands above 6 GHz
are often under-utilized or even abundant [2].
• From the perspective of link capacity, a large carrier band-
width of around 1 GHz may carry a data rate of 10 Gbps
or higher, compared to that of a carrier bandwidth of 100
MHz, which may carry a data rate of 1 Gbps in the low-
frequency spectrum [28].
• The size requirement for the antenna is lower which al-
lows for smaller antennas inside the fuselage and greatly
increases the number of antennas.
However, there are also some issues with the high fre-
quency bands which oﬀer limited coverage due to the higher
radio propagation loss. Therefore, in 5G, lower frequency
bands can be used for providing wide-area nationwide cov-
erage, whereas the millimeter wave or above 6 GHz bands
can provide more targeted coverage in smaller areas with very
high throughput.
According to 3GPP speciﬁcations, frequency bands for
5G NR are split into two diﬀerent frequency ranges: Fre-
quency Range 1 (FR1) and Frequency Range 2 (FR2). The
range of FR1 is 450 MHz-6 GHz, which is typically called
a sub-6 GHz frequency band. The FR2 is concentrated in
24.25-52.6 GHz and is generally called the millimeter wave.
Within each frequency range, 3GPP has deﬁned diﬀerent
operating bands associated with diﬀerent bandwidths ranging
from several MHz to a few GHz. To suit various spectrum
conﬁgurations while keeping implementation complexity to
a minimum, 5G features a variety of channel bandwidths,
i.e., the bandwidth of the NR carrier, from 5 to 400 MHz.
One of the core features introduced in 3GPP Release 15
to reduce the power consumption of 5G NR devices is the
BandWidth Part (BWP), which is a set of contiguous resource
blocks conﬁgured within a channel bandwidth. With BWP,
the carrier can be subdivided and support multiple services,
such as eMBB and mMTC [32].
To further improve network capacity and expand coverage
in the medium and high-frequency bands, 5G NR supports
Carrier Aggregation, which increases bandwidth by combin-
ing multiple carriers. While carrier aggregation is not speciﬁc
to 5G and has already been used in 4G LTE, it is envisioned
as a key 5G technology that creates opportunities far be-
yond those of 4G networks. Speciﬁcally, 5G NR supports
carrier aggregation of a maximum of 16 contiguous and non-
contiguous component carriers on multiple spectrum bands
in FR1 and FR2.
2.3. Densiﬁcation
One of the best-known approaches to improve the capacity
of wireless networks is the deployment of smaller cells. This
enables higher frequency reuse to improve network capacity,
also called cell splitting gain. A traditional macro cells (MCs)
system may also be made denser by increasing the number of
sectors per macro site or by implementing more base stations,
but in practice, it is often much more complicated and costly
to acquire macro cell BS sites. Based on cell densiﬁcation
through small cells (SCs), heterogeneous networks consisting
of MCS and SCs have been proposed in 3GPP LTE/LTE-
A to ﬁt various use scenarios and to deal with spectrum
scarcity. In general, in homogeneous cellular networks, the
deployment of macro base stations is carefully planned to
minimize the overlap of neighboring BSs while ensuring
seamless coverage for all terminals in the system. Heteroge-
neous networks inherently modify this concept through the
overlay of the existing homogeneous macro cell networks,
usually referred to as the macro layer, with extra low power,
low-complexity BSs, known as small cells, while keeping
infrastructure costs low. It is expected that mm-wave will
operate in small cell architecture and be especially favorable
for hotspots that require targeted coverage and demand for
very high data rates. Network densiﬁcation involves the pre-
planned deployment of macro BSs that usually operate at
high power levels, overlaid with multiple types of small BSs
(e.g., pico and femto cells), which operate at signiﬁcantly
lower power levels [33, 34]. Since macro base stations already
provide coverage, SCs are typically implemented in densely
crowded regions to increase the capacity of the wireless
network or to cover certain coverage gaps. Due to their weak
transmitter power and small physical size, smaller BSs can
provide great ﬂexibility in site acquisition and signiﬁcantly
reduce network CAPEX/OPEX. Small cell technology is very
important to millimeter wave communications for 5G net-
works [35].
As illustrated in Figure 3, among the several types of SCs,
we can have :
• Femto cell (also called home BS): It is initially intended for
domestic use, but can also be used in an oﬃce or enterprise.
Its radio coverage reach is often inferior to 50 m with a
transmission power inferior to 23 dBm.
• Pico cell: It is intended for indoor businesses and public
places, but can also be used outdoors. It typically serves
a few dozen users in a 300 m radio coverage area with a
transmission power typically between 23 dBm and 30 dBm.
Page 6 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
Figure 3: HetNets Small Cell Types.
• Relay: It can be used to route data from macro cells or
can be used to extend the radio coverage range of a mobile
network. Its transmission power is between 23 dBm and 33
dBm for outdoor use, and 20 dBm or less for indoor use.
Since the low-power BSs are deployed on top of the macro
cell layer, the spatial reuse of time-frequency resources is
greatly enhanced, resulting in increased network capacity. We
refer to this as area spectral eﬃciency. Network densiﬁcation
reduces the average distance between UEs and the nearest
base station, which decreases the transmitted signal loss and
improves link gain and channel capacity. An important ad-
vantage of SC deployments is that they allow some UEs to be
oﬄoaded from MCs to SCs, thus balancing the traﬃc load
and improving throughput and overall network eﬃciency.
However, increasing cell density may result in increased inter-
cell (cross-tier and intra-tier) interference that needs to be
eﬀectively managed.
In recent years, ultra densiﬁcation has further been adopted
in mobile networks, where the BS density potentially reaches
or even exceeds the user density to the point where the
Ultra Dense Network (UDN) capacity grows sub-linearly,
due to the inevitably growing impact of severe inter-cell
interference. Due to the massive number of adjacent cells
and edge users in UDN, traditional interference distributed
coordination approaches can not eﬀectively mitigate ICI, as
they may cause signiﬁcant additional signal exchange and rely
on simple and obsolete interference information. Therefore,
accurate interference modeling in UDN is essential, along
with adapted advanced interference management approaches.
2.4. Duplex Scheme
The two key duplex schemes used by mobile operators are
called Frequency Division Duplex (FDD) and Time Division
Duplex (TDD). TDD architecture uses one frequency band
both for uplink (UL) and downlink transmissions and assigns
alternative time slots for transmitting and receiving, making
it more suitable when a paired spectrum is not available. FDD
uses two diﬀerent frequency bands, one for downlink and one
for uplink, with a suﬃcient frequency gap allocated between
them, which is called a duplex distance. Both FDD and TDD
have beneﬁts depending on the application. In general, FDD
is considered better for coverage, while TDD is better for
capacity.
As 4G LTE networks employ both FDD and TDD with
FDD as a primary duplex scheme, 5G networks will also
support both of them, using a slightly diﬀerent approach. In
5G NR, the millimeter frequency band can use Time Division
Duplex while the lower frequency bands (low and mid) may
still use FDD. This is due to diﬀerent reasons:
• Since FDD has been a winner in the implementation of
legacy mobile networks, the FDD spectrum has become
costly and scarce.
• As FDD requires a larger duplex distance between down-
link and uplink bands, this can be very diﬃcult to achieve
when carrier frequency increases.
• Since most futuristic use cases of 5G NR operate at mil-
limeter waves, TDD can provide the required ﬂexibility
to adjust downlink/uplink network resources depending on
the customer’s needs.
Contrary to LTE which uses two diﬀerent frames for FDD
and TDD, 5G NR networks will operate in both models using
the same frame structure for both duplex schemes, as it will be
more explained in the next sub-section. 5G TDD can be static
or dynamic. In Static TDD, the UL/DL ratio is decided only
once. In dynamic TDD, resource allocation between DL and
UL can be dynamically adjusted which can provide signiﬁcant
performance improvements. However, dynamic TDD also
brings out additional interference between UL and DL that
may degrade system performance.
It is also important to note that Full-duplex (FD) (or In-
band-Full-Duplex IBFD) technology is a futuristic option
for 5G and beyond networks as it enables the terminal to
transmit and receive signals in the same frequency band at
the same time. FD can eﬀectively double the capacity and
the eﬃciency of the spectrum. However, the main issue of
IBFD technology is how to eﬀectively cancel the strong self
interference [36, 37].
2.5. Waveform, Numerology & Frame Structure
The 5G and beyond mobile networks are envisioned to
cater to multiple use cases with various requirements in terms
of latency and data rates. Deﬁning the adequate waveform to
be used in 5G RAN is one of the essential elements of the
PHY layer design.
The waveform deﬁnes the physical shape of the signal car-
rying the modulated information [38]. Orthogonal frequency-
division multiplexing (OFDM), the most popular multicarrier
modulation scheme used in the downlink 4G LTE and the
IEEE 802.11 networks, has many advantages, but also some
drawbacks. On one hand, it utilizes the spectrum eﬃciently
as the channel is divided into a set of independently modu-
lated and orthogonal subcarriers. OFDM can also be easily
implemented and partly diminishes the inter-carrier and inter-
symbol interferences. On the other hand, OFDM systems are
more sensitive to synchronization errors than single-carrier
Page 7 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
systems. If the orthogonality is lost, the leakage from other
subcarriers causes interference between carriers. Similarly,
the timing oﬀset causes interference between symbols or
carriers.
Although many waveforms were considered as strong
contenders to replace OFDM in 5G, 3GPP eventually decided
to stick to OFDM, for the simple but powerful reason of
backward compatibility to 4G LTE system. More precisely,
as speciﬁed in 3GPP Release 15, the standardization orga-
nization decided to use the Orthogonal Frequency Division
Multiplexing with cyclic preﬁx (CP-OFDM) in the down-
link and CP-OFDM and Discrete Fourier Transform-spread-
OFDM with CP, better known as Single Carrier Frequency
Division Multiplexing (SC-FDM), in the uplink [28].
As already mentioned, 5G systems are expected to support
a wide range of deployment scenarios: from macro cell de-
ployments with low-band frequency to smaller cell sizes with
higher carrier frequencies. A subcarrier spacing (SCS) of 15
kHz, as in an LTE system, may be suﬃcient to handle the de-
lay spread for the low range of carrier frequencies. However,
for implementation limitations in the mm-wave band, like the
phase noise, and to mitigate inter-carrier interference, a higher
SCS, and a shorter cyclic preﬁx are suitable. As having a
single numerology, i.e., subcarrier spacing in the frequency
domain, is not eﬃcient or possible, 5G NR allows the use of
multiple numerologies with diﬀerent SCS (Δf) to provide dif-
ferent services while satisfying related requirements [28, 39].
The scalable OFDM numerology speciﬁes SCS, CP, and the
number (or duration) of slots. As shown in Table 2, the 5G
numerology is based on SCS between 15 kHz and 240 kHz
(Δf= 2휇×15 kHz, where 휇={0,1,2,3,4}) with a proportional
change in CP duration.
흁
횫f (kHz)
N slots /
sub-
frame
CP Type
Support
for Data
0
15
1
Normal
Yes
1
30
2
Normal
Yes
2
60
4
Normal -
Extended
Yes
3
120
8
Normal
Yes
4
240
16
Normal
No
Table 2: Numerology Structures in 5G
The multiplexing of diﬀerent numerologies to meet various
requirements and frequency bands can be done in two dif-
ferent ways: non-overlapping numerologies, or overlapping
with spectrum sharing [40]. In the non-overlapping mixed
numerology system, the multiplexing of numerologies can
be done in the time or frequency domain. In time-domain
multiplexing, thanks to the waveform design, orthogonality is
maintained between consecutive blocks. In non-overlapping
frequency domain numerology multiplexing, the entire sys-
tem bandwidth is subdivided into BWPs, where each part
of the bandwidth has its numerology and signal character-
istic, enabling a more eﬃcient spectral and power utiliza-
tion. Therefore, frequency multiplexing has better forward
compatibility and support for multi-service with diﬀerent
requirements coexistence in comparison to the time domain
counterpart [32, 41]. However, due to the diﬀerence in SCS,
combining multiple numerologies in one frequency band may
destroy inter-numerology orthogonality and result in out-of-
band-emission [40, 42]. In the overlapping mixed numerol-
ogy system, also called spectrum sharing multi-numerology
system, diﬀerent numerologies are combined in the same time
and frequency resource, resulting in the loss of orthogonality
between overlapping numerologies [42]. Generally, the ﬂexi-
bility provided by mixed numerologies may destroy the inter-
carrier orthogonality of multiple numerologies. Achieving
symbol alignment in the time domain can also be an issue.
Diﬀerent from LTE, 5G NR deﬁnes a unique frame struc-
ture that supports both TDD and FDD. It consists of a 10ms
radio frame formed by 10 subframes. A 1ms subframe is
divided into 2휇adjacent slots, depending on the numerology.
Each slot of a duration 1∕2휇ms comprises 14 symbols (or 12
symbols in the case of extended CP). For the numerology 0,
a 5G NR slot is similar to an LTE sub-frame, for backward
compatibility. Figure 4 illustrates the 5G NR frame structure
for numerologies that support data.
Each OFDM symbol in a slot can be downlink, uplink,
or ﬂexible. If it is DL or UL, it means that no transmission
in the other direction is allowed. Flexible symbols can be
adapted for DL or UL transmission. The allowed symbol
combinations by 3GPP are similar to LTE TDD, with an
important diﬀerence: the division of UL and DL was based
on subframe but in 5G it is based on OFDM symbols.
Along with ﬂexible numerology, 5G NR supports an
eﬃcient approach to allow immediate transmission of low
latency communication, referred to as “mini-slot” transmis-
sion using the shortest scheduling units of 2, 4, or 7 OFDM
symbols.
2.6. Multiple Access Schemes, massive MIMO &
Beamforming
From the ﬁrst generation to the fourth generation of wire-
less networks, orthogonal multiple access (OMA) schemes,
such as frequency division multiple access (FDMA), time
division multiple access (TDMA), code division multiple
access (CDMA), and orthogonal frequency division multiple
access (OFDMA) have been employed to allocate orthogonal
resources in frequency, time, or code domains, to multiple
users, and hence avoiding, in theory, intra-cell multi-user
interference using relatively cost-eﬃcient receivers [43]. In
particular, in the same way, as 4G LTE, OFDMA and SC-
FDMA, where the radio resources are orthogonally parti-
tioned in the time-frequency grid, were also adopted in the
ﬁrst releases of 5G as DL and UL multiple access schemes
respectively. However, although such schemes simplify the
transceiver design, they lead to low spectral eﬃciency in
general and it is not a trivial task to realize massive access
Page 8 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
Figure 4: 5G Frame Structure.
in 5G and beyond wireless networks [44]. The exploding de-
mand for wireless capacity and the spectrum resource scarcity
have led to the deployment of multiple-input multiple-output
(MIMO) antennas at the base stations and to the application of
a new non-orthogonal multiple access scheme, referred to as
space division multiple access (SDMA), or multi-user MIMO
(MU-MIMO). Exploiting the spatial dimension created by the
multi-antennas transmitter, SDMA allows to project narrow
beams and to serve many users in the same time-frequency
resource thus improving the network transmission capac-
ity. Each user decodes its intended data stream by treating
other users’ interference as noise [45]. To further improve
the spectral eﬃciency, other multiple access schemes have
been studied in the literature, speciﬁcally power-domain Non-
Orthogonal Multiple Access (PD-NOMA) and code-domain
NOMA (CD-NOMA), allowing to superpose multiple users
in the same time-frequency resource by using complex al-
gorithms for multi-user detection and interference cancella-
tion. While these schemes have also been considered in 5G
standardization, they have not yet been adopted. Research
is still ongoing for optimal multiple access scheme design.
In the following, we will focus on SDMA and the use of
beamforming in mm-wave massive MIMO networks.
Based on the use of multiple antennas for transmission
and reception, massive MIMO is considered to be one of
the key technologies of 5G [4]. The most commonly seen
deﬁnition is that mMIMO is a system that deploys a very large
number of antennas on the BS. Some of the factors that drive
5G’s massive MIMO adoption can be summarized as follows
[2, 28, 46]:
• It is the only wireless technology that can multiply system
capacity without additional spectrum, as it enables serv-
ing many devices with the same time-frequency resource.
Multiple users, separated in the spatial domain, receive
simultaneous transmissions using very directive signals.
• The use of higher frequencies and smaller wavelengths
enables the deployment of large-scale antenna elements
that can be grouped into sub-arrays at the base station.
These sub-arrays provide array gain to overcome the eﬀects
of noise and fading, which results in enhancing the network
data rate and link reliability.
• Massive MIMO networks will utilize beamforming and
combining technology for transmission and reception re-
spectively, which can enhance spectrum and energy eﬃ-
ciency through various domains. Typically, beamforming
is achieved by proper phase shifting and amplitude scaling
of the signal transmitted to create multiple spatial beams.
In essence, in mm-wave mMIMO networks, based on channel
quality measurements sent from the terminals, the BS applies
distinct precoding2, usually selected from a codebook to
reduce the complexity, for the data stream of each UE where
the location of all UEs are taken into account. This aims to
optimize the signal for the target UE and to minimize inter-
user interference.
Generally, beamforming can be divided into three cate-
gories: analog beamforming, digital beamforming, and hybrid
2The terms of precoding and beamforming are used interchangeably in
this article.
Page 9 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
beamforming. Considered as the simplest, most straightfor-
ward, and cost-eﬀective implementation, with analog beam-
forming, using a single radio frequency (RF) chain, the same
analog signal is ﬁrst split into several paths and fed to each
antenna. Then, using analog phase-shifters, each signal is
steered, i.e., phase-adjusted and ampliﬁed to create one di-
rectional beam per set of antenna elements. While analog
beamforming enhances the cell coverage, it is still limited in
performance for two main reasons: (i) a single data stream is
fed to each antenna, and (ii) the maximum number of beams
that can be formed is hardware-dependent. Oﬀering more
ﬂexibility than analog beamforming, digital beamforming
enables the adjustment of the phase and amplitude of the
signal in baseband processing before analog transmission.
Diﬀerent signals with diﬀerent powers and phases are then fed
to the multiple antennas, allowing the formation of multiple
beams, one per user, from each set of antenna elements. In
digital beamforming, one diﬀerent TRX chain is required
in the BS for each co-served user, which in turn limits the
maximum number of simultaneous beams and co-scheduled
users. While digital beamforming further enhances ﬂexibility,
performance, and cell capacity, it induces more complex-
ity and baseband processor’s cost and power requirements.
Combining digital and analog processing in the baseband and
RF domains respectively, hybrid beamforming is a promising
solution for mm-wave mMIMO networks, which is under
development using diﬀerent approaches in the literature.
Discussion: In this section, we provided an overview of
the key pivotal 5G technologies and the main diﬀerences
with 4G LTE networks. Mainly, the distinctive feature of the
5G and Beyond network is its intrinsic ﬂexibility as (i) it
supports several use cases with diﬀerent QoS requirements
(eMBB, URLLC, and MMTC), (ii) it uses low, medium and
high-frequency bands, licensed and unlicensed spectrum, and
supports carrier aggregation, (iii) it uses multiple numerolo-
gies and new ﬂexible waveforms are currently studied, (iv)
is envisioned as a multi-tiered HetNets network supporting
multiple mobile devices in each layer, which can be deployed
randomly, and reusing the same frequency resources, (v) it
supports both TDD and FDD and Full duplex is considered
as a promising and attractive solution for the near future,
(vi) it supports carrier aggregation and massive MIMO, etc.
However, this ﬂexibility may result in unprecedented levels
of interference that can severely limit network performance.
3. Classiﬁcation of Interference & Interference
Management Techniques
The term “interference” is commonly used to describe the
addition of unintended signals to a desirable signal. It can be
caused for example by the reuse of the time–frequency re-
sources of diﬀerent base stations or user devices, or due to the
unintentional leakage of a transmit signal. Interference is one
of the most dominant factors, which could lead, if not properly
mitigated, to considerable performance deterioration.
Despite the inevitable advantages of all 5G key tech-
nologies previously introduced in Section 2, the variability
and ﬂexibility in 5G could introduce a non-orthogonality
into the network and generate consequent interference. To
alleviate the severe and sometimes unpredictable interference
in 5G, it is critical to design eﬃcient interference management
techniques. Therefore, in this section, we will ﬁrst discuss
and propose a uniﬁed classiﬁcation and nomenclature of the
prominent interferences in 5G and beyond cellular networks.
Then, we develop a comprehensive taxonomy for describing
the diﬀerent interference management schemes.
3.1. Interference Classiﬁcation
As shown in Figure 5, there are two major categories of in-
terference for cellular mobile networks: intra-cell interference
and inter-cell interference. Next, we will highlight the various
types of interferences for these two categories, starting with
inter-cell interference.
3.1.1. Inter-Cell Interference (ICI)
Inter-cell interference, generally caused by using the same
resources in neighboring cells, is a classical problem for mo-
bile cellular networks, which could limit the overall network
performance and degrade the signal quality of edge users.
With the massive deployment of small power low-complexity
BSs within the macro coverage and with the reuse of scarce
spectrum resources, ICI became more and more serious [12].
A) Co-tier and Cross-tier Interference
While multi-tier networks improve signiﬁcantly network ca-
pacity, they face important challenges, especially in managing
interference between neighboring cells [9]. Generally, two
types of inter-cell interferences may degrade the performance
of heterogeneous networks: either co-tier interference be-
tween network entities in the same tier or cross-tier Inter-
ference (also called inter-tier interference) between network
entities from diﬀerent tiers of the network, for example,
interference between SCs and MCs.
B) Adjacent Channel Interference (ACI)
In general, inter-cell interference is either due to operating
on the same channel which is referred to as Co-Channel
Interference (CCI), or due to the overlapping between adja-
cent channels which is called Adjacent Channel Interference.
ACI mainly occurs due to imperfect receiver ﬁlters, allowing
adjacent frequencies to enter the pass-band, and to ampli-
ﬁers’ non-linearity. One critical issue of OFDM networks
is the high out-of-band emissions that result in important
interference [46]. As the problem of adjacent channel coex-
istence is relatively common in mobile networks, regulators
have already established stringent rules concerning adjacent
channel leakage and undesired emissions in the operating
band to limit ACI [47]. For example, the eﬀects of ACI can
be reduced by (i) carefully choosing the bandpass ﬁlter at
the receiver, (ii) using advanced modulation schemes and
signal processing techniques, (iii) allocating a guard band,
and (iv) allocating adjacent channels to the cells in diﬀerent
geographical regions.
Page 10 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
Figure 6: Inter-Cell Interference Intra Mode.
processing, including channel estimation. Consequently, pre-
deﬁned codebooks are generally employed for initial access
and data transmission. However, since they are predeﬁned,
these beams are typically designed with a focus on enhanc-
ing beam-forming/combining gain from speciﬁc directions
only, regardless of interference. This poses problems when
interfering UEs in the surrounding area are transmitting on
the same time and frequency resources. These interference-
unaware beams can lead to a high level of packet delivery
failure and cause severe inter-beam interference that needs
to be eﬃciently handled [52]. It is worth noting that even
when the downlink interfering beam is not directly pointing
at the UE, which is referred to as the ﬂashlight eﬀect, IC-
IBI is still considerable because of the dense and ultra-dense
deployment of base stations [53].
(b) Inter-mode Interference (Cross-Link and Remote Inter-
ference)
Generally, Time Division LTE (TD-LTE) networks adopt
synchronous transmission in the whole network, with all cells
with overlapping coverage applying the same slots conﬁgura-
tion for uplink and downlink transmission. Moreover, a guard
period is speciﬁed in the special subframe [54]. This time
alignment and guard period permit us to avoid the inter-mode
inter-cell interference, i.e., downlink-to-uplink interference
(base station-to-base station), and uplink-to-downlink inter-
ference (terminal-to-terminal) [55]. However, synchronous
multi-cell operation with a shared UL/DL conﬁguration is not
convenient in 5G networks, where the amount of traﬃc may
be very diﬀerent between cells for downlink and uplink trans-
missions. As seen in the previous section, 5G NR supports
both FDD and TDD for paired and unpaired spectrum respec-
tively. For traﬃc adaptation, it is necessary to adopt Dynamic-
TDD to allow every cell to have customized subframe conﬁg-
urations according to its traﬃc situation with no need to be
synchronized [18]. With the adoption of D-TDD, spectrum
utilization can be enhanced and latency reduced. However, the
inter-mode interference represents a serious challenge to deal
with. Obviously, these interference scenarios are also noticed
in In-band-Full-duplex networks.
• Cross-link interference (CLI) also called cross-slot inter-
ference is an inter-mode inter-cell interference, which hap-
pens generally between adjacent (i) BSs or (ii) UEs using
Page 12 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
Figure 7: Cross-Link Interference (CLI).
diﬀerent transmission directions as displayed in Figure 7.
Both interference scenarios need to be managed in macro
and small-cell deployments.
The issue of DL-to-UL (base station-to-base station) inter-
ference is particularly noticeable in macro-deployments for
two reasons. First, the transmission power in macro BS is
much higher than in mobile terminals. Second, the macro
BS antennas are usually deployed over rooftops which can
imply line-of-sight propagation. Therefore, the downlink
transmission of a macro base station would highly impact
the uplink signal in neighboring BSs [56]. On the other
hand, in small-cell deployments, UEs and small BSs have
similar transmission power and their antennas are approx-
imately at the same level, thus the small-BS-to-small-BS
interference is not that critical and is more similar to intra-
mode uplink interference from UE to the base station. In
such small-cell deployments, and since the user density of
5G devices will be very high, two closely located UEs and
served by diﬀerent gNBs, may experience critical cross-
link UL-to-DL interference. This means there is a possibil-
ity that at any given instant, a UE may be transmitting, and
a neighboring UE will be receiving at the same time.
• Remote Interference (RI) is a downlink-to-uplink interfer-
ence that may occur between very distant BSs, even in static
synchronized TDD networks due to very large propagation
delays. In certain weather conditions, the refraction index
gradient decreases rapidly in the low troposphere, form-
ing anomalous atmospheric ducts [57]. Such ducts impact
electromagnetic waves and send the trapped transmitted
signals very far with much lower attenuation than in a
natural atmosphere (see Figure 8). In these rare scenarios,
the propagation delay goes beyond the guard period which
is set to manage adjacent BSs interference. Consequently,
the strong copy of the DL transmission of the aggressor BS
may critically interfere with the UL reception at a victim
distant base station. This remote interference may aﬀect
the UL data, as well as the reception of uplink reference
signals, such as sounding reference signals (SRS) used
by the victim BS to estimate the uplink channel’s quality.
In 5G TDD systems, relying on channel symmetry and
UL/DL channel reciprocity characteristics, the SRS also
permits the estimation of the DL channel’s quality. When
the SRS signal is aﬀected by remote interference, this will
directly lead to the deterioration of KPI indicators such as
call drop rate and handover success rate, resulting in poor
user experience. According to statistics, many countries
such as China and the United States have suﬀered from RI
for a long time [58]. Although ducting is a rather rare event,
whenever it does occur, it can aﬀect thousands of base
stations, and the network performance can be seriously
impacted. The damaging eﬀects of atmospheric ducting
and remote interference have drawn the interest of industry
and academia alike. ITU recommended to consider atmo-
spheric ducts in channel modeling and 3GPP initiated an
RI project in the standardization process of 5G. Moreover,
many telecom companies started to monitor and analyze RI
eﬀects.
To manage inter-mode interference (cross-link and re-
mote interference), 3GPP Release 16 introduced two enhance-
ments, namely Cross-link interference handling and Remote
Interference Management (RIM) [59], to mainly enhance the
detection of such interference using speciﬁed signaling and
measurements. While CLI handling is mainly aimed at small-
cell deployments based on dynamic TDD, RIM targets large
macro-cell deployments where interference scenarios can be
managed in an automated way. These two enhancements will
be further explained in Section 4.
3.1.2. Intra-Cell Interference
The use of OFDMA (and SC-FDMA) in LTE networks
made the intra-cell interference almost negligible, due to
the orthogonality among subcarriers. In 5G and beyond, the
multiplexing of several numerologies, the use of the same
time/frequency resource to serve two or multiple users in
Page 13 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
millimeter-wave is inherently distinct from that for micro-
wave networks and therefore necessitates novel interference
management schemes [66].
When NOMA is applied, two or several UEs can be served
by the same beam which can result in intra-beam interference
between the users. Such interference is usually reduced via
superposition coding in the transmitter and interference can-
cellation techniques in the receiver to decode the signal and
subtract the perceived multi-user interference [67].
C) Inter-Numerology Interference (INI)
In a single-numerology system such as LTE, intra-cell in-
terference is materialized as Inter-Carrier Interference and
Inter-Symbol Interference. The former deﬁnes the interfer-
ence generated among subcarriers in the frequency domain,
and the latter deﬁnes the interference among symbols in
the time domain. However, Inter-Carrier and Inter-Symbol
interferences are not suﬃcient to capture all the impairments
incurred in a multi-numerologies system such as 5G. While
the use of multiple numerologies enables high ﬂexibility for
the diﬀerent services, it destroys the orthogonality principle
deﬁned for single-numerology systems, which in turn results
in interference among the multiplexed numerologies, i.e.,
inter-numerology interference [68, 69, 70].
Non-orthogonality can result either from partially or
completely overlapped numerologies, or nonoverlapping nu-
merologies for synchronous communications [71]. In non
overlapping mixed numerologies system, the principal source
of non-orthogonality is out-of-band transmission, as the sub-
carriers of one numerology can receive energy leaked from
the subcarriers of other numerologies. Apart from destroying
the orthogonality in the frequency domain, multiplexing
diﬀerent numerologies may also result in symbol misalign-
ment in the time domain. However, the scalable numerology
design of 5G permits the multi-numerology symbols to be
aligned over the least common multiplier symbol duration as
discussed in [72].
In an overlapping mixed numerologies spectrum sharing
system, achieving reliable co-existence among diﬀerent nu-
merologies at the same time-frequency resources is more
challenging due to the non-orthogonality originating from
overlapping subcarriers. Interference management is, there-
fore, more complicated in mixed numerology overlapping
systems than in single numerology or non-overlapping sys-
tems [40].
To take full advantage of the multi-numerology concept,
analyzing the pattern of emitted interference and identifying
the various factors contributing to INI is inevitable. Recent
studies [69, 73, 74] show that the inter-numerology inter-
ference depends on subcarrier spacing, number of subcar-
riers and bandwidth within each numerology, power oﬀset
between numerologies, doppler spread, etc. Managing the
inter-numerology interference in 5G networks is deﬁnitely
one of the most challenging issues. Advanced Interference
Cancellation (IC) techniques and signal processing, along
with adaptive resource and power allocation may reduce
the INI impact. Diﬀerent approaches will be presented and
discussed in Section 11.
3.2. Taxonomy of Interference Management
Techniques
Designing an appropriate interference management has
always been a key factor in mobile cellular networks. This
continues to be the case in 5G and beyond cellular networks
where ﬂexibility comes with a cost. Legacy interference man-
agement schemes are a good point to start from and make im-
provements to suit such an ultra-dense and dynamic network.
In this subsection, we will develop a comprehensive taxon-
omy for describing the diﬀerent interference management
schemes, giving some examples to illustrate. From Figure 9,
the taxonomy of interference management can be divided into
ﬁve categories as follows.
3.2.1. Basic Objective
Interference management schemes can be sorted based on
their basic objective into three classes:
1. Interference avoidance schemes: the main idea is to pre-
vent and avoid interference occurrence. The interference
avoidance techniques are applied before signal transmission
and usually require some coordination between the transmit-
ter and receiver to divide the available resources and avoid
collisions on simultaneous transmissions. There are multiple
examples, such as frequency reuse-based schemes and inter-
cell interference coordination techniques.
2. Interference suppression/reduction schemes: the applied
approaches aim to eliminate the interference when it occurs,
either during the transmission or at the receiver side that de-
codes the interference or treats it as noise [45]. For example:
• Conventional precoding techniques [75] which take advan-
tage of the Channel State Information (CSI) available at the
transmitter and direct the signal spatially with varying am-
plitude and phase, and thus oﬀer maximum beamforming
gain in the required direction, and reduce interference in
other directions. Popular precoding schemes include Zero
Forcing (ZF), Maximum Ratio Transmission, Minimum
Mean Square Error (MMSE) and Dirty-Paper Coding [76].
Interference Alignment (IA) [77] is also a well-known
linear cooperative precoding scheme that exploits the mul-
tiple signaling dimensions to align and constrain interfering
signals into an interference sub-space so that they can be
easily decoded and ﬁltered out at the receiver.
• Advanced receivers applying ﬁltering mechanism or in-
terference cancellation schemes such as Successive Inter-
ference Cancellation (SIC) [78, 79], Parallel Interference
Cancellation [80] and hybrid mechanisms that combine
both approaches [81], to decode the received signal and
subtract the interference.
3. Interference exploitation schemes [82]: While interference
is traditionally viewed as a performance limiting factor in
wireless networks, which is to be avoided or eliminated, a
third line of work has argued that interfering signals can add
Page 15 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
3.2.4. Level of Coordination
Based on the level of coordination, interference manage-
ment schemes can be categorized into four categories:
1. Centralized [17]: A central entity (which can be an external
controller or a macro base station) is in charge of collecting
diﬀerent measurements and required information from con-
cerned cells (channel gains, users’ QoS requirements, power
and frequency patterns, etc.) and managing and allocating the
available resources according to a utility function (maximize
capacity, sum data rates, energy eﬃciency, etc.). Generally,
these schemes deliver optimal global resource allocation,
however, due to frequent exchanges between multiple cells
and the centralized coordinator, they result in high backhaul
signaling and computational complexity, which renders this
architecture infeasible in large-scale networks.
2. Semi-distributed: Instead of centralizing all the required
processing, a functional split [91] is performed such that inter-
ference management is performed at both a centralized exter-
nal entity and at the BS. Based on partial network information
sent from the base stations, the coordinator allocates a subset
of the resources (time, frequency, power levels..) to each BS
which is responsible for performing users’ scheduling on a
ﬁner level. Compared to centralized schemes, the overhead
and computational complexity of these two-level schemes are
reduced. An example of a semi-distributed scheme can be
found in [92].
3. Coordinated-distributed: In this category, all the process-
ing is performed at the BS using local information received
from its associated users. However, to perform global inter-
cell interference management, the neighboring base stations
exchange minimal amounts of information [93]. Although
coordinated-distributed interference management schemes
permit the minimization of the backhaul signaling and com-
putational complexity, their implementation is limited due to
constraints on communication between BSs.
4. Autonomous-distributed: No coordination is required be-
tween the diﬀerent base stations. Based on local reported
measurements, each BS applies an individual strategy to
manage the inter-cell interference, for instance, to reduce
power level transmission of selected resources with low SINR
[94, 95]. The advantage of such schemes is that there is no
signaling overhead and each BS can adapt its scheduling strat-
egy very quickly to changing channel conditions. However,
designing completely distributed algorithms that converge
rapidly to optimal solutions is rather complicated [96].
3.2.5. Domain
From a domain perspective, interference management
schemes can be categorized into four categories:
1. Time domain: These schemes enable time sharing of spec-
trum between neighboring cells in a way that minimizes inter-
cell interference. Time domain eICIC technique is a well-
known example where a BS (generally a macro BS) mutes its
transmission during certain subframes referred to as Almost
Blank Subframes (ABS) so that neighboring BSs (generally
small cells) schedule their edge users in the protected sub-
frames [97]. Various interference management schemes using
ABS have been suggested in the literature [98].
2. Frequency domain: In the same way as time domain
schemes, the frequency resources are divided between inter-
fering BSs to reduce resource collision probability.
3. Power domain: These schemes enable better use of time-
frequency resources, as the base stations are allowed to use
the available spectrum during all subframes. However, to
minimize the inter-cell interference level, the BSs apply some
power control to reduce the generated interference. Further
eICIC (FeICIC) is based on the same concept as eICIC,
with the diﬀerence that during ABS, the BS is allowed to
transmit data using relatively low power. Besides DL power
control, it is also possible to perform UL-PC to optimize
the power of associated UL channels and limit the eﬀects of
interference especially for cell edge users. This UL-PC can be
performed via an open-loop PC, where the user determines
its adequate uplink transmission power based on some DL
measurements, or via a closed-loop PC where explicit power-
control commands are transmitted by the BS based on pre-
vious measurements of the received UL power. To note that
5G NR has the capability for beam-based power control as an
extension of LTE.
4. Space domain: Interference alignment, interference whiten-
ing (IW) and adaptive beamforming are powerful interference
management schemes that can serve as examples for this
category. For instance, beamforming exploits the spatial
domain created by several antennas to focus signal energy on
the receiver side, which increases the signal-to-interference
ratio [99]. Treating interference as colored Gaussian noise,
spatial-domain IW is a low-complexity scheme using the
estimated covariance matrix of interference plus noise to
whiten the received signal and estimated MIMO channel
matrix [100]. Blind interference alignment is applied to serve
multiple users in each cell and mitigate interference at the
cell-edge users [101].
5. Code domain: Through the use of well-designed spreading
codes, these schemes can manage interference between the
users with similar channels. Sparse code multiple access
(SCMA) [102] is an example of code-domain non-orthogonal
multiple access schemes, which explores the codebook spar-
sity to eliminate the multi-user interference.
Several research works address the interference problem
from multiple domain perspectives [103].
Discussion: In this section, we ﬁrst classiﬁed the promi-
nent interference in 5G and beyond cellular networks into two
main categories, namely intra-cell interference and inter-cell
interference. Then, we further organized the various types of
interference for these two categories and provided a detailed
description and explanation of each interference, i.e., when
it occurs and its eﬀects on the network. We also developed a
comprehensive taxonomy to describe and categorize various
Page 17 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
interference management approaches according to their basic
objective, implementation place, static or dynamic nature,
level of coordination, and domain.
4. Interference Measurements and Signaling in
5G NR
Before providing a survey of the diﬀerent interference
management approaches for each interference type, it is nec-
essary to have a complete understanding of the signaling for
interference measurements and the diﬀerent information ex-
changes between all the nodes in 5G systems. While academia
is generally more focused on the study of interference man-
agement schemes than on signaling and measurement reports,
standardization has been more active on this topic. Thus,
this section mainly deals with a survey of 3GPP speciﬁca-
tions of interference measurements and signaling in 5G NR,
with speciﬁc subsections dealing with cross-link and remote
interference-related enhancements.
4.1. 5G NR Signaling
For DL/UL channel sounding, beam management, syn-
chronization, channel demodulation, and so on, Reference
Signals (RS) are exchanged between the gNBs and UEs. In
previous cellular technologies, always-on cell-speciﬁc syn-
chronization and reference signals were spread over the en-
tire spectrum for precise channel estimation. 5G NR uses a
completely new approach, as it only broadcasts a minimum
amount of cell-speciﬁc signals and the only always-on signal
is the synchronization signal block (SSB). The main DL
and UL synchronization and reference signals are introduced
below.
• Channel State Information Reference Signal (CSI-RS) is
sent by the base station towards the UE and used for DL CSI
acquisition. Compared to Cell-speciﬁc Reference Signal
(CRS) which was introduced in LTE Release 8, CSI-RS is
conﬁgured per UE or beam for any conﬁgurable frequency
range, has less overhead as it is not necessarily transmitted
continuously, and supports a larger number of antenna
ports. The resource elements carrying the CSI-RS can be
conﬁgured to be either Zero Power CSI-RS (ZP-CSI-RS)
or Non Zero Power CSI-RS (NZP-CSI-RS). CSI-RS also
supports interference estimation.
• Sounding RS (SRS) is transmitted by each user periodically
or aperiodically to the base station and utilized for UL
channel quality estimation over full bandwidth or for a
certain segment of the frequency band depending on its
conﬁgurations speciﬁed by the gNB. Its role is similar
to CSI-RS used for DL but in the opposite direction.
Assuming channel reciprocity in TDD networks, SRS can
be helpful for both UL and DL scheduling based on UL
channel estimation.
• DeModulation RS (DMRS) is used in virtually each UL
or DL physical channel instead of always-on CRS, for
decoding the speciﬁc channel and providing information
about a limited frequency range.
• Synchronization signals and physical broadcast channel
including its DMRS, called SS/PBCH block (SSB) and
transmitted over a limited bandwidth with a periodic but
lower duty cycle than CRS, may be used for DL channel
quality estimation to establish an initial connection or
perform beam management [104]. To cover the whole cell,
every gNB transmits one SSB per beam, which can be static
or semi-static. While using SSB to acquire CSI reports does
not lead to additional overhead, it is rather limited in terms
of frequency and time conﬁguration ﬂexibility compared to
CSI-RS.
Typically, to measure the interference from other neigh-
boring BSs, the user may directly measure the reference
signal power from the interfering signal directly, or use the
ZP-CSI-RS which are special empty resource elements that
can be conﬁgured for channel state information-interference
management (CSI-IM) estimation [105]. With the latter ap-
proach, the network conﬁgures the CSI-IM to puncture the
PDSCH from the serving cell creating a transmission gap and
to collide with data transmission of the neighboring cell. In
this way, the UE can perform interference measurements and
provide feedback.
For a reasonably accurate estimate of the channel quality,
ideally, orthogonal pilot signals should be assigned to dif-
ferent beams or users. However, considering the scarcity of
orthogonal sequences, such a transmission approach becomes
infeasible [106]. Consequently, non-orthogonal RS are used
to satisfy the requirements, resulting in a signiﬁcant problem,
which is inter-pilot interference, referred to as pilot contami-
nation [107]. This issue arises both in the same cell or between
diﬀerent cells. In multi-cell systems, the non-orthogonal pilot
sequences in adjacent cells, especially those of cell edge users,
may overlap with each other, leading to a poor UL channel
estimation [108]. Furthermore, due to the sporadic massive
access in 5G mMIMO networks, several users in the same cell
may probably be assigned the same pilot for UL training re-
sulting in severe intra-cell pilot contamination [106]. Besides
its detrimental impact on UL coherent demodulation, in TDD
networks, pilot contamination may also lead to inaccurate
DL channel estimation and a degradation in DL throughput.
The issue of pilot contamination, its possible sources, and
mitigation techniques has been investigated by a wide body
of existing literature. We refer the interested reader to [109]
for more detailed information.
4.2. 5G NR Measurements and Reporting
When the users and gNBs receive reference signaling,
they perform some measurements of the quality of the chan-
nel, to better manage the available resources and handle
the interference. Typically, a UE measures the quality of
downlink signals, such as CSI-RS and SSB, while the base
station measures the quality of uplink reference signals such
as SRS. However, it’s also possible for a UE to measure
uplink SRS sent by other UEs. The main UE measurement
quantities include: (i) SS reference signal received power
(SS-RSRP) and CSI-RSRP that represent the linear average
power received from resource elements corresponding to
Page 18 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
the respective reference signal, (ii) SS signal-to-noise and
interference ratio (SS-SINR) and CSI-SINR that represent
the ratio of the linear average wanted signal power to the
linear average interference plus noise power received from
resource elements corresponding to the respective reference
signal and (iii) NR Received Signal Strength Indicator (NR-
RSSI) and CSI-RSSI that represent the linear average power
over certain OFDM symbols from all sources including co-
channel serving and neighboring cells, noise and ACI. If
capable, a 5G user may also measure and report CLI-RSSI
and SRS-RSRP representing DL-to-UL interference from a
neighboring gNB and UL-to-DL interference from neighbor-
ing UEs respectively. For the gNB, it essentially measures UL
SRS-RSRP.
Using the previously mentioned measurements, some
lookup and mapping tables to discretize the measured entities
and map them to a set of predeﬁned values, the user generates
its reporting which consists of the feedback concerning the
channel quality and measured interference, and sends it back
to the gNB in a periodic, aperiodic or semi-persistent manner
depending on the conﬁguration. While all measurements are
done in the physical layer, the reporting can be sent via layer
1 in the CSI reporting or via layer 3 RRC in the measurement
report message. In NR, the CSI report generally includes
the following indicators: (i) Channel Quality Indicator (CQI)
providing a measure of the channel strength, (ii) Precoding
Matrix Indicator (PMI) to reconstruct or calculate the DL
precoders, (iii) CSI-RS Resource Indicator (CRI) precising
the index for strongest beamformed RS for beam training, (iv)
Strongest layer Indicator (SLI), (v) Rank Indicator (RI) for
multi-stream transmissions, and (vi) L1-RSRP [110].
Generally, the CSI reporting contains the feedback of
codewords indexes, which refer to the optimum scheduling
parameters, including the DL precoders, for the concerned
user depending on its channel measurements. A set of dif-
ferent pre-deﬁned codewords represents a codebook. Relying
on the codebook design, the CSI feedback enables the BS to
calculate the precoding matrix for adaptive beamforming and
user scheduling [111]. Acquiring accurate CSI at the transmit-
ter is of the utmost importance, especially for codebook-based
beamforming, traditional resource scheduling schemes, and
conventional interference management techniques. However,
in practice channel estimation errors, along with feedback
delay often occur in dynamic mobile networks, leading to
imperfect and outdated CSI, which further complicates the
design of adequate radio resource management approaches.
In TDD networks, assuming channel reciprocity, the BS may
use the UL SRS-RSRP channel estimation, to deduce the
DL propagation channel, compute the DL beam weighting
factors, and allocate the DL resources. While this approach
permits the design of ﬂexible dynamic beams following the
users in a very accurate way in contrast to CSI-dependent
codebased beamforming, it requires signiﬁcant baseband pro-
cessing on the gNB side.
Considered as one of the most important interference
management schemes, designing adaptive beamforming ap-
proaches that are robust to channel aging, delay feedback and
inaccurate estimation, etc., in dynamic mobile environments
is still ongoing research. Some of the proposed schemes in the
literature will be reviewed in the next sections.
4.3. Cross-link Interference - Signaling and
Measurements
To mitigate cross-link interference in dynamic TDD-LTE
systems, 3GPP Release 12 proposed diﬀerent approaches
for the enhanced interference mitigation and traﬃc adapta-
tion (eIMTA) [54], including power control, cell clustering,
UL/DL dynamic conﬁguration, interference cancellation, and
resource allocation and scheduling schemes.
To allow more ﬂexible resource allocation in dynamic
TDD networks, Release 16 introduced enhancements to better
manage CLI [56, 59] that consist of:
• special measurements and reports on the terminal side:
this is done by extending the RSRP measurement/reporting
done by the device such that it is possible to measure uplink
SRS of other nearby terminals. In this way, the network
can gain knowledge about potential interference between
devices in diﬀerent neighboring cells.
• inter-gNB signaling to enable inter-cell coordination and
interference mitigation: Resources can be either ﬁxed re-
sources, i.e., assumed to be used in either DL or UL, or
ﬂexible which implies that the gNB can use them in both
transmission directions. The enhanced inter-gNB signaling
is used by a gNB to announce its ﬁxed and ﬂexible re-
sources to its neighboring gNBs. Using this information,
a gNB may update its scheduling strategy, for instance, to
schedule critical DL transmission in ﬁxed resources where
the interference levels from neighboring gNBs are known,
while less critical transmission can be scheduled in ﬂexible
resources.
4.4. Remote Interference - Signaling and
Measurements
There has been no standardized solution for managing the
remote interference in TD-LTE [112]. However, in commer-
cial LTE TDD networks, degradation of network coverage
and connection success rate due to remote interference has
been observed, thus RIM has been a mandatory feature by
the operators to ensure reliable network performance. In 5G
NR, with large-scale deployment of TDD networks, it is
expected that the impact of remote interference will be much
more severe not only in one country but also across borders.
furthermore, as current RIM schemes implemented in LTE
networks rely generally on manual control via operation and
management system, it was important to have a standardized
solution that minimizes manual intervention and improves the
network robustness. Therefore, based on the study in [57],
NR Release 16 included tools to support automatic RIM [56].
Speciﬁcally, two new RIM-reference signals type 1 and type
2, having the same basic design with diﬀerent objectives, were
speciﬁed.
• RIM-RS type 1 is used by a victim gNB and sent to
aggressor gNBs to indicate that a ducting phenomenon
Page 19 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
occurs and that RI is detected. This reference signal can
convey information about (i) the id of the gNB (or group
of gNBs) causing interference, (ii) the number of symbols
aﬀected by the RI, and (iii) whether or not the interference
has already been mitigated so that a progressive remote
interference management scheme can be applied to the
aggressor.
• RIM-RS type 2 is transmitted by the aggressor gNB after
applying the RIM procedure, to inform the victim that a
ducting phenomenon continues to occur.
Three diﬀerent frameworks were proposed: centralized and
two distributed ones, which diﬀer in terms of where in the
network the decision of RIM is applied and how the gNBs
communicate with each other. It is important to note that
the actual schemes to mitigate remote interference are not
speciﬁed by 3GPP.
Discussion: This section dealt with a survey of 3GPP
speciﬁcations of interference measurements and signaling in
5G NR. The main DL and UL synchronization and reference
signals were ﬁrst introduced, including CSI-RS, SRS, DMRS,
and SSB. Then, we introduced the problem of inter-pilot
interference, referred to as pilot contamination, which is due
to the use of non-orthogonal RS, and brieﬂy discussed its
detrimental impact on both UL and DL. A detailed expla-
nation of 5G NR measurements and reporting performed by
both the users and gNBs, was then provided, along with some
insights on channel estimation and CSI feedback challenges.
Finally, we discussed some NR Release 16 enhancements
speciﬁcally dealing with cross-link and remote interference
signaling and measurements.
5. Intra-Mode Inter-Cell Interference
Management
In this section, we will present various research works that
deal with intra-mode co-channel inter-cell interference man-
agement for downlink and uplink transmissions in LTE 4G
and 5G networks. A more focused review of inter-cell inter-
beam interference management will be provided in the next
section. To alleviate the severe inter-cell interference, several
interference management schemes have been proposed in the
literature, including power-domain schemes [113, 114, 115,
116], time-domain approaches [117, 118], frequency-domain
schemes [119, 120, 121], spatial-domain schemes [122, 123,
100], code-domain schemes [124] and multi-domain schemes
[125, 126, 127]. In the following, we review and compare
some of the proposed techniques.
A) Power-domain schemes
Assuming that macro co-tier interference is avoided through
some form of frequency repartition, the work in [113] only
focused on mitigating cross-tier DL and UL interference in an
OFDMA-based HetNet with multiple pico cells overlaid on a
macro cell. To expand small cell coverage, the authors ﬁrst in-
troduced closed-form expressions to calculate the proper cell
oﬀset values for two diﬀerent range expansion strategies. To
avoid both downlink and uplink interference and to improve
pico cell performance, a cooperative scheduling based on a
power transmission scheme was then proposed. The main idea
of this method is that pico BS would inform the macro BS,
via the X2 interface, about the set of resources allocated to
all the users in the expanded region. Hence, the macro would
lower its transmit power in these RBs to ensure the desired
SINR for pico edge UEs. Simulation results provided insights
on appropriate cell bias values and demonstrated that the
proposed cooperative scheduling power transmission scheme
enhances the downlink and uplink average network rates by
36% and 7%, respectively compared to ICIC approaches.
A similar approach to [113] was presented in [114], where
a distributed DL resource allocation algorithm based on trans-
mit power minimization, requiring some coordination be-
tween the base stations, was proposed. However, in the former
studies, only co-tier DL interference in OFDMA femto cell
networks was considered. Firstly, every station dynamically
and independently selects a modulation and coding scheme,
a resource block, and a transmission power for its UEs, to
minimize its total DL transmission power, and still meet the
UEs’ QoS requirements. Then, it informs its neighboring
cells of the RBs assigned to its cell edge users, so that they
minimize their transmit power on those speciﬁc RBs. This
inter-cell coordination was proved to provide eﬃcient spatial
reuse and interference management. Extensive simulation
results demonstrated that downlink power control on a per-RB
basis provides a 20% improvement in network throughput.
While in the last studies, the intra-mode inter-cell inter-
ference management was performed via a distributed coor-
dinated optimization on a per-RB basis, in [115], the authors
developed a Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL)-based cen-
tralized solution for DL-PC in a multi-cell 5G network opti-
mizing power transmission per cell. The problem was ﬁrst for-
mulated as a Markov Decision Process (MDP), then the well-
known deep Q-networks (DQN) algorithm and some of its
recent extensions were employed to learn optimal downlink
cells’ power based on global information such as certain user
statistics of SINR and the harmonic-mean of cell through-
puts, and aiming to maximize user rates while ensuring fair
resource allocation. With the help of a 5G-compliant system-
level simulator, several DQN agent variants with diﬀerent
extensions and hyperparameters were trained and validated.
The best model attaining the highest gain in throughput of
the cell-edge UEs in the validation stage was then selected
for the test stage, along with vanilla DQN. The performance
of the two models was tested and compared against the ﬁxed
power allocation approach in a set of scenarios diﬀerent from
the training and validation sets. The results showed that:
(i) the proposed scheme permits the mitigation of the ICI
experienced by cell edge UEs, and thus signiﬁcantly improves
their throughput, (ii) the vanilla DQN agent is slightly more
eﬃcient than the DQN agent with extension but transmits
20% more power on average and (iii) both agents exhibit good
generalization capabilities due the use of stochastic policies
to generate training data and random initialization of cell
powers.
Page 20 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
Power control schemes have also been frequently pro-
posed to mitigate uplink inter-cell interference, such as in
[116], where Deb et al. proposed a measurement data-driven
machine learning approach, called LeAP, for power control in
OFDMA-based heterogeneous networks. The proposed semi-
distributed framework permits the interference pattern to be
modeled while taking into account variations in traﬃc load as
well as propagation geometry and topology. However, the ef-
fects of fast fading were not adequately handled. Based on the
measurement of modeled interference patterns, a stochastic
learning-enabled gradient algorithm was proposed to identify
the best power control settings and maximize uplink network
performance. The authors carried out in-depth evaluations
based on radio network plans from a real LTE network. The
results demonstrated that, in comparison with conventional
methods, LeAP oﬀers an x4.9 gain in the 20th percentile of
user data rate and an x3.25 gain in the median data rate.
B) Time-domain schemes
Time domain eICIC scheme was studied in [117] and [118]
where a two-tier HetNets, containing macro and pico cells,
was considered. In the former study, users were sorted as
center and edge by comparing their RSRP measurements with
a ﬁxed threshold. The authors ﬁrst presented a stochastic
geometric analysis of spectral eﬃciency, then they used it
to derive a constrained optimization problem formulation of
the Almost Blank Subframe conﬁguration for both macro
and pico cells. The goal was to minimize the DL cross-
tier interference impacting edge users’ performance and to
maximize the derived energy eﬃciency objective. Using the
Lagrangian function and Kuhn–Karush–Tucker (KKT) con-
ditions, the authors provided a partial closed-form solution.
It was assumed that macro and pico BSs exchange their
ABS patterns. The cell edge users are then scheduled during
the ABS corresponding to the other tiers. The numerical
results provided some insight into the system’s behavior. For
instance, guidelines on whether to use ABS for macro, pico or
both tiers were presented. It was also shown that macro ABS
implementation provides better energy eﬃciency. Moreover,
the impact of cell range extension bias on the choice of ABS
patterns was given and an intuition of the value of the cell bias
was provided.
In [118], Ayala-Romero et al. developed an online learn-
ing algorithm to jointly control energy eﬃciency and in-
terference coordination using eICIC in a two-tier HetNets.
The two-level framework based on a constrained contextual
bandit problem, aimed to maximize the energy eﬃciency,
while meeting users’ requested QoS. At the higher level,
a centralized coordinator, in charge of an MCs cluster and
operating with reduced state and action spaces, selects global
control eICIC parameters, i.e., ABS ratio and CRE bias, for
the group of MCs. At the lower level, multiple controllers,
one per macro cell, translate each global conﬁguration into
local conﬁgurations. Then, each macro aggregates the feed-
back concerning energy consumption and attained QoS re-
ceived from its corresponding pico cells, and sends it back to
the coordinator. Using these performance observations, the
global coordinator updates its knowledge allowing it to learn
stage by stage how to select better policy maximizing the
energy eﬃciency with a minimum required QoS threshold.
According to the numerical results, the proposed algorithm
achieves an energy saving of 25% and a QoS fulﬁllment ratio
of 100%.
C) Frequency-domain schemes
The authors in [119], presented a novel FFR scheme, called
FFR-3SL, to avoid both intra and inter-tier DL interference in
HetNets, through a frequency partitioning mechanism. The
MC coverage zone is divided into three sectors, themselves
subdivided into three layers (central, middle, and outer), and
the total bandwidth is split into seven sub-bands. One sub-
band is reserved for macro UEs of the central layer. The other
six sub-bands are assigned to macro users in the middle and
outer layers of the three sectors, and can also be reused by
femto cells. When a new femto cell is turned on, the system
recognizes its position and tries to allocate the best available
sub-band. A Monte Carlo simulation is carried out to evaluate
the performance of the FFR-3SL algorithm. The simulation
results showed that the proposed FFR-3SL approach outper-
formed other FFR approaches in terms of throughput and
eﬃciency. However, one of the limitations of this algorithm
is the pre-assignment of a dedicated sub-band to the macro
central layer, which can aﬀect cell edge users.
Adopting a centralized heuristic approach with partially
static frequency subband assignment to mitigate time-varying
intercell interference is generally not eﬀective because of
its lack of adaptability and generalizability for the dynamic
environment. Therefore, in [121], an intelligent adaptive dis-
tributed ICI approach for autonomous SBS was proposed.
Speciﬁcally, with reduced signaling interactions, the small
BSs sense the environment and exploit partially observable
network information to allocate sub-channels to every UE at
each TTI in such a way that mitigates ICI and maximizes
the long-term throughput. The sequential decision-making
processes of the decentralized SBSs were ﬁrst modeled as a
distributed inverse reinforcement learning problem following
the non-cooperative Partially Observable MDP games. Then
a non-prior knowledge-based self-imitating learning algo-
rithm was proposed to imitate the expert strategies, generate
adversarial training samples, and perform the decentralized
resource scheduling. Simulation results conﬁrmed the eﬀec-
tiveness of the proposed method to mitigate ICI and improve
the overall throughput compared to other known benchmark
algorithms.
While the last studies dealt with DL interference, in [120],
UL multi-tier interference in HetNets was mitigated through
a heuristic physical-layer technique. Speciﬁcally, the authors
proposed to assign to multi-priority users a novel Frequency
Hopping (FH) pattern with multi-level Hamming correla-
tions. The numerical and simulation ﬁndings showed that the
prioritized radio-access scheme based on the FH sequence set
might minimize UL cross-tier interference in HetNets while
ensuring high transmission quality and spectral eﬃciency
for multi-tier users, even at the cell boundaries of HetNets.
Page 21 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
Particularly under the imperfect power control over the cross-
tiers, the proposed FH method outperforms the traditional FH
technique. The proposed approach only considered two levels
of priorities among users, but a general case of FH applied to
ﬂexible multi-level priorities was not investigated.
D) Spatial-domain schemes
Considering both cross-tier and co-tier interference, an inter-
ference management approach based on a hierarchical pre-
coding scheme was proposed in [122] to mitigate interfer-
ence from the macro and FD-enabled SCs with perfect self
interference cancellation capabilities. The authors considered
a dense deployment of multi-antennas macro and small BSs
using co-channel TDD protocol, where SCs serve both macro
and small cells’ users. The problem of joint load balancing
and interference mitigation was formulated as a network
utility maximization problem taking into account dynamic
backhaul constraints, traﬃc load, and imperfect CSI. Random
matrix theory was applied to derive closed-form for the ob-
jective and constraints and Lyapunov optimization was then
used to decouple the original problem into several solvable
sub-problems. Using the successive convex approximation
method, the problem was converted to a convex problem, and
an optimal solution for user association, beamforming design,
and power allocation was derived. Numerical results revealed
that the proposed framework can achieve a 5.6 times gain in
cell-edge users’ performance compared to un-optimized ultra-
dense networks with 350 SCs per km2.
While a precoding scheme was proposed to manage ICI
in the last study, [123] and [100] investigated spatial-domain
interference whitening (IW) using Machine Learning. IW per-
mits the estimation of the colored interference-plus-noise co-
variance matrix using demodulation reference signals. How-
ever, when the interference is rather small in comparison with
the noise, interference whitening may degrade the perfor-
mance gain due to inaccurate covariance matrix calculation
based on a few DMRS samples. To address this issue, in [123],
the authors proposed a distributed RL-based interference sup-
pression scheme for adaptive IW control. More speciﬁcally,
using the Q-Learning algorithm, each agent, i.e., the UE,
selects the best IW mode, i.e., ON or OFF, based on the esti-
mation of its average channel condition including interference
and noise. To ensure that each UE learns autonomously and
that only local information is exploited, the reward value is
deﬁned as the diﬀerence between the channel’s capacity and
a speciﬁed target threshold. The experimental results demon-
strated that RL-IW improved the performance gains in terms
of block-error rate (BLER) and DL throughput compared to
conventional interference whitening.
While in the last paper, the authors chose to activate/deactivate
IW according to the performance gain, in [100], the problem
of computing the interference-plus-noise covariance matrix
from a sparsely located DMRS was addressed using a su-
pervised learning (SL) based algorithm aiming to minimize
both the BLER and the whitening complexity. Under various
interference scenarios characterized by diﬀerent channel
models, interference occupancy, Signal-to-Interference Ratio
(SNR), etc., a single neural network is trained using the
quasi-Newton method to select an appropriate IW option to
minimize the BLER. Speciﬁcally, the proposed SL algorithm
decides (i) whether or not to calculate the covariance matrix
by averaging over the entire bandwidth and (ii) whether
the covariance matrix can be approximated with a diagonal
matrix or not. Results showed that the proposed scheme can
reduce the BLER, even under unseen interference scenarios
while minimizing the complexity of whitening.
E) Code-domain schemes
In [124], a non-orthogonal sparse code multiple access-based
uplink inter-cell interference cancellation technique was pro-
posed to enhance the performance of the cell-edge UEs in
a multi-cell scenario, by jointly decoding the useful sig-
nal and the interference signal at the BSs. Through the de-
sign of sparse SCMA codewords, the users’ data are spread
among the shared time-frequency RBs which permits the
achievement of frequency and interference diversity and a
near-optimal moderate complexity multi-user detection at the
base station. To optimize the BER even further, the SCMA
scheme was combined with the Alamouti code to provide
full space-time-frequency diversity. Simulation results proved
the ICI cancellation eﬃciency of the suggested SCMA-based
scheme, especially when combined with the MIMO tech-
nique.
F) Multi-domain schemes
Several studies were based on multi-domain schemes to eﬀec-
tively mitigate inter-cell interference, such as [125, 126, 127].
M. Kaneko et al. suggested an autonomous distributed
resource allocation in [125] for frequency-power domains
based inter-cell interference management. Speciﬁcally, the
authors considered an OFDMA-based macro cell/femto cell
overlaid Heterogeneous Network. Each femto cell is assumed
to operate in the closed access mode and to share the spectrum
frequency with macro cells. Unlike conventional methods of
cross-tier interference management that relied on the CSI
provided by macro BSs as well as macro users allocation map-
ping, and causing a signiﬁcant overhead increase, the work
in [125], proposed a distributed resource allocation method
based on femto BS’ overhearing of local CSI and prediction
of the sub-channels likely to be used by the nearby macro
UEs. Using the predicted low-interference sub-channels, the
femto BS performs the resource allocation to its associated
UEs while considering the maximization of the overall sys-
tem throughput without requiring additional control overhead
between BSs. The simulation results demonstrated that the
proposed approach eﬃciently manages to avoid cross-tier
downlink interference from femto BS to nearby macro UEs,
as it provides a trade-oﬀbetween macro and femto BSs
throughput while reducing required signaling overhead.
In addition to the power domain, the proposed inter-
ference mitigation approaches in [126] were also based on
the time domain. More speciﬁcally, Liu et al. considered a
randomly generated HetNet where macro BSs would oﬀer
muted or reduced power subframes, while the pico BSs al-
ways transmit on all subframes. They assumed that only the
Page 22 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
pico BSs may change their oﬀset bias value to extend their
coverage and assumed that the interference range of a base
station is within a few of its nearby cells. Using an exact-
potential game framework appropriate for performing eICIC
and FeICIC optimizations, the authors presented a scalable
distributed coordinated scheme to optimize cell oﬀset and
ABS patterns (muted or reduced power) using better response
dynamics. The objective utility function could be ﬂexibly
chosen. Moreover, a downlink scheduler based on a cake-
cutting approach was proposed and compared with well-
known schedulers. It was proved via simulations, that the
proposed framework achieves a signiﬁcant gain in energy
eﬃciency using eICIC and further improvement with FeICIC.
Higher cell edge throughput and user fairness were also
observed.
While the previous work focused on eICIC/FeICIC opti-
mization, the study in [127] proposed a frequency-time-power
domains scheme to handle the DL co-tier interference be-
tween SCs and improve the overall energy eﬃciency. Specif-
ically, M. Osama et al., proposed a static Soft Frequency
Reuse (SFR) scheme and a dynamic on/oﬀswitching of the
small cells based on their Interference Contribution Rate
(ICR) values, while considering the irregular nature of the 5G
HetNets. Cross-tier interference was not considered, as MCs
and SCs are assumed to use two diﬀerent frequency bands.
In this paper, a centralized controller, which can be the MC,
gathers the information from the diﬀerent SCs in its coverage,
statically allocates the sub-bands, and then controls the SC
switching based on their load and their generated interference.
Based on SFR, each small cell is divided into two areas:
center, and edge and the frequency band is partitioned into
seven sub-bands. The controller uses an iterative algorithm
to allocate for the edge zone of each small cell, one sub-
band that has not been allocated to neighboring SCs edge
area. The rest of the sub-bands can be used by the center
area with lower transmitted power to reduce the interference
between small cells. After assigning the resources to the users
by their serving cells, the controller performs the SC on/oﬀ
switching based on the ICR concept. On the other hand,
MCs are maintained active continuously to ensure network
coverage. The results showed that the suggested approach
could decrease the level of co-tier downlink interference, as
well as the power consumption and traﬃc loss.
Discussion: Table 3 provides a comparison between all
previously listed papers dealing with intra-mode inter-cell
interference management. The majority of the studies dealt
with DL interference as it is the most aﬀecting the network
performance. Few other papers studied the UL or DL and UL
inter-interference. Diverse domains were applied in the diﬀer-
ent proposed schemes in the literature, with a special focus on
power-domain approaches or multi-domain approaches com-
bining time/frequency/power schemes to avoid inter-cell in-
terference. Centralized methods usually incur high overhead
signaling while autonomous or coordinated distributed meth-
ods require zero or limited information exchange. With the
dynamic time-varying channel conditions and users’ mobility,
static interference coordination schemes can no longer adapt
and manage eﬀectively severe and unpredictable interference.
Recent emerging machine learning algorithms, such as deep
reinforcement learning and multi-agent DRL algorithms, in
particular, are excellent tool for tackling these challenges.
6. Inter-Cell Inter-Beam Interference
Management
This section will be dedicated to the in-depth study of
the proposed approaches managing the inter-cell inter-beam
interference from the beamforming transmissions of neigh-
boring BSs in 5G and beyond networks.
To avoid inter-cell inter-beam interference, diﬀerent ap-
proaches have been recently studied, including: interference-
aware beam selection schemes [62], interference-aware beam
power allocation schemes [128], interference-aware beam
selection and beam power allocation schemes [129, 49, 130],
time-domain beam scheduling schemes [52, 131] and precod-
ing design schemes [132, 133, 134, 135].
In the following, we review and compare some of the
proposed techniques.
A) Interference-aware beam selection schemes
The study in [62] considered the joint optimization of user
association and beam pair link (BPL) allocation in multi-user
multi-cell mm-wave networks to maximize the network sum
throughput, and mitigate the spatial interference.
Page 23 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
REF
INTERFERENCE
TYPE
CO-TIER/
CROSS-TIER
NETWORK
ENVIRONMENT
PROPOSED SCHEME
CONTROL LEVEL
LIMITS
[126]
Downlink ICI
Cross-tier &
Co-tier
LTE-A HetNets
eICIC / FeICIC + CRE
Distributed
coordinated
eICIC and FeICIC applied only on
macro BSs
[119]
LTE-A HetNets
Fractional Frequency Reuse with Three
Sectors and Three Layers
Centralized
pre-assignment of a dedicated
sub-band to the macro central layer
[122]
TDD 5G HetNets
Hierarchical precoding scheme
Centralized
-
[117]
Cross-tier
Two-tier HetNets
eICIC ABS + CRE
Centralized
disjoint ABS and CRE
optimization
[118]
Two-tier HetNets
eICIC ABS
Semi-distributed
(2 levels control)
reduced space dimension of
possible conﬁgurations
[125]
FDD HetNets
Local CSI overhearing and resource
allocation on predicted low interference
sub-channels
Autonomous
distributed
co-tier interference among
secondary users was not considered
[127]
Co-tier
FDD HetNets
SFR + ICR based on/oﬀSwitching
Centralized
Cross-tier interference is not
considered
[114]
OFDMA Femto
cell Networks
Power control on a per-RB basis
Distributed
coordinated
Cross-tier interference is not
considered
[115]
5G Macro layer
DQN-based Power control
Centralized
The power control is done on a
per-cell basis
[121]
OFDMA SBS
Networks
SIL algorithm which consists of WGANs)
and Double DQN methods to schedule
sub-channels to individual users
Autonomous
distributed
-
[123]
MIMO-OFDM
multi-cell
QL based IW
Autonomous
distributed
The deﬁnition of the reward may
induce a decrease in the throughput
[100]
MIMO-OFDM
multi-cell
Neural network based IW
Autonomous
distributed
-
[113]
Downlink &
Uplink ICI
Cross-tier
OFDMA HetNets
Cell oﬀset and cooperative scheduling
Centralized
Overhead Signaling
[116]
Uplink ICI
Cross-tier &
Co-tier
OFDMA HetNets
Power control based on the measurement
of modeled interference patterns
Semi-distributed
the eﬀects of fast-fading were not
adequately handled
[120]
Cross-tier
HetNets
A prioritized radio-access system based
on a frequency hopping technique
-
Only two-level access priorities
applied to HetNets uplinks
[124]
Co-tier
Multi-cell
network
An SCMA-based Uplink ICI
Centralized
-
Table 3: List of Papers dealing with Intra-mode Inter-Cell Interference Management Schemes
Page 24 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
While prior works in the literature generally relied on sta-
tistical channel models [136] and idealized antenna patterns
which may severely underestimate the spatial interference,
[62] used site-speciﬁc 3D directional mm-wave channel data
with realistic building and antenna models for a more accurate
networking study that fully characterizes the spatial intra and
inter-cell interference in SDMA networks. The study further
assumed an analog beamforming model using a predeﬁned
beam codebook. Two heuristic interference-aware schemes
based on a centralized joint-BS and a distributed Per-BS
approaches were proposed. While the former considers all
possible BPLs on all base stations for each UE, the latter
is executed on each base station, taking into account only
a small set of candidate BPLs on the serving base station
for every connected user. In the two approaches, the set of
candidate BPLs for every UE was ﬁrst determined. Then,
every approach sequentially veriﬁes the UEs and all of their
candidate BPLs and computes beamforming weights for each
new candidate BPL considering all previously allocated BPLs
at the serving BS. After updating the performance metrics, the
candidate BPL is either added to the UE’s provisional BPL
allocation set or discarded depending on the comparison of
previously allocated BPLs and a predeﬁned coverage thresh-
old. Finally, the candidate BPL in the provisional set with the
best SINR is assigned to the ﬁnal BPL allocation set. The per-
formance of the proposed strategies was evaluated against the
interference-agnostic Max-RSS baseline and load-balancing
WCS benchmark. On one hand, the results demonstrated
that the centralized approach substantially surpasses all other
schemes, although it is more complex and requires inter-BS
coordination and frequent up-to-date CSI from several base
stations. On the other hand, the distributed Per-BS scheme
achieves a comparable performance to the centralized WCS,
while being less complex, as it only takes into account the
BPLs assigned to the serving BS, and only operates based on
CSI-RS updates from the serving base station, as in 5G-NR’s
default beam management.
B) Interference-aware beam power allocation schemes
To mitigate uplink inter-cell inter-beam interference and en-
hance the total data rate on the UL channel, the authors
in [128], proposed a coordinated distributed Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning (MARL) beam-based uplink power
control framework which is compliant with the 5G NR spec-
iﬁcations in Release 15. They considered a multi-cell system
where both BSs and UEs were equipped with multiple anten-
nas. It was assumed that all the cells reuse the same frequency
band and that UEs periodically measure their associated beam
pairs. In this study, intra-cell interference was not considered
as only a single active UE per time-frequency resource in
a cell was allowed. The proposed approach consists of a
joint power optimization of multiple antenna ports per UE.
Based on uplink measurements of the SRS transmissions
of the associated UEs and using Q-Learning which is an
oﬀ-policy value-based RL method, each agent, i.e., the BS,
learns the most appropriate power allocation on the uplink
and speciﬁes to its users how to change their transmit power
levels via Transmit Power Control (TPC) commands which
are limited to the set {-1, 0, +1, +3}. The learning process
is achieved based on the exchange of UL measurements
inter-BSs and the computation of a reward function as a
convex parameterized weighted sum of all the cells’ data
rates. Such reward describes the direct impact of the BS’s
decision on its associated UEs and the data rate of the other
cells of the network. The determination of the most suitable
design of the parameterized weight in the reward function
is scenario and operator-objective dependent. Owing to the
results in the paper, when it is below 0.6, it results in the
most cooperative behavior of the system, which eﬃciently
reduces the interference, despite the small increment of the
transmit power. Overall, the simulation results showed that
the proposed uplink power control framework provides near-
optimum performance in terms of total transmit power, total
data rate, and network energy eﬃciency.
C) Interference-aware beam selection and beam power al-
location schemes
In [129], the authors considered a multi-access OFDM sys-
tem, from a multi-antenna BS to a single-antenna UE. The
sub-6 GHz band was used for voice and the mm-Wave band
for data. Starting from the question if there is a way to
jointly optimize beamforming, power control, and ICI which
achieves the upper bound on SINR, the authors formulated
the joint optimization problem as a non-convex problem
maximizing the achievable sum rate of the users. The au-
thors demonstrated that there is no closed-form solution for
the formulated problem. Therefore a centralized coordinated
scheme for voice and data bearers using deep reinforcement
learning was proposed. Based only on the reporting of the
user coordinates to the BS, the selection of the beamforming
vector of a selected user is ﬁrst performed, then the cen-
tralized coordinator adjusts the beam power of the BS to
this particular user. It was demonstrated that the proposed
approach enhances the performance measured by SINR and
total throughput capacity and that its run time is considerably
quicker than that of the upper bound algorithm.
Using a similar interference management approach as
the previous study, in [49], an online multi-agent Q-learning
algorithm was proposed to jointly optimize the user associ-
ation and beam power allocation in a NOMA mm-wave net-
work, where multiple users per cell were served on the same
time/frequency resources. The intra-cell intra-beam interfer-
ence was supposed to be canceled via Successive Interference
Cancellation at the UEs. Furthermore, as diﬀerent beams
in the same cell were allocated diﬀerent frequency bands,
the intra-cell inter-beam interference was avoided. However,
while the intersection of coverage areas of multiple beams
from diﬀerent gNBs oﬀers more options in the association
of users, inter-cell inter-beam interference mitigation was
essential to increase the network sum rate. In the proposed
scheme, each gNB was considered as an agent that chooses
user association for only cell edge users and inter-beam power
levels. The binary states of each agent were deﬁned according
to the average SINR, reﬂecting the level of interference in
the environment, compared to a predeﬁned threshold. After
Page 25 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
each learning step in the Q-Learning algorithm, each agent
receives a +1 or -1 reward depending on the achieved SINR
and previously mentioned threshold. The proposed machine
learning algorithm was compared to a baseline algorithm that
allocates equal power to the beams and results revealed a
sum rate improvement of 13% and 30% corresponding to the
lowest and highest traﬃc loads, respectively. However, there
were no reported results on cell edge users’ performance.
While in [49] a joint optimization of beam selection and
power allocation was performed, in [130], the optimization
was performed in a disjointed manner and a multi-cell least
beam interference (MLBI) algorithm and a multi-beam pri-
oritized power allocation (MPPA) algorithm were presented
to manage inter-cell inter-beam interference, guarantee the
QoS of edge UEs and enhance the overall rate. The authors
considered a multi-cell mm-wave network where each BS has
M beams selected from the codebook and orthogonal to each
other, therefore intra-cell inter-beam interference was not con-
sidered. However, the use of two beams with the same index
by two adjacent BSs would lead to IC-IBI for edge users.
In this study, for simplicity, only the main lobe interference
was considered (side-lobe interference was ignored). As the
optimization problem is a mixed-integer nonlinear program-
ming problem, two sub-problems were formulated. For the
ﬁrst problem, each cell is divided into sections, and users are
classiﬁed into central and edge users for each section. The
purpose of MLBI is to select the candidate beam set and corre-
sponding UEs with the least interference, based on the average
power allocation. To avoid IC-IBI, it is important to schedule
diﬀerent beam sets for edge users of adjacent sectors. Based
on the result of the ﬁrst sub-problem, the MPPA algorithm
including two scenarios - considering fairness or not - was
introduced to allocate power to multiple beams to maximize
the rate and improve the QoS. This problem was solved using
the water-ﬁlling algorithm and using a low-complexity sub-
optimal algorithm. Simulations demonstrated the eﬃciency
of the proposed solutions to improve the achievable rate, even
though it is sub-optimal.
D) Time-domain beam scheduling schemes
Such schemes allow the coordination of the beam transmis-
sion of diﬀerent cells on the time domain to avoid inter-
cell inter-beam interference. In [52], two transmission co-
ordination approaches aiming to maximize the aggregate
throughput in a dense mm-wave wireless network were intro-
duced. The ﬁrst one is a BS-density coordination approach
deﬁning an interference range based on the user and BS
locations and SINR threshold, and deriving an optimal trans-
mission probability of BSs. The second one is a pairwise
beam collision-measurement-based approach that exploits the
downlink beamforming information exchanged inter-BSs to
deﬁne an inter-base-stations collision matrix and a threshold
for the packet delivery failure probability-based transmission
policy.
In [131], a graph theory-based time-domain beam schedul-
ing scheme, referred to as least beam collision (LBC), was
developed to avoid DL inter-cell inter-beam interference in
mm-wave networks. It is assumed that every cell only uses
one beam at every time slot. The network was modeled as
a graph in which every cell is symbolized by a node. The
beams were sorted depending on the closest adjacent cell they
were likely to interfere with, and thus formed an edge between
the two network elements. Beam collision was deﬁned as the
simultaneous use of the beams that are represented by an
edge connecting a pair of adjacent cells. The purpose of the
proposed LBC algorithm is to minimize the number of beam
collisions while scheduling the beams in diﬀerent time slots
to guarantee the users’ demands. Monte Carlo simulations
veriﬁed that the proposed scheme ensures the acquisition of
the global minimum amount of beam collisions and mitigates
the strong inter-cell interference of the nearest cell. However,
taking into account only one beam interferer is not always
suﬃcient in dense networks.
E) Precoding design schemes
To mitigate the inter-beam interference caused by adjacent
beams in multi-cell multi-user environments, in [132, 133],
four diﬀerent digital precoding techniques with a hybrid
beamformer were proposed. The authors further analyzed the
pros and cons of each technique in terms of required RF chains
in the BS and UE, and network overhead and they compared
their performance in terms of the achievable rate and BER.
It has been shown that type 2/type 3/type 4 precoders with
the estimated eﬀective network channel may substantially
decrease inter-beam interference in millimeter-wave cellular
networks with stationary users.
Existing codebooks-based beamforming/combining are
generally pre-deﬁned and only concentrate on enhancing the
target user’s beamforming gain, without considering interfer-
ence, which leads to severe performance loss. Therefore, in
[134], the design of an interference-aware analog combiner
that maximizes the achievable rate of the target user without
knowing the explicit channel knowledge was investigated.
The study leveraged the powerful exploration capability of
reinforcement learning to propose an actor-critic-based DRL
approach that iteratively optimizes the beam pattern to sup-
press the interference without explicit CSI knowledge nor
inter-BSs coordination, and based solely on power measure-
ments. The proposed analog beamforming/combining method
also complies with the main hardware constraints, includ-
ing the quantized phase shifter constraint. Simulation results
proved that the proposed approach was able to learn an
eﬀective beam pattern suppressing inter-beam interference at
the cost of negligible beamforming/combing gain reduction.
In [135], the idea of the last study was further extended with
a sample-eﬃcient digital twin essentially used to provide the
RL agent with a simulated environment to interact with and
learn optimal beam pattern design. The adoption of the digital
twin enhances the sampling eﬃciency by taking better ad-
vantage of the underlying relationship between signals and by
allowing data sharing among diﬀerent beam learning agents.
Page 26 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
Discussion: Table 4 provides a comparison between all
previously listed papers dealing with inter-cell inter-beam in-
terference management. Generally, to manage inter-cell inter-
beam interference in mm-wave networks, there are two prin-
cipal approaches: (i) to perform interference-aware beam
selection/beam power allocation/time beam scheduling and
(ii) to design multi-user precoding/combining for IBI cancel-
lation. The ﬁrst method depends on codebook-based analog
beamforming with limited CSI feedback. The second ap-
proach however is generally based on hybrid beamforming
consisting of analog beamforming using a limited number of
radio frequency chains coupled and digital baseband beam-
forming using full channel estimates, which may lead to
extra CSI feedback and delay requirements. As traditional
fully digital beamforming schemes require one RF chain per
antenna which is not cost and power-eﬃcient to implement,
and as analog beamforming only enables one single stream
transmission per baseband chain, hybrid beamforming oﬀers
a compromise on the performance and cost trade-oﬀ. How-
ever, designing hybrid precoding for very large arrays and
bandwidths is still challenging.
7. Cross-Link Interference Management
This section will be dedicated to the in-depth study of the
main proposed schemes and research studies related to cross-
link interference management in 5G and beyond networks.
Z. Shen et al., in [55], provided an interesting tutorial on
dynamic downlink/uplink conﬁguration, adapting to chang-
ing traﬃc needs, and interference management schemes in
time-division LTE networks. The opportunities and chal-
lenges of D-TDD systems were analyzed and system require-
ments and performance evaluations were provided. Diﬀerent
approaches have been adopted in the literature to manage CLI,
including: power control schemes [137, 138, 139], UL/DL
dynamic conﬁguration [140, 141, 142, 143], cell clustering
[144, 145], beamforming schemes [146, 147, 148], interfer-
ence suppression schemes [149, 150, 151] and joint optimiza-
tion of coordination schemes [8]. In the following, we review
and compare some of the proposed techniques.
A) Power Control permits the management of CLI by reduc-
ing or/and boosting the DL/UL transmission power respec-
tively.
UL power control aims to adjust the power of the uplink
UE, either to reduce the UL-to-DL (between UEs) interfer-
ence or to enhance uplink performance in case of high BS-to-
BS interference. For instance, Q. Chen, et al. in [137], pro-
posed a closed-loop uplink power control scheme to reduce
DL-to-UL interference among TDD-based small cells. By
adequately boosting the UL transmission power according to
diﬀerent interference levels, the authors aimed to improve UL
performance. In this proposed scheme, based on geometric lo-
cation information, the number of interfering base stations is
ﬁrst estimated, then the BSs exchange their UL conﬁguration
number. After that, interfering BSs compute the interference
level indicator and conﬁgure UE power adjustment to enhance
their UL performance. From the simulation results, it was
shown that the proposed scheme achieves about 5% gains in
average DL/UL packet throughput.
Some studies cater to adjusting the DL power control as
an interference control mechanism like in [138]. The authors
considered local 5G indoor micro operator utilizing dynamic
TDD in the 3.6 GHz band and experiencing both inter-
operator intra-mode inter-cell interference and inter-operator
cross-link interference as cells that belong to separate oper-
ators are not coordinated. Assuming that the interfering net-
work is fully loaded, the victim micro-operator BS estimates
the total power received from all interfering BS that belong to
diﬀerent micro-operators. The maximum of these measured
values is then compared with a predetermined interference
threshold to set the transmit power scaling factor for the
interfering micro-operator. This simple interference control
depends on the appropriate deﬁnition of the interference
threshold which is extremely scenario-dependent.
Other research works like [139] considered both DL and
UL power control. To mitigate cross-link interference and
maximize traﬃc adaptation, a DL/UL transmission power
control for D-TDD heterogeneous networks was applied to
ﬂexible subframes that can be used either for downlink or
uplink. As macro and small BSs were assumed to operate on
diﬀerent frequency bands, only co-tier interference in small
cells was considered. To deﬁne the best power allocation
balance for downlink and uplink transmissions while semi-
statically exchanging information among BS, the authors pro-
posed to manage DL-to-UL interference by (i) reducing the
BS transmission power within a certain range to maintain an
acceptable DL throughput, and (ii) boosting UL transmission
power with a constraint on the user device power consump-
tion, in ﬂexible subframes. However, this power adjustment is
done using ﬁxed values. The proposed power control scheme
achieved a maximum gain of 21% for UL throughput, but
slightly degraded DL performance due to the reduction in the
base station’s power.
B) UL/DL Dynamic Conﬁguration is another method to
mitigate CLI [140, 141, 142, 143]. It is expected that 5G NR
would support both semi-static conﬁguration, to avoid inter-
operators interference, and dynamic conﬁguration in SCs.
In [140], the use of a multi-agent Q-learning-based ap-
proach to dynamically change the switching point (transition
point) from UL to DL transmission in non-cooperative femto
cell networks while mitigating CLI and maximizing the total
cell average packet throughput, was discussed. In the learning
phase, each agent, i.e., each femto BS senses its environment
and based on its local quantized information data, including
the level of the total received UL and DL interference, and its
current switching point, it conﬁgures the new UL/DL switch-
ing point. As a result of its action, it observes instantaneous
performance from UEs and an individual cost taking into
account the traﬃc demands (arrival rates and packets’ size)
and the total UL and DL service rate.
Page 27 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
REF
PROPOSED SCHEME
CONTROL LEVEL
MAIN IDEA
[62]
Interference-aware beam selection
scheme
(i) Centralized and
(ii) Distributed
Two heuristic interference-aware strategies using a centralized joint-BS and a
distributed Per-BS approach for the joint optimization of user association and beam
pair link allocation
[128]
Interference-aware beam power
allocation scheme
Coordinated
distributed
A multi-agent reinforcement learning beam-based uplink power control approach
relying on the exchange of UL measurements inter-BSs
[129]
Interference-aware beam selection
and beam power allocation scheme
Centralized
A deep reinforcement learning scheme for joint beam selection and power allocation
for voice and data bearers
[49]
Distributed
An online multi-agent Q-learning algorithm to jointly optimize the user association
and beam power allocation
[130]
Distributed
A disjoint optimization of the two sub-problems via a multi-cell least beam
interference algorithm and a multi-beam prioritized power allocation algorithm
[52]
Time-domain beam scheduling scheme
Coordinated
distributed
A BS-density and a pairwise beam collision-measurement based approaches
[131]
Centralized
A graph theory based time-domain beam scheduling scheme to minimize the number
of beam collisions, while scheduling the beams in diﬀerent time slots to guarantee the
users demands
[132,
133]
Precoding design scheme
Distributed
Four diﬀerent digital precoding techniques with a hybrid beamformer
[134,
135]
Autonomous
distributed
An actor-critic based DRL approach for the design of interference-aware analog-only
beamforming/combining + a sample-eﬃcient digital twin for environment simulation
Table 4: List of Papers dealing with Inter-Cell Inter-Beam Interference Management Schemes
Page 28 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
Through a learning phase based on trial and error be-
havior, each BS learns the optimal conﬁguration to reduce
the overall packet transmission delay while considering the
asymmetric traﬃc demands and inter-cell interference. The
major concern of the proposed method based on multi-agent
Q-learning is the convergence performance, as at each learn-
ing step, multiple agents are adapting their switching point
and thus making the environment non-stationary from a single
femto cell’s point of view, which is a well-known problem
in multi-agents RL, especially for independent learners who
don’t share observations or cost function. Simulation results
demonstrated that the proposed scheme achieves higher cell
average packet throughput compared to ﬁxed TDD and exist-
ing queue-aware dynamic TDD approaches, especially in the
case of diﬀerent UL and DL traﬃc in the diﬀerent femto cells.
Similarly to the last study using RL algorithms, in [141],
Tang et. al proposed a Deep RL-based dynamic UL/DL TDD
conﬁguration in a high mobility 5G HetNet, where chan-
nel conditions and network traﬃc demands are dynamically
changing. The research ﬁrst considered three user mobility
types: high-speed vehicles, relatively slow-speed pedestrians,
and unmanned aerial vehicles with ultra-high speed. Then the
UL/DL conﬁguration problem was formulated as a Markov
Decision Process. The state of each agent, i.e., each BS, at
a considered time slot, considered historical information and
was deﬁned as the discrete and normalized values of up/down-
link occupancy, buﬀer occupancy, etc., during the last Nt
time slots. Each BS has to choose, according to its local
state, one TDD conﬁguration from 6 possible choices that
are employed in LTE-release 11 and beyond. After applying
the chosen actions (TDD conﬁguration) for all base stations,
the network sends back an individual reward value to each
agent which is the sum of up and down channel utilities
depending on the channel occupancy of the next time slot.
In the simulated learning phase, past channel conditions were
known at each base station. The proposed DQN-based solu-
tion was compared to conventional dynamic TDD resource
allocation taking into account only current information, and
a tabular Q-learning-based solution. The simulation results
proved that the proposed DQN solution improves the network
performance in terms of throughput and packet loss rate.
Using deep neural networks and historical information as a
state’s features permits the authors to model the complexity of
a HetNet, predict future traﬃc patterns and thus intelligently
change TDD conﬁguration. While this DRL-based algorithm
has signiﬁcant advantages, it is important to note that in
this multi-agent setting, each BS learns an individual policy
to update its UL/DL conﬁguration and does not explicitly
cooperate with other BSs to reduce the cross-link interference.
In another UL/DL conﬁguration approach to mitigate
CLI, the authors of [142] proposed a novel centralized and
distributed UL/DL reconﬁguration method based on an eﬃ-
cient solution of a mixed integer linear program. Considering
the multi-cell DL-to-UL and UL-to-DL interference levels
and the traﬃc conditions, the suggested scheme aimed to
maximize the overall network data rate. Simulation results
indicated that the proposed solution performs better than the
conventional static TDD system and Traﬃc-Only cell recon-
ﬁguration schemes. For example, with a system model com-
posed of 4 cells, where each BS serves 10 users, it was shown
that the proposed centralized (distributed) scheme improves
the users’ throughput by 4.65 (2.75) times, as compared to
the conventional static TDD.
All of the previous studies aimed to mitigate cross-link
interference as it decreases system performance. But what if
cross-link interference could be used to enhance network ca-
pacity? In [143], it was argued that it is in fact possible. First,
the CLI was analyzed and compared to conventional intra-
mode interference, i.e., BS-to-UE and UE-to-BS interference.
It was shown that UE-to-UE interference is on average smaller
than BS-to-UE interference and thus the DL performance is
better when the interference is originated from the UE instead
of the BS. In contrast, BS-to-BS interference is stronger than
UE-to-BS. Fortunately, BS-to-BS interference can be esti-
mated and canceled. Based on these observations, the authors
proposed a novel aligned reverse frame structure to avoid BS-
to-UE interference and induce more UE-to-UE interference,
along with an interference cancellation technique to suppress
the inter-BS interference. As it is obviously more eﬃcient
to change the nearest BS interference to CLI, neighboring
base stations construct a BS pair to share transmission data
information and their uplink/downlink conﬁguration. Then,
each base station of the BS pair aligns its transmission to
the reverse of the other BS, to maximize weak inter-UE
interference instead of strong BS-to-UE interference. Using
the channel estimation and exchanged data information, an
interference cancellation was applied at the BS to cancel
the strong DL-to-UL interference. Mathematical analysis and
numerical results veriﬁed that the proposed approach out-
performs conventional dynamic TDD performance in terms
of uplink and downlink SINR, using 10dB of interference
cancellation (IC). With 20dB of IC, the proposed scheme was
as eﬃcient as with perfect IC.
C) Cell Clustering consists in regrouping multiple cells in
the same cluster based on a speciﬁc rule and applying the
same uplink/downlink conﬁguration for the group of cells
within the cluster to avoid cross-link inter-cell interference
[144, 145].
In [144], the authors proposed a centralized cell clus-
tering scheme with an uplink/downlink reconﬁguration to
mitigate CLI in dynamic TDD HetNets where multiple pico
and macro cells are using the same carrier frequency. To
perform cell clustering, the mutual coupling loss (MCL)
between eNBs was used, as it takes into account antenna
gains and propagation loss and thus permits the measurement
of the BS-to-BS interference level. If the MCL between two
eNBs is below a certain threshold, then the base stations are
grouped into a single cluster. Then, the study investigated
the best uplink/downlink conﬁguration based on diﬀerent
traﬃc situations for each cell cluster. In a single cell, to fully
utilize the radio resource, an eNB would choose the DL/UL
conﬁguration corresponding to the amount of data in UE
buﬀers on every TDD reconﬁguration. This metric obviously
Page 29 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
cannot be used in a cluster with diﬀerent BSs. In this regard, a
new metric of the resource utilization rate of DL and UL was
introduced. A center node collects the information concerning
the statistical ratio of used RB among uplink and downlink
transmissions for all cells belonging to the same group and
then selects the optimal conﬁguration that maximizes the total
throughput while increasing the radio resource utilization.
The new uplink/downlink conﬁguration was then sent to all
the cells in the cluster. The simulation results demonstrated
that the proposed approach can mitigate BS-to-BS interfer-
ence. However, excessive enlarging of cluster size results in
low downlink performance gain in pico cells.
In [145], to mitigate CLI, the authors proposed two en-
hancements to existing rules for cell clustering, taking into
account interference patterns and traﬃc load. The proposed
metrics were used in a very simple heuristic algorithm and
then compared to existing methods. To increase the ﬂexibil-
ity of frame conﬁguration, BSs with high traﬃc should be
grouped in diﬀerent clusters. Therefore, the ﬁrst proposed
rule is based on a diﬀerentiating metric with the inclusion
of the total traﬃc of the BSs pair. The second proposed
cell clustering metric attempts to track the number of cross-
slots. The proposed clustering rules, especially the second
one, provided signiﬁcant improvement in terms of UL SINR,
while not improving the DL performance, as expected. The
heuristics used for clustering can be improved using meta-
heuristic methods, but as they require some time to converge,
they should be used for mid to long-term planning.
D) Beamforming Schemes consisting of adjusting the beam
conﬁguration in the transceiver are another possible approach
to mitigate cross-link interference [146, 147, 148].
In [146], Y. Long et al. investigated the impact of an adap-
tive beamforming scheme with mMIMO in a dynamic TDD
network with a realistic network model where transceiver
noise at the BS and pilot contamination were taken into ac-
count. To derive a tight approximation of SINRs and UL and
DL ergodic achievable rates, random matrix theory was used.
Based on these approximations, the authors further analyzed
the CLI and transceiver noise and proved that mMIMO eﬀec-
tively suppresses both of them. More speciﬁcally, according
to [146], UL and DL tend to be decoupled under massive
antenna arrays, and therefore there is a way to mitigate CLI
without having to solve complex optimization problems. A
joint transmit power control scheme of UL and DL to maxi-
mize overall throughput was also presented and validated by
extensive simulation results.
In [147], a distributed pricing-based beamforming ap-
proach was proposed to adjust the beam direction and mitigate
downlink-to-uplink interference in a dynamic TDD Multiple-
Input-Single-Output pico cell network. The main objective
was to enhance the uplink SINR by meticulously selecting
the BS precoders, without boosting the power of UL users.
To this end, the authors formulated an optimization problem
that consists of penalizing the base station transmission by
the interference on uplink users. To solve this optimization
problem, a distributed beamforming algorithm, running in
sequential or parallel mode, and associated signaling support,
was proposed. Speciﬁcally, each BS identiﬁes the appropriate
precoder vectors that maximize an objective function that de-
pends on the achieved rate and a periodically updated penalty
factor that considers BS-to-BS interference. The beamform-
ing vectors were therefore calculated to ﬁnd the best equilib-
rium between transmitted power and induced interference. On
one hand, in terms of algorithm implementation, the conver-
gence of the parallel mode scheme was not proven. On the
other hand, although the sequential implementation has been
shown to converge, it resulted in higher signaling overhead
than the parallel implementation. The proposed schemes were
tested using a realistic system simulator and they have proven
to be an eﬀective way to improve UL performance at the cost
of a slight reduction in downlink capacity.
While the previous study dealt with BS-to-BS interfer-
ence, in [148] the authors investigated the UE-to-UE in-
terference management using coordinated beamforming for
MIMO Interfering Broadcast–Multiple Access Channel (IB-
MAC) Interference Channel. In particular, they studied zero-
forcing transmit beamforming design at initialization with and
without water-ﬁlling, and the iterative weighted minimum
mean-square error (WMMSE) algorithm to maximize the
sum rate. They considered a two-cell network with one cell
in DL and the second one in UL and supposed that BS-to-BS
interference is already managed by exploiting a limited rank
BS-to-BS channel and that ZF transmit ﬁlters are being used
at the base stations to handle the intra-cell interference, thus
only cross-link UL-to-DL (UE-to-UE) was being studied in
this paper. The proposed solution consisted of constructing
and using at the initialization the ZF beamformers at DL and
UL UEs so that the UL-to-DL interference is canceled. Then,
the WMMSE iterative algorithm was used. Exploiting the
water-ﬁlling algorithm at initialization was also considered to
improve the performance at low SNR.
E) Interference Suppression Schemes based on advanced
receivers algorithms such as in [149, 150, 151] are also a
viable way to mitigate CLI.
In [149], S. Guo et al. considered a multi-user MIMO
small cells network operating in D-TDD mode where UL/DL
conﬁguration is performed based on the traﬃc buﬀer status
of each cell and there is no intra-cell inter-user interference.
They ﬁrst provided analytic expressions of minimum mean
square error interference rejection and cancellation (MMSE-
IRC) receiver and enhanced MMSE-IRC (eMMSE-IRC) re-
ceiver with imperfect channel state information for gNB-to-
gNB interference suppression. Then, to support the proposed
interference suppression schemes, an interference measure-
ment scheme based on the demodulation reference signal
information of adjacent cells was also presented. The simula-
tion results conﬁrmed the UL user packet throughput gain of
the two proposed interference suppression schemes compared
with the baseline MMSE receiver. While the eMMSE-IRC
receiver performs better than than MMSE-IRC receiver with
imperfect CSI, the simulations showed that their UL SINR
Page 30 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
performance is near the ideal MMSE-IRC receiver with per-
fect CSI.
In [150], a high-performance and complexity-eﬃcient
DL-to-UL CLI suppression scheme was proposed. With a
limited and 3GPP-compliant signaling overhead over the
backhaul links, the BSs ﬁrst exchange the user DL spatial sig-
natures. The base stations then approximate the correspond-
ing orthonormal projector subspace and spatially project the
estimated IRC interference covariance onto the projector
subspace before decoding. Their improved formulation of the
IRC receiver allows it to further direct the user to the eﬀec-
tive channel. Following the major assumption for URLLC,
system-level simulations were performed and the proposed
solution was compared against a few DTDD studies from
industry and academia. It was shown that the enhanced IRC
receiver oﬀers about 199% gain of the URLLC outage latency
performance and improves the ergodic capacity by 156%
while requiring a modest inter-BS signaling overhead.
Starting from the observation that conventional channel
modeling does not ﬁt cross-link interference cancellation,
Tan et.al in [151] ﬁrst presented a more realistic BS-to-BS
MIMO channel model taking into account the hardware-
dependent non-linearity characteristics of radio frequency.
Then, using this channel model, three types of digital-domain
CLI cancellers- one polynomial canceller and two machine
learning-based CLI cancellers- were proposed to mitigate BS-
to-BS interference. Through analysis and simulations, it was
demonstrated that the three cancellers can improve CLI can-
cellation by 43.4% compared with the traditional CSI-based
interference canceller and that the hybrid canceller incorpo-
rating the linear and non-linear CLI components achieves
the best CLI cancellation performance while keeping the
computational complexity very low.
F) Joint Optimization of Coordination Schemes as in [8],
where M. Ding et al. proposed a uniﬁed framework to inves-
tigate the technical issues of combining multiple interference
mitigation methods in dynamic TDD small cells networks, as
well as their possible introduction in HetNets. First, they pre-
sented a dynamic resource allocation and scheduling scheme
to balance DL/UL traﬃc. They also investigated the eﬀec-
tiveness of multiple interference mitigation schemes (cluster-
ing, interference cancellation, UL power boosting) and their
combinations. It was demonstrated that using a clustering
scheme permits avoiding most of the inter-cell interference
and that there was no important gain to combining a cell
clustering scheme with interference cancellation. However,
combining UL power control and cell clustering is an eﬃcient
strategy to improve the system performance, especially for
low-complexity implementations. Furthermore, the authors
proposed two new partial interference cancellation schemes,
namely the BS-oriented partial IC, where only interference
from adjacent BS is canceled, and the UE-oriented partial
IC, where only cell edge users are allowed to use IC. Sim-
ulation results showed that the BS-oriented partial IC scheme
achieves similar performance to the complete IC scheme with
lower complexity. Furthermore, the uplink performance of
cell center users was also impacted by the DL-to-UL inter-
ference, therefore applying partial interference cancellation
for cell edge users was not enough, and using BS-oriented
partial IC was proven to be more eﬀective. Finally, the joint
optimization of cell bias and ABS in dynamic TDD HetNets
was studied. Scheduling policies and an algorithm to derive
the ABS ratio were proposed.
Discussion: Table 5 provides a comparison between all
previously listed papers dealing with cross-link interference
management. Several approaches have been studied in the
literature. Power control for DL or/and UL usually depends
on some interference threshold and is done via ﬁxed val-
ues, which is obviously sub-optimal and highly scenario-
dependent. In some other studies, it was proposed to cluster
the cells based on speciﬁcally designed rules to apply the
same TDD conﬁguration among the BSs in the same group.
Another CLI alleviation approach is to adjust the wireless
signal transmission strategies via interference cancellation
and adaptive beamforming schemes. Many studies also inves-
tigated the dynamic conﬁguration of UL/DL to mitigate CLI,
using reinforcement learning algorithms. Such approaches
permit taking into account the users’ mobility and the actual
traﬃc demands per cell to learn how to change dynami-
cally and intelligently the TDD conﬁguration. However, in
the existing literature, most UL/DL conﬁgurations are cell-
centric,i.e., based on the average UL/DL traﬃc within that
cell, without further diﬀerentiation of resource demands of
the speciﬁc UEs. Moreover, when adopting multi-agent set-
tings to distribute the computation, one should pay atten-
tion to the coordination and cooperation among the diﬀerent
agents and the convergence of the approach. This can be done
via a shared reward between the agents and by centralizing
the training of the DRL algorithm.
8. Remote Interference Management
To our knowledge, very few scientiﬁc papers have dealt
speciﬁcally with remote interference management. In this
section, we overview and discuss the most important research
contributions. We classify the studies into two categories :
(i) remote interference prediction/detection [152, 153, 154,
155, 58, 156, 157] and (ii) remote interference mitigation
[112, 158, 159], and we review and compare some of the
proposed techniques in the following.
A) Remote Interference Prediction/Detection
At present, there are two principal methods for detecting
and estimating the atmospheric duct: (i) theoretical calcu-
lations using Ray-optics and Parabolic Equation (PE), and
(ii) practical measurements using radar [58]. Because of the
abruptness of the atmospheric duct and the spatial distance
between interfering BSs, performing time-consuming, multi-
regional channel measurements is undoubtedly a tricky issue.
Instead of pre-building mathematical models, machine learn-
ing and speciﬁcally, supervised learning techniques provide
an eﬃcient solution to accurately predict remote interference.
Page 31 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
REF
PROPOSED SCHEME
CONTROL LEVEL
MAIN IDEA
LIMITS
[137]
Power Control
Distributed
Coordinated
Closed-loop UL PC based on exchanging UL conﬁguration between
closest BSs and computing interference level indicator in each BS
Interference is only estimated
based on UL conﬁguration
[138]
Autonomous
distributed
Deﬁning a transmission power scaling factor for interfering micro
operator after comparing maximum BS-to-BS interference to a deﬁned
threshold
The appropriate deﬁnition of the
interference threshold is highly
scenario-dependent
[139]
Distributed
coordinated
DL/UL transmission power control applied to ﬂexible subframes with
constraints on the UE power consumption and DL throughput
The power adjustment is done by
means of ﬁxed values
[140]
UL/DL Dynamic
Conﬁguration
Autonomous
distributed
Multi-agent Q-learning based approach to dynamically change the
switching point of each femto cell to minimize transmission time while
considering the asymmetric traﬃc demands and inter-cell interference
The convergence is not guaranteed
[141]
Autonomous
distributed
Multi-agent DQN based solution to choose, according to historical
local information, one TDD conﬁguration from 6 possible choices
No explicit cooperation between
BSs to reduce the CLI
[142]
Centralized /
Distributed
An eﬃcient solution of a mixed integer linear program considering
DL-to-UL and UL-to-DL interference levels and the traﬃc conditions
Problem formulation at the expense
of additional variables and
constraints
[143]
Distributed
coordinated
Forming BS pairs using a novel aligned reverse frame structure to
avoid BS-to-UE interference and induce more UE-to-UE interference
The need of data exchange and
interference cancellation at the BS
[144]
Cell Clustering
Centralized
Clustering based on mutual coupling loss between eNBs compared to a
threshold + DL/UL conﬁguration based on a new deﬁned metric of
cluster resource utilization rate
Accurate threshold design is
critical as excessive enlarging of
cluster size results in low DL
performance gain
[145]
Centralized
Two enhancements to existing rules for cell clustering, taking into
account interference patterns and traﬃc load
DL performance not improved
[146]
Beamforming
Distributed
The use of random matrix theory to derive a tight approximation of
SINRs and UL and DL ergodic achievable rates
-
[147]
Distributed
A pricing-based beamforming approach, running in sequential or
parallel mode, to enhance the uplink SINR
The convergence of the parallel
mode not proven + higher signaling
overhead in sequential mode
[148]
Distributed
coordinated
ZF transmit beamforming design at initialization with and without
water-ﬁlling + WMMSE algorithm to maximize the sum rate
CLI between BSs not considered
[149]
Interference
Suppression
Distributed
MMSE-IRC and eMMSE-IRC receivers with imperfect CSI for
gNB-to-gNB interference suppression + interference measurement
scheme based on the DMRS information of adjacent cells
-
[150]
Distributed
coordinated
Enhanced IRC receiver based on the projection of the estimated IRC
interference covariance onto the projector sub-space prior to decoding
Some signaling overhead is
required
[151]
Distributed
Three types of digital-domain CLI cancellers : one polynomial
canceller and two machine learning-based CLI cancellers
-
[8]
Joint Optimization
of Coordination
Schemes
-
A uniﬁed framework to investigate the technical issues of combining
multiple interference mitigation methods
-
Table 5: List of Papers dealing with Cross-Link Interference Management Schemes
Page 32 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
In [152], a remote interference prediction model based
on a feed-forward neural network (FNN) was proposed. The
database was generated using Petool, a widely acknowledged
simulation platform to acquire channel data. Taking into
account signal frequency, top and bottom height of duct,
antenna height, down tilt angle, vertical height, and horizontal
distance as input, the platform computed the pathloss. By
directly learning from the generated data on both the Sub-
6 GHz band and 28 GHz band, the FNN-based framework
achieved a prediction accuracy of 88.72% and 94.77% on the
two bands respectively.
Deep learning models were also applied in [153] to prop-
erly model the over-the-horizon propagation of intercity link
signals induced by atmospheric duct and tropospheric turbu-
lence eﬀects, taking into account real terrain and land cover.
Using 1300 sets of random terrain and landforms, the authors
proposed Deep MultiLayer Perceptron (DMLP) and Long-
and-Short Term Memory (LSTM) network models to predict
the pathloss distribution at the antenna height layer. The two
models used ﬁxed radar antenna parameters and atmospheric
environment parameters and took as input topography and
landform data. The prediction accuracy of the proposed mod-
els remained mainly between 0.8 and 1, however making
large to moderate errors after 80 Kms using DMLP and
LSTM models respectively. While the model training results
had certain errors mainly because of the randomness of the
generated data, they demonstrated that topography and land
cover types highly impact the propagation when a terrestrial
duct happens.
While in the previous studies, the data was generated
using a simulator, in [154], the authors analyzed the char-
acteristics of remote interference, called atmospheric duct
interference, using real data from a TDD LTE network owned
by China Mobile. According to [154], when RI occurred
in Xuzhou, Jiangsu Province, about 27.6% of cells expe-
rienced UL interference higher than -90 dBm, which to-
tally overwhelmed the useful signal and blocked the cell’s
communication. Based on their analysis and considering the
huge amount of input data, the authors proposed an SVM
(Support Vector Machine)-classiﬁer, which is a centralized
machine-learning algorithm, to forecast if the base stations
in the testing set will be aﬀected by the remote interference.
They further proposed an implementation of the Alternating
Direction Methods of Multipliers (ADMM) framework [160],
to perform a distributed SVM prediction scheme that reduces
data exchange between diﬀerent areas. The two prediction-
based schemes were compared with the KNN (K-Nearest
Neighbor) algorithm where a BS is classiﬁed depending on its
nearest neighboring BS, whether it is predicted to be aﬀected
by RI or not. The simulation results showed that when the
number of training samples is 40 000, the precision rate of
the two proposed methods can reach 72%, which surpasses
the conventional KNN algorithm. With its distributed imple-
mentation, ADMM-SVM prediction is thus a more suitable
and practical solution for a successful prediction of the remote
interference occurrence. An extension of the previous work
can be found in [155]. The authors proposed another machine
learning algorithm called Random Forest that has a shorter
learning time than SVM algorithms, while maintaining simi-
lar prediction precision, and is therefore more convenient for
operators.
In [58], 5,520,000 TDD network-side data, including the
longitude, latitude, time, antenna height, and down tilt angle,
were collected by real sensors from 240,000 antennas in
Jiangsu Province of China and then used to validate the RI
detection accuracy of nine Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) algo-
rithms. Speciﬁcally, the authors proposed a remote interfer-
ence detection testbed consisting of four modules, including
a meteorology and signal module, a data processing module,
an AI-based learning module, and a validation module. They
identiﬁed the most impacting factors of atmospheric duct
aﬀecting signal pathloss as follows: temperature, atmospheric
pressure, relative humidity, time, longitude, latitude, antenna
height, and down tilt angle. After collecting and processing
the data, the AI-based learning module is used to train and
generate multiple feature models including single model al-
gorithms (kNN, SVM, and Naive Bayes algorithm), and en-
semble algorithms (Random Forest, Bootstrap Aggregating,
Boosting, and Stacked Generalization), to discriminate the RI
of the BS. The selected algorithms were tested and compared
against each other on various aspects including accuracy and
recall, sensitivity to the data size and interfering ratio, robust-
ness, time complexity, etc. Numerical results demonstrated
that the ensemble algorithm can achieve an average accuracy
that is 12% higher than that of the single model algorithm.
While previous reviewed studies proposed remote inter-
ference prediction/detection schemes based on essentially nu-
merical data, in [156], a reliable remote interference detection
model was proposed based on the image recognition ability
of a deep convolutional neural network and a high number of
PRB interference statistics at the cell level. The RI identiﬁca-
tion accuracy of the proposed model reached 99%. When the
remote interference is detected, an interference optimization
algorithm based on daily experience is initiated: users are
then associated with the FDD network on the common cell
or to a new cell that has not been aﬀected by the atmospheric
duct. An automatic optimization algorithm would improve the
network performance. Since April 2019, the proposed detec-
tion model has been used to identify and optimize remote
interference management in Hebei province in China. After
ﬁve months of adjustment, RI occurrence has dropped from
35% to 7%.
In another approach to eﬃciently detect RI caused by mul-
tiple cell aggressors, two reference signal designs, denoted as
1OS (OFDM Symbol) and 2OS based RIM-RS for RIM were
described along with the detection processing framework in
the receiver side in [157]. The considered RIM-RS solutions
were thoroughly investigated in multiple realistic interference
scenarios. Results indicated that the proposed 2OS RIM-RS
design achieves modestly better detection performance than
the 1OS RIM-RS design in simple conﬁgurations involving a
low number of interfering BSs. However, when the number of
Page 33 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
interfering BSs grows, the 1OS design tends to perform better
than the 2OS-based design.
B) Remote Interference Mitigation
While an accurate prediction/detection of remote inter-
ference is of great importance, eﬃcient remote interference
management schemes are required to enhance the mobile
network suﬀering from the RI.
In [112], an overview of the atmospheric duct and its
eﬀects on radio propagation was presented, along with the
3GPP proposed enhancements to mitigate resulting remote
interference. Authors, also classiﬁed interference mitigation
schemes into four categories:
• Time domain schemes: can be either (i) semi-static where
a longer guard period can be conﬁgured, or (ii) dynamic
by muting the aggressor on DL resources causing remote
interference. Currently, time domain solutions are the most
used in TD-LTE networks by re-conﬁguring the guard
period from 3 to 9 OFDM symbols. This permits extending
the protected area from RI from about 64 km to 192 km
[161], however, it decreases the DL capacity by 15.7%.
• Frequency domain schemes: both the aggressor and vic-
tim BSs can be conﬁgured with orthogonal frequency
resources in a semi-static way at the expense of the spectral
eﬃciency loss. As a dynamic approach, the victim may stop
allocating the frequency resources suﬀering from high RI.
• Spatial domain schemes: careful network planning, for ex-
ample by installing antennas at lower altitudes, or adjusting
the down-tilt can avoid RI for example. It is also possible
to apply beam nulling or beam selection.
• Power domain schemes: by applying power control at the
victim or the aggressor.
Besides, according to [112], the polarization domain can also
be exploited to attenuate the co-channel RI [162]. To mini-
mize the performance loss due to RI, F. Liu et al. suggested
that more eﬀective and intelligent RI mitigation solutions
using machine learning should be explored.
The studies in [158] and [159] proposed two spatial do-
main schemes to manage remote interference. In [158], a
complete traceable RIM simulation scheme using meteorol-
ogy measurement data in terrestrial and maritime systems
and communication settings including antenna parameters,
was provided. The simulation system combining parabolic
equation methods computing pathloss and refractive index
estimation could be useful for network planning and remote
interference mitigation. With diﬀerent settings in the testbed,
the authors computed path loss in various atmospheric condi-
tions. The ﬁndings showed that the adjustment of the antenna
tilt and height may minimize the RI. For instance, an increase
of 1 degree on antenna tilt can reduce the remote interference
by 2 or 3 dB. According to [158], the adjustment of antenna
tilt has been used by China Mobile to manage RI, but there is
no theoretical analysis to support this technique.
In [159], based on the spatial domain of MIMO net-
works, the authors applied the existing interference alignment
scheme to the RI problem and studied its limitations, as it
does not handle the performance degeneration of the aggres-
sor cell. Then, considering the total network performance
including the DL performance of the aggressor cell, they
proposed a precoding scheme to steer the RI signal toward
the null space of the UL channel of the victim cell, instead of
aligning the RI signals. The authors modeled the atmospheric
duct channel as a wireless channel representing small-scale
fading and pathloss and further assumed perfect CSI at the
aggressor base stations. It was shown via numerical results
that the proposed null space alignment method outperforms
the standard RI alignment as it further improves the network
performance.
Discussion: Table 6 provides a comparison between all
previously listed papers dealing with remote interference
management. As previously stated, there is a lack of research
studies dealing with RI. Some papers investigated the use of
supervised learning along with deep learning algorithms to
detect atmospheric ducts causing remote interference using
synthetic data sets, or real network side data collected by
real sensors owned by Chinese mobile telecommunications.
Besides numerical data, some studies based their detection
model on the image recognition capability of deep convo-
lutional neural networks. Despite the importance of these
studies, it is crucial to investigate proactive schemes to predict
the occurrence of remote interference and the interfering and
victim BSs, to allow for interference avoidance. To mitigate
such interference, time-domain solutions, especially guard
periods are the most used, despite their negative impact on
DL capacity. Furthermore, few papers studied remote inter-
ference mitigation through spatial approaches. However, the
proposed schemes either lack theoretical analysis, are static
or require full CSI knowledge. Therefore, it is important to
design more eﬃcient and intelligent schemes, with theoretical
support and imperfect CSI. This can be done by the support
of machine learning algorithms such as deep reinforcement
learning along with digital twin architecture to model the
environment and atmospheric duct.
9. Self Interference Management
A diverse range of SI management schemes have been
proposed to handle self interference by the research commu-
nity from the simplest isolation to the complex adaptive can-
cellation. In this section, we will ﬁrst identify the challenges
of SI management scheme design, then we will classify and
discuss the main proposed approaches in 5G FDD and IBFD.
First of all, one can ask, if the transceiver knows the
transmitted, then why is self interference diﬃcult to subtract?
In fact, due to unknown noise and linear and non-linear
distortions in the radio TX chain, the transmitted signal looks
quite diﬀerent from the original digital baseband signal after
its conversion to analog and up-conversion to the right carrier
frequency. Therefore, it is required to account for all the
analog distortions and compensate for them at the receiver.
Page 34 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
REF
PROPOSED SCHEME
MAIN IDEA
LIMITS
[152]
Remote Interference
Prediction/Detection
FNN-based model for pathloss prediction taking into account distance
and duct and antenna parameters
A simple model using synthetic data
[153]
Deep learning models (DMLP and LSTM) to predict pathloss
distribution at the antenna height layer considering real terrain and
land cover
the model training results makes large to
moderate errors after 80 Kms
[154]
Centralized and distributed SVM model to forecast RI using real
network data
Prediction precision is not very high
[155]
An extension of previous paper using Random Forest model
Same prediction accuracy as previous
study
[58]
A remote interference detection testbed to validate the RI detection
accuracy of nine AI algorithms
-
[156]
A reliable RI detection model based on the image recognition
capability of deep convolutional neural network and a large number of
PRB interference statistics on the cell level
-
[157]
The design of reference signal along with the detection processing
framework in the receiver side
-
[112]
Remote Interference
Mitigation
An overview of the atmospheric duct and its eﬀects on radio
propagation + 3GPP proposed enhancements to mitigate RI +
interference mitigation schemes classiﬁcation
-
[158]
A complete traceable RIM simulation scheme + adjusting the antenna
tilt and height
No theoretical analysis to support the
applied mitigation scheme
[159]
A precoding scheme to steer the RI signal toward the null space of the
uplink channel of the victim cell
-
Table 6: List of Papers dealing with Remote Interference Management Schemes
Page 35 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
Besides the non-linear self interference, there is another
eﬀect that must be dealt with in the transceiver design, which
is the receiver saturation. This could happen when the input
signal is beyond the analog-to-digital conversion resolution.
Thus, any cancellation architecture must prevent receiver
saturation by suﬃciently canceling the interfering signal in
analog at RF before it hits the low-noise ampliﬁer, and fully
cancel the remaining residual self interference in digital by
modeling all of the nonlinear distortions [60].
Considering the requirements of SI isolation and can-
cellation, it is quite challenging to enable the FD scheme,
especially at macro BS with a large antenna number and
high transmission power. Moreover, because of the wide
bandwidth of 5G systems, a broadband pre-equalization in the
RF domain is needed to cancel the self interference over these
wide bands [163].
Other than base stations and other RAN node types, it is
also challenging to handle the self interference in user de-
vices, considering diﬀerent aspects: On one hand, the UE has
tighter implementation requirements in terms of complexity,
cost, power consumption, and size limitation. On the other
hand, due to the users’ mobility and changing environment
conditions, the self interference signal has a time-variant
characteristic [163].
As stated previously, a self interference signal comprises
a deterministic part, i.e., an ampliﬁed analog signal of digital
transmit samples, and a non-deterministic part, i.e., noise
and several non-linear harmonic components [163]. The lat-
ter portion requires special attention to be managed either
through passive suppression or active cancellation. In prac-
tice, diﬀerent techniques must be combined to cancel the
self interference to the desired power level. In the following,
we provide an overview of passive and active approaches to
manage self interference.
The passive suppression schemes aim to attenuate the self
interference using antenna directionality, cross-polarization,
spatial isolation or radio frequency absorber, etc. [164]. These
passive schemes are simple to realize, but they are unable to
retune and mimic self interference channel variation [163].
Thus, the isolation performance is generally relatively poor,
especially when the signal is constantly changing due to the
dynamics of the radio channel. [61]. Therefore, in FD and in
FDD with CA variants, simply relying on passive interference
cancellation may not be suﬃcient for today’s transceivers
[20]. To eﬀectively cancel SI, it is key to understand the self
interference channel behavior and to employ active/adaptive
cancellation approaches in addition to the passive suppression
techniques [163].
The basic idea of active cancellation schemes is to pro-
duce a copy of the self interference signal using some special
techniques and to subtract it from the received signal [61,
164]. According to the operation domain, active cancellation
schemes can be categorized as analog, digital, or hybrid
analog-digital cancellation approaches. In theory, SI can be
canceled in the digital domain with low complexity, since its
performance solely depends on the accuracy of baseband SI
channel estimation and the modeling of non-linearity of the
transceiver [165]. However, due to hardware imperfections
and to avoid the receiver chain saturation, SI has to be sup-
pressed at most in the analog domain. In the following, we
further discuss the diﬀerent categories of active cancellation
approaches and we review some of the proposed techniques
in the literature.
A) Digital domain schemes: implemented after the analog-
to-digital converter, are one of the most straightforward of
all active cancellation methods, operating exclusively in the
baseband and thus beneﬁting from all the advantages of all-
digital hardware, including simpliﬁed design and veriﬁcation
[20, 61]. However, compared to analog domain schemes,
digital domain approaches suﬀer from inferior cancellation
performance and reliability [20] and thus are generally used
to remove residual self interference after performing analog
cancellation. In the digital domain schemes, an equivalent
discrete-time coupling channel is computed to reconstruct a
digital SI signal which is then subtracted from the received
signal in the digital domain [164, 61].
For example, in [166], an auxiliary receive chain was
employed to get a digital-domain copy of the transmitted RF
SI signal, including any transmitter impairments. In addition,
to mitigate the eﬀect of receiver phase noise, a common
oscillator was shared between the auxiliary and ordinary
receive chains, and a non-linearity estimation and suppression
method was suggested to attenuate the eﬀects of receiver non-
linearity. Based on the signal conﬁguration of an LTE full-
duplex SISO system, the performance of the proposed ap-
proach was investigated numerically, and it was revealed that
the SI could be attenuated to ~3 dB above the receiver noise
ﬂoor, resulting in a 76% rate enhancement over conventional
half-duplex systems at 20 dBm transmit power values.
Aiming to introduce an FD cellular system to 6G, a novel
digital SI cancellation using a 5G-based OFDM signal was
proposed in [167]. Speciﬁcally, the demodulation reference
signal was reorganized to avoid UL-DMRS and DL-DMRS
interference and enhance the estimation accuracy of the self
interference signal and the noise power. The proposed SI
digital cancellation was evaluated and proved its eﬃciency
in terms of achieved BLER compared to the half-duplex
system. However, as the signal actually transmitted is based
on TDD, there are channel extrapolation components in the
forward and backward slots that may compromise the channel
estimation accuracy and negatively aﬀect the block error rate
performance. Therefore, the same authors further extended
the study in [164], by proposing a channel extrapolation
scheme and by developing a 5G PHY prototype implementing
the proposed method in a software-deﬁned radio platform.
The proposed approach was validated via both computer
simulations and experimental evaluation using the prototype.
For more details on digital self interference cancellation
schemes, we refer the interested reader to the survey in [168],
which presents an overview of all the estimation techniques
used in digital cancellation such as least square estimation and
digital signal processing-based self interference estimation,
and summarizes the advancements to date of digital SIC
Page 36 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
	




	




	







	
 




!	
!	
		
		

	




	




		







	
 




!	
!	
		
		


Figure 10: Analog Cancellation: RF-Tapping and Baseband-Tapping.
approaches, including machine learning and deep learning
based schemes for digital self interference cancellation.
B) Analog domain schemes: based on performing SI can-
cellation before entering the analog-to-digital converter, are
the most popular approaches for self interference cancellation.
Loopback self interference signal is obtained by tapping the
signal using the analog circuits and fed to the receiver as a
reference signal. The CSI are then acquired at the receiver,
using training-based SI cancellation approaches to estimate
the loopback channel, or non-training-based SI cancellation
approaches, which are more bandwidth eﬃcient as they do not
require any training phase [169]. After CSI acquisition, the
reference signal is passed to a reconﬁgurable ﬁlter emulating
the self interference channel at the required bandwidth and
then fed to the RX input to cancel the self interference.
Depending on where the Tx reference signal is tapped
from, the analog cancellation can be classiﬁed as RF-tapping
and baseband-tapping [20, 165], as shown in Figure 10.
• The RF tapping approaches are based on electronic circuits
that use several adjustable RF components to copy the TX
signal and tune the delay and attenuation of the cancella-
tion signal. These RF components can be classiﬁed into
single-tap and multi-tap architectures. As shown in Figure
10 (a), the Tap Generator module adapts the attenuation,
phase, and delay of each tap. While single-tap architectures
are easier to implement, multi-tap architectures achieve
a higher cancellation performance in multi-path environ-
ments in a wide bandwidth [20, 170].
• The BB-tapping approaches use the BB TX signal to gen-
erate a digital copy of the SI signal as shown in Figure 10
(b) via the Auxiliary Signal Generator module. After the
tuning phase, which is performed in the digital domain,
the digital copy is transformed into the analog domain and
injected into the receiver chain to eliminate self interfer-
ence [170]. This analog BB-tapping scheme is sometimes
considered as a mixed signal interference suppression or a
hybrid approach in the literature [20, 61].
Given the design of the necessary reconﬁgurable ﬁlter ad-
justing the canceling signal, two approaches to SI analog can-
cellation are possible: either time-domain cancellation (using
RF or BB tapping), or frequency-domain cancellation (using
RF tapping) [171]. While time-domain methods implement
ﬁnite impulse response (FIR) ﬁlters with parallel delay line
taps, frequency domain approaches employ parallel RF band-
pass ﬁlter taps emulating the SI channel at diﬀerent frequency
points [172]. When the self interference channel exhibits a
very large delay, frequency domain cancellers are preferred
over time domain cancellers due to the elimination of delay
elements in each tap, simplifying integrated circuit designs
[169]. However, It was demonstrated that due to hardware
losses limiting the number of possible taps, conventional
electrical components are not the best choice for analog self
interference cancellation [173].
Recently, optical-domain RF cancellers using optical
components allowing much smaller insertion losses and more
accurate delays and frequency operations, have been proposed
and tested in the literature [174, 173]. Unlike conventional
RF cancellers based on electrical components, the signal is
processed in the optical domain, requiring the input RF signal
coupled from the output of the transmitter power ampliﬁer to
be up-converted into the optical domain. Because of the wide-
band and tunable properties of optics, these novel approaches
have shown enhanced self interference cancellation capacities
over much wider bandwidths and operating frequency ranges
than their RF and digital cancellation counterparts [174]. For
Page 37 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
example, in [173], to meet the requirements of 5G and beyond
networks, an optical-domain active analog self interference
cancellation scheme to construct suﬃcient eﬀective taps
within wide-band and under various hardware conditions,
was investigated. The authors designed a novel tuning al-
gorithm that reduces the usage of optical carriers saving
implementation costs. With a 12-bit ADC and 20 eﬀective
taps, simulation results indicated that the self interference was
eﬃciently mitigated in a 3GPP LTE speciﬁcations compatible
system within 1GHz of operational bandwidth.
C) Analog-Digital (Hybrid) Domain schemes: are combin-
ing the advantages of both approaches, i.e., the high per-
formance and reliability of analog domain schemes, and
the ﬂexibility and lower complexity of the usage of digital
components [20]. Such approaches have a good cancellation
performance in non-linear systems and over a wide modulated
bandwidth.
While in the majority of previous studies, the focus was
directed to implementing self interference cancellers in the
FR1 band within limited operational, bandwidth, in [175],
a hybrid SI cancellation scheme in IBFD enabled private
5G network using large-scale antenna arrays with RF beam-
forming, operating in FR2 band with a wider bandwidth and
supporting a mixture of multi-type devices, was proposed.
Particularly, the authors introduced a cost-friendly eﬃcient
multi-tap RF cancellation scheme and a frequency-domain-
based digital canceller to deal with the residual SI with a
reduced processing latency. They further proposed a game
theoretic user allocation algorithm to mitigate the cross-link
interference between UL and DL users. It was demonstrated
that the proposed solution improves the spectral eﬃciency by
92% compared to the HD scheme, and due to the abundant
resources in the FR2 band, it achieves multi-Gbps peak data
rates, high reliability, and massive connectivity.
The wide bandwidth in 5G and beyond networks, requires
adjusting multiple weights in a multi-tap canceller. Real-time
adjustment of these weights, considered one of the remain-
ing problems in self interference cancellation, was tackled
in [176]. The authors proposed a new hybrid-analog-digital
interference cancellation scheme consisting of a multi-tap
and multi-stage RF and analog canceller that independently
adapts to a time-varying channel in real-time via a novel
on-chip hybrid-analog-digital adaptation loop. The proposed
scheme supporting both FDD and IBFD operations achieves
48 and 58 dB SI cancellation across a 100 MHz BW in both
modes, respectively.
Discussion: Table 7 provides a comparison between all
previously listed papers dealing with self interference man-
agement. State-of-the-art radio frequency transceivers for mo-
bile networks suﬀer from SI in FDD and IBFD operation, due
to TX-RX leakage or simultaneous transmission/reception
and non-idealities in the analog front-end. Diﬀerent SI can-
cellation schemes have been proposed in the literature, from
simple isolation to active analog, digital, and hybrid schemes,
in frequency, time, and optical domains. Generally, there is no
single approach that is capable of completely mitigating the
SI and a combination of multiple methods is often required.
10. Intra-Cell Multi-User Interference
Management
In this section, we will provide a detailed overview of
intra-cell multi-user interference management. Such inter-
ference is caused by the multiple access in 5G and be-
yond networks. We will divide this section into three sub-
sections dealing with the management of intra-beam interfer-
ence in NOMA networks, inter-beam interference in multi-
beam transmitters mMIMO networks, and inter and intra-
beam interference in NOMA multi-users mMIMO networks.
10.1. Intra-Beam Interference Management
In contrast to orthogonal multiple access techniques,
NOMA supports more UEs than the number of orthogonal
resource slots using non-orthogonal resource allocation and
thus improves the spectral eﬃciency and cell-edge users’
throughput. However, serving multiple neighboring users
under the same (narrow or wide) beam (in DL) and using
the same non-orthogonal resources (in DL or UL), can lead
to severe intra-beam (or intra-cluster) multi-user interference,
and therefore advanced inter-user interference cancellation
techniques are required. Generally speaking, NOMA tech-
niques managing such interference can be categorized into
power-domain and code-domain NOMA.
Several research studies have actively investigated multi-
user interference management in NOMA-based networks. We
brieﬂy overview the basic concepts and we refer the reader
to two comprehensive surveys in [177, 43]. Various NOMA
schemes [178, 43] have been introduced and compared in
terms of their operating principles, performance, and imple-
mentation challenges. In [177], a comprehensive survey of
power-domain NOMA exploiting the channel gain diﬀerence
between multiplexed users is presented. In power-domain
NOMA, the signals from several users are superposed and the
resulting signal is then sent using the same time/frequency
resource. On the receiver side, multi-user detection (MUD)
techniques, such as successive interference cancellation, par-
allel interference cancellation, and hybrid interference cancel-
lation, are applied to detect and decode the desired signals.
It is worth noting that in UL NOMA [179], diﬀerent users
may independently use their maximum available power to
transmit their signals using the same time-frequency resource,
as long as their channel gains are suﬃciently distinct [180].
The BS receives the data from all UEs simultaneously and
has to apply some multi-user detection and interference can-
cellation algorithms to mitigate the interference. Generally,
in this case, the intra-cell multi-user intra-cluster interference
depends on the channel statistics of all users in the same clus-
ter, i.e., using the same radio resource, and the transmission
of weak channel users is typically more aﬀected by strong
interference arising from strong channel UE transmissions.
In [181], the maximum completion time minimization for
users in multi-carrier NOMA is investigated for networks and
applications that have stringent latency requirements.
Page 38 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
REF
PROPOSED SCHEME
MAIN IDEA
[166]
Digital domain schemes
The use of auxiliary receive chain for SI copy generation and a common oscillator and
non-linear estimation and suppression method in an LTE full-duplex SISO system
[167,
164]
The reorganization of DMRS to prevent interference and enhance the SI estimation using
novel digital SI cancellation scheme + a channel extrapolation and 5G PHY prototype
[168]
An overview of the estimation techniques used in digital cancellation and the advancements
to date of digital SIC approaches
[173]
Analog domain schemes
An optical-domain RF canceller using a novel tuning algorithm to construct multiple taps
within wide-band and under diﬀerent hardware conditions
[175]
Hybrid domain schemes
A cost-friendly eﬃcient multi-tap RF cancellation scheme and a frequency-domain based
digital canceller to deal with the residual SI with a reduced processing latency in 5G IBFD
network operating in FR2 band
[176]
an hybrid SI cancellation scheme consisting of a multi-tap and multi-stage RF and analog
canceller adapting to a time-varying channel in real time via a novel on-chip
hybrid-analog-digital adaptation loop
Table 7: List of Papers dealing with Self Interference Management Schemes
Page 39 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
On the other hand, in DL NOMA [182], diﬀerent transmit
power is allocated to intra-beam (intra-cluster) users, such
as weak channel users are allocated high transmission power
and thus experience low interference from strong channel
users (and vice versa). To mitigate such DL interference, the
receiver of every UE has to implement advanced multi-user
detection and interference cancellation algorithms, which rep-
resents a cumbersome task due to its limited processing
capability. [183] derived complexity reduced optimization
methods for the joint power and subcarrier allocation in multi-
cell multi-carrier NOMA systems. In [184], power minimiza-
tion for zero-forcing based multi-cell MISO-NOMA systems
is addressed with eﬃcient joint user grouping, beamforming
and power control scheme.
Generally speaking, handling multi-user interference to
maximize the beneﬁts of NOMA networks, requires :
A) Appropriate user pairing/clustering: which consists in
dividing the users into multiple pairs or clusters using some
criterion, where intra-cluster users share the same transmit
source. Generally, user pairing refers to the special case of
user clustering where each cluster is composed of only two
users. The performance of NOMA highly depends on ﬁnding
the best user pairing/clustering which is an NP-hard problem
[185]. To simplify the exhaustive search over all possible
matching pairs/clusters, some studies suggest some other sub-
optimal pairing algorithms, such as decision tree pruning, hill
climbing, greedy search or matching algorithm, etc. Some
of these algorithms still have high computational complexity
or must be jointly designed with adaptive per-user power
allocation. We overview some of the proposed approaches in
the following.
In [186], two user pairing methods based on neighbor
search algorithms inspired by hill climbing and simulated
annealing were proposed for downlink NOMA networks.
The diﬀerence between the two proposed user pairing al-
gorithms is whether a worse solution can be tolerated to
explore more possibilities in the search process [187]. Sim-
ulations showed that when combined with power allocation
techniques, both could yield near-optimal sum throughput
while reducing complexity relative to exhaustive search.
Most of the existing works like [186] discuss the user
clustering algorithms considering two users in each cluster,
i.e., user pairing, and limited analysis has been performed
towards user clustering for a generalized number of users in
each cluster. Furthermore, the majority of works considered
user pairing/clustering under a perfect detection and interfer-
ence cancellation scenario at the receiver. Therefore, to tackle
these two challenges, [188] ﬁrst derived bounds on power
allocation and channel coeﬃcients for user clustering under
imperfect interference cancellation. Then, based on these
derived bounds, the authors proposed multi-user clustering
and adaptive multi-user clustering algorithms for NOMA
networks. The ﬁrst method considered the minimum SINR
diﬀerence criterion to group the users with higher channel
gain with those with lower gain values. The second algorithm
is a combination of the ﬁrst approach with an adaptation step
to adjust the clusters by splitting, regrouping, or transmitting
by orthogonal multiple access schemes. It was shown that the
proposed clustering schemes improve the achievable user data
rate compared to OMA and that the network performance
saturates with an increase in the number of users per clus-
ter, but does not decrease, unlike conventional user-pairing
algorithms. [189] further extended the multiple possibilities
of user arrangements for the proposed adaptive multi-user
clustering in the previous study.
To date, the majority of clustering/pairing schemes pre-
sented in the literature do not address a fundamental problem,
namely the time-varying nature of the number of users and
the channel conditions. To address these characteristics of dy-
namic communication systems and to improve the total data
rate of a NOMA DL, an adaptive and evolutionary clustering
strategy inspired by a modiﬁcation of the DenStream evolu-
tionary algorithm has been proposed in [190]. The proposed
method allows the online creation of new clusters and their
adaptation to network temporal variations and robustness to
noise. Considering a well-known power allocation scheme
referred to as improved fractional strategy power allocation,
the proposed clustering approach was evaluated and shown to
be eﬀective in following the network dynamics, grouping all
users into clusters, and allowing for a uniform transmission
rate between clusters.
B) Designing perfect superposition coding (SC): along with
the users pairing/clustering, to be applied on the transmitter
side, in a disjoint or joint manner. With SC, two or more
messages are ﬁrst encoded into one signal in two layers, then
sent at the same time using the same resource to multiple
receivers. In power-domain NOMA, UEs are grouped into
several clusters and then are superposition-coded with diﬀer-
ent transmit power in every cluster. To ensure user fairness,
NOMA assigns more power to UEs having lower channel
gains. With this approach, multiple users are served simul-
taneously without degrading the quality and user throughput.
We refer the interested reader to this survey [191], for more
details concerning the power allocation in NOMA, along with
user pairing algorithms in the literature.
C) Error-free multi-user detection algorithms: at the re-
ceiver side, such as successive interference cancellation are
used to detect and decode the superposed information to
extract the desired signals. The main idea of SIC is to order
the users according to the signal strength diﬀerence and
to decode the users’ signals successively starting with the
stronger signal which can then be removed from the combined
signal to isolate the weaker signal from the residue [177].
We refer the interested reader to this comprehensive survey
[78] over-viewing the various successive interference cancel-
lation techniques with perfect and imperfect CSI for diﬀerent
NOMA network conﬁgurations.
Apart from conventional interference management strate-
gies, i.e., treating interference completely as noise, as com-
monly used in OMA/SDMA networks, and completely de-
coding interference, as in NOMA, Rate-Splitting Multiple
Page 40 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
Access (RSMA) is emerging as a novel, generic, and eﬃ-
cient framework for designing and optimizing non-orthogonal
transmission, multiple access and interference management
approaches in 5G and beyond networks [45]. Essentially,
RSMA partially decodes interference and treats the residual
interference as noise. Based on the rate splitting (RS) concept
and linear precoding for multi-antenna multi-user transmis-
sions, RSMA breaks the data messages into common and
private portions and encodes the common portions into one
or more common streams, whereas the private portions are
encoded into distinct streams using either perfect or imperfect
CSI. The superimposed streams are then transmitted to the
receiver, which decodes the common streams, performs SIC
and then decodes its respective private streams.
10.2. Inter-Beam Interference Management
This section will be dedicated to the in-depth study
of the proposed approaches to manage the intra-cell inter-
ference caused by the use of multi-beam transmitting and
receiving antennas in 5G networks. To avoid inter-beam
interference, diﬀerent approaches have been recently stud-
ied, including: interference-aware beam selection schemes
[192, 193, 194, 195], interference-aware intra-beam resource
allocation schemes [196], time-domain beam scheduling
schemes [63, 197], frequency reuse scheme [198], and ad-
vanced transceivers for interference cancellation schemes
[199, 200, 201].
A) Interference-aware beam selection schemes
Considering the potential intra-cell inter-beam interference,
the study in [192] proposed an interference-aware beam selec-
tion scheme based on classifying all UEs into two sets depend-
ing on the potential inter-beam interference. First, high-power
beams were chosen for UEs with low inter-beam interference.
Then, for UEs suﬀering from high IBI levels, the authors
suggested a low-complexity step-wise algorithm selecting the
beams one by one and aiming to maximize the sum rate.
Simulation results showed that the proposed interference-
based beam selection provides a near-optimal sum rate and
better energy eﬃciency than conventional approaches.
In [193], exploiting a certain sparsity or limited scattering
environments of mm-wave channels in a TDD-based multi-
user MIMO system, a low-complexity joint beam selection
method for BS and user beams adopting compressed sensing
without explicit channel estimation is proposed to optimize
the performance managing inter-user interference. It was
shown through simulations that the proposed method can
provide a reasonable performance with low complexity and
signaling overhead, compared to the optimal beamforming
approach requiring full CSI.
The design of adaptive beamforming in multi-user MIMO
systems is highly challenging as it highly depends on ac-
curate CSI at the transmitter, which is diﬃcult to obtain
due to the rapidly changing propagation environment and
feedback delay leading to a mismatch between estimated and
update-to-date channels, known as channel aging. Therefore,
in [194], considering multiple transmit and receive antennas
case, a multi-agent deep reinforcement learning framework
for joint transmit precoder and receive combiner design in
DL transmission under imperfect CSI and only based on
the knowledge of past channels and multi-user interference,
was proposed to maximize the average information rate of
all users. Speciﬁcally, the problem was cast as a sequential
decision-making process, and based on stream-level, user-
level, and system-level agent modeling, three DRL-based
schemes, were proposed, analyzed, and evaluated. Due to the
feedback delay from users, only outdated CSI information
including interference information is used to formulate the
observations at the agent at the beginning of each time slot. In
the decision-making stage, each agent chooses one precoder
and one combiner from pre-deﬁned beamforming codebooks
and receives a reward value measuring the achievable rate
and quantifying the adverse impact of multi-user interference.
Such design allows the agent to intelligently learn the best
precoders/combiners maximizing the achievable rate while
minimizing the inter-users interference. The merits of the
proposed framework, especially fast convergence, robustness,
and lower complexity, were shown through extensive simu-
lations by benchmarking the diﬀerent schemes against some
conventional methods.
While the last study dealt with joint transmit precoding
and combining under imperfect outdated CSI, in [195], the
authors considered partial interfering beam feedback at the
transmitter to propose two designs for the non-linear Tom-
linson Harashima Precoding (THP)-based digital precoding
for downlink MU-MIMO, while the best codeword from
the transmitter/receiver beam codebook is selected for the
analog beamformers/combiners. The ﬁrst approach applied
THP based on an approximate eﬀective channel where only
inter-beam interference from top-p interfering beams was
considered. However, as the feedback available becomes more
reduced compared to the whole set of interfering beams,
the inaccuracy of the approximated channel aﬀects the BER
performance. Therefore, a second iterative method consisting
of a robust THP design minimizing the transmission power
under both mean square error constraints at each user and
the channel error conditions was proposed. This robust THP
was shown to perform better than the ﬁrst non-robust THP
technique, especially for poor channel conditions and in the
presence of noisy feedback scenarios.
B) Interference-aware intra-beam resource allocation schemes
In [196], considering URLLC and eMBB users in a beam-
forming heterogeneous 5G mmWave network, the authors
proposed a joint QoS-aware online clustering and a deep RL-
based resource allocation scheme to improve the network
sum rate while taking into account the users’ mobility and
dynamic traﬃc. Speciﬁcally, to maintain eﬃcient coverage
of mobile users, Density-Based Spatial Clustering of Ap-
plications with Noise was used for grouping adjacent users
in the coverage of a single beam. Such clustering was only
performed when the average SINR of a beam fell below
a pre-speciﬁed threshold, to avoid frequent changes in the
structure and number of beams, which could result in a tricky
Page 41 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
resource allocation problem. After the clustering, an LSTM-
based deep Q-learning technique was applied by each gNB
to perform resource block allocation to the users within each
of its beams. As intra-beam interference was avoided due to
the use of OFDMA per each beam, the resource allocation
was performed based on users’ CQI feedback capturing inter-
beam interference levels. The reward of the DRL-based
algorithm was designed to account for the latency and/or
the reliability depending on the diﬀerent users’ classes. The
suggested method was compared with a baseline using K-
means for clustering and priority-based proportional fairness
for resource allocation. The results of the simulations showed
that the proposed scheme is better than the baseline in terms
of latency, reliability, and achievable rate.
C) Time-domain beam scheduling schemes
In [63], the authors ﬁrst investigated via real-world simu-
lations, the characteristics of inter-beam interference in a
real mm-wave network with hybrid beamforming. Then, they
provided insightful observations that can be summarized as
follows: Single-hop adjacent beams are the most signiﬁcant
interfering beams, while interference from multi-hop adjacent
beams can be ignored in comparison to the dominant interfer-
ing beams, so the elimination of dominant adjacent interfering
beams from a set of active beams would greatly enhance
network performance. Leveraging such observations, the au-
thors suggested a practical and low-complex beam on/oﬀ
scheduling employing graph theory and network utility maxi-
mization framework. Finding an optimal scheduling beam set
at each time slot suﬀers from the curse of dimensionality,
therefore, the special interference graph based on deﬁned
beam interference relations was introduced and a practical
time-domain beam scheduling scheme leveraging the idea
of exception of dominant interfering beams was detailed in
the paper. Simulations revealed that the proposed algorithm
attains a high performance with a reduced computational
complexity.
In another approach, [197] proposed to manage multi-
user interference using a joint multilayered user clustering and
time-domain scheduling. Based on the users’ location infor-
mation, neighboring users are clustered together using the low
computational complexity K-means algorithm. To mitigate
the inter-beam interference, referred to as inter-cluster inter-
ference in this study and caused by simultaneous transmis-
sion by diﬀerent adjacent clusters using the same resources,
the authors proposed to perform a user-cluster layering so
that clusters in each layer can be distanced from each other
more than the interference-oﬀset-distance, which is deﬁned
as the required minimal distance to maintain inter-cluster
interference below a tolerable level. Then, BS performs layer-
wise cluster-antenna association and layer-by-layer round-
robin-type time-domain scheduling, in which transmission
opportunity is sequentially assigned to each layer. It is worth
noting, that the cell edge layer was referred to as the bot-
tom layer and its scheduling timing was synchronized across
neighboring cells. The performance of the proposed joint
multi-layer user clustering and time-domain scheduling was
validated by evaluating link capacity and inter-user fairness.
D) Frequency reuse schemes
In the paper [198], a greedy method maximizing the overall
sum rate was used to associate users with serving beams.
However, this user-beam association generates severe inter-
ference for users located in the coverage of adjacent beams.
To mitigate the signiﬁcant intra-cell inter-beam interference
that aﬀects users at the beam edge while maintaining the total
data rate, an adaptive frequency reuse scheme was proposed.
Speciﬁcally, for each beam edge user, it was proposed to al-
locate half of the frequency spectrum to its serving beam and
the other half to the interfering beam. The simulation results
conﬁrmed that the proposed adaptive frequency reuse policy
can signiﬁcantly improve the beam edge users’ throughput
and maximize the fairness between UEs without sacriﬁcing
the total throughput.
E) Advanced transceivers for interference cancellation schemes
One way of eliminating inter-beam interference between
multiple subarrays in multi-beam transmitters is to use an
additional array to create a notch for the original beam in
the desired direction. However, using the extra array just
to create notches is a waste of antenna space. Therefore, a
simpliﬁed two-stage beamforming approach based on cross-
coupling of independent beams either in baseband, inter-
mediate frequency (IF), or RF domain, was proposed in
[199]. The main idea was to combine the signals from
multiple subarrays over-the-air (OTA) by incorporating a
scaled and phase-shifted version of the interfering streams
to the initial beams suﬀering from IBI. The interference and
cross-coupling signals combine destructively and mutually
suppress each other in the corresponding directions. A related
method may be used at the receiver. The cross-coupling
coeﬃcients can be computed from the RF beamformers and
known transmission directions. While this can be simply
done in a two-beam scenario, the cross-coupling coeﬃcients
may slightly change the original beams in a multi-beam
cancellation. The simulation demonstrated an IBI suppression
typically greater than 40 dB for randomly distributed beams
and more than 4 dB improvement for the eﬀective isotropic
radiated powers in the desired directions.
With increased relative bandwidth, beam squint, i.e.,
frequency-dependent directivity, complicates the ability of
wideband phased arrays to eliminate interference. Therefore,
the same authors of the last study further analyzed the
eﬀectiveness of a component carrier-based cross-coupling-
based approach for the cancellation of inter-beam interference
of wideband arrays with visible squint eﬀect in [200]. An
example scenario was simulated using standard 5G NR
modulated waveforms. For larger arrays with a wider relative
bandwidth, simulation analysis showed that multiple cross-
couplings eliminate the inter-beam interference of diﬀerent
users.
Large-scale arrays with wideband inter-beam interference
cancellation were also investigated in [201], where a scalable
Page 42 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
IBI cancellation scheme at intermediate frequency using an IF
receiver chip supporting hybrid beamforming was introduced.
Speciﬁcally, a theoretical simpliﬁed over-the-air IBI cancel-
lation model in the presence of circuit matching and channel
non-idealities was presented, along with a two-phase calibra-
tion method computing accurate and phase-optimized can-
cellation weights to optimize the cancellation performance.
Interference rejection performance was demonstrated through
the OTA measurements where 34–37-dB, 16–19-dB, and 16-
dB rejections were achieved for 50–100-MHz signals, over
100-MHz bandwidth signals, and 400-MHz multicarrier 5G
NR waveform respectively.
10.3. Intra and Inter-Beam Interference
Management
The integration of both NOMA and Beamforming MU-
MIMO has the potential to capture the beneﬁts of the two
key technologies, allowing two or multiple users to share a
single beamforming vector and thus enhancing the spectral
eﬃciency of the network and its performance [177]. However,
despite the potential capacity gains, such integration comes
with a cost: intra and inter-beam interference in the same cell.
This sub-section will be dedicated to studying the mecha-
nisms reducing such interferences, such as user clustering,
adaptive beamforming, user scheduling, and power alloca-
tion.
A) Interference-aware beam selection and power allocation
schemes
In [202], the sum-rate maximization problem was formu-
lated to properly design beam selection and power allocation
approaches subject to several constraints, such as a limited
number of RF chains, maximum transmission power, and
the users’ requirements. Since the joint beam selection and
power allocation problem is combinatorial with a large set
of coupled and mixed integer variables, the authors in [202],
proposed to decompose the original problem into two sub-
problems. First, the beam selection sub-problem was solved
under an equal power allocation. Three widely used intelli-
gent searching algorithms, i.e., generic algorithm, PSO, and
simulated annealing, were tested in the study. In addition, us-
ing feature selection techniques, a mutual information-based
beam selection algorithm was adopted. The result of beam
selection is then used as the input to the power allocation
sub-problem, where two heuristic algorithms with a linear
complexity to the number of users, were proposed aiming to
maximize the sum rate and mitigate the intra and inter-beam
interference. The ﬁrst algorithm allocates power in two stages:
inter-beam and intra-beam power allocation. In the second
power allocation scheme, intelligent searching via PSO was
used to ﬁnd the optimal power allocation. It was demonstrated
through numerical results that the proposed beam selection
and PSO-based power allocation algorithms can eﬀectively
improve the sum rate while reducing the computational com-
plexity compared to the two benchmark schemes.
B) Interference-aware beam selection, user scheduling and
power allocation schemes
In [67], to maximize the time-averaged sum of utilities of
users, the authors formulated a long-term network utility
maximization constrained by a time-average transmit power,
where beam selection, user scheduling, and transmit power
allocation are incorporated on top of future network archi-
tecture with Multi-access Edge Computing managing a small
set of BSs. They proposed a low-complex algorithm, named
CRIM (CRitical user based Interference Management), to
sequentially solve the aforementioned problems, where the
Lyapunov optimization framework was used for the time scale
decomposition, and where the interference was abstracted
into a single critical user when deciding the transmit power.
Extensive simulations were performed and veriﬁed that the
proposed CRIM solution improves the utility performance by
up to 47.4% compared to other existing algorithms.
C) Interference-aware joint user-cell association and selec-
tion of number of beams
Considering a multi-cell mm-Wave networks scenario, [203]
addressed the problem of joint user-cell association and se-
lection of the number of beams that aims to mitigate intra and
inter-beam interference intra and inter-cell and maximize the
aggregate network capacity. Three machine learning-based
algorithms were proposed, namely: (i) transfer Q-learning
(TQL) where the knowledge of an expert agent consisting
of user-cell association using Q-learning is transferred to a
learner agent, which builds on the expert’s knowledge and
carries out the diﬃcult task of jointly associating user to
appropriate cells and selecting the number of beams to cover
the associated users, (ii) conventional Q-learning performing
joint user-cell association and selection of number of beams,
and (iii) a combination of best SINR association and Density-
based Spatial Clustering of Applications with Noise (BSDC)
for users clustering. The performance of the three proposed
approaches was analyzed and compared under diﬀerent net-
work scenarios varying the user deployments and mobil-
ity. The simulation results conﬁrmed the relevance of every
scheme to the deployment scenarios envisaged. For mobile
scenarios, TQL and Q-learning improved the rate by around
12% over BSDC for the highest traﬃc load, while Q-learning
and BSDC outperformed TQL under stationary scenarios.
The transfer-learning approach converged more rapidly than
conventional Q-learning, as it utilizes samples of experience
eﬃciently oﬀering the advantage of oﬄine learning of a task
and transferring the knowledge to another task with online
learning in the ﬁeld
D) Clustering, hybrid precoding and power-allocation schemes
To improve the spectral eﬃciency of mMIMO-NOMA net-
works, the number of beams is generally ﬁxed to the number
of RF chains. Typically, a maximum of two users are associ-
ated with a beam for non-orthogonal communication, giving
excellent results in terms of spectral eﬃciency. Nevertheless,
when the number of users is signiﬁcantly high, more beams
and thus more RF chains are required, which is not practical
because of the hardware costs involved. Therefore, it was
recommended in multiple studies, to equip the BS with
massive antenna arrays to meet the communication demand
Page 43 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
of all users without compromising performance and at a lower
cost. The users are then grouped in clusters following an
adequate strategy, and each group of multiple users is served
by one beam. Adaptive hybrid beamforming and power allo-
cation schemes are exploited to enhance the system’s spectral
eﬃciency and reduce inter and intra-beam interference.
For example, in [204], as it is impossible to implement
precoding schemes for a large number of users separately,
the authors ﬁrst provided a cluster-based hybrid precoding
approach. Speciﬁcally, they adopted the concept of chordal
distance in the clustering strategy, i.e., the selection of cluster
head users and the assignment of more than two users to each
beam. On one hand, head users representing the principal
characteristic of their clusters, have a low correlation with
each other which allows the reduction of intra-beam interfer-
ence. On the other hand, the users in every cluster must be
highly correlated to minimize inter-beam interference, which
may enhance multiplexing gains. According to the channel
vectors of the cluster headset, analog precoding was designed,
then a baseband precoding scheme was implemented based
on the conventional ZF precoding technique. Finally, with
a given total power budget, based on the Lagrange duality
theorem, a dynamic power allocation approach for assigned
users of each beam was proposed to improve the overall
spectrum and energy eﬃciency.
E) Hybrid transceiver design and interference-aware beam
selection schemes
Considering a typical single-cell downlink mm-wave net-
work, [205] introduced the concept of code domain NOMA
into beamspace MIMO to overcome the inherent limitation
of existing beamspace MIMO that the number of users cannot
surpass the number of RF chains. In particular, by considering
intra- and inter-beam interference, the authors proposed a
low-complexity beam selection scheme based on a factor
graph and codebook design to achieve sum-rate maximization
by exploiting the quasi-orthogonality of the beamspace chan-
nel. Furthermore, a threshold-based message-passing detec-
tion algorithm is developed to realize the hybrid transceiver
design in mm-wave communications using lens antennas.
While reducing the computational complexity, the proposed
solution achieves high spectrum and energy eﬃciency and
acceptable BER performance.
Discussion: Table 8 provides a comparison between all
previously listed papers dealing with intra-cell multi-user in-
terference management. To mitigate intra-beam interference
in non-orthogonal multiple access networks, it is primordial
to adopt (i) adequate user clustering strategies adapting to
the dynamics of the network environment, (ii) additional
advanced processing techniques for pre-interference suppres-
sion at the transmitter, including superposition coding and
rate splitting, which use the prior knowledge on CSI to ef-
ﬁciently precode the signals, and (iii) post-interference can-
cellation schemes at the receiver, such as SIC, to cancel out
the interference [78, 206]. The use of multi-beam antennas
may induce intra-cell inter-beam interference, which can be
managed through adequate beam scheduling in the time or
frequency domain, interference-aware beam selection and
power allocation schemes, and advanced signal processing
techniques at the transceiver. Designing dynamic multi-user
interference management schemes for both intra and inter-
beam scenarios is of high importance to fully beneﬁt from the
performance gains of NOMA MU-m-MIMO systems. To per-
mit the scheduling of multiple users within the same resource
and handle the severe interference, such approaches should
not rely on the prior knowledge of channel state information,
and adapt to diﬀerent conﬁgurations and dynamic changes
in the environment. Robust machine learning-based signal
processing schemes should be further investigated.
11. Inter-Numerology Interference
Management
In this section, we will discuss the most recent research
dealing with inter-numerology interference management in
5G NR for both non-overlapping and overlapping mixed
numerologies. Many studies included theoretical models and
proposed mathematical expressions of INI such as [69, 207,
208, 74, 209]. In [207], INI was studied and character-
ized through mathematical modeling for both discrete and
continuous-time mixed-numerology systems. Reduced-form
formulas for the INI were derived and explicitly revealed
some inﬂuencing factors, like the pulse shape and the relative
distance between subcarriers. These formulas can also be
used to design mitigation techniques and interference met-
rics. The authors of [74, 209] derived general closed-form
expressions for the fading-averaged and bandwidth-averaged
INI powers in mixed-numerology 5G OFDM systems. The
bounds on the bandwidth-averaged INI power demonstrate its
quadratic dependence on Doppler spread and that it impacts
the higher rate modulation and coding schemes of 5G NR.
In the literature, various INI management techniques were
proposed, such as windowing/ﬁltering [210], ﬂexible guard
bands [71, 211, 212], interference cancellation, precoding,
and equalization [69, 213, 214, 215, 40, 216, 217], resource
allocation and scheduling [70, 218, 219, 220, 221, 222], and
novel symbol design [73, 223].
A) Windowing/Filtering Mechanisms
These schemes are one of the most eﬀective means to control
the out-of-band-emission and to mitigate INI, especially in
non-overlapping numerologies systems. However, designing
such mechanisms can be challenging, especially to avoid
SINR loss or power consumption increase. Many studies pro-
posed windowing/ﬁltering-based INI management schemes
like [210], and many others combined the windowing/ﬁltering
mechanisms with other approaches such as [211, 69].
In [210], to mitigate the INI, the authors proposed a
convolutional neural network (CNN)-based mixed numerol-
ogy interference recognition approach, along with a dynamic
ﬁltering/windowing scheme that is only triggered when the
inter-numerology interference appears. Such an approach per-
mits handling the mixed numerology interference without
decreasing system performance (SINR loss or power con-
sumption increase) in normal scenarios when there is no INI.
Page 44 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
REF
INTRA-BEAM/
INTER-BEAM
PROPOSED SCHEME
MAIN IDEA
[186]
Intra-Beam
Interference
User pairing/clustering
schemes
Two user pairing methods based on neighbor search algorithms: hill climbing and simulated annealing
[188,
189]
Multi-user clustering and adaptive multi-user clustering algorithms under imperfect CSI
[190]
An adaptive and evolutionary clustering strategy based on a modiﬁcation of the DenStream evolutionary
algorithm and considering the dynamic characteristics of communication networks
[191]
Superposition coding
schemes
A survey of power allocation and user pairing schemes in NOMA
[78]
Multi-user detection
algorithms
A survey of the various successive interference cancellation techniques with perfect and imperfect CSI
[45]
Rate-Splitting and
Linear Precoding
Overview of RSMA as a novel framework for multiple access and interference management
[192]
Inter-Beam
Interference
Interference-aware
beam selection schemes
Users classiﬁcation into 2 groups: users with low IBI to be associated with high power beam, and users
with high IBI to be associated using a low-complexity step-wise algorithm
[193]
A low-complexity joint beam selection method for BS and user beams adopting compressed sensing
without explicit channel estimation
[194]
A multi-agent deep reinforcement learning framework for joint transmit precoder and receive combiner
design in DL transmission under imperfect CSI
[195]
Two designs for the non-linear THP-based digital precoding for downlink MU-MIMO with partial
interfering beam feedback
[196]
Interference-aware
intra-beam resource
allocation schemes
A joint QoS-aware online clustering and a deep QL-based resource allocation scheme to improve the
network sum rate while taking into account the users’ mobility and dynamic traﬃc
[63]
Time-domain beam
scheduling schemes
A practical and low-complex beam on/oﬀscheduling employing graph theory and network utility
maximization framework
[197]
A joint multilayered user clustering and time-domain scheduling
[198]
Frequency-reuse
schemes
Adaptive frequency-reuse scheme: for each beam edge user allocate half of the frequency spectrum to the
serving beam and the other half to the interfering beam
[199]
Interference cancellation
schemes
A simpliﬁed two-stage beamforming approach based on cross-coupling of independent beams
[200]
A component carrier-based cross-coupling based approach for wideband arrays with visible squint eﬀect
[201]
A scalable IBI cancellation scheme at intermediate frequency using an IF receiver chip supporting hybrid
beamforming
Page 45 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
REF
INTRA-BEAM/
INTER-BEAM
PROPOSED SCHEME
MAIN IDEA
[202]
Inter and Intra
Beam Interference
Interference-aware beam
selection and power
allocation schemes
Disjoint optimization using intelligent searching algorithms for beam selection sub-problem and heuristic
algorithms for power allocation
[67]
Interference-aware beam
selection, user
scheduling and power
allocation schemes
a low-complex algorithm using the Lyapunov optimization for the time scale decomposition, and
interference abstraction into one critical user
[203]
Interference-aware joint
user-cell association and
selection of number of
beams
Three machine learning-based algorithms: Transfer QL, conventional QL and a combination of best SINR
association and BSDC for users clustering
[204]
Clustering, hybrid
precoding and
power-allocation
schemes
Chordal distance based clustering, hybrid precoding scheme and a dynamic power allocation scheme
[205]
Hybrid transceiver
design and
interference-aware beam
selection schemes
A low-complexity beam selection scheme based on factor graph and codebook design, and a
threshold-based message passing detection algorithm for the hybrid transceiver design
Table 8: List of Papers dealing with Intra-Cell Multi-User Interference Management Schemes
Page 46 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
As mixed numerology interference operates with a power
spectrum density that is similar to the in-band signal, ac-
curately identifying inter-numerology interference when it
occurs, is a key but challenging task. The deep CNN was
used to recognize the hidden features in the waveform and
to classify the signal samples into two groups, either with or
without INI. As the generated data is a complex waveform,
the authors ﬁrst divided the time/frequency domain data into
real/imaginary parts or amplitude/phase parts so that they can
be used by standard loss functions and gradient descent algo-
rithms in deep neural networks. The authors used Bayesian
optimization and 5-fold cross-validation to determine the
optimal hyper-parameters of the model. Then, they compared
their built-up CNN model with three classic machine learning
methods and proved it outperforms SVM, kNN, and Decision
Tree algorithms in diﬀerent practical scenarios, achieving
over 90% accuracy. Based on the results of inter-numerology
interference identiﬁcation, the dynamic ﬁltering/windowing
scheme is triggered and through link level simulations, it was
shown that it can increase SINR by 3~6dB depending on the
scenario.
B) Flexible Guard Bands
Inserting a guard band (GB), as a sequence of unused contigu-
ous subcarriers, between neighboring numerologies is one
of the most common and eﬀective ways of reducing INI.
However, the common way to implement GBs is ineﬃcient in
terms of spectrum utilization. Moreover, generally, GBs are
combined with other schemes such as windowing/ﬁltering,
common preﬁx, or adaptive scheduling.
The study in [71] assumed no overlapping numerologies
in the frequency domain with equal UE powers. Based on
heuristic algorithms and through simulations, it presented INI
as a function of guard band allocation and multi-numerology
parameters. With the performance analysis results, the GBs
are shown as an eﬀective way to minimize inter-numerology
interference experienced by edge subcarriers. Few other basic
inferences are made from the simulation results, such as: (i)
there is more interference on the edge subcarriers, (ii) INI
decreases on each subcarrier as the guard band increases, and
(iii) interference decreases for higher numerologies.
While in [71], only guard bands were considered, in
[211], the authors proposed an INI management scheme
on the transmitter side with a cross-layer approach based
on a joint optimization of adaptive time and frequency do-
mains guards coupled with a multi-window mechanism in
the physical layer. This joint optimization was realized by
taking into account the SCS, the use case, and the power
diﬀerence between numerologies. To decrease the need for
guards, a MAC layer scheduling algorithm was also proposed
to allocate the numerologies to the available spectrum, with
respect to the SCS, power level, and signal-to-interference
ratio. Results conﬁrmed that the proposed guard allocation
and scheduling technique can enhance the spectral eﬃciency
of mixed numerology systems while reducing the guards.
In [212], exploiting the INI characteristics of the scalable
multi-numerology structure, Memisoglu et al. introduced a
new and spectrally eﬃcient way of guard band implemen-
tation to avoid inter-numerology interference and minimize
the spectral eﬃciency loss. More precisely, it was observed
that the INI generated between adjacent non-overlapping nu-
merologies is not random and exhibits a peculiar pattern that
can be exploited to redesign the GB structure. Therefore, the
authors proposed to insert data subcarriers with narrow SCS
and low-order modulations in carefully chosen indexed parts
of the GB such that the INI is limited. They also suggested the
use of a common cyclic preﬁx to enhance the average bit error
rate (BER) of the narrow numerology edge subcarriers within
the GB region. The proposed scheme was analyzed through
Monte Carlo simulations and was found to enhance the GB
usage by up to 50% with the same BER performance as the
traditionally implemented GB.
C) Interference Cancellation, Precoding and Equalization
Schemes
Advanced transceivers with enhanced capacities to suppress
or pre-cancel the INI are considered for non-overlapping
[69, 213, 214] and overlapping mixed numerologies [215, 40,
216, 217, 42].
In [69], Zhang et.al proposed to combine the windowing
mechanism with an interference cancellation scheme to miti-
gate INI in non-overlapping mixed numerologies Windowed-
OFDM systems. In particular, a theoretical model of INI
in Windowed-OFDM systems was built based on the spec-
tral distance between subcarriers, overlapping windows, and
channel frequency response. Based on derived analytical ex-
pressions, the INI was divided into a dominant deterministic
part and an equivalent noise part. An IC scheme was then
provided for jointly detecting the dominant victim subcar-
riers and interfering subcarriers to suppress the main inter-
numerology interference. Numerical analysis showed the ac-
curacy of the INI theoretical model compared to simulation
results. Furthermore, the proposed interference cancellation
scheme outperformed the existing receiver algorithms.
In a more recent study [213], a frequency division multiplexing-
based RAN slicing framework considering the imparities
in both base-band and radio frequency conﬁgurations, was
proposed and analyzed from the physical layer perspective.
The UL and DL system models and the relationships be-
tween the key parameters of a mixed numerology system
(including SCS, symbol duration, etc.) were established for
the most generic scenario. Two theorems of generalized
circular convolution properties of discrete Fourier transform
were presented and provided the theoretical foundation of
low complexity but eﬀective cancellation algorithms by joint
detection in the UL or precoding in the DL of the pro-
posed system model. Simulations were performed using both
OFDM and Filtered-OFDM waveforms. It was shown that a
4-5 subcarrier guard band can decrease the interference to an
insigniﬁcant level. Furthermore, the cancellation algorithms
proved their eﬃciency in improving SINR performance even
without additional guard bands.
Inter-numerology interference in OFDM systems was also
analyzed using discrete Fourier transform equations in the
Page 47 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
frequency and time domains in [214]. INI was then modeled
as weighted linear combinations of neighbor numerology’s
transmitted symbols and an INI weight ﬁxed matrix was
derived for all OFDM symbols. The authors proposed to sup-
press the inter-numerology interference by using the inverse
of the computed matrix as a pre-equalizer at the transmitter
side. The performance of the pre-equalization method was
veriﬁed via Monte Carlo simulations, as INI was completely
removed and spectral eﬃciency improved without needing
guard bands.
While [69, 213, 214] considered non-overlapping mixed
numerologies systems, the following studies investigated the
use of multiple overlapping numerologies systems.
In [215], a ﬂexible framework for multi-service systems
based on sub-band ﬁltered multicarrier transmission was
established and the INI was analyzed with and without
transceiver imperfections and insuﬃcient guard interval be-
tween symbols. Based on the derived signal models, base-
band processing algorithms by precoding the information
symbols at the transmitter were ﬁrst proposed. Assuming
perfect knowledge of channel information at the transmitter
side, the low-complexity cancellation algorithms using the
criteria of zero-forcing and minimum mean square error can
ﬂexibly cancel the INI for arbitrary bandwidth. Furthermore,
considering the synchronization errors and transceiver imper-
fections, enhanced channel equalization algorithms providing
signiﬁcant gain in terms of BER performance were also
presented. Various simulation results were given to show the
eﬀectiveness of the analysis and proposed algorithms.
In another transceiver design scheme considering a mixed
overlapping numerologies system, the authors in [40], ﬁrst
derived the interference pattern in closed-form expressions
and found out that while the mean of the interference energy is
maintained, its variance increases for higher SCS and badly
aﬀects decoding performance. Based on these observations,
a novel transceiver design using simple cyclic shift and fre-
quency shift operations was proposed to lower the variance
of interference energy by uniformly dispersing the eﬀect
of INI across diﬀerent subcarriers. Although no theoretical
model was formally presented, the simulation results veriﬁed
that the proposed transceiver suppresses the variance of the
interference energy and improves the decoding performance.
Cheng et.al in [216, 217] ﬁrst introduced an improved
precoding scheme to manage the mixed numerology spectrum
sharing transmissions for massive MIMO OFDM systems.
While time-domain overlapping of all signals maximizes the
spectrum, it introduces INI to the system. The interference
was analyzed regarding many parameters such as SCS, chan-
nel selectivity, and power allocation. Closed-form theoretical
expressions were derived and it was shown that INI is only
generated in frequency-selective channels and only by users
with large SCS to users with small SCS. Based on the derived
expressions, the authors proposed an INI pre-cancellation
scheme to be implemented only at the BS side so that the
receiver’s complexity does not increase. Through simulation
results, it was proved that the proposed cancellation scheme
eﬃciently mitigates the interference and enhances the perfor-
mance of the network, at the expense of some transmit power
loss and added system complexity.
D) Resource Allocation
A suitable resource allocation that reduces the numerology
gap may reduce the inter-numerology interference. Many
studies have focused on the inter-numerology interference
management approach from a resource allocation perspective.
In [70], novel optimization methods for time-frequency
resource allocation in a multi-user scenario employing mixed
numerology and mini-slot were proposed. The authors fo-
cused on low-latency communications and thus the optimiza-
tion approach aimed to increase the achievable rate of best-
eﬀort users whilst meeting the latency requirements of low-
latency users. A comparative study between the mini-slot
approach and the mixed numerology approach showed that
both methods perform similarly in the case of ﬂexible latency
constraints and similar channel conditions. However, in the
case of opposite channel conditions for the users involved,
the mixed numerology approach is much better than the mini-
slot approach, which is more adequate in the case of stringent
latency constraints.
Another study that focused on ultra-reliable and low la-
tency communications is provided in [218]. The authors
proposed heuristic INI-aware resource allocation schemes
including fractional numerology domain (FND) scheduling
and power diﬀerence-based (PDB) scheduling algorithms. A
machine learning-based scheduling method was also provided
as a perspective. The main objective of all these scheduling
schemes is to provide extra protection to uRLLC users and
cell edge users while increasing fairness for the edge sub-
carriers. In the FND approach, each numerology sub-block
is divided into one inner part for inner users and two outer
parts for outer users. Inner parts are less aﬀected by INI
and therefore allocated for users who need more reliability.
Outer users are sorted into two groups: non-edge and edge
users which are the most impacted by inter-numerology in-
terference. Fraction regions of each numerology sub-block
are used in the scheduling mechanism. In the PDB scheme,
the outer users are investigated to ﬁnd the best suitable edge
users of subblocks based on their power levels and bandwidth.
Simulation results of the proposed algorithms with the use of
a guard band demonstrated an overall reliability enhancement.
While in [218], heuristic scheduling schemes were pro-
posed, in [219], the authors proposed a deep reinforcement
learning agent using an INI-aware reward function to op-
timally allocate the spectrum and maximize the network
throughput. The DRL agent at the Network Owner (NO) has
access to the subchannel gains reported by every user to its
associated Mobile Virtual Network Operator (MVNO) and
the INI power measurements on each subchannel, without
taking into account the channel fading variations. The idea
behind this state design choice was to make the agent learn
and exploit the relationship between the INI power and the
channel fading variations to mitigate the INI. At each learning
step, the proposed DRL agent observes the state and chooses
Page 48 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
one feasible action from its action space which corresponds
to the possible sub-channel allocations per MVNO. However,
as the number of resources increases, it becomes impractical
to enumerate every possible allocation and approximate the
optimal solution. Therefore, the same authors proposed in
[220] an alternative multi-branch agent architecture to ensure
agent scalability. In particular, each branch of the network is
responsible for allocating the resources of only a subset of the
frequency band and coordinates with the other branches via a
common module that provides a shared value of the state of
the environment. To augment the agent learning performance
and boost its convergence to the optimal allocation policy,
the selection of feasible actions was enforced via an action
masking module. The analysis showed that the agent con-
verges with success under various conﬁgurations and achieves
a resource allocation scheme similar to the optimum solution
in almost all cases.
Zambianco et.al further extended their idea in [221] to
diﬀerentiate between eMBB and URLCC slices. The main
diﬀerence with the previous paper [220] consisted of the
deﬁnition of the state space and reward function. Besides
the subchannel gain information of all users, the DRL-based
agent observes at each time step, the buﬀer status of URLCC
users, the minimum required number of bits of eMBB users,
and the total data rate achieved in the previous time slot.
This design choice permits to take into account the diﬀerent
requirements of diﬀerent services and to take into account
implicitly and without complex computation, the INI power
in the data rate expression. The reward function was accord-
ingly adapted to correspond to the total data rate minus a
penalty function when the Service-Level Agreement (SLA)
requirements of the users are not satisﬁed. The agent per-
formance in terms of SLA satisfaction and aggregated user
throughput was analyzed and compared to Round Robin and
Weighted Max Rate resource allocation algorithms in two
network scenarios that reﬂect a diﬀerent network congestion
level. It was proven that the proposed scheme outperforms
both benchmark schemes by providing a more reliable SLA
fulﬁllment, i.e., a higher eMBB user data rate and, a lower
URLLC user delay.
Similarly to [221], [222] considered radio resource slicing
problems for URLCC and eMBB in multiple numerologies
5G networks. However, Esmaeily et.al further distinguished
between URLCC use cases and classiﬁed them into diﬀerent
URLCC traﬃc classes holding distinct QoS requirements.
Due to stringent latency requirements of URLCC traﬃc, the
gNB punctures previously scheduled eMBB transmissions, to
immediately schedule the incoming sporadic URLCC traﬃc
into the mini-slots. The authors investigated the puncturing
technique and the mini-slots approach to meet the require-
ments of diﬀerent URLLC classes and to increase the sum
rate of the eMBB users while maintaining the minimum
acceptable data rate of every eMBB user. Therefore, they
deﬁned a loss function of the eMBB user’s data rate to
measure the inﬂuence of puncturing by the overlapping traf-
ﬁc of each URLLC class, and they presented a puncturing
rate threshold to limit this inﬂuence. Since the formulated
resource allocation problem is mixed-integer nonlinear pro-
gramming, the authors relaxed the constraints and decom-
posed the problem into three convex sub-problems: eMBB
RBs allocation, power allocation, and URLLC traﬃc schedul-
ing. The CVX toolbox was then used when solving each sub-
problem. The Mixed-numerology Mini-slot-based Resource
Allocation (MiMRA) proposed algorithm iteratively searches
the optimal solutions for the sub-problems until convergence.
The simulation results showed that the proposed algorithm
MiMRA improves the total sum rate of eMBB users while
ensuring the minimum data rate requirement of each eMBB
user.
E) Symbol Design
A diﬀerent approach to managing multiple numerologies
using a novel cyclic preﬁx insertion technique can be found in
[223] and [73]. While the 5G standard speciﬁed an individual
CP conﬁguration where a CP is tied to each OFDM symbol
before being transmitted, the authors of the aforementioned
studies introduced a new CP insertion method, called com-
mon CP, where one cyclic preﬁx is used to protect multiple
OFDM symbols. In [73], it has been shown via simulation
that the inter-numerology interference distribution can be
restructured using the common CP, which leads to better inter-
ference management. In [223], the common CP conﬁguration
was mathematically analyzed and compared to conventional
individual CP conﬁguration. The analysis showed that some
subcarriers of narrow and large SCS numerologies are some-
how orthogonal to each other and that this orthogonality can
be further increased using the common CP conﬁguration.
According to the study, the inter-numerology interference can
be mitigated through alternative symbol design techniques
and intelligent scheduling without using techniques such as
windowing which decreases the spectral eﬃciency.
Discussion: Table 9 provides a comparison between all
previously listed papers dealing with inter-numerology in-
terference management for both non-overlapping and over-
lapping mixed numerologies. The multi-numerology frame-
work is envisioned to eﬃciently support diﬀerent service
requirements and to provide ﬂexibility to 5G and beyond
communication networks. However, multiplexing diﬀerent
numerologies induces non-orthogonality in the system that
needs to be handled. In non-overlapping mixed numerologies,
multiple physical layer techniques have been proposed, such
as windowing/ﬁltering mechanisms and adding guard bands
between the subcarriers. However, while these approaches
have relatively reduced complexity, they decrease the spectral
eﬃciency of the system. Furthermore, it is impossible to
avoid INI in mixed overlapping numerologies systems using
these techniques. Alternatively, it is recommended to apply
intelligent resource allocation schemes or adaptive precoding
and interference cancellation approaches.
Page 49 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
REF
OVERLAPPING/
NON-OVERLAPPING
MIXED NUMEROLOGIES
PROPOSED SCHEME
MAIN IDEA
[210]
Non-Overlapping
Windowing/Filtering
Mechanism
CNN-based mixed numerology interference recognition approach + a dynamic
ﬁltering/windowing scheme that is only triggered when the INI appears
[71]
Guard Bands
Based on heuristic algorithms and through simulations, INI presented as a function of
guard band allocation and multi-numerology parameters
[211]
Guard Bands + Windowing
A joint optimization of adaptive time and frequency domains guards coupled with a
multi-window mechanism in the physical layer and a MAC layer scheduling
algorithm
[212]
Guard Bands
Insertion of data subcarriers with narrow SCS and low-order modulations in carefully
chosen indexed parts of the GB such that the INI is limited
[69]
Windowing + Interference
Cancellation
Theoretical model of INI in Windowed-OFDM systems + IC scheme for jointly
detecting the dominant victim subcarriers and interfering subcarriers
[213]
Interference Cancellation
low complexity interference cancellation algorithms by joint detection in the UL or
precoding in the DL
[214]
Equalization Scheme
Using the inverse of the computed matrix as a pre-equalizer at the transmitter side
[218]
Resource Allocation
Heuristic INI-aware resource allocation schemes including FND and PDB scheduling
algorithms + a machine learning-based scheduling method as a perspective
[73,
223]
Symbol Design
Introduction of Common CP conﬁguration
[215]
Overlapping
Precoding + Equalization
schemes
Low-complexity cancellation algorithms using the criteria of ZF and MMSE
[40]
Transceiver Design
A time-domain spectrum sharing transceiver design to lower the variance of
interference energy by uniformly dispersing the eﬀect of INI across diﬀerent
subcarriers
[216,
217]
Precoding + Interference
Cancellation
INI pre-cancellation scheme to be implemented only at the BS side
[70]
Resource Allocation
Novel optimization methods for time-frequency resource allocation employing mixed
numerology and mini-slot
[219,
220,
221]
A deep reinforcement learning agent using an INI-aware reward function to optimally
allocate the spectrum
[222]
Puncturing method and mini-slots approach to fulﬁll distinct URLLC classes’
requirements and maximize eMBB users’ rates
Table 9: List of Papers dealing with Inter-Numerology Interference Management Schemes
Page 50 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
12. Research Challenges and Future Research
Directions
Explosive data demand growth has led to more challeng-
ing requirements such as higher data rates, greater eﬃciency,
and more reliable, lower latency communications. To meet all
of these demands and more, 5G networks incorporate multiple
novel technologies, a heterogeneous and ﬂexible architecture,
and dynamic and adaptable conﬁgurations. However, despite
all the advantages of this innovative design, severe interfer-
ence between diﬀerent network elements or within a single
node remains a challenging problem to manage.
Throughout the previous sections, we have outlined the
methods proposed in the literature and 3GPP speciﬁcations
to address diﬀerent types of interference in 4G, 5G, and
beyond networks. However, there are still several challenges
and open issues that have not yet been explored or need to be
further studied. This section highlights these open challenges
and provides an overview of future research directions in
the context of interference management in 6G networks and
beyond.
12.1. Interference Management in 5G and Beyond
Networks: Open Challenges
As shown in Table 10, we begin with a summary of
the main interference management challenges in 4G/5G and
beyond networks and the most promising proposed schemes.
• Dense and ultra-dense multi-tier networks suﬀer particu-
larly from cross-tier DL-to-DL inter-cell interference. ICIC
schemes based on power-time domains with coordinated
scheduling are in general the most eﬀective. However, spe-
cial attention should be paid to the cost of coordination in
conventional distributed coordinated approaches, i.e., the
inter-cell signaling exchange overhead. Furthermore, due
to the dynamic time-varying channel conditions and users’
mobility, the interference information may be incomplete
and outdated. To tackle these challenges, recent emerging
deep multi-agent model-free reinforcement learning algo-
rithms can be an eﬀective tool for real-time distributed
and dynamic interference management without the need
for prior knowledge of channel state information, or infor-
mation exchange. Such approaches permit one to learn the
dynamics of the environment and intelligently choose the
optimal conﬁguration, such as power allocation, resource
scheduling, precoding, etc., maximizing a speciﬁed utility,
which can be inversely proportional to the ICI levels.
• Dynamic TDD and FD networks are subject to inter-mode
CLI and RI. Cross-link inter-BS interference is particu-
larly noticeable in macro-deployments, while small-cell
deployments are especially subject to cross-link UE-to-
UE interference. Adequate clustering and dynamic UL/DL
conﬁguration are essential to limit the severe BS-to-BS
interference in macro-deployments. However, instead of
only depending on cell average data traﬃc, these schemes
should take into account the speciﬁc users’ demands. Ad-
vanced interference cancellation schemes are also beneﬁ-
cial for both MCs and SCs deployments. Although RI is
caused in rare weather conditions, it may severely impact
the network performance for a long duration, especially in
coastal and plain cities near the water which are more prone
to form ducts. Such interference may aﬀect the UL data of
a distant BS, or the UL RS used for DL channel quality
estimation, which in turn may lead to poor DL user expe-
rience. To our knowledge, there is a lack of research stud-
ies dealing with remote interference. The majority of the
works investigated the use of machine and deep learning
approaches to detect the occurrence of RI using synthetic
data sets, or real network side data. Few research papers
studied RI management through static spatial approaches
without theoretical analysis. More research work should be
performed to proactively predict the duct occurrence and to
automate the interference management schemes.
• The multiplexing of multiple numerologies introduces a
non-orthogonality to the system resulting in inter-numerology
interference. To take full advantage of the multi-numerology
framework supporting diﬀerent service requirements, ana-
lyzing the pattern of emitted interference to identify the
diﬀerent factors contributing to INI and to adequately avoid
or suppress it is inevitable. Several schemes have been
proposed in the literature, among them alternative symbol
design, adaptive precoding, and interference cancellation,
and intelligent resource allocation and scheduling are the
most optimal solutions in terms of spectral eﬃciency,
especially in overlapping mixed numerologies systems.
• Multi-beam antenna systems based on mMIMO technol-
ogy are used to overcome attenuation losses of mm-wave
bands. However, the space multiplexing of multiple beams
causes intra and inter-cell inter-beam interference that
needs to be eﬃciently handled. Interference-aware beam
selection and beam power allocation schemes, along with
advanced interference cancellation schemes are possible
solutions. Coordinating the diﬀerent beams in time or
frequency domain reuse schemes may also avoid such
interference at the cost of spectral eﬃciency reduction.
• Caused by the simultaneous transmission to multiple users
under the same (narrow or wide) beam and using the same
non-orthogonal resources, intra-beam multi-user interfer-
ence has been actively investigated in NOMA-based sys-
tems. The proposed management approaches are generally
grouped into pairing/clustering strategies, signal process-
ing techniques for pre-interference suppression at the trans-
mitter, and post-interference cancellation schemes at the
receiver. Recently, a new candidate for the multiple access
scheme for 6G networks, namely Rate Division Multiple
Access, has emerged. By exploiting the splitting of user
messages as well as the non-orthogonal transmission of
diﬀerently decoded common and private messages, RSMA
has a powerful interference management capability, where
the amount of interference to be decoded or treated as noise
is adaptively changed depending on the interference level.
Further research work should be eﬀectuated to assess its
performance in diﬀerent network conﬁgurations.
Page 51 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
• Compared to other interfering signals, self interference can
lead to the most severe performance degradation at the
receiver and therefore should be reduced at most under
the noise power level. This intra-system interference may
aﬀect both FDD and IBFD transceivers due to TX-RX
leakage or simultaneous transmission/reception operation.
Tremendous progress, in both industry and academia, has
been made in SI cancellation schemes. Generally, a com-
bination of analog and digital domain countermeasures is
required to mitigate the self interference.
After the successful standardization of 5G networks, the
focus in both academia and industry has shifted to next-
generation networks. 5G kicked oﬀﬂexible wireless com-
munications through the integration of diﬀerent technologies,
and 6G networks are expected to extend this ﬂexibility further
[224]. In the following, and as summarized in Table 11, we
present the envisioned key features in 6G networks and focus
on the related interference challenges. Then, an overview
of the main new approaches and paradigms for advanced
interference management is provided.
12.2. Interference Management Challenges in 6G
and beyond Networks
While 5G is rapidly becoming a commercial reality, the
sixth generation of wireless systems is already attracting a
great deal of interest [225]. This interest is primarily moti-
vated by revolutionary changes in both individual and societal
trends, which call for entirely automated systems and intel-
ligent services imposing unprecedented requirements, such
as providing ultra-high reliability with packet error rates as
low as 10−8, Tbps data rates, and sub-ms latency simulta-
neously on both uplink and downlink [226, 227]. Though
5G communication systems provide signiﬁcant enhancements
over existing systems [228], they will likely not be able to
meet the aforementioned diverse requirements and support
the growing data and connection demands. Speciﬁcally, the
ITU predicts that by 2030, data traﬃc will be reaching an as-
tonishing 5 zettabytes per month and the number of connected
devices could exceed 50 billion [229].
6G systems will rely on enhancements of existing tech-
nologies and the incorporation of new attractive features to
deliver future cutting-edge services. Several papers [228, 225,
226, 230, 231, 232] provide an overview of potential 6G
technological enablers such as TeraHertz, Intelligent Reﬂect-
ing Surface (IRS), ultra-dense networks, cell-free massive
MIMO, new multiple access schemes, unmanned aerial ve-
hicles (UAV), etc. The integration of these disruptive tech-
nologies that will shape the future 6G networks, comes with
a breed of issues and challenges that need to be eﬀectively
addressed. Interference management is still undoubtedly one
of these critical challenges towards realizing 6G networks. In
the following, we will highlight some of the key 6G features
and their associated interference issues.
• Just as 5G systems introduced millimeter-wave frequency
bands for higher data rates and to enable new services, 6G
networks aim to push the limits of the frequency spectrum
even further to meet greater demands [228]. Terahertz and
optical frequency bands are seen as very promising tech-
nologies for the 6G era and beyond to alleviate spectrum
scarcity and overcome the capacity limits of wireless net-
works [232]. However, despite these prospects, these bands
must overcome signiﬁcant interference-related problems.
At higher frequencies, it is very diﬃcult to support minia-
ture circuits and small transceivers while guaranteeing
noise and interference suppression between components
[233, 231]. In addition, the ultra-wide bandwidth of avail-
able licensed and unlicensed frequencies, and the diﬀerent
capabilities of users, require dynamic, eﬃcient, and self-
adaptive spectrum sharing and interference management
schemes between users and between diﬀerent sub-bands
and systems [234]. Furthermore, with the increase in the
size of the antenna arrays and the wider bandwidth in 6G
systems, the beam squint eﬀect is more severe in THz
which further aggravates the inter-beam interference.
• Although the multi-numerology waveform has paved the
way for ﬂexibility in networks beyond 5G, it is rather
limited, and the 6G air interface will require a higher level
of ﬂexibility and reconﬁgurability, due to the increased
heterogeneity of applications and use-case requirements in
6G. This has motivated ongoing research into a much wider
range of waveforms and modulation techniques [225]. It
is expected that the number of adjustable parameters and
numerologies for a given waveform will increase with
6G, leading to even more pronounced inter-numerology
interference than in 5G systems. Furthermore, as the design
of a single waveform based on multiple numeration did not
work in 5G, no single waveform will likely be able to meet
the requirements of all 6G scenarios [235]. Consequently,
6G systems will probably go beyond the use of diﬀerent
conﬁgurations of the same parent waveform, and multiple
conﬁgurable and ﬂexible 6G waveforms will coexist within
the same framework. However, the exponential increase in
waveform types and settings may give rise to new forms
of interference, notably inter-waveform interference [223,
236]. Controlling and mitigating such interference is likely
to be a major challenge.
• Supporting the upcoming massive interconnectivity and
highly diverse and revolutionary applications with far more
stringent communication requirements in terms of through-
put, latency, and reliability for various types of IoT devices,
will call for enhanced coverage, suﬃcient capacity, and
advanced multiple access technologies [237, 238]. Along
with network ultra-densiﬁcation, 6G in-X sub-networks
have been identiﬁed as a promising radio concept to
provide capillary wireless coverage for supporting extreme
connectivity requirements [239]. In-X sub-networks are
presented as highly specialized short-range low-power
cells to be installed inside entities such as robots, produc-
tion modules, vehicles, or human bodies [240, 241]. In-X
Sub-networks can, however, lead to high device density
scenarios, resulting in high interference levels that may
Page 52 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
INTERFERENCE
TYPE
MOST SUITABLE SCHEMES
OPEN CHALLENGES & RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
Inter-Cell
Intra-mode
Interference
ICIC schemes based on power-time domains with
coordinated scheduling
- Cost of coordination in distributed approaches
- Imperfect (incomplete/outdated) CSI
- Investigation of multi-agent model-free deep
reinforcement learning approaches
Cross-Link
Interference
Adequate clustering, dynamic UL/DL
conﬁguration, and advanced interference
cancellation schemes
- Variable cells’ data traﬃc patterns
Speciﬁc metrics based on users’ demands, for
clustering and dynamic conﬁguration
Remote
Interference
ML and DL-based approaches for RI detection
- Proactive prediction of the ducts occurrence,
and automation of interference management
schemes
Inter-
Numerology
Interference
Intelligent resource allocation schemes, adaptive
precoding, and interference cancellation
approaches
- Much more ﬂexibility in the numerology
system, and adequate interference management
approaches
Inter-Beam
Interference
Coordinated beam scheduling in time, frequency,
and power domains + advanced interference
cancellation schemes
- Cost of coordination, and spectral eﬃciency
Intra-Beam
Multi-User
Interference
Pairing/clustering, signal processing techniques,
and post-interference cancellation schemes
- Investigation of novel multiple access schemes,
such as RSMA
Self Interference
Combination of analog and digital cancellation
schemes
- Complexity and cost of implementation in user
devices
Table 10: Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks - Summary and Open Challenges
severely limit the expected performance. Moreover, the dy-
namic mobility of in-X sub-networks, such as in-body and
in-vehicle sub-networks, would potentially trigger highly
dynamic interference behavior compared to typical cellular
setups with static BSs, which poses a great challenge to
radio resource management [242]. Therefore, interference
management is of paramount importance in in-X sub-
networks which needs to mitigate not only cellular intra
and inter-sub-networks interference but also non-cellular
interference types such as impulsive noise, and jamming
which is one of the major potential threats to ultra-reliable
applications [227, 242].
• The concept of Integrated Sensing And Communications
(ISAC) is emerging as a key feature of 6G RAN which
is attracting signiﬁcant attention from both industry and
academia [243, 244]. This is mainly motivated by the
emerging applications, including autonomous cars, smart
cities, and industrial Internet-of-things, requiring integra-
tion of positioning, sensing, and communication capabili-
ties [227, 243]. By sharing the same radio resources, as well
as key elements including waveform, signal processing
pipelines and hardware platforms [245], ISAC enhances
resource eﬃciency and achieves mutual beneﬁts going be-
yond the two separate functionalities [243]. Nevertheless,
due to the hardware and radio resource sharing, ISAC may
suﬀer from severe mutual interference between sensing and
communications, which complicates the signal processing
procedure [243, 246]. In addition to mutual interference,
self interference which occurs when the echo signal returns
to the RX and gets interfered with self-TX transmission that
is not completed yet, is a main factor impacting the sensing
performance of a full-duplex ISAC system.
• To realize high-capacity high-speed worldwide and ubiqui-
tous connectivity, 6G networks are envisioned to comple-
ment the terrestrial networks with non-terrestrial commu-
nication networks, including satellite constellation, high-
altitude platforms, and unmanned aerial vehicles, etc. [247,
248, 249]. While the Space-Terrestrial Integrated Network
(STIN) will play a critical role in the forthcoming 6G in
extending coverage and supporting more mobile traﬃc in
hotspots, it will likely lead to an increased level of multi-
dimensional interference that may degrade the wireless
links and lead to poor performance [250, 247]. First, the
spectrum sharing between heterogeneous terrestrial and
non-terrestrial networks will cause more congestion and
bring inter-system interference. While diverse interference
management techniques have been proposed for HetNets
in 5G, the challenge of interference gets more complicated
and challenging in vertical HetNets as cell interactions at
higher altitudes are very diﬀerent from those of terrestrial
networks, and high-altitude LoS propagation would result
in higher downlink interference aﬀecting both terrestrial
DL and UL performance [251, 252]. Hence more eﬃcient
spectrum management techniques are required [253]. Sec-
ond, in a typical multi-beam scenario, it would be diﬃcult
to construct completely isolated beams while providing
Page 53 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
seamless coverage, which may lead to inter-beam interfer-
ence [250]. As traditional interference management tech-
niques are developed for individual application scenarios
or speciﬁc types of interference, they are unable to satisfy
the requirements of the STIN architecture [247].
12.3. Novel Interference Management Paradigms
and Future Research Directions
While beyond 5G networks are envisioned to provide sig-
niﬁcantly high-speed data transmission, they will likely suﬀer
from interference in diﬀerent application scenarios because
of high-level spectrum utilization, massive connectivity, and
the complex dynamic wireless environment. While several
novel 6G features add some challenging interference-related
issues, some potential 6G technological enablers may be seen
on the contrary as eﬃcient ways to reduce or eﬃciently deal
with such interference. In the following, we identify and
present some of these novel paradigms and methods starting
with the expected enhancements to the 6G new air interface
including IRS, cell-free massive MIMO, and novel multiple
access schemes. Then, to tackle the limitations of traditional
interference management techniques, we will overview the
integration of Artiﬁcial Intelligence as a 6G key paradigm
and present insightful guidelines for an AI-based interference
management solution.
A) Enhanced 6G Air Interface
Facing new challenges including various types of interfer-
ence, multiple emerging technologies are expected to play
their key roles in the evolution towards the next generation
6G air interface. This will be done via signiﬁcant shifts from
active antenna to passive reﬂective surfaces, from cellular to
cell-free architecture, and from conventional MA schemes to
new generation MA schemes. In the following, we brieﬂy
introduce these three essential paradigms in 6G RAN, their
useful impact on interference generation and/or management,
and the main remaining related challenges.
• Due to reﬂections, scattering, and fading in the propagation
channel, the received signal can be uncontrollable and sub-
ject to random delays and attenuation, which may impact
the channel estimation and signal processing and result
in network performance degradation [234]. Furthermore,
with the use of higher frequency bands, on one hand, the
channel conditions are more diﬃcult due to higher prop-
agation loss, lower diﬀraction, and more blockage [235,
232]. On the other hand, as the wavelength increases, the
size of each antenna element decreases, making it more dif-
ﬁcult to design operating antenna arrays [235]. To tackle all
these challenges, the technology of Intelligent Reﬂecting
Surfaces has been recognized for dynamic conﬁguration
of the wireless propagation environment by introducing
additional and controllable scattering, and for enhancing
current beamforming approaches [232, 254]. It is regarded
as a powerful solution for maximizing data rate and min-
imizing transmit power in future 6G systems, providing
an eﬃcient and cost-eﬀective approach to cope with the
co-channel interference problem [228]. With some unique
and appealing characteristics, IRS changes the research
of wireless communication from the conventional design
of transceivers to the redesign of transmitter-environment-
receiver [254]. Basically, an IRS is a thin two-dimensional
surface, also known as a metasurface made up of a mul-
titude of passive (or semi-passive) elements reﬂecting all
incident electromagnetic signals with tunable phase shift
and controllable scattering properties without the need for
traditional RF chains [228, 234]. The propagation char-
acteristics of a channel can therefore be conﬁgured and
via passive beamforming, the desired signal can be added
constructively to increase the received signal power, while
an unwanted signal can be added destructively to remove
interference and also improve the energy eﬃciency of
the network [234]. Meanwhile, compared to conventional
active MIMO arrays, the integration of IRS with back-
scatter communication can balance cost, complexity, and
power consumption as RF components are generally not
needed, and eﬃciently suppress the interference induced
by the active transmission. In addition, because of the
simple passive structure of IRS, there is no self-generated
extra circuit interference like in conventional active relays
[254]. Despite all these prospects, there are still unresolved
research challenges to be addressed in the areas of hardware
implementation, channel modeling, evaluation, and real-
time control.
• Severe inter-cell interference, frequent handovers, and the
large variations in QoS between center and edge cell users,
are considered as the main drawbacks of conventional
cellular networks, especially in dense deployments [252,
228]. By conveniently combining the most interesting fea-
tures of UDN, mMIMO, and CoMP with joint transmis-
sion/reception, the concept of user-centric cell-free mas-
sive MIMO (CF mMIMO) is viewed as a 6G key solution
to turn the co-channel interference into a useful signal and
achieve nearly uniform data rates and seamless handover
across the coverage area [255, 235]. To achieve large-
scale fading diversity in such systems, instead of traditional
access points (APs) with large co-located antenna arrays,
a high number of cost-eﬀective wireless APs, each with
a limited number of antennas, are distributed across a
coverage zone and are connected via the front-haul con-
nections to one or multiple central processing units to ease
their cooperation [256, 235]. Furthermore, diﬀerent from
conventional CoMP technology, where the cellular network
is divided into disjoint clusters and thus cell cluster edge
UEs are subject to interference from nearby cell clusters,
in user-centric CF mMIMO network, every UE is served
cooperatively by a chosen set of its neighboring APs, elim-
inating the interference that restricts conventional ultra-
dense networks and resulting in a cell-free network. While
such a system can be integrated with multiple emerging
technologies and has shown great potential in improv-
ing the network performance from various perspectives,
the main challenge is to enable a practical deployment
of massively large networks with scalable computational
complexity and front-haul requirements [257].
Page 54 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
• Originally designed for human-centric wireless networks
[258], conventional multiple access schemes need a re-
think in 6G, especially due to the signiﬁcant gap between
available radio resources and massive connections in IoT
6G networks [225]. Current systems use essentially or-
thogonal MA, grant-based [259], or space division MA
schemes, which may not ﬁt future 6G networks. Therefore,
advanced multiple access schemes are being designed,
namely Next Generation Multiple Access (NGMA), capa-
ble of serving a large number of users in a more resource
and complexity-eﬃcient way than the current ones. While
the investigation of NGMA is still in the infancy stage, non-
orthogonal transmission strategies, especially grant-free
NOMA and RSMA, are among the most promising candi-
dates for NGMA, enabling higher spectral and energy eﬃ-
ciency, user fairness, and QoS enhancements. Furthermore,
RSMA, which has shown superior performance compared
to spatial division MA, NOMA, and orthogonal schemes
[45], provides more ﬂexibility in managing interference by
partially decoding it and partially treating it as noise and is
more robust to imperfect CSI at the transmitter [225, 206].
Despite the great potential and research advances, devel-
oping advanced next-generation multiple access techniques
remains an open issue. They are the fundamental enablers
for eﬃciently accommodating massive communications
via appropriate interference control and resource alloca-
tion. Besides, traﬃc scheduling policy is also important
for future enriched user service experience, eMBB and
URLLC reliability requirements [260].
B) Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Traditional interference management approaches will unfor-
tunately face serious limitations in future 6G networks, for the
reasons mentioned below:
• Scalability: with the explosion in the number of user de-
vices and network nodes, it becomes impossible to obtain
accurate, real-time information about the channel state
between all interfering equipment. It also becomes diﬃcult
to formulate the optimization problem and ﬁnd a global op-
timal solution without increasing the computational com-
plexity.
• Massive heterogeneity: including diﬀerent spectrum bands,
diﬀerent waveform settings, diﬀerent network traﬃc loads,
diﬀerent DL/UL conﬁgurations, diﬀerent user types and
speeds, diﬀerent network architectures, etc. All this con-
ﬁguration ﬂexibility and rapidly changing environments
require highly dynamic and adaptive interference manage-
ment approaches.
Emerging machine learning and artiﬁcial intelligence ap-
proaches including deep learning [261] and deep reinforce-
ment learning (DRL) techniques are predicted to be one of
the key technology enablers to eﬃciently manage experienced
interference and optimize resource allocation in beyond 5G
networks [262]. AI algorithms can exploit the tremendous
amount of generated data between heterogeneous networks
and user equipment to develop dynamic and automated inter-
ference management schemes. Several works pinpointed the
beneﬁts of using AI-based schemes to manage radio resources
within 5G and beyond networks such as [263]. AI is seen
as a paradigm shift towards 6G, where the intelligence of
the network will be implemented from the transceiver to the
receiver, and from the physical layer to the application layer,
to perform channel estimation and interference detection,
dynamic spectrum management and resource scheduling, in-
telligent precoding and interference cancellation, etc [264]. In
the following, we brieﬂy present some guidelines for an AI-
based interference management solution and the future scope
of research.
Guidelines for an AI-based Interference Management So-
lution: To eﬃciently manage interference in beyond 5G net-
works, we envision a distributed multi-agent deep reinforce-
ment learning-based solution that permits the diﬀerent agents
to interact with the dynamic environment and via a trial and
error process, they would learn optimal policies to maximize
certain utility while avoiding or exploiting generated interfer-
ence. Modeled as a stochastic game, such a solution will have
to exhibit the following characteristics:
• Multiple heterogeneous agents with varying requirements,
including base stations, user devices, unmanned aerial ve-
hicles, etc., cooperate to either avoid, suppress, or exploit
the interference generated in the network.
• The solution should be hierarchical allowing the optimiza-
tion of diﬀerent network parameters on diﬀerent multi-time
scales.
• The local state information observed by each agent should
take into account that the feedback can be partial and
outdated due to the channel aging and the experienced
delay.
• The action space of each agent should not be restricted to
discrete values limiting the scope of the optimization, for
instance when choosing power transmission values. Hybrid
discrete-continuous spaces have to be further investigated
for more reasonable modeling while controlling their com-
plexity.
• The solution should target the optimization of multiple
metrics, and therefore a multi-objective reward taking into
account interference levels should be formulated.
• The solution should be scalable in terms of the number
of agents or the dimension of the state and action spaces.
Some possible approaches include Mean Field Reinforce-
ment Learning for homogeneous agents, where the dynam-
ics within diﬀerent agents are represented by those between
a given agent and the mean eﬀect of the whole population
or nearby agents.
• For eﬃcient and faster learning, the agents may federate
their computation and share either experiences, parame-
ters, or policies.
• One important hurdle to be tackled is the robustness of
the solution and the model’s capacity to generalize to
Page 55 of 63

Interference Management in 5G and Beyond Networks
unseen environments, requirements, and tasks. Basically,
the generated policy should be transferable and to manage
multiple types of interference, in diﬀerent heterogeneous
networks, with diﬀerent users’ requirements.
• The AI-based interference management solution should
be explainable and its policy model understood by hu-
man experts to be considered trustworthy. Deep Neural
Networks (DNN) are considered as an opaque black box
which makes the interpretation of the results very diﬃcult,
especially when DNN are coupled with RL, where the
MDP is integrated with hidden layer dynamics. Thus, there
is a need to develop explainable DRL algorithms. One
possible way is the use of Shapley values, for identifying
the contribution of individual players to the outcome of a
cooperative game.
• Another big challenge in integrating artiﬁcial intelligence
in wireless communications, is to ensure safe decisions. An
AI-based interference management solution should there-
fore be able to measure the risks of the output actions
and exclude the risky ones leading to high interference
levels and network performance degradation. This can be
performed using a digital twin of the network, which is a
virtual representation reﬂecting all the dynamics underly-
ing the investigated system, to estimate the risk of decision-
making in advance [265].
• In addition to the accurate modeling of the Markov game
and its components, the choice of the DRL algorithm, its
implementation, and the setting of the hyper-parameters,
are crucial to an eﬃcient solution. Ideally, the learning al-
gorithm should have a mathematical foundation proving its
convergence, optimality, and sample eﬃciency. There are
several multi-agent DRL algorithms, including MADDPG
[266], MAPPO [267], HATRPO [268], HAPPO [268], etc.,
each having its pros and cons.
13. Conclusion
In this article, we have provided a comprehensive survey
of interference management in 5G and Beyond networks.
After a global overview of the main 5G features and their po-
tential impact on interference generation, we have presented
a uniﬁed classiﬁcation and a detailed explanation of the main
encountered interference types that can degrade the perfor-
mance in such systems, including remote interference and
inter-numerology interference which have never been listed in
previous surveys. We also provided a taxonomy categorizing
existing interference management approaches and a detailed
explanation of interference measurement reports and signal-
ing in 5G NR according to the newest 3GPP speciﬁcations.
For each previously identiﬁed interference, an in-depth liter-
ature review and technical discussion of appropriate manage-
ment schemes were presented. To help new starters conduct-
ing research in this ﬁeld, we outlined the main interference
management challenges in 4G/5G and Beyond networks that
have not yet been explored or need to be further studied, along
with the most promising approaches. Moreover, we provided
an overview of envisioned key technologies in 6G and Beyond
networks with a focus on their associated interference issues.
We ﬁnished the article by identifying and presenting some
insights on the main novel paradigms and research directions
for advanced interference management schemes in future net-
works. As conventional interference management approaches
will likely face serious limitations, we proposed some useful
guidelines for an AI-based interference management solution
along with the future challenges that need to be addressed.
