Noname manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)
Feature base fusion for splicing forgery detection
based on neuro fuzzy
Habib Ghaﬀari Hadigheh · Ghazali bin
sulong
Received: date / Accepted: date
Abstract Most of researches on image forensics have been mainly focused on
detection of artifacts introduced by a single processing tool. They lead in the
development of many specialized algorithms looking for one or more particular
footprints under speciﬁc settings. Naturally, the performance of such algorithms
are not perfect, and accordingly the provided output might be noisy, inaccurate
and only partially correct. Furthermore, a forged image in practical scenarios is
often the result of utilizing several tools available by image-processing software
systems. Therefore, reliable tamper detection requires developing more poweful
tools to deal with various tempering scenarios. Fusion of forgery detection tools
based on Fuzzy Inference System has been used before for addressing this problem.
Adjusting the membership functions and deﬁning proper fuzzy rules for attaining
to better results are time-consuming processes. This can be accounted as main
disadvantage of fuzzy inference systems. In this paper, a Neuro-Fuzzy inference
system for fusion of forgery detection tools is developed. The neural network char-
acteristic of these systems provides appropriate tool for automatically adjusting
the membership functions. Moreover, initial fuzzy inference system is generated
based on fuzzy clustering techniques. The proposed framework is implemented and
validated on a benchmark image splicing data set in which three forgery detection
tools are fused based on adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy inference system. The outcome of
the proposed method reveals that applying Neuro Fuzzy inference systems could
be a better approach for fusion of forgery detection tools.
Keywords Machine Learning · Splicing Forgery Detection · Image Processing.
Habib Ghaﬀari-Hadigheh
Universiti Tecknologi Malaysia (UTM)
Tel.: +98-914-3091405

Ghazali bin sulong
Universiti Malaysia Terengganu (UMT)
Tel.: +60-177-467128

arXiv:1701.08374v1  [cs.CV]  29 Jan 2017

2
Habib Ghaﬀari Hadigheh, Ghazali bin sulong
1 Introduction
Nowadays, exploitation of digital images and photos taken by various smart record-
ing devices is getting more prevalent along with the extensive use of social media
like Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram. Individuals tend to spend a considerable
amount of time surﬁng the Internet, and share almost all moments of their lives, as
well as events in their districts such as festivals, concerts or some dreadful incidents
e.g. terrorist attacks, armed robberies or anti-human rights behaviors. Recently,
so many devices exist for producing digital images, and almost each communica-
tion device has access to the Internet and is equipped with a digital camera which
produces very high-resolution pictures. These snapshots and professionally taken
images are of very big advantage, since they are accounted as an inevitable part
of the accompanying contexts in the media, and they help to elucidate diﬀerent
aspects of events, while at the same time they could be a source of troublemaking
consequences both in local and global scales.
Images might be the mean of deliberately cynical distortion of a reality, and
aimed to convey special messages without other corroborating documents. A ma-
nipulated image taken from a protest may be intended to exaggerate the crowd
thronged in supporting of an idea which might be ignored by the authorities. Dis-
torted shots that are claimed have been taken from private moments of celebrities
might be used for extortion or imposing them to act in favor of third parties which
are the anomaly in their background. This innate and potential quality of pictures
in general and digital image in particular, would make them susceptible for forgery
by digital image editing and post processing.
Above mentioned issues assert the necessity for providing reliable tools to au-
thenticate the originality of such images, which attracted many researchers to work
on detecting the possible traces of forgery. Forgery detection methods are catego-
rized in two general branches, the active and the passive methods [Farid (2009)].
The former is based on the idea of inserting information inside the images and use
them for authentication and proving of their integrity. This information is usually
inserted either at the time of taking the photos or during the post-processing oper-
ations. This approach needs special kind of hardware while the information could
easily be altered [Katzenbeisser et al (2000); Cox et al (2003)]. The latter exploits
the image data to detect the possible clues of forgery. Since most of devices in
the market are not equipped with such complicated and fancy tools to accom-
plish the ﬁrst method, and consequently taken photos are free of such embedded
information, passive methods are more practical [Farid (2009)].
There are diﬀerent kinds of passive methods for detecting possible forgeries,
while none of them claims to have 100 percent accuracy, since forgers sometimes
professionally manipulate images such that detection of forgery becomes very hard
and even an impossible job [Kirchner and B¨ohme (2007); Kirchner and Bohme
(2008)]. Image splicing, copy-paste attack, and image retouching are three exam-
ples of passive methods. Most of the researches just focus on one type of these
methods, because they usually don’t use common features of photos during their
process [Avcibas et al (2004); Hsiao and Pei (2005)].
In this research, we only focus on image splicing methods. These methods are
applicable when the forged image are produced by integration of more than one im-
age. Splicing detection is the most challenging problem while there is almost no ul-
timate guaranteeing solution [Ms. Sushama (2014)]. To overcome this uncertainty,

Feature base fusion for splicing forgery detection based on neuro fuzzy
3
we use Neuro-Fuzzy Inference System (NFIS) for the fusion of features extracted
by three diﬀerent splicing forgery detection methods; Discrete Wavelet Transfor-
mation (DWT) decompression [Fu et al (2006)], Edge images based on Gray Level
Co-occurrence Matrix (GLCM) [Wang et al (2009)], and N-Run Length [Dong
et al (2009)]. To the best of our knowledge this is the ﬁrst study on using NFIS in
the combination of these methods.
The reminder of this paper is organized as follows: In Section 2 a literature
of problem is reviewed. The methodology of the study is described in Section 3.
Section 4 depicts experimental results, and the ﬁnal section includes the discussion
on the results and potential future work directions.
2 Problem Background
Image splicing is a kind of forgery attack implemented by integration of some
fragments from the same image or others, without further post-processing such as
smoothing of boundaries among adjacent fragments [Zhang et al (2008)]. Several
researches have been conducted on splicing forgery detection. One group focused
on detecting the possible forgery using statistical analysis of the image pixels infor-
mation, others diverted their focus on deriving the inconsistency of light directions,
to discover the potentially existent splicing forgery traces [Redi et al (2011)].
Any splicing operation, even when the forger tries to mask it with blending
techniques, leaves some traces in the image statistics. Subsequently, these sta-
tistical inconsistencies could be used for locating the manipulated place . The
primary application of this approach traces back to forgery detection in digital
signals [Farid (1999)]. The main idea was that, when digital data are deformed,
spectrum analysis could be used as a detection mean. This tool had been adapted
for 2d signal in image processing [Ng et al (2004)]. For more details we refer the
interested readers to [Birajdar and Mankar (2013)].
Illumination analysis is another trend for splicing forgery detection where il-
lumination directions could be detected by processing the intensity of the colors
in the neighboring pixels. The majority of objects in an authenticated image are
supposed to have consistent light directions [Redi et al (2011)]. Even though, mod-
ern editing tools allow concealing the traces of splicing in a deceptive manner, but
it is not always possible to match the lighting conditions of the fragments even
when it has been perfumed by professionals. One of the pioneering attempts aimed
to estimate the incident light direction of diﬀerent objects in order to highlight
the possible mismatches [Johnson and Farid (2005)]. Further ﬁndings are reported
in [Johnson and Farid (2007); Zhang et al (2009)].
In spite of numerous practical ﬁndings in this area, all of the proposed methods
suﬀer from a tangible degree of indeterminacy. This imperfection due to perform-
ing post-processing operations for hiding the traces of forgery or utilizing lossy
compression formats. This problem is referred to as Uncertainty, and could be
addressed by diverse approaches. One is to fuse more than one detection tool,
either extracted features by each tool are intergraded before decision making [He
et al (2006); Dong et al (2009); Chetty and Singh (2010)],or each tool individually
results to a decision and a combination rule produces a ﬁnal decision [Barni and
Costanzo (2012)].

4
Habib Ghaﬀari Hadigheh, Ghazali bin sulong
Fig. 1 Methodology used for fusion of forgery detection tools
Using fuzzy as a combination rule in the fusion of forgery detection tools had
been overlooked until it has been studied in Chetty and Singh (2010); Barni and
Costanzo (2012)]. The main disadvantage of their method is that, adjusting mem-
bership functions in order to acquire accurate results is a time-consuming process.
In this paper, we develop the idea presented in [Barni and Costanzo (2012)], and
introduce a methodology in order to detect splicing forgery automatically using
Neuro-Fuzzy fusion. The next section describes the steps of the proposed method-
ology.
3 Proposed Methodology
The suggested method aims to combine three existing tools; DWT decompression,
Edge images based on GLCM, and N-Run Length. In the sequel, three main steps
are described in details. Preprocessing is the ﬁrst step that has the responsibility
to extract necessary data for the subsequent steps. This data includes features
vectors from images for each tool and they are converted to decision values by a
Support Vector Machine (SVM). These decision values are used for fusion based
on an NFIS in the second step,. Analysis of the results and making ﬁnal decisions
are carried out in the last step. Fig. 1 illustrates the framework for fusion of forgery
detection tools.
3.1 Preprocessing Step
The ﬁrst step is to make decision based on each forgery detection tool. Extraction
of the features is the most important part of this step. The size of feature vectors
in the Edge Image based on GLCM is reasonable [Wang et al (2009)], while Boost-
ing Feature Selection (BFS) algorithm is used to reduce the size of feature vectors
in DWT decompression [Fu et al (2006)] and N-Run Length [Dong et al (2009)].
Using BFS with an acceptable number of iterations, makes it possible to gener-
ate eﬀective feature vectors with the smaller dimensions, an as a result, the main
classiﬁcation step could be accomplished faster. AdaBoost based feature selection

Feature base fusion for splicing forgery detection based on neuro fuzzy
5
Fig. 2 Process of training/testing for SVM
system preserves a probability distribution over the training samples. These prob-
abilities are assumed identical at the beginning of the learning stage. Adaboost
adjusts them on a series of cycles via a weak learning algorithm. For each training
sample, it aﬃliates a weight and these weights are updated by a multiplicative
rule based on the errors of the former learning step. This process is carried out by
giving the priority to those samples that are not classiﬁed correctly by the previ-
ous learning weak classiﬁer. Thus, the samples with lower errors during the weak
learning process have greater weights [Majid Valiollahzadeh et al (2008)]. Subse-
quently, a BFS system based on basic BFS introduced in [(Tieu and Viola, 2004)]
is designed. Finally, SVM classiﬁer with Radial Bases Function (RBF) kernel is
used for stable classiﬁcation, which provides a decision value of each tool for each
individual image. Fig. 2 depicts the process of generating decision values based on
SVM classiﬁer.
3.2 Rule Generation and Fusion Step
Let us discuss the process of converting the decision values generated in the previ-
ous step into input values for fusion of forgery detection tools. All decision values
are denoted as the detection rate, and should be standardized as a requirement
for an NFIS. For this purpose, we have to convert them to numbers in [0, 1] [Platt
et al (1999)]. The main idea is to extract the probability P(class/input) from
the decision values of the SVM classiﬁer. To this end, a sigmoid-based function is
considered that ﬁts with the output of the classiﬁer to ﬁnd two parameters A and
B of Eq. 1.
p(f) =
1
1 + exp(Af + B),
(1)
where f is the decision value of the tool. Fig. 3 depicts a sample of the generated
sigmoid function. The plus signs stand for the converted decision values which are
ﬁtted to an appropriate sigmoidal function.
Now, these scaled values are considered as inputs for training/testing of the
NFIS system, which integrates these values as a single decision value. Implementing
details are presented in Section 4, and schematically depicted in Fig. 4.

6
Habib Ghaﬀari Hadigheh, Ghazali bin sulong
Fig. 3 Sample of sigmoidal base function curve, generated based on an SVM decision values.
Decision Values
 of DWT
Decisoin Values 
of N-Run Length
Decision Values 
of Edge Images
Convert Decsiton Value
 int to Stanadar Input
Convert Decsiton Value
 int to Stanadar Input
Convert Decsiton Value
 int to Stanadar Input
ANFIS
T⩾0.5
Image is Forgery
Image is Original
Fig. 4 ANFIS training/testing process

Feature base fusion for splicing forgery detection based on neuro fuzzy
7
3.3 Evaluation and Comparison
Sensitivity and speciﬁcity are used for the construction of the ﬁnal results. Let us
deﬁne the following notations.
– True positive (TP). The image is detected as a forged one, and it is really
a forged image.
– False Positive (FP). The image is detected as an authenticated one, while
it is a forged image.
– True Negative (TN). The image is detected as an authenticated one, and it
is a real authenticate image.
– False Negative (FN). The image is detected as forged one, while it is an
authenticated image.
Here, the sensitivity of the test stands for the proportion of images identiﬁed
to be forged. Mathematically,
sensitivity =
number of TP
number of TP + number of FN,
=
number of TP
total number of forged image in test samples.
Further, speciﬁcity is the proportion of authenticated images identiﬁed not to be
forged. In mathematical notion, it is calculated as
speciﬁcity =
number of TN
number of TN + number of FP,
=
number of TN
total number of authenticate images in test samples.
4 Experimental Results
The proposed methodology was implemented on the benchmark data set Splic-
ing Forgery Detection Data Set, provided by the Columbia University’s Computer
Graphics and User Interfaces Lab [Yu-Feng Hsu (2006)]. It consists of 933 authen-
ticated and 912 spliced image blocks of the size of 128×128. All images are in gray
scale mode, and their blocks have been extracted from the CalPhotos image set.
The splicing operation was down by cutting some part of the original image blocks
and pasting inside the other original one, without any post processing operation.
Fig. 5 depicts two images of this data set, one is authenticated and the other is its
forged version. LIBSVM; a library for support vector machine has been utilized
for implementation of the SVM classiﬁer in Matlab [Chang and Lin (2011)]. Its
RBF kernel has two parameters C and γ, must be speciﬁed before starting the
training phase. Empirical results denote that RBF with default parameters values
may imply to misclassiﬁcation or overﬁtting of the classiﬁer. Therefore, a method
based on grid search was proposed and implemented [Dong et al (2009)].

8
Habib Ghaﬀari Hadigheh, Ghazali bin sulong
(a)
(b)
Fig. 5 Image (a) is an original one and, (b) is the same which is spliced using a fragment of
another original image.
All the calculations and implementations were performed using a desktop com-
puter with an Intel(R) Core(TM)i7-2630QM CPU, 2.00 × 8 GHz processor, and 8
Gb of RAM on the Ubuntu 14.04 LTS operating system platform. Image process-
ing toolbox of Matlab 8.1 is used for converting images to the matrices of the size
128 × 128. For obtaining the results, we carried out ﬁve runs, each run includes all
images of the data set. In each run, 90% of images were randomly selected for train-
ing and the rest were left for testing of both SVMs and NFIS. For generating scaled
values from each SVM classiﬁer result, a method based on the one introduced in
[Platt et al (1999)] was used. The image is considered the most authenticated as
the associated output value approaches to one. Accordingly, authenticated images
of the data set were labeled 1, and the others 0 in both training and testing steps.
Complete algorithm and details on the performance of this method are presented
thoroughly in [Platt et al (1999)], and a Matlab implementation is developed by
[Lin et al (2007)].
We examined diﬀerent kinds of Neuro-Fuzzy system to ﬁnd out which of them
has better accuracy rate. The input membership functions are considered as Gaus-
sian. However, output membership function is selected either constant or linear,
depending on the limitation of the fuzzy toolbox of Matlab. For implementation
of NFIS, we applied the Matlab Fuzzy Toolbox. Based on the limitation of NFIS
in Matlab, we are just able to implement Adaptive Neuro Fussy Inference System
(ANFIS) [Turevskiy (2014); Castillo et al (2007)]. We classiﬁed the ﬁnal results
based on the threshold used by [Barni and Costanzo (2012)], when the ﬁnal deci-
sion value of NFIS is greater than 0.5, the image was considered as authenticated
one, and otherwise as a forged image. Fig. 4 depicts the ﬂowchart of the evaluation
step as well.
The results are reported in Tables 1 and 2. The former depicts the best obtained
results of sensitivity measurement, and the latter shows the results of speciﬁcity.
Five columns are included in both tables; the ﬁrst column denotes the number of
selected features by BFS, which varies from 30 to 100. The case when all all features
are considered stands at the last row. The subsequent three columns respectively

Feature base fusion for splicing forgery detection based on neuro fuzzy
9
Table 1 Results of Fusion in terms of Sensitivity
Features Number
DWT
Edge Images
N-Run Length
NFIS
30
82.32%
50.61%
59.76%
85.37%
50
80.00%
50.30%
55.76%
83.03%
75
83.54%
51.22%
59.76%
86.59%
100
82.32%
50.00%
59.76%
82.93%
All
89.47%
32.26%
67.76%
72.37%
Table 2 Results of Fusion in terms of Speciﬁcity
Features Number
DWT
Edge Images
N-Run Length
NFIS
30
72.54%
74.19%
67.08%
71.61%
50
70.55%
74.85%
56.44%
85.28%
75
76.13%
79.73%
63.23%
70.32%
100
76.77%
80.65%
63.23%
81.29%
All
74.00%
86.67%
66.67%
91.33%
denote the results of DWT, Edge Rune base on GLCM and N-Run Length, and
the ﬁnal column reports the results of the fusion based on NFIS.
As shown in Table 1, the best sensitivity for DWT and N-Run Length is
achieved when all of the features are used, while this is not the case in others.
The accuracy rate of sensitivity for NFIS reveals that there is no necessity for
considering all features. Moreover, the results of the NFIS is as promising as the
others. As denoted in Table 2, the behavior of speciﬁcity is contrariwise, the best
results are obtained for Edge Rune base on GLCM and NFIS when all features
are applied. However, the NFIS competes with the Edge Rune base on GLCM in
speciﬁcity detection and approximately better than the two others.
5 Conclusion
In this paper, we presented a methodology for fusion of features on the decision
level, with the aim of automatically ﬁnding possible forgery traces in grayscale
images. For this propose, we integrated the scaled decision values of three diﬀerent
tools using the NFIS. To achieve lower run time, we applied a BFS algorithm for
detecting more eﬃcients among all features.
Based on the experimental results, our proposed method has almost promising
results in comparison with individual tools. It seems that considering a trade-oﬀ
between two objectives sensitivity and speciﬁcity is necessary for further investi-
gation. Based on the limitation of our benchmark data set, we experimented only
on grayscale images, while adapting the methodology on color images could be
challenging. We restate that reducing the run time was not our main concern.
Nevertheless, we observed that decreasing the number of features has the positive
eﬀect on the run time. Further study can be conducted using recently advanced
machine learning methods such as deep learning.

10
Habib Ghaﬀari Hadigheh, Ghazali bin sulong
Acknowledgements We sincerely appreciate Columbia University Graphic Lab for the help
in providing splicing forgery detection Data-set. We also acknowledge the UTM for providing
facilities and fretful environment for this research.
