Disparity-preserved Deep Cross-platform Association
for Cross-platform Video Recommendation
Shengze Yu1 , Xin Wang1∗, Wenwu Zhu1∗, Peng Cui1 and Jingdong Wang2
1 Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, China
2 Microsoft Research

Abstract
Cross-platform recommendation aims to improve
recommendation accuracy through associating in-
formation from different platforms. Existing cross-
platform recommendation approaches assume all
cross-platform information to be consistent with
each other and can be aligned. However, there re-
main two unsolved challenges: i) there exist in-
consistencies in cross-platform association due to
platform-speciﬁc disparity, and ii) data from dis-
tinct platforms may have different semantic granu-
larities. In this paper, we propose a cross-platform
association model for cross-platform video recom-
mendation, i.e., Disparity-preserved Deep Cross-
platform Association (DCA), taking platform-
speciﬁc disparity and granularity difference into
consideration.
The proposed DCA model em-
ploys a partially-connected multi-modal autoen-
coder, which is capable of explicitly capturing
platform-speciﬁc information, as well as utiliz-
ing nonlinear mapping functions to handle gran-
ularity differences.
We then present a cross-
platform video recommendation approach based on
the proposed DCA model. Extensive experiments
for our cross-platform recommendation framework
on real-world dataset demonstrate that the pro-
posed DCA model signiﬁcantly outperform ex-
isting cross-platform recommendation methods in
terms of various evaluation metrics.
1
Introduction
Recommender systems are playing an important role in our
life.
With the emergence of various online services, peo-
ple are now getting used to engaging on different platforms
simultaneously in order to meet their increasing diverse in-
formation needs [Chen et al., 2012b]. The complementary
information from various platforms jointly reﬂects user inter-
ests and preferences, providing us with a great opportunity
to tackle the data sparsity problem and improve the recom-
mendation accuracy through associating information across
∗Corresponding Author
platforms.
In order to improve user experience and in-
crease user adoption, many online service providers release
new features to encourage cross-platform data associations.
For example, Google+ encourages users to share their home-
pages on other platforms, enabling different accounts of the
same person to be linked together. To date, quite a number
of various platforms tend to associate with each other, which
provides chances for cross-platform information transfer and
association analysis possible.
Existing cross-platform recommendation works try to im-
prove their cross-platform performances mainly by investi-
gating the ablity of cross-platform association.
Yan et al.
propose a user-centric topic association framework to map
cross-platform data in a common latent space [2014]. They
then introduce a predeﬁned micro-level metric to adaptively
weight data while doing the data integration [2015]. Man
et al. propose an embedding and mapping framework, EM-
CDR, to represent and associate users across different plat-
forms [2017].
However, existing works on cross-platform
video recommendation ignore the inconsistencies in cross-
platform association and differences in semantic granulari-
ties, two challenging phenomena discovered in this paper.
The ﬁrst challenge, inconsistency in cross-platform associ-
ation, results in a reconsideration for the current assumption
that all cross-platform information of the same user is consis-
tent and can be aligned, which will be empirically validated
on a real-world cross-platform dataset later. Our discovery
demonstrates that the inconsistency is mainly caused by the
platform-speciﬁc disparity, i.e., in addition to a user’s inher-
ent personal preferences, its interests shown on different plat-
forms also contain platform-speciﬁc factors due to different
focuses of various platforms. The second challenge is that
different platforms may have different semantic granularities.
Take Twitter and YouTube as an example, tags on Twitter
are mainly hot event topics, which are generally ﬁner-grained
than video categories on YouTube. As such, a good cross-
platform video recommendation model based on the corre-
lated information across platforms should have the ability to
reveal characteristics at different semantic granularities.
To address these challenges, we propose the Disparity-
preserved Deep Cross-platform Association (DCA) model for
cross-platform recommendation, which employs a partially-
connected multi-modal autoencoder to explicitly capture and
preserve platform-speciﬁc disparities in latent representa-
arXiv:1901.00171v2  [cs.IR]  12 Nov 2019

tion. Besides, we also introduce nonlinear mapping function,
which is superior to their linear competitors in terms of han-
dling granularity difference. To validate the advantages of
our proposed DCA model, we further design a cross-platform
video recommendation approach based on the proposed DCA
model, which is capable of automatically targeting and trans-
ferring useful cross-platform information from a comprehen-
sive semantic level. The contributions of this paper can be
summarized as follows:
• We recognize the inconsistency phenomenon, which is
caused by platform-speciﬁc disparity, as well as the
granularity difference problem in cross-platform associ-
ation.
• We propose a novel Disparity-preserved Deep Cross-
platform Association (DCA) model for cross-platform
recommendation through employing a modiﬁed multi-
modal autoencoder, which is able to handle the cross-
platform inconsistency issue by preserving the platform-
speciﬁc disparities and solve the granularity difference
problem via nonlinear functions.
• We present a cross-platform video recommendation ap-
proach based on the proposed DCA model to test its ef-
fectiveness compared with other approaches.
• We conduct experiments on a real-world cross-platform
dataset on Twitter and YouTube to demonstrate the supe-
riority of our proposed DCA model over several state-of-
the-art methods in terms of various evaluation metrics.
2
Related Work
Existing cross-platform recommendation works can be cate-
gorized in two ways.
Categorization by what to associate. One option is to take
advantage of different platform characteristics towards col-
laborative applications. Particularly, Qian et al. propose a
generic cross-domain collaborative learning framework based
on nonparametric Bayesian dictionary learning model for
cross-domain data analysis [2015].
Min et al.
propose a
cross-platform multi-modal topic model which is capable of
differentiating topics and aligning modalities [2015]. An al-
ternative option is to associate in a user-centric way, which
focuses on integrating multiple sources of overlapped user’s
activities. In particaular, XPTrans [Jiang et al., 2016] opti-
mally bridges different platforms through exploiting the in-
formation from a small number of overlapped crowds. Yan
et al. propose an overlapped user-centric topic association
framework based on latent attribute sparse coding, and prove
that bridging information from different platforms in com-
mon latent space outperforms explicit matrix-oriented trans-
fer [2014]. Man et al. propose an embedding and mapping
framework, EMCDR, where user representations on differ-
ent platforms are ﬁrst learnt through matrix factorization and
then mapped via multi-layer perceptron [2017].
Although
the user-centric works above are based on different premises,
they share the same core idea that all cross-platform infor-
mation is consistent and should be aligned. However, several
works have pointed out the data inconsistency phenomenon in
cross-platform data association, and attempted to solve this
(a) User groups clustered on Twitter
(b) User groups clustered on YouTube
Figure 1: Visualization of users on Twitter and YouTube in the
CASIA-crossOSN subset. Orange and purple dots represent two
groups of aligned users across platforms. Concentrated areas are
circled with dashed lines.
problem by data selection. To be concrete, Lu et al. ﬁnd
that selecting consistent auxiliary data is important for cross-
domain collaborative ﬁltering [2013]. They propose a novel
criterion to assesses the degree of consistency, and embed it
into a boosting framework to selectively transfer knowledge.
Yan et al. divide users into three groups and introduce a pre-
deﬁned micro-level user-speciﬁc metric to adaptively weight
data while integrating information across platforms [2015].
Our proposed DCA model associates information from dif-
ferent platforms in the user-centric way.
Categorization by entire model structure. One group of
methods [Chen et al., 2012a; Jiang et al., 2016; Jing et al.,
2014; Qian et al., 2015] build the model in a uniﬁed frame-
work, where the former two works adopt matrix factoriza-
tion and the latter two employ the probabilistic models. An-
other group of works [Yan et al., 2014; Yan et al., 2015;
Man et al., 2017] adopt a two-step framework. These works
ﬁrst map users from different platforms into corresponding la-
tent spaces for representations, and then associate these rep-
resentations. Our proposed model in this work utilizes the
two-step structure in a topic-based way.
3
Measurement and Observation
To validate the existence of the inconsistency, we ﬁrst vi-
sualize users in CASIA-crossOSN, a cross-platform dataset
linking user accounts between YouTube and Twitter (whose
detailed description will be given in Section 6), following
three steps as follows.
1) For users who engage in both
Twitter and YouTube, we extract their interest representa-
tions by Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA). 2) We adopt the
interest representations as inputs to the visualization tool t-
SNE [Maaten and Hinton, 2008] so that users are represented
as two-dimensional vectors and visualized as dots — the

Platform
Average Euclidean distance
from center of user groups
Random
Clustered on
Twitter
Clustered on
YouTube
Twitter
0.346 (1)
0.244 (0.705)
0.341 (0.985)
YouTube
0.224 (1)
0.223 (0.995)
0.198 (0.883)
Table 1: Average Euclidean distance from the center of user groups
clustered on Twitter (resp. YouTube) vs. random. User groups clus-
tered on Twitter (resp. YouTube) no longer concentrate on YouTube
(resp. Twitter), indicating cross-platform user interest disparity.
closer two dots are in distance, the more similar their cor-
responding users are in topic space. 3) We cluster users into
different groups by their Twitter (resp. YouTube) interest rep-
resentations, select two groups, and mark them with orange
and purple respectively in Figure 1 such that users who share
a same color are regarded as similar.
We observe from Figure 1 that only a part of users who
are similar on Twitter (resp.
YouTube) still stay similar
on YouTube (resp. Twitter) (circled with dashed line) and
the rest actually becomes quite different. Moreover, in Fig-
ure 1(b), orange user group clustered on YouTube splits into
two subset on Twitter, indicating that two platforms may have
different semantic granularities.
In addition to visualizing the interest representations, Ta-
ble 1 further conﬁrms the existence of the inconsistency
phenomenon through a measurement study on CASIA-
crossOSN. i) For each clustered user group on Twitter and
YouTube, we calculate the average Euclidean distance from
the group center to group members. ii) We do the same thing
for randomly sampled groups on both platforms and use the
calculated average Euclidean distances as normalizers to ob-
tain the “concentration ratio” such that a larger concentration
ratio indicates a less clustered pattern.
It can be observed from Table 1 that when we cluster users
by their interest representations on Twitter (resp. YouTube),
the concentration ratio is small on the origin platform while
becomes quite large (close to 1) on the other platform, in-
dicating that users having similar interests on one platform
tend to behave quite similarly to randomly sampled users on
the other — they no longer share similar interests.
We close this section by giving a conclusion on the exis-
tence of inconsistency in cross-platform association: users’
interests on different platforms may be diverse and inconsis-
tent.
4
DCA: Disparity-preserved Deep
Cross-platform Association
In this section, we employ multi-modal autoencoder to
present our disparity-preserved deep cross-platform associ-
ation (DCA) model.
4.1
Problem Formulation
We ﬁrst introduce the problem of user-centric cross-platform
association. Given a set of aligned users U, for each user
u ∈U, his or her representations on different platforms (uT
on Twitter and uY on YouTube in the experiment) are known.
The goal is to ﬁnd the association among these representa-
tions (direct mapping function or uniﬁed latent representa-
tion), so that cross-platform applications can be carried out
(speciﬁcally inferring uY for video recommendation in the
experiment).
4.2
Disparity-preserved Deep Cross-platform
Association
Multi-modal autoencoder is an extension to basic autoen-
coder. It is trained to reconstruct multiple inputs from a uni-
ﬁed hidden layer when given multiple modalities of the same
entity, thus is able to discover correlations across modali-
ties. It has been widely applied to various multi-modal tasks
since being proposed [Ngiam et al., 2011; Zhang et al., 2014;
Wang et al., 2015]. Hong et al. extend the concept of “multi-
modal” to “multi-source” [2015]. In this paper, we treat rep-
resentations of the same user on different platforms as multi-
ple modalities of his or her uniﬁed latent representation, and
modify the structure of multi-modal autoencoder to conduct
disparity-preserved cross-platform association. The detailed
structure of multi-modal autoencoder is formulated as:
h = g
" X
i
Wi
1xi
!
+ b1
#
,
ˆxi = g

Wi
2h + bi
2

,
(1)
where i ∈{T, Y } denotes different platforms (e.g., Twitter
and YouTube). xi is the “multi-modal” input layer, specif-
ically the representations ui of the user u on different plat-
forms. h is the hidden layer, i.e., the derived uniﬁed user la-
tent representation. ˆxi is the output layer, i.e., the reconstruc-
tions of inputs. Weight matrices W and bias units b serve
as parameters of the multi-modal autoencoder, denoted as θ
together. g(·) is the activation function. The loss function of
multi-modal autoencoder is deﬁned as follows:
L(xi; θ) =
X
i

ˆxi −xi

2
2 + λ
X
W∈θ
∥W∥2
F + µ∥h∥1,
(2)
where the ﬁrst term is reconstruction error. The second term
is regularizer to avoid overﬁtting. The third term is a spar-
sity constraint to encourage sparse latent representations. We
minimize the loss function and train the parameters through
backpropagation.
Multi-modal autoencoder takes representations of the same
user on different platforms as inputs, mapping them to a uni-
ﬁed hidden layer h and expecting accurate reconstructions.
It learns mapping functions from representations on different
platforms to the uniﬁed representation and then vice versa,
which automatically completes the process of cross-platform
association. Moreover, it is able to handle the granularity dif-
ference through introduction of nonlinearity.
We note that all multi-modal inputs should be given for
the multi-modal autoencoder to work properly. However, in
many cross-platform applications, we need to infer unknown
data on other platforms, which is extremely difﬁcult. One
straightforward solution is to train several networks with a
certain combination of several platforms as inputs and output
the results for all platforms, setting every decoding weight

Figure 2:
Disparity-preserved Deep Cross-platform Association
model. uT and uY are representations of a same user on Twitter
and YouTube respectively. In latent representations, hT and hY
are platform-speciﬁc parts preserving the disparities, and hC is the
common part associating different platforms. The estimated repre-
sentations ˆuT and ˆuY are derived from both common and platform-
speciﬁc parts.
equally. However, such an approach does not scale well as
we will need an exponential number of models. Ngiam et
al. propose to train bi-modal autoencoder using augmented
but noisy data with additional examples that have only one
single modality as inputs [2011]. In this paper, we augment
data with average values of different platforms, and still ex-
pect the network to “reconstruct” real representations for all
modalities. To make the model become more robust to absent
inputs and being capable of inferring unknown data in cross-
platform association task, we split the training data as fol-
lows: one-third of the training data includes user representa-
tions on Twitter and average user representation on YouTube,
one-third consists of average user representation on Twitter
and user representations on YouTube, the remaining one-third
contains groundtruth representations.
As aforementioned, platform-speciﬁc disparity may cause
inconsistencies in cross-platform association. We need to en-
visage it and avoid messing up the association. To achieve
this goal, we divide the hidden layer into three parts and
cut off certain links, through which the shared and platform-
speciﬁc parts are explicitly captured and preserved. Specif-
ically, the hidden layer is divided into h = [hT , hC, hY ],
where hT and hY are Twitter and YouTube platform-speciﬁc
parts and hC is the common part. As is shown in Figure 2, we
assume that Twitter representations are derived from hT and
hC without hY while YouTube representations are derived
from hY and hC without hT . The fully-connected structure
is modiﬁed through cutting off links between units: from xT
to hY , from xY to hT , from hT to ˆxY and from hY to ˆxT .
The model is able to automatically map representations of the
same user on different platforms to a uniﬁed representation
while preserving the information in platform-speciﬁc parts at
the same time. It does not require cross-platform data to be
thoroughly consistent by allowing the existences of inconsis-
tencies. Thanks to the usage of shared common structure,
cross-platform association becomes clearer and tighter.
In addition, most traditional linear methods associate rep-
resentations on different platforms by utilizing a linear trans-
fer matrix, which is formulated in Eq. (3) and Eq. (4). The
linear combination limits the power in modeling complex re-
lations across different semantic granularities. Our modiﬁed
multi-modal autoencoder naturally introduces nonlinear acti-
vation function g(·), possessing great advantages in handling
the challenging granularity differences over linear methods.
We choose Sigmoid as the activation function in this paper
and other activation functions such as ReLU or tanh can also
be used.
The time complexity is O(MNk(n1 + n2)) for training
and O(k(n1 + n2)) for testing. M is the number of training
iterations, N is the number of users for training, k is the hid-
den layer dimension, n1 and n2 are the input dimensions of
two platforms. Our proposed DCA model, whose structure is
presented in Figure 2, automatically captures common infor-
mation and preserves platform-speciﬁc disparities through its
partially-connected structure, and meanwhile naturally adapts
to granularity difference via nonlinear functions.
5
Cross-platform Video Recommendation
In this section, we present the cross-platform video recom-
mendation approach based on the proposed DCA model.
5.1
Problem Formulation
We ﬁrst formulate the cross-platform video recommendation
problem. Given a set of aligned users U, for each user u ∈
U, his or her behaviors on social platform are observed (i.e.,
tweet text t in collection Tu on Twitter). The goal of cross-
platform video recommendation is to recommend videos for
those aligned users on video platform (i.e., YouTube) through
making use of the cross-platform information.
5.2
DCA-based Cross-platform Video
Recommendation
As is shown in Figure 3, our proposed cross-platform video
recommendation method includes preprocessing and match-
ing stages in addition to the DCA model. The capability of
DCA model in tackling the cross-platform inconsistency is-
sue through explicitly capturing shared information and pre-
serving platform disparities enables the cross-platform rec-
ommendation method to automatically concentrate on use-
ful information and discard useless one. Moreover, nonlin-
ear mapping functions in our proposed approach enhance the
method’s ability to conduct association across platforms at a
deeper and more comprehensive semantic level.
In order to apply our proposed DCA model for the asso-
ciations between Twitter and YouTube, we ﬁrst obtain user
representations by Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) [Blei et
al., 2003]. On Twitter, we regard each user’s tweeting data
together as a document in Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA).
Then each user u ∈U can be represented by a topic distribu-
tion uT . On YouTube, as we focus on the relevance between
videos and users in the recommendation problem, we extract
representations for both users and videos by two steps: (1)
treat the surrounding textual information (title, category, tags
and description) of each video together as a document and to
get video representation v through online LDA [Hoffman et
al., 2010], (2) take the average v of the interacted videos con-
sumed by each user to get uY . We remark that v and uY are
in the same YouTube topic space, which enables similarity
matching for recommendation.

Figure 3: Cross-platform video recommendation framework based
on the proposed Disparity-preserved Deep Cross-platform Associa-
tion model
Then the representation pairs of the same user as well as
the augmented examples are fed to the DCA model to learn
cross-platform association. Because of the input augment-
ing, the trained model is able to predict user representations
on YouTube when only information from Twitter is available.
By setting the input from YouTube to its average value, the
corresponding output can be used to predict user representa-
tions ˆuY .
We ﬁnally adopt Euclidean similarities between the repre-
sentations of the predicted user and candidate videos as the
properness measure. The recommendation results can be ob-
tained according to the rank of candidate videos.
6
Experiments
In this section, we carry out extensive experiments on a
real-world cross-platform dataset and compare our proposed
method with several state-of-the-art algorithms to show the
advantages of the proposed approach.
6.1
Dataset
CASIA-crossOSN1 is a cross-network user dataset with ac-
count linkages between YouTube and Twitter, created by In-
stitute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences. It con-
tains 11,687 aligned users across platforms and 2,280,129
YouTube videos. On YouTube, three kinds of user behav-
iors (i.e., uploading, favoring and adding to playlist) as well
as videos’ rich metadata are collected.
On Twitter, only
users’ representations extracted from their tweets via stan-
dard topic modeling (LDA) process [Blei et al., 2003] are
provided because of privacy concerns. We ﬁlter aligned users
and YouTube videos by keeping users who interacted with at
least 3 videos and videos which were consumed by at least 3
users. We ﬁnally obtain a subset containing 7,338 users and
34,144 videos, and randomly select 80% users for training,
and the rest 20% for testing.
1CASIA-crossOSN
dataset:
http://www.nlpr.ia.ac.cn/mmc/
homepage/myan/dataset.html
6.2
Experimental Settings
On Twitter, CASIA-crossOSN offers a 60-dimensional top-
ical distribution for each user.
On YouTube, we resort to
perplexity to determine the number of topics.
We select
80, which leads to the smallest perplexity on a 5% held-out
YouTube video subset, in our experiments.
To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed DCA model,
we implement the following baselines:
Linear Regression-based Association (LR)
LR treats cross-platform association as a linear transfer prob-
lem, and pursues an explicit transfer matrix based on regres-
sion. The objective function is:
min
W

WUT −UY 

2
F + λ∥W∥2,
(3)
Latent Attribute-based Association (LA)
Instead of pursuing hard transfer, Yan et al. introduce another
method by discovering the shared latent structure behind two
topic spaces [2014], whose objective function is:
min
DT ,DT ,S

UT −DT S

2
F +

UY −DY S

2
F + λ∥S∥1,
s.t.

dY
i

2
2 ≤1,

dT
j

2
2 ≤1,
∀i, j,
(4)
The problem can be efﬁciently solved by sparse coding al-
gorithm [Lee et al., 2007] after a few transformations.
MLP-based Nonlinear Mapping (MLP)
Man et al. employ MLP to cope with the latent space match-
ing problem [2017]. MLP is a ﬂexible nonlinear transforma-
tion. The optimization problem can be formulated as:
min
θ
X
u∈U

fmlp(uT ; θ) −uY 

2
2,
(5)
To train the above neural network-based model and our
DCA model, we adopt Adam optimizer to minimize the loss
functions.
6.3
Evaluation of Cross-platform Association
As for the proposed model in this paper, multi-modal autoen-
coder with L1-norm but without disparity-preserved structure
(MA) and the DCA model are examined.
We perform evaluations in two scenarios:
(1) Infer
YouTube from Twitter. Given users with their Twitter rep-
resentation uT , to estimate their YouTube representation uY .
(2) Infer Twitter from YouTube in turn. As is discussed be-
fore, by setting the unknown input to zeros, we can get the
corresponding output as the predicted representation ˆu. In
both scenarios, we utilize Mean Absolute Error (MAE) and
Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) as evaluation metric:
MAEi =
1
|Utest|
X
Utest
1
Ki

ˆui −ui

1 ,
RMSEi =
1
|Utest|
X
Utest
r
1
Ki ∥ˆui −ui∥2
F
(6)
where i ∈{T, Y } denotes platform, and Ki is the dimension
of representation. ui and ˆui are the real and predicted user
representation.

Figure 4: MAET , MAEY and RMSET , RMSEY of the examined
models in two testing scenarios. The results show that both dispar-
ity preserving and nonlinearity contribute to better cross-platform
association performance.
For model parameters, in LR model as Eq. 3, λ is selected
by line search. In LA model as Eq. 4, λ and the number
of latent attributes m are selected by two-dimensional grid
search. In the DCA model as Eq. 2, parameters consist of λ,
µ and m, which further divides into [mT , mC, mY ]. We ﬁrst
tune the MA model (equivalent to set mT = mY = 0, m =
mC in the DCA model) by multi-dimensional grid search,
and get an optimal setting for λ, µ and m. We then carefully
ﬁne-tune [mT , mC, mY ] by a combined line-search strategy.
Speciﬁcally for all randomly initialized autoencoder model,
we conduct 6 experiments and take the average result.
Performances are shown in Figure 4 . Several observa-
tions can be made: (1) LA and MLP achieve better result
than LR, indicating that the shared latent structure and non-
linear mapping function both beneﬁt the association. (2) MA
outperforms LA and MLP through combining the two strate-
gies.
(3) Compared with MA, DCA further improves the
performance, demonstrating the contribution of the disparity-
preserved structure. We also notice that compared with non-
linear models (MLP, MA and DCA), the optimal parameters
of the linear models vary greatly between two scenarios. We
think it is the granularity differences that cause the param-
eter gaps. Non-linear mappings can naturally tackle this is-
sue, and have more advantages over linear ones. In total,
the proposed DCA model outperforms LA by reducing rel-
atively 9.3% on MAEY , 8.6% on RMSEY , 7.2% on MAET
and 7.3% on RMSET , and outperforms MLP by reduc-
ing relatively 7.5% on MAEY , 7.8% on RMSEY , 6.5% on
MAET and 6.6% on RMSET . It greatly improves the perfor-
mance by preserving the disparities and introducing nonlin-
earity, validating that envisaging the inconsistency caused by
platform-speciﬁc disparity and granularity difference jointly
contributes to better cross-platform association performance.
6.4
Evaluation of Cross-platform Video
Recommendation
Then we evaluate the proposed DCA-based cross-platform
video recommendation method for new YouTube users, fol-
lowing the above “infer YouTube from Twitter” scenario.
For each test user u, we randomly select as many as
groundtruth interacted videos as additional candidates. We
perform a top-k recommendation task: to recommend the
top k YouTube videos with the highest topic-based Euclidean
similarity, and adopt top-k precision, recall and F-score as

methods.
Model
Precision
Recall
F-score
LR
0.331
0.320
0.268
LA
0.348
0.337
0.279
MLP
0.350
0.340
0.281
MA
0.362
0.352
0.290
DCA
0.367
0.357
0.296
Table 2: Top-10 Precision, Recall and F-score of examined methods.
The results show that the proposed DCA-based cross-platform video
recommendation method outperforms other approaches.
evaluation metrics [Herlocker et al., 2004].
The evalua-
tion metrics are calculated by examining whether the recom-
mended videos are included in u’s groundtruth video set Vu.
Final results are averaged over all test users.
As is shown in Figure 5 and Table 2, the proposed DCA-
based cross-platform video recommendation method outper-
forms LA-based method by enhancing relatively 6.1% on

The proposed
DCA-based method improves over existing cross-platform
association-based recommendation approaches.
7
Conclusion
In this paper, we discover the existence of inconsistency
in cross-platform recommendation.
We propose the DCA
model, which tackles the inconsistency issue, as well as the
granularity difference problem. We further present a cross-
platform video recommendation method based on the pro-
posed DCA model. Extensive experiments demonstrate the
superiority of the DCA model and the DCA-based cross-
platform recommendation approach over several state-of-the-
art methods.
