Artificial Intelligence for Social Good 

This material is based upon work supported by the 
National Science Foundation under Grant No. 1136993.  
Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or 
recommendations expressed in this material are those  
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views  
of the National Science Foundation.

Artificial Intelligence for Social Good 
Gregory D. Hager, Ann Drobnis, Fei Fang, Rayid Ghani, Amy Greenwald, Terah Lyons,  
David C. Parkes, Jason Schultz, Suchi Saria, Stephen F. Smith, and Milind Tambe
March 2017
Sponsored by the Computing Community Consortium (CCC)

ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE FOR SOCIAL GOOD
Overview..........................................................................................................................................................................1
Urban Computing............................................................................................................................................................1
Sustainability.................................................................................................................................................................3
Health.............................................................................................................................................................................8
Public Welfare................................................................................................................................................................11
Cross Cutting Issues....................................................................................................................................................15

1
Overview
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is currently seeing major media interest, significant interest from federal agencies, and interest from 
society in general. From its origins in the 1950s, to early optimistic predictions of its founders, to some recent negative views put 
forth by the media, AI has seen its share of ups and downs in public interest. Yet the steady progress made in the past 50-60 
years in basic AI research, the availability of massive amounts of data, and vast advances in computing power have now brought 
us to a unique and exciting phase in AI history. It is now up to us to shape the evolution of AI research.
AI can be a major force for social good; it depends in part on how we shape this new technology and the questions we use to 
inspire young researchers. Currently there is a significant spotlight on the future ethical, safety, and legal concerns of future 
applications of AI. While understanding and grappling with these concerns, and shaping the long-term future, is a legitimate 
aspect of future AI research and policy making decisions, we must not ignore the societal benefits that AI is delivering and can 
deliver in the near future, and how our actions today can shape the future of AI. 
The Computing Community Consortium (CCC), along with the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP), and 
the Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), co-sponsored a public workshop on Artificial Intelligence for 
Social Good on June 7th, 2016 in Washington, DC. This was one of five workshops that OSTP co-sponsored and held around the 
country to spur public dialogue on artificial intelligence, machine learning, and to identify challenges and opportunities related to 
AI. In the AI for Social Good workshop, the successful deployments and the potential use of AI in various topics that are essential 
for social good were discussed, including but not limited to urban computing, health, environmental sustainability, and public 
welfare. This report highlights each of these as well as a number of crosscutting issues. 
Urban Computing 
Urban computing pertains to the study and application of computing technology in urban areas. As such, it is intimately tied 
to urban planning, specifically infrastructure, including transportation, communication, and distribution networks. The urban 
computing workshop session focused primarily on transportation networks, the goal being to use AI technology to improve 
mobility and safety. We envision a future in which it is significantly easier to get people to the things they need and the things 
they want, including, but not limited to, education, jobs, healthcare, and personal services of all kinds (supermarkets, banks, etc.).
Time spent commuting to school or to work is time not spent working, studying, or with one’s family. When people do not 
have easy access to preventative healthcare, later costs to reverse adverse developments can far exceed those that would 
have been incurred had appropriate preventative measures been applied (Preventive Healthcare, 2016). Lack of easy access to 
supermarkets with healthful food is highly correlated with obesity (and hence heart disease, diabetes, etc.) (Studies Question the 
Pairing of Food Deserts and Obesity, 2012). Likewise, lack of easy access for many people to standard bank accounts is costly 
(Celerier, 2014). AI technology has the potential to significantly improve mobility, and hence substantially reduce these and other 
inefficiencies in the market to make daily living easier.
AI is now in a position to drive transformations in transportation infrastructure in urban areas. Technology exists that can mobilize 
people who have been immobile, due to a lack of availability of inexpensive transport; to increase flow/decrease congestion, 
thereby decreasing mean travel time requirements as well as variance (a great source of stress for many) (Commuting: The 
Stress that Doesn’t Pay, 2015); and autonomous vehicles have the potential to decrease emissions (less speeding up and slowing 
down). The easier it becomes for people to move about, the more vibrant our urban areas will be; likewise, the more fruitful the 
social and economic interactions that take place inside them will be.

ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE FOR SOCIAL GOOD
2
Technology Enablers
The coming transformation in transportation infra-
structure is being powered by technological progress. 
Ubiquitous connectivity and instrumentation are 
enabling us to measure things that were previously 
immeasurable; additionally, advances in data analytics 
are enabling us to build sophisticated models from 
those data. Specifically, we can now collect information 
about individuals’ travel patterns, so that we can better 
understand how people move through cities, thereby 
improving our understanding of city life. AI technology 
can then be leveraged to move from descriptive models 
(data analytics) to predictive ones (machine learning) to 
prescriptive decisions (optimization, game theory, and 
mechanism design). Like in other domains, AI enables us 
to go from “data to decision” in urban computing. With 
the data collections now happening at this scale to aid 
in decision-making, it is important to also consider the 
privacy implications around the data.
The potential of this transformation is being 
demonstrated in pilot systems that optimize the flow 
of traffic through cities, and in new on-demand, multi-
modal transportation systems. It is now within the realm 
of AI technology to optimize traffic lights in real time, 
continuously adapting their behavior based on current 
traffic patterns (Smith, 2016); and to dispatch fleets of 
small vehicles to provide on-demand transportation, 
address the “first and last mile” problem that plagues 
many urban transit systems (Van Hentenryck, 2016). 
More pilot deployments are needed to fully understand 
the scope of the transformation that is under way in 
our cities.
Technical Challenges
In spite of the significant promise, many challenges 
lie ahead before these new opportunities can be fully 
realized. Transportation systems are complex, socio-
technical systems that operate over multiple spatial 
and temporal scales. It is critical that we scale up 
existing pilots to multi-modal transportation models 
– incorporating pedestrians, bicycles, cars, vans, and 
buses – so that we can begin to understand how these 
models will impact big cities. Fundamental to this effort, 
it is crucial that we understand the human behavioral 
changes that new forms of mobility will induce, and 
the impact those behaviors will have on the efficacy of 
our systems.
Evidence-based Policy Making
AI, as it pertains to urban computing, is in a unique 
position to inform policy making in ways that could not 
be envisioned even a few years ago. It is now possible 
to carry out interventions that will help us understand 
mobility at scale, and to analyze how different segments 
of the population vary their transportation modes 
in response to various interventions. Consequently, 
we are in a position to conduct research that can 
inform regulators, prior to the full implementation of 
transportation and urban planning policies. What is 
needed, however, is to lower the standards for testing 
novel AI technologies and transportation models, which 
may well require that we first find a way to address 
the psychological concerns raised by the radical 
transformations they promulgate.
Case Study: Real-Time, Adaptive Traffic Signal 
Control for Urban Environments.
In US cities alone it is estimated that traffic 
congestion costs over $160 Billion annually in 
lost time and fuel consumption (Schrank, 2015). 
Traffic congestion is also responsible for putting 
an additional 50 Billion tons of CO2 annually into 
the atmosphere. A major cause of this congestion 
is poorly timed traffic signals. The vast majority 
of traffic signals run “fixed timing” plans, which 
are pre-programmed to optimize for average 
conditions observed at a particular snapshot in 
time and never change. These plans regularly 
perform sub-optimally since actual traffic flows 
are frequently quite different than average 
conditions, and they quickly become outdated 
over time as traffic flow patterns evolve.
Recent work by Stephen Smith and his research 
group at Carnegie Mellon University has been 

3
applying AI techniques for online planning and 
scheduling to the problem of real-time traffic 
signal control, leading to development of the 
Surtrac (Scalable URban TRAffic Control) adaptive 
signal control system (see Fig. 1) (Smith, 2013). 
Surtrac senses approaching traffic and allocates 
green time to different approaches in real-time. 
It is designed specifically for optimizing traffic 
flows in complex urban road networks where 
there are multiple, competing dominant flows 
that shift dynamically through the day. An initial 
deployment of the Surtrac technology in the East 
end area of Pittsburgh PA has produced significant 
performance improvements, reducing travel times 
through the network by 25%, wait times by over 
40%, and emissions by 21% (Smith, 2013). Over the 
past 3 years, this Pittsburgh deployment has grown 
to an interconnected network of 50 intersections, 
and the City of Pittsburgh currently has plans and 
funds in place to further expand and equip an 
additional 150 intersections with this technology.
Current research with Surtrac focuses on 
integration of smart signal control with emerging 
Dedicated Short Range Communication (DSRC) 
radio technology (Smith, 2016). This “connected 
vehicle” technology, which will begin to appear in 
some makes of new passenger vehicles in the US 
starting in the 2017 model year, will allow direct 
“vehicle-to-infrastructure” (V2I) communication. 
In addition to simple use of V2I communication 
to promote safer travel (e.g., through advance 
warning of pending signal changes), projects 
aimed at utilizing V2I communication to enhance 
urban mobility (particularly under the shorter-term 
assumption that the penetration level of equipped 
vehicles is low) are also underway.
Sustainability
Sustainability can be interpreted narrowly as the 
conservation of endangered species and the sustainable 
management of ecosystems. It can also be interpreted 
Figure 1: Scalable URban TRAffic Control

ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE FOR SOCIAL GOOD
4
broadly to include all aspects of sustainable biological, 
economic, and social systems that support human 
well being. Here we focus primarily on the ecological 
component, but the larger issues of social and economic 
sustainability must be considered as well.
Short-term Applications and Challenges
Current research and applications in AI for sustainability 
can be organized in terms of data, modeling, decision 
making, and monitoring. The goal is to manage 
ecosystems with policies that are based on the high 
quality data and science.
Data
Several activities concern the measurement and 
collection of data relevant to ecosystems.
One approach is to develop and deploy sensor 
networks. For example, the TAHMO (Trans-Africa Hyrdo-
Meteorological Observatory; www.tahmo.org) project is 
designing and deploying a network of 20,000 weather 
stations throughout sub-Saharan Africa (van de Giesen, 
2014). Several efforts are deploying camera traps to 
collect image data or microphone systems to collect 
bioacoustic data. Still other projects employ unmanned 
aerial vehicles to obtain video imagery for tracking 
elephants and other large animals. AI algorithms can be 
applied to optimize the locations of these sensors and 
traps in order to gather the most valuable information 
Figure 2: Image-Based Ecological Information System

5
at the lowest cost. Once the data are collected, other AI 
algorithms can be applied to identify species and track 
their locations.
A second approach to data collection is to engage citizen 
volunteers. One of the oldest citizen science projects is 
eBird (www.ebird.org), in which bird watchers upload 
checklists of the birds they have seen at a particular 
time and place. The Image-Based Ecological Information 
System (IBEIS; www.ibeis.org) project analyzes animal 
photos scraped from internet sources such as Flickr 
and Facebook and applies computer vision and active 
learning methods to detect the animals, identify the 
species, and even identify individual animals (“Bob the 
giraffe”) (see Fig. 2). Their AI techniques can identify 
unique animals as long as they have stripes, wrinkles, 
or other unique textures.
A third approach employs technically trained people 
(e.g., government and corporate scientists) to collect 
data. One example of this is the freshwater stream 
surveys conducted by the EMAP project of the EPA 
(https://archive.epa.gov/emap/archive-emap/web/
html/), and similar efforts by forest resource companies 
such 
as 
Weyerhauser 
(http://www.weyerhaeuser.
com/timberlands/forestry/about-our-forests/us-
west/). These groups collect samples of freshwater 
macroinvertebrates that live in streams. These insects 
must then be examined by humans to identify the genus 
and species of each. AI computer vision methods are 
now being applied to accelerate this process.
Models
After data are collected, the data can be analyzed by 
applying techniques from data mining, statistics, and 
machine learning to discover trends and fit models. For 
species data, most efforts begin by counting individuals 
in order to produce estimates of population size and 
maps of the spatial distribution of species. For this 
purpose, it is particularly valuable to identify individuals 
and take into account multiple detections of the 
same individual across time and space. These models 
can support some inferences about species habitat 
requirements. In light of climate change, an important 
goal is to understand which climate variables affect 
species habitat carrying capacity.
A second important type of model seeks to characterize 
the spatio-temporal dynamics of species. Such models 
can predict migration, dispersal, reproduction, and 
mortality of species. Developing such dynamical 
models is critical to developing policies that can help 
endangered species thrive and control the spread of 
invasive species. One recent example is the BirdCast 
bird migration model under that combines eBird and 
weather radar to test hypotheses about the behavior 
of migrating birds (birdcast.info).
Policy Optimization
Once we have models of species distribution, behavior, 
and habitat requirements, we can begin to design 
and optimize policies for successful management of 
species and ecosystems. This requires articulating our 
policy goals and objectives. Virtually every ecosystem 
management problem combines an ecological model with 
an economic model of the economic costs and benefits 
of various policy outcomes.
One example is the design of a schedule for purchasing 
habitat parcels to support the spatial expansion of the 
Red Cockaded Woodpecker (Sheldon, 2010; Sheldon, 2015). 
An optimal policy takes into account uncertainty in the 
spread of the species and the availability of land parcels 
while seeking to link up existing patches of reserved 
habitat. Algorithms for computing this policy combine 
ideas from network cascade analysis (maximizing spread 
in social networks) with techniques from AI planning and 
Monte Carlo optimization.
A second example considers the temporary needs 
of migrating birds. Instead of making a permanent 
purchase of land, the Nature Conservancy is applying 
detailed bird migration models developed by the Cornell 
Lab of Ornithology to rent rice fields in California 
(Axelson, 2014). The farmers who own those fields agree 
to flood them at the right time to support migrating 
waterfowl in the pacific flyway. The exact timing varies 
from year to year based on the predictive migration 

ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE FOR SOCIAL GOOD
6
models developed using multi-scale machine learning 
techniques (cite STEM).
A third example of policy development confronts the 
issue of long-term planning in the face of climate 
change and sea level rise. One approach, known as 
adaptive management, explicitly considers the need to 
update and revise models based on new data that will 
become available in the future. There is considerable 
uncertainty about the timing and degree of sea level 
rise. Nicol, et al., (2015) formalize the problem of 
planning in the presence of this uncertainty. Their 
goal is to conserve appropriate coastal habitat for 
migrating birds under the risk of sea level rise. Low-
lying land will become inundated, and migrating birds 
will be threatened unless additional habitat further 
inland is available for them. As always, there are tight 
budgetary constraints on the amount of land that 
can be purchased. AI algorithms for solving Partially-
Observable Markov Decision Problems are able to solve 
these difficult constrained optimization problems 
(Pineau, 2003).
Case Study: Monitoring and Enforcement
When policies are put into effect, there is often 
a need for law enforcement to ensure their 
successful execution and for monitoring to detect 
errors in the data and models that require re-
optimizing the policy. For example, elephant 
poachers in Africa routinely enter national parks 
and other bioreserves to hunt elephants illegally 
for the ivory tusks. The PAWS project (Fang, 2016; 
Nguyen, 2016; Yang, 2014) applies AI algorithms to 
predict poaching attacks and optimize the patrol 
routes of game wardens in order to maximize 
their deterrent effect while minimizing costs. 
PAWS relies on two key underlying systems: (i) 
Predicting poacher behavior from past poaching 
data: This system builds poacher behavior models 
using machine learning algorithms (Nguyen, 2016); 
(ii) Game theoretic security resource allocation: 
Using these learned poacher behavior models, it 
uses game theoretic algorithms to prescribe new 
patrolling strategies; thus, rather than assuming the 
standard rational adversary response in standard 
game theoretic models, this work assumes that 
the adversary behavior is governed by models 
derived from past adversary behavior. The use  of 
security resource allocation using game theory 
has been explored in urban contexts, particularly 
in counter-terrorism settings in the past (Tambe, 
2011). The current work builds on this past work 
while also significantly enhancing it with machine 
learning based predictions of adversary behaviors. 
Opportunities and Challenges in the 
Medium Term
With few exceptions, most work in ecosystem 
management and conservation focuses on a small 
number of species in particular regions. A major 
challenge for the medium term is to develop methods 
that can collect and model data encompassing a broad 
range of species at continental scales. This will require 
integrating many different data sources (e.g., for birds, 
fish, plants, and insects) collected by many different 
methods (e.g., stationary sensors, earth orbit satellites, 
citizen scientists, sensors worn by animals, and so on). 
There are many research issues in data management and 
data integration that must be addressed. For example, 
the most common approach to data integration is to 
assimilate all data to a fixed spatial and temporal scale 
by smoothing fine-scale data and interpolating coarse-
scale data. This process introduces distortions into the 
data. We need methods for integrating and modeling 
data at multiple scales that can retain the resolution 
and uncertainty associated with each data source.
A related shortcoming of current modeling efforts is 
that they generally assume stationary (steady-state) 
climate, land use, and species behavior whereas the 
real systems are experiencing climate change, rapid 
economic development, and continuing evolution, 
dispersal, and natural selection of species. Modeling 
techniques and supporting data are needed that can 
take into account these drivers of change and the many 
uncertainties associated with them.
As the scale of questions grow, it is no longer possible 
to focus only on the biological components of a 

7
system. Instead, one must take a “systems of systems 
approach” and incorporate models of social, cultural, 
and economic activity. For example, when choosing 
a site for a new dam, we must consider not only the 
impact on native and invasive species in the riverine 
ecosystem, but also the benefits for farming, the 
potential inundation of important cultural and religious 
sites, and changes in sediment transport that may 
affect the distribution of pollutants and contaminated 
soils. Current AI technologies cannot currently operate 
at this scale and level of complexity.
One trend that will enable broader and more 
comprehensive modeling of ecosystems is the 
continuing improvement of sensors: reduction in size, 
power requirements, and cost. These improvements 
will support and drive the demand for better models 
that can support the development of higher-quality 
policies. However, cheaper sensors can be less reliable, 
so research is needed on methods for automatically 
detecting and removing bad data and broken sensors. 
This is a theme that is also common to other areas such 
as healthcare and public policy, as we discuss below, 
and poses a major challenge for many AI-powered 
decision-support systems.
A second set of data challenges concerns the biases 
and quality of data, particularly crowd-sourced data. 
Birders choose where they go bird watching; tourists 
and tour operators choose where people take pictures 
of wildlife. Even the data collected by game wardens 
is biased by the need to maintain unpredictability. 
New incentive mechanisms are needed to encourage 
volunteers to collect less biased data. Examples of 
mechanisms that are showing some success include 
the Great Zebra Challenge and the eBird Global Big 
Day. New algorithms are needed to incorporate data 
collection goals into the PAWS enforcement games. 
And methods for explicitly modeling the data collection 
process (“measurement models”) must be improved. A 
major analytical challenge is that when measurement 
models are incorporated into machine learning, the 
variables of fundamental interest are no longer directly 
observed. This raises questions about the identifiability 
and semantics of the inferred values of those variables. 
A third challenging aspect of sustainability work arises 
due to lack of technical infrastructure: poor networking, 
little access to high-performance computing resources, 
and lack of local personnel with sufficient education 
and training. We must develop algorithms that can run 
locally on small computers (or telephones) that only 
have intermittent access to large cloud computing 
resources. We must take into account the possibility 
that human actors may fail to adhere to designated 
policies. Finally, we must develop creative methods of 
establishing metrics for assessing the effectiveness of 
data collection and policy execution to compensate for 
the lack of historical data.
A fourth challenge is finding business models that support 
long-term data collection and policy enforcement efforts. 
Many current projects rely on the enthusiasm of citizen 
scientists, the generosity of private donors, or grants 
from funding agencies. None of these is likely to provide 
steady, long-term support. One possibility is to develop 
business models that generate continuing revenue 
streams. For example, the TAHMO project seeks to sell 
its weather data to insurance companies, commodities 
traders, and other businesses that rely on high quality 
weather data and forecasts.
Long Term Prospects
Sustainability is concerned with the long-term health of 
ecosystems and human societies. As we contemplate the 
creation and deployment of policies over the long term, 
we must confront the fact that the long-term behavior 
of ecological, economic, and social systems is radically 
uncertain. We can be very confident that our current 
models are missing critical variables and important 
interactions. How can artificial intelligence methods deal 
with the uncertainty of these “unknown unknowns”?
One important strategy is to plan for the “learning 
process”. When a new policy is put into place, we must 
also develop and deploy an instrumentation plan to 
collect data on a broad range of variables. We must 
incorporate “precautionary monitoring”, in which we 
monitor not only the variables that we expect to change 
as a result of the policy, but also a wide range of variables 

ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE FOR SOCIAL GOOD
8
that could allow us to detect unexpected side effects 
and unmodeled phenomena. We must plan to iteratively 
extend our models to incorporate these phenomena and 
re-optimize the policies.
Finally, when formulating and optimizing management 
policies, we should adopt risk-sensitive methods. 
Standard practice in solving economic models is to 
minimize the expected costs and maximize the expected 
benefits of the policy. But if a policy has substantial 
downside risk (e.g., species extinction, economic 
catastrophe), then we should apply AI methods that 
find robust policies that control these downside risks. 
This is an active area of research (see, e.g., Chow, 2015), 
and much more work is needed to understand how 
we can ensure that our models are robust to both the 
known unknowns (as in traditional risk management 
methods) and the unknown unknowns.
Health
Success Stories 
Current methods for gathering population-scale 
data about public health through surveys of medical 
providers or the public are expensive, time consuming, 
and biased towards patients who are already engaged 
in the medical system. Social media analytics is 
emerging as an alternative or complementary approach 
for instantly measuring the nation’s health at large 
scale and with little or no cost. Natural language 
processing can accurately identify social media posts 
that are self-reports of disease systems, even for rare 
conditions. The nEmesis system, for example, helps 
health departments identify restaurants that are the 
source of food-borne illness (Sadilek, 2016). nEmesis 
finds all the Twitter posts for a city that are sent by 
restaurant patrons, and then checking if any of the 
patrons tweet about the symptoms of foodborne illness 
over the next 72 hours. When this happens, health 
department officials are alerted of the fact, so that they 
can schedule inspection of the restaurant. nEmesis 
significantly improved the effectiveness of inspections 
in Las Vegas and the Center for Disease Control is 
funding the expansion of nEmesis nationwide.
The Surgical Critical Care Initiative (SC2i), a 
Department of Defense funded research program, has 
deployed two clinical decision support tools (CDSTs) to 
realize the promise of precision medicine for critical 
care (Belard, 2016). The invasive fungal infection 
CDST was deployed in 2014 to assist military providers 
with treatment decisions both near point of injury 
and at definitive treatment centers. Trauma-related 
invasive fungal infections are well recognized for their 
devastating impacts on patients in both military and 
civilian populations. In addition to substantial morbidity 
resulting from recurrent wound necrosis (e.g., greater 
number of surgical procedures, amputations, and 
delayed wound closure), the disease is also associated 
with high mortality rates (Tribble and Rodriguez, 2014; 
Warkentien, 2012; Lewandowski, 2016; Rodriguez, 2014).
The massive-transfusion protocol (MTP) CDST is 
currently being assessed under a two-year clinical trial 
at Emory-Grady, one of the two SC2i civilian hospitals. 
This CDST uses evidence-based predictive analytics 
to help physicians identify which patients genuinely 
require a massive transfusion, thereby reducing 
complications associated with over-transfusion or 
the needless expenditure of blood products (Maciel, 
2015; McDaniel, 2014; McDaniel, 2014; O’Keeffe, 2008; 
Dente, 2009). The SC2i is also planning a clinical trial 
around its WounDX, a CDST that predicts the timing of 
traumatic wound closure. Once validated, this tool has 
the potential to substantially improve outcomes (by as 
much as 68%) and reduce resource utilization ($3.4B 
annual cost-savings) both nationally and within the 
Military Health System (Forsberg, 2015). 
Case Study: Making ‘Meaningful Use’ 
meaningful 
Sepsis is the 11th leading cause of death in the 
US – seven hundred fifty thousand patients 
develop severe sepsis and septic shock in the 
United States each year. More than half of them 
are admitted to an intensive care unit (ICU), 
accounting for 10% of all ICU admissions, and 20% 
to 30% of hospital deaths. Yet others experience 
sepsis due to hospital acquired infections 

9
(HAIs) in the medical units. Several studies have 
demonstrated that morbidity, mortality, and 
length of stay are decreased when severe sepsis 
and septic shock are identified and treated early; 
Kumar et al. 2006 show that every hour delay in 
treatment is associated with a 7-8% increase in 
mortality. Screening tools exist but these typically 
implement guidelines that are based on clearly 
visible symptoms, often delaying detection. 
Alternatively, the use of biomarkers or specific 
lab tests delay detection until caregivers are 
suspicious of decline. Recent work has led to 
new automated real-time surveillance tools: by 
using analytic techniques that integrate diverse 
data – routinely collected in the electronic health 
record – these tools identify individuals at risk for 
severe sepsis and septic shock at the early stages 
of decline, and much earlier than standard of care 
(Henry, 2015). Early warning opens up the possibility 
for providing the sepsis bundle in a timely fashion, 
which has been shown to reduce mortality rates by 
more than 50% (Barwell, 2014). Similar ideas have 
been explored for risk monitoring of individuals 
likely to test positive for C-diff (Wiens, 2014). In 
yet another example, in neonatology, routinely 
collected physiological data streams have been 
shown to construct an electronic score to risk 
stratify premature newborns into low-risk and 
high-risk cohorts (Saria, 2010). 
Near Term Opportunity
1) Targeted therapy decisions
Many chronic diseases are difficult to treat because 
of high variation among affected individuals. This 
makes it difficult to choose the optimal therapy for 
a patient. Developing systems that support targeted 
therapy decisions from large-scale observational 
data is an emerging and exciting area of research 
(Murphy, 2003). By analyzing longitudinal databases 
of clinical measurements and health records, we can 
develop decision support tools to improve decision-
making. This can take us towards precision medicine. 
Computational subtyping, for example, seeks to refine 
disease definition by identifying groups of individuals 
that manifest a disease similarly (Collins, 2015). These 
subtypes can be used within a probabilistic framework 
to obtain individualized estimates of a patient’s future 
disease course. Better decision support tools can be 
used for more than improved disease management – also 
providing for better wellness and diagnosis.
2) New sensors, new healthcare delivery
AI can be used to analyze social media data and 
discover and suggest behavioral and environmental 
impacts on health. In addition to the nEmesis system 
described above, examples include tracking influenza 
and predicting the likelihood that particular social 
media users will become ill, and quantifying alcohol 
and drug abuse in communities. Social media as well 
as social networks can also be used to address the 
informational and psychosocial needs of individuals 
e.g., the American Cancer Society’s Cancer Survivor 
Network (CSN) (Bui, 2016). Related also is the opportunity 
for cost-effective interventions for addressing mental 
health, addiction, and behavioral health issues using 
modern low cost sensing technologies. Data gathered 
routinely during healthcare delivery can be leveraged 
to reduce hospital-acquired infections. Low fidelity 
sensors, some of which are diagnostic, together with 
AI and internet technologies can enable low barrier 
telemedicine for example for chronic healthcare. 
Advances in natural language processing and machine 
reading can be used to synthesize, integrate and 
appropriately disseminate new medical knowledge 
(e.g., as reported in journal articles.)
Near Term Enablers
Incentive Alignment: We should consider questions 
of incentive alignment in order to encourage various 
actors in the health ecosystem to collect additional 
data and make their data available to the rest of 
the healthcare ecosystem (this includes health care 
providers as well as payers such as health insurance 
companies). For example, providing hospitals that share 
data with an immediate benefit such as predictions 

ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE FOR SOCIAL GOOD
10
that improve their use of hospital resources, thus enabling 
operational improvements. We should also provide clarity 
on the additional data that would be useful for health 
providers to collect, in order to provide better predictability 
for the effectiveness of therapy decisions. At the same time, 
we should address biases in public health data, for example 
countering biases by modeling the data acquisition process, 
and by encouraging the self-reporting of additional data. 
Data Science Platforms: Cloud-based data sharing and 
common data models should be developed and promoted 
in order to increase the likelihood of societally beneficial 
outcomes. Shared experimental test beds will also be 
important, in order to lower the barrier of entry into AI 
and health research in order to bring in more researchers. 
Another direction is to utilize non-U.S. data to speed up the 
development and testing of models. 
Longer Term Opportunity 
Personalized Health: In this time frame, the major 
opportunity is to pivot from personalized medicine to 
personalized health, to keeping people from getting to the 
hospital in the first place, and to dealing with life issues 
and not just specific diseases. For this, we need to move to 
modeling the health of individuals and populations by using 
integrated data sets –  electronic health records data and 
other data gathered within the health system with genomic, 
socio-economic, demographic, environmental, social network 
and social media and other, non-traditional data sources, 
such as  social service and law enforcement data. Particularly 
relevant in this context are causal inference methods 
(Pearl, 2000), including methods for inferring causal effects 
from disparate experimental and observational studies 
(Bareinboim, 2013; Bareinboim, 2014; Lee and Honavar, 2013a; 
2013b; Pearl, 2015) and from relational data (Maier, 2010; 2013; 
Lee and Honavar, 2016a; 2016b; Marazopoulou, 2015). From 
this can come personalized, longitudinal treatment plans to 
improve an individual’s health.
Collaborative Decision-Making: We need approaches 
that allow decision makers to collaboratively reason 
with models of the health of individuals. For example, 
can a healthcare provider ask a question about how the 
trajectory of an individual’s disease would change if a 
test came out positive? How would this health trajectory 
change if the individual was being treated with two 
different drugs? These questions can help a decision maker 
develop a mental model of the computational system and 
learn to use its output to influence decisions. What are 
good frameworks that integrate messy data as it arrives, 
maintain estimates of uncertainty, and support flexible, 
collaborative decision-making?
Addressing Bias: An important challenge that arises 
in fitting models from observational health data sources 
is that the data may be influenced by many phenomena, 
including some unrelated to the target disease of interest 
and arising from the structure of the health ecosystem. For 
example, information may be missing on conditions that are 
not reimbursed. Not accounting for these biases can lead 
to models that cause harm as provider practice patterns 
change (DS2016, PNS203). We also need to measure the 
extent to which models are transportable: building tools 
from health data requires models that are “healthcare 
process aware” (HA2013, BLHP2013, SW S2015) – in other 
words, what is the measurement process and how did it 
affect the data that were generated? 
Barriers to Progress
Need for Cross-Disciplinary Training: We need programs 
that train scientists in developing AI methods for complex 
socio-technical systems. Beyond training in methods 
from computer science and statistics, these individuals 
must gain exposure to working with domain scientists to 
understand problem requirements. For example, we need 
new frameworks for measuring performance. Contrary 
to existing ways where emphasis is on measuring 
performance with fixed datasets, our metrics must 
measure accountability and reliability in “living systems” 
– environments that are constantly changing. Scientists 
must also be trained in the ethics of working with human 
subjects data.
Privacy: We need better methods to understand how to 
work with data in a way that both sustains its utility while 
the decisions and outcomes of working with the data do 
not reveal information about individuals that can lead to 
a loss of privacy. A particular challenge is that the validity 

11
of methods of perturbation or aggregation, both in 
regards to privacy and retaining the utility of data, 
depends on task context. That is, protecting privacy 
while enabling utility is an important challenge. We 
need policy portability so that data can move around 
but still be used correctly, and connected with this is 
the need for methods to audit data use and to reconcile 
policy across organizations. Related to this, is the need 
for policy in regard to the data custody (ownership and 
management) of electronic medical records, including 
rules for access and commensurability (risk vs. value vs. 
penalty). Security is also vitally important and presents 
a barrier unless technological solutions can be put in 
place –  personalized medicine requires an integrated 
view of an individual and this data must be kept secure.
Grand Challenge
The grand challenge for AI and health is to develop 
a learning healthcare system. This is a sustainable 
system that is able to observe all the available data 
about a person, build appropriate models from the 
observations, help make the right decisions using all 
available AI technologies, proactively and reactively 
make the right interventions and care when the person 
needs it, re-capture the results of the intervention, and 
learn and adapt from the feedback.
Public Welfare 
Recent advances in Artificial intelligence have resulted 
in impact on several industries such as retail, security, 
defense, manufacturing, transportation, search, social 
networking and advertising. At the same time, AI has 
not had a lot of impact on fundamental issues our 
society faces today. Education, public health, economic 
development, criminal justice reform, public safety are 
just some of the areas where AI can potentially make 
an impact. Here we will discuss some of the issues in 
these areas where AI can play a critical role, describe 
some early work where AI has already started to make 
an impact, and highlight fundamental issues, short and 
long-term opportunities, barriers and grand challenges 
for AI research applied to public good. The overall end 
goal of the work we’re motivating is to enhance the 
quality of life for all individuals, and increase equity, 
effectiveness and efficiency of public services being 
provided to citizens.
Social Issues AI can help address
There are many social issues AI could contribute to. 
Some examples include the following:
Justice: How do we identify, target, and prevent 
individuals who are likely to cycle through various 
public systems (emergency rooms, homeless shelters 
for example) and eventually end up in the criminal 
justice system? Can I understand what factors best 
predict interactions with these systems and develop 
interventions so employees of these systems may reduce 
future interactions while providing quality services?
Economic Development: How do I allocate resources 
that a city has towards the homes, neighborhoods, and 
communities that are most likely to help reduce blight?
Workforce Development: How do we help Job Training 
and Skills Development programs to figure out what 
skills are going to be in demand in the future so they 
can train individuals and help them become employable?
Public Safety: How do I better make dispatch decisions 
for emergency response calls? Who do we send for a 
given dispatch and how do we ensure to send the 
appropriate resources without overspending?
Policing: Can I identify police officers that are at risk of 
adverse incidents with the public in order to match them 
appropriate preventative interventions?
Education: Build a system to help target early and 
effective interventions at students who may need 
extra support to graduate on time or not likely to apply 
to college or not ready for college or careers upon 
graduation from high school

ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE FOR SOCIAL GOOD
12
Success Stories and Case Studies
There has been recent work on some of the issues 
described above, mostly done by universities in 
collaboration with government agencies. Some examples 
include the following:
Public Health: Targeted Lead Inspections to Prevent 
Child Lead Poisoning: Almost 9,000 children in Chicago 
are thought to have been exposed in 2013 to lead at levels 
classified as dangerous by the CDC. While most of this 
exposure happens in the child’s home, limited funding 
and personnel make it impossible to inspect all 200,000 
Chicago buildings built before laws banned lead paint. 
This is the case in many cities, where lead remediation 
only occurs after a child in the home presents dangerous 
blood lead levels. The University of Chicago partnered 
with the Chicago Department of Public Health to build 
a system (Potash, 2015) to predict which children are at 
risk of lead poisoning, before they get exposed to lead, 
and allow CDPH to deploy inspectors and proactively 
address lead hazards before exposure impacted more 
children. CDPH is currently running a trial to validate the 
performance of the model as well as implementing it 
into the inspection targeting system and the Electronic 
Medical Records systems of hospitals so these risks 
can be determined while a woman is pregnant and 
remediation can happen before the child is born.
Education: Helping students graduate on time: Over 
700,000 students drop out of high school every year in 
the United States. High school graduation is associated 
with relatively higher overall lifetime earnings and life 
expectancy, and lower rates of unemployment and 
incarceration. Interventions can help those falling 
behind in their educational goals, but given limited 
resources, such programs must focus on the right 
students at the right time and with the right message. 
Over the past several years, several school districts 
around the US have been collaborating with universities 
to develop AI based systems to help them identify at-
risk students who are unlikely to finish high school on 
time (Lakkaraju, 2015).
Public Safety: Recent high profile cases of law 
enforcement officers using deadly force against 
civilians and other instances of police misconduct 
have caused a growing political and public uproar. 
The University of Chicago Center for Data Science and 
Public Policy has been working, as part of the Obama 
White House Police Data Initiative, to address these 
problems using a data-driven and predictive approach 
(Carton, 2016) - to identify officers who are at risk of 
adverse incidents early and accurately so supervisors 
can effectively target interventions. This system takes 
data about officer demographics, training, payroll, 
on-the-job actions, internal affairs data (complaints, 
investigations, reviews of incidents, etc.), dispatch data, 
negative interaction reports as well as some publically 
available data and uses machine learning methods 
to assign each officer a risk score. Compared to the 
existing Early Intervention System, the AI based system 
can correctly identify 10-20% more officers who go on 
to have adverse incidents over a 12-month period while 
reducing the false positives by 50-60%. This improved 
capability allows police departments to effectively and 
efficiently identify at-risk officers and provide them the 
necessary preventative interventions before an adverse 
incident occurs. Early interventions can lead to fewer 
adverse police interactions with the public, reduce 
injuries sustained by citizens and officers, improve 
the wellbeing of officers, improve police community 
relations and overall policing across the US.
Case Study: Economic Development: Targeted 
Home Inspections to Reduce Urban Blight
Blight starts as a small problem, usually only 
one house in a neighborhood starts to run down. 
However, it spreads fast, up and down the 
street and through other neighborhoods. First 
neighborhoods start declining, then communities 
start declining as people become unemployed 
and move away. Usually cities wait until an entire 
neighborhood has been affected, then they start 
to look for investments that they can put back 
into the neighborhood to try and revitalize them. 
Sometimes it works, but most of the time it is just 
too expensive to bring them back. 

13
Rayid Ghani from the University of Chicago 
Center for Data Science and Public Policy and his 
researchers have been working with the City of 
Cincinnati to combat this problem. They are taking 
the preventative route and looking at the past 10 
years of data on which areas are prone to blight 
and starting to predict which neighborhoods and 
homes will be next. Targeted home inspectors can 
then be sent to houses before blight happens.
Gaps and Barriers
Work in this area requires deep, intimate, and sustained 
interaction and efforts between the target community 
and AI researchers. Some of the current gaps and barriers 
are as follows:
Lack of Experienced Collaborators: There isn’t an 
established history of AI working in this area. As a result, 
there isn’t a ready supply of trained AI researchers (or 
practitioners) who are familiar with the unique aspects 
of working on public welfare problems. Conversely, 
government and policymakers have little experience 
working 
directly 
with 
the 
research 
community. 
Highlighting ongoing projects (and successes) to both 
raise awareness and to provide a roadmap is essential 
to growing this community. Also critical is training both 
sides on how to scope and formulate problems and 
projects that result in effective collaborations and impact. 
Several training programs targeted at seeding and 
fostering these collaborations have been created over the 
past several years, such as the Data Science for Social 
Good Fellowship program, initiated at the University of 
Chicago in 2013, and replicated by Georgia Tech, University 
of Washington, and IBM.
Lack of Visible Activity and Case Studies: Building 
on the previous point, the level of activity in this space 
is far lower than the needs. This lack of activity makes 
it difficult for governments and policymakers to know 
what’s possible when thinking about the uses of AI in 
their work. Increasing projects in this area is a “retail” 
problem, as pilot projects will inevitably be local and 
therefore shaped by the unique context and capabilities 
of the municipality and research group. Finding funding 
mechanisms that address local needs – e.g. the NSF Data 
Hubs model – is essential. Seeding lots of small prototype 
projects is also critical at this stage.
Lack of Reusable Infrastructure: While AI tools are 
increasingly available to a broad set of researchers, the 
underlying platforms to support them, within a context of 
public good, is missing. To continue the previous example, 
identifying at-risk populations will require access to data 
sets such as tax records, police records, education data, 
and healthcare data. Platforms that are able to access, 
aggregate, and curate such data sets do not exist; this is 
an enormous barrier to progress. Tools that build on such 
data sets – for example, basic methods for federation, 
inferences, and so forth can only be meaningfully 
developed once such infrastructure tools are available.
Longitudinal Perspective: Many of the problems 
related to public welfare are not “solvable” in the sense 
that they have a clear end point where they cease to be 
a problem. Further, the effect of a particular innovation 
or intervention may only become apparent over a period 
of years or decades and may be difficult to prove, as a 
controlled trial may be difficult or impossible to construct. 
Projects need to have a long-term structure, with 
appropriate intermediate goals, to avoid short-term fixes, 
or quick, but ephemeral, “feel-good” stories.
Legal, Regulatory, Compliance: No list of barriers 
would be complete without acknowledging that there 
are many legal and regulatory hurdles for many of 
these projects. Access to data, and to populations to 
evaluate against will require substantial investment of 
time, planning, and resources to have an effect. Creating 
frameworks for ethical evaluation of costs and benefits 
must be established. Understanding the impact of 
innovations will require an understanding of the level of 
compliance, and possibly methods to manage or pivot 
solutions in response to perception, trust, and compliance 
of the target population.
Fundamental Issues 
Although AI for public welfare draws on many common 
themes and ideas of AI research more broadly, there are 

ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE FOR SOCIAL GOOD
14
also some key differences. First and foremost, public 
welfare is ultimately about information and decisions that 
directly affect the lives of individuals. As a result, privacy 
issues, transparency and traceability of data collection 
and decision-making, and understanding of social context 
are factors that must be considered within the research 
context. Issues surrounding data bias and uncertainty 
have direct implications to fairness and the evaluation of 
the utility of possible decision paths. Indeed, formalizing 
impact of decision on the individual, and understanding 
how individual preferences play into those decisions is 
as important as the inferential framework that leads to 
those decisions.
A second significant challenge is to understand and frame 
the problem with respect to the sociodynamics of the 
population in question, and the organizational constraints 
that shape possible responses. For example, broad-
based surveillance of infant health may identify areas 
where lead poisoning is a substantial health risk, but 
the ability of a government to respond – by remediation, 
by education, by identifying and supporting relocation 
of at-risk populations – will vary by locality and by the 
willingness of the population involved.
With these challenges in mind, there are numerous basic 
and applied research problems to be solved. Some of 
these have been raised above. Others include: 1) data 
analytics and machine learning models that are robust 
to systematic bias, missing data, and data heterogeneity; 
2) the development of models or simulations that are 
sufficiently predictive to inform decision-making, 
and which also can then be adapted “closed-loop” 
as additional data is collected with time; 3) advanced 
models of decision-making and planning that incorporate 
social dynamics, resource constraints, and utility models 
for multiple actors; 4) consistent, cost-effective, and 
scalable models for measurement or data collection; and 
5) methods for causal reasoning and explanation. 
It is important to emphasize that these core AI problems 
have to be married with a set of broader computer-
science innovations. For example, much of the data 
in question will be personal and sensitive; scalable 
progress will depend on privacy preserving methods, 
particularly those that are robust to federation of data 
from multiple disparate sources. Additionally, user-
centered design approaches taking into account the 
individuals or populations will be essential for adoption. 
Opportunities
There are innumerable opportunities to advance work in 
AI for public welfare, for example:
◗ Better data collection, digitization, and curation, 
particularly around urgent priorities.
◗ Better federation and integration of data sources 
currently not being used together.
◗ Better models and predictions of individual behaviors to 
support existing interventions
◗ Better evaluation of existing and historical policies to 
understand their implications vis-a-vis enablement of AI 
advances.
More advanced AI capabilities in these 
areas could contribute to public welfare in 
many ways, including:
Public safety: Better data on the location and activities 
of first responders would quickly (over the space of 
months) create a dataset that could be mined to create 
predictive algorithms to better deploy first responders. 
Transportation: Using individual public transit and 
other transportation data (uber, bikeshare, etc.) would 
allow researchers to better understand mobility patterns 
of people, to understand gaps in transit with respect to 
citizenry needs and also to assess the impact of policy 
changes through data-enabled simulation analysis.
Public Health: School records, employment records, 
health records, and neighborhood level population 
statistics could be combined to build better predictive 
models and better detection of high-risk health events – 
e.g. women who may be at risk of adverse birth events 
to target human services programs and resources, 
men who are under stress due to long-term health 
and employment issues where intervention may be 
warranted, and so forth.

15
Public Welfare: Public data feeds and public reporting, 
combined with the growing body of surveillance data 
would potentially identify individuals or populations that 
are in danger of becoming homeless, incarcerated, or 
otherwise taking a path likely to lead to both personal 
and social costs. This could also be a fertile ground 
to study the interaction of prediction models and 
the effectiveness of interventions - i.e. heterogenous 
treatment effects, similar to the phenomena of behavior 
change due to clinical decision support.
Education: Social feeds, school records, and well 
constructed social network-informed behavioral models 
could be used to detect school populations that are at 
risk of falling below grade level and thus where to deploy 
interventions that could influence and change behavior 
much earlier than is now currently possible.
Research Challenges
Humans In The Loop: All of the ideas above have an 
inherent complexity that goes well beyond what can be 
inferred from data sets – for example, social behavior is 
shaped by government policies, by “what’s hot,” by news 
events, by the weather, or by many other phenomena that 
may be idiosyncratic to a particular locale, subpopulation, 
or point in time. Thus, all of the systems above must 
really be considered as “human-in-the loop” systems that 
will almost always involve human policy and decision-
makers, and of course operate on a specific population. 
Thus, research is needed in understanding how to 
develop these systems to be maximally effective and 
enabling within the context of system or organization.
Measuring Engagement: Much of what we’d like 
to affect cannot be directly measured or controlled. 
AI research will need to move beyond prediction of 
discrete (easily measurable) outcomes and instead use 
models/algorithms to optimize hidden variables such as 
engagement/happiness for students in school, people in 
a community, or in government. To do so, we will need 
to create a set of concepts, methods, and tools and 
methods that AI, Social Science, and policy specialists 
agree on and which form a “franca lingua” for work in 
this area. 
A Grand Challenge
A gross generalization of all of the above themes is that 
public good is a complex system of systems – information 
about welfare impacts education impacts law enforcement 
impacts health, and so forth. Just the implementation of 
a healthcare system or a transformation system involves 
the integration of many interacting components.  We 
need to create methods to abstract even further and 
develop methods to integrate multiple AI systems, which 
collectively monitor, detect, diagnose, and adapt within 
their own specific domains.
From this, we can frame the ultimate grand challenge of AI 
for public welfare: Can we create tools that automatically 
and proactively identify problem causes, propose policy 
solutions, and predict consequences of those (potentially 
cross-issue) policies? Can we identify solutions that a 
person may not immediately come up with because of 
the ability of a system of systems model to look across 
domains and see linkages that no single individual could? 
Cross Cutting Issues
This report started out by asserting that AI can be a major 
force for social good; but that to make it such a force, we 
need to shape this new technology and the questions we 
use to inspire young researchers. In this report, the term 
“social good” is intended to focus AI research on areas 
of endeavor that are to benefit a broad population in a 
way that may not have direct economic impact or return, 
but which will enhance the quality of life of a population 
of individuals through education, safety, health, living 
environment, and so forth. In general these are areas of 
work that have not benefited from AI research, but are 
nonetheless important for societal benefit.
At the end of this report, we now come to some key 
observations:
◗ AI for Social Good: We first observe through the 
research reported in this report that there is ongoing 
work, be it in urban computing, sustainability, health, 
public welfare, leading the way for applying AI for 
Social Good. AI research is already being shaped in 

ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE FOR SOCIAL GOOD
16
applications for social good; but this trend needs to 
be encouraged.
◗ Use inspired research: Research led from applications, 
from actual use, is important for this area of work, 
and in shaping AI for Social Good. Use inspired work 
in this area will lead to questions that are crucial to 
making a social impact, while also providing innovative 
research possibilities. For example, consider working 
with social networks in low resource communities; 
given unreliable and uncertain access to smart phones 
or other technologies, research questions that arise 
may be fundamentally different, often arising out 
of insufficient data about the networks. This is but 
one example, but the essential point is to drive the 
research from its use. 
◗ Interdisciplinary teams and new styles of research: 
Research on AI for Social Good necessarily will require 
research with interdisciplinary teams, where part of 
the team is rooted firmly in the domain discipline. 
◗ A novel aspect of this interdisciplinary work is new 
methods for evaluating interdisciplinary work and 
measuring impact. It is not sufficient then to only 
claim an AI contribution by showing an improvement 
in a modeling technique’s efficiency or testing in 
simulations; we would need to measure real impact 
in the field in terms of what was truly accomplished. 
Such measurements require time and effort, and 
it is not typically ready on a six month AI research 
conference cycle. Nonetheless, it is important that 
this type of science be encouraged and allowed to 
thrive (via new publication venues, prestigious awards, 
etc.). Traditionally AI publication venues focus on 
methodological advances, and impact driven work 
is relegated to “application conferences”. This would 
need to shift if in order to allow young scientists to get 
involved in research with social impact, to allow the 
scientists to build up careers in this interdisciplinary 
research space. 
◗ ●Interpretability, transparency, accountability are 
important: With interdisciplinary research and impact 
on society comes the burden that the resulting AI 
models be interpretable and transparent. Not only may 
users and collaborators not accept results that are 
output from a “black box” un-interpretable algorithm, 
but there is also a real danger that the black box 
may be using flawed or even illegal means of arriving 
at its conclusions. For example, a “black box” AI 
algorithm may rely on racist or sexist inferences for its 
conclusions (arriving there due to biased input). Thus 
interpretability and transparency of the algorithms will 
remain key requirements as we go into the future with 
AI for Social Good. 
◗ ●Human-AI boundary: As we apply AI for Social Good 
applications, many of these applications are seen to 
be decision aids, assisting the human. Because these 
applications might be in domains with vulnerable 
populations (but even if not so), the right human-AI 
interface is important to consider. The issue is not just 
the HCI aspects, but in a fundamental sense where 
to draw the boundary between AI and the human 
interacting with the AI. 
◗ Key principles of such human-AI interaction are an 
important issue for future work. Some principles are 
becoming apparent. For example, one such principle 
is respect for people’s autonomy. There are situations 
where 
humans 
have 
superior 
control, 
insight 
knowledge; for the AI system to have a human as a 
subordinate following its commands will not make 
sense. In such situations, instead, the human must be 
in charge. There are of course many others that veer 
into broader issues of safety in control, and ensuring 
justice (in the sense of making the AI’s benefit available 
to all segments of society). These will remain important 
issues to consider into the future. 
In summary, like many technologies before it, AI is a 
family of tools that will find their way into a broad 
spectrum of applications, many of which we cannot 
today imagine. However, as the discussion above 
demonstrates, with appropriate forethought and 
incentives, AI can become a tool that enhances our 
quality of life at a personal, national, and global level. 
In this regard, we hope this report inspires new ideas 
and approaches that leverage support for basic AI 
research with opportunities to work with state and 
local governments and other nonprofit organizations.

17
Finally, we note that many of the problems and solutions 
are uniquely local – many at the level of a city or 
community. Thus, AI for Social Good also provides a unique 
opportunity for technology researchers to personally 
engage with their local communities and, by doing so, 
concretely educate the public about the technology, its 
limitations, and its potential benefits. We hope this report 
will succeed in inspiring the AI research community to 
seek out and capitalize on these opportunities.
