A Spacetime Approach to Generalized
Cognitive Reasoning in Multi-scale Learning
Semantics and knowledge representation from observation, measurement, and learning.
Mark Burgess
August 2016
Revised January-February 2017
Appendix examples added July 2017
Abstract—In
modern
machine
learning,
pattern
recognition replaces realtime semantic reasoning. The
mapping from input to output is learned with ﬁxed
semantics by training outcomes deliberately. This is an
expensive and static approach which depends heavily on
the availability of a very particular kind of prior training
data to make inferences in a single step. Conventional
semantic network approaches, on the other hand, base
multi-step reasoning on modal logics and handcrafted
ontologies, which are ad hoc, expensive to construct,
and fragile to inconsistency. Both approaches may be
enhanced by a hybrid approach, which completely
separates reasoning from pattern recognition. In this
report, a quasi-linguistic approach to knowledge repre-
sentation is discussed, motivated by spacetime structure.
Tokenized patterns from diverse sources are integrated
to build a lightly constrained and approximately scale-
free network. This is then be parsed with very simple
recursive algorithms to generate ‘brainstorming’ sets of
reasoned knowledge.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Reasoning has long been associated with formal
logic in computer science, but it may be argued
that reasoning is only a subset of a wider class of
narratives, which may be told by joining together
assertions. Logic’s goal is to maximize the certainty
of a narrative derived from prior concepts, by trans-
forming them according to a constrained and largely
deterministic set of rules, in which each step selects
a unique possibility. However, it is only of value in
a very limited set of circumstances. In other cases,
where unique certainty is not available or practical, a
more expansive kind of ‘brainstorming’ is needed for
problem solving: one that allows multiple possibilities
to remain open for selection at a later time.
Brainstorming is the ﬁrst stage of a process of
reasoning by ‘whittling’. The idea is to create a
large hypothesis set, for subsequent reduction into
something more focused. The whittling is often emer-
gent and iterative. Reasoning, in this interpretation,
is a cognitive process, which allows an observer to
integrate experiences, perhaps not evidentially linked,
or even provably true, in order to form a set of specula-
tive hypotheses. By process of contextual elimination,
this converges, iteratively, to a much smaller set, or
a ﬁnal answer, using a variety of criteria from fresh-
ness to relevance and importance. In this dynamical
approach, criteria like semantic and dynamic stability
of the stories are now more important than logical
idealizations like ‘truth’ or ad hoc determinations of
‘correctness’ [1].
Narration, or storytelling, is an underestimated
aspect of intelligent behaviour [2]–[4]. It is how
learning individuals explain things in terms of prior
experience, and make sense of the world. To form
a story, we have to know the difference between
correlation and causation: correlations do not have
direction, i.e. no arrow of progression, which may
be used to accumulate narrative storyline. Hence,
correlation can only offer short-range explanations,
with uncertainty that grows with the number of claims
for similarity. Combining directed associations into a
reasoned argument is a different problem altogether,
one that requires the propagation of semantics from
step to step.
How we combine concepts into stories for small
sets is one thing; applying expansive reasoning to
systems with vast numbers of sensors, sporting very
different characteristics, is a whole new challenge.
Imagine a scenario like the monitoring of a massive
array of smart connected systems, e.g. an Internet of
Things, smart buildings and cities, etc. Data of very
different kinds are generated at many different scales,
and from a vast number of different sources. How
could we begin to interpret phenomena across differ-
ent scales? What concepts do we need? The challenge
of making sense of such data, at scale, urgently calls
for a broader view of artiﬁcial reasoning, based on
improved semantic labelling of collected data. This is
how we might scale the meaningful interpretation of
data. But it is not simply a case of collecting more
and more data. The monitoring of sensory data would
be incomplete without the ability to reason about
observations. Reasoning requires the deﬁnition of a
set of concepts, tied to operational goals.
This work summarizes a model of invariant story-
telling, based on spacetime inference [5]–[7]. The ap-
proach reduces the computational complexity for story
inference by orders of magnitude. It describes how
arXiv:1702.04638v2  [cs.AI]  1 Aug 2017

semantic associations may be collected from arbitrary
sensors and inputs, and how a knowledge represen-
tation can learn context-dependent interpretations of
those inputs, in order to later generate explanatory
narrative automatically. It summarizes the practical
and implementational aspects of the promise theoretic
notion of ‘semantic spacetime’, and implements a
number of experiments based on the model.
Promise theory [8] motivates a graph theoretical
approach to semantic scaling [6], which is based on
the observation that cognitive relationships ultimately
derive from elementary spacetime relationships. A set
of recursive structures leads to a partially deterministic
set of connected paths, each of which represents
reasoned ‘stories’, with explanatory content. In this
work, I show how to apply these structures, tentatively,
to simple cases.
II.
THE SEMANTIC SPACETIME (PROMISE) MODEL
Promise theory frames elementary questions about
intent: how it scales by cooperative interaction into
extensive spatial networks, and how its properties may
express spacetime-like variations to mirror a represen-
tation of environment. Based on the considerations in
[7], we expect a number of information processing
stages in a cognitive learning system (ﬁgure 1):
1)
A sensory apparatus for inputting exterior
information.
2)
A stage that replaces sensory patterns with
semantic tokens, i.e. naming.
3)
A stage that associates semantics i.e. mean-
ing to the named tokens, by associating them
as clusters called concepts, associated in pre-
dictable and qualifying ways.
4)
An
introspective
story-generating
stage,
which is able to ‘think’ about or activate
interior concepts, and feed the resulting
stream of consciousness back into the post-
tokenization stages (3 onwards), along side
sensory inputs.
Although we are not used to thinking of systems
(physical or software) explained as narratives, any
organized arrangement may be understood in terms of
stories, so our goal is completely general. Most discus-
sions of so-called Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) discuss
stages 1 and 2, this work deals mainly with stages 3
and onwards, which I believe are orthogonal. These
latter stages have much in common with linguistics
[7]; indeed, once one can map invariant patterns into
a ﬁnite alphabet of tokens, every reasoning problem
maps to a linguistic problem.
A simple prototype system, to explore the underly-
ing principles, has been reconstructed from the earlier
cognitive approaches applied to pervasive computing
management in CFEngine [9], [10], and further mod-
ernized and extended in the Cellibrium project [11].
III.
SEPARATION OF LEARNING SCALES
Data from only a single sensory episode, localized
in time or space, are of limited value, and do not
Curated contexts
Concepts and associations
(What am I doing? What’s going on out there?)
Patterns
Sensor assessments
Fig. 1: From fast to slow, concepts are aggregated from co-
activations over many scales. At each scale, meaning comes
from the way we assign names to the aggregates.
typically lead to claims of deep knowledge. It is by
revisiting experiences, i.e. by the iterative process of
observing and learning that we build trust in a stable
‘invariant’ representation of knowledge (see ﬁgure 2).
time
space
ensembles
sequential cognition
Frequentist interpretation
Bayesian interpretation
Fig. 2: We coarse grain space and time into regions of
partially indistinguishable equivalence, e.g. different exper-
imental ‘trials’. Concurrence (in the same temporal grain),
and coincidence (same spatial grain), deﬁne the boundaries
for our cognitive experience. In cognition, every new time-
like frame is a new experiment, and we must use learning
to even out experimental inequivalence. Our (un)certainty is
related to our choice of scaling or granularity.
Learning happens over a hierarchy of timescales
[7]. Fundamental concepts are evolved by stabilizing
‘genetic’ adaptations through long term selection in
a group; then there are concepts that build on this
stability and use them to frame newly learned con-
cepts, which congeal over generations, and are adapted
and passed on socially (we may call this domain
knowledge). This includes specialized sensors that to-
kenize, or dimensionally reduce, information intensive
data into compressed conceptual representations [7].
Finally, there are concepts, which build on the fore-
going, that are formed over shorter timescales by the
observation and introspection of a single observer (see
2

later ﬁgure 16). The latter is what we normally think
of as learning; however, it is important to remember
that it builds on a stable set of preconditions that
have evolved prior to the current learning episode. We
would expect consistent knowledge to be represented
by eigenstates of a memory network.
In approximate order of aggregation, learning may
be viewed at these scales:
•
Slow (evolutionary) training (unsupervised
adaptive learning): Random variations are
whittled away into a set of behaviours and
memories encoded in a long-term memory,
and providing the seeds and the framing into
which newer ideas are be formed through
realtime recombination. The hypothesis here
is that such ideas are naturally associated with
the the most invariant aspects of space and
time, leading to four basic kinds of conceptual
association, as well as the basic ability to
compress extensive spacetime datasets into
simple tokenized concepts [7].
In a software system, this is represented by
hardcoded semantics, and specialized sen-
sors, designed to discriminate pre-understood
concepts, by virtue of their adaptation (e.g.
sensors for hot/cold, light/dark, movement/no
movement, face/no face).
•
Fast (direct) cognitive assessment or context
(unsupervised learning and recall): Context
changes quickly, and some concepts and as-
sociations are formed at this timescale. Each
independent observer inherits the adaptations
learned by previous generations and can build
on this basis, assembling context from sen-
sory experiences, and assessing as emotional
state by pattern recognition. The sensory
channel will eventually be supplemented by
an introspective channel (see last item). The
effect of being simultaneously in mind, by ob-
servation or thought, leads to aggregate clus-
ters, or composite concepts, by co-activation,
which can be then named as new concepts.
In software, this represents monitoring and
classiﬁcation of data. It might be represented
by facial or handwriting recognition algo-
rithms for training, etc.
•
Slow (indirect) training (supervised linguistic
learning): Given a lexicon of tokens (i.e. a
language, however primitive), concepts inher-
ited in a compressed form may be passed
on from one individual to another, e.g. by
word of mouth, or as text in a book. There
is no longer need for direct experience. A
set of concepts may thus be remembered in
a knowledge bank, such as generational or
societal memory, and be handed down as
domain expertise. This form of knowledge
acts as a second level of boundary conditions
for framing and seeding new concepts. The
fast cognitive knowledge is useless without
having these seeds and constraints provide
basic conceptual anchors. In life, the analogy
would be the existence of domain knowledge
that frames our current awareness of a situa-
tion.
•
Fast
(recurrent)
introspection
(emergent
adaptation): Once a knowledge representation
contains
a
sufﬁciency
of
concepts
and
memory representations to be able to form
stories
without
new
outside
stimulus,
a
system can think about them and associate
freely, leading to further new concepts. This
would be essentially talking to oneself, as
it would naturally share the same linguistic
representation as the exterior sharing.
At each stage, the key question is how concepts
are addressed and recalled, based on a mixture exterior
and interior stimulus. This is what we mean by the
naming of concepts [5]1. This is discussed at length
in [7].
Finally, no memory system would be complete
without processes of annealing and garbage collection,
to even out and clear away clusters and memories that
do not become so important that they dominate over
older ones.
IV.
ENCODING AND RETRIEVING CONCEPTUAL
ASSOCIATIONS
Data are singular events, with no a priori inferable
interpretation. The meaning of a single data point
can only be promised by its source. A knowledge
system has to be able to integrate the diversity of such
experiences into a stable aggregation, channelling per-
ceived conﬂicts into contextualized differences, thus
preserving them without neutralizing them. In a sense,
diversity is a prerequisite for knowledge, and integra-
tion leads to a scaled form of hashing.
A. Direct primary cognition
Cognition leads to an association of tokenized
concepts through a process illustrated schematically in
ﬁgure 3. This prism separates data into a spectrum of
four basic associative types, known as the irreducible
types (see table I). It mirrors ideas in linguistics on
the classiﬁcation of nouns. [12]. The semantics of
cognition are very different from the semantics of
experimental observation in science. Ensemble mea-
surement is about eliminating ‘self’ from experience.
In cognition, observer subjectivity is a key aspect that
cannot be disregarded2.
1This suggests that language would co-evolve with a conceptual
representation of knowledge, and that utterances, i.e. statements
and stories would grow in sophistication along side the knowledge
evolved in a society of such representations or brains.
2A lot of attention has been given over to the algebraic aspects of
measurement in physics, e.g. quantum mechanics, but surprisingly
little attention has been given to the semantics of data, and cognitive
perception, except in the case of experimental error [13]–[15]. The
extent to which measurement disturbs the system during the act of
measurement affects what can be promised about a measurement.
Measurables may have the property of ‘compatibility’ [16], meaning
that measurement of one does not inﬂuence the measurement of the
other.
3

1. near
4. exhibits
Unsupervised
Supervised
Patterns
LEARNING
Distinguishable
Indistinguishable
intent/introspection
PROMISES
IMPOSITIONS
Unintended
Intended
Anomalies
(NOT)
3. contains
2. precedes
Fig. 3: A concept prism from left to right for association types.
B. Indirect secondary cognition (empathy)
In machine learning, one tries to ﬁt bulk recorded
experience, in all its detail, directly into a singular
neural network, simulating direct ﬁrst-hand experi-
ence by brute force reconstruction, then adapting
its hardwired nature to match presumed semantics.
However, humans are also able to learn from books
and stories passed on verbally: we can learn from
simpliﬁed, tokenized representations of knowledge, in
which we do not have to experience every sensation
and emotion as the source did. Even when learning
to read books, neural network techniques would need
to read every book into a network in order to train it,
rather than using a short summary of what each book
was about. As humans, we are able to scale knowledge
acquisition through summarization, on trust, without
verifying directly from a source. In order to scale
machine learning, machines must also be able to do
this.
When training a network by second hand teaching
alone (e.g. from books rather than from practice or
experience), we lose realistic sensory or emotional
context, which forms part of our access key to recover
the memories. Thus a model cannot simulate reality
from a memory standpoint. Some aspects of context
can be simulated or described second-hand, but a re-
alistic emotional state will not normally match actual
ﬁrst-hand experience. The ability of a second-hand
agent to empathize with the concepts and sensations
of a primary agent will therefore play a major role in
the ability of pass on knowledge3. On the other hand,
the compression of such a complex lookup key, into a
more compact address, allows to reorder concepts into
new categories, and to generalize them, overlooking
irrelevances based on context.
Cognition therefore ultimately leads to associa-
tions between tokenized (or dimensionally reduced)
concept representations, through a whittling process,
3This introspective simulation of emotional context may well be
the evolutionary purpose of empathy, given the enormous value of
saving in communication and computational processing.
described in ﬁgure 3. This ‘prism’ separates data into
a spectrum of associative types, which theory predicts
to represent different spacetime characteristics, called
the irreducible types [7] (see ﬁgure I). The conceptual
prism bears some similarity with the staged structures
of neural networks; however, neural networks are
relatively expensive compression algorithms, that are
not well suited to the latter ‘expansive’ stages of
reasoning, where the bulk of input data would make
reasoning too slow.
C. Tuple form of semantic graph
Let us assume that the result of a learning process
is a set of tuples of the form:
(C1, τ, A+, C2, A−, χ∗)
(1)
where C1, C2 are dimensionally reduced concept to-
kens, A+, A−are forward and backward associations
of type τ ∈{1, 2, 3, 4} and −τ respectively, and χ∗
context labels. These tuples represent links or edges
in a graph Γ(C, A) whose nodes C are conceptual
tokens, and whose edges A are associations. This
summarizes an associative relationship implied by an
observation. We can also add a weight or relative
strength for each tuple and a timestamp for when it
was last updated (which in a full knowledge equi-
librium, with garbage collection, would be equiva-
lent). All of these elements are strings. For example,
highlighting the main features of the tuple, we may
represent a simple qualitative description as a tuple:
doctor
concept
4
ST type
promises
forward association
identity credentials
next-concept
is promised by
reverse association
patient doctor registration
context
In other words, we know that a doctor promises to
have identity credentials, and we are thinking about
patient-doctor registration. This association is of type
4, on the prism. We can apply the same approach to
4

turn numerical data into qualitative linguistic repre-
sentations in this format, so
X = 47
(2)
might translate into:
X,
concept
4
ST type
has value,
forward association
identity credentials
next-concept
is the value of by,
reverse association
variable assignment
context
In other words, the token X has a value of 37, and
we are thinking about variable assignment.
What is noteworthy about the tuples is the absence
of data types for the tokens, translating in an untyped
graph. This is not a conventional data representation;
rather it is a symbolic (purely linguistic) representa-
tion. This must be so, since semantics can only be
extended by reference to other concepts, and these
must be rooted somewhere in language. All concepts
are thus symbolic strings, and their interpretation lies
in the way they are associated.
Given such a tuple, nodes and edges are created for
C1, C2, χ∗and a root node Call directed associative
edges are added for:
C1
A+,χ∗
−−−−⇁
C2
(3)
C2
A−,−χ∗
−−−−−⇁
C1
(4)
C1
ST 3
−−−⇁
χ∗
(5)
C2
ST 3
−−−⇁
χ∗
(6)
χ∗
ST −3
−−−−⇁
C1
(7)
χ∗
ST −3
−−−−⇁
C2
(8)
χ∗
ST 3
−−−⇁
Call
(9)
(10)
With this linkage, we can determine which associa-
tions Ai are relevant to which contexts χj and also
which concepts Ck may be activated by contexts
χj. The encoding of concepts in this way, linked
by associations, forms a recursive structure, which is
described below. This is not regular in the manner of
a Cayley tree: the result is closer to a ‘semantic small
worlds’ graph [17]–[19].
V.
NAMING OF CONCEPTS AND THE STRUCTURE
OF A NAME
Semantic interpretation is essentially about the
naming of things, in a representation meaningful to
the observer. A name is a pattern (behavioural or
symbolic) that represents a concept. Names are most
useful if they are shared between multiple agents, so
that concepts can be communicated and committed
to shared (societal) memory, and be used to explain
(not merely recognize) phenomena. Thus, the way
in which we name observed patterns is of vital im-
portance to their interpretation by other agents. This
includes numerical names such as coordinate tuples,
e.g. (1, 2, 3, 4), (x, y, z), etc.
Without a consistent pattern representation for
concepts (which we may deﬁne to be a language)
there could not be recall of memory, and thus concepts
would be useless and irretrievable. Thus language is
a necessary condition for semantic interpretation. In
neural network approaches, the dimensional reduction
of a number of inputs to a small number of outputs is
only meaningful when one can clearly and unambigu-
ously identify the output channels with named con-
cepts. This too is a simple language transformation4.
A. Associations and their aliases in context
As argued in [7], the fundamental basis for con-
ceptual association has its origins in the structure of
spacetime, represented by four types of relationship τ
(being close in space and time, being in a bounded
area, etc). We then give speciﬁc associative meaning
A(τ) to these different spacetime coincidences by
naming associations according to abstracted concepts.
Concepts and associations are nodes and edges of a
graph:
C1
A(τ)|χ
−−−−⇁C2
(11)
where the edge of the graph depends on a fundamental
spacetime type, whose qualitative description is given
by one of the four irreducible associations documented
in table I, and their negatives.
The conditional parameter χ represents a context
set of terms, under which this edge is active. Since
context changes, by deﬁnition, as fast as we can think,
or the environment can be perceived, the elementary
tokens associated with context must be expected to be
as large in number as the number of invariant sensory
perceptions of the observer, and the most rapidly
changing symbols in the knowledge representation.
For this reason, we could expect primary context
characterizations to be hardwired, i.e. built into the
functional nature of the agent, by specialized eyes
and ears, face cells and place cells, and so on [20].
Secondary characteristics could be learned over time,
provided they remain simple enough to be activated
quickly. It is unlikely that context would be expressed
by complex concepts. However, it could be that this is
the role of emotions: sensations as complex as sensory
perception, but without strong rational linkage [10].
Multiple aliases, or alternative interpretations, of
the four spatial relationships are possible, indeed
they are encouraged in effective communication for
expressivity and qualiﬁcation. For example, type 1
(proximity) may be interpreted as adjacency, ap-
proximately equal to, close to, next to, etc. Type
2 (linear sequential order) may represent time, or
unidirectional ordering, causation, dependency, etc.
4Note that this suggests that language is not a rule-determined
system, but a pattern-based one, i.e. that any rules we identify are
post-hoc rather than generative.
5

ST TYPE
FORWARD
RECIPROCAL
SPACETIME STRUCTURE
is close to
is close to
contiguity
approximates
is equivalent to
PROXIMITY
ST 1
is connected to
is connected to
“near”
is adjacent to
is adjacent to
Semantic symmetrization
is correlated with
is correlated with
similarity
FORWARD
RECIPROCAL
SPACETIME STRUCTURE
depends on
enables
ordering
ST 2
is caused by
causes
GRADIENT/DIRECTION
follows
precedes
“follows”
FORWARD
RECIPROCAL
SPACETIME STRUCTURE
contains
is a part of / occupies
boundary perimeter
ST 3
surrounds
inside
AGGREGATE / MEMBERSHIP
generalizes
is an aspect of / exempliﬁes
“contains” / coarse graining
FORWARD
RECIPROCAL
SPACETIME STRUCTURE
has name or value
is the value of property
qualitative attribute
ST 4
characterizes
is a property of
DISTINGUISHABILITY
represents/expresses
is represented/expressed by
“expresses”
promises
Asymmetrizer
TABLE I: Examples of the four irreducible association types, characterized by their spacetime origins, from [7]. In a graph
representation, ‘has attribute’ and ‘contains’ are clearly not independent, so implementation details can still compress the
number of types.
Type 3 (containment) may represent membership in
a group, generalization of a collection of concepts,
location inside or outside a perimeter, etc. However,
we should also be cautious that informal association
of linguistic metaphor also leads to confusions about
the appropriate classiﬁcation of meaning under the
irreducible types, as interpretation by metaphor is ﬂuid
in human language [21].
Associations must retain their speciﬁc interpreta-
tion on every link, but also the generic type, which af-
fects the way we parse the structure and hence reason
about the associations. Meaningful narrative is usually
driven mainly by type 2 (causally ordered sequences
of happenings or reasoned steps), embellished by type
4 discriminating properties and lateral reasoning of
types 1 and 3.
B. Scaling of semantics
Semantically enhanced concepts may be derived
from the aggregation of primitive concepts, by asso-
ciative clustering. Each cluster may act as a new com-
pound agent, through its representative hub (whose
name represents the aggregation), by making new
associative links. The hub acts as a gateway to the
qualiﬁed concept’s associative network, much as a
router is a gateway between a subnet and the larger
Internet. Each concept is therefore an agent, at some
scale of aggregation, with a unique name representing
its meaning. In addition, the names of contextualized
associations, within a cluster, and without, add the
speciﬁcity of concepts expressed.
Based on trial and error experience, it seems that
the most comprehensible or ‘natural’ linguistic nam-
ing strategy is one that follows the scaling of agency,
i.e. aggregation, as described in [6]. With a scaled ap-
proach, one combines the names of interior promises
to yield a compound name for a collective concept,
and exterior promises then express the associations
between the composite concepts [6]. In linguistics
this is called compounding. The scaling is compatible
with patterns observed in cognitive linguistics [22],
indicating that language, as we understand it, forms a
good network structure for concept representation5.
From a cognitive perspective, the way we turn
data into concepts depends on the spacetime bound-
ary conditions imposed by exterior environment. The
semantics of data are different depending on whether
samples originate from from a single source or from
a collection (statistical ensemble) of sources. In in-
formation culture, people sometimes talk about pets
versus cattle, meaning unique instances with names
and labels, versus herds without distinct identities. In
data terms, these are singletons and ensembles.
C. The role of approximation in scaling invariance
In a batch experiment, where multiple samples
contribute to a collective impression, all data points
within an ensemble are considered to be equivalent,
and with homogeneous semantics. In other words,
we choose (as a matter of policy) to overlook any
differences, and map them all to the same name. If
a dataset is a stream of scalar values qi, then every
qi would be considered interchangeable. The indices
i may be relabelled and the results will be preserved.
The properties that are derived from the dataset must
therefore be invariant under relabellings of the array
index i. This is how invariant representations are
formed. Such invariant representations are crucial to
avoid an explosion of contextualization, which would
be expensive and would render concepts non-reusable.
5It should probably be considered a tautology that linguistic
structure and conceptual networking are complementary.
6

In order to learn from the past, a cognitive agent must
transform ephemeral samples into invariant concepts
efﬁciently.
matroid agent
property
instances
contains
expresses
Fig. 4: The semantics of representing aggregation. If we
group aggregated properties by a linking them centrally to
a singular basis agent [5], [7], then attribute expression is
effectively the inverse of set membership, and the basis
agent alone represents the collective ensemble. Ad hoc
clusters not have this property.
Fig. 5: Indistinguishable agents at different scales.
For each of the irreducible spacetime association
types, there is an interpretation of the meaning of
aggregation, which promotes invariance:
1)
Proximity
clustering
or
approximation
(spacelike
or
semantic
convergence):
When named concepts are close together
either in the real external world, or in
the interior representation, then they form
a labelled proximity cluster. The nature
of the proximity may be physical, literal,
or semantic depending on the label. The
encoding is the same in all cases, up to a
label. See ﬁgure 6.
2)
Causal aggregation (timelike convergent dy-
namics): When dependencies come together
to a head, so that a single outcome may be a
causal determinant of multiple sources. This
is a deﬁnition of the arrow of time. See ﬁgure
7.
3)
Symmetry
aggregation
(membership
or
spacelike homogeneity): When concepts are
joined to a single hub that represents their
collective identity, by a ‘contains/contained
hub
near
body centre
near
near
Fig. 6: ST Type 1 Proximity cluster is accretion.
hub
depends on
depends on
depends on
outcome
Fig. 7: ST Type (2) Causal cluster indication causation, like
in a fault-dependency tree.
by’ relationship. See ﬁgure 8.
Type or class
hub
contains
contains
contains
Fig. 8: ST Type (1) Symmetry cluster or membership class
4)
Qualiﬁcation by attribution (semantic qual-
iﬁcation): When the name of a concept is
qualiﬁed by a context (sometimes called a
namespace), and possibly a role (like verb,
noun etc), For example, the multiple inter-
pretations of a word like “tar”
•
Tar as a noun in the context of wa-
terprooﬁng
•
Tar as a noun in the context of com-
puting
•
Tar as a verb in the context of paint-
ing
•
Tar as a verb in the context of char-
acterization
must be distinguished using the hub con-
struction for attribute association. This con-
struction is a generic (pattern) form of what
we call a schema or datatype in comput-
ing. It is recognizable without any specially
arranged protocol, just from the observed
associations. See ﬁgure 9.
7

has name
has role
has context
qualified concept
hub
Fig. 9: ST Type (3) Semantic qualiﬁcation clusters describe
the kind of concept and its context.
The scaling of conceptual agency, in these represen-
tations, is a direct application of the promise theory
[6], summarized here according to the four irreducible
spacetime attributes elucidated in [7]. The parsing al-
gorithm can now be be remarkably simple because the
associations are organized around the most elementary
spacetime concepts, or distinction in location, order,
or expressed properties.
VI.
THE MATROID NAMING CONSTRUCTION
In earlier work [5], I showed how a promise view
of structure motivated an identiﬁcation of concepts
as spanning sets, or matroids over a labelled graph.
The most convenient representation of these is to bind
all related clusters to a hub node, whose name is the
collective name of the cluster6. This offers a scalable
approach to spanning concepts [5], with upwardly
extensible uniqueness. By associating a collection of
associated concepts with a single point of address, we
throw a kind of perimeter around the spokes and rim
emanating from the hub to form a single new concept.
Such clusters may overlap without limit, thus this is
not a mutually exclusive branching process [3]7.
Unlike a hashing approach to unique naming,
uniqueness can be assured by combinatoric com-
pounding of names. The collection of named concepts
in a cluster is accessed through a single node hub
which acts as a gateway for the aggregation of parts.
The name of such a matroid hub (or compound name)
represents the name of the composite concept, formed
by the internal association of interior concepts.
A. Nominal compounds and orphans
Concepts, whether primitive or derived, may there-
fore be thought of as ‘lexical fragments’, ‘syntax
fragments’, or generally language fragment, formed
by recursive scaling. A compound is, in essence, a
long name, which contains evidence of the concepts
6This is broadly analogous to the way we name a compound data
schema object in computing. The hub has the name of the object
in its entirety, and the members have the names of the associated
items. The association types are analogous to the data types. Where
the analogy breaks down is that matroid hubs can name arbitrary
collections of data, they do not form mutually exclusive, non-
overlapping memory segments.
7Concepts may be aggregated without limit for qualiﬁcation,
but they cannot be subdivided without limit. Thus taxonomies and
ontologies as branching processes are not scalable to adaptation.
it depends on, and which is linked recursively to the
atomic concepts (see ﬁgure 11). It is also possible
that the compound name forgets its association to
the concepts from which it was derived, and survives
independently through the frequency and associative
density of its use.
GP
doctor
doctor in the role of GP
compound
attribute
role
4
4
Fig. 10: Compound formation can be reduced to a func-
tional pattern: a representative name linked to partial con-
cepts (type -1 association) one of which is a main subject
header (like doctor) This is a dimensional reduction strategy,
because we can now refer only to the compound name and
drag along all the conceptual baggage of its associations
accordingly. Note, however, that the interpretation of a
privileged role for is sometimes ambiguous.
The study of compound terminology is a major
topic in linguistics, which addresses the conceptual
origins of names we use in language. For example, the
leg of a table can be referred to by a single compound
word or phrase ‘tableleg’, in which the compound has
the role of ‘leg’ (by analogy to an animal leg) and a
contextual attribute ‘table’ (see ﬁgures 11 and 10).

leg
role
←−−(table-leg)
qualiﬁer
−−−−−→table

(12)
This example is straightforward, and fairly unam-
biguous. The name reﬂects the components directly
with a conventional ordering, leading to a simple
rule to construct a compound identiﬁer. However,
many compound concepts do not directly reﬂect their
origins, or in fact forget their origins over time, e.g
window (from Norwegian ‘vind’ and ‘auge’, meaning
eye for the wind, clearly before the invention of glass).
A window is neither a wind, nor an eye, yet the word
serves its purpose with a whiff of the metaphysical.
In other cases, there is no linguistic term for a new
qualiﬁcation, yet we need to distinguish ambiguous
concepts with qualifying context, e.g. consider ‘doc-
tor’. A doctor may refer to a medical doctor, a general
practitioner (GP), a surgeon, or someone with a PhD,
etc. We could simply ﬁnd unique names for all of
these, but this approach does not easily scale; hence,
it is normal to describe ‘namespaces’ as contextual
constraints. This can be done by forming a compound
name as a phrase ‘doctor in the role of GP’ for
instance (see ﬁgure 10).
It is now somewhat ambiguous what is the role and
what is the qualiﬁer in this construction. It could be
argued that ‘GP’ is the role and doctor is redundant, or
that ‘doctor’ is the role and ‘GP’ is the qualiﬁer. The
distinction is somewhat arbitrary from a computational
8

viewpoint (this is the danger of ‘schema’ thinking),
but it is sometimes helpful to be able to distinguish a
privileged component that describes the behaviour or
function of the term. Through the various experiments
conducted during the course of this work, from topic
maps [23] to the present model, it seems that the
appropriate place for agent role in a network lies in
the associations between pairs of concepts, rather than
in the concepts themselves. If one tries to ‘type’ con-
cepts (in a typology, taxonomy, ontology, meronomy
(partonomoy), etc) one prevents the free association of
ideas by analogy that is so central to human reasoning.
Thus the classic idea of a ‘data type’ for concepts
in a semantic network appears to be simply wrong
because it leads to an over-constrained network with
too much uniqueness. The resulting network is too
sparse to allow percolation and hence propagation of
storyline [7], [24].
Finally, there is the central problem: how do we
think up names to concept clusters? The naming of
clusters seems analogous to the matter of forming
nominal compounds (see ﬁgure 11). One approach is
to try to abandon linguistic meaning and use some
form of unique hash. This approach is used in natural
language processing [25] with some claimed success.
However, hashing is a one-way transformation, which
is unsuitable for our associative map. To create an
interactive system of knowledge, we need to be able
to read back concepts in a form parsable by humans.
surgeon
doctor in the role of GP
doctor
GP
colour
white colour
white
flower
lovely
doctor in the role of surgeon
lovely white flower
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
Fig. 11: Under aggregation by a hub, the irreducible types
effectively collapse into a single type, bound by membership
to the hub. This kind of central binding is the most invariant
construct of all.
The matroid hubs, with their compound names, are
binding points, or conﬂuences of association, which
act as semantic correlators, i.e. authoritative anchor
points, expressing uniqueness. If we follow through
this approach consistently, then conceptual speciﬁcity
increases upwards with the level of aggregation, rather
than downwards with the depth of branching, as in a
taxonomic hierarchies (i.e. branching processes). This
leads to a bottom-up approach to conceptualization,
which is entirely compatible with the modern genetic
understanding of phylogeny and phenotype expressed
through the aggregation of genetic ﬂavours. This is
also motivated by a promise-oriented interpretation.
Mirroring the proposed usage approach of language
formation in cognitive linguistics [26]. It is a chem-
istry of semantic atoms, mixed into distinct molecular
combinations, with differentiated functional meaning.
B. Concepts, associations and the scaling hierarchy
The end result of a cognitive process is to tokenize
complex data inputs into tokens (concepts), which
summarize the data in an invariant representation;
this might be approximate, but it is proportionately
immune to variations, and to link these together by
association. In promise theory language, concept to-
kens are agents (nodes in a graph), and associations
(graph edges) are promised by these agents.
There is a ladder from sensing to conceptualiza-
tion, which proceeds by aggregation (over time and
space). This involves work, and thus it takes increasing
time to process complex associative concepts. Con-
cepts are clusters of agents. The basis of interpreta-
tional semantics lies in the following observations:
Law 1 (Coincidence and concurrence): That
which occurs together (concurrently, coincidentally,
i.e. locally, or in the same context) is associated.
Thus context belongs to associations, not to concepts.
Measurements at different locations and at different
times are not necessarily causally related, but may
be correlated. The naming of the association is
undetermined.
Law 2 (Semantic stability): Averages stabilize se-
mantics by decoupling from temporal and spatial
approximate regions. Data sampled and combined
from different sources (locations) should be treated
as ensemble averages, in a single concurrent experi-
ment. The meaning of time and location are lost in
these averages, and semantics are stabilized by this
decoupling.
Law 3 (Scaled agency): Semantics
(interpreta-
tions) arise from the naming of associated forms
and patterns, in space and time, and across multiple
scales. Names assigned become invariant concepts.
Law 4 (Constant semantics during observation):
Measurements are comparable if they have the
same semantics. In cognition, observations are not
comparable in an experimental sense, unless we
deliberately
overlook
certain
information.
Thus
semantic stability depends on what information we
throw away.
The last two are circularly self consistent.
C. The learned context channel
During activation, inputs might activate an elemen-
tary context token, and in turn, several such atoms
might activate an association, somewhat in the manner
9

fluctuation
aggregate
Meaning
fast
slow
elapsed time/derivation
raw data for recall
patterns in time/space
context (predicate for concepts)
here + now
scalar/self attributes
concepts for future reference
links for reasoning
associations/promises to others
agents/sources
Fig. 12: Climbing the knowledge ladder takes longer and longer to advance towards sophisticated concepts, from fast
sensing to pondering concepts, because of iteration and aggregation (learning).
of a crude neural network (see ﬁgure 3). The relative
activation level of an association is thus the integral of
the weights of its incoming edges. A triggering policy
could also be employed for generality and tuning;
however, we can only simulate this spatial interference
process on von Neumann computers..
Context is used to frame the circumstances un-
der which associations and concepts are identiﬁed.
Striking the balance between a context that strives for
a coordinatized precision and one that is maximally
invariant (for repeated ‘context-free’ use) is the cen-
tral challenge of building an addressing system for
semantics and knowledge [7]. In the implementation
of Cellibrium, it is thus assumed that:
•
Context is attached to associations, not con-
cepts. A co-activation of an associative bond
needs only be a set that activates both ends,
but the speciﬁc members may differ at each
end by evolution of contextual awareness of
the cognitive agent.
•
Limiting the amount of nominal information
in context is a priority, else the memory
requirements for knowledge would be diver-
gent.
•
All associations belong to one of the four
spacetime association types [7]:
1)
An approximate similar location in
space.
2)
A common cause or outcome, con-
vergence of path in past or future.
3)
A common enclosure or membership.
4)
A shared property, leading to implicit
membership (e.g. all kinds of doctor
in ﬁgure 11).
In aggregation by symmetry, all these collapse
to type 3 in practice, i.e. grouping of indis-
tinguishable members [7].
•
Context describes something analogous to re-
cent browsing history:
1)
The intent that led to the association
being made (interior state).
2)
The emotional and rational state of
the agent’s recent thinking (interior).
3)
The
unintended
circumstances
in
which the agent ﬁnds itself when
making
the
association
(exterior
state).
In other words, anything we happen to be
thinking about or involved in can be a context
for knowledge relevance (see ﬁgure 13).
D. Interior and exterior associations of concept clus-
ters
What is expressed externally by sensors plays a
different role than what is expressed internally by
introspection, as we saw in section VI. Interior and
exterior properties continue to play a role in distin-
guishing. Figure 13 illustrates this. Both interior and
exterior contexts may play a role in addressing, i.e.
labelling and retrieving, concepts (see section VII-B).
There remains the question how we should use
context to activate or deactivate story pathways. In
an artiﬁcial system, especially one made for a do-
main speciﬁc purpose, the information content, or
semantic complexity, inherent in context annotation
during training might be too small to give a reasonable
chance of discrimination of relevance in real-world
circumstances. Unless there is a sufﬁcient density of
discriminators, we will either fail to ﬁnd possible
pathways (lateral thinking) or we will include too
many, losing the point of context as a reﬁnement
criterion.
We might rank pathways by an activation score for
how each node in a story overlaps with the current
context. Alternatively, we might rank an entire story
10

C
interior cognition
KNOWLEDGE
C
1
2
interior association
exterior association
exterior cognition
SENSORS
think about
Fig. 13: The scaling of association and cognition. Context
labelling of associations may be interior to compound con-
cepts, or exterior between concepts. Context acquisition, by
cognition, may be interior to an agent observer (intentional
or introspective) or exterior (sensory or unintentional).
along its path. The latter would bias in favour of long
stories8.
E. Examples of contextualization
The structure of the following examples helps to
show why context is so important, and why it is
important to aggregate clusters into concept-property
matroids and situation-context groups. This is a set-
theoretic interpretation. Contextual information is both
interior (explanatory of subjects) and exterior (causal
and situational or correlated). The following cases
help to exemplify the issue:
•
The doctor (in the role of surgeon) depends
on surgical gloves in the context of (operating
room,examining patients).
•
Bruce Wayne (in the role of Batman) is a
member of super-heroes (in the role of night-
club).
•
Tidal is generalized by (is a kind of) com-
pany when (thinking about music, streaming
music)
•
Tidal in the role of gravitational effect does
NOT have the role of company.
•
Tidal is NOT caused by the moon in the
context of tidal as a company.
•
Tidal has the role of an effect when thinking
about physics, gravity.
•
Gravity depends on mass in the context of
physics.
•
Gravity is the name of a book (a book called
gravity) in the context of physics.
8If we could ﬁnd a normalized ‘probability’ to sum per unit
story length, then we could build a score analogous to the Shannon
entropy, in which associations were symbols in an associative
alphabet. This remains for future investigation.
•
Temperature expresses very hot in the context
of measuring server.
•
Hot contains very hot in context (all contexts).
•
Very hot contains ‘50 degrees C’ in the con-
text of measuring server.
•
Temperature expresses hot in the context of
(measuring server, 306, datacentre, NYC).
•
Temperature expresses hot in the context of
June.
These singular context names, while meaningful to
readers with a broad cultural knowledge, are too
simple to allow meaningful discrimination during ma-
chine processing. We need to understand how to ex-
tend context labels for efﬁcient addressing of semantic
relevance.
F. Context design and compound concepts
Because of the recursive nature of concepts, the
promise model of scaled agency in [6] suggests that
it will be helpful to distinguish between interior and
exterior context of a concept. Interior context refers
to qualifying associations positioned ‘behind’ hubs,
which help to support and qualify the interpretation of
a concept. Exterior context refers to the set of concepts
that are active in the recent train of thought of the total
cognitive system, as it interfaces with the world on the
other end of its sensory apparatus (see table II).
CONTEXTS
INTERIOR
EXTERIOR
LEARNING SOURCE /
Introspective
Observational
AWARENESS
thinking
sensing
MEMORY ADDRESS /
Qualifying
Relative
RETRIEVAL
property
placement
TABLE II: Semantic scaling leads to a notion of interior
and exterior at many levels. These distinctions play an
important role in deﬁning cognitive linguistic recursion
during the learning and retrieval of stories.
Interior memory context acts as a kind of ‘type’
or ‘role’ interpretation for concepts that have been
selected or deselected by an exterior memory con-
text, whereas interior awareness context represents the
feedback of the system talking to itself about past
experiences and thoughts. In all cases, the functional
treatment of memory context may be handled by an
invariant algorithm, with great computational simplic-
ity. Context is not just about the addition of descriptive
words during learning, but also about linking those
compound states to all the sub-concepts on which they
depend too. By following this approach, the average
degree of connectivity in the graph increases superlin-
early, making non-trivial stories increasingly likely,
while also providing switches by which to exclude
pathways based on later context during retrieval.
The recursion in the graph corresponds to a re-
cursive linguistic structure that can be illustrated as
11

// What kinds of compound contexts can we expect? State of mind...
// What are we trying to do?
ContextCluster("doctor service");
ContextCluster("patient appointment");
ContextCluster("patient health service");
ContextCluster("need to visit a doctor");
ContextCluster("patient doctor registration");
ContextCluster("identity authentication verification");
// Compound (qualified) concepts
RoleCluster("GP doctor","doctor", "general practitioner", "patient health service");
RoleCluster("surgeon doctor","doctor", "surgeon", "patient health service");
RoleCluster("patient appointment","appointment", "doctor patient", "patient health service");
// Elementary bidirectional associative links
Gr("doctor",a_promises,"doctor availability","patient doctor registration");
Gr("health service access",a_depends,"patient authenticated","need to visit a doctor");
Gr("health service access",a_depends,"patient appointment","need to visit a doctor");
....
Fig. 14: Example programming statements leading to the formation of a graph from within a programming environment.
Any system could, in principle, be instrumented from within to offer semantic hints for aggregation by a central ‘brain’.
Helper functions divide up and generate patterns, as illustrated in ﬁgures 10 and 11.
follows. Consider the following unary association,
containing subgraphs, labelled by their irreducible ST-
type.
(the cat which (is black (4), eats ﬁsh (2)))
expresses(4) (happy purr) in the context of (living room)
The parenthetic recursions are all interior properties,
and the explanations of situation are exterior (bold-
face). We end up with useful statements of the general
structure:
(
(concept name, interior recursive properties)
(association type, alias)
(concept name, interior properties)
in (exterior context)
)
This suggests that an API, something like the one
shown in ﬁgure 14, can help to automate the struc-
tural regularity during the documentation of concepts
and associations, i.e. during semantic learning. No-
tice how, by using the matroid hubs and compound
concepts to reduce the dimensionality of conceptual
activations into a single concept, we also achieve
an economy of scale, with attendant computational
simpliﬁcation9.
VII.
RETRIEVAL OF ‘KNOWLEDGE’
Once encoded, retrieval of associations is achieved
by reparsing the representation in ﬁgure 3, subject
to an independently maintained context. Sensory con-
text is a set of somewhat elementary tokens, which
9It is interesting to speculate whether this observation might
help to explain the common use of compound words and special
terminology, like acronyms, in human language.
activates certain concepts and associations. Exterior
context may be exchanged for slower, but more stable
introspection, in which derived concepts are fed back
into the context by ‘thinking about’ a particular topic.
Tokens can be followed individually or activated in
parallel to search for the consequences of a particular
concept in the current context. Implementing this
context channel will be the most challenging aspect of
building a cognitive knowledge representation. Only
the ﬁrst stages will be addressed in this report.
A. Conceptual pathways
Retrieval of explanations and associative reasoning
can be open ended or bounded (see ﬁgure 15); we
want to:
•
Explain how to get from a starting concept
and a ﬁnal concept (bounded but not unique).
•
Explore where we can go from some a start-
ing concept (unbounded brainstorming).
•
Explain the different ways one can get to a
ﬁnal concept (inverse brainstorming).
The ﬁrst of these is somewhat analogous to a quantum
path integral [1]. Any one or several of the possible
pathways might be in play between concepts in a
given context. For example, without sufﬁcient context
to know the interpretations of ‘Oslo’ and ‘America’,
both these unary associations may be in play simulta-
neously during a reasoning process:
•
Oslo is located in America
•
Oslo is NOT located in America.
In logic, this would be considered impossible, yet
both of these pathways may be equally relevant (we
should avoid the expression ‘true’) if the context is
unable to select only one. A knowledge system cannot
12

Fig. 15: Brainstorming around a start concept, without a
clear end. Reasoning may contain loops, which need to be
handled somehow.
even know that these seem potentially contradictory
without a sufﬁcient density of linkage to qualifying
context. We must be quite careful not to over-constrain
reasoning by projecting human expectations onto a
process too early. It is likely that concepts such as
true and false are emergent rather than prescriptive.
B. Context in retrieval
As we trace along a story, from concept to concept,
four semantic component sets may be associated with
with each step in a story (see ﬁgure 16).
•
The current concept in a story (a ﬁxed bound-
ary condition).
•
The concepts associated with the current con-
cept (directed links to possibilities).
•
The current awareness context or ‘state of
mind’ of the observer (current relevance).
•
The awareness context at the time of learn-
ing (encoded in interior and exterior associa-
tions).
How these four sets activate one another is key to
how stories may be generated ‘deterministically’. The
current concept is a natural part of the state of
mind of an agent, and thus it belongs to the interior
cognitive context as much as any sensory inputs. The
cognitive context of an agent divides into interior and
exterior parts. Interior context is what the agent is
thinking about, independently of its sensory inputs.
The exterior context is its sensory channels. Thus
some context information is naturally inward-looking,
or introspective, while other information is outward-
looking (grounding in the realities at different times).
It is interior awareness context that determines the
relevance of forward pathways, because state of mind
is the calibrator of intent. Exterior awareness context
is about framing the current experience, grounding
it by experience or feeling. Thus, the two cognitive
‘awareness’ channels have different semantic roles [7].
As context evolves, so does the focus of conscious-
ness, or ‘what the system is thinking about’ i.e. the
current concept or set of concepts in a story frame.
Interior associative context plays the role of functional
type, and is entirely encoded in the recursive com-
pounding structures of the knowledge representation.
So when we retrieve knowledge, this kind of context
is purely qualifying or explanatory of the usage. The
major links to concepts will be to the fully qualiﬁed
hub nodes, and the interior context will be hidden
unless explicitly examined, at any given level of
recursion.
It is exterior associations that link concepts to one
another in the knowledge representation, so they deter-
mine which concepts lead to other concepts. However,
those exterior associations are judged for relevance
by comparing the context in which they were learned
with the current context or state of mind of the agent.
This leads to a complex causation: concepts overlap
through association, and context overlaps with pairs of
concepts, and perhaps beyond. We therefore have two
channels evolving in parallel: a short term memory of
context and a long term memory of qualiﬁed concepts
[7].
C. Evolution of awareness context
Measuring the relevance of forward pathways re-
mains an unsolved problem. How should the current
context evolve then as we traverse a story. How
quickly should context be forgotten? When to in-
crease the scope of context and when to say that our
evolving thoughts have drifted off-topic is an highly
subtle determination, which may not lend itself to
algorithmic or pattern based solution. It might well
be that relevance needs a bank of multiple pathways
interfering across the entire length of a story path.
When we apply software to the problem, it is natural
to treat each leg of a story as a Markov process,
each step independent of the last, with some activation
context adding transverse memory. This is probably
too simplistic, but for this work, that must be the limit
of ambition.
As a ﬁrst approximation, we may take the lexical
overlap of the two context sets (past and present) as
an estimation of relevance. Using this, we can sort
stories link by link to judge the relevance of each
twist and turn. The relevance of the total story cannot
be calculated without a particular end-topic. That goes
beyond the scope of these notes.
When machine learning is applied to document
processing, story fragments are treated as patterns
to be recognized, and the relevant forward pathways
are determined based on statistical ensemble support
rather than semantic relevance [27], [28].
There are many issues with trying to match rel-
evance based on context in a small system. Present
context may not match the context at the time of
learning, because there are too few degrees of freedom
for coupling contexts together. It may turn out that
we have to rely on more universal invariant context
markers like emotional states (fear, happiness, etc) to
play a role in activation and selection. Although these
are poorly understood, they may play a central role in
joining together ideas that cannot easily be joined by
explanations of semantics.
13

As usual, it is important to remember that se-
mantics are secondary to what dynamics enable, thus
causal propagation of meaning cannot be assumed
across different timescales (see ﬁgure 16). We may
expect the timescales of learning and retrieval to be-
come separated eventually, with retrieval times much
longer than training times, yet we must still recall and
modify stories that were learnt previously. This gives
some clues about the encoding. In particular it tells
us that all causal information needs to be encoded in
exterior associations, not by relying on context to light
up answers directly, like a primary database key.
concept 1
concept 2
1
χ
2
χ
concept 1
concept 2
 causal links?
(No causation)
χ
Intending
Sensing
retrieval
training
present
past
Time
Interpretation
Context
Knowledge
Invariant
Variant
Fig. 16: The timescales associated with learning and re-
trieval of stories. The links between concepts may or may
not be causal over long separations, but context is always
causally related to concepts over short timescales.
If excessive speciﬁcity can be the enemy of re-
trieval, then speciﬁcity is important during the encod-
ing phase of knowledge. For example, it is not the
general concept of birds that depends on the concept
of ﬂight, but rather a fully qualiﬁed instance of a
bird. In other words, we have to be careful not to
confuse what is general with what is speciﬁc, at any
level of recursion, as this can lead to manifest errors
of reasoning, such as ‘all birds depend on ﬂight’.
Matching of conceptual scales is yet another problem
that must be deferred for further study in future work.
VIII.
THE EXPERIMENTS
At the time of writing, a simple proof of concept
implementation of the foregoing cognitive system has
been implemented. Only the simplest level of inte-
rior/exterior context conditioning was used to activate
and screen paths, owing to the complexity of simu-
lating such a feedback system in software. The initial
goal was to illustrate the principles.
A. Data sources
Four kinds of data source were imported into a
semantic graph, in the hope of ﬁrst generating stories
by brainstorming. Even this simple ﬁrst step has
application for causal analysis, qualitative hypothesis
testing, etc. The data sources were:
•
Computer monitoring examples: data from
the Cellibrium CGNgine agent (a CFEngine
‘computer immunology’ derivative, with em-
bedded machine learning at the pattern level)
were output in realtime, as in a production
datacentre environment or IoT scenario. As
an intentional system, the intended policy
could also be encoded and connected to the
activities of the agent, describing desired
state. Thus data observations, intentionally
measured from the actual state of the system,
and converted into invariant forms, with an
intended interpretation relative determined by
policy goals and constraints. See ﬁgure 18.
Policy documentation ﬁles, describing intent,
were incorporated, such as the intended mean-
ings of software functions, with links to docu-
mentation, as well as the coding of particular
policy rules. The source code of the software
agent could be scanned to extract error mes-
sages given in a particular context10. Domain
knowledge about the design and intent of
the software itself was included manually, as
well as remarks about the world of computer
datacentres, servers, and operating systems.
•
Software system example: Data scanned from
the nesting structure and dependencies of
software, packaged in process containers, ﬁle
bundles, and linked binaries, probed using
intended composition rules (source: Make-
ﬁles, container speciﬁcations, package com-
positions, and binary linker data from ldd,
etc). See ﬁgures 19 and 20.
•
Doctor online registration wizard: Domain
knowledge from an imaginary online sce-
nario, where a patient is trying to register for
a doctors appointment in a new city. Concepts
and associations are input directly from a
wizard overview of knowledge of intent about
the smart distributed service, and the software
it uses, its dependencies, and workﬂows etc.,
(source: authors of the system). See ﬁgure 21.
•
Big picture semantic index example: Domain
knowledge contributed from possibly multiple
sources giving a cognitive overview of an
entire environment or experience. See ﬁgure
22.
B. Machine learning
Machine learning appears at two distinct levels:
1)
The sensory data collectors sample the ex-
terior sources at some (relatively frequent)
timescale, in accordance with Nyquist’s the-
orem. Each collector, with its independent
semantics, transmutes sample data into a sep-
arate invariant representation and learns its
signiﬁcant patterns and states (for monitor-
ing, see [29]). From this Bayesian statistical
10Current programming languages do not make it easy to export
the contextual intent behind code or user messages. In future, such
an innovation will become essential to the scaled monitoring of a
software society.
14

description, a lexical name representation is
selected from a small set invariant states.
2)
Associations
are
updated
on
a
regular
timescale, and each associative link acts as
an independent Bayesian learning process
(i.e. a Bayesian network), giving the links
in the semantic network weights relating to
their importance and frequency of visitation.
This applies at each recursive scale of con-
cept aggregation.
The intentional aspects of any system, which was
designed or evolved for a niche purpose, are central
to the encoding of its semantics. If such information
is not captured at the source, it is simply lost. Users
of the software may later reinterpret this intent, in
the light of current assumptions, but the intended
meaning ultimately originates from a source which
matches two promises: the ‘promise/intent offered’
and ‘promise/intent accepted’ (like lock and key). The
receiver always has the last word in interpretation
however [8].
C. Software implementation
Prototype code for creating and parsing the knowl-
edge representation, is shared under the Cellibrium
[11] project. This employs the simplest possible proof
of concept, avoiding programming concerns in favour
of pedagogy. Concepts are represented as directory
names, each containing subdirectories for the 4+1
association types; then, in turn, a ﬁle of association
annotations, including timestamps and weights for
Bayesian updating. Although ﬁlesystem limitations
make this approach unsuitable in the long run, it
made the coding of a prototype pleasantly free of
dependencies and obscure APIs. Everything could be
handled with fast, efﬁcient POSIX system calls11.
All concepts have directories under some root node,
which contain subdirectories corresponding to ± the
four spacetime association types. Under these lie ﬁles,
which document the concepts that may be reached by
following that type of association:
root/
root/StartConcept/
root/StartConcept/1-4/
root/StartConcept/1-4/NextConcepts*
The ‘next concepts’ are ﬁles containing the speciﬁc
annotations, timestamps, and learning weights of the
associations between the starting concept and the
chosen next concept.
To frame context, a separate control channel is
used, mainly for implementation convenience. The
context association is a spacetime containment type
(ST3), but its functional role is different to other
groupings. Contexts work in exactly the same way
as other concepts, with composites and sub-clusters.
11It would seem as though a graph database would be the ideal
candidate for representing such data, but thus far, the input and
query languages for such databases are clumsy and ill-suited to
this kind of structure.
However, contexts arise ad hoc and thus their clusters
do not always have lasting meaning as composite
concepts. As running catalogues of what is currently
going on, somewhat analogous to a browser history,
so relevant words pertaining to the agent state were
simply strung together in no particular order. This
is analogous to the original CFEngine classes [9],
where context was a collection of class strings that
were probed from the environment by specialized
software sensors. Combinations of these classes could
be constructed as quasi-logical expressions (acting
as hubs) to activate certain concepts (in this case
conﬁgurations). The basic atoms were drawn from
system variables.
In more general cases, at a higher level of abstrac-
tion, context must include the ‘state of mind’ of the
cognitive system over the recent past (again, think of
browser history), which encapsulates intent as well as
environmental impulses. These will be expressible in
terms of higher level concepts12
IX.
RESULTS
A. Assessment
Assessing the success of the prototype ‘brain-
storming’ experiments is not an easy matter, given
the qualitative nature of the results. This is not so
much a weakness of the experiment, as the nature of
the problem. Although it is possible to manufacture
artiﬁcial metrics by the collection of numerical data,
e.g. about numbers of proposed stories, or conceptual
overlap with context along a path, etc, these measures
are themselves ad hoc and largely unhelpful, as they
do not correlate easily with the subjective sense of
‘a ha!’ one has when ﬁnding a helpful outcome. So,
we are left with a kind of ‘Turing test’ assessment
approach, i.e. ‘it looks ok’ to a human. Later, once
one applies the approach to a speciﬁc problem, where
target goals can be incorporated from the beginning,
we should be able to do better in establishing con-
sistent criteria. I shall not address this further in this
report.
B. Data
Data sets used consisted of hundreds to thousands
of concept tuples, collected from a variety of sources.
These numbers are quite small for a realistic appli-
cation, but sufﬁce to test some comparative aspects
of the approach. Association data were generated
by annotating system monitoring in realtime, from
software outputs, documentation scans, and by manual
knowledge documentation of hints.
In early trials, realtime monitoring data were fed
into a knowledge representation in a way that retained
a lot of speciﬁc information, to see if this might stabi-
lize into a comprehensible emergent pattern. However,
12Framing and limiting a context is a very hard pedagogical
problem. As a semantic spacetime, a knowledge representation is
somewhat similar to a higher dimensional ﬁeld theory with an
ultraviolet cutoff, as information is discrete and ﬁnite. A story is
like a transition function, or S-matrix element, whose vertex rules
are based on the causal associations and their propagation rules.
15

IP address
kernel
software
container
container layers
base OS image
authentication
storage
libraries
service
host
hosting
+provides
+provides
contains
depends on
depends on
−uses
−uses
−uses
+provides
contains
depends on
Fig. 17: Software associations used to propose a template for scanning software services. From this model template, a
distributed software crawler could be written in a user-secure manner to extract operational knowledge about deployed
software. This cluster of concepts illustrates how one can build a template for a core ontology within a small domain.
this experiment quickly revealed that the potential
burden of remembering the detailed semantics of
every moment.
If each new measurement set leads to a differ-
ent context, i.e. making time itself the generator of
context, the number of concepts (or amount of data)
would be prohibitively large (not for a computer to
remember, but for any human or algorithm to make
sense of). One cannot escape the fact that our human
brains have builtin limitations.
Since we are dealing with semantic interpreta-
tions, we cannot simply say ‘big data’, and treat
every knowledge problem as a forensic investigation,
because we cannot guarantee that a focused set of
concepts will emerge from the data. That is a differ-
ent problem than having an expert on hand who is
already au fait with the necessary knowledge. Thus,
we must look for invariant representations of big data,
cumulatively over time, that may be interpreted by
only a small number of (possibly composite) concepts,
for the sake of comprehension. Fortunately, studies
have shown that meaningful patterns from system
monitoring behaviours are few in number, compared
to a bulk of non-meaningful noise [30].
C. Structure
Throughout early experiments, the output of a
brainstorming episode, based on a given starting con-
cept, tended to lead to either no stories or too many
stories. The reasons for this depended on both the
structure of data and the selection criteria. Initial
attempts to ﬁnd quality stories were hampered simply
by an absence of data. The ﬁrst trials, using data types
to represent contexts, were relatively unsuccessful.
The input of knowledge took a huge manual effort
to curate, both in terms of syntactic and semantic
burdens placed on the author; then, even if someone
could be persuaded to undertake encoding, it would
be fragile and under-connected. Very little unexpected
emergence was possible, as the typing made data
overconstrained. The sparseness and fragility of the
typed structure meant that concepts could not easily
be discovered by free association, and most searches
resulted in no results.
Topic map inspired structures [23] created mainly
led to trivial stories, so the project was set aside
for almost 4 years. Following this hiatus, the models
based on topic maps were abandoned [3], and ideas
from the promise theoretic approach [5] were revived.
The removal of ‘types’ as discriminators, and their
replacement with context-free lexical terms, led to a
large increase in the density of stories. It is difﬁcult to
put numerical measures to the improvement, because
a radical restructuring of many aspects was involved
in this shift, and the results are very dependent on
the particular characteristics of example data, which
were not preserved over the intervening years between
the difference, although an attempt was made to
reconstruct similar data. At best one could say that
there was a qualitative improvement in the results.
The earliest attempts at discovering emergent con-
nections, were implemented by my collaborator Alva
Couch [4], [31], and used a shortest path approach
to selecting a unique ‘route’ between two concepts:
initial and ﬁnal boundary conditions. This is slightly
16

different from full brainstorming, because it is already
more constrained by having a deﬁnite target concept.
Ultimately, I abandoned the shortest path approach
as it creates a tension between quantitative metrics
and dynamical selection criteria rather than semantic
relationships. The idea that a single path, based on its
length, could be a correct answer to the exclusion of
others does not well motivated; although, it is plausi-
ble that, given a set of semantically valid paths from A
to B, the shortest one might have interesting qualities.
The advantages of ﬁxing boundary conditions at the
start and the end of a story were compelling, but it
is not always so clear what we are looking for when
exploring causes and interpretations.
D. Computational complexity
The derivation of the four irreducible spacetime
association types brought a signiﬁcant simpliﬁcation
to the algorithm for exploring locales. Initially a linear
search was needed to identify matching concepts from
a number of type ‘namespaces’. Then associations
could be followed, but the question of whether the
associations could propagate or not was not encoded
directly into the association, requiring another lookup,
or so-called inference rule. The possible complex-
ity was of the order of the product of the length
of the inference table with the number of outgoing
associations (the out-degree of the graph). Thus the
pre-classiﬁcation according to the spacetime ‘compass
types’ led to a reduction in the order of magnitude of
the computational complexity by eliminating the need
for the inference table. The propagation of these types
in inferences is deﬁned by the spacetime classiﬁca-
tions themselves [7], and no matching is required.
A further reduction in the degree of ‘grammatical
complexity’ may come from the aggregation of mul-
tiple concepts into aggregate classes. If associations
can be made to larger umbrella concepts, rather than
concepts, which are too speciﬁc, then the cost of
recursion can be spared. Thus, what may seem to
be a context-free expression, linguistically, may be
sufﬁciently represented by a regular language expres-
sion. See [5], [7] for a discussion of the grammatical
complexity of spacetime associations.
The addition of context, for either positive or
negative matching, is the most intensive computation
remaining; however, this observation seems critical to
establishing semantic relevance of stories. Context, as
modelled in the original CFEngine representation [9],
[32], and its derived Cellibrium implementation [11],
is a non-ordered linear list composed of many atomic
characterizations. Each evaluation of context requires
parsing the entire list for matches with a similar non-
ordered expression composed of the same atoms. The
complexity could be of the order of the product of the
current context lookup and the learned context lookup,
for each association. Supposing that each could be of
logarithmic order, by hashing, this is much better than
a model without the encoding of spacetime types. The
size of a context cannot be pre-determined, because
it ﬂuctuates over short times, and grows during long-
term learning.
Each link in a story has a complexity cost, associ-
ated with the relevance of the link. This was measured
by the size of the overlap between current context and
learned context (analogous to the mutual information
transfer [33], [34]). In the CFEngine model, context
was deﬁned as a ‘logical boolean expression’, which
enabled contextual relevance to be reduced even fur-
ther to a single expression evaluation, whose overlap
was generally quite small, i.e. only the length of
a very speciﬁc boolean expression [32]. There are
many ways to optimize such contextual matches, using
aggregate classiﬁcations and caching, largely because
each execution of a CFEngine context is a frozen
moment in time. The nature of a cognitive system,
on the other hand, is that context is continuously
changing, so it will always be more expensive to
compute.
E. Sensemaking of stories from structure
Having enough brainstorming paths to analyze, in
the output of a search, was an advantage of the new
spacetime approach to knowledge representation. Two
problems remained however, whose remnants may still
be seen in the ﬁgures:
•
Stories were often unreadable and bizarre, as
even valid lexical phrases coughed up along
pathways of the graph had little meaning
without the original intent of the associations
and names preserved and represented. The
loss of intent seemed to lie at the heart of
this. Intent acts itself as a form of context.
•
Often, stories did not terminate, without an ar-
tiﬁcial length cutoff, in spite of loop detection
methods on a per-story basis, as the simplis-
tic recursion allowed stories to contain one
another as sub-parts by the free association.
This suggested that success may lie in the use
of context to constrain stories and bring focus
to the results.
Later, when repeated visitation of a concept was
forbidden across all stories (as a global constraint), the
stories did become ﬁnite; however, now an argument
could be made that the search was now overcon-
strained, and ad hoc choices might exclude certain
combinatoric stories from being visited at all13.
In fact, the non-termination of stories is another
indication that the graph is well connected, even with
the small data sets used, but they were also an artefact
of the open-endedness of the brainstorming process.
Without a clear goal either in terms of context or
speciﬁc concept, there is no deterministic criterion for
running out of combinatoric options.
The recursive scaling of ideas anchors ideas to
context in a more powerful way of attaching intended
13The original approach used by CFEngine was to simulate the
‘neuronal dead-time’ into concepts, eliminating loops by virtue
of concepts having ﬁred already [39]. This worked in CFEngine,
because of its simplistic linear processing approach. In a network
with multidimensional causation, the approach could easily prevent
important answers from emerging rather than protect against repe-
tition.
17

host£ ./stories -s ”Cannot mix CIDR notation with xxx-yyy range notation *” -c ”software fault” -t 2
0:follows) ”Cannot mix CIDR notation with xxx-yyy range notation *” may be caused by ”network policy”
(in the context of errors and faults)
1:apprxnr)
”network policy” contains ”interfaces conﬁguration” (in the context of software)
0:follows) ”Cannot mix CIDR notation with xxx-yyy range notation *” may be caused by ”FuzzySetMatch”
(in the context of errors and faults)
1:preceds)
”FuzzySetMatch” may be used by ”iprange” (in the context of software)
2:follows)
”iprange” depends on ”network pattern matching” (in the context of software)
0:follows) ”Cannot mix CIDR notation with xxx-yyy range notation *” may be caused by
”incorrect use of network pattern matching” (in the context of errors and faults)
1:hasprop)
”incorrect use of network pattern matching” is related to ”network pattern matching” (in the context of errors and faults)
2:preceds)
”network pattern matching” partly determines ”iprange” (in the context of software)
3:follows)
”iprange” may use ”FuzzySetMatch” (in the context of software)
3:apprxnr)
”iprange” belongs to or is part of ”CGNgine class function” (in the context of software)
4:apprxnr)
”CGNgine class function” belongs to or is part of ”system policy” (in the context of software)
4:apprxnr)
”CGNgine class function” belongs to or is part of ”CGNgine functions” (in the context of software)
5:apprxnr)
”CGNgine functions” belongs to or is part of ”CGNgine policy language” (in the context of software)
3:cntains)
”iprange” has the role of and expresses an attribute ”host classiﬁer” (in the context of software software)
4:expr-by)
”host classiﬁer” also known as ”class or context label” (in the context of system monitoring)
Fig. 18: A brainstorming rooted in an error message generated in a CGNgine system log. This story frames
the possible cause(s) of the initial error message anchor point nicely, and pin-points the offending function
‘iprange’.
context than typing. This is basically analogous to
a transition to a schemaless database. After the in-
troduction of the recursive hub structure, and the
automation API, in ﬁgure 14, the story density was
largely unchanged, but the readability of the stories
was greatly improved, allowing the kinds of outputs
shown in the ﬁgures. The structure led naturally to the
separation of context into interior and exterior memory
channels as mentioned in section VI-F. The interior
memory context, in particular, brought immediate
comprehension, even when the strict linguistic form
was contrived. This, of course, is more a testament to
human linguistic acumen than to the skill of a very
simple algorithm, but it indicates that the essence of
language is captured by a recursive identiﬁcation of
irreducible types.
F. Outputs
Figures 18-22 show typical samples of outputs
from a brainstorming. The actual outputs are much
longer than these. This print format is not well suited
to show the data. The left hand margin shows the
spacetime association types (ST1-ST4) followed to
make the association, and the indentation shows re-
cursion depth along a single path.
In ﬁgure 18, the data are taken from the CGNgine
software, using several data transmutors to scan both
the source code, and the system policy. The occur-
rence of an obscure error message in a system output
can immediately be tied to the likely sources and
points of expression, allowing a user to trace the
source all the way back to their intended policy, and
through the software layers.
Figure 19 shows data acquired by a software build
pipeline. It shows how deployed software depends on
its containerized packaging, software dependencies,
and host operating system base, all the way down
to the location of the deployment. This chain of
dependencies may be of use to developers, operations,
and risk analysis personnel, to name a few. Further
analysis based on the speciﬁc semantics could be
automated further. Simply gathering this information
into a single place, in a readable format is no small
task.
Figure 20 shows a more straightforward recursive
decomposition of library dependencies discovered by
using the Linux ldd command. The deeply nested and
extensive list of cross dependencies is quite impossible
for any human to comprehend, but is straightforward
to encode for analysis.
Figure 21 shows a facsimile of the distributed sys-
tem used by patients to register with a new doctor in
Norway, as curated from the perspective of a domain
expert. The procedure involves going to a website,
but ﬁrst one must have a number of credentials from
third party sites, totally unrelated to the public service.
This kind of constellation of independent services,
integrated into a meaningful whole would be handled
by some kind of wizard software if it were a task for
a single computer. In the web era, there is no single
agency with the responsibility to integrate this infor-
mation. A cognitive system, which monitors services
in a smart city, could do this, for instance.
Figure 22 shows some more playful examples of
domain knowledge, concerning the purpose of dif-
ferent services, in different contexts. A lexical token
like ‘tidal’ might refer to many different things in
different contexts. Here the brainstorming is able to
distinguish these cases using the recursive structure of
the matroid hubs. In a more sophisticated rendition of
the brain dump, one would be able to select speciﬁc
interpretations from these structures without risk of
conﬂict. Whether the source of the semantics is man-
ual curation or trained natural language processing,
it does alter the key beneﬁt of the approach used
here: namely that it is orders of magnitude cheaper to
build and to use than an approach based on repeated
use of ‘big data’. Such approaches have been used to
discover vector congruences and emergent functional
semantics, but only with extensive training [35]–[38].
18

host$ ./stories -s "microservice"
0:apprxnr) ”microservice” is approximately ”service” (in the context of software ops operations develop write)
1:follows)
”service” may use ”user authentication” (in the context of software ops operations develop write)
2:hasprop)
”user authentication” has the role of ”authentication” (in the context of software ops operations develop write)
and also note ”authentication” is a role fulﬁlled by ”service authentication” (in the context of software ops operations develop write)
1:follows)
”service” may use ”service authentication” (in the context of software ops operations develop write)
2:hasprop)
”service authentication” has the role of ”authentication” (in the context of software ops operations develop write)
and also note ”authentication” is a role fulﬁlled by ”user authentication” (in the context of software ops operations develop write)
1:follows)
”service” depends on ”software SOFTWARENAME” (in the context of software ops operations develop write)
2:follows)
”software SOFTWARENAME” depends on ”container CONTAINERNAME” (in the context of software ops operations de-
velop write)
3:follows)
”container CONTAINERNAME” depends on ”package PACKAGENAME2 VERSION2” (in the context of software ops op-
erations develop write)
4:hasprop)
”package PACKAGENAME2 VERSION2” has the role of ”package” (in the context of software ops operations develop write)
and also note ”package” is a role fulﬁlled by ”package PACKAGENAME1 VERSION1” (in the context of software ops opera-
tions develop write)
and also note ”package” is a role fulﬁlled by ”package PACKAGENAME3 VERSION3” (in the context of software ops opera-
tions develop write)
4:follows)
”package PACKAGENAME2 VERSION2” depends on ”library LIB1” (in the context of software ops operations de-
velop write)
5:preceds)
”library LIB1” partly determines ”package PACKAGENAME1 VERSION1” (in the context of software ops opera-
tions develop write)
6:hasprop)
”package PACKAGENAME1 VERSION1” has the role of ”package” (in the context of software ops operations de-
velop write)
and also note ”package” is a role fulﬁlled by ”package PACKAGENAME3 VERSION3” (in the context of software ops opera-
tions develop write)
5:preceds)
”library LIB1” partly determines ”package PACKAGENAME3 VERSION3” (in the context of software ops opera-
tions develop write)
6:hasprop)
”package PACKAGENAME3 VERSION3” has the role of ”package” (in the context of software ops operations de-
velop write)
and also note ”package” is a role fulﬁlled by ”package PACKAGENAME1 VERSION1” (in the context of software ops opera-
tions develop write)
1:follows)
”service” depends on ”hosting” (in the context of software ops operations)
2:expr-by)
”hosting” is a role fulﬁlled by ”hosting CONTAINERNAME INSTANCE” (in the context of software ops operations de-
velop write)
2:follows)
”hosting” depends on ”host HOSTNAME” (in the context of execute run software ops operations)
Fig. 19: Knowledge scanned from a distributed application (simulated) shows the structure of the service, its
software and dependencies, from containers to operating system package names. The litany of components and
service dependencies might be used for troubleshooting or risk/vulnerability/impact analysis.
Such approaches could still be used as inputs to the
present approach, in the absence of something more
practical.
G. Inadequate context
During the development of this approach, the
notion of context was subject to a lot of confusion
and misdirection. The way logic-based approaches to
semantic modelling have tried to use context (as data
types) turned out to be quite wrong: there exists no
objective version of knowledge that can determine a
ﬁxed type-hierarchy or preferred ontology. Knowledge
is very much in the eye of the beholder, and every
observer forms an individual ontology [3]. Context is
not an objective categorization, it is a running state
of mind (like a browser search history that records
our intent). As long as we try to treat a knowledge
representation as an objective static boundary condi-
tion on knowledge, rather than as a private subjective
interpretation, we will run into difﬁculties.
In this present approach, motivated by spacetime
classiﬁcation of semantics, and which thus far ignores
any preferred ordering by link weights, semantic sta-
bility is encouraged simply by a structural aggregation
of concepts, analogous to human language. So, even if
there are random variations, using promises like ‘A is
near B’ effectively allows us to collapse disconnected
or multiple stories into a single broader line story.
What is important to reasoning is that there lies a
causal set of paths, that may be integrated with the
speciﬁc boundary conditions from start to end14.
X.
SUMMARY AND REMARKS
The recent focus of work in artiﬁcial intelligence
(AI) has been on the training of artiﬁcial neural net-
works to recognize increasingly complicated patterns,
like voice, faces and handwriting. Trained networks
mimic human cognitive sensory systems, usually one
by one. Neural networks are trained by attempting to
replay a lifetime of experiences at high-speed into a
learning process. The extent to which such a network
accumulated, and made predictive, depends on the
extent to which its spatial structure can mimic a
representation of the semantics one happens to be
looking for, with only a single trigger [7]. How-
ever, it is impossible to measure the certainty of
even this simple kind of reasoning, indicating that
an entirely separate stage of processing by a more
deterministic representation is needed for reasoning
that goes beyond a single inference. That is where the
14This is tantalizingly reminiscent of a quantum path integral, for
reasons the reader may ponder without suggestion from me.
19

0:follows) ”application cgn-agent” depends on ”cgn-agent” (in the context of host conﬁguration maintenance agent CGNgine)
1:follows)
”cgn-agent” depends on ”libz.so.1” (in the context of host application software dependencies security)
2:follows)
”libz.so.1” depends on ”libc.so.6” (in the context of host application software dependencies security)
3:follows)
”libc.so.6” depends on ”!lib64!ld-linux-x86-64.so.2” (in the context of host application software dependencies security)
4:preceds)
”!lib64!ld-linux-x86-64.so.2” partly determines ”libkrb5support.so.0” (in the context of host application software de-
pendencies security)
5:follows)
”libkrb5support.so.0” depends on ”libpcre.so.1” (in the context of host application software dependencies security)
6:follows)
”libpcre.so.1” depends on ”libpthread.so.0” (in the context of host application software dependencies security)
7:preceds)
”libpthread.so.0” partly determines ”libdbus-1.so.3” (in the context of host application software dependencies security)
8:preceds)
”libdbus-1.so.3” partly determines ”libavahi-client.so.3” (in the context of host application software dependen-
cies security)
9:follows)
”libavahi-client.so.3” depends on ”libdl.so.2” (in the context of host application software dependencies security)
10:preceds)
”libdl.so.2” partly determines ”libcrypto.so.1.0.0” (in the context of host application software dependencies security)
10:preceds)
”libdl.so.2” partly determines ”libpq.so.5” (in the context of host application software dependencies security)
++ more ....
10:preceds)
”libdl.so.2” partly determines ”libp11-kit.so.0” (in the context of host application software dependencies security)
10:preceds)
”libdl.so.2” partly determines ”libgssapi˙krb5.so.2” (in the context of host application software dependen-
cies security)
++ more ....
10:preceds)
”libdl.so.2” partly determines ”libgcrypt.so.20” (in the context of host application software dependencies security)
++ more ....
9:follows)
”libavahi-client.so.3” depends on ”libavahi-common.so.3” (in the context of host application software depen-
dencies security)
10:preceds)
”libavahi-common.so.3” partly determines ”libvirt.so.0” (in the context of host application software depen-
dencies security)
++ more ....
9:preceds)
”libavahi-client.so.3” partly determines ”libvirt.so.0” (in the context of host application software dependen-
cies security)
10:follows)
”libvirt.so.0” depends on ”libcrypto.so.1.0.0” (in the context of host application software dependencies security)
++ more ....
10:follows)
”libvirt.so.0” depends on ”libidn.so.11” (in the context of host application software dependencies security)
10:follows)
”libvirt.so.0” depends on ”libudev.so.1” (in the context of host application software dependencies security)
10:follows)
”libvirt.so.0” depends on ”libnl-3.so.200” (in the context of host application software dependencies security)
10:follows)
”libvirt.so.0” depends on ”libp11-kit.so.0” (in the context of host application software dependencies security)
++ more ....
8:preceds)
”libdbus-1.so.3” partly determines ”libvirt.so.0” (in the context of host application software dependencies security)
9:follows)
”libvirt.so.0” depends on ”libcrypto.so.1.0.0” (in the context of host application software dependencies security)
10:follows)
”libcrypto.so.1.0.0” depends on ”libdl.so.2” (in the context of host application software dependencies security)
++ more ....
10:preceds)
”libcrypto.so.1.0.0” partly determines ”libpq.so.5” (in the context of host application software dependen-
cies security)
++ more ....
Fig. 20: Dependency relationships obtained by a simple scan of a process container are a hopeless task for a
human to trace. The level of interdependency is very large. The ability to trace dependencies across software
deployed in multiple distributed locations could be central to addressing transmission of faults and attacks.
We see that context strings can become quite long. This is both expected and welcome, as it increases the
possibility to ﬁlter and conjoin relationships based on speciﬁc circumstances, moving away the the kind of
general brain-dumps shown here.
present work ﬁts in. The recognition of the lexicon of
basic patterns is the ﬁrst part of sensory perception,
the second part is associative reasoning based on its
tokens.
In this report, the idea is not to mimic human
faculties but to integrate them, across multiple scales
of experience, allowing us to to add selected semantic,
data of high quality, incrementally from any source to
a single model with very few limitations. The learning
described here is unsupervised, in the AI sense, but
still curated by a surrounding ‘society’ of expert inter-
actions, so it is supervised by an emergent framework
of domain expertise. No learning can happen without
some external selection process, just as no child can
be programmed with life skills without others to raise
it. The boundary between raw exterior and curated in-
terior knowledge is what cognition enables: to be able
to represent and pass on knowledge is a compressed
(tokenized) form for consumption by others, without
the need to undergo every experience, blow by blow,
and in person.
These experiments are very interesting, but there
are plenty of issues to address in future work. Finding
how to constrain stories and bring focus to their trains
of thought is the major problem. With the use of
a spacetime inspired structure, stories are no longer
as scarce as when trying to use an overconstrained
typed approach. Lateral reasoning is now possible, and
relevance is maintained by representing context. The
treatment of context in this note is weak, but there
is much room for improvement. In [10], I speculated
on the role of emotional state in determining context.
Emotional weight plays a signiﬁcant role in cognition
for setting context and interpretation priorities. From
the viewpoint in [7], emotions seem to play the
role of very coarse aggregate ‘concepts’ stimulated
by sensory/introspective inputs. Emotional context is
thus a systemic assessment of some ‘agent’ based
20

host$ ./stories -t 2 -s "doctor service" |more
Found story subject: "doctor service"
Stories of type 2 only
0:follows) ”doctor service” depends on ”patient appointment” (in the context of need to see a doctor)
1:follows)
”patient appointment” depends on ”patient doctor register binding” (in the context of need to see a doctor)
2:follows)
”patient doctor register binding” depends on ”doctor patient binding service” (in the context of patient doctor registration)
3:follows)
”doctor patient binding service” depends on ”patient authenticated” (in the context of patient doctor registration)
4:follows)
”patient authenticated” depends on ”identity credentials” (in the context of identity authentication veriﬁcation)
5:follows)
”identity credentials” may originate from ”https:!!url1!form!element2” (in the context of identity authentication veriﬁcation)
5:follows)
”identity credentials” uses step 1 and may originate from ”https:!!url1!form!element1” (in the context of identity au-
thentication veriﬁcation i
dentity authentication veriﬁcation)
5:follows)
”identity credentials” uses step 1 ”https:!!url2!form!element2” (in the context of identity authentication veriﬁcation)
5:preceds)
”identity credentials” are required for and partly determines ”doctor authenticated” (in the context of identity authen-
tication veriﬁcation ide
ntity authentication veriﬁcation)
6:preceds)
”doctor authenticated” is required for and partly determines ”accepted doctor patient binding” (in the context of pa-
tient doctor registration
patient doctor registration)
7:follows)
”accepted doctor patient binding” depends on ”doctor authorized” (in the context of patient doctor registration)
7:follows)
”accepted doctor patient binding” depends on ”doctor” (in the context of patient doctor registration)
7:follows)
”accepted doctor patient binding” depends on ”patient” (in the context of patient doctor registration)
4:preceds)
”patient authenticated” partly determines ”have public health service access” (in the context of need to visit a doctor)
5:follows)
”have public health service access” depends on ”public health service available” (in the context of need to visit a doctor)
6:follows)
”public health service available” depends on ”general practictioner doctor available” (in the con-
text of need to visit a doctor)
6:follows)
”public health service available” depends on ”open for business” (in the context of need to visit a doctor)
6:preceds)
”public health service available” partly determines ”public health service” (in the context of need to visit a doctor)
7:follows)
”public health service” depends on ”patient uses appointment” (in the context of need to visit a doctor)
7:follows)
”public health service” depends on ”doctor availability” (in the context of need to visit a doctor)
3:follows)
”doctor patient binding service” depends on ”doctor authenticated” (in the context of patient doctor registration)
4:follows)
”doctor authenticated” depends on ”identity credentials” (in the context of identity authentication veriﬁcation)
5:follows)
”identity credentials” may originate from ”https:!!url1!form!element2” (in the context of identity authentication veriﬁcation)
5:follows)
”identity credentials” uses step 1 and may originate from ”https:!!url1!form!element1” (in the context of identity au-
thentication veriﬁcation i
dentity authentication veriﬁcation)
Total independent outcomes/paths = 28
Estimated relevance of outcomes 0/0
Fig. 21: Cooperating distributed (micro)services may have no cohesive storyline to connect them, without aggregating
the intended relationships between them. Intentional (promise oriented) documentation allows us to generate a kind
of documentation ‘wizard’ in realtime from processes changing in realtime. Causal links show the representation of a
complicated distributed system, which could be the basis of a wizard for integrating apparently unrelated parts in a single
view.
on a number of contextual factors. It is a threshold
judgement, based on policy:
POSITIVE
NEGATIVE
INTERIOR
CONTENTED
DISTRESSED
EXTERIOR
LIKE
DISLIKE
PREDICTION
OPTIMISTIC
PESSIMISTIC
States like distress are easy to measure in a ﬁnite
system. When a threshold of behaviour is reached
and a system is unable to keep its promises, e.g.
the thrashing to empty a queue. Emotions could be
semanticized versions of these major conditions.
States like good, bad, danger, happy, sad, etc are
components of what we would think of as emotional
states. These give clear meanings to other measure-
ments: how we respond to a context (state) and the
associations we make during good and bad times
affect how we recall concepts later. If we feel strongly
about something (good or bad) this translates into an
importance rank of an association. We want to sum
the recurrence scores of the concepts to label their
importance. It is possible that we might even be able
to make all of these by combining the simultaneous
activation of senses with the concepts of good and
bad: e.g.
Good/bad ∩person →love/hate
(13)
Good/bad ∩senses →happy/sad
(14)
Good/bad ∩comparison →true/false
(15)
This remains a topic for future exploration. I hope to
return to all these issues, in the context of applications,
in future work.
Acknowledgement: I am indebted to Steve Pep-
per for in depth discussions about linguistics and
knowledge representations. I am also grateful to Nikos
Anerousis, Anup Kalia, Maja Vukovic, and Jin Xiao
for helpful conversations.
APPENDIX
In this appendix, some we examine some ex-
amples of the semantic scaling of concepts, within
21

host$ ./stories -s "microservice"
0:hasprop) ”microservice” has the role of ”application” (in the context of software ops operations develop write)
and also note ”application” is a role fulﬁlled by ”application cgn-agent” (in the context of host application software dependencies security)
and also note ”application” is a role fulﬁlled by ”application service” (in the context of software ops operations develop write)
1:apprxnr)
”application” has instance ”tidal” (in the context of online services)
2:follows)
”tidal” depends on and NOT depends on ”facebook” (in the context of online services applications physics gravity or-
bit moon satellite distortion)
3:expr-by)
”facebook” offers service ”facebook authentication” (in the context of logging in)
3:cntaind)
”facebook” offers service ”facebook authentication” (in the context of logging in)
2:follows)
”tidal” is authenticated by ”facebook authentication” (in the context of online services applications)
3:hasprop)
”facebook authentication” is a service offered by ”facebook” (in the context of logging in)
3:cntains)
”facebook authentication” is a service offered by ”facebook” (in the context of logging in)
and also note ”tidal” is generalized by ”gravitational effect” (in the context of physics gravity orbit moon satellite distortion)
2:cntains)
”tidal” is generalized by ”gravitational effect” (in the context of physics gravity orbit moon satellite distortion)
3:follows)
”gravitational effect” depends on ”distance” (in the context of physics)
3:follows)
”gravitational effect” depends on ”mass” (in the context of physics)
1:cntaind)
”application” has instance ”tidal” (in the context of )
2:follows)
”tidal” depends on and NOT depends on ”facebook” (in the context of online services applications physics gravity or-
bit moon satellite distortion)
3:expr-by)
”facebook” offers service ”facebook authentication” (in the context of logging in)
3:cntaind)
”facebook” offers service ”facebook authentication” (in the context of logging in)
2:follows)
”tidal” is authenticated by ”facebook authentication” (in the context of online services applications)
3:hasprop)
”facebook authentication” is a service offered by ”facebook” (in the context of logging in)
3:cntains)
”facebook authentication” is a service offered by ”facebook” (in the context of logging in)
2:apprxnr)
”tidal” is generalized by ”gravitational effect” (in the context of physics gravity orbit moon satellite distortion)
3:follows)
”gravitational effect” depends on ”distance” (in the context of physics)
3:follows)
”gravitational effect” depends on ”mass” (in the context of physics)
and also note ”tidal” is generalized by ”gravitational effect” (in the context of physics gravity orbit moon satellite distortion)
Fig. 22: Knowledge scanned from a distributed application (simulated).
the hierarchy of increasing invariance. The following
excerpted diagrams help to illustrate different aspects
of the fully cyclic graph of links, picking out particular
‘parse trees’ from the full structure. For example,
the expression of an explained event Professor Plum
murders Miss Scarlet in the library with a breadknife,
because she won’t marry him’ is shown in ﬁgure
23. The central propositions may be understood as
contexts, composed of a hierarchy of concepts. Each
complex and temporary proposition is a point of
possibly ephemeral permanance, with the degree of
invariance and permanence increasing outwards in
rings around it, reaching a maximum at the most
primitive concepts. Note the intermediate levels of
conceptual aggregation in the full expression. One
could try to arge that these are may be eliminated or
ﬂattened, as in ﬁgure 24, but this obfuscates the reuse
of concepts, and the ranking of their permanence.
One might argue that this structure is too difﬁ-
cult to automate, because these levels of semantics
cannot be inferred from the top level proposition;
however, this is thinking upside down. It is the sensors
which have to be evolved to imprint the semantics
from the bottom. Propositions based on these seman-
tics can then make sense in a context formed as
(who,what,when,where,how,why).
Figure 25, shows how sensory inputs and anoma-
lies might contribute to the formation of the context
structure. Simply collecting data from sensors alone
will not advance towards a clear human understanding
of the relationships, without a skeleton model on
which to imprint data. In nature, this might occur by
some form of spontaneous symmetry breaking, and
separation of timescales, so that persistent structures
act as the skeleton on which shorter timescale correc-
tions attract. In this way, weakly non-linear feedback
can lead to emergent structure, but the results will
not be humanly comprehensible unless they map to
the particular conceptual structures we have evolved
ourselves. Thus pure emergence is not the right way
to bring about human inspectable results.
From here, if revisited enough times the hypothesis
hub will persist in the ‘mind’ of the cognitive structure
and become eligable for connection to other events
and concepts, as in ﬁgure 26.
From the hierarchy, we can start to see the in-
variances, and levels of permanance or timescale
sensitivity. Short term context is built from long-term
concepts to create a sense of ‘here and now’. This is
aggregated into a main structure, which contains frag-
ments of narrative meaning, over a longer timescale.
Then these in turn reduce to core long-term concepts
again. This sequence chases its tail: it is not an acyclic
decomposition, but rather an eigenstate of a cyclic
graph.
Consider an example of system measurment on a
website, in which trafﬁc to a sushi restaurant called
‘Jaws’ is high because users are getting muddled look-
ing for tickets to a ﬁlm festival featuring the Steven
Spielberg movie ‘Jaws’. The connection which would
allow us to make an inference is clearly the name
jaws, without particular semantics. We can postulate
what kinds of specialized sensor semaphores we need
to construct this cognitive narrative.
22

with a bread knife
knife
bread knife
used for bread
murder by bread knife
Miss Scarlet refuses to marry Professor Plum
Professor Plum murders Miss Scarlet
in the library with the bread knife 
because she refused to marry him
Professor Plum
Miss Scarlet
how
where
In the library
library
the library
refusal
marriage
refusal marriage
murder
why
active verb
background
passive
motivation
intent
what action
Fig. 23: Representation of the context around the event ‘Professor Plum murders Miss Scarlet with a breadknife in the
library, because she refused to marry him’. The hierarchy of concepts has least invariance at the single proposition, and
becomes increasingly invariant father from it, towards the edges. Note how the context envelops the concepts it includes,
and costs much more in terms of processing. In compensation, much of its structure is only temporary, and leaves behind
a smaller cheaper residue.
•
Here and now: short term context includes the
particular Jaws ﬁlm festival, web bookings,
tickets, web trafﬁc, etc.
•
Main structure: middle term context includes
the existence of the Jaws Sushi restaurant, the
concept of a ﬁle festival, interest in a ﬁlm
festival, cinemas, etc.
•
Basis concepts: web connections, festival,
ﬁlm, jaws, sushi, etc.
From a high level, if we assume that the sensors and
their aggregations have done their jobs to construct
a graph, we obtain a picture something like ﬁgures
28 and 27. A causal parsing based on a web sensor
anomaly makes a connection between the inputs of
different sensory semaphores attributing high web
trafﬁc on a trunk line as being due to hits on the
website of a sushi restaurant. This happens to have
the same name as a popular movie at a ﬁlm festival.
Confusion of these websites is the real reason for
anomalous trafﬁc. The brainstorming analysis does not
stop on ﬁnding the presumed ‘root cause’, however, it
wandering into other territory since it has no reason
to eliminate those pathways. The major task to be
solved in future work is the selection of only relevant
pathways and boundaries.
