1
Recognition of Visually Perceived Compositional
Human Actions by Multiple Spatio-Temporal Scales
Recurrent Neural Networks
Haanvid Lee, Minju Jung, and Jun Tani
Abstract—The current paper proposes a novel neural net-
work model for recognizing visually perceived human actions.
The proposed multiple spatio-temporal scales recurrent neural
network (MSTRNN) model is derived by introducing multiple
timescale recurrent dynamics to the conventional convolutional
neural network model. One of the essential characteristics of
the MSTRNN is that its architecture imposes both spatial and
temporal constraints simultaneously on the neural activity which
vary in multiple scales among different layers. As suggested
by the principle of the upward and downward causation, it is
assumed that the network can develop meaningful structures such
as functional hierarchy by taking advantage of such constraints
during the course of learning. To evaluate the characteristics of
the model, the current study uses three types of human action
video dataset consisting of different types of primitive actions and
different levels of compositionality on them. The performance of
the MSTRNN in testing with these dataset is compared with
the ones by other representative deep learning models used in
the ﬁeld. The analysis of the internal representation obtained
through the learning with the dataset clariﬁes what sorts of
functional hierarchy can be developed by extracting the essential
compositionality underlying the dataset.
Index Terms—Action recognition, dynamic vision processing,
convolutional neural network, recurrent neural network, symbol
grounding.
I. INTRODUCTION
R
ECENTLY, a convolutional neural network (CNN) [1],
inspired by a mammalian visual cortex, showed a re-
markably better object image recognition performance than
conventional vision recognition schemes which employ elab-
orately hand-coded visual features. A CNN trained with 1
million visual images from ImageNet [2] was able to classify
hundreds of object images with an error rate of 6.67% [3], and
demonstrated near-human performance [4]. However, CNNs
lack the capacity for temporal information processing. As a
consequence, CNNs are less effective in handling video image
patterns than static images.
To address this shortcoming, a number of action recognition
models have been developed. Typical deep learning models
H. Lee is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Korea Institute

M. Jung is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Korea Institute

J. Tani is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Korea Institute of
Science and Technology, Daejeon 305-701, Republic of Korea, and also with
the Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology, Okinawa 904-0412, Japan,

for action recognition are 3D convolutional neural networks
(3D-CNNs) [5], long-term recurrent convolutional networks
(LRCNs) [6], and two-stream convolutional networks [7]. The
3D-CNN extracts spatio-temporal features of videos through
convolutions in the temporal and spatial domains in a ﬁxed
window [5]. The LRCN is a two-stage model that ﬁrst extracts
spatial features in its CNN stage and then extracts temporal
features from its long-short term memory (LSTM) [8] stage
[8]. And the two-stream convolutional network has one CNN
stream for an RGB input, and the other CNN stream for an
input of stacked optical ﬂows. The two streams are joined at
the end to make a categorical output [7].
Although the 3D-CNN, LRCN, and two-stream convolu-
tional network perform well, some of their dynamics are not
consistent with neuroscientiﬁc evidences. One important piece
of evidence in mammals is that the size of the spatio-temporal
receptive ﬁeld of each cell is increased as the level goes higher
[9], [10]. And a principle from cybernetics era, so-called the
downward causation [11], [12] suggests that a spatio-temporal
hierarchy can be naturally developed in human brains by
taking advantage of macroscopic constraints genetically as-
signed to them. The evidence and principle suggest that a deep
learning model for action recognition should form a hierarchy
by assignment of spatio-temporal constraints. And the model
should extract spatial and temporal features simultaneously
in their hierarchy. But the representative action recognition
models lack such properties.
The current study is an extension of the prior study using
so-called the multiple spatio-temporal scales neural network
(MSTNN) [13]. The neural activity in the MSTNN is governed
by both spatial and temporal constraints by means of local con-
nectivity of convolutional layers and time constants assigned to
the leaky integrator neural units at each layer [13] respectively.
These constraints make the MSTNN to develop faster and
more local interaction in the lower layer whereas it develops
slower and more global interactions in the higher level. This
enables the MSTNN to extract spatio-temporal features in
multiple levels from the exemplar data patterns. This formation
of a spatio-temporal hierarchy is consistent with the biological
evidence and the principle mentioned earlier.
However, it is true that the temporal processing capacity
of the MSTNN is quite limited by the fact that its essential
dynamics is a decay dynamics exerted by leaky integrator
neurons [13] that compose the model. At the same time, the
MSTNN uses only forward connectivity without any recurrent
connectivity which is considered to be the source of generating
arXiv:1602.01921v3  [cs.CV]  22 Feb 2017

2
arbitrary complex dynamics, as known in the study of biolog-
ical brains [14]. In this context, the current study attempts
to add recursive dynamics to the MSTNN by introducing
recurrent connectivity in the convolutional layers. This leads to
our novel proposal of multiple spatio-temporal scales recurrent
neural network (MSTRNN) model in the current study.
In the
experiments, MSTRNNs were
compared
with
MSTNNs and LRCNs. MSTRNNs were compared to the
MSTNNs to observe how the existence of recurrent struc-
tures of MSTRNNs have effect on their action recognition
performances. Among the introduced representative action
recognition models, the LRCN was also used as a baseline
of the MSTRNN since both have CNN and recurrent neural
network structures. Also, it was chosen as a baseline model
of the MSTRNN to see the effect of setting spatio-temporal
constraints and extracting spatial and temporal features simul-
taneously.
The MTSRNN model was evaluated by using three dif-
ferent human action datasets that are distinct in types and
levels of compositionality introduced to the action patterns.
In the ﬁrst experiment, the MSTRNN is compared with the
MSTNN on a dataset that was prepared by concatenating three
action patterns that appear in Weizmann dataset [15]. The
experiment shows how the recurrent structure implemented on
the MSTRNN is effective in action recognition task. Also a
qualitative analysis on the neural activations generated from
both models are made to show how their categorical memories
are formed. The second and the third experiments were aimed
to conduct comparative experiments using datasets of more
natural human action patterns by controlling the level of the
underlying compositionality. Because there were no public
video datasets containing natural human actions with control
of their compositionality level, two human action datasets were
prepared for the current study. For the second experiment, a
video dataset was built by considering compositions of objects
and actions directed to those objects. In the experiment, the
performance of the MSTRNN, MSTNN, and LRCN were
compared. And analysis was made on the internal dynamics
of the MSTRNN and LRCN by observing their time series
activation patterns. The analysis was made to see how the
multiple timescale constraint assigned to the MSTRNN can
strengthen the model performance over the LRCN that does
not involve with such temporal constraints. For the third
experiment, triad compositions among a set of objects, object-
directed actions, and modiﬁers for those actions are considered
to prepare the dataset. The MSTRNN, MSTNN, and LRCN
were again compared in the experiment. The experiment was
designed to require the models to extract temporal features
with longer temporal correlation for recognition of action
modiﬁers than the one for objects and actions. By examining
the recognition accuracies among these models, the advantage
of the proposed model is clariﬁed.
II. PROPOSED MODEL
The MSTRNN model consists of the following four types
of layers: input, context, fully-connected, and an output layer
as shown in Fig. 1 (A). The MSTRNN receives RGB image
sequences in the input layer. Then from the image sequences,
multiple context layers extract spatio-temporal features from
the input image sequences. The extracted spatio-temporal
features go through several layers of fully-connected layers.
Then ﬁnally, in the output layer, categorical output is made.
The output layer consists of softmax neurons.
The context layer of a MSTRNN simultaneously extracts
spatio-temporal features, and is the core building block of
the MSTRNN. The context layer consists of feature units,
pooling units, and context units as shown in Fig. 1 (B). Each
context layer is assigned a time constant that controls the decay
dynamics of the context units and the feature units. A larger
time constant causes the internal states of the leaky integrator
neurons in the context layer to change more slowly at each
time step [16]. The MSTRNN assigns a larger time constant
to higher layers to develop a spatio-temporal hierarchy [13],
[16].
Input
Output
Small 𝜏𝜏
Large 𝜏𝜏
⋮
Context layer 3
Context layer 2
Context layer 1
Context layer N
Fully-connected
Fully-connected
𝛕𝛕
Previous layer
+
Context
units
Max-pooling
units
Next layer
𝛕𝛕
Feature 
units
Current context layer
rec
(A)
(B)
Fig. 1.
The architecture of the MSTRNN. (A) The full architecture of the
MSTRNN. τ is a time constant for a set of leaky integrator neurons in a
context layer. (B) The structure of the context layer. An arrow labeled τ
indicates the decay dynamics of the leaky integrator neurons in the feature
units and context units. The rec with the arrow indicates recurrent connections
made in the context units.
A. Feature Units
A set of feature units (Fig. 1 (B)) is equivalent to a convolu-
tional layer in CNN [1] composed of leaky integrator neurons
with time constants to control their decay dynamics [13]. The
feature units are capable of extracting temporal features via
the decay dynamics of the leaky integrator neurons, as well as
being capable of extracting spatial features by convolutional
operations. Feature units extract features from context units
and pooling units of the previous context layer as shown in
Fig. 1 (B), via convolutional kernels. The forward dynamics of
the feature units are explained in (1) and (2). The internal state

3
and the activation value of a neuron at the lth context layer,
mth map of feature units, retinotopic coordinates (x, y), and at
time step t are represented as ˆf txy
lm and f txy
lm respectively.
ˆf txy
lm =

1 −1
τl

ˆf (t−1)xy
lm
(1)
+ 1
τl
 Nl−1
X
n=1
(klmn ∗pt
(l−1)n)xy + blm

+ 1
τl
Al−1
X
a=1
(zlma ∗ct
(l−1)a)xy
f txy
lm = 1.7159 tanh
2
3
ˆf txy
lm

(2)
In (1) and (2), τ represents the time constant, k and z
are the convolutional kernels that extract features from the
previous layer pooling units and context units respectively.
And b is the bias used in the convolution operation, ∗is the
convolution operator, N is the total number of maps of the
pooling units, A is the total number of maps of the context
units. Additionally, p and c are the activation values of the
pooling units and the context units respectively. The ﬁrst term
on the right hand side of (1) describes the decay dynamics of
the leaky integrator neurons. The second term represents the
convolution of the features in the pooling units. And, the third
term describes the features extracted from the context units of
the previous context layer. Equation (2) shows the hyperbolic
tangent function [17] that is used as the activation functions
of the feature units.
B. Context Units
A set of context units (Fig. 1 (B)) is equivalent to feature
units with recurrent convolutional kernels. Due to the addition
of recurrent convolutional kernels in the structure of the
features units, it has more enhanced temporal processing
capacity than the feature units. The recurrent dynamics of
the context units enhance the extraction of latent temporal
features from input image sequences [18], [19]. The recurrent
connections are made by 3x3 convolutional kernels with 1 zero
padding. The context units get inputs from themselves using
the recurrent kernels and pooling units in the same layer (see
Fig. 1 (B)) via convolutional kernels. The forward dynamics
of the context units are shown in (3) and (4). The internal state
and activation value of a neuron in (x, y) coordinates of the
ath map of the context units in the lth context layer, at time
step t are represented as ˆctxy
la
and ctxy
la
respectively.
ˆctxy
la
=

1 −1
τl

ˆc(t−1)xy
la
(3)
+ 1
τl
 Ml
X
m=1
(˜klam ∗pt
lm)xy + ˜bla

+ 1
τl
 Bl
X
b=1
(˜zlab ∗ct−1
lb )xy
ctxy
la
= 1.7159 tanh
2
3ˆctxy
la

(4)
In (3) and (4), τ represents the time constant, ˜k is the con-
volutional kernel, ˜b is the bias for the convolution operation, ∗
is the convolution operator, M is the total number of maps of
the pooling units, B is the total number of maps of the context
units, ˜z is the recurrent convolutional kernel of the context
units, p and c are the neural activations of pooling units and
context units respectively. The ﬁrst term on the right hand side
of (3) describes the decay dynamics of the leaky integrator
neurons. The second term represents the convolution of the
pooling units. The third term describes the recurrent dynamics
in terms of recurrent shared weights. The neural activations of
the context units in the previous time step are supplied through
the recurrent convolutional kernels. For the activation function
of the context units, the MSTRNN uses the same hyperbolic
tangent function that was used for the feature units as shown
in (4) [17].
C. Training Method
Training was conducted in a supervised manner using the
delay response scheme [13]. Black frames were input to the
MSTRNN after each input image sequence during the delay
response period. In this period, errors were calculated for each
time step by comparing the outputs of the MSTRNN with the
true labels of the input image sequences using the Kullback-
Leibler divergence. The cost function used in the training
phase is shown in (5). The error calculated for a whole input
image sequence is represented as E.
E =
T +d
X
t=T +1
S
X
s=1
Ns
X
n=1
˜osn ln
 ˜osn
otsn

(5)
In (5), d is the delay response period, T is the duration of
an input video (length of frames), S is the total number of
softmax vectors in the output layer. The output layer can have
several softmax vectors depending on a task. Ns is the total
number of neurons in the sth softmax vector of the output
layer, ˜o is the true output, and o is the output categorized by
the MSTRNN. The true output was given as the one-hot-vector
for each softmax vector. Here, the term one-hot-vector refers
to a vector of values where a value is ”1” for the one and
only correct category and ”0” for the rest of the categories.
The error for each input action video is obtained with
(5). The error is used to optimize the learnable parameters
using the back propagation through time (BPTT) [20], and the
stochastic gradient descent algorithms. To prevent overﬁtting,
all learnable parameters (except biases) were learned with a
weight decay of 0.0005 [21]. In addition, 50% dropout [22]
and random cropping [23] of the input images that are 10
pixels smaller by width and height were also used to avoid
overﬁtting.
Learning rates started from 0.01 and decayed by 6% at
every epoch for the ﬁrst experiment. In the second and third
experiments, learning rates decayed by 2%. The other models

4
that were used for comparison with the MSTRNN were also
trained with this method.
D. Performance Evaluation
To evaluate categorization performance, the leave-one-
subject-out cross-validation (LOSOCV) scheme was used.
In this method, one subject was selected from the dataset
and his/her video clips were left out of the training data,
and were instead used as a test data. Accuracies obtained
from all possible validation sets were averaged to be used
as an evaluation measure. When there was more than one
set of categories, such as actions and action-related objects,
recognition accuracy for action-ADO pair was computed. Then
the epoch where a model showed best accuracy on the joint
category was picked. Then the accuracy of each set of category
(objects or actions) at the epoch was used for evaluation. The
accuracies were rounded off to the second decimal place, and
recorded as measures of overall performance.
III. EXPERIMENTS
In the ﬁrst experiment, the MSTRNN was compared with
the MSTNN using a relatively simple action dataset that has
a temporal compositionality. Then in the second and third
experiments, the MSTRNN was tested on datasets that look
more natural and have higher compositionality levels. In the
second and third experiments, the MSTRNN was compared
with the MSTNN and LRCN.
A. Model Parameter Settings
The MSTRNN was compared with MSTNN and MSTRNN
in the experiments. All three models have same input and
output layer according to the datasets they were tested. Table
I shows the RGB input image sizes according to the datasets
after cropping which is mentioned in the Training Method
section. Output layer conﬁgurations according to the datasets
are also described in Table I. The three actions concatenated
patterns from Weizmann Dataset (3ACWD), the composition-
ality level 1 action dataset (CL1AD), and the compositionality
level 2 action dataset (CL2AD) were used in the ﬁrst, second,
and third experiments respectively. The parameter settings that
differ by models are described below.
TABLE I
INPUT AND OUTPUT OF THE TESTED MODELS
Dataset
Input
size
Output
category
Softmax
neurons
3ACWD
38x44
Action
27
CL1AD
108x108
Object
4
Action
9
CL2AD
108x108
Object
4
Action
4
Modiﬁer
6
MSTRNN: The MSTRNN model has one convolutional
layer, one pooling layer, two context layers, two fully-
connected layers, and a softmax layer as described in Fig.
2 (A). The ﬁrst and second context layers have time constants
of 2 and 100 respectively. The convolutional layer and pooling
layer were used before the context layers to decrease the size
of input for the context layers to decrease the computing time.
This is because a context layer takes more computing time than
a convolutional layer and a pooling layer. With few exceptions,
all convolutional and pooling kernels used in the model are
3x3 (3 pixels wide, 3 pixels high) with stride of 1 and 2x2
with stride of 2 respectively. These were used since they were
found to be best for CNNs [24].
When the model was tested on the 3ACWD, 3x5 kernels
were used instead of 3x3 on the ﬁrst convolutional layer and
the set of convolutional kernels that were ﬁrst used after
the ﬁrst pooling layer (see Fig. 2 (A)). In the experiment
with compositionality level 1 action dataset (CL1AD) and
compositionality level 2 action dataset (CL2AD), the ﬁrst
convolutional layer used 3x3 kernels with stride of 3.
Also, the exceptions were made on the convolutional kernels
that are connected to context units (see Fig. 1 (B)). The
recurrent convolutional kernels of context units have size of
3x3 with stride of 1 and 1 zero padding. The convolutional
kernels that connect pooling units to context units and context
units to the next layer have size of 2x2 with stride of 1. These
exceptions were made so that the resulting map size of the
context units are unchanged as a time step progresses.
Baselines: Two baselines were used in our experiments. As
one of the two baselines, the MSTNN were used for all three
experiments. The MSTNN model has one convolutional layer,
two convolutional layers consisted of leaky integrator neurons,
three pooling layers, two fully-connected layers, and a softmax
layer (Fig. 2 (B)). The ﬁrst and second convolutional layers
consisted of leaky integrator neurons have time constants of 2
and 100 respectively. Also, the LRCN was used as a baseline
in the experiments with CL1AD and CL2AD. It has three
convolutional layers, three pooling layers, one LSTM layer,
one fully-connected layer, and a softmax layer (Fig. 2 (C)).
One LSTM layer was used following the works of Donahue
et al. [6]. As in the MSTRNN parameter settings, with the
same exceptions, all of the convolutional and pooling kernels
of MSTNN and LRCN are 3x3 with stride of 1 and 2x2 with
stride of 2 respectively due to the same reason as in the case of
MSTRNN parameter settings. The MSTNN and LRCN models
have the same exceptions of not using convolutional kernel
of 3x3 with stride of 1 on their ﬁrst convolutional layer and
ﬁrst set of convolutional kernels that are used after the ﬁrst
pooling layer. The parameters of MSTNNs and LRCNs were
adjusted so that they have similar number of parameters to
MSTRNNs. Table II shows the number of parameters used in
the MSTRNN, MSTNN, and LRCN in the second experiment.
The number of parameters in the three models differ between
the experiments that use different datasets. But the changes in
the parameters of the models according to datasets mentioned
above are very subtle and the number of parameters are kept
similar to each other for all experiments.
TABLE II
NUMBER OF PARAMETERS IN THE TESTED MODELS
MSTRNN
MSTNN
LRCN
3,540,365
3,549,433
3,655,053

5
𝜏𝜏= 100
𝜏𝜏= 2
softmax
pool
conv
180 
pool
fc1
720
fc2
720
conv
360
pool
conv
64 
𝜏𝜏= 100
𝜏𝜏= 2
softmax
context
128 
fc1
512
fc2
512
context
256
pool
conv
64 
softmax
pool
conv
128 
pool
fc1
512
LSTM
512
conv
256
pool
conv
64 
(A)
(B)
(C)
Fig. 2. Architectures of the models used in the experiments. (A) Architecture
of the MSTRNN. (B) Architecture of the MSTNN. (C) Architecture of the
LRCN.
B. Categorization of Three Actions Concatenated Patterns
from the Weizmann Dataset
This section compares action categorization capability of
the multiple spatio-temporal scales recurrent neural network
(MSTRNN) and that of the multiple spatio-temporal scales
neural network (MSTNN) [13] with analyzing the internal
dynamics developed in each model. For this purpose, three
actions concatenated patterns were prepared by using Weiz-
mann dataset [15].
Dataset: A set of compositional action videos was prepared
by concatenating videos of three different human actions from
the Weizmann dataset [15]. The three actions were jump-in-
place (JP), one-hand-wave (OH), and two-hand-wave (TH) as
shown in Fig. 3, resulting in 27 categories, and one video clip
of the concatenated actions for each category. 27 videos for
each of the nine subjects exist in the dataset. The foreground
silhouettes of the resulting 3ACWD were emphasized by
background subtraction utilizing background sequences, and
were resized to 48x54.
(A)
(B)
(C)
Fig. 3.
The 3 human action categories used from the Weizmann dataset. (A)
Jump-in-place. (B) One-hand-wave. (C) Two-hand-wave.
Results: The categorization accuracy of the MSTRNN on
the 3ACWD was more than double the categorization accuracy
obtained from MSTNN (Table III). This result implies that
context units with recurrent weights improve the categorization
of long concatenated human action sequences.
TABLE III
ACTION RECOGNITION ACCURACIES ON 3ACWD IN PERCENTAGE
Category
MSTRNN
MSTNN
Action
92.3
45.27
Next, the internal dynamics of MSTRNN and MSTNN were
assessed by time series analysis of their neural activation
values. The activation values were obtained from the third
convolutional layer of the MSTNN and the context units in the
second context layer of the MSTRNN (see Fig. 2). The time
series neural activations were visualized by using principle
component analysis (PCA) [25]. Only the ﬁrst and the second
principle components of the neural activations were used for
the visualization. In the following discussion of this analysis,
X indicates arbitrary primitive actions, and the time series of
neural activations obtained when given action primitives A, B,
C in a sequential manner is designated PCA trajectory A-B-
C. Since both models are trained to categorize actions based
on the outputs obtained during the teaching length, the end
position of trajectories should be differentiated based on the
history of images that were shown in a sequence.
The PCA trajectories of the MSTNN (Fig. 4 (A)) at any
given time step are largely affected by the primitive action
of the input video at that time step. Accordingly, neural
activations approached points representative of the current
action in the PCA mapped space. Trajectories JP-X-X, OH-
X-X, TH-X-X ﬁrst approached points marked JP, OH, TH in
Fig. 4 (A) respectively before the presentation of second and
third primitives. When the second and third primitives were
given, the trajectories immediately changed their directions
toward the representative positions of the primitives that were
recently shown. Therefore two branching points can be seen
at each of the JP-X-X, OH-X-X, and TH-X-X trajectories.
Unlike the characteristics shown for the MSTNN, the PCA
trajectories obtained from the context units of the second
context layer in the MSTRNN (Fig. 4 (B)) did not simply
approach positions representative of currently displayed action
primitives in the PCA mapped space, but tended to differen-
tiate the primitives from each other.
To show the characteristics of the MSTNN and MSTRNN
in more detail, PCA trajectories of JP-JP-JP, OH-JP-JP, and
TH-JP-JP of the MSTNN and MSTRNN models are shown in
Fig. 5. In the trajectories obtained from the MSTNN (Fig. 5
(A)), the JP-JP-JP trajectory directly approached the marker JP
in the ﬁgure. And the trajectories OH-JP-JP and TH-JP-JP ﬁrst
approached regions marked OH and TH respectively. After the
second and the third primitives (JP and JP), the trajectories
changed their paths and approached the region marked JP.
But the PCA trajectories obtained from the MSTRNN did
not converge to the JP position marked in the ﬁgure (Fig.
5 (B)). The JP-JP-JP trajectory of the MSTRNN directly
approached the marker JP in the ﬁgure, same as the MSTNN.
But for the trajectories of OH-JP-JP and TH-JP-JP, they ﬁrst
approached regions marked OH and TH respectively. Then,
when the second (JP) and third primitives (JP) were shown,
the trajectories changed their paths. However, the direction of
the trajectories did not point toward the JP position in the

6
JP
OH
TH
JP
OH
TH
(A)
(B)
Fig. 4.
PCA mapping of the time series activation values obtained from the MSTRNN and MSTNN when test data was given to the models. (A) PCA
mapping generated from the third convolutional layer of the MSTNN. (B) PCA mapping generated from the context units in the second context layer of the
MSTRNN.
JP
OH
TH
TH
OH
JP
(A)
(B)
Fig. 5.
PCA mapping of the time series activation values obtained when the test subject′s action videos of the JP-JP-JP, OH-JP-JP, and TH-JP-JP concatenated
action sequences were given to both the MSTNN and MSTRNN models. (A) PCA mapping generated from the third convolutional layer of the MSTNN. (B)
PCA mapping generated from the context units in the second context layer of the MSTRNN.
ﬁgure.
This shows that the MSTRNN has better categorical mem-
ory than the MSTNN since it was able to keep the temporal
information of the previously shown OH and TH action
primitives, and prevent the activation values from becoming
similar to the values obtained when the JP action primitive
was shown to the model.
The decay dynamics of the MSTNN are responsible for
the trajectories in Fig. 5 (A) approaching the markers which
represent the current action primitives. As described in (1), the
internal neural values of the feature units are affected by both
the current spatial-temporal features processed in the previous
context layer, and the decayed internal neural values of the
units of the previous time step. In this method, previously
extracted spatial features do not effectively inﬂuence the
internal neural values of the current time step to keep track of
which action primitives came in the past, since they gradually
decay over time.
The higher performance of categorical memories in the
MSTRNN, compared to that of the MSTNN, is due to the
recurrent structure in the context units. The context units retain
important spatio-temporal features extracted during previous
time steps, and are then more or less reinforced during current
steps. And it can be inferred that the improved categorical
memories of the MSTRNN led to better categorization perfor-
mance compared to the MSTNN.
C. Categorization of Compositionality Level 1 Action Dataset
This experiment compared the categorization performance
of the MSTRNN, MSTNN, and LRCN with the newly
prepared compositionality level 1 action dataset (CL1AD).
Each action pattern in CL1AD was generated by composition
of a speciﬁc action and corresponding action-directed-object
(ADO) in its category. In this experiment, the PCA represen-

7
tation of the activation values obtained from MSTRNN was
observed and compared to the neural activations generated
from LRCN.
Dataset: CL1AD consists of 900 videos that are made by 10
subjects performing nine actions directed at four objects. There
are 15 object-directed action categories in total (Fig. 6). The
dataset was designed so that the categorization task was non-
trivial. A non-ADO (distractor) appears along with an ADO in
each video to prevent the model from inferring a human action
or an ADO solely by recognizing an object in a video. For
each object-directed action category, six videos were shot for
each subject with three different non-ADOs appearing in two
videos each in different states (opened or closed) if possible,
as they are presented in the other videos as ADOs. During the
recording of the dataset, the subjects generated each action
without constraints. Objects were located in random positions
in the task space. However, the camera view angle was ﬁxed,
since the problem of view invariance is beyond the scope of
the current study. The dataset is open for public use (available
at http://neurorobot.kaist.ac.kr/programs.html).
Book-Sweep
Book-Open
Book-Close
Laptop-Close
Laptop-Type
Bottle-Open
Bottle-Close
Bottle-Drink
Bottle-Shake
Cup-Drink
Cup-Stir
Cup-Blow
Book-Change page
Laptop-Sweep
Laptop-Open
Fig. 6.
Sample frames from CL1AD. An object that is not related to the
action also appears in the scene to make the recognition task non-trivial.
Results: The results obtained by testing both the MSTRNN
and MSTNN on the CL1AD are shown in Table IV. The
MSTRNN showed the highest action categorization perfor-
mance among the models. This conﬁrms that the MSTRNN,
which are characterized by both of the multiscale spatio-
temporal constraint and the recurrent connectivity, outper-
formed both of the MSTNN without the recurrent connectivity,
and the LRCN without the multiscale temporal constraint.
Although the LSTM, which is considered to have a capability
of self-adapting timescale of own dynamics by adjusting the
ratio of the forgetting gate, can perform well in generating
and recognizing low dimensional or discrete sequence data
[26], [27], [28], its performance cannot be guaranteed with
extremely high dimensional temporal data such as video
data without introducing simultaneous constraint for spatial
processing and temporal one at each layer. Also, in the current
result, MSTRNN and MSTNN showed similar ADO catego-
rization accuracies that are higher than the one by LRCN.
This might have resulted because both of the MSTRNN and
MSTNN extracted spatio-temporal features simultaneously
while the LRCN extracted spatial features and extract temporal
features in different stages.
TABLE IV
CATEGORIZATION ACCURACIES ON CL1AD IN PERCENTAGE
Category
MSTRNN
MSTNN
LRCN
ADO
86.89
84
66
Action
77.44
59.67
58.44
Next, we observed how the temporal constraints in the
MSTRNN helped with action categorization by comparing
the time series activations of the MSTRNN and LRCN.
Neural activations in the ﬁrst fully-connected layer of the
MSTRNN, and the LSTM layer of the LRCN (see Fig. 2),
which are generated from the input action videos belonging
to Close/Drink-Bottle, were visualized by PCA in a manner
similar to the previous experiment.
For the PCA trajectories obtained from the MSTRNN (Fig.
7 (A)), the trajectories share paths until some point, then
branch out according to their action categories. This is because
the bottle in Close/Drink-Bottle category ﬁrst appears in their
opened states, so that the image and movement in the videos
are similar until a subject hand reaches out for the cup. The
image and movement then start to differ after the objects are
reached by the subject, and the subject starts to act according
to an action category. The PCA trajectories seem to represent
perceptual time series inputs in categorized space.
The PCA trajectories of the LRCN (Fig. 7 (B)) also seem to
share paths in the early time steps and differentiate at certain
points, like the trajectories by the MSTRNN. However, their
trajectories seem to make ﬂuctuated movements, sometimes
even going back and forth. This phenomenon may have oc-
curred because the LSTM could not learn to develop temporal
hierarchy because it does not have any temporal constraints
imposed on its learning process. This may be the reason why
the categorization performance of the LRCN is lower than the
MSTRNN.
D. Categorization of Compositionality Level 2 Action Dataset
In the third experiment, the categorization performances of
MSTRNN, MSTNN, and LRCN were compared by introduc-
ing a more challenging task with using the compositionality
level 2 action dataset (CL2AD). Each action pattern in CL2AD
can be expressed by an object, an action, and an action
modiﬁer.
Dataset: CL2AD consists of 840 videos that can be tagged
by labels of objects, actions, and action modiﬁers. The cate-
gorization of action modiﬁers often requires the action recog-
nition models to extract longer temporal correlation than the
recognition of ADOs or actions. For example, for a video of
Book-Touch-2 Times category, because the model can acquire
sufﬁcient information only after perceiving a book twice
touched, the model needs to extract a long-ranged temporal

8
(A)
(B)
Fig. 7. PCA trajectories obtained from correctly categorized cases of Close/Drink-Bottle. (A) Trajectories of the MSTRNN. (B) Trajectories of the LRCN.
correlation between two similar events, the ﬁrst touch and the
second touch in order to identify the proper modiﬁer as twice.
In Fig. 8, we show the sampled images from CL2AD dataset.
With a static image, it is hard to infer the action. But it is even
harder to infer the action modiﬁer.
Each video in the CL2AD are describable by composi-
tions of four objects, four actions, and six action modiﬁers.
Assumed categories in the dataset in terms of the object-
action-modiﬁer triplets are shown in Fig. 9. The total number
of triplets is 42. The video recordings were taken from
10 different subjects. A subject shot two videos for each
object, action, and modiﬁer triplet. During dataset recording,
subjects generated each action naturally. In a video, a non-
ADO appears alongside with an ADO. A non-ADO was
randomly picked from ADO categories excluding the true
ADO of the video. Objects were located in various positions
in the task space. However, the camera view angle was ﬁxed
(the problem of view invariance is beyond the scope of the
current study). The dataset is open for a public use (available
at http://neurorobot.kaist.ac.kr/programs.html).
Results: The results obtained by testing the MSTRNN,
MSTNN, and LRCN on the CL2AD are shown in Table
V. The MSTRNN exhibited a higher modiﬁer categorization
performance than the MSTNN and LRCN, by 11.67% and
12.74% respectively. And for the ADO and action categoriza-
tion accuracies, the MSTRNN performances were higher than
the LRCN, but lower than the MSTNN by a small gap.
The performance difference between the MSTRNN and
MSTNN may have been caused by the enhanced categorical
memories in the MSTRNN. As explained previously, the cat-
egorization of action modiﬁers requires more temporal infor-
mation than the categorization of ADOs or actions. Therefore
the MSTRNN, which has better categorical memories than the
MSTNN, was able to achieve higher modiﬁer categorization
accuracy than the MSTNN. And the MSTNN may have shown
higher accuracy in the ADO and action categorization than
the MSTRNN because while its categorical memories are not
effective for the modiﬁer categorization, they were sufﬁcient
Spray-Move-To Left
Cup-Touch-2 Times
Book-Sweep-3 Times
Box-Drag-To Front
Fig. 8. Sample frames from CL2AD. It is hard to infer the action category
from a static image. But it is even harder to infer the action modiﬁer from the
image. Recognition of action modiﬁers requires a action recognition model to
extract longer temporal correlation than the recognition of actions or ADOs.
Fig. 9.
Composition of the CL2AD. Each object-action-modiﬁer triplet or
joint category is indicated by a connection. There are 42 joint categories.
for the action categorization. Therefore the MSTNN may
have used more of its resources in the ADO and action
categorization than in the modiﬁer categorization.

9
TABLE V
RECOGNITION ACCURACIES ON THE CL2AD IN PERCENTAGE
Category
MSTRNN
MSTNN
LRCN
ADO
75
76.79
68.1
Action
56.67
61.67
52.98
Modiﬁer
61.43
49.76
48.69
IV. CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSIONS
We proposed a MSTRNN model for action recognition
which extracts spatio-temporal features simultaneously by
using multiscale spatio-temporal constraints imposed on the
neural activity in different layers. The MSTRNN and MSTNN
were compared by using the three actions concatenated pat-
terns from Weizmann dataset in the ﬁrst experiment. Results
showed that due to the recurrent structure in the MSTRNN, the
model outperformed the MSTNN. The comparative analysis
on the neural activation sequences generated by both models
suggest that the MSTRNN can develop more enhanced cat-
egorical memories by which compositional categorization of
visually grounded data can be done more effectively than the
MSTNN does. This is consistent with the biological evidences
that a human brain utilizes its recurrent pathways to learn
temporal sequences effectively [14].
In the second experiment, the performance of the MSTRNN,
MSTNN, and LRCN were compared by using composition-
ality level 1 action dataset, which is more challenging cat-
egorization task than the ﬁrst one. The MSTRNN showed
the highest categorization accuracies for both action-directed
object (ADO) and action categories among the tested mod-
els. And the comparative analysis on the internal dynamics
between the MSTRNN and LRCN suggested that the per-
formance by MSTRNN is better than the one by LRCN.
This is because the temporal hierarchy of the MSTRNN was
successfully developed with temporal constraints adequately
imposed on the model whereas the LRCN had no temporal
constraints and could not form a hierarchy.
The MSTRNN, MSTNN, and LRCN were again compared
in the third experiment. In the experiment, compositionality
level 2 action dataset which has triplets of ADOs, actions and
modiﬁers as labels was used. In the results, the MSTRNN
outperformed the other models in modiﬁer categorization that
requires the extraction of longer temporal correlation than
the categorization of ADOs and actions. Both MSTRNN and
MSTNN, which extract spatio-temporal features simultane-
ously, showed higher ADO categorization rate than the LRCN,
which extracts spatial and temporal features only separately in
different layers. This suggests that simultaneous extraction of
spatial and temporal features are advantageous for learning-
based action recognition models. This is consistent with the
biological evidences that spatio-temporal receptive ﬁelds of a
neuron in a mammalian cortex increases as the layer goes up
[9], [10].
Although the MSTRNN showed better performance than the
other models used for comparison, its recognition accuracy is
far less than the human level. One of the main reasons for
such degeneracy might be overﬁtting. In the future study, this
overﬁtting problem may be alleviated with recently developed
deep learning regularization techniques including the dropout
technique for recurrent connections based on variational infer-
ence [29]. Recurrent batch normalization [30] may also help to
alleviate overﬁtting. Cooijmans et al. have shown that batch-
normalization of LSTM improves its generalization capacity
and encourages faster convergence in the learning phase.
Future study should also investigate on the possible advan-
tage of adding a top-down prediction pathway and attention
process to the MSTRNN structure. By adding a top-down
pathway with attention, the recognition process should involve
with dense interaction between the top-down proactive process
of projecting possible image with attention and the bottom-up
perceptual process of reﬂecting the top-down expectation by
the perceptual reality. Such recognition process developed on
such interactions between the both sides is considered to be
more robust against possible perturbation in the input visual
signals.
Finally, the future study should aim for further scaling.
As mentioned previously, the current dataset used for the
experiment 2 and 3 were built by the authors because there
have been no adequate tagged video data with different levels
of action compositionality in public datasets. It is, however,
admitted that the size of the data is relatively small and this is
why the model cannot be tested under more general conditions
such as view angle free or size free conditions. Future study
should explore how to enlarge data size efﬁciently for the
purpose of scaling and generalization of the model system.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the National Research Foun-
dation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government
(MSIP) (No. 2014R1A2A2A01005491).
