Large-Scale Automatic Labeling of Video Events with Verbs Based on
Event-Participant Interaction
Andrei Barbu,a Alexander Bridge,a Dan Coroian,a Sven Dickinson,b Sam Mussman,a
Siddharth Narayanaswamy,a Dhaval Salvi,c Lara Schmidt,a Jiangnan Shangguan,a
Jeffrey Mark Siskind,a∗Jarrell Waggoner,c Song Wang,c Jinlian Wei,a Yifan Yin,a and Zhiqi Zhangc
aSchool of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA
bDepartment of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, CA
cDepartment of Computer Science & Engineering, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC, USA
Abstract
We present an approach to labeling short video
clips with English verbs as event descriptions. A
key distinguishing aspect of this work is that it
labels videos with verbs that describe the spa-
tiotemporal interaction between event partici-
pants, humans and objects interacting with each
other, abstracting away all object-class informa-
tion and ﬁne-grained image characteristics, and
relying solely on the coarse-grained motion of
the event participants. We apply our approach
to a large set of 22 distinct verb classes and
a corpus of 2,584 videos, yielding two surpris-
ing outcomes. First, a classiﬁcation accuracy of
greater than 70% on a 1-out-of-22 labeling task
and greater than 85% on a variety of 1-out-of-
10 subsets of this labeling task is independent of
the choice of which of two different time-series
classiﬁers we employ. Second, we achieve this
level of accuracy using a highly impoverished in-
termediate representation consisting solely of the
bounding boxes of one or two event participants
as a function of time. This indicates that success-
ful event recognition depends more on the choice
of appropriate features that characterize the lin-
guistic invariants of the event classes than on the
particular classiﬁer algorithms.

Additional images and videos as well as all code and
datasets are available at http://engineering.purdue.
edu/˜qobi/arxiv2012d.
1
Introduction
People describe observed visual events using verbs.
A
common assumption in Linguistics (Jackendoff, 1983;
Pinker, 1989) is that verbs typically characterize the in-
teraction between event participants in terms of the gross
changing motion of these participants. Object class and
image characteristics of the participants are believed to be
largely irrelevant to determining the appropriate verb label
for an event. Participants simply ﬁll roles (such as agent
and patient) in the spatiotemporal structure of the event
class described by a verb. For example, an event where
one participant (the agent) picks up another participant (the
patient) consists of a sequence of two subevents, where dur-
ing the ﬁrst subevent the agent moves towards the patient
while the patient is at rest and during the second subevent
the agent moves together with the patient away from the
original location of the patient. It does not matter whether
the agent is a human or a cat, or whether the patient is a
ball or a cup. Moreover, the shapes, sizes, colors, textures,
etc. of the participants are irrelevant. Additionally, only
the gross motion characteristics are relevant; it is irrelevant
whether the participants grow, shrink, bend, vibrate, etc.
during a pick up event. The precise linear or angular veloc-
ities and accelerations are likewise irrelevant.
The objective of this paper is to evaluate this Linguistic as-
sumption and its relevance to the computer-vision task of
labeling video events with verbs. In order to evaluate this
hypothesis, we focus our attention on methods that clas-
sify events solely on the basis of the gross changing motion
of the event participants. In doing do, we often expressly
discard other sources of information such as object class,
1
arXiv:1204.3616v1  [cs.CV]  16 Apr 2012

changing human body posture, and low-level image charac-
teristics such as shape, size, color, and texture. We do this
not because we believe that such information could not help
event recognition but rather to allow us to strongly evaluate
the above hypothesis. The surprising result of this endeavor
is that gross changing motion of event participants attains
greater than 70% accuracy on a 1-out-of-22 forced-choice
labeling task, signiﬁcantly outperforming chance (4.5%),
and greater than 85% accuracy on a variety of 1-out-of-
10 subsets of this labeling task, again signiﬁcantly outper-
forming chance (10%).
As this paper focusses on labeling video events with
verbs, both the methods and datasets commonly used
in prior event-classiﬁcation efforts are not appropriate.
Such work typically classiﬁes events using object and
image characteristics and ﬁne-grained shape and motion
features, such as spatiotemporal volumes (Blank et al.,
2005; I. Laptev and Rozenfeld, 2008; Rodriguez et al.,
2008) and tracked feature points (Liu et al., 2009; Schuldt
et al., 2004; Wang and Mori, 2009). Moreover, many of
the datasets commonly used in such work do not involve
people interacting with objects or other people and contain
event classes that do not depict common verbs.
For
example, the distinctions between wave1 and wave2 or
jump and pjump in the WEIZMANN dataset (Blank et al.,
2005) or the distinctions between Golf-Swing-Back,
Golf-Swing-Front,
and
Golf-Swing-Side;
Kicking-Front
and
Kicking-Side;
or
Swing-Bench
and
Swing-SideAngle
in
the
SPORTS ACTIONS dataset (Rodriguez et al., 2008) do not
correspond to distinctions in verb semantics. The event
classes side and jack in the WEIZMANN dataset, the
event classes Swing-Bench and Swing-SideAngle
in the SPORTS ACTIONS dataset, and the vast ma-
jority of the event classes in the UCF50 dataset (Liu
et
al.,
2009)
(e.g.
Basketball,
Billiards,
BreastStroke,
CleanAndJerk,
HorseRace,
HulaHoop, MilitaryParade, TaiChi, or YoYo,
just to name a few) do not correspond to verbs in any
language. The videos in the KTH dataset (Schuldt et al.,
2004) do not reﬂect the true meanings of any verbs, let
alone boxing or clapping or waving ones hands.
Typical actions in specialized domains like ballet (c.f. the
BALLET dataset (Wang and Mori, 2009)) are described
by nouns, not verbs, and often are not part of common
lay vocabulary. The distinction between the event classes
golf swing,
tennis swing,
and swing in the
YOUTUBE dataset (Liu et al., 2009) reﬂect distinctions in
event participants, not the semantics of the verb swing.
Siskind and Morris (1996) presented a technique for label-
ing video events with verbs based on the changing motion
patterns of the event participants. However, they only ap-
plied their technique to a small number of event classes
(six) and a small corpus of thirty-six videos, six per class.
Moreover, they derived the changing motion patterns us-
ing a rudimentary tracker that was speciﬁc to color and
motion using background subtraction. Thus the event par-
ticipants were limited to people’s hands interacting with
colored blocks in uncluttered desktop environments with
static backgrounds. In this paper, we employ the same tech-
nique for labeling video events with verbs but extend it to
a much larger number of event classes (twenty two) and
evaluate it on a much larger corpus of 2,584 videos rang-
ing from 6 to 584 per class. Since the corpus used in the
present effort exhibits a wide variety of natural event par-
ticipants in a wide variety of cluttered environments with
nonstationary backgrounds, this paper employs novel and
more general-purpose techniques for deriving the changing
motion patterns. Moreover, Siskind & Morris used only
one algorithmic method, namely hidden Markov models
(HMMs), to classify the time series that characterize the
changing motion patterns. Thus one might conclude that
the performance of this approach is somehow dependent
on this choice of classiﬁer. In this paper, we employ two
distinct time-series classiﬁcation methods, namely HMMs
and dynamic time warping (DTW) and demonstrate that
both achieve essentially identical performance. Thus it ap-
pears that the strength of the approach results from the gen-
eral principle of classifying events based on gross changing
motion patterns, not on the algorithmic particulars. More-
over, we demonstrate a surprising result. Our front-end
tracker abstracts each video as one or two moving axis-
aligned rectangles. Despite such an extremely impover-
ished representation that passes only 4 or 8 small integers
per frame between the front-end tracker and the back-end
time-series classiﬁer, and the fact that all training and clas-
siﬁcation is performed solely on this impoverished repre-
sentation, both of our classiﬁers attain greater than 70%
accuracy on a 1-out-of-22 forced-choice labeling task and
greater than 85% accuracy on a variety 1-out-of-10 subsets
of this task. This supports the common assumption in Lin-
guistics that the meanings of many common verbs are sen-
sitive only to gross changing motion patterns of the event
participants and not the object class or image characteris-
tics of those participants.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the
new corpus that we use for this effort. Section 3 describes
the tracking methods that we employ to abstract each video
in this corpus to one or two moving axis-aligned rectan-
gles. Section 4 describes the feature vectors that we extract
from this impoverished representation and the particulars
of the training and classiﬁcation paradigms. Section 5 de-
scribes our experimental results. Section 6 concludes with
a discussion of potential improvements.
2
The Mind’s Eye Corpus
As part of the Mind’s Eye program, DARPA has produced
a video corpus that is speciﬁcally designed to support la-
2

approach
584
drop
44
leave
116
arrive
8
exchange
18
lift
78
attach
48
fall
134
pass
76
bounce
22
give
552
pick-up
40
catch
201
go
6
pull
8
chase
108
jump
150
run
76
collide
101
kick
48
throw
26
dig
140
Figure 1: The number of exemplar videos for each verb in
the DARPA Mind’s Eye C-D1a corpus. There are 2,584
videos and 22 verbs in total.
beling of videos with common verbs. The particulars of
this corpus were driven by the desire to ground the seman-
tics of 48 speciﬁc English verbs. To date, several compo-
nents of this corpus have been released to program partic-
ipants. One portion, C-D1a, containing 2,584 videos, was
released in late September 2010, while a second portion, C-
D1b, containing 1,564 videos, was released in late January

from 21 frames to 1408 frames in length, with an average
of 241 frames. The videos in C-D1a range from 21 frames
to 809 frames in length, with an average of 141 frames.
Each video is intended to depict one of the 48 speciﬁc En-
glish verbs and collectively all 48 verbs are represented in
this combined corpus (with unequal numbers of exemplar
videos). Each video comes labeled with the intended verb
depiction.
Because verbs often exhibit a range of poly-
semous and homonymous meanings and also may exhibit
synonymy where the semantic space of one verb may in-
clude all or part of the semantics space of another verb,
DARPA intends to eventually solicit human judgements for
the association of verb labels with each video. Since such
human labelings have not yet been produced, in this paper
we simply take the ‘correct’ label for each video to be the
intended verb label provided with the video. Moreover, this
paper considers only the C-D1a portion that depicts 22 spe-
ciﬁc English verbs. Fig. 1 summarizes the distribution of
verbs and exemplar videos in this portion of the corpus.
Conformant to the linguistic observation that object iden-
tity and class is tangential to the task of labeling a video
with a verb, different exemplars for each of the verbs in
C-D1a often have the participant roles played by different
object instances and classes. The C-D1a corpus has a total
of 26 distinct objects that play a role in the depicted verbs
as enumerated in Fig. 2. (Note that there are far more dis-
tinct objects that do not play a role in the depicted verbs
and serve solely to clutter the background.) Many of these
objects, however, only appear in the corpus occupying a
Our corpus- size measurements reﬂect only the videos in the
SINGLE VERB directory of C-D1a, and eliminate from consider-
ation those videos not labeled with a single verb from this list of
48 verbs.
bag
football∗
rake
bicycle
gun∗
shovel
big ball
hammer∗
small ball
bottle∗
keys∗
spade∗
bucket
log∗
SUV
cap∗
motorcycle tape∗
cardboard box∗pen∗
tripod
cellphone∗
person
wooden box
chair
pouch∗
Figure 2: The 26 distinct objects that play a role in the
depicted verbs in the C-D1a corpus. The starred objects
are the ones that are most difﬁcult to detect and classify
reliably.
very small portion of the ﬁeld of view and are difﬁcult
for humans, let alone machines, to detect and classify re-
liably. The ones that are most difﬁcult to detect and clas-
sify reliably are starred in Fig. 2. For each of the remaining
ones, we manually cropped a collection of between 1,500
and 2,100 exemplars (combining both positive and nega-
tive samples) to train a part-based object detector (Felzen-
szwalb et al., 2010). It is important to stress that we use
this object detector solely to produce bounding-box infor-
mation for deriving the gross changing motion patterns of
the event participants. During event classiﬁcation, we ex-
pressly discard the object-class information and conﬁdence
scores provided by the object detector. In section 6, we
discuss how one could extend our methods to make use of
such information and achieve even higher classiﬁcation ac-
curacy.
3
Tracking
We use Felzenszwalb et al.’s (Felzenszwalb et al., 2010)
part-based object detector as a detection source to pro-
duce axis-aligned rectangles (henceforth detection boxes
or simply detections or boxes) as a function of time. How-
ever, it is unreliable alone as a means for characterizing
gross participant-object motion because it simultaneously
exhibits a high false-positive rate and a high false-negative
rate. Moreover, there is no single detection threshold that
properly trades off the false-positive and false-negative
rates in a class- or video-independent fashion. Addition-
ally, the raw detection-conﬁdence values produced by the
detector, or even their rank ordering, cannot be used on iso-
lated frames to select the desired detection. Moreover, the
detector alone cannot distinguish between false positives
and multiple objects of the same class at close positions in
the ﬁeld of view. Likewise, the detector alone does not pro-
vide temporal-correspondence information in this situation.
These problems are particularly exacerbated by occlusion,
where objects enter and leave the ﬁeld of view or pass in
front of or behind other objects. In these circumstances, the
3

detection conﬁdence becomes an even less reliable measure
of the (partially occluded) presence or absence of an object.
This is a particularly egregious limitation because verbs de-
scribe interaction among participants and such interaction
most frequently involves occlusion.
3.1
Optimal selection of object tracks
We address all of these issues with a novel technique that
produces coherent object tracks across a video from collec-
tions of independent detections in each frame by simulta-
neously selecting among multiple detections in all frames
of a video to ﬁnd the combination of selections that leads to
a global optimum of a cost function that characterizes the
overall object-track coherence. While we employ this tech-
nique using Felzenszwalb et al.’s part-based object detector
as a detection source, it can be more generally applied to
any alternate detection source that outputs boxes with con-
ﬁdence scores. The only requirement is that the conﬁdence
scores must provide a total ordering of the boxes. The con-
ﬁdence scores need not be normalized or lie in a particular
interval. This lax requirement facilitates integrating boxes
produced by different detection sources into a single coher-
ent track, simply by providing a correspondence between
the conﬁdence values produced by the different detection
sources and how they impact this total order. We avail our-
selves of this potential in section 3.4 to provide resilience
in the face of appearance change due to nonrigid motion
and out-of-plane object rotation.
One can conceivably use an alternate detection source that
does not rely on an object detector. For example, one might
do some form of background subtraction or motion-based
tracking to separate moving objects from the background
or some form of bottom-up foreground/background seg-
mentation or contour completion to segment salient ob-
jects. Any method that could reliably place bounding boxes
around event participants as a function of time would suf-
ﬁce for our purposes.
The sole reason that we employ
an object detector as a detection source is that bottom-up
methods are currently not sufﬁciently reliable, while meth-
ods based on background subtraction or motion detection
fail to detect non-moving event participants (of which there
are many in our corpus) and are unreliable in the presence
of nonstationary backgrounds (such as occur frequently in
our corpus).
We apply our detection source independently for each
frame and each model, biasing this detection source to yield
few false negatives at the expense of yielding a prepon-
derance of false positives, and use our tracker to ﬁlter out
the false positives. When using Felzenszwalb et al.’s part-
based object detector as a detection source, we do this by
subtracting a ﬁxed offset (which we take to be 1) from the
learned detection threshold. The particular value of this
offset is unimportant so long as it yields a sufﬁciently low
false-negative rate, as our method reliably selects coherent
tracks despite an extremely high false-positive rate. The
only negative impact of choosing too high of an offset is an
increase in run time.
Felzenszwalb et al.’s part-based object detector, by default,
incorporates non-maxima suppression to remove detections
that overlap more than 50% with detections of higher con-
ﬁdence. This tends to foil the above process for biasing the
detector towards few false negatives and many false posi-
tives. To counter the effect of excessive non-maxima sup-
pression, we raise the overlap threshold to 80%. This al-
lows for much better object localization and reduces jitter
considerably.
We have found that no amount of the above bias process
will completely eliminate false negatives. To provide for
robust production of coherent object tracks that are neces-
sary for successful event classiﬁcation, we compensate for
the remaining false negatives by projecting each detection
box in each frame forward a ﬁxed number of frames using
the Kanade-Lucas-Tomasi (KLT) (Shi and Tomasi, 1994;
Tomasi and Kanade, 1991) feature tracker. We track the
KLT features that reside inside each detection box for one
frame and compute a single velocity vector and divergence
vector for that detection by computing the average velocity
and divergence of the KLT features tracked for that box.
We use the aggregate velocity and divergence vectors to
project the detection box forward one frame and repeat this
process. We limit this projection process to 5 frames as it is
subject to drift, and we need it only to compensate for false
negatives which are relatively rare as a result of the above
bias process. We augment the collection of detections to
include the forward-projected boxes, taking the conﬁdence
score of a forward-projected box to be that of the original
detection that was forward projected.
To select a coherent object track across multiple frames we
construct a graph with one vertex for each detection in each
frame and edges connecting all pairs of detections in adja-
cent frames. The edges are weighted with a cost that in-
versely measures coherence and we search for a path from
the ﬁrst to last frames with minimal total edge weight us-
ing a dynamic-programming algorithm (Viterbi, 1971) that
ﬁnds a global optimum. This cost is formulated as a linear
combination of two components, one being the detection
conﬁdence score and the other being consistency with op-
tical ﬂow. The latter is taken to be the Euclidean distance
between the center of a detection box in a given frame and
a projection of the center of the corresponding detection
box from the previous frame forward using optical ﬂow.
This forward-projection process is analogous to the one
performed to compensate for false negatives except that
the average velocity vector is computed from dense opti-
cal ﬂow instead of tracked KLT features.
In principle, one could use either KLT features or opti-
4

cal ﬂow for either forward-projection process.
We ﬁnd
that, in practice, KLT features yield better results for the
forward-projection process used to compensate for false
negatives while optical ﬂow yields better results for the
forward-projection process used to compute track coher-
ence.
Also, our track-coherence measure uses only the
distance between detection-box centers and thus does not
need a divergence measure. While one could extend the
track-coherence measure to incorporate such information,
we ﬁnd that it yields no improvement in performance.
In our experiments, we weight the optical-ﬂow compo-
nent of track coherence ten times less than the detection-
conﬁdence score. We bias the track-coherence measure to-
wards detection conﬁdence to prevent production of tracks
that are consistent with optical ﬂow but do not correspond
to reliable object detections. Other than this general bias,
we ﬁnd that the object tracks produced are largely insensi-
tive to the precise weighting value.
3.2
Entering and leaving the ﬁeld of view
The algorithm described thus far constructs tracks that span
the entire video from the ﬁrst frame to the last frame. We
allow for objects that enter and leave the ﬁeld of view sim-
ply by applying this algorithm to a subinterval of the video.
The only difﬁculty in doing so is determining the subinter-
val boundaries. We take the subinterval to begin at the ﬁrst
frame with a detection conﬁdence above a certain thresh-
old, and end at the last such frame. To derive this threshold,
we compute a (50 bin) histogram of the maximal detection-
conﬁdence scores in each frame, over the entire video. One
expects this histogram to be bimodal since frames in which
the object is not present will have lower conﬁdence scores,
as all detections will be false positives. We take the thresh-
old to be the minimum of the value that maximizes the
between-class variance (Otsu, 1979) when bipartitioning
this histogram and the learned detector-conﬁdence thresh-
old offset by a ﬁxed, but small, amount (0.4). In practice,
we ﬁnd that proper selection of the subinterval is largely
insensitive to the number of bins and the precise threshold
offset.
3.3
Multiple instances of the same object class
We detect multiple tracks of the same object class by re-
peated application of the above method.
In doing so,
we must prevent subsequent iterations from rediscovering
tracks produced by earlier iterations. The na¨ıve way of do-
ing this would be to remove detections associated with ear-
lier tracks. Detection boxes can be deemed to be associated
with earlier tracks when their centers lie inside detection
boxes included in those earlier tracks. However, removing
all such detections runs the risk of precluding overlapping
tracks, as would happen when objects pass each other in
the ﬁeld of view. So instead of removing detections, we
rescore them with the maximal detection score in the lower
quartile of scores for that frame. Given the biasing pro-
cess towards false positives away from false negatives in
the detection source, boxes in the lower quartile are likely
to be false positives and undesirable to include in a coher-
ent track. Rescoring detections in this fashion biases subse-
quent iterations to ﬁnd distinct tracks while allowing tracks
to brieﬂy overlap.
If one is not careful, there can be crossover at such points of
overlap, where the object identity is swapped between two
distinct tracks. We use an object-appearance model to bias
against such crossover. Color histograms are computed in
the CIELAB (C.I.E., 1978) color space of the pixel val-
ues inside the detection boxes after shrinking those boxes
by 60% to ameliorate the inﬂuence of background pixels
on these histograms. We then augment the edge-weight
function to include a coherence measure on object appear-
ance, taking this coherence measure to be Earth Mover’s
distance (Peleg et al., 1989) between the corresponding his-
tograms. We weight object appearance and detector conﬁ-
dence equally in the coherence measure, though in practice,
we ﬁnd that the object tracks produced are largely insensi-
tive to the precise weighting.
3.4
Nonrigid motion and out-of-plane rotation
Felzenszwalb et al.’s part-based object detector is unreli-
able as a detection source when there is nonrigid motion
and out-of-plane rotation.
Our tracking framework can
provide resilience in the face of such unreliability by in-
tegrating detection boxes from multiple detection sources.
We do so by training multiple models for Felzenszwalb et
al.’s part-based object detector for varying object appear-
ance under nonrigid motion and out-of-plane rotation and
union the resulting detections. As discussed in section 3.1,
we must insure that the conﬁdence scores allow for com-
parison between detections produced by different detection
sources. We do this by offsetting the conﬁdence scores for
each detection source by the threshold computed in sec-
tion 3.2.
The C-D1a corpus has little out-of-plane rotation and there-
fore such does not impact the reliability of the detection
source. But the corpus does contain one source of nonrigid
motion, namely changing human body posture. For this
corpus, it is sufﬁcient to train detectors for three distinct
postures: standing, crouching, and lying down.
Integrating multiple detection sources into a single object
track allows annotation of the detections in that track with
their source.
In particular, this allows temporal annota-
tion of human motion tracks with their changing posture.
Conceivably one could use such information to support se-
lection of the appropriate verb label. Because we wish to
evaluate the hypothesis that verbs typically characterize the
gross changing motion of the event participants, we ex-
pressly discard such information in the experiments per-
5

formed in this paper.
3.5
Smoothing
Boxes comprising the recovered object tracks suffer from
jitter.
We remove this jitter by ﬁtting piecewise cubic
splines to the widths, heights, and x and y center coordi-
nates of the tracked boxes. A simple selection of smoothing
parameters sufﬁces for the C-D1a corpus. Since the videos
in C-D1a have low frame length variance, a constant num-
ber of spline pieces is adequate. Box x and y center co-
ordinates are smoothed with 10 pieces, as they can move
signiﬁcantly when tracking accelerating objects, for exam-
ple a bouncing ball. Box widths and heights are smoothed
with 5 pieces as object shape and size change less drasti-
cally.
3.6
Results
Our tracker runs in time O(lm + lmn|df|2) to recover n
tracks with m detection sources, each yielding d detec-
tions per frame, doing f frames of forward projection, on
videos of length l. In practise, the run time is dominated
by the detection process and the dynamic-programming
step. Fig. 3 illustrates the operation of our tracker, ren-
dering the output of each stage. From this video, one can
clearly see the robustness of our tracker in light of clut-
tered nonstationary backgrounds, motion that is not per-
pendicular to the camera axis, an extremely high false-
positive biased detection rate of the detection source, oc-
clusion that results from overlapping tracks corresponding
to interacting objects, nonrigid motion that results from
changing human body posture, objects entering and leav-
ing the ﬁeld of view, and multiple instances of the same
object class. Moreover, as illustrated in Fig. 4, the fact that
our tracker ﬁnds an optimal coherent track by processing
the entire video allows it to robustly track objects that ap-
proach or recede from the camera by a large distance that
would otherwise be too small in the ﬁeld of view to reli-
ably track by methods that did not process the entire video.
Without the false-positive bias that such a whole-video ap-
proach allows, Felzenszwalb et al.’s part-based object de-
tector would not even detect such objects.
4
Classiﬁcation
We convert the collection of object tracks for a video to a
time-series of real-valued feature vectors and formulate the
problem of labeling a video with a verb as a time-series
classiﬁcation problem. In doing so, we discard all object
identity and body posture information that is available in
those tracks.
For each video, we designate one track as the agent and
another track (if present) as the patient. The agent is deter-
mined using a heuristic: people are more likely to be agents
than inanimate objects are, and bicycles, motorcycles, and
SUVs are more likely to be agents than other inanimate ob-
jects because they are driven by people that we might fail
to detect due to occlusion. Another track (if present) is se-
lected as the patient using the same heuristic. Ties are bro-
ken by selecting the track with highest track coherence as
the agent and the one with second highest track coherence
as the patient.
For all videos, we extract a feature vector for each frame
representing the gross absolute motion of the agent:
1. x-coordinate of the box center
2. y-coordinate of the box center
3. box aspect ratio
4. derivative of the box aspect ratio
5. magnitude of the velocity of the box center
6. direction of the velocity of the box center
7. magnitude of the acceleration of the box center
8. direction of the acceleration of the box center
For videos with two or more object tracks, we also extract a
feature vector that includes the above absolute motion fea-
tures representing the independent motion of each of the
agent and patient along with additional features that de-
scribe their relative motion:
1. distance between agent and patient box centers
2. orientation of vector from agent box center to patient
box center
3. derivative of the distance between agent and patient
box centers
In all of the above, temporal derivatives and corresponding
velocities and accelerations are computed as a two-point ﬁ-
nite difference. Note that we label videos with verbs using
the gross changing motion patterns of at most two event
participants. While we could, in principle, label videos
on the basis of the motion patterns of more event partici-
pants, if present, by straightforward extension of the above
feature-vector computation to include absolute features for
all objects and relative features for all object pairs, we ex-
pressly refrain from doing so to evaluate the Linguistic hy-
pothesis that verbs largely describe the interaction between
an agent and a patient.
The verbs in C-D1a often have different senses, such as the
causative/inchoative alternation (the agent bounces vs. the
agent bounces the patient), that involve a different number
of participants. In this case, we train two distinct classi-
ﬁers, one on all videos characterizing the motion of just the
agent and one on those videos that have both an agent and
a patient characterizing the motion of both the agent and
the patient. When classifying an unseen video with just
a single object track we use models trained on just agents,
while when classifying an unseen video with more than one
object track we use models trained on both agents and pa-
tients.
6

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3: The output of each stage of our tracker on a single frame. (a) Detections for the person model in red and the
motorcycle model in green. (b) Forward projections of the detections from the 5 previous frames. (c) The object tracks
with maximal coherence selected by our dynamic-programming algorithm. Two distinct person tracks are shown in red
and blue, and a motorcycle track is shown in green. (d) The smoothed tracks.
Figure 4: Four frames tracking two people and one motorcycle. Two separate person tracks in red and blue, and the
motorcycle track in green. The tracker is robust despite the fact that one person occludes most of the motorcycle, the tracks
of the two people overlap, and all three objects become very small as they recede from the camera.
7

To evaluate the hypothesis that it is possible to classify
events solely on the basis of the gross changing motion
of the event participants and demonstrate the insensitiv-
ity of this hypothesis to the choice of time-series classi-
ﬁer, we have run two parallel sets of experiments, one with
HMMs (Baum and Petrie, 1966) and one with DTW (El-
lis, 2003; Sakoe and Chiba, 1978). When using HMMs,
we train models with 5 states and independent continuous
output distributions for each feature. We use Gaussian dis-
tributions for those features that constitute linear quantities
and Von Mises distributions for those features that consti-
tute angular quantities. We found that increasing the num-
ber of states beyond 5 did not signiﬁcantly improve accu-
racy. When using DTW, we employ Euclidean distance
between feature vectors as the distance metric between
frames and use DTW to extend this metric as a distance
between frame sequences to construct a nearest-neighbor
classiﬁer between unseen videos and training exemplars.
5
Results
We performed 5-fold cross-validation on the entire C-D1a
corpus with a 1-out-of-22 forced-choice classiﬁcation task
using both HMMs and DTW. To do this, we indepen-
dently partitioned the set of ‘correct’ exemplars for each
verb into ﬁve random but equally sized components (up to
quantization). For each of the ﬁve cross-validation runs
we trained on the exemplars in four of the ﬁve partitions
and tested on the exemplars in the remaining partition.
Fig. 5 gives the recognition accuracy for each classiﬁca-
tion algorithm for each cross-validation run. Fig. 7 and
Fig. 8 give the aggregate confusion matrices for each clas-
siﬁcation algorithm across all ﬁve cross-validation runs.
Note the essentially identical performance of HMMs and
DTW: HMMs exhibits an aggregate classiﬁcation accuracy
of 71.9% while DTW exhibits an aggregate classiﬁcation
accuracy of 71.3%. Moreover, we attain greater than 85%
aggregate classiﬁcation accuracy for three different 1-out-
of-10 subsets of this forced-choice classiﬁcation task with
both HMMs and DTW: arrive bounce dig drop exchange
give jump kick pickup run (87.4% HMMs, 85.3% DTW),
bounce dig drop exchange give jump kick pickup pull run
(87.5% HMMs, 85.1% DTW), and bounce dig drop ex-
change give jump kick pass pickup pull (86.1% HMMs,
87.0% DTW). These results support the hypothesis that
classiﬁcation accuracy depends more on the correct choice
of features than on the classiﬁcation algorithm.
6
Conclusion
Our focus in this paper is to evaluate the hypothesis that
it is possible to label videos with verbs using information
solely about the gross changing motion of the event par-
ticipants. There are numerous places where our computa-
tional methods expressly discard information that is oth-
HMMs
74.4
72.9
70.5
69.5
72.4
DTW
70.7
71.2
69.5
75.0
70.2
Figure 5: Accuracy for HMMs and DTW on the 1-out-of-
22 action classiﬁcation task for each of the 5 random parti-
tions of the corpus.
bag
→
lift
bicycle
→
give
big ball
→
appoach | chase | catch | collide
bucket
→
dig
chair
→
give | collide | fall
football
→
catch | throw
motorbike
→
give | approach | chase | leave | run
rake
→
dig
shovel
→
dig
small ball
→
collide | lift
SUV
→
give | approach | chase | leave | catch
|
throw | run
wooden box
→
give
Figure 6: Correlation between object and event class in C-
D1a.
erwise available in order to evaluate this hypothesis. Since
such information might correlate with the underlying event,
one could extend our classiﬁers to make use of such infor-
mation. For example, one might expect that detector conﬁ-
dence scores would decrease with occlusion and thus cor-
relate with the object interaction indicative of event class.
Similarly, one might expect that object class would corre-
late with event class. Indeed, as shown in Fig. 6, such cor-
relation signiﬁcantly reduces the potential verb-label space,
rendering the verb-labeling task almost trivial. Likewise,
as discussed in section 3.4, one could augment the time
series of feature vectors with human body-posture infor-
mation that is extracted as a by-product of using multiple
detection sources to provide resilience in the face of out-of-
plane rotation and nonrigid motion. It is quite unexpected
that we attain as good results as we have despite expressly
discarding such information. This supports the common
assumption in Linguistics that verbs typically characterize
the interaction between event participants in terms of the
gross changing motion of these participants.
