Super-resolution in Molecular Dynamics Trajectory Reconstruction with
Bi-Directional Neural Networks
Ludwig Winkler,1 Klaus-Robert M¨uller,1, 2, 3, 4, 5, ∗and Huziel E. Sauceda1, 6, 7, †
1Machine Learning Group, Technische Universit¨at Berlin, 10587 Berlin, Germany
2BIFOLD – Berlin Institute for the Foundations of Learning and Data, Berlin, Germany
3Department of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Korea University, Anam-dong, Seongbuk-gu, Seoul 136-713, Korea
4Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Stuhlsatzenhausweg, 66123 Saarbr¨ucken, Germany
5Google Research, Brain team, Berlin, Germany
6BASLEARN, BASF-TU joint Lab, Technische Universit¨at Berlin, 10587 Berlin, Germany
7Instituto de F´ısica, Universidad Nacional Aut´onoma de M´exico,
Apartado Postal 20-346, 01000 M´exico, D.F., M´exico
(Dated: January 5, 2022)
Molecular dynamics simulations are a cornerstone in science, allowing to investigate from the
system’s thermodynamics to analyse intricate molecular interactions. In general, to create extended
molecular trajectories can be a computationally expensive process, for example, when running ab-
initio simulations. Hence, repeating such calculations to either obtain more accurate thermodynam-
ics or to get a higher resolution in the dynamics generated by a ﬁne-grained quantum interaction
can be time- and computationally-consuming. In this work, we explore diﬀerent machine learning
(ML) methodologies to increase the resolution of molecular dynamics trajectories on-demand within
a post-processing step. As a proof of concept, we analyse the performance of bi-directional neural
networks such as neural ODEs, Hamiltonian networks, recurrent neural networks and LSTMs, as
well as the uni-directional variants as a reference, for molecular dynamics simulations (here: the
MD17 dataset). We have found that Bi-LSTMs are the best performing models; by utilizing the local
time-symmetry of thermostated trajectories they can even learn long-range correlations and display
high robustness to noisy dynamics across molecular complexity. Our models can reach accuracies of
up to 10−4 ˚A in trajectory interpolation, while faithfully reconstructing several full cycles of unseen
intricate high-frequency molecular vibrations, rendering the comparison between the learned and
reference trajectories indistinguishable. The results reported in this work can serve (1) as a baseline
for larger systems, as well as (2) for the construction of better MD integrators.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Computational physics and in particular molecular dy-
namics (MD) simulations are fundamental tools for the
understanding of molecular systems. [1–3] According to
the ergodic theorem, the statistical information embed-
ded in the MD generated trajectories is equivalent to per-
forming thermodynamical ensemble averages. [1] This is
a valid statement for very long molecular trajectories,
meaning that generating predictive thermodynamical ob-
servables using ab initio methodologies will demand large
computational resources. In order to reduce the compu-
tational load, a number of simulation parameters can be
tuned to considerably reduce the amount of costly elec-
tronic structure calculations. For example, it is known
that performing trustworthy thermodynamical averages
from MD results requires the use of non-correlated sam-
ples from the trajectory, which in turn allows dismissing
intermediate steps in the simulations. This means that,
if the MD integration time step is dt, then we can store
samples every n step (i.e. dτ = n ∗dt). Nevertheless,
by doing so, valuable dynamical information is being dis-
missed, for example subtle dynamical processes and ﬁne

correlations in the system.
The parameter dt in MD simulations represent a pa-
rameter that has to be chosen in a way to maximize
computational eﬃciency while keeping the precision re-
quired to generate physically meaningful results. On one
hand, the integration step dt has to be small enough to
generate energy conservative dynamics and to accurately
sample high frequency modes.
On the other hand, it
also has to be large enough to reduce unnecessary use of
computational resources, which then could also lead to
non-smooth trajectories and important features could be
overlooked.
Beyond the well known techniques developed within
the ﬁeld of statistical thermodynamics to discretize and
integrate Newton’s equations of motion [1], in recent
years, innovative machine learning methods have ap-
peared to accelerate and improve MD simulations rang-
ing from force ﬁelds learning [2, 4–22] to avoid expensive
ab initio evaluations, direct free energy sampling tech-
niques [23–26] as well as new integrator learning [27–
30]. Additionally, extensive software has been developed
coupling modern machine learning models with molec-
ular dynamics techniques [31–33].
Each one of those
approaches contributes to a diﬀerent aspect of the task
of accelerating molecular simulations, notably with the
learned integrator of equations of motion the least stud-
ied up to now. This last area of trajectory and integra-
tors’ learning is precisely the topic that we will address
arXiv:2201.01195v1  [physics.comp-ph]  2 Jan 2022

2
in this article.
In this regard, some early attempts to replace conven-
tional dynamic evolution methodologies were developed
ﬁrst by introducing the concept of neural ordinary dif-
ferential equations (NODEs) [28], and then by modify-
ing deep neural network (NN) architectures to include
physical inductive biases.
For example, Greydanus et
al. [29] introduced Hamiltonian NNs (HNN) which com-
pute the velocity and acceleration of a dynamical system
by approximating the Hamiltonian in classical mechan-
ics with a NN and subsequently computing the partial
derivatives of the approximated Hamiltonian, ˙q = ∂H/∂p
and ˙p = −∂H/∂q. Then following this idea, Cranmer et
al. [30] expanded on such approach by approximating the
Lagrangian of the system introducing Lagrangian NNs
(LNN), which relies on computing the partial derivatives
corresponding to velocity and acceleration with the La-
grangian formalism. The architectural conﬁguration of
HNN’s and LNN’s endow the models with the principle
of energy conservation. Even though these methods give
good results for ideal systems, their energy conserving
bias is then a limitation when describing realistic sys-
tems such as thermostated molecular simulations.
Recently, more robust methodologies have been ap-
plied to overcome some limitations of analytically biased
models, for example, Tsai et al. [23] used modern natural
language processing models to predict the probability dis-
tributions of dynamical systems allowing the direct cal-
culation of thermodynamical observables. Another im-
portant example was presented by Kadupitiya et al. [27]
where by means of uni-directional recurrent neural net-
works (RNN) they manage to forecast the positions and
velocities for low-dimensional systems. The methodolo-
gies above-mentioned, even though they have made con-
siderable advances in the ﬁeld of MD simulations, are
still missing a robust analysis of their applicability on
realistic scenarios and their interpolation accuracy.
In this article, we introduce a series of approaches to
create time-super-resolution of MD trajectories using a
wide variety of NN based methods. In particular, we fo-
cus on bi-directional recurrent neural networks (LSTM)
to precisely address this issue in the formalism of learn-
able diﬀerential equations.
Our method is used to in-
terpolate missing trajectory snapshots, thereby increas-
ing the resolution of the simulations in a post-processing
manner. Hence, it allows to enhance on-demand the res-
olution of dynamical properties such as vibrational spec-
tra, better free energy surfaces, as well as more detailed
animations. Additionally, from applying our methodol-
ogy to realistic molecular systems, we have found an in-
sightful trend (which may not come as a complete sur-
prise): the higher the temperature of the system, the
easier to learn its dynamics is. This result supports the
hypothesis that the Helmholtz free energy is less com-
plex than the underlying potential energy surface.
In
other words, as the temperature increases, the dynam-
ics of the system becomes smoother. Which means that
by combining MD simulations with our post-processing
A)
B)
C)
FIG. 1. Interpolation of the trajectory using a bi-directional
NNs.
A) Linear combination of the forward ⇀xτ (red) and
backward ↼xτ (blue) solutions allows for better control of the
error by using the information of both the initial and the
ﬁnal condition, x(ti) and x(tf), respectively. λτ is the mixing
parameter deﬁned by eq. 7. B) Graphical description of the
interpolation process by combining the forward and backward
predictors. C) Loss function.
super-resolution method, the computational cost as well
as simulations times could be considerably reduced.
II.
METHODOLOGY
A.
Molecular dynamics
Performing MD simulations of a molecular system in
practice requires discretizing in time Newtons’ equations
of motion ¨a = m−1F using, for example, the Velocity-
Verlet algorithm given a potential energy surface (PES)
U = U(r) which deﬁnes the force ﬁeld F = −∇rU acting
on each atom. Hence, as a result, we obtain a trajectory
with the molecular time evolution or in other words, a
time series of the atomic coordinates r and momentum
p: S = {xt = (rt, pt); t = i∆t, i = 0, . . . , NT }. Here x is
known as a point in the phase space of the system. The
discretization parameter dt has to be selected according
to the system and the simulations conditions, being for
example a key aspect the fact that has to be much smaller
than the fastest oscillation period in the system. Which,
due to the nature of chemical bonds, renders dt in the
order of 0.1 to 1 fs for organic systems. Now, another
fundamental aspect to generate meaningful simulations
is the length of the time series or the total simulation
time T = NT ∗dt, which contrasting the selection of dt,
it has to be much larger than the slowest oscillation in

3
the system. According to the ergodic theorem, in order
to fully recover the thermodynamical properties of the
system NT →∞, nevertheless in practice a careful selec-
tion of a ﬁnite value of these parameters gives accurate
results. Thereby, the selection of NT is a more abstract
task because it is tightly correlated to the type of system
and the physical phenomena to be studied. For example,
studying light diatomic molecules could require simula-
tion times on the order of tens of fs (NT ≈103), while
more interesting molecules containing a couple of dozens
of atoms and a ﬂuxional molecular structure would re-
quire simulations on the order of ns (NT ≈107) [20, 34].
Keeping in mind that every integration step during the
MD simulation requires the explicit calculation of the po-
tential energy and forces, which in the case of electronic
structure calculations such as Density Functional Theory
(DFT) can take on the order of seconds, we can see the
beneﬁt on creating a methodology that helps to reduce
the value of NT without losing accuracy. In a straightfor-
ward manner, this implies that we take larger integration
steps in the simulation.
B.
MD Trajectory Interpolation with Neural
Networks
In this article, we propose to employ machine learning
algorithms to integrate Newton’s laws of motion directly
from the phase space vector representation of molecules.
To that end, we train a machine learning integrator to
interpolate the phase space trajectory of the molecules
over a ﬁnite time horizon. In general, r, p ∈R3N where
N is the number of atoms in the molecular system, but
for the sake of simplicity here we will analyse the one
dimensional case, r, p ∈R and later generalize to 3N
dimensions.
A time-dependent variable can be described by the dif-
ferential equation ˙xt = f(xt, t) for a general time index
t, which is derived from the phase space vector, which
then has the discrete solution,
xt+∆t = xt +
Z t+∆t
t
f(xt′, t′)dt′.
(1)
Now, instead of performing a ”big” jump by ∆t, we
would like to interpolate in between the two subsequent
phase space vectors xt+∆t and xt to achieve a higher res-
olution. Hence, we choose to integrate a parameterized
dynamics described by, ˙xτ = fθ(xτ, τ) which has a higher
temporal resolution τ between any two subsequent states
in the simulation xt (i.e. τ ∈[t, t + ∆t]). Thereby, two
subsequent phase space vectors in the coarse simulation
separated by a time ∆t takes the form,
xt+∆t = xt +
Z t+∆t
t
fθ(xτ, τ)dτ
(2)
where the second term is the neural network integrator
that propagates the dynamics. To infer the correct set
of parameters θ of the integrator network, we have to
optimize the scalar loss function,
L(fθ(xτ, τ), f(xτ, τ), t, t + ∆t) =
(3)
1
∆t

Z t+∆t
t

fθ(xτ, τ) −f(xτ, τ)

dτ

2
.
(4)
The loss function is evaluated on randomly sampled
sections of the trajectories in mini batches.
1.
Bi-Directional Interpolation
The coarse simulation xt provides a trajectory at dis-
crete time steps ∆t, from which the learned intermedi-
ate dynamics fθ(xτ, τ) reconstructs the missing trajec-
tory segment at a higher resolution (See Fig. 1-B). This
means obtaining xτ, where τ ∈{t, t + ∆τ, . . . , t + (n −
1)∆τ, t + ∆t} and ∆τ/∆t gives the enhanced resolution.
The coarse trajectory at time steps xt and xt+∆t thus
provides the initial and the ﬁnal condition for the dy-
namics fθ(xτ, τ).
Now, for better error control we can make use of the
fundamental property of time reversibility of Newtons’
equations, meaning that we obtain the same trajectory
if we start from the initial conditions x0 and get to the
ﬁnal state xT and if we start from xT and propagate the
system backwards in time to x0. With the provision of
the initial condition xt and the ﬁnal condition xt+∆t, we
can compute the forward ⇀xτ and backward ↼xτ trajectories
for τ ∈{t, t + ∆t} (see Figs. 1),
⇀xτ = xt +
Z τ
t
fθ(xs, s)ds
(5)
↼xτ = xt+∆t −
Z τ
t+∆t
fθ(xs, s)ds
(6)
The interpolation of the two trajectories is achieved
via the interpolation parameter λτ ∈[0, 1], τ ∈[0, ∆t],
λτ =
R τ
s=0 s ds
∆t
(7)
which is a monotonically increasing for the duration
τ ∈[0, ∆t] and is designed to shift the weight from the
forward trajectory to the backward trajectory over the
course of the interpolation. The interpolated trajectory
can then be recovered via,
xτ = (1 −λτ)⇀xτ + λτ ↼xτ.
(8)
The interpolation is visualized in Fig. 1, which high-
lights the shifting interpolation parameter λτ.

4
ML Integrator
ML Integrator
ML Integrator
ML Integrator
ML Integrator
ML Integrator
Backward Integration
Forward Integration
+
c
h
Tanh
Tanh
x
h
h
c
LSTM Cell
LSTM Cell
LSTM Cell
LSTM Cell
LSTM Cell
LSTM Cell
FeedForward
FeedForward
FeedForward
c
h
c
h
c
h
c
h
h
Tanh
x
h
h
RNNCell
RNNCell
RNN Cell
RNNCell
RNNCell
RNN Cell
FeedForward
FeedForward
FeedForward
h
h
h
h
Tanh
A)
B)
C)
D)
E)
Interpolation
Initial Condition
Final Condition
FIG. 2. A) The information ﬂow in a Bi-directional integrator, which is trained to interpolate the diﬀerential equation that
governs the molecular dynamics. The same neural network diﬀerential equation is utilized to predict the solution from the initial
condition [r0, p0] at t = 0 forward in time and from the ﬁnal condition [r3, p3] at t = 3 backward in time. Subsequently, the
forward and backward solution is interpolated with λτ to obtain the interpolated values. B) The Hamiltonian Neural Network
(HNN) architecture which uses partial derivatives of the network output in the forward pass. C) The information propagation
of LSTM neural networks and the inner dynamics of each LSTM cell consists of aggregating the input information x with the
memory cell c and computing the output h. D) Neural ordinary diﬀerential equations use neural networks in black box adaptive
ODE solvers. E) RNN model architecture showcasing how the neural network integrators propagate and aggregate information
through time in their hidden state h.
2.
Neural Network Integrators
In order to assess which NN architecture is the most
suitable to interpolate MD trajectories, we considered
four NN integrators: neural ODEs, Hamiltonian neural
networks, recurrent neural networks and LSTM. A pic-
torial description of the considered architectures is pre-
sented in Fig. 2.
Diﬀerential
architectures:
The
most
accessible
approach to modeling the approximate dynamics fθ
is by directly computing the diﬀerentials with a fully-
connected neural network.
The Euler discretization is
often suﬃcient for convergence but more sophisticated,
adaptive solvers are applicable such as Runge-Kutta
and Dormand-Prince solvers for diﬀerential equations
[35]. In order to be applicable to deep neural networks
trained with the backpropagation algorithms,
these
solvers require the use of the adjoint sensitivity method,
which backpropagates an adjoint quantity as a surrogate
gradient through time [28].
The adjoint sensitivity
method backpropagates the error through adaptive
solvers with a constant memory cost which is highly
suitable for adaptive solvers which potentially large
number of evaluations. Once the adjoint is backpropa-
gated to all evaluations, the gradients of the parameters
θ can be obtained and gradient descent training is
eligible.
Newton’s equation for dynamical systems can be
generalized into the Hamiltonian mechanics framework.

5
The canonical coordinate positions rt and momentum pt
can be obtained through the partial derivatives of the
Hamiltonian H(rt, pt). Hamiltonian neural networks [29]
predict an approximate Hamiltonian Hθ ≈H parame-
terized as a deep neural network and compute the time
derivatives ˙rt and ˙pt during the forward pass. In terms
of functional analysis, one has to be careful in using
an architecture which is diﬀerentiable at least twice,
since the network is trained through backpropagation
which requires a second diﬀerentiation of the model. In
practice, this amounts to using continuously diﬀeren-
tiable activation functions such as tangent hyperbolic
or sigmoid and refrain from using piece-wise linear
activation functions such as rectiﬁed linear units.
By
virtue
of
their
construction,
Hamiltonian
networks
exhibit energy conserving properties, such that the total
energy of a dynamical system remains constant. This is
of interest for energy-based systems such as molecular
dynamics, in which energy is shifted between potential
and kinetic energy but never lost.
Recurrent architectures: RNNs extend feed-forward
neural networks through recurrent connections through
time. They oﬀer the ability to explicitly model time de-
pendent relationships by incorporating the neuron activa-
tions of the previous time step. Long Short-Term Mem-
ory (LSTM) networks are recurrent architectures that
resolve some important issues on general RNNs by using
memory cells that can selectively read and write to them.
LSTM’s are widely used in modelling time series and pro-
vide a remedy for the vanishing and exploding gradient
problem of classical RNN’s due to excessive or miniscule
eigenvalues in the recurrent weight matrices [36].
Whereas Ordinary Diﬀerential Networks and Hamil-
tonian Networks are considered Markovian in the sense
that they only use the current state xt of the dynami-
cal system to predict the time derivative ˙xt, RNNs and
LSTMs are capable of modelling long-distance dependen-
cies through their hidden states in memory cells.
In
the next section, we analyse in detail the performance
of these two diﬀerent approaches, as well as their bi-
directional variants on the task of trajectory reconstruc-
tion.
III.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A.
Training and validation of the model
The general goal of this study is to stablish the appli-
cability of the presented methodologies on realistic dy-
namics from physico-chemical simulations. To this end,
we have selected the well established extended-MD17
dataset [8, 34] which contains middle-sized molecules
with various dynamical complexities. In this section, we
analyse the performance of the bi-directional approaches
(i.e. LSTM, RNN, HNN, and NODE) compared to their
uni-directional counterparts while considering diﬀerent
resolution for the interpolation tasks. These results are
shown in Fig. 3.
1.
Uni- vs Bi-directional NNs
Common methods for sequence and trajectory learning
are usually deployed using the natural arrow of time, nev-
ertheless it has been demonstrated in other areas of ma-
chine learning, such as language modelling [37–39], that
bi-directional learning substantially improve the results.
Here, we exploit the regularity of the physical trajectories
and local time reversal symmetry by using bi-directional
versions of the architectures shown in Fig. 2. In order to
directly show the beneﬁt of this approach, in Fig. 3 we
compare the performance of the two approaches for all
the molecules from the extended-MD17 dataset [8]. From
this ﬁgure, we can quickly see that using bi-directional
NNs can boost the accuracy of the model by up to two
orders of magnitude. This reveals that including both
directions of the arrow of time goes beyond simply dupli-
cating the amount of data, instead this strongly encodes
the trajectory’s regularity in the model which results in
a more accurate description without increasing the num-
ber of parameters in the architecture. Additionally, we
can see that this phenomenon is not architecture spe-
ciﬁc, since all the tested NNs obtained a similar increase
in accuracy and similar learning curves when consider-
ing bi-directionality. Additionally, such behaviour is also
independent of the interpolation resolution.
2.
Bi-LSTM performance
Now, comparing the diﬀerent bi-directional methods,
we can see that recurrent neural networks (i.e.
RNN
and LSTM) always perform better than neural ODE
based approaches.
This is due to the fact that recur-
rent based NNs are more robust against noise, as will be
the case when dealing with thermostated molecular dy-
namics simulations. Furthermore, Fig. 3 shows that the
Bi-LSTM architecture (see Fig. 2) gives more consistent
results across molecular structures with diﬀerent com-
plexities compared to the rest of the architectures, reach-
ing interpolation errors of up to one order of magnitude
lower. This advantage of Bi-LSTMs over other architec-
tures could be related to the fact that LSTM cells prop-
agate information more eﬃciently and keep track of the
many subtleties in the molecular trajectories for longer
periods of time. It is worth to remark that the accura-
cies reached by Bi-LSTMs in real space (i.e. coordinates)
range on the order of 10−3 ˚A, which in practical terms
is indistinguishable from the reference trajectory. Given
these results, from now on, we will focus our analysis only
on Bi-LSTM networks.

6
Interpolation resolution [fs]
Interatomic distance error [Å]
100
10-1
10-2
10-3
10-4
0
20
10
5
0
20
10
5
0
20
10
5
0
20
10
5
0
20
10
5
0
20
10
5
0
20
10
5
0
20
10
5
0
20
10
5
Paracetamol
Ethanol
Aspirin
Toluene
Benzene
keto-MDA
Uracil
Salicylic acid
Naphthalene 
Molecules
Architectures: 
LSTM
Bi-LSTM
RNN
Bi-RNN
NODE
Bi-NODE
HNN
Bi-HNN
FIG. 3. Performance comparison of uni- and bi-directional models over multiple integration lengths ∆t on the extended-MD17
dataset [8, 34].
Uni-directional and bi-directional methods are represented by empty and full symbols, respectively.
The
considered interpolation resolutions are 5, 10, and 20 in femtoseconds.
3.
Molecular complexity and degrees of freedom
As an additional observation, we have noticed that
molecules with higher complexity (e.g.
larger number
of rotors and/or higher ﬂuxionality) generate more intri-
cate trajectories that render the reconstruction process
more challenging. This is only evident for the cases of
paracetamol, ethanol and aspirin, nevertheless, there are
cases where the correlation between interpolation accu-
racy and molecular morphology is non-intuitive. For ex-
ample, even though the keto-MDA molecule (see Fig. 3)
presents a complex PES with two rotors as main degrees
of freedom [40], its trajectory’s reconstruction precision
is similar to benzene and uracil, molecules that have no
rotors and are formed only by an aromatic ring. Further-
more, the best accuracy reached by the Bi-LSTM model
was for salicylic acid, a molecule that has two rotors cou-
pled by a complex hydrogen bond where the proton is dy-
namically being transferred between the two functional
groups.
The physical interpretation of these results is that the
reconstruction process occurs on the free energy surface
(FES) of the molecular system, which means that the
molecule is moving on its FES instead of the PES. Hence,
moving on the molecular FES at a given temperature
can result on non-trivial behaviour originated from the
entropic contributions. Thereby, an apparently intricate
molecular system such as salicylic acid can generate a
smother FES that uracil or naphthalene (see Fig. 3 for
molecular structure reference). The insight behind these
results is that, for the considered molecules, thermal ﬂuc-
tuations considerably reduce the dynamical complexity of
molecular systems with high ﬂuxionality. Thereby, sim-
plifying the learning process.
B.
Achieving super-resolution in MD trajectories
In the previous section, we have demonstrated that Bi-
LSTMs are a suitable architecture for trajectory learning
of realistic molecular simulations. In this section, we con-
tinue analysing what it implies to reconstruct molecular
trajectories, but now from the vibrational point of view,
ﬁrst from the normal frequencies framework and then
from the real dynamics perspective.
One of the keys aspects in trajectory interpolation is
the time resolution that can be achieved by the model.
Given that the MD17 dataset has integration steps of 1
fs, here the task was to skip a number of frames n for each
molecule and then reconstruct the missing fragments on
the trajectory. Hence, for this dataset, ∆τ = 1 fs and
∆t = n fs. In this regard, Fig. 3 shows the performance
of all the models for ∆t = 5, 10 and 20 fs. Let’s analyse
the results for each value of ∆t in the context of its phys-
ical implications for the vibrational normal modes (i.e.
harmonic analysis). As a reference, the fastest atomic
oscillation periods in paracetamol and in benzene are
≈9.3 fs and ≈11 fs, respectively [31].
Such vibrations
are mainly due to fast oscillations of the hydrogen atoms
in the molecule. Hence, sampling a trajectory every 5
fs in the context of molecular vibrations means that we
are skipping half the period of the fastest oscillation in
the molecule, which implies that, at most, the model has
to interpolate half of the oscillation cycle. This fact is
reﬂected on the validations errors shown in Fig. 3. More

7
0
1000
500
250
750
1250
1500
Time [fs]
~11 fs
~25 fs
~9 fs
20 fs
Dihedral [º]
ring
Dihedral [º]
hydrogen
Angle [º]
shearing
Distance [Å]
dC−C
Distance [Å]
dC−H
Distance [Å]
dH−H
FIG. 4. Analysis of the benzene dynamics and its interpolation for the 20 fs interpolation case. The six internal variables
displayed are representative feature of the molecule, including interatomic distances (in ˚A), internal angles (in degrees), and
dihedral angles (in degrees) (represented in red, green and blue in the left-most molecular structure, respectively). The true
dynamics is displayed by the blue curve and the predicted results are given by the dashed red lines. In grey dotted lines we
show some relevant periods for some variables, and in a green window we represent the 20 fs interpolation interval.
challenging cases are sampling molecular trajectories ev-
ery 10 and 20 fs, given that in these two cases the model
has to reconstruct at least one full period (in the case of
∆t =10 fs). Furthermore, the most interesting resolution
to analyse in more detail is ∆t =20 fs, given that in such
case the model has to reconstruct at least one full cycle of
all the molecular oscillations with frequencies larger than
≈1600 cm−1. Which in the case of the benzene molecule,
there are eight out of 30 normal modes with frequency
values larger than such value (i.e. ∼27% of the normal
modes). More interestingly, six of them have oscillation
periods of ≈10 fs, meaning that the ∆t =20 fs model has
to reconstruct two full oscillations periods for the six vi-
brational modes using as inputs only the initial and ﬁnal
states (i.e. (rt, pt) and (rt+21, pt+21)). In the Support-
ing Information, we have animated such example for the
toluene molecule case, where the true dynamics is rep-
resented by blue atoms and the interpolated dynamics
appears in red. As expected from Fig. 3, the dynamics is
practically indistinguishable.
In order to visualize this analysis, in Fig. 4 we present
the reconstructed trajectory for the benzene molecule us-
ing the Bi-LSTM architecture for ∆t =20 fs, and we show
its dynamics in terms of its main internal degrees of free-
dom: interatomic distances, angles and dihedral angles.
In this ﬁgure, the blue curve is the ground truth and
the red dashed line represents the predicted dynamics.
A quick glance over the plot, shows that, even though
the ∆t =20 fs case in Fig. 3 is the one that gives the
largest error, such accuracy still corresponds to an excel-
lent agreement between the reference trajectory and the
ML prediction.
As mentioned before,
the fastest oscillation in a
molecule are due to hydrogen atoms oscillations, which
in the benzene case it can be tracked by plotting the in-
teratomic distance dC-H (Fig. 4 top panel).
Here, the
measured oscillation period from the signal is ≈11 fs,
slightly larger than the normal mode value. The origin

8
of this red shift is the fact that at ﬁnite temperatures the
system visits the anharmonic region of the PES, which
then generate slower oscillations. As a reference, a green
rectangular window is used in Fig. 4 to show examples of
interpolated intervals of trajectories. Hence, in the case
of dC-H we can clearly see that the method is successfully
reconstructing two full cycles of the variable, rendering
indistinguishable the comparison to the reference trajec-
tory.
Another important internal variable is the ﬁrst
neighbour carbon-carbon distance dC-C (second panel in
Fig. 4). dC-C oscillation period is in general considerably
slower, but because such interatomic distance is part of
many anharmonically-coupled vibrational modes, it can
create apparent high-frequency diatomic oscillations (as
short as ≈9 fs). Here, despite the complex dynamics of
this internal variable, the model manages to faithfully
recover its behaviour.
Now, in order to incorporate a
highly non-linear and weakly correlated interatomic dis-
tance, we considered two opposite hydrogen atoms, dH-H
(third panel in Fig. 4). In principle, this variable should
amplify small errors in the reconstructed trajectory, nev-
ertheless the results are still in excellent agreement.
Another important aspect in molecular ﬂuctuations is
the analysis of internal shearing deformations as well as
out of plane deformations, which represent a global me-
chanical property of the system. These mechanical de-
formations can be analysed by measuring shearing an-
gles and dihedral angles as shown in the lower half of
Fig. 4.
The oscillations in these variables are consid-
erably slower compared to interatomic distance ﬂuctua-
tions, but they can contain highly anharmonic contribu-
tions, making them a good measure for reconstruction
accuracy. Again, here the interpolation accuracy of the
model very high, which makes the predicted trajectories
indistinguishable from the reference curve. In fact, the
MAE reconstruction accuracy of the Bi-LSTM model for
the benzene molecule’s trajectory is ∼10−4 ˚A, value that
is close to the accuracy of the actual numerical integra-
tors such as the Verlet algorithm.
The results obtained in this section show that the
methods presented here, and in particular Bi-LSTMs,
give excellent trajectories’ reconstruction accuracies, ren-
dering their predictions indistinguishable from full ab-
initio MD results. Hence, this allows to conﬁdently use
these techniques in a diverse range of applications such as
data augmentation, super-resolution generation, or even
storage capacity reduction. In the next section, we use
Bi-LSTMs to extract some physical insights from learning
trajectories at diﬀerent temperatures, where we demon-
strate that we can faithfully recover its molecular free
energy surface.
C.
Physical insights from the reconstruction
process: Application to keto-MDA as case of study
The keto-MDA molecule is a challenging molecule
given that it presets a wide variety of interactions that
1
2
3
4
d[˚A]
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
MD
MLMD
1
2
3
4
d[˚A]
°5
0
5
£10°3
0
2
4
6
|~˙r|
°1
0
1
£10°2
0
2
4
6
|~˙r|
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
MD
MLMD
A) Distances
B) Velocities 
Radial distribution function (a.u.)
Difference
FIG. 5. Comparison of between the interpolated (yellow) and
ground truth (blue) trajectories for keto-MDA molecule. A)
Interatomic distance histogram and B) speed histogram. The
interpolation was done with a Bi-LSTM integrator with ∆t =
10. The bottom panels provide the diﬀerence between the two
curves.
generate a PES with strong electrostatic interactions but
also regions with particle-in-a-box behaviour [40, 41].
Hence, such intricate energy landscape generates inter-
esting dynamics from which, for example, force ﬁeld re-
construction is not a straightforward task and requires
the use of sophisticated ML methodologies [6, 9, 19, 42].
Interestingly, there is evidence that the force ﬁeld learn-
ing process gets easier when the temperature of the gen-
erated training data gets lower [40].
From the statistical point of view, the MD trajectories
at a given temperature sample the conﬁguration space
in such a way that the molecular free energy surface can
be estimated by ∼ln P(θ1, θ2) where P(θ1, θ2) is the in-
tegrated conﬁgurational probability density, and θ1 and
θ2 are the main degrees of freedom of the system (see
Fig. 6). In general, the FES is known to get smoother
as we increase the temperature due to entropic eﬀects.
This also means that the molecular trajectory in phase
space becomes more stable, and hence it should be easier
to reconstruct. In order to get some insights about this
eﬀect as well as to further validate the performance of
our models, we have run three simulations of the keto-
MDA molecule at diﬀerent temperatures (100K, 300K
and 500K) using a pretrained sGDML model [31] and
analysed the generated trajectories. In Table I, we sum-
marize the results for the learning procedure for the three
temperatures.

9
A) Interatomic distances [10−3 ˚A]
Temperature [K] Ttr =5 Ttr =10 Ttr =20
100
0.259
0.930
3.287
300
0.417
1.500
5.321
500
0.501
1.801
6.399
B) Velocity ﬁeld [10−3 ˚A/fs]
Temperature [K] Ttr =5 Ttr =10 Ttr =20
100
11.7100 38.390 132.700
300
11.320
36.820 127.210
500
10.380
33.070
113.60
TABLE I. Experimental results for evaluating the inﬂuence
of varying training integration time Ttr of the Bi-LSTM ar-
chitecture on A) inter-atomic distances and B) velocity ﬁeld.
This was done for the keto-MDA molecule as a case of study
for simulations run at three diﬀerent temperatures. The inter-
atomic distances and velocity ﬁeld were normalized to follow
the ﬁrst two moments of a standard Normal distribution.
1.
Phase-space histograms
The frameworks presented in this study work on phase
space, (r, p), meaning that during the reconstruction task
the trajectory and the velocity ﬁeld have to be recovered.
Hence, here, we analyse Bi-LSTM’s predictive power in
terms of physically meaningful distributions from molec-
ular dynamics simulations by examining the speed and
interatomic distances distributions. In previous sections,
we have focused on spacial accuracy for trajectory re-
construction (up to ∼10−4 ˚A), but another important
aspect is to recover an accurate velocity ﬁeld.
In Ta-
ble I, we report the interpolation accuracy for both of
these variables, displaying an excellent agreement with
the reference data. In particular, in Fig. 5 we show the
explicit comparison of the reconstructed probability dis-
tributions for the interatomic pair distance distribution
function, h(r), and the speed distribution function for the
case of keto-MDA’s trajectory at 300K. From ﬁgures 5
and 6 and from Table I, we can see that the acquired ve-
locity ﬁeld precision is maintained for the three diﬀerent
temperatures.
2.
Temperature dependent learning
It is worth noticing that the temperature has indeed
an eﬀect during the learning process. From the dynam-
ical point of view, we know that the free energy surface
depends on the temperature, meaning that the trajectory
generated will follow diﬀerent patterns and statistically
sample diﬀerently the phase-space. This can be seen in
Fig. 6, where the upper panels show the sampling for the
diﬀerent temperatures and the lower row shows the pair
distance distribution. From here, we can see how the pair
distance distribution function evolves from a multimodal
histogram at 100K to a less complex function as the tem-
perature increases. In terms of trajectory reconstruction,
from Table I, we can quickly see that when increasing the
100 K
300 K
500 K
FIG. 6. The distribution of interatomic distances d[˚A] of keto-
MDA at 100 K, 300 K and 500 K. The predicted distribution
of interatomic distances is shown in red and the target dis-
tribution is shown in blue.
The distributions become less
multi-modal as the temperature increases.
temperature of the reference data, the accuracy in the
interatomic distances marginally decreases but the accu-
racy of the velocity ﬁeld reconstruction considerably in-
creases. Furthermore, in the case of the Bi-LSTM model
with ∆t = 20, the prediction accuracy increases roughly
by a factor of 4 when training on data generated at 500K
relative to the 100K case.
In a broader picture of the physical problem, these re-
sults tell us that the generated dynamics at higher tem-
peratures are smoother even though the atomic speeds
are higher. This is actually because the molecular sys-
tem spends more time in anharmonic regions, which then
generates the well-known frequency red shift of most of
the vibrational frequencies [34]. In other words, increas-
ing the system’s temperature reduces the oscillation peri-
ods and generates larger oscillation amplitudes, thereby
reducing the complexity of the learning problem.
3.
Free energy surface reconstruction
To complement the results from the previous sections,
here we correlate those results to the free energy sur-
face (FES). The FES can be estimated by integrating
the probability distribution generated by the molecu-
lar trajectories, hence smoother trajectories in principle

10
FIG. 7. Sampling generated from molecular dynamics using (right) the sGDML force ﬁeld trained on density functional theory
(MD17 database [8]) for the MDA, (middle) and its interpolation generated using a bi-directional LSTM model for ∆t = 80 fs.
(Right) Diﬀerence between the reference and the interpolated trajectories.
should lead to less complex FES as shown in Fig. 6. Now,
this actually has a beneﬁcial connection to the learning
problem, because given the previous analysis, we can ac-
curately reconstruct the molecular FES from a reduced
amount of data or sparse trajectories. In order to cor-
roborate such accuracy, in Fig. 7 we show a comparison
between the reference and Bi-LSTM-predicted conﬁgura-
tions’ sampling for the keto-MDA molecule for its main
degrees of freedom. As mentioned before, the accuracy in
trajectory reconstruction is ∼10−4 ˚A, meaning that the
diﬀerences on the generated FES are barely noticeable,
hence we highlight some diﬀerences by a letter A which
is just an artefact coming from the binning procedure in
the ﬁgure.
4.
Testing the limits of the methodology: Larger
interpolation intervals
In order to assess the accuracy of the bi-LSTM models
as a function of the sampling frequency, in Fig. 8 we show
their diﬀerent models with an interpolation capacity of
5, 20 and 80 fs, where the resolution of the training data
is 1 fs. This means that during training, the 80 fs model
for example, was trained using time series sampled every
80 fs, given the initial and ﬁnal conditions, the model
will predict the intermediate 78 points in the series. If
we analyse the information encoded in a time series sam-
pled every 80 fs, we can clearly see that the training data
set only contain information regarding molecular oscil-
lations with frequencies of ∼500 cm−1 at most, and the
rest of the spectrum is not explicitly embedded in the
data. The frequency spectrum shown to each model dur-
ing the training process is highlighted in red in Fig. 8.
From this ﬁgure we obtain that in the three cases, the
reconstructed vibrational spectrum is indistinguishable
from the ground truth calculations (see bottom plot in
each of the panels), despite the wide variability of the
interpolation parameter. Nevertheless, in the 80 fs case
(inset in Fig. 8-C), we can appreciate that some slight
deviations start to appear.
These results immediately bring up the question of
how the model can still reconstruct very high frequencies
when these are not explicitly given. The answer lies on
the memory cells of the LSTM architectures. It doesn’t
matter that high frequencies are not shown to the model,
since in each pass of the training process, the model is
getting diﬀerent conﬁgurations that sample the high fre-
quency normal modes. Hence, by keeping in memory all
that information, the model can infer the existence of all
the vibrations in the system.
From the results in this section and the previous one,
we obtain that bi-LSTM models not only manage to ac-
curately reconstruct the spacial components of the tra-
jectories, but also the velocity ﬁeld. Thereby, ensuring
their application to reconstruct the phase-apace dynam-
ics as well as the physical properties such as free energies
and vibrational spectra.

11
Ground Truth
MLMD T=5 fs
Interpolation T=5 fs
£10°4
A) Interpolation interval: 5 fs
(1)
(2)
Ground truth
Predicted
From training data
x 10-4
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Frequency [cm-1]
VDOS [a.u.]
0
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0
2.5
-2.5
Difference [a.u.]
MLMD T=20 fs
Interpolation T=20 fs
£10°4
B) Interpolation interval: 20 fs
(1)
(2)
x 10-4
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Frequency [cm-1]
VDOS [a.u.]
0
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0
2.5
-2.5
Difference [a.u.]
MLMD T=80 fs
Interpolation T=80 fs
15x
£10°4
C) Interpolation interval: 80 fs
(1)
(2)
x 10-4
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Frequency [cm-1]
VDOS [a.u.]
0
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0
2.5
-2.5
Difference [a.u.]
15x
FIG. 8. Reconstruction of the vibrational density of states
(VDOS) using the interpolation intervals: A) 5fs, B) 20 fs,
and C) 80 fs. In panel (1) are the ground truth VDOS (yel-
low), the predicted VDOS (blue), and the VDOS obtained
from the training data (shaded red). In Panel (2) is the dif-
ferences between the ground truth and predicted VDOSs.
IV.
CONCLUSIONS
In this work we have introduced a series of bi-
directional NN integrators (i.e. NODE, HNN, RNN and
LSTM) to increase the resolution of molecular dynamics
trajectories for a variety of molecular systems. An ex-
tensive validation process of these models on the MD17
dataset and diﬀerent interpolation resolutions was pre-
sented (see Fig. 3). For here, we found that the Bi-LSTM
model is the better performing method generating more
stable results across all the extended-MD17 dataset and
better accuracies, reaching errors as low as 10−4 ˚A. These
errors render the interpolated and ground truth trajecto-
ries indistinguishable. The overall higher performance of
Bi-LSTM networks is due to the robustness against noisy
(thermostated) reference data, as well as their capacity
to retain long time correlations’ during the learning pro-
cess.
Beyond the machine learning task of high dimensional
trajectory interpolation, by varying the temperature of
the reference data used for training the models, we ob-
tained important physical insights regarding the dynam-
ical behaviour of molecular systems. There is evidence
in the literature that learning molecular force ﬁelds gets
more complicated as the temperature of the training data
increases. Contrasting this behaviour, here we have ob-
served that trajectory interpolation becomes easier as
the temperature increases.
The origin of such diﬀer-
ent temperature-dependent learning behaviour is the fact
that the trajectories generated by molecular dynamics
simulations eﬀectively move on the Helmholtz free en-
ergy surface due to entropic contributions.
In other
words, ﬁnite temperature trajectories sample the FES in-
stead of the underlying PES. Furthermore, the FES gets
smoother as the temperature increases, meaning that the
FES’ landscape progressively deviates from the PES as
the temperature increases. Consequently, reconstructing
the underlying PES from MD datasets becomes harder as
the temperature increases, while this beneﬁts FES learn-
ing. Additionally, we found that the remarkable property
of Bi-LSTMs of being able to learn the full spectrum
of molecular vibrational frequencies (harmonic and an-
harmonic) even though this information is not explicitly
shown during the training process. This capability is due
to their memory cells.
From the results obtained in this work, we have evinced
the great learning capacity of Bi-LSTMs on the re-
construction of realistic high dimensional molecular be-
haviour. This opens up a new set of applications for the
family of recurrent neural networks on post-processing
molecular dynamics results.
Furthermore, the results
here presented can be used to set the stage for robust
extrapolation techniques, either by using it as a data en-
hancement method for forecasting or as the basis for nu-
merical propagator.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The training data and code base used in this study are
available from the authors upon reasonable request.

12
[1] M. Tuckerman, Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Molec-
ular Simulation (Oxford University Press, 2010).
[2] F. No´e, A. Tkatchenko, K.-R. M¨uller, and C. Clementi,
Annual review of physical chemistry 71, 361 (2020).
[3] M. Sadeghi and F. No´e, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 12, 10497
(2021).
[4] J. Behler, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 56, 12828 (2017).
[5] K.
T.
Sch¨utt,
P.-J.
Kindermans,
H.
E.
Sauceda,
S. Chmiela, A. Tkatchenko,
and K.-R. M¨uller, in Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30
(2017) pp. 991–1001.
[6] K.
T.
Sch¨utt,
H.
E.
Sauceda,
P.-J.
Kindermans,
A. Tkatchenko, and K.-R. M¨uller, J. Chem. Phys. 148,
241722 (2018).
[7] J. Han, L. Zhang, R. Car, and W. E, Commun. Comput.
Phys. 23, 629 (2018).
[8] S. Chmiela, A. Tkatchenko, H. E. Sauceda, I. Poltavsky,
K. T. Sch¨utt, and K.-R. M¨uller, Sci. Adv. 3, e1603015
(2017).
[9] S.
Chmiela,
H.
E.
Sauceda,
K.-R.
M¨uller,
and
A. Tkatchenko, Nat. Commun. 9, 3887 (2018).
[10] I. S. Novikov, K. Gubaev, E. V. Podryabinkin, and A. V.
Shapeev, Mach. Learn.: Sci. Technol. 2, 025002 (2021).
[11] A. P. Bart´ok, M. C. Payne, R. Kondor, and G. Cs´anyi,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 136403 (2010).
[12] C. Zeni, K. Rossi, A. Glielmo, A. Fekete, N. Gaston,
F. Baletto, and A. De Vita, J. Chem. Phys. 148, 241739
(2018).
[13] A. Glielmo, C. Zeni, and A. De Vita, Phys. Rev. B 97,
184307 (2018).
[14] O. T. Unke, S. Chmiela, H. E. Sauceda, M. Gastegger,
I. Poltavsky, K. T. Sch¨utt, A. Tkatchenko,
and K.-R.
M¨uller, Chem. Rev. 121, 10142 (2021).
[15] O. A. von Lilienfeld, K.-R. M¨uller, and A. Tkatchenko,
Nat. Rev. Chem. 4, 347– (2020).
[16] A. Tkatchenko, Nat. Commun. 11, 4125 (2020).
[17] F. Musil, A. Grisaﬁ, A. P. Bart´ok, C. Ortner, G. Cs´anyi,
and M. Ceriotti, Chem. Rev. 121, 9759–9815 (2021).
[18] J. A. Keith, V. Vassilev-Galindo, B. Cheng, S. Chmiela,
M. Gastegger, K.-R. M¨uller, and A. Tkatchenko, Chem.
Rev. 121, 9816–9872 (2021).
[19] O. T. Unke, S. Chmiela, M. Gastegger, K. T. Sch¨utt,
H. E. Sauceda, and K.-R. M¨uller, Nat. Commun. , 7273
(2021).
[20] H. E. Sauceda, L. E. G´alvez-Gonz´alez, S. Chmiela, L. O.
Paz-Borb´on, K.-R. M¨uller, and A. Tkatchenko, (2021),
arXiv:2106.04229.
[21] Z. Li, K. Meidani, P. Yadav,
and A. B. Farimani,
“Graph neural networks accelerated molecular dynam-
ics,” (2021), arXiv:2112.03383 [cs.LG].
[22] H. E. Sauceda, V. Vassilev-Galindo, S. Chmiela, K.-R.
M¨uller,
and A. Tkatchenko, Nat. Commun. 12, 442
(2021).
[23] S.-T. Tsai, E.-J. Kuo, and P. Tiwary, Nat. Commun. 11,
5115 (2020).
[24] S. Thaler and J. Zavadlav, (2021), arXiv:2106.01138.
[25] P.
R.
Vlachas,
G.
Arampatzis,
C.
Uhler,
and
P. Koumoutsakos, “Multiscale simulations of complex
systems by learning their eﬀective dynamics,”
(2021),
arXiv:2006.13431 [physics.comp-ph].
[26] P. R. Vlachas,
J. Zavadlav,
M. Praprotnik,
and
P. Koumoutsakos, “Accelerated simulations of molecu-
lar systems through learning of their eﬀective dynamics,”
(2021), arXiv:2102.08810 [physics.comp-ph].
[27] J. Kadupitiya, G. C. Fox,
and V. Jadhao,
(2020),
arXiv:2004.06493.
[28] R. T. Q. Chen, Y. Rubanova, J. Bettencourt, and D. K.
Duvenaud, in Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, Vol. 31 (Curran Associates, Inc., 2018).
[29] S. Greydanus, M. Dzamba, and J. Yosinski, in Adv. Neu-
ral Inf. Process. Sys. (2019) pp. 15379–15389.
[30] M. Cranmer, S. Greydanus, S. Hoyer, P. Battaglia,
D. Spergel, and S. Ho, in Adv. Int. Conf. Learn. Repr.
(2020).
[31] S. Chmiela, H. E. Sauceda, I. Poltavsky, K.-R. M¨uller,
and A. Tkatchenko, Comput. Phys. Commun. 240, 38
(2019).
[32] S.
Doerr,
M.
Majewski,
A.
P´erez,
A.
Kr¨amer,
C. Clementi, F. No´e, T. Giorgino, and G. De Fabritiis,
J. Chem. Theory Comput. 17, 2355–2363 (2021).
[33] K. T. Sch¨utt, P. Kessel, M. Gastegger, K. A. Nicoli,
A. Tkatchenko, and K.-R. M¨uller, J. Chem. Theo. Comp.
15, 448 (2019).
[34] H. E. Sauceda, S. Chmiela, I. Poltavsky, K.-R. M¨uller,
and A. Tkatchenko, J. Chem. Phys. 150, 114102 (2019).
[35] J. R. Dormand and P. J. Prince, J. of Comp. and Appl.
Math. 6, 19 (1980).
[36] R. Pascanu, T. Mikolov,
and Y. Bengio, in Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn. (PMLR, 2013) pp. 1310–1318.
[37] A. Vaswani,
N. Shazeer,
N. Parmar,
J. Uszkoreit,
L. Jones, A. N. Gomez,  L. Kaiser,
and I. Polosukhin,
in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
(2017) pp. 5998–6008.
[38] D. Bahdanau,
K. Cho,
and Y. Bengio,
(2014),
arXiv:1409.0473.
[39] Y. Wu, M. Schuster, Z. Chen, Q. V. Le, M. Norouzi,
W. Macherey, M. Krikun, Y. Cao, Q. Gao, K. Macherey,
J. Klingner, A. Shah, M. Johnson, X. Liu,  Lukasz Kaiser,
S. Gouws, Y. Kato, T. Kudo, H. Kazawa, K. Stevens,
G. Kurian, N. Patil, W. Wang, C. Young, J. Smith,
J. Riesa, A. Rudnick, O. Vinyals, G. Corrado, M. Hughes,
and J. Dean, (2016), arXiv:1609.08144.
[40] H. E. Sauceda, S. Chmiela, I. Poltavsky, K.-R. M¨uller,
and A. Tkatchenko, in Construction of Machine Learned
Force Fields with Quantum Chemical Accuracy: Applica-
tions and Chemical Insights (2020) pp. 277–307.
[41] H. E. Sauceda, M. Gastegger, S. Chmiela, K.-R. M¨uller,
and A. Tkatchenko, J. Chem. Phys. 153, 124109 (2020).
[42] K. Sch¨utt, O. Unke,
and M. Gastegger, in Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn. (PMLR, 2021) pp. 9377–9388.
