Identiﬁcation of Unmodeled Objects from Symbolic Descriptions*
Andrea Baisero, Stefan Otte, Peter Englert and Marc Toussaint
Abstract— Successful human-robot cooperation hinges on
each agent’s ability to process and exchange information
about the shared environment and the task at hand. Human
communication is primarily based on symbolic abstractions of
object properties, rather than precise quantitative measures. A
comprehensive robotic framework thus requires an integrated
communication module which is able to establish a link and
convert between perceptual and abstract information.
The ability to interpret composite symbolic descriptions
enables an autonomous agent to a) operate in unstructured
and cluttered environments, in tasks which involve unmodeled
or never seen before objects; and b) exploit the aggregation
of multiple symbolic properties as an instance of ensemble
learning, to improve identiﬁcation performance even when
the individual predicates encode generic information or are
unprecisely grounded.
We propose a discriminative probabilistic model which in-
terprets symbolic descriptions to identify the referent object
contextually w.r.t. the structure of the environment and other
objects. The model is trained using a collected dataset of
identiﬁcations, and its performance is evaluated by quantitative
measures and a live demo developed on the PR2 robot platform,
which integrates elements of perception, object extraction,
object identiﬁcation and grasping.
I. INTRODUCTION
The human ability to compose and interpret object de-
scriptions is a fundamental one for the purpose of efﬁcient
collaboration during the concurrent multi-agent execution of
a complex task. Humans are very skilled at guessing games in
which they have to identify objects given sparse, incomplete
or even mildly contradictory information. Succeeding at
such guessing games generally requires two complementary
skills: the ability to describe an object using a pre-speciﬁed
language (a.k.a. encoding the object identity), and the ability
to identify an object given its description (a.k.a. decoding
the object identity). Both skills abstract the human ability to
communicate about objects in a wide range of environments.
As robotics research moves from passive single-agent tasks
to active manipulation in close collaboration with humans,
the ability to play such guessing games is bound to extend
an autonomous system’s workspace.
Humans share information and reason about objects us-
ing a symbolic language consisting of low- and high-
level (relational) qualitative properties, e.g. blue, laptop,
next to. These symbolic predicates can be ﬂexibly com-
posed into structured descriptions (e.g. “Get the thin book
next to the white laptop”) which are typically tailored
*Work supported by the 3rdHand project, funded by the European Union
under the FP7 programme (FP7-ICT-2013-10610878).
All authors are with the Machine Learning and Robotics Lab,
University of Stuttgart, Germany.

Fig. 1: On the top, the identiﬁcation distribution given an
ambiguous description green. On the bottom left and right,
the identiﬁcation distributions for more speciﬁc descriptions,
respectively green bottom and green left.
around the existing environment. The previous description
might be suitable (or even redundant) for some environments,
but ambiguous in others, e.g. in rooms where there are
many books and laptops. The modularity of such descriptions
enables them to refer to an object which lacks a single promi-
nent identifying quality, and to exploit groups of uncertain
properties which still contribute to the overall identiﬁcation
process, in the style of ensemble models (Fig. 1).
Concerning object recognition, a number of approaches
are often used to overcome the hurdle of perception. Either
the world is restricted to a predeﬁned structure and degree of
sparsity; or all objects of interest are known beforehand, with
recognition systems tailored to previously acquired object
models; or ﬁducial markers are attached to the relevant ob-
jects; or the objects can be easily distinguished by predeﬁned
attributes such as shape and color. Each of these approaches
introduces a constraint on either the workspace or the task,
and thus on the operability of the autonomous system.
II. RELATED WORK
The language games of Steels [6], [7], [8] consider the
origin and use of language. Steels suggests that the key to
successful language grounding is to tightly couple it with
sensory-motor features and feedback. They represent the
context without which the language would be arbitrary and
its effectiveness unveriﬁable. A number of language games—
dynamic and interactive multi-agent verbal communication
exercises—are proposed as a general framework to achieve
this goal. The guessing game, in which agents have to draw
arXiv:1701.06450v1  [stat.ML]  23 Jan 2017

each other’s attention to speciﬁc objects of the environment
through verbal and non-verbal communication, is the fun-
damental archetype for most language games. For example,
talking heads is a guessing game where the goal is to create
new terms and to converge to a common grounded language
for object identiﬁcation.
Similar to Steels, we use a simple guessing game scenario
as a setting to develop the object identiﬁcation model.
However, unlike in Steels’ work where the language symbols
of each agent are learned and grounded independently, we
focus on the problem of how to map a given set of uncertain
symbols to the identity of an object in more complex scenes.
In our setting, we do not focus on the question of how
language arises, or how multiple agents can converge to
a similar language grounding; Rather, we assume that the
language is already shared, and explore in what way this
language can be efﬁciently used to solve the guessing game
at hand.
Tellex et al [9] develop an inverse semantics approach
to formulate recovery requests in a human understandable
format. Their focus is on how to transform the symbolic
request to a natural language one rather than generating the
request at a symbolic level.
A number of authors in the computer vision community
have proposed a shift in computer vision towards attribute
detection, in contrast to the topic of explicit object modeling.
Lampert et al [3] and Farhadi et al [2] demonstrate that ap-
propriate visual features can be extracted for this purpose and
use standard machine learning classiﬁers to learn attribute
categories such as plastic, round, furry, etc. We agree with
the authors that an attribute-centric framework for object
representation can improve recognition and generalization
capabilities of a system. However, non-goal-oriented attribute
extraction by itself does not serve any particular purpose
apart from image indexing. For an autonomous system to
make use of this type of object representation, the extraction
needs to be guided by a goal. We focus on descriptions for
object identiﬁcation in cooperative multi-agent settings as
a means to enhance inter-agent communication about their
environment.
Salvi et al [4] integrate language acquisition with affor-
dance models for actions and effects, thus grounding verbal
task descriptions together with perception and task execution
representations; In such a setting, the language is learned
through direct interaction with the environment. Their work
however focuses on the description of tasks, rather than the
description of objects.
Schauerte et al [5] deﬁne a discriminative model for object
segmentation based on visual (through pointing) and verbal
descriptions of areas of interest. They deﬁne a Conditional
Random Field model which integrates features of region
contrast, pointing gestures and spoken utterances.
In conclusion, the problem of computing optimal object
identiﬁcations for a given description which is contextual to
the environment is a relatively novel yet promising topic of
interest. We are not aware of work that integrate the use of
identiﬁcation methods in a live demonstration on a physical
robot.
III. IDENTIFICATION MODEL
Let O denote an arbitrary set of objects which may in
principle exist and which share a common set of measurable
features; in our setting, O contains all possible clusters of
image pixels. We deﬁne an environment E ⊆O as a ﬁnite
non-empty subset of objects which exist in a given context.
A lexicon Λ is deﬁned as a set of symbolic labels which are
known by all users, and a description Σ ⊆Λ as a subset of the
lexicon, with the empty set being an absolutely uninformative
description, and the full set an overspeciﬁed and almost
surely highly contradictory description.
A. Discriminative Identiﬁcation Model
We propose a model which generalizes standard multi-
class Logistic Regression. The identiﬁcation task is also
a labeling problem, although it differs from multi-class
classiﬁcation with respect to a few key aspects. Standard
classiﬁcation is the problem of ﬁnding a mapping from an
input vector x ∈Rd to a label y ∈{1,...,m} belonging to
some predeﬁned set. However, in our identiﬁcation setting
a) the number of classes and their assigned semantic are
context dependent rather than ﬁxed, b) the output classes
have features associated with them, and c) there is no similar
notion of an explicit input vector.
The proposed discriminative model is derived from a joint
log-linear parametric form,
pr(o,Σ;E) ∝expφ(o,Σ;E)⊺β ,
(1)
where φ and β are respectively the vector of object-
description features and the vector of model parameters.
We split the feature and parameter vectors φ and β into
independent components (one for each symbol σ in the
lexicon Λ):
φ(o,Σ;E) =×
σ∈Λ
φσ(o,Σ;E) ,
(2)
β =×
σ∈Λ
βσ ,
(3)
φ(o,Σ;E)⊺β = ∑
σ∈Λ
φσ(o,Σ;E)⊺βσ .
(4)
We emphasize that this allows us to manually select
different sets of features φσ to be associated with each
symbol σ. This is relevant not only because it allows us to
provide prior knowledge—if available—into the model, but
also will plays out the role of indirect regularization during
training.
We
further
factorize
the
object-description
features
φσ(o,Σ;E) into the product of an indicator description-
dependent
symbol
feature
I[σ ∈Σ]
and
description-
independent object features φσ(o;E),
φσ(o,Σ;E) = I[σ ∈Σ]φσ(o;E),
(5)
and use the indicator features to restrict the scope of the
summation,
∑
σ∈Λ
I[σ ∈Σ]φσ(o;E) = ∑
σ∈Σ
φσ(o;E).
(6)

Finally, the discriminative identiﬁcation model is propor-
tional to the joint model for a ﬁxed description Σ,
pr(o|Σ;E) ∝exp ∑
σ∈Σ
φσ(o;E)⊺βσ,
(7)
and its neg-log likelihood (nll) is
nll(o|Σ;E) = log ∑
o′∈E
exp ∑
σ∈Σ
φσ(o′;E)⊺βσ
−∑
σ∈Σ
φσ(o;E)⊺βσ.
(8)
B. Training and Loss Function
Multi-class Logistic Regression is usually trained using
the neg-log likelihood loss function. That is an appropriate
choice for typical classiﬁcation problems where training
labels only indicate one single class as being the correct one
(i.e. deterministic target distributions). On the other hand, the
identiﬁcation task has instances where the correct response is
to exhibit uncertainty through a non-deterministic posterior
distribution (e.g. in the case of ambiguous or contradictory
descriptions). To account for this, we train our model using
the Kullback-Leibler loss function. It is worth mention-
ing that the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence represents
a natural generalization of the neg-log likelihood function,
as they become equivalent when the target distribution is
deterministic.
Given a dataset D = {(Ei,Σi, pi)}i containing tuples of
environments Ei, descriptions Σi and target posterior distri-
butions pi, the loss function is computed as
L(β;D) =
∑
(E,Σ,p)∈D
DKL(p||q),
(9)
where q is the model identity posterior distribution (7).
The Jacobian J and Hessian H of (9) are computed as
J =
∑
(E,Σ,p)∈D
Φ(q −p) ,
(10)
H =
∑
(E,Σ,p)∈D
Φ[diag(q)−qq⊺]Φ⊺.
(11)
where the Φ matrix aggregates the object-description feature
vectors φ(o,Σ;E) column-wise. Equations (10) and (11)
allow the model to be trained using a variety of gradient-
based and Newton methods. In our evaluation, we have
used a standard implementation of the BFGS optimization
algorithm.
In this work, we enforce regularization implicitly by
manually selecting relevant features φσ for each of the used
symbols. In the general setting, where such expert knowledge
may not be available, we expect a normalizing term to be
required to avoid overﬁtting.
IV. EVALUATION
We evaluate the proposed model on a domain consisting of
wooden blocks of different colors, shapes and sizes. Model
performance and generalization properties are evaluated both
using cross-validation on a collected data-set of object iden-
tiﬁcation tasks, and through a live demonstration on a PR2
robot which integrates the identiﬁcation model in a full
working pipeline, from perception to grasping.
A. Lexicon and Features
We use a lexicon Σ composed of location labels left,
right, top and bottom; geometry labels thin, wide,
short, tall, small and big; and chromatic labels red,
green, blue, yellow and white.
For each object, the following features are computed from
the respective cluster of pixels in the image: a) average pixel
position relative to the whole image resolution; b) cluster
width and height relative to the whole image resolution;
c) number of pixels relative to the whole image size; d) av-
erage pixel hue; and e) pixel light mode.
As mentioned in Section III-A, we can use (2) to guide the
parameter learning and enforce regularization by manually
specifying which features correlate with any given symbol. In
our work, we manually associate symbols left and right
with the horizontal position feature; top and bottom with
the vertical position feature; thin, wide, short and tall
with the shape features; small and big with the size
feature; red, green, blue and yellow with the hue
chromatic features; and white with the light chromatic
feature.
B. Training Data
To train and evaluate the model, we collected a data-set
of object descriptions and one of object identiﬁcations.
1) Description Data: The data-set consists of 22 envi-
ronments, which we denote as E[1-4].[1-5] and E5.[1-2] and
differ in the number of objects, their properties, and/or their
disposition on the table (Fig. 2). We partition these into 5
categories γi = {Ei.∗} which broadly share some underlying
theme or pattern, respectively containing 5, 5, 5, 5 and 2
environments. Multiple descriptions are provided for each
object in each environment, ranging from overly-speciﬁc to
ambiguous ones, for a total of 660 descriptions in the whole
dataset.
2) Identiﬁcation Data: Each description is interpreted by
10 users, resulting in 6600 identiﬁcation data-points. The
users are instructed, for each description, to select all objects
which are plausible subjects of the description according
to their interpretation. The corresponding target distribution
is constructed such that the objects which have not been
selected assume a low probability mass of 0.005, while the
rest of the mass is uniformly distributed among all selected
objects.
C. Performance Statistics
Given an environment E, we deﬁne a partition of the
dataset D = DE
SD\E, where DE contains all data regarding
environment E, and D\E is its complement. Given a category
γ, we further deﬁne a partition of the dataset D = Dγ
SD\γ,
where Dγ = S
E∈γ DE, and D\γ is the complement.
We perform cross-validation using both environment-
induced partitions and category-induced partitions. Perform-
ing cross-validation on the category-induced partitions fur-
ther ensures that the model evaluation does not suffer from
overﬁtting, due to the shared high-level patterns which how-
ever don’t inﬂuence the identiﬁcation task.

(a) E1.1
(b) E2.4
(c) E3.5
(d) E4.2
(e) E5.1
(f) E1.4
(g) E2.2
(h) E3.3
(i) E4.5
(j) E5.2
Fig. 2: The images depict 10 of the 22 environments used for training. Each column contains 2 samples from each category.
The ﬁrst category contains environments where three differently colored blocks are positioned side by side; the second
category contains environments in which blocks of the same color have to be identiﬁed through their geometry of position.
The third category contains blocks of 2 colors positioned in way that each block has a variery of correct descriptions which
may be used to identify it. The fourth category contains environments in which a correct identiﬁcation can sometimes only be
achieved by learning an appropriate trade-off between the relevancy of positional and chromatic features. The ﬁfth category
only contains 2 environments in which the many objects are located in no particular order and without any pattern.
TABLE I: Evaluation Statistics computed by cross-validation
using environment-based splits and category-based splits.
Column t lklh contains the fraction of posterior identity mass
pr(o|Σ) which is correctly assigned to the objects selected
by the target distribution; this is approximatively q⊺p, with
q and p from (9). Column DKL contains the average KL-
divergence loss per identiﬁcation task [nats].
t lklh
DKL
t lklh
DKL
t lklh
DKL
E1.1
95.2%
0.04
E3.1
92.0%
0.12
E5.1
82.0%
0.29
E1.2
95.0%
0.04
E3.2
91.5%
0.14
E5.2
78.4%
0.32
E1.3
93.5%
0.05
E3.3
90.3%
0.18
E1.4
94.9%
0.04
E3.4
88.9%
0.21
γ1
94.9%
0.04
E1.5
96.0%
0.04
E3.5
89.8%
0.18
γ2
85.5%
0.24
E2.1
76.4%
0.39
E4.1
92.7%
0.11
γ3
90.3%
0.17
E2.2
88.4%
0.16
E4.2
92.4%
0.16
γ4
91.5%
0.13
E2.3
76.5%
0.36
E4.3
91.6%
0.11
γ5
80.5%
0.31
E2.4
93.5%
0.08
E4.4
88.9%
0.19
E2.5
89.2%
0.23
E4.5
92.0%
0.11
avg
86.3%
0.22
In the ﬁrst evaluation, we iterate through all environments
E and use D\E to train the model and DE to evaluate it.
We then repeat the process iterating through al categories γ,
using D\γ and Dγ respectively for training and testing.
The results—which are summarized in Table I—indicate
that the model suffers the most in situations where chromatic
features are undiscriminative and irrelevant. The lower-than-
average performance on category γ5 may be a consequence
of the number of objects, which is at least double compared
to all the other environments in the data-set.
D. Online Real-World Demonstration
We further illustrate the identiﬁcation model in an in-
tegrated real-world demonstration in which a PR2 robot
observes blocks arbitrarily disposed on a table and, upon
receiving the description of one of the blocks, identiﬁes and
grasps it.
The domain of this integrated demonstration is similar
to the one in the training data-set, but allows us to test
performance in a wider range of environments which differ
even more from the ones used for training. Fig. 3 illustrates
a selection of results obtained during the execution of the
integrated demonstrations.
The demonstration pipeline depicted in Fig. 4 mainly con-
sists of 4 components: an object extration module, the iden-
tiﬁcation model presented in this work, a grasping heuristic
valid for our blocks domain, and a trajectory optimization
routine for grasping.
1) Object Extraction: We use the Object Recognition
Kitchen (ORK) [1], a ROS package which specializes in
plane extraction and (modeled) object recognition, but which
also clusters all points which do not match any of the
extracted plane.
We select all clusters in 3D space which appear above the
table plane, project them onto the 2D image and compute
their convex-hulls, which represent binary masks through
which the previously mentioned image features can be com-
puted for each object.
2) Grasping Heuristic: We heuristically determine the op-
timal grasping position for an object by ﬁnding the horizontal
direction vector d along which the projected object point-

cloud P assumes the minimal thickness:
argmin
d

max
x∈P d⊺x−min
x∈P d⊺x

s.t.
∥d∥= 1,
d⊺z = 0,
where z is a vertical vector in the world frame. Grasping
position is set as the mean position of the point-cloud P.
3) Trajectory Optimization: We use k-order Markov mo-
tion optimization [10] to plan the motion for grasping the
object. We deﬁne a cost function that consists of the gripper
position and orientation during the grasp. We additionally
ensure safe motions by including collision avoidance and
joint limit limit constraints into the problem formulation.
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this work we propose and evaluate a discriminative
model which is able to interpret object descriptions and de-
code the intended object identity. Quantitative and qualitative
tests demonstrate positive identiﬁcation capabilities, and an
implementation on a PR2 robot demonstrates the usage in
a real-world scenario in which unmodeled objects are being
recognized by their description.
A. Further Work
The work presented in this submisison is not meant to
be conclusive, but rather represents a stepping stone to-
wards more sophisticated methods to bridge the gap between
perception and geometric and symbolic representations. We
identify the following extensions and topics of interest for
the further development.
While the focus of this work has been on the topic of
object identiﬁcation, the whole premise of successful human-
robot communication requires a bidirectional exchange of in-
formation. An extension of direct interest consists in building
on top of the discriminative identiﬁcation model to obtain
a generative description model which is able to produce
sparse and minimal symbolic descriptions understandable by
humans.
Another extension of immediate interest involves the usage
of relational symbols. Their inclusion in the framework
would greatly extend the space of existing descriptions in an
environment, which produces two beneﬁts: it increases the
chance that an appropriate description exists for any given
object—albeit this is true for any extension of the lexicon—
and it potentially decreases the minimal complexity of a
description required to describe an object.
The experiments presented in our work have considered a
relatively simple lexicon, and simple object features extracted
exclusively from image segments. Future effort should also
focus on applying the model in more extensive domains
where a bigger lexicon implies a wider range of possible
descriptions, and in which more informative features (e.g.
3D point-cloud features) may be required to successfully
perform the identiﬁcation task.
