Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research 41 (2011) 155-229
Submitted 01/11; published 06/11
Analyzing Search Topology Without Running Any Search:
On the Connection Between Causal Graphs and h+
J¨org Hoﬀmann

INRIA
Nancy, France
Abstract
The ignoring delete lists relaxation is of paramount importance for both satisﬁcing and
optimal planning. In earlier work, it was observed that the optimal relaxation heuristic
h+ has amazing qualities in many classical planning benchmarks, in particular pertaining
to the complete absence of local minima. The proofs of this are hand-made, raising the
question whether such proofs can be lead automatically by domain analysis techniques.
In contrast to earlier disappointing results – the analysis method has exponential runtime
and succeeds only in two extremely simple benchmark domains – we herein answer this
question in the aﬃrmative. We establish connections between causal graph structure and
h+ topology. This results in low-order polynomial time analysis methods, implemented in
a tool we call TorchLight. Of the 12 domains where the absence of local minima has been
proved, TorchLight gives strong success guarantees in 8 domains. Empirically, its analysis
exhibits strong performance in a further 2 of these domains, plus in 4 more domains where
local minima may exist but are rare. In this way, TorchLight can distinguish “easy” domains
from “hard” ones. By summarizing structural reasons for analysis failure, TorchLight also
provides diagnostic output indicating domain aspects that may cause local minima.
1. Introduction
The ignoring delete lists relaxation has been since a decade, and still is, of paramount
importance for eﬀective satisﬁcing planning (e.g., McDermott, 1999; Bonet & Geﬀner, 2001;
Hoﬀmann & Nebel, 2001a; Gerevini, Saetti, & Serina, 2003; Helmert, 2006; Richter &
Westphal, 2010). More recently, heuristics making this relaxation have also been shown
to boost optimal planning (Karpas & Domshlak, 2009; Helmert & Domshlak, 2009). The
planners using the relaxation approximate, in a variety of ways, the optimal relaxation
heuristic h+ which itself is NP-hard to compute (Bylander, 1994). As was observed in
earlier work (Hoﬀmann, 2005), h+ has some rather amazing qualities in many classical
planning benchmarks. Figure 1 gives an overview of these results.1
The results divide domains into classes along two dimensions. We herein ignore the hor-
izontal dimension, pertaining to dead ends, for which domain analysis is already available:
easy-to-test powerful criteria implying that a task is “undirected”/”harmless” are known
(e.g., Hoﬀmann, 2005). The vertical dimension divides the domains into three classes, with
respect to the behavior of exit distance, deﬁned as d −1 where d is the distance to a state
with strictly smaller h+ value. In the “easiest” bottom class, there exist constant upper
1. We omit ADL domains, and we add the more recent IPC benchmarks Elevators and Transport (without
action costs), for which these properties are trivial to prove based on the earlier results. Blocksworld-Arm
is the classical blocksworld, Blocksworld-NoArm is a variant allowing to “move A from B to C” directly.
c⃝2011 AI Access Foundation. All rights reserved.

Hoffmann
undirected
Logistics [0,1]
Ferry [0,1]
Gripper [0,1]
harmless
recognized
unrecognized
Miconic−STRIPS [0,1]
Movie [0,1]
Simple−Tsp [0,0]
Zenotravel [2,2]
Satellite [4,4]
Tyreworld [0,6]
Dining−Phil. [31,31]
Grid [0]
Optical−Telegraph
Rovers
bench ed <= c
local minima ed <= c
Hanoi [0]
Blocksworld−NoArm [0]
Transport [0]
Blocksworld−Arm
Depots
Driverlog
PSR
Pipesworld−NoTank
Mystery
Mprime
Freecell
Airport
Pipesworld−Tank
Elevators [0,1]
Figure 1: Overview of h+ topology (Hoﬀmann, 2005).
bounds on exit distance from both, states on local minima and states on benches (ﬂat re-
gions). In the ﬁgure, the bounds are given in square brackets. For example, in Logistics,
the bound for local minima is 0 – meaning that no local minima exist at all – and the bound
for benches is 1. In the middle class, a bound exists only for local minima; that bound is
0 (no local minima at all) for all domains shown. In the “hardest” top class, both local
minima and benches may take arbitrarily many steps to escape.
The proofs underlying Figure 1 are hand-made.
For dealing with unseen domains,
the question arises whether we can design domain analysis methods leading such proofs
automatically. The potential uses of such analysis methods are manifold; we discuss this at
the end of the paper. For now, note that addressing this question is a formidable challenge.
We are trying to automatically infer properties characterizing the informativeness (or lack
thereof) of a heuristic function. We wish to do this based on a static analysis, not actually
running any search.
Formally characterizing the informativeness of a heuristic function
is, in most cases, hardly possible even for experienced researchers, which explains perhaps
why no-one so far has even attempted to do it automatically. The single exception, to
the best of the author’s knowledge, is an analysis method mentioned on the side in the
author’s earlier work (Hoﬀmann, 2005).
This analysis method builds an exponentially
large tree structure summarizing all ways in which relaxed plans may generate facts. The
tree size, and therewith the analysis runtime, explodes quickly with task size. Worse, the
analysis succeeds only in Movie and Simple-TSP – arguably the two most simplistic planning
benchmarks in existence.2
By contrast, the TorchLight tool developed herein has low-order polynomial runtime and
usually terminates in split seconds. Distinguishing between global (per task) and local (per
state) analysis, it proves the global absence of local minima in Movie, Simple-TSP, Logistics,
and Miconic-STRIPS. It gives a strong guarantee for local analysis – to succeed in every state
– in Ferry, Gripper, Elevators, and Transport. Taking the success rate to be the fraction of
states for which local analysis succeeds, TorchLight empirically exhibits strong performance
– delivering high success rates – also in Zenotravel, Satellite, Tyreworld, Grid, Driverlog, and
2. Simple-TSP encodes TSP but on a fully connected graph with uniform edge cost.
The domain was
introduced by Fox and Long (1999) as a benchmark for symmetry detection.
156

Analyzing Search Topology Without Running Any Search
Rovers. Thus TorchLight’s success rates tend to be high in the “easy” domains of Figure 1,
while they are low in the “hard” ones, serving to automatically distinguish between these two
groups.3 By summarizing structural reasons for analysis failure, TorchLight ﬁnally provides
diagnostic output indicating problematic aspects of the domain, i.e., operator eﬀects that
potentially cause local minima under h+.
What is the key to this performance boost? Consider Logistics and Blocksworld-Arm.
At the level of their PDDL domain descriptions, the diﬀerence is not evident – both have
delete eﬀects, so why do those in Blocksworld-Arm “hurt” and those in Logistics don’t?
What does the trick is to move to the ﬁnite-domain variable representation (e.g., Jonsson &
B¨ackstr¨om, 1998; Helmert, 2006, 2009) and to consider the associated structures, notably
the causal graph (e.g., Knoblock, 1994; Jonsson & B¨ackstr¨om, 1995; Domshlak & Dinitz,
2001; Helmert, 2006) capturing the precondition and eﬀect dependencies between variables.
The causal graph of Blocksworld-Arm contains cycles. That of Logistics doesn’t. Looking
into this, it was surprisingly easy to derive the following basic result:
If the causal graph is acyclic, and every variable transition is invertible,
then there are no local minima under h+.
This result is certainly interesting in that, for the ﬁrst time, it establishes a connection
between causal graph structure and h+ topology. However, by itself the result is much
too weak for domain analysis – of the considered benchmarks, it applies only in Logis-
tics. We devise generalizations and approximations yielding the analysis results described
above. Aside from their signiﬁcance for domain analysis, our techniques are also interesting
with respect to research on causal graphs. Whereas traditional methods (e.g., Jonsson &
B¨ackstr¨om, 1995; Brafman & Domshlak, 2003; Jonsson, 2009; Gim´enez & Jonsson, 2009a)
seek execution paths solving the overall task, we seek “only” execution paths decreasing the
value of h+. In local analysis, this enables us to consider only small fragments of the causal
graph, creating the potential to successfully analyze states in tasks whose causal graphs are
otherwise arbitrarily complex.
The next section gives a brief background on planning with ﬁnite-domain variables, and
the associated notions such as causal graphs and the deﬁnition of h+ and its topology. Sec-
tion 3 then gives an illustrative example explaining our basic result, and Section 4 provides
a synopsis of our full technical results relating causal graphs and h+ topology. Sections 5
and 6 present these results in some detail, explaining ﬁrst how we can analyze a state s
provided we are given an optimal relaxed plan for s as the input, and thereafter providing
criteria on causal graph structure implying that such analysis will always succeed. We eval-
uate the domain analysis technique by proving a number of domain-speciﬁc performance
guarantees in Section 7, and reporting on a large-scale experiment with TorchLight in Sec-
tion 8. We point to related work within its context where appropriate, and discuss details
in Section 9. We close the paper with a discussion of future work in Section 10. To improve
readability, the main text omits many technical details and only outlines the proofs. The
full details including proofs are in Appendix A.
3. To some extent, this particular result can also be achieved by simpler means (limited search probing).
We discuss this along with the experiments in Section 8.
157

Hoffmann
2. Background
We adopt the terminology and notation of Helmert (2006), with a number of modiﬁcations
suiting our purposes. A (ﬁnite-domain variable) planning task is a 4-tuple (X, sI, sG, O). X
is a ﬁnite set of variables, where each x ∈X is associated with a ﬁnite domain Dx. A partial
state over X is a function s on a subset Xs of X, so that s(x) ∈Dx for all x ∈Xs; s is a state
if Xs = X. The initial state sI is a state. The goal sG is a partial state. O is a ﬁnite set of
operators. Each o ∈O is a pair o = (preo, eﬀo) of partial states, called its precondition and
eﬀect. As simple non-restricting sanity conditions, we assume that |Dx| > 1 for all x ∈X,
and preo(x) ̸= eﬀo(x) for all o ∈O and x ∈Xpreo ∩Xeﬀo.
We identify partial states with sets of variable-value pairs, which we will often refer to
as facts. The state space S of the task is the directed graph whose vertices are all states over
X, with an arc (s, s′) iﬀthere exists o ∈O such that preo ⊆s, eﬀo ⊆s′, and s(x) = s′(x)
for all x ∈X \ Xeﬀo. A plan is a path in S leading from sI to a state s with sG ⊆s.
We next deﬁne the two basic structures in our analysis: domain transition graphs and
causal graphs.
For the former, we diverge from Helmert’s deﬁnition (only) in that we
introduce additional notations indicating the operator responsible for the transition, as well
as the “side eﬀects” of the transition, i.e., any other variable values set when executing the
responsible operator. In detail, let x ∈X. The domain transition graph DTGx of x is the
labeled directed graph with vertex set Dx and the following arcs. For each o ∈O where
x ∈Xpreo ∩Xeﬀo with c := preo(x) and c′ := eﬀo(x), DTGx contains an arc (c, c′) labeled
with responsible operator rop(c, c′) := o, with conditions cond(c, c′) := preo \ {(x, c)}, and
with side eﬀects seﬀ(c, c′) := eﬀo \ {(x, c′)}. For each o ∈O where x ∈Xeﬀo \ Xpreo with
c′ := eﬀo(x), for every c ∈Dx with c ̸= c′, DTGx contains an arc (c, c′) labeled with
rop(c, c′) := o, cond(c, c′) := preo, and seﬀ(c, c′) := eﬀo \ {(x, c′)}.
The reader familiar with causal graphs may have wondered why we introduced a notion
of side eﬀects, seeing as causal graphs can be acyclic only if all operators are unary (aﬀect
only a single variable). The reason is that we do handle cases where operators are non-
unary. The variant of causal graphs we use can still be acyclic in such cases, and indeed this
happens in some of our benchmark domains, speciﬁcally in Simple-TSP, Movie, Miconic-
STRIPS, and Satellite. We deﬁne the support graph SG to be the directed graph with vertex
set X, and with an arc (x, y) iﬀDTGy has a relevant transition (c, c′) so that x ∈Xcond(c,c′).
Here, a transition (c, c′) on variable x is called relevant iﬀ(x, c′) ∈sG ∪S
o∈O preo.
Our deﬁnition modiﬁes the most commonly used one in that it uses relevant transitions
only, and that it does not introduce arcs between variables co-occurring in the same operator
eﬀect (unless these variables occur also in the precondition). Transitions with side eﬀects
are handled separately in our analysis. Note that irrelevant transitions occur naturally, in
domains with non-unary operators. For example, unstacking a block induces the irrelevant
transition making the arm non-empty, and departing a passenger in Miconic-STRIPS makes
the passenger “not-boarded”.4
Consider now the deﬁnition of h+. In the more common Boolean-variable setting of
PDDL, this is deﬁned as the length of a shortest plan solving the problem when ignoring
4. We remark that relevant transitions correspond to what has been called “requestable values” in some
works, (e.g., Jonsson & B¨ackstr¨om, 1998; Haslum, 2007).
In Fast Downward’s implementation, the
causal graph includes only precondition-eﬀect arcs, similarly as the support graph deﬁned here.
158

Analyzing Search Topology Without Running Any Search
all delete lists, i.e., the negative operator eﬀects (Bylander, 1994; McDermott, 1999; Bonet
& Geﬀner, 2001). This raises the question what h+ actually is, in ﬁnite-domain variable
planning, where there are no “delete lists”. That question is easily answered. “Ignoring
deletes” essentially means to act as if “what was true once will remain true forever”. In
the ﬁnite-domain variable setting, this simply means to not over-write any values that
the variables had previously. To our knowledge, this generalization was ﬁrst described by
Helmert (2006). Consider the directed graph S+ whose vertices are all sets s+ of variable-
value pairs over X, with an arc (s+
1 , s+
2 ) iﬀthere exists o ∈O such that preo ⊆s+
1 and
s+
2 = s+
1 ∪eﬀo. If s is a state, then a relaxed plan for s is a path in S+ leading from
s to s+ with sG ⊆s+. By h+(s) we denote the length of a shortest relaxed plan for s,
or h+(s) = ∞if no such plan exists. It is easy to see that this deﬁnition corresponds to
the common Boolean one: if we translate the ﬁnite-domain variables into Boolean ones by
creating one Boolean variable “is-(x, c)-true?” for every fact (x, c), then standard h+ in the
Boolean task is identical to h+ in the ﬁnite-domain variable task.
Bylander (1994) proved that it is intractable to compute h+.
Many state-of-the-art
planners approximate h+, in a variety of ways (e.g., McDermott, 1999; Bonet & Geﬀner,
2001; Hoﬀmann & Nebel, 2001a; Gerevini et al., 2003; Helmert, 2006; Richter, Helmert,
& Westphal, 2008; Richter & Westphal, 2010).
A popular approximation in satisﬁcing
planning – that gives no guarantees on the quality of the relaxed plan returned – is the
so-called relaxed plan heuristic ﬁrst proposed in the FF system (Hoﬀmann & Nebel, 2001a),
which approximates h+ in terms of the length of some not necessarily shortest relaxed plan.
Such relaxed plans can be computed in low-order polynomial time using techniques inspired
by Graphplan (Blum & Furst, 1997).
We next introduce the relevant notations pertaining to search space topology under h+.
Let s ∈S be a state where 0 < h+(s) < ∞. Then an exit is a state s′ reachable from s
in S, so that h+(s′) = h+(s) and there exists a neighbor s′′ of s′ so that h+(s′′) < h+(s′)
(and thus h+(s′′) < h+(s)). The exit distance ed(s) of s is the length of a shortest path to
an exit, or ed(s) = ∞if no exit exists. A path in S is called monotone iﬀthere exist no
two consecutive states s1 and s2 on it so that h+(s1) < h+(s2). We say that s is a local
minimum if there exists no monotone path to an exit.
The topology deﬁnitions, adapted from the author’s previous work (Hoﬀmann, 2005),
are speciﬁc to h+ only for the sake of simplicity (we will herein not consider any heuristics
other than h+).5 States with inﬁnite heuristic value are ignored because they are correctly
identiﬁed, by the heuristic, to be dead ends (relaxed-plan based approximations like that
of FF do identify all these cases). If the heuristic value is 0 then we have already reached
the goal, so this case can also be safely ignored. Note that we do not force exit paths to
be monotone, i.e., we will also talk about exit distances in situations where s may be a
local minimum. This is necessary to capture the structure of domains like Satellite and
Zenotravel, where local minima exist but their exit distance is bounded. Also, some of our
analysis methods guarantee an upper bound on the length of an exit path only, not that
the heuristic values on that path will decrease monotonically.
5. We remark that the original deﬁnitions are signiﬁcantly more involved, e.g., deﬁning “local minima” not
based on individual states but based on strongly connected sub-graphs of the state space. None of these
complications is relevant to the results herein.
159

Hoffmann
Finally, let us say a few words on domain analysis. Generally speaking, domain analysis
aims at automatically obtaining non-trivial information about a domain or planning task.
Such analysis has a long tradition in planning (e.g., Nebel, Dimopoulos, & Koehler, 1997;
Fox & Long, 1998; Gerevini & Schubert, 1998; Edelkamp & Helmert, 1999; Rintanen,
2000). Most often, the information sought pertains to reachability or relevance properties,
i.e., which entities or combinations thereof are reachable from the initial state/relevant to
the goal. A notable exception is the work of Long and Fox (2000) which automatically
recognizes certain “generic types” of domains, like transportation. However, there exists no
prior work at all trying to automatically infer topological properties of a heuristic function.
The single exception are the aforementioned disappointing results reported (as an aside)
in the author’s previous work (Hoﬀmann, 2005). This method builds a structure called
“fact generation tree”, enumerating all ways in which facts may support each other in a
non-redundant relaxed plan. If there is no “conﬂict” then h+ is the exact solution distance.
Clearly, this is a far too strong property to be applicable in any reasonably complex domain.
Of the considered benchmarks, the property applies only in Simple-TSP. A slightly more
general property, also identiﬁed in this work, applies in Movie as well as trivial Logistics
tasks with 2 locations, 1 truck, and 1 package.
It is worth noting that analyzing the topology of h+ is computationally hard:
Theorem 1. It is PSPACE-complete to decide whether or not the state space of a given
planning task contains a local minimum, and given an integer K it is PSPACE-complete to
decide whether or not for all states s we have ed(s) ≤K. Further, it is PSPACE-complete
to decide whether or not a given state s is a local minimum, and given an integer K it is
PSPACE-complete to decide whether or not ed(s) ≤K.
These results are hardly surprising, but have not been stated anywhere yet. The mem-
bership results in Theorem 1 are easy to prove based on guess-and-check arguments similar
as given by Bylander (1994), exploiting the fact that NPSPACE=PSPACE. The hard-
ness results still hold when restricting the input to solvable tasks/states. Their proofs work
by reducing plan existence, respectively bounded plan existence (with a bound in non-unary
representation). Given a task whose plan existence we wish to decide, we ﬂatten h+ by a
new operator that can always achieve the goal but that has a fatal side eﬀect. Then we give
the planner the choice between solving this task, or solving a new alternative task. That lat-
ter task is designed so that a local minimum exists/that the exit distance exceeds the bound
iﬀthe planner must choose the alternative task, i.e., iﬀthe original task is unsolvable/iﬀit
cannot be solved within a given number of steps. The full proof is in Appendix A.1.
In practice, computational hardness here is particularly challenging because, in most
applications of domain analysis, we are not willing to run a worst-case exponential search.
After all, the analysis will not actually solve the problem. Consequently, in the present
research, we restrict ourselves to analysis methods with low-order polynomial runtime.
The reader will have noticed the state-speciﬁc analysis problems in Theorem 1. We
distinguish between global analysis per-task, and local analysis per-state. More precisely,
we herein devise three kinds of analyses:
(I) Guaranteed global analysis. Taking as input the planning task description, this
analysis returns “yes, d” only if the state space does not contain any local minima
and the exit distance from any state is bounded by d.
160

Analyzing Search Topology Without Running Any Search
(II) Guaranteed local analysis. Taking as input the planning task description and a
state s, this analysis returns “yes, d” only if s is not a local minimum, and the exit
distance from s is bounded by d.
(III) Approximate local analysis. Taking as input the planning task description and a
state s, this analysis returns “yes, d” to indicate that s is not a local minimum, and
that the exit distance from s is bounded by d. Both may be wrong, i.e., the analysis
is not guaranteed to be sound. Compared to analysis (II), this trades soundness for
the ability to successfully analyze more states.
Domain analysis traditionally considers only the global variant (I), or even more generalizing
variants looking at only the PDDL domain ﬁle. While global once-and-for-all analysis is
also the “holy grail” in our work, local analysis has strong advantages. If a planning task
does contain local minima – which one would expect to typically be the case in interesting
domains – then analysis (I) is useless. It will simply answer “no”. By contrast, local analysis
(II,III) may still detect some individual states, that we sample randomly in our experiments,
to not be local minima. The percentage of such states, which we refer to as the success rate,
can deliver useful information no matter what the structure of the planning task is. Note
also that, while the contrast between a PSPACE-hard problem and low-order polynomial
analysis runtime necessarily implies that all analyses are incomplete, the local analyses have
a chance to ameliorate this by averaging their outcome over a set of sample states.
3. An Illustrative Example
The basic connection we identify between causal graphs and h+ topology – more precisely,
between support graphs, domain transition graphs, and h+ topology – is quite simple. It
is instructive to understand this ﬁrst, before delving into the full results. Figure 2 shows
fragments of the domain transition graphs (DTGs) of three variables x0, x1, and x2. All
DTG transitions here are assumed to be invertible, and to have no side eﬀects.
T1
g 0
R1
R2
R3
L2
L1
L3
t0
T2
c
c
s
s
1
1
2
2
1
0
2
x
x
x
Figure 2: An example illustrating our basic result.
The imaginative reader is invited to think of x0 as a car whose battery is currently
empty and that therefore requires the help of two people, x1 and x2, in order to push-start
it. The people may, to solve diﬀerent parts of the task, be required for other purposes too,
but here we consider only the sub-problem of achieving the goal x0 = g0. We wish to take
161

Hoffmann
the x0 transition t0, which has the two conditions c1 and c2. These conditions are currently
not fulﬁlled. In the state s at hand, x1 is in s1 and x2 is in s2. We must move to a diﬀerent
state, s0, in which x1 = c1 and x2 = c2. What will happen to h+ along the way?
Say that an optimal relaxed plan P +(s) for s moves x1 to c1 along the path marked T1,
and moves x2 to c2 along the path marked T2 – clearly, some such paths will have to be taken
by any P +(s). Key observation (1) is similar to a phenomenon known from transportation
benchmarks. When moving x1 and x2, whichever state s′ we are in, as long as s′ remains
within the boundaries of the values traversed by T1 and T2, we can construct a relaxed plan
P +(s′) for s′ so that |P +(s′)| ≤|P +(s)|. Namely, to obtain P +(s′), we simply replace the
respective move sequence −→o i in P +(s), for i = 1, 2, with its inverse ←−o i. For example, say
we got to s′ by −→o 1 = ⟨R1, R2, R3⟩moving x1 to c1, as indicated in Figure 2. Then wlog
P +(s) has the form ⟨R1, R2, R3⟩◦P. We deﬁne P +(s′) := ⟨L3, L2, L1⟩◦P. The postﬁx P
of both relaxed plans is the same; at the end of the preﬁx, the set of values achieved for x1,
namely s1, c1, and the two values in between, is also the same. Thus P +(s′) is a relaxed
plan for s′.6 This is true in general, i.e., ←−o 1 is necessarily applicable in s′, and will achieve,
within relaxed execution of P +(s′), the same set of facts as achieved by −→o 1 in P +(s). Thus
h+(s′) ≤h+(s) for any state s′, including the state s0 we’re after.
Key observation (2) pertains to the “leaf” variable, x0. Say that x0 moves only for its
own sake, i.e., the car position is not important for any other goal. Then executing t0 in
s0 does not delete anything needed anywhere else. Thus we can remove rop(t0) from the
relaxed plan P +(s0) for s0 – constructed as per observation (1) – to obtain a relaxed plan for
the state s1 that results from executing t0 in s0. Hence h+(s1) < h+(s). With observation
(1), the heuristic values along the path to s1 are all ≤h+(s). We know that at least one
state s′′ on the path has a heuristic value strictly smaller than h+(s): this happens at the
latest in s′′ = s1, and may happen earlier on in case the relaxed plan P +(s′′) as constructed
here is not optimal (cf. Footnote 6). Let s′′ be the earliest state with h+(s′′) < h+(s) on
the path, and let s′ be the state preceding s′′. Then s′ is an exit for s, and the path to that
exit is monotone. Thus s is not a local minimum. As for the exit distance, in the worst
case we have s′′ = s1 and s′ = s0, so ed(s) is bounded by the length of the path up to s0.
It is not diﬃcult to imagine that the above works also if preconditions need to be
established recursively, as long as no cyclic dependencies exist. A third person may be
needed to ﬁrst persuade x1 and x2, the third person may need to take a bus, and so on.
The length of the path to s0 may grow exponentially – if x1 depends on x3 then each
move of x1 may require several moves of x3, and so forth – but we will still be able to
construct P +(s′) by inverting the moves of all variables individually. Further, the inverting
transitions may have conditions, too, provided these conditions are the same as required
by the original moves. For example, in the above, the inverting operator L1 may have an
arbitrary condition p if that condition is also required for R1. This is because any conditions
that are required for the original moves (like p for R1) are established in P +(s), and thus
will be established in P +(s′) in time for the inverse moves (like L1).
6. Note that P +(s′) may not be an optimal relaxed plan for s′. If P +(s) does not move x1 for anything
other than attaining c1, then the postﬁx P alone is a relaxed plan for s′: there is no need to insert the
inverted preﬁx ⟨L3, L2, L1⟩. In cases like this, we obtain an exit state already on the path to s0; we get
back to this below.
162

Analyzing Search Topology Without Running Any Search
Now, say that the support graph is acyclic, and that all transitions are invertible and
have no side eﬀects. Given any state s, unless s is already a goal state, some variable x0
moving only for its own sake necessarily exists. But then, within any optimal relaxed plan
for s, a situation as above exists, and therefore we have a monotone exit path, Q.E.D. for
no local minima under h+.
The execution path construction just discussed is not so diﬀerent from known results
exploiting causal graph acyclicity and notions of connectedness or invertibility of domain
transition graphs (e.g., Jonsson & B¨ackstr¨om, 1995; Williams & Nayak, 1997). What is
new here is the connection to h+.
We remark that the hand-made analysis of h+ (Hoﬀmann, 2005) uses a notion of op-
erators “respected by the relaxation”. An operator o is respected by the relaxation iﬀ,
whenever o starts an optimal plan for s, then o also starts an optimal relaxed plan for s. A
core property of many of the hand-made proofs is that all operators are respected by the
relaxation. This motivated the speculation that recognizing this property automatically
could be key to domain analysis recognizing the absence of local minima under h+. We do
not explore this option herein, however we note that even the basic result we just outlined
contains cases not covered by this property. Even with acyclic support graph and invertible
transitions without side eﬀects, there are examples where an operator is not respected by
the relaxation. We give such a construction in Example 1, Appendix A.4.
4. Synopsis of Technical Results
Our technical results in what follows are structured in a way similar to the proof argument
outlined in the previous section. The results are structured into two parts, (A) and (B).
In (A), Section 5, we identify circumstances under which we can deduce from an optimal
relaxed plan that a monotone exit path exists. In (B), Section 6, we devise support-graph
based suﬃcient criteria implying that analysis (A) will always succeed.
Technique (B)
underlies TorchLight’s conservative analysis methods, i.e., guaranteed global analysis (I)
and guaranteed local analysis (II) as described at the end of Section 2. By feeding technique
(A) with the usual relaxed plans as computed, e.g., by FF’s heuristic function, we obtain
TorchLight’s approximate local analysis (III). That analysis does not give a guarantee,
because (and only because) FF’s relaxed plans are not guaranteed to be optimal.
For ease of reading, we now give a brief synopsis of the results obtained in (A) and
(B), and how they provide the analysis methods (I)–(III). The synopsis contains suﬃcient
information to understand the rest of the paper, so the reader may choose to skip Sections 5
and 6, moving directly to the evaluation.
Each analysis method is based on a particular kind of sub-graph of the support graph.
Table 1 overviews these. Their role in parts (A) and (B) is as follows:
(A) Given an optimal relaxed plan P +(s) for a state s, an optimal rplan dependency graph
oDG+ is a sub-graph of SG with a single leaf variable x0 with transition t0 as in our
example (rop(t0) will be frequently referred to as o0). An arc (x, x′) is in oDG+ if
P +(s) relies on x′ to achieve the conditions of t0, and P +(s) relies on x for moving x′.
We say that oDG+ is successful if it is acyclic, all involved transitions will be usable in
our exit path construction (e.g., they have no harmful side eﬀects), and the deletes of t0
163

Hoffmann
Name
Symbol
Analysis
Leaves
Arcs
Support graph
SG
–
All
All
Optimal rplan
dependency graph
oDG+
Approximate
local analysis (III)
Theorem 2
Single leaf x0 s.t. applying
t0 does not aﬀect the
remainder of P +(s)
(x, x′) where x is used in
P +(s) to support x′ for
obtaining cond(t0)
Local
dependency graph
lDG
Guaranteed
local analysis (II)
Theorem 3
Single leaf x0 ∈XsG,
s(x0) ̸= sG(x0) and x0 has
no transitive SG successor
with same property
(x, x0) where
s(x) ̸= cond(t0)(x); and
(x, x′) where x′ is in lDG
and (x, x′) is in SG
Global
dependency graph
gDG
Guaranteed
global analysis (I)
Theorem 4
Single leaf x0 ∈XsG
(x, x0) where x ̸= x0; and
(x, x′) where x′ is in gDG
and (x, x′) is in SG
Table 1: Overview of the diﬀerent support graph sub-graphs underlying our results.
are either not relevant to P +(s) at all, or are being recovered inside P +(s). The main
result, Theorem 2, states that s is no local minimum if there exists a successful oDG+
for s. It also derives an exit distance bound from oDG+. Approximating Theorem 2
by applying it to a relaxed plan as computed by FF’s heuristic yields analysis (III).
(B) Given a state s, a local dependency graph lDG is a sub-graph of SG with a single leaf
variable x0, whose goal value is yet unachieved, and all of whose transitive successors
in SG have already attained their goal values. In this setting, x0 “moves for its own
sake” as in the example. The graph lDG simply includes all SG predecessors of x0, the
single exception pertaining to arcs (x, x0) into x0 itself, which are not inserted if the
corresponding condition of t0 is already satisﬁed in s. We say that lDG is successful if
it is acyclic, all involved transitions will be usable in our exit path construction, and t0
does not have any relevant deletes. This implies that there exists a successful oDG+
contained in lDG, and thus we have Theorem 3, stating that s is no local minimum
and giving a corresponding exit distance bound. This result underlies analysis (II).
A global dependency graph gDG is a sub-graph of SG that identiﬁes any goal variable
x0, and includes all SG predecessors of x0. Being successful is deﬁned in the same
way as for lDGs. If all gDGs are successful, then Theorem 3 will apply to every state
because each lDG is contained in a successful gDG. Thus we have Theorem 4, stating
that the state space does not contain any local minima. The exit distance bound is
obtained by maximizing over all gDGs. This result underlies analysis (I).
For understanding the practical performance of TorchLight, it is important to note that
(A) is not only a minimal result that would suﬃce to prove (B). The cases identiﬁed by
Theorem 2 are much richer than what we can actually infer from support graphs. For this
reason, analysis (III), while not sound due to the use of potentially non-optimal relaxed
plans, is able to analyze a much larger class of states than analysis (II). In a little detail,
the diﬀerence between the two methods pertains to (1) whether “P +(s) relies on values
of x for moving x′”, and (2) whether “the deletes of t0 are being recovered inside P +(s)”.
Neither (1) nor (2) are visible in the support graph, because both rely on details of the
form of the relaxed plan P +(s). For example, consider the Gripper domain. Notion (1)
is important because the support graph contains the arcs (“carry-ball-b”, ”free-gripper”)
– due to dropping ball b – and (”free-gripper”, “carry-ball-b”) – due to picking up ball b.
Thus, looking only at SG, it seems that “carry-ball-b” may support itself (free the gripper
164

Analyzing Search Topology Without Running Any Search
by dropping the ball we want to pick up). Of course, that doesn’t happen in an optimal
relaxed plan. Notion (2) is important because some operators (picking up a ball) do have
harmful side eﬀects (making the gripper hand non-empty), but these side eﬀects are always
recovered inside the relaxed plan (when dropping the ball again later on). It remains future
work to extend analyses (I,II) so that they can detect these kinds of phenomenona.
5. Analyzing Optimal Relaxed Plans
We consider a state s and an optimal relaxed plan P +(s) for s. To describe the circumstances
under which a monotone exit path is guaranteed to exist, we will need a number of notations
pertaining to properties of transitions etc. We will introduce these notations along the way,
rather than up front, in the hope that this makes them easier to digest.
Given o0 ∈P +(s), by P +
<0(s) and P +
>0(s) we denote the parts of P +(s) in front of o0
and behind o0, respectively. By P +(s, x) we denote the sub-sequence of P +(s) aﬀecting
x. We capture the dependencies between the variables used in P +(s) for achieving the
precondition of o0, as follows:
Deﬁnition 1. Let (X, sI, sG, O) be a planning task, let s ∈S with 0 < h+(s) < ∞, let
P +(s) be an optimal relaxed plan for s, let x0 ∈X, and let o0 ∈P +(s) be an operator
taking a relevant transition of the form t0 = (s(x0), c).
An optimal rplan dependency graph for P +(s), x0 and o0, or optimal rplan dependency
graph for P +(s) in brief, is a graph oDG+ = (V, A) with unique leaf vertex x0, and where
x ∈V and (x, x′) ∈A if either: x′ = x0, x ∈Xpreo0, and preo0(x) ̸= s(x); or x ̸= x′ ∈
V \ {x0} and there exists o ∈P +
<0(s) taking a relevant transition on x′ so that x ∈Xpreo
and preo(x) ̸= s(x).
For x ∈V \ {x0}, by oDTG+
x we denote the sub-graph of DTGx that includes only
the values true at some point in P +
<0(s, x), the relevant transitions t using an operator in
P +
<0(s, x), and at least one relevant inverse of such t where a relevant inverse exists. We
refer to the P +
<0(s, x) transitions as original, and to the inverse transitions as induced.
The transition t0 with responsible operator o0 will be our candidate for reaching the
exit state, like t0 in Figure 2. oDG+ collects all variables x connected to a variable x′
insofar as P +
<0(s) uses an operator preconditioned on x in order to move x′. These are the
variables we will need to move, like x1 and x2 in Figure 2, to obtain a state s0 where t0 can
be taken. For any such variable x, oDTG+
x captures the domain transition graph fragment
that P +
<0(s) traverses and within which we will stay, like T1 and T2 in Figure 2.
Note that there is no need to consider the operators P +
>0(s) behind o0, simply because
these operators are not used in order to establish o0’s precondition. This is of paramount
importance in practice. An example is the Gripper situation mentioned above. if o0 picks
up a ball b in Gripper, then P +(s) will also contain – behind o0, i.e., in P +
>0(s) – an
operator o′ dropping b. If we considered o′ in Deﬁnition 1, then oDG+ would contain the
mentioned cycle assuming that o′ is used for making the gripper hand free for picking up b.
In TorchLight’s approximate local analysis, whenever we consider an operator o0, before we
build oDG+ we re-order P +(s) by moving operators behind o0 if possible. This minimizes
P +
<0(s), and oDG+ thus indeed contains only the necessary variables and arcs.
165

Hoffmann
Under which circumstances will t0 actually “do the job”? The suﬃcient criterion we
identify is rather complex. To provide an overview of the criterion, we next state its deﬁni-
tion. The items in this deﬁnition will be explained below.
Deﬁnition 2. Let (X, sI, sG, O), s, P +(s), x0, o0, t0, and oDG+ = (V, A) be as in Deﬁni-
tion 1. We say that oDG+ is successful if all of the following holds:
(1) oDG+ is acyclic.
(2) We have that either:
(a) the oDG+-relevant deletes of t0 are P +
>0(s)-recoverable; or
(b) s(x0) is not oDG+-relevant, and t0 has replaceable side eﬀect deletes; or
(c) s(x0) is not oDG+-relevant, and t0 has recoverable side eﬀect deletes.
(3) For x ∈V \ {x0}, all oDTG+
x transitions either have self-irrelevant deletes, or are
invertible/induced and have irrelevant side eﬀect deletes and no side eﬀects on V \{x0}.
As already outlined, our exit path construction works by staying within the ranges of
oDTG+
x , for x ∈V \ {x0}, until we have reached a state s0 where the transition t0 can be
taken. To make this a little more precise, consider a topological order xk, . . . , x1 of V \{x0}
with respect to oDG+ – such an order exists due to Deﬁnition 2 condition (1). (If there
are cycles, then moving a variable may involve moving itself in the ﬁrst place, which is
not covered by our exit path construction.) Now consider, for 0 ≤d ≤k, the d-abstracted
task. This is like the original task except that, for every transition t of one of the graphs
oDTG+
xi with i ≤d, we remove each condition (xj, c) ∈cond(t) where j > d. The exit
path construction can then be understood as an induction over d, proving the existence
of an execution path −→o at whose end t0 can be taken. We construct −→o exclusively by
operators responsible for transitions in oDTG+
x , for x ∈V \ {x0}. For the base case, in the
0-abstracted task, t0 is directly applicable. For the inductive case, if we have constructed
a suitable path −→o d for the d-abstracted task, then a suitable path −→o d+1 for the d + 1-
abstracted task can be constructed as follows. Assume that o is an operator in −→o d, and
that o has a precondition (xd+1, c) that is not true in the current state. Then, in −→o d+1, in
front of o we simply insert a path through oDTG+
xd+1 that ends in c. Note here that, by
construction, (xd+1, c) is a condition of a transition t in oDTG+
xi, for some i < d + 1. If
t is taken in P +
<0(s, x), then (xd+1, c) must be achieved by P +
<0(s) and thus c is a node in
oDTG+
xd+1. If t is an induced transition – inverting a transition taken in P +
<0(s, x) – then
the same is the case unless the inverse may introduce new outside conditions. We thus need
to exclude this case, leading to the following deﬁnition of “invertibility”:
• Let t = (c, c′) be a transition on variable x. We say that t is invertible iﬀthere exists
a transition (c′, c) in DTGx so that cond(c′, c) ⊆cond(c, c′).
A transition is invertible if we can “go back” without introducing any new conditions (e.g.,
driving trucks in Logistics). There are subtle diﬀerences to previous deﬁnitions of “invertible
operators”, like the author’s (Hoﬀmann, 2005). We do not allow new conditions even if they
are actually established by the operator rop(t) responsible for t. This is because, on −→o , we
do not necessarily execute t before executing its inverse – we may have got to the endpoint
of t via a diﬀerent path in oDTG+
x . On the other hand, our deﬁnition is also more generous
166

Analyzing Search Topology Without Running Any Search
than common ones because, per se, it does not care about any side eﬀects the inverse
transition may have (side eﬀects are constrained separately as stated in Deﬁnition 2).
Consider Deﬁnition 2 condition (3). Apart from the constraints on conditions of induced
transitions, for the oDTG+
x transitions taken by −→o , we must also make sure that there are
no harmful side eﬀects. Obviously, this is the case if, as in the example from Section 3, the
transitions have no side eﬀects at all. However, we can easily generalize this condition. Let
t = (c, c′) be a transition on variable x.
• The context of t is the set ctx(t) of all facts that may be deleted by side eﬀects of t.
For each (y, d) ∈seﬀ(t), (y, cond(t)(y)) ∈ctx(t) if a condition on y is deﬁned; else all
Dy values ̸= d are inserted.
• We say that t has irrelevant side eﬀect deletes iﬀctx(t) ∩(sG ∪S
o∈O preo) = ∅.
• We say that t has self-irrelevant side eﬀect deletes iﬀctx(t)∩(sG ∪S
rop(t)̸=o∈O preo) =
∅.
• We say that t has self-irrelevant deletes iﬀit has self-irrelevant side eﬀect deletes and
(x, c) ̸∈sG ∪S
rop(t)̸=o∈O preo.
Irrelevant side eﬀect deletes capture the case where no side eﬀect delete occurs in the goal
or in the precondition of any operator. Self-irrelevant side eﬀect deletes are slightly more
generous in that they allow to delete conditions needed only for the responsible operator
rop(t) itself. Self-irrelevant deletes, ﬁnally, extend the latter notion also to t’s “own delete”.
In a nutshell, we need to postulate irrelevant side eﬀect deletes for transitions that may
be executed again, on our path. Examples of irrelevant side eﬀect deletes are transitions
with no side eﬀects at all, or a move in Simple-TSP, whose side eﬀect, when x0=”at”,
deletes the target location’s being “not-visited”.
An example of an operator with self-
irrelevant side eﬀect deletes, but no irrelevant side eﬀect deletes, is departing a passenger
in Miconic-STRIPS, whose side eﬀect, when x0=”served”, deletes “boarded(passenger)”
which is used only for the purpose of this departure.
In fact, this transition has self-
irrelevant deletes because its own eﬀect deletes “not-served(passenger)” which obviously is
irrelevant. Another example of self-irrelevant deletes is inﬂating a spare wheel in Tyreworld
– the wheel is no longer “not-inﬂated”.
Clearly, if all oDTG+
x transitions t we may be using on −→o have irrelevant side eﬀect
deletes, then, as far as not invalidating any facts needed elsewhere is concerned, this is just
as good as having no side eﬀects at all. To understand why we need to require that t’s
side eﬀect is not used to move another variable x′ ∈V \ {x0}, recall that, for the states s′
visited by −→o , we construct relaxed plans P +(s′) with |P +(s′)| ≤|P +(s)| by inverting such
transitions t. Now, say that t’s side eﬀect is used to move another variable x′ ∈V \ {x0}.
Then we may have to invert both transitions separately (with diﬀerent operators), and thus
we would have |P +(s′)| > |P +(s)|.
Regarding the own delete of t, this may be important for two reasons. First, the deleted
fact may be needed in the relaxed plan for s′. Second, x may have to traverse oDTG+
x several
times, and thus we may need to traverse the deleted value again later on. Both are covered if
t is invertible, like we earlier on assumed for all transitions. Now, what if t is not invertible?
This does not constitute a problem in case that t has self-irrelevant deletes: in that case,
167

Hoffmann
all deletes of t are irrelevant except maybe for the responsible operator itself. Therefore,
to obtain P +(s′), we can simply remove rop(t) from the relaxed plan constructed for the
predecessor state s′′. Thus |P +(s′)| < |P +(s)| so we have reached an exit and there is no
need to continue the construction of −→o . For example, consider t that inﬂates a spare wheel
W in Tyreworld. This deletes only “not-inﬂated(W)”, and thus has self-irrelevant deletes
(“not-inﬂated(W)” is irrelevant for the goal and any other operator). Say that we are in a
state s′′ with relaxed plan P +(s′′) constructed as described. We have |P +(s′′)| ≤|P +(s)|.
We also have rop(t) =“inﬂate-W”∈P +(s′′), because “inﬂate-W”∈P +(s), and because
“inﬂate-W” was not executed as yet on our path, and was hence not removed from the
relaxed plan. Applying “inﬂate-W” to s′′, we get to a state s′ identical to s′′ except that W
is now inﬂated. Clearly, the relaxed plan for s′ no longer needs to apply “inﬂate-W”, and
the rest of the relaxed plan P +(s′′) still works unchanged. Thus P +(s′) can be obtained by
removing “inﬂate-W” from P +(s′′), yielding |P +(s′)| < |P +(s)| as desired.
Consider now our endpoint transition t0 and its responsible operator o0. We previously
demanded that x0 “moves for its own sake”, i.e., that x0 has a goal value and is not
important for achieving any other goal. This is unnecessarily restrictive. For example, in
Miconic-STRIPS, if we board a passenger then h+ decreases because we can remove the
boarding operator from the relaxed plan. However, boarding is only a means for serving
the passenger later on, so this variable x0 has no own goal. In Driverlog, a driver may
have its own goal and be needed to drive vehicles, and still t0 moving the driver results in
decreased h+ if the location moved away from is not actually needed anymore. The latter
example immediately leads to a deﬁnition capturing also the ﬁrst one: all we want is that
“any deletes of t0 are not needed in the rest of the relaxed plan”. We can then remove o0
from the relaxed plan for s0, and have reached an exit as desired.
To make this precise, recall the situation we are addressing. We have reached a state s0
in which t0 = (s(x0), c) can be applied, yielding a state s1. We have a relaxed plan P +(s0)
for s0 so that |P +(s0)| ≤|P +(s)|, where P +(s0) is constructed from P +(s) by replacing
some operators of P +
<0(s) with operators responsible for induced oDTG+
x transitions for
x ∈V \ {x0}. We construct P +
1
by removing o0 from P +(s0), and we need P +
1
to be a
relaxed plan for s1. What are the facts possibly needed in P +
1 ? A safe approximation is
the union of sG, the precondition of any o0 ̸= o ∈P +(s), and any oDTG+
x values needed
by induced oDTG+
x transitions.7 Denote that set with R+
1 . The values potentially deleted
by t0 are contained in C0 := {(x0, s(x0))} ∪ctx(t0). Thus if R+
1 ∩C0 = ∅then we are
ﬁne. Simple examples for this have been given above already. In Miconic-STRIPS, the
only delete of o0 boarding passenger “P” is “not-boarded(P)”, which is not contained in
any operator precondition or the goal and thus the intersection of R+
1 with C0 = {”not-
boarded(P)”} is empty. In Driverlog, C0 = {”at(D,A)”} is the delete of o0 moving driver
“D” away from location “A”. If that location is irrelevant to the rest of the task, then we
will have ”at(D,A)”̸∈R+
1 and thus, again, R+
1 ∩C0 = ∅.
We can sharpen this further. Consider the set of facts F0 := s ∪S
o∈P +
<0(s) eﬀo that
are true after relaxed execution of P +
<0(s). Say that p ̸∈F0. Then p is not needed for
7. To understand the latter two items, note ﬁrst that operators preceding o0 in P +(s), i.e., operators from
P +
<0(s), may still be contained in P +
1
and thus it does not suﬃce to include the preconditions only of
operators o ∈P +
>0(s). As for oDTG+
x values needed by induced oDTG+
x transitions, these may be needed
in P +
1 but not in P +
<0(s).
168

Analyzing Search Topology Without Running Any Search
P +
1 to be a relaxed plan for s1. To see this, note ﬁrst that p is not needed in the part of
P +
1 pertaining to P +
<0(s). More precisely, p cannot be an operator precondition in P +
<0(s)
because this condition would not be satisﬁed in (relaxed) execution of P +(s).
Also, p
cannot be the start value of an induced oDTG+
x transition because, by deﬁnition, all such
values are added by operators in P +
<0(s). Now, what about the part of P +
1 pertaining to
P +
>0(s)? Assume that p is either a goal, or is an operator precondition in P +
>0(s). Then,
since p ̸∈F0 and P +(s) is a relaxed plan, either o0 or an operator in P +
>0(s) must establish
p. As for o0, all its eﬀects are true in s1 anyway. As for P +
>0(s), this remains unchanged in
P +
1 and thus this part is covered, too. Altogether, it thus suﬃces if R+
1 ∩C0 ∩F0 = ∅. An
example where this helps is the Satellite domain. Say that o0 switches on instrument “I”.
This deletes calibration, i.e., “calibrated(I)”∈C0. The only purpose of switching “I” on
can be to take images with it, and thus “calibrated(I)”∈R+
1 ∩C0. However, the instrument
may not actually be calibrated in s. If that is so, then we need to switch “I” on before it
can be calibrated – because the calibration operator requires to have power in “I” – and
thus “calibrated(I)” will be false in the relaxed execution of P +(s), up to at least o0. In
particular, we have “calibrated(I)”̸∈F0 and thus R+
1 ∩C0 ∩F0 = ∅.
Even the condition R+
1 ∩C0 ∩F0 = ∅can still be sharpened. Say that there exists a
(possibly empty) sub-sequence −→
o0 of P +
>0(s) so that −→
o0 is guaranteed to be applicable at
the start of P +
1 , and so that −→
o0 re-achieves all facts in R+
1 ∩C0 ∩F0 (both are easy to
deﬁne and test). Then moving −→
o0 to the start of P +
1 does the job. We say in this case that
the oDG+-relevant deletes of t0 are P +
>0(s)-recoverable – Deﬁnition 2 condition (2a). For
example, consider o0 that picks up a ball b in the Gripper domain. This operator deletes a
fact p =“free-gripper” which may be needed in the remainder of the relaxed plan, and thus
p ∈R+
1 ∩C0 ∩F0. However, P +
>0(s) will necessarily contain a sub-sequence −→
o0 that moves
to another room and then puts b down again. We can re-order P +
1 to put −→
o0 right at the
start, re-achieving p. Similar patterns occur in any transportation domain with capacity
constraints, or more generally in domains with renewable resources.
Finally, we have identiﬁed two simple alternative suﬃcient conditions under which t0
is suitable, Deﬁnition 2 conditions (2b) and (2c). For the sake of brevity, we only sketch
them here. Both require that s(x0), i.e., the start value of t0, is not contained in R+
1 as
deﬁned above.
We say in this case that s(x0) is not oDG+-relevant.
Note that, then,
R+
1 ∩C0 = ∅unless t0 has side eﬀects. Side eﬀects do not hurt if t0 has replaceable side
eﬀect deletes, i.e., if any operator whose precondition may be deleted can be replaced with
an alternative operator o′ that is applicable and has the same eﬀect (this happens, e.g., in
Simple-TSP). Another possibility is that where t0 has recoverable side eﬀect deletes: there
exists an operator o′ that is necessarily applicable directly after execution of t0, and that
recovers all relevant side eﬀect deletes. This happens quite frequently, for example in Rovers
where taking a rock/soil sample ﬁlls a “store”, but we can free the store again simply by
emptying it anywhere. We can replace o0 with o′ to obtain a relaxed plan P +
1 for s1 (and
thus h+(s1) ≤h+(s)). Then we can apply o′, yielding a state s2 which has h+(s2) < h+(s)
because we can obtain a relaxed plan for s2 by removing o′ from P +
1 .
What will the length of the exit path be?
We have one move for x0.
Each non-
leaf variable x must provide a new value at most once for every move of a variable x′
depending on it, i.e., where (x, x′) ∈A.
The new value can be reached by a oDTG+
x
traversal. Denote the maximum length of such a traversal, i.e., the diameter of oDTG+
x ,
169

Hoffmann
by diam(oDTG+
x ).8 Now, we may have diam(oDTG+
x ) > diam(DTGx) because oDTG+
x
removes not only vertices but also arcs. There may be “short-cuts” not traversed by P +(s).
Under certain circumstances it is safe to take these short-cuts, namely if:
(*) all oDTG+
x transitions are invertible/induced and have irrelevant side eﬀect deletes
and no side eﬀects on V \ {x0}, and all other DTGx transitions either are irrelevant, or
have empty conditions and irrelevant side eﬀect deletes.
When traversing a short-cut under this condition, as soon as we reach the end of the short-
cut, we are back in the region of states s′ where a relaxed plan P +(s′) can be constructed
as before. The rest of our exit path construction remains unaﬀected. Thus, denote by V ∗
the subset of V \ {x0} for which (*) holds. We deﬁne costd∗(oDG+) := P
x∈V costd∗(x),
where costd∗(x) :=







1
x = x0
diam(oDTG+
x ) ∗P
x′:(x,x′)∈A costd∗(x′)
x ̸= x0, x ̸∈V ∗
min(diam(oDTG+
x ), diam(DTGx)) ∗P
x′:(x,x′)∈A costd∗(x′)
x ̸= x0, x ∈V ∗
Note that costd∗(.) is exponential in the depth of the graph. This is not an artifact of our
length estimation. It is easy to construct examples where exit distance is exponential in
that parameter. This is because, as hinted, a variable may have to move several times for
each value required by other variables depending on it. See Example 6 in Appendix A.4 for
such a construction (following an earlier construction in Domshlak & Dinitz, 2001).
That said, of course costd∗(.) may over-estimate the length of a shortest exit path. It
assumes that, whenever a variable x′ with (x, x′) ∈A makes a move, then x must move
through its entire oDTG+ respectively DTG. This is very conservative: (1) it may be that
the move of x′ does not actually have a condition on x; (2) even if such a condition exists,
x may need less steps in order to reach it. One might be able to ameliorate (1) by making
more ﬁne-grained distinctions which part of costd∗(x′) pertains to moves conditioned on
x. We leave this open for future work. For now, we note that the over-estimation can be
exponential even just due to (2), i.e., costd∗(oDG+) may be exponentially larger than the
length of a shortest exit path even if, for all (x, x′) ∈A, all moves of x′ depend on x. This
can be shown by a simple variant of Example 6; we discuss this in Appendix A.4.
Exit paths using short-cuts in the described way may be non-monotone. Example 5
in Appendix A.4 contains a construction showing this.
For an intuitive understanding,
imagine a line l0, . . . , ln where our current task, to achieve the precondition of another
operator, is to move from l0 to ln. Say that all locations on the line need to be visited, in
the relaxed plan, e.g. because we need to load or unload something at all of these locations.
Say further that there is a shortcut via l′ that needs not be visited. If we move to l′ then h+
increases because we have made it 1 step more costly – for the relaxed plan – to reach all the
locations l0, . . . , ln. For the same reason, costd∗(oDG+) is not an upper bound on the length
of a shortest monotone exit path. This is also shown in Example 5, where we construct a
8. More precisely, diam(.) is not the diameter of a graph but the maximum distance from vertex v to vertex
v′ where there exists a path from v to v′.
170

Analyzing Search Topology Without Running Any Search
situation in which the shortest monotone exit path is longer than costd∗(oDG+).9 To obtain
a bound on monotone exit paths, we can simply set V ∗:= ∅in the deﬁnition of costd∗.
If we have Deﬁnition 2 condition (2a) or (2b), then the exit distance is bounded by
costd∗(oDG+) −1 because costd∗(oDG+) counts the last step reducing h+.
If we have
Deﬁnition 2 condition (2c), then after that last step we need 1 additional operator to reduce
h+, and so the exit distance is bounded by costd∗(oDG+). Putting the pieces together yields
our main result of this section:
Theorem 2. Let (X, sI, sG, O), s, P +(s), and oDG+ be as in Deﬁnition 1. If oDG+ is suc-
cessful, then s is not a local minimum, and ed(s) ≤costd∗(oDG+). If we have Deﬁnition 2
condition (2a) or (2b), then ed(s) ≤costd∗(oDG+) −1.
The full proof is in Appendix A.2. As pointed out earlier, for approximate local analysis
(III) we simply feed Theorem 2 with the relaxed plans returned by FF’s heuristic function
(Hoﬀmann & Nebel, 2001a). It is important to note that, this way, we do not give any
guarantees, i.e., Theorem 2 does not hold if P +(s) is not optimal, and even if P +(s) is
non-redundant and parallel-optimal like those computed by FF. At the end of the “exit
path” we may obtain a relaxed plan shorter than P +(s) but not shorter than h+(s). In
a nutshell, the reason is that a parallel-optimal relaxed plan – more generally, a relaxed
plan not minimizing the number of operators – may take very diﬀerent decisions than a
sequentially-optimal relaxed plan, thus constructing an “exit path” leading into the wrong
direction. Example 8 in Appendix A.4 gives a full construction proving this.
Feeding Theorem 2 with non-optimal relaxed plans can of course also be imprecise “in
the other direction”, i.e., Theorem 2 may not apply although it does apply for an optimal
relaxed plan. Thus “good cases” may go unrecognized. We demonstrate this with a simple
modiﬁcation of Example 8, explained below the example in Appendix A.4. Importantly, as
we will point out in Section 8, our empirical results suggest that this weakness does not
tend to occur in practice, at least as far as represented by the benchmarks.
6. Conservative Approximations
We now identify suﬃcient criteria guaranteeing that the prerequisites of Theorem 2 hold
true. We consider both the local case where a particular state s is given, and the global
case where the criterion implies the prerequisites of Theorem 2 for every state s in the task
at hand. We approximate optimal rplan dependency graphs as follows:
Deﬁnition 3. Let (X, sI, sG, O) be a planning task, let s ∈S with 0 < h+(s) < ∞, let
x0 ∈XsG, and let t0 = (s(x0), c) be a relevant transition in DTGx0 with o0 := rop(t0).
A local dependency graph for s, x0, and o0, or local dependency graph in brief, is a
graph lDG = (V, A) with unique leaf vertex x0, and where x ∈V and (x, x′) ∈A if either:
x′ = x0, x ∈Xpreo0, and preo0(x) ̸= s(x); or x′ ∈V \ {x0} and (x, x′) is an arc in SG.
A global dependency graph for x0 and o0, or global dependency graph in brief, is a
graph gDG = (V, A) with unique leaf vertex x0, and where x ∈V and (x, x′) ∈A if either:
x′ = x0 and x0 ̸= x ∈Xpreo0; or x′ ∈V \ {x0} and (x, x′) is an arc in SG
9. We remark that, due to the mentioned sources of over-estimation in costd∗, constructing such an example
requires fairly awkward constructs that do not appear likely to occur in practice.
171

Hoffmann
If an optimal relaxed plan P +(s) for s contains o0, then oDG+ as per Deﬁnition 1 will
be a sub-graph of lDG and gDG as deﬁned here. This is simply because any optimal rplan
dependency graph has only arcs (x, x′) contained in the support graph of the task.10 As
previously indicated, the support graph may contain a lot more arcs than actually necessary.
SG captures what may ever support what else, not what will support what else in an optimal
relaxed plan. Consider our earlier point that, when constructing oDG+, we take into account
only the operators in front of o0 in P +(s). This information is not contained in SG, thus
in Gripper we get the aforementioned cycle dropping a ball to support “free-gripper” for
picking up the same ball.
The reader who has waded through the cumbersome details in the previous section will
be delighted to hear that deﬁning when an lDG respectively gDG is successful does not
involve any additional notation:
Deﬁnition 4. Let (X, sI, sG, O), s, x0, t0, o0, and G = lDG or G = gDG be as in
Deﬁnition 3. We say that G = (V, A) is successful if all of the following hold:
(1) G is acyclic.
(2) If G = lDG then sG(x0) ̸= s(x0), and there exists no transitive successor x′ of x0 in
SG so that x′ ∈XsG and sG(x′) ̸= s(x′).
(3) We have that t0 either:
(a) has self-irrelevant side eﬀect deletes; or
(b) has replaceable side eﬀect deletes; or
(c) has recoverable side eﬀect deletes.
(4) For x ∈V \ {x0}, all DTGx transitions either are irrelevant, or have self-irrelevant
deletes, or are invertible and have irrelevant side eﬀect deletes and no side eﬀects on
V \ {x0}.
Consider ﬁrst only local dependency graphs G = lDG; we will discuss G = gDG below.
Assume that we have an optimal relaxed plan P +(s) for s that contains o0, and thus oDG+
is a sub-graph of lDG. Then condition (1) obviously implies Deﬁnition 2 condition (1).
Condition (4) implies Deﬁnition 2 condition (3) because oDTG+
x does not contain any
irrelevant transitions. Condition (2) implies that (*) s(x0) is not oDG+-relevant, i.e., s(x0)
is not needed in the rest of the relaxed plan. This is simply because no other un-achieved
goal depends on x0. With (*), condition (3a) implies Deﬁnition 2 condition (2a), because
R+
1 ∩C0 = ∅, in the notation introduced previously.
Conditions (3b) and Deﬁnition 2
condition (2b), respectively (3c) and Deﬁnition 2 condition (2c), are equivalent given (*).
Regarding exit distance, we do not know which parts of the domain transition graphs of
the variables x ∈V \{x0} will be traversed by P +(s). An obvious bound on diam(oDTG+
x )
is the length maxPath(DTGx) of a longest non-redundant path through the graph (a path
visiting each vertex at most once).
Unfortunately, we cannot compute maxPath(.) eﬃ-
ciently. A Hamiltonian path (Garey & Johnson, 1979) exists in a graph G = (V, A) iﬀ
10. For gDG, note that preo0(x0), if deﬁned, will be = s(x0) and thus x0 does not need to be recorded as
its own predecessor.
172

Analyzing Search Topology Without Running Any Search
maxPath(G) = |V | −1.
Thus the corresponding decision problem is NP-hard.
Torch-
Light over-approximates maxPath(G) simply by |V | −1. However, we can sometimes use
diam(DTGx) instead of maxPath(DTGx), namely if we are certain that x is one of the
variables V ∗used in the deﬁnition of costd∗(oDG+). This is certain if:
(**) all DTGx transitions either are irrelevant, or are invertible and have empty
conditions, irrelevant side eﬀect deletes, and no side eﬀects on V \ {x0}.
Note that this is a strictly stronger requirement than Deﬁnition 4 condition (4). Clearly, it
implies Deﬁnition 2 condition (3) as well as condition (*) in Section 5. Denote by V ∗∗the
subset of V \ {x0} for which (**) holds. We deﬁne costD∗(G) := P
x∈V costD∗(x), where
costD∗(x) :=







1
x = x0
maxPath(DTGx) ∗P
x′:(x,x′)∈A costD∗(x′)
x ̸= x0, x ̸∈V ∗∗
diam(DTGx) ∗P
x′:(x,x′)∈A costD∗(x′)
x ̸= x0, x ∈V ∗∗
Because x0 must move – to attain its own goal – every optimal relaxed plan must take
at least one transition leaving s(x0). Thus, with Theorem 2 and the above, we have that:
Theorem 3. Let (X, sI, sG, O) be a planning task, and let s ∈S be a state with 0 < h+(s) <
∞. Say that x0 ∈X so that, for every o0 = rop(s(x0), c) in DTGx0 where (s(x0), c) is
relevant, lDGo0 is a successful local dependency graph. Then s is not a local minimum, and
ed(s) ≤maxo0 costD∗(lDGo0). If, for every lDGo0, we have Deﬁnition 4 condition (3a) or
(3b), then ed(s) ≤maxo0 costD∗(lDGo0) −1.
Theorem 3 is our tool for guaranteed local analysis (II). For guaranteed global analysis
(I), we simply look at the set of all global dependency graphs gDG, requiring them to be
successful. In particular, all gDG are then acyclic, from which it is not diﬃcult to deduce
that any non-goal state s will have a variable x0 fulﬁlling Deﬁnition 4 (2). For that x0, we
can apply Theorem 3 and thus get:
Theorem 4. Let (X, sI, sG, O) be a planning task. Say that all global dependency graphs
gDG are successful. Then S does not contain any local minima and, for any state s ∈S with
0 < h+(s) < ∞, ed(s) ≤maxgDG costD∗(gDG). If, for every gDG, we have Deﬁnition 4
condition (3a) or (3b), then ed(s) ≤maxgDG costD∗(gDG) −1.
The full proofs of Theorems 3 and 4 are in Appendix A.3. If SG is acyclic and all
transitions are invertible and have no side eﬀects, then Theorem 4 applies, whereby we have
now in particular proved our basic result. Vice versa, note that, if Theorem 4 applies, then
SG is acyclic. As far as local minima are concerned, one may thus reformulate Theorem 4
in simpler terms not relying on a notion of “successful dependency graphs”. Apart from
allowing to also determine an exit distance bound, the present formulation already paves
the way for future research: a gDG is deﬁned relative to a concrete variable x0 and operator
o0, and may thus allow for more accurate analysis of which other variables may actually
become important for x0 and o0, in an optimal relaxed plan.
The use of diam(DTGx) instead of maxPath(DTGx) in costD∗(.), for the variables
in V ∗∗, has a rather signiﬁcant eﬀect on the quality of the bounds computed in many
173

Hoffmann
benchmarks. A typical example is a transportation domain where vehicle positions are leaf
variables in SG whose transitions have no side eﬀects. Such variables qualify for V ∗∗. Using
maxPath(DTGx) instead, we would obtain exceedingly large bounds even for trivial road
maps. For example, consider Logistics where the road map is fully connected. We have
diam(DTGx) = 1 and thus costD∗(.) delivers the correct bound 1. Using maxPath(DTGx)
we instead get the bound N −1, N being the total number of locations in DTGx.
Note that, within the scope of Theorem 4, i.e., the class of planning tasks to which
Theorem 4 applies, plan existence is tractable. Namely, there exists a plan for the task iﬀ
there exists a relaxed plan for the initial state. This is because, starting from an optimal
relaxed plan, we are guaranteed to be able to construct an exit path; iterating this argument
gets us to the goal.
In our view, this tractability is a weakness of this form of global
analysis. The analysis does not apply in intractable classes of tasks that do not contain
local minima. Note that such classes do exist, cf. Theorem 1. On the other hand, plan
existence is tractable in all known benchmark domains where local minima are absent, so in
practice this does not appear to be a major limitation. Also, note that plan construction,
as well as optimal planning, are still intractable within the scope of Theorem 4.
Plan
construction is intractable because the plans may be exponentially long, cf. Example 6 in
Appendix A.4. As for optimal planning, just consider Logistics and Miconic-STRIPS. We
will see shortly (Proposition 1, next section) that these are fully covered by Theorem 4.
However, in both of them, deciding bounded plan existence is NP-hard (Helmert, 2003).
Interestingly, the fact that Theorem 2, and therewith indirectly also Theorem 4, rely on
optimal relaxed plans is not a source of intractability of plan construction here. If Theorem 4
applies, then any non-redundant relaxed plan P + has a successful oDG+, enabling us to
construct a path to a state where that particular relaxed plan (although not necessarily
an optimal relaxed plan) can be shortened. Iterating this argument gives us a constructive
method for obtaining a plan, where the only worst-case exponential behavior lies in the
length of the individual path segments. That said, of course the plan constructed in this
way may be highly non-optimal. Indeed, as is shown in Example 7 in Appendix A.4, this
plan may be exponentially longer than an optimal plan. Thus, even if Theorem 4 applies
and we do not need an optimality guarantee, running a planner still makes sense.
We will discuss the relation of the scope of Theorem 4 to known tractable classes in
Section 9. A basic fact is that one can construct local minima even in very small examples
involving only two variables and complying with our basic result except that either the
support graph is cyclic (Example 2, Appendix A.4), or there is a non-invertible transition
whose own delete is relevant (Example 3, Appendix A.4), or there is a transition with a
relevant side eﬀect delete (Example 4, Appendix A.4). These examples are contained in
many known tractable classes, thus underlining that the automatic analysis of h+ topology
and the identiﬁcation of tractable classes are diﬀerent (although related) enterprises.
7. Benchmark Performance Guarantees
We now state some guarantees that our analyses (I)–(III) give in benchmark domains.
The underlying ﬁnite-domain variable formalizations are straightforward, and correspond
174

Analyzing Search Topology Without Running Any Search
to formulations that can be found automatically by Fast Downward. They are listed in
Appendix A.5, where we also give the proofs of the following two simple observations.11
In four of our benchmark domains, guaranteed global analysis (I) will always succeed :
Proposition 1. Let (X, sI, sG, O) be a planning task from the Logistics, Miconic-STRIPS,
Movie, or Simple-TSP domain. Then Theorem 4 applies, and the bound delivered is at most
1, 3, 1, and 1 respectively.
It follows trivially from Proposition 1 that guaranteed local analysis (II) succeeds in
these domains as well. If s is any state in one of the four listed domains, then Theorem 3
applies to s, and the bound delivered is as stated.
Note that the bounds for Logistics and Movie are the correct ones, i.e., they are tight.
For Miconic-STRIPS, the over-estimation of the actual bound (which is 1, not 3) arises
because the analysis does not realize that boarding a passenger can be used as the leaf
variable x0. For Simple-TSP, the correct bound is 0 (since h+ is the exact goal distance).
The over-estimation arises because, in every goal variable x0 =”visited(location)”, the gDG
includes also the variable “at”, not realizing that the value of “at” does not matter because
any location can be visited from any other one.
For the transportation benchmarks involving capacity constraints, approximate local
analysis (III) will always succeed, if provided with suitable optimal relaxed plans:
Proposition 2. Let (X, sI, sG, O) be a planning task from the Elevators, Ferry, Gripper,
or Transport domain, and let s ∈S. In Ferry and Gripper, for every optimal relaxed plan
P +(s) there exists oDG+ so that Theorem 2 applies, the bound being at most 1. In Elevators
and Transport, there exists at least one P +(s) and oDG+ so that Theorem 2 applies, the
bound being at most 1 in Elevators and at most the road map diameter in Transport.
The relevant deletes of t0, in all these cases, are due to the eﬀects decreasing the remain-
ing vehicle capacity, like “free-gripper” in the Gripper domain. A decrease of capacity is
always due to a “load” type of operator, which is matched by an “unload” type of operator
later on inside the relaxed plan. Thus these deletes are always recovered inside P +(s) (we
have Deﬁnition 2 condition (2a)). Further, relaxed plans never use an “unload” action to
free a capacity for “load”ing the same object, thus the oDG+s are cycle-free. Hence the
oDG+s are successful, and Theorem 2 applies. For Elevators and Transport, Proposition 2
is slightly weaker because a vehicle may have capacity > 1, allowing – but not forcing –
relaxed plans to use unloading operators recovering a capacity not actually present.
We note that similar patterns are likely to occur in any domain with renewable resources,
and will be recognized by Deﬁnition 2 condition (2a) in the same way.
Proposition 2 does not hold for Theorems 3 and 4, i.e., for lDGs and gDGs. This is due
to two deﬁciencies (cf. the discussion at the end of Section 4). First, SG contains cycles
“unload”ing an object in order to free the capacity for “load”ing it. Second, Deﬁnition 2
condition (3a) is more restrictive than Deﬁnition 2 condition (2a), postulating the deletes
of t0 to be entirely irrelevant. If we had a way of removing these deﬁciencies, then the
guaranteed analyses (I,II) would succeed in the four domains from Proposition 2.
11. We say “can be found automatically” here because Fast Downward’s translator is not deterministic, i.e.,
it may return diﬀerent ﬁnite-domain variable encodings even when run several times on the same planning
task. Some but not all of these encodings correspond to our domain formalizations. For Elevators, we
do not give a full deﬁnition because, without action costs, this is merely a variant of Transport.
175

Hoffmann
8. Experiments
We report on a large-scale experiment with TorchLight. We ﬁll in a few details on Torch-
Light’s implementation, and we describe a simple alternative analysis technique based on
search probing. We explain the experiments set-up, report runtime results for the diﬀerent
stages of TorchLight, and describe TorchLight’s analysis results on a per-domain basis. We
assess the quality of that analysis in terms of its predictive capability. We ﬁnally summarize
the outcome of TorchLight’s diagnosis facility in our benchmarks.
8.1 TorchLight
TorchLight is implemented in C based on FF.12 TorchLight currently handles STRIPS only,
i.e., no ADL domains. It uses Fast Downward’s translator (Helmert, 2009) to ﬁnd the ﬁnite-
domain variables. Establishing the correspondence between these variables (respectively
their values) and FF’s internally used ground facts is mostly straightforward. There are a
few details to take care of; we omit these for brevity.
After parsing Fast Downward’s variables, TorchLight creates data structures represent-
ing the support graph and the domain transition graphs. It then enters a phase we refer
to as static analysis, where it determines ﬁxed properties such as, for every transition t,
whether t is irrelevant, invertible, etc.
The next step is guaranteed global analysis (I),
checking the preconditions of Theorem 4 by enumerating all global dependency graphs and
testing whether they are successful. To be able to report the percentage of successful gDGs,
we do not stop at the ﬁrst unsuccessful one.
The local analysis techniques – guaranteed local analysis (II) using Theorem 3 and
approximate local analysis (III) using Theorem 2 – are run on a set LS of states comprising
the initial state as well as a number R of sample states obtained by random walks starting
in sI. The set LS is identical for both analyses, and we run each technique on each state
s ∈LS regardless of what the outcome of running the respective other technique on s is.
Given s, analysis (II) checks Theorem 3 by constructing the local dependency graph for
every suitable variable x0 and every transition t0 leaving s(x0). If we ﬁnd a non-successful
t0, we stop considering x0. We minimize exit distance bounds across diﬀerent x0.
Analysis (III) checks Theorem 2 on a relaxed plan P +(s) computed by FF’s heuristic
function. In case that no relaxed plan exists for s, the analysis reports failure. Otherwise,
the analysis proceeds over all operators o0 in P +(s), from start to end, and over all variables
x0 aﬀected by o0. For each pair o0, x0 we build the optimal rplan dependency graph oDG+ as
per Deﬁnition 1. We skip variables x0 where eﬀo0(x0) is not actually used as a precondition
or goal, in the rest of P +(s). If oDG+ is successful, we stop. (Relaxed plans can be big
in large examples, so continuing the analysis for exit bound minimization was sometimes
costly.) As mentioned in Section 5, before we build oDG+ we re-order P +(s) by moving
operators behind o0 if possible. This is of paramount importance because it avoids including
unnecessary variables into oDG+. The re-ordering process is straightforward. It starts at
the direct predecessor o of o0, and tests whether P +(s) is still a relaxed plan when moving
o directly behind o0. If yes, this arrangement is kept. Then we iterate to the predecessor
of o, and so forth. It is easy to see that, this way, oDG+ will contain exactly the variables
12. The source code of TorchLight is an online appendix to this paper. It is available for download also at
http://www.loria.fr/~hoffmanj/TorchLight.zip.
176

Analyzing Search Topology Without Running Any Search
and transitions used in P +(s) to achieve preo0. Finally, when we check whether the oDG+-
relevant deletes of t0 are P +
>0(s)-recoverable, we use a simple technique allowing to recognize
situations where failure due to one operator can be avoided by replacing with an alternative
operator. For example, if in Transport o0 is a loading operator reducing capacity level k to
k −1, then P +(s) may still contain an unloading operator relying on level k. Thus level k
will be contained in R+
1 ∩C0, causing failure. However, the unloading can just as well be
performed based on capacity level k −1, removing this diﬃculty. We catch cases like this
during construction of R+
1 . Whenever we ﬁnd o whose precondition overlaps C0, we test
whether we can replace o with a similar operator.
The local analyses return simple statistics, namely the minimum, mean, and maximal
exit distance bound found, as well as the success rate, i.e., the fraction of sample states
where guaranteed local analysis (II)/approximate local analysis (III) succeeded. Analysis
(III) success rates will be a main focus, because these turn out to be very informative.
We run R = 1, 10, 100, 1000 in the experiment.
The length of each random walk is
chosen uniformly between 0 and 5 ∗hFF(sI), i.e., 5 times the FF heuristic value for the
initial state. We do not play with the parameter 5. It is important, however, that this
parameter is not chosen too small. In domains with many dead ends – where one may do
things that are fatally wrong – it is likely that the “bad” things will happen only if doing
a suﬃciently large number of random choices. Consequently, the dead-end rate, i.e., the
fraction of sample states for which no relaxed plan exists, tends to be larger for longer
random walks. Since analysis (III) fails on states that have no relaxed plan, this exerts an
important inﬂuence on analysis (III) success rates. We illustrate this below by comparing
some results for sampled states to results obtained using the initial states only.
8.2 Search Probing
For approximate analysis of sample states, there exists a simple (and rather obvious) al-
ternative to TorchLight’s causal graph based technology. One can use search to determine
whether or not a given sample state s is a local minimum, and what its exit distance is. Since
we cannot compute h+ eﬀectively, such a search-based analysis is necessarily approximate.
The straightforward method is to replace h+ with a relaxed-plan based approximation.
Herein, we replace h+ with hFF, i.e., with FF’s heuristic function. Precisely, given a state
s, we run a single iteration of FF’s Enforced Hill-Climbing, i.e., a breadth-ﬁrst search for
a state with better heuristic value. In this search, like FF does, we use helpful actions
pruning to avoid huge search spaces. Unlike FF, to focus on the detection of states not on
local minima, we allow only monotone paths (thus restricting the search space to states s′
where hFF(s′) = hFF(s)). We refer to this technique as search probing, SP in brief. We also
experiment with a variant imposing a 1 second runtime cut-oﬀon the search. We refer to
this as limited search probing, SP1s in brief. SP and SP1s are run on the same set LS of
states as TorchLight’s local analyses (II,III).
As it turns out, empirically – in the present benchmarks – SP and SP1s are very compet-
itive with TorchLight’s analysis (III). Since that analysis is a main focus of our experiments,
it is relevant to understand the commonalities and diﬀerences between these techniques.
As far as analysis quality guarantees are concerned, all 3 techniques – analysis (III),
SP, SP1s – have similar properties: there are no guarantees whatsoever. Each may report
177

Hoffmann
success although s is a local minimum (false positives), and each may fail although s is
not a local minimum (false negatives). In all cases, false positives are due to the use of
non-optimal relaxed plans (hFF instead of h+). False negatives are inherent in analysis (III)
because this covers only certain special cases; they are inherent in SP1s due to the search
limit. SP can have false negatives due to helpful actions pruning, however that could in
principle be turned oﬀ; the more fundamental source of false negatives are the non-optimal
relaxed plans. These are also responsible for a lack of connections across the techniques.
The only implication is the trivial one that SP1s success on a state s implies SP success on
s. In particular, if analysis (III) correctly identiﬁes s to not be a local minimum, then this
does not imply that SP will do so as well. The causal graph analysis may be less aﬀected
by irregularities in the hFF surface. This happens, for example, in the Transport domain of
IPC 2008, resulting in higher success rates for analysis (III).
There are some obvious – but important – diﬀerences regarding runtime performance
and the danger of false negatives. SP runtime is worst-case exponential in the size of the
(grounded) input, whereas analysis (III) and SP1s runtime is low-order polynomial in that
size. For SP, decreasing the number R of sample states merely reduces the chance of hitting
a “bad” state (a sample state on a large ﬂat region), whereas analysis (III) and SP1s scale
linearly in R. On the other hand, both analysis (III) and SP1s buy their eﬃciency with
incompleteness, i.e., increased danger of false negatives. Analysis (III) simply recognizes
only special cases. SP1s eﬀectively bounds the lookahead depth, i.e., the search depth in
which exit states can be detected.
As indicated, SP and SP1s turn out to be competitive in the benchmarks. Large search
spaces are rare for SP. The success rates of SP and SP1s are similar, and as far as predictive
capability is concerned are similarly informative as those of analysis (III). Thus good-
quality success rates can be obtained with much simpler techniques than TorchLight.13
This notwithstanding, (a) TorchLight has other functions – the guaranteed analyses (I,II)
as well as diagnosis – that cannot be simulated, and (b) results in benchmarks only ever
pertain to these examples. TorchLight’s analysis (III) oﬀers unlimited lookahead depth at
low-order polynomial cost. This does not appear to matter much in the present benchmarks,
but there are natural cases where it does matter. We get back to this below.
8.3 Experiments Set-Up
We run experiments in a set of 37 domains. These include the domains investigated in
the hand-made analysis of h+ topology (Hoﬀmann, 2005), as shown in Figure 1, which
include all domains from the international planning competitions (IPC) up to IPC 2004.
Our remaining domains are the STRIPS (versions of the) domains from IPC 2006 and IPC
2008, except IPC 2008 Cyber-Security which we omit due to parsing diﬃculties.14 The test
instances were collected from the IPC collection(s) where applicable (removing action cost
constructs from the IPC 2008 domains), and randomly generated elsewhere. In total, our
test set contains 1160 instances.
13. In particular, search probing appears to be a rather useful technique, raising the question why such
techniques have not yet been used for performance prediction purposes. Roberts and Howe (2009), for
example, use very simple features only. We get back to this in the conclusion.
14. The instances are too large for FF’s parser in its standard conﬁguration. When tweaking bison to allow
larger parse trees, we obtained a segmentation fault even in the smallest instance of IPC 2008.
178

Analyzing Search Topology Without Running Any Search
single-shot/R = 1
R = 10
R = 100
R = 1000
tool/phase
mean
max
mean
max
mean
max
mean
max
FD Translator
6.12
690.59
SG/DTG
0.14
6.91
Static Analysis
0.25
31.42
Analysis (I)
0.40
53.29
Sample States
0.01
0.53
0.08
4.81
0.76
50.35
7.50
491.20
Analysis (II)
0.00
0.18
0.01
1.11
0.10
9.56
0.98
94.59
Analysis (III)
0.02
1.31
0.03
2.46
0.23
20.09
2.15
194.79
TorchLight total
6.92
727.63
7.04
736.98
8.00
807.70
17.57
1510.74
TorchLight (III)
6.52
724.54
6.64
732.98
7.51
795.16
16.19
1413.23
TorchLight (III) no FD
0.40
33.95
0.49
40.50
1.37
103.67
10.04
719.27
SP
0.06
58.02
0.23
138.54
5.47
—
26.24
—
SP total
0.07
58.03
0.32
138.59
6.23
—
33.74
—
SP1s
0.01
1.08
0.07
4.46
0.66
56.18
5.89
391.59
SP1s total
0.01
1.48
0.15
9.27
1.42
106.53
13.39
882.79
FF
268.20
—
LAMA
185.05
—
Table 2: Summary of runtime data. Mean/max is over all instances of all domains. For
empty ﬁelds, the respective tool/phase is “single-shot”, i.e., does not depend on R.
A dash means time-out, 1800 seconds, which is inserted as the runtime for each re-
spective instance into the mean computation. Rows “FD Translator” . . . “Analysis
(III)” time the diﬀerent stages of TorchLight. “TorchLight total” is overall run-
time, “TorchLight (III)” does not run analyses (II) and (III), “TorchLight (III) no
FD” is the latter when disregarding the translation costs. “SP” determines a suc-
cess rate (fraction of sample states deemed to not be on local minima) via search
probing, i.e., search around each sample state; “SP1s” imposes a 1 second time-out
on these searches. “SP total” and “SP1s total” include the time for generating the
sample states.
All experiments are run on a 1.8 GHZ CPU, with a 30 minute runtime and 2 GB
memory cut-oﬀ. We run 4 diﬀerent planners/tools. Apart from TorchLight (and SP/SP1s),
these include FF (Hoﬀmann & Nebel, 2001a), and LAMA (Richter et al., 2008; Richter
& Westphal, 2010).
The purpose of running these planners is to assess to what extent
TorchLight’s output – in particular analysis (III) success rate – can predict planner success
or failure. To examine this also for a very plain planner, we also run a version of FF that uses
no goal ordering techniques, and that runs only Enforced Hill-Climbing, without resorting
to best-ﬁrst search if that fails. We will refer to this planner as EHC in what follows.
8.4 Runtime
Our code is currently optimized much more for readability than for speed. Still, TorchLight
is fast. Up to R = 100, the bottleneck is Fast Downward’s translator. With R = 1, 10, 100,
the actual analysis takes at most as much time as the translator in 99.74%, 99.74%, and
96.21% of the instances respectively. To assess this in more detail, consider Table 2 which
gives the timing of the diﬀerent stages of TorchLight, and of the other planners/tools.
The translation runtime sometimes hurts considerably, with a peak of 690.59 seconds
in the most costly instance of the Scanalyzer domain. This is rather exceptional, however.
The second most costly domain is Blocksworld-NoArm, with a peak of 138.33 seconds. In
179

Hoffmann
20 of the 37 domains, the most costly instance is translated in less than 10 seconds. In
57.24% of the instances, Fast Downward’s translator takes at most 1 second.
For static analysis, the peak behavior of 31.42 seconds (also in Scanalyzer) is even more
exceptional: in 95.34% of the instances, static analysis takes at most 1 second. The second
highest domain peak is 7.88 seconds in Pipesworld-Tankage. Similarly, while analysis (I)
takes a peak of 53.29 seconds – in Blocksworld-NoArm – in 96.12% of the instances it
completes in at most 1 second. The only domain other than Blocksworld-NoArm where the
peak instance takes more than 10 seconds is Airport, with a peak of 41.71 seconds; the next
highest domain peaks are Pipesworld-Tankage (6.8), Scanalyzer (2.91), Logistics (1.89), and
Woodworking (1.17). In all other domains, analysis (I) always completes within a second.
Turning focus on the local analyses, we see that they are even more eﬀective. In par-
ticular, we will concentrate below mostly on approximate local analysis (III). We will see
that R = 1000 does not oﬀer advantages over R ≤100 as far as the information obtained
goes, so we will mostly concentrate on R ≤100. For R = 1, 10, 100, analysis (III) com-
pletes in at most 1 second for 99.66%, 99.40%, 95.60% of the instances respectively. For
R = 1000 this still holds for 76.55% of the instances. The peak runtime of 20.09 seconds
for R = 100 occurs in Scanalyzer. The next highest domain peaks are Blocksworld-NoArm
(9.23), Pipesworld-Tankage (4.24), Ferry(3.21), Logistics (2.99), Blocksworld-Arm (2.77),
Optical-Telegraph (1.97), and Airport (1.41). In all other 29 domains, analysis (III) with
R = 100 always completes within a second.
The bottleneck in local analysis is the generation of sample states. This can be costly
because it involves the repeated computation of applicable operators during the random
walks. Its R ≤100 peak of 50.35 seconds is in the Scanalyzer domain. However, once
again, this peak behavior is exceptional.
With R = 1, 10, 100, the sampling completes
within at most 1 second for 100%, 98.28%, 87.41% of the instances respectively.
The main competitor of TorchLight analysis (III) success rates is search probing, i.e.,
SP and SP1s. Consider for the moment only the analysis methods themselves, i.e., row
“Analysis (III)” vs. rows “SP” and “SP1s” in Table 2. Compared to SP1s, analysis (III) is
consistently in the advantage (except for maximum runtime with R = 1), but the diﬀerence
is not dramatic. This is to be expected, given that SP1s trades completeness against a small
ﬁxed maximum runtime. Compared to the complete search in SP, analysis (III) consistently
has a signiﬁcant advantage. However, for R ≤10 the mean runtime of SP is tolerable, and
even the maximum runtime is not too bad. Further, bad runtime behavior is exceptional.
For R = 1, 10, SP completes in at most 1 second for 99.83% and 98.45% of the instances
respectively. In 35 (R = 1) respectively 32 (R = 10) of the 37 domains even the maximum
runtime is below 1 second. With R = 100, SP has two time-outs, both in Blocksworld-Arm.
With R = 1000, there are 11 time-outs, in Blocksworld-Arm, Blocksworld-NoArm, Freecell,
and Pipesworld-NoTankage. With R = 100, the maximum runtime is above 10 seconds in
7 domains; with R = 1000, in 12. However, with R = 100, 1000, SP still completes in at
most 1 second for 92.33% and 71.98% of the instances respectively (compared to 95.60%
and 76.55% for analysis (III), cf. above).
Neither analysis (III) nor search probing are stand-alone methods. The former requires
all of TorchLight except analyses (I,II). The latter requires the sampling of random states.
The respective total data is given in rows “TorchLight (III)” and “SP total”/ “SP1s total” in
Table 2. Here the picture changes dramatically in favor of SP and especially SP1s. It should
180

Analyzing Search Topology Without Running Any Search
be noted, though, that this is mostly due to the overhead for the translation to ﬁnite-domain
variables. This overhead is an artifact of the implementation. Our approach is deﬁned
for ﬁnite-domain variables, while the benchmarks are not, even though the ﬁnite-domain
representation is in most cases more natural than the Boolean one. Further, many planners
(notably Fast Downward and its quickly growing set of derivatives) use the translation
anyway. The runtimes without translation are given in the row “TorchLight (III) no FD”.
As one would hope and expect, the analysis methods are much faster than actual plan-
ners. LAMA has 112 time-outs in our test suite, FF has 173.
8.5 Analyzing Domains
We now discuss the actual analysis outcomes, on a per-domain basis. We ﬁrst consider
only TorchLight, then give some details on the comparison of analysis (III) success rates to
those obtained by search probing. Before we begin, a few words are in order regarding the
comparison between SP and SP1s. With R = 1, 10, 100, 1000, the success rates are identical
in 99.83%, 99.14%, 97.5%, 94.66% of our 1160 benchmark instances respectively; in 99.83%,
99.14%, 99.31%, 98.97% of the instances, the success rates diﬀer by at most 5%. Thus, a
small runtime cut-oﬀdoes not adversely aﬀect the success rates of search probing (because
long searches are rare). This being so, we henceforth do not discuss the data for SP vs.
SP1s separately. We compare TorchLight’s analysis (III) success rates to those of SP only.
The guarantees of Proposition 1 are conﬁrmed, i.e., guaranteed global analysis (I) suc-
ceeds as described in Logistics, Miconic-STRIPS, Movie, and Simple-TSP. It never succeeds
in any other domain, though. In some domains, fractions of the gDGs are successful. Pre-
cisely, the maximum fraction of successful gDGs is 97% in Satellite, 50% in Ferry, 33.33% in
TPP, 22.22% in Driverlog, 20% in Depots, 13.33% in Tyreworld, and 12.5% in Blocksworld-
Arm. However, if the fraction is below 100% then nothing is proved, so this data may at
best be used to give an indication of which aspects of the domain are “good-natured”.
Guaranteed local analysis (II) generally is not much more applicable than global analysis.
Thus we now concentrate on approximate local analysis (III) exclusively.
Proposition 2 is backed up impressively. Even with R = 1000, analysis (III) succeeds
in every single sample state of Ferry, Gripper, Elevators, and Transport.15 This indicates
strongly that the potentially sub-optimal relaxed plans do not result in a loss of information
here. Indeed, the analysis yields high success rates in almost all domains where local minima
are non-present or limited. This is not the case for the other domains, and thus TorchLight
can distinguish domains with “easy” h+ topology from the “hard” ones. Consider Figure 3,
showing mean analysis (III) success rates per-domain with R = 1. (The picture is similar
for R = 10, 100, 1000; cf. Table 3 below.)
The domains whose h+ topology is not known are shown separately on the right hand
side in Figure 3. For the other domains, we see quite nicely that “harder” domains tend
to have lower success rates. In particular, the easiest domains in the bottom class all have
100% success rates (95% in the case of Zenotravel), whereas the hardest domains in the
top right corner only have around 50% or less. In the latter domains, to some extent the
15. Historically, this observation preceded Proposition 2, as well as the h+ topology categorization of Ele-
vators and Transport as per Figure 1. That is, these hand-made analyses were motivated by observing
TorchLight’s analysis outcome.
181

Hoffmann
local minima ed <= c
bench ed <= c
Openstacks [0]
Parc−Printer [3]
Pathways [10]
Peg−Sol [0]
Scanalyzer [30]
Sokoban [13]
Storage [93]
TPP [80]
Trucks [0]
Woodwork [13]
undirected
Logistics [*,100]
Ferry [+,100]
Gripper [+,100]
Hanoi [0]
Blocks−NoArm [57]
Transport [+,100]
Blocks−Arm [30]
Depots [82]
Driverlog [100]
Elevators [+,100]
Grid [80]
PSR [50]
Pipes−NoTank [76]
Pipes−Tank [40]
Tyreworld [100]
Satellite [100]
Zenotravel [95]
Miconic−STR [*,100]
Movie [*,100]
Simple−Tsp [*,100]
harmless
Rovers [100]
recognized
Airport [0]
Freecell [55]
Mprime [49]
Mystery [39]
unrecognized
Opt−Tele [7]
Din−Phil [24]
Figure 3: Overview of TorchLight domain analysis results. “*”: guaranteed global analysis
(I) always succeeds.
“+”: approximate local analysis (III) always succeeds if
provided an optimal relaxed plan. Numbers shown are mean success rates per
domain, for approximate local analysis (III) with R = 1, i.e., when sampling a
single state per domain instance.
low success rates result from the recognition of dead ends by FF’s heuristic function. For
example, if during random sampling we make random vehicle moves consuming fuel, like
in Mystery and Mprime, then of course chances are we will end up in a state where fuel
is so scarce that even a relaxed plan does not exist anymore. This is most pronounced in
Airport, where all sample states here have inﬁnite heuristic values. However, the capabilities
of the analysis go far beyond counting states on recognized dead ends. In Blocksworld-Arm,
for example, there are no dead ends at all and still the success rate is only 30%, clearly
indicating this as a domain with a diﬃcult topology.
To some extent, based on the success rates we can even distinguish Pipesworld-Tankage
from Pipesworld-NoTankage, and Mprime from Mystery (in Mprime, fuel can be transferred
between locations). The relatively high success rate in Depots probably relates to its trans-
portation aspects. In Grid, in 20% of cases our analysis is not strong enough to recognize
the reasons behind non-existence of local minima; these reasons can be quite complicated
(Hoﬀmann, 2003). Dining-Philosophers does not really have a favorable h+ topology. Its
rather excessive bound 31 is due to the very particular domain structure where philosophers
behave in strictly symmetrical ways (Hoﬀmann, 2005). Apart from this, the only strong
outliers are Driverlog, Rovers, Hanoi, and Blocksworld-NoArm. All of these are more prob-
lems of the hand-made analysis than of TorchLight’s. In Driverlog and Rovers, deep local
minima do exist, but only in awkward situations that don’t tend to arise in the IPC in-
stances. Thus the hand-made analysis, which is of a worst-case nature, is too pessimistic
here. The opposite happens in Hanoi and Blocksworld-NoArm, where the absence of local
minima is due to rather idiosyncratic reasons. For example, in Hanoi the reason is that h+
is always equal to the number of discs not yet in goal position – in the relaxation, one can
always accomplish the remaining goals one-by-one, regardless of the constraints entailed
by their positioning. Hanoi and Blocksworld-NoArm are not actually “easy to solve” for
182

Analyzing Search Topology Without Running Any Search
sI
R = 1
R = 10
R = 100
R = 1000
domain
(III)
(III)
SP
(III)
SP
(III)
SP
(III)
SP
DE
Airport
96.0
0.0
0.0
2.0
2.0
2.8
2.9
2.9
3.0
97.0
Blocks-Arm
38.3
30.0
93.3
28.2
94.5
26.9
91.7
26.5
82.1
0
Blocks-NoArm
70.0
56.7
100
57.2
100
55.9
99.9
56.2
98.3
0
Depots
100
81.8
100
85.9
99.1
86.3
99.7
86.2
99.6
0
Din-Phil
100
24.1
27.6
22.8
23.1
22.8
22.9
22.0
22.3
77.2
Driverlog
100
100
100
97.5
100
97.4
99.9
97.9
99.8
0
Elevators
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
0
Ferry
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
0
Freecell
97.5
55.0
60.0
57.4
62.8
57.9
63.5
58.0
63.2
35.4
Grid
60.0
80.0
100
74.0
92.0
69.0
93.8
69.5
93.5
0
Gripper
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
0
Hanoi
0.0
0.0
33.3
11.1
44.4
10.2
41.9
10.6
41.9
0
Logistics
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
0
Miconic
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
0
Movie
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
0
Mprime
74.3
48.6
74.3
61.1
76.3
64.3
79.0
64.1
78.2
7.2
Mystery
75.0
39.3
42.9
37.1
43.9
37.6
45.6
36.3
44.4
46.8
Opt-Tele
0
7.1
14.3
1.4
2.9
0.9
1.4
1.1
1.7
98.3
Pipes-NoTank
40.0
76.0
98.0
75.4
97.4
75.2
97.4
75.1
95.4
0
Pipes-Tank
34.0
40.0
92.0
50.6
90.0
49.4
88.1
48.7
88.2
8.7
PSR
66.0
50.0
62.0
57.6
69.8
58.3
71.1
57.0
70.4
0
Rovers
100
100
100
100
99.5
100
99.8
100
99.8
0
Satellite
85
100
100
98.5
100
98.4
100
98.0
99.8
0
Simple-TSP
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
0
Transport
100
100
93.3
100
93.0
100
94.8
100
94.4
0
Tyreworld
100
100
100
95.6
100
96.3
100
95.5
100
0
Zenotravel
90
95
100
94.5
99.5
95.8
98.4
95.4
98.2
0
Openstacks
100
0
4.4
14.8
21.3
17.7
22.0
16.6
20.8
79.1
Parc-Printer
100
3.3
6.7
8.0
8.3
6.3
7.2
6.0
6.8
93.0
Pathways
100
10.0
10.0
6.0
6.0
5.4
5.4
4.6
4.6
95.3
Peg-Sol
0
0
10
13.3
22.7
13.1
22.3
12.6
22.2
75.2
Scanalyzer
0
30.0
96.7
33.0
99.7
33.5
97.9
33.9
98.5
0
Sokoban
30.0
13.3
33.3
20.3
38.3
19.1
38.2
18.5
37.7
54.2
Storage
100
93.3
96.7
89.0
96.3
89.8
96.8
89.3
96.9
0
TPP
100
80.0
80.0
68.0
67.0
65.4
63.8
65.5
63.9
34.5
Trucks
56.3
0
0
2.5
3.1
1.9
2.9
1.4
2.7
97.3
Woodworking
100
13.3
13.3
14.3
14.3
15.3
15.4
15.3
15.4
84.6
Table 3: Mean success rates per domain. Upper part: domains whose h+ topology was pre-
viously examined by hand (Hoﬀmann, 2005) or is trivial to examine based on these
results; lower part: IPC 2006/2008 domains where that is not the case. Columns
“sI” show data for analyzing the initial state only, columns “R = 1, 10, 100, 1000”
for analyzing the respective number of sample states. Columns “(III)” give data
for approximate local analysis (III), columns “SP” give data for search probing,
column “DE” gives dead-end rates for R = 1000.
FF, and in that sense, from a practical perspective, the low success rates of TorchLight’s
analysis (III) provide the more accurate picture.
Table 3 gives a complete account of per-domain averaged success rates data, including
all domains, all values of R, the rates obtained on initial states, and using SP instead of
TorchLight. This serves to answer three questions:
(1) Is it important to sample random states, rather than only analyzing the initial state?
(2) Is it important to sample many random states?
183

Hoffmann
(3) How competitive is analysis (III) with respect to a search-based analysis?
The answer to question (1) is a clear “yes”. Most importantly, this pertains to domains
with dead ends, cf. our brief discussion above. It is clear from Table 3 that, in such domains,
analyzing sI results in a tendency to be too optimistic. To see this, just consider the entries
for Airport, Dining-Philosophers, Freecell, Mystery, Openstacks, Parc-Printer, Pathways,
TPP, Trucks, and Woodworking. All these domains have dead ends, for a variety of reasons.
The dead ends do not occur frequently at initial state level, but do occur frequently during
random walks – cf. column “DE” in Table 3. (Interestingly, in a few domains – most notably
the two Pipesworlds – the opposite happens, i.e., success rates are lower for sI than for the
sample states. It is not clear to us what causes this phenomenon.)
If we simply compare the sI column with the R = 1000 column for analysis (III), then
we ﬁnd that the result is “a lot” diﬀerent – more than 10% – in 22 of the 37 domains. To
some extent, this diﬀerence between initial states and sample states may be just due to the
way these benchmarks are designed. Often, the initial states of every instance are similar
in certain ways (no package loaded yet, etc). On the other hand, it seems quite natural, at
least for oﬄine problems, that the initial state is diﬀerent from states deeper down in the
state space (consider transportation problems or card games, for example).
The answer to question (2) is a clear “no”.
For example, compare the R = 1 and
R = 1000 columns for analysis (III). The diﬀerence is greater than 10% in only 6 of the
37 domains. The peak diﬀerence is in Openstacks, with 16.6% for R = 1000 vs. 0% for
R = 1. The average diﬀerence over all domains is 4.17%. Similarly, comparing the R = 1
and R = 1000 columns for SP results in only 5 of 37 domains where the diﬀerence is greater
than 10%, the peak being again in Openstacks, 20.8% for R = 1000 vs. 4.4% for R = 1.
The average diﬀerence over all domains is 3.7%.
The answer to question (3) is a bit more complicated. Look at the columns for analysis
(III) respectively SP with R = 1000. The number of domains where the diﬀerence is larger
than 10% is now 11 out of 37, with a peak of 64.6% diﬀerence in Scanalyzer. On the one
hand, this still means that in 26 out of 37 domains the analysis result we get is very close
to that of search (average diﬀerence 2.18%), without actually running any search! On the
other hand, what happens in the other 11 domains? In all of these, the success rate of SP is
higher than that of TorchLight. This is not surprising – it basically means that TorchLight’s
analysis is not strong enough here to recognize all states that are not on local minima.
Interestingly, this weakness can turn into an unexpected advantage. Of the 11 domains in
question, 8 domains – Blocksworld-Arm, Depots, Mprime, Pipesworld-Tankage, Pipesworld-
NoTankage, PSR, Scanalyzer, and Sokoban – do contain deep local minima.16 Thus, in these
8 domains, we would wish our analysis to return small success rates. TorchLight grants this
wish much more than SP does. Consider what happens when using SP instead of analysis
(III) in Figure 3. For Mystery, PSR, and Sokoban, the change is not dramatic. However,
Blocksworld-Arm is marked with average success rate 93 instead of 30, putting it almost
on par with the very-simple-topology domains in the bottom class. Similarly, Pipesworld-
Tankage, Pipesworld-NoTankage, and Scanalyzer are put almost on par with these. Depots
16. Sokoban has unrecognized dead-ends (in the relaxation, blocks can be pushed across each other) and
therefore local minima. In Scanalyzer, analyzing plants misplaces them as a side eﬀect, and bringing
them back to their start position, across a large circle of conveyor belts, may take arbitrarily many steps.
See Figure 3 for the other 6 domains.
184

Analyzing Search Topology Without Running Any Search
actually receives a 100, putting it exactly on par with them. Thus the SP analysis outcome
actually looks quite a bit worse, in 5 of the domains.
What causes these undesirably high success rates for SP? The author’s best guess is that,
in many domains, the chance of randomly ﬁnding a state on a local minimum is low. In
large-scale experiments measuring statistics on the search space surface under FF’s heuristic
function (Hoﬀmann, 2003), it was observed that many sampled states were not local minima
themselves, but where contained in “valleys”. Within a valley, there is no monotonically
decreasing path to a goal state. Such a state may not be a local minimum because, and only
because, one can descend deeper into the valley. It seems that SP correctly identiﬁes most
valley states to not be local minima, thus counting as “good” many states that actually are
located in diﬃcult regions of the search space. This is a weakness not of SP, but of success
rate as a search space feature.17 Why does this weakness not manifest itself as much in
analysis (III)? Because that analysis is “more picky” – it takes as “good” only states that
qualify for particular special cases. These tend to not occur as often in the diﬃcult domains.
Of course, it is easy to construct examples turning the discussed “strength” into a real
weakness of TorchLight’s analysis quality. This just does not seem to happen a lot in the
present benchmarks. Now, having said that, the present benchmarks aren’t well suited to
bring out the theoretical advantage of analysis (III) either. The analysis oﬀers unlimited
lookahead depth at low-order polynomial cost. However, even with R = 1000, in 23 of the 37
domains the highest exit distance bound returned is 0, i.e., every exit path identiﬁed consists
of a single operator. These cases could be handled with a much simpler variant of analysis
(III), looking only at operators o0 that are directly applicable in s, and thus removing the
entire machinery pertaining to SG predecessors of x0. Still, that machinery does matter in
cases that are quite natural. The highest exit distance bound returned is 10 in Grid and 7 in
Transport. More generally, in any transportation domain with a non-trivial road-map, it is
easy to construct relevant situations. For example, say the road map in Transport forms N
“cities”, each with diameter D and at least one vehicle, distances between cities being large
relative to D. Then, in a typical state, around N vehicle moves will be considered helpful
by FF: at least 1 per city since local vehicles will be preferred by the relaxed plan. All
successor states will have identical h+ until a package can be loaded/unloaded. The typical
number of steps required to do so will grow with D. If, for example, the vehicle is in the
“outskirts” and the packages are in the “city center”, then around D/2 steps are required,
and ﬁnding an exit takes runtime around ND/2. Then small values of N and D already
render search probing either devoid of information (if the runtime cut-oﬀis too small), or
computationally infeasible (recall that the probing should be a “quick” pre-process to the
actual planning). By contrast, analysis (III) easily delivers the correct success rate 100%.
8.6 Predicting Planner Performance
As a direct measure of the “predictive quality” of success rates, we conducted preliminary
experiments examining the behavior of primitive classiﬁers, and of runtime distributions
for large vs. small success rates. We consider ﬁrst the classiﬁers. They predict, given a
planning task, whether EHC/FF/LAMA will succeed in solving the task, within the given
17. Note that we cannot use “valley rate” instead, in a cheap domain analysis, since determining whether
or not s lies on a valley implies ﬁnding a plan for s and thus solving the task as a side eﬀect.
185

Hoffmann
time and memory limits. The classiﬁers answer “yes” iﬀthe success rate is ≥a threshold
T in 0, 10, . . . , 100. Obviously, to do this, we need R > 1. We consider in what follows only
R = 10 and R = 100 because, as shown above, R = 1000 can be costly.
For EHC, both TorchLight analysis (III) and SP deliver fairly good-quality predictions,
considering that no actual machine learning is involved. The prediction quality of Torch-
Light is just as good as – sometimes slightly better than – that of search. Whether we use
R = 10 or R = 100 does not make a big diﬀerence. EHC solves 60.69% of the instances, so
that is the rate of correct predictions for a trivial baseline classiﬁer always answering “yes”.
For R = 10, the best rate of correct predictions is 71.90% for TorchLight (with T = 80)
and 70.17% for SP (with T = 90). For R = 100, these numbers are 71.76% (T = 60) and
71.16% (T = 100). Dead-end rate is a very bad predictor. Its best prediction is for the
baseline classiﬁer T = 0, and the second best classiﬁer (T = 100) is only 36.79% correct.
Interestingly, there are major diﬀerences between the diﬀerent sets of domains. On the
domains previously analyzed by hand (Hoﬀmann, 2005; as in Figure 1 but without Elevators
and Transport), the best prediction is 75.75% correct for TorchLight with T = 70, and
74.07% correct for SP with T = 100, vs. a baseline of 63.81%. On the IPC 2006 domains,
these numbers are 57.98% and 61.34% vs. baseline 55.46%, and T = 10 in both cases, i.e.,
the best classiﬁer is very close to the baseline. IPC 2008, on the other hand, appears to be
exceptionally good-natured, the numbers being 79.52% (T = 60) and 82.38% (T = 80) vs.
baseline 51.90%. It is not clear to us what causes these phenomena.18
In summary, the quality of prediction is always clearly above the baseline, around 10%
when looking at all domains, and even up to 30% when looking at the IPC 2008 domains
only. For comparison, using state-of-the-art classiﬁcation techniques but only simple fea-
tures, Roberts and Howe (2009) get 69.47% correctness vs. baseline 74% (for saying “no”),
on unseen testing domains for FF. Having said that, if setting T in the above is considered
to be the “learning”, then the above does not actually distinguish between learning data
and testing data. Roberts and Howe’s unseen testing domains are those of IPC 2006 (in
a diﬀerent setting than ours including also all ADL test suites). If we set T on only the
domains from before 2006 (Figure 1 without Elevators and Transport), then we get the
best prediction at T = 70 for TorchLight and T = 100 for SP. With this setting of T, the
prediction correctness on our IPC 2006 suite is 29.41% respectively 51.26% only, vs. the
baseline 55.46%. On the other hand, this seems to pertain only to IPC 2006 speciﬁcally.
For IPC 2008, T = 70 respectively T = 100 are good settings, giving 76.67% respectively
76.19% correctness vs. the baseline 51.90%.
Importantly, Roberts and Howe are not predicting the performance of EHC but that of
FF, which is a more complex algorithm. For FF and LAMA, the prediction quality of both
TorchLight and SP is rather bleak, using the described primitive classiﬁers. In all cases,
the best prediction correctness is obtained when always answering “yes”. The best that
can be said is that success rate still predicts much better than dead-end rate. To give some
example data, with R = 10 across all domains for FF, the baseline is 85.09% correct. With
T = 10, this goes down to 77.50% for TorchLight, 79.31% for SP, and 34.57% for dead-end
rate. For LAMA, the baseline is 90.26% correct, and with T = 10 this goes down to 81.81%
18. The bad prediction quality in IPC 2006 domains might be related to the fact that these are fully grounded,
potentially impeding the ability of Fast Downward’s translator to ﬁnd useful ﬁnite-domain variables.
186

Analyzing Search Topology Without Running Any Search
for TorchLight, 83.97% for SP, and 29.91% for dead-end rate. For both FF and LAMA,
with growing T the prediction quality decreases monotonically in all cases.
Why is prediction quality so much worse for FF than for EHC, which after all is the
main building block of FF? Whereas EHC typically fails on tasks whose h+ topology is
not favorable, FF’s and LAMA’s complete search algorithms are able to solve many of
these cases, too. For example, with TorchLight success rates and R = 10, EHC solves only
34.07% of the tasks with success rate 0, and solves less than 50% up to success rate 70%.
By contrast, FF and LAMA solve 74.18% respectively 76.92% of the tasks with success rate
0, and solve at least 70% for all success rates.
Despite this, success rates are far from devoid of information for FF and LAMA. Setting
the threshold T in 10, . . . , 100, we look at the distribution of planner runtime in the instance
subset (A) where success rate is < T, vs. instance subset (B) where success rate is ≥T.
Taking the null hypothesis to be that the means of the two runtime distributions are the
same, we run the Student’s T-test for unequal sample sizes to determine the conﬁdence with
which the null hypothesis can be rejected. That is, we determine the conﬁdence with which
distribution (B) has a lower mean than distribution (A). Using TorchLight’s success rate on
FF runtimes, with both R = 10 and R = 100, and in all 10 settings of T, we get a conﬁdence
of at least 99.9%. The diﬀerence between the means in our data, i.e., the mean runtime of
(A) minus the mean runtime of (B), tends to grow over T. It peaks at 336 respectively 361
seconds for R = 10 respectively R = 100; the average diﬀerence over all values of T is 239
respectively 240. Likewise, for LAMA runtimes all settings of T and R yield a conﬁdence of
99.9%, with average diﬀerences 242 respectively 235. The results for SP are comparable for
LAMA. They are slightly worse for FF, though. With R = 10 the conﬁdence is 99.9% only
for T = 10, 20; the conﬁdence is 95% for all other values of T. The diﬀerence peaks at 241
seconds (vs. 336 for TorchLight), with an average of 150 seconds (vs. 239). With R = 100,
thresholds T = 30, 40, 50, 100 yield 99.9% conﬁdence, the average diﬀerence being 160.
Again perhaps a little surprisingly, for the simpler planner EHC the runtime distribu-
tions behave very diﬀerently. For TorchLight success rates, we do get several cases with
conﬁdence < 95%, and average diﬀerences of around 80 seconds. For SP, in most cases we
get a 99.9% conﬁdence that the mean of (B) is larger than that of (A). Again, the reason
is simple. On many tasks with unfavorable h+ topology, enforced hill-climbing quickly ex-
hausts the space of states reachable by FF’s helpful actions. EHC then gives up on solving
the task, although it has consumed only little runtime – a peculiar behavior that one would
certainly not expect from a planner trying to be competitive.
Summing up, success rates as a planning task feature provide a very good coverage
predictor for EHC even without any signiﬁcant learning. For FF and LAMA, things are
not that easy, however the consideration of runtime distributions clearly shows that the
feature is highly informative. Exploiting this informativeness for predicting planner perfor-
mance presumably requires combination with other features, and actual machine learning
techniques, along the lines of Roberts and Howe (2009). This is a topic for future research.
8.7 Diagnosis
Let us ﬁnally consider TorchLight’s diagnosis facility. The idea behind this facility is to
summarize the reasons for analysis failure. Testing suﬃcient criteria for the absence of local
187

Hoffmann
minima, such diagnosis is not guaranteed to identify domain features causing their presence.
Still, at least for analysis using Theorem 2, the diagnosis can be quite accurate.
The current diagnosis facility is merely a ﬁrst-shot implementation based on reporting
all pairs (operator o0, variable x) that caused an oDG+ for o0 to not be successful. That is,
we report the pair (o0, x) if o0 has an eﬀect on x, and a context fact (x, c) of the transition
t0 taken by o0 is contained in R+
1 ∩C0 ∩F0, and is not recoverable by a sub-sequence
of P +
>0(s). In brief, we record (o0, x) if o0 has a harmful eﬀect on x. We perform a test
whether the “main” eﬀect of o0, i.e., that on x0, is invertible; in this case we do not record
x0 since the problem appear to be the side eﬀects. To avoid redundancies in the reporting,
we record not the grounded operator o0 but only the name of the action schema (“load”
instead of “load(package1 truck7)”). Similarly, as an option we record not x but the name
of the predicate underlying the fact (x, c). In that conﬁguration, the diagnosis comes in the
form of “action-name, predicate-name”, which has a direct match with the high-level PDDL
input ﬁles. To have some measure of which parts of the diagnosis are “more important”,
we associate each pair with a count of occurrences, and weigh the pairs by frequency.
In Zenotravel, the diagnosis output always has the form “ﬂy, fuel-level” and “zoom,
fuel-level”, indicating correctly that it’s the fuel consumption which is causing the local
minima.
In Mprime and Mystery, the cause of local minima is the same, however the
diagnosis is not as reliable because of the speciﬁc structure of the domain, associating fuel
with locations instead of vehicles. This sometimes causes the diagnosis to conclude that it
is the eﬀect changing locations which is causing the trouble. Concretely, with R = 1000
in Mystery, fuel consumption is the top-weighted diagnosis in 17 out of the 28 tasks; in
Mprime, this happens in 30 out of the 35 tasks. In Satellite and Rovers, the diagnosis
always takes the form “switch-on, calibrated” respectively “take-image, calibrated”, thus
reporting the problem to be that switching on an instrument, respectively taking an image,
deletes calibration. This is precisely the only reason why local minima exist here.19
In
Tyreworld, most often the diagnosis reports the problem to be that jacking up a hub results
in no longer having the jack (which is needed elsewhere, too). While this does not actually
cause local minima (there are none), it indeed appears to be a crucial aspect of the domain.
Similarly, in Grid the most frequent diagnosis is that picking up a key results in the arm
no longer being empty – again, not actually a cause of local minima, but a critical resource
in the domain. In Blocksworld-Arm, the dominant diagnoses are that a block is no longer
clear if we stack something on top of it, and that the hand is no longer empty when picking
up a block. Similarly, in Freecell, the dominant diagnoses are “send-to-free, cellspace” and
“send-to-new-col, colspace”.
One could make the above list much longer, however it seems clear already that this
diagnosis facility, although as yet primitive, has the potential to identify interesting aspects
of the domain. Note that we are making use of only one of the information sources in
TorchLight. There are many other things to be recorded, pertaining to other reasons for
analysis failure, like support graph cycles etc, and also to reasons for analysis success, like
successful gDGs and x0, o0 pairs yielding successful oDG+s. It appears promising to try
to improve diagnosis by combining some of these information sources. A combination with
19. Since analysis failure is rare in these two domains, often diagnosis does not give any output at all. With
R = 1000, the output is non-empty in 10 instances of Satellite and in 8 instances of Rovers. For R = 100
this reduces to 4 instances in Satellite, and not a single one in Rovers.
188

Analyzing Search Topology Without Running Any Search
other domain analysis techniques, like landmarks or invariants extraction, could also be
useful. This is a direction for future work.20
9. Related Work
There is no prior work – other than the aforementioned one of the author (Hoﬀmann, 2005)
– trying to automatically infer topological properties of a heuristic function. Thus our work
does not relate strongly to other domain analysis techniques. The closest relation is to other
techniques relying on causal graphs. In what follows we discuss this in some detail, along
with some other connections arising in this context.
If local analysis succeeds, then we can construct a path to the exit identiﬁed. In this,
our work relates to work on macro-actions (e.g., Botea, M¨uller, & Schaeﬀer, 2004; Vidal,
2004). Its distinguishing feature is that this macro-action is (would be) constructed in a
very targeted and analytical way, even giving a guarantee, in the conservative case, to make
progress towards the goal. The machinery behind the analysis is based on causal graphs, and
shares some similarities with known causal-graph based execution path generation methods
(e.g., Jonsson & B¨ackstr¨om, 1995; Williams & Nayak, 1997; Brafman & Domshlak, 2003).
The distinguishing feature here is that we focus on h+ and individual states rather than
the whole task. This allows us to consider small fragments of otherwise arbitrarily complex
planning tasks – we look at oDG+ instead of SG. Note that this ability is quite powerful
as far as applicability goes.
As we have seen in Section 8, the success rate of (local)
approximate analysis – and therewith the fraction of states for which we would be able to
generate a macro-action – is non-zero in almost all benchmark domains. Of course, this
broad applicability comes with a prize. While traditional causal graph methods guarantee to
reach the goal, in the worst case the macro-actions may only lead into h+ local minima. Still,
it may be interesting to look into whether other, traditional, causal-graph based methods
can be “localized” in this (or a similar) manner as well.
Global analysis, where we focus on the whole planning task and thus the whole causal
graph, is even more closely related to research on causal graphs based tractability analysis.
The major diﬀerence between tractability analysis and h+ topology analysis, in principle,
is that tractability and absence of local minima are orthogonal properties – in general,
neither one implies the other. Now, as we pointed out at the end of Section 6, our global
analysis does imply tractability (of plan existence). Vice versa, do the restrictions made in
known tractable classes imply the absence of local minima? In many cases, we can answer
this question with a deﬁnite “no”; some interesting questions are open; in a single case –
corresponding to our basic result – the answer is “yes”.
Example 3 in Appendix A.4 shows that one can construct a local minimum with just 2
variables of domain size 3, 1-arc SG, unary operators, and strongly connected DTGs with a
single non-invertible transition. This example (and various scaling extensions not breaking
the respective conditions) falls into a variety of known tractable classes. The example is in
20. In particular, Fast Downward’s translator is not always perfect in detecting the ﬁnite-domain variables
underlying benchmarks. For example, in Satellite it often does not detect that electricity is available
in exactly one of the instruments mounted on a satellite. This can lead to pointless diagnosis output,
which for now is handled using a simple notion of predicates “exchanged” by every operator. For doing
things like this in a more principled manner, further invariants analysis would be useful.
189

Hoffmann
the tractable class F∨
n identiﬁed by Domshlak and Dinitz (2001), because every transition of
the dependent variable depends on the other variable. The example is in Helmert’s (2004,
2006) SAS+-1 class with strongly connected DTGs. The example is “solved”, i.e., reduced
to the empty task, by Haslum’s (2007) simpliﬁcation techniques (also, these techniques
solve tasks from the Satellite domain, which do contain local minima). The example has
a fork and inverted fork causal graph, with bounded domain size and 1-dependent actions
only (actions with at most 1 prevail condition), thus it qualiﬁes for the tractable classes
identiﬁed by Katz and Domshlak (2008b).
The example’s causal graph is a chain, and
thus in particular a polytree with bounded indegree, corresponding to the tractable class
identiﬁed by Brafman and Domshlak (2003) except that, there, variables are restricted to
be binary (domain size 2). It is an open question whether plan existence with chain causal
graphs and domain size 3 is tractable; the strongest known result is that it is NP-hard for
domain size 5 (Gim´enez & Jonsson, 2009b).21 Similarly, the example ﬁts the prerequisites
stated by Katz and Domshlak (2008a) except that these are for binary variables only; it
is an open question whether local minima exist in the tractable classes identiﬁed there.
Finally, the example, and a suitable scaling extension, obviously qualiﬁes for two theorems
stated by Chen and Gimenez (2010). Their Theorem 3.1 (more precisely, the ﬁrst part of
that theorem) requires only a constant bound on the size of the connected components in
the undirected graph induced by the causal graph. The ﬁrst part of their Theorem 4.1
requires a constant bound on the size of the strongly connected components in the causal
graph, and pertains to a notion of “reversible” tasks requiring that we can always go back
to the initial state.
Next, consider the line of works restricting not the causal graph but the DTGs of the
task (B¨ackstr¨om & Klein, 1991; B¨ackstr¨om & Nebel, 1995; Jonsson & B¨ackstr¨om, 1998).
The simplest class identiﬁed here, contained in all other classes, is SAS+-PUBS where each
fact is achieved by at most one operator (“post-unique”, “P”), all operators are unary
(“U”), all variables are binary (“B”), and all variables have at most one value required in
the condition of a transition on any other variable (“single-valued”, “S”). Now, Example 2
in Appendix A.4 shows a local minimum in an example that has the U and S properties.
The example has two variables, x and y, and the local minimum arises because a cyclic
dependency prevents y from attaining its goal value dn via the shortest path as taken by
an optimal relaxed plan. If we remove all but two values from the domain of y, and remove
the alternative way of reaching dn,22 then the example still contains a local minimum and
also has the P and B properties. We remark that the modiﬁed example is unsolvable. It
remains an open question whether solvable SAS+-PUBS tasks with local minima exist; more
generally, this question is open even for the larger SAS+-PUS class, and for the (yet larger)
SAS+-IAO class identiﬁed by Jonsson and B¨ackstr¨om (1998).
Another open question is whether the “3S” class of Jonsson and B¨ackstr¨om (1995)
contains local minima. The class works on binary variables only; it requires unary operators
and acyclic causal graphs, however it allows facts to be “splitting” instead of reversible. If
p is splitting then, intuitively, the task can be decomposed into three independent sub-
tasks with respect to p; it is an open question whether local minima can be constructed
21. Although, of course, it is clear that, if the DTGs are strongly connected as in our case, then deciding
plan existence is tractable no matter what the domain size is.
22. This modiﬁcation is given in detail below the example in Appendix A.4.
190

Analyzing Search Topology Without Running Any Search
while satisfying this property. Disallowing the “splitting” option in 3S, we obtain the single
“positive” case, where a known tractable class does not contain any local minima. This
class corresponds to our basic result – acyclic causal graphs and invertible transitions –
except that the variables are restricted to be binary. Williams and Nayak (1997) mention
restrictions (but do not make formal claims regarding tractability) corresponding exactly
to our basic result except that they allow irreversible “repair” actions. The latter actions
are deﬁned relative to a specialized formal framework for control systems, but in spirit they
are similar to what we term “transitions with self-irrelevant deletes” herein.
Finally, it is easy to see that, of Bylander’s (1994) three tractability criteria, those two
allowing several eﬀects do not imply the absence of local minima. For his third criterion,
restricting action eﬀects to a single literal and preconditions to positive literals (but allowing
negative goals), we leave it as an open question whether or not local minima exist. We
remark that this criterion does not apply in any benchmark we are aware of.
To close this section, while we certainly do not wish to claim the identiﬁcation of
tractable classes to be a contribution of our work, we note that the scope of Theorem 4 –
which is a tractable class, cf. the above – is not covered by the known tractable classes.23
The tractable cases identiﬁed by Bylander (1994) obviously do not cover any of Logistics,
Miconic-STRIPS, Movie, and Simple-TSP. Many causal graph based tractability results
require unary operators (Jonsson & B¨ackstr¨om, 1995; Domshlak & Dinitz, 2001; Braf-
man & Domshlak, 2003; Helmert, 2004, 2006; Katz & Domshlak, 2008a, 2008b; Jonsson,
2009; Gim´enez & Jonsson, 2008, 2009a), which does not cover Miconic-STRIPS, Movie,
and Simple-TSP. In the work of Chen and Gimenez (2010), Theorem 4.1 requires re-
versibility which is not given in either of Movie, Miconic-STRIPS, or Simple-TSP, and
Theorem 3.1 requires a constant bound on the size of the connected components in the
undirected graph induced by the causal graph, which is given in none of Logistics, Miconic-
STRIPS, and Simple-TSP. Other known tractability results make very diﬀerent restrictions
on the DTGs (B¨ackstr¨om & Klein, 1991; B¨ackstr¨om & Nebel, 1995; Jonsson & B¨ackstr¨om,
1998). Even the most general tractable class identiﬁed there, SAS+-IAO, covers none of
Miconic-STRIPS, Logistics, and Simple-TSP (because vehicle variables are not “acyclic
with respect to requestable values”), and neither does it cover Movie (because rewinding a
movie is neither unary nor “irreplaceable”: it has a side eﬀect un-setting the counter, while
not breaking the DTG of the counter into two disjoint components).
As far as coverage of the benchmarks goes, the strongest competitor of Theorem 4 are
Haslum’s (2007) simpliﬁcation techniques.
These iteratively remove variables where all
paths relevant for attaining required conditions are “free”, i.e., can be traversed using tran-
sitions that have neither conditions nor side eﬀects. Haslum’s Theorem 1 states that such
removal can be done without jeopardizing solution existence, i.e., a plan for the original
task can be reconstructed easily from a plan for the simpliﬁed task. In particular, if the
task is “solved” – simpliﬁed completely, to the empty task – then a plan can be constructed
in polynomial time. Haslum combines this basic technique with a number of domain refor-
mulation techniques, e.g., replacing action sequences by macros under certain conditions.
The choice which combination of such techniques to apply is not fully automated, and parts
23. This is not true of our basic result, which as just explained is essentially covered by the works of Jonsson
and B¨ackstr¨om (1995) and Williams and Nayak (1997). Formally, its prerequisites imply those of (the
ﬁrst part of) Theorem 4.1 in the work of Chen and Gimenez (2010), namely, the postulated bound is 1.
191

Hoffmann
of these techniques are not fully described, making a comparison to Theorem 4 diﬃcult.
Haslum reports his techniques to solve tasks from Logistics, Miconic-STRIPS, and Movie,
plus Gripper and Satellite. Haslum does not experiment with Simple-TSP. His Theorem 1,
in its stated form, does not solve Simple-TSP, because there the transitions of the root
variable have side eﬀects (with irrelevant deletes). Extending the theorem to cover such
irrelevant deletes should be straightforward. A more subtle weakness of Haslum’s Theo-
rem 1 relative to our Theorem 4 pertains to reaching required values from externally caused
values. Haslum requires these moves to be free, whereas, in the deﬁnition of recoverable
side eﬀect deletes, Theorem 4 allows the recovering operators to aﬀect several variables and
to take their precondition from the prevails and eﬀects of o0.
10. Conclusion
We identiﬁed a connection between causal graphs and h+, and devised a tool allowing to
analyze search space topology without actually running any search. The tool is not yet
an “automatic Hoﬀmann”, but its analysis quality is impressive even when compared to
unlimited search probing.
At a very generic level, a conclusion of this work is that, sometimes, it is possible to
automatically infer topological properties of a heuristic function. An interesting question
for future work is whether this can also be done for heuristics other than h+ (cf. also the
comments regarding causal graph research below). Methodologically, it is noteworthy that
the analysis is based on syntactic restrictions on the problem description, which has tradi-
tionally been used to identify tractable fragments (of planning and other computationally
hard problems). The present work showcases that very similar techniques can apply to the
analysis of the search spaces of general problem solvers.
A main open question is whether global analysis can more tightly approximate the scope
of Theorem 2. As indicated, a good starting point appears to be trying to include, in a gDG
for operator o0, only variable dependencies induced by operators o that may actually precede
o0 in an optimal relaxed plan. An approach automatically recognizing such operators could
possibly be developed along the lines of Hoﬀmann and Nebel (2001b), or using a simpliﬁed
version of the aforementioned “fact generation tree” analysis technique (Hoﬀmann, 2005).
Additionally, it would be great to recognize situations in which harmful side eﬀects of o0
– like making the hand non-empty if we pick up a ball in Gripper – will necessarily be
recovered inside the relaxed plan. Possibly, such analysis could be based on a variant of
action landmarks (Hoﬀmann, Porteous, & Sebastia, 2004; Karpas & Domshlak, 2009).
Another interesting line of research is to start from results given for individual states s
by local analysis, then extract the reasons for success on s, and generalize those reasons to
determine a generic property under which success is guaranteed. Taken to the extreme, it
might be possible to automatically identify domain sub-classes, i.e., particular combinations
of initial state and goal state, in which the absence of local minima is proved.
This work highlights two new aspects of causal graph research. First, it shows that, in
certain situations, one can “localize” the causal graph analysis, and consider only the causal
graph fragment relevant for solving a particular state. Second, one can use causal graphs
for constructing paths not to the global goal, but to a state where the value of a heuristic h
is decreased. The former enables the analysis to succeed in tasks whose causal graphs are
192

Analyzing Search Topology Without Running Any Search
otherwise arbitrarily complex, and thus has the potential to greatly broaden the scope of
applicability. The latter is not necessarily limited to only h+ – as a simple example, it is
obvious that similar constructions can be made for the trivial heuristic counting the number
of unsatisﬁed goals – and thus opens up a completely new avenue of causal graph research.
Another possibility is planner performance prediction, along the lines of Roberts and
Howe (2009). Our experimental results indicate that TorchLight’s problem features, and
also those of search probing, are highly informative. This has the potential to signiﬁcantly
improve the results of Roberts and Howe for unseen domains – they currently use only very
simple features, like counts of predicates and action schemes, that hardly capture a domain-
independent structure relevant to planner performance. Like limited search probing (SP1s),
TorchLight generates its features without jeopardizing runtime, thus enabling automatic
planner conﬁguration. Unlike for search probing, this may even work on-line during search:
a single relaxed plan can already deliver interesting information. For example, one might
make the search more or less greedy – choosing a diﬀerent search strategy, switching helpful
actions on or oﬀ, etc. – depending on the outcome of checking Theorem 2.
As mentioned in Section 9, a direction worth trying is to use local analysis for generating
macro-actions. In domains with high success rate, it seems likely that the macro-actions
would lead to the goal with no search at all. It is a priori not clear, though, whether such
an approach would signiﬁcantly strengthen, at least in the present benchmarks, existing
techniques for executing (parts of) a relaxed plan (e.g., Vidal, 2004).
One could use TorchLight’s diagnosis facility as the basis of an abstraction technique
for deriving search guidance, much as is currently done with other relaxation/abstraction
techniques. The diagnosis can pin-point which operator eﬀects are causing problems for
search. If we remove enough harmful eﬀects to end up with a task to which Theorem 4
applies, then the abstracted problem is tractable. For example, in transportation domains,
this process could abstract away the fuel consumption. If we do not abstract that much,
then the information provided may still outweigh the eﬀort for abstract planning, i.e., for
using an actual planner inside the heuristic function. For example, in Grid the abstract task
could be a problem variant allowing to carry several keys at once. One could also focus the
construction of diﬀerent heuristics – not based on ignoring deletes – on the harmful eﬀects.
Finally, an interesting research line is domain reformulation.
As is well known, the
domain formulation can make a huge diﬀerence for planner performance. However, it is
very diﬃcult to choose a “good” formulation, for a given planner. This is a black art even if
the reformulation is done by the developer of the planner in question. The lack of guidance is
one of the main open problems identiﬁed by Haslum (2007) for his automatic reformulation
approach. The most frequent question the author has been asked by non-expert users is
how to model a domain so that FF can handle it more easily.
TorchLight’s diagnosis facility, pin-pointing problematic eﬀects, might be instrumental
for addressing these diﬃculties. For the case where the reformulation is done by a computer,
one possibility to use the analysis outcome could be to produce macro-actions “hiding”
within them the operators having harmful eﬀects.
Another possibility could be to pre-
compose variable subsets touched by the harmful eﬀects.
For the case where the reformulation is done by a human user, the sky is the limit.
To name just one example, the local minima in Satellite could be removed by allowing
to switch on an instrument only when pointing in a direction where that instrument can
193

Hoffmann
be calibrated.
More generally, note that end-user PDDL modeling – writing of PDDL
by a non-expert user wanting to solve her problem using oﬀ-the-shelf planners – is quite
diﬀerent from the PDDL modeling that planning experts do when developing benchmarks.
For example, if an expert models a transportation benchmark with fuel consumption, then
it may seem quite pointless for TorchLight to determine that fuel consumption will hurt
planner performance. Indeed this may be the reason why the fuel consumption was included
in the ﬁrst place. By contrast, for an end-user (a) this information may come as a surprise,
and (b) the user may actually choose to omit fuel consumption because this may yield a
better point in the trade-oﬀbetween planner performance and plan usability. Generally
speaking, such an approach could give the user guidance in designing a natural hierarchy
of increasingly detailed – and increasingly problematic – domain formulations. This could
help making planning technology more accessible, and thus contribute to a challenge that
should be taken much more seriously by the planning community.
