Noname manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)
Geometry of Interest (GOI): Spatio-Temporal Destination
Extraction and Partitioning in GPS Trajectory Data
Seyed Morteza Mousavi · Aaron Harwood · Shanika Karunasekera ·
Mojtaba Maghrebi
Received: date / Accepted: date
Abstract Nowadays large amounts of GPS trajectory
data is being continuously collected by GPS-enabled
devices such as vehicles navigation systems and mobile
phones. GPS trajectory data is useful for applications
such as traﬃc management, location forecasting, and
itinerary planning. Such applications often need to ex-
tract the time-stamped Sequence of Visited Locations
(SVLs) of the mobile objects. The nearest neighbor
query (NNQ) is the most applied method for labeling
the visited locations based on the IDs of the POIs in
the process of SVL generation. NNQ in some scenar-
ios is not accurate enough. To improve the quality of
the extracted SVLs, instead of using NNQ, we label the
visited locations as the IDs of the POIs which geometri-
cally intersect with the GPS observations. Intersection
operator requires the accurate geometry of the points
of interest which we refer to them as the Geometries
NICTA VRL, Department of Computing and Information
Systems, The University of Melbourne, Australia
Tel.: +61-405967448

Department
of
Computing
and
Information
Systems,
The University of Melbourne, Australia
Tel.: +61-383441351

Department
of
Computing
and
Information
Systems,
The University of Melbourne, Australia
Tel.: +61-383441351

School of Civil and Environmental Engineering, UNSW,
Australia
Tel.: +61-383441351

of Interest (GOIs). In some application domains (e.g.
movement trajectories of animals), adequate informa-
tion about the POIs and their GOIs may not be avail-
able a priori, or they may not be publicly accessible and,
therefore, they need to be derived from GPS trajectory
data. In this paper we propose a novel method for es-
timating the POIs and their GOIs, which consists of
three phases: (i) extracting the geometries of the stay
regions; (ii) constructing the geometry of destination
regions based on the extracted stay regions; and (iii)
constructing the GOIs based on the geometries of the
destination regions. Using the geometric similarity to
known GOIs as the major evaluation criterion, the ex-
periments we performed using long-term GPS trajec-
tory data show that our method outperforms the exist-
ing approaches.
Keywords Trajectory Data, Spatio-Temporal Par-
titioning, Geometry of Interest, Time-Value, Time-
Weighted Centroid, Destination Extraction
1 Introduction
In recent years, GPS trajectory data has become abun-
dant due to the many GPS enabled devices used on a
daily basis. Mining these GPS trajectories for gather-
ing useful information for applications has received a
growing amount of attention in the recent literature. In
this ﬁeld, researchers have tried to derive knowledge for
solving practical problems (e.g. traﬃc and transporta-
tion management systems (Min and Wynter, 2011), an-
imal migration and movement monitoring (Handcock
et al, 2009), location prediction (Gid´ofalvi and Dong,
2012), transportation mode estimation (Zheng et al,
2010), and location-based social networks (Zheng et al,
2012)).
arXiv:1603.04110v2  [cs.AI]  16 May 2016

2
Seyed Morteza Mousavi et al.
The applications dealing with data analysis on tra-
jectory data often need to have access to information
about the signiﬁcant places which a mobile object fre-
quently travels and stay. These signiﬁcant places are
referred to as the points of interest (POIs). The loca-
tions of the POIs are often used in projecting the trajec-
tory of a mobile object into a meaningful time-stamped
Sequence of Visited Locations (SVL). The constructed
sequences are used in various machine learning applica-
tions dealing with trajectory data (Yan et al, 2011).
Therefore, the quality and accuracy of the sequence
have very signiﬁcant impact on the performance of the
machine learning applications.
In the process of constructing the SVL of a tra-
jectory, the applications often use Nearest Neighbor
Queries (NNQ) to label each GPS observation with the
ID of a POI. Fig. 1(a) presents an overview of the SVL
construction process. Given a GPS trajectory (depicted
with green arrows), and a set of destinations showed as
polygons, the NNQ based labeling method labels each
GPS observation (depicted in red points) with the ID
of the nearest POI (centroid of the destination poly-
gons) in chronological order. Although this process is
quite simple and eﬃcient, it has a few signiﬁcant limi-
tations which have a dramatic impact on the quality of
the generated time-stamped SVL.
As an example, consider the GPS point covered by
destination d3. The labeling process labels the destina-
tion with the ID of the nearest destination d4, while in
the real world, the GPS coordinate intersect with the
geometry of d3. Therefore, the resulting SVL for the
depicted trajectory using NNQ based labeling method
is d1 →d1 →d1 →d2 →d3 →d4. This scenario fre-
quently happens especially in environments with a high
number of POIs located near each other. The problem
has a dramatic impact of the quality of the constructed
SVLs.
One solution to the problem is to label each of the
GPS points with the ID of the POIs which intersect
with them instead of performing NNQ. Fig. 1(b), shows
the estimated geometry of each of the POIs which we re-
fer to them as the Geometries of Interest (GOIs). More-
over, the GOIs must not be overlapping. Otherwise, the
intersection operator would not be able to label a GPS
point intersecting with more than one GOI. This so-
lution requires having access to the real world GOIs
stored in a spatial database.
The information about the GOIs might be publicly
available in the spatial databases (e.g. geometries of
the famous places in a city). However, in applications
such as those processing the motion patterns of animals
or the movement patterns of the troops in a battleﬁeld,
(a)
Nearest
Neighbor
Based
(b) GOI Based
Fig. 1 Labling Approaches in the Process of Generating the
Sequence of Visited Locations (SVL)
GOIs are not available and are required to be extracted
from the trajectory data.
In this paper, we address the problem of extracting
the GOIs of a mobile object, without using any infor-
mation other than the GPS trajectory of the mobile
object. We propose a method to partition the trajec-
tory area, which is deﬁned by the minimum bounding
rectangle (MBR) of the trajectory, into a grid contain-
ing the GOIs of the moving object. Using the extracted
GOIs and the partitioned trajectory area, we can ex-
tract the trajectory SVL by only using intersection ge-
ometric operator. The quality and accuracy of the SVL
highly depend on the accuracy of the estimated GOIs.
Aiming for that, we extend the spatio-temporal par-
titioning techniques proposed in (Ye et al, 2009; Har-
iharan and Toyama, 2004). The partitioning methods
have three phases. Firstly, they extract the stay re-
gions within which a moving object has stayed for a
time duration greater or equal than a predeﬁned mini-
mum time threshold and within a predeﬁned Euclidean
vicinity distance. Secondly, they cluster the resulting
stay points (the centroids of the stay regions) to ex-
tract the destinations of the moving objects. Thirdly,
they implicitly partition the trajectory area based on
the coordinates of the centroids of the extracted des-
tinations by using NNQ in the process of labeling the
GPS points with the identiﬁcations of the POIs.
Our proposed method improves the baselines, in
each of the three phases. Given a GPS trajectory
(Fig. 2(a)), in the stay extraction phase, we propose
a novel clustering method for constructing the stay re-
gions (Fig. 2(b)). In the destination construction phase,
we propose a geometry based hierarchical agglomera-

Geometry of Interest (GOI): Spatio-Temporal Destination Extraction and Partitioning in GPS Trajectory Data
3
(a) GPS Trajectory
(b) Extracted Stay Regions
(First Phase)
(c) Extracted
Destination
Regions (Second Phase)
(d) Final Partitioned Area
(Third Phase)
Fig. 2 The Results of the Spatio-Temporal Partitioning Phases.
tive clustering method for clustering (merging) the stay
regions based on a geometric similarity measure and
construct the geometries of the destinations (Fig. 2(c)).
In the third phase, we extract the GOIs based on the
geometries of the destinations and include them in the
ﬁnal grid which is composed of the GOIs and the cells
with ﬁxed sizes (Fig. 2(d)).
The performance of our approach is evaluated based
on comparing the similarity of the derived GOIs from
our approach to know geometries of the POIs. Our ex-
perimental results performed on a long-term GPS tra-
jectories show that, in the stay extraction phase, our
method outperforms the existing methods by making
the higher number of valid stay regions with geometries
more related to the real world POIs. In the destination
extraction phase, the performance and the accuracy of
our method are considerably higher than the baseline
methods, considering the geometric similarity between
the geometries of the extracted destination to the real
world POIs. Moreover, our method is able to partition
the trajectory area based on the extracted destinations
resulting in a grid which guarantees the characteristics
of a validly partitioned area. Using the resulting grid,
we can easily generate the SVL of the mobile object by
using intersection geometric operator instead of using
the nearest neighbor queries or Voronoi diagrams (Au-
renhammer, 1991).
1.1 Contributions
The main contributions of this research can be summa-
rized as follows:
• Proposing a novel spatio-temporal stay extraction
method to extract the stay regions of a mobile ob-
ject by incorporating the introduces concepts of
time-value and time-weighted centroid.
• Introducing a novel agglomerative hierarchical clus-
tering method to merge the stay regions of a mobile
object based on their geometries and constructing
the geometries of the destinations of the mobile ob-
ject.
• Developing a spatio-temporal partitioning method
to partition the trajectory area of a mobile object
into a grid with inhomogeneous cells containing the
GOIs of the mobile object.
1.2 Paper Organisation
The remaining part of the paper proceeds as follows: In
section 2, the related works focused on the partitioning
of the trajectory area of mobile objects are discussed.
In section 3, our problem is preliminarily deﬁned. We
introduce the concepts of time-value and time-weighted
centroid in a GPS trajectory in section 4. In section 5.1,
we present our proposed stay region extraction method
and compare it with the related works. In section 5.2,
a novel geometric similarity based agglomerative hi-
erarchical clustering method for merging the similar
stay regions and extracting the destination geometries
is discussed and compared with the related works. In
section 5.3, our partitioning method which constructs
a grid with inhomogeneous cells using the destination
geometries constructed in the previous phase is intro-
duced. In section 6, we analyze the computational com-
plexity of our method compared to the baselines. In

4
Seyed Morteza Mousavi et al.
section 7, the quality of our method compared to the
related works is evaluated compared to the previous
works. Finally, in section 8, the introduced method is
summarized, and the achieved results and the future
works are discussed.
2 Related Works
In recent years, various works have considered trajec-
tory data pre-processing, indexing, storage, and anal-
ysis (Zheng and Zhou, 2011). These trajectories could
be collected by social networks (Cho et al, 2011), sen-
sor networks (Ji and Zha, 2004), RFIDs (Kourogi et al,
2006), WI-FI (Song et al, 2006), simulators (Mousavi
et al, 2007), internet of things (Macagnano et al, 2014),
and cellular networks (Si et al, 2010). Among all of
these kinds of trajectories, our work is focused on the
trajectories collected by GPS sensors. GPS trajectories
have been used in various research works in diﬀerent ap-
plications (Zheng and Zhou, 2011), however, our work
is a pre-processing prerequisite for all of the applica-
tions which attempt to extract the GOIs of the mobile
objects.
2.1 Partitioning Approaches
In the related works aiming to partition the trajec-
tory area of a mobile object, ﬁve approaches have been
taken. Following, we discuss the approaches and their
capabilities and limitations.
2.1.1 Grid with homogeneous cells
The ﬁrst approach is to partition the trajectory area
into a homogeneous grid to represent the regions of in-
terest (e.g. (Xue et al, 2013)). The shape of the cells
is often considered as triangular, square, rectangular,
or hexagonal polygons. The main drawback of this ap-
proach is the degree of granularity of the cell. Coarse
granularity leads to each of the grid cells cover a wide
area which might include various POIs. The ﬁne gran-
ularity results in the geometry of one POI to lie into
diﬀerent cells. These problems have signiﬁcant draw-
backs on the quality of the SVL extracted based on
such grids.
2.1.2 Coverage Area Based
The second approach deﬁnes the POIs as the area
being covered by a wireless accesspoint (Song et al,
2006) in wireless networks or the area covered by base
transceiver stations (BTS) of a cellular network (Si
et al, 2010). The geometries of the POIs are constructed
using circular area or hexagonal polygons around the
access points or the BTS. The main problem with this
approach is that estimating a ﬁxed geometry for the
area covered by a wireless access point or a BTS is not
straight forward due to various reasons such as signal
power, noise, and obstacles, particularly in the urban
areas. Also, the problems, above-mentioned, related to
the granularity of the grid cells remains. For example,
the covered area by a BTS in a cellular network might
cover a very wide area which includes various POIs, or
a the covered area of an access point might not cover
the whole area of a POI (covered by more than one
access points).
2.1.3 Spatial Clustering Based
The third approach is to construct the geometries of
the POIs based on the GPS track points in the tra-
jectory datasets using simple spatial clustering meth-
ods without considering the temporal aspects of the
GPS trajectories. Spatial clustering methods perform
very similar to the classic clustering schemes such as
KMeans (Ashbrook and Starner, 2003), Gaussian mix-
ture model (GMM) (Banﬁeld and Raftery, 1993), and
DBSCAN (Zhou et al, 2004). These methods simply
cluster the GPS points using measures such as the dis-
tance between GPS points or density connectivity in
a two-dimensional Cartesian space, without taking the
third dimension time into consideration, and partition
the trajectory area based on the destination geometries
constructed based on that clusters.
Another class of research works which can be catego-
rized into spatial clustering based approach are research
works (Scellato et al, 2011; Li et al, 2011) which have
used frequency map based spatial clustering methods
for extracting signiﬁcant places in the trajectory area.
They partition the area into the very ﬁne grid with equi-
sized cells and assign a weight to each cell around each
GPS point based on the duration of the GPS staying
at that point. This weight assigned to each cell is com-
puted based on the assumption that the real position of
a mobile object has a normal distribution with standard
deviation σ = 10m (Scellato et al, 2011). Then they
generate a frequency map which contains peaks that
give information about the region of signiﬁcant places.
They consider regions that are above a predeﬁned visit
frequency threshold as POIs. The main problem in the
spatial clustering based partitioning approaches is the
inaccuracy in the number and the geometries of the ex-
tracted POIs. They merely consider the density of the
GPS track points in a neighborhood in the trajectory
area as an indicator of a signiﬁcant place or a POI. This

Geometry of Interest (GOI): Spatio-Temporal Destination Extraction and Partitioning in GPS Trajectory Data
5
assumption that the places which have more density of
GPS track points are more signiﬁcant for the user than
the places with less density is not always true. Con-
sider a mobile object often moves on a road network
between its POIs regularly and repetitively. Obviously,
during the journies between the POIs, there are some
places which are being frequently visited and, therefore,
have higher GPS track point density, while they are not
the mobile objects POIs. For example, the conjunctions
with traﬃc lights or the road segments with higher traf-
ﬁc loads often have a high density of GPS track points.
These two approaches consider these kinds of places as
POIs because they are not able to distinguish between
POIs (with high density) and the non-POI places with
nearly the same GPS point density.
2.1.4 Speed Based
The fourth partitioning approach is taken by incorpo-
rating the speed restrictions in ﬁnding the stop and
moves (E.g. (Palma et al, 2008; Bhattacharya et al,
2012)). This approach assumes the clusters with the
GPS track points with lower speed are more likely to
be stop points. This approach is not applicable in GPS
datasets where the GPS speed is not available, or the
speed is not easily computable (e.g. in trajectories with
low sampling rate or with large time gaps). Moreover,
there are some scenarios where deﬁning a threshold for
maximum speed is not straight forward. For example,
assume a mobile object carrying a GPS-enabled mobile
phone. During the daily traveling activities, he might
have diﬀerent transportation modes (e.g. walk, bike,
train, car, bus, etc.) (Zheng et al, 2010). In each of
the transportation modes the speed threshold should
be diﬀerent since the average walking speed is diﬀerent
to driving. Furthermore, even if we assume the same
transportation mode for the mobile object throughout
the trajectory (e.g. walk), places like shopping centers,
zoos, parks, campuses, and so many other POIs exist
where the mobile object stays in their geometry while
keeping moving (speed is greater than zero).
2.1.5 Spatio-Temporal Clustering Based
The ﬁfth approach (Ye et al, 2009; Xiao et al, 2010)
employes time restricted spatio-temporal clustering in
extracting the stay regions and the destinations. They
extract the stay regions based on predeﬁned spatio-
temporal restrictions. Then, they merge the stay re-
gions to construct the destinations.
They deﬁne a valid stay region (a vicinity distance
with radius ∆D ≤Dmax) within which the mobile ob-
ject has strayed (stopped or kept moving) for a time
span ∆T ≥Tmin, where Tmin, is a time span thresh-
old. The destinations which represent the POIs are ex-
tracted by clustering (merging) the stay centroid points
of the extracted stay regions using density-based clus-
tering methods such as OPTICS (Ye et al, 2009). This
approach is highly used in research works such as (Ye
et al, 2009; Xiao et al, 2010; Zheng et al, 2009, 2008;
Xiao et al, 2014) conducted in Microsoft Research Asia.
This approach eﬀectively incorporates the temporal as-
pects of the mobile object trajectory into extracting the
stay regions and as a result into the extracted destina-
tion regions. As a result, the places which the mobile
object stays for a considerable time are selected, and
the other places are ﬁltered although they might have
high point densities.
The research presented in (Hariharan and Toyama,
2004) has a similar approach in the extraction of the
stay regions with the diﬀerence that deﬁnes the time
and vicinity distance based on the diameter of the ex-
tracted stay regions. The destinations are extracted
based on the predeﬁned maximum diameter of the des-
tinations by merging the stay regions.
The ﬁfth approach extracts the most meaningful
and valid stay and destination regions because of their
speciﬁc spatio-temporal deﬁnition of a valid stay region.
Therefore, among all the works discussed above, in this
paper, we choose the works discussed in the ﬁfth ap-
proach as the baseline to compare the performance of
our proposed partitioning method.
3 Problem Deﬁnition
Deﬁnition 1 The trajectory of a moving object is a
sequence of time stamped GPS observations ( points),
T = {p1, p2, ..., pn}, where pi = (ti, xi, yi) indicates the
spatio-temporal data of the moving object at time ti.
The parameters ti, xi, and yi, are the time stamp and
(x, y) ∈R2 Cartesian plane of the moving object re-
spectively. in our GPS trajectories, ∀p ∈T ,
i, j =
1, 2, . . . ,
tp
i > tp
j
⇐⇒
i > j. There are no other
guarantees such as constant sampling rate.
Deﬁnition 2 The geometric similarity between a set
of real GOIs R = {r1, r2, ..., rn} and a set of estimated
GOIs G = {g1, g2, ..., gm} is deﬁned as:
GS(R, G) = 1
n
n
X
i
m
X
j
Area(ri ∩gj)
Area(ri ∪gj).
(1)
Given a GPS trajectory T , and a set of geome-
tries of the real POIs R = {r1, r2, ..., rn} covered
by the MBR of T , our objective is to propose the
best (optimal) partitioning method to partition the

6
Seyed Morteza Mousavi et al.
MBR of the trajectory, fo : T
→G which maxi-
mizes the geometric similarities between the real GOIs
R = {r1, r2, ..., rn} and their corresponding extracted
GOIs G = {g1, g2, ..., gm}.
fo = argmax
fi∈F GS(fi(T ), R),
(2)
where F = {f1, f2, ..., fk} is the set of diﬀerent par-
titioning methods, e.g., {diameter based, density based,
geometric similarity based}.
Subject to
✓∀gj and gk ∈G : if j ̸= k then Area(gj ∩gk) = 0,
✓∀pt ∈T , ∃gj ∈G | pt ∩gj ̸= Ø.
The ﬁrst constraint guarantees that the geometries
of extracted partitions are mutually disjoint. The sec-
ond constraint ensures that all the GPS points in the
trajectory can be assigned to one and only one parti-
tion.
4 Concepts of Time-Value and Time-Weighted
Centroid in Trajectory Data
In this section, we brieﬂy introduce the concepts of
time-value and time-weighted centroid which will be
used in the ﬁrst phase of our partitioning method to
improve the performance of the stay region extraction.
In the process of collecting GPS observations which
are often done by GPS devices installed on vehicles or
mobile phones, ideally, we would like to collect each
GPS observation with constant sampling rate. For ex-
ample, we would like to have one sample point ev-
ery 10 seconds or every one minute. However, due to
various reasons, it is not always applicable. GPS sen-
sors installed on mobile phones consume a considerable
amount of power. So people usually tend to keep their
GPS sensor oﬀ. This fact has a dramatic impact on the
quality of the collected GPS trajectories. Another rea-
son is poor GPS coverage in places such as urban envi-
ronments and particularly in indoor locations. Besides,
the process of GPS data collection is often terminated
by the user for long periods (e.g. in the car parks).
The time gap between two consecutive GPS obser-
vations can be short or considerably long. The long time
gaps often take place when a vehicle is parked at a car
park, or a mobile device is switched oﬀ. We consider
the time gap between two consecutive GPS points in a
trajectory as a signiﬁcant inﬂuencing factor.
Deﬁnition 3 For a GPS point pi in the trajectory T ,
we deﬁne the time-value as:
tvp
i = tp
i+1 −tp
i
i = 0, 1, ..., n.
(3)
where tp
i indicates the time stamp of point pi.
As an example, we can consider the simple problem
of computing the centroid of a set of GPS points to
address the eﬀectiveness of considering the time-value
of GPS points in trajectory data processing.
Deﬁnition 4 The centroid ci = (cx
i , cy
i ) of a set of
points PS = {pm, pm+1, ..., pn}, is often computed as:
cx
i =
Pn
i=m xp
i
|PS|
,
cy
i =
Pn
i=m yp
i
|PS|
(4)
where, xp
i and yp
i are the x and y coordinates of point
pi, and |PS| is the cardinality of the point set PS.
In Eq. 4, the values of all the GPS points are con-
sidered the same in computing the centroid. Contrary
to the previous works, we incorporate the time-value of
each GPS point tvp
i in computing the centroid resulting
in the time-weighted centroid of the set of GPS points.
Deﬁnition 5 The time-weighted centroid (twcx
i , twcy
i )
of a set of points PS = {pm, pm+1, ..., pn} is deﬁned as:
twcx
i =
Pn
i=m xp
i × tvp
i
Pn
i=m tvp
i × |PS|
twcy
i =
Pn
i=m yp
i × tvp
i
Pn
i=m tvp
i × |PS|
(5)
where, tvp
i is the time-value of point pi computed using
Eg. 3, and |PS| is the cardinality of the point set PS.
In Eq. 5, the time-value of each GPS point is con-
sidered as the weight or degree of signiﬁcance of each
point in computing the centroid. By this, we discrimi-
nate our GPS points based on the value of information
they give us about the location of the mobile object. By
incorporating the time-value, the centroid will be more
biased to and closer to the locations where long term
stops have taken place.
5 Methodology
Our partitioning method has three phases. (i) Spatio-
temporal extraction of stay regions, (ii) Constructing
the destination regions based on the extracted stay
regions, (iii) Partitioning the MBR of the trajectory
based on the extracted destinations. Following, we dis-
cuss each phase of the method and compare them with
the related works in detail.
5.1 Spatio-Temporal Extraction of Stay Regions
Extraction of the stay regions of a mobile object is the
ﬁrst phase of our spatio-temporal partitioning method.
Aiming for that as the ﬁrst step We convert the GPS

Geometry of Interest (GOI): Spatio-Temporal Destination Extraction and Partitioning in GPS Trajectory Data
7
trajectory into a sequence of stays and moves. We deﬁne
a stay si as an event which has been taken place within
the trajectory period of a mobile object. The event has
happened in a geometric region or neighborhood called
a stay region. A stay region is an area in which the
mobile object spends some time ∆t ≥Tmin. During
this time, the mobile object can be either moving or
stopping provided that it does not pass the boundary
of the region. The boundary of the region is calculated
based on the roaming distance ∆d ≤Dmax which is the
maximum distance that a moving object can stray from
the centroid of the stay region. For example, if a vehicle
has stopped in a car park for 8 hours starting from 9
AM to 5 PM, the event is the visit to the car park, the
starting time of the event is 9 AM (arrival time) and the
ending time of the event is 5 PM (departure time). Each
stay has a set of GPS points (point set) which indicates
the GPS observations which were collected within the
stay period.
Deﬁnition 6 We deﬁne stay si, i = 1, 2, ...n as si =
(idi, gi, psi, ci, ati, dti), where idi, psi, gi, ci, ati, dti are
the identiﬁcation, geometry, point set, centroid, arrival
time and departure time of of si, respectively. psi is
a sub trajectory of the mobile object trajectory which is
deﬁned as a set of consecutive points {pm, pm+1, ..., pn},
where ∀k, m < k ≤n, Dist(ci, pk) ≤Dmax, and
Dist(ci, pn+1) > Dmax. The parameter ci referes to the
centroid of the points in psi and gi is the the convex
polygon of the point set psi.
The deﬁnition of a ∆d in our approach is diﬀerent to
the previous work (Hariharan and Toyama, 2004) and
(Ye et al, 2009). In (Hariharan and Toyama, 2004), ∆d
is deﬁned as the Euclidean diameter of the coordinates
of elements of a stay. This means that the diameter
(the longest Euclidean distance between two points in
the set) of a stay must not be greater than ∆d. They
iteratively add a point to the sub-trajectory pi and re-
compute the diameter of pi. If the diameter, remains
less than Dmax after adding the new point, they keep
the point in pi. Otherwise, they remove the point from
pi, store si, and start constructing a new stay. Ye et al.,
in (Ye et al, 2009) have taken the very ﬁrst chronolog-
ical point in each stay as the reference point and have
deﬁned ∆d as the Euclidian distance between each new
point and the reference point. They do not refresh the
reference point coordinate when adding a new point to
the stay. While in our method, ∆d is deﬁned as the
Euclidian distance between the time-weighted centroid
of the stay (reference point) to the new point which is
being examined (line 11 in Alg. 1). In other words, we
use the time-weighted centroid of the point set in the
Algorithm 1: Time-Weighted Centroid Based
Stay Region Extraction (Our Method)
input : P (A set of GPS points), vicinity distance
threshold Dmax, time span threshold Tmin
output: A set of Stays S where
sk = (idk, gk, psk, ck, atk, dtk)
Data: Coordinate twc
1
∆d ←0, ∆t ←0, i ←0, j ←0, token ←0
2
foreach pi ∈P do
3
pi.tv ←ComputeTimeValue(pi)
4
end
5
while i < |P| do
6
psk.insert(pi)
7
twc ←TimeWeigtedCentroid(psk)
8
j ←i + 1
9
token ←0
10
while j < |P| do
11
∆d ←EucDistance(twc, pj)
12
if ∆d > Dmax then
13
∆t ←(tp
j + tvp
j ) −tp
i
14
if ∆t ≥Tmin then
15
idk ←k
16
gk ←
ComputeConvexHull(PS)
17
ck ←GeometryCentroid(gk)
18
atk ←tp
i
19
dtk ←tp
j + tvp
j
20
sk = (idk, gk, psk, ck, atk, dtk)
21
S.insert(sk)
22
i ←j
23
token ←1
24
k ←k + 1
25
break
26
end
27
end
28
psk.insert(pj)
29
twc ←TimeWeightedCentroid(psk)
30
j ←j + 1
31
end
32
if token ̸= 1 then
33
i ←i + 1
34
end
35
end
36
return S
current stay as the reference points instead of the very
ﬁrst point of the stay.
The calculation of the parameter ∆t in our method
is diﬀerent to the previous works as well. In the previ-
ous works, the parameter is deﬁned as ∆t ←(tp
j) −tp
i ,
which means the time diﬀerence between the ﬁrst and
the last GPS observation in the stay. In our method we
incorporate the time-value of the last point (tvp
j ) and
deﬁne the ∆t as: ∆t ←(tp
j + tvp
j ) −tp
i . This means that
we consider the time gap between the last point and its
successor point in the trajectory to compute ∆t.
In our method (presented in Alg. 1), having a cur-
rent stay, for each new GPS observation in the trajec-
tory, if the condition ∆d > Dmax and ∆t > Tmin, are

8
Seyed Morteza Mousavi et al.
true, we close the current stay, store it, and make a
new stay with the GPS observation as the ﬁrst point
in its point set. Otherwise, we add the new GPS obser-
vation to the point set of the current stay, update the
time-weighted centroid of the current stay, and keep
examining the next points in the trajectory. In other
words by adding each point to the stay, we refresh the
coordinate of the reference point as the time-weighted
centroid of the points of the current stay. We assign a
unique numeric identiﬁcation idi to each stay si. The
parameter ati indicates the arrival time of stay si which
is the time that the moving object has arrived in the
region (gi). Similarly, dti is the departure time of stay
si.
To calculate the geometry of the region gi within
which the stay si has taken place, we compute the con-
vex hull of the set of points psi = {p1, p2, ..., pn}. The
convex hull of a set of points is the smallest polygon
that contains all of the points (Andrew, 1979). Then,
we add a predeﬁned geometric buﬀer around the con-
vex hull polygon to compensate for the GPS noise. The
width of the buﬀer is set to 10 meters (Navstar, 2008).
Fig. 3(b) shows the extracted stay regions based on the
trajectory shown in Fig. 3(a).
5.2 From Stay Regions to Destination Regions
Assume a moving object visits a certain place every day
(e.g. home). If we extract every stay throughout a tra-
jectory period with a long time duration, e.g., one year
or more, we would have at least 365 extracted stays
with approximately the same geometry. At this stage,
we need to merge the duplicated stays which represent
the same destination region (e.g. car park). Aiming for
that, we detect the stays that have approximately the
same geometry and merge (cluster) them together re-
sulting in a set of destinations with unique geometries
and Identiﬁcation.
In related works, there are two major schemes for
merging the stay regions. They cluster the stay points
(the centroids of the GPS points stored in each stay)
such that the stay points that have close distance are
clustered into the same destination. Ye et al. in (Ye
et al, 2009), have used the density of neighborhood of
stay points in a group as a measure of similarity in
the clustering process. In other words, the stay points
which have more dense neighbors (stay points with
many nearby neighbors closely packed together) make
a cluster (destination) and stay points that lie alone
in low-density regions are considered as outliers. The
result of running OPTICS (Ankerst et al, 1999) clus-
tering algorithm on the set of stay points is a set of
destinations (each destination is a set of stay points).
One major problem of density-based clustering
methods such as OPTICS is that it is required to deﬁne
two parameters neighborhood distance ϵ eps (neighbor-
hood distance) and the (minPts) (minimum number
of points required to form a dense region). The perfor-
mance and output of the methods are strongly sensi-
tive to the values chosen for these two parameters. For
instance, in our application, if we choose a relatively
big value for parameter (minPts), the density-based
clustering methods will consider lots of stay points as
noise or outliers in the clustering and eliminate them
because they have the lower density of neighbors than
(minPts).
Hariharan et al., in (Hariharan and Toyama, 2004)
have used a clustering method which ﬁnds each pair
of stay points which have maximum similarity to each
other and merge them together iteratively. They have
deﬁned a similarity criterion which indicates if the di-
ameter of the resulting region of merging two stay
points is less than or equal to a given threshold Dmin,
these two stay points will be merged. This process con-
tinues until all similar stay points are merged.
In our method, we incorporate the geometries the
stay regions in extracting the destinations instead of
only considering the density or distance of the stay
points. In the process of clustering, we deﬁne a crite-
rion that helps us control our merging process in our
hierarchical clustering method.
Alg. 2 presents the pseudo-code of our method. We
use R-Tree indexing method to index the geometry of
each stay gi ∈S. Subsequently, at each step, we send
a query to the R-Tree to ﬁnd only the clusters which
their geometry intersects with the current stay geome-
try. The result is a list of stays (interList). Then, we
compute the most similar stay geometry in interList
to our current stay region (gi). After ﬁnding the sim-
ilarity of all pairs in S, if JSimmax = 0, this means
that there is no intersecting pair of stay regions in S.
If JSimmax > 0, then there is still, at least, a pair of
interesting stay regions in S. smaxIndex represents the
stay region that has the highest similarity to our current
stay si in the second loop in Alg. 2. To decide whether
we need to merge the current stay si and smaxIndex,
we compare their similarity coeﬃcient (JSimmax) with
Jmin. If (JSimmax > Jmin), we merge the two stays by
adding all the GPS points in stay smaxIndex to si and
computing the new region geometry of our current stay
gi as the geometric union of two geometries.
After merging stay region pairs, we compute the
visit frequency of the resulting stay region as the sum of
visit frequency of the current stay fi and the most simi-
lar stay region smaxIndex. We consider the frequency of
visits to each destination as a useful criterion for select-

Geometry of Interest (GOI): Spatio-Temporal Destination Extraction and Partitioning in GPS Trajectory Data
9
(a) GPS Trajectory
(b) Stay Regions
(c) Jmin = 0
(d) Jmin = 0.10
(e) Jmin = 0.20
Fig. 3 Results of the Destination Extraction Phase With Diﬀerent Values of Jmin.
ing the signiﬁcant destinations (POIs). As a result, we
can decide whether we consider a cluster of stay regions
(destination) as a POI or consider it as a trivial cluster
(noise). The last loop in Alg. 2 removes the destina-
tions which have been visited with the frequency less
than Fmin.
We deﬁne the similarity of two geometries (gi, gj) as
the measure of similarity of two stay regions as follows:
GS(gi, gj) = Area(gi ∩gj)
Area(gi ∪gj).
(6)
Fig 3 shows the destinations extracted from the a
set of stay regions using diﬀerent values for parameter
Jmin. The higher value of Jmin leads to higher num-
ber of overlapping destination regions being extracted.
Interestingly, if we set Jmin = 1, we will have exactly
all the stay regions extracted as destination regions be-
cause the probability that two stay regions have identi-
cal convex hulls (and accordingly JSim = 1) is approx-
imately zero.
5.3 From Destination Regions to Geometries of
Interest (GOIs)
Having extracted the destination regions and their esti-
mated geometries, as the ﬁnal phase of our partitioning
method, based on the geometries of the destination re-
gions, we partition our trajectory area into a grid area
with inhomogeneous cells such that both characteris-
tics of a valid partitioning (discussed in section 3) are
guaranteed.
Firstly, we make a grid called micro-grid MG with
equi-sized rectangular shaped cells with very ﬁne granu-
larity. The grid covers the area minimum bounding rect-
angle (MBR) of our GPS trajectory T . Also we make a
grid composed of geometries of all destination regions.
We refer to this grid as destination-grid (DG). Then
we convert the destination-grid (DG) to a grid called
GOI-Grid (GG) with mutualy disjoint cells. Aiming for
that, for each cell mi ∈MG, we ﬁnd the cell in dj ∈DG
which maximizes the geometric similarity (Eq. 6) with
mi.
dj ∈DG = argmax
dj GS(ci, dj).
We also deﬁned and examined an alternative sim-
ilarity metric as the Euclidean distance between the
centroid of the polygon of cell i in micro-grid (cm
i ) to
the centroid of the polygon of cell j in destination-grid
(cd
j). We call this similarity as polygon centroid simi-
larity (PCS).
PCS(mi, dj) =
1
EucDistance(cm
i , cd
j).
Next, we label mi ∈MG as a cell that represents a
tiny part of the destination dj in the destination-grid.
We continue this process until there are no remaining
unlabeled cells in MG which have an intersection with
any of the cells in DG. By merging the geometries of
all the cells in MG labeled with ID of each cell in DG,
we make the GOI-Grid (depicted in Fig 4(d)).
Since we ﬁnd the most similar destination for each
cell mi ∈MG and label it to be a part of the geome-
try of only one destination, all GOIs in the GOI-Grid
are mutually disjoint, the ﬁrst condition of a valid spa-
tial partition is guaranteed. However, the grid does not
cover all of the area of the MBR of the trajectory.
This means that there might be a GPS observation
that does not lie in the geometry of one of the GOI-
Grid cells. To tackle this problem, we insert all the cells
mi ∈MG, which were not already been labeled, into
the GOI-Grid. The resulting grid in referred to as ﬁnal-
grid (Fig. 4(e)) which is composed of the GOIs of the

10
Seyed Morteza Mousavi et al.
(a) Micro-Grid
(b) Destination-Grid
(c) GOI-Grid (PCS)
(d) GOI-Grid (GS)
(e) Final-Grid (GS)
Fig. 4 Partitioning Results Using Two Geometric Similarity Metrics.
mobile object, and the tiny cells with unique IDs. As a
result, all of the area of the MBR of the trajectory T
are covered by either a GOI or a tiny cell in ﬁnal-grid.
Fig. 4(d) and Fig. 4(c) show the performance of both
similarity metrics (GS and PCS) in the partitioning. As
is seen, the resulting GOI-Grid using geometric similar-
ity resembles the Destination-Grid much better because
the PCS based method is biased to the centroid of the
polygon and makes the shape of the resulting polygon
less similar to the corresponding cell in the destination-
grid.
6 Computational Complexity
In the stay extraction phase, in the worst case, the time
complexity of our method is O(n2) for n track points
in the trajectory. However, in practice, since the sum
of the track point of the extracted stays are consider-
ably fewer than n. Note that, the inner loop in Alg. 1
deals with computing the centroids of the stay regions
which depends on the number of the track points in
each stay. Since a large number of track points in the
trajectory are not clustered in the stays (due to restric-
tions of a valid stay), the sum of the track points of
the stays is much lower than n. Computing the diam-
eter of the stays in the work proposed by (Hariharan
and Toyama, 2004) is more complex than computing
the centroid in our method, since for computing the di-
ameter, we need to compute the distance of each point
to all of the other points in the cluster with the time
complexity of O(n2). Therefore, we can consider the
complexity of the method, in the worst case, O(n3) for
n track points in the trajectory. The time complexity of
the method proposed by (Ye et al, 2009) is O(n) which
is lower than our method since they do not refresh the
coordinate of the reference point while making the stay
region.
In the destination extraction phase, Zheng et al.,
in (Ye et al, 2009) have used OPTICS (Ankerst et al,
1999) clustering method. The time complexity of OP-
TICS algorithm is O(n2). The time complexity of the
hierarchical clustering method provided by Hariharan
et al. (Hariharan and Toyama, 2004) is O(n3) in the
worst case. The complexity of our method (Alg. 2)
in the worst case, is O(n3). We use R-Tree indexing
method to reduce the runtime of our method in ﬁnd-
ing the intersecting cells. The most costly part in our
method is ﬁnding the degree of similarity between two
geometries (Eq. 6).
In the partitioning phase, in the process of assign-
ing each of the cells in micro-grid to the cells in GOI-
Grid, in the worst case, the complexity of the method is
O(nm), where n is the number of cells in the MG and
m is the number of cells in the destination-grid. There-
fore, the granularity of MG has a signiﬁcant impact on
the runtime of our method. To increase the eﬃciency of
the method we use R-Tree indexing to index the cells
in the destination-grid.
7 Experimental Results
In this section, we analyze the performance of our pro-
posed method in comparison with the baselines. In our
evaluations, we use a dataset of GPS trajectories col-
lected in Anchorage, Alaska, USA as a part of the
project FreeSim (Miller and Horowitz, 2007; Miller,
2009). The trajectory we use in this paper has been
collected from a vehicle for the duration of about 42
months from 2010 to 2013 with varying sampling rate
from one sample every 10 seconds to one sample ev-
ery two minutes. We used ELKI machine learning li-

Geometry of Interest (GOI): Spatio-Temporal Destination Extraction and Partitioning in GPS Trajectory Data
11
Stay Extraction Method
Number of Extracted Stay Regions
Number of Single Sized Stay Regions
Reference Point Based (Ye et al, 2009)
3568
0
Diameter Based (Hariharan and Toyama, 2004)
3587
0
Time-Weighted Centroid Based (Our Method)
4127
292
Table 1 Spatio-temporal Stay Region Extraction Results (Tmin = 60min)
Algorithm 2: Geometric Similarity Based
Destination Detection Method
input : A set of stay regions S, Jaccard similarity
threshold Jmin visit frequency threshold
Fmin
output: A set of destination regions D
Data: Destination d, InterList, RTreeIndex
1
JSimmax ←0, JSim ←0, firstSimIndex ←0,
secondSimIndex ←0
2
foreach si ∈S do
3
fi ←1
4
end
5
while (JSimmax < Jmin) do
6
RTreeIndex.Update(S)
7
i ←0, JSimmax ←0
8
while (i < |S|) do
9
interList ←
RTreeIndex.FindIntersectingStays(si)
10
j ←0
11
JSim ←0
12
JSimmax ←0
13
while (j < |interList|) do
14
JSim ←
Area(gi
T interList[j])/Area(gi
S interList[j])
15
if (JSim > JSimmax) then
16
JSimmax ←JSim
17
maxIndex ←
FindIndex(S, interList[j])
18
end
19
j ←j + 1
20
end
21
i ←i + 1
22
end
23
if (JSimmax > Jmin) then
24
si.MergePoints(smaxIndex)
25
gi ←gi ∪gmaxIndex
26
fi ←fi + fmaxIndex
27
S.remove(smaxIndex)
28
end
29
else
30
break
31
end
32
end
33
foreach (si ∈S) do
34
D.insert(si)
35
end
36
foreach (dk ∈D) do
37
if fk < Fmin then
38
D.remove(di)
39
end
40
end
41
return D
brary (Schubert et al, 2015), to implement the OPTICS
clustering algorithm. Following we discuss the results in
each of the three phases.
7.1 Stay Extraction Experimental Results
We implemented the method presented in Alg. 1 and
two methods proposed in (Hariharan and Toyama,
2004), and (Ye et al, 2009). Table 1 presents a com-
parison of the experimental results for each stay extrac-
tion method. As it is seen, our time-weighted clustering
method outperforms the other two methods in the num-
ber of extracted clusters. Moreover, our method detects
and report the stay regions with the single point while
the other methods simply lose the stay regions.
Fig. 5 shows a visual perspective of the extracted
stay regions by each of the stay region extraction meth-
ods in a selected area of the main GPS trajectory.
We selected this particular region (Fig. 5(b)) because
it contains clearly depicted places which indicate the
car parks. We consider the car park geometries as the
ground truth for our empirical observation and geomet-
ric similarity analysis. We cropped the GPS trajectory
only to cover the selected area by removing all the GPS
track point lie outside the geometry of the selected area.
As it is seen in Fig. 5(c), the extracted stay regions
by diameter based method does not have acceptable
results. Although some of the exacted stay regions in-
tersect with the car park regions, they cover the consid-
erable areas outside the car parks. The reference point
based stay extraction method (Ye et al, 2009) depicted
in Fig. 5(d) has much better performance compared
to diameter based method since most of the extracted
stay regions intersect with the car parks. However, on
the bottom left side of the area, some irrelevant stays
are evident. Fig. 5(e) shows the extracted stays using
our proposed method. Although there are some minor
stay regions extracted outside the car parks geometries
(in places the same as those in Fig. 5(d)), the extracted
stay regions are more compact and more biased to the
car parks geometries.
Table 1 reports that our method has extracted 292
stay regions with only one GPS points (cluster with
one member) whereas, the two baseline methods were
not able to detect them. The baseline methods compute

12
Seyed Morteza Mousavi et al.
(a) Map of the Selected Area in Anchorage, Alaska, USA (Bing)
(b) Map of the Selected Area in Anchorage, Alaska, USA
(Mapnik)
(c) Diameter Based Stay Extraction Method (Tmin
=
60min, Diammax = 200m)
(d) Reference Point Based Based Stay Extraction Method
(Tmin = 60min, Diammax = 200m)
(e) Time-Weighted Centroid Based Stay Extraction Method
(Tmin = 60min, Dmax = 100m)
Fig. 5 Stay Region Extraction Results

Geometry of Interest (GOI): Spatio-Temporal Destination Extraction and Partitioning in GPS Trajectory Data
13
Destination Extraction Method
Parameters
Number of Stays
Number of Destinations
Diameter Based (Hariharan and Toyama, 2004)
Diametermin = 200m
3587
304
Diameter Based
Diametermin = 300m
3587
166
Diameter Based
Diametermin = 400m
3587
128
Density Based (Ye et al, 2009)
eps = 100m, minPts = 3
3566
456
Density Based
eps = 100m, minPts = 6
3566
206
Density Based
eps = 100m, minPts = 9
3566
120
Geometric Similarity Based (Our Method)
Jmin = 0
4127
364
Geometric Similarity Based
Jmin = 0.05
4127
434
Geometric Similarity Based
Jmin = 0.10
4127
490
Table 2 Destination Regions Extraction Results (Tmin = 60min, Fmin = 1)
the value of ∆t as the time distance between two con-
secutive points because need at least two GPS points
in a cluster to make a valid stay region. However, our
method incorporates the time-value of the current track
point in computing ∆t. The time-value of the current
track point compensates the cases where the next point
lies outside the current stay region (∆d > Dmax) but
the time gap is long enough (∆t ≥Tmin), resulting
in the stay points with only one track point being de-
tected.
Table 1 also shows that our method has extracted
a considerably higher number of stay regions compared
to the baselines. The reason is, there might be clus-
ters which have members more than one but the time
duration of the stay is less than Tmin without consider-
ing the time-value. In this case, the stay is considered
invalid. The duration of the same stay might become
more than or equal to Tmin by considering the time-
value of the last point in the cluster. In such scenario,
our method detects these clusters while the other two
methods miss them.
In our method, after adding a point to point set of a
stay, we update the coordinate of the reference point of
the stay by computing the time-weighted centroid of the
points in the stay. Therefore, the points extracted in a
stay become more biased and closer to the places which
longer stops have taken place. Whereas, reference point
based method considers the ﬁrst point of the stay as
the reference point does not update it iteratively. The
diameter based method (Hariharan and Toyama, 2004)
does not use a centroid point or a reference point and
instead uses the diameter of the stay region as the con-
dition of a valid stay. So, it performs much less accurate
than both methods.
7.2 Destination Extraction Experimental Results
In this section, we examine and compare our method
with two baseline destination extraction methods us-
ing the stay regions extracted in the previous section.
Table 2 shows the results for three methods. It is ev-
ident that the parameters Diametermin, minPts, and
Jmin have a signiﬁcant impact on the number of ex-
tracted destinations in all three methods. In the diam-
eter based method, the larger Diametermin leads to
a fewer number of destinations since destinations with
the larger area are constructed. The parameter minPts
has a signiﬁcant impact on the number of destinations
in density based method. The higher minPts leads to a
fewer number of destinations. The greater Jmin in our
method leads to higher number of destinations.
Fig. 6 shows the results of the destination extrac-
tion methods on the map. As it is evident, the diame-
ter based method (Fig. 6(a)) does not have acceptable
performance in extracting the geometries of the destina-
tions. Although the extracted destinations do cover the
car parks, they have areas much larger than the car park
areas, and also, they have signiﬁcant overlaps. Density
based method has more acceptable performance that
diameter based method. However, it loses two of the
car parks. Moreover, it covers places not related to the
car parks. Fig. 6(c) shows the destinations extracted by
our geometric similarity based method. It is evident our
method has constructed destination regions with much
more acceptable geometric similarity to the car parks.
As it is evident in ﬁgures 6(c) and 6(e), in our
method with with Fmin = 1, the value Jmin = 0 leads
to all the geometries of all the destinations being dis-
joint while the number of extracted destination using
Jmin = 0.1 is much higher. The destinations are over-
lapping, and even some destinations are fully covered
by the other destinations.
Figures 6(d) and 6(f) illustrate the extracted des-
tinations with Fmin = 6. Comparison of the ﬁgures
with ﬁgures 6(c) and 6(e) clearly indicates the eﬀect of
parameter Fmin in our destination extraction method.
In the latter ﬁgures, the destinations with fewer visit
frequencies have been eliminated from the destination-

14
Seyed Morteza Mousavi et al.
(a)
Destination
Grid,
Diameter
Based
(Tmin
=
60min, Diametermax = 300m)
(b) Destination Grid, Density Based (Tmin = 60min, Dmax =
100m, minPts = 6, eps = 100m)
(c) Destination Grid, Geometric Similarity Based (Tmin =
60min, Dmax = 100m, Jmin = 0, Fmin = 1 )
(d) Destination Grid, Geometric Similarity Based (Tmin =
60min, Dmax = 100m, Jmin = 0, Fmin = 6)
(e) Destination Grid, Geometric Similarity Based (Tmin =
60min, Dmax = 100m, Jmin = 0.10, Fmin = 1)
(f) Destination Grid, Geometric Similarity Based (Tmin =
60min, Dmax = 100m, Jmin = 0.10, Fmin = 6 )
(g) GOI
Grid,
Geometric
Similarity
Based
(Tmin
=
60min, Dmax = 100m, Jmin = 0.10, Fmin = 6)
(h) Final-Grid,
Geometric
Similarity
Based
(Tmin
=
60min, Dmax = 100m, Jmin = 0.10, Fmin = 6)
Fig. 6 Destination-Grid, GOI-Grid, and Final-Grid Extraction Results

Geometry of Interest (GOI): Spatio-Temporal Destination Extraction and Partitioning in GPS Trajectory Data
15
GOI Extraction Method
Parameters
Degere of Geometric Similarity
Diameter Based
Diametermin = 200m
0.415
Diameter Based
Diametermin = 300m
0.097
Diameter Based
Diametermin = 400m
0.130
Density Based
eps = 100m, minPts = 3
0.310
Density Based
eps = 100m, minPts = 6
0.329
Density Based
eps = 100m, minPts = 9
0.314
Geometric Similarity Based
Jmin = 0
0.623
Geometric Similarity Based
Jmin = 0.05
0.628
Geometric Similarity Based
Jmin = 0.10
0.650
Table 3 GOI Extraction Extraction Results (Tmin = 60min, Fmin = 6)
grids, and only the destinations which have more geo-
metric similarity to car park areas have been left.
Comparing two ﬁgures 6(d) and 6(f) reveals the ef-
fect of the value of Jmin on the extracted destinations.
The extracted destinations in both ﬁgures are quite sim-
ilar except for the destination in the middle of the area.
Fig. 6(d) has merged the area of the two neighboring
car parks together while Fig. 6(f) has extracted two dis-
tinct geometries for the same destination. This shows
the better performance of the method with parameter
Jmin = 0.1.
7.3 Paritioning Experimental Results
The GOI-Grid, which is the result of constructing the
GOIs based on the destinations in Fig. 6(f) is illus-
trated in Fig. 6(g). It is clearly seen that the parti-
tioning method has resolved the problem of two desti-
nations having a geometric overlap. The two destina-
tion regions in the middle of the Fig. 6(f) have been
partitioned into two distinct cells in GOI-Grid without
having any intersection.
The Final-grid, which is depicted in Fig. 6(h) is the
last result of our partitioning. It is evident that the
ﬁnal-grid guarantees both characteristics of a valid par-
tition. None of the cells overlap each other and all the
GPS points in the mobile object trajectory can be la-
beled with the ID of a cell in the ﬁnal grid.
7.4 Geometric Similarity Evaluation Results
In this section, we use the geometric similarity as a
quantitive metric to analyze the quality of our parti-
tioning method compared to the baselines. We use Eq. 1
for analyzing the performance of the similarity of the
real GOIs and the estimated GOIs. This metric uses
the proportion of the area of the intersection of two
geometries (gi and gj) to the area of the union of them.
Table 3, presents the calculated degree of geomet-
ric similarity between the geometries of the real GOIs
(the red colored polygons in ﬁgure 6(g)) and their corre-
sponding extracted GOIs (the blue colored polygons in
ﬁgure 6(g)). As it is evident, our method has the highest
values for the geometric similarity. Table 3 also shows
that the values of geometric similarities vary based on
diﬀerent values for the parameters Jmin, minPts, and
Diamatermin.
Among the evaluated methods with diﬀerent pa-
rameters, our method with Jmin = 0.15 has the best
results. Therefore, the partitioning method which max-
imizes the geometric similarity (discussed in section 3)
is our method with Jmin = 0.15.
8 Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, we addressed the problem of ﬁnding the
Geometries of Interest of a mobile object and partition-
ing the trajectory area into a grid through analyzing
its GPS trajectories. The research shows that consider-
ing the concept of time-value of the GPS points signiﬁ-
cantly improves the accuracy of stay region extraction.
Moreover, the results of this study support the idea that
considering the geometries of the stay regions, makes
the geometries estimated GOIs remarkably more simi-
lar to the real world GOIs.
This research has opened up many questions in need
of further investigation and will serve as a base for fu-
ture studies. It would be interesting to focus on improv-
ing the performance and the accuracy of our proposed
partitioning method by aggregating the trajectory data
of other mobile objects moving in the same area of our
particular mobile object. Other improvements such as
using outlier detection methods to detect and remove
the outlier points from the point set of the destinations
could improve the results further. Finding the best ge-
ometric similarity metric to improve the performance
of the destination extraction phase would be another

16
Seyed Morteza Mousavi et al.
interesting research problem that could be addressed in
the future.
