Active learning for object detection in
high-resolution satellite images
Alex Goupilleau, Tugdual Ceillier, and Marie-Caroline Corbineau
Preligens (ex-Earthcube), Paris, France

Abstract. In machine learning, the term active learning regroups tech-
niques that aim at selecting the most useful data to label from a large
pool of unlabelled examples. While supervised deep learning techniques
have shown to be increasingly eﬃcient on many applications, they require
a huge number of labelled examples to reach operational performances.
Therefore, the labelling eﬀort linked to the creation of the datasets re-
quired is also increasing. When working on defense-related remote sensing
applications, labelling can be challenging due to the large areas covered
and often requires military experts who are rare and whose time is primar-
ily dedicated to operational needs. Limiting the labelling eﬀort is thus of
utmost importance. This study aims at reviewing the most relevant active
learning techniques to be used for object detection on very high resolution
imagery and shows an example of the value of such techniques on a relevant
operational use case: aircraft detection.
Keywords: Deep learning · Convolutional neural networks · Earth obser-
vation · Active learning · Object detection.
1
Introduction
1.1
Context
Active learning is a sub-domain of machine learning, whose objective is to smartly
select the relevant data to label in order to maximize the performance of a given
model. Active learning can help achieve two goals:
– Get the best possible performance given a ﬁxed labelling budget,
– Minimize the labelling eﬀort to reach some target performance.
In remote sensing use cases, the labelling eﬀort is particularly laborious, as one
often has to ﬁnd objects of interest in very large images, before creating a label for
them. The integration of active learning methods could therefore allow annotators
to focus only on the most relevant images or zones inside images – which would
make the whole labelling process easier, faster, and more eﬃcient.
In particular, deep learning models – including convolutional neural networks
(CNN) – would greatly beneﬁt from these methods, as these types of machine
learning models generally need a large amount of labelled images to work well. In
a larger context, active learning methods could help improve the whole lifecycle of
an algorithm: on a regular basis, some raw images could be ingested in a database
of unlabelled images, of which only a relevant subset would be selected by active
learning methods in order to be labelled and used for the improvement of a given
deep learning model.
These techniques are particularly interesting when the user has limited labelling
capabilities and owns a lot of unlabelled images – and one can expect the latter to
be especially true in the future where the number of sensors is assumed to increase
over time.
arXiv:2101.02480v1  [cs.CV]  7 Jan 2021

2
A. Goupilleau et al.
Fig. 1. Schematics of the active learning iterative process (from [3]).
1.2
Problem setting
The objective of this section is to formulate the problem that active learning
methods try to solve, as well as to establish the necessary vocabulary to understand
the diﬀerent methods that will be described in the following subsections.
The classic active learning scenario can be described in the following way: a
given operator owns a database of unlabelled images B and a CNN classiﬁcation
model M – that takes as input an image X and outputs class probabilities p(X ∈
c) = M(X).
The operator has a given labelling budget: this means that he can only label a
maximum of N images in the database B. After selection and labelling, the result-
ing labelled dataset can be called B∗. The objective of any active learning method
is to ﬁnd the optimal B∗subset of images in B that maximizes the performances
of the model M on its task, when trained on B∗.
In practice, this scenario is often iterative. The operator already owns a dataset
of labelled images that was used to train an initial model. Then, at each step, the
active learning technique selects new unlabelled images that are then labelled and
used to retrain or ﬁne-tune the initial model, either on the concatenation of the
initial dataset and the new images or on the selected images only. This iterative
process can be stopped if targeted performances or maximum labelling budget are
reached, or continuously used to accommodate for novelties in the data distribution
(in the remote sensing use case, it can be new types of objects, new geographic
areas, new sensors). Figure 1 illustrates this iterative process.
2
Related work
The objective of an active learning method is to evaluate the informativeness of a
given image X, i.e. how much information that image can bring to the model M
when it is trained on it. To do so, most techniques use the model itself. The diﬀerent
approaches used by active learning methods diﬀer in the way informativeness is
deﬁned. The diﬀerent strategies can be split into four categories: uncertainty-
based active learning, representativity-based active learning, hybrid methods that
combine uncertainty and representativity, and methods that use neither. In this
section, we will detail examples of these four categories.
2.1
Uncertainty-based active learning
The techniques based on uncertainty select images that generate the most un-
certainty for the model. A well known and relevant technique to estimate model
uncertainty is the one used by [6]. In order to evaluate uncertainty, the authors
use Bayesian dropout at inference time to obtain slightly diﬀerent predictions. The
authors test diﬀerent ways of selecting images based on these multiple predictions,
called acquisition functions. Using the MNIST dataset, they show that compared

Active learning for object detection
3
to a random selection of the images, all acquisition functions yield positive perfor-
mance gains – except one based on the variance – and that these techniques work
especially well if the labelling budget is low.
Other approaches also use uncertainty in order to select relevant images to la-
bel, either by using an ensemble of classiﬁers [2], or by using generative adversarial
networks (GANs) to compute the distance between an example and its adversarial
equivalent [5].
2.2
Representativeness-based active learning
One drawback of uncertainty-based methods is that they tend to select very similar
images. In order to counter this problem, methods based on representativeness aim
is to select a dataset B∗such that the images in this subset are as representative
as possible of the whole dataset B.
A popular example of these technique is described in [12]. The authors show
that this problem can be solved with the geometric K-Center problem, using the L2
distance between activations of the last dense layer in the CNN. Using the CIFAR-
10 and CIFAR-100 datasets, they compare their selection method with various
other techniques, including a random selection, and the uncertainty approach by
[6]. For both datasets, the technique seems to yield better results than all other
approaches when the the labelling budget is less than 40% of the dataset. According
to the authors, the technique seems more eﬃcient when the number of classes is
low. They also conclude that uncertainty could be added to the recipe in order to
improve the method.
A more recent work [7] presents a technique inspired from GANs [8] by deceiv-
ing a discriminator so that it can no longer decide if an example image selected
by the generator belongs to B∗or B. Once the generator is trained well enough,
it can be used to generate a dataset B∗which is representative of B. Using the
MNIST and CIFAR-10 dataset, they compare it to other popular approaches and
conclude that their method works as well as any other method. This approach is
interesting because it is simple to adapt to other tasks such as object detection or
segmentation. However, this technique requires an additional optimization step –
which makes the process much more computation-heavy than other methods.
2.3
Hybrid active learning
Few recent papers propose relevant methods that try to get the best of uncertainty
and representativeness. Among them is [1]. The authors consider that uncertainty
can be evaluated by studying the magnitude of the loss gradients in the last layer
of the network: if the model is certain about a given prediction, the magnitude of
the gradients would be low, and model parameters would only be weakly updated.
The same loss gradients are used to evaluate diversity: a batch of examples has
a good diversity if the gradients of the examples have complementary directions.
Computing loss gradients is not possible if one does not have ground truth labels.
To overcome this, the authors use model predictions instead of the groundtruth to
compute the gradients. The authors test their method on a large diversity of use
cases by varying the number of selected images, the CNN architecture used, and
the dataset used (SVHN, OpenML #156, CIFAR-10). They compare their method
with the uncertainty-only approach and the diversity-only approach (Core-Set).
The authors conclude that their approach is almost always the best, and that it
seems to be robust to the diversity of use-cases.

4
A. Goupilleau et al.
2.4
Other methods
Some other methods in the litterature oﬀer to solve the active learning problem,
without directly measuring uncertainty or representativeness. This is the case of
[13], where the authors propose to learn to predict the value of the loss during
training by using a loss prediction module. The core hypothesis is that the loss
value is directly linked to the quantity of information that a single example brings
to the network during training. A clear advantage is that the module can be easily
stacked to any architecture, meaning that the method can be easily adapted from
the classiﬁcation tasks to segmentation or detection tasks. For the detection task,
the results seem to indicate that the Core-Set approach works better when the
number of labelled images is low, whereas the loss prediction approach seems to
work better when this number is higher.
Interestingly, some recent approaches have tried to treat the active learning
problem as a reinforcement learning task. In [4], the authors propose to train a
reinforcement learning algorithm to select the most useful patches in images from
two public datasets – CamVid and Cityscape – to improve an existing segmentation
model. Their solution is not straightforward to implement and remains more com-
putation heavy than the others presented here but their results on both datasets
seem to outperform other uncertainty-based approaches. It will be interesting to
watch closely such reinforcement learning approaches in the future as they gain in
maturity.
3
Proposed approach
In this work, we apply two active learning techniques to segmentation of satellite
images: Bayesian dropout from [6] and Core-Set from [12]. However, we need to
adapt these methods to the segmentation task, as they were designed for image
classiﬁcation, and to allow the use of large rasters instead of pre-calibrated data.
3.1
Pre-selection of tiles
In order to use large raster images, the ﬁrst step is to split the original images
into ﬁxed-size tiles. We choose 512x512 tiles to prevent any memory-related issues
during training. However, considering the amount of data we use, processing all
created tiles (several hundred thousands) through the active learning techniques
proves unpractical. For this reason, we choose to perform a ﬁrst selection on the
tiles, before applying the active learning techniques. To do so, we use the initial
network to predict once on all available tiles and we then order these tiles according
to the average intensity of the corresponding segmentation map. This technique
comes from initial experiments showing that tiles with a very low response were
almost never among the ones selected by active learning techniques.
This pre-selection therefore allows to speed up considerably the whole process
while not modifying the selection performed through active learning. The number
of selected tiles is set to 5% of all the available tiles, based on computational
limitations.
3.2
Bayesian dropout
The ﬁrst active learning method we use is derived from [6]. While this method
was developed for image classiﬁcation, we modify it to apply it for semantic seg-
mentation. To do so, we follow the same approach of predicting multiple times on

Active learning for object detection
5
a given tile while activating dropout in the network, using the same parameters
as the ones used during training. We choose to perform 10 predictions, to get
suﬃcient variations while limiting the computing cost of the method.
We then need to derive an estimation of the uncertainty of the whole tile from
the 10 segmentation maps thus obtained. We ﬁrst compute, for each pixel, the
variance of the 10 values. Then, we take the average of all the variances as an
estimation of the uncertainty of the 512x512 tile.
3.3
Core-Set
The second active learning method we use uses the approach of [12]. Similarly
to the ﬁrst method, this technique has been developed for image classiﬁcation.
To adapt it to segmentation, one need to ﬁnd a way to derive a reasonably-sized
vector from the features extracted by the network.
As the CNN we use has a U-Net structure, we use the feature map at the
end of the decoder, which has a size of 128x128x128 (width, height, and number
of ﬁlters). We ﬁrst use max pooling to get an 8x8x128 matrix and then average
pooling to compress it into a 1x1x128 matrix, interpreted as a 1D vector. We then
use the Robust k-center algorithm from [12] to select the k most representative
tiles, k being equal to our labelling budget.
4
Experiments and results
To evaluate the potential of active learning for a defense-related use-case, we choose
to test the developed methods on aircraft detection, using image segmentation
models. As a ﬁrst step, we performed only one iteration of the diﬀerent methods
and measure the performance increase compared with random selection.
4.1
Initial models and pool of unlabelled images
Before applying the active learning techniques, we need to train initial models
which will be incrementally improved. We choose to create two diﬀerent models,
with the same modiﬁed U-Net architecture [11], that correspond to two diﬀerent
use-cases:
– a weak model that has been trained on relatively few images, corresponding to
a model still in development that we want to improve as fast as possible;
– a strong model that has been trained on much more data and that reaches
correct performances, representative of a model in production that could be
improved with time.
We choose to select full-sized satellite images based on their date of acquisition,
to mimic a real-life situation where images are gradually available. In this work,
we use images from Maxar/DigitalGlobe satellites WorldView 1, 2, and 3 and
GeoEye 1. For the weak model, we select images acquired 2010 January 1st and
2012 January 1st and for the strong model we extend the second limit to 2017
January 1st. We then create a dataset from these images by splitting them into
512x512 tiles, with 90% of the tiles being the ones containing aircraft and 10% of
the tiles being randomly sampled among negative tiles. We train each model until
convergence, using the Adam optimizer [9] and weighted cross-entropy loss.
Now that we have initial models to improve, we need a vast amount of “unla-
belled” images to select from. In our case, all the labels are already available, but
only imagettes selected through active learning will be actually used. Following

6
A. Goupilleau et al.
Table 1. Data used to train the initial models and create the pool of unlabelled images.
Model
Acquisition period
# images Total area # aircraft # tiled imagettes
Weak 2010/01/01-2012/01/01
40
222 km2
951
2,740
Strong 2010/01/01-2017/01/01
3,891
14,445 km2
67,008
54,851
Pool 2017/01/01-2017/07/01
467
5,905 km2
11,017
∼400k possible
Fig. 2. Testing set used to measure performances. Left: examples of labelled
aircraft. Right: Distribution of the aircraft models between four categories
(combat, bomber, transport, and civilian).
the same approach we followed to train the initial models, we select images from
the Maxar/DigitalGlobe satellites WorldView 1, 2, and 3 and GeoEye 1 based on
their acquisition date. We therefore choose only images acquired between 2017
January 1st and 2017 July 1st. It is worth noting that while the images used to
train the initial models contained mostly civilian aircraft, the images in our pool
contains mostly military aircraft, which is an interesting setup to see if our models
can improve on these new aircraft types.
Table 1 summarises the data used to train the initial models and to create the
pool of “unlabelled” images.
4.2
Testing set and performance metrics
To measure the performances of the diﬀerent models, we use a testing set composed
of images present neither in the data used to train the initial models nor in the
pool of unlabelled images. To focus the evaluation on military aircraft, we select 30
full-size satellite images from 16 diﬀerent locations that contains mostly military
aircraft. These images contain 1532 individual aircraft in total. Figure 2 presents
examples of the labelled aircraft and the distribution of the models present in the
testing set.
The metrics we consider are the classical precision, recall and F1-score. An
aircraft in the ground truth is considered as a true positive if it is at least partly
covered by the predicted segmentation. On the other hand, the segmentation out-
puted by the network is divided into connected components; if one component does
not cover any aircraft in the ground truth, it is considered as a false positive. To
compare the behaviour of diﬀerent models, we consider the precision-recall curve
of each model, obtained by varying the threshold applied to the segmentation out-
put in order to obtain a binary map aircraft/background. We then choose as the
operational threshold the one yielding the best F1-score.

Active learning for object detection
7
Table 2. Labelling budget and number of tiles of the diﬀerent approaches compared and
gains in F1-score.
Model
Approach
Labelling budget # Tiles selected F1-score gain
Weak
Baseline Unlimited
unlimited
5700
+6.6%
Baseline Random
1000
1000
+2.0%
Bayesian dropout
1000
1000
-0.2%
Core-Set
1000
1000
+6.7%
Strong
Baseline Unlimited
unlimited
5700
+3.6%
Baseline Random
5000
5000
+4.5%
Bayesian dropout
5000
5000
+8.0%
Core-Set
5000
5000
+6.6%
4.3
Results
To evaluate the contribution of the uncertainty and core-set approaches, we com-
pare them to two diﬀerent baselines. The ﬁrst baseline, called Unlimited, corre-
sponds to an unlimited labelling budget, with all the objects in the pool of images
being labelled. In this case, a training set is built by selecting all the tiles contain-
ing aircraft (90% of the set) and randomly selected negative tiles (10% of the set),
leading to a training set containing 5700 tiles, which is higher than the labelling
budgets used for the active learning approaches. The second baseline, called Ran-
dom, uses the same labelling budget as the active learning approaches but in this
case the tiles are randomly selected after the pre-selection step.
To improve the weak model, we choose a labelling budget of 1000 tiles while
for the strong model we choose a higher budget of 5000 tiles. This choice was
made to match the diﬀerence in the number of tiles in their initial training sets.
Table 2 summarises the labelling budget and the number of tiles added to the initial
datasets for the diﬀerent approaches, as well as the gains in term of F1-score of
each experiment.
Results can be seen in Figure 3. For the weak model, the best approach appears
to be the Core-Set. It leads to an F1-score increase of 6.7% while the Baseline Un-
limited – that selects more than 5 times more tiles – improves the F1-score of
6.6%. However, in the high recall regime, the Baseline Unlimited is performing
better. This is likely due to the fact that the model trained for this baseline has
bee presented with all the new aircraft while active learning techniques cannot
necessarily select all the tiles containing aircraft due to their limited labelling
budget. Interestingly, the Bayesian dropout approach does not lead to any sig-
niﬁcant improvement over the initial model and is outperformed by the Baseline
Random. This only exception lies in the very high precision regime, meaning that
the Bayesian dropout impact is limited to removing some false positives detected
by the initial weak model.
For the strong model, even if the Core-Set approach is also performing well
(+6.6% f F1-score), the Bayesian dropout approach outperforms it by a large
margin (+8.0% of F1-score). Both active learning approaches are behaving much
better than the baselines – including the Unlimited one that selects 700 tiles more
– which shows the usefulness of selecting the examples to present to an already
well-performing model to improve it. This follows the intuition than as a model
gets more and more eﬃcient, new data bring relatively small information to it. It
is especially striking to see that active learning methods perform on part with the
Unlimited baseline in the high recall regime. This might be an indication that the
strong model has learned more generic features, which can be leveraged by both
active learning methods to identify diﬃcult aircraft models.

8
A. Goupilleau et al.
Fig. 3. Performance of the various approaches. Left: weak model. Right: strong
model. The contour lines indicate similar values of the F1-score.
5
Conclusion
In this work, we have presented the various techniques of active learning that can
be used to improve a object detection algorithm working on very high resolution
remote sensing images. We have adapted two approaches – Bayesian dropout and
Core-Set – to the segmentation task and tested them on two CNN models with
diﬀerent levels of performances. By comparing them with two baselines, we have
shown that active learning approaches are very eﬃcient to boost performances of
existing models while limiting the amount of labels needed. The most consistent
active learning technique tested here seems to be the Core-Set one, as it yields good
results on both test cases. However, the Bayesian dropout technique is signiﬁcantly
more eﬃcient for the strong model, which could imply the necessity to change the
active learning strategy at one stage during model development.
Future developments could include a variety of diﬀerent experiments. First, it
could be informative to apply these two techniques in an iterative manner, with
several pools of data. It could allow to identify at which point the uncertainty
approach becomes more eﬃcient than the core-set one. Another obvious option
would be to follow the same experimental on other types objects, such as ter-
restrial vehicles or vessels for instance. Finally, these techniques still rely on the
initial training set, which both makes the new trainings long and can be imprac-
tical in an industrial context where data cannot be transferred. Combining the
active learning techniques developed in this paper with continuous learning such
as Elastic Weight Consolidation [10] to avoid re-using initial data could lead to an
even more operational solution.
Even with the aforementioned cautions, we believe that this work has proven
how eﬃcient and relevant active learning solutions are in a defense-related context.
The techniques presented here have a high potential to ease adoption of CNN-
based solutions into the workﬂow of military analysts. They can allow them to
adapt products developed on commercial data to their own speciﬁc needs, either
linked to sovereign sensors or to new types of objects of interest.
