1
A Survey on Deep Reinforcement Learning
for Audio-Based Applications
Siddique Latif1, Heriberto Cuay´ahuitl2, Farrukh Pervez3, Fahad Shamshad4, Haﬁz Shehbaz Ali5, and Erik
Cambria6
1University of Southern Queensland, Australia
2University of Lincoln, United Kingdom
3National University of Science and Technology, Pakistan
4Information Technology University, Pakistan
5EmulationAI
6Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Abstract—Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) is poised to
revolutionise the ﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) by endowing
autonomous systems with high levels of understanding of the
real world. Currently, deep learning (DL) is enabling DRL to
effectively solve various intractable problems in various ﬁelds.
Most importantly, DRL algorithms are also being employed in
audio signal processing to learn directly from speech, music and
other sound signals in order to create audio-based autonomous
systems that have many promising application in the real world.
In this article, we conduct a comprehensive survey on the
progress of DRL in the audio domain by bringing together the
research studies across different speech and music related areas.
We begin with an introduction to the general ﬁeld of DL and
reinforcement learning (RL), then progress to the main DRL
methods and their applications in the audio domain. We conclude
by presenting challenges faced by audio-based DRL agents and
highlighting open areas for future research and investigation.
Index Terms—Deep learning, reinforcement learning, speech
recognition, emotion recognition, (embodied) dialogue systems
I. INTRODUCTION
Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) has gained widespread attention in
many areas of life, especially in audio signal processing. Audio
processing covers many diverse ﬁelds including speech, music
and environmental sound processing. In all these areas, AI
techniques are playing crucial roles in the design of audio-based
intelligent systems [1]. One of the prime goals of AI is to create
fully autonomous audio-based intelligent systems or agents
that can learn optimal behaviours by listening or interacting
with their environments and improving their behaviour over
time through trial and error. Designing of such autonomous
systems has been a long-standing problem, ranging from
robots that can react to the changes in their environment, to
purely software-based agents that can interact with humans
using natural language and multimedia. Reinforcement learning
(RL) [2] represents a principled mathematical framework
of such experience-driven learning. Although RL had some
successes in the past [3]–[5], however, previous methods
were inherently limited to low-dimensional problems due to

lack of scalability. Moreover, RL also has issues of memory,
computational and sample complexity—in the case of learning
algorithms [6]. Recently, deep learning (DL) models have
risen as new tools with powerful function approximation and
representation learning properties to solve these issues.
The advent of DL has had a signiﬁcant impact on many areas
of machine learning (ML) by dramatically improving the state-
of-the-art in image processing tasks such as object detection and
image classiﬁcation. Deep models such as deep neural networks
(DNNs) [7], [8], convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [9],
and long short-term memory (LSTM) networks [10] have
also enabled many practical applications by outperforming
traditional methods in audio signal processing. Given that
DL has also accelerated RL’s progress with the use of DL
algorithms within RL, it has given rise to the ﬁeld of deep
reinforcement learning (DRL).
DRL embraces the advancements in DL to establish the
learning processes, performance and speed of RL algorithms.
This enables RL to operate in high-dimensional state and
action spaces to solve complex problems that were previously
difﬁcult to solve. As a result, DRL has been adopted to solve
many problems. Inspired by previous works such as [11], two
outstanding works kick-started the revolution in DRL. The
ﬁrst was the development of an algorithm that could learn to
play Atari 2600 video games directly from image pixels at
a superhuman level [12]. The second success was design of
the hybrid DRL system, AlphaGo, which defeated a human
world champion in the game of Go [13]. In addition to playing
games, DRL has also been applied to a wide range of problems
including robotics to control policies [14]; generalisable agents
in complex environments with meta-learning [15], [16]; indoor
navigation [17], and many more [18]. In particular, DRL is
also gaining increased interest in audio signal processing.
In audio processing, DRL has been recently used as an
emerging tool to address various problems and challenges in
automatic speech recognition (ASR), spoken dialogue systems
(SDSs), speech emotion recognition (SER), audio enhancement,
music generation, and audio-driven controlled robotics. In this
work, we therefore focus on covering the advancements in audio
arXiv:2101.00240v1  [cs.SD]  1 Jan 2021

2
TABLE I: Comparison of our paper with that of the existing surveys.
Focus
Reference
Deep
Reinforcement
Learning
Audio
Applications
Other
Applications
Details
Arulkumaran et al. [18]
2017


This paper presents a brief overview of recent developments in
DRL algorithms and highlights the beneﬁts of DRL and several
current areas of research.
Yuxi Li [19]
2017

This paper presents a generalised overview of recent exciting
achievements of DRL and discus core elements and mechanisms.
It also discusses various ﬁelds where DRL can be applied.
Luong et al. [20]
2019

communications
and networking
This paper presents a comprehensive literature review on the
applications of DRL in communications and networking, highlights
challenges, and discusses open issues and future directions.
Kiran et al. [21]
2020

autonomous
driving
This paper summarises DRL algorithms and autonomous driving,
where (D)RL methods have been employed.It also highlights key
challenges towards real-world deployment of autonomous cars.
Haydari et al. [22]
2020

transportation
systems
This paper summarises existing works in the ﬁeld of transportation,
and discusses the challenges and open questions regarding DRL
in transportation systems.
Ours (2020)

We present a comprehensive review focused on DRL applications
in the audio domain, highlight existing challenges that hinder the
progress of DRL in audio, and discuss pointers for future research.
processing by DRL. Although there are multiple survey articles
on DRL. For instance, Arulkumaran et al. [18] presented a brief
survey on DRL by covering seminal and recent developments
in DRL—including innovative ways in which DNNs can be
used to develop autonomous agents. Similarly, in [19], authors
attempted to provide comprehensive details on DRL and cover
its applications in various areas to highlight advances and
challenges. Other relevant works include applications of DRL in
communications and networking [20], human-level agents [23],
and autonomous driving [24]. None of these articles has focused
on DRL applications in audio processing as highlighted in
Table I. This paper aims to ﬁll this gap by presenting an up-
to-date literature review on DRL studies in the audio domain,
discussing challenges that hinder the progress of DRL in audio,
and pointing out future research areas. We hope this paper will
help researchers and scientists interested in DRL for audio-
driven applications.
This paper is organised as follows. A concise background of
DL and RL is provided in Section II, followed by an overview
of recent DRL algorithms in Section III. With those foundations,
Section IV covers recent DRL works in domains such as
speech, music, and environmental sound processing; and their
challenges are discussed in Section V. Section VI summaries
this review and highlights the future pointers for audio-based
DRL research and Section VII concludes the paper.
II. BACKGROUND
A. Deep Learning (DL)
DNNs have been shown to produce state-of-the-art results in
audio and speech processing due to their ability to distil com-
pact and robust representations from large amounts of data. The
ﬁrst major milestone was signiﬁcantly increasing the accuracy
of large-scale automatic speech recognition based on the use of
fully connected DNNs and deep autoencoders around 2010 [7].
It focuses on the use of artiﬁcial neural networks, which consists
of multiple nonlinear modules arranged hierarchically in layers
to automatically discover suitable representations or features
from raw data for speciﬁc tasks. These non-linearities allow
DNNs to learn complicated manifolds in speech and audio
datasets. Below we discuss different DL architectures, which
are illustrated in Figure 1.
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are a kind of
feedforward neural networks that have been speciﬁcally de-
signed for processing data having grid-like topologies such
as images [25]. Recently, CNN’s have shown state-of-the-
art performance in various image processing tasks, including
segmentation, detection, and classiﬁcation, among others [26].
In contrast to DNNs, CNNs limit the number of parameters
and memory requirements dramatically by leveraging on two
key concepts: local receptive ﬁelds and shared weights. They
often consist of a series of convolutional layers interleaved
with pooling layers, followed by one or more dense layers.
For sequence labelling, the dense layers can be omitted to
obtain a fully-convolutional network (FCN). FCNs have been
extended with domain adaptation for increased robustness [27].
Recently, CNN models have been extensively studied for
a variety of audio processing tasks including music onset
detection [28], speech enhancement [29], ASR [30], etc.
However, raw audio waveform with high sample rates might
have problems with limited receptive ﬁelds of CNNs, which can
result in deteriorated performance. To handle this performance
issue, dilated convolution layers can be used in order to
extend the receptive ﬁeld by inserting zeros between their
ﬁlter coefﬁcients [31], [32].
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) follow a different
approach for modelling sequential data [33]. They introduce
recurrent connections to enable parameters to be shared across
time, which make them very powerful in learning temporal
structures from the input sequences (e.g., audio, video). They
have demonstrated their superiority over traditional HMM-
based systems in a variety of speech and audio processing
tasks [34]. Due to these abilities, RNNs, especially long-
short term memory (LSTM) [10] and gated recurrent unit
(GRU) [35] networks, have had an enormous impact in the
speech community, and they are incorporated in state-of-the-

3
Fig. 1: Graphical illustration of different DL architectures.
art audio-based systems. Recently, these RNN models have
been extended to include information in the frequency domain
besides temporal information in the form of Frequency-LSTMs
[36] and Time-Frequency LSTMs [37]. In order to beneﬁt from
both neural architectures, CNNs and RNNs can be combined
into a single network with convolutional layers followed by
recurrent layers, often referred to as convolutional recurrent
neural networks (CRNN). Related works combining CNNs and
RNNs have been presented in ASR [38], SER [39], music
classiﬁcation [40], and other audio related applications [34].
Sequence-to-sequence (Seq2Seq) models were motivated
due to problems requiring sequences of unknown lengths [41].
Although they were initially applied to machine translation,
they can be applied to many different applications involving
sequence modelling. In a Seq2Seq model, while one RNN
reads the inputs in order to generate a vector representation
(the encoder), another RNN inherits those learnt features to
generate the outputs (the decoder). The neural architectures
can be single or multilayer, unidirectional or bidirectional [42],
and they can combine multiple architectures [33], [43] using
end-to-end learning by optimising a joint objective instead of
independent ones. Seq2Seq models have been gaining much
popularity in the speech community due to their capability
of transducing input to output sequences. DL frameworks
are particularly suitable for this direct translation task due
to their large model capacity and their capability to train in
an end-to-end manner—to directly map the input signals to
the target sequences [44]–[46]. Various Seq2Seq models have
been explored in the speech, audio and language processing
literature including Recurrent Neural Network Transducer
(RNNT) [47], Monotonic Alignments [48], Listen, Attend and
Spell (LAS) [49], Neural Transducer [50], Recurrent Neural
Aligner (RNA) [48], and Transformer Networks [51], among
others.
Generative Models have been attaining much interest in
the three types of generative models: Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs) [52], Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) [53],
and autoregressive models [54]. This type of models are
powerful enough to learn the underlying distribution of speech
datasets and have been extensively investigated in the speech
and audio processing scientiﬁc community. Speciﬁcally, in the
case of GANs and VAEs, audio signal is often synthesised
from a low-dimensional representation, from which it needs
to by upsampled (e.g., through linear interpolation or the
nearest neighbour) to the high-resolution signal [55], [56].
Therefore, VAEs and GANs have been extensively explored
for synthesising speech or to augment the training material by
generating features [57] or speech itself. In the autoregressive
approach, the new samples are synthesised iteratively—based
on an inﬁnitely long context of previous samples via RNNs
(for example, using LSTM or GRU networks)—but at the cost
of expensive computation during training [58].
B. Reinforcement learning
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a popular paradigm of ML,
which involves agents to learn their behaviour by trial and
error [2]. RL agents aim to learn sequential decision-making
by successfully interacting with the environment where they
operate. At time t (0 at the beginning of the interaction, T
at the end of an episodic interaction, or ∞in the case of
non-episodic tasks), an RL agent in state st takes an action
a ∈A, transits to a new state st+1, and receives reward rt+1
for having chosen action a. This process—repeated iteratively—
is illustrated in Figure 2.
An RL agent aims to learn the best sequence of actions, known
as policy, to obtain the highest overall cumulative reward in
the task (or set of tasks) that is being trained on. While it can
choose any action from a set of available actions, the set of
actions that an agent takes from start to ﬁnish is called an

4
Fig. 2: Basic RL setting.
episode. A Markov decision process (MDP) [59] can be used to
capture the episodic dynamics of an RL problem. An MDP can
be represented using the tuple (S, A, γ, P, R). The decision-
maker or agent chooses an action a ∈A in state s ∈S at time t
according to its policy π(at|st)—which determines the agent’s
way of behaving. The probability of moving to the next state
st+1 ∈S is given by the state transition function P(st+1|st, at).
The environment produces a reward R(st, at, st+1) based on
the action taken by the agent at time t. This process continues
until the maximum time step or the agent reaches a terminal
state. The objective is to maximise the expected discounted
cumulative reward, which is given by:
Eπ[Rt] = Eπ
h ∞
X
i=0
γirt+i
i
(1)
where γ ∈[0,1] is a discount factor used to specify that rewards
in the distant future are less valuable than in the nearer future.
While an RL agent may only learn its policy, it may also learn
(online or ofﬂine) the transition and reward functions.
III. DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) combines conventional
RL with DL to overcome the limitations of RL in complex
environments with large state spaces or high computation
requirements. DRL employs DNNs to estimate value, policy or
model that are learnt through the storage of state-action pairs
in conventional RL [19]. Deep RL algorithms can be classiﬁed
along several dimensions. For instance, on-policy vs off-policy,
model-free vs model-based, value-based vs policy-based DRL
algorithms, among others. The salient features of various key
categories of DRL algorithms are presented and depicted in
Figure 3. Interested readers are referred to [19] for more details
on these algorithms. This section focuses on popular DRL
algorithms employed in audio-based applications in three main
categories: (i) value-based DRL, (ii) policy gradient-based DRL
and (iii) model-based DRL.
A. Value-Based DRL
One of the most famous value-based DRL algorithms is Deep
Q-network (DQN), introduced by Mnih et al. [12], that learns
directly from high-dimensional inputs. It employs convolution
neural networks (CNNs) to estimate a value function Q(s, a),
which is subsequently used to deﬁne a policy. DQN enhances
the stability of the learning process using the concept of target
Q-network along with experience replay. The loss function
computed by DQN at ith iteration is given by
Li(θi) = Es,a∼p(.)[(yi −Q(s, a; θi))2],
where
yi = Es′∼s[r + γmax
a′ Q(s′, a′; θi−1|s, a].
(2)
Although DQN, since inception, has rendered super-human
performance in Atari games, it is based on a single max
operator, given in (2), for selection as well evaluation of an
action. Thus, the selection of an overestimated action may lead
to over-optimistic action value estimates that induces an upward
bias. Double DQN (DDQN) [60] eliminates this positive bias
by introducing two decoupled estimators: one for the selection
of an action, and one for the evaluation of an action. Schaul
et al. in [61] show that the performance of DQN and DDQN
is enhanced considerably if signiﬁcant experience transitions
are prioritised and replayed more frequently. Wang et al. [62]
present a duelling network architecture (DNA) to estimate a
value function V (s) and associated advantage function A(s, a)
separately, and then combine them to get action-value function
Q(s, a). Results prove that DQN and DDQN having DNA and
prioritised experience replay can lead to improved performance.
Unlike the aforementioned DQN algorithms that focus
on the expected return, distributional DQN [63] aims to
learn the full distribution of the value in order to have
additional information about rewards. Despite both DQN and
distributional DQN focusing on maximising the expected return,
the latter comparatively results in performant learning. Will et
al. [64] propose distributional DQN with quantile regression
(QR-DQN) to explicitly model the distribution of the value
function. Results prove that QR-DQN successfully bridges the
gap between theoretic and algorithmic results. Implicit Quantile
Networks (IQN) [65], an extension to QR-DQN, estimate
quantile regression by learning the full quantile function instead
of focusing on a discrete number of quantiles. IQN also
provides ﬂexibility regarding its training with the required
number of samples per update, ranging from one sample
to a maximum computationally allowed. IQN has shown to
outperform QR-DQN comprehensively in the Atari domain.
The astounding success of DQN to learn rich representations
is highly attributed to DNNs, while batch algorithms prove
to have better stability and data efﬁciency (requiring less
tuning of hyperparameters). Authors in [66] propose a hybrid
approach named as Least Squares DQN (LS-DQN) that exploits
the advantages of both DQN and batch algorithms. Deep Q-
learning from demonstrations (DQfD) [67] leverages human
demonstrations to learn at an accelerated rate from the start.
Deep Quality-Value (DQV) [68] is a novel temporal-difference-
based algorithm that trains the Value network initially, and
subsequently uses it to train a Quality-value neural network for
estimating a value function. Results in the Atari domain indicate
that DQV outperforms DQN as well as DDQN. Authors
in [69] propose RUDDER (Return Decomposition for Delayed
Rewards), which encompasses reward redistribution and return

5
Fig. 3: Classiﬁcation of DRL algorithms.
decomposition for Markov decision processes (MDPs) with de-
layed rewards. Pohlen et al. [70] employ a transformed Bellman
operator along with human demonstrations in the proposed
algorithm Ape-X DQfD to attain human-level performance
over a wide range of games. Results prove that the proposed
algorithm achieves average-human performance in 40 out of 42
Atari games with the same set of hyperparameters. Schulman
et al. in [71] study the connection between Q-learning and
policy gradient methods. They show that soft Q-learning (an
entropy-regularised version of Q-learning) is equivalent to
policy gradient methods and that they perform as well (if not
better) than standard variants.
Previous studies have also attempted to incorporate the
memory element into DRL algorithms. For instance, the deep
recurrent Q-network (DRQN) approach introduced by [72]
was able to successfully integrate information through time,
which performed well on standard Atari games. A further im-
provement was made by introducing an attention mechanism to
DQN, resulting in a deep recurrent Q-network (DARQN) [73].
This allows DARQN to focus on a speciﬁc part of the input
and achieve better performance compared to DQN and DRQN
on games. Some other studies [74], [75] have also proposed
methods to incorporate memory into DRL, but this area remains
to be investigated further.
B. Policy Gradient-Based DRL
Policy gradient-based DRL algorithms aim to learn an
optimal policy that maximises performance objectives, such as
expected cumulative reward. This class of algorithms make use
of gradient theorems to reach optimal policy parameters. Policy
gradient typically requires the estimation of a value function
based on the current policy. This may be accomplished using the
actor-critic architecture, where the actor represents the policy
and the critic refers to value function estimate [76]. Mnih et
al. [77] show that asynchronous execution of multiple parallel
agents on standard CPU-based hardware leads to time-efﬁcient
and resource-efﬁcient learning. The proposed asynchronous
version of actor-critic, asynchronous advantage actor-critic
(A3C) exhibit remarkable learning in both 2D and 3D games
with action spaces in discrete as well as continuous domains.
Authors in [78] propose a hybrid CPU/GPU-based A3C —
named as GA3C — showing signiﬁcantly higher speeds as
compared to its CPU-based counterpart.
Asynchronous actor-critic algorithms, including A3C and
GA3C, may suffer from inconsistent and asynchronous param-
eter updates. A novel framework for asynchronous algorithms
is proposed in [79] to leverage parallelisation while providing
synchronous parameters updates. Authors show that the pro-
posed parallel advantage actor-critic (PAAC) algorithm enables
true on-policy learning in addition to faster convergence. Au-
thors in [80] propose a hybrid policy-gradient-and-Q-learning
(PGQL) algorithm that combines on-policy policy gradient with
off-policy Q-learning. Results demonstrate PGQL’s superior
performance on Atari games as compared to both A3C and
Q-learning. Munos et al. [81] propose a novel algorithm
by bringing together three off-policy algorithms: Instance
Sampling (IS), Q(λ), and Tree-Backup TB(λ). This algorithm
— called Retrace(λ) — alleviates the weaknesses of all three
algorithms (IS has low variance, Q(λ) is not safe, and TB(λ)
is inefﬁcient) and promises safety, efﬁciency and guaranteed
convergence. Reactor (Retrace-Actor) [82] is a Retrace-based
actor-critic agent architecture that combines time efﬁciency of
asynchronous algorithms with sample efﬁciency of off-policy
experience replay-based algorithms. Results in the Atari domain
indicate that the proposed algorithm performs comparably with
state-of-the-art algorithms while yielding substantial gains in
terms of training time. The importance of weighted actor-
learner architecture (IMPALA) [83] is a scalable distributed
agent that is capable of handling multiple tasks with a single
set of parameters. Results show that IMPALA outperforms

6
A3C baselines in a diverse multi-task environment.
Schulman et al. [84] propose a robust and scalable trust
region policy optimisation (TRPO) algorithm for optimising
stochastic control policies. TRPO promises guaranteed mono-
tonic improvement regarding the optimisation of nonlinear and
complex policies having an inundated number of parameters.
This learning algorithm makes use of a ﬁxed KL divergence
constraint rather than a ﬁxed penalty coefﬁcient, and outper-
forms a number of gradient-free and policy-gradient methods
over a wide variety of tasks. [85] introduce proximal policy
optimisation (PPO), which aims to be as reliable and stable
as TRPO but relatively better in terms of implementation and
sample complexity.
C. Model-Based DRL
Model-based DRL algorithms rely on models of the en-
vironment (i.e. underlying dynamics and reward functions)
in conjunction with a planning algorithm. Unlike model-free
DRL methods that typically entail a large number of samples to
render adequate performance, model-based algorithms generally
lead to improved sample and time efﬁciency [86].
Kaiser et al. [87] propose simulated policy learning (SimPLe),
a video prediction-based model-based DRL algorithm that
requires much fewer agent-environment interactions than model-
free algorithms. Experimental results indicate that SimPLe
outperforms state-of-the-art model-free algorithms in Atari
games. Farquhar et al. [88] propose TreeQN for complex
environments, where the transition model is not explicitly given.
The proposed algorithm combines model-free and model-based
approaches in order to estimate Q-values based on a dynamic
tree constructed recursively through an implicit transition model.
Authors of [88] also propose an actor-critic variant named
ATreeC that augments TreeQN with a softmax layer to form a
stochastic policy network. They show that both algorithms yield
superior performance than n-step DQN and value prediction
networks [89] on multiple Atari games. Authors in [90]
introduce a Strategic Attentive Writer (STRAW), which is
capable of making natural decisions by learning macro-actions.
Unlike state-of-the-art DRL algorithms that yield only one
action after every observation, STRAW generates a sequence
of actions, thus leading to structured exploration. Experimental
results indicate a signiﬁcant improvement in Atari games
with STRAW. Value Propagation (VProp) [91] is a set of
Value Iteration-based planning modules trained using RL and
capable of solving unseen tasks and navigating in complex
environments. It is also demonstrated that VProp is able to
generalise in a dynamic and noisy environment. Authors in [92]
present a model-based algorithm named MuZero that combines
tree-based search with a learned model to render superhuman
performance in challenging environments. Experimental results
demonstrate that MuZero delivers state-of-the-art performance
on 57 diverse Atari games. Table II presents an overview of
DRL algorithms for a reader’s glance.
IV. AUDIO-BASED DRL
This section surveys related works where audio is a key
element in the learning environments of DRL agents. An
example scenario is a human speaking to a machine trained
via DRL as in Figure 4, where the machine has to act based
on features derived from audio signals. Table III summarises
the characterisation of DRL agents for six audio-related areas:
1) automatic speech recognition;
2) spoken dialogue systems;
3) emotions modelling;
4) audio enhancement;
5) music listening and generation; and
6) robotics, control and interaction.
A. Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR)
Automatic speech recognition (ASR) is the process of
converting a speech signal into its corresponding text by
algorithms. Contemporary ASR technology has reached great
levels of performance due to advancements in DL models. The
performance of ASR systems, however, relies heavily on super-
vised training of deep models with large amounts of transcribed
data. Even for resource-rich languages, additional transcription
costs required for new tasks hinders the applications of ASR.
To broaden the scope of ASR, different studies have attempted
RL based models with the ability to learn from feedback. This
form of learning aims to reduce transcription costs and time
by humans providing positive or negative rewards instead of
detailed transcriptions. For instance, Kala et al. [122] proposed
an RL framework for ASR based on the policy gradient method
that provides a new view of existing training and adaptation
methods. They achieved improved recognition performance and
reduced Word Error Rate (WER) compared to unsupervised
adaptation. In ASR, sequence-to-sequence models have shown
great success; however, these models fail to approximate real-
world speech during inference. Tjandra et al. [123] solved
this issue by training a sequence-to-sequence model with a
policy gradient algorithm. Their results showed a signiﬁcant
improvement using an RL-based objective and a maximum
likelihood estimation (MLE) objective compared to the model
trained with only the MLE objective. In another study, [124]
extended their own work by providing more details on their
model and experimentation. They found that using token-level
rewards (intermediate rewards are given after each time step)
provide improved performance compared to sentence-level
rewards and baseline systems. In order solve the issues of
semi-supervised training of sequence-to-sequence ASR models,
Chung et al. [125] investigated the REINFORCE algorithm by
rewarding the ASR to output more correct sentences for both
unpaired and paired speech input data. Experimental evaluations
showed that the DRL-based method was able to effectively
reduce character error rates from 10.4% to 8.7%.
Karita et al. [126] propose to train an encoder-decoder
ASR system using a sequence-level evaluation metric based
on the policy gradient objective function. This enables the
minimisation of the expected WER of the model predictions. In
this way, the authors found that the proposed method improves
recognition performance. The ASR system of [127] was
jointly trained with maximum likelihood and policy gradient to
improve via end-to-end learning. They were able to optimise
the performance metric directly and achieve 4% to 13% relative

7
TABLE II: Summary of DRL algorithms.
DRL algorithms
Approach
Details
off-policy/
on policy
Value-based DRL
DQN [2]
Target Q-network, experience replay
• Learns directly from high dimensional visual inputs
• Stabilises learning process with target Q-network
• Experience replay to avoid divergence in parameters
off-policy
DDQN [3]
Double Q-learning
Decoupled estimators for the selection and evaluation of an action
Prioritised DQN [4]
Prioritised experience replay
Signiﬁcant experience transitions are prioritised and replayed
frequently thus leading to efﬁcient learning
DNA [5]
Duelling neural network architecture
Estimates a value function and associated advantage function and combine
them to get a value function with faster convergence than Q-learning
Distributional DQN [6]
Learns distribution of cumulative returns
using distributional Bellman equation
• Leads to performant learning than DQN
• Possibility to implement risk-aware behaviour
QR-DQN [7]
Distributional DQN with quantile regression
Bridges gap between theoretical and algorithmic results
IQN [8]
Extends QR-DQN with a full quantile function
Provides ﬂexibility regarding number of samples required for training
LS-DQN [9]
A hybrid approach combining DQN with
least-squares method
Exploits advantages of both DQN, ability to learn rich representations,
and batch algorithms, stability and data efﬁciency
DQfD [10]
Learns from demonstrations
Learns at an accelerated rate from the start.
DQV [11]
Uses temporal difference to train a Value network
and subsequently uses it for training a Quality-Value
network that estimates state-action values
Learns signiﬁcantly better and faster than DQN and DDQN
RUDDER [12]
Reward redistribution and return decomposition
Provides prominent improvement on games having long
delayed rewards
Ape-X DQfD [13]
Employs transformed Bellman operator
together with temporal consistency loss
Surpasses average human performance on 40 out
of 42 Atari 2600 games
Soft DQN [14]
Incorporation of soft KL penalty and entropy bonus
Establishes equivalence between Soft DQN and policy gradient
DRQN, DARQN [14-15]
Memory, attention
DQN policies modelled by attention-based recurrent networks
Policy Gradient-based DRL
A3C [16]
Asynchronous gradient descent
Consumes less resources; able to run on a standard multi-core CPU
on-policy
GA3C [17]
Hybrid CPU/GPU-based A3C
Achieves speed signiﬁcantly higher than its CPU-based counterpart
PAAC [18]
Novel framework for asynchronous algorithms
Computationally efﬁcient & enables faster convergence to optimal policies
PGQL [19]
Combines on-policy policy gradient
with off-policy Q-learning
Enhanced stability and data efﬁciency
off-policy
Retrace(λ) [20]
Expresses three off-policy algorithms—IS,
Q(λ) and TB(λ)— in a common form
Safe, sample efﬁcient and has low variance
Reactor [21]
Retrace-based actor-critic agent architecture
Yields substantial gains in terms of training time.
IMPALA [22]
Scalable distributed agent capable
of handling multiple tasks with
a single set of parameters
outperforms state-of-the-art agents in a
diverse multi-task environment
on-policy
TRPO [23]
Employs ﬁxed KL divergence constraint
for optimising stochastic control policies
Performs well over a wide variety of large-scale tasks
PPO [24]
Makes use of adaptive KL penalty coefﬁcient
As reliable and stable as TRPO but relatively better
in terms of implementation and sample complexity
Model-based DRL
SimPLe [26]
Video prediction-based model-based algorithm that
requires much fewer agent-environment
interactions than model-free algorithms
Outperforms state-of-the-art model-free algorithms in Atari games
on-policy
TreeQN [27]
Estimates Q-values based on a dynamic
tree constructed recursively through
an implicit transition model
Outperforms n-step DQN and value prediction networks
in multiple Atari games
STRAW [29]
Capable of natural decision making
by learning macro actions
Improves performance signiﬁcantly in Atari games
VProp [30]
A set of Value Iteration-based planning
modules that is trained using RL
• Able to solve an unseen task and navigate in complex environments
• Able to generalise in dynamic and noisy environment
-
MuZero [31]
Combines tree-based search with learned
model to render superhuman performance
in challenging environments
Delivers state-of-the-art performance on 57 diverse Atari games
off-policy
performance improvement. In [128], the authors attempted to
solve sequence-to-sequence problems by proposing a model
based on supervised backpropagation and a policy gradient
method, which can directly maximise the log probability of
the correct answer. They achieved very encouraging results
on a small scale and a medium scale ASR. Radzikowski et
al. [129] proposed a dual supervised model based on a policy
gradient methodology for non-native speech recognition. They
were able to achieve promising results for the English language
pronounced by Japanese and Polish speakers.
To achieve the best possible accuracy, end-to-end ASR
systems are becoming increasingly large and complex. DRL
methods can also be leveraged to provide model compres-
sion [130]. In [131], RL-based ShrinkML is proposed to
optimise the per-layer compression ratios in a state-of-the-
art LSTM-based ASR model with attention. For time-efﬁcient
ASR, [132] evaluated the pre-training of an RL-based policy
gradient network. They found that pre-training in DRL offers
faster convergence compared to non-pre-trained networks, and
also achieve improved recognition in lesser time. To tackle the
slow convergence time of the REINFORCE algorithm [133],
Lawson et al. [134], evaluated Variational Inference for Monte
Carlo Objectives (VIMCO) and Neural Variational Inference
(NVIL) for phoneme recognition tasks in clean and noisy
environments. The authors found that the proposed method
(using VIMCO and NVIL) outperforms REINFORCE and other
methods at training online sequence-to-sequence models.
All of the above-mentioned studies highlight several beneﬁts
of using DRL for ASR. Despite these promising results, further
research is required on DRL algorithms towards building

8
Fig. 4: Schematic diagram of DRL agents for audio-based applications, where the DL model (via DNNs, CNN, RNNs, etc.)
generates audio features from raw waveforms or other audio representations for taking actions that change the environment
from state st to a next state st+1.
autonomous ASR systems that can work in complex real-
life settings. REINFORCE algorithm is very popular in ASR,
therefore, research is also required to explore other DRL
algorithms to highlights suitability for ASR.
B. Spoken Dialogue Systems (SDSs)
Spoken dialogue systems are gaining interest due to many
applications in customer services and goal-oriented human-
computer-interaction. Typical SDSs integrate several key
components including speech recogniser, intent recogniser,
knowledge base and/or database backend, dialogue manager,
language generator, and speech synthesis, among others [135].
The task of a dialogue manager in SDSs is to select actions
based on observed events [136], [137]. Researchers have shown
that the action selection process can be effectively optimised
using RL to model the dynamics of spoken dialogue as a fully or
partially observable Markov Decision Process [138]. Numerous
studies have utilised RL-based algorithms in spoken dialogue
systems. In contrast to text-based dialogue systems that can be
trained directly using large amounts of text data [139], most
SDSs have been trained using user simulations [104]. The
justiﬁcation for that is mainly due to insufﬁcient amounts of
training dialogues to train or test from real data [105].
SDSs involve policy optimisation to respond to humans by
taking the current state of the dialogue, selecting an action,
and returning the verbal response of the system. For instance,
Chen et al. [140] presented an online DRL-based dialogue state
tracking framework in order to improve the performance of a
dialogue manager. They achieved promising results for online
dialogue state tracking in the second and third dialog state
tracking challenges ( [141], [142]). Weisz et al. [143] utilised
DRL approaches, including actor-critic methods and off-policy
RL. They also evaluated actor-critic with experience replay
(ACER) [81], [144], which has shown promising results on
simple gaming tasks. They showed that the proposed method
is sample efﬁcient and that performed better than some state-
of-the-art DL approaches for spoken dialogue. A task-oriented
end-to-end DRL-based dialogue system is proposed in [145].
They showed that DRL-based optimisation produced signiﬁcant
improvement in task success rate and also caused a reduction
in dialogue length compared to supervised training. Zhao
et al. [146] utilised deep recurrent Q-networks (DRQN) for
dialogue state tracking and management. Experimental results
showed that the proposed model can exploit the strengths
of DRL and supervised learning to achieve faster learning
speed and better results than the modular-based baseline
system. To present baseline results, a benchmark study [147]
is performed using DRL algorithms including DQN, A2C and
natural actor-critic [148] and their performance is compared
against GP-SARSA [149]. Based on experimental results on
the PyDial toolkit [150], the authors conclude that substantial
improvements are still needed for DRL methods to match
the performance of carefully designed handcrafted policies. In
addition to SDSs optimised via ﬂat DRL, hierarchical RL/DRL
methods have been proposed for policy learning using dialogue
states with different levels of abstraction and dialogue actions
at different levels of granularity (via primitive and composite
actions) [151]–[156]. The beneﬁts of this form of learning
include faster training and policy reuse. A deep Q-network
based multi-domain dialogue system is proposed in [157]. They

9
TABLE III: Summary of audio related ﬁelds, characterisation of DRL agents, and related datasets.
Appl. Area
State Representations S, Actions A, and Reward Functions R
Popular Datasets
Automatic
Speech
Recognition
S: States are learnt representations from input speech features (e.g. fMLLR or MFCC vectors [93]).
A: Actions include phonemes, graphemes, commands, or candidates from the ASR N-best list.
R: They have included binary rewards (positive for selecting the correct choice, 0 otherwise),
and non-binary sentence/token rewards based on the Levenshtein distance algorithm.
• LibriSpeech [94]
• TED-LIUM [95]
• Wall Street Journal [96]
• SWITCHBOARD [97]
• TIMIT [98]
Spoken
Dialogue
Systems
S: They encode the uttered words by the system and recognised user words into a dialogue history
and some additional information from classiﬁers such as user goals, user intents, speech recognition
conﬁdence scores, and visual information (in the case of multimodal systems), among others.
A: While actions in task-oriented systems include slot requests/conﬁrmations/apologies, slot-value
selection, ask question, data retrieval, information presentation, among others; actions in open-ended
systems include either all possible sentences (inﬁnite) or clusters of sentences (ﬁnite).
R: They vary depending on the company/project requirements and tend to include sparse and
non-sparse numerical rewards such as dialogue length, task success, dialogue similarity, dialogue
coherence, dialogue repetitiveness, game scores (in the case of game-based systems), among others.
• SGD [99]
• DSTC [100]
• Frames [101]
• MultiWOZ [102]
• SubTle Corpus [103]
• Simulations [104]
• Other datasets [105]
Speech
Emotion
Recognition
S: Speech features (e.g., MFCC) are considered as input features.
A: Actions include speech emotion labels (e.g. unhappy, neutral, happy), sentiment detection
(e.g. negative, neutral, positive), and termination from utterance listening.
R: Binary reward functions have been used (positive for choosing the correct choice, 0 otherwise).
• EMODB [106]
• IEMOCAP [107]
• MSP-IMPROV [108]
• SEMAINE [109]
• MELD [110]
Audio
Enhancement
S: States are learnt from clean and noisy acoustic features.
A: Finding closest cluster and its index, time-frequency mask estimation, and increasing or decreasing
the parameter values of the speech-enhancement algorithm.
R: Positive rewards for correct choice, negative otherwise.
• DEMAND [111]
• CHiME-3 [112]
• WHAMR [113]
Music
Generation
S: State representations are learned from Musical notes.
A: Musical generation and next note selection are considered as actions.
R: Binary reward functions based on hard-coded musical theory rules, including the likelihood of actions.
• Classical piano MIDI
database [114]
• MusicNet dataset [115]
• JSB Chorales
dataset [116]
Robotics,
Control and
Interaction
S: They encode visual and verbal representations derived from image embeddings, speech features,
and word or sentence embeddings. Additional information include user intents, speech recognition
scores, human activities, postures, emotions, and body joint angles, among others.
A: They include motor commands (e.g. gestures, locomotion, navigation, manipulation, gaze) and
verbalizations such as dialogue acts and backchannels (e.g. laughs, smiles, noddings, head-shakes).
R: They are based on task success (positive rewards for achieving the goal, negative rewards for
failing the task, and zero/shaped rewards otherwise) and user engagement.
• AVDIAR [117]
• NLI Corpus [118]
• VEIL dataset [119]
• Simulations [120]
• Real-world
interactions [121]
train the proposed SDS using a network of DQN agents, which
is similar to hierarchical DRL but with more ﬂexibility for
transitioning across dialogues domains. Another work related
to faster training is proposed by [158], where the behaviour of
RL agents is guided by expert demonstrations.
The optimisation of dialogue policies requires a reward
function that unfortunately is not easy to specify. This often
requires annotated data for training a reward predictor instead of
a hand-crafted one. In real-world applications, such annotations
are either scarce or not available. Therefore, some researchers
have turner their attention to methods for online active reward
learning. In [159], the authors presented an online learning
framework for a spoken dialogue system. They jointly trained
the dialogue policy alongside the reward model via active
learning. Based on the results, the authors showed that the
proposed framework can signiﬁcantly reduce data annotation
costs and can also mitigate noisy user feedback in dialogue
policy learning. Su et al. [148] introduced two approaches:
trust region actor-critic with experience replay (TRACER) and
episodic natural actor-critic with experience replay (eNACER)
for dialogue policy optimisation. From these two algorithms,
they achieved the best performance using TRACER.
In [160], the authors propose to learn a domain-independent
reward function based on user satisfaction for dialogue policy
learning. The authors showed that the proposed framework
yields good performance for both task success rate and user
satisfaction. Researchers have also used DRL to learn dialogue
policies in noisy environments, and some have shown that their
proposed models can generate dialogues indistinguishable from
human ones [161]. Carrara et al. [162] propose online learning
and transfer for user adaptation in RL-based dialogue systems.
Experiments were carried out on a negotiation dialogue task,
which showed signiﬁcant improvements over baselines. In
another study [163], authors proposed ϵ-safe, a Q-learning
algorithm, for safe transfer learning for dialogue applications.
A DRL-based chatbot called MILABOT was designed in [164],
which can converse with humans on popular topics through
both speech and text—performing signiﬁcantly better than
many competing systems. The text-based chatbot in [165] used
an ensemble of DRL agents, and showed that training multiple
dialogue agents performs better than a single agent.
Table IV shows a summary of DRL-based dialogue systems.
While not all involve spoken interactions, they can be applied to
speech-based systems by for example using the outputs from
a speech recogniser instead of typed interactions. In terms
of application, we can observe that most systems focus on
one or a few domains—systems trained with a large amount
of domains is usually not attempted, presumably due to the
high requirements of data and compute involved. Regarding
algorithms, the most popular are DQN-based or REINFORCE

10
TABLE IV: Summary of research papers on dialogue systems trained with DRL algorithms (?=information not available)
Refe-
Application
DRL
User Si-
Transfer
Training
Human
Reward
rence
Domain(s)
Algorithm
mulations
Learning
(Test) Data
Evaluation
Function
[166]
Games:
KG-DQN
No
Yes
40 (10) games
No
+1 for getting closer to the ﬁnish, -1 for
Slice of Life, Horror
extending the minimum steps, 0 otherwise
[167]
Restaurants, laptops
FDQN,
Yes
No
4K (0.5K) dialogues
No
+20 if successful dialogue or 0 otherwise,
GP-Sarsa
minus dialogue length
[168]
Restaurants
MADQN
Yes
Yes
15K (?) dialogues
No
+1 if successful dialogue,
-0.05 at each dialogue turn
[120]
Chitchat
Ensemble
No
No
≤64K (1k) dialogues
Yes
+1 for a human-like response,
DQN
-1 for a randomly chosen response
[165]
Robot playing
Competitive
Yes
No
20K (3K) games
Yes
+5 for a game win,
noughts & crosses
DQN
+1 for a draw, -5 for a loss
[169]
Restaurants, hotels
NDQN
Yes
No
8.7K (1K) dialogues
No
P r(TaskSuccess) plus P r(Data-Like)
minus number of turns × −0.1
[170]
Visual
Reinforce
No
No
68K (9.5K) images
Yes
Euclidean distances between predicted and
Question-Answering
target descriptions of the last 2 time steps
[171]
Restaurants
DA2C
Yes
No
15K (0.5K) dialogues
No
+1 if successful dialogue, -0.03 at each turn,
-1 if unsuccessful dialogue or hangup
[172]
Movie chat
Dueling
Yes
No
150K (?) sentences
No
+10 for correct recognition, -12 for incorrect
DDQN
recognition, smaller rewards for conﬁrm/elicit
[158]
MultiWoz
NDfQ
Yes
No
11.4K (1K) dialogues
No
+100 for successfully completing the task,
-1 at each turn
[173]
Chitchat
DBCQ
No
No
14.2×2K (?) sentences
Yes
Weighted scores combining sentiment, asking,
laughter, long dialogues, & sentence similarity
[174]
OpenSubtitles
Reinforce
No
No
˜10M (1K) sentences
Yes
Weighted scores combining ease of answering,
information ﬂow, and semantic coherence
[175]
OpenSubtitles
Adversarial
No
No
? (?) dialogues
Yes
Learnt rewards (binary classiﬁer determining
Reinforce
a machine- or human-generated dialogue)
[176]
Movie booking
BBQN
Yes
No
20K (10K) dialogues
Yes
+40 if successful dialogue, -1 at each turn,
-10 for a failed dialogue
[177]
Freeway, Bomberman,
Text-DQN,
No
Yes
10M-15M (50K) steps
No
Learnt rewards (CNN network trained from
Bourderchase, F&E
Text-VI
crowdsourced text descriptions of gameplays)
[155]
Flights and hotels
Hierarchical
Yes
No
20K (2K) dialogues
Yes
+120 if successful dialogue, -1 at each turn,
DQN
-60 for a failed dialogue
[178]
Movie-ticket booking
Adversarial
Yes
No
100K (5K) dialogues
No
Learnt rewards (MLP network comparing
A2C
state-action pairs with human dialogues)
[179]
Chitchat
Hierarchical
No
No
109K (10K) dialogues
Yes
Predeﬁned scores combining question,
Reinforce
repetition, semantic similarity, and toxicity
[180]
Chitchat
Reinforce
No
No
∼2M (?) dialogues
Yes
Positive reward from ease of answering -
negative reward for manual dull utterances
[181]
Chitchat
Reinforce
No
No
∼5K (0.1) dialogues
Yes
Learnt rewards (linear regressor predicting
user scores at the end of the dialogue)
[182]
Restaurants
TRACER,
Yes
No
≤3.5K (0.6K) dialogues
No
+20 if successful dialogue (0 otherwise)
eNACER
minus 0.05 × number of dialogue turns
[183]
Buses, restaurants,
GP-Sarsa
Yes
No
1K (0.1K) dialogues
No
Learnt rewards (Support Vector Machine
hotels, laptops
predicting user dialogue ratings)
[184]
Medical diagnosis
KR-DQN
Yes
No
423 (104) dialogues
Yes
+44 for successful diagnoses, -22 for failed
(4 diseases)
diagnoses, -1 for failing symptom requests
[185]
Restaurants
ACER
Yes
No
4K (4K) dialogues
Yes
+20 for a successful dialogue minus number
of turns in the dialogue
[186]
Dialling domain
Reinforce
Yes
No
5K (0.5K) dialogues
No
+1 for successfully completing the dialogue,
0 otherwise
[187]
20-question game
DRQN
Yes
No
120K (5K) sentences
No
+30 for a game win, -30 for a lost game,
-5 for a wrong guess
[188]
DealOrNotDeal,
Reinforce
Yes;No
No
≤8.4K (≤1K) dialogues
No
+≤10 for a negotiation, 0 for no agreement;
MultiWoz
language constrained reward curve
[156]
20 images
DRRN+
Yes
No
20K (1K) games
No
+10 for a game win, -10 for a lost game,
guessing game
DQN
a pseudo reward for question selection
[189]
MultiWoz
GPmbcm, PPO
Yes
No
10.5K (1K) dialogues
Yes
Learnt rewards (MLP network comparing
ACER, ALDM
state-action pairs with human dialogues)
among other more recent algorithms—when to use one over
another algorithm still needs to be understood better. We can
also observe that user simulations are mostly used for training
task-oriented dialogue systems, while real data is the preferred
choice for open-ended dialogue systems. We can note that while
transfer learning is an important component in a trained SDS, it
is not common-place yet. Given that learning from scratch every
time a system is trained is neither scalable nor practical, it looks
like transfer learning will naturally be adopted more and more
in the future as more domains are taken into account. In terms
of datasets, most of them they are still in the small size. It is
rare to see SDSs trained with millions of training dialogues or
sentences. As datasets grow, the need for more efﬁcient training
methods will take more relevance in future systems. Regarding
human evaluations, we can observe that about half of research
works involve human evaluations. While human evaluations
may not always be required to answer a research question,
they certainly should be used whenever learnt conversational
skills are being assessed or judged. We can also note that
there is no standard for specifying reward functions due to
the wide variety of functions used in previous works—almost
every paper uses a different reward function. Even when some
works use learnt reward functions (e.g. based on adversarial
learning), they focus on learning to discriminate between
machine-generated and human generated dialogues without
taking other dimensions into account such as task success

11
or additional penalties. Although there is advancement in the
speciﬁcation of reward functions by learning them instead of
hand-crafting them, this area requires better understanding for
optimising different types of dialogues including information-
seeking, chitchat, game-based, negotiation-based, etc.
C. Emotions Modelling
Emotions are essential in vocal human communication,
and they have recently received growing interest by the
research community [39], [190], [191]. Arguably, human-
robot interaction can be signiﬁcantly enhanced if dialogue
agents can perceive the emotional state of a user and its
dynamics [192], [193]. This line of research is categorised
into two areas: emotion recognition in conversations [194],
and affective dialogue generation [195], [196]. Speech emotion
recognition (SER) can be used as a reward for RL based
dialogue systems [197]. This would allow the system to adjust
the behaviour based on the emotional states of the dialogue
partner. Lack of labelled emotional corpora and low accuracy in
SER are two major challenges in the ﬁeld. To achieve the best
possible accuracy, various DL-based methods have been applied
to SER, however, performance improvement is still needed for
real-time deployments. DRL offers different advantages to SER,
as highlighted in different studies. In order to improve audio-
visual SER performance, Ouyang et al. [198] presented a model-
based RL framework that utilised feedback of testing results as
rewards from environment to update the fusion weights. They
evaluated the proposed model on the Multimodal Emotion
Recognition Challenge (MEC 2017) dataset and achieved top
2 at the MEC 2017 Audio-Visual Challenge. To minimise
the latency in SER, Lakomin et al. [199] proposed EmoRL
for predicting the emotional state of a speaker as soon as it
gains enough conﬁdence while listening. In this way, EmoRL
was able to achieve lower latency and minimise the need
for audio segmentation required in DL-based approaches for
SER. In [200], authors used RL with an adaptive fractional
deep Belief network (AFDBN) for SER to enhance human-
computer interaction. They showed that the combination of
RL with AFDBN is efﬁcient in terms of processing time and
SER performance. Another study [201] utilised an LSTM-
based gated multimodal embedding with temporal attention
for sentiment analysis. They exploited the policy gradient
method REINFORCE to balance exploration and optimisation
by random sampling. They empirically show that the proposed
model was able to deal with various challenges of understanding
communication dynamics.
DRL is less popular in SER compared ASR and SDSs. The
above mentioned studies attempted to helps solving different
SER challenges using DRL, however, there is still a need
for developing adaptive SER agents that can perform SER in
cross-lingual settings.
D. Audio Enhancement
The performance of audio-based intelligent systems is
critically vulnerable to noisy conditions and degrades according
to the noise levels in the environment [202]. Several approaches
have been proposed [203] to address problems caused by envi-
ronmental noise. One popular approach is audio enhancement,
which aims to generate an enhanced audio signal from its noisy
or corrupted version [204]. DL-based speech enhancement has
attained increased attention due to its superior performance
compared to traditional methods [205], [206].
In DL-based systems, the audio enhancement module is
generally optimised separately from the main task such as
minimisation of WER. Besides the speech enhancement module,
there are different other units in speech-based systems which
increase their complexity and make them non-differentiable.
In such situations, DRL can achieve complex goals in an
iterative manner, which makes it suitable for such applications.
Such DRL-based approaches have been proposed in [207]
to optimise the speech enhancement module based on the
speech recognition results. Experimental results have shown
that DRL-based methods can effectively improve the system’s
performance by 12.4% and 19.2% error rate reductions for
the signal to noise ratio at 0 dB and 5 dB, respectively.
In [208], authors attempted to optimise DNN-based source
enhancement using RL with numerical rewards calculated from
conventional perceptual scores such as perceptual evaluation of
speech quality (PESQ) [209] and perceptual evaluation methods
for audio source separation (PEASS) [210]. They showed
empirically that the proposed method can improve the quality
of the output speech signals by using RL-based optimisation.
Fakoor et al. [211] performed a study in an attempt to improve
the adaptivity of speech enhancement methods via RL. They
propose to model the noise-suppression module as a black box,
requiring no knowledge of the algorithmic mechanics. Using
an LSTM-based agent, they showed that their method improves
system performance compared to methods with no adaptivity.
In [212], the authors presented a DRL-based method to achieve
personalised compression from noisy speech for a speciﬁc user
in a hearing aid application. To deal with non-linearities of
human hearing via the reward/punishment mechanism, they
used a DRL agent that receives preference feedback from the
target user. Experimental results showed that the developed
approach achieved preferred hearing outcomes.
Similar to SER, very few studies explored DRL for audio
enhancement. Most of these studies evaluated DRL-based
methods to achieve a certain level of signal enhancement in a
controlled environment. Further research efforts are needed to
develop DRL agents that can perform their tasks in real and
complex noisy environments.
E. Music Listening and Generation
DL models are widely used for generating content including
images, text, and music. The motivation for using DL for
music generation lies in its generality since it can learn from
arbitrary corpora of music and be able to generate various
musical genres compared to classical methods [213], [214].
Here, DRL offers opportunities to impose rules of music
theory for the generation of more real musical structures [215].
Various researchers have explored such opportunities of DRL
for music generation. For instance, in [216] authors achieved
better quantitative and qualitative results using an LSTM-based

12
architecture in an RL setting generating polyphonic music
aligned with musical rules. Jiang et al. [217] presented an
interactive RL-Duet framework for real-time human-machine
duet improvisation. The actor-critic with generalised advantage
estimator (GAE) [218] based music generation agent was able
to learn a policy to generate musical note based on the previous
context. They trained the model on monophonic and polyphonic
data and were able to generate high-quality musical pieces
compared to a baseline method. Jaques et al. [215] utilised a
deep Q-learning agent with a reward function based on rules
of music theory and probabilistic outputs of an RNN. They
showed that the proposed model can learn composition rules
while maintaining the important information of data learned
from supervised training. For audio-based generative models,
it is often important to tune the generated samples towards
some domain-speciﬁc metrics. To achieve this, Guimaraes et
al. [219] proposed a method that combines adversarial training
with RL. Speciﬁcally, they extend the training process of a
GAN framework to include the domain-speciﬁc objectives
in addition to the discriminator reward. Experimental results
show that the proposed model can generate music while
maintaining the information originally learned from data, and
attained improvement in the desired metrics. In [220], they
also used a GAN-based model for music generation and
explored optimisation via RL. RaveForce [221] is a DRL-
based environment for music generation, which can be used
to search new synthesis parameters for a speciﬁc timbre of an
electronic musical note or loop.
Score following is the process of tracking a musical
performance for a known symbolic representation (a score).
In [222], the authors modelled the score following task with
DRL algorithms such as synchronous advantage actor-critic
(A2C). They designed a multi-modal RL agent that listens to
music, reads the score from an image, and follows the audio
in an end-to-end fashion. Experiments on monophonic and
polyphonic piano music showed promising results compared
to state-of-the-art methods. The score following task is studied
in [223] using the A2C and proximal policy optimisation (PPO).
This study showed that the proposed approach could be applied
to track real piano recordings of human performances.
F. Robotics, Control, and Interaction
There is a recent growing research interest in robotics
to enable robots with abilities such as recognition of users’
gestures and intentions [224], and generation of socially
appropriate speech-based behaviours [225]. In such applications,
RL is suitable because robots are required to learn from rewards
obtained from their actions. Different studies have explored dif-
ferent DRL-based approaches for audio and speech processing
in robotics. Gao et al. [226] simulated an experiment for the
acquisition of spoken-language to provide a proof-of-concept
of Skinner’s idea [227], which states that children acquire
language based on behaviourist reinforcement principles by
associating words with meanings. Based on their results, the
authors were able to show that acquiring spoken language is
a combination of observing the environment, processing the
observation, and grounding the observed inputs with their true
meaning through a series of reinforcement attempts. In [228],
authors build a virtual agent for language learning in a maze-
like world. It interactively acquires the teacher’s language
from question answering sentence-directed navigation. Some
other studies [229]–[231] in this direction have also explored
RL-based methods for spoken language learning.
In human-robot interaction, researchers have used audio-
driven DRL for robot gaze control and dialogue management.
In [232], the authors used Q-learning with DNNs for audio-
visual gaze control with the speciﬁc goal of ﬁnding good
policies to control the orientation of a robot head towards
groups of people using audio-visual information. Similarly,
authors of [233] used a deep Q-network taking into account
visual and acoustic observations to direct the robot’s head
towards targets of interest. Based on the results, the authors
showed that the proposed framework generates state-of-the-art
results. Clark et al. [234] proposed an end-to-end learning
framework that can induce generalised and high-level rules
of human interactions from structured demonstrations. They
empirically show that the proposed model was able to identify
both auditory and gestural responses correctly. Another inter-
esting work [235] utilised a deep Q-network for speech-driven
backchannels like laugh generation to enhance engagement
in human-robot interaction. Based on their experiments, they
found that the proposed method has the potential of training
a robot for engaging behaviours. Similarly, [236] utilised
recurrent Q-learning for backchannel generation to engage
agents during human-robot interaction. They showed that an
agent trained using off-policy RL produces more engagement
than an agent trained from imitation learning. In a similar
strand, [237] have applied a deep Q-network to control the
speech volume of a humanoid robot in environments with
different amounts of noise. In a trial with human subjects,
participants rated the proposed DRL-based solution better
than ﬁxed-volume robots. DRL has also been applied to
spoken language understanding [238], where a deep Q-network
receives symbolic representations from an intent recogniser and
outputs actions such as (keep mug on sink). In [121],
the authors trained a humanoid robot to acquire social skills
for tracking and greeting people. In their experiments, the
robot learnt its human-like behaviour from experiences in
a real uncontrolled environment. In [120], they propose an
approach for efﬁciently training the behaviour of a robot playing
games using a very limited amount of demonstration dialogues.
Although the learnt multimodal behaviours are not always
perfect (due to noisy perceptions), they were reasonable while
the trained robot interacted with real human players. Efﬁcient
training has also been explored using interactive feedback from
human demonstrators as in [239], who show that DRL with
interactive feedback leads to faster learning and with fewer
mistakes than autonomous DRL (without interactive feedback).
Robotics plays an interesting role in bringing audio-based
DRL applications together including all or some of the above.
For example, a robot recognising speech and understanding
language [238], aware of emotions [199], carryout activities
such as playing games [120], greeting people [121], or playing
music [240], among others. Such a collection of DRL agents
are currently trained independently, but we should expect more

13
Fig. 5: A summary of audio-based DRL connecting the application areas and algorithms described in the previous two sections
– the coloured circles correspond to the three groups of algorithms (from left to right: value-based, policy-based, model-based)
connectedness between them in the future work.
V. CHALLENGES IN AUDIO-BASED DRL
The research works in the previous section have focused on
a narrow set of DRL algorithms and have ignored the existence
of many other algorithms, as can be noted in Figure 5. This
suggests the need for a stronger collaboration between core
DRL and audio-based DRL, which may be already happening.
In Figure 6, we note an increased interest in the communities
of core and applied DRL. While core DRL grew from 3 to 4
orders of magnitude from 2015 to 2020, applied DRL grew
from 2 to 3 orders of magnitude in the same period.
Figure 7 help us to illustrate that previous works have only
explored a modest space of what is possible. Based on the
related works above, we have identiﬁed three main challenges
that need to be addressed by future systems. Those dimensions
converge in what we call ‘very advanced systems’.
A. Real-World Audio-Based Systems
Most of the DRL algorithms described in Section III carry
out experiments on the Atari benchmark [241], where there is
no difference between training and test environments. This is
an important limitation in the literature, and it should be taken
into account in the development of future DRL algorithms. In
contrast, audio-based DRL applications tend to make use of a
more explicit separation between training and test environments.
While audio-based DRL agents may be trained from ofﬂine
interactions or simulations, their performance requires to be
assessed using a separate set of ofﬂine data or real interactions.
The latter (often referred to as human evaluations) is very
important for analysing and evidencing the quality of learnt
behaviours. In almost all (if not all) audio-based systems, the
creation of data is difﬁcult and expensive. This highlights
the need for more data-efﬁcient algorithms—specially if DRL
agents are expected to learn from real data instead of synthetic
data. In high-frequency audio-based control tasks, DRL agents
Fig. 6: Cumulative distribution of publications per year (data
gathered from 2015 to 2020) – from https://www.scopus.com
have the requirements of learning fast and avoiding repeating
the same mistake. Real-world audio-based systems require
algorithms that are sample efﬁcient and performant in their
operations. This makes the application of DRL algorithms in
real systems very challenging. Some studies such as [242]–
[244], have presented approaches to improve the sample
efﬁciency of DRL systems. These approaches, however, have
not been applied to audio-based systems. This suggests that
much more research is required to make DRL more practical
and successful for its application in real audio-based systems.
B. Knowledge Transfer and Generalisation
Learning behaviours from complex signals like speech and
audio with DRL requires processing high-dimensional inputs
and performing extensive training on a large number of samples
to achieve improved performance. The unavailability of large
labelled datasets is indeed one of the major obstacles in the
area of audio-driven DRL [1]. Moreover, it is computationally

14
expensive to train a single DRL agent, and there is a need
for training multiple DRL agents in order to equip audio-
based systems with a variety of learnt skills. Therefore, some
researchers have turned their attention to studying different
schemes such as policy distillation [245], progressive neural
networks [246], multi-domain/multi-task learning [150], [169],
[247], [248] and others [249]–[251] to promote transfer learning
and generalisation in DRL to improve system performance and
reduce computational costs. Only a few studies in dialogue
systems have started to explore transfer learning in DRL for
the speech, audio and dialogue domains [163], [166], [168],
[177], [252], and more research is needed in this area. DRL
agents are often trained from scratch instead of inheriting
useful behaviours from other agents. Research efforts in these
directions would contribute towards a more practical, cost-
effective, and robust application of audio-based DRL agents.
On the one hand, to train agents less data-intensively, and on
the other to achieve reasonable performance in the real world.
C. Multi-Agent and Truly Autonomous Systems
Audio-based DRL has achieved impressive performance in
single-agent domains, where the environment stays mostly
stationary. But in the case of audio-based systems operating in
real-world scenarios, the environments are typically challenging
and dynamic. For instance, multi-lingual ASR and spoken
dialogue systems need to learn policies for different languages
and domains. These tasks not only involve a high degree of
uncertainty and complicated dynamics but are also characterised
by the fact that they are situated in the real physical world, thus
have an inherently distributed nature. The problem, thus, falls
naturally into the realm of multi-agent RL (MARL), an area of
knowledge with a relatively long history, and has recently re-
emerged due to advances in single-agent RL techniques [253],
[254]. Coupled with recent advances in DNNs, MARL has
been in the limelight for many recent breakthroughs in various
domains including control systems, communication networks,
economics, etc. However, applications in the audio processing
domain are relatively limited due to various challenges. The
learning goals in MARL are multidimensional—because the
objectives of all agents are not necessarily aligned. This
situation can arise for example in simultaneous emotion and
speaker voice recognition, where the goal of one agent is to
identify emotions and the goal of the other agent is to recognise
the speaker. As a consequence, these agents can independently
perceive the environment, and act according to their individual
objectives (rewards) thus modifying the environment. This can
bring up the challenge of dealing with equilibrium points, as
well as some additional performance criteria beyond return-
optimisation, such as the robustness against potential adversarial
agents. As all agents try to improve their policies according to
their interests concurrently, therefore the action executed by
one agent affects the goals and objectives of the other agents
(e.g. speaker, gender, and emotion identiﬁcation from speech
at the same time), and vice-versa.
One remaining challenging aspect is that of autonomous skill
acquisition. Most, if not all, DRL agents currently require a
substantial amount of pre-programming as opposed to acquiring
Fig. 7: A pictorial view of previous works on audio-based DRL
and potential dimensions to explore in future systems.
skills autonomously to enable personalised/extensible behaviour.
Such pre-programming includes explicit implementations of
states, actions, rewards, and policies. Although substantial
progress in different areas has been made, the idea of creating
audio-driven DRL agents that autonomously learn their states,
actions, and rewards in order to induce useful skills remains
to be investigated further. Such kind of agents would have to
know when and how to observe their environments, identify
a task and input features, induce a set of actions, induce a
reward function (from audio, images, or both), and use all of
that to train policies. Such agents have the potential to show
advanced levels of intelligence, and they would be very useful
for applications such as personal assistants or interactive robots.
VI. SUMMARY AND FUTURE POINTERS
This literature review shows that DRL is becoming popular
in audio processing and related applications. We collected DRL
research papers in six different but related areas: automatic
speech recognition (ASR), speech emotion recognition (SER),
spoken dialogue systems (SDSs), audio enhancement, audio-
driven robotic control, and music generation.
1) In ASR, most of the studies have used policy gradient-
based DRL, as it allows learning an optimal policy that
maximises the performance objective. We found studies
aiming to solve the complexity of ASR models [131],
tackle slow convergence issues [133], and speed up the
convergence in DRL [132].
2) The development of SDSs with DRL is gaining inter-
est and different studies have shown very interesting
results that have outperformed current state-of-the-art
DL approaches [143]. However, there is still room for
improvement regarding the effective and practical training
of DRL-based spoken dialogue systems.
3) Several studies have also applied DRL to emotion recog-
nition and empirically showed that DRL can (i) lower

15
latency while making predictions [199], (ii) understand
emotional dynamics in communication [200], and (iii)
enhance human-computer interaction [201].
4) In the case of audio enhancement, studies have shown
the potential of DRL. While these studies have focused
their attention on the speech signals, DRL can be used
to optimise the audio enhancement module along with
performance objectives such as those in ASR [207].
5) In music generation, DRL can optimise rules of music
theory as validated in different studies [215], [219].
It can also be used to search for new tone synthesis
parameters [221]. Moreover, DRL can be used to perform
score following to track a musical performance [222], and
it is even suitable for tracking real piano recordings [223],
among other possible tasks.
6) In robotics, audio-based DRL agents are in their infancy.
Previous studies have trained DRL-based agents using
simulations, which have shown that reinforcement prin-
ciples help agents in the acquisition of spoken language.
Some recent works [235], [236] have shown that DRL
can be utilised to train gaze controllers and speech-driven
backchannels like laughs in human-robot interaction.
The related works reviewed above highlight several beneﬁts
of using DRL for audio processing and applications. Challenges
remain before such advancements will succeed in the real world,
including endowing agents with commonsense knowledge,
knowledge transfer, generalisation, and autonomous learning,
among others. Such advances need to be demonstrated not
only in simulated and stationary environments, but in real and
non-stationary one as in real world scenarios. Steady progress,
however, is being made in the right direction for designing more
adaptive audio-based systems that can be better suited for real-
world settings. If such scientiﬁc progress keeps growing rapidly,
perhaps we are not too far away from AI-based autonomous
systems that can listen, process, and understand audio and act in
more human-like ways in increasingly complex environments.
VII. CONCLUSIONS
In this work, we have focused on presenting a comprehensive
review of deep reinforcement learning (DRL) techniques
for audio based applications. We reviewed DRL research
works in six different audio-related areas including automatic
speech recognition (ASR), speech emotion recognition (SER),
spoken dialogue systems (SDSs), audio enhancement, audio-
driven robotic control, and music generation. In all of these
areas, the use of DRL techniques is becoming increasingly
popular, and ongoing research on this topic has explored many
DRL algorithms with encouraging results for audio-related
applications. Apart from providing a detailed review, we have
also highlighted (i) various challenges that hinder DRL research
in audio applications and (ii) various avenues for future research.
We hope that this paper will help researchers and practitioners
interested in exploring and solving problems in the audio
domain using DRL techniques.
VIII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank Kai Arulkumaran (Imperial College
London, United Kingdom) and Dr Soujanya Poria (Singapore
University of Technology and Design) for proving feedback on
the paper. We also thank Waleed Iqbal (Queen Mary University
of London, United Kingdom) for helping with the extraction
of DRL related data from Scopus (Figure 6).
