A Near-Term Quantum Computing Approach for Hard Computational
Problems in Space Exploration
Vadim N. Smelyanskiy,∗Eleanor G. Rieﬀel, and Sergey I. Knysh
NASA Ames Research Center, Mail Stop 269-3, Moﬀett Field, CA 94035
Colin P. Williams
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology,Pasadena, CA 91109-8099
Mark W. Johnson, Murray C. Thom, William G. Macready
D-Wave Systems Inc., 100-4401 Still Creek Drive, Burnaby, BC, Canada V5C 6G9
Kristen L. Pudenz†
Ming Hsieh Department of Electrical Engineering,
Center for Quantum Information Science and Technology, and Information Sciences Institute,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089
Abstract
The future of Space Exploration is entwined with the future of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) and machine
learning.
Autonomous rovers, unmanned spacecraft, and remote space habitats must all make
intelligent decisions with little or no human guidance. The decision-making required of such NASA
assets stretches machine intelligence to its limits. Currently, AI problems are tackled using a variety
of heuristic approaches, and practitioners are constantly trying to ﬁnd new and better techniques.
To achieve a radical breakthrough in AI, radical new approaches are needed. Quantum computing
is one such approach.
Many of the hard combinatorial problems in space exploration are instances of NP-complete or
NP-hard problems. Neither traditional computers nor quantum computers are expected to be able
to solve all instances of such problems eﬃciently. Many heuristic algorithms, such as simulated
annealing, support vector machines, and SAT solvers, have been developed to solve or approximate
solutions to practical instances of these problems.
The eﬃcacy of these approaches is generally
determined by running them on benchmark sets of problem instances. Such empirical testing for
quantum algorithms requires the availability of quantum hardware.
Quantum annealing machines, analog quantum computational devices, are designed to solve dis-
crete combinatorial optimization problems using properties of quantum adiabatic evolution. We are
now on the cusp of being able to run small-scale examples of these problems on actual quantum
annealing hardware which will enable us to test empirically the performance of quantum annealing
on these problems. For example, D-Wave builds quantum annealing machines based on supercon-
ducting qubits. While at present noise and decoherence in quantum annealing devices cannot be
easily controlled or corrected, these devices have been shown to display multi-spin tunneling, a
distinct quantum phenomenon at the root of the quantum annealing process. In order to attack
an optimization problem on these machines, the problem must be formulated in quadratic uncon-
strained binary optimization form in which the cost function is strictly quadratic in bit assignments
(in physics applications this form is often referred to as an Ising model). The above limitation is not
fundamental: all NP-complete problems can be mapped to this form. However, an optimal mapping
involving small or no overhead in terms of additional bits is of signiﬁcant practical interest because
of the limited size of early quantum annealing machines.
In this article, we discuss a sampling of the hardest artiﬁcial intelligence problems in space explo-
ration in the context in which they emerge. We show how to map them onto equivalent Ising models
arXiv:1204.2821v2  [quant-ph]  18 Apr 2012

that then can be attacked using quantum annealing. We review existing quantum annealing results
on supervised learning algorithms for classiﬁcation and clustering and discuss their application to
planetary feature identiﬁcation and satellite image analysis. We present quantum annealing algo-
rithms for unsupervised learning for clustering and discuss its application to anomaly detection in
space systems. We introduce quantum annealing algorithms for data fusion and image matching for
remote sensing applications. We overview planning problems for space exploration missions applica-
tions and introduce algorithms for planning problems using quantum annealing of Ising models. We
describe algorithms for diagnostics and recovery as well as their applications to NASA deep space
missions and show how a fault tree analysis problem can be mapped onto an Ising model and solved
with quantum annealing. We discuss combinatorial optimization algorithms for task assignment in
the context of autonomous unmanned exploration that take into account constraints due to physical
limitations of the vehicles. We show how these algorithms can be presented in the framework of Ising
model optimization with application to quantum annealing. Finally, we discuss ways to circumvent
the need to map practical optimization problems onto the Ising model. We demonstrate how this
can be done in principle using a “blackbox" approach based on ideas from probabilistic computing.
In particular, we provide initial results on Monte Carlo sampling for solving non-Ising problems.
In this article, we describe the architecture, duty cycle times and energy consumption of the D-
Wave One quantum annealing machine. We report on benchmark scalability studies of D-Wave One
run times and compare to state of the art classical algorithms for solving Ising optimization problems
on a uniform random ensemble of problems. Results on problems in the range of up to 96 qubits
show improved scaling for median core quantum annealing time compared with simulated annealing
and iterative tabu search, though how it will scale as the number of qubits increases remains an
open question. We also review existing results of D-Wave One benchmarking studies for solving
binary classiﬁcation problems with a quantum boosting algorithm. The error rates on synthetic
data sets show that quantum boosting algorithm consistently outperforms the AdaBoost classical
machine learning algorithm. We review quantum algorithms for structured learning for multi-label
classiﬁcation and describe how the problem of ﬁnding an optimal labeling can be mapped onto
quantum annealing with Ising models, and then introduce a hybrid classical/quantum approach for
learning the weights. We review results of D-Wave One benchmarking studies for learning structured
labels on four diﬀerent data sets. The ﬁrst data set is Scene, a standard image benchmark set. The
second data set, the RCV1 subset of the Reuters corpus of labeled news stories, has a signiﬁcantly
larger number of labels, and more complex relationships between the labels. The other two are
synthetic data sets generated using MAX-3 SAT problem instances. On all four data sets, quantum
annealing was compared with an independent Support Vector Machine (SVM) approach with linear
kernel and exhibited a better performance.
Contents
I. Introduction
4
II. A High-Level View of Quantum Annealing
7
III. Background for Quantum Annealing
9
A. Evolution of quantum systems
10
B. Stationary states and system energies
11
C. Example Hamiltonian for a pair of superconducting ﬂux qubits
12
∗To whom correspondence should be addressed.

†KLP would like to acknowledge support from the Lockheed Martin Corporation under the URI program and the
NSF under a graduate research fellowship.

D. Hamiltonian for a binary optimization problem
14
E. Hamiltonian with fully-symmetric ground state
15
F. Basics of Adiabatic Theorem
16
IV. Quantum Annealing Concept
17
A. Quantum measurements at intermediate times
17
B. Complexity of Quantum Annealing
18
V. Superconducting Quantum Annealing Machine
22
A. Duty Cycle
22
VI. Benchmarking Studies of the D-Wave Processor
25
A. Energy dissipation
25
B. Processor Speed
26
VII. Classiﬁcation for Planetary Feature Identiﬁcation
27
A. Boosting for Binary Classiﬁcation
28
B. QBoost: Mapping Boosting onto Quantum Annealing
29
VIII. Clustering for Pattern Recognition
32
A. The MAXCUT clustering algorithm
32
B. QCut: Mapping Clustering onto Quantum Annealing
33
IX. Anomaly Detection for Space Systems
34
A. The Inductive Monitoring System (IMS)
35
B. QIMS: Mapping IMS onto Quantum Annealing
37
X. Data Fusion and Image Matching for Remote Sensing
39
A. Image Alignment
40
B. Mapping Image Alignment onto Quantum Annealing
41
XI. Planning of NASA operations: from ISS to Deep Space missions
42
A. Planning Problem
42
B. Mapping to Quadratic Unconstrained Binary Optimization (QUBO)
43
XII. Diagnostics and Recovery
46
A. Fault tree analysis
47
B. Mapping to QUBO
47
XIII. Unmanned Autonomous Exploration
49
A. Multi-UAV Task Assignment as Combinatorial Optimization
49
B. Mapping UAV Task Assignment to Quantum Annealing
51
XIV. Structured Learning for Multiple Label Classiﬁcation
52
A. Mapping Optimal Labeling onto Quantum Annealing
53
B. A Hybrid Classical/Quantum Approach to Learning the Weights
55
C. D-Wave Results on Learning Structured Labels
56
XV. Probabilistic computing
57
A. Monte Carlo Sampling for Solving non-Ising problems
59

I. INTRODUCTION
XVI. Concluding remarks
60
A. Gaining insight into quantum annealing process
60
B. Overhead of the Ising Model Encoding
62
XVII. Summary
63
