Generalization and Exploration via Randomized Value Functions
Ian Osband

Benjamin Van Roy

Zheng Wen

Stanford University
Abstract
We propose randomized least-squares value iter-
ation (RLSVI) – a new reinforcement learning al-
gorithm designed to explore and generalize ef-
ﬁciently via linearly parameterized value func-
tions. We explain why versions of least-squares
value iteration that use Boltzmann or ϵ-greedy
exploration can be highly inefﬁcient, and we
present computational results that demonstrate
dramatic efﬁciency gains enjoyed by RLSVI.
Further, we establish an upper bound on the ex-
pected regret of RLSVI that demonstrates near-
optimality in a tabula rasa learning context.
More broadly, our results suggest that random-
ized value functions offer a promising approach
to tackling a critical challenge in reinforcement
learning: synthesizing efﬁcient exploration and
effective generalization.
1. Introduction
The design of reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms that
explore intractably large state-action spaces efﬁciently re-
mains an important challenge. In this paper, we propose
randomized least-squares value iteration (RLSVI), which
generalizes using a linearly parameterized value function.
Prior RL algorithms that generalize in this way require, in
the worst case, learning times exponential in the number
of model parameters and/or the planning horizon. RLSVI
aims to overcome these inefﬁciencies.
RLSVI operates in a manner similar to least-squares value
iteration (LSVI) and also shares much of the spirit of other
closely related approaches such as TD, LSTD, and SARSA
(see, e.g., (Sutton & Barto, 1998; Szepesv´ari, 2010)). What
fundamentally distinguishes RLSVI is that the algorithm
explores through randomly sampling statistically plausible
value functions, whereas the aforementioned alternatives
are typically applied in conjunction with action-dithering
schemes such as Boltzmann or ϵ-greedy exploration, which
lead to highly inefﬁcient learning. The concept of explor-
ing by sampling statistically plausible value functions is
broader than any speciﬁc algorithm, and beyond our pro-
posal and study of RLSVI. We view an important role of
this paper is to establish this broad concept as a promising
approach to tackling a critical challenge in RL: synthesiz-
ing efﬁcient exploration and effective generalization.
We will present computational results comparing RLSVI
to LSVI with action-dithering schemes. In our case stud-
ies, these algorithms generalize using identical linearly pa-
rameterized value functions but are distinguished by how
they explore. The results demonstrate that RLSVI enjoys
dramatic efﬁciency gains. Further, we establish a bound
on the expected regret for an episodic tabula rasa learn-
ing context. Our bound is ˜O(
√
H3SAT), where S and A
denote the cardinalities of the state and action spaces, T
denotes time elapsed, and H denotes the episode duration.
This matches the worst case lower bound for this problem
up to logarithmic factors (Jaksch et al., 2010). It is interest-
ing to contrast this against known ˜O(
√
H3S2AT) bounds
for other provably efﬁcient tabula rasa RL algorithms (e.g.,
UCRL2 (Jaksch et al., 2010)) adapted to this context. To
our knowledge, our results establish RLSVI as the ﬁrst RL
algorithm that is provably efﬁcient in a tabula rasa context
and also demonstrates efﬁciency when generalizing via lin-
early parameterized value functions.
There is a sizable literature on RL algorithms that are prov-
ably efﬁcient in tabula rasa contexts (Brafman & Tennen-
holtz, 2002; Kakade, 2003; Kearns & Koller, 1999; Latti-
more et al., 2013; Ortner & Ryabko, 2012; Osband et al.,
2013; Strehl et al., 2006). The literature on RL algorithms
that generalize and explore in a provably efﬁcient manner
is sparser. There is work on model-based RL algorithms
(Abbasi-Yadkori & Szepesv´ari, 2011; Osband & Van Roy,
2014a;b), which apply to speciﬁc model classes and are
computationally intractable. Value function generalization
approaches have the potential to overcome those computa-
tional challenges and offer practical means for synthesizing
efﬁcient exploration and effective generalization. A rele-
vant line of work establishes that efﬁcient RL with value
function generalization reduces to efﬁcient KWIK online
arXiv:1402.0635v3  [stat.ML]  15 Feb 2016

Generalization and Exploration via Randomized Value Functions
regression (Li & Littman, 2010; Li et al., 2008). How-
ever, it is not known whether the KWIK online regres-
sion problem can be solved efﬁciently. In terms of con-
crete algorithms, there is optimistic constraint propaga-
tion (OCP) (Wen & Van Roy, 2013), a provably efﬁcient
RL algorithm for exploration and value function gener-
alization in deterministic systems, and C-PACE (Pazis &
Parr, 2013), a provably efﬁcient RL algorithm that gen-
eralizes using interpolative representations.
These con-
tributions represent important developments, but OCP is
not suitable for stochastic systems and is highly sensitive
to model mis-speciﬁcation, and generalizing effectively in
high-dimensional state spaces calls for methods that extrap-
olate. RLSVI advances this research agenda, leveraging
randomized value functions to explore efﬁciently with lin-
early parameterized value functions. The only other work
we know of involving exploration through random sam-
pling of value functions is (Dearden et al., 1998). That
work proposed an algorithm for tabula rasa learning; the
algorithm does not generalize over the state-action space.
2. Episodic reinforcement learning
A ﬁnite-horizon MDP M=(S,A,H,P,R,π), where S is a
ﬁnite state space, A is a ﬁnite action space, H is the number
of periods, P encodes transition probabilities, R encodes
reward distributions, and π is a state distribution. In each
episode, the initial state s0 is sampled from π, and, in pe-
riod h=0,1,···,H−1, if the state is sh and an action ah is
selected then a next state sh+1 is sampled from Ph(·|sh,ah)
and a reward rh is sampled from Rh(·|sh,ah,sh+1). The
episode terminates when state sH is reached and a terminal
reward is sampled from RH (·|sH).
To represent the history of actions and observations over
multiple episodes, we will often index variables by both
episode and period. For example, slh, alh and rlh respec-
tively denote the state, action, and reward observed during
period h in episode l.
A policy µ = (µ0, µ1, · · · , µH−1) is a sequence of func-
tions, each mapping S to A. For each policy µ, we deﬁne
a value function for h = 0, .., H:
V µ
h (s):=EM
hPH
τ=hrτ
sh=s,aτ=µτ(sτ) for τ=h,..,H−1
i
The optimal value function is deﬁned by V ∗
h (s)
=
supµ V µ
h (s). A policy µ∗is said to be optimal if V µ∗=
V ∗. It is also useful to deﬁne a state-action optimal value
function for h = 0, .., H −1:
Q∗
h(s, a) := EM

rh + V ∗
h+1(sh+1)
sh = s, ah = a

A policy µ∗is optimal ⇐⇒µ∗
h(s)∈argmaxα∈AQ∗
h(s,α), ∀s,h.
A reinforcement learning algorithm generates each action alh
based on observations made up to period h of episode l. Over
each episode, the algorithm realizes reward PH
h=0rlh. One way
to quantify the performance of a reinforcement learning algorithm
is in terms of the expected cumulative regret over L episodes, or
time T=LH, deﬁned by
Regret(T, M) = PT/H−1
l=0
EM
h
V ∗
0 (sl0) −PH
h=0 rlh
i
.
Consider a scenario in which the agent models that, for
each h, Q∗
h ∈span [Φh] for some Φh ∈RSA×K. With
some abuse of notation, we use S and A to denote the car-
dinalities of the state and action spaces. We refer this ma-
trix Φh as a generalization matrix and use Φh(s, a) to de-
note the row of matrix Φh associated with state-action pair
(s, a). For k = 1, 2, · · · , K, we write the kth column of
Φh as φhk and refer to φhk as a basis function. We refer
to contexts where the agent’s belief is correct as coherent
learning, and refer the alternative as agnostic learning.
3. The problem with dithering for exploration
LSVI can be applied at each episode to estimate the op-
timal value function Q∗from data gathered over previous
episodes. To form an RL algorithm based on LSVI, we
must specify how the agent selects actions. The most com-
mon scheme is to selectively take actions at random, we
call this approach dithering. Appendix A presents RL algo-
rithms resulting from combining LSVI with the most com-
mon schemes of ϵ-greedy or Boltzmann exploration.
The literature on efﬁcient RL shows that these dithering
schemes can lead to regret that grows exponentially in
H and/or S (Kearns & Singh, 2002; Brafman & Ten-
nenholtz, 2002; Kakade, 2003). Provably efﬁcient explo-
ration schemes in RL require that exploration is directed to-
wards potentially informative state-action pairs and consis-
tent over multiple timesteps. This literature provides sev-
eral more intelligent exploration schemes that are provably
efﬁcient, but most only apply to tabula rasa RL, where lit-
tle prior information is available and learning is considered
efﬁcient even if the time required scales with the cardinal-
ity of the state-action space. In a sense, RLSVI represents a
synthesis of ideas from efﬁcient tabula rasa reinforcement
learning and value function generalization methods.
To motivate some of the beneﬁts of RLSVI, in Figure 1
we provide a simple example that highlights the failings of
dithering methods. In this setting LSVI with Boltzmann or
ϵ-greedy exploration requires exponentially many episodes
to learn an optimal policy, even in a coherent learning con-
text and even with a small number of basis functions.
This environment is made up of a long chain of states
S = {1, .., N}. Each step the agent can transition left or
right. Actions left are deterministic, but actions right only
succeed with probability 1 −1/N, otherwise they go left.
All states have zero reward except for the far right N which

Generalization and Exploration via Randomized Value Functions
gives a reward of 1. Each episode is of length H = N −1
and the agent will begin each episode at state 1. The opti-
mal policy is to go right at every step to receive an expected
reward of p∗= (1−1
N )N−1 each episode, all other policies
give no reward. Example 1 establishes that, for any choice
of basis function, LSVI with any ϵ-greedy or Boltzmann
exploration will lead to regret that grows exponentially in
S. A similar result holds for policy gradient algorithms.
Figure 1. An MDP where dithering schemes are highly inefﬁcient.
Example 1. Let l∗be the ﬁrst episode during which state
N is visited.
It is easy to see that θlh = 0 for all h
and all l < l∗.
Furthermore, with either ϵ-greedy or
Boltzmann exploration, actions are sampled uniformly at
random over episodes l < l∗.
Thus, in any episode
l < l∗, the red node will be reached with probability
p∗2−(S−1) = p∗2−H. It follows that E[l∗] ≥2S−1 −1
and lim infT →∞Regret(T, M) ≥2S−1 −1.
4. Randomized value functions
We now consider an alternative approach to exploration
that involves randomly sampling value functions rather
than actions. As a speciﬁc scheme of this kind, we propose
randomized least-squares value iteration (RLSVI), which
we present as Algorithm 1.1 To obtain an RL algorithm,
we simply select greedy actions in each episode, as speci-
ﬁed in Algorithm 2.
The manner in which RLSVI explores is inspired by
Thompson sampling (Thompson, 1933), which has been
shown to explore efﬁciently across a very general class of
online optimization problems (Russo & Van Roy, 2013;
2014). In Thompson sampling, the agent samples from a
posterior distribution over models, and selects the action
that optimizes the sampled model. RLSVI similarly sam-
ples from a distribution over plausible value functions and
selects actions that optimize resulting samples. This distri-
bution can be thought of as an approximation to a poste-
rior distribution over value functions. RLSVI bears a close
connection to PSRL (Osband et al., 2013), which maintains
and samples from a posterior distribution over MDPs and
is a direct application of Thompson sampling to RL. PSRL
satisﬁes regret bounds that scale with the dimensionality,
rather than the cardinality, of the underlying MDP (Osband
& Van Roy, 2014b;a). However, PSRL does not accommo-
date value function generalization without MDP planning,
a feature that we expect to be of great practical importance.
1Note that when l = 0, both A and b are empty, hence, we set
˜θl0 = ˜θl1 = · · · = ˜θl,H−1 = 0.
Algorithm 1 Randomized Least-Squares Value Iteration
Input: Data Φ0(si0,ai0),ri0,..,ΦH−1(siH−1,aiH−1),riH :
i<L, Parameters λ>0, σ>0
Output: ˜θl0,..,˜θl,H−1
1: for h=H−1,..,1,0 do
2:
Generate regression problem A∈Rl×K, b∈Rl:
A←


Φh(s0h,a0h)
...
Φh(sl−1,h,al−1,h)


bi ←
(
rih+maxα

Φh+1˜θl,h+1

(si,h+1,α)
if h<H−1
rih+ri,h+1
if h=H−1
3:
Bayesian linear regression for the value function
θlh ←1
σ2
 1
σ2 A⊤A+λI
−1
A⊤b
Σlh ←
 1
σ2 A⊤A+λI
−1
4:
Sample ˜θlh ∼N(θlh,Σlh) from Gaussian posterior
5: end for
Algorithm 2 RLSVI with greedy action
Input: Features Φ0,..,ΦH−1; σ>0, λ>0
1: for l=0,1,.. do
2:
Compute ˜θl0,..,˜θl,H−1 using Algorithm 1
3:
Observe sl0
4:
for h=0,..,H−1 do
5:
Sample alh ∈argmaxα∈A

Φh˜θlh

(slh,α)
6:
Observe rlh and sl,h+1
7:
end for
8:
Observe rlH
9: end for
5. Provably efﬁcient tabular learning
RLSVI is an algorithm designed for efﬁcient exploration in
large MDPs with linear value function generalization. So
far, there are no algorithms with analytical regret bounds in
this setting. In fact, most common methods are provably
inefﬁcient, as demonstrated in Example 1, regardless of the
choice of basis function. In this section we will establish
an expected regret bound for RLSVI in a tabular setting
without generalization where the basis functions Φh = I.
The bound is on an expectation with respect to a prob-
ability space (Ω, F, P).
We deﬁne the MDP M
=
(S, A, H, P, R, π) and all other random variables we will
consider with respect to this probability space. We assume
that S, A, H, and π, are deterministic and that R and P
are drawn from a prior distribution. We will assume that

Generalization and Exploration via Randomized Value Functions
rewards R(s, a, h) are drawn from independent Dirichlet
αR(s, a, h) ∈R2
+ with values on {−1, 0} and transitions
Dirichlet αP (s, a, h) ∈RS
+. Analytical techniques exist to
extend similar results to general bounded distributions; see,
for example (Agrawal & Goyal, 2012).
Theorem 1. If Algorithm 1 is executed with Φh=I for h=
0,..,H−1,
λ≥max(s,a,h)
 1T αR(s,a,h)+1T αP (s,a,h)

and σ≥
√
H2+1, then:
E [Regret(T, M)] ≤˜O
√
H3SAT

(1)
Surprisingly, these scalings better state of the art opti-
mistic algorithms speciﬁcally designed for efﬁcient analy-
sis which would admit ˜O(
√
H3S2AT) regret (Jaksch et al.,
2010). This is an important result since it demonstrates
that RLSVI can be provably-efﬁcient, in contrast to popular
dithering approaches such as ϵ-greedy which are provably
inefﬁcient.
5.1. Preliminaries
Central to our analysis is the notion of stochastic optimism,
which induces a partial ordering among random variables.
Deﬁnition 1. For any X and Y real-valued random vari-
ables we say that X is stochastically optimistic for Y if and
only if for any u:R→R convex and increasing
E[u(X)] ≥E[u(Y )].
We will use the notation X ≽so Y to express this relation.
It is worth noting that stochastic optimism is closely con-
nected with second-order stochastic dominance: X ≽so Y
if and only if −Y second-order stochastically dominates
−X (Hadar & Russell, 1969). We repoduce the following
result which establishes such a relation involving Gaussian
and Dirichlet random variables in Appendix G.
Lemma 1. For all V ∈[0, 1]N and α ∈[0, ∞)N with
αT 1 ≥2, if X ∼N(α⊤V/α⊤1, 1/α⊤1) and Y = P T V
for P ∼Dirichlet(α) then X ≽so Y .
5.2. Proof sketch
Let ˜Ql
h = Φh˜θlh and ˜µl denote the value function and
policy generated by RLSVI for episode l and let ˜V l
h(s) =
maxa ˜Ql
h(s, a). We can decompose the per-episode regret
V ∗
0 (sl0) −V ˜µl
0 (sl0) = ˜V l
0(sl0)−V ˜µl
0 (sl0)
|
{z
}
∆conc
l
+ V ∗
0 (sl0)−˜V l
0(sl0)
|
{z
}
∆opt
l
.
We will bound this regret by ﬁrst showing that RLSVI gen-
erates optimistic estimates of V ∗, so that ∆opt
l
has non-
positive expectation for any history Hl available prior to
episode l. The remaining term ∆conc
l
vanishes as estimates
generated by RLSVI concentrate around V ∗.
Lemma 2. Conditional on any data H, the Q-values gen-
erated by RLSVI are stochastically optimistic for the true
Q-values ˜Ql
h(s, a) ≽so Q∗
h(s, a) for all s, a, h.
Proof. Fix any data Hl available and use backwards in-
duction on h = H −1, .., 1. For any (s, a, h) we write
n(s, a, h) for the amount of visits to that datapoint in Hl.
We will write ˆR(s, a, h), ˆP(s, a, h) for the empirical mean
reward and mean transitions based upon the data Hl. We
can now write the posterior mean rewards and transitions:
R(s, a, h)|Hl = −1 × αR
1 (s, a, h) + n(s, a, h) ˆR(s, a, h)
1T αR(s, a, h) + n(s, a, h)
P(s, a, h)|Hl = αP (s, a, h) + n(s, a, h) ˆP(s, a, h)
1T αP (s, a, h) + n(s, a, h)
Now, using Φh = I for all (s, a, h) we can write the RLSVI
updates in similar form. Note that, Σlh is diagonal with
each diagonal entry equal to σ2/(n(s, a, h) + λσ2). In the
case of h = H −1
θ
l
H−1(s, a) = n(s, a, H −1) ˆR(s, a, H −1)
n(s, a, H −1) + λσ2
Using the relation that ˆR ≥R Lemma 1 means that
N(θ
l
H−1(s, a),
1
n(s, a, h) + 1T αR(s, a, h)) ≽so RH−1|Hl.
Therefore, choosing λ > maxs,a,h 1T αR(s, a, h) and σ >
1, we must satisfy the lemma for all s, a and h = H −1.
For the inductive step we assume that the result holds for
all s, a and j > h, we now want to prove the result for all
(s, a) at timestep h. Once again, we can express θ
l
h(s, a)
in closed form.
θ
l
h(s, a) =
n(s, a, h)

ˆR(s, a, h) + ˆP(s, a, h)T ˜V l
h+1

n(s, a, h) + λσ2
To simplify notation we omit the arguments (s, a, h) where
they should be obvious from context. The posterior mean
estimate for the next step value V ∗
h , conditional on Hl:
E[Q∗
h(s, a)|Hl] = R + P
T V ∗
h+1 ≤n( ˆR + ˆP T V ∗
h+1)
n + λσ2
.
As long as λ > 1T αR + 1T (αP ) and σ2 > H2. By our
induction process ˜V l
h+1 ≽so V ∗
h+1 so that
E[Q∗
h(s, a)|Hl] ≤E
"
n( ˆR + ˆP T ˜V l
h+1)
n + λσ2
| Hl
#
.
We can conclude by Lemma 1 and noting that the noise
from rewards is dominated by N(0, 1) and the noise from
transitions is dominated by N(0, H2). This requires that
σ2 ≥H2 + 1.

Generalization and Exploration via Randomized Value Functions
Lemma 2 means RLSVI generates stochastically optimistic
Q-values for any history Hl. All that remains is to prove
the remaining estimates E[∆conc
l
|Hl] concentrate around
the true values with data. Intuitively this should be clear,
since the size of the Gaussian perturbations decreases as
more data is gathered. In the remainder of this section we
will sketch this result.
The concentration error ∆conc
l
= ˜V l
0(sl0) −V ˜µl
0 (sl0). We
decompose the value estimate ˜V l
0 explicitly:
˜V l
0(sl0)
=
n( ˆR + ˆP T ˜V l
h+1)
n + λσ2
+ wσ
=
R + P
T ˜V l
h+1 + bR + bP + wσ
0
where wσ is the Gaussian noise from RLSVI and bR =
bR(sl0, al00), bP = bP (sl0, al00) are optimistic bias terms
for RLSVI. These terms emerge since RLSVI shrinks es-
timates towards zero rather than the Dirichlet prior for re-
wards and transitions.
Next we note that, conditional on Hl we can rewrite
P
T ˜V l
h+1 = ˜V l
h+1(s′) + dh where s′ ∼P ∗(s, a, h) and
dh is some martingale difference. This allows us to decom-
pose the error in our policy to the estimation error of the
states and actions we actually visit. We also note that, con-
ditional on the data Hl the true MDP is independent of the
sampling process of RLSVI. This means that:
E[V ˜µl
0 (sl0)|Hl]
=
R + P
T V ˜µl
h+1.
Once again, we can replace this transition term with a sin-
gle sample s′ ∼P ∗(s, a, h) and a martingale difference.
Combining these observations allows us to reduce the con-
centration error
E[ ˜V l
0(sl0) −V ˜µl
0 (sl0)|Hl] =
H−1
X
h=0

bR(slh, alh, h) + bP (slh, alh, h) + wσ
h
	
.
We can even write explicit expressions for bR, bP and wσ.
bR(s, a, h) =
n ˆR
n + λσ2 −n ˆR −αR
1
n + 1T αR
bP (s, a, h) = n ˆP T ˜V l
h+1
n + λσ2 −(n ˆP + αP )T ˜V l
h+1
n + 1T αP
wσ
h ∼N

0,
σ2
n + λσ2

The ﬁnal details for this proof are technical but the ar-
gument is simple.
We let λ=1T αR+1T αP and σ=
√
H2+1. Up to ˜O notation bR≃
αR
1
n+1T αP , bP ≃H1T αP
n+1T αP
and wσ
h≃
H
√
n+H21T αR+1T αP .
Summing using a pi-
geonhole principle for P
s,a,hn(s,a,h)=T gives us an
upper bound on the regret.
We write K(s,a,h):=
 αR
1 (s,a,h)+H1T αP (s,a,h)

to bound the effects of the
prior mistmatch in RLSVI arising from the bias terms
bR, bP . The constraint αT 1 ≥2 can only be violated twice
for each s, a, h. Therefore up to O(·) notation:
E
hPT/H−1
l=0
E[∆conc
l
|Hl]
i
≤2SAH+
P
s,a,hK(s,a,h)log(T+K(s,a,h))+H
p
SAHTlog(T)
This completes the proof of Theorem 1.
6. Experiments
Our analysis in Section 5 shows that RLSVI with tabular
basis functions acts as an effective Gaussian approximation
to PSRL. This demonstrates a clear distinction between
exploration via randomized value functions and dithering
strategies such as Example 1. However, the motivating for
RLSVI is not for tabular environments, where several prov-
ably efﬁcient RL algorithms already exist, but instead for
large systems that require generalization.
We believe that, under some conditions, it may be possi-
ble to establish polynomial regret bounds for RLSVI with
value function generalization. To stimulate thinking on this
topic we present a conjecture of result what may be pos-
sible in Appendix B. For now, we will present a series of
experiments designed to test the applicability and scalabil-
ity of RLSVI for exploration with generalization.
Our experiments are divided into three sections. First, we
present a series of didactic chain environments similar to
Figure 1. We show that RLSVI can effectively synthesize
exploration with generalization with both coherent and ag-
nostic value functions that are intractable under any dither-
ing scheme. Next, we apply our Algorithm to learning to
play Tetris. We demonstrate that RLSVI leads to faster
learning, improved stability and a superior learned policy
in a large-scale video game. Finally, we consider a busi-
ness application with a simple model for a recommendation
system. We show that an RL algorithm can improve upon
even the optimal myopic bandit strategy. RLSVI learns this
optimal strategy when dithering strategies do not.
6.1. Testing for efﬁcient exploration
We now consider a series of environments modelled on
Example 1, where dithering strategies for exploration are
provably inefﬁcient. Importantly, and unlike the tabular
setting of Section 5, our algorithm will only interact with
the MDP but through a set of basis function Φ which gener-
alize across states. We examine the empirical performance
of RLSVI and ﬁnd that it does efﬁciently balance explo-
ration and generalization in this didactic example.
6.1.1. COHERENT LEARNING
In our ﬁrst experiments, we generate a random set of K ba-
sis functions. This basis is coherent but the individual basis
functions are not otherwise informative. We form a ran-

Generalization and Exploration via Randomized Value Functions
dom linear subspace VhK spanned by (1,Q∗
h, ˜w1,.., ˜wk−2).
Here wi and ˜wi are IID Gaussian ∼N(0,I)∈RSA. We
then form Φh by projecting (1,w1,..,wk−1) onto VhK and
renormalize each component to have equal 2-norm2. Figure
2 presents the empirical regret for RLSVI with K=10,N =
50,σ=0.1,λ=1 and an ϵ-greedy agent over 5 seeds3.
(a) First 2000 episodes
(b) First 106 episodes
Figure 2. Efﬁcient exploration on a 50-chain
Figure 1 shows that RLSVI consistently learns the opti-
mal policy in roughly 500 episodes. Any dithering strategy
would take at least 1015 episodes for this result. The state
of the art upper bounds for the efﬁcient optimistic algo-
rithm UCRL given by appendix C.5 in (Dann & Brunskill,
2015) for H = 15,S = 6,A = 2,ϵ = 1,δ = 1 only kick in af-
ter more than 1010 suboptimal episodes. RLSVI is able
to effectively exploit the generalization and prior structure
from the basis functions to learn much faster.
We now examine how learning scales as we change the
chain length N and number of basis functions K. We ob-
serve that RLSVI essentially maintains the optimal policy
once it discovers the rewarding state. We use the number
of episodes until 10 rewards as a proxy for learning time.
We report the average of ﬁve random seeds.
Figure 3 examines the time to learn as we vary the chain
length N with ﬁxed K=10 basis functions. We include the
dithering lower bound 2N−1 as a dashed line and a lower
bound scaling
1
10H2SA for tabular learning algorithms as
a solid line (Dann & Brunskill, 2015). For N=100, 2N−1>
1028 and H2SA>106. RLSVI demonstrates scalable gen-
eralization and exploration to outperform these bounds.
Figure 3. RLSVI learning time against chain length.
Figure 4 examines the time to learn as we vary the basis
functions K in a ﬁxed N=50 length chain. Learning time
2For more details on this experiment see Appendix C.
3In this setting any choice of ϵ or Boltzmann η is equivalent.
scales gracefully with K. Further, the marginal effect of K
decrease as dim(VhK)=K approaches dim(RSA)=100.
We include a local polynomial regression in blue to high-
light this trend. Importantly, even for large K the perfor-
mance is far superior to the dithering and tabular bounds4.
Figure 4. RLSVI learning time against number of basis features.
Figure 5 examines these same scalings on a logarithmic
scale. We ﬁnd the data for these experiments is consis-
tent with polynomial learning as hypothesized in Appendix
B. These results are remarkably robust over several orders
of magnitude in both σ and λ. We present more detailed
analysis of these sensitivies in Appendix C.
Figure 5. Empirical support for polynomial learning in RLSVI.
6.1.2. AGNOSTIC LEARNING
Unlike the example above, practical RL problems will typ-
ically be agnostic. The true value function Q∗
h will not lie
within VhK. To examine RLSVI in this setting we generate
basis functions by adding Gaussian noise to the true value
function φhk ∼N(Q∗
h, ρI). The parameter ρ determines
the scale of this noise. For ρ = 0 this problem is coherent
but for ρ > 0 this will typically not be the case. We ﬁx
N = 20, K = 20, σ = 0.1 and λ = 1.
For i=0,..,1000 we run RLSVI for 10,000 episodes with
ρ=i/1000 and a random seed. Figure 6 presents the num-
ber of episodes until 10 rewards for each value of ρ. For
large values of ρ, and an extremely misspeciﬁed basis,
RLSVI is not effective.
However, there is some region
0 < ρ < ρ∗where learning remains remarkably stable5.
This simple example gives us some hope that RLSVI can be
4For chain N=50, the bounds 2N−1>1014 and H2SA>105.
5Note Q∗
h(s,a)∈{0,1} so ρ=0.5 represents signiﬁcant noise.

Generalization and Exploration via Randomized Value Functions
useful in the agnostic setting. In our remaining experiments
we will demonstrate that RLSVI can acheive state of the art
results in more practical problems with agnostic features.
Figure 6. RLSVI is somewhat robust model mispeciﬁcation.
6.2. Tetris
We now turn our attention to learning to play the iconic
video game Tetris. In this game, random blocks fall se-
quentially on a 2D grid with 20 rows and 10 columns. At
each step the agent can move and rotate the object sub-
ject to the constraints of the grid. The game starts with
an empty grid and ends when a square in the top row be-
comes full. However, when a row becomes full it is re-
moved and all bricks above it move downward. The objec-
tive is to maximize the score attained (total number of rows
removed) before the end of the game.
Tetris has been something of a benchmark problem for RL
and approximate dynamic programming, with several pa-
pers on this topic (Gabillon et al., 2013). Our focus is not
so much to learn a high-scoring Tetris player, but instead
to demonstrate the RLSVI offers beneﬁts over other forms
of exploration with LSVI. Tetris is challenging for RL with
a huge state space with more than 2200 states. In order to
tackle this problem efﬁciently we use 22 benchmark fea-
tures. These featurs give the height of each column, the ab-
solute difference in height of each column, the maximum
height of a column, the number of “holes” and a constant.
It is well known that you can ﬁnd far superior linear basis
functions, but we use these to mirror their approach.
In order to apply RLSVI to Tetris, which does not have
ﬁxed episode length, we made a few natural modiﬁca-
tions to the algorithm.
First, we approximate a time-
homogeneous value function. We also only the keep most
recent N=105 transitions to cap the linear growth in mem-
ory and computational requirements, similar to (Mnih,
2015). Details are provided in Appendix D. In Figure 7
we present learning curves for RLSVI λ=1,σ=1 and LSVI
with a tuned ϵ-greedy exploration schedule6 averaged over
5 seeds. The results are signiﬁcant in several ways.
First, both RLSVI and LSVI make signiﬁcant improve-
ments over the previous approach of LSPI with the same
6We found that we could not acheive good performance for
any ﬁxed ϵ. We used an annealing exploration schedule that was
tuned to give good performance. See Appendix D
basis functions (Bertsekas & Ioffe, 1996). Both algorithms
reach higher ﬁnal performance (≃3500 and 4500 respec-
tively) than the best level for LSPI (3183).
They also
reach this performance after many fewer games and, un-
like LSPI do not “collapse” after ﬁnding their peak perfor-
mance. We believe that these improvements are mostly due
to the memory replay buffer, which stores a bank of recent
past transitions, rather than LSPI which is purely online.
Second, both RLSVI and LSVI learn from scratch where
LSPI required a scoring initial policy to begin learning. We
believe this is due to improved exploration schemes, LSPI
is completely greedy so struggles to learn without an ini-
tial policy. LSVI with a tuned ϵ schedule is much better.
However, we do see a signiﬁcant improvement through ex-
ploration via RLSVI even when compared to the tuned ϵ
scheme. More details are available in Appendix D.
Figure 7. Learning to play Tetris with linear Bertsekas features.
6.3. A recommendation engine
We will now show that efﬁcient exploration and general-
ization can be helpful in a simple model of customer in-
teraction. Consider an agent which recommends J ≤N
products from Z = {1, 2, . . . , N} sequentially to a cus-
tomer. The conditional probability that the customer likes
a product depends on the product, some items are better
than others. However it also depends on what the user has
observed, what she liked and what she disliked. We repre-
sent the products the customer has seen by ˜Z ⊆Z. For
each product n ∈˜Z we will indicate xn ∈{−1, +1} for
her preferences {dislike, like} respectively. If the customer
has not observed the product n /∈˜Z we will write xn = 0.
We model the probability that the customer will like a new
product a /∈˜Z by a logistic transformation linear in x:
P(a|x) = 1/ (1 + exp (−[βa + P
n γanxn])) .
(2)
Importantly, this model reﬂects that the customers’ pref-
erences may evolve as their experiences change. For ex-
ample, a customer may be much more likely to watch the
second season of the TV show “Breaking Bad” if they have
watched the ﬁrst season and liked it.
The agent in this setting is the recommendation system,

Generalization and Exploration via Randomized Value Functions
whose goal is to maximize the cumulative amount of items
liked through time for each customer.
The agent does
not know p(a|x) initially, but can learn to estimate the
parameters β, γ through interactions across different cus-
tomers. Each customer is modeled as an episode with hori-
zon length H = J with a “cold start” and no previous ob-
served products ˜Z = ∅. For our simulations we set βa = 0
∀a and sample a random problem instance by sampling
γan ∼N(0, c2) independently for each a and n.
Figure 8. RLSVI performs better than Boltzmann exploration.
Figure 9. RLSVI can outperform the optimal myopic policy.
Although this setting is simple, the number of possible
states |S| = |{−1, 0, +1}|H = 3J is exponential in J.
To learn in time less than |S| it is crucial that we can ex-
ploit generalization between states as per equation (2). For
this problem we constuct the following simple basis func-
tions: ∀1 ≤n, m, a ≤N, let φm(x, a) = 1{a = m}
and φmn(x, a) = xn1{a = m}. In each period h form
Φh = ((φn)n, (φm)m). The dimension of our function
class K = N 2 + N is exponentially smaller than the num-
ber of states. However, barring a freak event, this simple
basis will lead to an agnostic learning problem.
Figure 8 and 9 show the performance of RLSVI compared
to several benchmark methods. In Figure 8 we plot the
cumulative regret of RLSVI when compared against LSVI
with Boltzmann exploration and identical basis features.
We see that RLSVI explores much more efﬁciently than
Boltzmann exploration over a wide range of temperatures.
In Figure 9 we show that, using this efﬁcient exploration
method, the reinforcement learning policy is able to out-
perform not only benchmark bandit algorithms but even
the optimal myopic policy7. Bernoulli Thompson sampling
does not learn much even after 1200 episodes, since the
algorithm does not take context into account. The linear
contextual bandit outperforms RLSVI at ﬁrst. This is not
surprising, since learning a myopic policy is simpler than
a multi-period policy. However as more data is gathered
RLSVI eventually learns a richer policy which outperforms
the myopic policy.
Appendix E provides pseudocode for this computational
study. We set N = 10, H = J = 5, c = 2 and L = 1200.
Note that such problems have |S| = 4521 states; this al-
lows us to solve each MDP exactly so that we can compute
regret. Each result is averaged over 100 problem instances
and for each problem instance, we repeat simulations 10
times. The cumulative regret for both RLSVI (with λ = 0.2
and σ2 = 10−3) and LSVI with Boltzmann exploration
(with λ = 0.2 and a variety of “temperature” settings η)
are plotted in Figure 8. RLSVI clearly outperforms LSVI
with Boltzmann exploration.
Our simulations use an extremely simpliﬁed model. Never-
theless, they highlight the potential value of RL over multi-
armed bandit approaches in recommendation systems and
other customer interactions. An RL algorithm may out-
perform even even an optimal myopic system, particularly
where large amounts of data are available. In some settings,
efﬁcient generalization and exploration can be crucial.
7. Closing remarks
We have established a regret bound that afﬁrms efﬁciency
of RLSVI in a tabula rasa learning context. However the
real promise of RLSVI lies in its potential as an efﬁcient
method for exploration in large-scale environments with
generalization. RLSVI is simple, practical and explores
efﬁciently in several environments where state of the art
approaches are ineffective.
We believe that this approach to exploration via random-
ized value functions represents an important concept be-
yond our speciﬁc implementation of RLSVI. RLSVI is
designed for generalization with linear value functions,
but many of the great successes in RL have come with
highly nonlinear “deep” neural networks from Backgam-
mon (Tesauro, 1995) to Atari8 (Mnih, 2015). The insights
and approach gained from RLSVI may still be useful in this
nonlinear setting. For example, we might adapt RLSVI to
instead take approximate posterior samples from a nonlin-
ear value function via a nonparametric bootstrap (Osband
& Van Roy, 2015).
7The optimal myopic policy knows the true model deﬁned in
Equation 2, but does not plan over multiple timesteps.
8Interestingly, recent work has been able to reproduce similar
performance using linear value functions (Liang et al., 2015).

Generalization and Exploration via Randomized Value Functions
