1 
Perspectives and Ethics of the  
Autonomous Artificial Thinking Systems 
Joël Colloc 
Normandie Univ, UNIHAVRE, CNRS, IDEES, 76600  Le Havre France 

WWW home page: http://www.cirtai.org/spip.php7rubrique389 
Abstract: The feasibility of autonomous artificial thinking systems needs to compare the way 
the human beings acquire their information and develops the thought with the current capacities 
of the autonomous information systems. Our model uses four hierarchies: the hierarchy of 
information systems, the cognitive hierarchy, the linguistic hierarchy and the digital informative 
hierarchy that combines artificial intelligence, the power of computers models, methods and tools 
to develop autonomous information systems. The question of the capability of autonomous 
system to provide a form of artificial thought arises with the ethical consequences on the social 
life and the perspective of transhumanism. 
Keywords: artificial thinking, holism, Ethics, autonomous systems, artificial consciousness 
1. Introduction 
The recent progress of the cognitive sciences, neurosciences, computing and robotics boosts the 
project of autonomous artificial being capable of thinking. The feasibility of autonomous 
artificial thinking systems needs to compare the way the human beings acquire their information 
and develops the thought with the current capacities of the autonomous information systems.  Our 
model is based on four hierarchies: the hierarchy of information systems, stemming from the 
systemic theory, supplies indicators of complexity and autonomy; the cognitive hierarchy 
describes the sub-symbolic acquisition and the emergence of our personal experience, our 
knowledge, whereas the linguistic hierarchy builds the speech describing the knowledge acquired 
in terms of concrete and abstract objects on the environment and on oneself. The digital 
informative hierarchy relies on the necessary concepts, models, methods and tools to build 
autonomous information systems. At last, we discuss the nature of artificial thinking. 
 
Caption: 
Level 6: Operating, Information Decision 
system 
Level 7: The system coordonates its actions 
of different agents 
Level 8: 
The 
system 
imagines 
and 
elaborates new means of decision 
Level 9: The system finalizes 
Acronyms: 
SCS: Selection and Coordination System 
DS: Decision System 
FS: Finalization System 
IS: Information System 
SID: System of Imagination and Design 
OS: Operating System 
Figure 1: The levels 6 to 9 of the model of complex system (J-L. Le Moigne, 1990) 
OS!
DS!
IS!
Behavior and 
actions!
IS!
OS!
DS!
Behavior and 
actions!
OS!
IS!
DS!
SCS!
SID!
FS!
Behavior and 
actions!
OS!
IS!
SCS!
SID!
DS!
Level%6%
Level%7%
Level%8%
Level%9%

 
2 
2. The hierarchy of information systems 
Jean-Louis Le Moigne describes the evolution of information systems. Like epigenesis, the 
following level adds features to the previous one. By conciseness, the levels 6 to 9 are presented 
figure 1. On level 6, the system becomes is able to memorize his decision O.I.D (Operating 
system (O), Information system (I), System of Decision (D)). On level 7, the system coordinates 
numerous decisions of actions at all the time t, concerning its internal activity and regulation and 
the external information from and to the environment. On level 8, the system is endowed with a 
sub-system of imagination and design (SIC). On level 9, the system is able to decide on its 
decision and to determine the positive and negative aspects of its actions. This finalization of a 
complex system is closed to the human thought (SF) which confers him an autonomy of decision 
allowing him to set his own goals. They correspond to the autonomous multi-agents systems. 
3. Integration of the sensory ways and motricity: emergence of objects 
The neurophysiology of the sensory ways is described with details in (Arbib and 
Hanson 1988),(Gazzaniga et al., 2001) and (Purves et al., 1997).For all the sensory ways (vision, 
hearing, smell, taste, touch, ...) we find globally an ascending similar organization: peripheral 
sensors, transduction in electric signal, the transmission (+/- long) by nerves in the brainstem or 
by pairs of cranial nerves (V, VII, IX, X), the relay in a specific thalamic area, a projection in a 
specialized cortical zone and associative areas common to several sensory modalities. In every 
level, numerous recurring neurons constitute the feedback loops of the cerebral cortex that are 
essential to do the predictions of the future expected perceptions as coherent with those recently 
memorized at each level of details: from short-lived elements of perception called "percepts" up 
to durably memorized objects (figure 2 and 3). The motricity works similarly by downward ways 
and is strongly entangled with the sensory ways and also have feedback loops. The cerebral 
cortex functioning is rather uniform on its whole surface (Mountcastle, 1978). Seeing an apple 
actives the smell of the fruit, its shape, consistency (in connection with the motricity) and the 
word « apple » to speak about it. Smelling (blindly) the odor of apple activates a stereotypical 
image of apple which we would expect to see. All these predictions is possible because we 
memorized a global unified perception of the object apple bound with the other various sensory, 
linguistic modalities which correspond to it (Hawkins and Blakeslee, 2005), (Minsky, 1988). 
 
 
Figure 2: Sensory emergence of known objects 
(Hawkins and Blakeslee, 2005)  
Figure 3:  Cognitive / linguistic hierarchy 
(Colloc, 2016) 
V1%
V2%
V4%
IT%
Hearing 
Sight 
Touch 
Smell 
Taste 
Sensory 
areas 
Agrégation 
of sub-
symbolic 
Levels 
Emergence%of%objects%
Percepts"and"Feelings"
Shapes"and""Pieces"
Pa3erns"
Concrete"Objects"
Charactéris:cs"
Symbols"
Names"
"Verbs"
Abstract"objects"
SubA
symbolic"
Percep:on"
Level"
Symbolic"
Level"
Cogni:ve"pyramid""
"Sensory"Cortex"and"Thalamus""
"Emo:on:"hypothalamus"
Sentences"
"
Life"
Experiences"
"
Ontologies""
Knowledge"
Linguis:c"pyramid"
Cor:cal"areas"of"the"language,"
Thalamus"
Informa:on"
Flow"
Texts"
Informa:ons"
R"
Signs"
R"
R"
R"
R"
R"
L"
R"
L"
L"
L"
Oc"
∈"
Speech/WriPng"
Listening/Reading"
OL"
Se"
Sy"
∈"
SIGNIFIED%
SIGNIFIER%(Saussure)%

 
3 
The figure 2 shows the various cortical layers V1, V2, V4 that integrate the sensory modalities 
and associative zones in the inféro-temporal cortex (IT) and that are activated when an apple is 
recognized in any manner. This activation is then transmitted in a downward way in the other 
sensory or linguistic areas which are going to predict patterns corresponding to levels of details 
more and more fine to confirm or counter that they are corresponding in each of the other senses. 
We can so know if we are feeling a real apple or only a partial representation as in the famous 
Magritte’s painting entitled « Ceci n’est pas une pomme » (this is not an apple). To this anatomo-
physiological organization corresponds a hierarchy of the sensory information passed on and 
integrated into the cortical level figure 3. The hippocampus is the zone situated at the top of the 
mnesic pyramid. This cerebral structure is at the origin of the matching and the interconnection of 
the various sensory modalities and the memorization of the characteristics of the new unknown 
objects (Hawkins and Blakeslee, 2005). The figure 3 describes an abstract model of the human 
information system (Colloc, 2016). In his left part we find the sensory and cognitive pyramid 
leading to the emergence of concrete objects and to the memorization of knowledge and 
experiences on the objects of the world. 
 At every level recognition operators (R) confirm or 
counter the coherence in the flow of the perceptions. Percepts is primary elements perceived by 
the organs of the senses. For the vision, it is points, of directed segments (vertical, oblique, 
horizontal ...) which establish in the field of vision of the forms elementary as those described in 
the theory of "geons" proposed by Hummel and Biederman in 1987 (Biederman, 1987),(Boucart, 
1996) and the hypothalamic emotional aspects concerning them (Damasio, 1995). The 
neurohormones, secreted mainly by the hypothalamus and the amygdalae, influence the 
interpretation of the sensory information. The hypothalamus regulates the set of the balances of 
the body (hunger and thirst/satisfaction, pleasure/pain, ...) (Vincent, 1996),(Vincent, 2002). The 
amygdalae intervene in the circuits of the reward and the motivation. For Alain Prochiantz, there 
is no organ of the thought, " there n is no thought without body, nor of body without thought" 
(Prochiantz, 2001), he so joins Francisco Varela (Varela et al., 1993). 
 The cognitive operators ⊕ 
composition and (R) Recognition establish signs which base the experience of patterns and 
behavior of the concrete objects at successive levels of compositions (part left of the figure 3). 
The operator of synthesis ⊗ Predicted the characteristics or the behavior of the similar objects 
and exploit the following operators: the operator of generalization (G) groups together similar 
objects in a category. The operator of deduction (Dd) predicts the characteristics and the behavior 
of objects to be looked for from the shapes and already observed patterns. The induction operator 
(In) search for predictable properties in unknown objects because of their resemblance with 
already known objects. The operator of abduction (Ab) detects missing or abnormal properties in 
usually known objects. The operator of subsumption (Sb) connects an object type more 
specialized in a more general already known object type. The analogy operator detects similarity 
between the structures, the characteristics or the behavior of known and memorized objects. 
The linguistic hierarchy: The concrete objects do not need to be put into words to be 
recognized, the language appears later with the maturation of the nervous system. Jean Piaget 
underlines that the language is gradually set up from the 12th to the 18th months of the life of the 
child (Piaget, 1992). The sign language being older than the spoken language, it is earlier set up 
in the encephalon and precedes the language in the verbal flow (Jacquet-Andrieu and 
Colloc, 2014). The perception, the emergence, the recognition of the concrete objects and the 
thought are previous to the implementation of the language, they are thus considered as sub-
symbolic, they result from the memorization of the experiences of perception. The Haeckel’s 

 
4 
theory :"The ontogeny recapitulates the philogenesis" finds a new lighting by the discovery of the 
genes of the development (Hox) (Prochiantz, 2001). In particular, the development of the sensory 
ways takes place during the embryogenesis and continues after the birth in the presence of the 
stimulations of the environment. The absence of visual stimulation of kittens in the birth prevents 
the maturation of the vision and causes a partial or total agenesis of the visual ways 
(Shatz, 1992). Also, the other intellectual functions would be organized according to an 
intellectual protomap (similar to that proposed by Brodman) which determines the migration of 
neurons and the maturation of the sensory and motor ways. The linguistic pyramid (part right of 
figure 3) establishes the symbols, the characteristics, the names of objects abstracted from the 
concrete objects or the other pre-existent abstract objects. It determines semantics, the syntax of 
the sentences allowing to establish input flows (reading / listening) and output (speaking / 
writing) of texts and flows of information (verbal and nonverbal). The linguistic operators (Ol) 
are: the lexical operator (L) in charge of naming and associating a word with the concrete and 
abstract objects and with their characteristics or  behavior. The operator of membership (∈) (has 
a) establishes that a characteristic or a behavior belongs to a concrete or abstract object. The 
semantic operator defines himself the meaning of a word (name, verb, adverb) that is with which 
concrete or abstract object is the meant according to (de Saussure, 1916). The syntactic operator 
(Sy) determines in a given language the possible syntaxes of the sentences. The objects of the 
world are meaningful by their name, the actions  by verbs and their characteristics by adjectives, 
the quite ordered by the syntax rules of a grammar and operators like generalization (is-a), 
causality (caused by), composition (is-part-of), temporality (succeeds, precedes)... They allow to 
create new abstract objects memorized in their turn and then combined with others in an 
incremental way. Our model is always incomplete and reducing but it shows the interactions 
between the perception, the cognition, the language and the feelings. It tries to reconcile the 
structuralist approach of the linguistics initialized by Ferdinand de Saussure with the current 
neurophysiological and neuro-psychological approaches (de Saussure, 1916). 
Caption 
5. Objects encapsulate (∈) data or attributes, and 
procedures to make necessary  arithmetics or logic 
calculations and  deductions from the data values. 
6. Semantic systems implements entities and then 
objects 
7-8. Distributed Knowledge bases implement 
cognitive agents and ontologies cooperation. 
9. Conscious autonomous multi-agent systems 
(CAMAS) has an internal memory to store facts of 
consciousness. It is able to choose its objectives and 
then schedule its goals and actions. 
Figure 4 : Digital information hierarchy (Colloc, 2016) 
5 The digital information hierarchy 
Information relies on the triptych: data, information and knowledge (Abiteboul, 2012). 
Many knowledge bases were developed like MYCIN (Buchanan and Shortliffe, 1984)  and 
SIAMED (Colloc, 1985). Logic is used to classify objects as initially shown by (Carroll, 1896) 
and languages like LISP (McCarthy,1960) or PROLOG (Colmerauer, 1996). Semantic models 
(object oriented and agents) allows to build knowledge and ontologies more efficiently (Shen et 
Object""
Internal"or"private"part"
External"or"public""Interface"
Data%
EnGGes%
%
Processing%:%
Func:ons"
Procedures"
Queries"
Logical"operators"
∈"
∈"
CogniGve%/%ReacGve%%Agents%%
/%Actors%
MulGOAgent%Systems%MAS%
Autonomous%
%MulGOagent%Systems%%
AMAS%
InformaGon%Systems%IS""
Databases%DB"
SemanGc%Systems%:"
A"Object"Oriented"Model"
A"En:tyARela:onship"Model"
Knowledge%Based%
Systems%KBS"
Distributed%ArGﬁcial%
Intelligence%DAI%
Finalized%
Autonomous%Systems%
Lev"5"
Lev"6"
Lev"7"
Lev"7A8"
Lev"9"
Le"Moigne’s"
Levels"

 
5 
al.,2015). The semantic Web allow to access a considerable quantity of knowledge and data on 
the world and the people (level 6-7). Multi-agent systems (MAS) are used to build simulations: A 
community of numerous agents ants solve problems of search  for paths in complex graphs 
thanks to their stigmergic behavior (level 7). MAS allows to to coordinate mutiple ontologies and 
knowledge agents to support clinical decision in medicine (Shen et al., 2015). Alain Cardon 
proposes a psychic system  that relies on knowledge in psychology and capable of generating 
flows of thoughts that take place in the temporality under the shape of organized groups of 
processes to build the artificial psychic system and its interactions (Cardon, 2011). This 
conscious autonomous multi-agent system (CAMAS) is able to choose its objectives and set its 
goals to achieve them (level 9).  
6. Conclusion Can computers think ? 
Computers could think in a very different way than human, as a plane flights differently but faster 
than a bird (Pitrat, 1990).  The Zen is a total holism, the world cannot be absolutely divided into 
parts. The dilemma is that for every object of the world, according to master Zen Mummon: "we 
cannot express him with words and we cannot express him without the words". According to the 
Buddhism : to trust the words to reach the truth is equivalent of trusting an always incomplete 
formal system (Hofstadter, 1985). For Jiddu Khrishnamurti, our consciousness is common to all 
the humanity: All the human beings think that contribute to build it. He considers the 
individualism, the ego as an obstacle to understand the consciousness with rare moments of 
clarity ("insight"). "The thought is a movement in the time and the space. The thought is memory, 
memory of the past things. The thought is the activity of the knowledge, the knowledge which was 
gathered through millions of years and stored in the form of memory in the brain." 
(Krishnamurty, 2005). There are two forms of thinking: -The first is a reaction of the memory 
which contains the knowledge, the result of the experience from the beginning of humanity 
(phylogenesis) and since our birth (epigenesis) in a loop: experience, knowledge, memory, 
thought, action, experience... necessarily limited by the time, it is used every day, rational, 
individualistic, power-hungry and of progress submissive to the knowledge which accumulates, 
in the words which divide and this division is responsible for all the suffering, for all the troubles 
of the world. -The alternative thinking: the action-perception where in rare occasions, we pay 
simply our attention to the world, without interpreting it, without naming anything, virgin of any 
prejudice, knowledge and especially spontaneously, by living this moment without thinking of it 
and without the will. For example: the direct perception of a wonderful landscape of mountain 
one morning with all our senses uses our complete attention where we forget ourselves and 
banish the use of the words (Krishnamurty, 2005). Such a full perception requests only the left 
lower part: the sub-symbolic cognitive pyramid (figure 3) and not the linguistic pyramid. The 
first way of thinking is a fatal vicious circle implemented soon in computers that will think better 
than human beings! And there nothing prevents that a computer invents a new religion at the 
origin of new sufferings for the humanity. The language during the evolution would have made 
lose to the man his spontaneity in the immediate perception of the world such as it is. The digital 
technology, which strengthens the symbolic nature of our relation to the world, is doubtless going 
to establish the peak of our ignorance. The realization of CAMAS able to think is now possible. 
These systems have access to Internet and will quickly become more powerful than the human 
beings with disturbing consequences for the future of the humanity. In conclusion, we have 
shown that computers can think in the first way only. The main characteristic of humanity is to 
still be able to think also in the alternative way but how long before losing our essential faculty ? 

 
6
