COMPOSITION AND DECOMPOSITION OF GANS
Yeu-Chern Harn
Department of Computer Science
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

Zhenghao Chen & Vladimir Jojic
Calico Life Sciences

ABSTRACT
In this work, we propose a composition/decomposition framework for adversari-
ally training generative models on composed data - data where each sample can be
thought of as being constructed from a ﬁxed number of components. In our frame-
work, samples are generated by sampling components from component generators
and feeding these components to a composition function which combines them
into a “composed sample”. This compositional training approach improves the
modularity, extensibility and interpretability of Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) - providing a principled way to incrementally construct complex models
out of simpler component models, and allowing for explicit “division of respon-
sibility” between these components. Using this framework, we deﬁne a family of
learning tasks and evaluate their feasibility on two datasets in two different data
modalities (image and text). Lastly, we derive sufﬁcient conditions such that these
compositional generative models are identiﬁable. Our work provides a principled
approach to building on pre-trained generative models or for exploiting the com-
positional nature of data distributions to train extensible and interpretable models.
1
INTRODUCTION
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have proven to be a powerful framework for training gen-
erative models that are able to produce realistic samples across a variety of domains, most notably
when applied to natural images. However, existing approaches largely attempt to model a data dis-
tribution directly and fail to exploit the compositional nature inherent in many data distributions
of interest. In this work, we propose a method for training compositional generative models us-
ing adversarial training, identify several key beneﬁts of compositional training and derive sufﬁcient
conditions under which compositional training is identiﬁable.
This work is motivated by the observation that many data distributions, such as natural images, are
compositional in nature - that is, they consist of different components that are combined through
some composition process. For example, natural scenes often consist of different objects, composed
via some combination of scaling, rotation, occlusion etc. Exploiting this compositional nature of
complex data distributions, we demonstrate that one can both incrementally construct models for
composed data from component models and learn component models from composed data directly.
In our framework, we are interested in modeling composed data distributions - distributions where
each sample is constructed from a ﬁxed number of simpler sets of objects. We will refer to these sets
of objects as components. For example, consider a simpliﬁed class of natural images consisting of a
foreground object superimposed on a background, the two components in this case would be a set of
foreground objects and a set of backgrounds. We explicitly deﬁne two functions: composition and
decomposition, as well as a set of component generators. Each component generator is responsible
for modeling the marginal distribution of a component while the composition function takes a set of
component samples and produce a composed sample (see ﬁgure 1). We additionally assume that the
decomposition function is the inverse operation of the composition function.
We are motivated by the following desiderata of modeling compositional data:
• Modularity: Compositional training should provide a principled way to reuse off-the-shelf
or pre-trained component models across different tasks, allowing us to build increasingly
complex generative models from simpler ones.
1
arXiv:1901.07667v1  [cs.LG]  23 Jan 2019

• Interpretability: Models should allow us to explicitly incorporate prior knowledge about
the compositional structure of data, allowing for clear “division of responsibility” between
different components.
• Extensibility: Once we have learned to decompose data, we should be able to learn com-
ponent models for previously unseen components directly from composed data.
• Identiﬁability: We should be able to specify sufﬁcient conditions for composition under
which composition/decomposition and component models can be learned from composed
data.
Within this framework, we ﬁrst consider four learning tasks (of increasing difﬁculty) which range
from learning only composition or decomposition (assuming the component models are pre-trained)
to learning composition, decomposition and all component models jointly.
To illustrate these tasks, we show empirical results on two simple datasets: MNIST digits superim-
posed on a uniform background and the Yelp Open Dataset (a dataset of Yelp reviews). We show
examples of when some of these tasks are ill-posed and derive sufﬁcient conditions under which
tasks 1 and 3 are identiﬁable. Lastly, we demonstrate the concept of modularity and extensibility
by showing that component generators can be used to inductively learn other new components in a
chain-learning example in section 3.4.
The main contributions of this work are:
1. We deﬁne a framework for training compositional generative models adversarially.
2. Using this framework, we deﬁne different tasks corresponding to varying levels of prior
knowledge and pre-training. We show results for these tasks on two different datasets from
two different data modalities, demonstrating the lack of identiﬁability for some tasks and
feasibility for others.
3. We derive sufﬁcient conditions under which our compositional models are identiﬁable.
1.1
RELATED WORK
Our work is related to the task of disentangling representations of data and the discovery of inde-
pendent factors of variations (Bengio et al. (2013)). Examples of such work include: 1) methods for
evaluation of the level of disentaglement (Eastwood & Williams (2018)), 2) new losses that promote
disentaglement (Ridgeway & Mozer), 3) extensions of architectures that ensure disentanglement
(Kim & Mnih (2018)). Such approaches are complementary to our work but differ in that we ex-
plicitly decompose the structure of the generative network into independent building blocks that can
be split off and reused through composition. We do not consider decomposition to be a good way to
obtain disentangled representations, due to the complete decoupling of the generators. Rather we be-
lieve that decomposition of complex generative model into component generators, provides a source
of building blocks for model construction. Component generators obtained by our method trained to
have disentangled representations could yield interpretable and reusable components, however, we
have not explored this avenue of research in this work.
Extracting GANs from corrupted measurements has been explored by Bora et al. (2018). We note
that the noise models described in that paper can be seen as generated by a component generator
under our framework. Consequently, our identiﬁability results generalize recovery results in that
paper. Recent work by Azadi et al. (2018) is focused on image composition and ﬁts neatly in
the framework presented here. Along similar lines, work such as Johnson et al. (2018), utilizes a
monolithic architecture which translates text into objects composed into a scene. In contrast, our
work is aimed at deconstructing the monolithic architectures into component generators.
2
METHODS
2.1
DEFINITION OF FRAMEWORK
Our framework consists of three main moving pieces:
2

Method
Learn
components
Learn
composition
Learn decom-
position
Generative
model
LR-GAN(Yang et al., 2017)
Background
True
False
True
C-GAN (Azadi et al., 2018)
False
True
True
False
ST-GAN (Zhang et al., 2017)
False
True
False
False
InfoGAN (Chen et al., 2016)
False
False
False
True
Table 1:
Various GAN methods can learn some, but not all, parts of our framework. These parts
may exist implicitly in each of the models, but their extraction is non-trivial.
Component generators gi(zi) A component generator is a standard generative model. In this pa-
per, we adopt the convention that the component generators are functions that maps some noise
vector z sampled from standard normal distribution to a component sample. We assume there are m
component generators, from g1 to gm. Let oi := gi(zi) be the output for component generator i.
Composition function (c : (Rn)m →Rn) Function which composes m inputs of dimension n to a
single output (composed sample).
Decomposition function (d : Rn →(Rn)m) Function which decomposes one input of dimension
n to m outputs (components). We denote the i-th output of the decomposition function by d(·)i.
Without loss of generality we will assume that the composed sample has the same dimensions as
each of its components.
Together, these pieces deﬁne a “composite generator” which generates a composed sample by two
steps:
• Generating component samples o1, o2, ..., om.
• Composing these component samples using c to form a composed sample.
The composition and/or decomposition function are parameterized as neural networks.
Below we describe two applications of this framework to the domain of images and text respectively.
2.2
EXAMPLE 1: IMAGE WITH FOREGROUND OBJECT(S) ON A BACKGROUND
In this setting, we assume that each image consists of one or more foreground object over a back-
ground. In this case, m ≥2, one component generator is responsible for generating the background,
and other component generators generate individual foreground objects.
An example is shown in ﬁgure 1. In this case the foreground object is a single MNIST digit and
the composition function takes a uniform background and overlays the digit over the background.
The decomposition function takes a composed image and returns both the foreground digit and the
background with the digit removed.
Components
Composed 
Example
Composition
Decomposition
Figure 1: An example of composition and decomposition for example 1.
3

2.3
EXAMPLE 2: COHERENT SENTENCE PAIRS
In this setting, we consider the set of adjacent sentence pairs extracted from a larger text. In this
case, each component generator generates a sentence and the composition function combines two
sentences and edits them to form a coherent pair. The decomposition function splits a pair into
individual sentences (see ﬁgure 2).
Nice restaurant.
Dry corn bread.
Terrible restaurant.
Dry corn bread.
Terrible restaurant.
Dry corn bread.
Composition
Decomposition
Composed 
Example
Components
Figure 2: An example of composition and decomposition for example 2.
2.4
LOSS FUNCTION
In this section, we describe details of our training procedure. For convenience of training, we imple-
ment a composition of Wasserstein GANs introduced in Arjovsky et al. (2017) ) but all theoretical
results also hold for standard adversarial training losses.
Notation We deﬁne the data terms used in the loss function. Let x1 be a component sample. There
are m such samples. Let y be a composite sample be obtained by composition of components
x1, x2, ..., xm. For compactness, we use oi as an abbreviation for gi(zi). We denote vector L1
norm by ∥a∥1 (∥a∥1 = P
i |ai| ). Finally, we use capital D to denote discriminators involved in
different losses.
Component Generator Adversarial Loss (lgi) Given the component data, we can train component
generator (gi) to match the component data distribution using loss
lgi ≡Exi∼pdata(xi)[Di(xi)] −Ezi∼pz[Di(gi(zi))].
Composition Adversarial Loss (lc) Given the component generators and composite data, we can
train a composition network such that generated composite samples match the composite data dis-
tribution using loss
lc ≡Ey∼pdata(y)[Dc(y)] −Ez1∼pz1,...,zm∼pzm [Dc(c(o1, ..., om))]
Decomposition Adversarial Loss (ld) Given the component and composite distributions, we can
train a decomposition function d such that distribution of decomposed of composite samples
matches the component distributions using loss
ld ≡Ez1∼pz1,...,zm∼pzm [Df(o1, ..., om)] −Ey∼pdata(y)[Df(d(y))].
Composition/Decomposition Cycle Losses (lc−cyc, ld−cyc) Additionally, we include a cyclic con-
sistency loss (Zhu et al. (2017)) to encourage composition and decomposition functions to be in-
verses of each other.
lc−cyc ≡Ez1∼pz1,...,zm∼pzm
"X
i
∥d(c(o1, ..., om))i −oi∥1
#
ld−cyc ≡Ey∼pdata(y) [∥c(d(y)) −y∥1]
Table 2 summarizes all the losses. Training of discriminators (Di, Dc, Df ) is achieved by maxi-
mization of their respective losses.
2.5
PROTOTYPICAL TASKS AND CORRESPONDING LOSSES
Under the composition/decomposition framework, we focus on a set of prototypical tasks which
involve composite data.
4

Table 2: Table for all losses
Loss name
Detail
lgi
Exi∼pdata(xi)[Di(xi)] −Ezi∼pz[Di(gi(zi))]
lc
Ey∼pdata(y)[Dc(y)] −Ez1∼pz1,...,zm∼pzm [Dc(c(o1, ..., om))]
ld
Ez1∼pz1,...,zm∼pzm [Df(o1, ..., om)] −Ey∼pdata(y)[Df(d(y))]
lc−cyc
Ez1∼pz1,...,zm∼pzm [P
i∥d(c(o1, ..., om))i −oi∥1]
ld−cyc
Ey∼pdata(y) [∥c(d(y)) −y∥1]
Task 1: Given component generators gi, i ∈{1, . . . , m} and c, train d.
Task 2: Given component generators gi, i ∈{1, . . . , m}, train d and c.
Task 3: Given component generators gi, i ∈{1, . . . , m −1} and c, train gm and d.
Task 4: Given c, train all gi, i ∈{1, . . . , m} and d
To train generator(s) in these tasks, we minimize relevant losses:
lc + ld + α(lc−cyc + ld−cyc),
where α ≥0 controls the importance of consistency. While the loss function is the same for the
tasks, the parameters to be optimized are different. In each task, only the parameters of the trained
networks are optimized.
To train discriminator(s), a regularization is applied. For brevity, we do not show the regularization
term (see Petzka et al. (2017)) used in our experiments.
The tasks listed above increase in difﬁculty. We will show the capacity of our framework as we
progress through the tasks.
Theoretical results in Section 4 provide sufﬁcient conditions under which Task 1. and Task 3. are
tractable.
3
EXPERIMENTS
3.1
DATASETS
We conduct experiments on three datasets:
1. MNIST-MB MNIST digits LeCun & Cortes are superimposed on a monochromic one-
color-channel background (value ranged from 0-200) (ﬁgure 3). The image size is 28 x
28.
2. MNIST-BB MNIST digit are rotated and scaled to ﬁt a box of size 32 x 32 placed on
a monochrome background of size 64 x 64. The box is positioned in one of the four
possible locations (top-right, top-left, bottom-right, bottom-left), with rotation between
(−π/6, π/6) (ﬁgure 4).
3. Yelp-reveiws We derive data from Yelp Open Dataset Yelp Inc. (2004-2018). From each
review, we take the ﬁrst two sentences of the review. We ﬁltered out reviews containing
sentences shorter than 5 and longer than 10 words. By design, the sentence pairs have the
same topic and sentiment. We refer to this quality as coherence. Incoherent sentences have
either different topic or different sentiment.
3.2
NETWORK ARCHITECTURES
MNIST-MB, MNIST-BB The component generators are DCGAN (Radford et al. (2015)) models.
Decomposition is implemented as a U-net (Ronneberger et al. (2015)) model. The inputs to the
composition network are concatenated channel-wise. Similarly, when doing decomposition, the
5

Figure 3: Examples of MNIST-MB dataset. 5x5 grid on the left shows examples of MNIST digits
(ﬁrst component), middle grid shows examples of monochromatic backgrounds (second compo-
nent), grid on the right shows examples of composite images.
Figure 4: Examples of MNIST-BB dataset. 5x5 grid on the left shows examples of MNIST digits
(ﬁrst component), middle grid shows examples of monochromatic backgrounds with shifted, rotated,
and scaled boxes (second component), grid on the right shows examples of composite images with
digits transformed to ﬁt into appropriate box.
outputs of the decomposition network are concatenated channel-wise before they are fed to the
discriminator.
Yelp-reviews The component (sentence) generator samples from a marginal distribution of Yelp
review sentences. Composition network is a one-layer Seq2Seq model with attention Luong et al.
(2015). Input to composition network is a concatenation of two sentences separated by a delimiter
token. Following the setting of Seq-GAN Yu et al. (2017), the discriminator (Dc) network is a
convolutional network for sequence data.
3.3
EXPERIMENTS ON MNIST-MB
Throughout this section we assume that composition operation is known and given by
c(o1, o2)i =
o1,i
if o2,i = 0
o2,i
otherwise.
In tasks where one or more generators are given, the generators have been independently trained
using corresponding adversarial loss lgi.
Task 1: Given gi, i ∈{1, 2} and c, train d. This is the simplest task in the framework. The
decomposition network learns to decompose the digits and backgrounds correctly (ﬁgure 5) given c
and pre-trained generative models for both digits and background components.
Task 2: Given g1 and g2 train d and c. Here we learn composition and decomposition jointly 6.
We ﬁnd that the model learns to decompose digits accurately; interestingly however, we note that
backgrounds from decomposition network are inverted in intensity (t(b) = 255 −b) and that the
model learns to undo this inversion in the composition function (t(t(b)) = b) so that cyclic consis-
tency (d(c(o1, o2)) ≈[o1, o2)] and c(d(y)) ≈y is satisﬁed. We note that this is an interesting case
where symmetries in component distributions results in the model learning component distributions
only up to a phase ﬂip.
Task 3: Given g1 and c, train g2 and d. Given digit generator and composition network, we train
decomposition network and background generator (ﬁgure 7). We see that decomposition network
learns to generate nearly uniform backgrounds, and the decomposition network learns to inpaint.
6

Composed Data
Learns
Decomposition
Given :
- Component generators
- Composition function
+
Figure 5: Given component generators and composite data, decomposition can be learned.
Composed Data
Learns
Decomposition
Given :
- Component generators
+
Composition
Figure 6: Training composition and decomposition jointly can lead to “incorrect” decompositions
that still satisfy cyclic consistency. Results from the composition and decomposition network. We
note that decomposition network produces inverted background (compare decomposed backgrounds
to original), and composition network inverts input backgrounds during composition (see back-
grounds in re-composed image). Consequently decomposition and composition perform inverse
operations, but do not correspond to the way the data was generated.
FID evaluation
In Table 3 we illustrate performance of learned generators trained using the setting
of Task 3, compared to baseline monolithic models which are not amenable to decomposition. As
a complement to digits we also show results on Fashion-MNIST overlaid on uniform backgrounds
(see appendix for examples).
Task 4: Given c, train g1, g2 and d. Given just composition, learn components and decomposition.
We show that for a simple composition function, there are many ways to assign responsibilities to
different components. Some are trivial, for example the whole composite image is generated by a
single component (see ﬁgure 11 in Appendix).
3.4
CHAIN LEARNING - EXPERIMENTS ON MNIST-BB
In task 3 above, we demonstrated on the MNIST-MB dataset that we can learn to model the back-
ground component and the decomposition function from composed data assuming we are given a
model for the foreground component and a composition network. This suggests the natural follow-
up question: if we have a new dataset consisting of a previously unseen class of foreground objects
on the same distribution of backgrounds, can we then use this background model we’ve learned to
learn a new foreground model?
We call this concept “chain learning”, since training proceeds sequentially and relies on the model
trained in the previous stage. To make this concrete, consider this proof-of-concept chain (using the
MNIST-BB dataset):
7

Composed Data
Learns
Decomposition
Given :
- Foreground generator
- Composition function
+
1
Given foreground generator for digits and composition func-
tion, we can learn background generator and decomposition
2
Similarly, given background generator and composition func-
tion, we can learn foreground generator and decomposition
+
Background 
Generator
Composed Data
Learns
Decomposition
Given :
- Background generator
- Composition function
+
+
Foreground 
Generator
Figure 7: Given one component, decomposition function and the other component can be learned.
0. Train a model for the digit “1” (or obtain a pre-trained model).
1. Using the model for digit “1” from step 1 (and a composition network), learn the decom-
position network and background generator from composed examples of “1”s.
2. Using the background model and decomposition network from step 2, learn a model for
digit “2” from from composed examples of “2”s.
As shown in ﬁgure 8 we are able to learn both the background generator (in step 1) and the fore-
ground generator for “2” (in step 2) correctly. More generally, the ability to learn a component
model from composed data (given models for all other components) allows one to incrementally
learn new component models directly from composed data.
1
Given foreground generator for “1”s and composition function, 
we can learn background generator from composed data
Composed Data
“1”s
Learns
2
Given background generator from step 1 and new composed 
data, we can learn foreground generator for “2”s
Learns
Given :
-  “1”s generator 
- Composition function
Given :
-  Background generator 
   (from step 1)
- Composition function
Composed Data
“2”s
+
+
Background 
Generator
Decomposition
+
New Foreground 
Generator
Decomposition
+
Figure 8: Some results of chain learning on MNIST-BB. First we learn a background generator given
foreground generator for “1” and composition network, and later we learn the foreground generator
for digit “2” given background generator and composition network.
8

Methods
Foreground
Foreground+background
Digits
Fashion
Digits
Fashion
WGAN-GP
6.622 ± 0.116
20.425 ± 0.130
25.871 ± 0.182
21.914 ± 0.261
By decomposition
9.741 ± 0.144
21.865 ± 0.228
13.536 ± 0.130
21.527 ± 0.071
Table 3:
We show Frechet inception distance (Heusel et al., 2017) for generators trained using
different datasets and methods. The “Foreground” column and “Foreground+background” reﬂect
performance of trained generators on generating corresponding images. WGAN-GP is trained on
foreground and composed images. Generators evaluaged in the “By decomposition” row are ob-
tained as described in Task 3 – on composed images, given background generator and composition
operator. The information processing inequality guarantees that the resulting generator cannot beat
the WGAN-GP on clean foreground data. However, the composed images are better modeled using
the learned foreground generator and known composition and background generator.
Example of coherent sentence composition
Inputs
the spa was amazing ! the owner cut my hair
Baseline
the spa was amazing ! the owner cut my hair .
lc
the spa was clean and professional and professional . our server was friendly and helpful .
ld−cyc + lc
the spa itself is very beautiful . the owner is very knowledgeable and patient .
Failure modes for ld−cyc + lc
Inputs
green curry level 10 was perfect . the owner responded right away to our yelp inquiry .
ld−cyc + lc
the food is amazing ! the owner is very friendly and helpful .
Inputs
best tacos in las vegas ! everyone enjoyed their meals .
ld−cyc + lc
the best buffet in las vegas . everyone really enjoyed the food and service are amazing .
Figure 9: Composition network can be trained to edit for coherence. Only the model trained using
loss ld−cyc + lc achieves coherence in this example. For this model, we show illustrative failure
modes. In the ﬁrst example, the network removes speciﬁcity of the sentences to make them coherent.
In the second case, the topic is changed to a common case and the second sentence is embellished.
3.5
EXPERIMENTS ON YELP DATA
For this dataset, we focus on a variant of task 1: given d and g1, g2, train c. In this task, the
decomposition function is simple – it splits concatenated sentences without modiﬁcation. Since we
are not learning decomposition, lc−cyc is not applicable in this task. In contrast to MNIST task,
where composition is simple and decomposition non-trivial, in this setting, the situation is reversed.
Other parts of the optimization function are the same as section 2.4.
We follow the state-of-the-art approaches in training generative models for sequence data. We brieﬂy
outline relevant aspects of the training regime.
As in Seq-GAN, we also pre-train the composition networks. The data for pre-training consist of
two pairs of sentences. The output pair is a coherent pair from a single Yelp review. Each of the
input sentences is independently sampled from a set of nearest neighbors of the corresponding output
sentences. Following Guu et al. (2017) we use Jaccard distance to ﬁnd nearest neighbor sentences.
As we sample a pair independently, the input sentences are not generally coherent but the coherence
can be achieved with a small number of changes.
Discrimination in Seq-GAN is performed on an embedding of a sentence. For the purposes of
training an embedding, we initialize with GloVe word embedding Pennington et al. (2014). During
adversarial training, we follow regime of Xu et al. (2017) by freezing parameters of the encoder of
the composition networks, the word projection layer (from hidden state to word distribution), and
the word embedding matrix, and only update the decoder parameters.
To enable the gradient to back-propagate from the discriminator to the generator, we applied the
Gumbel-softmax straight-through estimator from Jang et al. (2016). We exponentially decay the
temperature with each iteration. Figure 9 shows an example of coherent composition and two failure
modes for the trained composition network.
9

4
IDENTIFIABILITY RESULTS
In the experimental section, we highlighted tasks which suffer from identiﬁability problems. Here
we state sufﬁcient conditions for identiﬁability of different parts of our framework. Due to space
constraints, we refer the reader to the appendix for the relevant proofs. For simplicity, we consider
the output of a generator network as a random variable and do away with explicit reference to
generators. Speciﬁcally, we use random variables X and Y to refer to component random variables,
and Z to a composite random variable. Let range(·) denote range of a random variable. We deﬁne
indicator function, 1[a] is 1 if a is true and 0 otherwise.
Deﬁnition 1. A resolving matrix, R, for a composition function c and random variable X, is a
matrix of size |range(Z)| × |range(Y )| with entries Rz,y = P
x∈range(X) p(X = x)1[z = c(x, y)]
(see ﬁgure 10).
Deﬁnition 2. A composition function c is bijective if it is surjective and there exists a decomposition
function d such that
1. d(c(x, y)) = x, y; ∀x ∈range(X), y ∈range(Y )
2. c(d(z)) = z; ∀z ∈range(Z)
equivalently, c is bijective when c(x, y) = c(x′, y′) iff x = x′ and y = y′. We refer to decomposition
function d as inverse of c.
In the following results, we use assumptions:
Assumption 1. X, Y are ﬁnite discrete random variables.
Assumption 2. For variables X and Y , and composition function c, let random variable Z be
distributed according to
p(Z = z) =
X
x
X
y
p(Y = y)p(X = x)1[z = c(x, y)].
(1)
Theorem 1. Let Assumptions 1 and 2 hold. Further, assume that resolving matrix of X and c has
full column-rank. If optimum of
inf
p(Y ′)
sup
∥D∥L≤1
EZ [D (Z)] −EX,Y ′ [D (c (X, Y ′))]
(2)
is achieved for some random variable Y ′, then Y and Y ′ have the same distribution.
Theorem 2. Let Assumptions 1 and 2 hold. Further, assume that c is bijective. If optimum of
inf
d EX,Y [∥d (c (X, Y ))x −X∥1] + EZ
h
∥d (c (X, Y ))y −Y ∥1
i
+ EZ [∥c(d(Z)) −Z∥1]
(3)
is 0 and it is achieved for some d′ then d′ is equal to inverse of c.
5
CONCLUSION
We introduce a framework of generative adversarial network composition and decomposition. In
this framework, GANs can be taken apart to extract component GANs and composed together to
construct new composite data models. This paradigm allowed us to separate concerns about training
different component generators and even incrementally learn new object classes – a concept we
deemed chain learning. However, composition and decomposition are not always uniquely deﬁned
and hence may not be identiﬁable from the data. In our experiments we discover settings in which
component generators may not be identiﬁable. We provide theoretical results on sufﬁcient conditions
for identiﬁability of GANs. We hope that this work spurs interest in both practical and theoretical
work in GAN decomposability.
