Enhanced Pub/Sub Communications for Massive IoT
Traﬃc with SARSA Reinforcement Learning ⋆
Carlos E. Arruda2, Pedro F. Moraes2, Nazim Agoulmine1[0000−0002−3461−4284], and
Joberto S. B. Martins2[0000−0003−1310−9366]
1 University of Paris-Saclay/IBISC Laboratory, France
2 Salvador University - UNIFACS, Salvador, Brazil

Abstract. Sensors are being extensively deployed and are expected to expand at
signiﬁcant rates in the coming years. They typically generate a large volume of data
on the internet of things (IoT) application areas like smart cities, intelligent traf-
ﬁc systems, smart grid, and e-health. Cloud, edge and fog computing are potential
and competitive strategies for collecting, processing, and distributing IoT data. How-
ever, cloud, edge, and fog-based solutions need to tackle the distribution of a high
volume of IoT data eﬃciently through constrained and limited resource network in-
frastructures. This paper addresses the issue of conveying a massive volume of IoT
data through a network with limited communications resources (bandwidth) using a
cognitive communications resource allocation based on Reinforcement Learning (RL)
with SARSA algorithm. The proposed network infrastructure (PSIoTRL) uses a Pub-
lish/ Subscribe architecture to access massive and highly distributed IoT data. It is
demonstrated that the PSIoTRL bandwidth allocation for buﬀer ﬂushing based on
SARSA enhances the IoT aggregator buﬀer occupation and network link utilization.
The PSIoTRL dynamically adapts the IoT aggregator traﬃc ﬂushing according to
the Pub/Sub topic’s priority and network constraint requirements.
Keywords: Publish/ Subscribe · Reinforcement Learning · SARSA · IoT · Massive
IoT Traﬃc · Resource Allocation · Network Communications.
1
Introduction
Sensors are being extensively deployed and are expected to expand at signiﬁcant rates in
the coming years in the internet of things (IoT) application areas like smart city, intelligent
traﬃc systems (ITS), connected and autonomous vehicles (CAV), video analytics in public
safety (VAPS) and mobile e-health [31] [37], to mention some.
Cloud, edge and fog computing are currently the most prevailing and competing used
strategies to convey IoT data between producers and consumers. They use several diﬀerent
alternatives to decide where to process, how to distribute, and where to store IoT data [23].
Nevertheless, cloud, edge, and fog-based solutions need to tackle the distribution of a high
volume of IoT data eﬃciently.
IoT data distribution, whatever data handling, processing, or storing strategy used,
does require eﬃcient network communications infrastructures. In fact, there is a research
challenge on enhancing network communications and providing eﬃcient resource allocation
⋆Work supported by CAPES and Salvador University (UNIFACS)
arXiv:2101.00687v1  [cs.AI]  3 Jan 2021

2
C. Arruda, P. Moraes, N. Agoulmine and J. Martins
based on the fact that, in many applications like IoT, networks have limited and constrained
resources [5].
Machine learning and reinforcement learning with distinct algorithms like Q-Learning
[33], deep reinforcement learning [11], and SARSA (State-Action-Reward-State-Action) [1]
are being applied to support an eﬃcient allocation of resources in networks for application
areas like 5G, cognitive radio, and mobile edge computing, to mention some [7] [28].
The Publish/Subscribe (Pub/Sub) paradigm is extensively used as an enabler for data
distribution in various scenarios like information-centric networking, data-centric systems,
smart grid, and other general group-based communications [25] [10] [2]. The Pub/Sub
paradigm is an alternative for IoT data distribution between producers and consumers in
general [10] [22].
This work addresses the issue of enhancing the utilization of a communication channel
(MPLS label switched path - LSP, physical link, ﬁber optics slot, others) deployed in net-
work infrastructures with limited resources (bandwidth) using the SARSA reinforcement
learning algorithm. The target application area is the massive exchange of IoT data using
the Pub/Sub paradigm. The framework integrating the SARSA module with the Pub/Sub
message exchange deployment (PSIoT described in [22]) is the PSIoTRL.
Diﬀerently from other proposals for network infrastructure resource allocation and opti-
mization that consider, for instance, the quality of service for the entire set of network nodes
and Pub/Sub aggregators, the SARSA-based PSIoTRL framework provides a simple data
ingress based solution. In fact, it controls the quality of Pub/Sub topics data distribution in
an aggregator by keeping Pub/Sub buﬀer topics occupation below a deﬁned threshold. This
indirectly means that a certain amount of bandwidth is available for the Pub/Sub topic
and, consequently, a level of quality is allocated for the communication channel. Since the
Pub/Sub data transfers are dynamically requested, SARSA deploys a dynamic control of
bandwidth allocation for buﬀer data ﬂushing.
The contribution of this work is multi-fold. Firstly, we modeled the SARSA agent com-
munications with a generic buﬀer occupation metric. The adopted metric results in a limited
amount of SARSA states to allow the allocation of bandwidth preserving Pub/Sub topic
priorities without using extensive computational resources. Moreover, we demonstrate that
Pub/Sub communications with SARSA can be enhanced by dynamically adjusting IoT ag-
gregators queues occupation to Pub/Sub topics priority and network resources availability.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the related work on
IoT data processing deployments with cognitive communications approaches. Section 3 is a
background section about reinforcement learning with SARSA. Sections 4 and 5 describe the
basic PSIoT Pub/Sub framework, discuss the RL applicability for the constrained commu-
nication problem and present the PSIoTRL framework components including the intelligent
orchestrator for IoT traﬃc management. In Section 6, we present a proof of concept for
the PSIoTRL and evaluate how it enhances the IoT network resource management. Finally,
section 7 concludes with an overview of the main highlights, contributions and future work.
2
Related Work
Architectural and system-wide studies about IoT massive data processing and data ﬂow
in smart cities are presented in Al-Fuqaha [20], Rathore [27] and Martins [17]. Al-Fuqaha
[20] introduces the concept of cognitive smart city where IoT and artiﬁcial intelligence are
merged in a three-level model with diﬀerent requirements. In relation to the communication
level, the basic approach assumes a fog cloud computing (fog-CC) communication without

Enhanced Pub/Sub with SARSA
3
considering any speciﬁc IoT massive traﬃc requirement. In fact, the proposal assumes that
the aggregation with edge processing reduces the required bandwidth for fog-CC communi-
cation to a minimum. Rathore [27] explores the issue of big data analytics for smart cities.
The paper proposes an edge-based aggregation and processing strategy for raw data. Pro-
cessed data is forwarded through gateways to smart city applications using Internet and
assuming bandwidth reduction at edge-level. Martins [17] discusses the potential beneﬁts
and impacts of how some technological enablers, like software-deﬁned networking [12] and
machine learning [36], are integrated and aim at cognitive management [28]. IoT data edge-
processed aggregation, network communication and service deployments towards an eﬃcient
overall smart city solution are discussed and the relevance of intelligent communication re-
source provisioning and deployment are highlighted.
Resource provisioning from the perspective of IoT services deployment for smart city is
considered by Santos [31]. The paper proposes a container-based micro-services approach,
using Kubernetes, for service deployment that aims to oﬀ-load IoT processing with fog com-
puting. In relation to this paper discussion, the proposal endorses fog processing oﬄoading
using a edge-computed approach and does not consider the network communication resource
provisioning necessary to distribute the outcomes of the edge processing.
Edge intelligence for service deployment is discussed in Zhang [37]. The proposed solu-
tions deﬁnes a framework capable to support the deployment of AI algorithms like RL on
common edge aggregators like Raspberry. The approach assumed is to enable the execu-
tion of AI algorithms in the edge for those applications that require near real time edge
processing like voice recognition and on-board autonomous vehicles processing.
Machine learning in communication networks is broadly addressed by Cote [7] and
Boutaba et al in [5].
Intelligent network communication resources are considered by Zhao [38]. The work
presents a smart routing solution for crowdsourcing data with mobile edge computing (MEC)
in smart cities using reinforcement learning (RL). The solution deﬁnes routes, diﬀerently
from ours that optimizes the bandwidth allocated for IoT ﬂow ﬂushing.
In summary, this work advances on existing studies that propose service provisioning by
adding an intelligent component for the allocation of communication resources between IoT
data aggregators and IoT data consumers. From the architectural point of view, this work
adopts an edge-based processing approach coupled with an eﬃcient communication resource
allocation for massive IoT data transfers.
3
Reinforcement Learning and SARSA Algorithm
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a largely used machine learning (ML) technique in which
a trial-and-error learning process is executed by an agent that acts on a system aiming to
maximize its rewards. The RL algorithm is expected to learn how to reach or approach a
certain objective by interacting with a system through a feedback loop [13] [33] [19].
In RL, a reward value r is received by the agent for the transitions from one state to
another. The overall objective of the agent is to ﬁnd a policy π which maximizes the expect
future sum of rewards received, each of them, subjected to a discount policy γ.
The value function in RL is a prediction of the return available from each state, as
indicated in Equation 1.

4
C. Arruda, P. Moraes, N. Agoulmine and J. Martins
V(t) ←E{
∞
X
k=o
γkrt+k}
(1)
Where rt is the reward received for the transition from state t to t+1 and γ is the
discount factor (0 ≤γ ≤1). The value function V(t) represents the discounted sum of
rewards received from step t onward. Therefore, it will depend on the sequence of actions
taken and on the policy adopted to take these actions.
Two well-known and somehow similar reinforcement learning algorithms are Q-learning
[33] [8] and SARSA [14] [1].
Q-learning is an oﬀ-policy RL algorithm in which the agent ﬁnds an optimal policy
that maximizes the total discount expected reward for executing a particular action at
a particular state. Fundamentally, Q-learning ﬁnds the optimal policy in a step-by-step
manner. Q-learning is oﬀ-policy because the next state and action are uncertain when the
algorithm updates the value function.
In Q-learning, the value function termed Q-function is learnt. It is a prediction of the
return associated with each action ∈A (set of actions). This prediction can be updated
with respect to the predicted return of the next state visited (Equation 2).
Q(t, at) ←rt + γV(t+1)
(2)
Since the overall objective is to maximize the reward received, the current estimate of
V(t) becomes:
Q(t, at) ←rt + γ mx
∈A Q(t+1, )
(3)
The Q-function is shown to converge for markovian decision processes (MDP) [26]. In
Q-learning, the agent maintains a lookup table of Q(X, A) and Q(, ) represents the
current estimate of the optimal action value function. Once the Q-function has converged,
the optimal policy π is to take the action in each state with the highest predicted return
(greedy policy) [29].
3.1
SARSA Algorithm
SARSA (State-Action-Reward-State-Action) algorithm is the reinforcement learning ap-
proach used by PSIoTRL framework [14] [1].
SARSA is a temporal-diﬀerence (TD) on-policy algorithm that learns the Q-values based
on the action performed by the current policy. SARSA algorithm diﬀers from Q-learning
by the way it sets up the future reward. In SARSA the agent uses the action and the state
at time t + 1 to update the Q-value. The SARSA tuple of main elements involved in the
interaction process are:
< t, t, rt+1, t+1, t+1 >
(4)
Where:

Enhanced Pub/Sub with SARSA
5
– t, t are the current state and action;
– rt+1 is the reward; and
– t+1, t+1 are the next state and action reached using the policy (ε −Greedy).
SARSA Q-values are therefore updated based on the Equations 5 or 6.
Q(t, t) ←Q(t, t) + α[rt+1 + γQ(t+1, t+1) −Q(t, t)]
(5)
ΔQ(t−1, t−1) = α(t)[rt−1 + γQ(t, t) −Q(t−1, t−1)]
(6)
Where:
– α is the learning rate (0 ≤α ≤1); and
– γ is the discount factor (0 ≤γ ≤1).
3.2
Network Communications Resource Allocation with SARSA
Reinforcement learning has achieved superhuman performance in games like Go [32] and
also obtained a critical result bridging the divide between high-dimensional sensory inputs
and actions with ATARI [18].
Video games and communication networks have imperfect but interesting operation sim-
ilarities. As discussed in Cote [7], video games and networks are closed systems with a ﬁnite
number of states. In games, actions include pressing buttons and moving the joystick, the
image pixels deﬁne the state, and the cost function is the game score. In networks, actions
correspond mainly to network conﬁguration parameters (bandwidth allocation, ﬁber allo-
cation, others) or network routing conﬁguration. The network state (snapshot) deﬁnes the
state of the system at each iteration, and the cost function corresponds to the performance
of the network such like utilization rate, throughput, or number of dropped packets.
Hence, it is reasonable to consider that SARSA may have a parallel success for allocating
network communications resources (bandwidth) in the PSIoTRL.
Reinforcement learning with SARSA has proved eﬃcient and obtained substantial suc-
cess in resource allocation [1] [30], cloud computing [4] and computational oﬄoading [3]
[24].
An evaluation of SARSA and various other model-free algorithms is presented in Dafazio
[9]. The evaluation considered diverse and diﬃcult problems within a consistent environment
(Arcade [15]) involving conﬁguration aspects like Epsilon-greedy policy, exploration versus
exploitation and state space with SARSA outperforming algorithms like Q-learning, ETTR
(Expected Time-to-Rendezvous) [34], R-learning [16], GQ algorithm [35] and Actor-Critic
algorithm [6].
SARSA algorithm features and potential advantages within the PSIoTRL environment
include:
– Being an on-policy algorithm, SARSA attempts to evaluate or improve the policy that
is used to make decision;
– SARSA avoids the state explosion issue common with the Q-learning algorithm;
– PSIoTRL has a reduced state space and, consequently, SARSA behaves eﬀectively by
exploring all states at least once; and
– Key issues that RL algorithms experience like bad initial performance and large training
time are minimized in the PSIoTRL environment since SARSA addresses the allocation
of network bandwidth locally with a reduced state-space.

6
C. Arruda, P. Moraes, N. Agoulmine and J. Martins
4
The Publish/Subscribe Framework for IoT (PSIoT)
The objective of this work is to enhance the Publish/ Subscribe (Pub/Sub) communications
used in the context of massive IoT data transfers (Figure 1).
The Pub/Sub communications is supported by the PSIoT framework described in [22].
The PSIoT framework aims to eﬃciently handle network resources and IoT QoS require-
ments over the network between the IoT devices and consumer IoT applications [22]. Con-
sumers are applications executed in servers located beyond the backbone network, cloud
computing infrastructure accessed by the network or any other scheme that makes use of
the managed network infrastructure for communications (Figure 1).
Fig. 1. PSIoT Framework Functional View [22].
The PSIoT framework was developed to manage IoT traﬃc in a network and to provide
QoS based on IoT data characteristics and network-wide speciﬁcations, e.g. total network
use, realtime network traﬃc, routing and bandwidth constraints.
IoT data generated from sensors and devices can be aggregated and processed in the
cloud or at the network edge, where each of these points are considered as Aggregators
or Producers in the PSIoT framework. Whereas each client that receives IoT data, both
end-users applications and even other aggregation nodes, are denoted as Consumers.
The PSIoT framework was designed to orchestrate massive IoT traﬃc and allocate net-
work resources between producers and consumers. Besides, the PSIoT framework can sched-
ule the data ﬂow, based on Quality of Service (QoS) requirements, and allocates bandwidth
on a backbone with limited resources. For this, the PSIoT was modeled to operate with
four main components: producers, consumers, a backbone with limited resources; and the
orchestrator (Figure 1) [22].
Aggregators are elements that gather the data obtained by connected sensors to send
them (in an opportune moment) to their consumers (clients) using a Pub/Sub-style commu-
nication channel. In the opposite direction, aggregators deliver data received from producers
to send them to actuators.

Enhanced Pub/Sub with SARSA
7
Cloud 
Computing
Cloud 
Computing
PRODUCER
PRODUCER
CON
SU
MER
COMMUNICATION
ALLOCATION
METHOD
SUBSCRIBE
PUBLISH
METADATA
SCHEDULING
Network Resources
b
a
c
d
e
CoT
CoT
PSIoT-
Orchestrator
Engine
IoT Data 
Scheduler
Data stream 
orchestration
LSP/ bandwidth
allocation
f
g
PSIoT-Orch Framework
IoTGW-Ag
PSIoT-Orchestrator
h
CHANNEL 
REQUEST
IoT GATEWAY
SENSORS
PRODUCER
IoT GATEWAY
SENSORS
PRODUCER
Fig. 2. PSIoT Pub/Sub Message Model [22].
This exchange of information is performed through the Pub/Sub architecture, whose
characteristic of asynchronous, use of topics and the use of a broker, makes it attractive for
IoT applications [10].
PSIoT implements QoS when forwarding the data gathered by the aggregator to output
buﬀers, according to the following characteristics [22]:
– b0 (priority) - high transmission rates and low delay application requirements for health
care and data from critical industrial sensors, as examples;
– b1 (sensitive) - commercial data and security sensors; and
– b2 (insensitive) - best eﬀort.
The Pub/Sub message model adopted by the PSIoT is illustrated in Figure 2. In sum-
mary, the message ﬂow is as follows [22]:
1. A consumer subscribes to a particular topic and specify the requested QoS level with a
particular aggregator ();
2. The aggregator sends to the orchestrator relevant metadata such as number of sub-
scribers and their associated QoS levels and buﬀer allocation (b);
3. The orchestrator notiﬁes the aggregator with an amount of bandwidth that can be
consumed by each level of QoS (c); and
4. The aggregator publishes the data to the consumer according to bandwidth and data
availability in the buﬀer (d).
The PSIoT uses ﬁxed rule scheduling for IoT data consumption.

8
C. Arruda, P. Moraes, N. Agoulmine and J. Martins
5
PSIoTRL Framework - Architectural Components,
Communication Model and SARSA Algorithm
The PSIoTRL architectural components are illustrated in Figure 3. Its main proposed mod-
ules are:
– The SARSA agent;
– The PSIoTRL orchestrator module;
– Aggregators (at least one for each cluster where IoT data will be consumed);
– The network infrastructure (backbone); and
– Producers and consumers.
The SARSA agent is integrated in the PSIoT framework [22] and, by demand, allocates
bandwidth for the aggregator queues.
The PSIoTRL orchestrator module is described in [22] and [21]. It basically has the
knowledge of each aggregator Pub/Sub subscriptions, as well as the QoS levels required for
each topic subscription. This allows it to control the transmission emptying rates of IoT
data from each buﬀer within the aggregator in the network. The SARSA agent computes
the allocated bandwidth and the orchestrator deploys it.
The aggregators are Fog-like nodes connected to IoT devices that act as aggregators for
their data and also act as Pub/Sub producers regarding IoT applications subscribing to
topics and consuming corresponding IoT data [21] [10].
The network interconnects data producers (aggregators) and consumers and, has limited
bandwidth resources for massive IoT data transfers.
Producers and consumers exchange IoT data. They use Pub/Sub [10] to communicate
and exchange massive amounts of IoT data through a network with constrained bandwidth
resources [22] [21].
5.1
PSIoTRL Aggregator Conﬁguration
The PSIoTRL framework uses the Pub/Sub paradigm to produce and consume data. Con-
sumers request IoT data on the aggregator’s queues, and the aggregator empties its buﬀers
according to consumer requests. The aggregator queues are deployed with the following
conﬁguration:
– Three IoT data queues (buﬀers) are conﬁgured per aggregator (one Pub/Sub topic per
queue): B1, B2 and B3;
– Initial buﬀer transmission rates3 are: T1, T2 and T3; and
– Buﬀer priorities are: p1, p2 and p3 with p1 > p2 > p3.
For this evaluation we consider one aggregator Aglocated at network node nz that
delivers IoT data to a set of consumers C, with = 1, 2, ..., n located at network node ny.
Between nodes nz and ny there is a communication resource (MPLS LSP, physical link, ﬁber
slot, other) with a limited bandwidth BWnz. The communication resource interconnecting
Pub/Sub producer and consumers is then constrained as follows:
3 By initial buﬀer transmission rate, we mean the conﬁgured initial transmission rate to empty
buﬀers without any buﬀer over-utilization.

Enhanced Pub/Sub with SARSA
9
IoT DATA 
BUFFER 
CONTROL AND 
MONITORING
(Pub/Sub 
Messages)
IoTGW-Ag
PSIoT-
Orchestrator
PSIoTRL
COMMUNICATION
CHANNEL
RL/SARSA AGENT
SDN/ Openflow
Network
Programming
AGENT
Ai
Si
IoT AGGREGATOR
SENSORS
PRODUCER
IoT BUFFERS
SCHEDULING
c
BUFFER 
STATUS 
AND 
METADATA
b
BUFFERS
THERSHOLD
Cloud 
Computing
Cloud 
Computing
CONSUMER
CoT
CoT
Cloud 
Computing
CONSUMER
CoT
Network Resources
Network Resources
SYSTEM
Fig. 3. PSIoTRL Components and Communication - Orchestrator, Aggregator, Buﬀers and Com-
munication Chanel.
BWzy ≥
n
X
j=1
TBj
(7)
Where TBj is the currently transmission rate to empty a buﬀer j.
The aggregator monitors buﬀer occupation and occupation above a deﬁned threshold
limit is signaled to the orchestrator (Figure 3).
5.2
The SARSA Agent Communication Model
The PSIoTRL deployment and operation require SARSA agent modeling for the buﬀer
bandwidth allocation problem and the deﬁnition of basic SARSA algorithm conﬁguration
parameters.
The primary goal of the SARSA agent is to arbitrate the output transmission rates
among the aggregator buﬀers in order to eﬃciently distribute IoT data to the consumers
(Figure 3).
The PSIoTRL SARSA agent is modeled with a ﬁnite set of states for the aggregator
output queues, a ﬁnite set of conﬁguration actions to be executed on each queue, and a set
of reward values for each state/action transition pair.
In the SARSA agent, the system state Srepresents the overall aggregator’s output queue
status in terms of occupation at a given time t.

10
C. Arruda, P. Moraes, N. Agoulmine and J. Martins
Table 1. Buﬀer (Queue) States.
Buﬀer (queue) State (B1,B2,B3)
Description
BL, BL, BL
all queues below the threshold limit
BL, BL, AL
queues 1 and 2 below the threshold limit
BL, AL, BL
queues 1 an 3 below the threshold limit
BL, AL, AL
queue 1 below the threshold limit
AL, BL, BL
queues 2 and 3 below the threshold limit
AL, BL, AL
queue 2 below the threshold limit
AL, AL, BL
queue 1 below the threshold limit
AL, AL, AL
no queues below the threshold limit
† Legend: BL - Below Limit; AL - Above Limit.
Table 2. SARSA agent actions.
Buﬀer (Queue)
Actions
B1
T+, T−, N
B2
T+, T−, N
B3
T+, T−, N
T+: increase transmission rate; T−: decrease transmission rate; N: null action.
The SARSA agent states are indicated in Table 1. Each queue has two states either below
(BL) or above (AL), a preconﬁgured threshold. Having two states for each queue allows, in
this context, suﬃcient information for bandwidth allocation and contributes to avoid the
common state explosion issue existing in many RL deployments.
A discrete and small number of states for the queues can be reasonably assumed because
it mainly works as a threshold to indicate that queues require attention to enforce priorities
or maximize throughput. The ﬁrst case eventually happens when queued Pub/Sub messages
require more capacity to be transferred than the actually allocated one. The second case
corresponds to the situation where some queues have plenty of data to transmit, while others
have unused capacity.
The utilization of the buﬀer threshold results in having a kind of agnostic Pub/Sub
implementation. In fact, the threshold-based cognitive actions allow:
– To tune the PSIoTRL to have a faster or proactive reaction to adjust the queue’s band-
width; and
– To tune the Pub/Sub dynamic reconﬁguration capability according to IoT data transfer
sensitivity.
The PSIoTRL SARSA agent actions are illustrated in Table 2. Three actions are deﬁned
for each buﬀer: increase capacity (transmission rate), reduce capacity (transmission rate)
and do nothing. Therefore, twenty seven actions are possible for each agent state. The
amount of bandwidth increased or reduced per queue is a SARSA conﬁguration parameter.
A set of rewards is also deﬁned for each executed state/action pair.

Enhanced Pub/Sub with SARSA
11
5.3
The SARSA ε-Greedy Policy
The SARSA agent uses an ε-greedy policy since it must exploit as much as possible the
acquired knowledge but also explores new possibilities of enhancing the allocation of band-
width for queue communications. The SARSA agent will take new actions at random with
the ε-greedy policy deﬁning the probability of choosing random actions. No value change
or on-the-ﬂy ﬁne-tuning of ε was considered in this solution.
The ε-greedy policy matches adequately the inherent need of a Pub/Sub IoT message
delivery framework. Random demands from consumers consume Pub/Sub data with dif-
ferent priorities. These demands generate a random volume of data to be transferred from
aggregator queues to consumers. The per-queue bandwidth distribution must be dynam-
ically computed among IoT data queues considering the existing constraint (bandwidth
limitation) of the available communication channel.
5.4
The SARSA Algorithm for Bandwidth Allocation
The SARSA agent manages the aggregator’s output queues transmission rate according to
IoT data demands, IoT data priority, and communication resource constraints (bandwidth
limitation). The bandwidth allocation algorithm pseudo-code is presented in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 PSIoTRL-SARSA Bandwidth Allocation Algorithm Pseudo-code
1: procedure PSIoTRL-SARSA(Q(St, At, r, St+1, At+1))
▷SARSA states and reward
2:
for each pair (Qt, At) do
▷Initialization
3:
Initialize Q-values - Q(St, At) = 0
▷Tabula rasa approach
4:
repeat
▷Forever
5:
Gets current PSIoTRL buﬀers state St
▷Buﬀer state is the trigger event
6:
repeat
▷Finishes upon terminal condition
7:
Choose action At using the ε-greedy policy
▷Exploration and exploitation
8:
Execute action At on the PSIoTRL system
▷T+, T- or do nothing on queues
9:
Get immediate reward rt
10:
Collect new state St+1
11:
Choose new action At+1 using the ε-greedy policy
12:
Update Q-value - Q(St, At) using SARSA equation 5
▷SARSA algorithm
13:
until Terminal condition reached
14:
until forever
The algorithm procedure is as follows:
1. The algorithm starts initializing the Q-values in table, Q(s, );
2. The current state, s is captured;
3. An action is chosen for the current state using the greedy policy;
4. The agent triggers the action, and observes the immediate reward, r, as well as the new
reached state s′;
5. The Q-value for the state s′ is updated using the observed reward and the maximum
reward possible for the next state; and
6. Finally for the current cycle, set the state to the new state, and repeat the process until
the end condition is reached.

12
C. Arruda, P. Moraes, N. Agoulmine and J. Martins
The end condition for the PSIoTRL bandwidth allocation process is the following:
– Bandwidth constraint limit is reached (Equation 7); or
– Current buﬀers transmission rates corresponding priorities are (T1 > T2 > T3); or
– Maximum number of attempts is reached.
6
Proof of Concept
The purpose of this proof of concept is to validate that the agent behavior enhanced the
allocation of bandwidth when one or more buﬀers exceeded the deﬁned buﬀer occupation
limit (50% - AL condition). When this event occurs, the aggregator detects the problem
and sends an alarm containing metadata to the orchestrator. After that, the SARSA agent
allocates a new percentage of bandwidth among the aggregator buﬀer.
Four initial buﬀer conditions were used:
– One queue exceeds the occupation threshold (AL, BL, BL);
– Two queues exceed the occupation threshold (AL, AL, BL);
– Three queues exceed the occupation threshold (AL, AL, AL); and
– One queue exceeds the link bandwidth capacity and the two other queues exceed the
occupation threshold (+AL, AL, AL).
The considered performance parameters are the following:
– Queue (buﬀer) Occupation;
– Link Occupation; and
– Packet Loss.
The allocation of bandwidth to the aggregator queues is evaluated in two scenarios. In
scenario 1, a predeﬁned simple algorithm is used to allocate the bandwidth. In scenario
2, the SARSA agent does the same task. Table 3 presents a summary of the evaluation
scenarios.
Table 3. Summary of the Proof of Concept Scenarios.
AGGREGATOR
ORCHESTRATOR
Queues States (B1,B2,B3) T1i T2i T3i
Scenario 1
Scenario 2 (SARSA)
AL,BL,BL
AL,AL,BL
35% 25% 15%
T1 = T1i * factor;
SARSA
AL,AL,AL
T2 = (100 - T1)/2;
Module
+AL,BL,BL
T3 = (100 - T1)/2;
– +AL: 120% buﬀer occupation; dropping packets; factor:1.15 or 1.25 or 1.50.

Enhanced Pub/Sub with SARSA
13
6.1
Scenario 1 - Bandwidth Allocation with Fixed Rule
In this scenario, the orchestrator has a simple ﬁxed rule to increase or decrease the bandwidth
for buﬀer ﬂushing. T1 bandwidth is adjusted by a ﬁxed factor (15%, 25% or 50%) and the
remaining queues get half of the remaining bandwidth as follows:
– T1 = T1∗factor where T1= T1 initial state;
– T2 = (100 −T1)/2; and
– T3 = (100 −T1)/2.
Buﬀer transmission emptying initial rates are respectively 35%, 25% and 15% for T1,
T2 and T3. Tables 4, 5 and 6 present the results obtained with the ﬁxed rule bandwidth
allocation method. In these Tables, packets loss for queue Bis P.
Table 4. Bandwidth allocation with ﬁxed rule - 15% bandwidth adjustment.
Initial QS
(B1i,B2i,B3i)
Final QS
(B1,B2,B3)
Final TR
(T1,T2,T3)
Packet Loss
(P1,P2,P3)
Link Occupation
AL,BL,BL
(72,16,0)
(40,30,30)
(0,0,0)
100
AL,AL,BL
(72,64,0)
(40,30,30)
(0,0,0)
100
AL,AL,AL
(72,64,0)
(40,30,30)
(0,0,0)
100
+AL,BL,BL
(108,16,0)
(40,30,30)
(8,0,0)
100
– QS: Queue State; TR: Transmission Rate; AL: 80%; BL: 20%; +AL: 120%.
Table 5. Bandwidth allocation with ﬁxed rule - 25% bandwidth adjustment.
Initial QS
(B1i,B2i,B3i)
Final QS
(B1,B2,B3)
Final TR
(T1,T2,T3)
Packet Loss
(P1,P2,P3) Link Occupation
AL,BL,BL
(56,18,2)
(44,28,28)
(0,0,0)
100
AL,AL,BL
(56,72,2)
(44,28,28)
(0,0,0)
100
AL,AL,AL
(56,72,8)
(44,28,28)
(0,0,0)
100
+AL,BL,BL
(84,18,2)
(44,28,28)
(0,0,0)
100
– QS: Queue State; TR: Transmission Rate; AL: 80%; BL: 20%; +AL: 120%.
6.2
Scenario 2 - Enhanced Communications with SARSA Agent
The parameters and initial conditions used in this scenario of the the proof-of-concept are
the following:
– SARSA Agent conﬁguration parameters:
• Epsilon-greedy policy ε of 2%;

14
C. Arruda, P. Moraes, N. Agoulmine and J. Martins
Table 6. Bandwidth allocation with ﬁxed rule - 50% bandwidth adjustment.
Initial QS
(B1i,B2i,B3i)
Final QS
(B1,B2,B3)
Final TR
(T1,T2,T3)
Packet Loss
(P1,P2,P3) Link Occupation
AL,BL,BL
(40,20,10)
(53,24,23)
(0,0,0)
100
AL,AL,BL
(40,80,10)
(53,24,23)
(0,0,0)
100
AL,AL,AL
(40,80,40)
(53,24,23)
(0,0,0)
100
+AL,BL,BL
(60,20,10)
(53,24,23)
(0,0,0)
100
– Legend: QS: Queue State; TR: Transmission Rate; AL: 80%; BL: 20%; +AL: 120%.
• Learning rate α of 20%; and
• Discount factor γ of 80%
– Pub/Sub queue threshold limit (triggers agent action) = 50%
– Agent actions: bandwidth increased or reduced by 10%
– Maximum number of attempts = 400
The SARSA conﬁguration parameters are ﬁxed for all evaluations in this scenario 2.
Typical values were used and the impact of the variation of the values of these parameters
was not considered in this evaluation and left for future works.
In terms of the PSIoTRL operation and SARSA evaluation, the agent action in the
orchestrator is triggered by the aggregator anytime one of its queues occupation goes beyond
the conﬁgured threshold limit (Figure 3).
The initial condition with SARSA are the same as those applied for the scenario 1 as
indicated in Table 3. Ten runs were executed for each of the four initial states and the
obtained results are summarized in Table 7 with a conﬁdence interval of 5%.
Table 7. Queue Occupation, Packet Loss and Link Occupation with SARSA.
Initial QS
(B1i,B2i,B3i)
Final QS
(B1,B2,B3)
Final TR
(T1,T2,T3)
Packet Loss
(P1,P2,P3)
Link Occupation
AL,BL,BL
(48,12,22)
(49,35,13)
(0,0,0)
97
AL,AL,BL
(47,47,23)
(50,35,12)
(0,0,0)
97
AL,AL,AL
(48,48,87)
(49,35,14)
(0,0,0)
98
+AL,BL,BL
(24,24,26)
(63,20,11)
(28,0,0)
94
– QS: Queue State; TR: Transmission Rate; AL: 80%; BL: 20%; +AL: 120%.
6.3
Bandwidth Allocation with SARSA for Buﬀer Flushing - Results
First of all, it is essential to highlight that this analysis’s objective is to verify that the
SARSA algorithm enhances bandwidth allocation for an IoT aggregator using speciﬁcally a
Pub/Sub method to exchange data. In this context, enhanced bandwidth allocation means
that the constrained bandwidth resources can be tuned and, consequently, better used for
attained QoS performance parameters like delay, jitter, and packet loss.

Enhanced Pub/Sub with SARSA
15
The evaluated parameters are queue occupation, link occupation and packet loss.
The algorithm’s ability to bring the queue state back to a threshold limit is not an
eﬀective performance parameter but demonstrates that the algorithm enhances the usage
of the constrained bandwidth resources. For example, keeping the occupation of queues 1
and 2 below 50% would imply having the delay and jitter for the IoT data belonging to the
speciﬁc Pub/Sub topics within its application’s requirements.
The link occupation performance parameter evaluated in the runs indicates the eﬃcient
use or not of the bandwidth available, and the packet loss performance parameter is relevant
to Pub/Sub topics sensitive to data loss.
The Figures 4, 5, 6 and 7 present the ﬁnal buﬀer occupation with bandwidth allocation
for buﬀer ﬂushing done by the orchestrator using ﬁxed rule (case 1) and SARSA (case 2).
Fig. 4. Final Queue Occupation - Initial State = AL, BL, BL.
Fig. 5. Final Queue Occupation - Initial State = AL, AL, BL.
For all initial states (AL, BL, BL; AL, AL, BL; AL, AL, AL nd + AL, BL, BL) band-
width allocation with SARSA performed better that the ﬁxed rule using increments of 15%,

16
C. Arruda, P. Moraes, N. Agoulmine and J. Martins
25% and 50% in the buﬀer ﬂushing bandwidth. SARSA algorithm brought all buﬀers to the
ﬁnal condition BL, BL, BL.
In Figure 5, the case 1 (50%) was the unique ﬁxed rule option that succeeded to bring
one of the queue occupation (queue 3) below the threshold limit.
In Figure 6, the bandwidth allocation with SARSA performed again better than the
ﬁxed rule algorithm. However, while the two priority buﬀers B1 and B2 are below the limit,
buﬀer B3 (least eﬀort) was set above the limit due to its lower priority.
Fig. 6. Final Queue Occupation - Initial State = AL, AL, AL.
Figure 7 corresponds to the evaluation scenario in which we want to observe the behavior
of the ﬁxed rule bandwidth allocation and SARSA when buﬀer B1 is already experiencing
packet loss (above 100% capacity). Figure 7 shows that the SARSA algorithm is again the
most eﬃcient approach to bring all buﬀers below the threshold limit.
Fig. 7. Final Queue Occupation - Initial State = +AL, BL, BL.

Enhanced Pub/Sub with SARSA
17
6.4
Allocated Bandwidth per Queue, Link Occupation and Packet Loss
In this experimentation, the objective is to use the minimum amount of link bandwidth per
buﬀer to transmit data. Buﬀer priority should be preserved, and the aimed ﬁnal condition
is to bring all buﬀers to the BL state after bandwidth allocation.
Figure 8 illustrates two related aspects of link occupation. Firstly, it shows that the
SARSA allocation of bandwidth per buﬀer is aligned with buﬀer priorities. In fact, more
bandwidth is allocated to B1 than to B2, and, in turn, B2 gets more bandwidth than
B3. This result is fully consistent with the deﬁned buﬀer priorities. The ﬁxed rule method
allocates bandwidth to buﬀer B1 and splits the remaining bandwidth among the other
buﬀers.
Fig. 8. Allocated Bandwidth per Queue and Link Occupation.
A second result illustrated in Figure 8 is link occupation. The result indicates that the
SARSA algorithm is more eﬃcient than the ﬁxed rule allocation method. SARSA succeeds
in bringing all buﬀer occupation levels bellow the deﬁned threshold and, concomitantly,
preserves link utilization below 100%.
Packet loss is indicated in Tables 4, 5, 6 and 7. The allocation of chunks of bandwidth
for IoT data ﬂushing in queues is done proactively once the 50% buﬀer occupancy threshold
is reached. Consequently, no packet loss occurs for three out of four cases considered in the
PSIoTRL evaluation (AL, BL, BL; AL, AL, BL nd AL, AL, AL). It happens that the buﬀer
ﬂushing bandwidth is adjusted before any packet loss could occur.
The case +AL, BL, BL starts with buﬀer overloaded and, as such, packet loss does occur
since either the ﬁxed rule method or the SARSA algorithm takes some time to allocate
bandwidth to the overloaded buﬀer and ﬁx the problem. As expected, SARSA takes more
time to allocate bandwidth due to the learning process inherent to the algorithm and,
consequently, presents a more signiﬁcant packet loss.
7
Final Considerations
This work has presented a solution to address the problem of network resources allocation
in the context of massive IoT data distribution. It has presented a PSIoTRL framework that

18
C. Arruda, P. Moraes, N. Agoulmine and J. Martins
introduces an architecture that aim to manage the allocation of limited network resources
to aggregators.
As highlighted in the simulations, the SARSA agent in PSIoTRL was able to recon-
ﬁgure the queues’ ﬂushing transmission rate eﬃciently, providing in 100% of the tested
cases, that these queues reached the BL (below threshold limit) ﬁnal condition with less
link bandwidth usage. The PSIoTRL demonstrates that a solution based on SARSA is an
eﬃcient reinforcement learning approach for enhancing resource (bandwidth) allocation in
the Pub/Sub-based massive IoT data exchange context.
Future works will address SARSA computation scalability concerning the granularity for
allocating new chunks of bandwidth to ﬂush IoT data and adjust the Pub/Sub queue occu-
pancy. The impact of the SARSA conﬁguration parameters (epsilon-greedy policy, learning
rate, and discount factor), in the algorithm time response, with a focus on the learning rate,
will also be evaluated.
