Agent-Agnostic Human-in-the-Loop
Reinforcement Learning
David Abel
Brown University

John Salvatier
AI Impacts

Andreas Stuhlmüller
Stanford University

Owain Evans
University of Oxford

Abstract
Providing Reinforcement Learning agents with expert advice can dramatically
improve various aspects of learning. Prior work has developed teaching protocols
that enable agents to learn efﬁciently in complex environments; many of these
methods tailor the teacher’s guidance to agents with a particular representation
or underlying learning scheme, offering effective but specialized teaching pro-
cedures. In this work, we explore protocol programs, an agent-agnostic schema
for Human-in-the-Loop Reinforcement Learning. Our goal is to incorporate the
beneﬁcial properties of a human teacher into Reinforcement Learning without
making strong assumptions about the inner workings of the agent. We show how to
represent existing approaches such as action pruning, reward shaping, and training
in simulation as special cases of our schema and conduct preliminary experiments
on simple domains.
1
Introduction
A central goal of Reinforcement Learning (RL) is to design agents that learn in a fully autonomous
way. An engineer designs a reward function, input/output channels, and a learning algorithm. Then,
apart from debugging, the engineer need not intervene during the actual learning process. Yet fully
autonomous learning is often infeasible due to the complexity of real-world problems, the difﬁculty
of specifying reward functions, and the presence of potentially dangerous outcomes that constrain
exploration.
Consider a robot learning to perform household chores. Human engineers create a curriculum,
moving the agent between simulation, practice environments, and real house environments. Over
time, they may tweak reward functions, heuristics, sensors, and state or action representations. They
may intervene directly in real-world training to prevent the robot damaging itself, destroying valuable
goods, or harming people it interacts with.
In this example, humans do not just design the learning agent: they are also in the loop of the agent’s
learning process, as is typical for many learning systems. Self-driving cars learn with humans ready
to intervene in dangerous situations. Facebook’s algorithm for recommending trending news stories
has humans ﬁltering out inappropriate content [1]. In both examples, the agent’s environment is
complex, non-stationary, and there are a wide range of damaging outcomes (like a trafﬁc accident).
As RL is applied to increasingly complex real-world problems, such interactive guidance will be
critical to the success of these systems.
Presented at the 2016 NIPS Future of Interactive Learning Machines Workshop, Barcelona, Spain.
arXiv:1701.04079v1  [cs.LG]  15 Jan 2017

Prior literature has investigated how people can help RL agents learn more efﬁciently through different
methods of interaction [32, 24, 28, 36, 42, 48, 21, 17, 25, 43, 23, 49, 46, 44, 30, 10]. Often, the
human’s role is to pass along knowledge about relevant quantities of the RL problem, like Q-values,
action optimality, or the true reward for a particular state-action pair. This way, the person can bias
exploration, prevent catastrophic outcomes, and accelerate learning.
Most existing work develops agent-speciﬁc protocols for human interaction. That is, protocols for
human interaction or advice that are designed for a speciﬁc RL algorithm (such as Q-learning). For
instance, Grifﬁth et al. [17] investigate the power of policy advice for a Bayesian Q-Learner. Other
works assume that the states of the MDP take a particular representation, or that the action space is
discrete or ﬁnite. Making explicit assumptions about the agent’s learning process can enable more
powerful teaching protocols that leverage insights about the learning algorithm or representation.
1.1
Our contribution: agent-agnostic guidance of RL algorithms
Our goal is to develop a framework for human-agent interaction that is (a) agent-agnostic and (b)
can capture a wide range of ways a human can help an RL agent. Such a setting is informative of
the structure of general teaching paradigms, the relationship and interplay of pre-existing teaching
methods, and suggestive of new teaching methodologies, which we discuss in Section 6. Additionally,
approaching human-in-the-loop RL from a maximally general standpoint can help illustrate the
relationship between the requisite power of a teacher and the teacher’s effectiveness on learning. For
instance, we demonstrate sufﬁcient conditions on a teacher’s knowledge about an environment that
enable effective1 action pruning of an arbitrary agent. Results of this form can again be informative
to the general structure of teaching RL agents.
We make two simplifying assumptions. First, we consider environments where the state is fully
observed; that is, the learning agent interacts with a Markov Decision Process (MDP) [37, 22, 40].
Second, we note that conducting experiments with an actual human in the loop creates a huge amount
of work for a human, and can slow down training to an unacceptable degree. For this reason, we
focus on programatic instantiations of humans-in-the-loop; a person informed about the task (MDP)
in question will write a program to facilitate various teaching protocols.
There are obvious disadvantages to agent-agnostic protocols. The agent is not specialized to the
protocol, so it is unable to ask the human informative questions as in [4], or will not have an
observation model that faithfully represents the process the human uses to generate advice, as in
[17, 21]. Likewise, the human cannot provide optimally informative advice to the agent as they don’t
know the agent’s prior knowledge, exploration technique, representation, or learning method.
Conversely, agent-speciﬁc protocols may perform well for one type of algorithm or environment, but
poorly on others. In many cases, without further hand-engineering, agent-speciﬁc protocols can’t be
adapted to a variety of agent-types. When researchers tackle challenging RL problems, they tend
to explore a large space of algorithms with important structural differences: some are model-based
vs. model-free, some approximate the optimal policy, others a value function, and so on. It takes
substantial effort to adapt an advice protocol to each such algorithm. Moreover, as advice protocols
and learning algorithms become more complex, greater modularity will help limit design complexity.
In our framework, the interaction between the person guiding the learning process, the agent, and
the environment is formalized as a protocol program. This program controls the channels between
the agent and the environment based on human input, pictured in Figure 1. This gives the teacher
extensive control over the agent: in an extreme case, the agent can be prevented from interacting with
the real environment entirely and only interact with a simulation. At the same time, we require that
the human only interact with the agent during learning through the protocol program—both agent
and environment are a black box to the human.
1By “effective“ we mean: pruning bad actions while never pruning an optimal action. See Remark 3 (below).
2

Environment M
Agent L
Protocol Program P
2
1
Human H
3
s, r
a
a
s, r
Figure 1: A general setup for RL with a human in the loop. By instantiating P with different protocol
programs, we can implement different mechanisms for human guidance of RL agents.
2
Framework
Any system for RL with a human in the loop has to coordinate three components:
1. The environment is an MDP and is speciﬁed by a tuple M = (S, A, T , R, γ), where S
is the state space, A is the action space, T : S × A × S 7→[0, 1], denotes the transition
function, a probability distribution on states given a state and action, R: S × A 7→R is the
reward function, and γ is the discount factor.
2. The agent is a (stateful, potentially stochastic) function L: S × R →A.
3. The human can receive and send advice information of ﬂexible type, say Xin and Xout,
so, we will treat the human as a (stateful, potentially stochastic) function H : Xin →Xout.
For example, Xin might contain the history of actions, states, and rewards so far, and a
new proposed action a′, and Xout might be an action as well, either equivalent to a′ (if
accepted) or different (if rejected). We assume that the human knows in general terms how
their responses will be used and is making a good-faith effort to be helpful.
The interaction between the environment, the agent, and a human advisor sets up a mechanism
design problem: how can we design an interface that orchestrates the interaction between these
components such that the combined system maximizes the expected sum of γ-discounted rewards
from the environment? In other words, how can we write a protocol program P : S × R →A that
can take the place of a given agent L, but that achieves higher rewards by making efﬁcient use of
information gained through sub-calls to L and H?
By formalizing existing and new techniques as programs, we facilitate understanding and comparison
of these techniques within a common framework. By abstracting from particular agents and environ-
ments, we may better understand the mechanisms underlying effective teaching for Reinforcement
Learning by developing portable and modular teaching methods.
3
Capturing Existing Advice Schemes
Naturally, protocol programs cannot capture all advice protocols. Any protocol that depends on
prior knowledge of the agent’s learning algorithm, representation, priors, or hyperparameters is
ruled out. Despite this constraint, the framework can capture a range of existing protocols where a
human-in-the-loop guides an agent.
Figure 1 shows that the human can manipulate the actions (A) sent to the environment, the agent’s
observed states (S), and observed rewards (R). This points to the following combinatorial set of
protocol families in which the human manipulates one or more of these components to inﬂuence
learning:
{S, A, R, (S, A), (S, R), (A, R), (S, A, R)}
3

The ﬁrst three elements of the set correspond to state manipulation, action pruning, and reward
shaping protocol families.2 The remaining elements represent families of teaching schemes that
modify multiple elements of the agent’s learning; these protocols may introduce powerful interplay
between the different components, which hope future work will explore.
We now demonstrate simple ways in which protocol programs instantiate typical methods for
intervening in an agent’s learning process.
Algorithm 1 Agent in control (standard)
1: procedure AGENTCONTROL(s, r)
2:
return L(s, r)
3: end procedure
Algorithm 2 Human in control
1: procedure HUMANCONTROL(s, r)
2:
return H(s, r)
3: end procedure
Algorithm 3 Action pruning
1: ∆←H.∆
▷To Prune: S × A 7→{0, 1}
2: procedure PRUNEACTIONS(s, r)
3:
a = L(s, r)
4:
while ∆(s, a) do
▷If Needs Pruning
5:
r = H[(s, a)]
6:
a = L(s, r)
7:
end while
8:
return a
9: end procedure
Algorithm 4 Reward manipulation
1: procedure MANIPULATEREWARD(s, r)
2:
r = H(s, r)
3:
return L(s, r)
4: end procedure
Algorithm 5 Training in simulation
1: M ∗= (S, A, T ∗, R∗, γ)
▷Simulation
2: η = []
▷History: array of (S × R × A)
3: procedure TRAININSIMULATION(s, r)
4:
s = s
5:
r = r
6:
while H(η) ̸= “agent is ready” do
7:
a = L(s, r)
8:
append (s, r, a) to η
9:
r ∼R∗(s, a)
10:
s ∼T ∗(s, a)
11:
end while
12:
return L(s, r)
13: end procedure
Figure 2: Many schemes for human guidance of RL algorithms can be expressed as protocol programs.
These programs have the same interface as the agent L, but can be safer or more efﬁcient learners by
making use of human advice H.
3.1
Reward shaping
Section 2 deﬁned the reward function R as part of the MDP M. However, while humans generally
don’t design the environment, we do design reward functions. Usually the reward function is hand-
coded prior to learning and must accurately assign reward values to any state the agent might reach.
An alternative is to have a human generate the rewards interactively: the human observes the state
and action and returns a scalar to the agent. This setup has been explored in work on TAMER
[23]. A similar setup (with an agent-speciﬁc protocol) was applied to robotics by Daniel et al. [6].
It is straightforward to represent rewards that are generated interactively (or online) using protocol
programs.
We now turn to other protocols in which the human manipulates rewards. These protocols assume a
ﬁxed reward function R that is part of the MDP M.
3.1.1
Reward shaping and Q-value initialization
In Reward Shaping protocols, the human engineer changes the rewards given by some ﬁxed reward
function in order to inﬂuence an agent’s learning. Ng et al. [32] introduced potential-based shaping,
which shapes rewards without changing an MDP’s optimal policy. In particular, each reward received
by the environment is augmented by a shaping function:
F(s, a, s′) = γφ(s′) −φ(s),
(1)
so the agent actually receives r = F(s, a, s′) + R(s, a). Wiewiora et al. [48] showed potential
shaping to be equivalent (for Q-learners) to a subset Q-value initialization under some assumptions.
2State manipulation can correspond to abstraction or training in simulation
4

Further, Devlin and Kudenko [8] propose dynamic potential shaping functions that change over time.
That is, the shaping function F also takes as two time parameters, t and t′, such that:
F(s, t, s′, t′) = γφ(s′, t′) −φ(s, t)
(2)
Where t′ > t. Their main result is that dynamic shaping functions of this form also guarantee optimal
policy invariance. Similarly, Wiewiora et al. [48] extend potential shaping to potential-based advice
functions, which identiﬁes a similar class of shaping functions on (s, a) pairs.
In Section 4, we show that our Framework captures reward shaping, and consequently, a limited
notion of Q-value initialization.
3.2
Training in Simulation
It is common practice to train an agent in simulation and transfer it to the real world once it performs
well enough. Algorithm 5 (Figure 2) shows how to represent the process of training in simulation as a
protocol program. We let M represent the real-world decision problem and let M ∗be a simulator for
M that is included in the protocol program. Initially the protocol program has the agent L interact
with M ∗while the human observes the interaction. When the human decides the agent is ready, the
protocol program has L interact with M instead.
3.3
Action Pruning
Action pruning is a technique for dynamically removing actions from the MDP to reduce the branching
factor of the search space. Such techniques have been shown to accelerate learning and planning
time [39, 19, 38, 2]. In Section 5, we apply action-pruning to prevent catastrophic outcomes during
exploration, a problem explored by Lipton et al. [27], Garcia and Fernandez [14, 15], Hans et al.
[18], Moldovan and Abbeel [31].
Protocol programs allow action pruning to be carried out interactively. Instead of having to decide
which actions to prune prior to learning, the human can wait to observe the states that are actually
encountered by the agent, which may be valuable in cases where the human has limited knowledge of
the environment or the agent’s learning ability. In Section 4, we exhibit an agent-agnostic protocol
for interactively pruning actions that preserves the optimal policy while removing some bad actions.
Our pruning protocol is illustrated in a gridworld with lava pits (Figure 3). The agent is represented
by a gray circle, “G” is a goal state that provides reward +1, and the red cells are lava pits with reward
−200. All white cells provide reward 0.
5
4
3
2
1
G
1
2
3
4
5
(34, DOWN, 0, 33)
(33, RIGHT, -1000, 33)
Figure 3: The human allows movement
from state 34 to 33 but blocks agent from
falling in lava (at 43).
At each time step, the human checks whether the agent
moves into a lava pit. If it does not (as in moving DOWN
from state 34), the agent continues as normal. If it does
(as in moving RIGHT from state 33), the human bypasses
sending any action to the true MDP (preventing movement
right) and sends the agent a next state of 33. The agent
doesn’t actually fall in the lava but the human sends them a
reward r ≤−200. After this negative reward, the agent is
less likely to try the action again. For the protocol program,
see Algorithm 3 in Figure 2.
Note that the agent receives no explicit signal that their
attempted catastrophic action was blocked by the human.
They observe a big negative reward and a self-loop but
no information about whether the human or environment
generated their observation.
3.4
Manipulating state representation
The agent’s state representation can have a signiﬁcant
inﬂuence on its learning. Suppose the states of MDP M
consist of a number of features, deﬁning a state vector s.
The human engineer can specify a mapping φ such that the agent always receives φ(s) = ¯s in place
5

of this vector s. Such mappings are used to specify high-level features of state that are important for
learning, or to dynamically ignore confusing features from the agent.
This transformation of the state vector is normally ﬁxed before learning. A protocol program can
allow the human to provide processed states or high-level features interactively. By the time the
human stops providing features, the agent might have learned to generate them on its own (as in
Learning with Privileged Information [45, 35]).
Other methods have focused on state abstraction functions to decrease learning time and preserve
the quality of learned behavior, as in [26, 33, 12, 20, 7, 3, 13]. Using a state abstraction function,
agents compress representations of their environments, enabling deeper planning and lower sample
complexity. Any state aggregation function can be implemented by a protocol program, perhaps
dynamically induced through interaction with a teacher.
4
Theory
Here we illustrate some simple ways in which our proposed agent-agnostic interaction scheme
captures other existing agent-agnostic protocols. The following results all concern Tabular MDPs,
but are intended to offer intuition for high-dimensional or continuous environments as well.
4.1
Reward Shaping
First we observe that protocol programs can precisely capture methods for shaping reward functions.
Remark 1: For any reward shaping function F, including potential-based shaping, potential-based
advice, and dynamic potential-based advice, there is a protocol that produces the same rewards.
To construct such a protocol for a given F, simply let the reward output by the protocol, r, take on
the value F(s) + r at each time step. That is, in Algorithm 4, simply deﬁne H(s, r) = F(s) + r.
4.2
Action Pruning
We now show that there is a simple class of protocol programs that carry out action pruning of a
certain form.
Remark 2: There is a protocol for pruning actions in the following sense: for any set of state action
pairs sa ⊂S × A, the protocol ensures that, for each pair (si, aj) ∈sa, action aj is never executed
in the MDP in state si.
The protocol is as described in Section 3.3 and shown in Algorithm 3. The premise is this: in all cases
where the agent executes an action that should be pruned, the protocol gives the agent low reward
and forces the agent to self-loop.
Knowing which actions to prune is itself a challenging problem. Often, it is natural to assume that the
human guiding the learner knows something about the environment of interest (such as where high
rewards or catastrophes lie), but may not know every detail of the problem. Thus, we consider a case
in which the human has partial (but useful) knowledge about the problem of interest, represented
as an approximate Q-function. The next remark shows there is a protocol based on approximate
knowledge with two properties: (1) it never prunes an optimal action, (2) it limits the magnitude of
the agent’s worst mistake:
Remark 3: Assuming the protocol designer has a β-optimal Q function:
||Q∗(s, a) −QH(s, a)||∞≤β
(3)
there exists a protocol that never prunes an optimal action, but prunes all actions so that the agent’s
mistakes are never more than 4β below optimal. That is, for all times t:
V Lt(st) ≥V ∗(st) −4β,
(4)
where Lt is the agent’s policy after t timesteps.
6

Proof of Remark 3. The protocol designer has a β-approximate Q function, denoted QH, deﬁned as
above. Consider the state-speciﬁc action pruning function H(s):
H(s) =
n
a ∈A | QH(s, a) ≥max
a′ QH(s, a′) −2β
o
(5)
The protocol prunes all actions not in H(s) according to the self-loop method described above. This
protocol induces a pruned Bellman Equation over available actions, H(s), in each state:
VH(s) = max
a∈H(s)
 
R(s, a) + γ
X
s′
T (s, a, s′)VH(s′)
!
(6)
Let a∗denote the true optimal action: a∗= arg maxa′ Q∗(s, a′). To preserve the optimal policy, we
need a∗∈H(s), for each state. Note that a∗̸∈H(s) when:
QH(s, a∗) < max
a′ QH(s, a′) −2β
(7)
But by deﬁnition of QH(s, a):
|QH(s, a∗) −max
a
QH(s, a)| ≤2β
(8)
Thus, a∗∈H(s) can never occur. Furthermore, observe that H(s) retains all actions a for which:
QH(s, a) ≥max
a′ QH(s, a′) −2β,
(9)
holds. Thus, in the worst case, the following two hold:
1. The optimal action estimate is β too low: QH(s, a∗) = Q∗(s, a∗) −β
2. The action with the lowest value, abad, is β too high: QH(s, abad) = Q∗(s, abad) + β
From Equation 9, observe that the minimal Q∗(s, abad) such that abad ∈H(s) is:
Q∗(s, abad) + β ≥Q∗(s, a∗) −β −2β
∴Q∗(s, abad) ≥Q∗(s, a∗) −4β
Thus, this pruning protocol never prunes an optimal action, but prunes all actions worse then 4β
below a∗in value. We conclude that the agent may never execute an action 4β below optimal.
5
Experiments
This section applies our action pruning protocols (Section 3.3 and Remarks 2 and 3 above) to concrete
RL problems. In Experiment 1, action pruning is used to prevent the agent from trying catastrophic
actions, i.e. to achieve safe exploration. In Experiment 2, action pruning is used to accelerate learning.
5.1
Protocol for Preventing Catastrophes
Human-in-the-loop RL can help prevent disastrous outcomes that result from ignorance of the
environment’s dynamics or of the reward function. Our goal for this experiment is to prevent the
agent from taking catastrophic actions. These are real world actions so costly that we want the agent
to never take the action3. This notion of catastrophic action is closely related to ideas in “Safe RL”
[16, 31] and to work on “signiﬁcant rare events” [34].
Section 3.3 describes our protocol program for preventing catastrophes in ﬁnite MDPs using action
pruning. There are two important elements of this program:
1. When the agent tries a catastrophic action a in state s, the agent is blocked from executing
the action in the real world, and the agent receives state and reward: (s, rbad), where rbad is
an extreme negative reward.
3We allow an RL agent to take sub-optimal actions while learning. Catastrophic actions are not allowed
because their cost is orders of magnitude worse than non-catastrophic actions.
7

Figure 4: Preventing Catastrophic Speeds
0
50
100
150
200
Episode Number
500
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Cumulative Reward
Cumulative Reward: taxi_h-10_w-10
qlearner-uniform-prune
qlearner-uniform
rmax-h4-prune
rmax-h4
Figure 5: Pruning in Taxi.
2. This (s, a) is stored so that the protocol program can automate the human’s intervention,
which could allow the human to stop monitoring after all catastrophes have been stored.
This protocol prevents catastrophic actions while preserving the optimal policy and having only
minimal side-effects on the agent’s learning. We can extend this protocol to environments with
high-dimensional state spaces. Element (1) above remains the same. But (2) must be modiﬁed:
preventing future catastrophes requires generalization across catastrophic actions (as there will be
inﬁnitely many such actions). We discuss this setting in Appendix A.
5.2
Experiment 1: Preventing Catastrophes in a Pong-like Game
Our protocol for preventing catastrophes is intended for use in a real-world environment. Here we
provide a preliminary test of our protocol in a simple video game.
Our protocol treats the RL agent as a black box. To this end, we applied our protocol to an open-
source implementation of the state-of-the-art RL algorithm “Trust Region Policy Optimization” from
Duan et al. [11]. The environment was Catcher, a simpliﬁed version of Pong with non-visual state
representation. Since there are no catastrophic actions in Catcher, we modiﬁed the game to give a
large negative reward when the paddle’s speed exceeds a speed limit. We compare the performance of
an agent who is assisted by the protocol (“Pruned”) and so is blocked from the catastrophic actions4
to the performance of a normal RL agent (“Not Pruned”).
Figure 4 shows the agent’s mean performance (±1SD over 16 trials) over the course of learning.
We see that the agent with protocol support (“Pruned”) performed much better overall. This is
unsurprising, as it was blocked from ever doing a catastrophic action. The gap in mean performance
is large early on but diminishes as the “Not Pruned” agent learns to avoid high speeds. By the end (i.e.
after 400,000 actions), “Not Pruned” is close to “Pruned” in mean performance but its total returns
over the whole period are around 5 times worse. While the “Pruned” agent observes incongruous
state transitions due to being blocked by our protocol, Figure 4 suggests these observations do not
have negative side effects on learning.
5.3
Protocol for Accelerating Learning
We also conducted a simple experiment in the Taxi domain from Dietterich [9]. The Taxi problem is
a more complex version of grid world: each problem instances consists of a taxi and some number of
passengers. The agent directs the taxi to each passenger, picks the passenger up, and brings them to
their destination and drops them off.
4 We did not use an actual human in the loop. Instead the agent was blocked by a protocol program that
checked whether each action would exceed the speed limit. This is essentially the protocol outlined in Appendix
A but with the classiﬁer trained ofﬂine to recognize catastrophes. Future work will test similar protocols using
actual humans. (In this experiment a human can easily recognize catastrophic actions by reading the agent’s
speed directly from the game state.)
8

We use Taxi to evaluate the effect of our action pruning protocol for accelerating learning in discrete
MDPs. There is a natural procedure for pruning suboptimal actions that dramatically reduces the size
of the reachable state space: if the taxi is carrying a passenger but is not at the passenger’s destination,
we prune the dropoff action by returning the agent back to its current state with -0.01 reward. This
prevents the agent from exploring a large portion of the state space, thus accelerating learning.
5.4
Experiment 2: Accelerated Learning in Taxi
We evaluated Q-learning [47] and R-MAX [5] with and without action pruning in a simple 10 × 10
instance with one passenger. The taxi starts at (1, 1), the passenger at (4, 3) with destination (2, 2).
We ran standard Q-Learning with ε-greedy exploration with ε = 0.2 and with R-MAX using a
planning horizon of four. Results are displayed in Figure 5.
Our results suggest that the action pruning protocol simpliﬁes the problem for a Q-Learner and
dramatically so for R-Max. In the allotted number of episodes, we see that pruning substantially
improves the overall cumulative reward achieved; in the case of R-MAX, the agent is able to effectively
solve the problem after a small number of episodes. Further, the results suggests that the agent-
agnostic method of pruning is effective without having any internal access to the agent’s code.
6
Conclusion
We presented an agent-agnostic method for giving guidance to Reinforcement Learning agents.
Protocol programs written in this framework apply to any possible RL agent, so sophisticated
schemes for human-agent interaction can be designed in a modular fashion without the need for
adaptation to different RL algorithms. We presented some simple theoretical results that relate our
method to existing schemes for interactive RL and illustrated the power of action pruning in two toy
domains.
A promising avenue for future work are dynamic state manipulation protocols, which can guide
an agent’s learning process by incrementally obscuring confusing features, highlighting relevant
features, or simply reducing the dimensionality of the representation. Additionally, future work
might investigate whether certain types of value initialization protocols can be captured by protocol
programs, such as the optimistic initialization for arbitrary domains developed by Machado et al.
[29]. Moreover, the full combinatoric space of learning protocols is suggestive of teaching paradigms
that have yet to be explored. We hypothesize that there are powerful teaching methods that take
advantage of the interplay between state manipulation, action pruning, and reward shaping. A further
challenge is to extend the formalism to account for the interplay between multiple agents, in both
competitive and cooperative settings.
Additionally, in our experiments, all protocols are explicitly programmed in advance. In the future,
we’d like to experiment with dynamic protocols with a human in the loop during the learning process.
Lastly, an alternate perspective on the framework is that of a centaur system: a joint Human-AI
decision maker [41]. Under this view, the human trains and queries the AI dynamically in cases
where the human needs help. In the future, we’d like to establish and investigate formalisms relevant
to the centaur view of the framework.
9
