Machine Learning to Estimate Gross Loss of
Jewelry for Wax Patterns
Mihir Jain1, Kashish Jain2, and Sandip Mane3
1 Purdue School of Industrial Engineering, West Lafayette, IN 47906, USA

2 Sardar Patel Institute of Technology, Mumbai, 400058, India

3 D.J Sanghvi College of Engineering, Mumbai, 400056, India

Abstract. In mass manufacturing of jewellery, the gross loss is esti-
mated before manufacturing to calculate the wax weight of the pattern
that would be investment casted to make multiple identical pieces of
jewellery. Machine learning is a technology that is a part of AI which
helps create a model with decision-making capabilities based on a large
set of user-deﬁned data. In this paper, the authors found a way to use
Machine Learning in the jewellery industry to estimate this crucial Gross
Loss. Choosing a small data set of manufactured rings and via regres-
sion analysis, it was found out that there is a potential of reducing the
error in estimation from ±2-3 to ±0.5- using ML Algorithms from his-
toric data and attributes collected from the CAD ﬁle during the design
phase itself. To evaluate the approach’s viability, additional study must
be undertaken with a larger data set.
Keywords: CAD · Gross Loss · Jewelry · Machine Learning · Wax
Model.
1
Introduction
Loss is an inevitable component of manufacturing. In the manufacturing of jew-
ellery from precious metals, accounting and calculating the losses is a very cru-
cial. Gross Loss of jewellery is the total metal loss during its manufacturing.
Loss in metal happens during casting, ﬁling, polishing, setting and at almost
every stage. Even though most of this lost metal is recovered and reﬁned in the
reﬁnery to get a recovery of 92%, on average, these losses are extremely crucial
not to be accounted for.
The loss on each piece of jewellery varies, based on various factors. Estimat-
ing this gross loss beforehand was very crucial for the manufacturing of that
jewellery. This estimated gross loss was used for while pulling wax patterns dur-
ing the process of injection moulding [1]. Jewelry made from the heavier wax
piece will have surplus metal that must be ﬁled down and recovered later, which
arXiv:2301.02872v1  [cs.LG]  7 Jan 2023

2
M. Jain et al.
is a waste of time and materials because only some of the metal will be recov-
ered. Therefore, estimating the total loss provides a general estimate of the wax
weight and can be used as a guide for how each procedure should be carried out.
In a production process, a step wise loss of each of step of manufacturing is
collected. This is done by weighing the jewelry after each step. Hence after the
jewelry has been manufactured it can assess the ﬁnal data of gross loss that the
company bore. Total recovery that was done was also considered, and added to
the database.
This gross loss found out was further collected out of which a wide set of
databases is manufactured by an in-house engineer. Calculations based on cur-
rent trends are made where a few other variables are also taken into considera-
tion.
Variables like, weight of the ﬁnal product, metal type (White Gold, Yellow
Gold, Pink Gold, Silver, Platinum and Palladium), cartage of metal (8k, 9k, 10k,
12k, 14k, 18k, 20k etc.), the customer for whom the jewelry is being manufac-
tured, the setting of diamond (whether the piece is handset or wax set) and of
course the type of jewelry it is (whether it is a ring, a pendant, an earring, a
bracelet or a bangle.)
Currently, the estimation comes with a variance of ±4-5%. Hence there is a
scope here by which, using the powerful tools of Machine Learning [2,3,4,5] we
can consider the variable constants to ﬁnd out the gross loss in jewelry. These
variable constants can most often than not be fetched directly from the CAD
ﬁles which are made way before the actual manufacturing process even begins.
The aim of the paper is to estimate the gross loss of jewelry at the CAD level
with greater and repeatable accuracy using machine learning algorithms. This
paper will systematically narrow down the variables responsible for gross loss of
jewelry during its manufacturing, create a machine learning model that predicts
the ﬁnal gross loss based on the data collected from the CAD ﬁle generated
before manufacturing and ensure greater accuracy of the model as compared to
the traditional methods of estimating loss.
2
Methodology
As the project is a proof of concept, it only takes into account 26 rings as a
sample size. This project will only use information from the last several months
of production for all ring kinds for which CAD ﬁles were available (developed in
Rhino 3D [6]) and for which the company knew the associated gross losses. It is
important to highlight that only information that could be shown publicly has
been included in this report. There were notably three stages to the project’s
execution.
2.1
Creating the Dataset
The ﬁrst phase comprised of selecting all possible attribute of the rings from
the CAD ﬁle and listing them down with their corresponding values on an excel
sheet. This data was paired with its corresponding historic gross loss.

Machine Learning to Estimate Gross Loss of Jewelry for Wax Patterns
3
Table 1. Parameters of the Dataset
# Attribute
Datatype
1
Volume
mm3
2
Surface Area
mm2
3
Metal
Karat-metal
4
Weight/ Piece (Estimated)
gm
5
Total Lot Quantity
integer
6
Total Weight of Lot
gm
7
Inner Diameter
mm
8
Outer Diameter
mm
9
Minimum Shank Thickness
mm
10 Maximum Shank Thickness
mm
11 Minimum Shank Width
mm
12 Maximum Shank Width
mm
13 Total Height
mm
14 Top Height
mm
15 Number of Components
integer
16 Number of Rings
integer
17 Tone
1/2/3
18 True Miracle
binary
19 No. of True Miracle
integer
20 Diamond – Handset and Wax Set integer
21 Filigree
binary
22 J Back
binary
23 Gallery
binary
24 Fake Beads
integer
25 Plating
binary
2.2
Preparation of Data
The compiled data was obtained from the CAD ﬁles. This data had irrelevant
parameters that are currently unknown but will be ﬁltered out through process-
ing. The reason why all possible data was collected was to avoid any human
generated discrepancies in the very ﬁrst stage of the project. Even though 26
is a small number for a machine learning algorithm, its corresponding volume
would still suﬃce to give us the proof of concept required to carry on with the
project. But in an ideal situation, the number of rows should be 4x the number
of columns. So, it can safely consider that the results obtained will only improve
when the amount of data of rings increases. Before testing algorithms, the data
was checked for any missing values and such values were designated a weighted
average value. Feature scaling was done using Standard Scaling which standard-
ize features by removing the mean and scaling to unit variance [7]. The standard
score of a sample x is calculated as:
z = (x −u)/s
(1)
where u is the mean of the training samples, and s is the standard deviation of
the training samples.

4
M. Jain et al.
2.3
Models
The above-mentioned data was split tested, and the mean value graph of each
feature was derived. The data set was split as 80-20, where 80 was the train
dataset and 20 was the test dataset. After the data set is split, feature scaling
was done to make the comparison easier. This data was the processed through
various algorithms.
1. Linear Regression Algorithm
Fig. 1. Architecture of Linear Regression Algorithm
(a) Linear Regression [8] is a supervised learning-based machine learning
technique. One of its functions is to carry out a regression analysis.
Through the use of independent variables, the regression model can pre-
dict a desired outcome. Its primary function is to investigate causal links
between factors and predicting.
(b) Predicting a value (y) of a dependent variable (x) from known values
(y) of independent variables (x) is the job of linear regression (x). Ac-
cordingly, this method of regression establishes a linear connection be-
tween the input variable (x) and the output variable (y) (output). Linear
Regression perfectly describes this method [9]. Hypothesis function for
Linear Regression :
y = θ1 + θ2.x
(2)
(c) When training the model – it ﬁts the best line to predict the value of
y for a given value of x. The model gets the best regression ﬁt line by
ﬁnding the best θ1 and θ2 values where θ1 is the intercept and θ2 is the
coeﬃcient of x.

Machine Learning to Estimate Gross Loss of Jewelry for Wax Patterns
5
(d) The best ﬁt line is obtained by locating the optimal values of θ1 and θ2.
When our model is used for prediction, it will give us y as a function of
x.
2. Random Forest Regression
Fig. 2. Architecture of Random Forest Algorithm
(a) Random Forest Regression [10] algorithm is an example of a supervised
learning algorithm that use the ensemble learning approach of regression.
By combining the results of several diﬀerent machine learning algorithms,
an ensemble learning method can produce a more precise forecast than
any one of them could on its own.
(b) Random Forest relies on the ”wisdom of the crowds” principle, which
states that a large number of independent models working in concert
can achieve better results than any of their parts working alone.
(c) This is owing to the fact that the trees buﬀer one another from their
particular errors. Since a random forest is completely random, there is no
communication between the trees that make up the forest. Random forest
is an estimator technique that takes the outputs of multiple decision
trees, compiles them, and then generates the ideal answer for the given
situation. [11]
3. Decision Tree Regression
(a) Decision tree [12] builds regression or classiﬁcation models in the form of
a tree structure. It breaks down a dataset into smaller and smaller sub-
sets while at the same time an associated decision tree is incrementally
developed. The result is a tree with decision nodes and leaf nodes.
(b) There are three distinct sorts of nodes in this regression tree. The Root
Node is the primary node, representing the whole sample and potentially
being subdivided into further nodes. Features of a dataset are represented
by Interior Nodes, while decision rules are shown by Branches. In the end,
the result is shown by the Leaf Nodes. If you have an issue that requires
a choice, this algorithm is excellent. [13]

6
M. Jain et al.
Fig. 3. Architecture of ecision Tree Algorithm
(c) A single data point is processed all the way down to the leaf node by
asking and answering True/False queries. Ultimately, the dependent vari-
able value in each leaf node is averaged to arrive at a ﬁnal forecast. The
Tree is able to provide an accurate prediction after going through several
rounds.
(d) The beneﬁts of using decision trees include their simplicity, the fact that
they require less data cleaning, the fact that non-linearity has no eﬀect
on the performance of the model, and the fact that the number of hyper-
parameters to be set is practically zero.
4. K-Nearest Neighbors Regression
Fig. 4. Example of KNN Algorithm

Machine Learning to Estimate Gross Loss of Jewelry for Wax Patterns
7
(a) K-Nearest Neighbors [14] is an easy-to-implement method that remem-
bers past examples and makes a numerical prediction based on a simi-
larity measure (e.g., distance functions). KNN is a non-parametric tech-
nique that has been utilised for statistical estimates and pattern recog-
nition since the early 1970s.
(b) We need to use cross-validation to choose K. Unlike classiﬁcation we
cannot accuracy use as metric, since our predictions will almost never
exactly match the true response variable values. Therefore in the con-
text of KNN regression we will use root mean square prediction error
(RMSPE) instead. The mathematical formula for calculating RMSPE
is:
RMSPE =
sPn
1 (yi −ˆyi)2
n
(3)
Where n is the number of observations, yi is the observed value for the
ith observation, and ˆyi is the predicted value for the ith observation.
(c) To put it another way, for each observation in our test (or validation)
set, we calculate the squared diﬀerence between the anticipated and true
response value, average over observations, and then square root. Since
diﬀerences can be either positive or negative—that is, we can over- or
under-estimate the genuine response value—we utilise the squared dif-
ference rather than merely the diﬀerence. [15]
3
Results
As we’ve seen, we have put our datasets through their paces with a wide range
of ML algorithms. The Mean Absolute Error (MAE) represents the error that
was introduced into our ﬁndings. The formula for the same is
MAE =
Pn
i=1 |yi −xi|)
n
(4)
Where, yi is the prediction, xi is the true value and n speciﬁes the total number
of data points.
Table 2. Mean Absolute Error Of Diﬀerent Methods
Method
Mean Absolute Error
Linear Regression
0.56
Random Forest Regressor
1.72
Decision Tree Regressor
1.49
K-Nearest Neighbour Regressor 2.02
It was observed that all 4 algorithms performed well considering how small
the data set was. All algorithms gave promising results with Linear Regression

8
M. Jain et al.
lending the lowest MAE. Though with increasing data set, it would be wise to
consider all the remaining models as well. The scores will only improve as the
data set increases.
4
Conclusion
The results show us that the gross loss can be predicted to an error margin of
±0.5. The proof of concept needed to be derived from the results was suﬃcient
to take to the company to act on it. Each of the 4 algorithms have potential,
Linear Regression being the most promising one so far. Further testing needs to
be done by increasing the number of data set and even expanding to diﬀerent
category of jewelry. The implementation of this innovation in the ﬁeld of jewelry
manufacturing would be a big undertaking and would be a time consuming and
labour-intensive processes but one which would bare fruitful results.
