The Defeat of the Winograd Schema Challenge
Vid Kocijana,1, Ernest Davisb, Thomas Lukasiewiczc,d, Gary Marcuse,
Leora Morgensternf
aKumo.ai, 357 Castro Street, Suite 200 Mountain View, CA 94041, United States
bNew York University, Department of Computer Science, 251 Mercer St, NY 10012,
United States
cInstitute of Logic and Computation, TU Wien, Austria
dDepartment of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK
eRobust AI, 380 Portage Avenue Palo Alto, CA 94306 United States
fPalo Alto Research Center, 3333 Coyote Hill Rd, Palo Alto, CA 94304, United States
Abstract
The Winograd Schema Challenge—a set of twin sentences involving pro-
noun reference disambiguation that seem to require the use of commonsense
knowledge—was proposed by Hector Levesque in 2011. By 2019, a number
of AI systems, based on large pre-trained transformer-based language models
and ﬁne-tuned on these kinds of problems, achieved better than 90% accu-
racy. In this paper, we review the history of the Winograd Schema Challenge
and discuss the lasting contributions of the ﬂurry of research that has taken
place on the WSC in the last decade. We discuss the signiﬁcance of various
datasets developed for WSC, and the research community’s deeper under-
standing of the role of surrogate tasks in assesssing the intelligence of an AI
system.
Keywords:
Commonsense Reasoning, Winograd Schema Challenge
1. Introduction
In 2010, Hector Levesque (2011) proposed a new challenge for artiﬁcial
intelligence: The Winograd Schema Challenge. The challenge was named
1Work performed while at the University of Oxford.
Preprint submitted to Artiﬁcial Intelligence
January 24, 2023
arXiv:2201.02387v3  [cs.CL]  23 Jan 2023

after a well-known example in Terry Winograd’s 1972 ground-breaking doc-
toral thesis, Understanding Natural Language. The example consists of a
pair of sentences:
The city councilmen refused the demonstrators a permit because
they feared violence.
The city councilmen refused the demonstrators a permit because
they advocated violence.
In the ﬁrst sentence, the pronoun “they” is naturally interpreted as re-
ferring to the city councilmen; in the second, it is naturally interpreted as
referring to the demonstrators. The only diﬀerence between the two sentences
is that the ﬁrst has “feared” where the second has “advocated”. Therefore,
the diﬀerent referents chosen for “they” must somehow reﬂect that diﬀer-
ent choice of word. Presumably when humans read the ﬁrst sentence, their
choice of referent for “they” is guided by their knowledge that X fearing that
Y would be violent would be a reason for X to deny Y a permit to demon-
strate, whereas Y fearing violence would rarely be a reason for X to deny Y
such a permit. Humans’ choice of referent in the second sentence is likewise
guided by their knowledge that Y advocating violence would be a reason
to deny Y a permit to demonstrate, whereas X advocating violence would
not be a good reason for X to deny Y a permit to demonstrate. Knowl-
edge about the attitudes of city councils’ vs. demonstrators’ stereotypical
attitudes toward (non-state-sanctioned) violence no doubt also plays a role
in the disambiguation. In 1972, and still in 2011, it seemed reasonable to
suppose that an AI that would be able to do this kind of disambiguation
would similarly have to draw on a body of commonsense knowledge.
Levesque therefore proposed to use these kinds of sentences as a test
to measure the depth of understanding of AI natural language programs. In
particular, he deﬁned a Winograd schema as a pair of sentences,2 comparable
to Winograd’s example above, with the following features.
1. The two sentences are identical except for one or two words: “feared”
vs. “advocated” in Winograd’s example.
2. The two sentences both contain two noun phrases and a pronoun: “the
city council”, “the demonstrators”, and “they” in Winograd’s example.
2In later work, this was often relaxed, so that each element of the pair could be a
two-sentence text.
2

1972: Winograd’s (1972) thesis introduces the original example.
2010: Levesque (2011) proposes the Winograd Schema Challenge.
2010–2011: The initial corpus of Winograd schemas is created.
2014: Levesque’s Research Excellence talk “On our best behavior”
(Levesque, 2014).
2016: The Winograd Schema Challenge is run at IJCAI-16. No systems do
much better than chance (Davis et al., 2017b).
2018: WNLI is incorporated in the GLUE set of benchmarks. BERT-based
systems do no better than most-frequent-class guessing
(Wang et al., 2019b).
2019, May: Kocijan et al. (2019b) achieve 72.5% accuracy on WSC273 using
pretraining.
2019, June: Liu et al. (2019) achieve 89.0% on WNLI.
2019, November: Sakaguchi et al. (2020) achieve 90.1% on WSC273.
Table 1: Time line of the Winograd Schema Challenge
3. The natural readings of the two sentences in isolation would assign
diﬀerent choices of referents for the pronoun.
4. Simple feature matching, known as “selectional restrictions”, will not
suﬃce to do the disambiguation. For instance, the pair of sentences
The women stopped taking the pills because they were [preg-
nant/carcinogenic].
is disallowed, because pills cannot be pregnant and women cannot be car-
cinogenic.
5. Matching based on simple frequency of co-occurrence will not suﬃce
to do the disambiguation. For instance, the pair of sentences
The racecar zoomed by the school bus because it was going so
[fast/slow].
would be disallowed, because the words “racecar” and “fast” tend to appear
together in text.
6. Both sentences must seem natural and must be easily understood by a
human listener or reader; ideally, so much so that, coming across the sentence
in some context, the reader would not even notice the potential ambiguity.
3

Point (6) was taken for granted by Levesque (2011) but was made explicit
in (Levesque et al., 2012).
These features / conditions were assumed at the time to be straightfor-
ward to evaluate. It was also assumed that it would be relatively easy to
write such Winograd schemas, so much so that it was originally suggested
that a restricted vocabulary could suﬃce to generate large numbers of Wino-
grad schemas, and that it would be possible to generate schemas that focused
on particular areas of commonsense reasoning, which could enable focusing
on measuring progress in these speciﬁc commonsense reasoning domains.
The ﬁrst of these assumptions speaks to the suitability of Winograd
schemas as a test for intelligence, substituting, as Levesque and later, his
co-authors, argued, for the Turing Test; the second speaks to the feasibility
of running the test. Both were crucial for the challenge’s success. Indeed,
one of the arguments for using the Winograd Schema Challenge rather than
the Turing Test was the well-known diﬃculty of evaluating computer systems
using Turing’s criteria, a diﬃculty that has led to competitions of dubious
worth, such as the Loebner competition, and the crowning of clearly non-
intelligent agents like Eugene Goostman, as “winners” of the Turing Test
(Levesque, 2017). But neither assumption turned out to be correct.
More precisely, regarding ease of evaluation: While it is easy to determine
whether a computer system gets the correct answers on a test consisting of
Winograd schemas (or more precisely, Winograd schema halves, as discussed
below), it turns out that it is not easy to evaluate the quality of the test itself,
that is, whether these Winograd schemas satisfy conditions 1–6.
Indeed,
with the exception of conditions 1 and 2, these conditions can be diﬃcult to
evaluate, perhaps because they were not stated precisely enough, For example
(condition 4), it is often not clear whether a pronoun can be disambiguated
using selectional restrictions, or what the boundary between this sort of
disambiguation and commonsense knowledge is.
It is also not simple to
decide whether “simple frequency of co-occurrence” suﬃces to disambiguate.
We need to specify: co-occurrence in which corpus or set of corpora? Do we
use Google as the arbiter, as explicitly suggested in the paper, and if so how
do we take into account the fact that Google can return diﬀerent answers for
diﬀerent users depending on its history of interaction with them? And the
fact that its corpora of reference are always changing?
Moreover, it is not necessarily easy to determine what the natural read-
ing of a sentence is (conditions 3 and 6). The question of whether readers
ordinarily would not notice that the pronoun is ambiguous, has never been
4

tested, as far as we know. (Reading-time experiments have been carried out
for similar issues in the naturalness and coherence of texts; see, e.g., (Wolf
et al., 2004).) However, as discussed further in Section 2.1, the constructors
of the dataset kept it very much in mind as a design consideration, and in
fact several examples that otherwise met the criteria were rejected, because
the dataset’s authors could not ﬁnd any way to phrase them that sounded
natural. This was one of the factors that played into the diﬃculty of con-
structing a large set of Winograd schemas, in direct contradiction to our
early assumption that such construction would be easy.
Before the authors explicitly recognized just how diﬃcult it would be to
create sentences that satisﬁed conditions 3 and 6, the naturalness of the task
was an aspect of the Winograd Schema Challenge that was particularly strik-
ing as compared to many other natural language tasks used as benchmarks.
It made it particularly compelling as a powerful test of human understand-
ing. In a sentence from a well-designed schema, human readers could carry
out the inference automatically, in a “System 1” (Kahneman, 2011) process
in reading the sentence, before they read the question that points out the
ambiguity; although this inference seems to require commonsense reasoning
of some depth and complexity.
This naturalness, if achievable, would result in a task that would be clearly
superior to other tasks of comprehension and inference that had previously
been suggested. For example, by contrast, characterizing the relation be-
tween two sentences as “entailment”, “neutral”, or “contradiction”, as in the
RTE task (recognizing textual entailment) (Candela et al., 2006); or identi-
fying the segment of a text that answers a question, as in SQuAD (Stanford
Question Answering Dataset) (Rajpurkar et al., 2016); or word analogies
(Mikolov et al., 2013); or predicting a probability distribution over the next
word following a speciﬁed text, which is the fundamental task in “language
modeling” (Brown et al., 2020), are not ecologically valid tasks that people
ordinarily carry out explicitly.
As a contrast in a diﬀerent direction, Cozman and Munhoz (2020) propose
encoding brainteasers as Winograd schemas; for example,
Miss Marple was looking for the jewel, so she asked the girls about
it: Ann said she took the jewel, Bella said Donna was the thief,
Carol said she did not even see the jewel, and Donna said Ann
(did/didn’t) in fact take the jewel. When Miss Marple learned
that only one of the girls was telling the truth, she immediately
5

knew who had the jewel, and she smiled to her.
It is not clear to us what is gained by casting this in terms of pronoun
disambiguation, instead of simply asking the question; and it is certainly not
what the creators of the challenge had in mind.
Levesque’s original 2011 paper included eighteen original Winograd sche-
mas. The ﬁrst of these, “The trophy doesn’t ﬁt in the brown suitcase because
it’s too [small/large],” has become a standard example, cited hundreds of
times in articles about AI language understanding.
Davis, Levesque, and Morgenstern intended that once a reasonable-sized
collection of Winograd schemas had been assembled, these could be used as a
challenge for AI systems as follows. One sentence of each pair would be cho-
sen at random; that sentence would be turned into a binary-choice question.
For instance, the “trophy” schema would yield the following question
The trophy doesn’t ﬁt in the brown suitcase because it is too
large.
What is too large?
A. The trophy
B. The suitcase
The advantage of using halves of Winograd schemas rather than simply
using sentences with pronoun ambiguity is that one can be sure that the only
clue to the correct resolution lies in the choice of the alternating word; any
clue that does not depend on the alternating word would point in the same
direction for both sentences, which would be the wrong direction for one of
the pair. For example, one can be entirely sure that the “recency” heuristic
has exactly a 50% chance of working, since it will work on one sentence of
the pair, and fail on the other and the sentence in the test set is chosen at
random.
Thus, a program that guesses randomly will have an expected accuracy
of 50%. Human readers should have accuracy close to 100%. Thus, an AI
program that achieves an accuracy that is statistically larger than 50% is
accomplishing something signiﬁcant by way of understanding; an AI cannot
claim to have achieved human-level abilities unless its accuracy is close to
100%.
Levesque argued that this test would be a better test of understanding
than the Turing test—trivial to evaluate, diﬃcult to game. He also argued
that it would be more robust than some alternative semantic tasks that had
6

been proposed, such as the RTE (recognizing textual echallenge (Candela
et al., 2006).
2. Dataset creation
Building on Levesque’s initial work, in 2010, Ernest Davis created an
additional eighty-nine schemas. Together with four suggested by Ray Jack-
endoﬀ, these were published on the web in HTML and XML.3 Since then, the
collections have been ampliﬁed with new schemas, by Davis and others; in
particular, the collection includes twenty schemas written by David Bender.
Currently, the HTML ﬁle includes 150 schemas; the XML version includes
285 individual sentences. (Some of the HTML schemas do not ﬁt into the
stricter form of the XML framework and are thus not included.) The latter
is generally known by the acronym WSC285 in recent articles on the subject;
since it has become a standard, it is now ﬁxed and will not be modiﬁed fur-
ther. To ensure consistency with earlier models, several authors often prefer
to report the performance on the ﬁrst 273 examples only. This dataset is
known as WSC273.
Levesque, Davis, and Leora Morgenstern 2012 published an expanded
version of (Levesque, 2011), expanding the comparison to other proposed
tests of AI semantic understanding and of the signiﬁcance of the test in the
general context of AI research, as well as presenting the corpus. Levesque
(2014) made the challenge the subject of his speech “On Our Best Behavior”
accepting the 2013 IJCAI Research Excellence Award.
The spatial and physical knowledge used in disambiguating the trophy
example—that proposed content A will not ﬁt inside container B if either A
is too large or B is too small—is fairly complex from a logical standpoint,
particularly the interpretation of “too”. (Davis (2013) includes a logic-based
analysis.) Other Winograd schemas likewise draw on fairly complex knowl-
edge and reasoning. “The sack of potatoes had been placed [above/below]
the bag of ﬂour, so it had to be moved ﬁrst” draws on a diﬀerent body of
spatial and physical knowledge, and is similar to the knowledge needed to
stack and unstack blocks in Blocks World. “There is a pillar between me
3https://cs.nyu.edu/faculty/davise/papers/WinogradSchemas/WSCollection.html
and
https://cs.nyu.edu/faculty/davise/papers/WinogradSchemas/WSCollection.xml
7

and the stage, and I can’t see [around it/it]” draws on knowledge of spa-
tial relations and perception. “Bob paid for Charlie’s college education, but
now Charlie acts as though it never happened. He is very [hurt/ungrateful]”
draws on a body of knowledge of human interactions and emotions, as well as
the realities of the cost of college education. (Note that this example demon-
strates that the quality of a Winograd schema must often be evaluated with
respect to a speciﬁc culture. The example might not work so well in cultures
in which college is nearly free.) “Alice tried frantically to stop her daughter
from [chatting/barking] at the party, leaving us to wonder why she was be-
having so strangely” requires reasoning about atypical human behavior; for
the variant with “chatting”, this requires applying the rather complex rule
that “It is generally inappropriate for A to try to prevent B from carrying
out an innocuous behavior E”. All told, the Winograd schemas draw on a
wide range of knowledge, often of fairly complex structure. Of course draw-
ing on a wide range of knowledge does not entail knowing all, or most, or
even a large part of the knowledge that one assumes an intelligent human
would have. We believed that a system that knew and could reason with this
knowledge would know even more and would have a means to acquire still
more knowledge.
The challenge attracted a fair amount of favorable interest from both
the research community and the popular science press (e.g., (Markoﬀ, 2015;
Knight, 2016)). The naturalness of the problems made it a fair one for AI
systems; the complexity of the inferences involved seemed to put it far beyond
the range of what was then current technology.
But even at the start and continuing throughout the early years of the
challenge, when there were few signs that AI systems could succeed at the
Winograd Schema Challenge, there were those who warned that it might be
a less robust test than its creators hoped and believed. They argued that, as
was the case with past challenges, success might come without solving the
underlying problem that had motivated the challenge, and moreover, that
the very nature of the test invited systems that were tailored to the test

5, 2011, Doug Hofstadter wrote:
The problem is that I believe that what will happen is that you
will simply wind up spawning a whole host of new and ultra-clever
brute-force techniques to solve the “Winograd Challenge” with-
out solving the problem of understanding whatsoever. I always
8

liked Terry Winograd’s sample sentence, but I hardly think that
it represents the epitome or the essence of what is wrong with
today’s computer approaches to language. It is just one type of
example among thousands of types. It’s a great example but it’s
misleading to focus on it as if it were really the crux of the matter.
Getting people to spend huge amounts of time on just one kind
of challenge is not going to be helpful. In fact, I fear it will be
counterproductive, because I don’t think that anyone who will be
moved to tackle this particular challenge is likely to take up the
deeper and more general challenge of what language understand-
ing really is. People are daunted by that, as well they should be,
and no one is going to be motivated by a prize to suddenly tackle
that gigantic challenge. Instead, very smart engineering types are
going to be motivated to seek clever tricks that will allow com-
puters to solve this very narrow type of linguistic disambiguation
problem with a high degree of accuracy.
A similar sentiment was expressed by Craig Boutillier at the KR-2012 con-
ference after Morgenstern’s presentation of the (Levesque et al., 2012) paper.
He pointed out that challenges often do get solved sooner or later; and chal-
lenged the authors to a thought experiment.
If a system did succeed at
the Winograd Schema Challenge, would they be convinced of its intelligence
through this alone? In a conversation with Morgenstern in April 2011 at a
DARPA PI meeting for the Machine Reading program, Ed Hovy pointed out
that this challenge was very likely the sort of problem that a smart graduate
student could ﬁgure out how to solve, given the right resources. Indeed, the
ﬁrst author of this survey was until last year a graduate student who came up
with the ﬁrst system that performed much better than chance and achieved
what was close to human performance, conﬁrming Hovy’s prediction. Dan
Weld argued, at Marcus’s AAAI-2015 workshop Beyond the Turing Test,
that the nature of a narrow test was that researchers would ﬁgure out how to
game the test without making real progress in the ﬁeld. In addition, Charles
Ortiz was one of several researchers who in 2013 suggested requiring systems
to furnish an explanation for their choice of pronoun referent in order to
guard against systems solving the WSC without having achieved the ability
to do commonsense reasoning.
Hofstadter, Boutillier, Hovy, Weld, and Ortiz all turned out to be correct.
Solving Winograd schemas is not a surrogate for the ability to do common-
9

sense reasoning, let alone for intelligence. The diﬃculty of using success at
a speciﬁc task as a surrogate for intelligence is one that continues to this
day, even as the tasks that computers can successfully perform signiﬁcantly
increase in complexity. And the ability to furnish explanations has years
later been recognized as a potential diﬀerentiator for determining the depth
of understanding of systems that solve Winograd schemas
2.1. Manually constructing Winograd Schemas
(Levesque et al., 2012) or any subsequent papers did not discuss the
actual process of constructing Winograd Schemas, because at that time it
seemed a reasonably easy task of no great interest.
But the diﬃculty of
creating more than a relatively small set of Winograd schemas (on the order of
several hundred), the requests for larger sets, the attempts to produce larger
colllections of Winograd schemas using inexpert labor, and the proliferation
of adversarial data sets of all kinds in the last few years, make it now worth
a brief discussion.
The bulk of the Winograd Schemas in the online collection were con-
structed by Davis over a month in the summer of 2010. Working an hour
a day, he found that he could reliably generate three schemas an hour —
rarely fewer, almost never more. In the fall of 2015, preparing for the Wino-
grad Schema competition at AAAI-16, he produced another collection of 60,
which has been held in reserve and has never been published. This was car-
ried out less systematically, and was somewhat slower, but not enormously
so. Overall, the continued slow pace led us to the development of the Pronoun
Disambiguation corpus, discussed below.
The primary diﬃculty in constructing Winograd schemas is that English
usage imposes a variety of formal constraints on how pronouns can be used,
beyond purely syntactic rules. These constraints are complex and not fully
understood (Rohde, 2018), but can be quite rigid, nonetheless.
For instance, both halves of Levesque’s canonical trophy example are ﬁne:
The trophy doesn’t ﬁt inside the suitcase because it is too large.
The trophy doesn’t ﬁt inside the suitcase because it is too small.
Commonsense knowledge about ﬁtting and size require that, in the ﬁrst sen-
tence, “it” refers to the trophy, and in the second “it” refers to the suitcase.
But you can hardly say
* The trophy doesn’t ﬁt in the suitcase because the trophy is an
awkward shape and it is too small.
10

with the intent that “it” should refer to the suitcase.
Likewise, you can reasonably say in English,
Ann has no children, but Barbara has two sons, Carl and David.
Her children are in elementary school.
However, you cannot say
* Barbara has two sons, Carl and David, but Ann has no children.
Her children are in elementary school.
in the expectation that semantic constraints will force the interpretation of
“Her” as “Barbara’s”. The natural reading of this sentence is to interpret
“Her” as meaning “Ann’s” and then try to work out the contradiction.
Kehler (2015) similarly gives a number of examples where the form of the
sentence either forces a pragmatically implausible reading or conﬂicts with
pragmatics in a way that makes the sentence diﬃcult to understand:
(a) The demonstrators were denied a permit by the city council
because they feared violence.
(b) The city council denied the demonstrators a permit because
they felt strongly that the best way to draw attention to current
political issues is to advocate violence.
(c) Norm lent his car to his brother’s girlfriend. He doesn’t own
one.
(d) Margaret Thatcher admires Hillary Clinton, and George W.
Bush absolutely worships her.
In (a), readers generally interpret “they” as referring to the demonstra-
tors. In (b), readers “garden path”: they initially interpret “they” as mean-
ing “the city council” and then consciously backtrack and correct when they
reach the end of the sentence. In (c), readers end up confused rather than
deciding that “he” refers to the brother.
In (d), readers interpret “her”
as meaning Clinton rather than Thatcher, despite the fact that, when the
example was devised, Thatcher was much more plausible.
Since the two sentences in a Winograd schema can diﬀer only in a word or
two, and both sentences have to be very easily understood by a human reader,
and both have to sound natural in their use of pronouns, and neither can
11

be resolvable by selectional restrictions or considerations of frequency, 4 the
problem of generating Winograd schemas is substantially overconstrained.
The problem of generating a collection of Winograd schemas that span a
range of commonsense knowledge and linguistic constructions is still harder.
Often it happened that a promising ﬁrst sentence could not be completed
to a full schema. For instance, the text “Tom’s books are full of mistakes.
Some of them are quite [foolish/worthless].” seemed promising; but “foolish
mistake” is a much more common association than “foolish book”, and we
couldn’t ﬁnd a way to ﬁx this.
Another example: The following sentence is from a published article
(Joukovsky and Powell, 2011):
Late in 2009, the novelist Jim Powell found a cache of letter
written by the 19th century novelist George Meredith to his great-
great-grandmother Susan Mary Neil.
The pronoun “his” here most likely refers to Powell, not Meredith; very few
people in the nineteenth century were in a position to write letters to their
own great-great-grandmother.
Even setting these issues aside, the Powell example could be turned into
a Winograd schema by changing “great-great-grandmother” to “friend”; in
that version, “his” must refer to Meredith, since it would be unusual (though
not quite impossible) for a nineteenth-century novelist to write letters to a
friend of someone alive in 2009. However, the problem with this example
is that the ﬁrst version is too easily misread. In fact, Davis, reading the
article, did misinterpret it until he got further in the article and realized
that interpreting “his” as “Meredith’s” was not only wrong but close to
impossible.
There is a web page5 with a few more examples of attempts at Winograd
schemas that could not be brought to fruition.
Manually creating a large, diverse collection of high-quality Winograd
schemas is inherently diﬃcult. As a result, the collection was small; initially
a little more than a hundred, and later less than three hundred. This led
to some complaints; for instance, Trichelair et al. (2018) wrote that “the
4It has become very clear that the measure of frequency originally considered for the
WSC, namely, the number of results returned by Googling phrases, without any consid-
eration of context, is much too simple a notion.
5https://cs.nyu.edu/faculty/davise/papers/WinogradSchemas/WSfailed.html
12

main drawback of the Winograd Schema Challenge is its limited size and the
absence of training and validation sets for (hyper)parameter tuning. For its
size, it turns out that if one were to choose from a set of 10 random binary
classiﬁers, the best based on its performance on the WSC, there is more than
a 1-in-3 chance of scoring above 55% accuracy with this chosen classiﬁer.”
However, it was not our purpose to construct a training set, because there is
no point in training an AI program to solve Winograd schemas speciﬁcally.
The point of the Winograd Schema Challenge is to test programs that claim
to have solved the problem of pronoun reference resolution; and for that
purpose, what would be relevant would be a training set for pronoun reference
resolution generally. As for testing for pronoun resolution: a sample of 100
would be small for polling voters in an election, where you generally expect
percentages between 40% and 60% and you would like to get precision of
around 2% or 3%. But for distinguishing between success rates for humans
on the Winograd schemas, which are around 95% and those of 2011-level AIs,
which were little better than 50%, a sample of 100 is more than adequate. If
an AI scores 50% on a sample of 100, then one can reject the hypothesis that
its actual accuracy is 95% with a conﬁdence of around 1 −10−36. (Linzen
(2020) similarly argues for the value of expert-constructed, comparatively
small, “test-only” datasets.)
However, if we look beyond the problem of pronoun resolution and con-
sider the fact that this problem was intended to be a surrogate for com-
monsense reasoning, we note that it is still the case that a set of 100 or so
Winograd schemas is unlikely to cover or even touch the many domains and
subdomains and aspects of commonsense reasoning that would be expected
to be in the purview of an intelligent agent.
2.2. Subclasses of the original collection
Trichelair et al. (2018) have observed that 37 sentences in the Wsc273
dataset (13.6%) can be easily solved using statistics over simple patterns;
that is, they fail condition (5) above. An example of such a sentence is
In the storm, the tree fell down and crashed through the roof of my house.
Now, I have to get it [repaired/removed].
The roof is commonly associated with being repaired, while the tree is
not. They call these examples associative and name the rest non-associative.
Such patterns can involve multi-word phrases. For instance, the example
Joe has sold his house and bought a new one a few miles away. He will
be moving out of it on Thursday.
13

can be solved using the fact that moving out of his old house is a much
more common phrase than moving out of his new house. (As of May 13,
2021, a Google search claimed that there were 481,000 results for the ﬁrst
quoted phrase and 2 for the second.) Trichelair et al. (2018) used human
annotators to identify the associative sentences; their identiﬁcations were
largely replicated by Elazar et al. (2021), using an automated measure.
2.3. Pronoun Disambiguation Problem Dataset
The Pronoun Disambiguation Problem (PDP) dataset consists of 122
problems of pronoun disambiguation collected from classic and popular lit-
erature, newspapers, and magazines.
As discussed by Morgenstern et al.
(2016), PDPs were originally conceived as an auxiliary dataset to Wino-
grad schemas primarily because constructing Winograd schemas according
to Levesque’s original guidelines was a diﬃcult, manual process. Indeed, as
of this date, the plurality of such Winograd schemas has been constructed
by Davis. Moreover, in the decade since the Winograd Schema Challenge
was ﬁrst published, no one has successfully developed a methodology for
constructing large numbers of such schemas. There have been eﬀorts to con-
struct large sets of Winograd schemas, such as WinoGrande (Sakaguchi
et al., 2020), but as discussed in Appendix A.6, the schemas are often ﬂawed
and do not come close to meeting Levesque’s guidelines.
The chief distinction between PDPs and Winograd schemas is the lifting
of Levesque’s criterion of the “special word” or phrase that when substituted
creates a pair of similar sentences with diﬀerent pronoun referents. Wino-
grad schemas are rarely found “in nature,” that is, in novels, short stories,
newspaper articles, or other pieces of existing text. In contrast, PDPs are
ubiquitous in text. Not every instance of a pronoun in text, of course, is a
suitable PDP. For example, the sentence starting Chapter 4 in Maud Hart
Lovelace’s Carney’s House Party “During the long trip Carney began to
think about her reunion with Bonnie,” has the pronoun her, but there is
no challenge in resolving that pronoun to Carney. A suitable PDP should
ideally present a slight challenge to a human reader, a challenge that is easily
resolvable using commonsense knowledge, but a challenge nonetheless. An
example, from Alcott’s Little Women is:
Mrs. March gave the mother tea and gruel, while she dressed the
little baby as tenderly as if it had been her own
14

There are two possible referents for she: Mrs. March and the mother.
It is not diﬃcult to reason that she must refer to Mrs. March rather than
the mother, since it is clear from the remainder of the sentence, especially
the phrase “as if it had been her own” that the little baby does not in fact
belong to the referent of she. Humans are likely to do this reasoning using,
among other things, the commonsense knowledge that a baby is understood
to belong to its mother.
The aim in collecting and vetting PDPs has been to come up with a set
consisting of challenging problems that tests the ability to do something akin
to commonsense reasoning. They were intended to be used as a gateway
set before administration of the Winograd Schema Challenge and in fact
were used in this way in the IJCAI-2016 running of the Challenge (Davis
et al., 2017b).
Our aim in construction and vetting was to create a test
that was roughly equivalent in diﬃculty to a WSC test corpus, though of
course, the absence of pairs of sentences distinguished only by a single word
or phrase means that one cannot guarantee that the pronoun reference is
resolved through commonsense knowledge and reasoning ability, rather than
sentence structure.
PDPs are clearly easier to collect and to vet than Winograd schemas are
to construct. In addition, there are other reasons that appropriate sets of
PDPs are of interest. First, by construction, Winograd schemas are generally
quite simple –– in general, the more complex the sentence, the more diﬃcult
it is to create a sentence identical in all but a word or short phrase — and it
may be of interest to test a system’s ability to resolve pronoun referents in
contexts that are more complex.
Second, the reasoning and the knowledge involved in many PDPs has
tended to be deeper and involve more types of commonsense knowledge than
that needed for Winograd schemas. An example of a PDP of this sort is
taken from All-of-a-Kind Family:
Mama came over and sat down beside Sarah. Gently she stroked
her hair and let the child weep.
This example involves relatively profound concepts of parenting and em-
pathy and comforting and soothing that are not, at least at this point, present
in existing Winograd schema collections, perhaps partly because it is not
straightforward to ﬁnd a sentence that is nearly identical to the one above,
but for which the referent for she would be Sarah rather than Mama. Such
a range of diﬃculty and complexity of reasoning in Winograd schemas was a
15

desideratum in Levesque’s original paper. Finally, ﬁnding pronoun referents
in “naturally occurring” PDPs corresponds to a useful task in a way that
ﬁnding pronoun referents in Winograd schemas do not, precisely because the
latter are artiﬁcial.
Despite the fact that collecting and vetting PDPs is a much simpler task
than constructing Winograd schemas, it is not a trivial task. Morgenstern
et al. focused on children’s books partly because they tended to contain a
wide range of commonsense reasoning concepts of interest. However, some
candidate examples did not stand up to careful examination; others were
trivial or did not involve interesting or complex commonsense concepts.
62 examples of PDPs were published before the Winograd Schema Chal-
lenge was administered,6 and 60 PDPs were included in the Winograd Schema
Challenge that was administered at IJCAI 2016 (Davis et al., 2017b).7 A cor-
pus of 400 sentences was collected semi-automatically from online text, with
less vetting by Davis and Pan (2015).8 In addition, in developing this set,
there was little emphasis on collecting examples that, for pronoun resolution
by humans, would involve complex concepts of commonsense reasoning.
2.4. Other collections of Winograd Schemas
Over time, additional collections of Winograd Schemas or closely related
examples have been created, either for the purpose of creating additional
examples (e.g., for training), or to use them for purposes other than com-
monsense evaluation. In this section, we discuss diﬀerent approaches to con-
struction of more schemas and their uses, with a detailed discussion of all
existing datasets provided in Appendix A. These datasets can be grouped
into ﬁve types, outlined below. The ﬁrst, third, and fourth types are of par-
ticular interest in their potential to have a lasting eﬀect on various research
communities, independent of whether or not they have helped progress sys-
tems that can correctly solve Winograd Schemas.
The ﬁrst category includes attempts at creating larger collections of ex-
amples, often by using inexpert labour and automatic ﬁltering. Examples of
such construction procedures are, for example, asking students for help (Rah-
man and Ng, 2012), extracting examples from literature and manually vetting
6http://commonsensereasoning.org/disambiguation.html
7https://cs.nyu.edu/faculty/davise/papers/PDPChallenge.xml
8https://cs.nyu.edu/faculty/davise/annotate/corpus.xml
16

them (Morgenstern et al., 2016; Isaak and Michael, 2020), or completely rely-
ing on inexpert labor from crowdsourcing platforms (Sakaguchi et al., 2020;
Isaak and Michael, 2019). Depending on the amount of expert labour in-
volved, these datasets can be constructed at a much larger scale, usually at
the cost of example quality. Examples in the datasets of this type often fail to
meet one or more of the features listed in Section 1. Nevertheless, some work
in this area, including the crowdsourcing approach taken in WinoGrande is of
interest, because it is part of a growing movement to massively crowdsource
examples when large datasets are needed.
For example, the crowdsourc-
ing methods used in WinoGrande have also been used in developing other
datasets developed by Choi’s group at AI2, such as Social-Chem-101. Un-
derstanding the ways in which crowdsourcing fell short in WinoGrande has
helped us understand anomalous entries in Social-Chem-101.
Second, there are translations into other languages. These often come
with various linguistic challenges as Winograd Schemas translate into co-
references other than pronoun resolution (Bernard and Han, 2020; ˇZagar
et al., 2020). Moreover, in languages with a strong presence of grammatical
gender, modiﬁcations are necessary to avoid giving away the answer (Melo
et al., 2020; Amsili and Seminck, 2017).
However, not all Winograd Schema collections were created with an intent
to measure commonsense reasoning capabilities.
The third category includes datasets that aim to measure the impact of
gender bias on model predictions. Winograd Schemas that describe gender-
stereotypical (female homemakers, male CEOs) or anti-stereotypical (female
astronauts; male domestic workers) scenarios can be used to observe how
the gender of the pronoun aﬀects the prediction.
Datasets of this kind
have been constructed to detect gender bias in systems for coreference res-
olution (Rudinger et al., 2018; Zhao et al., 2018) and machine translation
(Stanovsky et al., 2019; Emelin and Sennrich, 2021). This work remains rel-
evant even in an age of large language models (LLMs), since much of data
used to train these LLMs is steeped in gender bias. While obviously an LLM
that has been trained on a speciﬁc small set of Winograd schemas would
answer those questions correctly, this ﬁne tuning could itself be useful in
reducing the gender bias of an LLM.
Fourth, there are datasets that additionally come with explanations. The
aim of these datasets is not only to evaluate model correctness, but also
to evaluate its ability to provide a correct explanation, usually in natural
language (Zhang et al., 2020; He et al., 2021; Yordanov et al., 2021). AI
17

researchers had suggested requiring systems to furnish explanations of why
pronoun referents were chosen since shortly after the WSC was published, as
discussed earlier. But datasets supporting explanations became particularly
relevant after the human performance on the Winograd Schema Challenge
was reached. Models that can make the correct prediction are often unable
to provide or even pick the correct explanation for their prediction.
Fifth, and most distant from the original, Winoground (Thrush et al.,
2022) is a challenge dataset for visio-linguistic compositional reasoning. Each
example consists of a pair of images and a pair of captions that diﬀer only
in word order; the task is to match the correct caption with the correct
image (e.g., a lightbulb surrounding plants as opposed to plants surrounding
a lightbulb).
(Storks et al., 2019) is an extensive survey and analysis of benchmarks
for natural language inference, through 2019.
3. Methods
At least three diﬀerent methods have been used to try to solve the Wino-
grad Schema Challenge. One class of approaches consists of feature-based
approaches, typically extracting information such as semantic relations (Rah-
man and Ng, 2012; Peng et al., 2015). Additional commonsense knowledge is
usually included in the form of explicitly written rules from knowledge bases,
web searches, or word co-occurrences (Emami et al., 2018). The collected
information is then used to make a decision, using rule-based systems, vari-
ous types of logics, or discrete optimization algorithms (Isaak and Michael,
2016). We observe that the extraction of relevant information from the sen-
tence is usually the bottleneck of these approaches.
Given the nature of
the challenge, even the slightest noise in the feature collection can make the
problem unsolvable.
The second group of approaches are neural approaches, excluding language-
model-based approaches, which we consider as a separate group. Neural-
network-based approaches usually read the sentence as a whole, removing
the bottleneck of information extraction (Opitz and Frank, 2018). To in-
corporate background information, these networks or their components are
usually pre-trained on unstructured data, usually unstructured text, or other
datasets for coreference resolution (Liu et al., 2017b). Common approaches
to the tasks in this group take advantage of semantic similarities between
18

word embeddings or use recurrent neural networks to encode the local con-
text (Zhang and Song, 2018; Wang et al., 2019c). We ﬁnd this group of
approaches to lack reasoning capabilities, as semantic similarity or local con-
text usually do not contain suﬃcient information to solve Winograd schemas.
The third group includes approaches that make use of large-scale pre-
trained language models, trained with deep neural networks, extensively pre-
trained on large corpora of text. Some of the approaches then additionally
ﬁne-tune the model on Winograd-Schema-Challenge-style data to maximize
their performance (Kocijan et al., 2019b; Ruan et al., 2019). Approaches in
this group achieve visibly better performance than approaches from the ﬁrst
two groups and led to the eventual near-human performance on all bench-
marks (Lourie et al., 2021a; Sakaguchi et al., 2021).
All approaches are compared and discussed in Appendix B. The ability
of AI systems to achieve a high accuracy on Winograd Schema benchmarks
went from random guessing to human performance in a very short time span,
a phenomenon described as an “emergent capability” (Wei et al., 2022).
3.1. The Winograd Schema Challenge at IJCAI-16
The ﬁrst and last running of the Winograd Schema Challenge as a compe-
tition took place at IJCAI-16 (Davis et al., 2017b). Six systems were entered
and tested on a collection of 60 PDPs. The most successful of these was that
of Liu et al. (2017b) discussed in Appendix B.3, which achieved a score of
58% on the test collection. The other contestants for the most part used
knowledge-based technology, and submitted systems that incorporated only
the speciﬁc knowledge that was required for the examples that had been pub-
lished. Not surprisingly, these systems did not do better than chance when
tested on new examples.
4. The Problem of Commonsense Reasoning Remains
The Winograd Schema Challenge as originally formulated has largely
been overcome. However, this accomplishment may in part reﬂect ﬂaws in
its formulation and execution. Indeed, Elazar et al. (2021) argue that the
success of existing models at solving WSC may be largely artifactual. They
write
We provide three explanations for the perceived progress on the
WS task: (1) lax evaluation criteria, (2) artifacts in the datasets
19

that remain despite eﬀorts to remove them, and (3) knowledge
and reasoning leakage from large training data.
In their experiments, they determined that, when the form of the task, the
training regime, the training set, and the evaluation measure were modiﬁed
to correct for these, the performance of existing language models dropped
signiﬁcantly.
The problem of commonsense reasoning still stands as one of the major
challenges facing AI (Davis and Marcus, 2015). Large language models often
give answers that are nonsensical or just plain wrong (Marcus and Davis,
2020), as do question-answering systems.
Speech transcription and auto-
correct systems of every kind regularly turn sensible speech and text into
gibberish, by turns confusing, humorous, or embarrassing. Vision systems
do not ensure that their interpretations are physically or even geometrically
coherent. Video interpretation systems often have little idea of what is hap-
pening in a video. Robotic systems are extremely limited in their under-
standing of the world that they are interacting with. While no computer
system or human’s performance is perfect, the frequency and magnitude of
system error is too great for such systems to be considered reliable without
a great deal of help. This is a serious concern for technologies, such as self-
driving cars, in which near-perfect performance is crucial in order for the
technology to be considered useful, reliable, and ethical.
This gap has recently come increasingly to the fore of the general discus-
sion of AI challenges. For example, over the last decade, DARPA has cre-
ated several large programs in diﬀerent aspects of commonsense reasoning,
including Causal Exploration, Computational Cultural Understanding, and
Machine Common Sense (Gunning, 2018). Commonsense has become a hot
buzzword, as can be seen by its multiple mentions in the popular press (e.g.,
New Uorker, Hutston, April 5, 2022). Numerous commonsense benchmarks
have been created; a collection maintained by Davis9, as of the time of writ-
ing, contains 157 such benchmarks, and new ones are published frequently.
However, it still remains the case that research into commonsense reason-
ing constitutes a small fraction of AI research—indeed, a rapidly shrinking
fraction, given the extraordinary explosion of AI research—and that, almost
without exception, successful AI applications avoid the issue.
9http://cs.nyu.edu/~davise/Benchmarks/
20

Meanwhile, the need for commonsense understanding in AI systems re-
mains as crucial as ever. The facts that, if a small object O does not ﬁt into
a container C, then O will not ﬁt into a container smaller than C, and an
object larger than O will not ﬁt into C10 are the same whether the object and
container are a trophy in a suitcase, a picture on a printed page, or a quart
of milk in a bottle. These facts are the same whether they are being used to
disambiguate the “trophy” sentence; to understand a narrative or video in
which a container is being packed; to plan how to load a container; or to write
a program for a robot to load containers. They can be used metaphorically
in reasoning about ﬁtting data into computer memory or ﬁtting content into
an article with word limits. They are part of a rich, general understanding
of space and motion and of the constraints on how various kinds of phys-
ical objects can be moved and manipulated (Davis et al., 2017a; Lake and
Murphy, 2020). The fact that large language models with one hundred bil-
lion parameters trained on half a trillion words can learn enough linguistic
patterns that they can disambiguate the pronouns in the “trophy” sentence
does not solve the larger problem reliably; it is not even guaranteed to be
progress toward reliably solving the larger problem.
The WSC and similar datasets do not in fact explore all aspects of the
use of commonsense knowledge in resolving pronoun references, although
originally it was hoped that the WSC would do precisely that.
For one
thing, these datasets are limited to referents explicitly named in the same
or previous sentence. In ordinary usage, the referent of a pronoun may be
implicit from the context but not previously named in any noun phrase; for
example, the referent of it in I hiked for an hour and it tired me out or the
referent of they in I went to the hospital but they sent me home.
Furthermore, as argued in (Elazar et al., 2021), the success at a particular
task, such as pronoun disambiguation of a model that has been ﬁne-tuned to
that task is not at all a reliable measure of the degree to which the model has
learned commmonsense knowledge broadly, or even to which it has learned
the commonsense knowledge needed for language understanding. For one
thing, pronoun disambiguation may only probe a limited subset of the com-
monsense knowledge needed in natural language understanding. For another,
the ﬁne-tuned model may only able to use its commonsense knowledge for
10Depending on the exact interpretation of “larger” and “ﬁt”, this can be either a reliable
inference or a plausible inference.
21

this single task but not for other understanding tasks. For instance, it may
“know” that small objects ﬁt better in large containers than vice versa for
the purpose of pronoun reference resolution, but not for any other kind of dis-
ambiguation or interpretation. We do note that (Elazar et al., 2021) focused
on systems trained with supervised learning; their analysis does not touch
on the more recent successes of systems trained with unsupervised learning
only.
The goal of the WSC was to present a challenge that (a) was clearly
“commonsensical” and easily carried out by humans; (b) was easy to evaluate;
(c) was an adequate test of commonsense reasoning abilities. It succeeded at
(a) and (b), but not at (c).
We are doubtful that any benchmark or challenge set that consists of
many bite-sized instances of a single simple tasks can adequately test for
commonsense reasoning. As seen in Section 2.4, it may always be possible to
construct a training set comparable to the dataset and to train a system that
can exploit task-speciﬁc features, while still avoiding confronting the com-
monsense knowledge that is involved when humans do the task—especially
if, as is general practice, the training set and the test set are random samples
of the same corpus. As seen in Section 3, combining such datasets with mod-
els that can ﬁt increasingly larger corpora, and/or augmenting them with
task-speciﬁc tricks, it seems to always be possible to obtain a model that
achieves high accuracy on examples of such a narrowly-deﬁned task.
Rather, it may be necessary to relax one of the criteria originally con-
sidered to be essential to the WSC: that of a clear cut evaluation measure.
It may be necessary, for example, to look at larger tasks with less tightly-
structured measures of success, such as reading an extended document and
giving free-form answers to free-form questions, or carrying out a new task
from verbal instructions.11. Of course, allowing free-form answers makes it
diﬃcult to accurately carry out automated evaluation. An alternative ap-
proach would be to interactively probe the AI system’s depth of understand-
11There are, currently, almost no commonsense benchmarks involving free-form Q/A.
Among the 48 tasks tagged as “common sense” in the Big-Bench collection, only one,
“tellmewhy” allows free-form answers to a limited class of questions https://github.
com/google/BIG-bench/blob/main/bigbench/benchmark_tasks/tellmewhy.
Among
the other 56 text-oriented benchmarks in the collection maintained by Davis, none are
Q/A system that allow free-form answers. https://cs.nyu.edu/~davise/Benchmarks/
Text.html
22

ing. In designing such a measure, it is always important to keep in mind
that, at least at present, AI tends to stumble over basic concrete realities
much more than over abstractions; it is more likely to fail conspicuously
in discussing a pot being knocked oﬀa counter than in discussing whether
automata can be truly conscious (Davis, 2021).
5. Larger Lessons
AI challenge problems other than the Winograd Schema Challenge have
been raised, studied, and solved without substantially changing the general
AI landscape. Examples of such challenge problems include checkers (mas-
tered by Chinook), chess (mastered by Deep Blue), and go (mastered by
AlphaGo). All introduced new techniques; some like AlphaGo used novel
combinations of self play and reinforcement learning techniques that have
greatly inﬂuenced the AI research community – and have made possible, for
example, the recent progress in automated playing of Diplomacy
(FAIR).
But although they solved diﬃcult problems, these were not problems that
were believed to be essential to the development of an artiﬁcially intelligent
agent. After all, most humans do not excel at checkers, chess, or go, but are
no less intelligent because of this lack.
The Winograd Schema Challenge was diﬀerent in that it targeted pronoun
reference disambiguation, a task that seems simple for humans to perform
and is widely performed by people in nearly all cultures since the develop-
ment of spoken language. The actual target was larger still: the ability to
do commonsense reasoning, an ability that nearly all humans have to some
extent. At the same time, it maintained the deﬁnitive evaluation criteria
that distinguish the best AI challenge problems: it is easy to tell when they
have been solved.
Because the expectations were higher – if this challenge were solved, we
believed, we would be able to develop artiﬁcial agents that were capable of
tasks that have been considered unique to human intelligence – its defeat is
sobering.
What does it mean when a carefully constructed challenge that seemed
to combine both an important target and rigid evaluation criteria is solved
without in fact reaching the larger target?
We believe that there are four general lessons to be learned:
23

1. We need to be cautious when introducing proxy problems. The
use of proxy problems has been common to AI since its inception: The
Turing Test, which is precisely concerned with developing a proxy test for
an artiﬁcially intelligent agent, was formulated just as the ﬁeld of artiﬁcial
intelligence (not yet labeled as such) was being founded. To some extent
nearly all tests are proxies. When one gives a test to make sure that an
individual knows how to solve a problem or do a task, the test necessarily
only validates a part of that problem or task. Proxies are not troublesome if
the gap between the test and the targeted problem is reasonably small.
But if there is a large gap, as there is between the Turing Test and the
task of acting as intelligent as a human, or between the Winograd Schema
Challenge and the task of performing commonsense reasoning, that proxy
problem is an invitation to disappointment. The statement of a proxy prob-
lem rarely includes a solid argument establishing the connection between the
two problems. In the case of the Winograd Schema Challenge, there were in
fact two proxy problem statements: ﬁrst, that if a system solved the Wino-
grad Schema Challenge, it would have a reasonable amount of commonsense
knowledge and be able to perform commonsense reasoning, and second, that
if a system solved the Winograd Schema Challenge, it could also act in an
intelligent manner, akin to what is described in Turing’s original formulation
of the Turing Test.
Although good arguments were made to bolster these proxy problem
statements, they were not solid enough, and both turned out to be false.
This does not mean that solving challenge problems or excelling at a
well-constructed test are meaningless achievements. But we need to be much
more careful about what precisely they do mean. Note that this applies also
to recent AI developments like DALL-E and ChatGPT. Their abilities, even
if consistent, are not proof of the existence of artiﬁcially intelligent agents.
2. We need to be careful not to rely on a perceived connection be-
tween tasks and methods. We should not fall into the pitfall of assuming
that if humans accomplish task X using method Y, then non-human entities,
including computer systems, must also accomplish task X using method Y.12
It was very tempting to believe, as we developed Winograd schemas or
12Note that this is a distinct problem from assuming that Problem Z is a proxy for
Problem X. Here were are concerned with assuming that a speciﬁc method for a particular
task is the only method that works.
24

selected Pronoun Disambiguation Problems, that being able to determine a
pronoun’s referent depended on having the requisite commonsense knowledge
and being able to use that knowledge. We have given multiple examples in
this paper of the sort of knowledge and reasoning that we envisioned, e.g.,
understanding that funding a person’s college education is a generous action,
and that the receiver is ordinarily quite grateful for the largesse.
But we ignored a fundamental truth: Diﬀerent human beings solve prob-
lems in diﬀerent ways, and certainly, computer systems may solve problems
in diﬀerent ways than humans do. What seems an obvious, even essential el-
ement of a solution to some set of humans may be neither. In the case of the
Winograd Schema Challenge, it was a mistake to assume that commonsense
knowledge and the ability to reason with that knowledge are prerequisites
for pronoun disambiguation. In contrast to our expectations and predictions,
machine learning methods combined with very large datasets and large lan-
guage models do very well at pronoun disambiguation. Nevertheless, there
is little evidence to support any conclusion they have the ability to do com-
monsense reasoning consistently well.
3.
We should be careful to create test sets that span, as much
as possible, instances of the targeted problem. As discussed earlier,
due to the intrinsic diﬃculty of constructing Winograd schemas, it was very
diﬃcult to start out with a target domain of commonsense knowledge and to
construct Winograd schemas that corresponded to that domain. The existing
set of Winograd schemas touch on physical, spatial, interpersonal, and social
reasoning. But except for one Winograd schema, they do not address nested
modalities, e.g, the ways in which individuals reason about their knowledge
of others’ beliefs or lack of knowledge. They do not touch on ethical issues,
such as whether sacriﬁcing one life to save many others is appropriate, or how
to allocate scarce resources and to balance needs against wants. They hardly
touch on the commonsense knowledge speciﬁc to crafts like needlework and
knitting (including, for example, the way rigid objects and ﬂexible objects
interact, or that speciﬁc arrangements of ﬂexible objects can become denser
and less ﬂexible) or to agricultural activities or to many other domains.
Narrow test sets are often useful, and it is often necessary to start with
a smaller than desired test set in order to make progress in research. More-
over, it is possible and perhaps even likely that systems that solve Winograd
schemas using large language models would also successfully solve schemas
in domains not present in the collection. However, the fact that these other
25

schemas are not present means that even if we were to “ﬁx” the WSC, solving
the challenge would at best show proﬁciency for the problems in the domains
covered by the test sets. It would not suﬃce to demonstrate proﬁciency in
general commonsense reasoning.
4. We should recognize that there is often a tension between tests
that are easy to evaluate and tests that are deﬁnitive. One of the
most appealing features of the WSC was the ease of evaluating whether or
not a system passed the test. But, as is often the case with easy-to-evaluate
multiple choice exams, even for humans, one can learn to do well on the
test without being particularly proﬁcient in the tested domain. We decided
not to include as a requirement for solving the WSC the ability to furnish
explanations, because there was no clear way to evaluate such explanations.
As a result, good performance on the Winograd Schema Challenge on its
own ended up being a weak and unconvincing proof of commonsense rea-
soning ability, if at all, proving the concerns that Hofstadter and Boutillier
expressed in 2011 and 2012 (see Section 2) to be correct. The decision to
not require any explanation or justiﬁcation with the prediction may have
hastened the defeat of the Winograd Schema Challenge, though if we had
decided in favor of requiring explanations, we would probably now be writing
about the diﬃculties of performing the evaluation task and the signiﬁcance
of the results.
We believe that these larger lessons, if kept in mind by AI practitioners
when they pose challenge problems in the future or try to determine the
signiﬁcance of new AI technology, will help clarify the state of current AI
research and pave the way for meaningful AI research in the future.
Appendix A. Overview of Other Collections of Winograd Schemas
Appendix A.1. Winograd Schema Challenge in other languages
While the inspiration and original design of the challenge was in English,
translations into other languages exist. Amsili and Seminck (2017) trans-
lated the collection of 144 Winograd schemas into French, and 285 original
Winograd schemas were translated into Portuguese by Melo et al. (2020).
Authors of French and Portuguese translation both report having to make
some changes to the content to avoid unintended cues, such as grammatical
gender. In the case of Portuguese, 8 sentences had to be dropped, as no
appropriate translation could be found.
26

Translations to Japanese13 and Chinese14 are available on the oﬃcial web
page of the challenge. A second translation into Chinese, “Mandarinograd”,15
is reported in (Bernard and Han, 2020) together with an account of the
diﬃculties involved in the translation process.
The Chinese Winograd Schema Collection (CLUEWSC2020) is an ana-
phora/coreference resolution task where the model is asked to decide whether
a pronoun and a noun (phrase) in a sentence co-refer (binary classiﬁcation).
The collection contains 1838 questions hand-selected from thirty-six contem-
porary literary works in Chinese. The anaphora relations have been hand-
annotated by linguists. The dataset is part of CLUE (Chinese Language
Understanding Evaluation), a collection of Chinese language benchmarks
analogous to GLUE (Xu et al., 2020)
The Indic General Language Understanding Evaluation (IndicGLUE)
(Kakwani et al., 2020) includes translations of GLUE’s WNLI into Hindi,
Marathi, and Gujarathi. Slovene translation of SuperGLUE benchmark in-
cludes the translation of Wnli into Slovene (ˇZagar et al., 2020).
Vered Shwartz has translated the WSC collection into Hebrew.16 WSC
has been translated into Russian (Shavrina et al., 2020).
WSC273 and
some other anaphora resolution datasets have been translated into Hungarian
(Vad´asz and Ligeti-Nagy, 2022).
Appendix A.2. Deﬁnite Pronoun Resolution Dataset
The Deﬁnite Pronoun Resolution (Dpr) dataset is an easier variation of
the Winograd Schema Challenge (Rahman and Ng, 2012). The constraints
on the Winograd schemas have been relaxed, and several examples in the
dataset are not Google-proof. The dataset consists of 1322 training examples
and 564 test examples, constructed manually. 6 examples in the training set
reappear in Wsc273 in a very similar form. These should be removed when
training on Dpr and evaluating on Wsc273. This dataset is also referred
to as WscR, as named by Opitz and Frank (2018).
13http://arakilab.media.eng.hokudai.ac.jp/~kabura/collection_katakana.
html
14https://cs.nyu.edu/faculty/davise/papers/WinogradSchemas/WSChinese.
html
15https://gitlab.com/vanTot/mandarinograd/
16https://vered1986.github.io/resources/winograd_he.html
and https://vered1986.github.io/resources/winograd_he.jsonl
27

An expanded version of this dataset, called WinoCoref, has been re-
leased by Peng et al. (2015), who further annotate all previously ignored
mentions (in their work, a mention can be either a pronoun or an entity) in
the sentences that were not annotated in the original work. In this way, they
add 746 mentions to the dataset, 709 of which are pronouns.
Appendix A.3. Winograd Natural Language Inference Dataset
The Winograd Natural Language Inference (Wnli) dataset is part of the
GLUE benchmark (Wang et al., 2019b) and is a textual entailment variation
of the Winograd Schema Challenge. An example from Wnli is given below
with the goal to determine whether the hypothesis follows from the premise.
Premise: The city councilmen refused the demonstrators a permit because
they feared violence.
Hypothesis:
The demonstrators feared violence.
Answer:
true / false
The dataset consists of 634 training examples, 70 validation examples, and
145 test examples. Training and validation sets contain a major overlap with
the Wsc273 dataset, while test samples come from a previously unreleased
collection of Winograd schemas. Not all examples in this dataset contain
the special word and therefore do not come in pairs. Kocijan et al. (2019b)
note that examples are much easier to approach if the Winograd schemas are
transformed from the textual entailment back into the pronoun resolution
problem, and approached as such.
The same collection of examples is used for the SuperGLUE benchmark
(Wang et al., 2019a) as a pronoun resolution problem to begin with. For
the purpose of this survey paper, Wnli and SuperGlue Wsc are considered
the same dataset. They consist of the same examples and all approaches
to Wnli described in this paper transform the examples as noted in the
previous paragraph.
Appendix A.4. WinoGender Dataset
Unlike the previous datasets, WinoGender was created as a diagnostic
dataset and is aimed to measure gender bias of the systems for pronoun
resolution (Rudinger et al., 2018).
WinoGender consists of 120 hand-
written sentence templates, together with candidates and pronouns that can
be inserted into the templates to create valid sentences.
In each sentence, one of the candidates is an occupation, usually one with
a high imbalance in gender ratio (e.g., surgeon). The other candidate is a
28

participant (e.g., patient) or a neutral someone. For each sentence, either
of the pronouns he, she, or they can be included to create a valid sentence,
as the candidates are gender-neutral. All together, this gives 720 Winograd
schemas. An example from the dataset is
The surgeon operated on the child with great care; [his/her] [tumor/aﬀec-
tion] had grown over time.
Note that the gender of the pronoun does not aﬀect the expected answer;
however, a biased system that associates the pronoun his with the surgeon
is likely to answer one of them incorrectly. The aim of this dataset is not to
measure model performance, as its data distribution is highly skewed, but to
help analyse the models for gender bias.
A Swedish-language version of WinoGender has also been developed
(Hansson et al., 2021).
Appendix A.5. WinoBias Dataset
WinoBias was created by Zhao et al. (2018), which tries to identify
gender bias in pronoun resolution models. WinoBias and WinoGender
were created concurrently but independently, despite the same objective.
They introduce a dataset with 3, 160 sentences, split equally into development
and test. Each sentence contains two candidates that are selected from a list
of jobs with highly imbalanced gender ratio.
Two diﬀerent templates are used to create Winograd schemas. Type 1
sentences follow a structure that does not give away any syntactic cues. The
authors thus estimate these sentences to be more challenging. An example
of such a sentence is
The farmer knows the editor because [he/she] [is really famous/likes the
book].
Type 2 sentences can be answered based on the structure of the sentence.
The authors thus expect the models to perform better. An example of such
a sentence is
The accountant met the janitor and wished [her/him] well.
Just like in example of type 1, the referent is not aﬀected by the grammat-
ical gender of the pronoun. Its “twin pair” has the candidates swapped. As
the structure of the sentence gives the answer away, there is no special word.
Moreover, the authors evenly split the whole dataset into pro-stereotypical
and anti-stereotypical, depending on whether the gender of the pronoun
matches the most common gender of the referent occupation or not. They
observe that publicly available models for co-reference resolution exhibit a
29

major diﬀerence (up to 21.1% F1) in performance on pro- and anti- subsets
of the dataset.
Appendix A.6. WinoGrande Dataset
In contrast to the sets of Winograd schemas discussed above, created
either entirely by hand or using templates and a ﬁxed set of rules for instan-
tiating the templates, and consisting of anywhere from a few hundred to a few
thousand examples, Sakaguchi et al. (2020) presented a substantially larger
(∼44K) set of coreference resolution problem sentences, along with methods
to ﬁlter these sentences to remove bias. As discussed in (Morgenstern, 2021),
Sakaguchi et al. were primarily motivated by the fact that systems already
existed that achieved near-human performance on the Winograd Schema
challenge, yet none had achieved the ability to do commonsense reasoning,
a central aim of posing the WSC. They therefore sought to re-engineer the
WSC as a more meaningful benchmark of a system’s CSR ability, by introduc-
ing new methods of dataset development and adversarial ﬁltering, expressly
designed to prevent AI systems from making claims of smashing through
benchmarks without making real progress.
The WinoGrande corpus was collected using the Amazon Mechanical
Turk (MTurk) crowd-sourcing marketplace. To prevent crowd workers from
creating lexically and stylistically repetitive examples, they were primed by
a randomly chosen topic from a WikiHow article as a suggestive context.
Additionally, they were instructed to adhere to constraints close to the origi-
nal WSC constraints, e.g., avoiding writing examples where word association
would lead to inferring the correct pronoun referent. Workers were told to
focus on the domains of social common sense and physical common sense.
An additional set of Mechanical Turkers checked all sentences generated to
increase the likelihood that humans could easily infer pronoun referents but
that making such inferences required at least some commonsense knowledge.
The authors additionally introduced the AfLite adversarial ﬁltering al-
gorithm.The idea was to retain only examples that minimize representation
bias. Removed pairs include those with data-set speciﬁc polarity basis (e.g.,
advanced rock climbing is more strongly associated with being strong than
being weak). They used a ﬁne-tuned RoBERTa language model (Liu et al.,
2019) to gain contextualized embeddings for each instance. Using these em-
beddings, they iteratively trained an ensemble of linear classiﬁers, trained
on random subsets of the data and discard top-k instances that were cor-
rectly resolved by more than 75% of the classiﬁers. By iteratively apply-
30

ing this algorithm, the authors identiﬁed a subset (12, 282 instances), called
WinoGrandedebiased. Finally, they split this dataset into training (9, 248),
development (1, 267), and test (1, 767) sets. In many cases, the AFLITe ﬁl-
tering removes only one sentence of a pair. Slightly more than 1/2 of the
questions in WinoGrandedebiased are not twins.17 They also released the un-
ﬁltered training set WinoGrandeall with 40, 938 examples (Sakaguchi et al.,
2020); these are all twins.
Despite the promise of this approach, we note ﬁrst, that many of the
sentences in the ﬁltered WinoGrande corpus do not ﬁt the criteria laid
out in the WSC, and therefore are not actually Winograd schemas. Many
sentences are easily solvable using word correlation; that is, they are not
Google-proof. For example (all examples below are from the debiased, ﬁltered
set released in September 2020), consider: The doctor diagnosed Justin with
bipolar and Robert with anxiety. Justin/Robert had terrible nerves recently.
A Google search shows that anxiety and nerves are more strongly associated
than bipolar and nerves. Some sentences appear to be poorly written or to
contain the answer directly in the sentence, e.g. The waiter could not cover
the round tables with the square tablecloths because the tables/tablecloths were
square. Others are genuinely hard to understand, e.g., George opted for both
of them to use a knife instead of a gun in the duel because the knife/gun could
partially injure them.
We note, second, that the goal of postponing human-level performance
on this dataset until systems achieve commonsense reasoning ability was
achieved only brieﬂy. The WinoGrande leaderboard shows that the UNI-
CORN system (Lourie et al., 2021b) achieves 91.2% accuracy, despite little
progress in commonsense reasoning.
Appendix A.7. WinoFlexi Dataset
Similarly to WinoGrande, Isaak and Michael (2019) aimed to construct
a dataset through crowdsourcing. They built their own crowdsourcing inter-
face for generating and evaluating schemas, and they collected 165 candidate
Winograd schemas. In our manual review of this, we found that there were
84 distinct valid schemas (168 examples). Unlike workers on WinoGrande,
workers on WinoFlexi were not presented with any particular topic and
17Sakaguchi et al. (2021) state that 1/3 are not twins, but our own count found that
the true ﬁgure is 56%.
31

were free to pick it on their own; and they were not instructed to avoid
examples that could be solved using word associations.
Appendix A.8. Winventor Dataset
The Winventor program (Isaak and Michael, 2020) uses automated meth-
ods to generate candidates for pronoun disambiguation problems, which
could then be polished or adapted by human post-editors. Using hand-coded
techniques, the program collected Wikipedia sentences with a pronoun with
two potential referents and formulated a question based on the resolution of
that pronoun. (An alternative, less successful, program tried to use a deep
learning architecture for the same task.)
For example, starting with the Wikipedia sentence, “As Frederick was
rather distant to his family, Eleanor had a great inﬂuence on the raising
and education of Frederick’s children, and she therefore played an important
role in the House of Hapsburg’s rise to prominence,” Winventor proposed the
question “Who therefore played an important role in the House of Hapsburg’s
rise to prominence?” Since, as it stands, “she” can be disambiguated by gen-
der constraints, a human editor changed “Eleanor” to “John” and “she” to
“he”. The authors compared the performance of human experts in generat-
ing PDPs when aided by Winventor as compared to working by themselves;
they found that, using Winventor the editors were able to generate examples
1.5 times as fast as without it (10 PDPs in 20 minutes as opposed to 7), and
that their examples were much more varied in form.
Appendix A.9. Datasets of Explanations
WinoWhy (Zhang et al., 2020) and WinoLogic (He et al., 2021) are
collections of correct and incorrect natural language explanations of all Wino-
grad Schemas in the Wsc273 dataset. Moreover, Yordanov et al. (2021)
collect a small set of explanations for the WinoGrande dataset, called
e-WinoGrande. The goal of all three datasets is to determine whether
systems that can correctly answer Winograd Schemas are also capable to
identify the correct explanations for their choice. The answer to this ques-
tion at the time of the writing seems to be negative. The diﬀerence between
the datasets is in their construction. WinoWhy and e-WinoGrande were
constructed through crowdsourcing with no guarantee that the explanations
are exhaustive, that is, a correct explanation is not guaranteed to contain all
the necessary steps to get the answer. WinoLogic, on the other hand, con-
sists of explanations that were obtained by manually deriving the answers
32

to examples in ﬁrst-order logic ﬁrst and then rewriting the derivation into
natural language explanations.
Appendix A.10. Winograd Schemas for Machine Translation
Machine translation of schemas to languages with a strong presence of
grammatical gender can require their implicit resolution. For instance, Emelin
and Sennrich (2021) provide an example of the following translation from En-
glish to German:
The gardener used the shovel more than the rake because it was
poorly made.
Der G¨artner benutzte die Schaufel mehr als den Rechen, weil
[er/sie] schleht gemacht war.
Die Schaufel and der Rechen have feminine and masculine grammatical gen-
der, respectively, and to correctly translate the pronoun it into sie or er, the
system must resolve the pronoun ﬁrst. Alternatively, Stanovsky et al. (2019)
note that translating the sentence
The doctor asked the nurse to help her in the procedure.
requires implicit resolution of the pronoun to determine whether to use the
feminine or masculine form of the doctor (in German, der Arzt/die ¨Arztin).
Stanovsky et al. (2019) create a WinoMT dataset to detect gender bias
in machine translation systems by observing how sentences in WinoGender
and WinoBias are translated to Spanish, French, Italian, Russian, Ukrainian,
Hebrew, Arabic, and German. Kocmi et al. (2020) extend this to Polish
and Czech.
They ﬁnd that systems for machine translation regularly as-
sign grammatical gender based on gender stereotypes. Emelin and Sennrich
(2021), on the other hand, focus on the subset of WinoGrande that talks
about inanimate objects that can be referred to with the pronoun it. They
create a Wino-X, a diagnostic dataset for machine translation from English
to French, German, and Russian.
They, too, ﬁnd that existing machine
translation systems do not resolve Winograd Schemas well. Curiously, they
ﬁnd that systems are more likely to (incorrectly) translate an entity into a
masculine than feminine form, indicating that gender bias and possible im-
balance in the training data aﬀects even the treatment of inanimate objects
with feminine grammatical gender.
33

Appendix A.11. Winoground Dataset
Winoground (Thrush et al., 2022) is a challenge dataset for visio-linguistic
compositional reasoning. Each example consists of a pair of images and a
pair of captions that diﬀer only in word order; the task is to match the correct
caption with the correct image (Figure A.1).
Figure A.1: Example from Winoground (Thrush et al., 2022)
Appendix A.12. An earlier dataset for psycholinguistic experimentation
In psycholinguistic studies of pronoun disambiguation, Kehler et al. (2008)
report using experimental material that includes a set of 16 pairs of Winograd
schemas following a ﬁxed framework:
Samuel threatened Justin with a knife, and Erin [blindfolded/stopped]
him. Whom did Erin [blindfold/stop]?
Samuel threatened Justin with a knife, and he [blindfolded Erin/alerted
security]. Who [blindfolded Erin/alerted security]?
Appendix A.13. Evaluation with Human Subjects
Human subject evaluation has been carried out for a number of data sets
(see Table A.2). The study reported in (Kehler et al., 2008) were carried out
by undergraduates at UCSD, who were self-reported monolingual English
speakers. The studies reported in (Davis et al., 2016) and the unpublished
studies carried out by Davis were carried out in person by paid volunteers
from the NYU community (in the latter case, the volunteers were screened for
34

Dataset
% correct
Reference
Experimental dataset of
93.0%
(Kehler et al., 2008)
32 schemas
143 schemas from WSC273
92.1%
(Bender, 2015)
66 texts with 108 PDPs
90.1%
(Davis et al., 2016)
89 unpublished Winograd schemas
92%
(Davis et al., 2016)
Unpublished collection of
96%
Unpublished test,
86 texts with 101 PDPs
(Ernest Davis)
WNLI
96.1%
(Nangia and Bowman, 2019)
WinoGender
94.9%
(Rudinger et al., 2018)
WSC273
86.5%
(Rudinger et al., 2018)
WinoGrande
94%
(Sakaguchi et al., 2020)
Table A.2: Human subject evaluation of datasets
being native speakers of English). In all the other studies, the subjects were
crowd workers recruited on Amazon Mechanical Turk or similar platforms.
The details of the methodology used are given in the references. The anoma-
lously low result of 86.5% accuracy on WSC273 is mentioned in passing in a
footnote in (Rudinger et al., 2018); the method used is not described.
Appendix B. Overview of Methods to Solving the Winograd Schema
Challenge
Appendix B.1. History of pronoun disambiguation in AI and linguistics
The AI problem of building natural language understanding systems ca-
pable of determining the referent of pronouns in text,18 and the related lin-
guistics problem of characterizing the rules that govern pronoun reference
have been studied extensively since the 1970s.
Pronouns in English are generally, though not always, anaphoric—that
is, a pronoun generally refers to some entity mentioned by a noun phrase
earlier in the text—and most of the AI research on pronoun use has focused
on ﬁnding anaphoric references in the text, since those are more easily char-
acterized than non-anaphoric references. The problem is thus a subset of the
18As with many linguistic phenomena, the issue is much less crucial in generation than
in interpretation, because a generator generally can avoid diﬃcult cases by limiting its
pronoun use to clear-cut cases, with at worst some loss in the naturalness of the expression.
35

broader problem of anaphoric resolution. Indeed, in general, pronoun resolu-
tion is a particularly easy category of anaphoric resolution for computational
systems; the problem of determining whether two noun phrases in text refer
to the same entity is often much more diﬃcult (Claire Cardie, personal com-
munication). (Extensive surveys of anaphoric reference are given in (Poesio
et al., 2011), (Poesio et al., 2016), and (Kehler et al., 2008).)
Early AI work in pronoun resolution mostly focused on the role of com-
monsense knowledge in disambiguation (e.g., (Charniak, 1972; Wilks, 1975;
Schank and Abelson, 1977; Hobbs, 1979; Hobbs et al., 1993)) or on struc-
tural characteristics of the text, such as parallelism and focus (Grosz, 1977;
Sidner, 1979; Kameyama, 1986). Implementations were almost always proof-
of-concept rather than practical systems. Development was guided by the
researchers’ intuitions and interests, rather than by evaluation. Systematic
evaluation of systems was extremely rare (McDermott, 1976).
As we have discussed in Section 2.1, it is clear that both types of in-
formation are used in human interpretation of natural language. When dif-
ferent constraints conﬂict, the rules for resolving the conﬂict are complex:
sometimes pragmatic preferences overrule formal preferences, sometimes vice
versa, sometimes the conﬂict leads to an unintelligible sentence. This line of
work continues among linguists (Kehler et al., 2008), but has largely been
abandoned in AI, due to the diﬃculties of developing such systems at scale.
Statistical approaches: The early DARPA-funded conferences MUC-6 and
MUC-7 (Message Understanding Conferences) (Grishman and Sundheim,
1996; Chinchor, 1998) included an evaluation of coreference resolution sys-
tems. Both conferences involved the construction of large text corpora, drawn
from natural sources, and carefully hand-annotated following guidelines that
were carefully worked out (though not uncontroversial) and presented in
careful detail to the annotators. Systems used the machine learning tech-
nology available at the time and were both trained and evaluated on these
corpora. Systems were generally trained for a fairly narrowly deﬁned tasks;
progress relative to the evaluation metric tended to take place steadily, in
small increments. This general approach dominated work in the area for the
next decade.
Deep learning systems trained on big data: A second revolution in nat-
ural language processing began in the early 2010’s, and has dominated the
ﬁeld since around 2016. The technology used is some variant of deep learn-
ing; in the last two years, particularly transformer-based technology (Devlin
36

et al., 2019). Much of the most impactful technology is task-independent,
particularly enormous language modeling systems and word embeddings; per-
formance on individual tasks can then be enhanced with ﬁne-tuning. Data
sets of all kinds—enormous unannotated corpora, datasets annotated or cre-
ated by crowd-workers, synthetic datasets—have proliferated. Progress has
in some cases been astonishing.
In statistical approaches, and still more in approaches based on deep
learning, commonsense knowledge has been incorporated into the systems
only to the extent that the learning procedure implicitly abstracts it from
text corpora.
Though the deep-learning technology had led to incomparably more pow-
erful systems than the knowledge-based approach, the former does not sub-
sume the latter. Many of the issues that were addressed in knowledge-based
systems are not reliably solved in 2021 state-of-the-art technology. For in-
stance, the language modeling system GPT-3 failed (Marcus and Davis, 2020)
when tested on an example from (Charniak, 1972).
Appendix B.2. Feature-based Approaches to the Winograd Schema Challenge
This section covers the approaches that collect knowledge in form of ex-
plicit rules from knowledge bases, internet search queries, and use logic-based
systems or optimization techniques to deduce the answer. Results of meth-
ods that rely on search engines, such as Google, can be irreproducible, as
they strongly depend on the search results.
The majority of the early approaches to the Winograd Schema Challenge
were feature-based or logic-based. While powerful in theory, their main bot-
tleneck was usually the processing of the input data or relevant background
knowledge. This is best demonstrated by Sharma (2019) who designs a rea-
soning algorithm that solves 84.2% of examples in WSC285 if the input
processing and background knowledge acquisition are done manually. The
same algorithm solves fewer than 50% of examples when data processing is
done with K-Parser (Sharma et al., 2015).
At the same time, the methods in this group are the hardest to com-
pare one to another. The models are often evaluated on speciﬁc subsets of
Wsc273 or other datasets, making direct comparison hard. We thus chose
not to summarize the results in a table like we do for neural and language-
model-based approaches.
Approaches in this work usually work in three steps: First, the input
sentence is processed to extract keywords and semantics. In the second step,
37

relevant background knowledge is extracted from various sources, most com-
monly knowledge bases and internet search queries. Finally, all this infor-
mation is combined used the input to the reasoning algorithm, which gives
the ﬁnal answer. The third step is where approaches diﬀer the most one
from another. Approaches used were, for example, SVM-rankers (Rahman
and Ng, 2012), integer linear programming (Peng et al., 2015), answer set
programming (Sharma et al., 2015), message passing on a graph (F¨ahndrich
et al., 2018), and formal logic (Isaak and Michael, 2016).
While many of these models achieve decent results on the data they have
been evaluated on, their ability to generalize can be contested. Sharma et al.
(2015), for example, report achieving 69% on a selected subset of Wsc285,
but when re-evaluated on a diﬀerent subset of the data, the same model only
achieved chance-level performance (Zhang and Song, 2018).
We highlight (Emami et al., 2018) as the ﬁrst model to achieve a better-
than-chance accuracy (57.1%) performance on the entire Wsc273. Their
system is completely rule-based and focuses on high-quality knowledge hunt-
ing, rather than reasoning, showing the importance of the former. Unlike
neural approaches from later sections, this model is not negatively aﬀected
by switching candidates.
With the increase in the popularity of large language models, interest in
feature and reasoning-based methods decreased, however, Hong and Bennett
(2020) note that hybrid approaches can be useful when solving schemas of a
very speciﬁc type, using a language model when the symbolic approach does
not yield an answer.
Appendix B.3. Neural Approaches
This section contains approaches that rely on neural networks and deep
learning, but do not use pre-trained language models. Models in this section
are usually designed, built, and trained from scratch in contrast to models
that use language models and are usually built on top of an oﬀ-the-shelf pre-
trained neural network. We ﬁnd that several ideas introduced in this section
are later adjusted and scaled to language models; see Appendix B.4. Note
that each work comes with a collection of model-speciﬁc architecture designs
that are not covered in detail.
We summarize the resources and approaches of neural methods in Ta-
ble B.3 and give main observations in the following paragraph. Most of the
methods in this section attempt to incorporate semantic features into the
38

training resource
Wsc273
Pdp
Liu et al. (2017a)
cause-eﬀect pairs
70%†
–
Liu et al. (2017b)
cause-eﬀect pairs, Ontonotes
52.8%
58.3%
Zhang and Song (2018) Wikipedia, dependency parser
60.33%†
–
Opitz and Frank (2018)
DPR, InferSent
56%
–
Wang et al. (2019c)
Gutenberg, 1 Billion Word
62.4%
78.3%
Table B.3: Resources, both data and tools, used by diﬀerent neural approaches, ordered
by the time of publication.
† denotes results that were obtained on modiﬁed version of the Wsc273 dataset, usually
a hand-picked subset. Such results are not guaranteed to generalize to full dataset.
unsupervised training of the models. The listed pieces of work usually in-
troduce tricks that aim to force a model to pick up the relevant training
signals, either through speciﬁc architectures, or through appropriate formu-
lation of the training data. Success is often limited and many models are thus
only evaluated on subsets of the dataset that suit the model better, making
a direct comparison of the results non-trivial.
An evident trend through
time is the movement from methods based on (contextual) word embeddings
(e.g., (Zhang and Song, 2018)) into end-to-end systems with a more complex
set of objectives (Wang et al., 2019c).
Appendix B.4. Language Model Approaches
This section covers the approaches that use neural language models to
tackle the Winograd Schema Challenge. Most of them use one or more lan-
guage models that were trained on a large corpus of text. Several authors use
large pre-trained language models, such as BERT (Devlin et al., 2019), and
have to tailor their approach accordingly. Such works thus focus on better
ﬁne-tuning of such language models instead of inventing new architectures.
We summarize the resources and results of all language-model based ap-
proaches in Tables B.4 and B.5, respectively. A careful comparison of the
approaches in the listed works reveals multiple changes of trends over time.
We list and discuss them below.
• Used language models consistently rise in complexity. First approaches
use custom-made LSTMs, trained speciﬁcally for the task, which are
replaced with large-scale language models such as BERT, in turn re-
placed with even larger T5 and GPT-3. This trend is not exclusive
39

Language Model
ﬁne-tuning or external data
(Trinh and Le, 2018)
custom LSTM
–
(Radford et al., 2019)
GPT-2
–
(Klein and Nabi, 2019)
BERT
–
(Prakash et al., 2019)
custom LSTM
internet querying
(Kocijan et al., 2019b)
BERT
MaskedWiki, DPR
(Kocijan et al., 2019a)
BERT
WikiCREM, DPR, GAP
(Ruan et al., 2019)
BERT
DPR
(He et al., 2019)
BERT
DPR
(Ye et al., 2019)
BERT
ConceptNet, DPR
(Sakaguchi et al., 2020)
RoBERTa
WinoGrande
(Melo et al., 2020)
custom LSTM
–
(Brown et al., 2020)
GPT-3
–
(Yang et al., 2020)
RoBERTa
WinoGrande and generated data
(Lin et al., 2020)
T5 (3B)
WinoGrande
(Khashabi et al., 2020)
T5
WinoGrande and QA tasks
(Lourie et al., 2021a)
T5
WinoGrande and RAINBOW
Table B.4: Resources used by diﬀerent language-model based approaches, ordered by the
time of publication. With time, ever larger language models and more additional ﬁne-
tuning data was used.
40

Wsc273
Wnli
Pdp
WinoGrande
(Trinh and Le, 2018)
63.7%
–
70%
–
(Radford et al., 2019)
70.7%
–
–
–
(Klein and Nabi, 2019)
60.3%
–
–
–
(Prakash et al., 2019)
70.17%
–
–
–
(Kocijan et al., 2019b)
72.5%
74.7%
–
–
(Kocijan et al., 2019a)
71.8%
74.7%
86.7%
–
(Ruan et al., 2019)
71.1%
–
–
–
(He et al., 2019)
75.1%
89%
90.0%
–
(Ye et al., 2019)
75.5%
83.6%
–
–
(Sakaguchi et al., 2020)
90.1%
85.6%
87.5%
79.1%
(Brown et al., 2020)
88.3%
–
–
77.7%
(Yang et al., 2020)
–
–
–
80.0%
(Lin et al., 2020)
–
–
–
84.6%
(Khashabi et al., 2020)
–
–
–
89.4%
(Lourie et al., 2021a)
–
–
–
91.3%
Table B.5: Results of language-model based approaches on the most commonly used
datasets.
Less commonly used evaluation sets include Dpr and Wsc285.
The only
non-English result by Melo et al. (2020) who evaluate their model on a set of Portugese
Winograd Schemas is not included.
41

to the Winograd Schema Challenge, and it is a general ongoing trend
in NLP.
• Appropriate ﬁne-tuning grows in importance, as it turns out to be
the most eﬃcient way of improving performance. Approaches that use
language models without ﬁne-tuning (e.g., (Trinh and Le, 2018) and
(Klein and Nabi, 2019)) are outperformed by approaches that ﬁne-tune
the same models on WSC-like data (e.g., DPR). To increase the impact
of ﬁne-tuning, language models are often ﬁne-tuned on more than one
dataset.
Earlier approaches usually use synthetic datasets (Kocijan
et al., 2019b; Ye et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2020), while later approaches
resort to multi-task learning on related tasks (Khashabi et al., 2020;
Lourie et al., 2021a).
• Wnli only becomes commonly used after the reformulation trick de-
scribed in Appendix A.3 is introduced by Kocijan et al. (2019b). We
note that many models were evaluated on this dataset as part of the
Glue benchmark (Wang et al., 2019b), which we do not include in this
survey, because they do not introduce any ideas speciﬁc to the task.
Their novelty is in better pre-training, which is not the focus of this
paper.
• The introduction of WinoGrande dataset made most other smaller
datasets less interesting to researchers, even if these small datasets
are higher in quality. The majority of the papers published after the
release of WinoGrande (Sakaguchi et al., 2020) only evaluated their
work on that dataset.
We highlight that many of the approaches that use large-scale pre-trained
language models use various input and output formats, which can aﬀect the
performance of the model. For a detailed comparison of diﬀerent training
objectives and their impact on the performance of the pre-trained language
model, we refer the reader to the work by Yordanov et al. (2020) and Liu
et al. (2020).
