Assessment Modeling: Fundamental Pre-training Tasks for Interactive
Educational Systems
YOUNGDUCK CHOI, Riiid! AI Research, Republic of Korea
YOUNGNAM LEE, Riiid! AI Research, Republic of Korea
JUNGHYUN CHO, Riiid! AI Research, Republic of Korea
JINEON BAEK, Riiid! AI Research, Republic of Korea
DONGMIN SHIN, Riiid! AI Research, Republic of Korea
HANGYEOL YU, Riiid! AI Research, Republic of Korea
YUGEUN SHIM, Riiid! AI Research, Republic of Korea
SEEWOO LEE, Riiid! AI Research, Republic of Korea
JONGHUN SHIN, Riiid! AI Research, Republic of Korea
CHAN BAE, Riiid! AI Research, Republic of Korea
BYUNGSOO KIM, Riiid! AI Research, Republic of Korea
JAEWE HEO, Riiid! AI Research, Republic of Korea
Like many other domains in Artificial Intelligence (AI), there are specific tasks in the field of AI in Education (AIEd) for which labels
are scarce and expensive, such as predicting exam score or review correctness. A common way of circumventing label-scarce problems
is pre-training a model to learn representations of the contents of learning items. However, such methods fail to utilize the full range of
student interaction data available and do not model student learning behavior. To this end, we propose Assessment Modeling, a class of
fundamental pre-training tasks for general interactive educational systems. An assessment is a feature of student-system interactions
which can serve as a pedagogical evaluation. Examples include the correctness and timeliness of a student’s answer. Assessment
Modeling is the prediction of assessments conditioned on the surrounding context of interactions. Although it is natural to pre-train
on interactive features available in large amounts, limiting the prediction targets to assessments focuses the tasks’ relevance to the
label-scarce educational problems and reduces less-relevant noise. While the effectiveness of different combinations of assessments is
open for exploration, we suggest Assessment Modeling as a first-order guiding principle for selecting proper pre-training tasks for
label-scarce educational problems.
CCS Concepts: • Computing methodologies →Artificial intelligence; Neural networks; • Applied computing →Interactive
learning environments; • Social and professional topics →Student assessment.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Assessment Modeling, Deep Learning, Label Scarcity, Pre-training
ACM Reference Format:
Youngduck Choi, Youngnam Lee, Junghyun Cho, Jineon Baek, Dongmin Shin, Hangyeol Yu, Yugeun Shim, Seewoo Lee, Jonghun Shin,
Chan Bae, Byungsoo Kim, and Jaewe Heo. 2018. Assessment Modeling: Fundamental Pre-training Tasks for Interactive Educational
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to

© 2018 Association for Computing Machinery.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
1
arXiv:2002.05505v6  [cs.LG]  28 Jun 2021

Woodstock ’18, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
Youngduck, et al.
My
friend
restaurant
.
.
.
gave
had given
be given
E43
E21
E8
Student1 Interaction Sequence
Exercise Contents
E72
E43
E89
StudentN Interaction Sequence
. . . 
. . . 
(response_correctness, timeliness)
(O, X)
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
Student Interaction Sequence
I1
I2
IT
I1
I2
IT
(O, X)
(O, X)
(O, O)
(X, O)
(X, X)
Fig. 1. Comparison between content-based and interaction-based approaches. Content-based approaches learn representations of
contents in learning items (e.g. exercises). On the other hand, interaction-based approaches model student learning behaviors in
interactive educational systems.
Systems. In Woodstock ’18: ACM Symposium on Neural Gaze Detection, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
17 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/1122445.1122456
1
INTRODUCTION
Interactive Educational Systems (IESs) have been developed rapidly in recent years to address the issue of quality and
affordability in education. IESs automatically collect observations of student behaviors at scale, and thus can power
data-driven approaches for many Artificial Intelligence in Education (AIEd) tasks. However, there are important tasks
where a label-scarce problem prevents relevant models from attaining their full potential. For instance, information
about exam scores and grades are essential to understanding a student’s educational progress and is a key factor
affecting social outcomes. However, unlike interactive features automatically collected by IESs, obtaining the labels is
costly as they are often generated outside the IESs. Other examples of scarce labels include data on course dropout
and review correctness. While this data is automatically recorded by IESs, they tend to be few in number as the events
occur sporadically in practice.
Pre-train/fine-tune paradigm is a common way of circumventing the label-scarce problem that has been actively
explored in the machine learning community. In this paradigm, a model is first pre-trained in an unsupervised auxiliary
task for which data is abundant. Then, the model is slightly modified to match the main task and fine-tuned with
possibly scarce data. This approach has seen success in other subfields of AI including Natural Language Processing
(NLP), computer vision, and motion planning [7, 21, 22]. Following this line of inquiry, content-based pre-train/fine-tune
methods [11, 23, 26] have been studied in AIEd community. However, student interactions are not considered and the
work was limited to capturing the content of learning materials. Accordingly, they do not make use of the information
carried by the learning behavior of students using IESs.
In this paper, we propose Assessment Modeling, a class of fundamental pre-training tasks for general IESs. Here,
an assessment is any feature of student-system interactions which can act as a criterion for pedagogical evaluation.
Examples of assessments include the correctness and timeliness of a student response to a given exercise. While there
is a wide range of interactive features available, we narrow down the prediction targets to assessments to focus on
the information most relevant to label-scarce educational problems. Inspired by the recent success of bidirectional
2

Assessment Modeling: Fundamental Pre-training Tasks for Interactive Educational Systems
Woodstock ’18, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
representations in NLP domain [7], we develop an assessment model using a deep bidirectional Transformer [24]
encoder. In the pre-training phase, we randomly select a portion of entries in a sequence of interactions and mask
the corresponding assessments. Then, we train a deep bidirectional Transformer encoder-based assessment model to
predict the masked assessments conditioned on the surrounding interactions. After pre-training, we replace the last
layer of the model with a layer corresponding to each label-scarce educational task, and all parameters of the model are
then fine-tuned to the task. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work investigating appropriate pre-training
methods for predicting educational features from student-system interactions.
We empirically evaluate the use of Assessment Modeling as pre-training tasks. Our experiments are conducted on
EdNet [4], a large-scale dataset collected by an active mobile education application, Santa, which has more than 131M
response data points from around 780K students gathered since 2016. The results show that Assessment Modeling
provides a substantial performance improvement in label-scarce AIEd tasks. In particular, we obtain improvements
of 13.34% mean absolute error and 4.26% area under the receiving operating characteristic curve from the previous
state-of-the-art model for exam score and review correctness prediction, respectively.
2
RELATED WORKS
Pre-training is the act of training a model to perform an unsupervised auxiliary task before using the trained model to
perform the supervised main task [9]. Pre-training has been shown to enhance the performance of models in various
fields including NLP [2, 5, 7, 15, 17, 25], Computer Vision [3, 22] and Speech Recognition [21]. Pre-training techniques
have been also applied to educational tasks with substantial performance improvements. For example, [13] predicts
whether a student will graduate or not based on students’ general academic information such as SAT/ACT scores or
courses taken during college. They predict the graduation of 465 engineering students by first pre-training on the data
of 6834 students in other departments using the TrAdaBoost algorithm [6]. [8] suggests two transfer learning methods,
Passive-AE transfer and Active-AE transfer, to predict student dropout in Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs).
Their experimental results show that both methods improve the prediction accuracy, with Passive-AE transfer more
effective for transfer learning across the same subject and Active-AE transfer more effective for transfer learning across
different subjects.
Most of the pre-training methods used in interactive educational system are NLP tasks with training data produced
from learning materials. For example, the short answer grading model suggested in [23] uses a pre-trained BERT model
to ameliorate the limited amount of student-answer pair data. They took a pre-trained, uncased BERT-base model
and fine-tuned it on the ScientsBank dataset and two psychology domain datasets. The resulting model outperformed
existing grading models. Test-aware Attention-based Convolutional Neural Network (TACNN) [11] is a model that
utilizes the semantic representations of text materials (document, question and options) to predict exam question
difficulty (i.e. the percentage of examinees with wrong answer for a particular question). TACNN uses pre-trained
word2vec embeddings [18] to represent word tokens. By applying convolutional neural networks to the sequence of
text tokens and an attention mechanism to the series of sentences, the model quantifies the difficulty of the question.
QuesNet [26] is a question embedding model pre-trained with the context information of question data. Since existing
pre-training methods in NLP are unsuited for heterogeneous data such as images and metadata in questions, the authors
suggest the Holed Language Model (HLM), a pre-training task, in parallel to BERT’s masking language model. HLM
differs from BERT’s task, however, because it predicts each input based on the values of other inputs aggregated in the
Bi-LSTM layer of QuesNet, while BERT masks existing sequences at random. Also, QuesNet introduces another task
called Domain-Oriented Objective (DOO), which is the prediction of the correctness of the answer supplied with the
3

Woodstock ’18, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
Youngduck, et al.
question, to capture high-level logical information. QuesNet adds a loss for each of HLM and DOO to serve as its final
training loss. Compared to other baseline models, QuesNet shows the best performance in three downstream tasks:
knowledge mapping, difficulty estimation, and score prediction.
3
ASSESSMENT MODELING
3.1
Formal Definition of Assessment Modeling
Recall that Knowledge Tracing is the task of modeling a student’s knowledge state based on the history of their
learning activities. Although Knowledge Tracing is widely considered a fundamental task in AIEd and has been studied
extensively, there is no precise definition in the literature. In this subsection, we first define Knowledge Tracing in a
form that is quantifiable and objective for a particular IES design. Subsequently, we introduce a definition of Assessment
Modeling that addresses the educational values of the label being predicted.
A learning session in IES consists of a series of interactions [𝐼1, . . . , 𝐼𝑇] between a student and the system, where
each interaction 𝐼𝑡= {𝑓1
𝑡, . . . , 𝑓𝑛
𝑡} is represented as a set of features 𝑓𝑘
𝑡automatically collected by the system. The
features represent diverse aspects of learning activities provided by the system, including the exercises or lectures being
used, and the corresponding student actions. Using the same notation, we define Knowledge Tracing and Assessment
Modeling as follows:
Definition 1. Knowledge Tracing is the task of predicting a feature 𝑓𝑘
𝑡of the student in the 𝑡’th interaction 𝐼𝑡given
the sequence of interactions [𝐼1, . . . , 𝐼𝑇]. That is, the prediction of
𝑝(𝑓𝑘
𝑡|{𝐼1, . . . , 𝐼𝑇} \ Γ(𝑓𝑘
𝑡))
(1)
for some Γ, where Γ(𝑓) is the set of features that should be masked when the feature 𝑓is guessed. This is to mask input
features not available at prediction time, so that the model does not cheat while predicting 𝑓.
This definition is compatible with prior uses of the term in works on Knowledge Tracing models [12, 19, 20, 27].
Although a common set-up of Knowledge Tracing models is to predict a feature conditioned on only past interactions,
we define Knowledge Tracing as a prediction task that can also be conditioned on future interactions to encompass the
recent successes of bi-directional architectures in Knowledge Tracing [16].
Example 1 (Knowledge Tracing). A typical instance of a Knowledge Tracing task might be response correctness
prediction, where the interaction 𝐼𝑖= {𝑒𝑖,𝑟𝑖} consists of an exercise 𝑒𝑖given to a student, and the correctness 𝑟𝑖of
the student’s corresponding response [12, 16, 19, 20, 27]. In this setup, only the response correctness 𝑟𝑇of the last
interaction 𝐼𝑇is predicted and the features related to 𝑟𝑇are masked. Following our definition of Knowledge Tracing,
the task can be extended further to predict diverse interactive features such as:
• offer_selection: Whether a student accepts studying the offered learning items.
• start_time: The time a student starts to solve an exercise.
• inactive_time: The duration for which a student is inactive in a learning session.
• platform: Whether a student responds to each exercise on a web browser or a mobile app.
• payment: Whether a student purchases paid services.
• event : Whether a student participates in application events.
• longest_answer: Whether a student selected the answer choice with the longest description.
• correctness: Whether a student responds correctly to a given exercise.
4

Assessment Modeling: Fundamental Pre-training Tasks for Interactive Educational Systems
Woodstock ’18, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
AIEd
exam_score
certiﬁcation
Knowledge Tracing
payment
platform
inactive_time
start_time
offer_selection
longest_answer
Assessment Modeling
event
correctness
review_correctness
lecture_complete
timeliness
elapsed_time
course_dropout
grade
Fig. 2. The features predicted in general AIEd tasks, Knowledge Tracing and Assessment Modeling. Assessment Modeling predicts the
distribution of assessments, the subset of interactive features which can act as pedagogical evaluation criteria. Note that predicting an
exam score (exam_score), a grade (grade) and whether a student will pass to get a certificate (certification) are tasks outside Knowledge
Tracing.
• timeliness: Whether a student responds to each exercise under the time limit recommended by domain experts.
• course_dropout : Whether a student drops out of the entire class.
• elapsed_time: The duration of time a student takes to solve a given exercise.
• lecture_complete: Whether a student completes studying a video lecture offered to them.
• review_correctness : Whether a student responds correctly to a previously solved exercise.
In the aforementioned example, features like correctness and timeliness directly evaluate the educational values of a
student interaction, while it is somewhat debatable whether platform and longest_answer are also capable of addressing
such qualities. Accordingly, we define assessments and Assessment Modeling as the following:
Definition 2. An assessment 𝑎𝑘
𝑡of the 𝑡’th interaction 𝐼𝑡is a feature of 𝐼𝑡which can act as a criterion for pedagogical
evaluation. The collection 𝐴𝑡= {𝑎1
𝑡, . . . ,𝑎𝑚
𝑡} of assessments is a subset of the available features {𝑓1
𝑡, . . . , 𝑓𝑛
𝑡} of 𝐼𝑡.
Assessment Modeling is the prediction of assessment 𝑎𝑘
𝑡for some 𝑘from the interactions [𝐼1, . . . , 𝐼𝑇]. That is, the
prediction of
𝑝(𝑎𝑘
𝑡|{𝐼1, . . . , 𝐼𝑇} \ Γ(𝑎𝑘
𝑡)).
(2)
Example 2 (Assessments). Among the interactive features listed in Example 1, we consider correctness, timeliness,
course_dropout, elapsed_time, lecture_complete and review_correctness to be assessments. For example, correctness is an
assessment as whether a student responded to each exercise correctly provides strong evidence regarding the student’s
mastery of concepts required to solve the exercise. Also, timeliness serves as an assessment since a student solving
given exercise within the recommended time limit is expected to be proficient in skills and knowledge necessary to
answer the exercise. Figure 2 depicts the relationship between assessments and general Knowledge Tracing features.
5

Woodstock ’18, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
Youngduck, et al.
Interactive
platform
inactive_time
start_time
offer_selection
longest_answer
response_correctness
lecture_complete
timeliness
elapsed_time
payment
review_correctness
event
course_dropout
Sporadic
Fig. 3. Not all interactive features are collected equally often. For example, payment, event, course_dropout and review_correctness
are interactive features obtained more sporadically than other features. Among the sporadic interactive features, we consider
course_dropout and review_correctness as assessments.
3.2
Assessment Modeling as Pre-training Tasks
In this subsection, we provide examples of important yet scarce educational features and argue that Assessment
Modeling enables effective prediction of such features.
Example 3 (Non-Interactive Educational Features). In many applications, IES is often integrated as part of a larger
learning process. Accordingly, the ultimate evaluation of the learning process is mostly done independently from the
IES. For example, academic abilities of students are measured by course grades or standardized exams, and the ability to
perform a complicated job or task is certified by professional certificates. Such labels are considered essential due to
the pedagogical and social needs for consistent evaluations of student ability. However, obtaining these labels is often
challenging due to their scarcity compared to that of features automatically collected from student-system interactions.
We give the following examples (Figure 2):
• exam_score: A student’s score on a standardized exam.
• grade: A student’s final grade in a course.
• certification: Professional certifications obtained by completion of educational programs or examinations.
Example 4 (Sporadic Assessments). All assessments are automatically collected by IESs, but some assessments are
few in number as the corresponding events occur rarely in practice. For example, it is natural for students to invest
more time in learning new concepts than reviewing previously studied materials. course_dropout and review_correctness
are examples of sporadic assessments (Figure 3).
To overcome the aforementioned lack of labels, we consider the pre-train/fine-tune paradigm that leverages data
available in large amounts to aid performance in tasks where labels are scarce. In this paradigm, a model is first trained
in an auxiliary task relevant to the tasks of interest with label-scarce data. Using the pre-trained parameters to initialize
the model, the model is slightly modified to suit the task of interest, and then fine-tuned on the main tasks. This
approach has been successful in AI fields like NLP, computer vision and speech recognition [7, 21, 22]. Following this
6

Assessment Modeling: Fundamental Pre-training Tasks for Interactive Educational Systems
Woodstock ’18, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
offer_selection
start_time
inactive_time
platform
payment
longest_answer
exam_score
grade
certiﬁcation
review_correctness
Interactive
Educational
event
course_dropout
lecture_complete
timeliness
elapsed_time
correctness
Fig. 4. Assessment Modeling is an effective pre-training method for label-scarce educational problems. First, most assessments are
available in large amounts as they are automatically collected from student-system interactions (Interactive). Also, assessments are
selected to be relevant to educational progress, narrowing down the scope of prediction targets and reducing noise irrelevant to the
problems (Educational).
template, existing methods in AIEd pre-train on the contents of learning materials, but such methods do not capture
student behavior and only utilize a small subset of features available from the data.
Instead, one may pre-train on different features automatically collected by IESs (Figure 4). However, training on
every available feature is computationally intractable and may introduce irrelevant noise. To this end, Assessment
Modeling narrows down the prediction targets to assessments, the interactive features that also hold information
on educational progress. Since multiple assessments are available, a wide variety of pre-train/fine-tune pairs can be
explored for effective Assessment Modeling (Figure 5). This raises the open-ended questions of which assessments to
pre-train on for label-scarce educational problems and how to pre-train on multiple assessments.
3.3
Assessment Modeling with Deep Bidirectional Transformer Encoder
While there are several possible options for the architecture of the assessment model, we adopt the deep bidirectional
Transformer encoder proposed in [7] for the following reasons. First, [19] showed that the self-attention mechanism in
Transformer [24] is effective for Knowledge Tracing. The Transformer-based Knowledge Tracing model proposed in
[19] achieved state-of-the-art performance on several datasets. Second, the deep bidirectional Transformer encoder
model and pre-train/fine-tune method proposed in [7] achieved state-of-the-art results on several NLP tasks. While
[7] conducted experimental studies in the NLP domain, the method is also applicable to other domains with slight
modifications. Figure 6 depicts our proposed pre-train/fine-tune approach. In the pre-training phase, we train a deep
bidirectional Transformer encoder-based assessment model to predict assessments conditioned on past and future
interactions. After the pre-training phase, we replace the last layer of the assessment model with a layer appropriate for
each label-scarce educational task and fine-tune parameters in the whole model to predict labels in the task. We provide
detailed descriptions of our proposed assessment model in the following subsections.
3.3.1
Input Representation. The first layer in the assessment model maps each interaction to an embedding vector.
First, we embed the following attributes:
7

Woodstock ’18, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
Youngduck, et al.
timeliness
Interactive
Educational
start_time
correctness
review_correctness
exam_score
Fig. 5. Possible pre-train/fine-tune scenarios. We may pre-train a model to predict start_time, correctness and timeliness, and then
train it to estimate exam_score (red). Likewise, a model pre-trained to predict start_time and correctness can be trained to predict
review_correctness (green). However, pre-training to predict non-educational interactive features (non-assessment) like start_time is
not effective in label-scarce educational problems (dotted line).
...
...
...
Interaction Sequence
Linear
Assessment Modeling
Interaction
Embedding 1
Interaction
Embedding 2
Interaction
Embedding T
Review Correctness Prediction
...
...
...
Pre-training
Interaction Sequence
Linear
...
response_correctness
timeliness
...
response_correctness
timeliness
response_correctness
timeliness
...
...
...
Interaction Sequence
Linear
Exam Score Prediction
Fine-tuning
Interaction
Embedding 1
Interaction
Embedding 2
Interaction
Embedding T
Assessment Modeling
Assessment Modeling
Interaction
Embedding T
Interaction
Embedding 1
Interaction
Embedding 2
Fig. 6. Proposed pre-train/fine-tune approach. In the pre-training phase, we train an assessment model to predict assessments
conditioned on past and future interactions. After the pre-training phase, we fine-tune parameters in the model to predict labels in
label-scarce educational tasks.
• exercise_id: We assign a latent vector unique to each exercise id.
• exercise_category: Each exercise has its own category tag that represents the type of the exercise. We assign a
latent vector to each tag.
• position: The relative position 𝑡of the interaction 𝐼𝑡in the input sequence. We use the sinusoidal positional
encoding that is used in [24].
As shown in Example 1, IES collects diverse interactive features that can potentially be used for Assessment Modeling.
However, not only using all possible interactive features for Assessment Modeling is computationally intractable, there
8

Assessment Modeling: Fundamental Pre-training Tasks for Interactive Educational Systems
Woodstock ’18, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
is no guarantee that the best results on label-scarce educational tasks will be achieved when all the features are used. For
experimental studies, we narrow down the scope of interactive features to the ones available from an exercise-response
pair, the simplest and widely-considered interaction in Knowledge Tracing. In particular, we embed the following
interactive features:
• correctness: The value is 1 if a student response is correct and 0 otherwise. We assign a latent vector corresponding
to each possible value 0 and 1.
• elapsed_time: The time taken for a student to respond is recorded in seconds. We cap any time exceeding 300
seconds to 300 seconds and normalize it by dividing by 300 to have a value between 0 and 1. The elapsed time
embedding vector is calculated by multiplying the normalized time by a single latent embedding vector.
• inactive_time: The time interval between adjacent interactions is recorded in seconds. We set maximum inactive
time as 86400 seconds (24 hours) and any time more than that is capped off to 86400 seconds. Also, the inactive
time is normalized to have a value between 0 and 1 by dividing the value by 86400. Similar to the elapsed time
embedding vector, we calculate the inactive time embedding vector by multiplying the time by a single latent
embedding vector.
Let 𝑒𝑡be the sum of the embedding vectors of exercise_id, exercise_category and position. Likewise, let 𝑐𝑡, 𝑒𝑡𝑡and
𝑖𝑡𝑡be the embedding vectors of correctness, elapsed_time and inactive_time, respectively. Then, the representation of
interaction 𝐼𝑡is 𝑒𝑡+ 𝑐𝑡+ 𝑒𝑡𝑡+ 𝑖𝑡𝑡.
3.3.2
Masking. Inspired by the masked language model proposed in [7], we use the following method to mask the
assessments in a student interaction sequence. First, we mask a fraction 𝑀of interactions chosen uniformly at random.
If the 𝑡-th interaction is chosen, we replace embedding vectors of interactive features that are being predicted as targets
with 𝑚𝑎𝑠𝑘, a trainable vector that represents masking. For instance, if the correctness and elapsed_time are prediction
targets for Assessment Modeling, 𝑐𝑡+ 𝑒𝑡𝑡is replaced with 𝑚𝑎𝑠𝑘and the embedding vector for interaction 𝐼𝑡becomes
𝑒𝑡+ 𝑖𝑡𝑡+ 𝑚𝑎𝑠𝑘.
3.3.3
Model Architecture. After the interactions are embedded and masked accordingly, they enter a series of Trans-
former encoder blocks, each consisting of a multi-headed self-attention layer followed by position-wise feed-forward
layer. Every layer has input dimension 𝑑model. The first encoder block takes the sequence of interactions 𝐼1, . . . , 𝐼𝑇
embedded in latent space and returns a series of vectors of the same length and dimension. For all 2 ≤𝑖≤𝑁, the 𝑖’th
block takes the output of the (𝑖−1)’th block as input and returns the series of vectors accordingly. We describe the
architecture of each block as the following.
The multi-headed self-attention layer takes a series of vectors, 𝑋1, . . . ,𝑋𝑇. Each vector is projected to latent space by
projection matrices 𝑊𝑄,𝑊𝐾∈R𝑑model×𝑑𝐾and 𝑊𝑉∈R𝑑model×𝑑𝑉:
𝑄= [𝑞1, . . . ,𝑞𝑇]𝑇= 𝑋𝑊𝑄
𝐾= [𝑘1, . . . ,𝑘𝑇]𝑇= 𝑋𝑊𝐾
𝑉= [𝑣1, . . . , 𝑣𝑇]𝑇= 𝑋𝑊𝑉
(3)
Here 𝑋= [𝑋1, . . . ,𝑋𝑇]𝑇, and each 𝑞𝑖, 𝑘𝑖and 𝑣𝑖are the query, key and value of 𝑋𝑖, respectively. The output of the
self-attention is then obtained as a weighted sum of values with coefficients determined by the dot products between
9

Woodstock ’18, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
Youngduck, et al.
queries and keys:
Attention(𝑋) = Softmax
 
𝑄𝐾𝑇
√︁
𝑑𝑘
!
𝑉
(4)
Models with self-attention layers often use multiple heads to jointly attend information from different representative
subspaces. Following this, we apply attention ℎtimes to the same query-key-value entries with different projection
matrices for output:
Multihead(𝑋) = concat(head1, . . . , head𝑇)𝑊𝑂
(5)
Here, each head𝑖is equal to the output of self-attention in Equation 4 with corresponding projection matrices𝑊𝑄
𝑖,𝑊𝐾
𝑖
and 𝑊𝑉
𝑖
in Equation 3. We use the linear map 𝑊𝑂to aggregate each attention result. After we compute the resulting
value in Equation 5, we apply point-wise feed-forward layer to add non-linearity to the model. Also, we apply the skip
connection [10] and layer normalization [1] to the output of the feed-forward layer.
Assume that the last encoder block returns the sequence 𝐻= [𝐻1, . . . , 𝐻𝑇]𝑇of vectors. For pre-training, the
predictions to features in 𝑖’th timestep are made by applying a linear layer with the proper activation function to 𝐻𝑖.
We consider four interactive features as prediction targets: correctness, timeliness, elapsed_time and inactive_time. If the
prediction target is correctness or timeliness, the sigmoid activation function is applied to the linear layer output. If
elapsed_time or inactive_time is the prediction target, the final output of the model is the output of the linear layer. The
overall loss is defined to be
L =
𝑇
∑︁
𝑡=1
𝑚𝑡L𝑡
(6)
where L𝑡is the sum of binary-cross-entropy (resp. mean-squared-error) losses if the prediction target is correctness
or timeliness (resp. elapsed_time or inactive_time). The value 𝑚𝑡is a flag that represents whether the 𝑡-th exercise is
masked (𝑚𝑡= 1) or not (𝑚𝑡= 0). The input embedding layer and encoder blocks are shared over pre-training and
fine-tuning. For fine-tuning, we replace the linear layers applied to each 𝐻𝑖in pre-training with a single linear layer
that combines all the entries of 𝐻to fit the output to label-scarce educational downstream tasks.
4
EXPERIMENTS
4.1
Label-Scarce Educational Tasks
We apply Assessment Modeling to exam score (a non-interactive educational feature) and review correctness (a sporadic
assessment) predictions.
4.1.1
Exam Score Prediction. Exam score prediction is the estimation of student’s scores in standardized exams, such
as the TOEIC and the SAT, based on the student’s interaction history with IES. Exam score prediction is one of the
most important tasks of AIEd, as standardized assessment is crucial for both the students and IES. Because a substantial
amount of human effort is required to develop or take the tests, the number of data points available for exam score
prediction is considerably fewer than that of student interactions automatically collected by IES. By developing a
reliable exam score prediction model, a student’s universally accepted score can be estimated by IES with considerably
less effort. Exam score prediction differs from response correctness prediction because standardized tests are taken in a
controlled environment with specific methods independent of IES.
10

Assessment Modeling: Fundamental Pre-training Tasks for Interactive Educational Systems
Woodstock ’18, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
Fig. 7. Student Interface of Santa
4.1.2
Review Correctness Prediction. Assume that a student incorrectly responds to an exercise 𝑒rev and receives
corresponding feedback. The goal of review correctness prediction is to predict whether a student will be able to respond
to the exercise 𝑒rev correctly if they encounter the exercise again. The significance of this AIEd task is that it can
assess the educational effect of an exercise to a particular student in a specific situation. In particular, the correctness
probability estimated by this task represents the student’s expected marginal gain in knowledge as they go through
some learning process. For example, if the correctness probability is high, it is likely that the student will obtain relevant
knowledge in the future even if their initial response was incorrect.
4.2
Dataset
We use the public EdNet [4] dataset obtained from Santa, a mobile AI tutoring service for TOEIC Listening and
Reading Test preparation. The test consists of two timed sections named Listening Comprehension (LC) and Reading
Comprehension (RC) with a total of 100 exercises, and 4 and 3 parts, respectively. The final test score ranges from 10 to
990 in steps of 5. Once a student solves each exercise, Santa provides educational feedback to their responses including
explanations and commentaries on exercises. EdNet is the collection of student interactions of multiple-choice exercises,
which contains more than 131M response data points from around 780K students gathered over the last four years.
The main features of the student-exercise interaction data consists of six columns: student id, exercise id, exercise part,
student response, received time and time taken. The student (resp. exercise) ID identifies each unique student (resp.
exercise). The student response is a student’s answer choice for the given exercise. Exercise part is the part of the exam
that the exercise belongs to. Finally, the absolute time when the student received the exercise and the time taken by the
student to respond are recorded.
4.2.1
Dataset for Pre-training. For pre-training, we first reconstruct the interaction timeline of each student by gathering
the responses of a specific student in increasing chronological order. For each interaction 𝐼𝑡, correctness𝑡is recorded as
1 if the student’s answer is correct and 0 otherwise. timeliness𝑡is recorded as 1 if the student responded under the time
11

Woodstock ’18, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
Youngduck, et al.
limits recommended by TOEIC experts (Table 1) and 0 otherwise. elapsed_time𝑡is the time taken for the student to
respond recorded in seconds, and inactive_time𝑡is the time interval between the current and previous interactions
recorded in seconds. We exclude the interactions of students involved in any of the label-scarce educational downstream
tasks for pre-training to preemptively avoid data leakage. After processing, the data consists of 414,375 students with a
total of 93,121,528 interactions.
Table 1. Time Limits
Part
1 ∼4
5
6
7
Time limit (sec)
audio duration + 8
25
50
55
4.2.2
Dataset for Label-Scarce Educational Tasks. For exam score prediction, we aggregate the real TOEIC scores
reported by students of Santa. The reports are scarce in number because a student has to register, take the exam and
report the score at their own expense. To collect this data, Santa offered a small reward to students in exchange for
reporting their score. A total of 2,594 score reports were obtained over a period of 6 months, which is considerably
fewer than the number of exercise responses. For our experiment, we divide the data into five splits, and use 3/5, 1/5
and 1/5 of the data as training, validation and test set, respectively.
For review correctness prediction, we look over each student’s timeline and find exercises that have been solved
at least twice. That is, if an exercise 𝑒appears more than once in a student interaction sequence 𝐼1 = (𝑒1,𝑟1), 𝐼2 =
(𝑒2,𝑟2), . . . , 𝐼𝑇= (𝑒𝑇,𝑟𝑇), we find the first two interactions 𝐼𝑖and 𝐼𝑗(𝑖< 𝑗) with the same exercise 𝑒. The sequence of
interactions 𝐼𝑖+1, · · · , 𝐼𝑗−1 and 𝑒𝑗are taken as input, and correctness𝑗is taken as the label. The total of 4,540 labeled
sequences which are not appeared in the pre-training dataset are generated after pre-processing. Similar to the case in
exam score prediction, we divide the data into five splits, and use 3/5, 1/5 and 1/5 of the data as training, validation and
test set, respectively.
4.3
Setup
4.3.1
Assessment Model. Our assessment model consists of two encoder blocks (𝑁= 2) with a latent space dimension
of 256 (𝑑𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙= 256). The model takes 100 interactions as input. For pre-training, the model parameters are first
randomly initialized and trained with 0.6 making rate 𝑀. Then we replace the last layer of the pre-trained model with
a linear layer appropriate for each label-scarce educational downstream task, and fine-tune the whole parameters
of the model. In fine-tuning, to alleviate label-scarce problem, we apply the following data augmentation strategy.
Given the original interaction sequence with a label, we select each entry in the sequence with 50% probability to
generate a subsequence with the same label. The model is fine-tuned on these subsequences. In both pre-training and
fine-tuning, dropout rate and batch size are set to 0.2 and 128, respectively. We use the Adam optimizer [14] with
𝑙𝑟= 0.001, 𝛽1 = 0.9, 𝛽2 = 0.999,𝑒𝑝𝑠𝑖𝑙𝑜𝑛= 1𝑒−8, and Noam scheme [24] to schedule the learning rate with 4000
warmup-steps. We conduct 5-fold cross validation to select the model with the best result on the validation set, and
report the evaluation result of the model on the test set.
We compare the effectiveness of the assessment model with the following content-based pre-training methods. Since
the existing content-based pre-training methods learn embedding vectors of each exercise, we replace the embedding
of exercise_id in our model with respective exercise embedding for fine-tuning.
12

Assessment Modeling: Fundamental Pre-training Tasks for Interactive Educational Systems
Woodstock ’18, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
Fig. 8. Review System of Santa
• Word2Vec [18] is a standard word embedding model used in many tasks. [12] used word embedding vectors
obtained from Word2Vec model to generate exercise embedding vectors. In our experiment, we obtain 256
dimension word embedding vectors from the continuous bag-of-words Word2Vec model trained on text corpus
consists of exercise descriptions. The embedding vector assigned to each exercise is the average of embedding
vectors of all words appearing in the exercise description.
• BERT [7] is a Transformer encoder-based bidirectional representation learning model used in various domains.
The original BERT was pre-trained by masked language modeling and next sentence prediction objectives.
However, several subsequent works [15, 17] questioned the necessity of the next sentence prediction objective.
Accordingly, we train 2 layers and 256 dimension BERT model using only masked language modeling objective
on exercise descriptions. Similar to the case in Word2Vec, we obtain each exercise embedding vector by averaging
the embedding vectors of words in the exercise description.
• QuesNet [26] is a content-based pre-training method learning unified representation for each exercise comprises of
text, images and side information. Following the method suggested in the original paper, we train bi-directional
LSTM followed by multi-headed self-attention model with holed language modeling and domain oriented
objectives. The embedding vector of each exercise is computed as the sentence layer output of the model when
the exercise is taken as input.
4.3.2
Metrics. We use the following evaluation metrics to evaluate model performance on each label-scarce educational
downstream task. For exam score prediction, we compute the Mean Absolute Error (MAE), the average of differences
between the predicted exam scores and the true values. For review correctness prediction, we use Area Under the
receiving operating characteristic Curve (AUC).
13

Woodstock ’18, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
Youngduck, et al.
4.4
Experimental Results
4.4.1
Effect of Pre-training Tasks. We demonstrate the importance of choosing appropriate pre-training tasks by
comparing models pre-trained to predict one of correctness, correctness + elapsed_time, correctness + timeliness, and
correctness + inactive_time. Since correctness is the feature with the most pedagogical aspect, we include correctness in
the prediction targets of all the pre-training tasks. The results are shown in Table 2. For both exam score and review
correctness prediction, the results show that it is the best to pre-train the model to predict correctness and timeliness. This
is because the exam score and review correctness distribution are related to not only correctness but also timeliness of
the student’s answers. This shows the importance of choosing appropriate pre-training tasks relevant to the downstream
tasks.
Table 2. Comparison of Assessment Modeling with different pre-training tasks.
Exam score prediction
Review correctness prediction
correctness
59.48 ± 1.56
0.852 ± 0.006
correctness + elapsed_time
59.79 ± 1.49
0.854 ± 0.009
correctness + timeliness
57.83 ± 1.36
0.857 ± 0.011
correctness + inactive_time
59.73 ± 1.58
0.850 ± 0.009
4.4.2
Effect of Assessment Modeling. Experimental results comparing Assessment Modeling with three different content-
based pre-training methods and the model without pre-training are shown in the Table 3. In all downstream tasks,
Assessment Modeling outperforms the other methods. Compared to the model without pre-training, MAE for exam
score prediction is reduced by 21.96% and AUC for review correctness prediction is increased by 6.99%. Also, Assessment
Modeling improves 13.34% MAE for exam score and 4.26% AUC for review correctness prediction, respectively, from
the previous state-of-the-art content-based pre-training methods. These results support our claim that Assessment
Modeling is more suitable for label-scarce educational downstream tasks than content-based pre-training methods.
Table 3. Comparison to content-based pre-trainig methods.
Exam score prediction
Review correctness prediction
Without pre-train
74.10 ± 3.76
0.801 ± 0.019
Word2Vec
68.87 ± 3.20
0.822 ± 0.014
BERT
66.73 ± 2.10
0.814 ± 0.008
QuesNet
75.44 ± 1.45
0.817 ± 0.012
Assessment Modeling
57.83 ± 1.36
0.857 ± 0.011
5
DISCUSSIONS
5.1
Choosing Appropriate Pre-training Task
Determining which pre-training task is appropriate for a specific downstream task is not clear and somewhat ambiguous.
For instance, while the experimental results of including inactive_time in the prediction targets of pre-training shown
in Table 2 is aligned with our intuition that inactive_time can not be an assessment, the experimental results of using
14

Assessment Modeling: Fundamental Pre-training Tasks for Interactive Educational Systems
Woodstock ’18, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
Available
features
Masked
features
Target 
to predict
Exercise ID
Exercise
Category
Correctness
Elapsed
Time
Word
...
...
BERT
...
...
Assessment Modeling
...
e15
1
2
3
e24
4
e5
1
1
5
e87
0
6
4
M(rt)
M(tt)
P(wt)
P(rt)
Predicted
Output
Predicted
Output
...
He
M(wt)
to
school
went
1
loss
loss
Label
Fig. 9. The issue of asymmetry arising in Assessment Modeling. In BERT’s masked language modeling training scheme, features that
are available, being masked and being predicted for each time step are all of the same nature. However, in Assessment Modeling,
features being predicted can be a subset of features being masked, and features being masked can be a subset of features available in
a specific time step.
timeliness and elapsed_time as assessments are not. As described in Example 2, intuitively, both timeliness and elapsed_-
time are assessments since the amount of time a student takes to respond to each exercise serves as a pedagogical
evaluation. Also, since timeliness is a fine-grained version that binarizes elapsed time using the time limit for each
exercise, timeliness and elapsed time have a lot of overlap of information. Nevertheless, according to the results shown in
Table 2, when correctness + timeliness (resp. correctness + elapsed_time) are used as the prediction target of pre-training,
there was a 2.77% reduction (resp. 0.53% increase) in MAE in exam score prediction than when only correctness is used as
the prediction target, so the opposite results are obtained. These results represent the difficulty in defining appropriate
pre-trainig task for Assessment Modeling. Although there remains room for development and challenges for identifying
pre-train/fine-tune relations in Assessment Modeling, we do not dig into it any further and leave it as a future work.
5.2
Asymmetry of Assessment Modeling
While the masking scheme for Assessment Modeling was inspired by masked language modeling proposed in [7],
there is a key difference between the two approaches (Figure 9). In masked language modeling, the features available
at a timestep are (the embeddings of) each word, the masked feature is the word at the timestep, and the target to
predict is also the word at the timestep. That is, there is a symmetry in that the features that are available, the features
being masked, and the features being predicted are all of the same nature. But that is not necessarily the case in
Assessment Modeling. For example, suppose the features available at a given timestep are exercise_id, exercise_category,
correctness, and elapsed_time. In the above situation, Assessment Modeling pre-training scheme may mask correctness
and elapsed_time, and predict just correctness. This asymmetry raises the issue of precisely which features to mask and
which features to predict, and the choices made will have to reflect the specific label-scarce educational downstream
task that Assessment Modeling is being used to prepare for. While we draw attention to this issue, it is outside the
scope of this paper and we leave the details for future study.
15

Woodstock ’18, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
Youngduck, et al.
6
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduced Assessment Modeling, a class of fundamental pre-training tasks for IESs. Our experiments
show the effectiveness of Assessment Modeling as pre-training tasks for label-scarce educational problems including
exam score and review correctness prediction. Avenues of future research include 1) investigating forests of pre-
train/fine-tune relations in AIEd, and 2) pre-training a model to learn not only assessments, but also representations of
the contents of learning items.
