Characterizing the Set of Coherent Lower Previsions
with a Finite Number of Constraints or Vertices
Erik Quaeghebeur
Department of Philosophy
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
SYSTeMS Research Group
Ghent University
Gent, Belgium
Abstract
The standard coherence criterion for lower pre-
visions is expressed using an inﬁnite number of
linear constraints. For lower previsions that are es-
sentially deﬁned on some ﬁnite set of gambles on
a ﬁnite possibility space, we present a reformula-
tion of this criterion that only uses a ﬁnite number
of constraints. Any such lower prevision is coher-
ent if it lies within the convex polytope deﬁned
by these constraints. The vertices of this polytope
are the extreme coherent lower previsions for the
given set of gambles. Our reformulation makes it
possible to compute them. We show how this is
done and illustrate the procedure and its results.
1
INTRODUCTION
Consider a subject facing uncertainty and assume that, to
deal with it, she formalizes it as a—possibly abstract—
gambling problem. The classical coherence criterion then
states that, for the gambles she faces, she should choose her
previsions—interpreted as fair prices—so as to avoid a sure
loss (de Finetti 1974–1975; Walley 1991, §2.8).1 The result-
ing coherent previsions are linear expectation operators.
Now, let us allow our subject to be more cautious and spec-
ify possibly non-coinciding lower and upper previsions—
interpreted as supremum acceptable buying and inﬁmum
acceptable selling prices. A modiﬁed coherence condition
has to be used to accommodate this (Walley 1991, §2.5).
The resulting coherent lower previsions are nonlinear ex-
pectation operators. (The so-called conjugacy relationship
between lower and upper previsions allows us, in all gener-
ality, to only consider one of both.)
Coherent lower previsions are, as models of uncertainty,
equivalent to convex sets of coherent previsions, or credal
1Terminology: a gamble is the same thing as a bet or a random
variable; a sure loss corresponds to a Dutch book or arbitrage.
sets. Mathematically, they generalize classical probabilities,
possibility distributions, and belief functions, among others.
In recent years, there has been an increasing interest from
the artiﬁcial intelligence community for this general type
of model—in both incarnations: credal sets and lower or
upper previsions—as regards theory as well as applications
(see, e.g., Cozman et al. 2004; De Cooman & Zaffalon 2003;
De Cooman et al. 2008; Grünwald & Halpern 2008). This
paper’s contribution lies mostly in the theoretical realm;
results are derived and presented using lower previsions, but
some illustrations will make good use of credal sets.
We restrict attention to ﬁnite sets of simple gambles, i.e.,
which take only a ﬁnite number of values, so that we can
consider them as essentially deﬁned on ﬁnite possibility
spaces (Walley 1991, §4.2.1). In such a context, the set of
linear previsions can be represented by the unit simplex
of probability mass functions on the possibility space of
elementary events. It is completely characterized by both
(a) a ﬁnite number of linear constraints: the probability
mass on each elementary event is nonnegative and it
sums up to one for the whole possibility space; and
(b) a ﬁnite number of extreme linear previsions: those that
correspond to the degenerate probability mass functions,
which are one on a single elementary event and zero
elsewhere—the vertices of the unit simplex.
No similar pair of characterizations was known for coherent
lower previsions. In this paper, we present
(a) a ﬁnitary formulation of the coherence criterion for
lower previsions that—when used as an algorithm—
generates a ﬁnite set of linear constraints that are suf-
ﬁcient to guarantee coherence (but which may contain
constraints that are not strictly necessary); and
(b) a procedure that, starting from these constraints, can be
used to obtain the ﬁnite set of extreme coherent lower
previsions that characterizes the set of all coherent lower
previsions on the given ﬁnite set of simple gambles.
In general, it is not possible to represent a coherent lower
prevision in a simpler way: e.g., both lower and upper prob-
ability mass functions and lower and upper probabilities are
less expressive uncertainty models (Walley 1991, §2.7).

Apart from the linear previsions, there are other special
classes of coherent lower or upper previsions for which
(one or) both characterizations are known. The most impor-
tant ones are possibility distributions (Quaeghebeur 2009,
§2.2.7), belief functions (Brüning & Dennenberg 2008), and
lower probabilities (Quaeghebeur & De Cooman 2008). The
ideas of Quaeghebeur & De Cooman (2008) provided us
with the foundations for this paper, which generalizes their
results from an important subclass to the general case.
The two characterizations are two faces of the fact that the
set of all coherent lower previsions—regarded as vectors—
is a convex polytope: On the one hand, a convex polytope is
the intersection of a set of half-spaces, i.e., those deﬁned by
the hyperplanes in which its facets lie. On the other hand,
it is the convex hull of its extreme points or vertices. So
polytope theory will play an important supporting role in
this paper (good references: Grünbaum 1967; Ziegler 1995).
Overview
We present the material as follows: In Sec-
tion 2, we reformulate the standard coherence criterion into
one that generates a ﬁnite sufﬁcient set of constraints and
in parallel explain the procedure to obtain extreme coher-
ent lower previsions.2 In Section 3, we analyze the sets
of constraints and extreme coherent lower previsions that
we obtain when applying our results to different sets of
gambles.3 We end with some conclusions.
Notation
The generic notation of the ﬁnite possibility
space is Ω. An event A is one of its subsets and an ele-
mentary event ω is one of its elements.
A gamble g is a real-valued function on Ωthat maps an
elementary event ω to a payoff gω. (Parentheses are used
for grouping, but not for function application.) The indica-
tor IA of an event A is the gamble that is one on A and zero
elsewhere; Iω := I{ω} is the singleton indicator of ω.
A lower prevision P is a real-valued functional on a set of
gambles K —ﬁnite in this paper—that maps each of its
elements g to a lower prevision Pg, which can be seen
as one of the components of the vector P in RK . The
upper prevision P conjugate to a lower prevision P is de-
ﬁned by Pg = −P(−g). The vacuous lower prevision PA
expressing ignorance relative to the event A is deﬁned by
PAg = minω∈A gω. Similarly, for any elementary event ω,
the degenerate prevision Pω is deﬁned by Pωg = gω.
The set of all linear previsions P is the convex hull of the
set of degenerate previsions: P = co{Pω : ω ∈Ω}. So a
linear prevision P is completely deﬁned by its probability
mass function p on Ω: P = ∑ω∈Ωpω ·Pω, where pω = PIω.
We use ⟨µ,φ⟩X as a formal shorthand for bilinear expres-
sions of the type ∑x∈X µx ·φx. Because of this, the identity
function id that maps an object onto itself will be useful.
2For proofs, see (Proofs).
3For implementation details and a compilation of resulting
output ﬁles, see (Implementation; Output).
2
COHERENCE CRITERION
REFORMULATION
In this section, we ﬁrst formulate the standard coherence
criterion for lower previsions (§2.1). Next, using a toy ex-
ample, we introduce some useful concepts from polytope
theory and the theory of coherent lower previsions (§2.2).
Then, we reformulate the coherence criterion in a stepwise
fashion, to end up with a ﬁnitary version (§2.3–§2.6).
2.1
THE STANDARD COHERENCE CRITERION
A lower prevision is coherent if it avoids sure loss and
is internally consistent in the following way: consider a
gamble f that dominates a positive linear combination of
other gambles, each of which is acceptable to the subject
in the sense that her lower prevision for it is nonnegative,
then she must accept f as well. A standard way to formalize
coherence is (cf. Walley 1991, §2.5, also for justiﬁcations):
Deﬁnition 1. A lower prevision P on K is coherent iff
⟨λ,P⟩N −P f ≤max(⟨λ,id⟩N −f) for all
• gambles f in K ,
• subsets N of K ,
• coefﬁcient vectors λ in (R>0)N .
◁
We see that a linear constraint on P is generated for each f,
N and λ. To get a ﬁnitary coherence criterion, i.e., one that
generates only a ﬁnite number of constraints, the possible
values of λ need to be restricted to a ﬁnite number.
By playing with the normalization and sign of λ-compo-
nents we can obtain an equivalent, shorter formulation:
Deﬁnition 2. A lower prevision P on K is coherent iff
⟨λ,P⟩K ≤max⟨λ,id⟩K for all coefﬁcient vectors λ in RK
with at most one strictly negative component.
◁
2.2
CONSTRAINTS, VERTICES & CREDAL SETS
It is useful to have a visual image of what the linear con-
straints appearing in Deﬁnition 2 look like. Consider a toy
example, where Ω= {a,b,c} and K consists of two gam-
bles, f := (1,1/2,0) and g := (0,2/3,1). Up to normalization,
each constraint in (P f,Pg)-space is completely determined
by its coefﬁcient vector λ = (λf ,λg), so there is only one
constraint for each orientation.
We have drawn a ﬁnite sufﬁcient set of constraints at
the top-left corner of the next page. Even with the max-
normalization used, the complete set of constraints would be
inﬁnite. Each constraint corresponds to a closed half-space,
indicated by stubs drawn on the hyperplane delimiting it.
The intersection of all half-spaces is the shaded polytope
that corresponds to the set of coherent previsions on K .

P f
Pg
0
min f =
1
max f =
ming = 0
maxg = 1
(−1,0)
(0,−1)
(1,0)
(0,1)
(−1,1)
(1,−1)
(1,3/4)
(2/3,1)
Pc
Pb
Pa
PΩ
= P{a,c}
P{b,c}
P{a,b}
Of the constraints drawn, (0,1), (1,0), (−1,1), and (1,−1)
are redundant, meaning that they can be removed without
enlarging the intersection. The constraints (0,−1), (−1,0),
(1,3/4), and (2/3,1) form a necessary and sufﬁcient set.
Degenerate previsions are coherent lower previsions. So be-
cause ⟨λ,Pω⟩K = max⟨λ,id⟩K for ω in argmax⟨λ,id⟩K ,
all generated constraints are strict: the corresponding hyper-
planes support the polytope. In our toy example, the only
vertex apart from the degenerate previsions is the vacuous
prevision PΩ. The other, non-vertex vacuous previsions,
P{a,b} and P{b,c}, have been indicated as well.
The fact that a polytope can be represented both by an
H-representation, a set of linear constraints (half-spaces),
and a V-representation, a set of vertices (points), is ex-
pressed by the so-called Minkowski–Weyl theorem (Ziegler
1995, Thm. 1.1). Going from the H-representation to the
V-representation is called vertex enumeration; the other di-
rection is called facet enumeration. Points that can be written
as strict convex combinations of vertices and constraints that
can be written as positive linear combinations of other con-
straints are redundant. Using this terminology, our endeavor,
schematically, is the following:
constraint generation
(deﬁnition of coherence)
K
H-representation
V-representation
redundancy removal
vertex enumeration
redundancy removal
facet enumeration
In between the minimal V-representation and the full vector
PΩ
Pa
Pc
Pb
space view, as given above, there is
the adjacency graph representation, in
which neighboring vertices are con-
nected by edges. It is useful for working
with extreme coherent lower previsions.
Our toy example’s is given on the right.
What we have here done by hand, enumerate the vertices
of a polytope speciﬁed by a set of linear constraints and
deduce the adjacency graph, can be done using publicly
available polyhedral computation computer programs (e.g.,
Avis 2000; Fukuda & Prodon 1996).
A standard way to represent a coherent lower prevision P
is by using its credal set MP (Walley 1991, §3.3). This
set consists of all the linear previsions that dominate it:
MP := {P ∈P : P ≤P}; and P is its lower envelope: for
all gambles g, Pg = minP∈MP Pg. The set P is the unit
simplex in RΩand each one of its points corresponds to
a probability mass function. The credal set of a coherent
lower prevision P is the convex subset of P determined by
the linear constraints corresponding to its values.
PΩ
P f = 0
Pg = 0
Pf = 1
Pg = 0
Pa
P f = 1/2
Pg = 2/3
Pb
Pf = 0
Pg = 1
Pc
For our example, the unit sim-
plex is an equilateral triangle;
the constraints are ⟨p, f⟩Ω≥
P f and ⟨p,g⟩Ω≥Pg. On the
side, we give the credal sets
of the extreme coherent lower
previsions we found.
Credal sets represent lower
previsions deﬁned on the set
of all gambles. This is why
in our example, with a ﬁnite
set K , we had PΩ= P{a,c},
even though the credal set
of P{a,c} is the convex hull
of Pa and Pc, a strict subset
of MPΩ. It is prudent to as-
sociate coherent lower previ-
sions with the largest credal
set possible.4
2.3
REDUCTION THROUGH NORMALIZATION
A well-chosen normalization of the coefﬁcients is an es-
sential ﬁrst step in the process towards a ﬁnitary coherence
criterion. Starting from Deﬁnition 2, we normalize the coef-
ﬁcients by normalizing the constraints’ right-hand side:
Deﬁnition 3. A lower prevision P on K is coherent iff
⟨λ,P⟩K ≤γ for all
• constants γ in {−1,0,1},
• coefﬁcient vectors λ in RK
– with at most one strictly negative component,
– such that max⟨λ,id⟩K = γ.
◁
Now let us return for a moment to the toy example of the pre-
vious section. In this example, the constraints (1,−1) and
(1,0) are made redundant by the constraints (0,−1) and
(1,3/4). Put slightly differently, both are made redundant
4This corresponds to using the so-called natural extension
(Walley 1991, §3.1), the least committal extension to all gambles.

by (1,3/4), given (0,−1), i.e., Pg ≥ming = 0. The right-
hand side max⟨λ,id⟩K is one for both (1,−1), (1,0), and
(1,3/4), so the difference between them, the value of λg, only
affects the constraints’ left-hand side ⟨λ,P⟩K . Exactly be-
cause Pg ≥0, we have that ⟨(1,−1),P⟩K ≤⟨(1,0),P⟩K ≤
⟨(1,3/4),P⟩K , which explains why (1,−1) and (1,0) are
redundant. The same story can be told about (−1,1) and
(0,1) versus (−1,0) and (2/3,1).
We learn from this that having a set of gambles that only
take nonnegative values is useful for removing redundant
constraints, by maximally increasing the values of their co-
efﬁcients in such a way that the right-hand side maximum
stays the same, given that we know that the lower prevision
must, by coherence, be everywhere nonnegative. Restricting
the set of gambles in such a way does not reduce the gener-
ality of our endeavor. We next show that we can apply an
even more stringent restriction.
Two consequences of coherence are nonnegative homogene-
ity and constant-additivity (Walley 1991, §2.6.1). Together,
for a coherent lower prevision P on a set of gambles K , they
imply the following: P(λ ·g+α) = λ ·Pg+α must hold
for all gambles g in K , all nonnegative real λ and all real α,
whenever λ ·g+α ∈K .5 Equality constraints of this type
express that the polytope of coherent lower previsions for
a set of gambles in which some gamble pairs are related by
such afﬁne transformations is isomorphic to the one for a
maximal subset for which this is not the case. So we can
restrict our attention to sets of gambles which have a min-
imum of zero and a maximum of one: For sets of gambles
that are not of this type, we can remove the constant gambles
and for any other gamble g use g−ming/maxg−ming instead.
To modify Deﬁnition 3 to take into account what we have
learned, we introduce the set of gambles
L :=

g ∈RΩ: ming = 0 and maxg = 1
	
.
Deﬁnition 4. A lower prevision P on K , a ﬁnite subset
of L , is coherent iff
(i) P ≥0,
(ii) ⟨λ,P⟩K ≤γ for all
• constants γ in {0,1},
• coefﬁcient vectors λ in RK
– with at most one strictly negative component,
– such that max⟨λ,id⟩K = γ,
– such that increasing any single component would
increase this maximum.
◁
Note that the right-hand side maximum, and thus γ, cannot
be negative. The reason is that all gambles considered are
nonnegative and that the single gamble with a strictly nega-
tive coefﬁcient—if present—has nonfull support, like any
other gamble in K .
5Put differently, λ · Pg + α is the unique coherent extension
of P to λ ·g+α (gamble-constant addition evaluated pointwise).
2.4
ADDING SINGLETON INDICATORS
While Deﬁnition 4 does provide a reduction in the number
of constraints, we are still faced with an inﬁnity of them.
In our toy example, all convex combinations of (1,3/4) and
(2/3,1) satisfy the deﬁnition—they correspond to the con-
straints through Pb. Moreover, the last two restrictions on
the coefﬁcient vectors are bothersome to check in practice.
We are going to improve this impractical formulation here. If
we add all singleton indicators to the set of gambles K , the
requirement that increasing any one component of λ must
engender an increase of max⟨λ,id⟩K , leads to a selection of
coefﬁcients that makes ⟨λ,id⟩K constant (cf. Walley 1991,
§A2): Consider a vector of coefﬁcients for which this is not
the case; then we can modify it by increasing the coefﬁcients
of the singleton indicators until it is. This leads to:
Deﬁnition 5. A lower prevision P on K , a ﬁnite subset
of L that contains all singleton indicators, is coherent iff
(i) P ≥0,
(ii) ⟨λ,P⟩K ≤γ for all
• constants γ in {0,1},
• coefﬁcient vectors λ in RK
– with at most one strictly negative component,
– such that ⟨λ,id⟩K = γ.6
◁
So now, to ﬁnd the λ that satisfy the given restrictions, we
must ﬁnd the solution set of the linear system ⟨λ,id⟩K = γ
and retain those solutions λ that have at most one negative
component. However, it is still not practical to implement,
and the resulting number of constraints is still inﬁnite. So
we need further modiﬁcations, to be applied in upcoming
subsections. In the rest of this subsection, we show that we
have not lost any generality by adding singleton indicators.
To see its effect, let us look how it impacts our toy example:7
We study the adjacency graph and the (P f,Pg)-plane, to
which orthogonal projections of Pa, Pb, and Pc are added.
Pf
Pg
0
1
0
1
Pc
Pb
Pa
PΩ
P{b,c}
P{a,b}
P2
P3
PΩ
Pab
Pbc
Pa
Pc
Pb
P2
P3
6The gamble-constant equality is evaluated pointwise.
7The data for examples such as this (Output, toy) were gath-
ered using our implementation of our ﬁnitary coherence criterion
(Implementation) and publicly available polyhedral computation
computer programs (e.g., Avis 2000; Fukuda & Prodon 1996).

The degenerate previsions are the only extreme coherent
lower previsions that do not lie in the (P f,Pg)-plane; each
one of them is moreover connected to all other extreme
coherent lower previsions (cf. graph). These observations
about the degenerate previsions are general in character:
Proposition 1. Of the extreme coherent lower previsions on
a set of gambles K that includes the indicator Iω of some
elementary event ω of Ω, the degenerate prevision Pω is the
only one that is nonzero in Iω.
◁
Four new extreme points have appeared: P2, P{a,b} = Pab,
P2
P3
Pab
Pbc
P{b,c} = Pbc,
and P3. The
credal
sets
are given on
the right.
When orthogonally projecting the whole polytope onto the
(P f,Pg)-plane, the situation pictured in Subsection 2.2 re-
sults and these four points become redundant. In general,
we can look at the coherent set of lower previsions on any
set of gambles K as the projection on RK of the polytope
for the set of all gambles. After projection, some vertices
become redundant, but the projected polytope is the same as
the one that would be obtained by constructing it directly.
It is possible to do the projection in terms of the linear con-
straints using Fourier–Motzkin elimination (Ziegler 1995,
Thm. 1.4). This algorithm is also implemented in publicly
available polyhedral computation computer programs (e.g.,
Avis 2000; Fukuda & Prodon 1996). We now know that no
generality is lost by adding the singleton indicators; it only
result in an extra processing step. As a consequence, our
endeavor schematic must be expanded:
K
H-representation
V-representation
H-representation
V-representation
adding singleton
indicators
Fourier–Motzkin
elimination
projection
2.5
ELIMINATING LINEAR DEPENDENCE
Deﬁnition 5 is still not ﬁnitary. To apply the essential step,
we reformulate it back into a ﬂavor that is closer to Deﬁni-
tion 1, in which all coefﬁcients are nonzero:
Deﬁnition 6. A lower prevision P on K , a ﬁnite subset
of L that contains all singleton indicators, is coherent iff
(i) P ≥0,
(ii) ⟨λ,P⟩N ≤γ for all
• constants γ in {0,1},
• subsets N of K ,
• coefﬁcient vectors λ in (R̸=0)N
– with at most one strictly negative component,
– such that ⟨λ,id⟩N = γ.
◁
The following technical lemma tells us that we only need to
consider speciﬁc subsets of gambles.
Lemma 1 (Elimination of linear dependence).8#
Consider a constraint ⟨λ,P⟩N ≤γ on P determined by
• a set of gambles N s.t. (id−P)N is linearly dependent,9
• a coefﬁcient vector λ in (R̸=0)N ,
• a real number γ such that ⟨λ,id⟩N = γ.
It is equivalent to a constraint ⟨ˇλ,P⟩
ˇ
N ≤ˇγ determined by
• a set of gambles
ˇ
N ⊂N such that (id−P)
ˇ
N is linearly
independent,
• a coefﬁcient vector ˇλ in (R̸=0)
ˇ
N such that λg and ˇλg have
the same sign for all g in
ˇ
N ,
• a real number ˇγ such that ⟨ˇλ,id⟩
ˇ
N = ˇγ ∈{−1,0,1}.
◁
So we only need to consider the subsets N —ﬁnite in
number—that satisfy a linear independence condition:
Deﬁnition 7. A lower prevision P on K , a ﬁnite subset
of L that contains all singleton indicators, is coherent iff
(i) P ≥0,
(ii) ⟨λ,P⟩N ≤γ for all
• constants γ in {0,1},
• subsets N of K such that (id−P)N is linearly
independent,
• coefﬁcient vectors λ in (R̸=0)N
– with at most one strictly negative component,
– such that ⟨λ,id⟩N = γ.
◁
This ﬁnitary deﬁnition is useful as such for checking the
coherence of a known lower prevision P,10 but it does not
provide an explicit characterization: the selection of sub-
sets N depends on a condition in which P appears, so it
cannot be used to generate the constraints that delimit the
set of all coherent lower previsions. We remedy this next.
2.6
REQUIRING LINEAR INDEPENDENCE
In Deﬁnition 7, we make no substantive distinction be-
tween the cases for the different values for γ. But in fact,
these determine the nature of the linear system of equations
⟨λ,id⟩N = γ that deﬁnes the coefﬁcient vector λ for each
subset of gambles N . For γ = 1, this system is inhomoge-
neous; for γ = 0, it is homogeneous.
Due to solution unicity considerations, we transform the
homogeneous systems to inhomogeneous ones: We bring
the single gamble with a negative coefﬁcient—which by
construction is always present in this case—to the system’s
right-hand side and renormalize the coefﬁcients.
8This lemma is inspired by Walley (1991, §A1).
9Notation: (id−P)N is the image of N under id−P.
10It is very similar to a criterion by Walley (1991, §A2). Alter-
natives using linear programming algorithms also exist (see, e.g.,
Walley et al. 2004, which also deals with contingent gambles).

Deﬁnition 8. A lower prevision P on K , a ﬁnite subset
of L that contains all singleton indicators, is coherent iff
(i) P ≥0,
(ii) ⟨λ,P⟩N ≤P f for all
• subsets N of K ,
• gambles f in K \N ,
• coeff. vectors λ in (R>0)N such that ⟨λ,id⟩N = f.
(iii) ⟨λ,P⟩N ≤1 for all
• subsets N of K such that (id−P)N is linearly
independent
• coefﬁcient vectors λ in (R̸=0)N
– with at most one strictly negative component,
– such that ⟨λ,id⟩N = 1.
◁
Note that we have dropped the restriction to linearly inde-
pendent (id−P)N in (ii); it is of no more use to us there.
However, the linear independence criterion in (iii) is of use:
the following technical lemma allows it to be reformulated
to not include reference to the lower prevision P anymore.
Lemma 2 (Preservation of linear independence). Consider
a set of gambles N , a coefﬁcient vector λ in RN such
that ⟨λ,id⟩N = 1, and a lower prevision P on N . If the set
(id−P)N is linearly independent, then so is N .
◁
The restriction to linearly independent N can be applied
to (ii) as well. The reason is the following: If ⟨λ,id⟩N = f,
the nonnegative gamble f lies in the convex conical hull of
the set of nonnegative gambles N . Carathéodory’s theorem
(Ziegler 1995, Thm. 1.15) then tells us that f lies in the
convex conical hull of some linearly independent subset
of N .11 Any solution for N will then be a convex combi-
nation of the solutions for the minimal such subsets. The
corresponding constraint is the same convex combination
of the constraints corresponding to these minimal subsets,
and thus redundant.
At last we arrive at our ﬁnal, ﬁnitary and practical deﬁnition:
Deﬁnition 9. A lower prevision P on K , a ﬁnite subset
of L that contains all singleton indicators, is coherent iff
(i) P ≥0,
(ii) ⟨λ,P⟩N ≤P f for all
• linearly independent subsets N of K such that
1 < |N | ≤|Ω|,
• gambles f in K \N such that supp f = suppN ,12
• coeff. vectors λ in (R>0)N s.t. ⟨λ,id⟩N = f.
(iii) ⟨λ,P⟩N ≤1 for all
• linearly independent subsets N of K such that
1 < |N | ≤|Ω| and suppN = Ω.
11Carathéodory’s theorem can be illustrated by using a section
of the cone and the rays corresponding to the gambles considered:
f
f
f
In this example there are two three-dimensional and one two-
dimensional minimal subsets of linearly independent gambles.
12Notation: suppN = S
g∈N suppg and supp f is f’s support.
• coefﬁcient vectors λ in (R̸=0)N
– with at most one strictly negative component,
– such that ⟨λ,id⟩N = 1.
◁
We have made some cardinality and support restrictions
explicit in this deﬁnition as well. The support restrictions
follow from the restricted choice of coefﬁcients and the gam-
ble equation. The lower bound on the cardinality of the N
comes from the fact those same equalities cannot be satis-
ﬁed for |N | = 1, as f /∈N and IΩ/∈L . The upper bound
is a consequence of the linear independence of the N .
Deﬁnition 9 allows us to obtain a characterization of the set
of coherent lower previsions in terms of a ﬁnite number of
constraints and—via vertex enumeration—extreme coherent
lower previsions. It can also be used to efﬁciently check the
coherence of a large number of lower previsions on the same
set of gambles, as the constraints do not depend on the lower
prevision to be checked.13
3
CONSTRAINTS & VERTICES
ANALYZED
In this section, we present a number of cases—sets of gam-
bles K —for which we use Deﬁnition 9 to generate a suf-
ﬁcient set of coherence constraints and calculate the cor-
responding extreme coherent lower previsions. In general,
Deﬁnition 9 still generates redundant sets of constraints.
Applying a redundancy removal algorithm is therefore ad-
visable to speed up the Fourier–Motzkin elimination and
vertex enumeration steps.
As a warm-up exercise, and to illustrate some basic ideas,
we ﬁrst look at cases with few—one, two, or three—gambles
(§3.1). Then we increase the number of gambles and move
the focus to combinatorial aspects (§3.2 and §3.3).
3.1
SMALL SETS OF GAMBLES
One gamble
For completeness, we ﬁrst consider the al-
most trivial case in which K consists of just one gamble,
PΩ
Pf = 0
Pf = 1
Pa
e.g., f := (1,1/2,0) on Ω:= {a,b,c}
(Output, 1on3). The one-dimensional
nature of of this case inevitably leads
to two irredundant constraints and
two vertices. From how the credal
sets of the example—given on the
right—arise, we can deduce that in
general the vertices are the vacuous
prevision and a vacuous prevision rel-
ative to some event.
13It is a mathematical generalization and historical descendant
of the one for lower probabilities by Walley (1991, §A3).

Two gambles
The toy example of Subsection 2.2 belongs
to this class. We found four irredundant constraints and
vertices. These numbers reappeared for the set of gam-
bles K consisting of f := (1,1/2,0) and g := (0,1,1/2) on
Ω:= {a,b,c} (Output, 2on3) and also when increasing the
size of the possibility space—to four, ﬁve (Output, 2on4,
2on5). A general result for gambles ‘in general position’?
As a showcase, we here consider a situation in which both an
upper and a lower prevision for a single gamble are speciﬁed.
This is done by choosing an essentially negation invariant
set of gambles, because of conjugacy: Pf = −P(−f) =
1−P(1−f). So we choose the set K := { f,1−f}, with
the gamble f as above (Output, 1on3_lu). We ﬁnd three
Pa
PΩ
Pc
irredundant con-
straints and ver-
tices. On the right
we give their cre-
dal sets.
Three gambles
Consider a set of gambles K consisting
of f := (1,0,1/2), g := (0,1/2,1), and h := (1/2,1,0) (Output,
3on3). There are seven irredundant constraints. We get the
following seven-verticed three-dimensional polytope:
f
g
h
PΩ
0
0
0
Pab
0
0
1/2
Pac
1/2
0
0
Pbc
0
1/2
0
Pa
1
0
1/2
Pb
0
1/2
1
Pc
1/2
1
0
PΩ
Pac
Pab
Pbc
Pb
Pa
Pc
When increasing the size of the possibility space—to four,
ﬁve—, we observe that the number of irredundant con-
straints and vertices does not increase substantially (i.e.,
from 7 to 9) (Output, 3on4, 3on5). Up until now, we ob-
served that the number of irredundant constraints and ver-
tices increases superlinearly with |K |.
3.2
CLASSES OF EVENT-BASED GAMBLES
To get a feel for larger sets of gambles, we investigate
the combinatorics of some classes of event-based gambles,
which give rise to interesting classes of lower previsions.
Singletons
When K consists of all |Ω| singleton indica-
tors, the resulting class of lower previsions is deﬁned by
a lower probability mass function (Output, l). There are
|Ω|+1 irredundant constraints and vertices, which are the
degenerate previsions and the vacuous lower prevision.
Singleton complements
When K consists of all |Ω| sin-
gleton complement indicators, the resulting class of lower
previsions is—through conjugacy—deﬁned by an upper
probability mass function (Output, u). There are 2·|Ω|+1
irredundant constraints (but |Ω| for |Ω| = 2) and 2|Ω| −1
vertices, the vacuous lower previsions relative to all events.
This class does not encompass the previous one, even though
this is the case for their sets of vertices.14 This is illustrated
on the right by giving the credal
sets of the same convex combi-
nation of vertices for the former,
respectively the latter class.
Singletons and their complements
When K consists of
all 2·|Ω| singleton and singleton complement indicators
(but |Ω| for |Ω| = 2), the resulting class of lower previsions
is deﬁned by lower and upper probability mass functions
(Output, lu). We have gathered the number of irredundant
constraints (#λ) and vertices (#P) for cardinalities two to
ten in the table below.
|Ω|
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
#λ
3
9
16
20
24
28
32
36
40
#P
3
8
20
47
105
226
474
977
1991
After an initial transient, the irredundant constraints fall
into a clear pattern: #λ = 4·|Ω|. There is a combinatorial
explosion—with no pattern apparent—in the vertex counts.
Power set
When K consists of the 2|Ω| −2 indicators for
all nontrivial events, the resulting class of lower previsions
is deﬁned by an imprecise probability (Output, pset). We
have now gathered the number of irredundant constraints
and vertices for cardinalities two to ﬁve in a table.15 The
total number of constraints generated by Deﬁnition 9 is
given in parentheses.
|Ω|
2
3
4
5
#λ
3 (3)
9 (17)
48 (179)
285 (7351)
#P
3
8
402
> 1743093
Here, there is a combinatorial explosion in the number of ir-
redundant constraints and, quite pronounced, in the number
of vertices and generated constraints.
3.3
VALUES-BASED GAMBLES
To close off our analysis, we vary the number of gambles
for the case |Ω| = 3.15 The sets of gambles K we consider
to this end contain those gambles in L that take values in

ℓ/k : 0 ≤ℓ≤k
	
, for k from one to six (Output, vb).16 We
ﬁnd (for k equal to one, see above):
k
2
3
4
5
6
|K |
12
18
24
30
36
#λ
15 (178)
21 (699)
27 (1796)
33 (3685)
39 (6582)
#P
49
180
455
928
1653
14This is due to the fact that in general pointwise natural exten-
sion of the convex set of coherent lower previsions on a given set
of gambles to a larger one does not preserve its convexity.
15Calculations for higher cardinalities is too computationally
taxing for current PCs, i.e., takes more than a few days on a 2006
Intel T7200 processor, or requires more than 2GiB of RAM.
16Our tests showed that the speciﬁc, structured choice of K
due to the use of evenly spaced values is mostly irrelevant to the
combinatorics (Output, vb3_2+3,vb3_2like).

The patterns we observe are that #λ = 3·(2·k +1), so the
number of irredundant constraints remains remarkably low
in this case, and that #P = (3·k +1)·(3·k2 −4·k +3), the
vertex count increases cubicly in k.
4
CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we have derived a ﬁnitary coherence criterion
(Deﬁnition 9) for coherent lower previsions deﬁned on a
ﬁnite set of gambles on a ﬁnite possibility space. In this
deﬁnition, this set is restricted to be a subset of a speciﬁc
normed class and to contain singleton indicators. However,
we have also shown that neither restriction is substantive: the
ﬁrst because extension to the whole class is an isomorphism,
the second because Fourier–Motzkin elimination can be
applied. In this sense we have given a most general ﬁnitary
characterization of the set of coherent lower previsions.
From the combinatorial data we obtained, we see that the
set of constraints generated by this criterion is still redun-
dant, but that the irredundant sets can be relatively small.
The less redundant, the more efﬁcient and thus useful this
type of criterion becomes for checking coherence. So work-
ing towards an irredundant criterion could be an interesting
research path. The regularity found in the values-based gam-
bles case provides hope that progress can be made here.
In this paper, we also showed how the criterion, together
with vertex enumeration algorithms, can be used to compute
extreme coherent lower previsions. Again, this is a most
general procedure in the sense that we can in principle now
calculate them for all ﬁnite sets of simple gambles and so ob-
tain an alternative characterization of the corresponding set
of coherent lower previsions. However, the computational
burden—both in calculation time and vertex storage—seems
prohibitive for real-life problems.
Applications of extreme coherent lower previsions—e.g.,
approximation—would rely on our ability to decompose
any coherent lower prevision into a convex combination
of extreme ones. This decomposition itself is also compu-
tationally intensive, further depressing application hopes.
Looking at things from the polytope theory side, this decom-
position is based on the Minkowski sum of polytopes (Grün-
baum 1967, Ch. 15). There is, however, also the Blaschke
sum of polytopes, which provides a decomposition in terms
of simplices (Alexandrov et al. 2005; Grünbaum 1967,
Thm. 15.3.1). It could provide a more fruitful path.
For lower previsions that have to satisfy some additional
property, e.g., permutation invariance, the extreme coherent
lower previsions can be obtained by adding the necessary
constraints to the H-representation. Furthermore, the ideas
applied in this paper can be used to derive a similar ﬁnitary
criterion for the more general conditional lower previsions,
i.e., when contingent gambles are considered as well.
