Pairwise Choice Markov Chains
Stephen Ragain
Management Science & Engineering
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305

Johan Ugander
Management Science & Engineering
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305

Abstract
As datasets capturing human choices grow in richness and scale—particularly in
online domains—there is an increasing need for choice models that escape tra-
ditional choice-theoretic axioms such as regularity, stochastic transitivity, and
Luce’s choice axiom. In this work we introduce the Pairwise Choice Markov
Chain (PCMC) model of discrete choice, an inferentially tractable model that does
not assume any of the above axioms while still satisfying the foundational axiom
of uniform expansion, a considerably weaker assumption than Luce’s choice ax-
iom. We show that the PCMC model signiﬁcantly outperforms both the Multino-
mial Logit (MNL) model and a mixed MNL (MMNL) model in prediction tasks
on both synthetic and empirical datasets known to exhibit violations of Luce’s
axiom. Our analysis also synthesizes several recent observations connecting the
Multinomial Logit model and Markov chains; the PCMC model retains the Multi-
nomial Logit model as a special case.
1
Introduction
Discrete choice models describe and predict decisions between distinct alternatives. Traditional ap-
plications include consumer purchasing decisions, choices of schooling or employment, and com-
muter choices for modes of transportation among available options. Early models of probabilistic
discrete choice, including the well known Thurstone Case V model [29] and Bradley-Terry-Luce
(BTL) model [7], were developed and reﬁned under diverse strict assumptions about human de-
cision making. As complex individual choices become increasingly mediated by engineered and
learned platforms—from online shopping to web browser clicking to interactions with recommen-
dation systems—there is a pressing need for ﬂexible models capable of describing and predicting
nuanced choice behavior.
Luce’s choice axiom, popularly known as the independence of irrelevant alternatives (IIA), is ar-
guably the most storied assumption in choice theory [20]. The axiom consists of two statements, ap-
plied to each subset of alternatives S within a broader universe U. Let paS = Pr(a chosen from S)
for any S ⊆U, and in a slight abuse of notation let pab = Pr(a chosen from {a, b}) when there are
only two elements. Luce’s axiom is then that: (i) if pab = 0 then paS = 0 for all S containing a and
b, (ii) the probability of choosing a from U conditioned on the choice lying in S is equal to paS.
The BTL model, which deﬁnes pab = γa/(γa + γb) for latent “quality” parameters γi > 0, satisﬁes
the axiom while Thurstone’s Case V model does not [1]. Soon after its introduction, the BTL model
was generalized from pairwise choices to choices from larger sets [4]. The resulting Multinomal
Logit (MNL) model again employs quality parameters γi ≥0 for each i ∈U and deﬁnes piS, the
probability of choosing i from S ⊆U, proportional to γi for all i ∈S. Any model that satisﬁes
Luce’s choice axiom is equivalent to some MNL model [21].
One consequence of Luce’s choice axiom is strict stochastic transitivity between alternatives: if
pab ≥0.5 and pbc ≥0.5, then pac ≥max(pab, pbc). A possibly undesirable consequence of
strict stochastic transitivity is the necessity of a total order across all elements. But note that strict
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.
arXiv:1603.02740v4  [stat.ML]  14 May 2021

stochastic transitivity does not imply the choice axiom; Thurstone’s model exhibits strict stochastic
transitivity.
Many choice theorists and empiricists, including Luce, have noted that the choice axiom and stochas-
tic transitivity are strong assumptions that do not hold for empirical choice data [10, 14, 15, 28, 30].
A range of discrete choice models striving to escape the conﬁnes of the choice axiom have emerged
over the years. The most popular of these models have been Elimination by Aspects [31], mixed
MNL (MMNL) [6], and nested MNL [24]. Inference is practically difﬁcult for all three of these
models [17, 25]. Additionally, Elimination by Aspects and the MMNL model also both exhibit the
rigid property of regularity, deﬁned below.
A broad, important class of models in the study of discrete choice is the class of random utility
models (RUMs) [4, 22]. A RUM afﬁliates with each i ∈U a random variable Xi and deﬁnes for each
subset S ⊆U the probability Pr(i chosen from S) = Pr(Xi ≥Xj, ∀j ∈S). An independent RUM
has independent Xi. RUMs assume neither choice axiom nor stochastic transitivity. Thurstone’s
Case V model and the BTL model are both independent RUMs; the Elimination by Aspects and
MMNL models are both RUMs. A major result by McFadden and Train establishes that for any
RUM there exists a MMNL model that can approximate the choice probabilities of that RUM to
within an arbitrary error [25], a strong result about the generality of MMNL models. The nested
MNL model, meanwhile, is not a RUM.
Although RUMs need not exhibit stochastic transitivity, they still exhibit the weaker property of
regularity: for any choice sets A, B where A ⊆B, pxA ≥pxB. Regularity may at ﬁrst seem
intuitively pleasing, but it prevents models from expressing framing effects [14] and other empirical
observations from modern behavior economics [30]. This rigidity motivates us to contribute a new
model of discrete choice that escapes historically common assumptions while still furnishing enough
structure to be inferentially tractable.
The present work. In this work we introduce a conceptually simple and inferentially tractable
model of discrete choice that we call the PCMC model. The parameters of the PCMC model are
the off-diagonal entries of a rate matrix Q indexed by U. The PCMC model afﬁliates each subset
S of the alternatives with a continuous time Markov chain (CTMC) on S with transition rate matrix
QS, whose off-diagonal entries are entries of Q indexed by pairs of items in S. The model deﬁnes
piS, the selection probability of alternative i ∈S, as the probability mass of alternative i ∈S of the
stationary distribution of the CTMC on S.
The transition rates of these CTMCs can be interpreted as measures of preferences between pairs
of alternatives. Special cases of the model use pairwise choice probabilities as transition rates,
and as a result the PCMC model extends arbitrary models of pairwise choice to models of set-
wise choice. Indeed, we show that when the matrix Q is parameterized with the pairwise selection
probabilities of a BTL pairwise choice model, the PCMC model reduces to an MNL model. Recent
parameterizations of non-transitive pairwise probabilities such as the Blade-Chest model [8] can be
usefully employed to reduce the number of free parameters of the PCMC model.
Our PCMC model can be thought of as building upon the observation underlying the recently in-
troduced Iterative Luce Spectral Ranking (I-LSR) procedure for efﬁciently ﬁnding the maximum
likelihood estimate for parameters of MNL models [23]. The analysis of I-LSR is precisely analyz-
ing a PCMC model in the special case where the matrix Q has been parameterized by BTL. In that
case the stationary distribution of the chain is found to satisfy the stationary conditions of the MNL
likelihood function, establishing a strong connection between MNL models and Markov chains. The
PCMC model generalizes that connection.
Other recent connections between the MNL model and Markov chains include the work on Rank-
Centrality [26], which employs a discrete time Markov chain for inference in the place of I-LSR’s
continuous time chain, in the special case where all data are pairwise comparisons.
Separate recent work has contributed a different discrete time Markov chain model of “choice sub-
stitution” capable of approximating any RUM [3], a related problem but one with a strong focus on
ordered preferences. Lastly, recent work by Kumar et al. explores conditions under which a prob-
ability distribution over discrete items can be expressed as the stationary distribution of a discrete
time Markov chain with “score” functions similar to the “quality” parameters in an MNL model
[19].
2

The PCMC model is not a RUM, and in general does not exhibit stochastic transitivity, regularity,
or the choice axiom. We ﬁnd that the PCMC model does, however, obey the lesser known but
fundamental axiom of uniform expansion, a weakened version of Luce’s choice axiom proposed
by Yellott that implies the choice axiom for independent RUMs [32]. In this work we deﬁne a
convenient structural property termed contractibility, for which uniform expansion is a special case,
and we show that the PCMC model exhibits contractibility. Of the models mentioned above, only
Elimination by Aspects exhibits uniform expansion without being an independent RUM. Elimination
by Aspects obeys regularity, which the PCMC model does not; as such, the PCMC model is uniquely
positioned in the literature of axiomatic discrete choice, minimally satisfying uniform expansion
without the other aforementioned axioms.
After presenting the model and its properties, we investigate choice predictions from our model on
two empirical choice datasets as well as diverse synthetic datasets. The empirical choice datasets
concern transportation choices made on commuting and shopping trips in San Francisco. Inference
on synthetic data shows that PCMC is competitive with MNL when Luce’s choice axiom holds,
while PCMC outperforms MNL when the axiom does not hold. More signiﬁcantly, for both of the
empirical datasets we ﬁnd that a learned PCMC model predicts empirical choices signiﬁcantly better
than a learned MNL model.
2
The PCMC model
a
b
c
a
b
b
c
a
c
Figure 1: Markov chains on choice
sets {a, b},
{a, c},
and {b, c},
where line thicknesses denote tran-
sition rates.
The chain on the
choice set {a, b, c} is assembled
using the same rates.
A Pairwise Choice Markov Chain (PCMC) model deﬁnes the
selection probability piS, the probability of choosing i from
S ⊆U, as the probability mass on alternative i ∈S of
the stationary distribution of a continuous time Markov chain
(CTMC) on the set of alternatives S. The model’s parame-
ters are the off-diagonal entries qij of rate matrix Q indexed
by pairs of elements in U. See Figure 1 for a diagram. We
impose the constraint qij + qji ≥1 for all pairs (i, j), which
ensures irreducibility of the chain for all S.
Given a query set S ⊆U, we construct QS by restricting the rows and columns of Q to elements in S
and setting qii = −P
j∈S\i qij for each i ∈S. Let πS = {πS(i)}i∈S be the stationary distribution
of the corresponding CTMC on S, and let πS(A) = P
x∈A πS(x). We deﬁne the choice probability
piS := πS(i), and now show that the PCMC model is well deﬁned.
Proposition 1. The choice probabilities piS are well deﬁned for all i ∈S, all S ⊆U of a ﬁnite U.
Proof. We need only to show that there is a single closed communicating class. Because S is ﬁnite,
there must be at least one closed communicating class. Suppose the chain had more than one closed
communicating class and that i ∈S and j ∈S were in different closed communicating classes. But
qij+qji ≥1, so at least one of qij and qji is strictly positive and the chain can switch communicating
classes through the transition with strictly positive rate, a contradiction.
While the support of πS is the single closed communicating class, S may have transient states
corresponding to alternatives with selection probability 0. Note that irreducibility argument needs
only that qij + qji be positive, not necessarily at least 1 as imposed in the model deﬁnition. One
could simply constrain qij + qji ≥ϵ for some positive ϵ. However, multiplying all entries of Q by
some c > 0 does not affect the stationary distribution of the corresponding CTMC, so multiplication
by 1/ϵ gives a Q with the same selection probabilities.
In the subsections that follow, we develop key properties of the model. We begin by showing how
assigning Q according a Bradley-Terry-Luce (BTL) pairwise model results in the PCMC model
being equivalent to BTL’s canonical extension, the Multinomial Logit (MNL) set-wise model. We
then construct a Q for which the PCMC model is neither regular nor a RUM.
2.1
Multinomial Logit from Bradley-Terry-Luce
We now observe that the Multinomial Logit (MNL) model, also called the Plackett-Luce model,
is precisely a PCMC model with a matrix Q consisting of pairwise BTL probabilities. Recall that
the BTL model assumes the existence of latent “quality” parameters γi > 0 for i ∈U with pij =
γi/(γi + γj), ∀i, j ∈U and that the MNL generalization deﬁnes piS ∝γi, ∀i ∈S for each S ⊆U.
3

Proposition 2. Let γ be the parameters of a BTL model on U. For qji =
γi
γi+γj , the PCMC
probabilities piS are consistent with an MNL model on S with parameters γ.
Proof. We aim to show that πS =
γ
||γ||1 is a stationary distribution of the PCMC chain: πT
S QS = 0.
We have:
(πT
S QS)i =
1
||γ||1

X
j̸=i
γjqji −γi(
X
j̸=i
qji)


=
γi
||γ||1

X
j̸=i
γj
γi + γj
−
X
j̸=i
γj
γi + γj

= 0, ∀i.
Thus πS is always the stationary distribution of the chain, and we know by Proposition 1 that it is
unique. It follows that piS ∝γi for all i ∈S, as desired.
Other parameterizations of Q, which can be used for parameter reduction or to extend arbitrary
models for pairwise choice, are explored section 1 of the Supplementary material.
2.2
A counterexample to regularity
The regularity property stipulates that for any S′ ⊂S, the probability of selecting a from S′ is at
least the probability of selecting a from S. All RUMs exhibit regularity because S′ ⊆S implies
Pr(Xi = maxj∈S′ Xj) ≥Pr(Xi = maxj∈S Xj). We now construct a simple PCMC model which
does not exhibit regularity, and is thus not a RUM.
Consider U = {r, p, s} corresponding to a rock-paper-scissors-like stochastic game where each
pairwise matchup has the same win probability α >
1
2. Constructing a PCMC model where the
transition rate from i to j is α if j beats i in rock-paper-scissors yields the rate matrix
Q =
" −1
1 −α
α
α
−1
1 −α
1 −α
α
−1
#
.
We see that for pairs of objects, the PCMC model returns the same probabilities as the pairwise
game, i.e. pij = α when i beats j in rock-paper-scissors, as pij = qji when qij+qji = 1. Regardless
of how the probability α is chosen, however, it is always the case that prU = ppU = psU = 1/3. It
follows that regularity does not hold for α > 2/3.
We view the PCMC model’s lack of regularity is a positive trait in the sense that empirical choice
phenomena such as framing effects and asymmetric dominance violate regularity [14], and the
PCMC model is rare in its ability to model such choices. Deriving necessary and sufﬁcient con-
ditions on Q for a PCMC model to be a RUM, analogous to known characterization theorems for
RUMs [11] and known sufﬁcient conditions for nested MNL models to be RUMs [5], is an interest-
ing open challenge.
3
Properties
While we have demonstrated already that the PCMC model avoids several restrictive properties that
are often inconsistent with empirical choice data, we demonstrate in this section that the PCMC
model still exhibits deep structure in the form of contractibility, which implies uniform expansion.
Inspired by a thought experiment that was posed as an early challenge to the choice axiom, we deﬁne
the property of contractibility to handle notions of similarity between elements. We demonstrate that
the PCMC model exhibits contractibility, which gracefully handles this thought experiment.
3.1
Uniform expansion
Yellott [32] introduced uniform expansion as a weaker condition than Luce’s choice axiom, but one
that implies the choice axiom in the context of any independent RUM. Yellott posed the axiom of
invariance to uniform expansion in the context of “copies” of elements which are “identical.” In the
context of our model, such copies would have identical transition rates to alternatives:
Deﬁnition 1 (Copies). For i, j in S ⊆U, we say that i and j are copies if for all k ∈S −i −j,
qik = qjk and qij = qji.
4

Yellott’s introduction to uniform expansion asks the reader to consider an offer of a choice of bever-
age from k identical cups of coffee, k identical cups of tea, and k identical glasses of milk. Yellott
contends that the probability the reader chooses a type of beverage (e.g. coffee) in this scenario
should be the same as if they were only shown one cup of each beverage type, regardless of k ≥1.
Deﬁnition 2 (Uniform Expansion). Consider a choice between n elements in a set S1
=
{i11, . . . , in1}, and another choice from a set Sk containing k copies of each of the n elements:
Sk = {i11, . . . , i1k, i21, . . . , i2k, . . . , in1, . . . , ink}. The axiom of uniform expansion states that for
each m = 1, . . . , n and all k ≥1:
pim1S1 =
k
X
j=1
pimjSk.
We will show that the PCMC model always exhibits a more general property of contractibility, of
which uniform expansion is a special case; it thus always exhibits uniform expansion.
Yellott showed that for any independent RUM with |U| ≥3 the double-exponential distribution
family is the only family of independent distributions that exhibit uniform expansion for all k ≥1,
and that Thurstone’s model based on the Gaussian distribution family in particular does not exhibit
uniform expansion.
While uniform expansion seems natural in many discrete choice contexts, it should be regarded with
some skepticism in applications that model competitions. Sports matches or races are often modeled
using RUMs, where the winner of a competition can be modeled as the competitor with the best draw
from their random variable. If a competitor has a performance distribution with a heavy upper tail
(so that their wins come from occasional “good days”), uniform expansion would not hold. This
observation relates to recent work on team performance and selection [16], where non-invariance
under uniform expansion plays a key role.
3.2
Contractibility
In a book review of Luce’s early work on the choice axiom, Debreu [10] considers a hypothetical
choice between three musical recordings: one of Beethoven’s eighth symphony conducted by X,
another of Beethoven’s eighth symphony conducted by Y , and one of Debussy quartet conducted
by Z. We will call these options B1, B2, and D respectively. When compared to D, Debreu argues
that B1 and B2 are indistinguishable in the sense that pDB1 = pDB2. However, someone may
prefer B1 over B2 in the sense that pB1B2 > 0.5. This is impossible under a BTL model, in which
pDB1 = pDB2 implies that γB1 = γB2 and in turn pB1B2 = 0.5.
To address contexts in which elements compare identically to alternatives but not each other (e.g. B1
and B2), we introduce contractible partitions that group these similar alternatives into sets. We
then show that when a PCMC model contains a contractible partition, the relative probabilities of
selecting from one of these partitions is independent from how comparisons are made between
alternatives in the same set. Our contractible partition deﬁnition can be viewed as akin to (but
distinct from) nests in nested MNL models [24].
Deﬁnition 3 (Contractible Partition). A partition of U into non-empty sets A1, . . . , Ak is a con-
tractible partition if qaiaj = λij for all ai ∈Ai, aj ∈Aj for some Λ = {λij} for i, j ∈{1, . . . , k}.
Proposition 3. For a given Λ, let A1, . . . , Ak be a contractible partition for two PCMC models on
U represented by Q, Q′ with stationary distributions π, π′. Then for any Ai:
X
j∈Ai
pjU =
X
j∈Ai
p′
jU,
(1)
or equivalently, π(Ai) = π′(Ai).
Proof. Suppose Q has contractible partition A1, . . . , Ak with respect to Λ. If we decompose the
balance equations (i.e. each row of πT Q = 0), for x ∈A1 WLOG we obtain:
π(x)

X
y∈A1\x
qxy +
k
X
i=2
X
ai∈Ai
qxai

=
X
y∈A1\x
π(y)qyx +
k
X
i=2
X
ai∈Ai
π(ai)qaix.
(2)
5

Noting that for ai ∈Ai and aj ∈Aj, qaiaj = λij, (2) can be rewritten:
π(x)

X
y∈A1\x
qxy

+ π(x)
k
X
i=2
|Ai|λi1 =
X
y∈A1\x
π(y)qyx +
k
X
i=2
π(Ai)λi1.
Summing over x ∈A1 then gives
X
x∈A1
π(x)

X
y∈A1\x
qxy

+ π(A1)
k
X
i=2
|Ai|λi1 =
X
x∈A1
X
y∈A1\x
π(y)qyx + |A1|
k
X
i=2
π(Ai)λi1.
The leftmost term of each side is equal, so we have
π(A1) = |A1| Pk
i=2 π(Ai)λi1
P
i=2 |Ai|λ1i
,
(3)
which makes π(A1) the solution to global balance equations for a different continuous time Markov
chain with the states {A1, . . . , Ak} and transition rate ˜qAiAj = |Aj|λij between state Ai and Aj,
and ˜qAiAi = −P
j̸=i ˜qAiAj. Now qaiaj + qajai ≥1 implies λij + λji ≥1. Combining this
observation with |Ai| > 0 shows (as with the proof of Proposition 1) that this chain is irreducible
and thus that {π(Ai)}k
i=1 are well-deﬁned. Furthermore, because ˜Q is determined entirely by Λ and
|A1|, . . . , |Ak|, we have that ˜Q = ˜Q′, and thus that π(Ai) = π′(Ai), ∀i regardless of how Q and Q′
may differ, completing the proof.
The intuition is that we can “contract” each Ai to a single “type” because the probability of choosing
an element of Ai is independent of the pairwise probabilities between elements within the sets. The
above proposition and the contractibility of a PCMC model on all uniformly expanded sets implies
that all PCMC models exhibit uniform expansion.
Proposition 4. Any PCMC model exhibits uniform expansion.
Proof. We translate the problem of uniform expansion into the language of contractibility. Let U1
be the universe of unique items i11, i21, . . . , in1, and let Uk be a universe containing k copies of
each item in U1. Let imj denote the jth copy of the mth item in U1. Thus Uk = ∪n
m=1 ∪k
j=1 imj.
Let Q be the transition rate matrix of the CTMC on U1. We construct a contractible partition of Uk
into the n sets, each containing the k copies of some item in U1. Thus Am = ∪k
j=1imj. By the
deﬁnition of copies, that {Am}n
m=1 is a contractible partition of Uk with Λ = Q. Noting |Am| = k
for all m in Equation (3) above results in {π(Am)}n
m=1 being the solution to πT Q = πT Λ =
0. Thus pimU1 = π(Am) = Pk
j=1 pimjUk for each m, showing that the model exhibits uniform
expansion.
We end this section by noting that every PCMC model has a trivial contractible partition into single-
tons. Detection and exploitation of Q’s non-trivial contractible partitions (or appropriately deﬁned
“nearly contractible partitions”) are interesting open research directions.
4
Inference and prediction
Our ultimate goal in formulating this model is to make predictions: using past choices from diverse
subsets S ⊆U to predict future choices. In this section we ﬁrst give the log-likelihood function
log L(Q; C) of the rate matrix Q given a choice data collection of the form C = {(ik, Sk)}n
k=1, where
ik ∈Sk was the item chosen from Sk. We then investigate the ability of a learned PCMC model to
make choice predictions on empirical data, benchmarked against learned MNL and MMNL models,
and interpret the inferred model parameters ˆQ. Let CiS(C) = |{(ik, Sk) ∈C : ik = i, Sk = S}|
denote the number of times in the data that i was chosen out of set S for each S ⊆U, and let
CS(C) = |{(ik, Sk) ∈C : Sk = S}| be the number of times that S was the choice set for each
S ⊆U.
6

4.1
Maximum likelihood
For each S ⊆U, i ∈S, recall that piS(Q) is the probability that i is selected from set S as a function
of the rate matrix Q. After dropping all additive constants, the log-likelihood of Q given the data C
(derived from the probability mass function of the multinomial distribution) is:
log L(Q; C) =
X
S⊆U
X
i∈S
CiS(C) log(piS(Q)).
Recall that for the PCMC model, piS(Q) = πS(i), where πS is the stationary distribution for a
CTMC with rate matrix QS, i.e. πT
S QS = 0 and P
i∈S πS(i) = 1. There is no general closed form
expression for piS(Q). The implicit deﬁnition also makes it difﬁcult to derive gradients for log L
with respect to the parameters qij. We employ SLSQP [27] to maximize log L(Q; C), which is non-
concave in general. For more information on the optimization techniques used in this section, see
the Supplementary Materials.
4.2
Empirical data results
We evaluate our inference procedure on two empirical choice datasets, SFwork and SFshop, col-
lected from a survey of transportation preferences around the San Francisco Bay Area [18]. The
SFshop dataset contains 3,157 observations each consisting of a choice set of transportation alter-
natives available to individuals traveling to and returning from a shopping center, as well as a choice
from that choice set. The SFwork dataset, meanwhile, contains 5,029 observations consisting of
commuting options and the choice made on a given commute. Basic statistics describing the choice
set sizes and the number of times each pair of alternatives appear in the same choice set appear in
the Supplementary Materials1.
We train our model on observations Ttrain ⊂C and evaluate on a test set Ttest ⊂C via
Error(Ttrain; Ttest) =
1
|Ttest|
X
(i,S)∈Ttest
X
j∈S
|pjS( ˆQ(Ttrain)) −˜piS(Ttest)|,
(4)
where ˆQ(Ttrain) is the estimate for Q obtained from the observations in Ttrain and ˜piS(Ttest) =
CiS(Ttest)/CS(Ttest) is the empirical probability of i was selected from S among observations in
Ttest. Note that Error(Ttrain; Ttest) is the expected ℓ1-norm of the difference between the empirical
distribution and the inferred distribution on a choice set drawn uniformly at random from the obser-
vations in Ttest. We applied small amounts of additive smoothing to each dataset.
We compare our PCMC model against both an MNL model trained using Iterative Luce Spectral
Ranking (I-LSR) [23] and a more ﬂexible MMNL model. We used a discrete mixture of k MNL
models (with O(kn) parameters), choosing k so that the MMNL model had strictly more parameters
than the PCMC model on each data set. For details on how the MMNL model was trained, see the
Supplementary Materials.
Figure 3 shows Error(Ttrain; Ttest) on the SFwork data as the learning procedure is applied to in-
creasing amounts of data. The results are averaged over 1,000 different permutations of the data
with a 75/25 train/test split employed for each permutation. We show the error on the testing data as
we train with increasing proportions of the training data. A similar ﬁgure for SFshop data appears
in the Supplementary Materials.
We see that our model is better equipped to learn from and make predictions in both datasets, and
when using all of the training data, we observe an error reduction of 36.2% and 46.5% compared to
MNL and 24.4% and 31.7% compared to MMNL on SFwork and SFshop respectively.
Figure 3 also gives two different heat maps of ˆQ for the SFwork data, showing the relative rates
ˆqij/ˆqji between pairs of items as well as how the total rate ˆqij + ˆqji between pairs compares to
total rates between other pairs. The index ordering of each matrix follows the estimated selection
probabilities of the PCMC model on the full set of the alternatives for that dataset. The ordered
options for SFwork are: (1) driving alone, (2) sharing a ride with one other person, (3) walking,
1Data and code available here: https://github.com/sragain/pcmc-nips
7

Figure 2: Prediction error on a 25% holdout of the SFwork data for the PCMC, MNL, and MMNL
models. PCMC sees improvements of 34.1% and 23.1% in prediction error over MNL and MMNL,
respectively, when training on 75% of the data.
(4) public transit, (5) biking, and (6) carpooling with at least two others. Numerical values for the
entries of ˆQ for both datasets appear in the Supplementary Materials.
The inferred pairwise selection probabilities are ˆpij = ˆqji/(ˆqji + ˆqij). Constructing a tournament
graph on the alternatives where (i, j) ∈E if ˆpij ≥0.5, cyclic triplets are then length-3 cycles in the
tournament. A bound due to Harary and Moser [13] establishes that the maximum number of cyclic
triples on a tournament graph on n nodes is 8 when n = 6 and 20 when n = 8. According to our
learned model, the choices exhibit 2 out of a maximum 8 cyclic triplets in the SFwork data and 6
out of a maximum 20 cyclic triplets for the SFshop data.
Additional evaluations of predictive performance across a range of synthetic datasets appear in the
Supplementary Materials. The majority of datasets in the literature on discrete choice focus on
pairwise comparisons or ranked lists, where lists inherently assume transitivity and the independence
of irrelevant alternatives. The SFwork and SFshop datasets are rare examples of public datasets
that genuinely study choices from sets larger than pairs.
5
Conclusion
We introduce a Pairwise Choice Markov Chain (PCMC) model of discrete choice which deﬁnes
selection probabilities according to the stationary distributions of continuous time Markov chains
on alternatives. The model parameters are the transition rates between pairs of alternatives.
In general the PCMC model is not a random utility model (RUM), and maintains broad ﬂexibility
by eschewing the implications of Luce’s choice axiom, stochastic transitivity, and regularity. De-
spite this ﬂexibility, we demonstrate that the PCMC model exhibits desirable structure by fulﬁlling
uniform expansion, a property previously found only in the Multinomial Logit (MNL) model and
the intractable Elimination by Aspects model.
We also introduce the notion of contractibility, a property motivated by thought experiments instru-
mental in moving choice theory beyond the choice axiom, for which Yellott’s axiom of uniform
expansion is a special case. Our work demonstrates that the PCMC model exhibits contractibility,
which implies uniform expansion. We also showed that the PCMC model offers straightforward in-
ference through maximum likelihood estimation, and that a learned PCMC model predicts empirical
choice data with a signiﬁcantly higher ﬁdelity than both MNL and MMNL models.
The ﬂexibility and tractability of the PCMC model opens up many compelling research directions.
First, what necessary and sufﬁcient conditions on the matrix Q guarantee that a PCMC model is a
RUM [11]? The efﬁcacy of the PCMC model suggests exploring other effective parameterizations
for Q, including developing inferential methods which exploit contractibility. There are also open
computational questions, such as streamlining the likelihood maximization using gradients of the
implicit function deﬁnitions. Very recently, learning results for nested MNL models have shown
favorable query complexity under an oracle model [2], and a comparison of our PCMC model with
these approaches to learning nested MNL models is important future work.
Acknowledgements.
This work was supported in part by a David Morgenthaler II Faculty Fellow-
ship and a Dantzig–Lieberman Operations Research Fellowship. We thank Flavio Chierichetti and
8

Ravi Kumar for noticing an irregularity in the previously published version of Figure 4 that helped
us identify a minor bug. Figures 3 and 4 have been ﬁxed in this arxiv version.
