PHYSICS-INFORMED NEURAL NETWORKS FOR
HIGH-FREQUENCY AND MULTI-SCALE PROBLEMS USING
TRANSFER LEARNING
A PREPRINT
Abdul Hannan Mustajab ∗
DIBRIS
University of Genoa
via Dodecaneso, 35, 16146 Genoa, Italy

0009-0000-9337-7410
Hao Lyu†
Institute for Geosciences
Kiel University
24118 Kiel, Germany

Zarghaam Rizvi ‡
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering
University of Waterloo
Waterloo, Canada N2L 3G1

Frank Wuttke §
Institute for Geosciences
Kiel University
24118 Kiel, Germany

January 17, 2024
ABSTRACT
Physics-informed neural network (PINN) is a data-driven solver for partial and ordinary differential
equations(ODEs/PDEs). It provides a unified framework to address both forward and inverse
problems. However, the complexity of the objective function often leads to training failures. This
issue is particularly prominent when solving high-frequency and multi-scale problems. We proposed
using transfer learning to boost the robustness and convergence of training PINN, starting training
from low-frequency problems and gradually approaching high-frequency problems. Through two
case studies, we discovered that transfer learning can effectively train PINN to approximate solutions
from low-frequency problems to high-frequency problems without increasing network parameters.
Furthermore, it requires fewer data points and less training time. We elaborately described our
training strategy, including optimizer selection, and suggested guidelines for using transfer learning
to train neural networks for solving more complex problems.
Keywords PINN · transfer learning · damped harmonic oscillator · wave equation
1
Introduction
Physics Informed Neural Networks (PINNs) are a relatively new data-driven solver of partial differential equations
(PDEs) [33, 34, 32]. The neural networks’ capability to approximate complex functions is their basis for solving partial
differential equations. While the idea of using neural networks to estimate PDE solutions dates back to the 1990s, it
initially garnered limited attention for various reasons. With the rapid advancements in deep neural network technology,
the exponential growth in computing power, and the thriving open deep learning community, PINNs have recently
garnered substantial interest and acclaim.
∗These authors contributed equally to this work.
†These authors contributed equally to this work.
‡Current address: GeoAnalysis Engineering GmbH, Kiel, Germany 24118.
§Corresponding author.
arXiv:2401.02810v2  [cs.LG]  15 Jan 2024

arXiv Template
A PREPRINT
PINNs possess several notable advantages that make them a competitive method compared to mature, traditional
numerical approaches for PDEs. PINN, as a meshless method, directly embeds mathematical equations into the network
structure. The dual reliance on observational data and mathematical models equips PINN to handle noisy observational
data. Moreover, PINN offers a consistent framework for forward and inverse problems through optimization algorithms
[32]. By simply extending the neural network with additional output channels, PINNs can be employed to solve inverse
problems. In inverse design, PINNs can impose PDEs as rigorous constraints, enhancing their utility. While neural
networks grapple with the curse of dimensionality as problems become more complex, PINNs strive to resolve PDEs
and their inversion challenges in domains characterized by intricate geometries and high dimensions, where numerical
simulations are notably challenging.
PINNs harness the PDEs to guide and constrain the training process of neural networks. PINNs incorporate the residuals,
initial conditions, and boundary conditions of the PDE into their loss function. The neural networks are tasked with
fitting the observed data while simultaneously minimizing the PDE residuals. The neural network is thus trained to
approximate the solution of the PDE by minimizing this loss function. This approach reduces the need for additional
observational data, making it a powerful and efficient technique to solve PDEs.
The core of PINN implementation is to calculate partial derivatives, and this task can be completed through automatic
differentiation algorithms in mainstream deep learning frameworks [4]. Several open-source libraries such as DeepXDE
[21], SimNet [13] and SciANN [11] have been developed, making PINN easier to apply in practice. PINN has produced
compelling results on a range of problems in computational science and engineering, such as computational fluid
dynamics, acoustics, solid mechanics [19, 35, 47], and geo-physics[6, 40, 12, 29, 36, 14].
The challenge of training PINNs to achieve fast convergence and accuracy is persistent. This challenge is intricately
linked to the highly complex and non-convexity of the loss function, which makes a PINN hard to train[17, 41]. Besides,
training PINNs also suffer from spectral bias. The neural networks prioritize learning low-frequency patterns over high-
frequency details [31, 7]. When the problem contains high-frequency features, the PINN models often fail to converge
to the desired solution due to this phenomenon [39, 42, 37]. PINNs inherent ability to encapsulate domain knowledge
and exploit neural network architectures has made them particularly attractive for simulating complex physical systems.
However, as the applications of PINNs extend to problems characterized by high-frequency oscillations and intricate
multiscale phenomena, they face significant hurdles. These challenges often manifest in numerical instability, slow
convergence, and increased computational demands, making it imperative to develop strategies that enhance the
robustness and efficiency of PINNs in such scenarios.
We believe that transfer learning is a key technique to address the training difficulties for high-frequency and multiscale
problems. Transfer learning is a technique that leverages knowledge acquired from solving one problem to solve
a related problem, involving training a network to solve the desired PDEs from an initial model [23]. It enables
training PINNs with a reduced amount of data and training costs [30, 43, 38]. Moreover, it addresses the challenge of
insufficient high-fidelity data in numerous scientific computing cases [8]. Through transfer learning, PINN demonstrates
its capability to effectively solve intricate PDEs, positioning itself as a valuable tool in addressing complex engineering
challenges, such as fracture mechanics[10] and flows in porous media[9].
The primary objective of this research is to elucidate the prevailing challenges encountered in PINNs when applied to
high-frequency and multiscale problems. To mitigate these challenges, we investigate the utility of transfer learning.
By incorporating transfer learning into the PINN framework, we aim to harness the benefits of pre-trained models
and transferable knowledge, potentially enhancing the convergence and accuracy of PINNs for high-frequency and
multiscale applications. Moreover, the choice of optimizer plays a crucial role in training neural networks, including
PINNs. Different optimization algorithms possess distinct characteristics and may perform differently in terms of
convergence speed and solution quality. In this study, we empirically evaluate a range of optimizers to determine their
effectiveness in training the foundational model of the PINN. Through a comparative analysis, we seek to identify
the optimizer that best suits the specific requirements and challenges of PINNs in the context of high-frequency and
multiscale problems. We take wave propagation for our case study as it is an essential phenomenon in engineering due
to its ability to transfer energy and information through a medium without the bulk motion of the medium itself. Waves
are a fundamental concept in many engineering disciplines, including acoustics, electro-magnetics, cosmology, fluid
dynamics, and not least in geophysics [29, 46, 25]. In particular, PINN has been explored and applied to full waveform
inversion (FWI) due to its ability to solve inverse problems with noisy inputs [36, 16, 44, 45, 26]. The wave equation
provides a mathematical framework for understanding and predicting how waves propagate through various physical
systems. While numerous numerical methods have been developed for solving wave equations, the emergence of PINN
has garnered significant interest as a data-driven approach [1, 2, 27, 22].
In summary, this manuscript addresses these issues faced by PINNs when confronted with high-frequency and multiscale
problems. By investigating transfer learning and scrutinizing the performance of various optimizers, we aim to provide
valuable insights into improving the efficacy and versatility of PINNs for challenging physical simulations. The rest of
2

arXiv Template
A PREPRINT
the paper is organized as follows: The second section provides a brief introduction to PINN, emphasizing the crucial
components pertinent to our study. In the third section, we show two studies where transfer learning is employed to
train PINN for solving partial differential equations (PDEs) from low frequencies to high frequencies. Additionally, we
explore best practices for selecting the base model. The final section summarizes our findings and offers conclusions
while also suggesting potential directions for future research.
2
Method
2.1
Physics Informed Neural Networks
PINNs or Physics-Informed Neural Networks are a specific kind of neural network that is trained to approximate the
solution to any given law of physics defined by a partial differential equation (PDE) or a system of PDEs [32]. The
most significant benefit of PINN over other methods is that it is a mesh-free method. The classical PINN follows the
collocation-based approach, implying that the neural network aims to approximate the strong form of the governing
equation at a set of collocation points. As the collocation points can be distributed randomly within the domain, and
no mesh is required, this approach belongs to the category of mesh-free methods [3]. Most modern machine learning
frameworks, such as Pytorch or Tensorflow, have implemented automatic differentiation for PINNs.
The architecture of a PINN can vary depending on the specific problem, while many PINNs still use the feed-forward
fully connected neural network (FCN) as part of their architecture. The FCN is the basic architecture used in deep
learning algorithms [18]. A fully-connected neural network with L layers is a function fθ : Rd →Rk described by
fθ(x) = W [L−1]σ ◦(. . . σ ◦(W [0]x + b[0]) + . . .) + b[L−1],
(1)
where σ is an entry-wise activation function, W [l] and b[l] are respectively the weight matrices and the bias corresponding
to each layer l, and θ is the set of weights and biases:
θ = (W [0], . . . , W [L−1], b[0], . . . , b[L−1]).
(2)
The activation function is a crucial component of a neural network, and there are several favoured choices available,
including the sigmoid function, hyperbolic tangent function (tanh), and rectified linear unit (ReLU). It is worth
mentioning that we have implemented the hyperbolic tangent function as part of the neural network for PINN.
The hyperbolic tangent activation function is defined as
tanh(x) = ex −e−x
ex + e−x .
The smoothness and overall S-shape of this function are similar to that of the sigmoid function. However, unlike the
sigmoid function, the range of the outputs is centered at 0 and falls between (-1, 1). This makes the tanh activation
function more appropriate for deep neural networks as it avoids creating a bias towards positive outputs[3]. ReLU is
more commonly used as an activation function in neural networks. However, it’s unsuitable for PINNs due to its second
derivative being zero.
3

arXiv Template
A PREPRINT
.
Figure 1: PINN Model
A PINN consists of multiple loss terms, each corresponding to initial conditions, boundary conditions and the function
loss itself, or the PDE / ODE residuals. This results in a high-dimensional and non-convex loss function with different
competing loss terms. It is essential to weigh these loss terms; otherwise, the optimizer might train only one term and
create a bias. Later in the 1D wave section, we discuss about temporal loss weighting technique that we used to assign
the highest weight to temporal loss terms in the beginning.
We consider a scalar function u(x, t) on the domain Λ × [0, ∞); with the boundary ∂Λ, where Λ ⊂Rd. u(x, t) satisfies
the following PDEs:
F(x, t; u, ∂xu, ∂tu, . . . , λ) = 0,
∀(x, t) ∈U
(3)
I(x, t0, h; u, ∂tu, . . . , λ) = 0,
∀(x, t) ∈I
(4)
B(x, t, g; u, ∂xu, . . . , λ) = 0,
∀(x, t) ∈∂U
(5)
where F contains a sequence of differential operators (i.e., [∂t, ∂x, . . .]), which represent the residual of the PDEs,
λ is the PDEs’ parameter vector, I is the residual form of the initial condition containing a function h(x, t), and
B is the residual form of the boundary condition containing a function g(x, t). U = {(x, t) | x ∈Λ, t ∈[0, T]},
∂U = {(x, t) | x ∈∂Λ, t ∈[0, T]}, and I = {(x, t) | x ∈∂Λ, t = 0}.
Figure 1 illustrates the structure of a PINN model. The space coordinates x and time t are usually taken as the inputs,
and the outputs ˆu(x, t) are used to approximate the true solution u(x, t) of the PDEs. The differential operators are
calculated by Automatic Differentiation (AD), and then the PDEs’ residual, initial condition and boundary condition
are embedded into the loss function of neural networks:
L(θ) = WF LF (θ) + WILI(θ) + WBLB(θ)
(6)
With θ representing the weights of neural network, WF , WI, and WB are the weights for various loss terms, and LF ,
LI, and LB are the loss functions of PDE, initial condition, and boundary condition, respectively:
LF =
1
NF
NF
X
i=1
∥F(x(i), t(i); ˆu)∥2
(7)
LI = 1
NI
NI
X
i=1
∥I(x(i), t(i), h(i); ˆu)∥2
(8)
LB =
1
NB
NB
X
i=1
∥B(x(i), t(i), g(i); ˆu)∥2
(9)
where NF , NI, and NB are the sets of collocation points in U, I, and ∂U, and NF , NI, and NB denote the number of
sampling points. In this manuscript, the total loss function is represented as LPINN(θ).
4

arXiv Template
A PREPRINT
After the formulation of these loss terms, the PINN can be trained using any optimizer, such as Adam, Stochastic
Gradient descent or Netwon-based method like L-BFGS. In this work, we mainly use Adam [15] and LBFGS [5], which
are described in detail in the following parts.
2.2
Optimizers
Here we outline the common optimization algorithms used to train neural networks, and minimizing the loss function.
2.2.1
Adam Optimizer
Algorithm 1 Adam Optimization
Input: parameters, learning_rate, β1, β2, ϵ
m ←zeros_like(parameters)
▷Initialize 1st moment vector
v ←zeros_like(parameters)
▷Initialize 2nd moment vector
t ←0
▷Initialize timestep
while not converged do
t ←t + 1
gradient ←compute_gradient(parameters)
▷Compute gradient of the objective function
m ←β1 · m + (1 −β1) · gradient
▷Update biased first moment estimate
v ←β2 · v + (1 −β2) · (gradient2)
▷Update biased second raw moment estimate
mhat ←m/(1 −βt
1)
▷Bias-corrected first moment estimate
vhat ←v/(1 −βt
2)
▷Bias-corrected second moment estimate
parameters ←parameters −learning_rate · mhat/(√vhat + ϵ)
▷Update parameters
end while
2.2.2
LBFGS Optimizer
Broyden–Fletcher–Goldfarb–Shanno is a quasi-Newton-based optimization algorithm commonly used for training
neural networks. The loss landscape of a PINN is highly complex due to competing loss terms, making BFGS an
effective choice for training PINNs.
BFGS ([28]) is a gradient method that iteratively computes the Hessian matrix of the loss function, and this process
requires O(n2) gradient evaluations, where n represents the number of parameters. The BFGS curvature matrix can be
updated without the need for matrix inversion, and this reduces the computational cost significantly. However, since
the Hessian matrix is the foundation of the BFGS algorithm, memory usage increases as the square of the number of
parameters. This results in rapid memory usage growth, making it impractical to use this approach for neural networks
with a large number of parameters.
The BFGS algorithm may use large amounts of memory, but L-BFGS ([20]) solves this issue by storing a few vectors
that represent an estimate of the full Hessian matrix. Compared to BFGS, L-BFGS is more computationally efficient,
uses less memory, and can handle problems with larger numbers of parameters. Due to its lower memory requirements,
the L-BFGS algorithm has become the favorite among second-order optimization techniques.
3
Result and discussion
3.1
Simple Harmonic Oscillator (SHM).
The damped harmonic oscillator is a classic problem in mechanics that describes the motion of a mechanical oscillator
(e.g., a spring pendulum) under the influence of a restoring force and friction. The governing equation for the damped
harmonic oscillator is given by:
F(x) = md2u
dt2 + µdu
dt + ku
(10)
where:
m : mass of the oscillator
µ : coefficient of friction
k : spring constant
5

arXiv Template
A PREPRINT
Algorithm 2 BFGS Method
1: Input: Initial guesses x0 and B0, tolerance tol
2: Set k = 0
3: repeat
4:
Obtain descent direction dk = −B−1
k ∇f(xk)
5:
Set αk = 1
6:
Calculate the step sk = αkdk
7:
Update the design xk+1 = xk + sk
8:
if |xk+1 −xk| < tol or |∇f(xk+1)| < tol then
9:
break
10:
end if
11:
Obtain the variation in the gradient yk = ∇f(xk+1) −∇f(xk)
12:
Update the Hessian approximation Bk+1 = Bk
13:
Increase the iterator k = k + 1
14: until convergence
In the paper, we focus on the under-damped state, i.e. where the oscillation is slowly damped by friction occurs when
δ < ω0, where δ =
µ
2m and ω0 =
q
k
m.
The following initial conditions are applied:
u(t = 0) = 1,
du
dt (t = 0) = 0
The exact solution of the above setup is given by:
u(t) = e−δt (2A cos(ϕ + ωt)) ,
(11)
where ω =
p
ω2
0 −δ2.
The interior residual is given by
rint,θ(t) := md2ˆuθ
dt2 + µdˆuθ
dt + kˆuθ
(12)
This is the exact solution of the oscillator with w0 as 20 Hz.
With an increasing frequency (ω0), the damped harmonic oscillator function becomes more complicated for PINNs to
approach. Figure 2 illustrates the exact solution of the oscillator for four frequencies ω0 = 20, 40, 50, 60.
Figure 2: Exact solution for different values of ω
In the experiment, our PINN model is used to approximate the solutions of the oscillator for the above four frequencies.
The selected source terms yield uncomplicated solutions that demonstrate how the F-principle affects the convergence
of PINN to the numerical solution. According to the F-principle, the low-frequency or large-scale characteristics of the
solution are initially manifested in the PINNs, while it may take multiple training epochs to retrieve the high-frequency
or small-scale features.[23]. We expect that the vanilla PINN will converge faster and achieve better accuracy in learning
the damped harmonic oscillator for lower-frequency components, e.g., ω0 = 20 than for higher-frequency components
(ω0 = 40, 50, 60). The experiment results that come in the following part are aligned with the expectations.
The PINN model we used in experiments for this case, comprises a fully connected network (FCN) with 5 fully
connected layers, each consisting of 64 neurons, totalling 4321 parameters. We trained the PINN model using two
6

arXiv Template
A PREPRINT
optimizers, Adam and L-BFGS, which are mentioned in most PINN papers. To populate the computational domain, we
utilized a total of 100 equidistant points. It is worth noting that the selection of the number of points within the domain
is a decision that is dependent on the user.
For ω0 = 20 [Figure. 3a], PINN was able to fit well where the loss reaches the order of 10−3 with both Adam and
L-BFGS optimizers. With the LBFGS optimizer, it converged at around 2200 epochs, while with the Adam optimizer, it
converged at around 7000 epochs.
(a) PINN solution vs. exact solution using L-BFGS
(b) Loss curve with L-BFGS Optimizer over epochs
(c) PINN solution vs. exact solution using Adam
(d) Loss curve with Adam Optimizer over epochs
Figure 3: Comparisons of Adam optimizer vs. L-BFGS optimizer at 20Hz
For ω0 = 30, PINN was also able to reach the order of 10−3 loss with both Adam and L-BFGS optimizers. With the
L-BFGS optimizer, it converged at around 7000 epochs. The Adam optimizer needs around 22,000 epochs to converge.
7

arXiv Template
A PREPRINT
(a) PINN solution vs. exact solution using L-BFGS
(b) Loss curve with L-BFGS Optimizer over epochs
(c) PINN solution vs. exact solution using Adam
(d) Adam Loss
Figure 4: Comparison of the Adam optimizer with the L-BFGS optimizer at 30Hz: (a) comparing the PINN solution and
the exact solution using L-BFGS, (b) visualization of loss curve with L-BFGS Optimizer across epochs, (c) analyzing
the PINN solution and exact solution using Adam, (d) Loss using Adam Optimizer.
In comparing the convergence behaviour of the Adam optimizer and the L-BFGS optimizer at a frequency of 40
Hz, it becomes apparent that both algorithms exhibit different characteristics and performances, particularly in their
speed of convergence and stability during optimization. The Adam optimizer eventually converges; however, this is
achieved after a significant number of iterations. This observation raises concerns as we transition to higher frequencies,
suggesting challenges in PINN convergence. This could be partly attributed to the well-documented issue of spectral
bias inherent in neural networks.
When considering which optimizer to use, it’s crucial to select one with caution as it can have a significant impact on
the efficiency of the training process. We found out that using Adam with L-BFGS gave the best results.
8

arXiv Template
A PREPRINT
(a) PINN solution vs. exact solution using L-BFGS
(b) Loss curve with L-BFGS Optimizer over epochs
(c) PINN solution vs. exact solution using Adam
(d) Loss curve with Adam Optimizer over epochs
Figure 5: Comparisons of Adam optimizer vs. L-BFGS optimizer at 40Hz
The performance of PINN is observed to be consistent in two different frequency scenarios (20 Hz and 30 Hz)
when using Adam and L-BFGS. This indicates that the quality of predictions remains stable regardless of the chosen
optimization algorithm. It’s important to note that both optimizers ultimately achieve convergence and deliver favorable
predictive outcomes; however, they exhibit notable differences in behavior.
The Adam optimizer, although effective, requires a higher number of iterations to reach convergence and shows some
degree of instability compared to the L-BFGS optimizer. At times, Adam outperforms L-BFGS, possibly due to
L-BFGS temporarily getting stuck in a local minimum leading to quick convergence. In the context of the mentioned
frequency scenarios, a learning rate of 0.1 was set for the L-BFGS optimizer. Since L-BFGS is a quasi-newton method,
it depends on the initial guess.
At a frequency of 40 Hz, Adam optimizer was able to solve the problem but it required significantly more number of
iterations, with almost 80,000 iterations needed to reach convergence. On the other hand, LBFGS failed to converge and
seemed to fit the lower-frequency components of the problem. It is important to note that the loss in this case remained
at the order of 10−1, highlighting the problems of solving high-frequency cases within the PINN framework.
9

arXiv Template
A PREPRINT
3.1.1
Transfer Learning
This section introduces a transfer learning technique to boost the robustness and convergence of training PINN. Transfer
learning presents a promising solution to mitigate these issues by leveraging the pre-trained model or the baseline PINN,
thereby furnishing an advantageous initial guess to expedite convergence. To assess the efficacy of this technique,
we conducted a series of experiments involving different optimization algorithms and compared their performances
respectively. The baseline low-frequency model is required to initiate the transfer learning of PINN from low-frequency
to high-frequency. The models mentioned in the previous part are selected for transfer learning to facilitate the scaling
of the model to higher frequencies. The baseline model is established, revealing that as the frequency is elevated,
the capability of the PINN, given the present configuration, to scale effectively diminishes. It is important to note
that LBFGS, a Newton-based optimization method, exhibits sensitivity to the initial guess, rendering it susceptible
to convergence challenges, including the risk of getting trapped in local minima or failing to converge even after a
substantial number of iterations. Some empirical evidence shows that Adam optimizer when used with a combination
of the L-BFGS optimizer, ensures that the latter escapes from the local minima [24]. We selected the baseline models at
30Hz generated by both the Adam and LBFGS optimizers. These models were subsequently employed as the starting
point for training a PINN model targeting a frequency of 40 Hz. This approach enables us to evaluate which of the two
optimizers produces a more effective baseline model for this task.
3.1.2
Discussion on results
In this section, we test out both Adam and L-BFGS optimizers, to see which of the two performs better as a source
model to scale to higher frequencies.
In the following results, we use L-BFGS to train the network. We make use of transfer learning and compare Adam and
L-BFGS baseline models. In Fig[6b], it is evident that the source model for 30 Hz with Adam performed much better
than that of L-BFGS. As mentioned above, this might be due to the nature of L-BFGS.
When we compare the results of the 40Hz case without transfer learning (Fig. 5d) with those using transfer learning
(Fig. 6b), we observe that Adam achieved a loss order of 10−3 in about 75000 iterations, while the one using transfer
learning achieved the same order in less than 2000 epochs. This not only reduced the computation time significantly but
also provided a more accurate solution.
(a) PINN vs Exact Solution
(b) Adam vs L-BFGS Initializers.
Figure 6: 40Hz comparisons for Adam and LBFGS.
Now, moving on to the next set of results, we use the 40Hz model as the source to train the model on ω = 50. Similarly,
we used the ω = 50 model as the source to train the model on ω = 60.
10

arXiv Template
A PREPRINT
(a) Source PINN: 40 Hz
(b) Loss
(c) Source PINN: 50 Hz
(d) Loss
Figure 7: Transfer Learning Results for ω = 50Hz and ω = 60Hz. In both the cases, L-BFGS optimizer was used to
train the model. The order of loss for ω = 60Hz is higher than that that of ω = 50Hz because of the complexity of the
solution, however the PINN solutions fit well with the exact solution.
3.2
1D Wave Equation
The wave equation:
∂2u
∂t2 = c2∇2u
The equation models the oscillations of a one-dimensional string (u = u(x, t)), the oscillations of a two-dimensional
thin membrane (u = u(x, y, t)), or the pressure oscillations of an acoustic wave in air (u = u(x, y, z, t)). The constant c
denotes the velocity of wave propagation for the oscillations and is also known as the wave velocity in certain literature.
11

arXiv Template
A PREPRINT
L2 Relative Error (%) of Adam, LBFGS, and Transfer Learning
Adam
LBFGS
Transfer Learning (Adam)
20
0.95
0.92
-
30
1.24
0.88
-
40
0.80
0.95
0.037
50
3.15
0.95
0.881
60
71.54
0.95
0.218
Table 1: Relative L2 Error (%).
Although typically discussed in just one spatial dimension (x) due to time (t) being the only independent variable, it’s
important to mention that the variable we’re studying (u) can represent movement in another direction, like up and
down (y). For example, this occurs when a string is not only moving horizontally (x) but also vertically (y), as seen on
a flat surface.
The unknown function u depends on space x and time t, and can be represented as an equation:
u = u(x, t)
(13)
To solve the function, we need also Initial conditions and boundary conditions. In the experiments, we use the following
conditions.







utt = c2uxx
u(x, 0) = sin(x)
ut(x, 0) = sin(x)
ub(0, t) = ub(π, t) = 0
for 0 ≤t ≤2π,
0 ≤x ≤π
(14)
We solve the case where c = 1. Specifically, we address the equation with homogeneous Dirichlet conditions, c = 1,
and compare the results with the analytical solution.
As we increase c from 1 to 2, we observe that the solution takes much longer to converge. To address this, we employ
transfer learning. We first train the model for c = 1 and then use this knowledge to approximate the solution for c = 2.
To do so, we approximate the underlying solution with a feedforward dense neural network with tunable parameters θ:
ˆuθ(x, t) ≈u(x, t)
This approach allows us to efficiently model and compare solutions under different conditions, providing a deeper
understanding of the system’s behaviour.
The loss function is given by
L(θ) = WF LF (θ) + WILI(θ) + WBLB(θ),
with θ as the weights of neural networks.
The interior residual is given by
rint,θ(x, t) := ˆuθ,tt(x, t) −c2(ˆuθ,xx(x, t)),
∀t ∈[0, T], x ∈[0, π].
(15)
The spatial boundary residual or boundary conditions are given by
rsb,θ(0, t) := ˆuθ(0, t) −ub(0, t),
rsb,θ(π, t) := ˆuθ(π, t) −ub(π, t),
∀t ∈(0, T].
(16)
The temporal boundary residual is given by
rtb,θ(x) := ˆuθ(x, 0) −u(x, 0),
∀x ∈[0, π],
rtb,θ(x) := ˆuθ,t(x, 0) −ut(x, 0),
∀x ∈[0, π].
(17)
12

arXiv Template
A PREPRINT
With the training input points corresponding to low-discrepancy Sobol sequences, the loss terms are:
LF (θ) =
1
Nint
Nint
X
i=1
r2
int,θ(xi, ti)
(18)
LB(θ) =
1
Nsb
Nsb
X
i=1
r2
sb,θ(ti, 0) +
1
Nsb
Nsb
X
i=1
r2
sb,θ(ti, π),
(19)
LI(θ) =
1
Ntb
Ntb
X
i=1
r2
tb,θ(xi)
(20)
Where Nint are the number of collocation points or the PDE points, Nsb are the points are each spatial boundary or
boundary condition points and Ntb are temporal boundary points or the Initial condition points.
Finally, we train our neural network to minimize the above loss terms and find the parameter θ.
θ∗= argminθ

LF (θ) + LB(θ) + λILI(θ)

(21)
The weight (λI) for the temporal loss term is given by the equation:
λI = Ct

1 −
t
Tmax

+ 1
(22)
where: - λI is the weight for the temporal loss term, - Ct is a constant, - t is the current time, - Tmax is the maximum
time.
In the first experiments, we added an approximation of the wave for c=1. We know the exact solution for that case,
which is :
u(x, t) = sin(x) · (sin(t) + cos(t))
(23)
For this experiment, we used a fully connected neural network comprising of 5 layers and 64 units. Sobol sequences
were used to generate collocation points, spatial boundary points and temporal boundary points. Specifically, we
generated 512 collocation points, 32 temporal points, and 64 points on each boundary. The network was optimized
using an L-BFGS optimizer.
13

arXiv Template
A PREPRINT
Figure 8: Sampled points over the spatial and temporal domain. At x = 0 and x = L boundary points are added, which
will define the value which u(x,t) will take.
14

arXiv Template
A PREPRINT
3.2.1
Results for 1D Wave Equation
(a) PINN Solution
(b) Exact Solution
(c) Loss
(d) c = 1.5
(e) c = 2
(f) c = 4
(g) c = 1.5
(h) c = 2
(i) c = 4
Figure 9: Results for c = 1 (L-BFGS): (a) Approximated solution by PINN, (b) Exact solution, (c) Loss Results for
various values of c with transfer learning: (d) c = 1.5, (e) c = 2, (f) c = 4.
For c=1, the L2 Relative Error Norm between the exact solution and PINN solution is 0.05%.
Result 9a is the baseline or the source model that we trained, for c = 1. Now, in the upcoming results, we use this
model as a source; as we increase the value of c to 1.5, 2.0, and 4.0. In figure [9], the model that used transfer learning
performed better than the models without transfer learning. In 6a, the loss reached an order of 10−5 in 600 epochs with
transfer learning whereas it took 1000 epochs without transfer learning.
15

arXiv Template
A PREPRINT
It can be observed in figure [9i] that the model without transfer learning took more than 10,000 epochs to converge,
whereas the model which used transfer learning took only 7,500 epochs to converge. The order of loss is not as low as
the other results because of the complexity of the solution.
4
Conclusions
This work aims to shed light on the common challenges encountered by PINN when applied to high-frequency and
multi-scale problems. We explored the potential of transfer learning as a viable solution to these problems. In the
experiments, we observed that the PINN depicts the ability to approximate the harmonic oscillator at a frequency of
20 Hz. However, as the frequency increases, a noticeable increase in computational cost follows, accompanied by
increased convergence times.
The application of the vanilla PINN, utilizing an identical neural network architecture as the 20 Hz case, proves
unfeasible in achieving convergence at 40 Hz, 50 Hz, and 60 Hz with the same amount of collocation points. While the
model performs well on low-frequency problems, it starts struggling when given higher frequencies. Through transfer
learning, we were able to learn the 50 Hz and 60 Hz solutions, without adding more layers or changing the number of
collocation points. The results were promising as well, with a loss reaching an order of 10−2.
Similarly, in the context of the one-dimensional wave equation, with the use of transfer learning, we learned the PINN
solution for different wave velocities, starting from 2 all the way up to 4. The transfer learning method turned out to be
effective, as for higher wave velocity, the model achieved convergence significantly quicker.
Transfer learning has proved to be an effective method for enhancing the efficiency and convergence characteristics of
PINNs, preventing the necessity for modifications to the network architecture, which in turn causes more parameters.
Future research will focus on exploring transfer learning methodologies in more complex scenarios, including the
two-dimensional wave equation with different source terms.
