AI Trust in business processes: The need for process-aware explanations
Steve T.K. Jan1, Vatche Ishakian2, Vinod Muthusamy2
1Virginia Tech, 2IBM Research AI
Introduction
Business processes underpin a large number of enterprise
operations including loan origination, invoice management,
and insurance claims processing (Van Der Aalst and others
2011). The business process management (BPM) industry
is expected to approach $16 billion by 2023 (Marketwatch
2019). There is a great opportunity for infusing AI to reduce
cost or provide better customer experience (Rao and Verweij
2017), and the BPM literature is rich in machine learning so-
lutions to gain insights on clusters of process traces (Nguyen
et al. 2016; Nguyen et al. 2019), predict outcomes (Breuker
et al. 2016), and recommend decisions (Mannhardt et al.
2016). Deep learning models including from the NLP do-
main have also been applied (Tax et al. 2017; Evermann,
Rehse, and Fettke 2017).
Unfortunately, very little of these innovations have been
applied and adopted by enterprise companies (Daugherty
and Wilson 2018), and those adopted are limited to narrow
domains such as customer services, enterprise risk and com-
pliance (Wilson, Alter, and Shukla 2016).
We assert that a large reason for the lack of adoption of AI
models in BPM is that business users are risk-averse and do
not implicitly trust AI models. There has been little attention
paid to explaining model predictions to business users with
process context. These business users are typically experts
in their ﬁelds but not data scientists, and explanations must
be presented in their business domain vocabulary. We chal-
lenge the BPM community to build on the AI interpretability
literature, and the AI Trust community to take advantage of
business process artifacts.
Example of process-aware explanations
Consider the example loan application process in Fig. 1.
Suppose we build a sequence model that takes as input the
activities and features observed in the process and predicts
the outcome, in this case whether a loan will be approved.
Such models have been shown to achieve accuracies of up to
85% (Evermann, Rehse, and Fettke 2017). We can then use
tools such as LIME (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016) to
Copyright c⃝2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
Skilled agent
Verify 
amount
Novice agent 
Reject
Accept
Credit check
Risk 
assessment
Receive loan 
application
amount 
>= $1000
amount 
< $1000
score 
< 700
risk 
< 0.6
Figure 1: Example loan application business process
explain the prediction, and as we see in Fig. 2, LIME sug-
gests that the presence of the skilled agent activity causes
the application to be rejected.
A subject matter expert, however, would understand from
the process description that large loan requests from borrow-
ers with low credit scores are the ones most likely to end up
routed to a skilled agent. This is an example of a causal re-
lationship that can be inferred from the process description:
the LOAN AMOUNT and/or CREDIT SCORE features are the
cause of the feature associated with the skilled agent activity.
The explanations from LIME are based on sampling per-
turbations around the input features and measuring how the
predictions change with the perturbations. It turns out in our
example, that many of the perturbations do not conform to
the process description and hence can never occur. Once we
apply the causal relationship above to constrain the perturba-
tion sampling, LIME offers the explanation in Fig. 3 where
the CREDIT SCORE is now prominent.
This simple example illustrates how directly applying in-
terpretability techniques to process models results in incom-
plete or potentially misleading explanations. We also see
how by being process-aware we can augment existing al-
gorithms to improve the quality of explanations. This is a
Figure
2:
Vanilla
LIME:
The explanation is incom-
plete showing only that the
loan is rejected because it is
sent to a skilled agent.
Figure
3:
Process-aware
LIME: The explanation now
highlights the inﬂuence of
the causal CREDIT SCORE
feature.
arXiv:2001.07537v1  [cs.AI]  21 Jan 2020

nascent and fertile research area that we have only scratched
the surface of.
Challenges to trustworthy AI for BPM
As stated earlier, virtually all AI models in the BPM litera-
ture train models with features from process traces, depicted
as “state of the art” in Fig. 4.
process traces
runtime features
AI models
predictions
interpretable models
explanations
process-aware 
interpretable models
process-aware 
explanations
business process
( State of the art )
( Level 1 )
( Level 2 )
Figure 4: Approaches for interpretability in BPM AI models
There is an opportunity to apply known interpretabil-
ity approaches in a BPM context, denoted as LEVEL 1 in
Fig. 4. For example, a regression model to predict pro-
cess completion time (Polato et al. 2014) can be aug-
mented by techniques to make regression models more in-
terpretable (Schielzeth 2010). The same can apply to deep
learning models for process prediction tasks. Most of the
current techniques, however, are based on sequence models
including LSTMs and RNNs (Tax et al. 2017; Evermann,
Rehse, and Fettke 2017). While there has been a lot of re-
search on explaining deep learning models based on CNNs
for image classiﬁcation tasks (Gan et al. 2015), there is
a growing interest in similar problems for sequence mod-
els (Li et al. 2015). LEMNA attempts to offer high ﬁdelity
explanations for deep learning models (Guo et al. 2018) but
assumes a security context where adjacent features are de-
pendent on each other, an assumption that does not always
hold true in business processes. Note that LEVEL 1 inter-
pretability only uses the trained model (either as a black box
or white box) and possibly features from the training data.
Of course, applying known interpretability techniques to the
new business process domain may not be straightforward
and require additional innovations, but LEVEL 1 at least of-
fers researchers a pathway to begin experimenting.
A more ambitious, and promising, approach is to bring
process-awareness to the problem, marked as LEVEL 2 in
Fig. 4. Here, interpretability models would take advantage
of the knowledge of the business process deﬁnitions and full
runtime process traces. Some of the information in these ar-
tifacts is typically lost when preparing the data for the pre-
dictive models. There is, unfortunately, a dearth of solutions
that apply this approach. An example of LEVEL 2 was pre-
sented in the previous section where the black box inter-
pretability model in LIME is augmented with knowledge of
the causal relationships derived from the business process
deﬁnition. An understanding of the feature causality graph
avoids misleading or incomplete explanations.
Business process datasets1 are publicly available, but as
part of this research area the community will need to develop
metrics to measure the quality of the explanations. Standard
techniques that measure how model accuracy degrades as
features are removed from the dataset may make sense in
other machine learning domains, such as visual explanations
1 https://data.4tu.nl/repository/collection:event logs real
of image classiﬁcation models (Adebayo et al. 2018), but
may not be appropriate for business process.
We think process-aware explanations is an interesting re-
search area with potential for high business impact.
