How Deep is Knowledge Tracing?
Mohammad Khajah
Dept. of Computer Science
University of Colorado
Boulder, Colorado 80309

Robert V. Lindsey
Dept. of Computer Science
University of Colorado
Boulder, Colorado 80309

Michael C. Mozer
Dept. of Computer Science
University of Colorado
Boulder, Colorado 80309

ABSTRACT
In theoretical cognitive science, there is a tension between
highly structured models whose parameters have a direct
psychological interpretation and highly complex, general-
purpose models whose parameters and representations are
diﬃcult to interpret.
The former typically provide more
insight into cognition but the latter often perform better.
This tension has recently surfaced in the realm of educa-
tional data mining, where a deep learning approach to pre-
dicting students’ performance as they work through a series
of exercises—termed deep knowledge tracing or DKT—has
demonstrated a stunning performance advantage over the
mainstay of the ﬁeld, Bayesian knowledge tracing or BKT.
In this article, we attempt to understand the basis for DKT’s
advantage by considering the sources of statistical regularity
in the data that DKT can leverage but which BKT cannot.
We hypothesize four forms of regularity that BKT fails to
exploit: recency eﬀects, the contextualized trial sequence,
inter-skill similarity, and individual variation in ability. We
demonstrate that when BKT is extended to allow it more
ﬂexibility in modeling statistical regularities—using exten-
sions previously proposed in the literature—BKT achieves
a level of performance indistinguishable from that of DKT.
We argue that while DKT is a powerful, useful, general-
purpose framework for modeling student learning, its gains
do not come from the discovery of novel representations—
the fundamental advantage of deep learning. To answer the
question posed in our title, knowledge tracing may be a do-
main that does not require ‘depth’; shallow models like BKT
can perform just as well and oﬀer us greater interpretability
and explanatory power.
1.
INTRODUCTION
In the past forty years, machine learning and cognitive sci-
ence have undergone many paradigm shifts, but few have
been as dramatic as the recent surge of interest in deep
learning [16].
Although deep learning is little more than
a re-branding of neural network techniques popular around
1990, deep learning has achieved some remarkable results
thanks to much faster computing resources and much larger
data sets than were available in 1990. Deep learning under-
lies state-of-the-art systems in speech recognition, language
processing, and image classiﬁcation [16, 26]. Deep learning
also is responsible for systems that can produce captions for
images [29], create synthetic images [9], play video games
[19] and even Go [27].
The ‘deep’ in deep learning refers to multiple levels of rep-
resentation transformation that lie between model inputs
and outputs.
For example, an image-classiﬁcation model
may take pixel values as input and produce a labeling of
the objects in the image as output. Between the input and
output is a series of representation transformations that con-
struct successively higher-order features—features that are
less sensitive to lighting conditions and the position of ob-
jects in the image, and more sensitive to the identities of the
objects and their qualitative relationships. The features dis-
covered by deep learning exhibit a complexity and subtlety
that make them diﬃcult to analyze and understand (e.g.,
[31]). Furthermore, no human engineer could wire up a so-
lution as thorough and accurate as solutions discovered by
deep learning. Deep learning models are fundamentally non-
parametric, in the sense that interpreting individual weights
and individual unit activations in a network is pretty much
impossible. This opacity is in stark contrast to parametric
models, e.g., linear regression, where each of the coeﬃcients
has a clear interpretation in terms of the problem at hand
and the input features.
In one domain after the next, deep learning has achieved
gains over traditional approaches.
Deep learning discards
hand-crafted features in favor of representation learning, and
deep learning often ignores domain knowledge and structure
in favor of massive data sets and general architectural con-
straints on models (e.g., models with spatial locality to pro-
cess images, and models with local temporal constraints to
process time series).
It was inevitable that deep learning would be applied to
student-learning data [22].
This domain has traditionally
been the purview of the educational data mining community,
where Bayesian knowledge tracing, or BKT, is the dominant
computational approach [3]. The deep learning approach to
modeling student data, termed deep knowledge tracing or
DKT, created a buzz when it appeared at the Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems Conference in December 2015,
including press inquiries (N. Heﬀernan, personal communi-
arXiv:1604.02416v2  [cs.AI]  21 Jun 2016

cation) and descriptions of the work in the blogosphere (e.g.,
[7]). Piech et al. [22] reported substantial improvements in
prediction performance with DKT over BKT on two real-
world data sets (Assistments, Khan Academy) and one
synthetic data set which was generated under assumptions
that are not tailored to either DKT or BKT. DKT achieves a
reported 25% gain in AUC (a measure of prediction quality)
over the best previous result on the Assistments bench-
mark.
In this article, we explore the success of DKT. One approach
to this exploration might be to experiment with DKT, re-
moving components of the model or modifying the input
data to determine which model components and data char-
acteristics are essential to DKT’s performance. We pursue
an alternative approach in which we ﬁrst formulate hypothe-
ses concerning the signals in the data that DKT is able to
exploit but that BKT is not. Given these hypotheses, we
propose extensions to BKT which provide it with additional
ﬂexibility, and we evaluate whether the enhanced BKT can
achieve results comparable to DKT. This procedure leads
not only to a better understanding of how BKT and DKT
diﬀer, but also helps us to understand the structure and
statistical regularities in the data source.
1.1
Modeling Student Learning
The domain we’re concerned with is electronic tutoring sys-
tems which employ cognitive models to track and assess stu-
dent knowledge. Beliefs about what a student knows and
doesn’t know allow a tutoring system to dynamically adapt
its feedback and instruction to optimize the depth and eﬃ-
ciency of learning.
Ultimately, the measure of learning is how well students are
able to apply skills that they have been taught.
Conse-
quently, student modeling is often formulated as time series
prediction: given the series of exercises a student has at-
tempted previously and the student’s success or failure on
each exercise, predict how the student will fare on a new
exercise. Formally, the data consist of a set of binary ran-
dom variables indicating whether student s produces a cor-
rect response on trial t, {Xst}. The data also include the
exercise labels, {Yst}, which characterize the exercise. Sec-
ondary data has also been incorporated in models, including
the student’s utilization of hints, response time, and char-
acteristics of the speciﬁc exercise and the student’s partic-
ular history with related exercises [2, 30]. Although such
data improve predictions, the bulk of research in this area
has focused on the primary measure—whether a response is
correct or incorrect—and a sensible research strategy is to
determine the best model based on the primary data, and
then to determine how to incorporate secondary data.
The exercise label, Yst, might index the speciﬁc exercise,
e.g., 3 + 4 versus 2 + 6, or it might provide a more general
characterization of the exercise, e.g., single digit addition.
In the latter case, exercise are grouped by the skill that
must be applied to obtain a solution. Although we will use
the term skill in this article, others refer to the skill as a
knowledge component, and the authors of DKT also use the
term concept. Regardless, the important distinction for the
purpose of our work is between a label that indicates the
particular exercise and a label that indicates the general skill
required to perform the exercise. We refer to these two types
of labels as exercise indexed and skill indexed, respectively.
1.2
Knowledge Tracing
BKT models skill-speciﬁc performance, i.e., performance on
a series of exercises that all tap the same skill. A separate in-
stantiation of BKT is made for each skill, and a student’s raw
trial sequence is parsed into skill-speciﬁc subsequences that
preserve the relative ordering of exercises within a skill but
discard the ordering relationship of exercises across skills.
For a given skill σ, BKT is trained using the data from each
student s, {Xst|Yst = σ}, where the relative trial order is
preserved. Because it will become important for us to dis-
tinguish between absolute trial index and the relative trial
index within a skill, we use t to denote the former and use i
to denote the latter.
BKT is based on a theory of all-or-none human learning
[1] which postulates that the knowledge state of student s
following the i’th exercise requiring a certain skill, Ksi, is
binary: 1 if the skill has been mastered, 0 otherwise. BKT,
formalized as a hidden Markov model, infers Ksi from the
sequence of observed responses on trials 1 . . . i, {Xs1, Xs2,
. . . , Xsi}. BKT is typically speciﬁed by four parameters:
P(Ks0 = 1), the probability that the student has mas-
tered the skill prior to solving the ﬁrst exercise; P(Ks,i+1 =
1 | Ksi = 0), the transition probability from the not-mastered
to mastered state; P(Xsi = 1 | Ksi = 0), the probability of
correctly guessing the answer prior to skill mastery; and
P(Xsi = 0 | Ksi = 1), the probability of answering incor-
rectly due to a slip following skill mastery. Because BKT is
typically used in modeling practice over brief intervals, the
model assumes no forgetting, i.e., K cannot transition from
1 to 0.
BKT is a highly constrained, structured model. It assumes
that the student’s knowledge state is binary, that predicting
performance on an exercise requiring a given skill depends
only on the student’s binary knowledge state, and that the
skill associated with each exercise is known in advance. If
correct, these assumptions allow the model to make strong
inferences. If incorrect, they limit the model’s performance.
The only way to determine if model assumptions are correct
is to construct an alternative model that makes diﬀerent
assumptions and to determine whether the alternative out-
performs BKT. DKT is exactly this alternative model, and
its strong performance directs us to examine BKT’s limita-
tions. First, however, we brieﬂy describe DKT.
Rather than constructing a separate model for each skill,
DKT models all skills jointly. The input to the model is the
complete sequence of exercise-performance pairs, {(Xs1, Ys1)
...(Xst, Yst)...(XsT , YsT )}, presented one trial at a time. As
depicted in Figure 1, DKT is a recurrent neural net which
takes (Xst, Yst) as input and predicts Xs,t+1 for each possi-
ble exercise label. The model is trained and evaluated based
on the match between the actual and predicted Xs,t+1 for
the tested exercise (Ys,t+1). In addition to the input and
output layers representing the current trial and the next
trial, respectively, the network has a hidden layer with fully
recurrent connections (i.e., each hidden unit connects back
to all other hidden units). The hidden layer thus serves to
retain relevant aspects of the input history as they are use-

Output layer
(predicted accuracy
for each exercise)
Input layer
(current exercise + 
accuracy)
Hidden layer
(student knowledge state)
Figure 1: Deep knowledge tracing (DKT) architec-
ture.
Each rectangle depicts a set of processing
units; each arrow depicts complete connectivity be-
tween each unit in the source layer and each unit in
the destination layer.
ful for predicting future performance. The hidden state of
the network can be conceived of as embodying the student’s
knowledge state.
Piech et al. [22] used a particular type
of hidden unit, called an LSTM (long short-term memory)
[10], which is interesting because these hidden units behave
very much like the BKT latent knowledge state, Ksi. To
brieﬂy explain LSTM, each hidden unit acts like a mem-
ory element that can hold a bit of information. The unit
is triggered to turn on or oﬀby events in the input or the
state of other hidden units, but when there is no speciﬁc
trigger, the unit preserves its state, very similar to the way
that the latent state in BKT is sticky—once a skill is learned
it stays learned. With 200 LSTM hidden units—the num-
ber used in simulations reported in [22]—and 50 skills, DKT
has roughly 250,000 free parameters (connection strengths).
Contrast this number with the 200 free parameters required
for embodying 50 diﬀerent skills in BKT.
With its thousand-fold increase in ﬂexibility, DKT is a very
general architecture. One can implement BKT-like dynam-
ics in DKT with a particular, restricted set of connection
strengths. However, DKT clearly has the capacity to en-
code learning dynamics that are outside the scope of BKT.
This capacity is what allows DKT to discover structure in
the data that BKT misses.
1.3
Where Does BKT Fall Short?
In this section, we describe four regularities that we conjec-
ture to be present in the student-performance data. DKT
is ﬂexible enough that it has the potential to discover these
regularities, but the more constrained BKT model is simply
not crafted to exploit the regularities. In following sections,
we suggest means of extending BKT to exploit such regular-
ities, and conduct simulation studies to determine whether
the enhanced BKT achieves performance comparable to that
of DKT.
1.3.1
Recency Effects
Human behavior is strongly recency driven. For example,
when individuals perform a choice task repeatedly, response
latency can be predicted by an exponentially decaying av-
erage of recent stimuli [12]. Intuitively, one might expect
to observe recency eﬀects in student performance.
Con-
sider, for example, a student’s time varying engagement.
If the level of engagement varies slowly relative to the rate
at which exercises are being solved, a correlation would be
induced in performance across local spans of time. A stu-
dent who performed poorly on the last trial because they
were distracted is likely to perform poorly on the current
trial. We conducted a simple assessment of recency using
the Assistments data set (the details of this data set will
be described shortly). Similarly to [5], we built an autore-
gressive model that predicts performance on the current trial
as an exponentially weighted average of performance on past
trials, with a decay half life of about 5 steps. We found that
this single parameter model ﬁt the Assistments data reli-
ably better than classic BKT. (We are not presenting details
of this simulation because we will evaluate a more rigorous
variant of the idea in a following section. Our goal here is
to convince the reader that there is likely some value to the
notion of recency-weighted prediction.)
Recurrent neural networks tend to be more strongly inﬂu-
enced by recent events in a sequence than more distal events
[20]. Consequently, DKT is well suited to exploiting recent
performance in making predictions. In contrast, the gener-
ative model underlying BKT supposes that once a skill is
learned, performance will remain strong, and that a slip at
time t is independent of a slip at t + 1.
1.3.2
Contextualized Trial Sequence
The psychological literature on practice of multiple skills in-
dicates that the sequence in which an exercise is embedded
inﬂuences learning and retention (e.g., [24, 25]). For exam-
ple, given three exercises each of skills A and B, presenting
the exercises in the interleaved order A1–B1–A2–B2–A3–B3
yields superior performance relative to presenting the exer-
cises in the blocked order A1–A2–A3–B1–B2–B3. (Perfor-
mance in this situation can be based on an immediate or
delayed test.)
Because DKT is fed the entire sequence of exercises a stu-
dent receives in the order the student receives them, it can
potentially infer the eﬀect of exercise order on learning. In
contrast, because classic BKT separates exercises by skill,
preserving only the relative order of exercises within a skill,
the training sequence for BKT is the same regardless of
whether the trial order is blocked or interleaved.
1.3.3
Inter-Skill Similarity
Each exercise presented to a student has an associated la-
bel. In typical applications of BKT—as well as two of the
three simulations reported in Piech et al. [22]—the label in-
dicates the skill required to solve the problem. Any two such
skills, S1 and S2, may vary in their degree of relatedness.
The stronger the relatedness, the more highly correlated one
would expect performance to be on exercises tapping the two
skills, and the more likely that the two skills will be learned
simultaneously.
DKT has the capacity to encode inter-skill similarity. If each
hidden unit represents student knowledge state for a partic-
ular skill, then the hidden-to-hidden connections encode the
degree of overlap. In an extreme case, if two skills are highly
similar, they can be modeled by a single hidden knowledge
state. In contrast, classic BKT treats each skill as an in-

dependent modeling problem and thus can not discover or
leverage inter-skill similarity.
DKT has the additional strength, as demonstrated by Piech
et al., that it can accommodate the absence of skill labels.
If each label simply indexes a speciﬁc exercise, DKT can
discover interdependence between exercises in exactly the
same manner as it discovers interdependence between skills.
In contrast, BKT requires exercise labels to be skill indexed.
1.3.4
Individual Variation in Ability
Students vary in ability, as reﬂected in individual diﬀerences
in mean accuracy across trials and skills. Individual varia-
tion might potentially be used in a predictive manner: a
student’s accuracy on early trials in a sequence might pre-
dict accuracy on later trials, regardless of the skills required
to solve exercises. We performed a simple veriﬁcation of this
hypothesis using the Assistments data set. In this data set,
students study one skill at a time and then move on to the
next skill. We computed correlation between mean accuracy
of all trials on the ﬁrst n skills and the mean accuracy of all
trials on skill n+1, for all students and for n ∈{1, ..., N −1}
where N is the number of skills a student studied. We ob-
tained a correlation coeﬃcient of 0.39: students who tend
to do well on the early skills learned tend to do well on later
skills, regardless of the skills involved.
DKT is presented with a student’s complete trial sequence.
It can use a student’s average accuracy up to trial t to pre-
dict trial t + 1. Because BKT models each skill separately
from the others, it does not have the contextual information
needed to estimate a student’s average accuracy or overall
ability.
2.
EXTENDING BKT
In the previous section, we described four regularities that
appear to be present in the data and which we conjecture
that DKT exploits but which the classic BKT model cannot.
In this section, we describe three extensions to BKT that
would bring BKT on par with DKT with regard to these
regularities.
2.1
Forgetting
To better capture recency eﬀects, BKT can be augmented
to allow for forgetting of skills. Forgetting corresponds to
ﬁtting a BKT parameter F ≡P(Ks,i+1 = 0 | Ksi = 1), the
probability of transitioning from a state of knowing to not
knowing a skill. In standard BKT, F = 0.
Without forgetting, once BKT infers that the student has
learned, even a long run of poorly performing trials cannot
alter the inferred knowledge state. However, with forgetting,
the knowledge state can transition in either direction, which
allows the model to be more sensitive to the recent trials:
A run of unsuccessful trials is indicative of not knowing the
skill, regardless of what preceded the run.
Forgetting is
not a new idea to BKT, and in fact was included in the
original psychological theory that underlies the notion of
binary knowledge state [1].
However, it has not typically
been incorporated into BKT. When it has been included in
BKT [23], the motivation was to model forgetting from one
day to the next, not forgetting that can occur on a much
shorter time scale.
Incorporating forgetting can not only sensitize BKT to re-
cent events but can also contextualize trial sequences. To
explain, consider an exercise sequence such as A1–A2–B1–
A3–B2–B3–A4, where the labels are instances of skills A and
B. Ordinary BKT discards the absolute number of trials be-
tween two exercises of a given skill, but with forgetting, we
can count the number of intervening trials and treat each as
an independent opportunity for forgetting to occur. Conse-
quently, the probability of forgetting between A1 and A2 is
F, but the probability of forgetting between A2 and A3 is
1 −(1 −F)2 and between A3 and A4 is 1 −(1 −F)3. Using
forgetting, BKT can readily incorporate some information
about the absolute trial sequence, and therefore has more
potential than classic BKT to be sensitive to interspersed
trials in the exercise sequence.
2.2
Skill Discovery
To model interactions among skills, one might suppose that
each skill has some degree of inﬂuence on the learning of
other skills, not unlike the connection among hidden units
in DKT. For BKT to allow for such interactions among
skills, the independent BKT models would need to be in-
terconnected, using an architecture such as a factorial hid-
den Markov model [6]. As an alternative to this somewhat
complex approach, we explored a simpler scheme in which
diﬀerent exercise labels could be collapsed together to form
a single skill. For example, consider an exercise sequence
such as A1–B1–A2–C1–B2–C2–C3.
If skills A and B are
highly similar or overlapping, such that learning one pre-
dicts learning the other, it would be more sensible to treat
this sequence in a manner that groups A and B into a sin-
gle skill, and to train a single BKT instantiation on both
A and B trials.
This approach can be used whether the
exercise labels are skill indices or exercise indices. (One of
the data sets used by Piech et al. [22] to motivate DKT has
exercise-indexed labels).
We recently proposed an inference procedure that automati-
cally discovers the cognitive skills needed to accurately model
a given data set [18].
(A related procedure was indepen-
dently proposed in [8].) The approach couples BKT with
a technique that searches over partitions of the exercise la-
bels to simultaneously (1) determine which skill is required
to correctly answer each exercise, and (2) model a student’s
dynamical knowledge state for each skill. Formally, the tech-
nique assigns each exercise label to a latent skill such that a
student’s expected accuracy on a sequence of same-skill ex-
ercises improves monotonically with practice according to
BKT. Rather than discarding the skills identiﬁed by ex-
perts, our technique incorporates a nonparametric prior over
the exercise-skill assignments that is based on the expert-
provided skills and a weighted Chinese restaurant process
[11].
In the above illustration, our technique would group A and
B into one skill and C into another. This procedure col-
lapses like skills (or like exercises), yielding better ﬁts to the
data by BKT. Thus, the procedure performs a sort of skill
discovery.
2.3
Incorporating Latent Student-Abilities
To account for individual variation in student ability, we
have extended BKT [14, 13] such that slip and guess prob-

abilities are modulated by a latent ability parameter that is
inferred from the data, much in the spirit of item-response
theory [4]. As we did in [14], we assume that students with
stronger abilities have lower slip and higher guess probabil-
ities. When the model is presented with new students, the
posterior predictive distribution on abilities is used initially,
but as responses from the new student are observed, un-
certainty in the student’s ability diminishes, yielding better
predictions for the student.
3.
SIMULATIONS
3.1
Data Sets
Piech et al. [22] studied three data sets. One of the data
sets, from Khan Academy, is not publicly available. Despite
our requests and a plea from one of the co-authors of the
DKT paper, we were unable to obtain permission from the
data science team at Khan Academy to use the data set. We
did investigate the other two data sets in Piech et al., which
are as follows.
Assistments is an electronic tutor that teaches and eval-
uates students in grade-school math. The 2009-2010 “skill
builder” data set is a large, standard benchmark, available
by searching the web for assistment-2009-2010-data.
We
used the train/test split provided by Piech et al., and fol-
lowing Piech et al., we discarded all students who had only
a single trial of data.
Synthetic is a synthetic data set created by Piech et al. to
model virtual students learning virtual skills. The training
and test sets each consist of 2000 virtual students perform-
ing the same sequence of 50 exercises drawn from 5 skills.
The exercise on trial t is assumed to have a diﬃculty char-
acterized by δt and require a skill speciﬁed by σt. The ex-
ercises are labeled by the identity of the exercise, not by
the underlying skill, σt. The ability of a student, denoted,
αt varies over time according to a drift-diﬀusion process,
generally increasing with practice. The response correctness
on trial t is a Bernoulli draw with probability speciﬁed by
guessing-corrected item-response theory with diﬃculty and
ability parameters δt and αt. This data set is challenging
for BKT because the skill assignments, σt, are not provided
and must be inferred from the data. Without the skill as-
signments, BKT must be used either with all exercises asso-
ciated with a single skill or each exercise associated with its
own skill. Either of these assumptions will miss important
structure in the data. Synthetic is an interesting data set
in that the underlying generative model is neither a perfect
match to DKT or BKT (even with the enhancements we
have described). The generative model seems realistic in its
assumption that knowledge state varies continuously.
We included two additional data sets in our simulations.
Spanish is a data set of 182 middle-school students prac-
ticing 409 Spanish exercises (translations and application of
simple skills such as verb conjugation) over the course of a
15-week semester, with a total of 578,726 trials [17]. Statics
is from a college-level engineering statics course with 189,297
trials and 333 students and 1,223 exercises [28], available
from the PSLC DataShop web site [15].
3.2
Methods
We evaluated ﬁve variants of BKT1, each of which incor-
porates a diﬀerent subset of the extensions described in the
previous section: a base version that corresponds to the clas-
sic model and the model against which DKT was evaluated
in [22], which we’ll refer to simply as BKT; a version that in-
corporates forgetting (BKT+F), a version that incorporates
skill discovery (BKT+S), a version that incorporates latent
abilities (BKT+A), and a version that incorporates all three
of the extensions (BKT+FSA). We also built our own im-
plementation of DKT with LSTM recurrent units2. (Piech
et al. described the LSTM version as better performing, but
posted only the code for the standard recurrent neural net
version.) We veriﬁed that our implementation produced re-
sults comparable to those reported in [22] on Assistments
and Synthetic. We then also ran the model on Spanish
and Statics.
For Assistments, Spanish, and Statics, we used a single
train/test split. The Assistments train/test split was iden-
tical to that used by Piech et al. For Synthetic, we used
the 20 simulation sets provided by Piech et al. and averaged
results across the 20 simulations.
Each model was evaluated on each domain’s test data set,
and the performance of the model was quantiﬁed with a dis-
criminability score, the area under the ROC curve or AUC.
AUC is a measure ranging from .5, reﬂecting no ability to
discriminate correct from incorrect responses, to 1.0, reﬂect-
ing perfect discrimination. AUC is computed by obtaining
a prediction on the test set for each trial, across all skills,
and then using the complete set of predictions to form the
ROC curve. Although Piech et al. [22] do not describe the
procedure they use to compute AUC for DKT, code they
have made available implements the procedure we describe,
and not the obvious alternative procedure in which ROC
curves are computed on a per-skill basis and then averaged
to obtain an overall AUC.
3.3
Results
Figure 2 presents the results of our comparison of ﬁve vari-
ants of BKT on the four data sets. We walk through the
data sets from left to right.
On Assistments, classic BKT obtains an AUC of 0.73, bet-
ter than the 0.67 reported for BKT by Piech et al. We are
not sure why the scores do not match, although 0.67 is close
to the AUC score we obtain if we treat all exercises as asso-
ciated with a single skill or if we compute AUC on a per-skill
basis and then average.3 BKT+F obtains an AUC of 0.83,
1https://github.com/robert-lindsey/WCRP/tree/forgetting
2https://github.com/mmkhajah/dkt
3Piech et al. cite Pardos and Heﬀernan [21] as obtain-
ing BKT’s best reported performance on Assistments—
an AUC of 0.69. In [21], the overall AUC is computed by
averaging the per-skill AUCs. This method yields a lower
score than the method used by Piech et al., for two reasons.
First, the Piech procedure weighs all trials equally, whereas
the Pardos and Heﬀernan procedure weighs all skills equally.
With the latter procedure, the overall AUC will be dinged
if the model does poorly on a skill with just a few trials, as
we have observed to be the case with Assistments. The
latter procedure also produces a lower overall AUC because
it suppresses any lift due to being able to predict the rela-
tive accuracy of diﬀerent skills. In summary, it appears that

0.72
0.75
0.78
0.81
0.84
0.87
0.90
0.93
AUC
Assistments
BKT
BKT+A
BKT+F
BKT+S
BKT+FSA
DKT
0.61
0.64
0.67
0.70
0.73
0.76
0.79
0.82
Synthetic
BKT
BKT+A
BKT+F
BKT+S
BKT+FSA
DKT
0.72
0.75
0.78
Statics
BKT
BKT+A
BKT+F
BKT+S
BKT+FSA
DKT
0.82
0.85
0.88
Spanish
BKT
BKT+A
BKT+F
BKT+S
BKT+FSA
DKT
Figure 2: A comparison of six models on four data sets. Model performance on the test set is quantiﬁed by
AUC, a measure of how well the model discriminates (predicts) correct and incorrect student responses. The
models are trained on one set of students and tested on another set. Note that the AUC scale is diﬀerent for
each graph, but tic marks are always spaced by .03 units in AUC. On Assistments and Synthetic, DKT results
are from Piech et al. [22]; on Statics and Spanish DKT results are from our own implementation. BKT=
classic Bayesian knowledge tracing; BKT+A= BKT with inference of latent student abilities; BKT+F= BKT
with forgetting; BKT+S= BKT with skill discovery; BKT+FSA= BKT with all three extensions; DKT=
deep knowledge tracing
not quite as good as the 0.86 value reported for DKT by
Piech et al. Examining the various enhancements to BKT,
AUC is boosted both by incorporating forgetting and by in-
corporating latent student abilities. We ﬁnd it somewhat
puzzling that the combination of the two enhancements,
embodied in BKT+FSA, does no better than BKT+F or
BKT+A, considering that the two enhancements tap diﬀer-
ent properties of the data: the student abilities help predict
transfer from one skill to the next, whereas forgetting facil-
itates prediction within a skill.
To summarize the comparison of BKT and DKT, 31.6% of
diﬀerence in performance reported in [22] appears to be due
to the use of a biased procedure for computing the AUC
for BTK. Another 50.6% of the diﬀerence in performance
reported vanishes if BKT is augmented to allow for forget-
ting.
We can further improve BKT if we allow the skill
discovery algorithm to operate with exercise labels that in-
dex individual exercises, as opposed to labels that index the
skill associated with each exercise. With exercise-indexed la-
bels, BKT+S and BKT+FSA both obtain an AUC of 0.90,
beating DKT. However, given DKT’s ability to perform skill
discovery, we would not be surprised if it also achieved a sim-
ilar level of performance when allowed to exploit exercise-
indexed labels.
Turning to Synthetic, classic BKT obtains an AUC of 0.62,
again signiﬁcantly better than the 0.54 reported by Piech et
al. In our simulation, we treat each exercise as having a dis-
tinct skill label, and thus BKT learns nothing more than the
mean performance level for a speciﬁc exercise. (Because the
exercises are presented in a ﬁxed order, the exercise identity
and the trial number are confounded. Because performance
tends to improve as trials advance in the synthetic data,
BKT is able to learn this relationship.) It is possible here
that Piech et al. treated all exercises as associated with a
single skill or that they used the biased procedure for com-
inconsistent procedures may have been used to compute per-
formance of BKT versus DKT in [22], and the procedure for
BKT is biased to yield a lower score.
puting AUC; either of these explanations is consistent with
their reported AUC of 0.54.
Regarding the enhancements to BKT, adding student abil-
ities (BKT+A) improves prediction of Synthetic which is
understandable given that the generative process simulates
students with abilities that vary slowly over time. Adding
forgetting (BKT+F) does not help, consistent with the gen-
erative process which assumes that knowledge level is on
average increasing with practice; there is no systematic for-
getting in the student simulation. Critical to this simulation
is skill induction: BKT+S and BKT+FSA achieve an AUC
of 0.80, better than the reported 0.75 for DKT in [22].
On Statics, each BKT extension obtains an improvement
over classic BKT, although the magnitude of the improve-
ments are small.
The full model, BKT+FSA, obtains an
AUC of 0.75 and our implementation of DKT obtains a
nearly identical AUC of 0.76. On Spanish, the BKT exten-
sions obtain very little beneﬁt. The full model, BKT+FSA,
obtains an AUC of 0.846 and again, DKT obtains a nearly
identical AUC of 0.836. These two sets of results indicate
that for at least some data sets, classic BKT has no glaring
deﬁciencies. However, we note that BKT model accuracy
can be improved if algorithms are considered that use exer-
cise labels which are indexed by exercise and not by skill.
For example, with Statics, performing skill discovery using
exercise-indexed labels, [17] obtain an AUC of 0.81, much
better than the score of 0.73 we report here for BKT+S
based on skill-indexed labels.
In summary, enhanced BKT appears to perform as well on
average as DKT across the four data sets. Enhanced BKT
outperforms DKT by 20.0% (.05 AUC units) on Synthetic
and by 3.0% (.01 AUC unit) on Spanish. Enhanced BKT
underperforms DKT by 8.3% (.03 AUC units) on Assist-
ments and by 3.5% (.01 AUC unit) on Statics.
These
percentages are based on the diﬀerence of AUCs scaled by
by AUCDKT −0.5, which takes into account the fact that an
AUC of 0.5 indicates no discriminability.

4.
DISCUSSION
Our goal in this article was to investigate the basis for the
impressive predictive advantage of deep knowledge tracing
over Bayesian knowledge tracing. We found some evidence
that diﬀerent procedures may have been used to evaluate
DKT and BKT in [22], leading to a bias against BKT. When
we replicated simulations of BKT reported in [22], we ob-
tained signiﬁcantly better performance: an AUC of 0.73 ver-
sus 0.67 on Assistments, and an AUC of 0.62 versus 0.54
on Synthetic.
However, even when the bias is eliminated, DKT obtains
real performance gains over BKT. To understand the basis
for these gains, we hypothesized various forms of regularity
in the data which BKT is not able to exploit. We proposed
enhancements to BKT to allow it to exploit these regulari-
ties, and we found that the enhanced BKT achieved a level
of performance on average indistinguishable from that of
DKT over the four data sets tested. The enhancements we
explored are not novel; they have previously been proposed
and evaluated in the literature. They include forgetting [23],
latent student abilities [14, 13, 21], and skill induction [17,
8].
We observe that diﬀerent enhancements to BKT matter for
diﬀerent data sets. For Assistments, incorporating forget-
ting is key; forgetting allows BKT to capture recency eﬀects.
For Synthetic, incorporating skill discovery yielded huge
gains, as one would expect when the exercise-skill mapping
is not known. And for Statics, incorporating latent student
abilities was relatively most beneﬁcial; these abilities enable
the model to tease apart the capability of a student and
the intrinsic diﬃculty of an exercise or skill. Of the three
enhancements, forgetting and student abilities are compu-
tationally inexpensive to implement, whereas skill discovery
adds an extra layer of computational complexity to infer-
ence.
The elegance of DKT is apparent when one considers the ef-
fort we have invested to bring BKT to par with DKT. DKT
did not require its creators to analyze the domain and de-
termine sources of structure in the data. In contrast, our
approach to augmenting BKT required some domain exper-
tise, a thoughtful analysis of BKT’s limitations, and distinct
solutions to each limitation. DKT is a generic recurrent neu-
ral network model [10], and it has no constructs that are
specialized to modeling learning and forgetting, discovering
skills, or inferring student abilities. This ﬂexibility makes
DKT robust on a variety of datasets with little prior analy-
sis of the domains. Although training recurrent networks is
computationally intensive, tools exist to exploit the parallel
processing power in graphics processing units (GPUs), which
means that DKT can scale to large datasets. Classic BKT
is inexpensive to ﬁt, although the variants we evaluated—
particularly the model that incorporates skill discovery—
require computation-intensive MCMC methods that have a
distinct set of issues when it comes to parallelization.
DKT’s advantages come at a price: interpretability. DKT is
massive neural network model with tens of thousands of pa-
rameters which are near-impossible to interpret. Although
the creators of DKT did not have to invest much up-front
time analyzing their domain, they did have to invest sub-
stantive eﬀort to understand what the model had actually
learned. Our proposed BKT extensions achieve predictive
performance similar to DKT whilst remaining interpretable:
the model parameters (forgetting rate, student ability, etc.)
are psychologically meaningful. When skill discovery is in-
corporated into BKT, the result is clear: a partition of exer-
cises into skills. Reading out such a partitioning from DKT
is challenging and only an approximate representation of the
knowledge in DKT.
Finally, we return to the question posed in the paper’s title:
How deep is knowledge tracing? Deep learning refers to the
discovery of representations. Our results suggest that rep-
resentation discovery is not at the core of DKT’s success.
We base this argument on the fact that our enhancements
to BKT bring it to the performance level of DKT without
requiring any sort of subsymbolic representation discovery.4
Representation discovery is clearly critical in perceptual do-
mains such as image or speech classiﬁcation. But the domain
of education and student learning is high level and abstract.
The input and output elements of models are psychologically
meaningful. The relevant internal states of the learner have
some psychological basis. The characterization of exercises
and skills can—to at least a partial extent—be expressed
symbolically.
Instead of attributing DKT’s success to representation dis-
covery, we attribute DKT’s success to its ﬂexibility and gen-
erality in capturing statistical regularities directly present in
the inputs and outputs. As long as there are suﬃcient data
to constrain the model, DKT is more powerful than clas-
sic BKT. BKT arose in a simpler era, an era in which data
and computation resources were precious. DKT reveals the
value of relaxing these constraints in the big data era. But
despite the wild popularity of deep learning, there are many
ways to relax the constraints and build more powerful mod-
els other than creating a black box predictive device with
a vast interconnected tangle of connections and parameters
that are nearly impossible to interpret.
5.
