CaosDB - Research Data Management for
Complex, Changing, and Automated Research
Workﬂows
Timm Fitschen
1,2,*, Alexander Schlemmer
1,*,α, Daniel Hornung
1,
Henrik tom W¨orden
1,2, Ulrich Parlitz
1,2,3, and Stefan Luther
1,2,3,4,5

*These authors contributed equally to this work.
1Max Planck Institute for Dynamics and Self-Organization, G¨ottingen, Germany
2Institute for Nonlinear Dynamics, Georg-August-Universit¨at, G¨ottingen, Germany
3German Center for Cardiovascular Research (DZHK), partner site G¨ottingen, Germany
4Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University Medical Center G¨ottingen, G¨ottingen, Germany
5Department of Physics and Department of Bioengineering, Northeastern University, Boston, USA
March 21, 2019
We present CaosDB, a Research Data Management System (RDMS) designed to en-
sure seamless integration of inhomogeneous data sources and repositories of legacy data
in a FAIR way. Its primary purpose is the management of data from biomedical sciences,
both from simulations and experiments during the complete research data lifecycle. An
RDMS for this domain faces particular challenges: Research data arise in huge amounts,
from a wide variety of sources, and traverse a highly branched path of further process-
ing. To be accepted by its users, an RDMS must be built around workﬂows of the
scientists and practices and thus support changes in workﬂow and data structure. Nev-
ertheless it should encourage and support the development and observation of standards
and furthermore facilitate the automation of data acquisition and processing with spe-
cialized software. The storage data model of an RDMS must reﬂect these complexities
with appropriate semantics and ontologies while oﬀering simple methods for ﬁnding,
retrieving, and understanding relevant data. We show how CaosDB responds to these
challenges and give an overview of its data model, the CaosDB Server and its easy-to-
learn CaosDB Query Language. We brieﬂy discuss the status of the implementation,
how we currently use CaosDB, and how we plan to use and extend it.
Keywords: RDMS, research data management, FAIR, database, ACID
1 Background
Despite the technological advances over the last decades, the scientiﬁc community still faces the
problem of storing and accessing scientiﬁc data in a structured and future-proof manner [1, 6, 7, 9].
1
arXiv:1801.07653v2  [cs.DB]  20 Mar 2019

Figure 1: Screenshot of the WebUI (graphical web user interface) of CaosDB showing a search query
that returned a ﬁctitious experiment.
Although principles for good scientiﬁc data management have since been formulated under the
acronym FAIR [8] and are now widely recognized in the community, real-life obstacles tend to
prevent their wide-spread adoption. Especially in cross-disciplinary environments, the interaction
between diﬀerent user groups, e.g. numerical scientists conducting simulation studies and experi-
menters working in the laboratory, often leads to highly inhomogeneous approaches to data man-
agement. For such heterogeneous data, ineﬃciencies become inevitable when diﬀerent kinds of data
have to be combined in a joint research project or when data has to be accessed by scientists who
were not involved in the recording and storage procedure. In the worst case, this can lead to data
being de facto inaccessible after their creators can no longer be reached.
The ongoing issues are rooted in some ubiquitous properties of scientiﬁc environments themselves:
• Scientists use special or customized tools, software and data formats with good reason. A re-
search data management system (RDMS) must be built around their workﬂows and practices
and be open for change.
2

• If the system imposes too many restrictions on individual scientists they are likely to be
unwilling or even unable to use it.
• If the RDMS requires too much extra work for learning and understanding, it is likely that
the individual scientist will be unable to use it eﬃciently or just be unwilling to use it at all.
This holds in particular for the construction of queries which should retrieve data according
to powerful criteria while being simple and intuitive at the same time.
• The system should strongly encourage to develop and use standards for workﬂows and data
models without being overly restrictive. Users of the database can only proﬁt from the system
when data is organized suﬃciently structured to enable everyone to search and retrieve data
easily and to understand the structure of the data intuitively. At the same time the database
has to be prepared for constantly evolving data models and standards.
• File systems and other types of storage usually organize data into some kind of hierarchy
which can be folders or projects. In scientiﬁc environments this can raise issues, especially
when data belongs to multiple projects or is part of cooperations.
2 Requirements
Based on the considerations described in the previous section, we deﬁne the following requirements
for a data management system to address the mentioned issues.
Architecture The system must be built in a client / server architecture for separating the high-
performance workload on the database and ﬁlesystem from the lightweight clients. Create /
Read / Update / Delete (CRUD) transactions on the server side must be ACID1 compliant
in order to keep the structure consistent at any time. The communication API must be built
around a transparent human-readable protocol with RESTful2 identiﬁers [2]. This API can
then be used by libraries and clients that can be integrated into existing data management
workﬂows.
Access control, ﬁle system Heterogenous scientiﬁc environments require ﬁne-grained access-control
on object level. In order to seamlessly integrate into existing data acquisition and data anal-
ysis workﬂows the system must be able to incorporate an existing ﬁle system with its grown
folder structure.
Query language One of the most important requirements is the query language which has to fulﬁll
several properties that guarantee that heterogenous data in big amounts can be searched and
retrieved easily. The logic behind the query language can also have a major impact on the
data models used. To spell this out more precisely, the data model and the query language
must support:
• Entities with subtyping
• User-deﬁned n-ary relationships and properties
1Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, Durability
2Representational State Transfer
3

• Integration of ﬁles and directories as entities
• Native support for primitive data types which include several numeric data types with
their physical units and uncertainties, standard compliant date and time values, booleans,
strings and undeﬁned values
• Compound data types for lists, sets, tuples and dictionaries
Extensibility The system must be able to adapt to new software and hardware requirements. The
simplest way to ensure this extensibility is to implement a server-side API for extensions and
plug-ins.
3 Implementation
CaosDB [3] is our in-house solution for fulﬁlling these conditions, to our knowledge it is currently
the only existing software to satisfy the mentioned requirements.
CaosDB is an object oriented database with a powerful query language based on English natural
language and a ﬂexible and adaptive data model. For example, a typical query could look like this:
SELECT
flavour , rating , ingredients
FROM
Experiment
WHICH HAS A
room_temperature > 26C AND WHICH IS REFERENCED BY ExperimentSeries
WHICH HAS A name LIKE *ice cream
testing*
It also integrates eﬃcient management of large data ﬁles directly into the core functionality to
accomodate speciﬁc requirements by the scientiﬁc users:
• oﬀers a ﬂexible data model
• can be seamlessly integrated into existing workﬂows
• allows search for values of speciﬁc ﬁelds (not just full text search), with automatic unit
conversion and search for (back)references of linked objects.
3.1 Architecture
The software design follows a server/client architecture. The CaosDB server handles all CRUD
requests, implements consistency checks and translates the requests into SQL commands which are
redirected to the MySQL backend. It furthermore provides a transparent layer for interactions with
the ﬁle system. The server frontend is written entirely in Java and is accessed using an RESTful
API over HTTP with XML messages.
The frontend also serves a web user interface (WebUI,
shown in Fig. 1) written in XSLT, HTML and JavaScript that can be used for browsing data and
maintenance operations.
The server is complemented by client libraries for Python and C++ that encapsulate the XML API
for usage in scripting, data acquisition and data analysis tools. Fig. 2 gives a schematic overview
4

CRUD transactions,
ﬁle upload/download,
query search
 
Analysis
Plug-ins
Scripts
for R, 
Python, 
...
Data
Aquisition
Simulation
Inhouse 
software
DropOﬀBox
Drop ﬁles
Pick up
ﬁles
MySQL
File System
HeartDB Server
Protocol API
HeartDB Server
Http/xml
CaosDB Server
Protocol API
WebUI
Http/XML
CppCaosDB
PyCaosDB
ClientLib API
cp, scp, 
drag'n'drop
File system 
tools
Lab Software
Third-party
software
*.wav
*.dat
*.hdf5
*.tiﬀ
+
Meta-data
CaosDB Software
Manual data exchange
Automatable data exchange
Figure 2: An overview of the components of the CaosDB project and its relations to contexts of
application. The CaosDB server encapsulates access to the MySQL back end and the local
ﬁle system. It implements the protocol API for CRUD transactions (creation, retrieval,
update, deletion), ﬁle exchange, and query search. The client libraries (ClientLib API)
can communicate with the server via the protocol API and provide interfaces in several
programming languages for automatable data exchange with data aquisition software and
analysis tools. The WebUI for convenient database access is directly integrated into the
core application. These also facilitate the manual data exchange with non-customizable
third-party tools and data sources.
of the software architecture.
3.2 Data Model
CaosDB has a general purpose object-oriented data model which is not tied to any particular
scientiﬁc ﬁeld or structure of data.
It has a base object called Entity. Entities are either Record Types, Records, or Abstract
Properties and every Entity has a unique, server-generated Id.
Record Types and Abstract Properties are used to deﬁne the ontology for a particular
domain in which the RDMS is used. Records are used to store the actual data and therefore
represent individuals or particular things, e.g. a particular experiment, a particular time series, etc.
Record Types deﬁne classes or types of things, e.g. persons, experiments, timeseries, etc. Records
can be viewed as members of the class deﬁned by its Record Type. These classes can contain
Abstract Properties which deﬁne key-value relationships for properties of the things along
with the expected data type and possibly the default unit, a default value, or a range of permitted
values. As ﬁles on the back-end ﬁle system are a major focus of this database management system,
there is a special entity File that encapsulates typical ﬁle properties like path, size and checksum.
Entities can be related via binary, directed, transitive is-a relations which model both subtyping
and instantiation, depending on the relata.
These relations construct a directed graph of the
5

Entities. If A is-a B we call A the child of B and B the parent of A. No adamant restrictions are
imposed on the relate of the is-a relation and thus, Entities can be children of multiple Entities.
Each Entity has a list of Entity Properties, or in short just Properties. An Entity Prop-
erty is not an Entity of its own, but a triple of an Abstract Property, a value or Null, and
an Importance. The values can be numericals, strings, dates, any other valid value that ﬁts into
one of several builtin data types, or, most notably, references to other Entities. The importance
is either obligatory, recommended, suggested, or fix. A valid child of an Entity implicitly
inherits its parent’s Properties according to their Importance, which means that it is obliged,
recommended or only suggested to have a Property with the same Abstract Property (or
any subtype thereof).
As opposed to Properties with other priorities, Fixed Properties have no eﬀect on the En-
tity’s children. During the creation or update of Entities, the importances of the parents are
being checked by the Server. Missing obligatory Properties invalidate the transaction and
result in an error, by default. Missing Properties, when they are recommended, result in a
warning, but the transaction is considered valid. Entities with missing suggested Properties
are silently accepted as valid.
This novel approach to ontology standardization is inspired by the operators from deontic logics,
the logics of obligation and permission [4]. It is designed to guide the users without restricting
them too heavily and ensures that they do not insert their data wrongly by accident. Furthermore,
it helps them to ﬁnd the most relevant or best ﬁtting Properties for their Entity based on the
supertype(s).
CaosDB thus facilitates the deﬁnition and observation of standards for data storage.
3.3 Query Language
The CaosDB Query Language (CQL) is designed to express simple questions with simple queries
resembling English. Its syntax is illustrated in Fig. 3 using EBNF3. The language is case-insensitive,
but for clarity some terms are explicitely spelled in upper or mixed case here.
The ﬁrst term (query prefix in Fig. 3) in a CQL expression is the desired return type of the
query:
• A query starting with Count returns a non-negative integer.
• A query starting with Find returns a list of entities.
• A query starting with Select returns a table containing the values of selected Properties.
This is optionally followed by an entity type which restricts the query to speciﬁc entities. The
most important information searched for is probably the entity name which speciﬁes the actual
“thing” searched for. This term makes use of the object-oriented structure of the database and - in
addition to searching for all entities having a speciﬁc name - also returns subtypes and Records
3Extended Backus-Naur Form
6

cql
= query prefix , [entity
type], entity name ,
[filter
separator ,
filter] ;
query
prefix
= "FIND" | "COUNT" | select
clause ;
select
clause
= "SELECT", field , {",", field}, "FROM" ;
entity
type
= "ENTITY" | "RECORDTYPE" | "RECORD"
| "PROPERTY" | "FILE" ;
entity
name
= ? any string ? ;
filter
separator = "WHICH", ["HAS A"] | "WITH" ;
filter
= conjunction | disjunction | negation
| propery name , operator , value
| back -reference | ...
...
Figure 3: The ﬁrst levels of the CQL syntax in EBNF. This is only a schematic overview and does
not include the syntactic sugar or white spaces. However, it should be noted that the top
level of this syntax is not too complex and has only very few keywords. Yet even simple
queries are very powerful, mainly due to the transitivity of the is-a relation.
being of that type.
In an CQL expression, entity name is followed by a list of ﬁlters which are connected by ﬁlter
separators. Filters can address any possible Property of an Entity and restrict the values to
ranges or particular values, use a range of comparison operators, and even search with wildcards or
regular expressions. Furthermore, relations between Entities can be expressed precisely. Filters
can be combined with logical operators like And, Or, and Not.
The query processor is able to interpret and convert physical units. This unique feature simpliﬁes
working with scientiﬁc data and sets CQL apart from SQL and various modern query languages
for RDF(S), OWL or graph data.
We will illustrate the basic concepts by giving some typical examples:
COUNT Experiment with date in 2017 will return the number of experiments from 2017. In this
query, Experiment is typically the name of a Record Type with a possibly large number of
subtypes and instances. All Entities which have the name Experiment or have a parent with this
name are ﬁltered for those which have a Property with the name date and a date value in the
year 2017.
CQL ﬁlters can also express the equivalence of complex SQL joins in an easily understandable
syntax:
FIND Person which is referenced as an Author by an Article which has a Title like
*terminating ventricular fibrillation*
In this example, Person is a Record Type. Article is another Record Type having an Author
and a Title as Properties. The statement would therefore return all Records, if they are a
Person, that are assigned as values of an Author Property of a Record of type Article with
a speciﬁc title. Since the returned objects are themselves Records of Record Type Person,

some other contact information.
7

Another special feature are Select queries which follow an SQL-like syntax and represent their
results as a table. E.g. the result of SELECT first name, family name from person with date
of birth > 2000 will appear as an HTML table in the WebUI (downloadable as a tsv table),
with three columns – id, ﬁrst name, and family name. This feature is intended to provide one of
the interfaces between CaosDB and existing scientiﬁc workﬂows.
CQL is inspired by SQL and therefore probably feels familiar to users with knowledge of prevalent
database management systems. It should be clear from the aforementioned examples that the query
language is structured, precise and powerful, but nevertheless resembles English sentences. This
makes it easier to learn for users without SQL experience.
3.4 User Management and Access Control
CaosDB provides a ﬁne-grained role-based access control system with access control lists. It is
possible to deﬁne the permissions for insertion, update, retrieval and deletion of Entities, single
Properties, and is-a relations, as well as the access to the transaction log and the user manage-
ment.
CaosDB has a built-in user database where users can sign up or be registered by administrators.
Furthermore, users can login with the credentials of their user accounts from PAM (Pluggable
Authentication Modules). Access roles – which are relevant for the authorization – can be assigned
to clients based on various criteria including their authentication status, the Unix groups of the
user – if PAM is used –, and connection details, like IP address and others. This makes it possible
to share subsets of the data base with collaborators and even a greater audience of anonymous
users.
4 Discussion
CaosDB is currently in beta testing stage and handling around 40TiB of experimental data from
biomedical physics in 250000 Files along with detailed meta data contained in about 320 Record
Types and 95000 Records. Data ﬁle types include video recordings from optical imaging, elec-
trophysiological time series, scanned lab notes and image ﬁles. Furthermore, data and parameters
from simulations and information about source code is stored along with analysis results of exper-
imental and numerical data. The analysis results are thereby linked to the data from which they
stem. Many ﬁle types are automatically parsed and integrated as parts of Records into our data
model. The hash sums computed and stored for every ﬁle allow for comprehensive consistency
checks. One advantage of our strict separation between ﬁle system and data model is that the
system can be directly used on top of the established ﬁle system structure without the need to
move or modify any existing ﬁle.
For data analysis mainly the CaosDB Python client is used which can directly query and retrieve
the relevant data and use it for more speciﬁc analyses. The power of CQL leads to much complexer
SQL queries in the background than what users would typically enter manually, and subsequently
to perceived slower responses. Still it already proves to be faster than using simple ﬁle operations
for ﬁnding speciﬁc data.
8

Figure 4: A UML diagram of a small excerpt of the data model we currently use for experimental
data.
However, the query language processing is still subject to algorithmic optimizations.
Our current eﬀorts to improve the data model focus on connecting experimental data to interme-
diate and ﬁnal results of data analysis, and the integration of data from cardiac simulations.
The software is publicly available at https://gitlab.gwdg.de/bmp-caosdb under the GNU Aﬀero
General Public License [5].
5 Conclusions
In this article we presented our approach to improve research data management in heterogenous
scientiﬁc environments. We presented our perspective on the current situation and proposed a list
of requirements an RDMS must fulﬁll and further described how our research data management
system lives up to these requirements.
The most important diﬀerences to existing solutions include a smart data model framework which
enforces the development of standards while allowing for enough ﬂexibility to adapt to rapidly
changing scientiﬁc workﬂows.
Furthermore, the powerful and intuitive query language enables
quick access to data and simpliﬁes data retrieval and data analysis.
We conclude that our database management system could provide a solution for ongoing issues
9

with research data management in heterogenous environments and promote the development of
standards of data storage and retrieval. It will thereby improve the FAIRness of research data
management.
Software availability
The public git repository with the source code is available at https://gitlab.gwdg.de/
bmp-caosdb as version v0.1, the program version described here can be accessed at http:
//dx.doi.org/10.17617/3.1s [3]. The software requirements are: Java 1.7 or higher, MySQL
or MariaDB, Python. The software is licensed under the GNU AGPLv3.
Authors’ contributions
T.F., D.H., A.S., H.t.W. are the main authors of the software, U.P. and S.L. contributed conceptual
ideas and feedback, all authors contributed to writing the article.
The creation of a company for providing commercial support for CaosDB is planned by: T.F.,
D.H., A.S., H.t.W.
Acknowledgement
We would like to thank the contributors to the software listed in the ﬁle caosdb/HUMANS.md and
especially Philip Bittihn and Johannes Schr¨oder-Schetelig for their valuable ideas on the design of
CaosDB.
We acknowledge support from the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF)
(project FKZ 031A147, GO-Bio), the German Research Foundation (DFG) (Collaborative Research
Centers SFB 1002 Project C3 and SFB 937 Project A18) and the German Center for Cardiovascular
Research (DZHK e.V.).
