RDF annotation of Second Life objects:
Knowledge Representation meets Social Virtual reality
Carlo Bernava, Giacomo Fiumara1, Dario Maggiorini2, Alessandro Provetti1,
and Laura Ripamonti2
1 Dept. of Mathematics and Informatics, Univ. of Messina,
V.le F. Stagno d’Alcontres, 31. I-98166, Messina, Italy.

2 Dept. of Informatics, Univ. of Milan
Via Comelico 39/41, Milan. I-20135 Italy.

Abstract. We have designed and implemented an application running
inside Second Life that supports user annotation of graphical objects and
graphical visualization of concept ontologies, thus providing a formal,
machine-accessible description of objects. As a result, we oﬀer a platform
that combines the graphical knowledge representation that is expected
from a MUVE artifact with the semantic structure given by the Resource
Framework Description (RDF) representation of information.
1
Introduction
We present our project on the implementation of a platform for the creation of
structured, i.e. non-ﬂat, folksonomies and taxonomies in a MUVE (Multi User
Virtual Environment). We have designed and implemented a set of Second Life
(SL)3 user objects (called Prims) that bring into the virtual environment i) the
organization of a Folksonomy, intended as a keywords deployed user annotations.
The referred folksonomies will be located outside SL and will be represented
in the standard RDF notation, thus maximizing ﬂexibility and accessibility by
non-human agents.
Our Prims allow avatars and Second Life agents from within to participate
to the building of the folksonomy by contributing their own annotations. Hence,
our solution blurs the distinction between consulting/annotating objects inside
and outside SL and the distinction between user- and agent-annotations.
In the landscape of contemporary Web, our project can be seen as bringing
together folksonomies, a staple of Web2.0 and the SL advanced graphical visual-
ization that is needed to participate to Multi-users graphical virtual environment.
Even though our implementation is exclusive to SL, as it relies on the Linden
Lab scripting language, the methodology for annotation is not speciﬁc for SL
and can be applied, in our opinion, in future collaboration platforms.
3 Second Life is owned and developed by Linden Labs http://lindenlab.com/
arXiv:1504.02358v1  [cs.AI]  9 Apr 2015

1.1
Goals of the project
The long-term goal of our project is the creation of a knowledge base within
Second Life that is accessible both to human users (through their avatars) and
SL applications (which include non-human avatars). Our Knowledge base will
support the automated access, selection and consultation of the objects appearing
on one or more speciﬁed SL loci. The application we developed is available to
all avatars in the (virtual) neighborhood of Prims (primitives of objects existing
in the virtual environment); avatars will collaborate in making a semantics
emerge out of frequencies and in annotating SL Prims. By sending messages from
avatars/bots or by interacting directly with the Prims that carry the application,
it is possible to insert new elements of the knowledge base so to obtain a 3D
graphical representation of the relationship among concepts.
2
Knowledge Bases and user annotations
A Knowledge Base (KB) can be seen as a set of formal statements that express
information (knowledge) about an object or a resource which is being described.
Today, almost all semantics annotations on the Web are expressed by means of
RDF (Resource Description Framework) and its variations, e.g., RDFA, which
allows annotations “hidden” in traditional HTML pages. At a minimum, the
attributes of a resource are described by means of properties which in turn are
described by ontologies, which are available on the Web. The approach used in
our application is named social tagging and, as is known, produces folksonomies.
2.1
Folksonomies
Folksonomies are a popular way to classify objects through the use of tags deﬁned
by users. It can be deﬁned as a bottom-up classiﬁcation, as opposed to the
classical methods, namely taxonomies. User annotation is one of the elements
underlying the success of social network repositories such as Flickr and YouTube.
A tag is simply a string that users attach (associate) to the object that they are
classifying, thus introducing a series of concepts somehow related to the resource.
In principle, the task of associating concepts and terms to objects is continuous
and open to all users, thus resulting in a great expressivity. With folksonomies,
the frequency by which a tag is associated to a resource may become (in a social
networking scenario) a statistically-accurate description of the resource itself.
Thanks to user annotation and convergence, each resource can thus be repre-
sented by means of the so-called cloud of tags, namely a graphical representation
of all tags, where a tag size represents analogically the frequency of its use
in context. Again, social tagging is meaningful only in large communities of
users where the meaning of an object may emerge from the frequency by which
tag terms are attached to it. So, even though user tagging does not provide a
semantics per se, it does provide the basis for the creation of one.

Fig. 1. Example of a cloud of tags created by L. Cremonini for railsonwave.com
2.2
The SCOT ontology
In order to describe the composition of declarative languages used in our ap-
plication, we have adopted the SCOT (Semantic Cloud of Tags) ontology. As
an ontology, SCOT describes in a precise way the use of various properties and
classes available to developers. We brieﬂy recall the properties of SCOT that
were used more frequently in our application.
– TagCloud: this class describes the main repository of the tagging activity,
i.e., namely the cloud of tags. All other properties derive from this one.
– HasTag: this property describes the set of tags associated to an object. It is
incorporated from the sioc ontology.
– Tag: this class describes the single tag belonging to a cloud of tags. It is a
simple string used to identify a speciﬁed resource.
– OwnAFrequency: a RDF DataTypeProperty used to describe the absolute
frequency of occurrence of a tag, namely the total number of times the
speciﬁed tag has been associated to an object.
Notice that these properties have a hierarchical structure: TagCloud contains
HasTag which in turn contains Tag, which contains ownAFrequency. In order
to explain how classes and properties of the SCOT ontology are exploited to
create RDF models, it is useful to see an example of a model extracted from the
knowledge base of the application related to object computer mouse:
In Figure 2 an example of a RDF model is shown, describing the tagging
activity of the object mouse: scroll, optical, informatics, components, peripheral,
and laser that has been used to describe the mouse. For ease of reading, diﬀerent
parts of the model have been drawn with diﬀerent colors. Let us now see in detail
what are the components of our annotations.

Fig. 2. Example of a RDF model used to describe the resource mouse
– Preamble: The red section, immediately after the opening tag, is called
preamble and is present in every type of model. It contains the namespaces
used in the model. Each line speciﬁes a namespace and its URI. It has the
form:
xmlns:xxx=“uri ontology”
where xmlns is a particular namespace associated to every RDF model and
is used for dynamic binding of namespaces within the RDF model. The
string xmlns:xxx speciﬁes the preﬁx xxx which will be used for all properties
belonging to the namespace speciﬁed on the right of the line. As an example,
please note the third line in the preamble:
xmlns:scot= "http://scot-project.org/scot/ns">
where the various components of the SCOT ontology will be uniquely identi-
ﬁed using the preﬁx scot and its properties will be invoked simply typing:
<scot:property=value>
or, equivalently:
<scot:property>value</scot:property>

– Object description: The green section relates to the description of the resource.
Line
<rdf:type rdf:resource=
"http://scot-project.org/scot/nsTagCloud"/>
describes the resource as a cloud of tags. Other lines in this section specify
the structure of the cloud of tags.
– Deﬁnition of tags: The blue section refers to the deﬁnition of tags and
illustrates their main features. In this example, the laser tag shows an
absolute frequency deﬁned by means of a ﬂoat data type.
<rdf:Description rdf:about="http://yourdns.com/rdfs/laser.rdf">
<rdf:type rdf:resource="http://scot-project.org/scot/nsTag"/>
<scot:ownAFrequency
rdf:datatype="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema float">3.0
</scot:ownAFrequency>
</rdf:Description>
In conclusion, the SCOT ontology has been so far expressing enough.
2.3
Taxonomies
A taxonomy deﬁnes both a hierarchical classiﬁcation of concepts and the clas-
siﬁcation methods: complex of ideas and rules with which object are classiﬁed.
The taxonomic model seems to be in contrast with the folksonomy model deﬁned
before, as in the former there is a well-founded rule to bind concepts, while in
the latter there is no rule at all and the process is based on frequency. In this
application we created an hybrid model which exploits the hierarchical feature of
taxonomies and the lack of rules of folksonomies. In short, we created a folkson-
omy organized as it were a taxonomy. Concepts are bound to their respective
ancestors without any pre-deﬁned rule of derivation, but are organized according
to topic maps, in the form of trees. Of course, the scalability of this model is
somewhat limited, in that the tagging of all conceivable concepts would produce
a graph rather than a tree. Nevertheless, the goal of our model is the creation of
a topic map, with an arbitrary depth, derived from a single concept.
3
Second Life
In on-line multiplayer games (the so-called MMORPG, Massively Multiplayer
On-line Role-Playing Game) the user/player usually pursues objectives preset by
the administrator/designer of the game and which can be changed according to
feedback of players. In Second Life, on the opposite, the user is able to use her
avatar (her alter-ego in the virtual reality) as a synthetic human being, according
to an evolution directly maintained and sustained by the users themselves. This
is why Second Life is usually deﬁned a MUVE (Multi-User Virtual Environment).
In this section, we provide some explanations about terms and concepts typical
of SL.

3.1
Regions
The world of Second Life is made up of regions, which are reachable from
within the MUVE by means of speciﬁc coordinates. Due to the intrinsically
tri-dimensional nature of SL, each point is located by means of a set of four
coordinates, namely island name, abscissa, ordinate and altitude. A region is
deﬁned as a square with edges measuring 256 meters each. Also, the region
contains the space over itself, up to a maximum altitude of about 166 meters.
There exist three types of regions:
– mainland: large amounts of contiguous land owned by Linden Labs.
– private region: islands mainly inhabited by users who buy lands. The admin-
istrator of this type of regions is able to access all administrative controls.
This is the most common type of region in SL, and
– openspace: a land with intermediate features between the former two, with
limitations on the number of objects and avatars allowed to visit it.
SL allows region administrators to create groups associated to resident users
in order to allow/forbid some activities such as creating objects, modifying the
land or entering some zones. Together, the regions form what is called the grid of
Second Life. At infrastructure level each region is hosted inside a software virtual
machine taking care to coordinate interaction between avatar and objects and
to simulate physics. Typically, each virtual machine is located on an hardware
server whose computational power is in the same range as a mid-range desktop
PC. The legacy software manages the lands together with the interactions among
avatars and the creation/modiﬁcation of the objects acting in each square.
3.2
Objects
With SL, users have the possibility to create custom objects with a virtual physical
appearance. In order to do this, the avatar of a user must have the necessary
rights, some exceptions being possible in particular regions called sandboxes. As
for regions, the creator of an object is the owner and is allowed to change its
features, including, e.g., the texture, the consistency of the material, and the
color. The creator may also forbid changes from other users. The creation of
SL objects is greatly helped by a 3D modeling tool, which supports complex
operations such as torsion, dilatation and compression, concavity and convexity,
ﬂexibility. Objects may be associated to certain types:
– locked, in order to prevent modiﬁcations of the object;
– physical, if the object has to undergo physical laws of the emulator, such as
gravity or friction;
– temporary, if the object has a limited life, a
– phantom, if other objects or avatars may pass through the created object.
Automatically, the response to physical laws such as friction depends on the
matter with which objects are “made” of. So, for example a glassy object has a
lower friction than a woody one.

Primitives and the LindenLab Scripting Language (LSL) Primitives
(Prims) are the basic building blocks of the SL virtual environment. Prims appear
as simple geometrical objects (cones, cylinders etc.); by combining them complex
objects can be created. A complex graphical object may be composed of up to
255 Prims. However, an avatar may create complex objects only by using Prims
that he/she owns. All objects and avatars have a 128-bit identifying code called
UUID (Universal Unique IDentiﬁer), which is frequently refereed to within the
native LindenLab scripting language, which is presented next.
In Second Life objects may have associated scripts, which make it possible
to objects to perform actions of various kind. The native underlying scripting
language is called Linden Scripting Language (LSL), a C-like, event-driven
programming language. The LSL compiler produces a bytecode which can be
executed by SL servers. Although it is endowed by a set of more than 300
functions, LSL has some important limitations:
– it is loosely typed
– a maximum of 64KB of memory can be assigned to a script associated to a
prim
which obviously rule out the possibility to endow objects with their own knowledge
representation capabilities.
Other major limitations are:
– money (the well-known Linden dollars) cannot be withdrawn from an avatar,
unless explicitly allowed
– it is impossible to instruct an avatar to perform some animation, with the
exception of some postures
Interaction between avatars and objects is governed by a messaging system, which
can be local to a SIM or global to the grid. Local interaction is initiated by
the interface (e.g., by mouse clicks or a keyboard press) and by text messages
(or with the chat). When one of these events is triggered, the simulator will
distribute a number of messages to involved avatars and objects; reception of
these messages may imply the visualization of a text message and/or a state
change for a program inside an object. Global interaction is essentially text-
based and is mainly intended as an inter-SIM instant messaging system; both
avatar and objects can beneﬁt from global communications. Communication
is a key point of SL: the messaging system can be intertwined with all other
in-world operations. Also, interaction between avatars will extend in-world with
no distance boundaries and will also span oﬀto real life, because messages will

Expressing personal identity and feelings can be performed not just by avatar
reshaping, but also by wearing (attaching) scripted Prims, which in turn will
be able to interact and send messages to nearby objects and avatars. Thus,
attachments plays a role in how the surrounding environment perceives the user
presence, even at a distance.

SL places can be ﬁlled with interacting and active scripted objects, which
will send messages to users independently from their whereabouts, thus, helping
creating a social network without the constraint of being there. To some extent,
SL communication is not limited to the grid itself: scripted objects have means
to reach the Internet and use data from it to augment the virtual environment;

messages and even SMS (Short Message System). Multimedia content from the
Internet is supported in an indirect way; a real-time media stream can be set
as part of the environment. Thus, the SL client will take care to independently
retrieve the content and perform the playout without interfering with the grid.
4
Architecture of the application
SL has a rich set of features, but communications with external applications and
the scripting of Prims are two weak points, especially in view of the deployment of
MASs. Indeed, scripts are limited to a memory occupation of about 25 KB, which
includes the source code itself and the prim description (name, owner, texture,
interactions prim-prim and avatars-prim, permissions etc.). Also, communication
with external applications may occur only throughout XML-RPC and HTTP.
The former is not suited for intensive applications as a consequence of the delay
artiﬁcially introduced between two subsequent requests. The latter is also severely
limited to about 25 maximum requests over 20 seconds, preferably with the GET
method, and to a total amount of 2048 bytes each.
The main implementation eﬀort of our project so far has been the development
of an architecture based on the client-server paradigm: clients from within SL (see
Figure 3) communicate with on an external server by means of HTTP requests.
In order to overcome these potential bottlenecks we resorted to implement a
light application on the SL client-side (see Figure 4). Our solution consists of a
listener unit which is activated by avatars; in turn it activates a “communication
center” from which a communication unit is originated for each request. Our
solution bypasses both the limitations on the maximum number of requests and
on the maximum script size. Communications among the various scripts are made
possible using the channels that within Second Life are provided for conversations
among avatars and/or scripts. The server side of the application is composed of
a Java servlet that
1. receives requests from clients;
2. exploits the SCOT ontology (described in Section 2.2) to produce RDF
models;
3. serializes them into XML-RDF structures to be stored in a Mulgara RDF
database (see the example in Figure 2).
The graphical rendering of ontologies in SL has been relatively easy in
comparison. However, in SL there is a limitation on the maximum distance, about
10 meters, at which a Prim can be rezzed by a script. Such limitation implies
a strict constraint on the maximum extension of the graphical appearance of

Fig. 3. Architecture of the application
Fig. 4. The architecture of Second Life client-side of our application

the concept map. As the size of the hierarchy grows, a ﬁxed maximum space
occupation may aﬀect negatively (human) readability, yet we have not yet
experienced such degradation with fairly complex conceptual maps.
5
Results
The main technical result of our project is the ﬁrst-time embedding of a knowledge
base with a graphical, interactive environment of the size and complexity of
Second Life. The chosen application can be sketched as in Figure 5.
Fig. 5. An avatar sees our Prims
The Prims showed in Figure 5 contain the client-side application. They have
been left as primitive as possible from the graphical point of view, so land owners
are free to customize their graphical part. Moreover, as the application has been
conceived for the use of bots, its graphical simplicity makes easier the interaction
with the application.
As can be seen in Figure 6, the avatar is querying the bot by asking which
messages activate the software components. As shown in Figure 7, each tag
associated to the resource is annotated with its absolute frequency. With the
same tools, multi-level topic maps may be built. In Figure 7, a two-level topic
map is shown. The ﬁrst level is developed starting from the concept of shoe, while
the second level details rubber, the material this shoe sole is made of.
Topic maps can cover great lengths (w.r.t. Second Life virtual reality), so the
client application must be viewed in locations free from other objects that could

Fig. 6. Submission of a query to the bot
Fig. 7. Example of a two-level topics map for resource shoe

interfere with the proper visualization. In order to preserve performances in the
space which hosts the maps, and to avoid problems due to residual maps, topic
maps undergo an automatic self-destruction after 1 minute.
Estimating the performances of the application is not easy, as it depends on
various features. The main factors aﬀecting responsiveness are:
– Degree of network congestion;
– load at server hosting our application;
– number of Prims active on the island considered, and
– complexity of the submitted query.
Altering any of these parameters results in a performance degradation pro-
portional —empirically— to the degree of change of the parameter.
It is important to notice that the knowledge base (the set of annotations)
resides in a RDF native repository, and is reachable by the application within
Second Life and/or HTTP protocols and/or plain TCP/IP connections. Our multi-
protocol database allows the content usable in diﬀerent contexts, so assuring the
stability and availability of data from within diﬀerent application, each developed
in environments external to Second Life. Even though the adopted software
architecture is somehow forced by the limitations of the SL platform, for our
purposes it is interesting as it brings about the beneﬁts of having [practically
all] data stored independently, and externally to the applications, even of the SL
platform itself. The obvious upshot is a certain complexity in the implementation
of external calls, and their number may aﬀect scalability eventually. These aspects
are discussed in depth by Campi et al. [5].
6
Related works
Since its appearance Second Life attracted a lot of attention from users and
several research eﬀorts have aimed at coupling virtual environment with semantic
web applications running on web servers external to SL. Karakatsiotis et [12,13]
developed a robotic avatar (perhaps better termed a bot) which follows a virtual
visitor in her tour of the virtual museum. Whenever the visitor touches an exhibit
the bot produces a textual description developed in NaturalOwl, a Natural
Language Generation engine developed in Java. A more scalable version of this
work is described in [18].
A somewhat diﬀerent perspective was pursued by Kleinermann et al. [16],
who designed a tool, based on Ajax3D and that was mainly intended for X3D
applications, for the semantic annotation and creation of navigation paths in
virtual environments. Speciﬁc to the Second Life virtual environment is the work
of Schneider et al. [23]. Their approach allows users to tag her own virtual objects.
It is also possible to associate a piece of software, a so-called tagget, to a virtual
object thus allowing other users to freely tag it.
Speciﬁc to the SL virtual environment is the work by Schneider et al. [23]:
their approach allows users to tag their own virtual objects; it is also possible to

associate a piece of software, a so-called tagget, to a virtual object so to allow
other users to tag it.
We would like to stress, however, that none of those works focuses on the
problem of including social interaction in the process of representing and sharing
knowledge.
7
From annotation to autonomous agent systems
As virtual environments become increasingly open, an emerging research issue
is the introduction of automated external agents. Two recent works by Rehm
and Rosina [21] and by Sierra et al. [4] show that Second Life may eventually
embed MAS applications in full. Rehm and Rosina, for instance, developed an
application that turns Second Life into a realistic test range for MAS; it supplies
a set of features that are interesting for testing agent’s social interaction skill
and general long-term behavior. Their work is a good example of how and why
MAS research may adopt Second Life as a natural setting for experiments and
deployment.
Sierra et al., vice versa, show the huge potential for applying MAS to improving
the Second Life experience. Their work propose Normative Multi-agent systems
as the basis for creating with a MUVE realistic, individual-centered virtual
heritage applications, where users may experience a version of being there related
to ancient times, yet preserving the full range of complex individual behaviors
and interactions.
Probably the MAS approach that best ﬁts our scenario is that based on the
Knowledge representation language DALI [9,10], which endows agents with auto-
mated reasoning, meta-reasoning and reﬂective capabilities [3]. Another feature
of DALI agent that we feel needed for SL agents is the explicit representation and
management of complex preferences [6,7]. In our opinion, the DALI deployment
that best illustrate this potential is [8], where agents assist the user in a visit
to a museum or archeological site while taking into account her/his preferences,
background knowledge,experience, time for the visit, and proposes a personalized
route augmented with suggestions and information so as to lead to an enriched
experience.
8
Discussion: what else can be done in Second Life?
Today, there are Semantic Web, Web2.0 and MUVE applications that are very
eﬀective in their own domain of application. However, it is not always easy to
combine the good features of each one of these domains into one. The problem is
partly conceptual and mostly technological, e.g., due to the limitations of the SL
virtual environment described earlier in this article. Ripamonti et al. [22] have
summarized the current situation with a use-cases table which we report, with
some adaptations, in Table 1.

Requirements
Compl. Notes
creation/representation of 3D multi-level conceptual maps average achievable through SL building facilities
plus LSL scripting language;
to guarantee a good user experience must
-obey strict constraints intrinsic to client app.
-address latency due to bandwidth etc.
update of tags attached to concepts
average
import/export maps from/to Internet sources
average
multimedia content attach. to concepts
hard
manipulation of multimedia content attached to concepts
hard
deﬁnition of groups of users
easy
SL client allows groups and permissions manag.
work collaboratively on the conceptual maps
easy
collaborative work is a key feature
yet bandwidth, server/clients
limitations may harm users’ experience
personalization of the application
average under appropriate permissions for both code
& 3D it is possible (and easy) to modify objects
& conceptual maps appearance
deﬁnition of privacy policies to protect intell. property
easy
restricted areas are supported; SL has
policies to guarantee IPRs of in-world artifacts
Creative Commons licenses are available
users learn easily how to interact in the environment
easy
basic interaction is almost eﬀortless
3D-modeling requires learning curve
Table 1. What a in-world application for conceptual maps should provide
9
Discussion: how these results impact organizations
Barriers against the integration of diﬀerent organizational functions are a well-
known phenomenon, whose complexity (and related costs) grows with the degree
of virtualisation of the organization, reaching their maximum in the so-called
Virtual Enterprises (VEs) [11,14,15].
Several well-known case studies (see, e.g., [1,22]) oﬀer us intriguing test
beds for verifying to what extent social interaction in organizational settings
can be eﬀectively supported by a MUVE. Consider, in particular the following
cases. CIGNA-Vielife (which considers SL a key factor to communicate in an
eﬀective way to audiences that are both diverse and widespread: an environment
that is both immersive and synthetic greatly facilitates lowering social taboos
about sensitive topics and overcoming geographical barriers. For instance, IBM
established one of the most complex and advanced corporate presences in SL,
which lasted from 2006 to mid 2011. Other examples are Intel (which also exploited
SL as an accessible, low-cost and carbon-free location to hold its 2009 biannual
conference), US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, NOAA and
Northrop Grumman Corporation (NGC), who demonstrated that MUVEs seem to
be an elective channel for fostering undergoing social interaction, communication
and knowledge sharing among diverse and geographically distributed nets of
people/communities of practice.
In other words, SL interactions may indeed provide support to tacit knowledge
sharing [19,20] and to the higher levels of the semiotic ladder [24] in organizational
settings. Moreover, activities held in a speciﬁc virtual place create memories that
could be useful when a similar situation arises in the physical world, as supported
by scientiﬁc and empirical evidences in the ﬁeld of game design (see e.g. [17]
and, e.g., in the Chocolate factory experiment held in Multiverse and described
in [2]. In summary, we submit that virtual worlds equipped with knowledge
representation should be regarded at as suitable digital habitats, able to support
the higher levels of the semiotic ladder, and thus as useful tools, for example, to
help lowering inter-functional or inter-team(s) barriers in organizational settings.

10
Future work
The architecture presented in this article represents a bridge between two diﬀerent
technologies, namely the Semantic web and MUVEs like Second Life. From this
point of view, our application may represent a starting point for communities
accessible inside and outside Second Life. One aspect that should be developed
further is an hierarchical permission structure that grants appropriate, role-based
permissions to avatars willing to annotate objects.
A natural development of the ideas underlying our application is the possi-
bility of porting inside Second Life Web communities which mainly based their
activities on social tagging, folksonomies and taxonomies. Also, Wikis, the Blo-
gosphere and social bookmarking portals should export their communities and
activities. Another possible development of our application is the implementation
of reasoning techniques to data structured in a semantic way.
