arXiv:1701.01329v1  [cs.NE]  5 Jan 2017
Segler et al.
RESEARCH
Generating Focussed Molecule Libraries for Drug
Discovery with Recurrent Neural Networks
Marwin HS Segler1*, Thierry Kogej2, Christian Tyrchan3 and Mark P Waller4
Abstract
In de novo drug design, computational strategies are used to generate novel molecules with good aﬃnity to the
desired biological target. In this work, we show that recurrent neural networks can be trained as generative
models for molecular structures, similar to statistical language models in natural language processing. We
demonstrate that the properties of the generated molecules correlate very well with the properties of the
molecules used to train the model. In order to enrich libraries with molecules active towards a given biological
target, we propose to ﬁne-tune the model with small sets of molecules, which are known to be active against
that target.
Against Staphylococcus aureus, the model reproduced 14% of 6051 hold-out test molecules that medicinal
chemists designed, whereas against Plasmodium falciparum (Malaria) it reproduced 28% of 1240 test
molecules. When coupled with a scoring function, our model can perform the complete de novo drug design
cycle to generate large sets of novel molecules for drug discovery.
Keywords: computer-assisted drug design; recurrent neural networks
1 Introduction
Chemistry is the language of nature. Chemists speak
it ﬂuently and have made their discipline one of the
true contributors to human well-being, which has
“change[d] the way you live and die”.[1] This is par-
ticularly true for medicinal chemistry. However, creat-
ing novel drugs is an extraordinarily hard and com-
plex problem.[2] One of the many challenges in drug
design is the sheer size of the search space for novel
molecules. It has been estimated that 1060 drug-like
molecules could possibly be synthetically accessible.[3]
Chemists have to select and examine molecules from
this large space to ﬁnd molecules that are active to-
wards a biological target. Active means for example
that a molecule binds to a biomolecule, which causes
an eﬀect in the living organism, or inhibits replication
of bacteria. Modern high-throughput screening tech-
niques allow to test molecules in the order of 106 in
the lab.[4] However, larger experiments will get pro-
hibitively expensive. Given this practical limitation of
in vitro experiments, it is desirable to have compu-
tational tools to narrow down the enormous search
space. Virtual screening is a commonly used strat-
egy to search for promising molecules amongst mil-

1Institute of Organic Chemistry & Center for Multiscale Theory and
Computation, Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität, Münster, Germany
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
lions of existing or billions of virtual molecules.[5]
Searching can be carried out using similarity-based
metrics, which provides a quantiﬁable numerical indi-
cator of closeness between molecules. In contrast, in
de-novo drug design, one aims to directly create novel
molecules that are active towards the desired biologi-
cal target.[6, 7] Here, like in any molecular design task,
the computer has to
i create molecules,
ii score and ﬁlter them, and
iii search for better molecules, building on the knowl-
edge gained in the previous steps.
Task i, the generation of novel molecules, is usu-
ally solved with one of two diﬀerent protocols.[7]
One strategy is to build molecules from predeﬁned
groups of atoms or fragments. Unfortunately, these ap-
proaches often lead to molecules that are very hard to
synthesise.[8] Therefore, another established approach
is to conduct virtual chemical reactions based on ex-
pert coded rules, with the hope that these reactions
could then also be applied in practice to make the
molecules in the laboratory.[9] These systems give rea-
sonable drug-like molecules, and are considered as “the
solution” to the structure generation problem.[2] We
generally share this view. However, we have recently
shown that the predicted reactions from these rule-
based expert systems can sometimes fail.[10] Also, fo-

Segler et al.
Page 2 of 17
cussing on a small set of robust reactions can unneces-
sarily restrict the possibly accessible chemical space.
Task ii, scoring molecules and ﬁltering out unde-
sired structures, can be solved with substructure ﬁl-
ters for undesirable reactive groups in conjunction
with established approaches such as docking[11] or
machine-learning (ML) approaches.[7, 12, 13] The ML
approaches are split into two branches: Target predic-
tion classiﬁes molecules into active and inactive, and
quantitative structure-activity relationships (QSAR)
seek to quantitatively predict a real-valued measure
for the eﬀectiveness of a substance (as a regression
problem). As molecular descriptors, Signature Fin-
gerprints, Extended-Connectivity (ECFP) and atom
pair (APFP) ﬁngerprints and their fuzzy variants are
the de-facto standard today.[14–16] Convolutional Net-
works on Graphs are a recent addition to the ﬁeld
of molecular descriptors.[17, 18] Random Forests and
Neural Networks are currently the most widely used
machine learning models for target prediction.[19–31]
This leads to task iii, the search for molecules with
the right binding aﬃnity combined with optimal molec-
ular properties. In earlier work, this was performed
(among others) with classical global optimisation tech-
niques, for example genetic algorithms or ant-colony
optimisation.[7, 32] Furthermore, de novo design is re-
lated to inverse QSAR.[33–36] While in de novo de-
sign design, a regular QSAR mapping X →y from
molecular descriptor space X to properties y is used
as the scoring function for the global optimizer, in
inverse QSAR one aims to ﬁnd an explicit inverse
mapping y →X, and then maps back from optimal
points in descriptor space X to valid molecules. How-
ever, this is not well deﬁned, because molecules are
inherently discrete. Several protocols have been devel-
oped to address this, for example enumerating all struc-
tures within the constraints of hyper-rectangles in the
descriptor space.[33–38] Gómez-Bombarelli et al. pro-
posed to learn continuous representations of molecules
with variational auto-encoders, based on the model
by Bowman et al.,[39] and to perform Bayesian op-
timisation in this vector space to optimise molecular
properties.[40] Nevertheless, this approach was not ap-
plied to create active drug molecules, and did not suc-
ceed in optimising more complex molecular properties,
such as emission color and delayed ﬂuorescence decay
rate (kTADF).[40]
In this work, we suggest a novel, completely data-
driven de novo drug design approach. It relies only on
a generative model for molecular structures, based on
a recurrent neural network, that is trained on large
sets of molecules. Generative models learn a proba-
bility distribution over the training examples; sam-
pling from this distribution generates new examples
similar to the training data. Intuitively, a generative
model for molecules trained on drug molecules would
"know" how valid and reasonable drug-like molecules
look like, and could be used to generate more drug-
like molecules. However, for molecules, these models
have been studied rarely, and rigorously only with
traditional models such as Gaussian mixture models
(GMM).[37, 41] Recently, recurrent neural networks
(RNNs) have emerged as powerful generative models
in very diﬀerent domains, such as natural language
processing,[42] speech,[43] images,[44] video,[45] for-
mal languages,[46] computer code generation,[47] and
music scores.[48] In this work, we highlight the analogy
of language and chemistry, and show that RNNs can
also generate reasonable molecules. Furthermore, we
demonstrate that RNNs can also transfer their learned
knowledge from large molecule sets to directly produce
novel molecules that are biologically active by retrain-
ing the models on small sets of already known actives.
We test our models by reproducing hold-out test sets
of known biologically active molecules.
2 Methods
2.1 Representing Molecules
To connect chemistry with language, it is important
to understand how molecules are represented. Usu-
ally, they are modeled by molecular graphs, also called
Lewis structures in chemistry. In molecular graphs,
atoms are labeled nodes. The edges are the bonds be-
tween atoms, which are labeled with the bond order
(e.g. single, double or triple). One could therefore en-
vision having a model that reads and outputs graphs.
Several common chemistry formats store molecules in
such a manner. However, in models for natural lan-
guage processing, the input and output of the model
are usually sequences of single letters, strings or words.
We therefore employ the Smiles format, which en-
codes molecular graphs compactly as human-readable
strings. Smiles is a formal grammar which describes
molecules with an alphabet of characters, for example
c and C for aromatic and aliphatic carbon atoms, O for
oxygen, -, = and # for single, double and triple bonds
(see Figure 1).[49] To indicate rings, a number is intro-
duced at the two atoms where the ring is closed. For
example, benzene in aromatic Smiles notation would
be c1ccccc1. Side chains are denoted by round brack-
ets. To generate valid Smiles, the generative model
would have to learn the Smiles grammar, which in-
cludes keeping track of rings and brackets to eventually
close them. In morphine, a complex natural product,
the number of steps between the ﬁrst 1 and the sec-
ond 1, indicating a ring, is 32. Having established a
link between molecules and (formal) language, we can
now discuss language models.

Segler et al.
Page 3 of 17
O
N
N
N
N
O
Caffeine
CN1c2ncn(C)c2C(=O)N(C)C1=O
O
OH
Ibuprofen
CC(C)Cc1ccc(cc1)C(C)C(O)=O
HO
HO
O
H
N
Morphine

Figure 1 Examples of molecules and their Smiles
representation. To correctly create smiles, the model has to
learn long term dependencies, for example to close rings
(indicated by numbers) and brackets.
2.2 Language Models and Recurrent Neural Networks
Given a sequence of words (w1, ..., wi), language mod-
els predict the distribution of the (i + 1)th word
wi+1.[50] For example, if a language model receives the
sequence "Chemistry is", it would assign diﬀerent
probabilities to possible next words. "fascinating",
"important", or "challenging" would receive high
probabilities, while "runs" or "potato" would receive
very low probabilities. Language models can both cap-
ture the grammatical correctness ("runs" in this sen-
tence is wrong) and the meaning ("potato" does not
make sense). Language models are implemented for
example in message autocorrection in many modern
smartphones. Interestingly, language models do not
have to use words. They can also be based on charac-
ters or letters.[50] In that case, when receiving the se-
quence of characters chemistr, it would assign a high
probability to y, but a low probability to q. To model
molecules instead of language, we simply swap words
or letters with atoms, or, more practically, characters
in the Smiles alphabet, which form a (formal) lan-
guage. For example, if the model receives the sequence
c1ccccc, there is a high probability that the next sym-
bol would be a "1", which closes the ring, and yields
benzene.
More formally, to a sequence S of symbols si at steps
ti ∈T , the language model assigns a probability of
Pθ(S) = Pθ(s1) ·
T
Y
t=2
Pθ(st|st−1, ..., s1)
(1)
where the parameters θ are learned from the training
set.[50] In this work, we use a recurrent neural net-
work (RNN) to estimate the probabilities of Equation
1. In contrast to regular feedforward neural networks,
RNNs maintain state, which is needed to keep track
of the symbols seen earlier in the sequence. In ab-
stract terms, an RNN takes a sequence of input vectors
x1:n = (x1, ..., xn) and an initial state vector h0, and
returns a sequence of state vectors h1:n = (h1, ..., hn)
and a sequence of output vectors y1:n = (y1, ..., yn).
The RNN consists of a recursively deﬁned function R,
which takes a state vector hi and input vector xi+1
and returns a new state vector hi+1. Another function
O maps a state vector hi to an output vector yi.[50]
RNN(h0, x1:n) = h1:n, y1:n
(2)
hi = R(hi−1, xi)
(3)
yi = O(hi)
(4)
The state vector hi stores a representation of the in-
formation about all symbols seen in the sequence so far.
As an alternative to the recursive deﬁnition, the recur-
xt
ht-1
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
R,O
ht
yt
x1
h0
R,O
h1
y1
x2
R,O
h2
y2
x3
R,O
h3
y3
x4
R,O
h4
y4
a)
b)
Figure 2 a) Recursively deﬁned RNN b) The same RNN,
unrolled. The parameters θ (the weight matrices of the neural
network) are shared over all time steps.
rent network can also be unrolled for ﬁnite sequences
(see Figure 2). An unrolled RNN can be seen as a very
deep neural network, in which the parameters θ are
shared among the layers, and the hidden state ht is
passed as an additional input to the next layer. Train-
ing the unrolled RNN to ﬁt the parameters θ can then
simply be done by using backpropagation to compute
the gradients with respect to the loss function, which
is categorical cross-entropy in this work.[50]
As the speciﬁc RNN function, in this work, we use
the Long Short Term Memory (LSTM), which was in-
troduced by Hochreiter and Schmidhuber.[51] It has
been used successfully in many natural language pro-
cessing tasks,[42] for example in Google’s Neural Ma-
chine Translation system.[52] For excellent in-depth
discussions of the LSTM, we refer to the articles by
Goldberg,[50] Graves,[53] Olah,[54] and Greﬀet al.[55]
To encode the Smiles symbols as input vectors xt
, we employ the "one-hot" representation.[53] This
means if there are K symbols, and k is the symbol
to be input at step t, then we can construct an input
vector xt with length K, whose entries are all zero ex-
cept the k-th entry, which is one. If we assume a very
restricted set of symbols {c, 1, \n}, input c would cor-
respond to xt = (1, 0, 0), 1 to xt = (0, 1, 0) and \n to
xt = (0, 0, 1).
The probability distribution Pθ(st+1|st, ..., s1) of the
next symbol given the already seen sequence is thus

Segler et al.
Page 4 of 17
c
(1,0,0)
(0.2,0.8,0)
1
1
(0,1,0)
(0.9,0,0.1)
c
Step t
st
st+1
xt
h1
h2
h3
yt
1
2
c
(1,0,0)
(0.8,0.1,0.1)
c
...
...
...
3
c
(1,0,0)
(0.2,0.8,0)
1
1
(0,1,0)
(0.1,0.1,0.9)
\n
7
8
c1ccccc1\n
h8
h9
gather
symbols
Figure 3 The Symbol Generation and Sampling Process. We start with a random seed symbol s1, here c, which gets converted into
a one-hot vector x1 and input into the model. The model then updates its internal state h0 to h1 and outputs y1, which is the
probability distribution over the next symbols. Here, sampling yields s2 =1. Converting s2 to x2, and feeding it to the model leads to
updated hidden state h2 and output y2, from which can sample again. This iterative symbol-by-symbol procedure can be continued
as long as desired. In this example, we stop it after observing an EOL (\n) symbol, and obtain the Smiles for benzene. The hidden
state hi allows the model to keep track of opened brackets and rings, to ensure that they will be closed again later.
a multinomial distribution, which is estimated using
the output vector yt of the recurrent neural network
at time step t by
Pθ(st+1 = k|st, ..., s1) =
exp(yk
t )
PK
k′=1 exp(yk′
t )
(5)
where yk
t corresponds to the k-th element of vector
yt.[53] Sampling from this distribution would then
allow generating novel molecules: After sampling a
Smiles symbol st+1 for the next time step t + 1, we
can construct a new input vector xt+1, which is fed
into the model, and via yt+1 and Equation 5 yields
Pθ(st+2|st+1, ..., s1). Sampling from the latter gener-
ates st+2, which serves again also as the model’s in-
put for the next step (see Figure 4). This symbol-by-
symbol sampling procedure is repeated until the de-
sired number of characters has been generated.[53]
To indicate that a molecule is "completed", each
molecule in our training data ﬁnishes with an “end
of line” (EOL) symbol, in our case the single charac-
ter \n (which means the training data is just a simple
Smiles ﬁle). Thus, when the system outputs an EOL,
a generated molecule is ﬁnished. However, we simply
continue sampling, thus generating a regular Smiles
ﬁle that contains one molecule per line.
In this work, we used a network with three stacked
LSTM layers, using the keras library.[56] The model
was trained with back propagation through time,[53]
using the ADAM optimizer at standard settings.[57]
To mitigate the problem of exploding gradients during
training, a gradient norm clipping of 5 is applied.[53]
2.3 Transfer Learning
For many machine learning tasks, only small datasets
are available, which might lead to overﬁtting with pow-
erful models such as neural networks. In this situation,
transfer learning can help.[58] Here, a model is ﬁrst
trained on a large dataset for a diﬀerent task. Then,
the model is retrained on the smaller dataset, which is
also called ﬁne-tuning. The aim of transfer learning is
to learn general features on the bigger data set, which
also might be useful for the second task in the smaller
data regime. To generate focussed molecule libraries,
we ﬁrst train on a large, general set of molecules,
then perform ﬁne-tuning on a smaller set of speciﬁc
molecules, and after that start the sampling procedure.
2.4 Target Prediction
To verify whether the generated molecules are active
on the desired targets, standard target prediction was
employed. Machine learning-based target prediction
aims to learn a classiﬁer c : M →{1, 0} to decide
whether a molecule m ∈molecular descriptor space M
is active or not against a target.[12, 13] The molecules
are split into actives and inactives using a threshold
on a measure for the substance eﬀectiveness. pIC50 =
−log10(IC50) is one of the most widely used metrics
for this purpose. IC50 is the half maximal inhibitory
concentration, that is the concentration of drug that is
required to inhibit 50% of a biological target’s function
in vitro.
To predict whether the generated molecules are ac-
tive towards the biological target of interest, target
prediction models (TPMs) were trained for all the
tested targets (5-HT2A, Plasmodium falciparum and
Staphylococcus aureus). We evaluated Random Forest,

Segler et al.
Page 5 of 17
Logistic Regression, (Deep) Neural Networks and Gra-
dient Boosting Trees (GBT) as models with ECFP4
(Extended Connectivity Fingerprint with a diameter
of 4) as the molecular descriptor.[14, 15] We found
that GBTs slightly outperformed all other models, and
used these as our virtual assay in all studies (see Sup-
porting Information for details). ECFP4 ﬁngerprints
were generated with CDK version 1.5.13.[59, 60] Scikit-
Learn,[61] xgBoost[62] and keras[56] were used as the
machine learning libraries. For 5-HT2A and Plasmod-
ium, molecules are considered as active for the TPM
if their IC50 reported in ChEMBL is < 100 nm, which
translates to a pIC50 > 7, whereas for Staphylococcus,
we used pMIC > 3.
2.5 Data
The chemical language model was trained on a Smiles
ﬁle containing 1.4 million molecules from the ChEMBL
database, which contains molecules and measured
biological activity data. The Smiles strings of the
molecules were canonicalized (which means ﬁnding
a unique representation that is the same for isomor-
phic molecular graphs)[63, 64] before training with
the CDK chemoinformatics library, yielding a Smiles
ﬁle that contained one molecule per line.[59, 60] It has
to be noted that ChEMBL contains many peptides,
natural products with complex scaﬀolds, Michael ac-
ceptors, benzoquinones, hydroxylamines, hydrazines
etc. which is reﬂected in the generated structures (see
below). This corresponds to 72 million individual char-
acters, with a vocabulary size of 51 unique characters.
51 characters is only a subset of all Smiles symbols,
since the molecules in ChEMBL do not contain many
of the heavy elements. As we have to set the number of
symbols as a hyperparameter during model construc-
tion, and the model can only learn the distribution over
the symbols present in the training data, this implies
that only molecules with these 51 Smiles symbols seen
during training can be generated during sampling.
The 5-HT2A, the Plasmodium falciparum and the
Staphylococcus aureus dataset were also obtained from
ChEMBL. The molecules for the hold-out test sets
were removed from the training data.
2.6 Model Evaluation
To evaluate the models for a test set T , and a set of
molecules GN generated from the model by sampling,
we report the ratio of reproduced molecules |GN∩T |
|T |
,
and enrichment over random (EOR), which is deﬁned
as,
EOR =
n
|GN|
m
|RM|
(6)
where n = |GN ∩T | is the number of reproduced
molecules from T by sampling a set GN of |GN| = N
molecules from the ﬁne-tuned generative model, and
m = |RM ∩T | is the number of reproduced molecules
from T by sampling a set RM of |RM| = M molecules
from the generic, unbiased generative model trained
only on the large dataset. Intuitively, EOR indicates
how much better the ﬁne-tuned models work when
compared to the general model.
3 Results and Discussion
In this work, we address two points: First, we want
to generate large sets of diverse molecules for vir-
tual screening campaigns. Second, we want to gener-
ate smaller, focussed libraries enriched with possibly
active molecules for a speciﬁc target. For the ﬁrst
task, we can train a model on a large, general set
of molecules to learn the Smiles grammar. Sampling
from this model would generate sets of diverse, but un-
focused molecules. To address the second task, and to
obtain novel active drug molecules for a target of in-
terest, we perform transfer learning: We select a small
set of known actives for that target and we reﬁt our
pre-trained chemical language model with this small
data-set. After each epoch, we sample from the model
to generate novel actives. Furthermore, we investigate
if the model actually beneﬁts from transfer learning,
by comparing it to a model trained from scratch on
the small sets without pre-training.
3.1 Training the recurrent network
We employed a recurrent neural network with three
stacked LSTM layers, each with 1024 dimensions,
and each one followed by a dropout[65] layer, with
a dropout ratio of 0.2, to regularise the neural net-
work. The model was trained until convergence, using
a batch size of 128. The RNN was unrolled for 64 steps.
It had 21.3 × 106 parameters.
During training, we sampled a few molecules from
the model every 1000 mini-batches to inspect progress.
Within a few 1000 steps, the model starts to output
valid molecules (see Table 1).
3.2 Generating Novel Molecules
To generate novel molecules, 50,000,000 Smiles sym-
bols were sampled from the model symbol-by-symbol.
This corresponded to 976,327 lines, from which 97.7%
were valid molecules after parsing with the CDK
toolkit. Removing all molecules already seen during
training yielded 864,880 structures. After ﬁltering out
duplicates, we obtained 847,955 novel molecules. A few
generated molecules were randomly selected and de-
picted in Figure 4. The Supporting Information con-
tains more structures. The created structures are not

Segler et al.
Page 6 of 17
Table 1 Molecules sampled during training.
Batch
Generated Example
valid
0
Oc.BK5i%ur+7oAFc7L3T=F8B5e=n)CS6RCTAR((OVCp1CApb)
no
1000
OF=CCC2OCCCC)C2)C1CNC2CCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCC
no
2000
O=C(N)C(=O)N(c1occc1OC)c2ccccc2OC
yes
3000
O=C1C=2N(c3cc(ccc3OC2CCC1)CCCc4cn(c5c(Cl)cccc54)C)C
yes
HN
N
F
O
N
NH2
OH
O
O
HN
O
NH
O
N
O
O
S
N
N
N
N
N
O
O
HN
F
Cl
N
N
N
N
O
Cl
F
F
F
H
N
O
N
H
O
N
H
O
N
O
Ad
N
O
S
N N
O
H
N
O
O
O
Figure 4 A few randomly selected, generated molecules. Ad =
Adamantyl
just formally valid, but are also mostly chemically rea-
sonable.
In order to check if the de novo compounds could
be considered as valid starting points for a drug dis-
covery program, we applied the internal AstraZeneca
ﬁlters.[66] At AstraZeneca, this ﬂagging system is used
to determine if a compound is suitable to be part of
the high-throughput screening collection (if ﬂagged as
“core” or “backup”) or should be restricted for particu-
lar use (ﬂagged as “undesirable” since it contains one
or several unwanted substructures, e.g. undesired re-
active functional groups). The ﬁlters were applied to
the generated set of 848 k molecules and they ﬂagged
most of them, 640 k (75%), are either core or backup.
Since the same ratio (75%) of core and backup com-
pounds has been observed for the ChEMBL collection,
we therefore conclude that the algorithm generates pre-
ponderantly valid screening molecules and faithfully
reproduces the distribution of the training data.
To determine whether the properties of the gener-
ated molecules match the properties of the training
data from ChEMBL, we followed the procedure of
Kolb:[67] We computed several molecular properties,
namely molecular weight, BertzCT, the number of H-
donors, H-acceptors, and rotatable bonds, logP and
total polar surface area for randomly selected sub-
sets from both sets with the RDKit[68] library ver-
sion 2016.03.1. Then, we performed dimensionality re-
duction to 2D with t-SNE (t-Distributed Stochastic
Neighbor Embedding, a technique analogous to PCA),
which is shown in Figure 5.[69] Both sets overlap al-
most completely, which indicates that the generated
molecules very well recreate the properties of the train-
ing molecules.
−20
−15
−10
−5
0
5
10
15
20
−15
−10
−5
0
5
10
15
t-SNE of Phys.Chem Descriptors
ChEMBL
Generated
Figure 5 t-SNE projection of 7 physicochemical descriptors of
random molecules from ChEMBL (blue) and molecules
generated with the neural network trained on ChEMBL
(green), to two unitless dimensions. The distributions of both
sets overlap signiﬁcantly.
Furthermore, we analysed the Bemis-Murcko scaf-
folds of the training molecules and the sampled
molecules.[70] Bemis-Murcko scaﬀolds contain the ring
systems of a molecule and the moieties that link these
ring systems, while removing any side chains. They
represent the scaﬀold, or “core” of a molecule, which
series of drug molecules often have in common. The
number of common scaﬀolds in both sets, divided by
the union of all scaﬀolds in both sets (Jaccard index)
is 0.12, which indicates that the language model does
not just modify side chain substituents, but also intro-
duces modiﬁcations at the molecular core.
3.3 Generating Active Drug Molecules and Focused
Libraries
3.3.1 Targeting the 5-HT2A receptor
To generate novel ligands for the 5-HT2A receptor,
we ﬁrst selected all molecules with pIC50 > 7 which
were tested on 5-HT2A from ChEMBL (732 molecules),
and then ﬁne-tuned our pre-trained chemical language
model on this set. After each epoch, we sampled
100,000 chars, canonicalised the molecules, and re-
moved any sampled molecules that were already con-
tained in the training set. Following this, we evalu-
ated the generated molecules of each round of retrain-
ing with our 5-HT2A target prediction model (TPM).

Segler et al.
Page 7 of 17
In Figure 4, the ratio of molecules predicted to be
active by the TPM after each round of ﬁne-tuning
is shown. Before ﬁne-tuning (corresponding to epoch
0), the model generates almost exclusively inactive
molecules. Already after 4 epochs of ﬁne-tuning the
model produced a set in which 50% of the molecules
are predicted to be active.
0
5
10
15
20
Epochs of fine-tuning
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Ratio of actives
Influence of fine-tuning epochs on the ratio of actives
Figure 6 Epochs of ﬁne-tuning vs ratio of actives.
Diversity Analysis
In order to assess the novelty of
the de novo molecules generated with the ﬁne-tuned
model, a nearest neighbor similarity/diversity analysis
has been conducted using a commonly used 2D ﬁn-
gerprint (ECFP4) based similarity method (Tanimoto
index).[67] Figure 7 shows the distribution of the near-
est neighbor Tanimoto index generated by comparing
all the novel molecules and the training molecules be-
fore and after n epochs of ﬁne-tuning. For each bin,
the white bars indicate the molecules generated from
the unbiased, general model, while the darker bars in-
dicate the molecules after several epochs of ﬁne-tuning.
Within the bins corresponding to lower similarity, the
number of molecules decreases, while the bins of higher
similarity get populated with increasing numbers of
molecules. The plot thus shows that the model starts
to output more and more similar molecules to the
target-speciﬁc training set. Notably, after a few rounds
of training not only highly similar molecules are pro-
duced, but also molecules covering the whole range of
similarity, indicating that our method could not only
deliver close analogs but new chemotypes or scaﬀold
ideas to a drug discovery project.[5] To have the best
of both worlds, that is diverse and focussed molecules,
we therefore suggest to sample after each epoch of re-
training and not just after the ﬁnal epoch.
3.3.2 Targeting Plasmodium falciparum (Malaria)
Plasmodium falciparum is a parasite that causes the
most dangerous form of Malaria.[71] To probe our
model on this important target, we used a more
challenging validation strategy. We wanted to inves-
tigate whether the model could also propose the same
molecules that medicinal chemists chose to evaluate in
published studies. To test this, ﬁrst, the known actives
against Plasmodium falciparum with a pIC50 > 8 were
selected from ChEMBL. Then, this set was split ran-
domly into a training (1239 molecules) and a test set
(1240 molecules). The chemical language model was
then ﬁne-tuned on the training set. 7500 molecules
were sampled after each of the 20 epochs of reﬁtting.
Table 2 Reproducting known actives in the Plasmodium test set.
EOR: Enrichment over random.
#
pIC50
Train.
Test
Gen. mols.
Reprod.
EOR
1
> 8
1239
1240
128,256
28%
66.9
2
> 8
100
1240
93,721
7%
19.0
3
> 9
100
1022
91,034
11%
35.7
This yielded 128,256 unique molecules. Interestingly,
we found that our model was able to "redesign" 28%
of the unseen molecules of the test set. In compari-
son to molecules sampled from the unspeciﬁc, untuned
model, an Enrichment over Random (EOR) of 66.9 is
obtained. With a smaller training set of 100 molecules,
the model can still reproduce 7% of the test set, with
an EOR of 19.0. To test the reliance on pIC50 we
chose to use another cut-oﬀof pIC50 > 9, and took
100 molecules in the training set and 1022 in the test
set. 11% of the test set could be recreated, with an
EOR of 35.7. To visually explore how the model pop-
ulates chemical space, Figure 8 shows a t-SNE plot of
the ECFP4 ﬁngerprints of the test molecules and 2000
generated molecules that were predicted to be active
by the target prediction model for Plasmodium falci-
parum. It indicates that the model has generated many
similar molecules around the test examples.
3.3.3 Targeting Staphylococcus aureus (Golden Staph)
To evaluate a diﬀerent target, we furthermore con-
ducted a series of experiments to reproduce known ac-
tive molecules against Staphylococcus aureus. Here, we
used actives with a pMIC > 3. MIC is the Mean In-
hibitory Concentration, the lowest concentration of a
compound that prevents visible growth of a microor-
ganism. As above, the actives were split into a train-
ing and a test set. However, here, the availability of
the data allows larger test sets to be used. After ﬁne-
tuning on the training set of 1000 molecules (Table 3,
Entry 1), our model could retrieve 14% of the 6051 test
molecules. When scaling down to a smaller training set
of 50 molecules (the model gets trained on less than

Segler et al.
Page 8 of 17
Figure 7 Nearest-neighbour Tanimoto similarity distribution of the generated molecules for 5-HT2A after n epochs of ﬁne-tuning
against the known actives. The generated molecules are distributed over the whole similarity range. Generated molecules with a
medium similarity can be interesting for scaﬀold-hopping.[5]
Table 3 Reproducting known actives in the Staphylococcus test set. EOR: Enrichment over random.
Entry
pMIC
Train.
Test
Gen. mols.
Reprod.
EOR
1
> 3
1000
6051
51,052
14%
155.9
2
> 3
50
7001
70,891
2.5%
21.6
3a
> 3
50
7001
85,755
1.8%
6.3
4b
> 3
50
7001
285
0%
—
5c
> 3
0
7001
60,988
6%
59.6
aFine-tuning learning rate = 10−4. bNo Pretraining. c8 Generate-Test cycles.
1% of the data!), it can still reproduce 2.5% of the test
set, and performs 21.6 times better than the unbiased
model (Table 3, Entry 2). Using a lower learning rate
(0.0001, Entry 3) for ﬁne-tuning, which is often done in
transfer learning, does not work as well as the standard
learning rate (0.001, Entry 2). We additionally exam-
ined whether the model beneﬁts from transfer learning.
When trained from scratch, the model performs much
worse than the pretrained and subsequently ﬁne-tuned
model (see Figure 9 and Table 3, Entry 4). Pretrain-
ing on the large dataset is thus crucial to achieve good
performance against Staphylococcus aureus.
3.4 Simulating Design-Synthesis-Test Cycles
The experiments we conducted so far are applicable if
one already knows several actives. However, in drug
discovery, one often does not have such a set to start
with. Therefore, high throughput screenings are con-
ducted to identify a few hits, which serve as a starting
point for the typical cyclical drug discovery process:
Molecules get designed, synthesised, and then tested
in assays. Then, the best molecules are selected, and
based on the gained knowledge new molecules are de-
signed, which closes the cycle. Therefore, as a ﬁnal chal-
lenge for our model, we simulated this cycle by iterat-
ing molecule generation ("synthesis"), selection of the
best molecules with the machine learning-based tar-
get prediction ("virtual assay") and retraining the lan-
guage model with the best molecules ("design") with
Staphylococcus aureus as the target. We thus do not
use a set of known actives to start the structure gener-
ation procedure (see Figure 10).
We started with 100,000 sampled molecules from the
unbiased chemical language model. Then, using our
target prediction model, we extracted the molecules
classiﬁed as actives. After that, the RNN was ﬁne-
tuned for 5 epochs on the actives, sampling ≈10,000
molecules after each epoch. The resulting molecules

Segler et al.
Page 9 of 17
−20
−15
−10
−5
0
5
10
15
20
−20
−15
−10
−5
0
5
10
15
20
t-SNE of ECFP4
Generated, Predicted Actives
Plasmodium f. Test Set
Figure 8 t-SNE plot of the pIC50>9 test set (blue) and the de
novo molecules predicted to be active (green). The language
model populates chemical space around the test molecules.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
Epochs
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
Test Loss
Fine-Tuning vs Direct Training
type
from scratch
pretrained
Figure 9 Diﬀerent training strategies on the Staphylococcus
aureus dataset with 1000 training and 6051 test examples.
Fine-tuning the pretrained model performs better than training
from scratch (lower test loss [cross entropy] is better).
were ﬁltered with the target prediction model, and the
new actives appended to the actives from the previous
round, closing the loop.
Already after 8 iterations, the model reproduced 416
of the 7001 test molecules from the previous task,
which is 6% (Table 3, Entry 5), and exhibits and EOR
of 59.6. This EOR is higher than if the model is re-
trained directly on a set of 50 actives (Entry 2). Ad-
ditionally, we obtained 60,988 unique molecules that
the target prediction model classiﬁed as active. This
demonstrates that in combination with a target pre-
diction or scoring model, our model can also perform
the complete de novo-design cycle.
Target Prediction
Model
RNN
New Active Molecules
1) Retrain
2) Sample
1) Score
2) Filter Inactives
Figure 10 Scheme of our de novo design cycle. Molecules are
generated by the chemical language model and then scored
with the target prediction model (TPM). The inactives are
ﬁltered out, and the RNN is retrained. Here, the TPM is a
machine learning model, but it could also be a robot
conducting synthesis and biological assays, or a docking
program.
3.5 Why does the model work?
Our results presented in Section 3.2 show that the
general model trained on a large molecule set has
learned the Smiles rules and can output valid, drug-
like molecules, which resemble the training data. How-
ever, sampling from this model does not help much if
we want to generate actives for a speciﬁc target: We
would have to generate very large sets to ﬁnd actives
for that target among the diverse range of molecules
the model creates, which is indicated by the high EOR
scores in our experiments.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Levenshtein Distance
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
Normed Frequency
Figure 11 Histogram of Levenshtein (String edit) distances of
the Smiles of the reproduced molecules to their nearest
neighbour in the training set (Staphylococcus aureus, model
retrained on 50 actives). While in many cases the model
makes changes of a few symbols in the Smiles, resembling
the typical modiﬁcations applied when exploring series of
compounds, the distribution of the distances indicates that the
RNN also performs more complex changes by introducing
larger moieties or generating molecules that are structurally
diﬀerent, but isofunctional to the training set.
When ﬁne-tuned to a set of actives, the probability
distribution over the molecules captured by our model

Segler et al.
Page 10 of 17
is shifted towards molecules active towards our tar-
get. To study this, we compare the Levenshtein (String
edit) distance of the generated Smiles to their nearest
neighbours in the training set in Figure 11. The Leven-
shtein distance of e.g. benzene c1ccccc1 and pyridine
c1ccncc1 would be 1. Figure 11 shows that while the
model often seems to have made small replacements
in the underlying Smiles, in many cases it also made
more complex modiﬁcations or even generated com-
pletely diﬀerent Smiles. This is supported also by the
distribution of the nearest neighbour ﬁngerprint simi-
larities of training and rediscovered molecules (ECFP4,
Tanimoto, Figure 12). Many rediscovered molecules
are in the medium similarity regime.
Because we perform transfer learning, during ﬁne-
tuning, the model does not "forget" what it has
learned. A plausible explanation why the model works
is therefore that it can transfer the modiﬁcations that
are regularly applied when series of molecules are stud-
ied, to the molecules it has seen during ﬁne-tuning.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Similarity
Nearest Neighbour Distribution - Training vs Reproduced Molecules
Figure 12 Violin plot of the nearest-neighbour
ECFP4-Tanimoto similarity distribution of the 50 training
molecules against the rediscovered molecules in Table 3, Entry
2. The distribution suggests the model has learned to make
typical small functional group replacements, but can also
reproduce molecules which are not too similar to the training
data.
4 Conclusion
In this work, we have shown that recurrent neural net-
works based on the Long Short Term Memory (LSTM)
can be applied to learn a statistical chemical language
model. The model can generate large sets of novel
molecules with similar physico-chemical properties to
the training molecules. This can be used to generate
libraries for virtual screening. Furthermore, we demon-
strated that the model performs transfer learning when
ﬁne-tuned to smaller sets of molecules active towards
a speciﬁc biological target, which enables the creation
of novel molecules with the desired activity. By iter-
ating cycles of structure generation with the language
model, scoring with a target prediction model (TPM)
and retraining of the model with increasingly larger
sets of highly scored molecules, we showed that we do
not even need a set of active known active molecules to
start our procedure with, as the TPM could also be a
docking program, or a robot conducting synthesis[72]
and biological testing.
We see three main advantages of our method. First,
it is conceptually orthogonal to established molecule
generation approaches, as it learns a generative model
for molecular structures. Second, our method is very
simple to setup, train and to use, and can be adapted
to diﬀerent datasets without any modiﬁcations to the
model architecture, and does not depend on hand-
encoded expert knowledge. Furthermore, it merges
structure generation and optimisation in one model. A
weakness of our model is interpretability. In contrast,
existing de-novo design methods settled on virtual re-
actions to generate molecules, which has advantages as
it minimises the chance of obtaining "overﬁt", weird
molecules, and increases the chances to ﬁnd synthesiz-
able compounds.[2, 7]
To extend our work, it is just a small step to cast
molecule generation as a reinforcement learning prob-
lem, where the pre-trained LSTM generator could be
seen as a policy, which can be encouraged to create
better molecules with a reward signal obtained from a
target prediction model.[73] In addition, diﬀerent ap-
proaches for target prediction, for example docking,
could be evaluated.[7, 11]
Deep Learning is not a panacea, and we join Gawehn
et al. in expressing “some healthy skepticism” regard-
ing its application in drug discovery.[26] Generating
molecules that are almost right is not enough, be-
cause in Chemistry, a miss is as good as a mile, and
drug discovery is a “needle in the haystack” problem
– in which also the needle looks like hay. Neverthe-
less, given that we have shown in this work that our
model can rediscover those needles, and other recent
developments,[26, 74–76] we believe that deep neu-
ral networks can be complimentary to established ap-
proaches in drug discovery. The complexity of the prob-
lem certainly warrants the investigation of novel ap-
proaches. Eventually, success in the wet lab will de-
termine if the new wave[21] of neural networks will
prevail.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Segler et al.
Page 11 of 17
