1
Machine Intelligence Techniques for
Next-Generation Context-Aware Wireless
Networks
Tadilo Endeshaw Bogale1,2, Xianbin Wang1 and Long Bao Le2
Western University, London, Canada1
Institute National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque (INRS),
Universit´e du Qu´ebec, Montr´eal, Canada2

Abstract
The next generation wireless networks (i.e. 5G and beyond), which would be extremely dynamic and
complex due to the ultra-dense deployment of heterogeneous networks (HetNets), poses many critical
challenges for network planning, operation, management and troubleshooting. At the same time, generation
and consumption of wireless data are becoming increasingly distributed with ongoing paradigm shift from
people-centric to machine-oriented communications, making the operation of future wireless networks even
more complex. In mitigating the complexity of future network operation, new approaches of intelligently
utilizing distributed computational resources with improved context-awareness becomes extremely important.
In this regard, the emerging fog (edge) computing architecture aiming to distribute computing, storage, control,
communication, and networking functions closer to end users, have a great potential for enabling efﬁcient
operation of future wireless networks. These promising architectures make the adoption of artiﬁcial intelligence
(AI) principles which incorporate learning, reasoning and decision-making mechanism, as natural choices
for designing a tightly integrated network. Towards this end, this article provides a comprehensive survey
on the utilization of AI integrating machine learning, data analytics and natural language processing (NLP)
techniques for enhancing the efﬁciency of wireless network operation. In particular, we provide comprehensive
discussion on the utilization of these techniques for efﬁcient data acquisition, knowledge discovery, network
planning, operation and management of the next generation wireless networks. A brief case study utilizing the
AI techniques for this network has also been provided.
Keywords– 5G and beyond, Artiﬁcial (machine) intelligence, Context-aware-wireless, ML, NLP, Ontology
I. INTRODUCTION
The advent of the ﬁfth generation (5G) wireless
network and its convergence with vertical applications
constitute the foundation of future connected society
which is expected to support 125 billion devices by
2030 (IHS Markit). As these applications and devices
are featured by ubiquitous connectivity requirements,
future 5G and beyond networks are becoming more
complex. Besides the complexity increase of base
stations (BSs) and user equipments (UEs), signiﬁcant
challenges arise from the initial network planning to
the deployment and situation-dependent operation and
management stages.
The network architecture of 5G and beyond will
be inevitably heterogeneous and multi-tier with ultra-
dense deployment of small cells to achieve the an-
ticipated 1000 fold capacity increase cost-effectively.
For instance, the mixed use of planned and centrally
controlled macro-BSs and randomly deployed wireless
ﬁdelity (WiFi) access points or femto-BSs in the ultra-
dense heterogeneous network (HetNet) raises several
unexpected operation scenarios, which are not possible
to envision at the network design stage. This requires
future wireless networks to have self organizing, con-
ﬁguring and healing capability based on the oper-
ational condition through tight coordination among
different nodes, tiers and communication layers. These
challenges make the existing network design strategies
utilizing a fairly simple statistics experience unaccept-
able performance (for example, in terms of spectrum
arXiv:1801.04223v1  [cs.IT]  12 Jan 2018

AI opportunities 
for wireless 
networks
Network interoperability
Distributed & affordable 
computing resources
Massive data availability
Predictive network 
characteristics
Fig. 1. Favorable conditions for the adoption of machine intelli-
gence techniques in the next generation wireless networks.
and energy efﬁciency, coverage, delay and cost) [1],
[2].
The rapidly growing number of machine-type-
communication (MTC) devices contribute a consider-
able portion on the complexity of this ultra-dense net-
work. Many of the future MTC applications supported
by 5G and beyond will require the underlying wireless
networks to achieve high availability, reliability and
security, very short transit time and low latency [3].
Furthermore, in such use cases, uninterrupted and
safe operation is often the top priority (for instance,
connected vehicles). Taking a MTC application ofﬂine
for any reason can cause signiﬁcant business loss or
non-tolerable customer experience, and many of the
MTC devices are resource-constrained and will not be
able to rely solely on their own limited resources to
fulﬁll their processing demands [4].
As a result, these latency critical applications cannot
be moved to the network controller or cloud due to de-
lay, bandwidth, or other constraints. Moreover, the data
sets generated from these devices will be extremely
diverse and may have large-scale missing (inaccurate)
values [5]. In addition, a number of new data hungry
MTC immersive use-cases will arise including wear-
ables, virtual realities, intelligent product and support-
systems where most of them will use built-in back-
end data infrastructure and analytics engine to provide
context-aware services. All these necessitates the next
generation network (i.e. 5G and beyond) to adopt an
intelligent and context-aware approach for network
planning, design, analysis, and optimization.
We are in the beginning phase of an intelligent era
that has been driven by the rapid evolution of semicon-
ductor industries, computing technologies, and diverse
use cases. This is witnessed by the tight integration of
networked information systems, sensing and commu-
nication devices, data sources, decision making, and
cyber physical infrastructures. The proliferation of tiny
wireless sensors and MTC devices, and smart phones
also show clear evidences for the exceptional process-
ing capability and cost-effectiveness of semiconduc-
tor devices. These promising developments facilitate
distributed computing resources not only in the cloud
but also in the fog and edge nodes. Both fog and
edge computing attempt pushing the intelligence and
processing capabilities down closer to where the data
originates.
The edge computing aims to integrate intelligence
and processing power capabilities closest to the orig-
inal data source. The edge node, for example, intel-
ligent programmable automation controllers (PACs),
determines which raw input data should be stored
locally or sent to the fog (cloud) for further analysis.
On the other hand, in the fog computing, all the raw
input data will ﬁrst be converted to the appropriate
Internet protocol (such as HTTP) before sending to
the fog nodes. Thus, higher-level data contents are
processed, stored and sent to the cloud for further anal-
ysis in the fog devices (for example, intelligent routers,
access points, Internet of things (IoT) gateways). Thus,
the edge and fog enabled network allows distributed
computing, storage, control, communication and net-
working functions by reducing the data transmitted and
work load of the cloud, latency and system response
time especially for applications demanding localized
and location dependent information [6]. Moreover, the
node, user, sensor, or MTC device is potentially capa-
ble of generating row and processed data at different
granularity levels which ultimately help the network
to have a massive amount of data likely exhibiting
some pattern. This will help different nodes to lever-
age data mining and analytics techniques to predict
relevant network metrics such as user mobility, trafﬁc
behavior, network load ﬂuctuation, channel variations,
and interference levels.
All these opportunities enable efﬁcient and ﬂexible
resource allocation and management, protocol stack
conﬁguration, and signaling procedure and physical
layer optimization, and facilitate existing devices to
harness the powers of sensors, edge, fog and cloud
based computing platforms, and data analytics engines
[7]–[9]. These also create favorable conditions to engi-
neer a tightly integrated wireless network by adopting
the AI principles (see Fig. 1) incorporating learning,
reasoning and decision making mechanisms which are
crucial to realize context-awareness capability. A typi-
cal next generation network utilizing the AI principles

at different nodes is shown in Fig. 2. Towards this end,
the current paper provides a comprehensive survey
on the utilization of AI integrating machine learning,
data analytics and natural language processing (NLP)
techniques for enhancing the efﬁciency of wireless
systems. We particularly focus on the utilization of
these techniques for efﬁcient wireless data acquisition
and knowledge discovery, planning, and operation and
management of the next generation wireless networks.
A brief case study showing the utilization of AI
techniques for this network has also been provided.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section II,
we discuss data acquisition and knowledge discovery
approaches used in AI enabled wireless. Then, a com-
prehensive discussion on how these knowledge can be
used in network planning, operation and management
of the next generation wireless is given in Sections
III and IV. A case study discussing the applications
of AI techniques for channel impulse response (CIR)
prediction and context-aware data transmission is then
provided in Section V. Finally, conclusions are drawn
in Section VI.
II. DATA ACQUISITION AND KNOWLEDGE
DISCOVERY
Efﬁcient data acquisition and knowledge discovery
is one of the requirements of future wireless networks
as it helps to realize situation aware and optimized
decisions as shown in Fig. 3. The gathered data may
need to be processed efﬁciently to extract relevant
knowledge. Furthermore, as the available data may
contain a large amount of erroneous (missing) values,
a robust knowledge discovery may need to be devised
[5].
A. Data Acquisition
The AI based tools relying on machine learning for
the input data mining and knowledge model extraction
at different levels could be applied [10]. This includes
the cell level, cell cluster level and user level. In
general, one can collect data from three main sources;
network, user, and external. The network data char-
acterizes the network behavior including outage and
usage statistics of services or nodes, and load of a
cell. The user data could comprise user subscription
information and user device type. And, the external
data contains a user speciﬁc information obtained
from different sources such as sensors and channel
measurements [11].
One way of collecting wireless data is by employing
content caching where the idea is to store popular
contents at the network edge (at BSs, devices, or
other intermediate locations). In this regard, one can
enable the proactive cache type if the trafﬁc learn-
ing algorithm predicts that the same content will be
requested in the near future [12], [13]. Moreover,
since different users may request the same content
with different qualities, each edge node may need to
cache the same content in different granularity (for
example, caching video data with different resolution).
This further requires the edge device to apply coded
(adaptive) caching technique based on the quality of
service (QoS) requirement of the requester [14]. Coded
caching also enables devices to create multicasting
opportunities for certain contents via coded multicast
transmissions [15].
In some cases, a given edge (fog) may collect date
from more than one sources with different connectiv-
ity criteria [16]. In a fog enabled wireless network,
this is facilitated by employing IoT devices which
leverage a multitude of radio-access technologies such
as wireless local area network (WLAN) and cellular
networks. In this regard, context-aware data collection
from multiple sources probably in a compressed for-
mat by employing appropriate dimensionality reduc-
tion techniques under imperfect statistical knowledge
of the data while simultaneously optimizing multiple
objective functions such as delay and transmission
power can be enabled [13].
B. Knowledge Discovery
Efﬁcient knowledge discovery is critical for opti-
mized operation and management of the network. The
network may need to use a novel learning technique
such as deep learning to extract the hidden contextual
information of the network which are crucial for
knowledge base (KB) creation. In general, context is
related to any information used to characterize the
situation of an entity, including surrounding location,
identity, preferences, and activities. Context may affect
the operation and management procedures of complex
systems at various levels, from the physical device
level to the communication level, up to the applica-
tion level [17]. For instance, uncovering the relation
between the device and network information (user
location, velocity, battery level, and other medium
access control (MAC) and higher layer aspects) would
permit adaptive communication and processing capa-

IoT 
edges
Cloud
Cellular edges
ITS
edges
Fog
Fog
Microwave
mmWave
BS
BS
Fig. 2. Typical next generation network adopting AI principles with learning, reasoning and decision making.
Network, user, 
external data
Data acquisition
Reasoning and decision
Optimized 
network
Knowledge discovery
Fig. 3. Optimized network design with AI techniques.
bilities based on the changes in the environment and
application [2], [17].
Analyzing wireless data contextually (semantically)
facilitate wireless operators to optimize their network
trafﬁc. To realize semantic aware trafﬁc optimization,
however, the network may need to understand the
content of the signal. One way of understanding the
information content of a data is by creating semantic
aware ontology using predeﬁned vocabulary of terms
and concepts [18]. The ontology speciﬁcation can
provide an expressive language with many logical
constructs to deﬁne classes, properties and their re-
lationships. In this regard, the authors of [18] propose
a semantic open data model for sensor data called
MyOntoSens and write using ontology web language
2 description logic language. The proposed KB has
been implemented using prot´eg´e and pre-validated
with pellet reasoner. In a similar context, an ontology
for wireless sensor networks (WSNs) dedicated to the
description of sensor features and observation has been
presented in [19], [20].
Understanding the context also helps to produce
a context-aware compressed (summary) information
which will utilize less radio resource for transmission.
For instance, if a BS would like to transmit text
information to a user, the BS can transmit only its
contextual coded data. The user will, then, extract
the desired content just from the context by utilizing
appropriate decoder and big-data analytics technique
such as NLP. As context differs from the user’s world
knowledge about the content, the coding and decoding
technique may vary among users [17]. In general,
two types of content summarizing approaches are
commonly adopted; abstractive and extractive. The
extractive approach uses only the relevant content
from the original information whereas, the abstractive
approach may use new words (expressions or con-
tents) as part of the summary information [21], [22].
Although most of the existing methods can extract
useful information for the summary, they are very
far from generating human understandable summary.
One of the main reasons is the loose associations

and unordered information distribution which make it
hard to extract syntactically correct and semantically
coherence information from the summary. In fact,
modeling the coherence of information summary is
one of the active areas of research [21].
III. NETWORK PLANNING
One of the most critical aspects determining the per-
formance of a wireless network is the initial planning.
This includes infrastructure (node deployment), fre-
quency, number of parameters and their conﬁguration
setting procedures, and energy consumption to run the
network in both idle (no data communication takes
place between the network and a user) and active (data
communication takes place between the network and
a user) conditions. A well planned network may need
to guarantee satisfactory user QoS (in terms of data
rate, reliability and latency) and the network operator
requirements (in terms of cost). The machine learning
technique can be used for planning different parts of
the network by utilizing the network and user data.
A. Node Deployment, Energy Consumption and RF
Planning
The future generation wireless networks will be
extremely dense and heterogeneous, equipped likely
with moving and ﬂying BSs, and featured by continu-
ally varying network conditions [23]. This fact makes
the existing network planning techniques, which are
mainly static and designed from expensive ﬁeld tests,
not suitable for the future wireless networks [2], [24].
The utilization of AI techniques for network planning
has recently received an interest in the research com-
munity. For instance, a machine learning technique
is suggested for content popularity and request dis-
tribution predictions of a cache where its design in
the network considers several factors including cache
placement and update strategy which are determined
by utilizing the users’ content request distribution and
frequency, and mobility pattern [25].
In [26], an AI based system which leverages graph
theory based problem formulations for the ﬁber to
home network is proposed to automate the planning
process. To solve the problems, mixed integer linear
programming (MILP), ant colony optimization (ACO)
and genetic algorithm (GA) have been applied. The
authors of [10] employ the principles of AI for radio
access network (RAN) planning which includes new
cell, radio frequency (RF) and spectrum of the 5G
wireless. The analysis is performed by processing in-
put data from multiple sources, through learning based
classiﬁcation, prediction and clustering models, and
extracting relevant knowledge to drive the decisions
made by 5G network.
Wireless networks contribute an increasing share in
the energy consumption of the information commu-
nications technology (ICT) infrastructure. Over 80%
of a wireless network power consumption is used by
the RANs, especially at the BS, since the present BS
deployment is designed on the basis of peak trafﬁc
loads and generally stays active irrespective of the
huge variations in trafﬁc load [27]. This makes the
current energy planning inefﬁcient for the future smart
cities aiming to realize green communication. To en-
able energy efﬁcient wireless, different AI techniques
have been suggested. For instance, the authors of
[28] propose a method to realize the efﬁcient use
of electricity by autonomously controlling network
equipments such as servers, air-conditioners in an
integrated manner. Furthermore, the authors of [29]
suggest predictive models, including neural network
and Markov decision, for the energy consumption of
IoT in smart cities. Along this line, a BS switching
solution for trafﬁc aware greener cellular networks
using AI techniques has also been discussed in [27].
B. Conﬁguration Parameter and Service Planning
The number of conﬁgurable parameters in cellu-
lar networks fairly increases when moving from one
generation to the next. For instance, in a typical 3G
and 4G nodes these parameters are around 1000 and
1500, respectively. It is anticipated that this trend will
continue and the recently suggested 5G network node
will likely have 2000 or more parameters. In addition,
unlike the current and previous generation networks
which provides static services, the next generation net-
work may need to support the continuously evolving
new services and use cases, and establish sufﬁcient
network resource and provisioning mechanisms while
ensuring agility and robustness. These necessitate
the next generation network to understand parame-
ter variations, learn uncertainties, conﬁgure network
parameters, forecast immediate and future challenges,
and provide timely solutions by interacting with the
environment [27]. In this direction, the utilization of
big data analytics has been discussed for protocol stack
conﬁguration, signaling procedure and physical layer
procedure optimizations in [9].

Future smart cities require well planned wired and
wireless networks with ubiquitous broadband connec-
tivity, and ﬂexible, real time and distributed data pro-
cessing capability. Although most modern cities have
multiple cellular networks that provide adequate cov-
erage and data processing capability, these networks
often have limited capacity and peak bandwidths and
fail to meet the real time constraint of different emerg-
ing tactile applications. These make the realization
of advanced delay critical municipal services envi-
sioned in a smart city (e.g., real-time surveillance,
public safety, on-time advisories, and smart buildings)
challenging [1]. One way of addressing this challenge
would be by deploying an AI integrated fog based
wireless architecture which allows data processing of
the network using a number of distributed nodes.
This will help for analyzing network status, detecting
anticipated faults and planning new node deployment
using AI techniques [1].
IV. NETWORK OPERATION AND MANAGEMENT
Energy and spectrum efﬁciency, latency, reliability,
and security are the key parameters that are taken
into account during the network operation stage. And
properly optimizing these parameters usually yield
satisfactory performance for both the service providers
and end users. In addition, these optimization parame-
ters usually require simple and real time learning and
decision making algorithms.
A. Resource Allocation and Management
Different AI techniques have been proposed for
resource allocation, management and optimization of
wireless networks such as cellular, wearable, WSN,
body area network (BAN) [24]. In [30], the poten-
tial of AI in solving the channel allocation prob-
lem in wireless communication is considered. It is
demonstrated that the AI based approach has shown
better performance than those of randomized-based
heuristic and genetic algorithms (GAs). In [31], ra-
dio access technology (RAT) selection utilizing the
Hopﬁeld neural networks as a decision making tool
while leveraging the ability of AI reasoning and the
use of multi-parameter decision by exploiting the
options of IEEE 802.21 protocol is proposed. A ma-
chine learning based techniques including supervised,
unsupervised, and reinforcement learning techniques,
have been exploited to manage the packet routing in
many different network scenarios [32]. Speciﬁcally, in
[33], [34], a deep learning approach for shortest trafﬁc
route identiﬁcation to reduce network congestion is
presented. A deep learning technique aiming to shift
the computing needs from rule-based route compu-
tation to machine learning based route estimation
for high throughput packet processing is proposed in
[32]. Along this line, a fog computing based radio-
access network which exploits the advantage of local
radio signal processing, cooperative radio resource
management, and distributed storage capability of fog
has been suggested to decrease the load on the front
haul and avoid large scale radio signal processing in
the centralized baseband controllers [1].
The utilization of unlicensed spectrum as a com-
plement to licensed one receives an interest to of-
ﬂoad network trafﬁc through the carrier aggregation
framework, while critical control signaling, mobility,
voice and control data will always be transmitted on
the licensed bands. In this aspect, the authors of [35]
propose a hopﬁeld neural network scheme for multi-
radio packet scheduling. The problem of resource
allocation with uplink-downlink decoupling in a long
term evolution-unlicensed (LTE-U) system has been
investigated in [36] for which the authors propose a
decentralized scheme based on neural network. The
authors in [37] propose a distributed approach based
on Q-learning for the problem of channel selection
in an LTE-U system. Furthermore, in a multi-RAT
scenario, machine learning techniques can allow the
smart use of different RATs wherein a BS can learn
when to transmit on each type of frequency band based
on the network conditions. For instance, one can apply
a machine learning to predict the availability of a line
of sight (LoS) link, by considering the users’ mobility
pattern and antenna tilt, thus allowing the transmission
over the millimeter wave band.
B. Security and Privacy Protection
The inherent shared nature of radio propagation
environment makes wireless transmissions vulnerable
to malicious attacks, including eavesdropping and
jamming. For this reason, security and privacy pro-
tection are fundamental concerns of today’s wireless
communication system. Wireless networks generally
adopt separate security level at different layers of the
communication protocol stack. Furthermore, different
applications usually require different encryption meth-
ods [42]. The utilization of AI techniques for wireless
security has received a signiﬁcant interest.

TABLE I
MAIN ISSUES IN AI-ENABLED WIRELESS NETWORK
Data acquisition and knowledge discovery
Ref.
• Context-aware data acquisition from single/multiple sources
[13]
• Coded (adaptive) caching
[14], [15]
• Semantic-aware Ontology (KB) creation from network data
[18]–[20]
• Robust knowledge discovery from erroneous (missing) data
[5]
Network planning
• Node deployment and radio frequency allocation
[10], [26]
• Caching and computing placement and content update
[38]
• Energy consumption modeling and prediction (idle/active)
[27], [28]
• Parameter and service conﬁguration procedure
[1], [9]
Network operation and management
• Resource allocation: RAT and channel selection,
[30], [31]
packet routing, distributed storage and processing,
[1], [32]
multi-RAT packet scheduling
[35]
• Security: Spooﬁng attack and intrusion detection
[39]–[41]
• Latency: Context-aware edge computing and scheduling
[5], [38]
In [39], a spooﬁng attack detection scheme using
random key distribution based artiﬁcial immune sys-
tem (AIS) has been proposed. In a similar path, an
approach based on GA and AIS, called GAAIS, for
dynamic intrusion detection in mobile ad-hoc network
(MANETs) is suggested in [41]. In [40], advanced
detection of intrusions on sensor networks (ADIOS)
based intrusion detection and prevention system is
developed. The ADIOS is designed to mitigate denial-
of-service attacks in wireless sensor networks by cap-
turing and analyzing network events using AI and
an expert system developed using the C language
integrated production system tool. In a similar work,
the authors of [43] propose AI based scheme to secure
the communication protocol of connected vehicles.
C. Latency Optimization for Tactile Applications
The next generation wireless networks are fea-
tured by several mission critical (tactile) applications
such as lane switching in automated vehicles. For
vehicular networks, different levels of automation has
been deﬁned by the USA department of transportation
(DOT) ranging from a simple driver assistance (level
1) to the full automation mode (level 5). For this
application, one can apply different message repre-
sentations including warning alarm, picture and audio
information to request intervening. In fact, recently it
is demonstrated via experiment that the use of natural
language generation techniques from imprecise data
improves the human decision making accuracy. Such
a linguistic description of data could be designed by
modeling vague expressions such as small and large,
which are norms in daily life conversation, using fuzzy
logic theory [44]. All these facilitates the utilization of
predictive machine learning as in [45], [46].
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
CIR prediction index (in OFDM block) 
6.6
6.8
7
7.2
7.4
Average SE (bps/Hz)
Predicted CIR: Analytical (RLS)
Predicted CIR: ML (Linear regression)
Perfect CIR
Fig. 4.
Comparison of analytical and machine learning (ML)
approaches in terms of achieved average SE for different future
OFDM block index CIR.
From the computing side, edge devices can be
used for effective low-latency computations, using the
emerging paradigm of mobile edge computing. How-
ever, optimizing mobile edge computing faces many
challenges such as computing placement, computa-
tional resource allocation, computing task assignment,
end-to-end latency, and energy consumption. In this
aspect, a machine learning technique can be used to
address these challenges by utilizing historical data.
Predicting computational requirements enable the net-
work devices to schedule the computational resources
in advance to minimize the global latency. In this
aspect, the authors of [38] propose a cross-system
learning framework in order to optimize the long-term
performance of multi-mode BSs, by steering delay-
tolerant trafﬁc towards WiFi. Furthermore, in a fog
enabled wireless system, latency can be addressed by
exploiting different levels of awareness at each edge
network. In fact, a number of learning techniques can
be applied to achieve these awareness including incre-
mental, divide and conquer, parallel and hierarchical
[5]. A brief summary of different issues in the AI-
enabled wireless network is presented in Table I.
V. DESIGN CASE STUDIES
This section discusses typical design case studies
in which the AI techniques can be applied for the
context-aware wireless network.

A. Machine Learning for CIR Prediction
This study demonstrates the utilization of ma-
chine learning tools for optimizing wireless system
resources. In this aspect, we select the wireless CIR
prediction as the design objective. To solve this design
objective, the ﬁrst possibility could be to apply differ-
ent analytical CIR prediction techniques (for example,
the recursive least square (RLS) prediction proposed in
[45]). The second possibility could be to predict future
CIRs by leveraging the past experience. The former
possibility is very expensive particularly when real
time prediction is needed. Furthermore, in most cases,
the analytical prediction approach may fail whenever
there is a modeling error or uncertainty. The latter
possibility, however, is simple as it employs the past
experience and applies standard vector multiplication
and addition operations [47]. This simulation com-
pares the performances of RLS and machine learning
prediction approaches. For the machine learning, we
employ the well known multivariate linear regression.
For the comparison, we consider an orthogonal
frequency domain multiplexing (OFDM) transmission
scheme where a BS equipped with N antennas is
serving a single antenna IoT device. The CIR is
modeled by considering a typical scenario of the IEEE
802.11 standard with channel correlation both spatially
and temporarily. The spatial channel covariance matrix
is modeled by considering the uniform linear array
(ULA) structure, and the temporal channel correlation
is designed by the well known Jake’s model [48].
The number of multipath taps L = 4, fast Fourier
transform (FFT) size M
= 64, N
= 8, OFDM
symbol period Ts = 166µs, RLS window size Sb = 8,
forward prediction window size Sf = 8, carrier fre-
quency 5.6GHz, and mobility speed of the IoT device
30km/hr. The signal to noise ratio (SNR) for each sub-
carrier is set to 10dB. With these settings, Fig. 4 shows
the average spectrum efﬁciency (SE) obtained by the
RLS and machine learning approaches for sub-carrier
s = 4. In both cases, the achieved SE decreases as
the future OFDM-block index increases. This is ex-
pected since the number of unknown CIR coefﬁcients
increase as the future block index increases leading
to a degraded CIR prediction quality. However, for
a ﬁxed future prediction index, the machine learning
approach yields better performance than the RLS one1.
1Note that similar average performance is observed for other
sub-carriers.
9%3%
56%
19%
13%
Sample Traffic Data
1
2
3
4
5
Fig. 5. Data trafﬁc of a sample abstract information: In this ﬁgure,
(Sets) 1 to 5 denote, Background, Objective, Method and Result,
Conclusion, and Related and Future Works, respectively.
B. Context-Aware Data Transmission using NLP Tech-
niques
Context (semantic) aware information transmission
is crucial in the future generation network. To validate
this, we employ abstract texts from scientiﬁc articles
[49]. According to this paper, each scientiﬁc abstract
text consists of different types of information including
research background, methodology, main results etc.
Fig. 5 shows the expert annotated data size for differ-
ent types for 2000 biomedical article abstracts. As can
be seen from this ﬁgure, different information types
use different portions of the overall data set. And for
a given user, one can transmit the desired information
according to the context. For instance, for a user who
is interested in the basics about the article, transmit-
ting the background information could be sufﬁcient
which accounts for only 9% of the total trafﬁc. This
shows that semantically enabled data transmission
will reduce the network trafﬁc while simultaneously
maintaining the desired QoS experience of users.
Such a transmission, however, is realized when
sentences of similar types are clustered correctly for
each abstract. In scientiﬁc papers, the location and
part-of-speech voice of a sentence are crucial features
to identify its class set [49]. We have employed these
features with the commonly used data clustering algo-
rithms (i.e., K-means and Agglomerative) and present
the accuracy achieved by these algorithms for each
type as shown in Table II. As can be seen from this
table, different clustering algorithms yield different
accuracy. One can also notice from this table that
signiﬁcant research work may need to be undertaken

TABLE II
ACCURACY OF DIFFERENT CLUSTERING METHODS
Clustering Method
Set 1
Set 2
Set 3
Set 4
Set 5
K-Means
0.34
0.17
0.35
0.31
0.16
Agglomerative
0.21
0.18
0.38
0.30
0.15
to reach the ideal performance.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
The next generation wireless networks, which would
be more dynamic, complex with dense deployment
of BSs of different types and access technologies,
poses many design challenges for network planning,
management and troubleshooting procedures. Never-
theless, wireless data can be generated from differ-
ent sources including networked information systems,
and sensing and communication devices. Furthermore,
the emerging fog computing architecture aiming for
distributed computing, storage, control, communica-
tion, and networking functions closer to end users
contribute for the efﬁcient realization of wireless sys-
tems. This article provides a comprehensive survey
on the utilization of AI integrating machine learning,
data analytics and NLP techniques for enhancing the
efﬁciency of wireless networks. We have given a
comprehensive discussion on the utilization of these
techniques for efﬁcient wireless data acquisition and
knowledge discovery, planning, operation and manage-
ment of the next generation wireless networks. A brief
case study showing the utilization of AI techniques has
also been provided.
