1
Reward Engineering for Object Pick and Place
Training
Raghav Nagpal1, Achyuthan Unni Krishnan2 and Hanshen Yu1
.
Abstract—Robotic grasping is a crucial area of research as it
can result in the acceleration of the automation of several Indus-
tries utilizing robots ranging from manufacturing to healthcare.
Reinforcement learning is the ﬁeld of study where an agent learns
a policy to execute an action by exploring and exploiting rewards
from an environment. Reinforcement learning can thus be used
by the agent to learn how to execute a certain task, in our case
grasping an object. We have used the Pick and Place environment
provided by OpenAI’s Gym to engineer rewards. Hindsight
Experience Replay (HER) has shown promising results with
problems having a sparse reward. In the default conﬁguration
of the OpenAI baseline and environment the reward function is
calculated using the distance between the target location and the
robot end-effector. By weighting the cost based on the distance
of the end-effector from the goal in the x,y and z-axes we were
able to almost halve the learning time compared to the baselines
provided by OpenAI, an intuitive strategy that further reduced
learning time. In this project, we were also able to introduce
certain user desired trajectories in the learnt policies (city-block
/ Manhattan trajectories). This helps us understand that by
engineering the rewards we can tune the agent to learn policies
in a certain way even if it might not be the most optimal but is
the desired manner.
I. INTRODUCTION
A. Signiﬁcance of Reinforcement Learning in Robot Reach-to-
Grasp
Robot reach-to-grasp is one of the top applications of robot
manipulators[9], especially in industrial use such as warehouse
management and automobile manufacturing[4]. According to
Reuters and Robotic Industries Association’s data, 35580 new
robots are shipped to the US and Canada, in all industries just
in the year 2018. Among them, over 60% are used for handling
and grasping on the assembly line, making reach and grasp the
most important component of all industrial robot applications.
The theory of grasping manipulation starts from Reuleux’s
book, the kinematics of machinery, written in 1875[24][16].
In late 1970s C-space approach was raised by Lozano-Perez,
Mason and Taylor, which made up the basis of robot motion
planning to solve the problem of how to reach and grasp[11].
The early works made autonomous robot grasping possible.
In late 1980s, Roth and his team tried and solved the basic
1 Raghav Nagpal and Hanshen Yu are with the Robotics Engineer-
ing Program, Worcester Polytechnic Institute, Worcester, MA 01609, USA

2 Achyuthan Unni Krishnan is with the Mechanical Engineering De-
partment, Worcester Polytechnic Institute, Worcester, MA 01609, USA

Please
ﬁnd
the
link
for
the
video
demonstration
here:https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CFepYCdxlQs
.
The
Github
repository
for
this
project
can
be
found
here:
https://github.com/raghavnagpal/baselines
problems in robot grasping and dexterous manipulation, base
on the classical line geometry approach[17].
Two methods of robot reach-to-grasp motion planning can
be categorized as, classical and heuristic.[14]. The classical
methods are stable, however they require a time intensive com-
putations and would be trapped in the local minima[12]. Thus
we need the heuristic approaches to emphasize exploitation
and reduce computational complexity[18]. One of the efﬁcient
algorithms is nonlinear model predictive control, addressed by
Hsieh[7], focusing on dynamic known environments.
Reinforcement learning techniques are then used in solving
this problem[8]. By incorporating reinforcement learning algo-
rithms, robots could learn reach-to-grasp on a new or dynamic
environment, thus creating a need on more strong and efﬁcient
algorithms, their alternates or simply some improvements on
learning a model.
B. Motivation for the Project
Since it is a great challenge for robotic grasping under unin-
structed environments[10], most of the robot motion is now
planned manually for each individual task before deployment
for labour. Despite the concerns of safety and failures, the
ofﬂine training of a reinforcement model is also costly in both
computational effort and time. It is also extremely limited with
how robust the agent can be in terms of executing tasks. One
way to make the process quicker is to shape better reward
functions than the normal heuristic ones. Thus our project aims
to compare the reach-to-grasp training performance, based on
multiple reward functions.
Objective
Description
Paper review
Learn about prior state-of-the-art
and possible methods.
Train a baseline model
Get familiar with OpenAI simu-
lation environment(used traditional
hard coded heuristic based motion
planning), ﬁnish the code and train
a baseline model.
Execute multiple reward functions
Compare the training performance
of different models: success rate and
convergence time.
Generate
trajectories
from
the
trained models
Compare the trajectories based on
different reward functions
Finish report and present work
Complete the report, poster and
other paper work
TABLE I: Project objectives.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Deep Reinforcement Learning
Motion planning with distance as a simple heuristic was
used to move the robot to the object and then the goal. The

2
planner failed when picking up the object when approaching
from certain angles. Reinforcement Learning solves this prob-
lem by innately learning the strategies.
This problem is a continuous action state-space. This im-
plies that there are inﬁnite possible conﬁgurations or a lot of
state spaces to explore. This means conventional Reinforce-
ment algorithms fail as it is impossible to cover such a large
set of possibilities.
B. Reward Shaping
Reward shaping is a technique to make a model easier
to learn, by adding or modifying the reward function in
reinforcement learning. Usually, there are obvious heuristics,
such as the target in reach-to-grasp problems, and a win for
games[20]. Ng proposed a method for adding shaping rewards
in a way that guarantees the optimal policy maintains its
optimality[15]. Based on this multiple reward shaping methods
are proposed such as potential based[21] and plan based[6], for
different settings[3], and proved by theoretical analyses[5][13].
For this reach-to-grasp problem, by using a shaped reward
to bias the learned model, the robot could reach to the goal
more efﬁciently. We know an intuitive way of going to a goal
is reduce the distance to the ﬁnal goal. The best way to reduce
reach the goal is by reducing the distances to the goal along
the three dimensions so that the target goal is reached. As
a result we apply the knowledge that we possess on how to
solve this problem to augment reward functions and learn to
reach the goal faster than otherwise.
C. Sparse Reward Problem
Sparse rewards, along with human demonstrations, are
practical alternatives to teach robots to solve control tasks,
including reach-to-grasp[19]. Sparse rewards have the problem
of several experience episodes have no meaning at all as
the rewards might be 0. This is where Hindsight Experience
Replay (HER) plays a key role. HER lets the agent know that
any wrong action can be the right action if the goal had been
in the new state as a result of the wrong action[1].
Fig. 1: Pseudo-code of HER implementation.[1]
The current way in which the environment is designed is
that the reward function is sparse. Meaning no reward for every
moment when the goal is not achieved and only a positive
reward when the goal is achieved. HER was implemented
which signiﬁcantly boosted the successes of the algorithm.
A study of the impact of HER and it’s results were published
in their blog about the gym for robotics. As clearly indicated
in Fig 2 DDPG with HER was the most successful imple-
mentation by a substantially considerable margin. That is the
reason why we decided to utilize the baselines provided with
this infrastructure to train our models with our innovations in
reward functions.
Fig. 2: Impact of HER implementation on Shadow Hand
manipulation.[1]
Considering that we have prior knowledge on reach-to-
grasp problems, we could take this sparse reward problem
and control the policy in a certain direction. Hence in this
project we seek to use the successes of HER in sparse
reward situations and the DDPG model which is successful
in continuous state spaces to implement a solution for the
pick-and-place problem for our attempts at learning how to
engineer the rewards functions.
III. OPENAI GYM ENVIRONMENT AND BASELINES
For this project we take advantage of OpenAI environ-
ments and baselines[2], particularly the Robotics environment
’FetchPickAndPlace-v1’ for this project. We design our re-
wards in the conﬁguration ﬁle that details the environment
observation state space.
A. Environment
The ’FetchPickAndPlace-v1’ environment provides the in-
frastructure to train the agent to pick an object and move it to
a pre-determined goal.
The agent being controlled is the arm of the Fetch Mobile
Manipulator[23]. It is a 7 degree-of-freedom arm with a
gripper at the end of the arm.
The environment works based on the MuJoCo physics
simulator and is included in the OpenAI gym library. The
following information can be extracted from the environment:
• The system state including gripper position, object posi-
tion and orientation, goal position, gripper state (open or
close), gripper velocity and object velocity.
• The reward for the system: usually negative cost of living
and a ﬂat +1 reward for when the goal is achieved.
• The end-effector can be moved by supplying the target
location at each frame, meaning the (x,y,z) coordinates
to be moved to based on current locations of the black
box, gripper and goal.

3
Fig. 3: An example of an episode in the environment. Red
ball is the goal and the black box is the object
B. Baselines
OpenAI provides baselines which are a set of high quality
implementations of Reinforcement learning algorithms. These
implementations and the performances achieved are almost on
par with the results from published papers.
For this purpose the baselines were built off of to be more
efﬁcient with the progress of the project as the ultimate goal
was to identify the nuances of Reward Engineering.
Training of the models were done on the following two
systems. MuJoCo-py and gym were required to run the en-
vironment while the model was trained using models written
in Tensorﬂow which takes advantage of the Nvidia parallel
computing architecture Cuda 10.1.
All the models were trained for a 1000 epochs as per the
recommendation from OpenAI. The model trained thus from
the vanilla reward function will be compared to in terms of
performance, training time and also learned trajectories.
Speciﬁcation
Computer 1
Computer 2
CPU
8th Gen Intel Core i7-
8750H processor
7th Gen Intel Core i7
processor
RAM
16 GB
16 GB
GPU
NVIDIA GeForce GTX
1060 Max-Q
NA
Video Memory
6 GB
NA
OS
Ubuntu 18.04
Ubuntu 18.04
Additional Software
Tensorﬂow, Cuda 10.1,
MuJoCo Py and Ope-
nAI gym
Tensorﬂow, Cuda 10.1,
MuJoCo Py and Ope-
nAI gym
TABLE II: System Speciﬁcations and Software
Dependencies.
The reward function of the default baseline is based on the
distance from the goal. Hence there is a living cost involved in
the episode continuing. As a result, the agent will try to reduce
this cost and this is the least only when the goal is achieved
which is the only time a positive reward achieved. Hence to
maximize the reward the robot has to learn to reach the goal.
Improvising on this fact modifying the reward function will
result in different types of trajectories or training performances
can be achieved.
Fig. 4: The red, blue and yellow lines are examples of a
Manhattan trajectory. The green line is Euclidian trajectory
for comparison.[22]
IV. REWARD ENGINEERING
The reward type is sparse, meaning the only positive reward
occurs when the goal is achieved. This means in order to
maximize the reward it should always try to move the black
box to the red goal. Hindsight Experience Replay (HER) was
used to immediately compensate for this problem of sparse
rewards.
As mentioned the goal of this project is to study the process
of optimal reward engineering. We also tried to induce certain
characteristics into the ﬁnal learned trajectories using careful
designed reward functions. In this project we were able to
successfully implement the ﬁnal learned trajectory to be a
Manhattan/Taxi-cab trajectory[22].
In Table III some of the successful reward functions we
were able to implement are mentioned.
As previously mentioned the Vanilla reward function only
has a negative cost of living and a ﬁnal positive reward. This
reward function was used to train the model that we would
ultimately use as the benchmark to compare the performance,
ease of training, etc of the models we trained with our modiﬁed
reward functions. The reasoning behind designing our rewards
as mentioned in Table III is listed below:
• Prioritized distance from goal’s z-coordinates: The de-
fault reward function does not give any particular condi-
tions to the agent besides reaching the goal as soon as
possible. This resulted in instances where if the object or
the goal was on the surface of the table the gripper tended
to press down on the workspace, which is obviously not
ideal. We attempted to negate this issue by increasing
the penalty in the z-direction which points away from
the workspace.

4
Fig. 5: Training Performances of different models. Training success vs epochs
Reward Function
Description
Vanilla Reward Function (Model 1)
The default reward function pro-
vided by OpenAI baseline that is
sparse and gives a negative cost for
living with a ultimate positive re-
ward if goal is satisﬁed.
Prioritized distance from goal z-
coordinates (Model 2)
The reward function is further aug-
mented by adding a further penalty
based on the end-effector distance
from goal coordinates. Higher pri-
ority was placed on the goal z-
coordinate.
Prioritized distance from all goal
coordinates (Model 3)
The reward function is further aug-
mented by adding a further penalty
based on the end-effector distance
form the x,y and z-coordinates.
Varying
priority
was
placed
on
the goal coordinates in the follow-
ing format: x-coordinate (10x), y-
coordinate (5x) and z-coordinate.
Manhattan Trajectory (Model 4)
A constant penalty for being away
from x,y and z coordinates of the
goal is applied, augmenting the cur-
rent reward function. Similar varied
priority in the magnitude for x,y
and z-coordinates can be applied.
In our implementation the constant
penalties were 5 in x-direction, 2.5
in y-direction and 1 in z-direction.
TABLE III: Reward Functions.
• Prioritized distance from all goal coordinates: The re-
ward function is a means of relaying what the agent
is supposed to do by providing it positive and negative
rewards. The way this function is designed is crucial to
how effectively and efﬁciently the agent trains to perform
the delegated objectives. In this function we decided to
augment the reward function by giving an intuition of
how the goal can be achieved, that is, by reducing the
distance of the end effector from the goal’s x,y and z-
coordinates.
• Manhattan Trajectory: The goal of this reward is to see
if we could design a reward function that could teach
the agent to perform the goal exactly how we wanted it
to perform the task, even if it means it is not the best
solution. For this purpose we decided the agent shall
complete the task in a Manhattan trajectory as previously
mentioned. We gave constant penalties in the x,y and z
directions if the end-effector was away from this goal.
In this way, this reward function is different from the
previous function as this more replicates a binary step
function instead of a linear function based on distance.
This means if the end effector is not at the x-coordinate of
the goal it receives a constant penalty of -10 for example
instead of the negative reward based on the distance.
Based on the which coordinate of the end-effector needs
to be equal to the goals ﬁrst the weights in the reward
function as shown in Table III.
V. OBSERVATIONS AND RESULTS
A. Training Performance
All the ﬁnal models were trained for a 1000 epochs to ensure
they would reach convergence. However due to different
reward functions, convergence for the different models were
arrived at different epochs. The training performance over time
for the different models is provided in Fig 5. The model with
distance from all coordinates prioritized performed the best
as it reached convergence during training the fastest, while
learning the Manhattan trajectory was the fastest initially but
was the slowest. The default baseline provided by OpenAI
was placed third. The approximate epochs when these models
reached convergence is listed in Table IV.
Reward Function
Time of Convergence
Vanilla Baseline
∼650
Prioritized Distance - Only z-axis
∼500
Prioritized Distance - all axes
∼400
Manhattan Trajectory
∼700
TABLE IV: Convergence times for different reward
functions.
B. Observed Trajectories
We are also able to generate different trajectories for the
same task based on the reward functions implemented. The
most drastic deviation in learned trajectories is identiﬁed
by using the reward function labelled Manhattan trajectory.
The different trajectories developed are represented in the 3-
dimensional space in Fig 6.
As portrayed in Fig 6 the baseline model, Model 3 and
Model 4 all go approximately to the same coordinates. How-
ever Model 2 alone slightly deviates from this position. It is

5
Fig. 6: Generated trajectories in 3-D space. z-axis direction
is into the page.
because it was trained to avoid the table workspace and as
a result moves away slightly at the goal position to avoid
collision.
We also observe the success of the formation of the Manhat-
tan trajectory very clearly in the same Figure. It ﬁrst seeks to
achieve the x-coordinate (as this direction is weighted heavily
as the initial priority) before moving to the y-coordinate and
ﬁnally satisfying the z-coordinate. In order to better illustrate
this feature we have split the timings at which the different
x,y and z-coordinates of the goal location has been achieved
in the different trajectories in Fig 7.
We observe from Fig 7 that the Manhattan trajectory results
in the x-coordinate being equalled to the goal coordinate the
earliest by a considerable margin, around 12 frames compared
to 20 frames of the other trajectories. Additionally, it should
be noted that signiﬁcant motion in the z-direction is only
observed after x-coordinate of the end-effector has reached
a stable value. The end-effector exhibits a similar behaviour
where motion in the y-direction is seen only after z-coordinate
has reached a stable value.
In contrast in all the other models x,y and z-coordinates
all vary simultaneously suggesting a more direct approach to
the goal. This break down of the trajectories of the individual
models help clearly understand that we were successful in
enabling the algorithm to learn trajectories that follow a
particular pattern even if it is not essentially the most optimal
solution.
However not all these models were success on the ﬁrst
try. For the Model 3 in Table III we initially had reduced
punishments for deviation from the axes. The best results were
achieved when the punishments were increased by a factor of
10. On the contrary, in order to induce Manhattan trajectory
these punishments had to be reduced by a factor of 10. Initially,
the cost was so high the robot preferred to not move in the z-
direction as the cost of deviating from the other axes were too
high and as a result, limited it’s exploration capabilities. These
ﬁndings helped us further understand the do’s and don’ts of
Reward shaping.
Fig. 7: First plot shows the time at which x-coordinate of
goal is reached. Subsequent plots show when y and
z-coordinates of the goal were reached.
VI. FUTURE WORK
For future work, we would like to work more with the
observation space and the deﬁnition of the environment itself.
The current state space is only the end-effector location.
Working with joint-angles may result in improved results. It
can also help induce human like motion like picking up objects
from the side, etc. However, in order to work within this joint
space requires us to completely rework the deﬁnition of the
default observation space. These modiﬁcations proved to be
difﬁcult to be incorporated within the scope of the project.
We would also like to improve training times and identify
different strategies that might improve the efﬁciency of train-
ing. We would also like to extend these reward functions to
algorithms like PPO and A2C to study their performances and
if they carry over their successes to these different algorithms.
We are also intrigued in further exploring the philosophy

6
of reward engineering and how improvements can be made to
other tasks like manipulation with the Shadow Hand.
