1 
Graph Neural Networks: a bibliometrics overview 
Abdalsamad Keramatfar 1,2, Mohadeseh Rafiee1, Hossein Amirkhani2 
1 SID, Academic Center for Education, Culture and Research (ACECR( , Tehran, Iran 
2 Department of Computer Engineering and IT, Faculty of Engineering, University of Qom, Qom, Iran 

Abstract 
 Recently, graph neural networks (GNN) have become a hot topic in machine learning community. This paper 
presents a Scopus-based bibliometric overview of the GNNs’ research since 2004, when GNN papers were first 
published. The study aims to evaluate GNN research trend, both quantitatively and qualitatively. We provide the 
trend of research, distribution of subjects, active and influential authors and institutions, sources of publications, 
most cited documents, and hot topics. Our investigations reveal that the most frequent subject categories in this 
field are computer science, engineering, telecommunications, linguistics, operations research and management 
science, information science and library science, business and economics, automation and control systems, 
robotics, and social sciences. In addition, the most active source of GNN publications is Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science. The most prolific or impactful institutions are found in the United States, China, and Canada. We also 
provide must-read papers and future directions. Finally, the application of graph convolutional networks and 
attention mechanism are now among hot topics of GNN research. 
Keywords 
Bibliometrics, Graph Convolutional Network, Graph Neural Network, Graph representation learning
1. Introduction 
Graph data is ubiquitous; world wide web, social networks including online social networks, biological and 
chemical structures including brain and protein networks, scientific networks including citations, collaborations, 
and co-occurrences networks, business networks including network of financial transactions, wireless sensor 
networks, knowledge graphs, and water networks are just a few examples of the real-world data which are 
inherently graphs. The wide range of graph data has grabbed wide attention from scientific community [1-6] and 
specially from data mining and machine learning communities [7] for fraud detection [8], sentiment analysis [9-
11], link prediction [12], traffic forecasting [13], molecular graph generation [14], recommender systems [15, 16], 
epidemiology prediction [17], and action recognition [18-20]. 
Recently, deep learning [21] algorithms have achieved notable breakthrough in different areas including natural 
language processing  [22], computer vision [23], and speech recognition [24]. The ability to extract high quality 
features by passing data through different non-linear layers is the main reason for this performance. Moreover, 
deep learning has provided special algorithms for conventional types of data. Recurrent neural networks (RNN) 
and their variants, and recently transformers [25], were presented for sequential data, like texts, and 
convolutional neural networks (CNN) were presented for machine vision. Deep learning community has mainly 
focused on 1D, 2D, and 3D Euclidean structured data, such as images, videos, and texts [26]. 
As mentioned earlier, there are many data types, which inherently resemble graphs. This motivated machine 
learning community to provide different algorithms for graph data including label propagation [27] and Laplacian 
regularization [28]. However, with the success of deep learning methods, there has recently been growing 
attention to geometric deep, a kind of learning attempting to generalize deep learning to non-Euclidean data, 
such as graphs and manifolds [29]. 

2 
 
Due to their increasing popularity, deep learning-based methods have been developed for handling different 
graph tasks. Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are deep learning-based models which work on graph data and have 
been widely utilized recently [30]. A successful subcategory of GNNs is motivated by CNNs which are state-of-the-
art models on a variety of machine vision tasks [29]. CNNs have the ability to extract multi-scale spatial features 
using their filters to combine these features to construct high-quality representations [31]. However, it is hard for 
CNNs to mine and learn graph data [32]. As the structure of regular Euclidean data is a special kind of graph, 
machine learning community has tried to generalize the power of CNNs to graphs, too [30]. 
Generally, GNNs represent each node as a weighted sum of their neighborhood representations. If the signal is 
smooth enough with respect to the underlying graph, this feature aggregation process will provide extra 
information and, consequently better representation for the nodes. GNNs are connectionist models which hold 
states that can aggregate information from their neighbors with arbitrary distances. They model the graphs 
dependence via message-passing between nodes [30] and have been used in different graph-based tasks 
including node classification, graph classification, link prediction, and clustering [30, 33]. 
In the node classification problem, GNNs map network data to outputs in two steps. First, an information 
propagation occurs which provides node representations. These representations are in a low-dimensional space 
where neighboring nodes have similar representations [34]. Second, the model maps node representations to 
node labels [35]. For example, there are social theories which indicating that friends on social networks tend to 
express similar sentiments towards specific topics and a person tends to post tweets with similar sentiments [36]. 
These theories provide us with graphs in which social media posts constitute nodes, and different kinds of 
relations constitute edges. So, the extra textual features which exist in the neighborhood of a post can enrich its 
representation for node sentiment classification. In the graph-level classification problems, similar to CNN’s 
terminology, the graph pooling/readout aims to obtain representation of the entire graph [34]. In the link 
prediction setting, a common approach is to first compute node representations by GNNs, and then combine the 
representations of two nodes as their interlink representation [37]. For the clustering problems, algorithms 
usually embed the nodes using a GNN. The node embeddings are then fed to a conventional unsupervised 
algorithm to identify the clusters [38]. 
In the last few years, GNNs have become a hot topic in machine learning and benefited many graph-related tasks 
[39, 40] and real world applications across a verity of areas, including molecule design [14], financial fraud 
detection [8], traffic prediction [8, 13], user behavior analysis [15, 41, 42], and recommender systems [16, 43]. In 
addition, GNNs have performed well in learning from non-structural data such as texts and images. In the NLP 
and text analysis field, GNN-based modeling has been used for different tasks, such as semantic role labeling [44], 
relation extraction [45], gender detection [46], reading comprehension [47], sentence generation [48], and 
sentiment analysis [49]. In the machine vision field, researchers have carried out analyses based on different types 
of graphs such as the pixel adjacency network in different tasks including  hyperspectral image classification [50], 
action recognition [51], scene graph generation [52] , and multi-label image recognition [53].  
Bibliometrics is a field of study which uses publications’ bibliographic data and citation relations to evaluate and 
reveal the structure of a research field [54-58]. Previous research  used bibliometric methods to analyze different 
subfields of computer science, such as sentiment analysis [59-61], granular computing [62], topic modelling , NLP 
[63-65], and deep learning [66, 67]. To the best of our knowledge, there are not any bibliometric studies [68], 
which target the young and fast-growing research field of GNNs. So, in this paper, we employ different 
bibliometric methods to shed new light on the patterns in the global GNNs research. Using these methods, we 
identify characteristics of research, top subject categories, researchers, institutions, papers, journals, and hot 

3 
 
topics. The rest of this article is organized as follows: in Section 2, we introduce the setup of our study; Section 3 
provides the results of the study, and we conclude our results in Section 4. 
2. Material and methods 
Scopus1 is the largest abstract and indexing database of scientific publications and one of the main sources for 
bibliometrics studies [69-72]. Therefore, we used this database as our main source of data. In order to extract 
documents related to GNN, we used the following query in August 6, 2020: 
TITLE-ABS-KEY= "graph neural network" OR "convolutional graph neural network” OR “graph convolutional 
network” OR (“graph representation learning” and (deep or neural or convolution)) OR “graph autoencoder" OR 
“geometric deep learning". TITLE-ABS-KEY is a Scopus reserved key which searches the title, abstract, and 
keywords of documents for the provided term. The study period spanned from 1960 (our earliest access to the 
Scopus records) to 2020. 
We used the Bibexcel version 2008-08 [73] to discover the most common topics (identified by extracting the most 
frequent keywords) and subject categories, the most prolific authors, and h-index of researchers, the most prolific 
journals, and must-read papers. In addition, to assess the sources of publications qualitatively, we used SJR 
(SCImago Journal and Country Rank) of all sources from SCImago2, which is a free database of journals and 
countries bibliometric indicators based on Scopus data. SJR is a journal bibliometric index similar to impact factor 
that weighs citations based on the reputation of the source journals [74, 75]. In other words, citations from more 
impactful journals are not considered equal to those from less impactful ones. To extract the most prolific and 
impactful institutions, we used VOSviewer version 1.6.73 [76]. For other analyses of keywords, we used python 
3.8 and excel 2017. 
3. Results 
1.3 Overall statistics and distributions 
A total of 1280 documents matched our search query. One of the papers was retracted, so we excluded it from 
the list. These documents have been cited 7121 times in overall. So, the average number of citations per 
document is 5.56. Table 1 shows the distribution of the document types.  
The document types with the most average citations per paper are reviews, conference papers, and articles 
(which aggregately constitute 96.24% of data) on average received 49.44, 6.31 and 4.04 citations respectively. 
Approximately 78.58% of citations were to documents published within the last three years (2017 to 2019).  
TABLE 1. Documents types 
Document type 
Number 
Average citations per paper 
Conference Paper 
854 
6.31 
Article 
369 
4.04 
                                                          
1 https://www.scopus.com 
2 https://www.scimagojr.com 
3 https://www.vosviewer.com 

4 
 
Conference Review 
38 
2 
Review4 
8 
49.44 
Book Chapter5 
8 
0.25 
Note 
1 
1 
Book 
1 
0 
 
Figure 1 shows the publication trend of documents in this field. The first paper found in our documents set dates 
back to 2004 by Scarselli, et al. [77] published in Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including subseries Lecture 
Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics). Scarselli, Tsoi and Gori, as the authors of the 
paper, are among top authors of the field. They proposed an architecture similar to recursive neural networks in 
which each unit stores the current node state, and, when activated, it calculates the next state using its neighbor's 
states.  
A few numbers of documents were published before 2017 (41 documents). Thereafter, research in this field 
blossomed, with a significant rise in the number of documents. It is clear that this field of research is very young 
and is attracting more and more attention. The average annual growth of the documents from 2017 to 2019 is 
~447%. It shows that this field is very young, attracting more attentions. Note that the citations curve in Figure 1 
shows the number of citations to the papers published in a particular year. For instance, the plot shows that the 
papers published in 2017 are cited around 1800 times by the papers published thereafter. We observe two local 
peaks in the citations curve before 2017: one in 2005 and the other in 2009. These are mainly due to Gori, et al. 
[78] and Scarselli, et al. [79] papers. There is a rise in the number of citations in 2016  due to Li, et al. [35]. The 
year 2017 is an important milestone with a significant increase in the number of citations. Some of the most cited 
papers of the field appeared in this year including [80] and Bronstein, et al. [81]. The year 2018 is the most cited 
year with some notable papers including Yan, et al. [82], Schlichtkrull, et al. [83], Ying, et al. [16] and Zhang, et al. 
[84]. More than 50% of documents were published in 2019 with some remarkable documents including AlQuraishi 
[85] Wang, et al. [86] and Zhang, et al. [45]6.  
                                                          
4 List of reviews are provided in Table 6. 
5 Titles of the books and book chapters are provided in APPENDIX A. List of books and book chapters about GNN 
 
6 Note that the data gathering was done about the half of 2020. 

5 
 
 
Figure 1. Yearly number of documents and citations 
 
Figure 2 shows subject distribution of the GNN papers in the 22 different categories. The most frequent subjects 
are Computer Science (86%), Mathematics (22.90%), Engineering (22.59%), Decision Sciences (10.16%), Social 
Sciences (8.44%), Materials Science (5.16%), Physics and Astronomy (4.76%), Biochemistry, Genetics and 
Molecular Biology (3.98%), Business, Management and Accounting (3.67%), and Arts and Humanities (3.67%)7.  
 
                                                          
7 Note that a journal can be assigned to more than one category in Scopus. 
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
Citations
Documents
Years
Documents
Citations

6 
 
 
Figure 2. Different subject categories 
2.3 Top authors 
Table 2 shows the top ten authors based on their h-index [87] in this field8. Notice that the numbers reported in 
this table are limited to GNN papers which means the overall values can be larger. Franco Scarselli is the most 
prolific and impactful researcher in this field, with an h-index of 10. His top most frequently used keywords in 
descending order are graph neural networks, graphical domains, recursive neural networks, and deep neural 
networks. He is an associate professor at Department of Information Engineering and Mathematics at the 
University of Siena. His main topics of research are Artificial intelligence, Machine learning, Artificial neural 
                                                          
8 Hirsch (2005) proposed the h-index. The H-index of a researcher is h if h of his/her papers have at least h citations each, and the other papers have at 
most h citations each. 

7 
 
networks, Graph neural networks, and Deep learning9. In addition, he has published two of the most-cited GNN 
papers which will be introduced in the Section F “Must-read papers”. 
 
Table 2. Most prolific and impactful researchers 
H-index 
Author 
All citations 
Docs 
Affiliation 
Most used 
keywords 
10 
Franco Scarselli 
929 
19 
University of Siena 
Graph Neural Networks, 
Graphical Domains, Recursive 
Neural Networks, Deep 
Neural Networks 
8 
Marco Gori 
891 
11 
University of Siena 
Graphical Domains, Graph 
Neural Networks (GNNs), 
Biodegradability, Graph 
Processing 
8 
Wang Xiang 
252 
33 
National University 
of Singapore 
Graph Neural Network, 
Recommendation, 
Collaborative Filtering, 
Embedding Propagation 
8 
Markus 
Hagenbuchner 
732 
14 
University of 
Wollongong 
Graphical Domains, Recursive 
Neural Networks, Vapnik–
Chervonenkis Dimension 
8 
Ah Chung Tsoi 
732 
14 
University of 
Wollongong 
Graphical Domains, Recursive 
Neural Networks, 
Approximation theory 
7 
Jian Tang 
165 
21 
Syracuse University 
Representation Learning, 
Network Embedding, Graph 
Neural Networks, Graph 
Convolutional Network, 
Graph Attention 
6 
Sanja Fidler 
204 
7 
University of 
Toronto 
Deep Learning, Grouping And 
Shape, Segmentation 
6 
Gabriele 
Monfardini 
830 
6 
Università degli 
Studi di Siena 
Graphical Domains, Graph 
Neural Networks (Gnns), 
Graph Processing, Relational 
Neural Networks 
                                                          
9 Based on his Google scholar profile. 

8 
 
5 
Jure Leskovec 
336 
7 
Stanford University 
Graph Neural Networks, 
Knowledge-Aware 
Recommendation, Label 
Propagation 
5 
Raquel Urtasun 
142 
8 
University of 
Toronto 
Graph Neural Networks, 
Inference, Message-Passing, 
Probabilistic Graphical 
Models 
5 
Ivan Titov 
356 
5 
Universiteit van 
Amsterdam 
_ 
5 
Michael 
Bronstein 
767 
8 
University of 
Lugano 
Graph Convolutional Neural 
Networks, Geometric Deep 
Learning, Graph Neural 
Networks, Recommender 
Systems, Geometric Deep 
Learning 
 
3.3 Scientific collaboration 
Studying the co-authorship patterns shows that each paper has 5.73 authors on average. Figure 3 shows the 
distribution of the number of authors and the average number of citations per paper. Sügis, et al. [88] authored 
the most collaborative paper with 18 authors. We can see that the number of citations increases from single-
author papers to double-author papers, after which we observe a decrease in the average citations per paper 
except for the five-author papers. Collaborative papers (written by two or more authors) have been cited more 
than single-author papers on average (5.75 vs 3.82). 
 
Figure 3. Distribution of the number of authors and the average number of citations per document 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
18
Number of documents
Citations per documents 
Number of authors
Number of documents
Citations per document

9 
 
4.3 Top countries and institutions  
A total of Fifty-one countries contributed to writing GNN documents. China (with 593 documents) published the 
greatest number of documents in this field, followed by the United States (with 377 documents), and Canada 
(with 82 documents). Error! Reference source not found. shows collaboration map of the most prolific 
countries10. The size of the nodes in the graph shows the number of documents published by the respective 
country. The graph edges show co-authorship and the node’s colors indicate node clusters. Clustering has been 
done using VOS algorithm [89] based on collaborations. There are six clusters which can be explained partly by 
geographical distribution. Cluster one includes European countries, such as Netherlands, Belgium, and Spain. 
Cluster two has more diversity with three Asian countries plus the United States and Germany. Cluster three 
consists of East Asian, countries such as China, Japan, and South Korea. Cluster four consists of an East Asian 
country (Hong Kong), Australia and Italy which transfers knowledge between them and Europe. Also, it is clear 
that the United States acts as a bridge between China and European countries. Geographical patterns are not too 
clear in the Cluster five which consists of one Southeast Asian country (Singapore) one Middle East country (Israel) 
and one Northwestern Europe country (Switzerland). Cluster six consists of one Northwestern Europe country 
(Ireland) and Canada.  
 
Figure 4. Top countries scientific collaboration 
Table 3 shows the top ten prolific and impactful institutions in this field. Chinese institutions have published many 
documents, as expected because of China’s population and its science productivity. There is just one Italian 
institution among the top ten most prolific institutions. On the other hand, the top-cited list is dominated by 
                                                          
10 Twenty-four countries with more than five documents have been included in the map. 

10 
 
European and American institutions. University of Amsterdam is the most cited institution. There are some highly 
influential researchers at this university, such as Thomas Kipf, Max Welling, and Ivan Titov, who have contributed 
to important models and published highly cited papers. It is an interesting point that the Facebook research has 
appeared among the most influential institutions.    
Table 3. Top institutions 
Most prolific 
Most impactful 
Institution 
Country 
Docs 
Institution 
Country 
Citations 
Chinese Academy of Sciences 
China 
87 
University of Amsterdam 
Netherlands 
975 
University of Chinese Academy 
of Sciences 
China 
67 
University of Siena 
Italy 
944 
Tsinghua University 
China 
43 
Canadian Institute for Advanced 
Research 
Canada 
767 
Peking University 
China 
41 
University of Wollongong 
Australia 
714 
Beijing University of Posts and 
Telecommunications 
China 
31 
Hong Kong Baptist University 
Hong Kong 
651 
Institute of Automation Chinese 
Academy of Sciences 
China 
29 
New York University 
United 
states 
492 
Beihang University 
China 
29 
Universita della Svizzera Italiana 
Italy 
459 
Tencent 
China 
28 
Facebook research 
United 
states 
435 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 
China 
23 
Swiss Federal Institute of 
Technology in Zurich 
Switzerland 
435 
Università degli Studi di Siena 
Italy 
23 
Université catholique de Louvain 
Belgium 
435 
 
5.3 Top publication sources 
Table 4 shows the top ten publication sources which have published the greatest number of documents in this 
field. To evaluate these sources, we also included SJR and impact factor of these sources in the table. Lecture 
Notes in Computer Science Including Subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in 
Bioinformatics have published ~10.94% of the papers. Proceedings Of The IEEE International Conference On 
Computer Vision is the most impactful source in this table. Six of these sources are conferences, three are 
journals, and one is a book series. These 10 sources published around 27% of the documents in this field. In order 
to show the focus areas of these sources, we provided the most-used keywords in the fifth column. In the 
following, we provide a brief review of the most impactful papers of these journals based on the most frequent 
keywords. 
Table 4. Top Sources 
Sources 
Docs 
SJR 
2019 
IF 
2019 
Most used keywords 

11 
 
Lecture Notes In Computer Science Including 
Subseries Lecture Notes In Artificial Intelligence 
And Lecture Notes In Bioinformatics 
140 
0.42 
_ 
Graph convolutional 
network, 
Representation 
learning, Knowledge 
graph 
IEEE Access 
43 
0.77 
3.74 
Graph neural network, 
Deep learning, Link 
prediction 
Proceedings Of The IEEE Computer Society 
Conference On Computer Vision And Pattern 
Recognition 
32 
13.39 
10.25 
Categorization, Deep 
learning, Knowledge 
graph 
International Conference On Information And 
Knowledge Management Proceedings 
25 
0.51 
_ 
Recommender 
system, 
Heterogeneous graph, 
Link prediction 
Proceedings Of The ACM SIGKDD International 
Conference On Knowledge Discovery And Data 
Mining 
25 
1.004 
_ 
LSTM, Graph 
embedding, 
Heterogeneous graph 
Proceedings Of The IEEE International Conference 
On Computer Vision 
22 
13.63 
_ 
_ 
Neurocomputing 
19 
1.17 
4.43 
Relational learning, 
Attention mechanism, 
LSTM 
ACM International Conference Proceeding Series 
14 
0.2 
_ 
Auto-encoder, 
Skeleton-based, 
Action recognition 
Knowledge Based Systems 
13 
1.75 
5.92 
Aspect-level, 
Recommender 
system, Graph neural 
network 
Communications In Computer And Information 
Science 
12 
0.188 
_ 
Attention mechanism, 
Network embedding, 
Graph convolutional 
network 
 
 

12 
 
Graph convolutional network (GCN)[80], as a special kind of GNNs, bridges the gap between spatial and spectral 
methods. The GCN propagation rule is equivalent to aggregating node representation with the direct neighbor 
node representations [90]. Clearly, node representations can be enriched by second-order neighbors’ 
representations through adding another GCN layer. Yang, et al. [52] proposed Graph R-CNN for Scene Graph 
Generation. They used attentional GCN to integrate contextual information from neighboring objects in the 
scene. Also GCN has been used to model the spatial and semantic connections between objects for image 
captioning. Yao, et al. [48] leveraged this idea and proposed GCN-LSTM which uses LSTM with attention 
mechanism for sentence generation. It is interesting that GCN has opened its way into bioscience, too. Gievska 
and Madjarov [91] leveraged a modified version of GCN for prediction of the protein’s functions based on their 
structure which is essentially modeled by a graph. 
Representation learning, which mainly means graph representation learning in this context, aims to learn a low-
dimensional vector representation of nodes (or edges) for graph data mining [32]. The learned vectors can be 
used in different downstream tasks such as node classification [75], [92], link prediction [92] , and community 
discovery [93]. Deepwalk [94] and node2vec [95] are examples of node representation learning. Sun, et al. [96] 
proposed a representation learning method which incorporates the entity descriptions embeddings (built by 
Doc2Vec [97]), with translation-based models for Medical Knowledge Graphs Representation Learning. 
Another frequent keyword is knowledge graph. Formally, a knowledge graph is a collection of triplet (h, r, t) 
where h and t are head and tail entities, and r represents the relation from h to t [98]. The most popular 
knowledge graphs are WordNet, NELL, DBpedia, Freebase Google’s Knowledge Graph and YAGO, which 
empowered different Natural Language Processing tasks including relation extraction, named entity recognition, 
and question answering [99]. The knowledge graphs have been used as a dataset for testing the models [100]. 
They have also been exploited to mine the relationship between classes for zero-shot recognition [101]. 
Graph Neural Network has been used in the context of Internet of Things (IoT), too. Zhang, et al. [102] 
represented the IoT system as a complete graph and proposed GNN-based Modeling approach for IoT (GNNM-
IoT) which modeled the relationships between sensors with GNN. Yin, et al. [103] modeled interaction data in 
recommender systems by a bipartite user–item graph, and used some message passing layers to improve the 
latent factors of users and items. 
Deep learning as a super field of GNN, has also been used by the authors as a keyword. Shi, et al. [51] proposed 
a GCN-based model for skeleton-based action recognition which consists of two types of graphs. One represents 
the common pattern for all the data, and the other represents the unique pattern of each type of data. The 
structure of these graphs are trained with convolutional parameters. Chen, et al. [53] proposed Multi-Label image 
recognition with Graph Convolutional Networks (ML-GCN) for multi-label image recognition. The idea was to 
model the label dependencies based on the objects co-occurrences in the images and to use a GCN to map the 
label graph into inter-dependent object classifiers. 
Link prediction is the task of inferring upcoming likely interactions between nodes, given the existing graph [92]. 
GNNs has been popular tool for link prediction. Tan, et al. [104] proposed Combination-based knowledge Embedding 
model (CombinE), a knowledge graph embedding method which jointly minimized the norm of difference between 
entities’ plus/minus combinations and the relation. Jing, et al. [32] introduced Variable Heat Kernel 
Representation )VHKRep( for graph representation learning which captures implicit global features by a heat 
diffusion kernel. They showed the effectiveness of their method on link prediction and node classification. Since 

13 
 
the knowledge graphs are incomplete, a line of research focused on learning the knowledge graph representation 
(previously defined in this section).  
LSTM (Long Short-Term Memory), which is a powerful sequence modeling method has been used as a rival for 
GNNs in flood prediction task [105]. Lu, et al. [106] combined GCN in LSTM cell and called it Graph LSTM (GLSTM) 
to handle graph sequences rather than sequential vectors for road speed prediction task. 
Graph embedding and Network embedding, which have been used interchangeably, are among the most 
frequent keywords, too. Graph embedding is an effective method to represent graph data in a low dimensional 
space for graph analytics [107]. Hou, et al. [108] proposed a model named Property Graph Embedding (PGE) 
which incorporates nodes and edges properties into the procedure of graph embedding. Zhang, et al. [109], 
proposed Heterogeneous Graph Neural Network (HetGNN) based on the idea of leveraging heterogeneous 
structural and heterogeneous content information simultaneously. 
Relational learning, refers to the learning paradigm where there may be relationships between examples or the 
examples may have an internal structure [110]. Interestingly, Trentin and Di Iorio [111] modeled the problem of 
graph classification in the form of Bayesian maximum-a-posteriori. Specifically, they calculated the class 
probability of the graph by multiplication of the class prior probability to the conditional probability of the graph 
relations.  
Attention mechanism enables  a model to focus on the most relevant parts of the input [112]. In the graph 
context, attention is defined as a function which assigns a relevance score [0, 1] to each of the nodes’ neighbors. 
This score specifies the amount of attention the model gives to a particular neighbor [113]. Xie, et al. [114] 
proposed Attention-based Graph Convolution Networks (AGCN) for point clouds learning. They modeled the 
learning as a message propagation algorithm among adjacent points. Essentially, the model had three parts: local 
structural feature learning, point attention layer, and the global point network. They used the attention 
mechanism to model the relationship among k adjacent points. 
Graph auto-encoders map graphs to low-dimensional vectors [115]. Liu and Sabbata [12] utilized Variational 
graph auto-encoders [116] to predict tweet geolocations. The model predicted the link between an unknown 
tweet and the existing tweet. Wang, et al. [115] proposed a training strategy to improve the training performance 
of graph auto-encoders. They injected noise to the adjacency matrix and used the noisy input to replace the input 
and the output. 
Skeleton-based and action recognition are two keywords which co-occurred three times. In order to capture joint 
dependencies for action recognition, recent methods have constructed a skeleton graph whose vertices and 
edges are joints and bones, respectively. They applied GCN to extract correlated features [20]. More recently, 
Ding, et al. [19] proposed Semantics-guided Graph Convolutional Network (Sem-GCN). In order to aggregate 
information of the L-hop joint neighbors, the architecture utilized three semantic graph modules including 
structural graph extraction, actional graph inference and attention graph iteration. Yang, et al. [18] presented an 
end-to-end generative GCN to learn the joints graph connection from data. The model used self-attention to 
construct the weighted spatial graph of skeleton frames. 
Categorization or classification as a fundamental task in machine learning refers to the process of predicting the 
class of a given sample. Node classification, as one of the basic graph analysis tasks, is usually performed to test 
the GNNs [117]. Li, et al. [20] proposed Actional-Structural Graph Convolution Network (AS-GCN) which stacked 
actional-structural and temporal graph convolution for action recognition. The structural links specified by the 

14 
 
bones physical structure and the collaborative moving joints specified actional links. Kim, et al. [118] proposed 
Edge-Labeling Graph Neural Network (EGNN) which utilized a deep network for edge-labeling few-shot learning. 
For updating the nodes, the model aggregated features from inter/intra class neighbors of each node. After L 
updates, the edge label can be predicted based on the final edge feature. 
A recommender system aims to provide personalized product or service recommendations for users in order to 
manage the growing information [119]. In this context, GCN has been used for Click-Through Rate (CTR) prediction 
[120], session-based recommendation [121], and agent-initiated recommendation [120].  
Heterogeneous graph is another frequent keyword which refers to a kind of graph with more than one type of 
nodes or edges [122]. Li, et al. [123] constitute a heterogeneous graph composed of six kinds of nodes and eight 
kinds of edges for cross-domain aspect detection. Li, et al. [123] proposed GCN-based Anti-Spam (GAS) model 
composed of a heterogeneous graph to capture both the local and global contexts of a comment. Liu, et al. [124] 
introduced Graph Embeddings for Malicious accounts (GEM) i.e., for detecting malicious accounts which operated 
on account-device heterogeneous graph. 
Aspect-level sentiment analysis, which is a subtask of sentiment analysis, aims to discover sentiments about 
entities, such as laptop and their aspects, such as battery life [36, 125]. Zhou, et al. [9] utilized Syntax- and 
Knowledge-based Graph Convolutional Network (SK-GCN). In order to enhance the sentence representation with 
respect to the given aspect, they leveraged syntactic dependency tree and commonsense knowledge graph using 
two GCNs. Zhao, et al. [11] utilized bidirectional attention mechanism with position encoding to model aspect-
specific representations between each aspect and context words then exploited GCN over these representations 
to capture the sentiment dependencies between aspects in one sentence. 
 
6.3 Must-read papers 
Citation count is considered as an effective measure of the impact of a research paper [126-129]. In this section, 
we review the most-cited papers. We also present a list of available review papers and their suggested future 
directions and issues.  
Table 5 shows ten papers with the greatest number of citations11. It should be noted that the third paper in this 
table is a review paper which is also included in Table 6. Since our purpose in this section is to review the main 
ideas of these hot papers, we ignore this review paper. Interestingly, eight out of ten papers are conference 
papers, which indicates the relative importance of conferences compared to journals in this field.  
The most impactful paper is an article published in IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, which changed its title 
in 2011. The current retitled publication is IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, with an 
impact factor of 2.633, making it a prestigious journal in the field of deep learning. In this paper, Scarselli, et al. 
[79] proposed an architecture with forward and backward components. In the forward phase, the model 
computes states as a function of the target node’s features, target node neighbors’ features, the previous states, 
and the features of the edges which are connected to the target node. It stops when the difference between two 
states is less than or equal to a threshold. In the backward phase, the model computes gradient of a quadratic 
                                                          
11 The list of APPENDIX  is provided in APPENDIX D. APPENDIX  

15 
 
loss with respect to the model parameters. Indeed, they extended the framework of  Gori, et al. [78] by 
conditioning the message-passing updates on initial edge features. 
The second paper is the famous GCN paper of Kipf and Welling [80], a revolutionary paper in this field that 
combines the two different approaches. Basically, the model combines each node representation with its direct 
neighbors in each layer. 
Monti, et al [26] proposed Mixture Model Networks (MoNet), a special model to extend CNNs to graphs and 
manifolds. The model associates each neighbor of the point (x) with a d-dimensional pseudo-coordinates vector 
u (x, y). It then, applies a set of Gaussian kernels with some learnable parameters to these coordinates, instead 
of using fixed kernels. Yan, et al. [82] presented Spatial-Temporal Graph Convolutional Networks (ST-GCN) for 
action recognition which learns both the spatial and temporal patterns using GNN. The spatio-temporal graph is 
constructed by both intra-body edges of joints based on the natural connections and inter-frame edges which 
connect the same joints in the neighboring frames. Li, et al. [35] introduced Gated Graph Neural Networks (GG-
NNs). This model, as a modification of graph neural network (first paper in Table 5  [79]) uses gated recurrent 
units (GRUs) to generate sequences. Gori, et al. [78] proposed a neural network model which directly acted on 
graphs. The system computes the state of the node n (xn) as a function of its features along with the features and 
states of its neighbors. Schlichtkrull, et al. [83] proposed Relational Graph Convolutional Networks (R-GCNs) for 
multi-graphs and evaluated the model on link prediction and entity classification tasks. The architecture of the 
model is quite simple in each layer, the representation of each node is obtained by a combination of that node 
and its neighbors in different graphs. Ying, et al. [16] developed PinSage to generates the node embeddings for 
web-scale recommendation. The architecture computes the target node’s embedding based on its pervious 
representation and the representation of its neighbors which are computed based on their neighbors. In contrast 
to the mainstream of GCNs which are based on the powers of the graph Laplacian, PinSage performs by sampling 
the target node's neighborhood. Finally, Marcheggiani and Titov [42] utilized GCN over syntactic dependency 
trees as sentence encoder for semantic role labeling. Their experiments showed that stacking GCN and LSTM 
layers outperformed the state-of-the-art on CoNLL-2009. 
Table 5. Top ten cited papers 
Title 
Citation 
Authors 
Year 
Document 
type 
Source 
The graph neural network model 
578 
Scarselli, F.; 
Gori, M.; Tsoi, 
A.C.; 
Hagenbuchner, 
M.; 
Monfardini, G. 
2009 
Article 
IEEE 
Transactions on 
Neural Networks 
Semi-supervised classification with 
graph convolutional networks 
577 
Kipf, T.N.; 
Welling, M. 
2017 
Conference 
Paper 
5th International 
Conference on 
Learning 
Representations, 
ICLR 2017 

16 
 
Geometric Deep Learning: Going 
beyond Euclidean data 
435 
Bronstein, 
M.M.; Bruna, 
J.; Lecun, Y.; 
Szlam, A.; 
Vandergheynst, 
P. 
2017 
Review 
IEEE Signal 
Processing 
Magazine 
Geometric deep learning on graphs 
and manifolds using mixture model 
CNNs 
214 
Monti, F.; 
Boscaini, D.; 
Masci, J.; 
RodolÃ , E.; 
Svoboda, J.; 
Bronstein, 
M.M. 
2017 
Conference 
Paper 
30th IEEE 
Conference on 
Computer Vision 
and Pattern 
Recognition, 
CVPR 2017 
Spatial temporal graph convolutional 
networks for skeleton-based action 
recognition 
166 
Yan, S.; Xiong, 
Y.; Lin, D. 
2018 
Conference 
Paper 
32nd AAAI 
Conference on 
Artificial 
Intelligence, 
AAAI 2018 
Gated graph sequence neural 
networks 
161 
Li, Y.; Zemel, R.; 
Brockschmidt, 
M.; Tarlow, D. 
2016 
Conference 
Paper 
4th International 
Conference on 
Learning 
Representations, 
ICLR 2016 
A new model for learning in graph 
domains 
159 
Gori, M.; 
Monfardini, G.; 
Scarselli, F. 
2005 
Conference 
Paper 
International 
Joint Conference 
on Neural 
Networks, IJCNN 
2005 
Modeling Relational Data with Graph 
Convolutional Networks 
147 
Schlichtkrull, 
M.; Kipf, T.N.; 
Bloem, P.; van 
den Berg, R.; 
Titov, I.; 
Welling, M. 
2018 
Conference 
Paper 
15th 
International 
Conference on 
Extended 
Semantic Web 
Conference, 
ESWC 2018 
Graph convolutional neural networks 
for web-scale recommender systems 
136 
Ying, R.; He, R.; 
Chen, K.; 
Eksombatchai, 
P.; Hamilton, 
W.L.; Leskovec, 
J. 
2018 
Conference 
Paper 
24th ACM 
SIGKDD 
International 
Conference on 
Knowledge 
Discovery and 
Data Mining, 
KDD 2018 

17 
 
Encoding sentences with graph 
convolutional networks for semantic 
role labeling 
107 
Marcheggiani, 
D.; Titov, I. 
2017 
Conference 
Paper 
2017 
Conference on 
Empirical 
Methods in 
Natural 
Language 
Processing, 
EMNLP 2017 
 
Review papers are good starting points for those who want to work on a field and identify research gaps. Table 6 
shows the list of reviews conducted in the field of GNN. Bronstein, et al. [81] is the most cited review paper. The 
other seven review papers are all published in 2019 or 2020. 
Table 6. GNN review papers 
Title 
Year 
Citations 
Suggested future directions and open problems 
Geometric Deep Learning 
Going beyond Euclidean data 
77 
2017 
435 
1. Generalization across different domains. 
 
 
2. Dealing with signals over dynamic structures. 
 
 
3. Coping with directed graphs. 
 
 
4. Learning generative models. 
 
 
5. Developing efficient computational paradigms. 
An Overview of Unsupervised 
Deep Feature Representation 
for Text Categorization 126 
2019 
5 
1. Exploring more efficient unsupervised deep learning models. 
A gentle introduction to deep 
learning for graphs 127 
2020 
3 
1. Formalizing various adaptive graph processing techniques 
under a unified framework. 
 
 
 
2. Defining a set of benchmarks in order to assess proposed 
models. 
 
 
 
3. Transferring research knowledge to other application fields. 
Graph convolutional networks 
for computational drug 
development and discovery 
128 
2020 
2 
1.  Extending gcns to 3D structures (such as Molecular 
compounds). 
 
 
 
2. Exploring motif-based GCN and its application on drug 
discovery. 
 
 
 
3. Defining convolution on hyper graphs (for example drugs 
with the same adrs, targets or indications). 
Introduction to Graph Neural 
Networks 129 
2020 
0 
1. Deepening GNNs regarding over smoothing problem. 

18 
 
 
 
 
2. Dealing with dynamic networks. 
 
 
 
3. Generating optimal graphs for non-structured data. 
 
 
 
4. Applying embedding models in the web-scale. 
Learning Combinatorial 
Optimization on Graphs: A 
Survey with Applications to 
Networking 130 
2020 
0 
1. Improving scalability, adaptability, generalization, and run 
time of gnns. 
 
 
 
2. Automating above improvements without re-training. 
 
 
 
3.  Using distributed machine learning. 
Application of deep learning in 
ecological resource research: 
Theories, methods, and 
challenges  131 
2020 
0 
1. Standardizing and sharing of data for ecological resource 
research. 
 
 
 
2. Increasing ability to explain hidden layers 
 
 
 
3. Appling more advanced deep learning methods on ecological 
resource research. 
 
 
7.3 Keyword analysis 
7.3.1 The Most used keywords 
We analyze the most frequently used keywords in two time spans, 2004-2017 and 2017-2020. The word clouds 
of 
these 
periods 
are 
illustrated 
in  
Figure 5. Word clouds are used to visually summarize texts [130]. The size of keywords in the word clouds 
indicates their frequency in the respective time period. Graph neural network, relational learning, structured 
pattern recognition, recurrent network, feedforward network, neuroscience, random process, recursive neural 
network, graph structured data, semigraph, wavelet transform, and graphical domain are the most used 
keywords in the first period. In the second period graph convolutional network, graph neural network, deep 
learning, geometric deep learning, representation learning, machine learning, graph convolution, network 
embedding, convolutional neural network, knowledge graph, neural network, and action recognition are used 
most frequently by authors12. As it is obvious from this figure, graph neural network and graph convolutional 
network are the most frequent keywords in the first and second periods, respectively. This is because, as 
mentioned previously, early GNNs were more similar to RNNs with different states in different steps, while the 
recent models are more convolutional-based. Also, some topics, such as recursive neural network, have lost their 
positions over time, which demonstrates the change of approach to deep learning on graphs. Some technical 
topics have emerged or grown in the recent years, including representation learning, graph attention, graph 
autoencoder, variational autoencoder, spectral graph theory, message-passing, graph isomorphism test, label 
                                                          
12 http://rank.sid.ir/cloud  

19 
 
propagation, and balance theory. While early GNNs where based on message-passing too, the message-passing 
used in more recent methods refers to recent advancements such as [80, 131]. GNNs have been applied for 
different applications including action recognition, semantic segmentation, anomaly detection, drug discovery, 
sentiment analysis, session-based recommendation, video analytics, scene graph generation, social 
recommendation, image captioning, human pose estimation, traffic forecasting, visual question answering, traffic 
speed prediction, name disambiguation, hyperspectral image classification, and knowledge graph completion. 
 
Figure 5. Word clouds of the keywords used in the of GNN research papers in the two different time span13 
7.3.2 Hot topics 
Table 7 shows ten keywords with the highest average publication year to reveal topics that have received the 
most attention recently. In order to remove the possible noise, we include the keywords with more than two 
papers14. 
Table 7. Ten keywords with the highest average publication year (frequency > 2) 
keyword 
Number 
of 
papers 
Average 
publication 
year 
Type 
BERT 
3 
2020 
Model 
Dynamic network 
3 
2020 
Network 
Graph attention 
network 
6 
2020 
Model 
                                                          
13 List of keywords is provided in APPENDIX . 
14 For the continue of keywords with the highest average publication year refer to APPENDIX 3.  
2004-2016
 
2017-2020
 

20 
 
Relation extraction 
5 
2019.8 
Task 
Attention mechanism 
21 
2019.8 
Model 
Human pose 
estimation 
4 
2019.8 
Task 
Self-supervised 
learning 
4 
2019.8 
Learning 
approach 
Semisupervised 
learning 
4 
2019.8 
Learning 
approach 
Traffic prediction 
4 
2019.8 
Task 
Adversarial learning 
3 
2019.6 
Learning 
approach 
 
The first keyword is BERT, a successful language-understanding model based on transformer [132] which has 
been used recently in this field for token representation. Jeong, et al. [43], used BERT as the encoder of context 
sentences and GCN as citation context encoder in the task of context-aware paper recommendation.  
Dynamic network refers to a sequence of graph snapshots over time. Mahdavi, et al. [133] proposed Dynamic 
joint Variational Graph Auto-Encoders (Dyn-VGAE) which consists of auto-encoders that embed graph snapshots 
based on their local structures and interact with each other to learn temporal dependencies of graphs. 
Graph attention network specifies different weights for aggregating different neighbors [112] to obtain a 
weighted average of neighbors’ features. In this way, the model can overcome the cross-class links. Zhao, et al. 
[98] used different aggregation functions for the task of Out Of Knowledge Graph (OOKG) entity and relation. 
They leveraged average pooling, max pooling, and attention as the aggregation functions. 
Relation extraction is an NLP task which aims to distinguish relational facts from a piece of text. Xie, et al. [134] 
proposed a GNN with a propagation rule similar to GCN [80] on the heterogeneous graph composed of sentence 
and entity nodes for few-shot relation classification.  
Attention mechanism, introduced previously, is also among new topics. You, et al. [135] proposed Sliced 
recurrent neural network and Attention treated GCN-based Parallel (SAGP) model for remote sensing image 
recognition which is composed of two sub-modules: the improved Sliced Recurrent Neural Network (SRNN) 
retains the semantic information of the context and the original image features and a GCN which mines high-
weight features (obtained by attention mechanism) and reserves the relationship between their features.  
Human pose estimation’s goal is to identify the human body parts poses in images or videos [136]. Wang, et al. 
[137] proposed to utilize Global Relation Reasoning Graph Convolutional Networks (GRR-GCN) to model the global 
dependencies of body joints. The model projects the coordinate space features to a fully-connected graph, in 
which global relation reasoning is done by GCN.  
Bin, et al. [138] proposed a model which first feeds images to CNNs in order to obtain the key points 
representations. The model has two parallel multi-layer Pose Graph Convolutional Network (PGCN) modules 

21 
 
which then capture the feature correlation between key points locally and non-locally based on a directed graph 
over the obtained key representations. 
Self-supervised learning is an emerging effective learning strategy which creates a supervised task from 
unlabeled data. For instance, the model can learn to predict half of an image given the other half [139, 140]. Shen, 
et al. [141] used self-supervised learning for taxonomy expansion data generation. They suggested TaxoExpan a 
GCN-based neural network to learn to predict if a query concept is the hyponym of an anchor concept. Bo, et al. 
[142] proposed Structural Deep Clustering Network (SDCN) which uses a delivery operator in order to combine 
representations of auto-encoders and GCN layers. In effect, it leverages a dual self-supervised strategy to unify 
these deep learning models. Semisupervised learning is an approach to machine learning in which only a small 
subset of training samples are labeled [80]. The goal is to infer the labels of unlabeled samples from the 
information contained in feature vectors and labeled samples [143]. Qin, et al. [50] proposed Spectral–Spatial 
Graph Convolutional Networks (S2GCNs) for Hyperspectral Image Classification (HIC) which is a semisupervised 
GCN based model that utilizes spatial (pixel adjacency) and spectral information.  
Traffic prediction is the task of forecasting real-time traffic based on floating car and historical data including 
flow, average speed, and incidents [144]. Zhao, et al. [145] proposed SpatioTemporal Data Fusion (STDF) for traffic 
prediction which separates data into traffic directly/indirectly-related data. The model leverages GCN for 
processing directly-related data.  
Adversarial learning, the final hot topic, is a learning technique that tries to fool algorithms by presenting 
deceptive inputs to them. Hong, et al. [146] proposed an architecture based on Generative Adversarial Network 
(GAN) to predict missing longitudinal diffusion MRI data. They leveraged graph convolution in both generator and 
discriminator of the network. 
4. Conclusion 
In this paper, we presented a bibliometric overview of the young and fast-growing field of GNNs. The publication 
trend in the field shows that GNNs has recently attracted a huge amount of attention from scientific community. 
Moreover, GCN has recently become a more popular term than GNN. Conference papers constitute the main 
source of impactful publications in this field. Franco Scarselli, one of the authors of the first GNN paper, is the 
most active and impactful researcher in the field with the highest h-index.  
The most active institutions are from China and the most impactful institutions are mostly from Europe and the 
United States. Lecture Notes in Computer Science including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and 
Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics has published the most number of GNN papers.  
Based on the most used keywords, the node classification is the most popular task, followed by link prediction, 
and graph classification. In addition, it can be inferred from the recent keywords that the attention mechanism is 
now an important topic. The reason is that the GCNs mainly averages the representations of all the neighbors 
without considering their features’ similarity, which in turn can bring noise to node representations. 
It should be noted that the presented results are limited in some senses. First, we ignored the papers which are 
not indexed by Scopus. Second, even though we covered the main phrases in the field for data collection, it is 
possible that the list is not comprehensive. Third, some fields of records in Scopus were empty, which could affect 
the results. As a future work, we can provide a taxonomy of tasks which have been tackled using GNNs and their 
results. 

22
