Compact Mathematical Programs For DEC-MDPs With Structured
Agent Interactions
Hala Mostafa∗
BBN Technologies
10 Moulton Street, Cambridge, MA

Victor Lesser
Computer Science Department
University of Massachusetts, Amherst

Abstract
To deal with the prohibitive complexity of
calculating policies in Decentralized MDPs,
researchers have proposed models that ex-
ploit structured agent interactions. Settings
where most agent actions are independent
except for few actions that aﬀect the tran-
sitions and/or rewards of other agents can
be modeled using Event-Driven Interactions
with Complex Rewards (EDI-CR). Finding
the optimal joint policy can be formulated
as an optimization problem. However, exist-
ing formulations are too verbose and/or lack
optimality guarantees.
We propose a com-
pact Mixed Integer Linear Program formula-
tion of EDI-CR instances. The key insight
is that most action sequences of a group of
agents have the same eﬀect on a given agent.
This allows us to treat these sequences sim-
ilarly and use fewer variables. Experiments
show that our formulation is more compact
and leads to faster solution times and better
solutions than existing formulations.
1
Introduction
Consider a robotic team dealing with a building on ﬁre.
One agent is in charge of putting out the ﬁre, another
locates and evacuates survivors and a third delivers
ﬁrst aid to the injured. Most of an agent’s actions af-
fect only itself (e.g. the ﬁrst agent’s exact approach to
ﬁre ﬁghting and the kind of extinguisher it uses mainly
aﬀect its own progress). However, the decision-making
problems of these agents are not completely indepen-
dent. For example, the ﬁre-ﬁghting agent’s decision of
when to secure a given area aﬀects how easy it will be
for the rescue agent to locate survivors in that area.
∗This work was done while the ﬁrst author was a Ph.D.
student at University of Massachusetts, Amherst.
Decentralized
Markov
Decision
Processes
(DEC-
MDPs) have been widely used to model situations like
the above. However, DEC-MDPs obscure the struc-
tured agent interaction, thus missing the representa-
tional and computational savings that can be obtained
due to the loose coupling among the agents.
Several models have been proposed in an attempt to
exploit structured interactions, with each model cater-
ing to a diﬀerent kind of structure [11, 13, 12]. Settings
like the above example, where agents are largely inde-
pendent except for few actions that aﬀect the transi-
tions and/or rewards of other agents, can be modeled
using Event-Driven Interactions with Complex Re-
wards (EDI-CR). EDI-CR is much more compact than
DEC-MDPs [9] without sacriﬁcing expressive power.
Finding the optimal policy in decision-theoretic mod-
els can be formulated as a mathematical program. In
this paper, we propose a compact formulation of EDI-
CR as a Mixed Integer Linear Program (MILP). Start-
ing with an existing non-linear formulation of general
DEC-MDPs, we introduce new variables to linearize
the program, but exploit structured interactions to
minimize the number of variables introduced. We de-
velop an exact formulation for the case of 2 agents and
a relaxed formulation for the case of 3 or more agents.
This paper is organized as follows:
the next sec-
tion contains background material. Sections 3 and 4
present our 2- and 3-or-more-agents MILP formula-
tions. Section 5 demonstrates the size and computa-
tional savings we obtain. Related work is discussed in
Section 6, followed by conclusions and future work.
2
Background
2.1
EDI-CR
Event-Driven Interactions with Complex Rewards
(EDI-CR) is a model developed for problems with
structured transition and reward interactions [9]. It
builds on the intuition that when agents are largely

independent of each other, it is more natural to de-
scribe each agent’s decision problem separately and
list the interactions that tie these processes together.
Formally, an EDI-CR instance with n agents is a tuple
< A, S, A, P1..n, R1..n, ρ, τ, T > where:
• A is the set of n agents
• Si is agent i’s local state space
• Ai is agent i’s local action space
• Pi : Si × Ai × Si →[0, 1] is i’s local transition
function
• Ri : Si × Ai × Si →R is i’s local reward function
• ρ = {<(sk1, ak1), ..., (skm, akm), rk>k=1..|ρ|} is the
set of reward interactions.
Each interaction in-
volves any subset of agents and lists rk, the re-
ward/penalty of the team when the agents take
the speciﬁed actions in the speciﬁed states.
• τ = {<(sk1, ak1), ..., (skm, akm), pk>k=1..|τ|} is the
set of transition interactions. The kth entry speci-
ﬁes the new transition probability pk of the state-
action pair of the aﬀected agent km when agents
k1 to km−1 do the speciﬁed state-action pairs be-
fore km makes its transition.
• T is the time horizon of the problem
Individual states, actions, transitions and rewards de-
scribe each agent’s decision process, while ρ and τ cap-
ture the interactions among them. EDI-CR is as ex-
pressive as DEC-MDPs with local observability [9].
2.2
Sequence form policy representation
We use a policy representation that was ﬁrst suggested
by Koller et. al [7] for self-interested agents but has
also been used for cooperative agents [3].
In game
trees, the idea is that a policy can be characterized by
the probability distribution it induces over the leaves
of the tree. If two policies induce the same distribu-
tion, then they result in the same reward.
For models with local observability, a sequence (or his-
tory) of agent i, s1.a1..st.at, consists of i’s actions and
local states.
A history containing T (time horizon)
actions is a terminal history. For agent i, the set of
all histories is denoted by Hi, terminal histories by
Zi, and non-terminal histories by Ni. A joint history
h ∈H is a tuple containing one history per agent.
The realization weight of a history s1.a1..st.at under
a policy is the probability that the policy assigns to
taking actions a1..t given that states s1..t are encoun-
tered. A history’s realization weight does not include
chance outcome probabilities, so it can only be 0 or 1.
The vector of all realization weights will be denoted as
x and the weight of history hi by x(hi).
A pure policy deterministically chooses one action at
each decision making point.
In cooperative settings
Table 1: DEC-MDP as an NLP
max
X
h∈Z
R(h)
Y
g∈A
x(hg)
s.t.
X
a∈Ag
x(sg0.a) = 1
g ∈A
X
a∈Ag
x(hg.s.a) = x(hg)
g∈A, s∈Sg, hg ∈Ng
x ∈[0, 1]
there is at least one optimal pure joint policy, so we
restrict our attention to pure policies. But even a pure
policy will have multiple terminal histories with non-
zero weights, because it must specify an action at each
state reachable under the policy. The set of i’s termi-
nal histories with weight 1 is called the policy’s support
set, σi, and its size is the support size ∥σi∥.
In what follows, the agents are i, j and k, g is an arbi-
trary agent, and the subscript −g indicates a quantity
belonging to all agents but g.
2.3
Existing Mathematical Formulations
The formulation of DEC-MDP with local observability
as a Non-Linear Program (NLP) is given in Table 1.
In the objective function, R(h) = β(h)r(h) is the ex-
pected reward of terminal joint history h, where β(h)
is the probability of encountering the joint states in h
given the actions in h and r(h) is the sum of rewards of
states and actions along the history. The constraints
in the NLP are called policy constraints and guaran-
tee that a solution to the NLP represents a legal policy
where the sum of an agent’s action probabilities in any
state is 1. The ﬁrst set of constraints ensures the sum
of action probabilities at the start state is 1, while the
second set ensures that the realization weights of a
history’s extensions add up to that history’s weight.
The problem with the NLP formulation is that it re-
sults in a non-concave objective function for which no
methods guarantee ﬁnding a globally optimal solution.
Aras and Dutech [3] developed a formulation for DEC-
POMDPs as a MILP, thereby guaranteeing that a lo-
cally optimal solution is also globally optimal.
We
modify their formulation for the case of DEC-MDP
with local observability. For ease of explanation, Ta-
ble 2 is for the case with only 2 agents i and j. Be-
cause the diﬃculty of solving a MILP increases with
the number of integer variables, Aras only restricts
weights of terminal histories to be integer. The con-
straints force the other variables to be integers as well.
To linearize the objective function, Aras introduces a
compound variable zhi,hj for each pair of terminal his-

Table 2: DEC-MDP as a MILP
max
X
hi∈Zi,hj∈Zj
R(hi, hj)zhi,hj
s.t. policy constraints and
X
h−g∈Z−g
zhg,h−g =x(hg)∥σ−g∥
g∈A, hg ∈Zg
(1)
X
hi∈Zi,hj∈Zj
zhi,hj= ∥σi∥∥σj∥
(2)
x, z ∈[0, 1]
x(hg) ∈{0, 1}
g∈A, hg ∈Zg
tories. The variable is related to the existing x vari-
ables by the identity zhi,hj = x(hi)x(hj).
To enforce the identity by linear constraints, Aras uses
combinatorics (knowing ∥σi∥and ∥σj∥) and treats the
z variables as counters. Constraint (1) guarantees that
if hg is part of some agent g’s support set (x(h) = 1),
enough compound variables involving hg are set to 1,
otherwise all compound variables involving hg should
be 0. Constraint (2) limits the number of compound
variables that can be simultaneously set to 1.
3
Formulation of 2-agent EDI-CR
3.1
Binning histories
For the 2-agent case, the NLP in Table 1 is a Quadratic
Program (QP) whose objective function has the form
xTQx where x = [xi, xj] and Q is the reward ma-
trix.
Q(hi, hj) = R(hi, hj) if hi and hj are termi-
nal histories, and is 0 otherwise.
The MILP in Ta-
ble 2 “ﬂattens” this matrix, multiplying each matrix
entry by a compound variable created for that entry.
This approach makes sense for DEC-MDPs, because
agents’ decision processes are tightly coupled and the
rewards/transitions of one agent strongly depend on
the actions taken by another. For a given history hi,
R(hi, hj) can vary widely depending on hj, and a given
row or column in Q contains many distinct values, thus
justifying the need for a variable per entry in Q.
The situation can be very diﬀerent in the presence of
structured interactions. An agent is only aﬀected by a
small subset of actions of another agent. So for a given
hi, the rewards and transition along hi do not depend
on the exact actions in the history of another agent.
For example, suppose ρ says that agents i and j get a
bonus of 10 if they do actions a1 and a5, respectively,
at any point in time, and τ says that action a3 of
agent j aﬀects the transition probability of a7 of i.
Now suppose history hi ∈Zi involves doing action a1
at time 4 and a7 at time 6. In this case, all histories
hj ∈Zj that involve doing a3 before time 6 and a5
Table 3: 2-agent EDI-CR as a MILP
max
X
b∈Bhg
Rg(hg, b) zhg,b
g ∈A, hg ∈Zg,
s.t. policy constraints and
X
b∈Bhg
zhg,b = x(hg)
g ∈A, hg ∈Zg
zhg,b ≤
X
h−g∈b
β(h−g|hg)x(h−g)
g∈A, hg ∈Zg, b∈Bhg
x, z ∈[0, 1]
x(hg) ∈{0, 1}
g ∈A, hg ∈Zg
any time will have the same eﬀect on the transitions
and rewards of hi.
Because in EDI-CR agents have their local reward
functions, we can express Q as Qi + Qj. Note that
this does not assume that rewards are independent;
each entry in these matrices can depend on the histo-
ries of both agents. The rows (resp. columns) in Qi
(resp. Qj) will contain many duplicate entries, reﬂect-
ing the fact that an agent is oblivious to many details
of the other agent’s history.
The main idea in our formulation is that for a history
hg, we group all histories of the other agent that have
the same eﬀect on the transitions and rewards in hg
into a single bin. For each history hg of some agent g,
the set of bins it induces, Bhg, is a partition over the
set of terminal histories of the other agent.
Instead of creating a variable for every pair of terminal
histories, we introduce a single variable zhg,b for every
history hg and every bin b ∈Bhg associated with it.
In other words, we create a variable for each distinct
entry in Qi and Qj. Because structured interaction
results in many duplicate entries, binning can signif-
icantly reduce the number of compound variables we
introduce. Our MILP for EDI-CR is given in Table 3.
In the objective function, we fold into Rg(hg, b) those
quantities of hg that are oblivious to which history in b
is played, namely hg’s transition probabilities and re-
wards. We therefore have Rg(hg, b) = rg(hg|b)β(hg|b).
The factors on the right can be calculated using any
history h−g ∈b
rg(hg|b) =
T −1
X
t=1
Rg(st, at, st+1) + rρ(hg, h−g)/2
where rρ(h, hj) represents rewards (if any) that depend
on actions of both agents, as speciﬁed in ρ. Dividing
by 2 avoids double counting reward interactions. The
transition probability is given by
β(h|b) =
T −1
Y
t=1
Pτ(st+1|st, at, {a′
1..a′
t})

Pτ depends on the local transition function Pg and,
for transitions involved in τ, actions in h−g done up
to time t, {a′
1..a′
t}.
We fold into zhg,b quantities that depend on the partic-
ular h−g in the bin, namely the transition probabilities
along h−g, given history hg, β(h−g|hg). The identity
deﬁning a compound variable is therefore
zhg,b = x(hg)
X
h−g∈b
β(h−g|hg)x(h−g)
(3)
zhg,b is the probability that g plays hg, multiplied by
that of the other agent playing a history in b.
The eﬀect of the number of interactions on the size of
the formulation is clear. As the number of interactions
increases, we need more bins (thus more compound
variables), since each bin represents a unique way in
which an agent aﬀects another. In the extreme case
of a general DEC-MDP, an agent’s history needs a
separate bin for each of the other’s histories, essentially
creating a compound variable for every pair of histories
as in the DEC-MDP MILP.
3.2
Enforcing the identity
We need to enforce identity (3) by linear constraints.
This is more challenging than in the DEC-MDP case
where the binary nature of the compound variables al-
lows the use of combinatorics to devise the constraints.
In our formulation, the compound variables are not
binary, and we must resort to other properties and re-
lations to derive constraints equivalent to the identity.
Summing both sides of (3) over all bins of hg gives
X
b∈Bhg
zhg,b = x(hg)
X
b∈Bhg
X
h−g∈b
β(h−g|hg)x(h−g)
Since Bhg partitions Z−g, the double sum reduces to
a sum over all histories of the other agent, giving
X
b∈Bhg
zhg,b = x(hg)
X
h−g∈Z−g
β(h−g|hg)x(h−g)
(4)
A legal policy prescribes an action at each state reach-
able by a non-terminal history with non-zero weight.
As a result, histories in the support set cover all pos-
sible transitions of actions along their parents. This
means that the sum of probabilities of transitions along
histories in the support set must be 1. Consequently,
the sum in equation (4) is 1; only the xs of histories in
σ−g are 1, so the sum is over their corresponding βs.
We therefore have the following set of constraints, one
per terminal history of each agent
X
b∈Bhg
zhg,b = x(hg)
(5)
This constraint simply guarantees that if hg is not part
of the support, all the compound variables involving hg
and its bins should be 0. If hg is part of the support,
it guarantees there is enough contribution from the
compound variables associated with all bins of hg.
However, the above constraint does not prevent one
compound variable from taking too high a value at
the expense of another. We can use identity (3) itself
as a source of upper bounds on compound variables.
Because in (3) x(hg) is either 0 or 1, we have that
zhg,b ≤
X
h−g∈b
β(h−g|hg)x(h−g)
(6)
Together, constraints (5) and (6) strictly enforce the
identity.
One advantage of our constraints over the
combinatorics-based constraints in the DEC-MDP for-
mulation is that ours do not involve the size of the sup-
port set, which Aras calculates from the parameters of
the problem by assuming that the number of states
a state-action pair transitions to is constant. But in
settings where this number depends on the particu-
lar action taken, determining the support size requires
carefully looking at an agent’s decision tree and the
paths in it, which is non-trivial for large problems.
As for the number of constraints, the set of constraints
in (5) has the same size as the constraints in the DEC-
MDP MILP. The set in (6), however, is larger, because
it has a constraint for each bin of each history of each
agent. But as will be seen in Section 5, this does not
prevent us from obtaining computational savings com-
pared to the DEC-MDP formulation.
4
MILP for 3 or more agents
The idea of binning histories naturally extends beyond
2 agents. With n agents, an agent’s bin contains his-
tory tuples, where each tuple consists of histories of the
n −1 other agents. Compound variables are deﬁned
by the identity
zhg,b = x(hg)
X
h−g∈b
Y
hf ∈h−g
β(hf|h, h−g)x(hf)
(7)
As in the 2-agent case, the set of bins associated with
hg is a partition over Z−g, so we can use constraint
(5). The greater challenge is devising linear constraints
that impose upper bounds on the z variables, similar to
constraint (6). With 2-agents, we simply obtained lin-
ear constraints by dropping the leading x in the iden-
tity. But with 3 or more agents, doing so would result
in a non-linear constraint.
In the following, we use properties of legal policies and
structured interactions to derive 2 linear constraints

per z variable (in addition to constraint (5)) that at-
tempt, but are not guaranteed, to enforce the identity.
Note that even if the identity is violated, any feasible
solution to the MILP still forms a legal set of policies,
since legality is guaranteed by the policy constraints.
Allowing the identity to be violated means we are solv-
ing a relaxed version of the problem.
For ease of exposition, we show the derivation of the
constraints associated with a history hi of agent i when
A contains three agents i, j and k.
If we assume that an action of agent i can be aﬀected
by at most one other agent, we can decompose b into
a bin for each aﬀecting agent such that b = bj × bk.
Dropping the leading x in (7) and using the decompo-
sition of b to break down the summation gives
zhi,b ≤
X
hj∈bj
x(hj)
X
hk∈bk
x(hk)β(hj|hi, hk)β(hk|hi, hj)
(8)
We can obtain two linear upper bounds from the above
by setting all x(hj) (resp.
x(hk)) to 1.
But these
bounds would be too loose; for a feasible solution
< xs, zs > to the MILP, zs can be very diﬀerent from
the z calculated by applying the identity to xs.
In
other words, the solver has too much freedom to vi-
olate the identity and set some zs higher than the
identity allows if this improves the value of the ob-
jective function. The reward reported by the solver
(the value of the objective function at zs) is therefore
higher than the true reward obtained when the agents
follow the policies prescribed by xs. The solver is opti-
mizing a relaxed version of the problem whose optimal
solution does not necessarily correspond to an optimal
of the original problem. We need to tighten the upper
bound so that the relaxed problem corresponds more
faithfully to the original problem.
Consider the coeﬃcient of some x(hj) in the non-
linearized constraint (8):
X
hk∈bk
x(hk)β(hj|hi, hk)β(hk|hi, hj)
(9)
Setting all x(hk) = 1∀hk ∈bk allows this coeﬃcient
to be higher than it can be under a legal policy. Re-
garding the coeﬃcient as a sum over the contributions
of each hk ∈bk, we can decrease the coeﬃcient by
limiting the contributions of the hks. To do this, we
decompose the sum in (9) into a series of sums over
bins of k’s histories constructed from the perspective
of j’s history hj. We denote the bins of k’s histories
induced by hj as bhjk (S bhjk = bk). Because j’s tran-
sition probability is the same under all hk in the same
bin, we can factor this probability out. The coeﬃcient
can be re-written as
X
bhj k
β(hj|hi, bhjk)
X
hk∈bhj k
x(hk)β(hk|hi, hj)
Now we can use the same reasoning behind constraint
(5) to get rid of x(hk) and bound the factor multiplying
each β(hj|hi, bhjk) to be at most 1, thus restricting the
coeﬃcient of x(hj). The same can be done from the
perspective of x(hk). These restrictions, together with
the fact that a coeﬃcient cannot exceed 1, allow us to
approximately enforce identity (7) using constraint (5)
and the following bounds
zhi,b ≤
X
hj∈bj
x(hj)
¹ X
bhj k
β(hj|hi, bhjk)
¹
X
hk∈bhj k
β(hk|hi, hj)
ºº
zhi,b ≤
X
hk∈bk
x(hk)
¹ X
bhkj
β(hk|hi, bhkj)
¹
X
hj∈bhkj
β(hj|hi, hk)
ºº
(10)
where ⌊x⌋denotes min(x,1).
The quest for tight linear relaxations for non-linear
functions is common in the optimization literature. A
trilinear term (of the form xyz) can be replaced by
a new variable w and a set of constraints that form
a linear relaxation of the term’s convex envelope and
guarantee that w is within a certain amount of the
product xyz [8]. Although these constraints are some-
what similar to ours, they still do not guarantee that
zhi,b > 0 if x(hi) = 1 and j and k play histories in
b, which is key in bringing values of z in the relaxed
problem in alignment with what the identity speciﬁes.
The idea of further binning histories within a given bin
to bound the values of coeﬃcients can be used with any
number of agents. For n agents, we have n −1 upper
bounds per z1 and constraint (5) can be used as-is.
5
Results and Discussion
5.1
Results of 2-agent formulations
We compare 3 formulations of EDI-CR instances: 1)
the NLP formulation in Table 1, but restricted to 2
agents, 2) the DEC-MDP MILP formulation in Ta-
ble 2 and 3) the EDI-CR MILP formulation in Ta-
ble 3. All 3 formulations were solved using IBM ILOG
Cplex [1] under the default parameters; the ﬁrst us-
ing Cplex Mixed Integer QP solver, and the other two
using Cplex MILP solver.
We experimented with 22 instances of the modiﬁed
Mars rovers problem [9]. Each rover has a set of sites
1Also, relaxations of higher order terms can be obtained
by repeated application of relaxations of lower order terms
[6].

and picks the sites to visit and their order.
Proba-
bilistically, visiting a site can be slow or fast and each
outcome has an associated reward. A rover visiting
a site can aﬀect the outcome probability of another
rover if the latter visits a dependent site. Each such
transition dependence has an entry in τ (e.g., if rover
j visits a site 4 before rover i visits site 8, j can collect
samples that make it more likely that i process site 8
faster). Additional reward (for complementary sites)
or penalty (for redundant sites) is collected when the
rovers visit certain sets of sites. Each such reward in-
teraction has an entry in ρ. The number of interactions
ranges from 4 to 7.
We note that the time to generate the 3 formulations is
almost the same; constructing the bins and objective
function for the EDI-CR MILP is not more expensive
than constructing the reward matrix for the QP or the
objective function for the DEC-MDP MILP. In all 3
cases, we iterate over every pair of histories of the 2
agents to calculate their rewards and probabilities.
First, we look at behavior with respect to optimality.
Even after obtaining a solution that we know is opti-
mal (by comparing to a known optimal), Cplex may
spend a long time verifying optimality. We therefore
have 5 possible outcomes of a run: 1) optimal found
and veriﬁed, 2) optimal found but not veriﬁed before
timeout2, 3) Locally optimal solution found, 4) Opti-
mal not found before timeout, but a suboptimal solu-
tion was found, 5) No solution found before time out.
Of our 22 instances, Table 4 compares how many fall
in each category. Because a MILP solver never reports
a solution that is only locally optimal, the correspond-
ing entries are marked ’-’. Our formulation resulted
in a provably optimal solution in 17/22 instances. In
the remaining instances, we obtained higher rewards
than the other formulations, but Cplex could not ver-
ify optimality, so each of the remaining 5 instances falls
into category 2 or 4. QP and DEC-MDP MILP were
equally good at ﬁnding optimal solutions, although
DEC-MDP MILP was better at verifying optimality.
The table shows that the non-concavity of the QP can
often lead the solver to just report a locally optimal
solution. It also shows that in some cases, the number
of compound variables introduced in the DEC-MILP
is too large to allow the solver to ﬁnd any solution
before timeout (row 5).
Next, we look at the size of the MILP with and with-
out exploiting structured interactions. We break down
our 22 instances into 3 groups G1, G2 and G3 con-
taining 5, 9 and 8 instances, respectively. We grouped
instances based based on size, rather than number of
interactions.
The average number of interactions is
2Timeout is 60 seconds for small instances and 600 sec-
onds for larger ones.
Table 4: Optimality of 2-agent formulations
QP
DEC-MDP
EDI-CR
MILP
MILP
1) Optimal, Veriﬁed
5
9
17
2) Optimal, Not veriﬁed
9
5
x
3) Local optimal
5
-
-
4) Suboptimal
3
6
5-x
5) No solution
0
2
0
Table 5: Size of 2-agent instances and formulations
Zi
Zj
zEDI
zDEC
CEDI
CDEC
G1
81
46
254
3,762
381
127
G2
162
112
608
18,062
882
274
G3
941
781
3,793
596,950
5,515
1,722
4.8 for G1, 5.3 for G2 and 5.25 for G3. Table 5 shows
the number of terminal histories for each agent |Zi|
and |Zj|, the number of compound variables intro-
duced in the DEC-MDP formulation|z|DEC and our
EDI-CR formulation |z|EDI, and the number of con-
straints (besides the policy constraints). Results were
averaged over instances in each group.
Clearly, the
DEC-MDP formulation introduces many more com-
pound variables than our formulation which only cre-
ate as many variables as needed to distinguish between
bins induced by a given history. The diﬀerence in the
number of variables becomes more pronounced as the
problem size increases. Although our formulation has
more constraints than the DEC-MDP MILP, we next
show that the increased number of constraints is oﬀ-
set by the large reduction in the number of variables,
resulting in MILPs that are overall easier to solve.
Table 6 shows the results of comparing both the
time needed to ﬁnd the optimal solution (reported as
‘Find’), and the time needed to verify that the solution
is indeed optimal (reported as ‘Verify’). The times are
in seconds, averaged over instances in each group. For
groups where some solutions were not found/veriﬁed
within reasonable time, the number of instances over
which the averaging was done is indicated in brack-
ets. In general, solving the EDI-CR MILP formulation
is signiﬁcantly faster than solving the other 2 formu-
lations.
There is also a large diﬀerence in the time
needed to verify optimality. In G1, only 3 instances
could be solved provably optimally within 60 seconds
using the DEC-MDP MILP and QP formulations. In
G2, the diﬀerences in time to verify optimality among
the diﬀerent formulations is even more pronounced. In
G3, Cplex found solutions for all the instances of the
EDI-CR MILP formulation, but could not verify opti-
mality. A solution with the same quality could not be
found with any of the other formulations.

Table 6: Solution time of 2-agent formulations
Find
Find
Find
Verify
Verify
Verify
EDI
DEC
QP
EDI
DEC
QP
G1
0.29
8.68
0.57
0.12(3)
3.5(3)
0.58(3)
G2
0.59
10.72
6.4
0.35(6)
21.6(6)
> 60
G3
83
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
5.2
Results of 3-agent formulations
The 3-agent case exacerbates the problem of the DEC-
MDP MILP formulation which introduces hundreds
of thousands to several millions variables in our test
cases. Because Cplex was unable to solve (and usually
even load) the DEC-MDP MILP of our instances, we
omit this formulation from further discussion.
We compare the NLP in Table 1, solved using Kni-
tro [2] (active-set algorithm), and EDI-CR 3-agent
MILP solved using Cplex [1] under the default param-
eters. We used 25 instances of 3-agent Mars Rovers
problem broken down by size into 4 groups G1..G4
containing increasingly larger instances (sizes given in
Table 7). G1 contains 10 instances and each of the
other groups contains 5 instances. The number of in-
teractions ranges from 4 to 10.
Table 7 summarizes our experimental results averaged
over instances in each group. The ﬁrst 4 columns show
the sizes of the instances and the number of compound
variables our formulation creates. The number of non-
policy constraints introduced by our formulation can
be calculated as |Zi| + |Zj| + |Zg| + 2|z|.
The ﬁrst
3 terms are due to constraint (5) and the last term
is due to the upper bounds in (10). It is important
to note that the constraint matrix, although large,
is fairly sparse; the constraint of a terminal history
only involves the zs of this history’s bins, and the con-
straint of a zh,b only involves histories in b of 1 aﬀect-
ing agent. As will be shown presently, Cplex solves
EDI-CR MILPs in very little time.
To generate the NLP’s objective function and con-
struct the bins for the MILP, we need to calculate
rewards for each triplet < hi, hj, hk >.
And to be
able to solve large instances like the ones we experi-
ment with, we need to identify and remove dominated
histories as in [3]3. The times for these 2 steps are in
the ﬁrst 2 columns of the ‘Times’ section of Table 7.
Although expensive, the ﬁrst step is unavoidable and
the second saves time and space for both NLP and
MILP. Column ‘Bin’ shows the time to generate con-
straints (5) and (10) for the MILP. Although this step
is rather expensive, it results in a MILP that is solved
at least an order of magnitude faster than the NLP
3None of the formulations would otherwise ﬁt in mem-
ory. Reported numbers are those of undominated histories.
(shown in the ‘Sol.’ columns). Even with our current
implementation (unoptimized for speed), the time to
solve the NLP far exceeds the constraints generation
time and the MILP solving time combined. The diﬀer-
ence becomes more pronounced with larger instances
(for G4, we timed out Knitro and report the reward
obtained after 30 minutes).
Finally, Table 7 compares the rewards obtained by the
policies from the NLP and MILP solutions.
As ex-
plained in Section 4, our MILP is a relaxation of the
original problem where some zs can be higher than
their values under identity (7). The solution reported
by the MILP is therefore an over-estimate of the opti-
mal reward. The table shows the reward of the MILP
and NLP policies as a percentage of this over-estimate.
For smaller instances, MILP and NLP give compara-
ble rewards, but on larger ones, Knitro is unable to
produce good policies within 30 minutes.
Whereas we do not know of a way to improve the qual-
ity of the NLP solution, the MILP can be improved by
improving the correspondence between the MILP and
the original problem, i.e. making the upper bounds on
zs tighter and/or obtaining lower bounds on z. This
would result in a space of feasible solutions that bet-
ter resembles that of the original problem, and would
prevent the solver from pursuing solutions that appear
to be good, but are sub-optimal in the original space.
6
Related Work
Researchers have formulated decision problems as
mathematical programs with the aim of beneﬁting
from available industrial-grade optimization packages.
Besides formulations for the general DEC-MDPs [3],
special
cases
were
also
addressed.
Transition-
Independent
DEC-MDPs
[5]
were
formulated
as
MILP [14], but this formulation cannot be useful for
EDI-CR because transition dependence adds signiﬁ-
cant complexity (TI-DEC-MDP is NP-complete while
EDI-CR is NEXP-complete) and changes the way we
approach the problem. Aras et. al [4] developed a QP
for Network Distributed POMDPs (ND-POMDP) [10],
a model where agents either do not interact, or interact
very closely (coarse-grained independence). In EDI-
CR, interactions are speciﬁed at the level of actions,
and we exploit this ﬁne-grained speciﬁcation.
Several variants and sub-classes of DEC-(PO)MDPs
have been proposed, each catering to a diﬀerent kind
of structured interaction.
For example, IDMG and
DPCL [11, 12] address settings where interaction
among agents is speciﬁc to a set of interaction states.
We cannot (easily) represent situations where some
agents’ actions aﬀect outcomes of other actions using
these models because their agents are assumed to be

Table 7: Comparison of 3-agent formulations
Size
Time (s)
% Reward
Zi
Zj
Zk
zEDI
Reward
Dom.
Bin
MILP
NLP
MILP
NLP
MILP
NLP
Calc.
Removal
Sol.
Sol.
Total
Total
G1
116
114
102
507
192
78
6.6
1.2
27.4
278
297
88%
86%
G2
163
170
220
898
1296
353
56.2
7.22
284.9
1712
1934
85.7%
88.3%
G3
285
184
158
1265
2063
802
119
38.3
588
3022
3916
88.7%
87.2 %
G4
272
229
608
1555
3032
483
413
68.4
1800
3996
5315
86.2%
51.5%
tightly coupled in the interaction states, so all of an
agent’s actions taken in those states aﬀect the other
agent. Moreover, IDMG’s solution approach assumes
knowledge of the joint state (through free communi-
cation) when the agents are in the interaction states,
an assumption not in EDI-CR. TD-POMDP [13] is a
model somewhat similar to EDI-CR, but its solution
approach is very diﬀerent and has not been demon-
strated in situations where all agents aﬀect each other.
7
Conclusion
This paper presents compact MILP formulations of a
class of DEC-MDPs where there are structured tran-
sition and reward interactions among agents. Previ-
ously, this problem would be formulated as an NLP,
which is expensive to solve and can result in sub-
optimal solutions, or using a general MILP formulation
for DEC-MDPs, whose size is typically prohibitive.
Our formulation successfully exploits structured in-
teractions using the insight that most action histories
of a group of agents have the same eﬀect on a given
agent, thereby allowing us to treat these histories sim-
ilarly and use fewer variables in the formulation. Ex-
periments show that our MILP is more compact and
leads to faster solution times and generally better so-
lutions than formulations ignoring the structure of in-
teractions. Our formulation allows us to solve larger
problems which would otherwise be intractable.
One future direction for this work involves approxi-
mately binning where histories whose eﬀects are simi-
lar enough are grouped in the same bin, thus reducing
the number of compound variables needed.
