-; 
UAI2001 
ORMONEIT ET AL. 
395 
Lattice Particle Filters 
Dirk Ormoneit 
Computer Science Dept., 
Stanford University, 
Stanford, CA 94305 
Christiane Lemieux 
Mathematics and Statistics Dept., 
University of Calgary, 
Alberta, Canada 
David J. Fleet 
Xerox PARC, 
3333 Coyote Hill Rd, 
Palo Alto, CA 94304 
Abstract 
A promising approach to approximate infer­
ence in state-space models is particle filter­
ing. However, the performance of particle 
filters often varies significantly due to their 
stochastic nature. We present a class of al­
gorithms, called lattice particle filters, that 
circumvent this difficulty by placing the par­
ticles deterministically according to a Quasi­
Monte Carlo integration rule. We describe a 
practical realization of this idea, discuss its 
theoretical properties, and its efficiency. Ex­
perimental results with a synthetic 2D track­
ing problem show that the lattice particle fil­
ter is equivalent to a conventional particle fil­
ter that has between 10 and 60% more par­
ticles, depending on their "sparsity" in the 
state-space. We also present results on in­
ferring 3D human motion from moving light 
displays. 
1 
Introduction 
The Particle Filter (PF) has become a popular method 
for approximate inference in dynamical systems, with 
applications such as visual tracking [1, 11, 15, 18, 20] 
and robot localization [8]. The PF approximates a 
marginal probability distribution over unknown state 
variables with a weighted particle set, and thereby 
provides a convenient approach to dealing with multi­
modal distributions, and nonlinear dynamics and ob­
servation equations [6, 9, 11, 14]. But despite its suc­
cesses, the PF can be unstable. Statistically speak­
ing, even though the PF produces properly weighted 
samples, the random variation of predictions based on 
these samples may be excessive and therefore the pre­
dictions may be unreliable. For visual tracking, this 
results in poor estimates of object location; in some 
situations it causes the algorithm to lose track of the 
object altogether. 
This paper proposes the Lattice Particle Filter (LPF) 
as an alternative, where particles are placed deter­
ministically according to a lattice rule. Lattice rules 
are a subclass of Quasi-Monte Carlo (QMC) meth­
ods, which have been used successfully for high­
dimensional integration in computer graphics and fi­
nance [2, 12, 17]. An important theoretical advan­
tage of QMC methods is that for N samples the error 
converges at the rate O(N-1log8 N), where s is the 
state space dimension, versus O(N-112) for conven­
tional Monte Carlo (MC). From a practical viewpoint, 
randomized QMC methods can be used to construct 
unbiased estimators that have smaller variance than 
MC estimators. 
After a brief introduction to the PF, we introduce 
QMC methods and then describe the lattice particle 
filter. We show quantitative results on two problems, 
namely, tracking 2D image patterns, and the inference 
of 3D human pose from a 2D binocular sequence of 
projected limb positions. 
2 
Previous Work 
In Bayesian filtering we are interested in computing a 
probability distribution over the unknown state vari­
able Xt at time t, conditioned on the observation his­
tory, Yt ::::: (yt, ... , y1). This distribution, denoted 
p(x1 I Yt), is called the filtering distribution. The PF 
is a method for approximating p(xt I Yt) with a set of 
weighted states (or particles) . This approximation is 
updated recursively from one time step to the next as 
new observations become available. Gordon et al. [9] 
provide a clear description of the method which they 
call the Bootstrap Algorithm. In computer vision it is 
often called the Condensation Algorithm [11]. Other 
descriptions of the method, along with some important 
generalizations are given by Liu et al. [14], Doucet et 
al. [6], and Pitt and Shepard [19]. 
The goal of the particle filter is to approximate the fil­
tering distribution p(xt I Y1) with a set of samples. In 
many applications it is difficult to sample directly from 

396 
ORMONEIT ET AL. 
UAI2001 
p(x1 I Yt)· Instead, using Bayes' rule and a Markov 
assumption, one can use the fact that p(x1 I Yt) is 
proportional to the product of a likelihood function, 
p(yt I x1), and a prediction distribution that summa­
rizes the information from previous filtering steps, 
p(x1 I Yt-d· There are numerous variants of the PF 
that address specific shortcomings of the basic algo­
rithm [14, 19]. In its simplest form the PF draws 
random proposals (states) from the prediction distri­
bution, and evaluates the likelihood function at each 
proposal; normalized likelihood values serve as impor­
tance weights to account for the discrepancy between 
the filtering and the proposal distribution from which 
states were sampled. 
In many applications the evaluation of the likelihood 
function dominates the computational cost of the algo­
rithm. As a consequence the number of particles, and 
usually the dimensionality of the state space, should 
be kept relatively small. For example, in estimating 
3D human motion, it has been useful to design low­
dimensional subspaces of the state-space within which 
to do the filtering [20]. One can also learn better mod­
els of the body's dynamics. Of course, low dimensional 
representations may not exist for unconstrained mo­
tions, in which case the principal way to improve the 
performance of the PF is the efficient placement of 
particles, e.g., with importance sampling [6, 15, 19], 
or with MCMC sampling [3, 19]. 
This paper examines a Quasi-Monte Carlo (QMC) 
method as a general way to further reduce the num­
ber of samples. Similar approaches have only recently 
been suggested for filtering [7, 18]. In [18] , a non­
randomized QMC method is applied locally at each 
time step, and in [7], a form of stratified sampling 
with a QMC flavor is used; however, this method can 
only be applied in low dimensions. Here we use a 
randomized QMC method. This allows us to obtain 
properly weighted samples that can be used to con­
struct unbiased estimators in the same way the PF 
does, and therefore a similar statistical analysis can 
be performed. 
3 
Bayesian Filtering 
Before describing the lattice particle filter, we review 
the particle filter and the filtering equations. Let x1 
denote the unknown state variable at time t, and let 
Yt denote the image observation at time t. The tran­
sition model characterizes the state dynamics; with a 
first-order Markov model it takes the form p(x1 lxt-1 ). 
The observation model specifies the probabilistic rela­
tion between the state and the observations, providing 
a likelihood function, p(yt[xt). Then, the filtering dis-
tribution p(xtiY1) is given by 
p(xtiYt) = /·/ p(xt. ... ,xaiYt)dxJ ... dXt-l 
t 
ex/·/ IT P(Yklx;)p(xklxk_t)dxk . (1) 
A:=l 
The direct evaluation of (1) is difficult in practice be­
cause it involves an integral whose dimension grows 
with t. Hence it is advisable to solve (1) recursively 
using the prediction and filtering equations: 
p(xtiYt-d 
= J p(xtiXt-dP(Xt-1IYt-t)dxt-1 (2) 
p(xtiYt) 
ex P(Ytlxt)p(xtiYt-d . 
(3) 
If the transition and observation models are linear with 
Gaussian noise, then (2) and (3) are also Gaussian and 
can be updated using the Kalman filter [10]. Other­
wise, the representation and computation of (2) and 
(3) can be difficult. In this case, one approach is to 
approximate p(xt[Yt) with a weighted set of particles, 
(4) 
This idea can be made precise by requiring that St be 
properly weighted [14] in the sense that 
N L Wt,d(xt,i) N_ E[f(xtiYt)] 
(5) 
i=l 
for arbitrary integrable functions f. 
The PF generates properly weighted samples [14] and 
it encourages the exploration of paths (x1,i, ... , Xt,i) 
that appear likely given Y t, discarding particles with 
small weights from (4). The PF is described by: 
a(i) 
Xt,i 
Wt,i 
multinomial(wt-1,1, ... ,wt-1,N), (6) 
.-
g(ut,i,Xt-1,a(i)) , 
(7) 
P(Yt I Xt,i) 
(8) 
2:7=1 P(Yt I Xt,j) 
The index sequence generated in step (6) specifies the 
"surviving" particles, x1_1,a(i)• i 
= 1, ... , N. These 
particles are propagated forward in step (7), and 
step (8) specifies the weights associated with each 
new particle. The points Ut,i are independent, and 
g(ut,i, Xt-I,i) is a transformation function that maps 
the uniform vector Ut,i and the previous state Xt-1,; 
onto an sample from p(x1 lxt-t,;). This transformation 
is a component of any computer simulation since ran­
dom variate generation for many continuous distribu­
tions are based on transformations of uniform random 
numbers [5]. In the case of a univariate standard nor­
mal transition model, g(ut,i, 0) would be the inverse 
standard normal distribution function. 

UAI2001 
ORMONEIT ET AL. 
397 
The LPF provides an improved way of executing the 
filtering steps (6) - (7). The idea is to draw points Ut,i 
from a lattice rule instead of using random sampling, 
as we explain in the next section. 
4 
Lattice Particle Filter 
The PF described in Sec. 3 produces properly weighted 
samples that approximate the filtering distribution (1). 
However, the PF's performance may vary considerably 
in practice due to the random nature of the sampling. 
This is sometimes particularly harmful in the context 
of filtering because, even though the approximation 
error due to sampling at each step may be small, errors 
can accumulate over time in an exponential manner. 
To see this, consider a simple example where the tran­
sition density p(xt lxt-d is uniform on the state-space 
[0, 1) and independent of Xt-l· Let the observations 
be binary with P(yt = 1lxt), being 1 if Xt < 0.2 and 0 
otherwise. That is, the system states Xt are placed in­
dependently on the unit interval, but only those states 
in [0, 0.2) trigger the response Yt = 1. Suppose fur­
thermore that the true state trajectory of Xt happened 
to evolve entirely within [0, 0.2) so that Yt = 1 for all 
t. And assume we use a PF with N = 10 particles 
to recover the trajectory. At each time step the num­
ber of particles within [0, 0.2) is binomially distributed 
with parameters 10 and 0.2. Hence the probability of 
having no particles within [0, 0.2) in any one of k time 
steps is (1- (1 - 0.810)k), which converges to one ex­
ponentially with k. In other words, after a sufficiently 
long time there almost certainly occurs one time where 
the PF lost track of the object completely. 
In this example, an alternative strategy would have 
been to choose only one particle at random at each 
time, and to place the remaining particles equidis­
tantly around that particle. Then there would always 
be two particles in [0, 0.2). This deterministic place­
ment of particles according to a low-discrepancy rule 
is a special case of a QMC method. We next provide 
some general background on QMC methods and lattice 
rules, and then describe the LPF. 
4.1 
Quasi-Monte Carlo Methods 
Consider a generic integration problem with respect 
to the uniform measure over the domain [0, 1)8• There 
are several ways to approach this task. MC integra­
tion averages the values of the integrand at N random, 
uniform, independent points in [0, 1 )8• Its error has a 
convergence rate of O(N-!) that is independent of s. 
In many practical problems, this convergence rate is 
too slow. A deterministic alternative might be to use 
a Cartesian product of one-dimensional point sets, as 
shown in Figure l(left) for s = 2, but with this deter­
ministic approach the number of points N needed to 
1.0 
.
.
.
.
.
•
.
.
•
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
0.0 
1.0 
0.0 
1.0 
Figure 1: Left: Rectangle rule. Right: Korobov lattice 
rule with N = 256 and a = 25; the projection of the 
points on each axis results in N distinct values. 
preserve a constant level of integration accuracy grows 
exponentially fast with the dimensions. This subopti­
mal behavior is related to the fact that such construc­
tions have low-dimensional projections containing less 
than N points; for example, note that in Figure 1(left), 
the 256 points project to only 16 points along each axis 
to integrate the x1 and x2 components of an integrand 
of the form f(xt, x2) . 
By contrast, QMC methods aim to create point sets 
whose different projections onto coordinate subspaces 
always contain N distinct points. An overview of ran­
dom number generation and QMC methods is given 
in the book by Niederreiter (16]. An example of a 20 
QMC point set, called a Korobov lattice rule, is shown 
in Figure 1(right). 
A second goal of QM C methods is to create point 
sets that are as close as possible to a uniform distri­
bution. More precisely, QMC methods are based on 
so-called low-discrepancy point sets which give conver­
gence rates of O(N-1log8 N) for integration error, in 
contrast to the MC method that is O(N-!). In prac­
tice, the performance of QMC integration is intimately 
related to the effective dimension of the integration 
problem, i.e., the ability to approximate the integrand 
by a sum of low-dimensional functions [2, 17]. Inte­
grands having a small effective dimension can be inte­
grated accurately by QMC point sets that have good 
projections over subspaces of low dimension. Superior 
performance of QMC over MC has been demonstrated 
in numerous applications [2, 12, 17]. 
As a special case of QMC methods we consider lattice 
rules here [13, 21]. By comparison to the Sobol and 
Niederreiter sequences [16] used in [18], lattice rules 
are easy to implement (only one parameter, the gen­
erator, is required for a given sample size), and can be 
built so that their projections onto low-dimensional 
subspaces are not only well distributed but also of 
equivalent quality for different subspaces. They can 
also be randomized to produce unbiased estimators. 

398 
ORMONEIT ET AL. 
UAI2001 
log2N 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
a1 
3 
5 
11 
13 
25 
a11 
3 
5 
5 
11 
75 
log2N 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
az 
55 
43 
259 
307 
699 
a11 
51 
139 
519 
1081 
1289 
log2N 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
a1 
2087 
7243 
11035 
27891 
18373 
ah 
2961 
2149 
21553 
27383 
3597 
log2 N 
19 
20 
21 
a1 
21643 
201579 
431119 
ah 
120079 
172565 
232501 
Table 1: Generators for state-space dimensions up to 
8 should use generators, a1. Problems with dimensions 
up to 32 use generator, ah. 
To build the LPF, we use a special construction of 
lattice rule called a shifted K orobov lattice rule based 
on N points U 1, ... , UN given by 
U 
(iѿ1( 
s-1) ) 
d 
i = 
Ŋ 1, a, ... 'a 
+ a 
mo 1 ' 
(9) 
for i 
= 1, ... , N, where the modulo 1 is applied 
component-wise. The integer a E [1, ... , N  1] is called 
the generator of the rule; its choice is crucial for the 
performance. Suitable values for a, depending on the 
sample size N and the state dimension, are given in 
Table 1 (see [13] for more details). The vector a is a 
shift that is uniformly distributed over [0, 1)8, which 
implies that the points U i are also uniform, but depen­
dent. This shift is important as a means of obtaining 
error estimates via multiple simulations [4], and it is 
necessary to guarantee that the resulting approxima­
tions are unbiased. 
4.2 
LPF Algorithm 
The LPF algorithm propagates N particles following 
the rules (6), (7), and (8). However, the uniform num­
bers Ut,i in the forward propagation (7) become com­
ponents of the (shifted) lattice rule (9). 
More precisely, we start with a shifted lattice rule 
PN = {U ;, i = 1, . .. , N} in 8T dimensions, where 8 is 
the dimension of the state at a single time, and T is the 
number of time steps. We decompose PN into com­
ponents of the form Ut,1, Ut,2, ... , Ut,N for each time 
t. Note that, due to (9), these components can be 
computed recursively for t = 1, ... , T, without storing 
PN explicitly. Next, we use Ut,l, Ut,2, ... , Ut,N for for­
ward propagation in step (7). An important issue is 
the assignment of a particular uniform number Ut,j 
to the uniform variables Ut,i in (7). There is a dan­
ger of assigning components to particles that might 
depend on the outcome of the resampling, hence in­
troducing a serious bias. Our approach is to gener­
ate at each time t a uniform and random permutation 
r t 
= (Jt,l, .. . , 'Yt,N) of the integers [1 . .. N], and then 
assign the point Ut,"Y,.• to particle i. This implies that 
the trajectory Xt,i, ... , Xt,i of the ith particle from time 
1 to t is generated by the point 
Ut,i = (ul,·n,,,u2,"Y2,;,···•Ut,"Y,,;)· 
(10) 
Note that the point set {Ut,l, ... , Vt,N} does not form 
a lattice rule, which would be necessary to obtain 
the O(N-1 log• N) convergence rate globally. How­
ever, the point set used at each time t forms a lat­
tice rule. In addition, it can be shown [13] that when 
gcd( a, N) = 1, the point sets used at each time step 
differ in the implementation only because of the ran­
dom shift. Hence the quality of the sampling remains 
the same throughout time, which is generally not the 
case for other types of QMC point sets such as those 
used in [18]. 
In summary, the LPF implementation only differs from 
the PF in the use of the points Ut,i used to generate 
the state Xt,i· Instead of calling a pseudorandom num­
ber generator 8 times to define Ut,i, the LPF instead 
generates one random shift ß. one random permuta­
tion r t = ( 'Yt,1' ... ''Yt,N) of the integers from 1 to N' 
and then use the point 
( 'Yt,; 1 (1, a, . . .  , a•-1) + ß) mod 1 
to generate the state Xt,i of the ith particle. 
5 
Theoretical Aspects 
In this section we discuss some theoretical results and 
we outline differences and similarities between the LPF 
and the ordinary PF. In terms of search methods, 
one can view the ordinary PF as an informed, ran­
dom search where different nodes of a search tree are 
expanded or truncated at different time steps. Con­
versely, the LPF corresponds to an (almost) determin­
istic search algorithm. The observation model is used 
as a heuristic function to determine which "node" (i.e. 
branch of the filtering tree) is expanded next, and the 
transition model specifies how to carry out this expan­
sion. In the LPF the expansion is designed to search 
the state space as evenly as possible. 
From a mathematical perspective, we can show that 
the samples generated by the LPF are properly 
weighted in the sense of (5). This is suggested by the 
fact that the updating of the weights Wt,i and the sam­
pling with replacement in the LPF are done exactly as 
in the PF. The only difference is that the particles 
Xt,1, ... , Xt,N are not independent. We formalize this 
intuition in the following theorem, which covers the 
LPF as a special case: 

UAI2001 
ORMONEIT ET AL. 
399 
Theorem 1 If each particle Xt,i is generated by a 
point Ut,i that has a uniform distribution over [0, 1)8 
and such that Ut,i and Ur,j are independent for 1 ::; r < 
t ::; T, 1 ::; i, j ::; N, and if the resampling step at time 
t is done by sampling with replacement using weights 
Wt,i proportional to P(Ytlxt,i), then St:::: {xt,i, Wt,i}I1 
is a properly weighted sample, for t = 1, ... , T. 
The proof is omitted due to space limitations; it 
proceeds by showing that each Xt,i follows the dis­
tribution p(xt!Yt-1) as in (2), and then, that 
E[f(xt,d P(YtiXt,i)] ex: E[f(xtiYt)] for any function f; 
from there, applying the ergodic theorem yields the re­
sult. Hence, at least asymptotically, the LPF produces 
a correct approximation of the filtering distribution 
(3), and furthermore, the quantity L;:':1 w1,d(xt,i) is 
an unbiased estimator of E[j(x1JYt)]. Note that the 
random shift in (9) is essential to this result and is 
a principal difference between the LPF and previous 
work on QMC-based filtering where samples are gen­
erated deterministically, e.g. [18]. 
6 
Experiments 
To test the LPF we compare it to a conventional PF 
that uses residual sampling [14]. Both filters had the 
same observations, the same temporal dynamics, and 
the same likelihood function. Our goal is to compare 
the different filters in how well they approximate the 
filtering distribution (3). The quality of the approx­
imation is measured by computing the error covari­
ation in the estimation of the mean of the filtering 
distribution across many runs of the filters. By ap­
plying the filters with varying numbers of particles we 
can also analyze the relationship between estimation 
errors and the computation time required by both al­
gorithms. Computational requirements in both algo­
rithms scale similarly with the number of particles. 
6.1 
Disk Tracking 
The first experiment involves a circular disk undergo­
ing a random walk in an image sequence. The disk 
position at time t, x1 E JR2, is given by 
Xt 
= Xt-1 + 'TJt , 
(11) 
where 'Tit is 2D i.i.d. zero-mean Gaussian noise; i.e., 
TJt 
"' N(O, aii2), where I2 is the 2 x 2 identity matrix. 
The standard deviation was O"x = 3 pixels. 
The effective scene model m(r, t) is 1 if pixel location 
r is within a disk of radius 16 pixels, centered at x1: 
m(r t) = { 1 for Jlr .- Xtll::; 16 
(12) 
' 
0 otherwtse . 
The image observation is obtained by adding i.i.d. 
zero-mean Gaussian noise Vt,r "'N(O, aX), with 0"11 = 
1.2 
0.7 
a 
5 
10 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
Frame Number 
15 
20 
25 
Frame Number 
30 
35 
40 
30 
35 
40 
Figure 2: Root mean-squared errors (RMSE) in the esti­
mated disk location for a PF with residual sampling and 
for the LPF. (TOP) RMSE with confidence levels based 
on 64 samples. (BOTTOM) RMSE for PF's with differ­
ent sample sizes; with 50% more samples, the PF produces 
errors similar in magnitude to the LPF. 
0.25, to m(r, t): 
I(r, t) := m(r, t) + Vt,r . 
(13) 
The model transition density is 
We misspecified the model (14) by setting ad 
= 5, 
which is about 60% larger than the standard deviation 
in the "true" transition model (11). This is because 
such model parameters are typically unknown in prac­
tice, and hence a relatively large value must be chosen 
to search a sufficiently large neighborhood of x1. 
We created 1000 image sequences, each with 40 frames, 
by simulating (11), (12), and (13). We applied the PF 
and the LPF to each sequence, initialized by setting 
x0 to the true disk location at time 0. The disk lo­
cation was estimated by taking the weighted mean of 
the particles, according to (5). The error at each time 
step is the Euclidean distance between the estimated 
and the true disk location. As a summary statistic, 
we compute the root mean-squared estimation error 
(RMSE) of the 1000 trials at each time step. 
The RMSE results of an experiment with 64 particles 
are shown in Figure 2 as a function of time. The cir-

400 
ORMONEIT ET AL. 
UAI2001 
#particles 
16 
32 
64 
128 
256 
512 
Var difference 
20'?o 
21% 
19% 
ll'?o 
11% 
10% 
efficiency gain 
50% 
60% 
50% 
15% 
20% 
20% 
Table 2: Experimental results in disk tracking task 
cles represents the RMSE of the LPF and the other 
curves represent the performance of the ordinary PF 
for different numbers of particles. Figure 2 (top) com­
pares the LPF to the PF with identical numbers of 
particles, showing RMSE and standard error bars that 
provide a measure of our confidence in this expected 
deviation from the true disk location. The LPF pro­
duces location errors that are approximately 20% less 
than the PF with the same number of samples. This 
supports our hypothesis that the deterministic place­
ment of particles improves the average performance of 
the estimate. In addition, although difficult to discern 
from this plot, the standard error bars from the LPF 
are also smaller. 
Figure 2 (bottom) shows the same RMSE results for 
the LPF but compared against RMSE results for PFs 
with different numbers of particles. This allows one to 
assess the computational gains due to the LPF. One 
can see that we need to increase the number of parti­
cles, and hence the computation time, for the PF by 
approximately 50% in order to produce errors as small 
as those obtained with the LPF. Even with 50% more 
particles the performance of each individual trial may 
still be worse for the PF due to the larger error bars. 
These results hold over a wide range of particle set 
sizes. Figure 3 shows other experiments with from 16 
particles up to 512 particles. The experimental setup 
is identical to that in Figure 2. Note that the average 
prediction error of both methods, as well as the vari­
ability of the predictions, decreases with an increasing 
number of particles. A summary of the results from 
the complete set of experiments is given in Table 2. 
Note that the LPF consistently outperforms the PF by 
a margin of at least 15%. The performance improve­
ment seems to be less pronounced in the cases where 
we have relatively many particles (128, 256, and 512). 
This is to be expected because an optimized parti­
cle placement seems particularly relevant in the case 
where there are relatively few particles. Regarding the 
percentage of additional particles needed by the PF to 
match the performance of the LPF, which is reported 
in the third row of the table, the maximum difference 
of 60% occurs at a sample size of 32 particles for the 
LPF. Again, this difference becomes less pronounced 
as the overall number of particles increases. 
6.2 
Human Motion Tracking 
In our second set of experiments, we apply both the 
LPF and the PF using residual sampling to a human 
2.4 
c: I'J1.8 
.. 
W1.6 r? 
0 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
Frame Number 
0'
3
o:--,--:',o::---,'-5 --2:':0-----:'25--3'-0 __ 3.._5 _ _j40 
Frame Number 
Figure 3: Root mean-squared errors (RMSE) in the es­
timated disk location for PF's with residual sampling and 
for the LPF. The number of samples for the different filters 
are show in the legends in each plot. 
motion tracking problem. The task is to recover the 
lower portion of a human body from 2D projections. 
Rather than using camera images as observations, we 
used 2D projections of body markers (on the joints) 
obtained from a commercial motion capture system. 
This filtering problem is challenging because the lower 
body (legs and hips) is described in a 10D space. 
Tracking occurs directly on this space without first 
applying algorithms for dimensionality reduction like 
principal component analysis [20]. 
The image observations are labeled 2D positions cor­
responding to markers on a human subject, the 3D 
locations of which were found with a commercial mo­
tion capture system. The 6 markers used for track­
ing the lower body are shown in Fig. 4. The observa­
tion model involves the perspective projection of the 
3D points onto the image plane plus additive Gaus­
sian noise. Given a camera center at (Xc, Yc, Zc), with 
the optical axis parallel to theY-axis, a marker point 
(Xm, Ym, Zm) produces the observation 
(15) 
where TJ is isotropic 2D mean-zero Gaussian noise 
with variance CT2• In the experiments below we used 
CT ::::: 0.002, which is approximately 2% the length of an 
upright spine projected into the image plane. 

--; 
UAI2001 
ORMONEIT ET AL. 
401 
Figure 4: Locations of 6 markers on the lower body. 
The body is modeled as an articulated linkage. The 
state vector for the lower body model has 10 angular 
degrees of freedom (DOF): 2 for the pelvis, 3 for each 
hip, and 1 for each knee. Given a state, x, and the 
known spine location, one can traverse the kinematic 
tree, from the spine to the pelvis, and then to each 
leg, to generate the 3D marker locations. These 3D 
locations are then projected into the image to Ҁenerate 
predicted observations from the model. Let dj (x) be 
the 2D location for the jlh marker that is predicted by 
state x. Then the likelihood function for state s and 
observations D = { di }1=1 is 
p(D I x) = (27r1a2) 6 exp [-L,$=lfld%a& di(x)fl2] , (16) 
where a2 is the variance of the image noise. 
The experiments simulate a binocular observer that 
views the person from approximately 2.5m, with 6cm 
between the two eyes. Assuming independent noise in 
the two image views, the joint likelihood is the prod­
uct of the individual likelihoods. For a temporal prior 
over these state variables, we make the simplistic as­
sumption that the state changes slowly over time. In 
particular, the transition density for states Xt, condi­
tioned on Xt-1, is an isotropric, mean-zero Gaussian, 
with a variance of aV. Here, we fix aa = 0.1 radians. 
Note that we do not impose limits on how far joints 
can rotate. The tracker may draw high-likelihood pro­
posals that are anatomically impossible, but are con­
sistent with the 2D observations. Also, limb lengths 
are determined from the dimensions of the human sub­
ject before tracking begins and are then fixed during 
tracking. This is a source of error as real joints are 
more complicated than our model, causing some parts 
such as the pelvis to vary in width over time. 
Comparing the performance of the LPF and PF is 
more difficult in this case. In particular, the mean 
of the filtering distribution is not always equal to the 
true state. As the filters are attempting to approx­
imate the filtering distribution, an appropriate mea-
sure of performance is the difference between the true 
mean of the filtering distribution and the mean states 
computed using the approximations provided by the 
LPF and the PF. 
To obtain a ground truth measure of the true mean 
of the filtering distribution, we ran a PF on the input 
sequences with 16 times the number of samples than 
we used in the experiments. We then took the true 
mean to be the sample mean from this large run. We 
then ran the LPF and the PF 200 times on the same 
input, with different random seeds on every run. The 
means on each run were computed according to (5). 
Figure 5 summarizes the results for individual state 
variables of the left leg, namely, two angles from the 
left hip, and one for the left knee. Notice from Fig. 5 
(top) that the average of the mean estimates obtained 
over the 200 trials is very close to the true mean in 
both cases. This is not surprising since both the LPF 
and the PF produced unbiased estimates. The error 
bars in Fig. 5 (top) show the standard deviation of the 
ensemble of means for the 200 runs, which is where 
we expect the LPF to show smaller variability of the 
estimates about the true mean. Like the disk tracker 
results, the standard deviation for the LPF is usually 
5%- 20% below that for the particle filter, with similar 
gains in computational efficiency. 
Figure 5 (bottom) shows the expected (absolute) dif­
ference between the true mean and the mean estimates 
obtained with the LPF and the PF. The error bars are 
larger than in Fig. 2 because we have only 200 instead 
of 1000 trials. The lower errors with the lattice method 
are clear nonetheless. 
7 
Conclusions 
We presented an algorithm called the lattice parti­
cle filter to improve the reliability of particle filters 
in visual tracking. 
Specifically, the method places 
the particles deterministically according to a randomly 
shifted lattice rule. This reduces the variance of the 
particle-based approximation. 
Experiments demon­
strate that the practical improvement from using the 
LPF amounts to savings in the number of particles of 
between 20% and 60%. The size of this effect depends 
on the "sparsity" of the particles in the state-space, 
being more pronounced when there are relatively few 
particles as it is typical for real applications. In our 
experiments involving a IOD human motion tracker, 
the lattice particle filter also led to similar reductions 
in variance. 
For future work, we plan alternative versions of the 
LPF that are based on a global lattice rule in nT di­
mensions. We believe that the global lattice property 
will be central to obtain exact convergence rates and to 
., 

402 
ORMONEIT ET AL. 
UAI2001 
-1.2 
·1,78 
--+- Partidefiller 
, ....... Pal'tidefiltw 
·1.25 
ġ Lanioe F"i"., 
-1 .8 
 
.. 
:": :::::Þ. 
-<J.BĠ 
- - Pgslerior Mean 
-1.3 
-1.-8.2 
-<J.ğ 
' 
Mill 
CCI.-1.-84 
!-1.35 
· 
i' 
!-<1.9ŉ 
'ii 
Q-1.86 B#flt. 
Ğ -1.4 
ĝ 
:3"-1.45 
-1.5 
·1.55 
$-Q,09 
jo.iJe 
c: 0.07 
Û 0.06 
.5 ¸ 0.05 
w 
'il 0.04 
}o.o3 
. 
! 
5 
6 
Frame 
-r..., ...... 
iO 
;/! t}"#! 
'f-·-r-
:, -1.68 
Ý -1.9 
·1 .92 
-1.94 
-1.96 
¹ 0.03 
! 
 0..025 
Ü 
.5 0.02 
ň 
i 0.015 
O O.Q1 
"!" 
5 
6 
...... 
10 
"' 
-i 
!: 
-i.OS 
-1:.1 
I,U 0.02 
P-- Particte filter 
0
.
0
11_.-./0-12-.....':-<>-
=::t::=:Lattieo::i' =F='"i:'':!J 
5 
6 
10 
I :::: r.a: : /::: 
o.oo5R-'!-"'7--!'-7-s --:6":---:-!::::J:=ST1oU 
Fr<m(l 
Frame 
Figure 5: Summary of 200 trials of PF and LPF tracking of lower body. (Top) Individual state variables for the left leg, 
for which the LPF means are generally is closer to the posterior mean, and have significantly less variance. (Bottom) 
Expected difference between the posterior mean and the means computed by the PF and the LPF. 
optimize the practical performance of the LPF. How­
ever, it involves the creation of particles satisfying a 
global lattice constraint. We will also explore alterna­
tive resampling methods that could, e.g., depend on 
the variability of the likelihoods obtained at each time 
step, such as those in [6, 14].
