1
Moments in Time Dataset: one million
videos for event understanding
Mathew Monfort, Alex Andonian, Bolei Zhou,
Kandan Ramakrishnan, Sarah Adel Bargal, Tom Yan, Lisa Brown,
Quanfu Fan, Dan Gutfruend, Carl Vondrick, Aude Oliva
Abstract—We present the Moments in Time Dataset, a large-scale human-annotated collection of one million short videos
corresponding to dynamic events unfolding within three seconds. Modeling the spatial-audio-temporal dynamics even for actions
occurring in 3 second videos poses many challenges: meaningful events do not include only people, but also objects, animals, and
natural phenomena; visual and auditory events can be symmetrical in time ("opening" is "closing" in reverse), and either transient or
sustained. We describe the annotation process of our dataset (each video is tagged with one action or activity label among 339 different
classes), analyze its scale and diversity in comparison to other large-scale video datasets for action recognition, and report results of
several baseline models addressing separately, and jointly, three modalities: spatial, temporal and auditory. The Moments in Time dataset,
designed to have a large coverage and diversity of events in both visual and auditory modalities, can serve as a new challenge to develop
models that scale to the level of complexity and abstract reasoning that a human processes on a daily basis.
Index Terms—video dataset, action recognition, event recognition
!
1
INTRODUCTION
“The best things in life are not things, they are moments”
of raining, walking, splashing, jumping, etc. Moments hap-
pening in the world unfold at time scales from a second
to minutes, occur in different places, and involve people,
animals, objects and natural phenomena. Of particular
interest are moments of a few seconds as they represent
an ecosystem of diverse visual and auditory dynamic events.
We introduce the Moments in Time Dataset, a collection
of one million short videos each with a label corresponding
to an event unfolding in 3 seconds.1 Temporal events of
such length correspond to the average duration of human
working memory [1], [6] which is a short-term memory-in-
action buffer specialized in representing information that is
changing over time. Additionally, three seconds is a temporal
envelope which holds meaningful actions between people,
objects and phenomena (e.g. wind blowing, objects falling
on the ﬂoor, shaking hands, playing with a pet, etc).
Compound activities that occur at longer time scales
can be represented by sequences of three second actions.
For example, picking up an object and running could be
interpreted as the compound actions "stealing", "saving" or
"playing sports" depending on the context of the activity (e.g.
agent and scene). Hypothetically, when describing such a
"stealing" event, one can go into the details of the movement
of each joint and limb of the persons involved. However, this
M Monfort, A Andonian, K Ramakrishnan, T Yan, A Oliva are with
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Ave, Cambridge,
MA 02139 USA.
L Brown, Q Fan, D Gutfreund are with International Business Machines, 75
Binney St., Cambridge, MA 02142 USA.
B Zhou is with The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Pond Cres, Ma Liu
Shui, Hong Kong PRC
C Vondrick is with Columbia University, 530 West 120th St, New York, NY
10027 USA.
SA Bargal is with Boston University, 111 Cummington Mall, Boston, MA
02215 USA.
is not how we naturally describe compound events. Instead,
we use verbs such as "picking" and "running" which are
the actions which typically occur in a time window of 1-3
seconds. The ability to automatically recognize these short
actions is a core step for automatic video comprehension.
Modeling the spatial-temporal dynamics even for three
second videos, poses a daunting challenge. For instance,
videos with the action "opening" include people opening
doors, gates, drawers, and curtains, animals and humans
opening eyes, and even a ﬂower opening its petals. In some
cases the same set of frames in reverse can actually depict a
different action ("closing") showing that the temporal aspect
is crucial to video understanding. Humans can recognize a
common transformation that occurs in space and time that
allows for all of the mentioned scenarios to be assigned to
the category "opening" even though visually they look very
different from each other. The challenge is to develop models
that recognize these transformations in a way that will allow
them to discriminate between different actions, yet generalize
to other agents and settings within the same class.
We present the Moments in Time dataset, one million
videos each with one action label from 339 different classes,
to enable models to richly understand actions and dynamics
in videos. This is one of the largest human-annotated video
datasets capturing visual and audible short events produced
by humans, animals, objects or nature. The most commonly
used verbs in the English language are chosen as the
vocabulary covering a wide and diverse semantic space. This
presents a uniquely challenging and diverse dataset for action
recognition with signiﬁcant intra-class variation. In Section 4
we include baseline results of several known models trained
and tested on the dataset, addressing separately, and jointly,
three modalities: spatial, temporal and auditory.
1. The website is http://moments.csail.mit.edu
arXiv:1801.03150v3  [cs.CV]  16 Feb 2019

2
Fig. 1: Sample Videos. Day-to-day events can happen to many types of actors, in different environments, and at different
scales. Moments in Time dataset has a signiﬁcant intra-class variation among the categories. Here we illustrate one frame for
a few video samples and actions. For example, car engines, books, and tulips can all open.
2
RELATED WORK
Video Datasets: Over the years, the size of datasets for video
understanding has grown steadily. KTH [36] and Weizmann
[7] were early datasets for human action understanding.
UCF101 [40] and THUMOS [23] are built from web videos
and have become important benchmarks for video classiﬁ-
cation. Kinetics [25] and YouTube-8M [2] introduced a large
number of event classes by leveraging public videos from
YouTube. The micro-videos dataset [31] uses social media
videos to study an open-world vocabulary for video under-
standing. ActivityNet [8] explores recognizing activities in
video and AVA [15] explores recognizing amd localizing ﬁne-
grained actions. The “something something” dataset [14] and
Charades [38] used crowdsourced workers to collect video
datasets while the VLOG dataset [12] collects daily human
activities with natural spatio-temporal context.
Video Classiﬁcation: The availability of large-scale video
datasets has enabled signiﬁcant progress in video under-
standing and classiﬁcation. In early work, Laptev and Lin-
deberg [30] developed space-time interest point descriptors
and Klaser et al. [27] designed histogram features for video.
Pioneering work by Wang et al. [43] developed dense action
trajectories by separating foreground motion from camera
motion. Sadanand and Corso [34] designed ActionBank as a
high-level representation for video and action classiﬁcation,
and Pirsiavash and Ramanan [33] leveraged grammar models
for temporally segmenting actions from video. Advances in
deep convolutional networks have enabled the development
of a variety of large-scale video classiﬁcation models. Var-
ious approaches of fusing RGB frames over the temporal
dimension are explored on the Sport1M dataset [24]. Two
stream CNNs with one static image stream and one optical
ﬂow stream were proposed to fuse the information of object
appearance and short-term motion [39]. 3D convolutional
networks [42] use 3D kernels to extract features from a se-
quence of RGB frames. Temporal Segment Networks sample
frames and optical ﬂow on different time scales to extract
information for activity recognition [44]. A CNN+LSTM
model, which uses a CNN to extract frame features and
an LSTM to integrate features over time, is also used to
recognize activities in videos [11]. Recently, I3D networks
[9] use two stream CNNs with inﬂated 3D convolutions on
both RGB and optical ﬂow sequences to achieve state of
the art results on the Kinetics dataset [25]. More recent 3D
networks incorporate Non-local modules [45] in order to
capture long-range dependencies while Temporal Relation
Networks [47] take a different approach by learning the
relevant state transitions in sparsely sampled frames from
different temporal segments.
Sound Classiﬁcation: Environmental and ambient sound
recognition is a rapidly growing area of research. Stowell et
al. [41] collected an early dataset and assembled a challenge
for sound classiﬁcation, Piczak [32] collected a dataset of ﬁfty
sound categories and enough to train deep convolutional
models, Salamon et al. [35] released a dataset of urban
sounds, and Gemmeke et al. [13] use web videos for sound
dataset collection. Recent work is now developing models
for sound classiﬁcation with deep neural networks. For
example, Piczack [32] pioneered early work for convolutional
networks for sound classiﬁcation, Aytar et al. [4] transfer
visual models into sound for auditory analysis, and Hershey
et al. [19] develop large-scale convolutional models for sound
classiﬁcation, and Arandjelovi´c and Zisserman [3] train
sound and vision representations jointly. In Moments in
Time dataset, many videos have both visual and auditory
signals, enabling for multi-modal video recognition.
3
THE MOMENTS IN TIME DATASET
The goal of this project is to design a high-coverage, high-
density, balanced dataset of hundreds of verbs depicting
moments of a few seconds. High-quality datasets should
have a broad coverage, high diversity and density of samples,
and the ability to scale. The Moments in Time Dataset consists
of over one million 3-second videos corresponding to 339

3
different verbs. Each verb is associated with over 1,000 videos
resulting in a large balanced dataset for learning dynamic
events from videos. Importantly, the dataset is designed to
have, and grow towards, a very large set of both inter-class
and intra-class variation that captures a dynamic event at
different levels of abstraction (i.e. "opening" doors, curtains,
eyes, mouths, even a ﬂower opening its petals).
3.1
Building a Vocabulary of Active Moments
We began building our vocabulary by forming a list of
the 4,500 most commonly used verbs from VerbNet [37]
(according to the word frequencies in the Corpus of Con-
temporary American English (COCA) [10]). We clustered
these verbs using features from Propbank [26], FrameNet [5]
and OntoNotes [20] which contain information on both the
meaning and usage of each verb. This allows for clusters to
be formed that extend beyond synonymous groups.
We formed our clusted by assigning a binary feature
vector to each verb with an index for different features
provided by FrameNet, PropBank and VerbNet. If a verb
was associated with a given feature it’s value was set to 1
and 0 if not. These feature vectors were then used to perform
k-means clustering to create the set of semantic verb clusters.
For example, the actions "pour" and "ﬂow" have similar
meanings and can both be used to describe the movement
of a liquid. However, "pour" has features associated with an
agent (e.g. a person pouring coffee) whereas "ﬂow" does not.
These differences can lead to very different video clips when
we take into account the full context of an event.
To order our list of verbs we iteratively selected the most
common verb from the cluster with the highest cumulative
frequency of use among its members and added it to our vo-
cabulary. For example, a cluster associated with "grooming"
contains the following verbs in order of most common to least
common "washing, showering, bathing, soaping, grooming,
shampooing, manicuring, moisturizing, and ﬂossing". Verbs
can belong to multiple clusters due to their different frames
of use. For instance, "washing" also belongs to a group
associated with cleaning, mopping, scrubbing, etc. Once a
verb was chosen it was then removed from all of its member
clusters. We repeated this process for all verbs in the set
excluding verbs that were either ambiguous, not likely to
be visual/audible in a 3-seconds video (e.g. "thinking" and
"being") or too similar to a previously selected verb. We
settled on a set of 339 frequently used and semantically
diverse verbs that we used to build the proposed dataset
with a large coverage and diversity of labels.
3.2
Collection and Annotation
To generate candidate videos for annotation, we search the
Internet by parsing video metadata and crawling search
engines to build a list of candidate videos for each class in
our vocabulary using a variety of different sources 2. We
download each video and randomly cut a 3-second section
which we group with the corresponding verb. These verb-
video tuples are then sent to Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT)
for annotation. To ensure the highest level of diversity, we cut
2. Youtube, Flickr, Vine, Metacafe, Peeks, Vimeo, VideoBlocks, Bing,
Giphy, The Weather Channel, and Getty-Images
a single 3-second snippet from each video source. We used
this approach instead of using a model to localize interesting
video segments, such as Video2Gif [16], to reduce any model
bias where a trained model will localize segments more
similar to the data for which it was trained.
Fig. 2: User interface. An example for our binary annotation
task for the action cooking.
Each AMT worker is presented with a video-verb pair
and asked to press a Yes or No key signifying if the action
is happening in the scene. Positive responses from the ﬁrst
round are sent to subsequent rounds of annotation. Each
HIT (a single worker assignment) contains 64 different 3-
second videos that are related to a single verb and 10 ground
truth videos that are used for control. In each HIT, the ﬁrst
4 questions are used to train the workers on the task and
require the correct answer to be selected before continuing.
Only the results from HITs that earn a 90% or above on
the control videos are included in the dataset. This binary-
classiﬁcation setup eases class selection for workers allowing
for efﬁcient annotation. We run each video in the training
set through annotation at least 3 times and require a human
consensus of at least 75% to be considered a positive label. For
the validation and test set we increase the minimum number
of rounds of annotation to 4 with a human consensus of
at least 85%. We do not set the threshold at 100% to allow
for videos with more difﬁcult to recognize actions. Figure 2
shows an example of the annotation task.
3.3
Dataset Statistics
A motivation for this project was to gather a large balanced
and diverse dataset for training models for video under-
standing. Since we pull our videos from over 10 different
sources we are able to include a large breadth of diversity
that would be challenging using a single source. In total, we
have collected over 1,000,000 labelled videos for 339 Moment
classes. The graph on the left of Figure 3 shows the full
distribution across all classes where the average number of
labeled videos per class is 1,757 with a median of 2,775.
To further aid in building a diverse dataset we do not
restrict the active agent in our videos to humans. Many
events such as "walking", "swimming", "jumping", and
"carrying" are not speciﬁc to human agents. In addition,
some classes may contain very few videos with human
agents (e.g. "howling" or "ﬂying"). True video understanding
models should be able to recognize the event across agent
classes. With this in mind we decided to build our dataset

4
Fig. 3: Dataset Statistics. Left: Distribution of the number of videos belonging to each category. Middle: Per class distribution
of videos that have humans, animals, or objects as agents completing actions. Right: Per class distribution of videos that
require audio to recognize the class category and videos that can be categorized with only visual information.
Fig. 4: Comparison to Datasets. For each dataset we provide different comparisons. Left: the total number of action labels
in the training set. Middle: the average number of videos per class (some videos can belong to multiple classes).Right: the
coverage of objects and scenes recognized (top 1) by networks trained on Places and Imagenet.
to be general across agents and present a new challenge
to the ﬁeld of video understanding. The middle graph in
Figure 3 shows the distribution of the videos according to
agent type (human, animal, object) for each class. On the
far left (larger human proportion), we have classes such
as "typing", "sketching", and "repairing", while on the far
right (smaller human proportion) we have events such as
"storming", "roaring", and "erupting".
Another feature of the Moments in Time dataset is that
we include sound-dependant classes. We do not restrict our
videos to events that can be seen, if there is a moment that can
only be heard in the video (e.g. "clapping" in the background)
then we still include it. This presents another challenge in
that purely visual models will not be sufﬁcient to completely
solve the dataset. The right graph in Figure 3 shows the
distribution of videos according to whether or not the event
in the video can be seen.
3.4
Dataset Comparisons
In order to highlight the key points of our dataset, we com-
pare the scale and object-scene coverage found in Moments in
Time to other large-scale video datasets for action recognition.
These include UCF101 [40], ActivityNet [8], Kinetics [25],
Something-Something [14], AVA [15], and Charades [38].
Figure 4 compares the total number of action labels used for
training (left) and the average number of videos that belong
to each class in the training set (middle). This increase in
scale for action recognition is beneﬁcial for training large
generalizable systems for machine learning.
Additionally, we compared the coverage of objects and
scenes that can be recognized within the videos. This type
of comparison helps to showcase the visual diversity of our
dataset. To accomplish this, we extract 3 frames from each
video evenly spaced at 25%, 50%, and 75% of the video
duration and run a 50 layer resnet [17] trained on ImageNet
[28] and a 50 layer resnet trained on Places [49] over each
frame and average the prediction results for each video.
We then compare the total number of objects and scenes
recognized (top 1) by the networks in Figure 4 (right). The
graph shows that 100% of the scene categories in Places and
99.9% of the object categories in ImageNet were recognized
in our dataset. The closest dataset to ours in this comparison
is Kinetics which has a recognized coverage of 99.5% of the
scene categories in Places and 96.6% of the object categories
in ImageNet. We should note that we are comparing the
recognized categories from the top 1 prediction of each
network. We have not annotated the scene locations and
objects in each video of each dataset. However, a comparison
of the visual features recognized by each network does still
serve as an informative comparison of visual diversity.
4
EXPERIMENTS
In this section we present the details of our experimental
setup utilized to obtain the reported baseline results.

5
Model
Modality
Top-1 (%)
Top-5 (%)
Chance
-
0.29
1.47
ResNet50-scratch
Spatial
23.65
46.73
ResNet50-Places
Spatial
26.44
50.56
ResNet50-ImageNet
Spatial
27.16
51.68
TSN-Spatial
Spatial
24.11
49.10
BNInception-Flow
Temporal
11.60
27.40
TSN-Flow
Temporal
15.71
34.65
SoundNet
Auditory
7.60
18.00
TSN-2stream
Spatial+Temporal
25.32
50.10
TRN-Multiscale
Spatial+Temporal
28.27
53.87
I3D
Spatial+Temporal
29.51
56.06
Ensemble (SVM)
S+T+A
31.16
57.67
TABLE 1: Classiﬁcation Accuracy: We show Top-1 and Top-5
accuracy of the baseline models on the validation set.
4.1
Experimental Setup
Data. We generate a training set of 802,264 videos with
between 500 and 5,000 videos per class for 339 different
classes and evaluate performance on a validation set of
33,900 videos with 100 videos for each class. We additionally
withhold a test set of 67,800 videos consisting of 200 videos
per class which will be used to evaluate submissions for a
future action recognition challenge.
Preprocessing. We extract RGB frames from the videos at
25 fps and resize the RGB frames to a standard 340x256 pixels.
In the interest of performance, we pre-compute optical ﬂow
on consecutive frames using an off-the-shelf implementation
of TVL1 optical ﬂow algorithm [46] from the OpenCV
toolbox [22]. This formulation allows for discontinuities in
the optical ﬂow ﬁeld and is thus more robust to noise. For
fast computation, we discretize the values of optical ﬂow
ﬁelds into integers, clip the displacement with a maximum
absolute value of 15 and scale the range to 0-255. The x and
y displacement ﬁelds of every optical ﬂow frame are then
stored as two grayscale images to reduce storage. To correct
for camera motion, we subtract the mean vector from each
displacement ﬁeld in the stack. For video frames, we use
random cropping for data augmentation and subtract the
ImageNet mean from images.
Evaluation metric. We use top-1 and top-5 classiﬁcation
accuracy as the scoring metrics. Top-1 accuracy indicates the
percentage of testing videos for which the top conﬁdent
predicted label is correct. Top-5 accuracy indicates the
percentage of the testing videos for which the ground-truth
label is among the top 5 ranked predicted labels. This is
appropriate for video classiﬁcation as videos may contain
multiple actions (see Figure 5). For evaluation we randomly
select 10 crops per frame and average the results.
4.2
Baselines for Video Classiﬁcation
Here, we present several baselines for video classiﬁcation
on the Moments in Time dataset. We show results for three
modalities (spatial, temporal, and auditory), as well as for
recent video classiﬁcation models such as Temporal Segment
Networks [44] and Temporal Relation Networks [47]. We
further explore combining models to improve recognition
accuracy. The details of the baseline models grouped by
different modalities are listed below.
Spatial modality. We experiment with a 50 layer resnet
(Resnet50) [18] trained on randomly selected RGB frames
from each video with networks trained from scratch
(ResNet50-scrach), initialized on Places [50] (ResNet50-Places),
and initialized on ImageNet [28] (ResNet50-ImageNet). In
testing, we average the prediction from 6 equi-distant frames.
Auditory modality. While many actions can be rec-
ognized visually, sound contains complementary or even
mandatory information for recognition of particular classes,
such as cheering or talking, as can be seen in Figure 3
(right). We use raw waveforms as the input modality and
ﬁnetune a SoundNet network which was pretrained on 2
million unlabeled videos from Flickr [4] with the output layer
changed to predict moment classes (SoundNet).
Temporal modality. Following [39], we compute the
optical ﬂow between adjacent frames encoded in Carte-
sian coordinates as displacements by stacking together 5
consecutive frames to form a 10 channel image (the x
and y displacement channels). We then modify the ﬁrst
convolutional layer of a BNInception [21] model to accept 10
input channels (BNInception-Flow).
Spatial-Temporal modality. We also train three recent
action recognition models: Temporal Segment Networks
(TSN) [44], Temporal Relation Networks [47] and Inﬂated
3D convolutional networks (I3D) [9]. Temporal Segment
Networks aim to efﬁciently capture the long-range temporal
structure of videos using a sparse frame-sampling strategy.
The TSN’s spatial stream TSN-Spatial is fused with an optical
ﬂow stream TSN-Flow via average consensus to form the two
stream TSN TSN-2stream. The base model for each stream is
a BNInception [21] model with three time segments.
Temporal Relation Networks (TRN) [47] explicitly learn
temporal dependencies between video segments that best
characterize a particular action. This “plug-and-play" module
can simultaneously model several short and long range
temporal dependencies to classify actions that unfold at
multiple time scales. We trained a TRN with 8 multi-scale
relations TRN-Multiscale on RGB frames using a Resnet50
[18] base model. Note that we classify the TRN-Multiscale
as spatiotemporal modality because in training it utilizes the
temporal dependency of different frames.
Inﬂated 3D convolutional networks (I3D) [9] inﬂate
the convolutional and pooling kernels of a pretrained 2D
network to a third dimension. The inﬂated 3D kernel is
initialized from the 2D model by repeating the weights from
the 2D kernel over the temporal dimension. This improves
learning efﬁciency and performance as 3D models contain
far more parameters than their 2D counterpart and a strong
intialization greatly improves training. For our experiments
we use a 3D Resnet50 inﬂated from our best 2D Resnet50
(spatial) from Table 1. We train each model with 16 frames
selected at 5 frames-per-second (fps) for each video.
Ensemble. To combine different modalities for action
recognition, we form an ensemble using the top performing
model of each modality (spatial: ResNet50-ImageNet, spa-
tiotemporal: I3D and auditory: SoundNet). We concatenate
the features from the ﬁnal hidden layer of each modality and
train a linear SVM to predict the moment categories (SVM).
This ensemble learns how to fuse the features of the different
modalities in order to make a more robust prediction based
on spatial, temporal and auditory information giving us our
highest recognition scores of 31.16% top-1 and 57.67% top-5.

6
Fig. 5: Overview of top detections for several single stream models. The ground truth label and top three model predictions
are listed for representative frames of videos.
Fig. 6: Examples of missed detections: We show examples of videos where the prediction is not in the top-5. Common
failures are often due to background clutter or poor generalization across agents (humans, animals, objects).
Fine-Tuned
Pretrained
UCF
HMDB
Something
Kinetics
Top-1: 92.6
Top-1: 62.0
Top-1: 48.6
Top-5: 99.2
Top-5: 88.2
Top-5: 77.9
Moments
Top-1: 91.9
Top-1: 65.9
Top-1: 50.0
Top-5: 98.6
Top-5: 89.3
Top-5: 78.8
TABLE 2: Dataset transfer performance using ResNet50 I3D
models pretrained on both Kinetics and Moments in Time.
4.3
Baseline Results
Table 1 shows the performance of the baseline models on
the validation set. The best single model is I3D, with a Top-1
accuracy of 29.51% and a Top-5 accuracy of 56.06% while the
Ensemble model (SVM) achieves a 57.67% Top-5 accuracy.
Figure 5 illustrates some of the high scoring predictions
from the baseline models. These qualitative results suggest
that the models can recognize moments well when the
action is well-framed and close up. However, the model
frequently misﬁres when the category is ﬁne-grained or there
is background clutter. Figure 6 shows examples where the
ground truth category is not detected in the top-5 predictions
due to either signiﬁcant background clutter or difﬁculty in
recognizing actions across agents.
We visualize the prediction given by the model by
generating heatmaps for some video samples using Class
Activation Mapping (CAM) [48] in Figure 7. CAM highlights
the most informative image regions relevant to the prediction.
Here we use the top-1 prediction of the ResNet50-ImageNet
model for each individual frame of the given video.
Categories that perform the best tend to have clear
appearances and lower intra-class variation, for example
bowling and surﬁng frequently happen in speciﬁc scene
categories. The more difﬁcult categories, such as covering,

7
Fig. 7: Predictions and Attention: We show some predictions (shown with class probability in top left corner) from
ResNet50-ImageNet spatial model on held-out video data and the heatmaps which highlight the informative regions in some
frames. For example, for recognizing the action chewing, the network focuses on the moving mouth.
slipping, and plugging, tend to have wide spatiotemporal
support as they can happen in most scenes and with most
objects. Recognizing actions uncorrelated with scenes and
objects seems to pose a challenge for video understanding.
Auditory models have qualitatively different perfor-
mance per category versus visual models suggesting that
sound provides a complementary signal to vision. However,
the full ensemble model has per category performance that
is fairly correlated with a single image (spatial) model. Given
the relatively low performance on Moments in Time, this
suggests that there is still room to capitalize on temporal and
auditory dynamics to better recognize actions.
4.4
Cross Dataset Transfer
We additionally conducted a set of transfer experiments
where we pretrain two models, one on Kinetics [25] and one
on Moments in Time, in order to evaluate which model
generalizes better to other datasets. We use a Resnet50
I3D model for the experiments as this model gave us
the best single stream performance on our dataset (Table
1). We compare our results when transferring to UCF101
[40], HMDB51 [29] and Something-Something [14]. During
training we randomly crop the average duration of each
video in each dataset at 5 frames-per-second (fps). This
allows for scalable transfer between datasets with different
video lengths while keeping the frame-rates consistent with
the dataset used for pretraining. For evaluation we apply
the model using a sliding window at 5 fps with a 2 frame
step-size and average the results.
Table 2 shows the results of the transfer task where the
top-1 and top-5 scores are calculated by evaluating on the
validation set of the dataset used to ﬁne-tune the model.
We can see from the results that pretraining on Moments
in Time results in better performance when transferring
to HMDB51 and pretraining on Kinetics gives stronger
results when transferring to UCF101. This makes sense
as UCF101 and Kinetics share many classes (e.g. "playing
guitar", "skydiving", "walking dog", etc.) and both consist
solely of YouTube videos, while HMDB51 is built from
multiple sources and has a classes more similar to Mo-
ments in Time (e.g. "eating", "laughing", "pouring", etc.).
The results on Something-Something show that pretraining
on Moments in Time improves performance on a dataset
designed for learning action concepts (e.g. picking something
up). Additionally, the fact that each dataset has videos which
are consistently longer than 3 seconds (signiﬁcantly so for
HMDB51) suggests that the 3 second length of the videos in
the Moments in Time dataset does not hinder performance
when applied to datasets with much longer videos.
5
CONCLUSION
We present the Moments in Time Dataset, a large-scale
collection of three second videos covering a wide range of
dynamic events involving different agents (people, animals,
objects, and natural phenomena). We report results of several
baseline models addressing separately, and jointly, three
modalities: spatial, temporal and auditory. This dataset
presents a difﬁcult task for the ﬁeld of computer vision as the
labels correspond to different levels of abstraction (a verb like
"falling" can apply to many different agents and scenarios
and involve objects and scenes of different categories, see
Figure 1). It will serve as a new challenge to develop models
that can appropriately scale to the level of complexity and
abstract reasoning needed to process each video.
Acknowledgements: This work was supported by the
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, the Intelligence Advanced Re-
search Projects Activity (IARPA) via Department of Interior
/ Interior Business Center (DOI/IBC) contract number
D17PC00341 and the Toyota Research Institute / MIT CSAIL
Joint Research Center.
