Dominion
A constraint solver generator
Lars Kotthoff

University of St Andrews
Abstract This paper proposes a design for a system to generate con-
straint solvers that are specialised for speciﬁc problem models. It de-
scribes the design in detail and gives preliminary experimental results
showing the feasibility and eﬀectiveness of the approach.
1
Introduction
Currently, applying constraint technology to a large, complex problem requires
signiﬁcant manual tuning by an expert. Such experts are rare. The central aim
of this project is to improve the scalability of constraint technology, while sim-
ultaneously removing its reliance on manual tuning by an expert. We propose
a novel, elegant means to achieve this – a constraint solver synthesiser, which
generates a constraint solver specialised to a given problem. Constraints research
has mostly focused on the incremental improvement of general-purpose solvers so
far. The closest point of comparison is currently the G12 project [1], which aims
to combine existing general constraint solvers and solvers from related ﬁelds into
a hybrid. There are previous eﬀorts at generating specialised constraint solvers
in the literature, e.g. [2]; we aim to use state-of-the-art constraint solver techno-
logy employing a broad range of diﬀerent techniques. Synthesising a constraint
solver has two key beneﬁts. First, it will enable a ﬁne-grained optimisation not
possible for a general solver, allowing the solving of much larger, more diﬃcult
problems. Second, it will open up many new research possibilities. There are
many techniques in the literature that, although eﬀective in a limited number
of cases, are not suitable for general use. Hence, they are omitted from current
general solvers and remain relatively undeveloped. Among these are for example
conﬂict recording [3], backjumping [4], singleton arc consistency [5], and neigh-
bourhood inverse consistency [6]. The synthesiser will select such techniques as
they are appropriate for an input problem. Additionally, it can also vary basic
design decisions, which can have a signiﬁcant impact on performance [7].
The system we are proposing in this paper, Dominion, implements a design
that is capable of achieving said goals eﬀectively and eﬃciently. The design
decisions we have made are based on our experience with Minion [9] and other
constraint programming systems.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In the next section, we
describe the design of Dominion and which challenges it addresses in particular.
We then present the current partial implementation of the proposed system and
give experimental results obtained with it. We conclude by proposing directions
for future work.
arXiv:1002.0136v1  [cs.AI]  31 Jan 2010

Analyser
Solver
speciﬁcation
Generator
Specialised
solver
problem model
Solution
Figure 1. Components and ﬂow of information in Dominion. The part above
the dashed line is the actual Dominion system. The dotted arrow from the prob-
lem model to the specialised solver designates that either the model is encoded
entirely in the solver such that no further information is required to solve the
problem, or the solver requires further input such as problem parameters.
2
Design of a synthesiser for specialised constraint solvers
The design of Dominion distinguishes two main parts. The analyser analyses
the problem model and produces a solver speciﬁcation that describes what com-
ponents the specialised solver needs to have and which algorithms and data
structures to use. The generator takes the solver speciﬁcation and generates a
solver that conforms to it. The ﬂow of information is illustrated in Figure 1.
Both the analyser and the generator optimise the solver. While the analyser
performs the high-level optimisations that depend on the structure of the prob-
lem model, the generator performs low-level optimisations which depend on the
implementation of the solver. Those two parts are independent and linked by the
solver speciﬁcation, which is completely agnostic of the format of the problem
model and the implementation of the specialised solver. There can be diﬀerent
front ends for both the analyser and the generator to handle problems speciﬁed
in a variety of formats and specialise solvers in a number of diﬀerent ways, e.g.
based on existing building blocks or synthesised from scratch.
2.1
The analyser
The analyser operates on the model of a constraint problem class or instance. It
determines the constraints, variables, and associated domains required to solve
the problem and reasons about the algorithms and data structures the specialised
solver should use. It makes high-level design decisions, such as whether to use
trailing or copying for backtracking memory. It also decides what propagation
algorithms to use for speciﬁc constraints and what level of consistency to enforce.
The output of the analyser is a solver speciﬁcation that describes all the
design decisions made. It does not necessarily ﬁx all design decisions – it may
use default values – if the analyser is unable to specialise a particular part of the
solver for a particular problem model.

In general terms, the requirements for the solver speciﬁcation are that it
(a) describes a solver which is able to ﬁnd solutions to the analysed problem
model and (b) describes optimisations which will make this solver perform better
than a general solver.
The notion of better performance includes run time as well as other resources
such as memory. It is furthermore possible to optimise with respect to a partic-
ular resource; for example a solver which uses less memory at the expense of run
time for embedded systems with little memory can be speciﬁed.
The solver speciﬁcation may include a representation of the original problem
model such that a specialised solver which encodes the problem can be produced
– the generated solver does not require any input when run or only values for the
parameters of a problem class. It may furthermore modify the original model in
a limited way; for example split variables which were deﬁned as one type into
several new types. It does not, however, optimise it like for example Tailor [8].
The analyser may read a partial solver speciﬁcation along with the model of
the problem to be analysed to still allow ﬁne-tuning by human experts while not
requiring it. This also allows for running the analyser incrementally, reﬁning the
solver speciﬁcation based on analysis and decisions made in earlier steps.
The analyser creates a constraint optimisation model of the problem of spe-
cialising a constraint solver. The decision variables are the design decisions to
be made and the values in their domains are the options which are available
for their implementation. The constraints encode which parts are required to
solve the problem and how they interact. For example, the constraints could
require the presence of an integer variable type and an equals constraint which
is able to handle integer variables. A solution to this constraint problem is a
solver speciﬁcation that describes a solver which is able to solve the problem
described in the original model. The weight attached to each solution describes
the performance of the specialised solver and could be based on static meas-
ures of performance as well as dynamic ones; e.g. predeﬁned numbers describing
the performance of a speciﬁc algorithm and experimental results from probing
a speciﬁc implementation.
This metamodel enables the use of constraint programming techniques for
generating the specialised solver and ensures that a solver speciﬁcation can be
created eﬃciently even for large metamodels.
The result of running the analyser phase of the system is a solver speciﬁcation
which speciﬁes a solver tailored to the analysed problem model.
2.2
The generator
The generator reads the solver speciﬁcation produced by the analyser and con-
structs a specialised constraint solver accordingly. It may modify an existing
solver, or synthesise one from scratch. The generated solver has to conform to
the solver speciﬁcation, but beyond that, no restrictions are imposed. In par-
ticular, the generator does not guarantee that the generated specialised solver

will have better performance than a general solver, or indeed be able to solve
constraint problems at all – this is encoded in the solver speciﬁcation.
In addition to the high-level design decisions ﬁxed in the solver speciﬁcation,
the generator can perform low-level optimisations which are speciﬁc to the im-
plementation of the specialised solver. It could for example decide to represent
domains with a data type of smaller range than the default one to save space.
The scope of the generator is not limited to generating the source code which
implements the specialised solver, but also includes the system to build it.
The result of running the generator phase of the system is a specialised solver
which conforms to the solver speciﬁcation.
3
Preliminary implementation and experimental results
We have started implementing the design proposed above in a system which
operates on top of Minion [9]. The analyser reads Minion input ﬁles and writes a
solver speciﬁcation which describes the constraints and the variable types which
are required to solve the problem. It does not currently create a metamodel of
the problem. The generator modiﬁes Minion to support only those constraints
and variable types. It furthermore does some additional low-level optimisations
by removing infrastructure code which is not required for the specialised solver.
The current implementation of Dominion sits between the existing Tailor and
Minion projects – it takes Minion problem ﬁles, which may have been generated
by Tailor, as input, and generates a specialised Minion solver.
The generated solver is specialised for models of problem instances from the
problem class the analysed instance belongs to. The models have to be the same
with respect to the constraints and variable types used.
Experimental results for models from four diﬀerent problem classes are shown
in Figure 2. The graph only compares the CPU time Minion and the specialised
solver took to solve the problem; it does not take into account the overhead of
running Dominion – analysing the problem model, generating the solver, and
compiling it, which was in the order of a few minutes for all of the benchmarks.
The problem classes Balanced Incomplete Block Design, Golomb Ruler, n-
Queens, and Social Golfers were chosen because they use a range of diﬀerent
constraints and variable types. Hence the optimisations Dominion can perform
are diﬀerent for each of these problem classes. This is reﬂected in the experi-
mental results by diﬀerent performance improvements for diﬀerent classes.
Figure 2 illustrates two key points. The ﬁrst point is that even a quite basic
implementation of Dominion which does only a few optimisations can yield sig-
niﬁcant performance improvements over standard Minion. The second point is
that the performance improvement does not only depend on the problem class,
but also on the instance, even if no additional optimisations beyond the class
level were performed. For both the Balanced Incomplete Block Design and the
Social Golfers problem classes the largest instances yield signiﬁcantly higher
improvements than smaller ones.

7,3,40
7,3,50
7,3,60
7,3,70
7,3,30
10
11
12
13
20
22
24
26 27
28
29
2,10,4
2,6,4
2,7,4
2,8,4
2,9,4
G
G
G
G
G
1
10
100
1000
10000
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
CPU time [seconds]
CPU time of the specialised solver relative to Minion
G BIBD
(v,k,lambda)
Golomb Ruler
(ticks)
n−Queens
(queens)
Social Golfers
(weeks,groups,players)
Figure 2. Preliminary experimental results for models of instances of four prob-
lem classes. The x axis shows the time standard Minion took to solve the respect-
ive instance. The labels of the data points show the parameters of the problem
instance, which are given in parentheses in the legend. The times were obtained
using a development version of Minion which corresponds to release 0.8.1 and
Dominion-generated specialised solvers based on the same version of Minion.
Symbols below the solid line designate problem instances where the Dominion-
generated solver was faster than Minion. The points above the line are not
statistically signiﬁcant; they are random noise. The dashed line designates the
median for all problem instances.
At this stage of the implementation, our aim is to show that a specialised
solver can perform better than a general one. We believe that Figure 2 conclus-
ively shows that. As the problem models become larger and take longer to solve,
the improvement in terms of absolute run time diﬀerence becomes larger as well.
Hence the more or less constant overhead of running Dominion is amortised for
larger and more diﬃcult problem models, which are our main focus. Generating
a specialised solver for problem classes and instances is always going to entail

a certain overhead, making the approach infeasible for small and quick-to-solve
problems.
4
Conclusion and future work
We have described the design of Dominion, a solver generator, and demonstrated
its feasibility by providing a preliminary implementation. We have furthermore
demonstrated the feasibility and eﬀectiveness of the general approach of gener-
ating specialised constraint solvers for problem models by running experiments
with Minion and Dominion-generated solvers and obtaining results which show
signiﬁcant performance improvements. These results do not take the overhead
of running Dominion into account, but we are conﬁdent that for large problem
models there will be an overall performance improvement despite the overhead.
Based on our experiences with Dominion, we propose that the next step
should be the generation of specialised variable types for the model of a problem
instance. Dominion will extend Minion and create variable types of the sort
“Integer domain ranging from 10 to 22”. This not only allows us to choose
diﬀerent representations for variables based on the domain, but also to simplify
and speed up services provided by the variable, such as checking the bounds of
the domain or checking whether a particular value is in the domain.
The implementation of specialised variable types requires generating solvers
for models of problem instances because the analysed problem model is essen-
tially rewritten. The instance the solver was specialised for will be encoded in it
and no further input will be required to solve the problem. We expect this op-
timisation to provide an additional improvement in performance which is more
consistent across diﬀerent problem classes, i.e. we expect signiﬁcant improve-
ments for all problem models and not just some.
We are also planning on continuing to specify the details of Dominion and
implementing it.
5
