168 
UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
Mix-nets: Factored Mixtures of Gaussians in Bayesian Networks with Mixed 
Continuous And Discrete Variables 
Scott Davies and Andrew Moore 
School of Computer Science 
Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 

Abstract 
Recently developed techniques have made it pos­
sible to quickly learn accurate probability density 
functions from data in low-dimensional continu­
ous spaces. In particular, mixtures of Gaussians 
can be fitted to data very quickly using an ac­
celerated EM algorithm that employs multires­
olution kd-trees (Moore, 1999). In this paper, 
we propose a kind of Bayesian network in which 
low-dimensional mixtures of Gaussians over dif­
ferent subsets of the domain's variables are com­
bined into a coherent joint probability model over 
the entire domain. The network is also capable 
of modeling complex dependencies between dis­
crete variables and continuous variables without 
requiring discretization of the continuous vari­
ables. We present efficient heuristic algorithms 
for automatically learning these networks from 
data, and perform comparative experiments illus­
trating how well these networks model real sci­
entific data and synthetic data. We also briefly 
discuss some possible improvements to the net­
works, as well as possible applications. 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
Bayesian networks are a popular method for represent­
ing joint probability distributions over many variables. A 
Bayesian network contains a directed acyclic graph G with 
one vertex Vi in the graph for each variable Xi in the do­
main. The directed edges in the graph specify a set of inde­
pendence relationships between the variables. Define rfi to 
be the set of variables whose nodes in the graph are "par­
ents" of v;;. The set of independence relationships spec­
ified by G is then as follows: given the values of rfi but 
no other information, xi is conditionally independent of 
all variables corresponding to nodes that are not Vi's de­
scendants in the graph. These independence relationships 
allows us to decompose the joint probability distribution 
-
-
N 
-
P(X) as P(X) = f1i=l P(Xiiiii), where N is the num-
ber of variables in the domain. Thus, if in addition to G 
we also specify P(Xilrli) for every variable Xi, then we 
have specified a valid probability distribution P(X) over 
the entire domain. 
Bayesian networks are most commonly used in situations 
where all the variables are discrete; if continuous variables 
are modeled at all, they are typically assumed to follow 
simple parametric distributions such as Gaussians. Some 
researchers have recently investigated the use of complex 
continuous distributions within Bayesian networks; for ex­
ample, weighted sums of Gaussians have been used to ap­
proximate conditional probability density functions (Driver 
and Morrell, 1995). Such complex distributions over con­
tinuous variables are usually quite computationally expen­
sive to learn. This expense may not be too problematic 
if an appropriate Bayesian network structure is known be­
forehand. On the other hand, if the dependencies between 
variables are not known a priori and the structure must be 
learned from data, then the number of conditional distri­
butions that must be learned and tested while a structure­
learning algorithm searches for a good network can become 
unmanageably large. 
However, very fast algorithms for learning complex joint 
probability densities over small sets of continuous variables 
have recently been developed (Moore, 1999). This pa­
per investigates how these algorithms can be used to learn 
Bayesian networks over many variables, each of which can 
be either continuous or discrete. 
2 
MIX-NETS 
Suppose we have a very fast, black-box algorithm A geared 
not towards finding accurate conditional models of the form 
Pi(Xilrli), but rather towards finding accurate joint prob­
ability models Pi(§;) over subsets of variables 5;, such 
as Pi(Xi, rfi). Furthermore, suppose it is only capable of 
generating joint models for relatively small subsets of the 
variables, and that the models returned for different sub-

UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
169 
sets of variables are not necessarily consistent. Can we still 
combine many different models generated by A into a valid 
probability distribution over the entire space? 
Fortunately, the answer is yes, as long as the models re­
turned by A can be marginalized exactly. If for any given 
Pi(Xi, Ifi) we can compute a marginal distribution Pi(ITi) 
that is consistent with it, the!! we can empl?,Y Pi asì con­
ditional distribution Pi(Xiiiii) = Pi(Xi,IIi)/Pi(IIi). In 
this case, given a directed acyclic graph G specifying a 
Bayesian network structure over N variables, we can sim­
ply use A to acquire N models Pi(Xi, Ifi), marginalize 
these models, and string them together to form a distribu­
tion over the entire space: 
N 
P(X) = II (Pi(Xi, Ifi)/ Pi(ITi)) 
i=l 
Even though the marginals of different Pi's may be incon­
sistent with each other, the Pi's are only used conditionally, 
and in a manner that prevents these inconsistencies from 
actually causing the overall model to become inconsistent. 
Of course, the fact that there are inconsistencies at all -
suppressed or not - means that there is a certain amount 
of redundancy in the overall model. However, if allowing 
such redundancy lets us employ a particularly fast and ef­
fective model-learning algorithm A, it may be worth it. 
Joint models over subsets of variables have been similarly 
conditionalized in previous research in order to use them 
within Bayesian networks. For example, the conditional 
distribution of each variable in the network given its par­
ents can be modeled by conditionalizing another "embed­
ded" Bayesian network that specifies the joint between the 
variable and its parents (Heckerman and Meek, 1997a). 
(Some theoretical issues concerning the interdependence 
of parameters in such models appear in (Heckerman and 
Meek, 1997a) and (Heckerman and Meek, 1997b).) Joint 
distributions formed by convolving a Gaussian kernel func­
tion with each of the datapoints have also been condition­
alized for use in Bayesian networks over continuous vari­
ables (Hofmann and Tresp, 1995). 
2.1 
HANDLING CONTINUOUS VARIABLES 
Suppose for the moment that X contains only continuous 
values. What sorts of models might we want A to return? 
One powerful type of model for representing probability 
density functions over small sets of variables is a Gaussian 
mixture model (see e.g. (Duda and Hart, 1973)). Let sj 
represent the values that the jth datapoint in the dataset D 
assigns to a variable set of interest §. In a Gaussian mix­
ture model over S, we assume that the data are generated 
independently through the following process: for each sj in 
tum, nature begins by randomly picking a class, Ck. from 
a discrete set of classes c1, ... , CM. Then nature draws sj 
from a multidimensional Gaussian whose mean vector 1-'·k 
and covariance matrix I:k depend on the class. This pro-
duces a distribution of the following mathematical form: 
where ak represents the probability of a point coming from 
the kth class, and if denotes the entire set of the mixture's 
parameters (the a's, f.L's and I:'s). It is possible to model 
any continuous probability distribution with arbitrary accu­
racy by using a mixture with a sufficiently large M. 
Given a Gaussian mixture model Pi(Xi, Ifi), it is easy to 
compute the marginalization Pi(ITi): the marginal mixture 
has the same number of Gaussians as the original mix­
ture, with the same a's. The means and covariances of the 
marginal mixture are simply the means and covariances of 
the original mixture with all elements corresponding to the 
variable Xi removed. Thus, Gaussian mixture models are 
suitable for combining into global joint probability density 
functions using the methodology described in section 2, as­
suming all variables in the domain are continuous. This is 
the class of models we employ for continuous variables in 
this paper, although many other classes may be used in an 
analogous fashion. 
The functional form of the conditional distribution we use 
is similar to that employed in previous research by con­
ditionalizing a joint distribution formed by convolving a 
Gaussian kernel function with all the datapoints (Hofmann 
and Tresp, 1995). The differences are that our distribu­
tions use fewer Gaussians, but these Gaussians have vary­
ing weights and varying non-diagonal covariance matrices. 
The use of fewer Gaussians makes our method more suit­
able for some applications such as compression, and may 
speed up inference. Our method may also yield more ac­
curate models in many situations, but we have yet to verify 
this experimentally. 
2.1.1 
Learning Gaussian Mixtures From Data 
The EM algorithm is a popular method for learning mixture 
models from data (see, e.g., (Dempster et a!., 1977)). The 
algorithm is an iterative algorithm with two steps per itera­
tion. The Expectation or "E" step calculates the distribution 
over the unobserved mixture component variables, using 
the current estimates for the model's parameters. The Max­
imization or "M" step then re-estimates the model's param­
eters to maximize the likelihood of both the observed data 
and the unobserved mixture component variables, assum­
ing the distribution over mixture components calculated in 
the previous "E" step is correct. Each iteration of the EM 
algorithm increases the likelihood of the observed data or 
leaves it unchanged; if it leaves it unchanged, this usually 
indicates that the likelihood is at a local maximum. Un­
fortunately, each iteration of the basic algorithm described 
above is slow, since it requires a entire pass through the 
dataset. Instead, we use an accelerated EM algorithm in 

170 
UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
which multiresolution kd-trees (Moore et al., 1997) are 
used to dramatically reduce the computational cost of each 
iteration (Moore, 1999). We refer the interested reader to 
this previous paper (Moore, 1999) for details. 
An important remaining issue is how to choose the appro­
priate number of Gaussians, M, for the mixture. If we re­
strict ourselves to too few Gaussians, we will fail to model 
the data accurately; on the other hand, if we allow ourselves 
too many, then we may "overfit" the data and our model 
may generalize poorly. A popular way of dealing with this 
tradeoff is to choose the model maximizing a scoring func­
tion that includes penalty terms related to the number of 
parameters in the model. We employ the Bayesian Infor­
mation Criterion (Schwarz, 1978), or BIC, to choose be­
tween mixtures with different numbers of Gaussians. The 
BIC score for a probability model P' (S) is as follows: 
BIC(P') = logP'(Ds)- lo;RIP'I 
where D s is the dataset D restricted to the variables of 
interest S, R is the number of datapoints in the dataset, and 
IP'I is the number of parameters in P'. 
Rather than re-running the EM algorithm to convergence 
for many different choices of M and choosing the resulting 
mixture that maximizes the BIC score, we use a heuristic 
algorithm that starts with a small number of Gaussians and 
stochastically tries adding or deleting Gaussians as the EM 
algorithm progresses. The details of this algorithm are de­
scribed in a separate paper (Sand and Moore, 2000). 
2.2 
HANDLING DISCRETE VARIABLES 
Suppose now that a set of variables  we wish to model 
includes discrete variables as well as continuous variables. 
Let Qi be the discrete variables in . and Ci the contin­
uous variables in - One simple model for Pi(Qi, Ci) is 
a lookup table with an entry for each possible set qi of as­
signments to Qi. The entry in the table corresponding to a 
particular rji contains two things: the marginal probability 
Pi(qi), and a Gaussian mixture modeling the conditional 
distribution pi ( ci I rii). Let us refer to tables of this form as 
mixture tables. We obtain the mixture table's estimate for 
each Pi ( qi) directly from the data: it is simply the fraction 
of the records in the dataset that assigns the values qi to Qi. 
Given an algorithm A for learning Gaussian mixtures from 
continuous data, we use it to generate each conditional dis­
tribution Pi(Cilqi) in the mixture table by calling it with 
the subset of the dataset D that is consistent with the val­
ues specified by qi. 
Suppose now that we are given a network structure over 
the entire set of variables, and for each variable Xi we are 
given a mixture table for Pi() = Pi(Xi, :rfi). We must 
now calculate new mixture tables for the marginal distri­
butions Pi(:rfi) so that we can use them for the conditional 
distributions pi (XiiTii) = pi (Xi, :rfi) I pi (Tii). Let ci rep­
resent the continuous variables in {Xi} U :rfi; Qi represent 
the discrete variables in {xi} u :rfi; c1. represent the con­
tinuous variables in :rfi; and Q7I, represent the discrete vari­
ables in :rfi. (Either Q7I, = Qi or c1. = Ci, depending on 
whether xi is continuous or discrete.) 
If Xi is continuous, then the marginalized mixture table 
for Pi (:rfi) has the same number of entries as the original 
table for Pi(Xi,:rfi), and the estimates for P(Qi) in the 
marginalized table are the same as in the original table. For 
each combination of assignments to Qi, we marginalize the 
appropriate Gaussian mixture Pi(CiiQi) = Pi(CdQ7IJ in 
the original table to a new mixture Pi ( C1, I Q1, ) , and use 
this new mixture in the corresponding spot in the marginal­
ized table. 
If Xi is discrete, then for each combination of values 
for Q7I, we combine several different Gaussian mixtures 
for various Pi(C1, IQi)'s into a new Gaussian mixture 
for Pi(C1, IQ7IJ. 
First, the values of Pi(Q1.) in the 
marginalized table are computed from the original table as 
Pi(Q7IJ = Lx, Pi(Xi, Q7IJ. Pi(XiiQ2.) is then calcu­
lated as Pi(Xi, Q7IJ/ Pi(Q7IJ. Finally, we combine the 
Gaussian mixtures corresponding to different values of Xi 
according to the relationship 
Pi(c1. IQ7IJ = L Pi(XiiQ7IJPi(c1. IQi)· 
x, 
We have now described the steps necessary to use mixture 
tables in order to parameterize Bayesian networks over do­
mains with both discrete and continuous variables. Note 
that mixture tables are not particularly well-suited for deal­
ing with discrete variables that can take on many possible 
values, or for scenarios involving many dependent discrete 
variables - in such situations, the continuous data will be 
shattered into many separate Gaussian mixtures, each of 
which will have little support. Better ways of dealing with 
discrete variables are undoubtedly possible, but we leave 
them for future research (see section 6.3). 
3 
LEARNING MIX-NET STRUCTURES 
Given a Bayesian network structure over a domain with 
both discrete and continuous variables, we now know how 
to learn mixture tables describing the joint probability of 
each variable and its parent variables, and how to marginal­
ize these mixture tables to obtain the conditional distribu­
tions needed to compute a coherent probability function 
over the entire domain. But what if we don't know a pri­
ori what dependencies exist between the variables in the 
domain - can we learn these dependencies automatically 
and find the best Bayesian network structure on our own, 
or at least find a "good" network structure? 

UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
171 
In general, finding the optimal Bayesian network struc­
ture with which to model a given dataset is NP­
complete (Chickering, 1996), even when all the data is 
discrete and there are no missing values or hidden vari­
ables. A popular heuristic approach to finding networks 
that model discrete data well is to hillclimb over network 
structures, using a scoring function such as the BIC as 
the criterion to maximize. (See, e.g., (Heckerman et a!., 
1995).) Unfortunately, hillclimbing usually requires scor­
ing a very large number of networks. While our algorithm 
for learning Gaussian mixtures from data is comparatively 
fast for the complex task it performs, it is still too expen­
sive to re-run on the hundreds of thousands of different 
variable subsets that would be necessary to parameterize 
all the networks tested over an extensive hillclimbing run. 
(Such a hillclimbing algorithm has previously been used 
to find Bayesian networks suitable for modeling continu­
ous data with complex distributions (Hofmann and Tresp, 
1995), but in practice this method is restricted to datasets 
with relatively small numbers of variables and datapoints.) 
However, there are other heuristic algorithms that often find 
networks very close in quality to those found by hillclimb­
ing but with much less computation. A frequently used 
class of algorithms involves measuring all pairwise inter­
actions between the variables, and then constructing a net­
work that models the strongest of these pairwise interac­
tions (e.g. (Chow and Liu, 1968; Sahami, 1996; Friedman 
et a!., 1999)). We use such an algorithm in this paper to au­
tomatically learn the structures of our Bayesian networks. 
In order to measure the pairwise interactions between the 
variables, we start with an empty Bayesian network B, in 
which there no arcs - i.e., in which all variables are as­
sumed to be independent. We use our mixture-learning al­
gorithm to calculate B, 's parameters, and then calculate 
B, 's BIC score. (The number of parameters in the network 
is computed as the sum of the parameters in each network 
node, where the parameters of a node for variable X; are 
the parameters of P;(X;, II).) We then calculate the BIC 
score of every possible Bayesian network containing ex­
actly one arc. With N variables, there are O(N2) such 
networks. Let B;j denote the network with a single arc 
from X; to Xi. Note that to compute the BIC score of B;j, 
we need not recompute the mixture tables for any variable 
other than Xj, since the others can simply be copied from 
B,. Now, define I(X;, Xi), the "importance" of the depen­
dency between variable X; and Xj, as follows: 
I(X;, Xi)= BIC(B;j)- BIC(B,). 
After computing all the I(X;, Xj)'s, we initialize our cur­
rent working network B to the empty network B., and then 
greedily add arcs to Busing the I(X;, Xj)'s as hints for 
what arcs to try adding next. At any given point in the 
algorithm, the set of variables is split into two mutually ex­
clusive subsets, DONE and PENDING. All variables begin 
• B := B" PENDING:= the set of all variables, DONE:={} 
• While there are still variables-in PENDING: 
-
Consider all pairs of variables Xd and Xp such that Xd is in DONE 
and Xp is in PENDING. Of these, let X:Ja• and x;a• be the 
pair of variables that maximizes I (X d, X P) . Our algorithm selects 
x;a• as the next variable to consider adding arcs to. (Ties are han­
dled arbitrarily, as is the case where DONE is currently empty.) 
-
Let K' = min(K, I DON El). where K is a user-defined pa­
rameter. Let X$, XJ, ... X:f' denote the K' variables in DONE 
with the highest values of !(X%, X;:'a'), in descending order of 
!(X%, x;;a• ). 
-
Fori = 1 to K': 
* 
If x;;a• 
now 
has 
MAX.PARS 
parents 
in 
B, 
or 
if I (X%, X;:' a. ) is less than zero, break out of the for loop 
over i and do not consider adding any more parents to x;a•. 
* 
Let B' be a network identical to B except with an additional 
arc from X& to x;;a•. Call our mixture-learning algorithm to 
update the parameters for X;'"' 's node in B', and compute 
BIC(B'). 
* 
IfBIC(B') > BIC(B),B := B'. 
-
Move X;'"' from PENDING to DONE. 
Figure 1: Our network structure learning algorithm. 
in the PENDING set. Our algorithm proceeds by selecting 
a variable in the PENDING set, adding arcs to that variable 
from other variables in the DONE set, moving the variable 
to the DONE set, and repeating until all variables are in 
DONE. High-level pseudo-code for the algorithm appears 
in Figure 1. 
The algorithm generates O(N2) mixture tables contain­
ing two variables each in order to calculate all the pair­
wise dependency strengths I(X;, Xj ), and then O(N * K) 
more tables containing MAX PARS + 1 or fewer vari­
ables each during the greedy network construction. K is a 
user-defined parameter that determines the maximum num­
ber of potential parents evaluated for each variable during 
the greedy network construction. 
If MAXPARS is set to 1 and I(X;, Xj) is symmetric, then 
our heuristic algorithm reduces to a maximum spanning 
tree algorithm (or to a maximum-weight forest algorithm if 
some of the I's are negative). Out of all possible Bayesian 
networks in which each variable has at most one parent, this 
maximum spanning tree is the Bayesian network Bpt that 
maximizes the scoring function. (This is a trivial general­
ization of the well-known algorithm (Chow and Liu, 1968) 
for the case where the unpenalized log-likelihood is the ob­
jective criteria being maximized.) If MAXPARS is set above 
1, our heuristic algorithm will always model a superset of 
the dependencies in Bpt• and will always find a network 
with at least as high a BIG score as Bpt 's. 
There are a few details that prevent our I(X;, Xi )'s from 
being perfectly symmetric. 
(See (Davies and Moore, 
2000).) However, I is close enough to symmetric that it's 
often worth simply assuming that it is symmetric, since 

172 
UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
this cuts down the number of calls we need to make to 
our mixture-learning algorithm in order to calculate the 
I(X;, Xj)'s by roughly a factor of 2. 
Since learning joint distributions involving real variables 
is expensive, calling our mixture table generator even just 
O(N2) times to measure all of the I(Xi, Xj)'s can take a 
prohibitive amount of time. We note that the I(X;, Xj)'s 
are only used to choose the order in which the algorithm 
selects variables to move from PENDING to DONE, and 
to select which arcs to try adding to the graph. The ac­
tual values of I(X;,Xj) are irrelevant - the only things 
that matter are their ranks and whether they are greater 
than zero. Thus, in order to reduce the expense of com­
puting the I(X;, Xj )'s, we can try computing them on a 
discretized version of the dataset rather than the original 
dataset that includes continuous values. The resulting ranks 
of I(Xi, Xj) will not generally be the same as they would 
if they were computed from the original dataset, but we 
would expect them to be highly correlated in many practi­
cal circumstances. 
Our structure-learning algorithm is similar to the "Limited 
Dependence Bayesian Classifiers" previously employed to 
learn networks for classification (Saharni, 1996), except 
that our networks have no special target variable, and we 
add the potential parents to a given node one at a time to 
ensure that each actually increases the network's score. Al­
ternatively, our learning algorithm can be viewed as a re­
striction of the "Sparse Candidate" algorithm (Friedman 
et al., 1999) in which only one set of candidate parents 
is generated for each node, and in which the search over 
network structures restricted to those candidate parents is 
performed greedily. (We have also previously used a very 
similar algorithm for learning networks with which to com­
press discrete datasets (Davies and Moore, 1999).) 
4 
EXPERIMENTS 
4.1 
ALGORITHMS 
We compare the performance of the network-learning al­
gorithm described above to the performance of four other 
algorithms, each of which is designed to be similar to 
our network-learning algorithm except in one important 
respect. First we describe a few details about how our 
primary network-learning algorithm is used in our experi­
ments, and then we describe the four alternative algorithms. 
The Mix-Net algorithm is our primary network-learning 
algorithm. For our experiments on both datasets, we set 
MAXPARS to 3 and K to 6. When generating any given 
Gaussian mixture, we give our accelerated EM algorithm 
thirty seconds to find the best mixture it can. In order 
to make the most of these thirty-second intervals, we also 
limit our overall training algorithm to using a sample of at 
most I 0,000 datapoints from the training set. Rather than 
computing the I(Xi, Xj )'s with the original dataset, we 
compute them with a version of the dataset in which each 
continuous variable has been discretized to 16 different val­
ues. The boundaries of the 16 bins for each variable's dis­
cretization are chosen so that the numbers of datapoints in 
each bin are approximately equal. 
Mixture tables containing many discrete variables (or a few 
discrete variables each of which can take on many values) 
can severely overfit data, since some combinations of the 
discrete variables may occur rarely in the data. For now, 
we attempt to address this problem by slightly smoothing 
the distributions represented in the tables. (See (Davies and 
Moore, 2000) for details.) 
The Independent Mixtures algorithm is identical to our 
mix-net learning algorithm in almost all respects; the main 
difference is that here the MAXPARS parameter has been 
set to zero, thus forcing all variables to be modeled inde­
pendently. We also give this algorithm more time to learn 
each individual Gaussian mixture, so that it is given a total 
amount of computational time at least as great as that used 
by our mix-net learning algorithm. 
The Trees algorithm is identical to our mix-net algorithm in 
all respects except that the MAXPARS parameter has been 
set to one, and we give it more time to learn each individual 
Gaussian mixture (as we did for the Independent Mixtures 
algorithm). 
The Single-Gaussian algorithm is identical to our pri­
mary network-learning algorithm except for the follow­
ing differences. When learning a given Gaussian mixture 
Pi(
 IQ i), we use only a single multidimensional Gaus­
sian. (Note, however, that some of the marginal distribu­
tions Pi(C1; IQ.) may contain multiple Gaussians when 
the variable marginalized away is discrete.) Since single 
Gaussians are much easier to learn in high-dimensional 
spaces than mixtures are, we allow this single-Gaussian al­
gorithm much more freedom in creating large mixtures. We 
set both MAXPARS and K to the total number of variables 
in the domain minus one. We also allow the algorithm to 
use all datapoints in the training set rather than restrict it to 
a sample of 10,000. Finally, we use the original real-valued 
dataset rather than a discretized version of the dataset when 
computing the I(Xi, Xj)'s. 
The Pseudo-Discrete algorithm is similar to our primary 
network-learning algorithm in that it uses the same sort 
of greedy algorithm to select which arcs to try adding to 
the network. However, the networks this algorithm pro­
duces do not employ Gaussian mixtures. Instead, the dis­
tributions it uses are closely related to the distributions that 
would be modeled by a Bayesian network for a completely 
discretized version of the dataset. For each continuous vari­
able X; in the domain, we break X; 's range into F buckets. 
The boundaries of the buckets are chosen so that the num­
ber of datapoints lying within each bucket is approximately 

UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
173 
equal. The conditional distribution for Xi is modeled with 
a table containing one entry for every combination of its 
parent variables, where each continuous parent variable's 
value is discretized according to the F buckets we have se­
lected for that parent variable. Each entry in the table con­
tains a histogram for xi recording the conditional proba­
bility that xi's value lies within the boundaries of each of 
Xi's F buckets. We then translate the conditional probabil­
ity associated with each bucket into a conditional probabil­
ity density spread uniformly throughout the range of that 
bucket. (Discrete variables are handled in a similar man­
ner, except the translation from conditional probabilities to 
conditional probability densities is not performed.) 
When performing experiments with the Pseudo-Discrete 
network-learning algorithm, we re-run it for several differ­
ent choices of F: 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, and 64. Of the resulting 
networks, we pick the one that maximizes the BIC. When 
the algorithm uses a particular value for F, the I(Xi, Xj ) ' s 
are computed using a version of the dataset that has been 
discretized accordingly, and then arcs are added greedily as 
in our mix-net learning algorithm. The networks produced 
by this algorithm do not have redundant parameters as our 
mix-nets do, as each node contains only a model of its vari­
able's conditional distribution given its parents rather than 
a joint distribution. 
Note that there are better ways of discretizing real vari­
ables in Bayesian networks (e.g. (Kozlov and Koller, 1997; 
Monti and Cooper, 1998a)); the simple discretization al­
gorithm discussed here and currently implemented for our 
experiments is certainly not state-of-the-art. 
4.2 
DATASETS AND RESULTS 
We tested the previously described algorithms on two dif­
ferent datasets taken from real scientific experiments. The 
"Bio" dataset contains data from a high-throughput biolog­
ical cell assay. There are 12,671 records and 31 variables. 
26 of the variables are continuous; the other five are dis­
crete. Each discrete variable can take on either two or three 
different possible values. The "Astro" dataset contains data 
taken from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey, an extensive as­
tronomical survey currently in progress. This dataset con­
tains 111,456 records and 68 variables. 65 of the variables 
are continuous; the other three are discrete, with arities 
ranging from three to 81. All continuous values are scaled 
to lie within [0 ,  I] after a small amount of uniform noise 
is added to them to prevent potential problems caused by 
point distributions or deterministic relationships in the data. 
For each dataset and each algorithm, we performed ten­
fold cross-validation, and recorded the log-likelihoods of 
the test sets given the resulting models. Figure 2 shows the 
mean log-likelihoods of the test sets according to models 
generated by our five network-learning algorithms, as well 
as the standard deviation of the means. (Note that the log-
likelihoods are positive since most of the variables are con­
tinuous and bounded within [0 ,  1], which implies that the 
models usually assign probability densities greater than one 
to regions of the space containing most of the datapoints. 
The probability distributions modeled by the networks are 
properly normalized, however.) 
On the Bio dataset, our primary mix-net learner achieved 
significantly higher log-likelihood scores than the other 
four model learners. The fact that it significantly outper­
formed the independent mixture algorithm and the tree­
learning algorithm indicates that it is effectively utiliz­
ing relationships between variables, and that it includes 
useful relationships more complex than mere pairwise 
dependencies. The fact that its networks outperformed 
the pseudo-discrete networks and the single-Gaussian net­
works indicates that the Gaussian mixture models used for 
the network nodes' parameterizations helped the networks 
achieve much better prediction than possible with simpler 
parameterizations. Our primary mix-net learning algorithm 
took about an hour and a half of CPU time on a 400 MHz 
Pentium II to generate its model for each of the ten cross­
validation splits for this dataset. 
The mix-net learner similarly outperformed the other al­
gorithms on the Astro dataset. The algorithm took about 
three hours of CPU time to generate its model for each of 
the cross-validation splits for this dataset. 
To verify that the mix-net's performance gain over the 
pseudo-discrete network's was due to its use of Gaussian 
mixtures rather than piecewise constant densities, we con­
structed a synthetic dataset from the Bio dataset. All real 
values in the original dataset were discretized in a man­
ner identical to the manner in which the pseudo-discrete 
networks discretized them, with 16 buckets per variable. 
(Out of the many different numbers of buckets we tried 
with the pseudo-discrete networks, 16 was the number that 
worked best on the Bio dataset.) Each discretized value 
was then translated back into a real value by sampling it 
uniformly from the corresponding bucket's range. The re­
sulting synthetic dataset is similar in many respects to the 
original dataset, but its probability densities are now com­
posed of piecewise constant axis-aligned hyperboxes -
precisely the kind of distributions that the pseudo-discrete 
networks model. The test-set performance of the pseudo­
discrete networks on this synthetic dataset is the same as 
their test-set performance on the original dataset (59100+/-
100). As one would expect, the test-set performance of 
mix-nets on this synthetic task is indeed worse (57600+/-
200). However, it is not dramatically worse. 
As a second synthetic task, we generated 12,671 samples 
from the network learned by the Independent Mixtures al­
gorithm during one of it cross-validation runs on the Bio 
dataset. The test-set log-likelihood of the models learned 
by the Independent Mixtures algorithm on this dataset was 

174 
UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
Bio 
Astro 
Independent Mixtures 
33300 +1- 500 
2746000 +1- 5000 
Single-Gaussian Mixtures 
65700 +1- 200 
2436000 +1- 5000 
Pseudo-Discrete 
59100 +1- 100 
3010000 +1- 1000 
Tree 
74600 +1- 300 
3280000 +1- 8000 
Mix-Net 
80900 +1- 300 
3329000 +1- 5000 
Figure 2: Mean log-likelihoods (and the standard deviations of the means) of test sets in a 10-fold cross-validation. 
32580 +1- 60, while our primary mix-net learning algorithm 
scored a slightly worse 31960 +1- 80. However, the net­
works learned by the mix-net learning algorithm did not 
actually model any spurious dependencies between vari­
ables. The networks learned by the Independent Mixtures 
algorithm were better only because the Independent Mix­
tures algorithm was given more time to learn each of its 
Gaussian mixtures. 
5 
POSSIBLE APPLICATIONS 
Space restrictions prevent us from going into much de­
tail on possible applications; for a more extended discus­
sion, see the tech report version of this paper (Davies and 
Moore, 2000). The networks discussed here are trivially 
applicable to anomaly detection tasks in which all variables 
are observed. They may be well-suited to compressing 
datasets containing both discrete and real values (with the 
real values compressed lossily). It is also easy to modify 
our greedy network-learning algorithm to learn networks 
for classification tasks; the resulting networks would be 
similar in structure to those generated by previous algo­
rithms (Friedman et a!., 1997, 1998; Sahami, 1996), but 
with more flexible parameterizations. 
While it is possible to perform exact inference in some 
kinds of networks modeling continuous values (e.g. (Driver 
and Morrell, 1995; Alag, 1996)), general-purpose exact 
inference in arbitrarily-structured mix-nets with continu­
ous variables may not be possible. However, inference in 
these networks can be performed via stochastic sampling 
methods (such as importance sampling or Gibbs sampling). 
Other approximate inference methods such as variational 
inference or discretization-based inference are also worth 
investigating. 
6 
CONCLUSIONS I FUTURE RESEARCH 
We have described a practical method for learning 
Bayesian networks capable of modeling complex inter­
actions between many continuous and discrete variables, 
and have provided experimental results showing that the 
method is both feasible and effective on scientific data with 
dozens of variables. The networks learned by this algo­
rithm and related algorithms show considerable potential 
for many important applications. However, there are many 
ways in which our method can be improved upon. We now 
briefly discuss a few of the more obvious possibilities for 
improvement. 
6.1 
VARIABLE GROUPING 
The mixture tables in our network include a certain degree 
of redundancy, since the mixture table for each variable 
models the joint probability of that variable with its parents 
rather than just the conditional probability of that variable 
given its parents. One possible approach for reducing the 
amount of redundancy in the network is to allow each node 
to represent a group of variables, where each variable must 
be represented in exactly one group. See the technical re­
port version of this paper (Davies and Moore, 2000) for a 
slightly more extensive discussion. 
6.2 
ALTERNATIVE STRUCTURE-LEARNERS 
So far we have only developed and experimented with vari­
ations of one particular network structure-learning algo­
rithm. There is a wide variety of structure-learning algo­
rithms for discrete Bayesian networks (see, e.g., (Cooper 
and Herskovits, 1992; Lam and Bacchus, 1994; Heckerman 
et a!., 1995; Friedman et a!., 1999)), many of which could 
be employed when learning mix-nets. The quicker and 
dirtier of these algorithms might be applicable directly to 
learning mix-net structures. The more time-consuming al­
gorithms such as hill climbing can be used to learn Bayesian 
networks on discretized versions of the datasets; the result­
ing networks may then be used as hints for which sets of 
dependencies might be worth trying in a mix-net. Such ap­
proaches have previously been shown to work well on real 
datasets (Monti and Cooper, 1998b). 
6.3 
ALTERNATIVE PARAMETER-LEARNERS 
While the accelerated EM algorithm we use to learn Gaus­
sian mixtures is fast and accurate for low-dimensional mix­
tures, its effectiveness decreases dramatically as the num­
ber of variables in the mixture increases. 
This is the 
primary reason we have not yet attempted to learn mix­
ture networks with more than four variables per mixture. 
Further research is currently being conducted on alternate 
data structures and algorithms which with to accelerate 
EM in the hopes that they will scale more gracefully to 

UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
175 
higher dimensions (Moore, 2000). 
In the meantime, it 
would be trivial to allow the use of some high-dimensional 
single-Gaussian mixtures within mix-nets as we do for the 
"competing" Single-Gaussian algorithm described in Sec­
tion 4.1. Other methods for accelerating EM have also 
been developed in the past (e.g., (Neal and Hinton, 1998; 
Bradley et a!., 1998)), some of which might be used in our 
Bayesian network-learning algorithm instead of or in ad­
dition to the accelerated EM algorithm employed in this 
paper. 
Our current method of handling discrete variables does not 
deal well with discrete variables that can take on many pos­
sible values, or with combinations involving many discrete 
variables. Better methods of dealing with these situations 
are also grounds for further research. One approach would 
be to use mixture models in which the hidden class vari­
able determining which Gaussian each datapoint's contin­
uous values come from also determines distributions over 
the datapoint's discrete values, where each discrete value 
is assumed to be conditionally independent of the others 
given the class variable. Such an approach has been used 
previously in AutoClass (Cheeseman and Stutz, 1996). The 
accelerated EM algorithm exploited in this paper would 
have to be generalized to handle this class of models, how­
ever. Another approach would be to use decision trees over 
the discrete variables rather than full lookup tables, a tech­
nique previously explored for Bayesian networks over dis­
crete domains (Friedman and Goldszmidt, 1996). In pre­
vious work (Koller et a!., 1999) employing representations 
closely related to the those employed in this paper, a com­
bination of these two approaches has been explored briefly 
in order to represent potentials in junction trees; further ex­
ploration along these lines may prove fruitful. 
The Gaussian mixture learning algorithm we currently em­
ploy attempts to find a mixture maximizing the joint like­
lihood of all the variables in the mixture rather than a con­
ditional likelihood. Since the mixtures are actually used 
to compute conditional probabilities, some of their repre­
sentational power may be used inefficiently. The EM al­
gorithm has recently been generalized to learn joint dis­
tributions specifically optimized for being used condition­
ally (Jebara and Pentland, 1999). If this modified EM al­
gorithm can be accelerated in a manner similar to our cur­
rent accelerated EM algorithm, it may result in significantly 
more accurate networks. 
Finally, further comparisons with alternative methods for 
modeling distributions over continuous variables (such as 
the Gaussian kernel functions used in (Hofmann and Tresp, 
1995)) are warranted.
