Representative Selection in Non Metric Datasets
Elad Liebman1, Benny Chor2, and Peter Stone1
1 Computer Science Department
The University of Texas at Austin
2317 Speedway, Stop D9500
Austin, TX 78712
2 School of Computer Science
Tel Aviv University
P.O.B. 39040, Ramat Aviv
Tel Aviv 69978
Abstract. This paper considers the problem of representative selection:
choosing a subset of data points from a dataset that best represents
its overall set of elements. This subset needs to inherently reﬂect the
type of information contained in the entire set, while minimizing redun-
dancy. For such purposes, clustering may seem like a natural approach.
However, existing clustering methods are not ideally suited for repre-
sentative selection, especially when dealing with non-metric data, where
only a pairwise similarity measure exists. In this paper we propose δ-
medoids, a novel approach that can be viewed as an extension to the
k-medoids algorithm and is speciﬁcally suited for sample representative
selection from non-metric data. We empirically validate δ-medoids in two
domains, namely music analysis and motion analysis. We also show some
theoretical bounds on the performance of δ-medoids and the hardness of
representative selection in general.
1
Introduction
Consider the task of a teacher who is charged with introducing his class to
a large corpus of songs (for instance, popular western music since 1950). In
drawing up the syllabus, this teacher will need to select a relatively small set of
songs to discuss with his students such that 1) every song in the larger corpus is
represented by his selection (in the sense that it is relatively similar to one of the
selected songs) and 2) the set of selected songs is small enough to cover in a single
semester. This task is an instance of the representative selection problem. Similar
challenges often arise in tasks related to data summarization and modeling. For
instance, ﬁnding a characteristic subset of Facebook proﬁles out of a large set, or
a subset of representative news articles from the entire set of news information
gathered during a single day from many diﬀerent sources.
On its surface, representative selection is quite similar to clustering, a more
widely studied problem in unsupervised learning. Clustering is one of the most
widespread tools for studying the structure of data. It has seen extensive usage
in countless research disciplines. The objective of clustering is to partition a
arXiv:1502.07428v2  [cs.AI]  19 Jun 2015

given data set of samples into subsets so that samples within the same subset
are more similar to one another than samples belonging to diﬀerent subsets.
Several surveys of clustering techniques can be found in the literature [20,41].
The idea of reducing a full set to a smaller set of representatives has been
suggested before in speciﬁc contexts, such as clustering xml documents [11] or
dataset editing [13], and more recently in visual [17,7] and text summarization
[28]. It has also been discussed as a general problem in [39]. These recurring
notions can be formalized as follows. Given a large set of examples, we seek a
minimal subset that is rich enough to encapsulate the entire set, thus achieving
two competing criteria - maintaining a representative set as small as possible,
while satisfying the constraint that all samples are within δ from some represen-
tative. In the next subsections we deﬁne this problem in more exact terms, and
motivate the need for such an approach.
While certainly related, clustering and representative selection are not the
same problem. A seemingly good cluster may not necessarily contain a natural
single representative, and a seemingly good partitioning might not induce a good
set of representatives. For this reason, traditional clustering techniques are not
necessarily well suited for representative selection. We expand on this notion in
the next sections.
1.1
Representative Selection: Problem Deﬁnition
Let S be a data set, d : S × S →R+ be a distance measure (not necessarily
a metric), and δ be a distance threshold below which samples are considered
suﬃciently similar. We are tasked with ﬁnding a representative subset C ⊂S
that best encapsulates the data. We impose the following two requirements on
any algorithm for ﬁnding a representative subset:
– Requirement 1: The algorithm must return a subset C ⊂S such that for
any sample x ∈S, there exists a sample c ∈C satisfying d(x, c) ≤δ.
– Requirement 2: The algorithm cannot rely on a metric representation of
the samples in S.
To compare the quality of diﬀerent subsets returned by diﬀerent algorithms, we
measure the quality of encapsulation by two criteria:
– Criterion 1: |C| - we seek the smallest possible subset C that satisﬁes
Requirement 1:.
– Criterion 2: We would also like the representative set to best ﬁt the data
on average. Given representative subsets of equal size, we prefer the one that
minimizes the average distance of samples from their respective representa-
tives.
Criteria 1 and 2 are applied on a representative set solution. In addition, we
expect the following desiderata for a representative selection algorithm.

– Desideratum 1: We prefer representative selection algorithms which are
stable. Let C1 and C2 be diﬀerent representative subsets for dataset S ob-
tained by two diﬀerent runs of the same algorithm. Stability is deﬁned as
the overlap |C1∩C2|
|C1∪C2|. The higher the expected overlap is, the more stable the
algorithm is. This desideratum ensures the representative set is robust to
randomization in data ordering or the choices made by the algorithm.
– Desideratum 2: We would like the algorithm to be eﬃcient and to scale
well for large datasets.
Though not crucial for correctness, the ﬁrst desideratum is useful for consistency
and repeatability. We further motivate the reason for desideratum 1 in Appendix
B, and show it is reasonably attainable.
The representative selection problem is similar to the ϵ-covering number problem
in metric spaces [43]. The ϵ-covering number measures how many small spheri-
cal balls would be needed to completely cover (with overlap) a given space. The
main diﬀerence is that in our case we also wish the representative set to closely
ﬁt the data (Criterion 2). Criteria 1 and 2 are competing goals, as larger repre-
sentative sets allow for lower average distance. In this article we focus primarily
on criterion 1, using criterion 2 as a secondary evaluation criterion.
1.2
Testbed Applications
Representative selection is useful in many contexts, particularly when the full
dataset is either redundant (due to many near-identical samples) or when using
all samples is impractical. For instance, given a large document and a satisfactory
measure of similarity between sentences, text summarization [25] could be framed
as a representative selection task - obtain a subset of sentences that best captures
the nature of the document. Similarly, one could map this problem to extracting
“visual words” or representative frames from visual input [42,26]. This paper
examines two concrete cases in which representatives are needed:
– Music analysis - the last decade has seen a rise in the computational
analysis of music databases for music information retrieval [5], recommender
systems [23] and computational musicology [8]. A problem of interest in
these contexts is to extract short representative musical segments that best
represent the overall character of the piece (or piece set). This procedure is
in many ways analogous to text summarization.
– Team strategy/behavior analysis - opponent modeling has been dis-
cussed in several contexts, including game playing [3], real-time agent track-
ing [37] and general multiagent settings [4]. Given a large dataset of recorded
behaviors, one may beneﬁt from reducing this large set into a smaller col-
lection of prototypes. In the results section, we consider this problem as a
second testbed domain.
What makes both these domains appropriate as testbeds is that they are realis-
tically rich and induce complex, non-metric distance relations between samples.

The structure of this paper is as follows. In the following section we provide a
more extensive context to the problem of representative selection and discuss why
existing approaches may not be suitable. In Section 3 we introduce δ-medoids, an
algorithm speciﬁcally designed to tackle the problem as we formally deﬁned it.
In Section 4 we show some theoretical analysis of the suggested algorithm, and
in Section 5 we show its empirical performance in the testbed domains described
above.
2
Background and Related Work
There are several existing classes of algorithms that solve problems related to
representative selection. This section reviews them and discusses the extent to
which they are (or are not) applicable to our problem.
2.1
Limitations of Traditional Clustering
Given the prevalence of clustering algorithms, it is tempting to solve represen-
tative selection by clustering the data and using cluster centers (if they are in
the set) as representatives, or the closest point to each center. In some cases it
may even seem suﬃcient, once the data is clustered, to select samples chosen at
random from each cluster as representatives. However, such an approach usu-
ally only considers the average distance between representatives and samples,
and it is unlikely to yield good results with respect to any other requirement,
such as minimizing the worst case distance or maintaining the smallest set pos-
sible. Moreover, the task of determining the desirable number of clusters k for a
suﬃcient representation can be a diﬃcult challenge in itself.
Consider the example in Figure 1: given a set of |S| = 100 points, and a dis-
tance measure (in this case, the Euclidean distance metric), we seek a set of
representatives that is within distance 1 of every point in the set, thus satisfying
Criterion 1 with δ = 1. Applying a standard clustering approach on this set, the
distance constraint is only consistently met when k ≥77 (and rarely with less
than 70 samples). Intuitively, a large number of clusters is required to ensure
that no sample is farther than δ from a centroid. However, we can obtain the
same coverage goal with only 13 samples. Deﬁning a distance criterion rather
than a desired number of clusters has a subtle but crucial impact on the problem
deﬁnition.
2.2
Clustering and Spatial Representation
The above limitation of clustering applies even when the data can be embedded
as coordinates in some n-dimensional vector space. However, in many cases, in-
cluding our motivating domain of music analysis, the data does not naturally
ﬁt in such a space. This constraint renders many common clustering techniques
inapplicable, including the canonical k-means [24], or more recent works such
as [39]. Furthermore, the distance function we construct (detecting both local

Fig. 1. Clustering vs. representative selection. (a) When applying k-medoids (deﬁned
in Section 2.4), k = 77 clusters are required to satisfy the distance condition. (b) A
better representative set does so with only 13 representatives.
and global similarities) is not a metric, since it violates the triangle inequality.
Because of this property, methods reliant on a distance metric are also inappli-
cable. Among such methods are neighbor-joining [32], which becomes unreliable
when applied on non-metric data, or the k-prototypes algorithm [1].3
Nevertheless, certain clustering algorithms still apply, such as the k-medoids al-
gorithm, hierarchical clustering [35], and spectral clustering [38]. These methods
can be employed directly on a pairwise (symmetric) similarity matrix,4 while
satisfying the triangle inequality is not a requirement.
2.3
The k-Medoids Algorithm
The k-medoids algorithm [31] is a variation on the classic k-means algorithm that
only selects centers from the original dataset, and is applicable to data organized
as a pairwise distance matrix. The algorithm partitions a set of samples to a
predetermined number k based on the distance matrix. Similarly to the k-means
algorithm, it does so by starting with k random centers, partitioning the data
around them, and iteratively moving the k centers toward the medoids of each
cluster (a medoid is deﬁned as medoidS = argmin
s∈S
P
x∈S d(x, s)).
All of the approaches mentioned so far are speciﬁcally designed for dividing
the data to a ﬁxed number of partitions. In contrast, representative selection
deﬁnes a distance (or coverage) criterion δ, rather than a predetermined number
of clusters k. In that respect, k-medoids, or spectral and hierarchical clustering,
3 In certain contexts, metric learning [40,10] can be applied, but current methods are
not well suited for data without vector space representation, and in some sense,
learning a metric is of lesser interest for representative selection, as we care less
about classiﬁcation or the structural relations latent in the data.
4 For spectral clustering, the requirement is actually an aﬃnity (or proximity) matrix.

Algorithm 1 Extended Greedy K-Centers Approach (farthest ﬁrst traversal)
1: Input: data sampleSet = x0 . . . xm, required distance δ
2: choose random starting representative xi
3: representativeSet = {xi}
4: sampleSet = x0 . . . xi−1, xi+1 . . . xm
5: maximalDist = maxs∈sampleSetd(s, representativeSet
6: while maximalDist > δ do
7:
maximalElement = argmaxs∈sampleSetd(s, representativeSet)
8:
representativeSet = representativeSet ∪{maximalElement}
9:
sampleSet = representativeSet/{maximalElement}
10:
maximalDist = maxs∈sampleSetd(s, representativeSet)
11: end while
force us to search for a partition that satisﬁes this distance criterion. Applying a
clustering algorithm to representative selection requires an outer loop to search
for an appropriate k, a process which can be quite expensive.
We note that traditionally, both hierarchical methods and spectral clustering
require the full pairwise distance matrix. If the sample set S is large (The usual
use case for representative selection), computing a pairwise |S| × |S| distance
matrix can be prohibitively expensive. In the case of spectral clustering, an
eﬃcient algorithm that does not compute the full distance matrix exists [34], but
it relies on a vector space representation of the data, rendering it inapplicable in
our case.5 The algorithm we introduce in this article does not require a distance
metric, nor does it rely on such a spatial embedding of the data, which makes it
useful even in cases where very little is known about the samples beyond some
proximity relation.
2.4
k-Centers Approach
A diﬀerent, yet related, topic in clustering and graph theory is the k-centers prob-
lem.
Let
the
distance
between
a
sample
s
and
a
set
C
be:
d(s, C) = minc∈Cd(s, c). The k-centers problem is deﬁned as follows: Given
a set S and a number k, ﬁnd a subset R ⊂S, |R| = k so that maxs∈Sd(s, R) is
minimal [18].
In metric spaces, an eﬃcient 2-approximation algorithm for this problem exists
as follows.6 First choose a random representative. Then, for k −1 times, add the
element farthest away from the representative set R to R. This approach can
be directly extended to suit representative selection - instead of repeating the
addition step k −1 times, we can continue adding elements to the representative
set until no sample is > δ away from any some representative (see Algorithm 1).
5 In some cases the distance matrix can be made sparse via KD-trees and nearest-
neighbor approximations, which also require a metric embedding.[6]
6 We note that no better approximation scheme is possible under standard complexity
theoretic assumptions [18].

While this algorithm produces a legal representative set, it ignores criterion 2
(average distance).
Another algorithm that is related to this problem is Gonzales’ approximation
algorithm for minimizing the maximal cluster diameter [16], which iteratively
takes out elements from existing clusters to generate new clusters based on the
inter-cluster distance. This algorithm is applicable in our setting since it too only
requires pairwise distances, and can produce a legal coverage by partitioning the
data into an increasing number of cluster until the maximal diameter is less
than δ (at which point any sample within a cluster covers it). This approach is
wasteful for the purpose of representative selection, since it forces a much larger
number of representatives than needed.
Lastly, in a recent, strongly related paper [14], the authors consider a similar
problem of selecting exemplars in data to speed up learning. They do not pose
hard constraints on the maximal distance between exemplars and samples, but
rather frame this task as an optimization problem, softly associating each sample
with a “likelihood to represent” any other sample, and trying to minimize the ag-
gregated coverage distance while also minimizing the norm of the representation
likelihood matrix. Though very interesting, it’s hard to enable this method to
guarantee a desired minimal distance, and the soft association of representatives
to samples is inadequate to our purposes.
3
The δ-Medoids Algorithm
In this section, we present the novel δ-medoids algorithm, speciﬁcally designed
to solve the representative selection problem. The algorithm does not assume a
metric or a spatial representation, but rather relies solely on the existence of some
(not necessarily symmetric) distance or dissimilarity measure d : S × S →R+.
Similarly to the k-centers solution approach, the δ-medoids approach seeks to
directly ﬁnd samples that suﬃciently cover the full dataset. The algorithm does
so by iteratively scanning the dataset and adding representatives if they are suﬃ-
ciently diﬀerent from the current set. As it scans, the algorithm associates a clus-
ter with each representative, comprising the samples it represents. Then, the al-
gorithm reﬁnes the selected list of representatives, in order to reduce the average
coverage distance. This procedure is repeated until the algorithm reaches con-
vergence. Thus, we address both minimality (criterion 1) and average-distance
considerations (criterion 2). We show in Section 5 that this algorithm achieves its
goal eﬃciently in two concrete problem domains, and does so directly, without
the need for optimizing a meta-parameter k.
We ﬁrst introduce a simpler, single-iteration δ-representative selection algorithm
on which the full δ-medoids algorithm is based.
3.1
Straightforward δ-Representative Selection
Let us consider a more straightforward “one-shot” representative selection al-
gorithm that meets the δ-distance criterion. The algorithm sweeps through the

Algorithm 2 One-shot δ-representatives selection algorithm
1: Input: data x0 . . . xm, required distance δ
2: Initialize representatives = ∅.
3: Initialize clusters = ∅
4: representative assignment subroutine, RepAssign, lines 5-22:
5: for i = 0 to m do
6:
Initialize dist = ∞
7:
Initialize representative = null
8:
for rep in representatives do
9:
if d(xi, rep) ≤dist then
10:
representative = rep
11:
dist = d(xi, rep)
12:
end if
13:
end for
14:
if dist ≤δ then
15:
add xi to clusterrepresentative
16:
else
17:
representative = xi
18:
Initialize clusterrepresentative = ∅
19:
add xi to clusterrepresentative
20:
add clusterrepresentative to clusters
21:
end if
22: end for
elements of S, and collects a new representative each time it observes a suﬃ-
ciently “new” element. Such an element needs to be > δ away from any previ-
ously collected representative. The pseudocode for this algorithm is presented in
Algorithm 2.
While this straightforward approach works well in the sense that it does produce
a legal representative set, it is sensitive to scan order, therefore violating the
desired stability property. More importantly, it does not address the average
distance criterion. For these reasons, we extend this algorithm into an iterative
one, a hybrid of sorts between direct representative selection and EM clustering
approaches.
3.2
The Full δ-Medoids Algorithm
This algorithm is based on the straightforward approach, as described in Sec-
tion 3.1. However, unlike Algorithm 2, it repeatedly iterates through the sam-
ples. In each iteration, the algorithm associates each sample to a represen-
tative so that it is never ≥δ away from some representative (the RepAs-
sign subroutine, see Algorithm 3), just as in Algorithm 2. The main diﬀer-
ence is that at the end of each iteration it subsequently ﬁnds a closer-ﬁtting
representative for each cluster S associated with representative s. Concretely,
representativeS = medoidS = argmin
s∈S
P
x∈S d(x, s) (lines 8 −13), under the
constraint that no sample ∈S is farther than δ from medoidS. This step en-

Algorithm 3 The δ-medoid representative selection algorithm.
1: Input: data x0 . . . xm, required distance δ
2: t = 0
3: Initialize representativest=0 = ∅.
4: Initialize clusters = ∅
5: repeat
6:
t = t + 1
7:
call RepAssign subroutine, lines 5-22 of Algorithm 2
8:
Initialize representativest = ∅
9:
for cluster in clusters do
10:
representative = argmin
s∈cluster
P
x∈cluster d(x, s) s.t. ∀x ∈cluster.d(x, s) ≤δ
11:
add representative to representativest
12:
end for
13: until representativest ≡representativest−1
sures that a representative is “best-ﬁt” on average to the cluster of samples it
represents, without sacriﬁcing coverage. In other words, while trying to mini-
mize the size of the representative set, the algorithm also addresses criterion
2 - average distance as low as possible. This step also drastically improves the
stability of the retrieved representative set under diﬀerent permutations of the
data (desideratum 1). We note that by adding the constraint that new represen-
tatives must still cover the clusters they were selected from, we guarantee that
the number of representatives k does not increase after the ﬁrst scan.
The process is repeated until δ-medoids reaches convergence, or until we reach
a representative set which is “good enough” (remember that at the end of each
cluster-association iteration we have a set that satisﬁes the distance criterion).
This algorithm uses a greedy heuristic that is indeed ensured to converge to
some local optimum (Theorem 1). This local optimum is dependent on the value
of δ and the structure of the data. In Subsection 4.1, we show that solving the
representative selection problem for a given δ is NP-hard, and therefore heuristics
are required.
Theorem 1 Algorithm 3 converges after a ﬁnite number of steps.
See Appendix A for proof sketch.
3.3
Merging Close Clusters
Since satisfying the distance constraint with a minimal set of representatives
(Criterion 1) is NP-hard (see Section 4), the δ-medoids algorithm is not guar-
anteed to do so. A simple optimization procedure can reduce the number of
representatives in certain cases. For instance, in some cases, oversegmentation
may ensue. To abate such an occurrence, it is possible to iterate through rep-
resentative pairs that are no more than δ apart, and see whether joining their
respective clusters could yield a new representative that covers all the samples
in the joined clusters. If it is possible, the two representatives are eliminated in
favor of the new joint representative. The process is repeated until no pair in the
potential pair list can be merged. This procedure can be generalized for larger

representative group sizes, depending on computational tractability. These re-
ﬁnement steps can be taken after each iteration of the algorithm. If the number
of representatives is high, however, this approach may be computationally in-
feasible altogether. Although this procedure was not required in our problem
domains (see Section 5), we believe it may still prove useful in certain cases.
4
Analysis Summary
In this section, we present the hardness of the representative selection problem,
and brieﬂy discuss the eﬃciency of the δ-medoids algorithm. We show that the
problem of ﬁnding a minimal representative set is NP-hard, and provide certain
bounds on the performance of δ-medoids in metric spaces with respect to repre-
sentative set size and average distance. We continue to show that approximating
the representative selection problem is NP-hard in non-metric spaces, both in
terms of the representative set size and with respect to the maximal distance.
For the sake of readability, we present full details in Appendix D.
4.1
NP-Hardness of the Representative Selection Problem
Theorem 2 Satisfying Criterion 1 (minimal representative set) is NP-Hard.
4.2
Bounds on δ-medoids in Metric Spaces
The δ-medoids algorithm is agnostic to the existence of metric space in which
the samples can be embedded. That being said, it can work equally well in cases
where the data is metric (in Appendix C we demonstrate the performance of the
δ-medoids algorithm in a metric space test-case). However, we can show that if
the measure which generates the pairwise distances is in fact a metric, certain
bounds on performance exist.
Theorem 3 In a metric space, the average distance of a representative set |C| =
k obtained by the δ-medoids algorithm is bound by 2OPT where OPT is the
maximal distance obtained by an optimal assignment of k representatives (with
respect to maximal distance).
Theorem 4 The size of the representative set returned by the δ-medoids algo-
rithm, k, is bound by k ≤N( δ
2) where N(x) is the minimal number of represen-
tatives required to satisfy distance criterion x.
4.3
Hardness of Approximation of Representative Selection in
Non-Metric Spaces
In non-metric spaces, the representative selection problem becomes much harder.
We now show that no c-approximation exists for the representative selection
problem either with respect to the ﬁrst criterion (representative set size) or the
second criterion (distance - we focus on maximal distance but a similar outcome
for average distance is implied).

Theorem 5 No constant-factor approximation exists for the representative se-
lection set problem with respect to representative set size.
Theorem 6 For representative sets of optimal size k,7 no constant-factor ap-
proximation exists with respect to the maximal distance between the optimal rep-
resentative set and the samples.
4.4
Eﬃciency of δ-Medoids
The actual run time of the algorithm is largely dependent on the data and the
choice of δ. An important observation is that at each iteration, each sample
is only compared to the current representative set, and a sample is introduced
to the representative set only if it is > δ away from all other representatives.
After each iteration, the representatives induce a partition to clusters and only
samples within the same cluster are compared to one another. While in the
worst case the runtime complexity of the algorithm can be O(|S|2), in practice
we can get considerably better runtime performance, closer asymptotically to
|S|1.5. We note that in each iteration of the algorithm, after the partitioning
phase (the RepAssign subroutine in Algorithm 3) the algorithm maintains a
legal representative set, so in practice we can halt the algorithm well before
convergence, depending on need and resources.
5
Empirical Results
In this section, we analyze the performance of the δ-medoids algorithm empir-
ically in two problem domains - music analysis and agent movement analysis.
We show that δ-medoids does well on Criterion 1 (minimizing the representative
set) while obtaining a good solution for Criterion 2 (maintaining a low aver-
age distance). We compare ourselves to three alternative methods - k-medoids,
the greedy k-center heuristic, and spectral clustering (using cluster medoids as
representatives) [33], and show we outperform all three. We note that although
these methods weren’t necessarily designed to tackle the representative selection
problem, they, and clustering approaches in general, are used for such purposes
in practice (see [17], for instance). To obtain some measure of statistical sig-
niﬁcance, for each dataset we analyze, we take a random subset of |S| = 5000
samples and use this subset as input for the representative selection algorithm.
We repeat this process N = 20 times, averaging the results and obtaining stan-
dard errors. We show that the δ-medoid algorithm produces representative sets
at least as compact as those produced by the k-centers approach, but obtains
a much lower average distance. We further note it does so directly, without the
need for ﬁrst optimizing the number of clusters k, unlike k-medoids or spectral
clustering.
7 In fact, this proof applies for any value of k that cannot be directly manipulated by
the algorithm.

In Appendix C, we also demonstrate the performance of the algorithm in a
standard metric space, and show it outperforms the other methods in this setting
as well.
5.1
Distance Measures
In both our problem domains, no simple or commonly accepted measure of dis-
tance between samples exists. For this reason, we devised a distance function for
each setting, based on domain knowledge and experimentation. Feature selec-
tion and distance measure optimization are beyond the scope of this work. For
completeness, the full details of our distance functions appear in Appendix E.
We believe the results are not particularly sensitive to the choice of a speciﬁc
distance function, but we leave such analysis to future work.
5.2
Setting 1 - musical segments
In this setting, we wish to summarize a set of musical pieces. This domain
illustrates many of the motivations listed in Section 1. The need for good rep-
resentative selection is driven by several tasks, including style characterization,
comparing diﬀerent musical corpora (see [12]), and music classiﬁcation by com-
poser, genre or period [2].
For the purpose of this work we used the Music21 corpus, provided in MusicXML
format [9]. For simplicity, we focus on the melodic content of the piece, which
can be characterized as the variation of pitch (or frequency) over time.
Data We use thirty musical pieces: 10 representative pieces by Mozart, Beethoven,
and Haydn. The melodic lines in the pieces are isolated and segmented using ba-
sic grouping principles adapted from [29]. In the segmentation process, short
overlapping melodic sequences 5 to 8 beats long are generated. For example,
three such segments are plotted in Figure 2 as pitch variation over time. For
each movement and each instrument, segmentation results in 55−518 segments.
All in all we obtain 20, 000 −40, 000 segments per composer.
Distance measure We devise a fairly complex distance measure between any
two musical segments S1 and S2. Several factors are taken into account:
– Global alignment - the global alignment score between the two segments,
calculated using the Needleman-Wunsch algorithm [27].
– Local alignment - the local alignment score between the two segments, cal-
culated using the Smith-Waterman algorithm [36]. Local alignment is useful
if two sequences are diﬀerent overall, but share a meaningful subsequence.
– Rhythmic overlap, interval overlap, step overlap, pitch overlap - the extent to
which one-step melodic and rhythmic patterns in the two segments overlap,
using a “bag”-like distance function dset(A1, A2) = |A1△A2|
|A1∪A2| .

Fig. 2. Three musical segments as pitch (in MIDI format) over time, along with the
musical notation of the ﬁrst segment (1stViolinSeg).
The diﬀerent factors are then weighted and combined. This measure was chosen
because similarity between sequences is multifaceted, and the diﬀerent factors
above capture diﬀerent aspects of similarity, such as sharing a general contour
(global alignment), a common motif (local alignment), or a similar “musical
vocabulary” (the other factors, which by themselves each capture a diﬀerent
aspect of musical language). The result is a measure but not a metric since local
alignment may violate the triangle inequality.
Results We compare δ-medoids to the k-medoids algorithm and the greedy
k-center heuristic for ﬁve diﬀerent δ values. The results are presented in Figure
3. For each composer and δ, we searched exhaustively for the lowest k value for
which k-medoids met the distance requirement. We study both the size of the
representative set obtained and the average sample-representative distance.
From the representative set size perspective, for all choices of δ the δ-medoids
algorithm obtains better coverage of the data compared to the k-medoids, and
does at least as well (and most often better) compared to the greedy k-centers
heuristic. However, in terms of average distance, δ-medoids performs much better
compared to the k-centers heuristic, implying that the δ-medoids algorithm out-
performs the other two. While spectral clustering seems to satisfy the distance
criteria with a small representative set for small values of δ, its non-centroid
based nature makes it less suitable for representative selection, as a more lax δ
criterion might not necessarily mean a smaller representative set will be needed
(as apparent from the result). Indeed, as the value of δ increases, the δ-medoids
algorithm signiﬁcantly outperforms spectral clustering.

Fig. 3. Representative set size in % from entire set and average representative set dis-
tance for three diﬀerent composers, ten diﬀerent pieces each, and ﬁve diﬀerent distance
criteria. Each column represents data for a diﬀerent composer. δ-medoids yields the
most compact representative set overall while still obtaining a smaller average distance
than the k-centers heuristic.
5.3
Setting 2 - agent movement in robot soccer simulation
As described in Section 1.2, analyzing agent behavior can be of interest in sev-
eral domains. The robot world-cup soccer competition (RoboCup) is a well-
established problem domain for AI in general [22]. In this work we chose to
focus on the RoboCup 2D Simulation League. We have collected game data
from several full games from the past two Robocup competitions. An example
for the gameplay setting and potential movement trajectories can be seen in
Figure 5.
Our purpose is to extract segments that best represent agent movement patterns
throughout gameplay. In the speciﬁc context of the Robocup simulation league,
there are several tasks that motivate representative selection, including agent
and team characterization, and learning training trajectories for optimization.
Data Using simulation log data, we extract the movement of the 22 agents over
the course of the game (#timesteps = 6000). The agents move in 2-dimensional
space (three example trajectories can be seen in Figure 5). We extract 1-second
(10 timestamps) long, partially overlapping segments from the full game trajec-
tories of all the agents on the ﬁeld except the goalkeeper, who tends to move
less and in a more conﬁned space and for the purpose of this task is of lesser
interest. That leads to 900 · 20 = 18000 movement segments in total per game.
We analyzed 4 teams and 5 games (90000 segments) per team.

Fig. 4. The RoboCup 2D Simulation. Three potential movement trajectories for a
speciﬁc agents are marked.
Distance measure Given two trajectories, one can compare them as contours
in 2-dimensional space. We take an alignment-based approach, with edit costs
being the RMS distance between them. Our distance measure is comprised of
three elements: global and local alignment (same as in music analysis), and a
“bag of words”-style distance based on patterns of movement-and-turn sequences
(turning is quantized into 6 angle bins). As in music analysis, the reason for this
approach is that similarity in motion is hard to deﬁne, and we believe each
feature captures diﬀerent aspects of similarity. As in the previous setting, this is
not a metric, as local alignment may violate the triangle inequality.
Results As in the previous setting, we compare δ-medoids to the k-medoids
algorithm as well as the greedy k-center heuristic, for ﬁve diﬀerent game logs
and ﬁve diﬀerent δ values. The results are presented in Figure 5. As before, for
each δ, we searched exhaustively for the optimal choice of k in k-medoids.
The results reinforce the conclusions reached in the previous domain - for all
choices of δ we meet the distance requirement using a much smaller representa-
tive set compared to the k-medoids and spectral clustering approaches (which
does much worse in this domain compared to the previous one). Furthermore,
δ-medoids once again does at least as well as the k-centers heuristic. In terms of
average distance, our algorithm performs much better compared to the k-centers
heuristic, suggesting that the δ-medoids algorithm generally outperforms the
other approaches.

Fig. 5. Representative set size in % from entire set for four diﬀerent teams, ﬁve diﬀerent
game logs each, and ﬁve distance criteria. Each column represents game data for a
diﬀerent team. Axes denoting distance are in log-scale.
5.4
Stability of the δ-Medoids Algorithm
In this section we establish that indeed the δ-medoids algorithm is robust with
respect to scan order (satisfying desideratum 1 from Section 1). To test stability,
we ran δ-medoids, k-medoids, the k-center heuristic and spectral clustering mul-
tiple times on a large collection of datasets, reshuﬄing the input order on each
iteration, and examined how well preserved the representative set was across
iterations and methods. Our analysis indicated that the ﬁrst three algorithms
consistently obtain > 90% average overlap, and the level of stability observed is
almost identical. Spectral clustering yields drastically less stable representative
sets. For a fuller description of these results see Appendix B.
6
Summary and Discussion
In this paper, we present a novel heuristic algorithm to solve the representative
selection problem: ﬁnding the smallest possible representative subset that best
ﬁts the data under the constraint that no sample in the data is more than a
predetermined parameter δ away from some representative. We introduce the
novel δ-medoids algorithm and show it outperforms other approaches that are
only concerned with either best ﬁtting the data into a given number of clusters,
or minimizing the maximal distance.
There is a subtle yet signiﬁcant impact to focusing on a maximal distance crite-
rion δ rather than choosing the number of clusters k. While both δ-medoids and
k-medoids aim to minimize the sum of distances between representatives and

the full set, k-medoids does so with no regard to any individual distance. Be-
cause of this, we need to increase the value of k drastically in order to guarantee
that our distance criterion is met, and that sparse regions of our sample set are
suﬃciently represented. This results in over-representation of dense regions in
our sample set. By carefully balancing between minimality under the distance
constraint and average distance minimization, the δ-medoids algorithm adjusts
the representation density adaptively based on the sample set, without any prior
assumptions.
Although this paper establishes δ-medoids as a leading algorithm for represen-
tative selection, we believe that more sophisticated algorithms can be developed
to handle diﬀerent variations of this problem, putting diﬀerent emphasis on the
minimality requirement for the representative set vs. how well the set ﬁts the
data. Depending on the speciﬁc nature of the task the representatives are needed
for, diﬀerent tradeoﬀs may be most appropriate and lead to algorithmic varia-
tions. For instance, an extension of interest could be to modify the value of
δ adaptively depending of the density of sample neighborhoods. However, we
show that δ-medoids is a promising approach to the general problem of eﬃcient
representative selection.
