Detecting Hostile Posts using Relational Graph
Convolutional Network
Sarthak1 ⋆, Shikhar Shukla1 *, and K.V. Arya2
1 Samsung Research Institute, Bangalore-560037, India

2 ABV-Indian Institute of Information Technology & Management, Gwalior-474015,
India

Abstract. This work is based on the submission to the competition

in Hindi on social media platforms. Here, a model is presented for de-
tection and classiﬁcation of hostile posts and further classify into fake,
oﬀensive, hate and defamation using Relational Graph Convolutional
Networks. Unlike other existing work, our approach is focused on using
semantic meaning along with contextutal information for better classiﬁ-

is performing at par with Google’s XLM-RoBERTa on the given dataset.
Our best submission with RGCN achieves an F1 score of 0.97 (7th Rank)
on coarse-grained evaluation and achieved best performance on identify-
ing fake posts. Among all submissions to the challenge, our classiﬁcation
system with XLM-Roberta secured 2nd rank on ﬁne-grained classiﬁca-
tion.
Keywords: Hate text classiﬁcation · Graph Networks · Multilingual
classiﬁcation.
1
Introduction
Though Hindi is one of the most prominent languages in online communities,
there has been a lack of research when it comes to identifying toxic and fake
posts in Hindi. The need for such solutions has been felt more acutely in the
light of the Covid pandemic. The online forums have been ﬂooded with unproven
remedies to cure and prevent the spread of the virus. False information regarding
government policies such as lockdown has often led to panic and shortage of es-
sential supplies in the communities. On the other hand, hate and oﬀensive posts
on online social forums targeting speciﬁc groups and religious beliefs have some-
times sparked violent incidents. Therefore, it is imperative to develop systems
that can ﬁlter out such posts. Through the “Hostile Post Detection in Hindi”
task, the organizers have provided a manually annotated dataset[2] which can
be immensely useful in combating the above-mentioned challenges.
⋆These two authors contributed equally
arXiv:2101.03485v2  [cs.CL]  7 Apr 2021

2
Sarthak et al.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes related work. Section
3 describes the background work on Relational Graph Convolutional Netowrks.
Section 4 describes the methodologies of proposed models. Sections 5 presents
analysis on the performance of the proposed models. Paper is concluded is Sec-
tion 6.
2
Related Work
Several people have presented diﬀerent approaches on how to classify toxic com-
ments on diﬀerent datasets presented by Google Jigsaw during a Kaggle Com-
petition1 and Twitter[6]. Several authors [1,8] suggested an ensemble learning
method which outperformed baselines by 7%. However, another dataset2 was
released later as models were getting biased towards certain identity words(gay,
black, etc.). The top solutions used transformers to achieve state-of-the-art re-
sults on this dataset.
However, all the models designed for them would work eﬃciently for clas-
sifying posts in English. Priya et al. [15] compiled a Hindi-English code-mixed
dataset for detecting hate speech in social media communications. They also
proposed an architecture using Word2vec and FastText embeddings for classiﬁ-
cation. For the given dataset, organizers[2] presented a baseline model of SVM
which used multilingual embeddings as input.
Recently, novel architectures[23,24] using Graph Convolutional Networks
[12,16] have achieved state-of-the-art results for text classiﬁcation on GAP [21],
Ohsumed[9], 20ng[7], and Reuters[7] datasets. They generalize better which mo-
tivated us to use them for this task. Also, to the best of our knowledge, this is the
ﬁrst attempt at using Relational Graph Convolutional Networks for classifying
hostile comments in Hindi.
The recently proposed XLM-Roberta [5], a multilingual model, outper-
forms all the other transformer architectures on classiﬁcation tasks such as Nat-
ural Language Inference (NLI) and Named Entity Recognition (NER) in multiple
languages. It was also a part of the top performing solutions in a recent Kaggle
challenge 3 on identifying hostile posts in multiple languages. This motivated us
to ﬁnetune the model on our dataset.
3
Background: Relational Graph Convolutional Networks
3.1
Relational Graph Convolutional Networks
GCNs[12,4] are used for performing convolution over graphs. GCNs, with and
without labeled edges, have been used in many text classiﬁcation tasks [20,24,23])
and achieved state-of-the-art results. Let G = (V , E) be a directed graph where
1 https://www.kaggle.com/c/jigsaw-toxic-comment-classification-challenge
2 https://www.kaggle.com/c/jigsaw-unintended-bias-in-toxicity-classification
3 https://www.kaggle.com/c/jigsaw-multilingual-toxic-comment-classification

Detecting hostile posts using Relational Graph Convolutional Networks
3
nodes vi ∈V and edges (vi, vj) ∈E with label r. The hidden state of each
node vi is represented as hi, where hi is a d0-dimensional vector. Every node vi
aggregates neighbours information hj in it as described in Eq. (1).
hl+1
i
= ψ

X
r∈R
X
j∈Nr
i
1
ci,r
W (l)
r h(l)
j
+ B(l)
r ,

,
∀vi ∈V
(1)
where ψ denotes an activation function, where ci,r represents a normalization
constant, N r
i represents the degree of the node i, and W (l)
r
represents the weight
matrix under relation r.
3.2
Edge Importance(Gating Mechanism)
In many cases, not all edges might be relevant to the model. The concept of Edge
importance was introduced by Marcheggiani et al.[16] for helping the model in
identifying the erroneous or irrelevant edges. The gating value for an edge is
computed as:
g(l)
(u,v) = σ

h(l)
u · w(l)
(u,v) + bl
(u,v)

(2)
where σ(·) is the sigmoid function, wk
(u,v) and bk
(u,v) are gating parameters
at layer l. Finally, the gated R-GCN embedding or hidden state of node for our
model is computed as:
hl+1
i
= ReLU

X
r∈R
X
j∈Nr
i
g(l)
(i,j) ×
 1
ci,r
W (l)
r h(l)
j
+ B(l)
r

,
∀vi ∈V
(3)
3.3
Dependency Parsing
Capturing syntactic information in a sentence helps in capturing the se-
mantic meaning and has often been found to be useful in many tasks[24,25] when
fed into models. Fig. 1 shows a syntactic graph of a sentence.
Fig. 1: Dependency Graph[18]
4
Methodology
In this section, we present three model architectures. First subsection elabo-
rates on proposed architecture using R-GCN and multilingual BERT. Next two
subsections discuss on how to ﬁnetune pretrained architectures for this task.

4
Sarthak et al.
4.1
RGCN with Multilingual Bert
Our deep learning-based multilabel classiﬁcation architecture (as seen in Fig. 2)
is inspired by the approach followed by Xu et al.[24] and Yao et al.[25]. It consists
of two layers in parallel for capturing the contextual4 and semantic information
of the sentence.
Fig. 2: R-GCN Architecture
– Context Embedding: In this layer, the original Hindi text is fed into bert-
base-multilingual-cased and pooler output is captured. It so happens, that it
represents the [CLS] token in BERT which is prepended to every sentence.
The embedding of this token is obtained by pooling, or making it dependent
on each token in a sentence, and ﬁnetuning it using sequence classiﬁcation
tasks. It captures the contextual information better than semantic context.
– Syntactic Embedding: We were not able to ﬁnd dependency parsers for
Hindi text. So, we translated data to English and did dependency parsing on
them using spaCy[10]. Dependency parsing is done for each sentence giving
us a labeled directed graph with nodes as tokens in a sentence. As mentioned
in [16] and [23], we also use three types of relationships for edge labels: heads
to dependents (u, v), dependents to heads (u, v)−1 and self-loops (u, u) where
(u, v) ∈E and u, v ∈V. Instead of random initialisation of hidden states of
4 reference to person, entity or event

Detecting hostile posts using Relational Graph Convolutional Networks
5
a node, we used embeddings of each token obtained from pretrained Bert-
Large-Uncased. This will help the gated R-GCN in capturing semantic task-
speciﬁc embeddings. Finally, we obtain sentence semantic embedding hmean
by average pooling of every token embedding.
The Pooler output from BERT and pooled output from Gated R-GCN is
concatenated. The reason for doing this is two-fold. First, it captures both the
semantic and contextual information of the text. Secondly, some contextual in-
formation might get lost in translation, which might impact semantic informa-
tion as well. As evident by Fig. 3, the semantic meaning is almost intact but a
word is incorrectly translated(highlighted in green, Hindi text mentions about a
“well”, but it’s translated as a “queue”). The concatenated output is then passed
through a fully connected layer for ﬁnal prediction.
We experimented RGCN with pooler outputs from other architectures as
well. The result for which can be seen in table 1.
Fig. 3: Hindi to English Translation
4.2
Training LSTM/RNN models
– Preprocessing: The given dataset had tweets that contained unwanted to-
kens such as tags and shortened URLs. We cleaned these using the “ﬁxhtml”
rule, available as part of the Fastai[11] text processing package.
– Tokenization: We used sentencepiece with two tokenization schemes:
• UnigramTokenizer : We used a vocabulary size of 20k with unigram
language model [13]. It starts out with a seed vocabulary set, and keeps
on dropping a ﬁxed percentage of subwords5 to optimize the marginal
likelihood till the desired vocabulary size is reached as shown in Eq. (5).
P(x) =
M
Y
i=1
p(xi)
;
∀xi ∈V,
X
x∈V
p(x) = 1
(4)
5 substrings in a word

6
Sarthak et al.
where , M is a subword sequence x = (x1, x2, ...xM), V is the vocabulary,
X is the corpus, S(X) represents a possible set of subword sequences,
|D| represents number of sets in S.
L =
|D|
X
s=1
log(P(X(s))) =
|D|
X
s=1
log


X
x∈S(X(s))
P(x)


(5)
• Byte Pair Encoding: BPE [17] starts out by computing the frequency
of characters in the text and iteratively merges the most common pair of
tokens till that point. The recently merged tokens are added to the initial
list and the frequency of each token is recalculated. This is repeated till
the set vocabulary limit is reached. We got better results with BPE as
compared to Unigram tokenization as observed from Table 1. We used a
vocabulary size of 20k.
Fig. 4: QRNN architecture
– Training: To establish a baseline, we started by training Average-SGD
Weight Dropped LSTM (AWD-LSTM) [14] and AWD-QuasiRNN [3] models
from scratch. In several tasks, these two models have performed comparable
to the more recent transformer architectures. These networks use DropCon-
nect, which sets a randomly selected subset of weights to zero. QRNN has
alternate recurrent and convolutional layers, which speeds up training and
testing because of parallel operations. They also outperform stacked LSTMs
of similar size (see Table 1).
4.3
Fine-tuning transformer model
We used pretrained multilingual transformer models from Huggingface library
[22]. We ﬁnetuned XLM-Roberta Large model which has been trained on Com-
monCrawl data in 100 languages, with masked language modeling objective on
text sampled from multiple languages.
– Dataset augmentation: We also experimented with ﬁnetuning transform-
ers on text from Kaggle’s Toxic Comment Classiﬁcation Challenge. Then we
translated the Hindi Hostile Post dataset to English using Google Translate

Detecting hostile posts using Relational Graph Convolutional Networks
7
and used these ﬁne-tuned models for further training and classiﬁcation. Sep-
arately, we also augmented our Hindi dataset with data from HASOC (2019)
challenge and ﬁnetuned XLM-Roberta on this dataset.
– Pseudo-labeling: We used the predictions made by our trained models on
the test set as soft labels and retrained the model after upsampling this
data. Data augmentation and pseudo-labeling didn’t provide any perfor-
mance boost to our models.
5
Results and Analysis
5.1
Dataset
The training and validation datasets[2] were provided as part of the competition,
which were split into hostile and non-hostile classes. The hostile posts were
further divided into fake, hate, oﬀensive and defamation categories. The training
and validation sets had 5728 and 811 samples respectively. The comments had
an average length of 30 tokens. We have presented word clouds for translated
data of each class in Fig. 5.
(a) Fake
(b) Hate
(c) Oﬀensive
(d) Defamation
(e) Non-hostile
Fig. 5: Word Clouds
5.2
Evaluation
The metric for evaluation in this task was F1 score. Since the data suﬀers from
class imbalance and its important to maintain a balance between precision and

8
Sarthak et al.
recall, weighted F1 scores become a better metric for evaluation. We evaluate
our models6 on the test set and the F1 scores are mentioned in Table 1.
Table 1: Coarse and ﬁne grained F1 scores
Model
Coarse
Fake
Hate
Defamation
Oﬀensive
Weighted Fine
Details
Grained
Grained
XLM-Roberta7
96.610
82.082
55.870
44.982
59.447
63.922
RGCN + BERT8
96.614
82.440
58.555
31.538
58.951
62.214
RGCN + XLM-RoBERTa
96.305
78.865
54.0
40.234
54.242
60.343
AWD-LSTM
96.4
74.2
52.7
38.4
59.7
53.7
AWD-QRNN
96.1
60.6
53.7
39.5
60.6
53.3
(a) Hate
(b) Oﬀensive
(c) Non-hostile
Fig. 6: Salience maps for posts with XLM-Roberta (Red tokens are less impor-
tant, blue tokens are more signiﬁcant to the model in the ﬁnal prediction)
We extracted last layer embedding from the trained XLM-Roberta model
and visualized it on validation set, after using PCA as shown in Fig. 7a. The
plot illustrates why the model performs well in classifying non-hostile and fake
posts. Also, the embeddings for hate, oﬀensive and defamation posts are clus-
tered together, thus resulting in a poor performance on those classes. In Fig. 6,
we visualize the salience maps of a few samples from the validation set, using
Google’s Language Interpretability Tool[19] with XLM-Roberta. It depicts each
token’s contribution to the ﬁnal prediction made by the model. The tokens in
red are less important, while the model focuses more on the blue tokens. The
plot 6a demonstrates how the model has learnt to attach more weight to words
6 https://github.com/shikhar00778/constraint21
7 bestﬁt ai 3rd submission
8 bestﬁt ai 2nd submission

Detecting hostile posts using Relational Graph Convolutional Networks
9
such as “Hindu” and “Muslim”. These words tend to appear often in hostile
posts in the given dataset.
(a) Last layer embeddings from trained
XLM-Roberta
(b) Pooler Output from multilingual
BERT
(c) Mean Sentence Embeddings from
trained RGCN layer
(d) Concatenated embeddings of RGCN
and BERT
Fig. 7: Embedding Visualisations of XLM-Roberta and RGCN+BERT
Sentence embeddings from RGCN layer, multilingual BERT and concate-
nated embeddings from the trained RGCN-BERT model were also extracted and
visualized on test set using T-SNE as shown in Fig. 7. The plot 7c illustrates
why the model performs well in achieving high coarse grained score. Fig. 7b illus-
trates how multilingual BERT can clearly classify fake news from other classes.
Fig. 7d illustrates the ﬁnal sentence embeddings obtained after concatenating
the RGCN and multilingual BERT embeddings. Fig 8 presents the confusion
matrix of trained RGCN+BERT model on test dataset for all the categories.
Overall, model can clearly identify non-hostile and fake posts due to the advan-

10
Sarthak et al.
tages that RGCN and BERT embeddings carry, and why it has outperformed
all other submissions for classifying fake posts.
Fig. 8: Confusion Matrix for classiﬁcation using R-GCN
6
Conclusion
In this paper, a model is presented for detecting hostile posts and further clas-
sifying them into fake, hate, oﬀensive and defamation. By combining semantic
information along with the contextual information leading to improved perfor-
mance was observed. The proposed model achieved (5th Rank) on ﬁne-grained

formed better than all the other teams’ submissions to the challenge on classify-
ing fake posts, achieving an F1 score of 82.4. Limitation of the proposed model
is that it is not able to classify defamation posts with the best F1 score of 44.9
across all our team’s submissions.
Future Scope: The work can further be explored by doing syntactic analy-
sis directly on Hindi text rather than translated text. Furthermore, ﬁnetuning
multilingual T5 for this task can also yield better results. Also, ensembling the
results of XLM-Roberta and RGCN+Bert architecture might give better results
since the former performed well on defamation while the latter achieved state-
of-the-art results for fake news detection.
