1
Highly Deformable and Mobile Palladium Nanocrystals as 
Efficient Carbon Scavengers 
Peng-Han Lu1†, De-Gang Xie1, Bo-Yu Liu1, Fei Ai1, Zhao-Rui Zhang2, Ming-Shang Jin2, Xiao 
Feng Zhang3, Evan Ma1,4, Ju Li1,2,5* and Zhi-Wei Shan1* 
1 Center for Advancing Materials Performance from the Nanoscale (CAMP-Nano) and XJTU-
HHT Research & Development Center (XHRDC), State Key Laboratory for Mechanical 
Behavior of Materials, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710049, China 
2 Frontier Institute of Science and Technology, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 
710054, China 
3 Hitachi High Technologies America, Pleasanton, CA 94588, USA 
4 Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 
21218, USA 
5 Department of Nuclear Science and Engineering and Department of Materials Science and 
Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA 
† Present address: Ernst Ruska-Centre for Microscopy and Spectroscopy with Electrons and Peter 
Grünberg Institute, Forschungszentrum Jülich, 52425 Jülich, Germany 

KEYWORDS: Metallic nanoparticles, heterogeneous catalysis, carbon removal, surface 
diffusion, environmental transmission electron microscopy.  

 
2
Fouling of surfaces leads to performance degradation in many energy-intensive industrial 
processes, but the present solutions are either too complicated to be routinely used or 
incomplete for eradication. Here we propose and demonstrate that carbon-containing 
deposits can be catalytically wiped out in an efficient way by roaming palladium 
nanoparticles with extreme shape flexibility at relatively low temperatures. Surprisingly, 
during their dramatic liquid-like migrations, these particles could still maintain crystalline 
interior and conserve their initial crystal orientations through self-surface diffusion. 
Moreover, these catalytic particles were even able to become regenerated by other roaming 
particles after occasionally deactivated by surface coking or multiple-particle sintering. 
These findings shed light on metabolically driven, "living" nanocrystals, and also open a 
new avenue for efficient catalysis. 
 
Carbon deposition on hot surfaces (e.g. in internal combustion engine, solid oxide fuel cell, 
electrochemical fuel production, etc.) usually leads to a measurable drop of energy efficiency 
and performance1,2. These carbon deposits originate from heat-induced decomposition of 
unconsumed vaporized fuel into solid fouling deposits. In a motor engine, components such as 
injectors, pistons, valves, spark plugs, throttle body, intake manifold, catalytic converter, and 
oxygen sensors etc., may all be potentially fouled by carbon2. Thus to bring the engine back to 
optimum combustion efficiency, routine maintenance is needed to clean up the fouling deposits, 
by adding chemical fuel additives3,4 into the fuel or by immersing the components into ultrasonic 
baths. Adopting new engineering designs might also be helpful, but these are still incomplete 
solutions5.  
 

 
3
Catalytic oxidation could be an alternative way to eradicate fouling. However, distinct from 
many reactions where all reactant gases flow over anchored nanoparticles6,7, catalytic defouling 
would involve a solid carbonaceous reactant besides gaseous oxygen. Given that carbon adheres 
to the surface and does not flow like gases, mobile catalytic nanoparticles would be necessary. 
Moreover, high shape flexibility is also essential for particles to stay adhered to the fouled 
surface while eating their ways forward. Finally, these particles must be able to maintain their 
catalytically active sites, such as certain crystalline facets, as they move. 
 
The past decade has witnessed an explosion of elegantly synthesized metal nanocrystals with 
controlled sizes, shapes, compositions and structures8,9. Indeed, metal nanocatalysts often 
experience dynamic evolution in response to the surrounding gaseous environment, including 
sintering/redispersion10,11, shape transition12,13, surface reconstruction14-17, surface segregation18-
20, phase transformation21,22, etc. These dynamic changes usually correlate with their catalytic 
reactivity. For example, the morphology change of metal nanocrystals was found to bring about a 
transient23 or oscillatory24 reaction kinetics. Inspired by the latest findings that metal 
nanostructures can experience fast geometry transformation through surface diffusion25,26, one 
may alternatively take advantage of these dynamic changes to mobilize catalytic nanoparticles 
and regenerate them after catalyst deactivation (e.g. coking and sintering)27 so as to efficiently 
catalyze carbon removal.  
 
Here we use palladium nanoparticles (Pd NPs) due to its demonstrated ability to catalyze the 
oxidation of graphite28. The solution containing Pd NPs of diameter ~10 nm were dispersed in 
ethanol under sonication and then dropped onto an amorphous SiNx support membrane. After 

 
4
drying up, a carbonaceous film, originating from the nonvolatile organic residues (e.g. 
surfactants, see more details in Supplementary Materials and Fig. S2), was left atop the surface 
of the support and some particles. This model system was then tested in a differentially pumped 
gas-environmental transmission electron microscope (Hitachi H-9500 ETEM) with a microchip-
based heating stage, which can achieve direct visualization of the particle dynamics under 
oxygen atmosphere at elevated temperature. The schematic illustration of the experimental setup 
is shown in Supplementary Fig. S1.  
 
The particles were firstly heated up to ~300 oC in vacuum. They stayed immobile even after 
half an hour except that the shape of some particles became a little round. Surprisingly, after a 
pure oxygen atmosphere was established around the sample with a partial pressure of ~0.2 Pa, 
some particles became “nanomotors” roaming around, but would become stationary again if the 
oxygen flow was cut off (see more details in Supplementary Materials Table S1). One typical 
example is illustrated in Fig. 1a-d. Fig. 1a, b displays the beginning (oxygen injection) and final 
(oxygen cut off) state of the particles, respectively. It can be seen that all of the six particles 
moved away from their initial positions. From the in situ movie data (Supplementary Movie S1), 
the moving trajectory of each of them was mapped out in Fig. 1c. These particles, however, did 
not show a universal moving direction, but seemed to move around semi-randomly like in 
Brownian motion. A check of the final state in the under-focus imaging mode demonstrated 
several etched channels on the substrate. Interestingly, those channels (Fig. 1d) coincided exactly 
with the trajectories of the particles extracted from the recorded movie (Fig. 1c), while in other 
areas where particles had not passed by, no such channels could be found. The channels were 
seen to be self-avoiding. That is, a particle would not cross the previous track of any other 

 
5
particles. Therefore, the random walks of these particles are not history-independent but has 
interesting non-Markovian (history-dependent) and multi-particle correlated features.  
 
These dynamics of the nanoscale particle ensemble cannot be rationalized by equilibrium 
thermodynamics, but is driven by active chemical energy dissipation (energy metabolism). In 
order to unveil the mechanism of aforementioned phenomena, local chemical characterization 
using high angle annular dark field-scanning TEM (HAADF-STEM) imaging and electron 
energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) was performed around the channels. Fig. 1e presents a series of 
core-loss spectra collected across a channel shown in the inset image. The nitrogen (N) K peak 
deriving from the SiNx membrane existed in all the spectra, while the carbon (C) K peak could 
only be detected in spectra 1&4 (outside the channel). This demonstrated that the carbonaceous 
layer has been consumed during the particle migration. On the other hand, the nanobeam 
diffraction pattern of Pd NPs demonstrated that they remained face-centered cubic palladium 
structure after the reaction, instead of forming carbides or oxides (Supplementary Fig. S3). 
Therefore, it can be inferred that the carbonaceous layer over the SiNx substrate was oxidized 
into volatile carbon monoxide (CO) or carbon dioxide (CO2) through the palladium-catalyzed 
reaction with oxygen at relatively low temperatures, and hence the carbon-deficient channels 
were etched out accompanying the migration of Pd NPs.  
 
Apart from their flexible spatial mobility, we also found an elongation-contraction shape 
oscillation of these Pd NPs. Fig. 2a-d, are four typical snapshots from an in situ movie 
(Supplementary Movie S3) demonstrating the contraction (Figs. 2a and 2c) and elongation (Figs. 
2b and 2d) in particle shape. In order to quantitatively describe the extent of deformation, the 

 
6
circumscribed ellipse of the particle was used to mimic its profile. The evolution of the 
eccentricity of the ellipse is plotted in Fig. 2e. It shows that the eccentricity quasi-periodically 
fluctuates between 0.65 (relatively round) and 0.93 (much more elongated), indicating a 
morphological oscillation of the particle. This thereupon gave rise to a peristalsis-fashion 
migration of the particle, which is akin to the movement of an earthworm by alternately 
shortening and lengthening of its body. 
 
Furthermore, when imaged with electron beam out of focus, some shadows with bright 
contrast (red crosses in Fig. 3a-f) were seen displaced from the particle (red spots in Fig. 3a-f), 
and appeared intermittently at some fixed angles (Fig. 3g) during the particle migration 
(Supplementary Movie S6). The formation of these shadows resulted from the image 
delocalization of the corresponding particle at large defocus setting. The shifts of the 
delocalization relative to the particle are in the direction of the vectors of the strongly excited 
diffraction beams, and the distances in between are inversely proportional to the interspacing of 
the corresponding crystal plane29. It is striking to confirm that the polar coordinates of the 
shadows (red crosses in Fig. 3h) coincided well with the diffraction pattern of a face-centered 
cubic structure under [100] zone axis (blue dots in Fig. 3h). It presents a persuasive evidence to 
prove that the active particle, although behaving like liquids morphologically, always maintained 
a crystalline interior with unchanging/conserved crystal orientation (always travelling around the 
fixed zone axis with negligible off-axis angle during its migration). This suggests that the 
locomotion did not involve obvious rigid-body rotation, but was dominated by surface diffusion, 
which is also affirmed in a bi-grained particle with a pinned grain boundary (see Supplementary 
Fig. S5 and Movie S5). We have thus established a high-throughput technique to simultaneously 

 
7
monitor the morphology and crystallography of the nanocrystals during their locomotion by 
performing in situ TEM with under-focus imaging condition. 
 
Physically, the particle movements are accomplished by Coble creep, that is, surface diffusion 
of Pd atoms, which happens so rapidly at this length scale that it is sufficient to sustain the mass 
transport needed for the shape changes. The key difference with traditional Coble creep is that it 
is driven by chemical energy release instead of mechanical energy release or capillary energy 
reduction25; that is, the Pd atoms diffuse to where C+O*CO or CO2 can happen. 
Consequently, the Pd particle is then motivated to spread part of itself towards the neighboring 
carbon, protruding in a way that allows it to meet carbon to mediate further catalytic reaction. 
This results in the observed “elongation”, as the ends appear as if they were anchored and 
“stretched” by the carbon borderline that is receding away from the particle. However, the 
catalytic etching perpendicular to the carbon borderline might experience different speeds at each 
point, especially at both ends of the particle due to the perturbation of the surface diffusion of Pd 
atoms parallel to the borderline. As a result, the slope of the carbon borderline and thus the 
elongation direction of the particle were modified constantly, as indicated by the angles between 
the horizontal line and one fixed end of the long axis of the ellipse which are plotted in Fig. 2f. 
On the other hand, the particles do not elongate indefinitely, and would sometime shrink towards 
a more spherical shape driven by surface energy minimization. This competition between active 
catalytic metabolism of the surroundings and self-energy minimization provokes the shape 
oscillation and “peristaltic” migration of Pd NPs. Especially, the shape oscillations of the 
particles enabled themselves to eat out carbon-free passages much longer and wider than their 
equilibrium sizes, which enhanced the efficiency of the catalytic carbon removal.  

 
8
 
Two main effects that could lead to the deactivation of the catalysts needs to be discussed 
further. The first one is surface coking30, which refers to the blocking of the metal surface by the 
accumulation of carbon. Since the catalytic oxidation is initiated by the chemisorption of oxygen 
on the Pd surface, a dense surface carbonaceous layer over the NPs would serve as a kinetic 
barrier to prevent the oxygen from directly contacting the catalyst, thus poisoning the catalytic 
reaction. However, these barricades are not all uniform or dense. Some particles with bald spots 
on the surface barrier layer could adsorb the oxygen, facilitate the metabolism of carbon over the 
particle surface (see the in situ high resolution ETEM results in Supplementary Fig. S4) as well 
as around the particle, and thus become the “pioneers” moving around (e.g. Fig. 1a-d). 
Moreover, a mobile NP will also, upon contact, help to remove the protective carbon shell of an 
initially-dormant particle that it touches, as illustrated in Fig. 4e-h. As a result of this “contagious 
mobilization”, more particles will be activated upon encountering mobile particles, which will 
then start to move themselves (Fig. 4a-d, Supplementary Movie S2). This is thus a self-
propelling chain reaction of mobilization and decoking. 
 
The other effect is particle sintering. In fact, we found that particle coalescence can be 
counteracted statistically by particle splitting, analogous to the cell fusion and fission in biology. 
One typical example is shown in Fig. 5 (Supplementary Movie S4). Three particles coalesced 
and then underwent shape elongation. However, soon after, this coalesced particle split into two, 
like in biological cell division. This splitting is an alternative process to the particle contraction: 
there seems to be a critical neck thickness below which the polarizing influence of the carbon on 

 
9
the two ends is too great to maintain unity. The split particles were then able to move around as 
independent entities.  
 
As either the density of the NPs increases, or the carbon resources nearby get exhausted, the 
NPs will migrate less, split off less and eventually turn into immobile particles that slowly 
coarsen, and the system will demonstrate less “living” but more near-equilibrium features. We 
conjecture based on our understanding of the dynamics, however, that if one were able to 
replenish carbon on the substrate continuously as in a fuel injection engines or many actual 
industrial processes, then fusion and fission events of NPs might balance statistically, and we 
should achieve a NP population at quasi-steady state, because the principle of maximum entropy 
production rate in non-equilibrium thermodynamics calls for many small NPs with long total 
carbon-Pd contact lines to metabolize carbon, rather than a gigantic fused particle favored by 
equilibrium thermodynamics. 
 
In summary, we have discovered an efficient catalytic carbon removal system with coking- and 
sintering-resistant nanocatalysts that maintains crystalline interior with strongly conserved 
crystallographic orientation, working via peristalsis-like migration with high shape flexibility 
and spatial mobility through surface diffusion. This lifelike dynamics of inorganic matter 
represents a startling emergent behavior that can arise out of an energy-metabolizing nano-
system, and may inspire more efficient use of nanostructures that are coarsening-resistant in 
energy-intensive industrial processes.  

 
10
 
Figure 1. “Self-propelled” migration. a-d, “Self-propelled” migration of Pd NPs under 0.2 Pa 
pure oxygen at 300 oC. The moving trajectories (c) of particles from the initial (a, also red 
circles in b and d) to the final (b) state coincided with the channels that were found in the final 
state at under-focused imaging mode (d). Scale bar, 50 nm. See Supplementary Movie S1. e, The 
electron energy loss spectra collected across a carved channel showed that the carbon inside the 
channel was consumed after the particle passing through. The collecting positions of each 
spectrum were marked in the inset HAADF-STEM image. Scale bar, 50 nm.  

 
11
 
 
Figure 2. Shape oscillation and peristalsis-like locomotion. a-d, In situ TEM snapshots 
illustrating an elongation-contraction shape oscillation and thus peristalsis-like locomotion of a 
Pd NP. Scale bar, 20 nm. See Supplementary Movie 3. e, Time-dependent evolution of the 
eccentricity of the particle geometry as delineated by the circumscribed ellipses in (a-d). f, Time-
dependent elongation direction of the particle. The direction is denoted by the angle between the 
horizontal line and one fixed end of the long axis of the ellipse. The four insets correspond to (a-
d).  

 
12
 
 
Figure 3. Crystalline orientation-conservation. a-f, Six example snapshots from an in situ movie 
in the under-focus imaging mode. The shadow images with bright contrast could be found near 
the particles. Scale bar, 50 nm. g, Time-dependent azimuthal angle of the shadow image marked 
with red “+” symbol in a-f.  h, Polar coordination diagram of the azimuth angle and relative 
distance between the shadow image and the particle from each snapshot (red crosses). They 
coincided very well with the diffraction pattern of a face-centered cubic structure under [100] 
zone axis (blue dots). See Supplementary Movie S6. 

 
13
 
 
Figure 4. Surface decoking and contagious mobilization. a-b, Time-lapsed TEM images of Pd 
NPs showing a “contagious mobilization” behavior. After the contact with the mobile Particle 1, 
Particle 2 (delineated by dashed red polygon in a and d) started migrating away from its initial 
position (c, d). Scale bar, 20 nm. See Supplementary Movie S2. e-h, Schematic illustration of the 
chain-reaction resulted from the surface decoking by contiguous particles. 

 
14
 
 
Figure 5. Particle fission after fusion. a-c, Fusion of the particles. Particle 1 moved around and 
coalesced with Particles 2&3 into a larger one. d-f, Fission of a larger particle and the split 
particles were then able to move around as independent entities. All scale bar, 20 nm. 

 
15
