1
gRoMA: a Tool for Measuring the Global
Robustness of Deep Neural Networks
Natan Levy1, Raz Yerushalmi1,2[0000−0002−0513−3211], and Guy Katz1
1 The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel

2 The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel

Abstract. Deep neural networks (DNNs) are at the forefront of cutting-
edge technology, and have been achieving remarkable performance in
a variety of complex tasks. Nevertheless, their integration into safety-
critical systems, such as in the aerospace or automotive domains, poses
a significant challenge due to the threat of adversarial inputs: perturba-
tions in inputs that might cause the DNN to make grievous mistakes.
Multiple studies have demonstrated that even modern DNNs are sus-
ceptible to adversarial inputs, and this risk must thus be measured and
mitigated to allow the deployment of DNNs in critical settings. Here, we
present gRoMA (global Robustness Measurement and Assessment), an
innovative and scalable tool that implements a probabilistic approach to
measure the global categorial robustness of a DNN. Specifically, gRoMA
measures the probability of encountering adversarial inputs for a specific
output category. Our tool operates on pre-trained, black-box classifica-
tion DNNs, and generates input samples belonging to an output category
of interest. It measures the DNN’s susceptibility to adversarial inputs
around these inputs, and aggregates the results to infer the overall global
categorial robustness of the DNN up to some small bounded statistical
error. We evaluate our tool on the popular Densenet DNN model over
the CIFAR10 dataset. Our results reveal significant gaps in the robust-
ness of the different output categories. This experiment demonstrates the
usefulness and scalability of our approach and its potential for allowing
DNNs to be deployed within critical systems of interest.
Keywords: Global Robustness · Deep Neural Networks · Adversarial
Examples · Categorial Robustness · Regulation · Safety Critical
1
Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have become fundamental components in many
applications that perform classification [2,25]. Empirically, DNNs often outper-
form traditional software, and even humans [35,40]. Nevertheless, DNNs have a
significant drawback: they are notoriously susceptible to small input perturba-
tions, called adversarial inputs [15], which can cause them to produce erroneous
outputs. These adversarial inputs are one of the causes likely to delay the adop-
tion of DNNs in safety-critical domains, such as aerospace [14], autonomous
vehicles [26], and medical devices [17].
arXiv:2301.02288v3  [cs.LG]  28 Dec 2023

2
In the aforementioned critical domains, systems must meet high depend-
ability standards. While strict guidelines exist for certifying that hand-crafted
software meets these standards (e.g., the DO-178 standard [13] in the aerospace
industry), no such certification guidelines currently exist for systems incorpo-
rating DNNs. Several regulatory agencies have recognized the existence of this
gap and the importance of addressing it. For example, in its recently published
roadmap, the European Union Aviation Safety Administration (EASA) has em-
phasized the importance of DNN robustness as one of the 7 key requirements
for trustworthy artificial intelligence [12]. However, certifying the robustness of
DNNs remains an open problem.
The formal methods community has begun addressing this gap by devising
methods for rigorously quantifying the local robustness of a DNN [21, 37, 42].
Local robustness refers to a DNN’s ability to withstand adversarial inputs in the
vicinity of a specific point within the input space. Although the rigorous verifi-
cation approaches proposed to date have had some success in measuring these
robustness scores, they typically struggle to scale as network sizes increase [21]
— which limits their practical application. To circumvent that limitation, ap-
proximate methods have been proposed, which can evaluate DNN robustness
more efficiently, but often at the cost of reduced precision [4,11,19,31,36].
Work to date, both on rigorous and on approximate methods, has focused
almost exclusively on measuring local robustness, which quantifies the DNN’s
robustness around individual input points within a multi-dimensional, infinite
input space. In the context of DNN certification, however, a broader perspective
is required — one that measures the global robustness of the DNN, over the
entire input space, rather than on specific points.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach for approximating the global
robustness of a DNN. Our method is computationally efficient, scalable, and can
handle various types of adversarial attacks and black-box DNNs. Unlike existing
approximate approaches, our approach provides statistical guarantees about the
precision of the computed robustness score.
More concretely, our approach (implemented in the gRoMA tool) implements
a probabilistic verification approach for performing global robustness measure-
ment and assessment on DNNs. gRoMA achieves this by measuring the prob-
abilistic global categorial robustness (PGCR) of a given DNN. In this study,
we take a conservative approach and consider the DNN as a black-box: gRoMA
makes no assumptions, e.g., about the Lipschitz continuity of the DNN, the kinds
of activation functions, the hyperparameters it uses, or its internal topology. In-
stead, gRoMA uses and extends the recently proposed RoMA (a Method for DNN
Robustness Measurement and Assessment) algorithm [29] for measuring local ro-
bustness. gRoMA repeatedly invokes this algorithm on a collection of samples,
drawn to represent a specific output category of interest; and then aggregates
the results to compute a global robustness score for this category, across the
entire input space. As a result, gRoMA is highly scalable, typically taking only a
few minutes to run, even for large networks. Further, the tool formally computes
an error bound for the estimated PGCR scores using Hoeffding’s inequality [18]

3
to mitigate the drawbacks of using a statistical method. Thus, gRoMA’s results
can be used in the certification process for components of safety-critical systems,
following, e.g., the SAE Aerospace Recommended Practice [27].
For evaluation purposes, we focused on a Densenet DNN [20], trained on the
CIFAR10 dataset [25]; and then measured the network’s global robustness using
one hundred arbitrary images for each CIFAR10 category. gRoMA successfully
computed the global robustness scores for these categories, demonstrating, e.g.,
that the airplane category is significantly more robust than other categories.
To the best of our knowledge, our tool is presently the only scalable solution
for accurately measuring the global categorial robustness of a DNN, i.e., the
aggregated robustness of all points within the input space that belong to a
category of interest — subject to the availability of a domain expert who can
supply representative samples from each category. The availability of such tools
could greatly assist regulatory authorities in assessing the suitability of DNNs
for integration into safety-critical systems, and in comparing the performance of
multiple candidate DNNs.
Outline. We begin with an overview of related work on measuring the local and
global adversarial robustness of DNNs, in Section 2. In Section 3, we provide
the necessary definitions for understanding our approach. We then introduce
the gRoMA tool in Section 4. Next, in Section 5, we evaluate the performance of
our tool using a popular dataset and DNN model. Finally, Section 6 concludes
our work and discusses future research directions.
2
Related Work
Measuring the local adversarial robustness of DNNs has received significant at-
tention in recent years. Two notable approaches for addressing it are:
– Formal-verification approaches [23, 32, 38], which utilize constraint solving
and abstract interpretation techniques to determine a DNN’s robustness.
These approaches are fairly precise, but generally afford limited scalability,
and are applicable only to white-box DNNs.
– Statistical approaches, which evaluate the probability of encountering ad-
versarial inputs. These approaches often need to balance between scalability
and accuracy, with prior work [4,11,19,31,36] typically leaning towards scal-
ability.
Recently, the RoMA algorithm [29] has been introduced as highly scalability
statistical method, but which can also provide rigorous guarantees on accuracy.
RoMA is a simple-to-implement algorithm that evaluates local robustness by
sampling around an input point of interest; measuring the confidence scores as-
signed by the DNN to incorrect labels on each of the sampled input points; and
then using this information to compute the probability of encountering an input
on which the confidence score for the incorrect category will be high enough
to result in misclassification. In the final step, RoMA assesses robustness using

4
properties of the normal distribution function [29]. RoMA handles black-box
DNNs, without any a priori assumptions; but it can only measure local, as op-
posed to global robustness.
Due to the limited usefulness of computing local robustness in modern DNNs,
initial attempts have been made to compute the global adversarial robustness of
networks. Prior work formulated and defined the concept of global adversarial
robustness [21,31]; but in the same breath, noted that global robustness can be
hard to check or compute compared to local robustness. More recently, there
have been attempts to use formal verification to check global adversarial ro-
bustness [24,39,43]; but the reliance on formal verification makes it difficult for
these approaches to scale, and requires a white-box DNN with specific activation
functions.
Two other recently proposed approaches study an altered version of global
robustness. The first work, by Ruan et al. [34], defines global robustness as the
expected maximal safe radius around a test data set. It then proposes an approx-
imate method for computing lower and upper bounds on DNN’s robustness. The
second work, by Zaitang et al. [41], redefines global robustness based on the prob-
ability density function, and uses generative models to assess it. These modified
definitions of global robustness present an intriguing perspective. However, it is
important to note that they differ from common definitions, and whether they
will be widely adopted remains to be seen. Another noteworthy recent approach,
proposed by Leino et al. [28], advocates for training DNNs that are certifiably
robust by construction, assuming that the network is Lipschitz-continuous. This
approach can guarantee the global robustness of a DNN without accurate mea-
surements, but it requires the DNN to be white-box, whereas our approach is
also compatible with black-box DNNs.
Our work here focuses on measuring and scoring the global robustness of
pre-trained black-box DNNs and is the first, to the best of our knowledge, that
is scalable and consistent with the commonly accepted definitions.
3
DNNs and Adversarial Robustness
Neural Networks. A DNN N : Rn →Rm is a function that maps input
x ∈Rn to output y ∈Rm. In classifier DNNs, which are our subject matter
here, y is interpreted as a vector of confidence scores, one for each of m possible
labels. We say that N classifies x as label l iff arg max(y) = l, i.e., when y’s l’th
entry has the highest score. We use L to denote the set of all possible labels,
L = {1, . . . , m}.
Local Adversarial Robustness. The local adversarial robustness of N around
input x is a measure of how sensitive N is to small perturbations around x [5]:
Definition 1. A DNN N is ϵ-locally-robust at input point x0 iff
∀x.
||x −x0||∞≤ϵ ⇒arg max(N(x)) = arg max(N(x0))

5
Intuitively, Definition 1 states that the network assigns to x the same label that
it assigns to x0, for input x that is within an ϵ-ball around x0. Larger values of
ϵ imply a larger ball around x0, and consequently — higher robustness.
The main drawback in Definition 1 is that it considers a single input point
in potentially vast input space. Thus, the ϵ-local-robustness of N at x0 does not
imply that it is also robust around other points. Moreover, it assumes that DNN
robustness is consistent across categories, although it has already been observed
that some categories can be more robust than others [29]. To overcome these
drawbacks, the notion of global categorial robustness has been proposed [22,34]:
Definition 2. A DNN N is (ϵ, δ)-globally-robust in input region D iff
∀x1, x2 ∈D.
||x1 −x2||∞≤ϵ ⇒∀l ∈L. |N(x1)[l] −N(x2)[l]| < δ
Intuitively, Definition 2 states that for every two inputs x1 and x2 that are
at most ϵ apart, there are no spikes greater than δ in the confidence scores that
the DNN assigns to each of the labels.
Definitions 1 and 2 are Boolean in nature: given ϵ and δ, the DNN is either
robust or not robust. However, in real-world settings, safety-critical systems can
still be determined to be sufficiently robust if the likelihood of encountering
adversarial inputs is sufficiently low [27]. Moreover, it is sometimes more ap-
propriate to measure robustness for specific output categories [29]. To address
this, we propose to compute real-valued, probabilistic global categorial robustness
scores:
Definition 3. Let N be a DNN, let l ∈L be an output label, and let I be a finite
set of labeled data representing the input space for N. The (ϵ, δ)-PGCR score for
N with respect to l and I, denoted pgcrδ,ϵ(N, l, I), is defined as:
pgcrδ,ϵ(N, l, I) ≜Px1∈I,x2∈Rn||x1−x2||∞≤ϵ[|N(x1)[l] −N(x2)[l]| < δ]
Intuitively, the definition captures the probability that for an input x1 drawn
from I, and for an additional input x2 that it is at most ϵ apart from x1, inputs
x1 and x2 will be assigned confidence scores that differ by at most δ for the
label l.
4
Introducing the gRoMA Tool
Algorithm. The high-level flow of gRoMA implements Definition 3 in a straight-
forward and efficient way: it first computes the local robustness for n representa-
tive points from each category, and then aggregates the global robustness using
Algorithm 1.
The inputs to gRoMA are: (i) a network N; (ii) I, a finite set of labeled data
that represents the input space, to draw samples from; (iii) a label l; (iv) n,

6
the number of representative samples of inputs classified as l to use; and (v) ϵ
and δ, which determine the allowed perturbation sizes and differences in con-
fidence scores, as per Definition 3. gRoMA’s output consists of the computed
pgcrδ,ϵ(N, l, I) score and an error term e, both specific to l. We emphasize the
reliance of the pgcrδ,ϵ score on having representative input samples for each rel-
evant category l. Under that assumption, in which the samples represent the
underlying input distribution, our method guarantees that, with some high, pre-
defined probability, the distance of the computed pgcrδ,ϵ value from its true value
is at most e.
Algorithm 1 gRoMA(N, I, l, n, ϵ, δ)
1: X := drawSamples(I, l, n)
2: for i := 1 to n do
3:
if ( N(X[i]) = l ) then
4:
plr[i] := RoMA(X[i], ϵ, δ, N)
5:
end if
6: end for
7: pgcr := aggregate(plr)
8: e := computeError(pgcr, plr, X)
9: return (pgcr,e)
In line 1, gRoMA begins by creating a vector, X, of perturbed inputs —
by drawing from I, at random, n samples of inputs labeled as l. Next, for each
correctly classified sample (line 3), gRoMA computes the sample’s probabilistic
local robustness (plr) score using RoMA [29] (line 4). Finally, gRoMA applies
statistical aggregation (line 7) to compute the pgcr score and the error bound
(line 8); and these two values are then returned on line 9.
gRoMA is modular in the sense that any aggregation method (line 7) and
error computation method (line 8) can be used. There are several suitable tech-
niques in the statistics literature for both tasks, a thorough discussion of which
is beyond our scope here. We focus here on a few straightforward mechanisms
for these tasks, which we describe next.
For score aggregation, we propose to use the numerical average of the local
robustness scores computed for the individual input samples. Additional ap-
proaches include computing a median score and more complex methods, e.g.,
methods based on normal distribution properties [9], maximum likelihood meth-
ods, Bayesian computations, and others. For computing the PGCR score’s proba-
bilistic error bound, we propose to use Hoeffding’s Inequality [18], which provides
an upper bound on the likelihood that a predicted value will deviate from its
expected value by more than some specified amount.

7
5
Evaluation
Implementation. We implemented gRoMA as a Tensorflow framework [1]. In-
ternally, it uses Google Colab [7,8] tools with 12.7GB system RAM memory, and
T4 GPU. It accepts DNNs in Keras H5 format [10], as its input. The gRoMA tool
is relatively simple, and can be extended and customized to support, e.g., mul-
tiple input distributions of interest, various methods for computing aggregated
robustness scores and probabilistic error bounds, and also to accept additional
DNN input formats. gRoMA is available online [30].
Setup and Configuration. We conducted an evaluation of gRoMA on a com-
monly used Densenet model [20] with 797,788 parameters, trained on the CI-
FAR10 dataset [25]. The model achieved a test accuracy of 93.7% after a standard
200-epoch training period. The code for creating and training the model, as well
as the H5 model file, are available online [30]
For gRoMA to operate properly, it is required to obtain a representative sam-
ple of the relevant input space I. Creating such a representative sample typically
requires some domain-expert knowledge [16,33]. However, random sampling can
often serve as an approximation for such sampling [16,33]; a more thorough dis-
cussion of that topic goes beyond the scope of this paper. In our experiments
here, we used a simple sampling mechanism in order to demonstrate the use of
gRoMA. We measured the global categorial robustness of each output category
by running the RoMA algorithm [29], to calculate the local robustness of one
hundred images drawn independently and arbitrarily from the set I, which in-
cludes varying angles, lighting conditions, and resolutions. We set ϵ to 0.04 and
δ to 0.07, as recommended in that work [29].
Due to our desire to check the approach’s applicability to the aerospace
industry, we paid special attention to the airplane category. In this category, we
focused on Airbus A320-200 commercial airplane images, either airborne or on
the ground. This type of airplane exists in the CIFAR10 training set as well, and
hence we expected a high level of categorial global robustness for this category.
The images, along with our code and dependencies, are available online [30].
Next, for each output category, we used RoMA to compute the probabilistic
local robustness (plr) score for each input sample. We configured gRoMA to use
the numerical average as the aggregation method; and for assessing the error
of gRoMA, we applied Hoeffding’s inequality [18]. Specifically, we aimed for a
maximum expected error value of 5%, which is an acceptable error value when
calculating a DNN’s robustness [19]. We used Hoeffding’s inequality to calculate
the probability that the actual error is higher than this value. This was achieved
by setting the upper and lower bounds of the plr values to be plus and minus five
standard deviations of the plr values, corresponding to a 1 −1 ∗10−6 accuracy,
all in a normal distribution context. These bounds were selected in order to
provide a conservative estimate, encompassing a significant portion of the input
space. We justify the normal distribution assumption using Anderson-Darling
goodness-of-fit test [3] that focuses on the tails of the distribution [6], as detailed
in [29].

8
Results. Running our evaluation took less than 21 minutes for each category,
using a Google Colab [7] machine. The various global robustness scores for each
category, as well as the calculated probabilistic error, appear in Fig. 1.
In the evaluation, the Airplane category obtained, as expected while focusing
on a specific type of airplane, the highest categorial robustness score of 99.91%
among all categories; while the Cat and Ship categories obtained the lowest
score of 99.52% (the PGCR scores appear in blue in Fig. 1). The statistical error
margin (tolerance) was set to 5% for this study. Based on these setting, the Ship
category had the highest probability to exceed this bound, at less than 0.16%. On
the other hand, the Airplane, Automotive, Bird, Dog, and Frog categories had
the lowest error likelihood, all below 0.0005% (the likelihood scores per category
scores appear in yellow in Fig. 1).
0.000%
0.000%
0.002%
0.086%
0.008%
0.000%
0.000%
0.025%
0.159%
0.107%
99.30%
99.40%
99.50%
99.60%
99.70%
99.80%
99.90%
100.00%
0.00%
0.02%
0.04%
0.06%
0.08%
0.10%
0.12%
0.14%
0.16%
0.18%
Error Bound
PGCR
Error Bound
Global Categorial Robustness Score (PGCR)
Fig. 1: PGCR scores, per category, for all CIFAR10 categories (blue); and the
corresponding statistical errors (yellow).
The PGCR scores calculated are aligned with previous research, that already
assessed the local robustness of all the images in the CIFAR10 test set, and which
indicate that different categories may obtain different robustness scores [29].
6
Conclusion and Future Work
We introduced here the notion of PGCR and presented the gRoMA tool for
probabilistically measuring the global categorial robustness of DNNs, e.g., cal-
culating the pgcrϵ,δ score — which is a step towards formalizing DNN safety
and reliability for use in safety-critical applications. Furthermore, we calculate a
bound on the statistical error inherent to using a statistical tool. The main con-
tribution of this work is developing a scalable tool for probabilistically measuring
categorial global DNN robustness.

9
Although extensive research has focused on DNN local adversarial robustness,
we are not aware of any other scalable tool that can measure the global categorial
robustness of a DNN. Therefore, we believe that our tool provides a valuable
contribution to the research community.
In future work, we plan to test the accuracy of gRoMA using a range of
input distributions and sampling methods, simulating various input spaces used
in different applications. Additionally, we intend to extend our tool to other
types of DNNs, such as regression networks, to broaden PGCR’s applicability.
These efforts will enhance our understanding of DNN robustness and facilitate
safe and reliable deployment in real-world applications.
6.1
Acknowledgments.
We thank Dr. Or Zuk of the Hebrew University for his valuable contribution and
support. This work was partially supported by the Israel Science Foundation
(grant number 683/18). The work of Yerushalmi was partially supported by a
research grant from the Estate of Harry Levine, the Estate of Avraham Rothstein,
Brenda Gruss and Daniel Hirsch, the One8 Foundation, Rina Mayer, Maurice
Levy, and the Estate of Bernice Bernath, grant 3698/21 from the ISF-NSFC,
and a grant from the Minerva foundation.
