JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
1
Self-directed Machine Learning
Wenwu Zhu, Fellow, IEEE, Xin Wang, Member, IEEE, and Pengtao Xie
Abstract—Conventional machine learning (ML) relies heavily
on manual design from machine learning experts to decide
learning tasks, data, models, optimization algorithms, and eval-
uation metrics, which is labor-intensive, time-consuming, and
cannot learn autonomously like humans. In education science,
self-directed learning, where human learners select learning
tasks and materials on their own without requiring hands-on
guidance, has been shown to be more effective than passive
teacher-guided learning. Inspired by the concept of self-directed
human learning, we introduce the principal concept of Self-
directed Machine Learning (SDML) and propose a framework
for SDML. Speciﬁcally, we design SDML as a self-directed
learning process guided by self-awareness, including internal
awareness and external awareness. Our proposed SDML process
beneﬁts from self task selection, self data selection, self model
selection, self optimization strategy selection and self evaluation
metric selection through self-awareness without human guidance.
Meanwhile, the learning performance of the SDML process
serves as feedback to further improve self-awareness. We propose
a mathematical formulation for SDML based on multi-level
optimization. Furthermore, we present case studies together with
potential applications of SDML, followed by discussing future
research directions. We expect that SDML could enable machines
to conduct human-like self-directed learning and provide a new
perspective towards artiﬁcial general intelligence.
Index Terms—Self-Directed Machine Learning, Self-Awareness
I. INTRODUCTION
Machine learning has achieved substantial success in many
areas such as natural language processing, computer vision,
and robotics. Towards the ultimate goal of artiﬁcial general
intelligence (AGI), researchers have kept working on reducing
manual design in learning processes. Unsupervised learning,
semi-supervised learning and self-supervised learning methods
have shown their strength [20], [48], [55], [29], [40] in
reducing manual annotations, and active learning can help
to reduce the cost for labeling data by interactively querying
users or some other information sources to label “important”
new data points [66], [35], [53]. Besides, automated machine
learning (AutoML) carries out neural architecture search and
hyperparameter optimization [73], [25], [76] for the sake of
reducing manual efforts in model design and selection. Meta
learning utilizes a meta learner to quickly adapt machine
learning algorithms to new tasks with a small amount of new
data without manually transferring knowledge [15], [65], [27].
Despite all the above progress, current machine learning
paradigm is still heavily dependent on manual design and
human guidance, where human experts decide learning tasks,
data, models, optimization algorithms and evaluation metrics.
Wenwu Zhu and Xin Wang are with the Department of Computer

Pengtao Xie is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineer-

Corresponding Author: Xin Wang
For example, to develop a rescue robotics system, human
experts need to design how to train analogous reasoning mod-
els on manually-selected datasets, how to perform automatic
knowledge graph construction, what evaluation metrics to use,
etc. Manual design is labor-intensive, time-consuming, and
lacks autonomy. To address this problem, we are interested
in investigating whether it is possible to let machines select
learning tasks, data, models, optimization algorithms, evalua-
tion metrics autonomously and control learning processes in a
self-directed manner?
Self-directed human learning (SDHL) has been studied
in education science for many years since the 1970s [33],
[18], [7]. Particularly, in adult education [42], [6] and online
education [60], [36], where learning initiatives of learners
are strong required, self-directed human learning shows great
effectiveness in improving learning outcomes. In self-directed
human learning, individuals take the initiative to determine
proper learning tasks, selecting appropriate learning materials,
making suitable learning plans, developing effective learning
strategies, and adopting effective evaluation metrics. It has
been shown that self-directed human learners who take the
initiative in learning tend to learn more and better than those
who passively wait for guidance from teachers [33].
Inspired by the concept of self-directed human learning, we
propose self-directed machine learning (SDML). The com-
parison between conventional machine learning and SDML
is illustrated in Fig. 1. While conventional machine learning
mostly depends on manual designs from humans, SDML
leverages self-awareness to perform a self-directed learning
process with high degree of autonomy, where the learning
process in turn can further improve self-awareness. Self-
awareness includes internal awareness and external aware-
ness. The internal awareness reveals the states of machines
themselves, while the external awareness represents machines’
perception abilities towards the physical world and how they
are seen by the external world. With the guidance of self-
awareness, SDML is able to conduct a self-directed learning
process through self task selection, self data selection, self
model selection, self optimization algorithm selection and
self evaluation metric selection in a more self-directed way.
We propose a mathematical formulation for SDML based on
multi-level optimization. Moreover, we present case studies
together with potential applications of SDML, followed by
discussing future research directions.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section
II reviews self-directed human learning. In Section III, we
introduce the principal concept and propose the framework
of self-directed machine learning. In Section IV we showcase
the superiority of SDML over conventional machine learning
by discussing several case studies and potential applications
for SDML, such as autonomous driving/robotics and auto-
arXiv:2201.01289v2  [cs.LG]  8 Jan 2022

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
2
(a) Conventional Machine Learning
(b) Self-directed Machine Learning
Fig. 1. Comparison of conventional machine learning (a) and self-directed machine learning (b).
Fig. 2. Illustration diagram of Self-directed Machine Learning (SDML).
mated computer programming. We discuss future directions
in Section VI, including equipping SDML with robustness,
explainability and reasoning capability.
II. SELF-DIRECTED HUMAN LEARNING
The concept of self-directed human learning (SDHL) has
been studied in educational science for decades [33], [18],
[7], especially in adult education [42], [6] and online ed-
ucation [60], [36] as the two scenarios both require high
initiative of learners. The original deﬁnition of self-directed
learning [33] is provided by Knowles in 1975:
In its broadest meaning, self-directed learning describes a
process by which individuals take the initiative, with or without
the assistance of others, in diagnosing their learning needs,
formulating learning goals, identifying human and material re-
sources for learning, choosing and implementing appropriate
learning strategies, and evaluating learning outcomes. It has
been shown that self-directed learners who take the initiative
can learn more and better than those who passively learn under
guidance from teachers [33], and can know how they see
themselves and how they are seen by others.
Self-directed learning relies on self-awareness. In education
science [14], there are two types of self-awareness: internal
awareness and external awareness. By combining internal
awareness and external awareness, learners can identify what
to improve and change the way of interacting with themselves,
with others and with the physical world. As such, being able
to master both internal and external awareness is regarded as a
very crucial prerequisite for conducting self-directed (human)
learning.
III. SELF-DIRECTED MACHINE LEARNING
We propose a new machine learning concept and framework
called self-directed machine learning (SDML), inspired by the
concept of SDHL in education science. Conventional machine
learning is mostly human-directed, which could handle well-
deﬁned speciﬁc tasks but is unable to automatically adapt to
changing environments. In contrast, SDML takes the initiative
in learning processes and pursues lifelong self-improvement,
as shown in Fig. 1b and Fig. 2.
In education science, self-directed learning views learners
as responsible owners and managers of their own learning
process [1]. Internal awareness and external awareness are

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
3
treated as two important components for improving and
changing learners’ perceptions about themselves and others.
Drawing inspirations from these facts, we design SDML as
a self-directed learning process guided by self-awareness,
including internal awareness and external awareness. During
the learning process, SDML is towards being self-directed to
select learning tasks, data, models, optimization algorithms,
and evaluation metrics. In turn, learning outcomes provide
feedback on how to improve self-awareness.
A. Self-awareness
Fig. 3. Self-awareness: i) Internal Awareness; ii) External Awareness
Motivated by discoveries in education science [57], [14],
we propose a way of implementing self-awareness, including
internal awareness and external awareness, as shown in Fig. 3.
1) Internal Awareness: As SDML requires lifelong self-
improvement of machines, it is essential to build machines’ in-
ternal awareness to better guide the learning process. Inspired
by humans’ cognitive conditions in self-directed learning, we
represent internal awareness with the following key factors:
1) Capacity. We represent the long-term internal awareness
of a machine using capacity C := {C1, C2, ..., CK},
where {Ci}K
i=1 are different aspects of capacity such as
computation speed and memory size. Machine capacity
speciﬁes the maximum available resources of an SDML
system.
2) State. We represent the short-term internal awareness
of a machine using state S := {S1, S2, ..., SK}, where
{Si}K
i=1 are the current states of the corresponding
capacity, {Ci}K
i=1, such as current computation speed
and currently available memory size. Machine state
represents the current ability and available resources of
an SDML system.
3) Learning Tasks. The COPES model of learning tasks
includes Conditions, Operations, Products, Evaluations,
and Standards [70], [71]. Inspired by this, we deﬁne
a machine learning task as {TC, TO, TE, TS}, where
TC is task conditions on inputs and system constraints,
TO is task outputs (products), TE is evaluations and
TS is standards. As machine learning tasks are related
(e.g., VQA tasks are supported by visual and textual
representation learning tasks), we organized the set of
known tasks as graphs GT = {T, E}, where T is the
set of machine learning tasks and E is their relations.
GT can be initialized with prior knowledge and updated
during the learning process/from external resources.
4) Learning Strategies. People can develop various and
personalized study strategies for different scenarios in
their lifetime. We denote the set of machine learning
strategies as Q, which consists of strategies for model
constructions, parameters optimizations, evaluation met-
rics and so on. It is worth noting that Q includes the
models and parameters pre-trained or already trained in
the machine learning task set T.
Overall, we represent machine self-awareness as MA =
{C, S, GK, GT , Q}, which serves as a central controller and
provides global guidance to the self-directed learning process.
2) External Awareness: External awareness represents ma-
chines’ perception abilities towards the physical world and
how the machine is seen by the external world. We represent
external awareness using the following key components.
• Relations. The physical world consists of entities. Differ-
ent from previous works which mostly represent entities
using texts, we deﬁne the set of entities V = {V1, V2, ...}
in a multi-modal way. Each entity is deﬁned as Vi =
{V j
i }M
j=0, where M is the number of modalities. The
entities in V are interrelated. We deﬁne their relations
R in a recursive and hierarchical way. For example, the
relation “is grandfather of” could be deﬁned recursively
by stacking the relation “is father of” twice. Formally,
we have some basic relations in R ﬁrst. We perform
statistical inference on basic relations to induce new
relations and add statistically signiﬁcant ones to R.
• Knowledge. Humans rely on commonsense and domain
knowledge to perform tasks. We deﬁne knowledge as
GK = {GC, GD}, where GC denotes commonsense
knowledge and GD represents domain knowledge. Both
GC and GD could be represented as graphs, where ver-
tices represent concepts V and edges represent relations
R. While commonsense knowledge remains roughly the
same in SDML, domain knowledge may be updated
frequently during the learning process.
3) Construction of self-awareness:
We construct self-
awareness by combining internal awareness and external
awareness. To initialize the values of internal awareness, we
collect information including computation speed and memory
size of machines, task conditions on inputs, system constraints,
et. To initialize the values of external awareness, we collect
information including entities in the external world and their
relations, seed commonsense knowledge such as Concept-
Net, domain knowledge, etc. During the SDML process, we
leverage feedback collected from learning outcomes to update
certain parts of self-awareness, including state, relationship
between tasks, domain knowledge, etc. The update of self-
awareness is conducted in a stable manner without catastrophic
forgetting. Internal and external awareness are updated in
a joint way instead of greedily to pursue globally optimal
updates.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
4
B. Self-directed Machine Learning Process
With the guidance of our proposed self-awareness, machine
algorithms can conduct self-directed learning processes. As
shown in Fig. 2, we propose an implementation of a self-
directed machine learning process. When interacting with the
external dynamic environment, SDML can select learning
tasks, data, models, optimization strategies and evaluation
metrics in a self-directed way based on the guidance of self-
awareness where the results will in turn provide feedback
to improve self-awareness, thus distinguishing SDML from
the conventional machine learning paradigm. Next, we will
describe each component in detail, i.e., self task selection, self
data selection, self model selection, self optimization strategy
selection and self evaluation metric selection.
1) Self Task Selection: Humans could usually decompose
a complex ultimate goal into several ﬁne-grained tasks, which
may be preconditioned or helpful to the ﬁnal goal. For
example, if we plan to cook a sumptuous meal, we will de-
compose this ultimate goal into the following tasks: buying the
ingredients, preparing the ingredients, cooking and seasoning.
Each task could be split to even smaller tasks, and we will
pay attention to the task which we perform the worst to lift
our ability towards the ultimate goal to a large extent.
Inspired by this, SDML is designed to decompose a complex
goal into a sequence of ﬁne-grained subtasks automatically.
SDML can choose a subset of learning tasks and determine
the order of executing them under the guidance of self-
awareness. Formally, we deﬁne the ultimate goal as T ∗=
{T ∗
C, T ∗
O, T ∗
E, T ∗
S}. Note that the graph of machine learning
tasks GT are included in machine self-awareness. Thus, given
T ∗, GT , machine capacity C, machine state S and evaluation
results O, SDML is able to develop a function fT that gen-
erates a task sequence T = {Ti}NT
i=0 = fT (T ∗, GT , C, S, O),
where the NT tasks are selected from GT and could be dupli-
cated. This function may be modeled by similarity matching
among the inputs, outputs, evaluation metrics, and experimen-
tal outcomes of different tasks. The selected tasks affect the
selection of data, model and optimization strategies.
2) Self Data Selection: Humans have the ability to ﬁnd the
materials most related to a given task for learning, so that
we could improve our ability on the given task in a rapid
and effective way. Humans usually choose suitable materials
to learn for the given problem, and SDML should have the
similar ability to select proper data to learn with awareness of
the ultimate goal, the selected task and its current state.
Formally, given the task sequence T, machine state S,
machine capacity C, evaluation results O, and the ultimate goal
T ∗, SDML selects the most suitable dataset for each task. That
is, D = {Di}NT
i=1 = fD(T ∗, Ti, C, S, O). The data selection
process not only relies on the selected task but also the ultimate
goal for better efﬁciency since it aims to choose data most
related to the ﬁnal target while discarding unrelated, noisy
or even harmful data. Therefore, the SDML is designed to
improve itself in an efﬁcient and rapid way. The data selection
results will also inﬂuence the model design and optimization
strategy selection.
3) Self Model Selection: Humans are able to locate the
potential candidate solutions given different learning tasks.
Similarly, after adjusting the learning tasks, SDML is required
to choose the learning models for each task. Formally, SDML
designs models M = {M}NT
i=0 = fM(Ti, Di, C, S, O) based
on the task sequence T, machine capacity C, machine state S
and evaluation results O. The design of learning models also
inﬂuences the selection of optimization strategies, while the
selected models together with the corresponding model per-
formance may give feedback to the task selection component.
4) Self Optimization Strategy Selection: As people vary in
their abilities and available learning time, each person has her
own learning pace and style. Therefore, people tend to choose
strategies that are most suitable for themselves. Inspired by
this, SDML chooses optimization strategies under the guidance
of machine self-awareness. To date, many optimization strate-
gies are proposed by researchers in order to reduce human
intervention in data, supervision, losses, and optimization. The
set of optimization strategies are encoded and updated in self-
awareness, which affects the learning speed, degree and cost
etc. The optimization strategies are most ﬂexible in SDML,
which can be set according to the tasks and models. The set
of strategies could also be a key factor for selecting tasks and
designing models. Formally, the chosen optimization strategies
are modeled through considering tasks, models as well as
machine self-awareness: P = FP (T, M, MA). Finally, the
selected optimization strategies, outcomes and evaluations will
provide feedback to further update all roles in the self-directed
learning process.
5) Self Evaluation Metric Selection: It is essential to set
proper evaluation metrics in machine learning. In conventional
machine learning, one or more evaluation metrics are set
through manual design. However, there exist various eval-
uation metrics and even researchers are not clear which
metrics should be used under different circumstances. Besides,
different evaluation metrics often lead to different optimization
directions during model training. We expect SDML to make
evaluation in a self-directed way, e.g., choosing evaluation
metrics adaptively from a large set of candidates or even
develop new evaluation metrics. When solving a complex goal
without clearly well-deﬁned objectives, machines will achieve
lifelong self-improvement in the world upon successful self
evaluations.
C. Mathematical Formulation of SDML
In this section, we present a mathematical formulation of
self-directed machine learning, by integrating the elements
and processes introduced in earlier sections. Speciﬁcally, we
propose a multi-level optimization based framework to for-
mulate SDML. In this framework, there are multiple joint
optimization problems, each corresponding to one process
outlined in Section III-B. These processes are organized into a
directed acyclic graph (DAG). If there is a directed edge from
process A to process B, then B is dependent on A: speciﬁcally,
the optimal solution of A’s optimization problem is used as
a variable in B’s optimization problem. These optimization
problems are organized into six levels.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
5
At the ﬁrst level, we construct self-awareness, by solving
the following optimization problem:
B∗(M) = argminB Lsac(B, M).
(1)
where
B
denotes
self-awareness,
Lsac
denotes
a
self-
awareness construction loss, and M are meta parameters. The
optimization is conducted over B. M is tentatively ﬁxed at
this stage and will be updated later on. Note that the optimal
solution B∗is a function of M since B∗is a function of the
loss function which is a function of M.
At the second level, we perform task selection. Given the
constructed self-awareness B∗(M), a set of candidate tasks
T = {tn}N
n=1 and a textual description E of the target appli-
cation, the goal of task selection is to select a subset of tasks
S ⊆T and form them into a DAG. The task DAG speciﬁes the
dependency between tasks and the execution order of tasks.
At this stage, we solve the following optimization problem:
S∗(B∗(M)) = argminS⊆T Lts(T , S, E, B∗(M)).
(2)
Lts is a task selection loss specifying the criteria of how to
select the optimal subset of tasks and form them into a DAG.
It is deﬁned on the entire set of tasks T , a candidate subset
of tasks S, the application description E, and self-awareness
B∗(M). The optimization is conducted over S.
At the third level, there are two processes: one is training
data selection; the other is model selection. Data selection
is deﬁned as follows. For each task s(M) in the selected
task subset S∗(B∗(M)), from the training data Ds(M) of
task s(M), we select a subset of training examples Cs(M) ⊆
Ds(M). Data selection for task s(M) amounts to solving the
following optimization problem:
C∗
s(M) = argminCs(M)⊆Ds(M) Lds(Ds(M), Cs(M)).
(3)
Lds is a data selection loss specifying the criteria of how to
select the optimal subset of training data. It is deﬁned on the
entire set of training data Ds(M) of task s(M) and a candidate
subset Cs(M) of data examples. The optimization is conducted
over Cs(M).
Model selection is deﬁned as follows. For each task s(M) in
the selected task subset S∗(B∗(M)), given the search space
of architectures and hyperparameters of the model used to
perform the task s(M), we select the optimal architecture and
hyperparameters. The corresponding optimization problem is:
A∗
s(M) = argminAs(M) Lms(As(M), s(M)).
(4)
Lms is a model selection loss specifying the criteria of
setting the optimal architecture and hyperparameters. As(M)
represents candidate architectures and hyperparameters in the
search space. Optimization is conducted over As(M).
At the fourth level, there is a single process, which is
optimizer selection. For each selected task s(M), given a set
of candidate optimizers O = {on}P
n=1, we select the optimal
one o∗
s(M) ∈O to train the selected model on the selected
data. The corresponding optimization problem is:
o∗
s(M) = argminos(M)∈O Los(os(M), A∗
s(M), C∗
s(M)).
(5)
Los is a loss specifying the criteria of selecting the best
optimizer. The selection of the optimizer depends on the
selected model A∗
s(M) and selected data C∗
s(M).
At the ﬁfth level, there is a single process, which is to train
weight parameters of the selected model on the selected data,
using the selected optimizer, which amounts to solving the
following optimization problem:
W ∗
s(M) = argminW Lwt(Ws(M), A∗
s(M), C∗
s(M), o∗
s(M)). (6)
At the sixth level, there is a single process, which is to
evaluate models trained at the fourth stage on a validation set
F. Meta parameters M are updated by minimizing the valida-
tion loss, which amounts to solving the following optimization
problem:
minM Lval({W ∗
s(M)|s(M) ∈S∗(M)}, F),
(7)
where Lval is the validation loss.
Putting these pieces together, we have the following multi-
level optimization problem.
minM Lval({W ∗
s(M)|s(M) ∈S∗(M)}, F),
s.t. W ∗
s(M) = argminW Lwt(Ws(M), A∗
s(M), C∗
s(M), o∗
s(M)),
o∗
s(M) = argminos(M)∈O Los(os(M), A∗
s(M), C∗
s(M)),
A∗
s(M) = argminAs(M) Lms(As(M), s(M)),
C∗
s(M) = argminCs(M)⊆Ds(M) Lds(Ds(M), Cs(M)),
S∗(B∗(M)) = argminS⊆T Lts(T , S, E, B∗(M)),
B∗(M) = argminB Lsac(B, M).
(8)
IV. CASE STUDIES AND POTENTIAL APPLICATIONS
In this section, we showcase how to leverage the proposed
self-directed learning framework to solve practical problems,
in two case studies: 1) autonomous rescue robotics, and 2)
automated computer programming. Besides, we discuss a few
other potential applications of SDML.
A. Case Study I: Autonomous Rescue Robotics
1) Problem Deﬁnition: In robotics applications such as
autonomous search and rescue, it is crucial for the agents
to derive analogous solutions based on learned knowledge,
such as opening a window based on the learned skills of
opening a door. This requires the agents to perform analogical
reasoning, including understanding which jobs (e.g., manipu-
lation, locomotion, navigation, assembly, etc.) are analogous,
adapting the actions of performing source jobs to an analogous
target job, etc. Existing research on analogical reasoning [19],
[61] heavily requires humans to manually build knowledge
bases about the analogy relationships between jobs and to
manually craft symbolic systems for adapting actions between
analogous jobs, which is labor-intensive, expensive, difﬁcult
to evolve over time, and less robust. In existing works on
job planning [16], [8], given a novel job, a software program
(e.g., policy, job plan, PDDL [2] description, etc.) operating
on a robotic system needs to be written by human experts to
execute this job, which is time-consuming and not scalable.
There have been a few data-drive approaches [11], [21] aiming
to reduce the dependency on humans. However, they require a
lot of experts-provided annotations for model training and such
annotations are difﬁcult to obtain practical robotics systems.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
6
2) An SDML-based Solution: To address the limitations
of existing works, we can leverage our proposed SDML
framework to develop analogical reasoning systems (shown in
Figure 4) that enable autonomous agents to master a much
wider range of jobs without heavily relying on humans to
provide supervision. Given a large set of analogous jobs, once
the agent learns to solve one of them, our system enables it to
automatically ﬁgure out how to solve the rest. This will make
the autonomous agents more adaptive, autonomous, robust,
and intelligent. Speciﬁcally, our solution aims to automatically
synthesize a correct and efﬁcient program (e.g., an application
domain deﬁnition written by the Planning Domain Deﬁnition
Language [2], which speciﬁes the sequence of actions needed
to accomplish a job and their preconditions and effects) to
execute a previously unseen job by drawing analogies with
previously seen jobs.
Fig. 4. Illustration diagram of autonomous rescue robotics.
a) Self task selection:
• Automatic construction of analogy job graph: automat-
ically build an analogy job graph (AJG) including jobs
with analogy relationships and programs that can be used
to perform these jobs. To perform analogical reasoning,
we ﬁrst need to know which jobs are analogous to each
other. The AJG needs to be constructed automatically
without heavily relying on human annotations.
• Program-job association: for each job in the AJG, we
aim to extract a program (represented using a syntax tree
containing actions with preconditions and effects) from
the robotics literature where the program can be used to
perform this job.
• Program synthesis: given the AKB, synthesize a target
program to execute a novel job from the source programs
of analogous jobs in the AKB.
b) Self model selection:
• Graph-to-graph (G2G) construction model. The model
is used for automatic construction of AJG. It takes un-
structured texts in the robotics and job-planning literature
and a small-sized seed AJG (created by domain experts)
as inputs and constructs a more comprehensive graph
containing previously unseen jobs and analogy relations.
The G2G model constructs a group of inter-correlated
jobs and analogy relations collectively as a graph. In the
construction process, high-order reasoning is performed
to construct jobs having unobvious analogy relations. To
train the G2G model, we construct training examples,
each containing a graph G sampled from the seed graph
and a subgraph S of G, where the goal is to construct
G from S. We use the jobs and analogy relations in
S as queries to retrieve relevant paragraphs P from the
unstructured texts. Then we use a graph neural network
to encode S and use a BERT model trained on the entire
collection of unstructured texts to encode P. Then the
graph embedding of S and BERT embedding of P are
fed into a two-layer hierarchical long short-term memory
(LSTM) network to construct new nodes. Given the
constructed nodes, a Siamese network is used to construct
edges: two jobs are connected if they are analogous.
Given the constructed graph, we compare it with the
ground-truth graph G using graph edit distance. Since the
objective is not end-to-end differentiable, we use policy
gradient to learn the weight parameters, where the reward
is deﬁned based on the graph edit distance.
• Cross-modal hashing model. We leverage a program
extractor which analyzes the robotics literature and ex-
tracts all programs used for job planning. The number
of extracted programs and the number of jobs in the
AJG can be very large, which incurs huge computational
costs when associating programs to jobs. We leverage
a cross-modal hashing model to address this issue. We
use a graph convolutional network to encode the AJG
and learn a latent representation vector (whose elements
are probability values) for each job in the graph. From
the representation vector of each job, a hash code is
sampled to represent this job. For programs extracted
from robotics literature, we represent them using syntax
trees and encode these trees using tree-structured LSTM
networks. A hash code is sampled from the encoding
of each program to represent this program. Given the
hash codes of jobs and the hash codes of programs, we
associate programs to jobs by calculating the Hamming
distance between their hash codes. Hamming distance
can be calculated extremely efﬁciently in memory, which
enables the association to be done with minimal latency.
• Program-to-program synthesis model. Given the learned
analogy job graph where each job is associated with
a program that can execute this job, we leverage it
for analogical job planning. In previous job-planning
approaches, a program (e.g., a PDDL description) needs
to be pre-deﬁned by human experts before the robot can
start its job. If a robot encounters a previously unseen
job where a program has not been written for, the robot
is unable to conduct this job. We leverage a program-to-
program (P2P) synthesis model to solve this issue. The
P2P model automatically generates a program for a novel
job J by leveraging programs pre-deﬁned for jobs that
are analogous to J. Speciﬁcally, from the analogy job
graph, the P2P model retrieves the neighboring jobs that
are analogous to J. The program associated with each
retrieved job is represented using a syntax tree, which is
encoded using a tree-structured LSTM model. Then these

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
7
program encodings are fed into a tree-structured LSTM
decoder to generate the program for executing J.
For the graph-to-graph construction model, the following
aspects are included in the model selection decision space:
architecture of the graph neural network, architecture of the
BERT model, architecture of the hierarchical long short-term
memory network, and architecture of the Siamese network.
For the cross-modal hashing model, the following aspects
are included in the model selection decision space: architecture
of the graph convolutional network, architecture of the tree-
structured LSTM network, and dimension of the hash codes.
For the program-to-program synthesis model, the following
aspects are included in the model selection decision space:
architecture of the tree-structured LSTM encoder, architecture
of the tree-structure LSTM decoder, and number of hidden
units in LSTM networks.
c) Self data selection:
• Data for training the graph-to-graph construction model:
1) unstructured texts in the robotics and job-planning
literature; 2) a small-sized seed AJG (created by domain
experts) as inputs. We construct training examples in the
following way: sample a graph G from the seed graph,
sample a subgraph S from G. Jobs and analogy relations
in S are used as queries to retrieve relevant paragraphs
P from the unstructured texts. The (S, P, G) tuple forms
a training example where S and P are the inputs and G
is the output.
• Data for training the cross-modal hashing model: 1)
programs used for job planning, extracted from robotics
literature; 2) jobs in the AJG. We utilize a program
extractor to analyze the robotics literature and extract all
programs used for job planning.
• Data for training the program-to-program synthesis
model: jobs in the AJG and programs associated with
these jobs.
For each training example x, we automatically learn a
weight a ∈[0, 1]. If a is close to 1, it means that x tends
to be selected; otherwise, x tends to be excluded. a can be
parameterized using a deep neural network which takes a latent
representation of x as input and produces a scalar between 0
and 1.
d) Self optimization strategy selection: In the afore-
mentioned tasks, some of them have differentiable objective
functions and some do not. For differentiable objectives, we
can use gradient based methods for optimization; and for non-
differentiable ones, we can resort to reinforcement learning
algorithms. The candidate optimizers include: stochastic gra-
dient descent, Adam, AdaGrad, RMSProp, policy gradient,
deep deterministic policy gradient, actor-critic, asynchronous
advantage actor-critic, trust region policy optimization, proxi-
mal policy optimization, and Q-learning.
e) Self evaluation metric selection: Each of the afore-
mentioned models can be evaluated from multiple perspec-
tives. The candidate evaluation metrics include precision,
recall, F1, area under ROC curve, accuracy, BLEU, NIST,
perplexity, etc.
B. Case Study II: Automated Computer Programming
1) Problem Deﬁnition: Developing AI systems to auto-
matically write computer-executable programs has attracted
much research attention recently. Given a text describing a
target functionality to implement, an automated programming
system takes the textual description as input and automatically
generates a program to execute the function. Existing works
for automated programming require a lot of training data
which is difﬁcult to obtain and do not perform reasoning
to improve semantic correctness of generated programs. We
aim to leverage our proposed self-directed ML framework to
address these two problems, as shown in Figure 5.
2) An SDML-based Solution: To apply SDML for auto-
mated programming, we conﬁgure the following elements and
processes.
Fig. 5. Illustration diagram of automated computer programming.
a) Self task selection:
• Program generation: given a textual description describ-
ing a functionality, generate a preliminary program that
can fulﬁll this functionality.
• Self-supervised pretraining: pretrain the program genera-
tor to alleviate overﬁtting.
• Abductive reasoning: perform abductive reasoning to
improve semantic correctness of generated programs.
b) Self model selection:
• Function-to-program (F2P) generation model. It takes
a functionality description f as input and generates a
program p that can fulﬁll this functionality. The program
is represented using a sequence of constituent parse trees
where on the nodes are symbols. The F2P model is based
on an encoder-decoder architecture. The encoder takes
the functionality description f as input and generates a
latent embedding for f. We use BERT as the encoder. The
decoder takes the embedding of f as input and generates
a program. The architecture of the decoder is a sequence-
of-trees long short-term memory (LSTM) network. Given
the embedding, the decoder ﬁrst uses a sequential LSTM
to decode a sequence of hidden states, each corresponding
to one constituent tree. Then each hidden state is fed
into a top-down tree-structured LSTM to generate the
corresponding constituent tree.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
8
• Generative self-supervised pretraining model. To train the
complicated F2P model, a lot of (functionality descrip-
tion, program) pairs are needed, which is difﬁcult to
obtain. Without sufﬁcient training data, the F2P model
is prone to overﬁtting. To address this problem, we
leverage a generative self-supervised pretraining approach
to alleviate overﬁtting: we deﬁne a generative SSL task
to learn a better decoder of programs. Given an original
program represented as a tree, we perform tree-alteration
operations (e.g., removing a node, inserting a new node,
moving a subtree of one node to another node, swap a
parent node with its child node, etc.) to create a sequence
of augmented programs A1, · · · , AK. Then we deﬁne the
generative SSL task as: given AK, predict the reverse
sequence of programs (including the augmented ones and
the original one) AK−1, AK−2, · · · , O from which AK
is generated. We develop an encoder-decoder model to
perform this prediction task where an encoder is used to
encode AK and a decoder is used to decode the sequence
of programs AK−1, AK−2, · · · , A1, O. We use a bottom-
up tree-structured LSTM network as the encoder which
produces a latent embedding for AK. Then the embed-
ding is fed into a sequence-of-trees LSTM decoder [72]
to generate a sequence of trees, each corresponding to a
program in AK−1, AK−2, · · · , A1, O.
• Abductive reasoning model. Programs generated by the
F2P model may contain semantic errors and fail to
execute. To address this problem, we perform abductive
reasoning on the generated programs to revise them.
The abductive reasoning model consists of a set R of
abduction rules. Each rule takes a set of statements as
inputs and produces a new statement. Given the state-
ments S in a program generated by the F2P model,
the abductive reasoning model selects a subset T of
statements from S, selects an abduction rule r ∈R, and
applies r to T to generate a new statement s, which is
added to S. This procedure repeats several times until
enough new statements are generated. Now the learning
problem is which abduction rules should be applied to T.
We develop an end-to-end reinforcement learning based
approach to perform this learning task. This RL-based
framework learns an abductive reasoning policy (ARP)
network which takes a set S of statements and a set R of
abduction rules as inputs and produces a new statement.
The ARP network is composed of three sub-networks:
a statement selection (SS) network, an abduction rule
selection (ARS) network, and a termination network. The
SS network takes S as input and selects a subset T of
statements. The ARS network takes R and T as inputs
and selects a rule r from R. Then the rule r is applied to
T to infer a new statement. Note that it could be possible
that r is not compatible with T, meaning that there is
no way to perform inference of r on T. In this case, a
negative reward will be assigned to guide the SS and ARS
networks not to select invalid T and r. The termination
network takes the initial set of statements and the newly
generated statements as inputs and produces a binary
variable indicating whether the process of generating new
statements should stop. The three sub-networks work
together as follows. First, the termination network deter-
mines whether the generation process should continue. If
so, the SS network selects T ⊆S. Then the ARS network
selects r ∈R. Afterwards, r is applied to T to infer a
new statement s, which is added to S. This procedure
continues until the termination network determines to
stop it.
For the function-to-program generation model, the fol-
lowing aspects are included in the model selection deci-
sion space: architecture of the BERT encoder, dimension
of functionality embeddings, architecture of the sequence-
of-trees LSTM decoder, and Attention mechanism. For the
generative self-supervised pretraining model, the following
aspects are included in the model selection decision space:
program augmentation policies, architecture of the bottom-up
tree-structured LSTM encoder, architecture of the sequence-of-
trees LSTM decoder, and dimension of program embeddings.
For the abductive reasoning model, the following aspects are
included in the model selection decision space: 1) architecture
of the statement selection network, architecture of the abduc-
tion rule selection network, and architecture of the termination
network.
c) Self data selection:
• Data for training the function-to-program generation
model: (functionality description, code) pairs in the IBM
CodeNet dataset.
• Data for generative self-supervised pretraining: programs
crawled from GitHub.
• Data for training the abductive reasoning model: 1) ab-
duction rules in computer programming; 2) (functionality
description, code) pairs in the IBM CodeNet dataset.
The data selection mechanism is the same as that described
in the previous section.
d) Self optimization strategy selection: This application
involves both differentiable and non-differentiable objective
functions, which can be optimized using gradient based
methods and reinforcement learning methods. The candidate
optimizers are the same as those listed in the previous section.
e) Self evaluation metric selection: We evaluate each
model using multiple metrics from different perspectives. The
candidate evaluation metrics are the same as those listed in
the previous section.
C. Potential Applications
Our SDML framework can be broadly applied to a variety
of applications in NLP, CV, data mining and multimedia etc.,
beyond the two case studies described above. Here we present
some examples.
• I) Commonsense-grounded controllable story writing.
Controllable story writing, which automatically writes
stories given control factors such as sentiment and sto-
rylines, ﬁnds broad applications. To write meaningful
and informative stories, it is necessary for ML models
to incorporate external commonsense knowledge. For
example, given a control factor “On a sunny day, we

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
9
go for exercise.” which is a storyline, a story writ-
ing model would not be able to write an interesting
and informative story such as “Yesterday was a sunny
day. We wanted to do some exercise. Sunny weather
is good for hiking and hiking is a popular exercise in
California. So we went hiking.” without knowing the
commonsense knowledge that hiking is an exercise and
is preferable on sunny days. Developing a commonsense-
grounded story writer has several technical challenges:
1) how to automatically or semi-automatically collect
commonsense knowledge? 2) how to efﬁciently retrieve
relevant commonsense when writing stories? 3) how
to train highly-performant commonsense-grounded story
writing systems when the size of the story corpus cov-
ering commonsense knowledge is limited? We leverage
our proposed SDML framework to automatically solve
these problems via self-directed selection of tasks, data,
models, and optimizers.
II) Controllable video captioning aims to control the
video caption generation process by auxiliary informa-
tion guidance, e.g., the stylistic label (romantic, humor-
ous) [17], POS (Part-of-Speech) tag sequence [13], or
one exemplar sentence [74]. The most challenging one
is leveraging the exemplar sentence, which means gen-
erating a corresponding video caption sharing the same
syntactic structure with one exemplar sentence. For exam-
ple, when the groundtruth caption is “A group of people
are dancing” with the example sentence “Bunch of green
bananas hanging in front of a banana tree”. The model
may output “Group of young people dancing in front of a
live audience”. So the model needs to extract the syntactic
structure of the exemplar sentence, incorporate it into the
caption generation process reasonably and avoid being
distracted from the extra noisy semantic information.
The difﬁculties can be summarized as follows: 1) how
to effectively extract syntactic information for further
caption generation with limited exemplar sentences. 2)
how to preserve video semantics in the generated captions
despite the disturbances from exemplar sentences. There-
fore, the capability of the SDML framework in the self-
directed selection of tasks, data, models, and optimizers
can be utilized for addressing the challenges mentioned
above.
• I) Semantics-aware chatbots. In open-world dialog sys-
tems, especially goal-oriented dialog systems, it is very
important to understand the semantics of conversation
histories and perform reasoning on the semantics, in
order to give informative, correct, and useful responses.
For example, given a human utterance “I want to drink
some coffee. How far is the coffee shop?”, without
understanding the semantics of this utterance, the chatbot
tends to give an uninformative and boring response such
as “Sounds cool”. In contrast, if using semantic parsers
to parse the query “How far is the coffee shop?” into a
logical form which represents the semantics of this query
and performing reasoning on the logical form together
with an external knowledge base, the chatbot is able
to give a useful and informative response such as “It’s
about half mile.” To develop semantics-aware chatbots,
several technical challenges need to be addressed: 1)
given limited annotated (utterance, logical forms) pairs,
how to train highly accurate semantic parsers? 2) given
limited (logical forms, response) pairs, how to train a
semantics-aware response generation model that is re-
silient to overﬁtting? 3) how to train reasoning systems
to infer deeper semantics? Leveraging the capability of
SDML in performing self selection of tasks, data, models,
and optimizers, the aforementioned challenges can be
automatically coped with.
II) Video dialogues. This is also known as the task of
audio-visual scene-aware dialog (AVSD) [3], [12], which
requires an agent to hold the conversation with humans
in natural, conversational language about video content
and audio content in the format of dialogue box. In real
world dialog systems, applied into daily use including
tools for early childhood education, it is important to
understand the semantics of conversation histories and the
multi-modal representation of video, audio, and text, so as
to give responses with high relevance as well as enough
information. For example, given a video with audio about
a person walking by a bag and leaving a book, and then
given a question in natural human language ”Does she
walk quickly or slowly?, without understanding the video,
the response could be random ”Quickly” or ”Slowly”.
While an agent who fully understands the video context
can give the response ”She walks pretty slowly back and
forth before putting down the book”, which obviously
gives more information in a softer description [3], [39].
To develop audio-visual scene-aware dialog agents, sev-
eral technical challenges need to be addressed: 1) how
to train highly accurate semantic parsers? Since all the
questions and responses are given in the textual format,
precisely understanding the question is the key part. 2)
how to train systems to fuse and understand multi-modal
information including the dynamic scene, the audio, and
the history (previous rounds) of the dialog? Leveraging
the capability of SDML in performing self selection
of tasks, data, models, and optimizers, the challenges
mentioned above could be easily coped with.
V. RELATED WORKS
In a section, we discuss several existing works that are re-
lated to our proposed SDML paradigms. In concrete, Curricu-
lum Learning, Meta Learning, Automated Machine Learning,
Lifelong/Continual Learning and Reinforcement Learning are
all related to SDML.
A. Curriculum Learning
Curriculum learning (CL) [4], [67] is a training strategy of
machine learning that selects the most suitable examples or
tasks (with adjustable loss weights) for each current training
step, aiming to improve the model’s generalization ability,
robustness, convergence speed, etc. CL can be seen as a self-
directed learning strategy, since the learning algorithm itself
makes efforts to handle the biases (e.g., class imbalance, label

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
10
noise, etc.) of the training set by autonomously re-weighting
the training samples, which is also one of the most crucial
advantage of CL [52].
Existing CL strategies can be roughly categorized into
three groups: original CL, hard example mining (HEM), and
automatic CL. Original CL [4] proposes to train the machine
learning model with easier data subsets (or easier subtasks),
and then gradually increase the difﬁculty level of data (or
subtasks) until the whole training dataset (or the target task(s)).
Imitating human learning from easy to hard, CL helps to
improve the performance on test set (or target tasks) and
the convergence speed. Predeﬁned CL methods measure data
difﬁculty with task-speciﬁc domain knowledge. For example,
longer sentences are often supposed as harder training data in
NLP tasks, and audios with lower Signal to Noise Ratio are ex-
pected to be more noisy and thus harder in speech recognition
tasks. On the other hand, self-paced learning (SPL), a primary
branch of CL, takes the example-wise training loss of the
current model as the criteria for difﬁculty measurement. SPL
alternatively optimizes the re-weighting variables for each data
example and the model parameters. Other methods also decide
difﬁculty measurement by the losses of pretrained teacher
models. Hard example mining (HEM) [58] is another well-
studied and popular data selection strategy that proposes to
assign higher weights to harder data at each training step,
taking an opposite paradigm to CL. The basic assumption of
HEM is that the harder examples are more informative than
easier examples and thus more beneﬁcial for model learning.
The difﬁculty in HEM is often deﬁned according to the
current model losses on examples or the gradient magnitude.
Automatic CL methods discard the prior assumptions on the
data difﬁculty and training strategies and aim to learn the
loss weights of data examples at each training step according
to a speciﬁc target (e.g., higher training efﬁciency, higher
validation/testing performance, etc.). A typical way to achieve
automatic CL is to make a reinforcement learning (RL) agent
learn to assign weights to data. Concretely, the state in RL
is the data, current state of model, training epoch, etc., the
action in RL is to assign weights to the data, and the reward is
deﬁned according to the requirement of tasks. Other automatic
CL methods optimize the re-weighting strategies by Bayesian
Optimization [64], meta-learning [52], gradient descent [30],
[31], adversarial learning [75], etc.
CL has been theoretically and practically proven an effective
strategy to improve the model’s robustness [9], performance on
target data/task, convergence speed [10], etc. It will be inter-
esting to exploit more self-directed methodologies by letting
the algorithm itself decide the most suitable loss functions
(or learning objective), training data (with automated data
generation), and hypothesis space for the model optimization.
B. Meta Learning
Last decade has witnessed a prosperous development for
supervised learning, which usually depends on large labeled
datasets and trains a huge model with a large number of
parameters from scratch. Thus, the requirement for data and
computing resources is relatively high. However, there are
many applications where data is difﬁcult or expensive to
collect, or computing resources are limited. Since the lack
of training data, supervised learning is not suitable for these
tasks and shows bad performances.
For the sake of human-like learning, meta-learning which
targets at simulating the concept of “learning to learn”, pro-
vides a paradigm where machine learning models are built
based on experience with related tasks. Meta-learning has
been becoming a very hot research topic in both academy
and industry since the year of 2017, covering many research
communities including machine learning, computer vision,
natural language processing, data mining and multimedia.
We summarize meta-learning as a series of techniques that
can learn prior experience across tasks in a systematic, data-
driven manner. We deﬁne the problem of meta-learning in two
views, i.e., task distribution view and learner and meta-learner
view.
Task Distribution View A good meta-learning method should
help the model fθ gain the ability of learning to learn across
tasks and improve its performance on a distribution of tasks
p(τ), including potentially unseen tasks. The optimal model
parameters are:
θ∗= arg min
θ
Eτi∼p(τ)[Lθ(τi)].
(9)
To implement the optimization goal Eq. (9), we usually
sample M meta-train tasks from p(τ), with which we learn
meta-knowledge ω. The meta-knowledge ω guides the opti-
mization of the model across tasks, and can have different
meanings, such as parameter initialization, gradients, and
optimization strategy. The training and validation sets of a
meta-train task are often called support set and query set.
Formally, we denote the set used in the meta-train stage as
Dmeta−train =

(DS
meta−train, DQ
meta−train)(i)	M
i=1. After
meta-train stage, the model gets the optimal meta-knowledge
ω∗:
ω∗= arg max
ω
log p(ω|Dmeta−train).
(10)
Similarly, we denote the N sampled tasks used in the meta-test
stage as Dmeta−test =

(DS
meta−test, DQ
meta−test)(i)	N
i=1.
We use the learned meta-knowledge to train the model on each
previously unseen task and get the optimal model parameters:
θ∗= arg max
θ
log p(θ|ω∗, DS
meta−test).
(11)
We can evaluate the meta-learning algorithm by the perfor-
mance of θ∗(i) on the corresponding meta-test query set
DQ
meta−test.
Learner and Meta-learner View Another common view
is that meta-learning decomposes the process of parameter
update into two stages: base-learning stage and meta-learning
stage. As aforementioned, the dataset for each task τi ∼p(τ)is
divided into support set S(i) and query set Q(i). During the
base learning stage, an inner learner model fθ is trained on
the support set S(i) for solving a given speciﬁc task. During
meta-learning stage, an outer meta-learner gω is applied to
improve an outer objective Lmeta that is calculated on the
query set Q(i). The outer optimization problem contains the
inner optimization as a constraint. Using this notation, the

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
11
parameter ω of meta-learner gω can be regarded as meta-
knowledge. The meta-learning algorithm can be formulated
as follows:
ω∗= arg min
ω
N
X
i=1
Lmeta 
θ∗(i)(ω), ω, Q(i)
,
(12)
s.t.
θ∗(i)(ω) = arg min
θ
Lbase 
θ, ω, S(i)
,
(13)
where Lmeta and Lbase refer to the outer and inner objective
losses respectively, such as cross entropy in the case of few-
shot classiﬁcation.
C. Automated Machine Learning
Most machine learning methods have a plethora of de-
sign choices that need to be made beforehand, and their
performance is shown to be very sensitive to these choices.
Furthermore, the desirable choices of algorithm design often
vary over different tasks and hence the algorithm conﬁgura-
tion requires intensive expertise, which becomes a substantial
hurdle for new users and further restricts the applicability
and feasibility of modern machine learning methods in a
wider range of public ﬁelds. To remedy this issue, automated
machine learning (AutoML) is developed to conﬁgure ma-
chine learning methods in a data-driven, object-oriented and
automatic way. AutoML aims to learn the conﬁguration of
machine learning methods that attains the best performance
on the speciﬁc task. In this way, AutoML largely reduces the
background knowledge needed to customize modern machine
learning methods in speciﬁc application domains, which makes
machine learning technologies more user-friendly [26], [73].
Complete AutoML pipelines have the potential to automate
every step of machine learning, including auto data collec-
tion and cleaning, auto feature engineering, and auto model
selection and optimization, etc. Due to the popularity of deep
learning models, hyper-parameter optimization (HPO) [5],
[68], [41] and neural architecture search (NAS) [22], [69], [49]
are most widely studied. AutoML has achieved or surpassed
human-level performance [78], [38], [47] with little human
guidance in areas such as computer vision [77], [50].
D. Lifelong Learning/Continual learning
Lifelong learning models are designed by humans to obtain
an ability to continually learn new skills and knowledge, while
not forgetting what has been learned. This ability is already
available to humans, but remains a challenge for computational
systems and autonomous agents [46]. In the lifelong learning
approaches, the idea of self-directed learning is reﬂected in
many places, such as selection of key parameters, pruning
network architecture, and replaying memories.
The existing methodologies for Lifelong learning can be
divided into three categories: regularization-based methods,
parameter isolation-based methods, and replay-based methods.
Regularization-based methods [32], [43] limit how far the pa-
rameters can move from values that were optimal for previous
learning. They automatically determine which parameters are
essential and then penalize the change to these parameters
in future training. Parameter isolation-based methods [44],
[37] autonomously dedicate different subsets of the model
parameters to different skills and knowledge. As the model
learns new things, the capacity of the model may increase as
needed, while some redundant parameters may be reinitialized
or pruned. Replay-based methods [51], [28] need a memory
component to store data from the previous learning process.
The stored data are strategically sampled and help the model
avoid forgetting in future learning.
However, in lifelong learning/continual learning, what learn-
ing sequence to follow and what learning regime to use be-
tween different knowledge and skills are still not self-directed.
In the future, making lifelong learning/continual learning work
in a more and even complete self-directed way will be an
interesting and exciting area.
E. Reinforcement Learning
Reinforcement Learning (RL), which emits a sequence of
actions in the Markov Decision Process (MDP), is sometimes
seen as a new category of machine learning method [24]. Other
than having an explicit ground-truth target, RL models are
usually optimized to maximize a long-term reward. In another
word, RL tasks usually do not have an immediate target like
“this image should be an apple” but have a long-term goal
like “win the game of Go with a sequence of actions” [59].
As both RL and our SDML are optimized towards a long-term
goal and do not have explicit supervision, the two paradigms
have a lot of features in common. But, there are also some
subtle and crucial differences in between. In the following, we
brieﬂy introduce Reinforcement Learning considering these
differences.
Firstly, the optimization target. An RL model is usually
designed for a speciﬁc task, e.g., chess [59], games [45]
robotics [34], auto-driving [54]. Given a task, the current
RL method would construct a model and sample data traces
from the task data distribution. Recently, equipped with Deep
Learning as a power function ﬁtting tool, RL methods tend to
leave most of the work to its underlying deep learning model
and focus on the optimization methods. As a comparison the
target of SDML is much bigger, which the target is far more
than a speciﬁc task, also includes the process of ﬁnding a
proper model (self data selection), data (self-data selection),
and optimization method (self optimization strategy selection)
to optimize the task. It would be possible to model the target of
SDML as an RL target and optimize that target in the abstract.
Still, it would not be technically possible because the target
of SDML would be too complicated and comprehensive to be
modeled with a single RL model.
An RL model is usually optimized via the samples drawn by
sampling. Early sampling strategies are inspired by the multi-
arm bandit that tries to balance exploration and exploitation.
The observation in RL is more likely the “data point” in
supervised learning, all the observations come from the same
distribution, and the goal is to select the best “action” under
that circumstance. While in SDML, we work with “task
distribution” rather than “data distribution”. The goal is more

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
12
general and difﬁcult, as there may be dozens of different
data distributions that SDML is required to handle, and our
observation is a task distribution rather than a single data point.
From the perspective of modeling, RL agents could be
categorized into model-free and model-based [63]. The former
is known for policy-gradient methods that directly learn the
mapping from observation O to the best action a, which has
achieved great success in early times [62]. The latter has
been studied recently in [56], [23], where besides the policy
is modeled, the environment is also modeled to predict the
possible reward R[a] given an action a. The modeling of
reward helps model-based RL methods have dominated several
RL areas. Modeling the environment as a “reward function”
is an ingenious abstraction as the whole environment would
be hard to model. In SDML, we have to model more than the
“reward function”. Usually, we humans have an understanding
of the world so as to abstract commonsense information
from different environments and make decisions for each of
them. While in the scope of SDML, the environment could
cover more: task distribution, model distribution, and even
knowledge distribution. A SDML model has to model all these
distributions at the same time so as to master them all.
VI. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Drawing inspiration from humans’ self-directed learning,
we introduce the principal concept and propose the frame-
work of self-directed machine learning (SDML). SDML aims
for high autonomy, which conducts self task selection, self
data selection, self model selection, self optimization strategy
selection as well as self evaluation metric selection instead
of requiring humans to manually perform the selections. Our
proposed SDML framework consists of key elements including
internal awareness and external awareness and key processes
including self-directed task selection, data selection, model
selection, and optimizer selection. We propose a multi-level
optimization based framework to formulate SDML. In the two
case studies including autonomous rescue robotics and auto-
mated computer programming, we illustrate how to leverage
SDML to solve complicated practical problems autonomously.
It is worth noting that our proposed SDML framework is ag-
nostic to speciﬁc ML applications and can be broadly applied
to improve a variety of ML tasks including but not limited
to: classiﬁcation, regression, clustering, text generation, dialog
systems, machine translation, document summarization, object
detection, semantic segmentation, visual question answering,
time series prediction, link and node prediction in graphs, etc.
For future work, we plan to investigate the following
research directions.
• Interpretable SDML Being reliable is almost a must
for ML models to be willingly used by humans. To gain
trust from humans, we will develop interpretable SDML
methods which generate explainable and transparent pre-
dictions. Most of the prior approaches for interpretable
ML focus on ﬁnding out key evidence from the input
data (such as phrases in texts and regions in images)
that is most relevant to a prediction, then using this
evidence to justify the meaningfulness of the prediction.
However, in many cases, the attributed evidence does
not make sense to the human. A fundamental reason is
that the reasoning processes of ML models and humans
are not aligned, though they reach the same prediction
outcome. To address this issue, we plan to study weakly
supervised model-interpretation. Speciﬁcally, we will de-
velop natural language processing methods to analyze
texts and automatically extract the decision-making pro-
cesses of humans therefrom, then inject these structured
processes into the SDML framework as an inductive
bias to achieve human-machine alignment. As a longer-
term goal, we will collaborate with cognitive scientists to
deeply understand the fundamental mechanisms of how
humans interpret phenomena and decisions and use these
mechanisms to guide the design of SDML frameworks.
• Robust SDML In many applications such as healthcare,
ﬁnance, etc., decisions are mission-critical. ML-aided
decision support software is required to be secure and
robust against malicious attacks. The existing clinical ML
models are shown to be vulnerable to adversarial exam-
ples. For example, given a chest X-ray that is predicted by
a convolutional neural network as containing pneumonia,
adding tiny perturbations (that are not perceivable by
the human) could render the model thinks this image
has no pneumonia. Most of the prior defense methods
are highly customized to speciﬁc attacks; thus they may
easily become futile when the attacks change. We will
develop SDML frameworks which represent attacks and
defenses in a uniﬁed way and accordingly devise defense
techniques that are able to cope with various forms
of attacks and robust to the changes of attacks. As a
longer-term goal, we will collaborate with cryptographers
to develop ML-speciﬁc homomorphic encryption (HE)
methods that allow SDML training and inference on
ciphertexts.
• Sample-efﬁcient SDML In many applications, due to pri-
vacy concerns and administrative regulations, the amount
of data that the SDML framework could access for model
training is usually quite limited. And the cost (regarding
time and ﬁnancial budget) of attempting to obtain more
data grows super-linearly with the amount of data. We
are interested in answering a research question: under
circumstances where we do not have a large amount of
data due to cost-control purposes, can we still be able
to learn highly performant ML models via SDML? This
question has been investigated in previous studies based
on few-shot learning, meta-learning, transfer learning, etc.
However, these approaches do not perform reasoning to
mitigate data deﬁciency. We plan to bridge this gap.
We will develop neural-symbolic reasoning systems to
understand the relationship between high-level variables
in data, develop logical and inductive reasoning systems
to discover the causality between tasks, and leverage
the reasoning outcomes to guide self-directed learning
processes. We will develop graph neural network based
reasoning systems to automatically discover logical rules
and conduct long-range multi-step complex reasoning to
determine the execution order and interactions between

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
13
models.
