Robustly Leveraging Prior Knowledge in Text Classiﬁcation
Biao Liu
Tsinghua University
Haidian District, Beijing, China

Minlie Huang
Tsinghua University
Haidian District, Beijing, China

Abstract
Prior knowledge has been shown very use-
ful to address many natural language process-
ing tasks. Many approaches have been pro-
posed to formalise a variety of knowledge,
however, whether the proposed approach is ro-
bust or sensitive to the knowledge supplied to
the model has rarely been discussed. In this
paper, we propose three regularization terms
on top of generalized expectation criteria, and
conduct extensive experiments to justify the
robustness of the proposed methods. Exper-
imental results demonstrate that our proposed
methods obtain remarkable improvements and
are much more robust than baselines.
1
Introduction
We posses a wealth of prior knowledge about many
natural language processing tasks.
For example,
in text categorization, we know that words such as
NBA, player, and basketball are strong indicators of
the sports category (Druck et al., 2008), and words
like terrible, boring, and messing indicate a nega-
tive polarity while words like perfect, exciting, and
moving suggest a positive polarity in sentiment clas-
siﬁcation.
A key problem arisen here, is how to leverage
such knowledge to guide the learning process, an in-
teresting problem for both NLP and machine learn-
ing communities. Previous studies addressing the
problem fall into several lines.
First, to leverage
prior knowledge to label data (Haghighi and Klein,
2006; Raghavan and Allan, 2007). Second, to en-
code prior knowledge with a prior on parameters,
which can be commonly seen in many Bayesian ap-
proaches (Andrzejewski and Zhu, 2009; Andrzejew-
ski et al., 2011). Third, to formalise prior knowl-
edge with additional variables and dependencies (Li
et al., 2010). Last, to use prior knowledge to control
the distributions over latent output variables (Grac¸a
et al., 2007; McCallum et al., 2007; Chang et al.,
2007), which makes the output variables easily in-
terpretable.
However, a crucial problem, which has rarely
been addressed, is the bias in the prior knowledge
that we supply to the learning model. Would the
model be robust or sensitive to the prior knowledge?
Or, which kind of knowledge is appropriate for the
task? Let’s see an example: we may be a baseball
fan but unfamiliar with hockey so that we can pro-
vide a few number of feature words of baseball, but
much less of hockey for a baseball-hockey classiﬁ-
cation task. Such prior knowledge may mislead the
model with heavy bias to baseball.
If the model
cannot handle this situation appropriately, the per-
formance may be undesirable.
In this paper, we investigate into the problem in
the framework of Generalized Expectation Criteria
(McCallum et al., 2007). The study aims to reveal
the factors of reducing the sensibility of the prior
knowledge and therefore to make the model more
robust and practical. To this end, we introduce aux-
iliary regularization terms in which our prior knowl-
edge is formalized as distribution over output vari-
ables. Recall the example just mentioned, though we
do not have enough knowledge to provide features
for class hockey, it is easy for us to provide some
neutral words, namely words that are not strong in-
arXiv:1503.00841v1  [cs.CL]  3 Mar 2015

dicators of any class, like player here. As one of the
factors revealed in this paper, supplying neutral fea-
ture words can boost the performance remarkably,
making the model more robust.
More attractively, we do not need manual annota-
tion to label these neutral feature words in our pro-
posed approach.
More speciﬁcally, we explore three regulariza-
tion terms to address the problem: (1) a regulariza-
tion term associated with neutral features; (2) the
maximum entropy of class distribution regulariza-
tion term; and (3) the KL divergence between ref-
erence and predicted class distribution. For the ﬁrst
manner, we simply use the most common features as
neutral features and assume the neutral features are
distributed uniformly over class labels. For the sec-
ond and third one, we assume we have some knowl-
edge about the class distribution which will be de-
tailed soon later.
To summarize, the main contributions of this
work are as follows:
• We explore three regularization terms to make
the model more robust: a regularization term
associated with neutral features, the maxi-
mum entropy of class distribution regulariza-
tion term, and the KL divergence between ref-
erence and predicted class distribution.
• Experiments demonstrate that the proposed ap-
proaches outperform baselines and work much
more robustly.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: In
Section 2, we brieﬂy describe the generalized expec-
tation criteria and present the proposed regulariza-
tion terms. In Section 3, we conduct extensive ex-
periments to justify the proposed methods. We sur-
vey related work in Section 4, and summarize our
work in Section 5.
2
Method
We address the robustness problem on top of GE-
FL (Druck et al., 2008), a GE method which lever-
ages labeled features as prior knowledge. A labeled
feature is a strong indicator of a speciﬁc class and
is manually provided to the classiﬁer. For example,
words like amazing, exciting can be labeled features
for class positive in sentiment classiﬁcation.
2.1
Generalized Expectation Criteria
Generalized expectation (GE) criteria (McCallum et
al., 2007) provides us a natural way to directly con-
strain the model in the preferred direction. For ex-
ample, when we know the proportion of each class
of the dataset in a classiﬁcation task, we can guide
the model to predict out a pre-speciﬁed class distri-
bution.
Formally, in a parameter estimation objective
function, a GE term expresses preferences on the
value of some constraint functions about the model’s
expectation. Given a constraint function G(x, y), a
conditional model distribution pθ(y|x), an empiri-
cal distribution ˜p(x) over input samples and a score
function S, a GE term can be expressed as follows:
S(E˜p(x)[Epθ(y|x)[G(x, y)]])
(1)
2.2
Learning from Labeled Features
Druck et al. (2008) proposed GE-FL to learn from
labeled features using generalized expectation crite-
ria. When given a set of labeled features K, the ref-
erence distribution over classes of these features is
denoted by ˆp(y|xk), k ∈K. GE-FL introduces the
divergence between this reference distribution and
the model predicted distribution pθ(y|xk) , as a term
of the objective function:
O =
X
k∈K
KL(ˆp(y|xk)||pθ(y|xk)) +
X
y,i
θ2
yi
2σ2
(2)
where θyi is the model parameter which indicates
the importance of word i to class y. The predicted
distribution pθ(y|xk) can be expressed as follows:
pθ(y|xk) = 1
Ck
X
x
pθ(y|x)I(xk)
in which I(xk) is 1 if feature k occurs in instance
x and 0 otherwise, Ck = P
x I(xk) is the number
of instances with a non-zero value of feature k, and
pθ(y|x) takes a softmax form as follows:
pθ(y|x) =
1
Z(x) exp(
X
i
θyixi).
To solve the optimization problem, L-BFGS can
be used for parameter estimation.

In the framework of GE, this term can be ob-
tained by setting the constraint function G(x, y) =
1
Ck ⃗I(y)I(xk), where ⃗I(y) is an indicator vector with
1 at the index corresponding to label y and 0 else-
where.
2.3
Regularization Terms
GE-FL reduces the heavy load of instance anno-
tation and performs well when we provide prior
knowledge with no bias. In our experiments, we ob-
serve that comparable numbers of labeled features
for each class have to be supplied. But as mentioned
before, it is often the case that we are not able to
provide enough knowledge for some of the classes.
For the baseball-hockey classiﬁcation task, as shown
before, GE-FL will predict most of the instances as
baseball. In this section, we will show three terms
to make the model more robust.
2.3.1
Regularization Associated with Neutral
Features
Neutral features are features that are not infor-
mative indicator of any classes, for instance, word
player to the baseball-hockey classiﬁcation task.
Such features are usually frequent words across all
categories.
When we set the preference distribu-
tion of the neutral features to be uniform distributed,
these neutral features will prevent the model from
biasing to the class that has a dominate number of
labeled features.
Formally, given a set of neutral features K
′, the
uniform distribution is ˆpu(y|xk) =
1
|C|, k ∈K
′,
where |C| is the number of classes. The objective
function with the new term becomes
ONE = O +
X
k∈K′
KL(ˆpu(y|xk)||pθ(y|xk)).
(3)
Note that we do not need manual annotation to pro-
vide neutral features. One simple way is to take the
most common features as neutral features. Experi-
mental results show that this strategy works success-
fully.
2.3.2
Regularization with Maximum Entropy
Principle
Another way to prevent the model from drifting
from the desired direction is to constrain the pre-
dicted class distribution on unlabeled data. When
lacking knowledge about the class distribution of the
data, one feasible way is to take maximum entropy
principle, as below:
OME = O + λ
X
y
p(y) log p(y)
(4)
where p(y) is the predicted class distribution, given
by p(y) =
1
|X|
P
x pθ(y|x). To control the inﬂuence
of this term on the overall objective function, we can
tune λ according to the difference in the number of
labeled features of each class. In this paper, we sim-
ply set λ to be proportional to the total number of
labeled features, say λ = β|K|.
This maximum entropy term can be derived by
setting the constraint function to G(x, y) = ⃗I(y).
Therefore, Epθ(y|x)[G(x, y)] is just the model distri-
bution pθ(y|x) and its expectation with the empiri-
cal distribution ˜p(x) is simply the average over input
samples, namely p(y). When S takes the maximum
entropy form, we can derive the objective function
as above.
2.3.3
Regularization with KL Divergence
Sometimes, we have already had much knowl-
edge about the corpus, and can estimate the class
distribution roughly without labeling instances.
Therefore, we introduce the KL divergence between
the predicted and reference class distributions into
the objective function.
Given the preference class distribution ˆp(y), we
modify the objective function as follows:
OKL = O + λKL(ˆp(y)||p(y))
(5)
Similarly, we set λ = β|K|.
This divergence term can be derived by setting the
constraint function to G(x, y) = ⃗I(y) and setting the
score function to S(ˆp, p) = P
i ˆpi log ˆpi
pi , where p
and ˆp are distributions. Note that this regularization
term involves the reference class distribution which
will be discussed later.
3
Experiments
In this section, we ﬁrst justify the approach when
there exists unbalance in the number of labeled fea-
tures or in class distribution. Then, to test the in-
ﬂuence of λ, we conduct some experiments with
the method which incorporates the KL divergence of

class distribution. Last, we evaluate our approaches
in 9 commonly used text classiﬁcation datasets. We
set λ = 5|K| by default in all experiments unless
there is explicit declaration.
The baseline we choose here is GE-FL (Druck et
al., 2008), a method based on generalization expec-
tation criteria.
3.1
Data Preparation
We evaluate our methods on several commonly used
datasets whose themes range from sentiment, web-
page, science to medical and healthcare. We use
bag-of-words feature and remove stopwords in the
preprocess stage. Though we have labels of all doc-
uments, we do not use them during the learning pro-
cess, instead, we use the label of features.
The movie dataset, in which the task is to classify
the movie reviews as positive or negtive, is used for
testing the proposed approaches with unbalanced la-
beled features, unbalanced datasets or different λ pa-
rameters1. All unbalanced datasets are constructed
based on the movie dataset by randomly removing
documents of the positive class. For each experi-
ment, we conduct 10-fold cross validation.
Labeled Features
As described in (Druck et al., 2008), there are two
ways to obtain labeled features. The ﬁrst way is to
use information gain. We ﬁrst calculate the mutual
information of all features according to the labels of
the documents and select the top 20 as labeled fea-
tures for each class as a feature pool. Note that using
information gain requires the document label, but
this is only to simulate how we human provide prior
knowledge to the model. The second way is to use
LDA (Blei et al., 2003) to select features. We use the
same selection process as (Druck et al., 2008), where
they ﬁrst train a LDA on the dataset, and then select
the most probable features of each topic (sorted by
P(wi|tj), the probability of word wi given topic tj).
Similar to (Schapire et al., 2002; Druck et al.,
2008), we estimate the reference distribution of the
labeled features using a heuristic strategy. If there
are |C| classes in total, and n classes are associated
with a feature k, the probability that feature k is re-
lated with any one of the n classes is 0.9
n and with
1We also experimented on other datasets, and observed sim-
ilar results.
any other class is
0.1
|C|−n
2.
Neutral features are the most frequent words af-
ter removing stop words, and their reference distri-
butions are uniformly distributed. We use the top 10
frequent words as neutral features in all experiments.
3.2
With Unbalanced Labeled Features
In this section, we evaluate our approach when there
is unbalanced knowledge on the categories to be
classiﬁed. The labeled features are obtained through
information gain. Two settings are chosen:
(a) We randomly select t ∈[1, 20] features from
the feature pool for one class, and only one feature
for the other. The original balanced movie dataset is
used (positive:negative=1:1).
(b) Similar to (a), but the dataset is unbalanced,
obtained by randomly removing 75% positive docu-
ments (positive:negative=1:4).
As shown in Figure 1, Maximum entropy princi-
ple shows improvement only on the balanced case.
An obvious reason is that maximum entropy only fa-
vors uniform distribution.
Incorporating Neutral features performs similarly
to maximum entropy since we assume that neutral
words are uniformly distributed. Its accuracy de-
creases slowly when the number of labeled features
becomes larger (t > 4) (Figure 1(a)), suggesting that
the model gradually biases to the class with more la-
beled features, just like GE-FL.
Incorporating the KL divergence of class distribu-
tion performs much better than GE-FL on both bal-
anced and unbalanced datasets. This shows that it is
effective to control the unbalance in labeled features
and in the dataset.
3.3
With Balanced Labeled Features
We also compare with the baseline when the labeled
features are balanced.
Similar to the experiment
above, the labeled features are obtained by informa-
tion gain. Two settings are experimented with:
(a) We randomly select t ∈[1, 20] features from
the feature pool for each class, and conduct compar-
isons on the original balanced movie dataset (posi-
tive:negtive=1:1).
2Previous work shows the model is insensitive to the setting
of the reference distribution.

(a) balanced dataset
(b) unbalanced dataset(1:4)
Figure 1: Performance with unbalanced labeled features, tested on the movie dataset. Randomly select from the
feature pool t (x-axis) labeled features for one class, and select 1 feature for the other. The unbalanced datasets in (b)
are constructed by randomly removing 75% of the positive documents.
(a) balanced dataset
(b) unbalanced dataset(1:4)
Figure 2: Performance with balanced labeled features, tested on the movie dataset. Randomly select from the feature
pool t (x-axis) labeled features for each class. The unbalanced datasets in (b) are constructed by randomly removing
75% of the positive documents.
(b) Similar to (a), but the class distribution is un-
balanced, by randomly removing 75% positive doc-
uments (positive:negative=1:4).
Results are shown in Figure 2. When the dataset is
balanced (Figure 2(a)), there is little difference be-
tween GE-FL and our methods. The reason is that
the proposed regularization terms provide no addi-
tional knowledge to the model and there is no bias in
the labeled features. On the unbalanced dataset (Fig-
ure 2(b)), incorporating KL divergence is much bet-
ter than GE-FL since we provide additional knowl-
edge(the true class distribution), but maximum en-
tropy and neutral features are much worse because
forcing the model to approach the uniform distribu-
tion misleads it.
3.4
With Unbalanced Class Distributions
Our methods are also evaluated on datasets with dif-
ferent unbalanced class distributions. We manually
construct several movie datasets with class distribu-
tions of 1:2, 1:3, 1:4 by randomly removing 50%,
67%, 75% positive documents.
The original bal-
anced movie dataset is used as a control group. We
test with both balanced and unbalanced labeled fea-
tures. For the balanced case, we randomly select 10
features from the feature pool for each class, and for
the unbalanced case, we select 10 features for one
class, and 1 feature for the other. Results are shown

(a) balanced labeled features
(b) unbalanced labeled features
Figure 3: Inﬂuence of unbalanced class distribution, tested on the movie dataset. We provide 10 labeled features for
each class in (a), and, 10 for one class and 1 for the other in (b). The three unbalanced datasets are constructed by
randomly removing 50%, 67%, 75% documents of the positive class.
(a) balanced dataset
(b) unbalanced dataset(1:4)
Figure 4: The inﬂuence of λ, tested on the movie dataset. Randomly select from the feature pool t (x-axis) labeled
features for one class, and keep 1 feature for the other. The unbalanced datasets in (b) are constructed by randomly
removing 75% documents of the positive class.
in Figure 3.
Figure 3 (a) shows that when the dataset and
the labeled features are both balanced, there is lit-
tle difference between our methods and GE-FL(also
see Figure 2(a)).
But when the class distribution
becomes more unbalanced, the difference becomes
more remarkable. Performance of neutral features
and maximum entropy decrease signiﬁcantly but
incorporating KL divergence increases remarkably.
This suggests if we have more accurate knowledge
about class distribution, KL divergence can guide
the model to the right direction.
Figure 3 (b) shows that when the labeled features
are unbalanced, our methods signiﬁcantly outper-
forms GE-FL. Incorporating KL divergence is ro-
bust enough to control unbalance both in the dataset
and in labeled features while the other three methods
are not so competitive.
3.5
The Inﬂuence of λ
We present the inﬂuence of λ on the method that
incorporates KL divergence in this section. Since we
simply set λ = β|K|, we just tune β here. Note that
when β = 0, the newly introduced regularization
term is disappeared, and thus the model is actually
GE-FL. Again, we test the method with different λ
in two settings:
(a) We randomly select t ∈[1, 20] features from

Dataset
GE-FL
Neutral Features
Max Entropy
KL Divergence
movie
0.623
0.672
0.681
0.684
sraa
0.559
0.628
0.618
0.547
webkb
0.615
0.685
0.640
0.646
med-space
0.927
0.921
0.936
0.928
ibm-mac
0.817
0.796
0.837
0.833
baseball-hockey
0.915
0.935
0.925
0.923
20 newsgroups
0.667
0.669
0.680
0.677
ﬁnancial-healthcare
0.588
0.618
0.618
0.507
sector.top
0.596
0.653
0.581
0.639
Table 1: Performance using LDA-features. Bold text means the method performs better than GE-FL.
the feature pool for one class, and only one fea-
ture for the other class. The original balanced movie
dataset is used (positive:negative=1:1).
(b) Similar to (a), but the dataset is unbalanced,
obtained by randomly removing 75% positive docu-
ments (positive:negative=1:4).
Results are shown in Figure 4. As expected, λ re-
ﬂects how strong the regularization is. The model
tends to be closer to our preferences with the in-
creasing of λ on both cases.
3.6
Using LDA Selected Features
We compare our methods with GE-FL on all the 9
datasets in this section. Instead of using features
obtained by information gain, we use LDA to se-
lect labeled features. Unlike information gain, LDA
does not employ any instance labels to ﬁnd labeled
features.
In this setting, we can build classiﬁca-
tion models without any instance annotation, but just
with labeled features.
Table 1 shows that our three methods signiﬁcantly
outperform GE-FL. Incorporating neutral features
performs better than GE-FL on 7 of the 9 datasets,
maximum entropy is better on 8 datasets, and KL
divergence better on 7 datasets.
LDA selects out the most predictive features as
labeled features without considering the balance
among classes. GE-FL does not exert any control
on such an issue, so the performance is severely suf-
fered. Our methods introduce auxiliary regulariza-
tion terms to control such a bias problem and thus
promote the model signiﬁcantly.
4
Related Work
There have been much work that incorporate prior
knowledge into learning, and two related lines are
surveyed here. One is to use prior knowledge to la-
bel unlabeled instances and then apply a standard
learning algorithm.
The other is to constrain the
model directly with prior knowledge.
Liu et al.(2004) manually labeled features which
are highly predictive to unsupervised clustering as-
signments and use them to label unlabeled data.
Chang et al.(2007) proposed constraint driven learn-
ing.
They ﬁrst used constraints and the learned
model to annotate unlabeled instances, and then up-
dated the model with the newly labeled data. Daum´e
(2008) proposed a self training method in which sev-
eral models are trained on the same dataset, and only
unlabeled instances that satisfy the cross task knowl-
edge constraints are used in the self training process.
MaCallum et al.(2007) proposed generalized ex-
pectation(GE) criteria which formalised the knowl-
edge as constraint terms about the expectation of the
model into the objective function.Grac¸a et al.(2007)
proposed posterior regularization(PR) framework
which projects the model’s posterior onto a set of
distributions that satisfy the auxiliary constraints.
Druck et al.(2008) explored constraints of labeled
features in the framework of GE by forcing the
model’s predicted feature distribution to approach
the reference distribution. Andrzejewski et al.(2011)
proposed a framework in which general domain
knowledge can be easily incorporated into LDA.
Altendorf et al.(2012) explored monotonicity con-
straints to improve the accuracy while learning from
sparse data. Chen et al.(2013) tried to learn compre-

hensible topic models by leveraging multi-domain
knowledge.
Mann and McCallum (2007; 2010) incorporated
not only labeled features but also other knowledge
like class distribution into the objective function
of GE-FL. But they discussed only from the semi-
supervised perspective and did not investigate into
the robustness problem, unlike what we addressed
in this paper.
There are also some active learning methods try-
ing to use prior knowledge. Raghavan et al.(2006)
proposed to use feedback on instances and features
interlacedly, and demonstrated that feedback on fea-
tures boosts the model much. Druck et al.(2009)
proposed an active learning method which solicits
labels on features rather than on instances and then
used GE-FL to train the model.
5
Conclusion and Discussions
This paper investigates into the problem of how to
leverage prior knowledge robustly in learning mod-
els. We propose three regularization terms on top
of generalized expectation criteria. As demonstrated
by the experimental results, the performance can
be considerably improved when taking into account
these factors. Comparative results show that our pro-
posed methods is more effective and works more ro-
bustly against baselines. To the best of our knowl-
edge, this is the ﬁrst work to address the robustness
problem of leveraging knowledge, and may inspire
other research.
We then present more detailed discussions about
the three regularization methods. Incorporating neu-
tral features is the simplest way of regularization,
which doesn’t require any modiﬁcation of GE-FL
but just ﬁnding out some common features. But as
Figure 1(a) shows, only using neutral features are
not strong enough to handle extremely unbalanced
labeled features.
The maximum entropy regularization term shows
the strong ability of controlling unbalance.
This method doesn’t need any extra knowledge,
and is thus suitable when we know nothing about the
corpus. But this method assumes that the categories
are uniformly distributed, which may not be the case
in practice, and it will have a degraded performance
if the assumption is violated (see Figure 1(b), Figure
2(b), Figure 3(a)).
The KL divergence performs much better on un-
balanced corpora than other methods. The reason is
that KL divergence utilizes the reference class distri-
bution and doesn’t make any assumptions. The fact
suggests that additional knowledge does beneﬁt the
model.
However, the KL divergence term requires pro-
viding the true class distribution. Sometimes, we
may have the exact knowledge about the true dis-
tribution, but sometimes we may not. Fortunately,
the model is insensitive to the true distribution and
therefore a rough estimation of the true distribu-
tion is sufﬁcient. In our experiments, when the true
class distribution is 1:2, where the reference class
distribution is set to 1:1.5/1:2/1:2.5, the accuracy is
0.755/0.756/0.760 respectively. This provides us the
possibility to perform simple computing on the cor-
pus to obtain the distribution in reality. Or, we can
set the distribution roughly with domain expertise.
