ELECTRONICS LETTERS 13th May 2010 Vol 46 Issue 10 p. 677-678 
 
A Cognitive Memory Network 
 
 
A. P. James and S. Dimitrijev 
 
 
A resistive memory network that has no crossover wiring is 
proposed to overcome the hardware limitations to size and 
functional complexity that is associated with conventional analog 
neural networks. The proposed memory network is based on 
simple network cells that are arranged in a hierarchical modular 
architecture. 
Cognitive 
functionality 
of 
this 
network 
is 
demonstrated by an example of character recognition. The 
network is trained by an evolutionary process to completely 
recognize characters deformed by random noise, rotation, 
scaling, and shifting.  
 
Introduction: Analog neural network hardware has many 
advantages over its digital and software counterparts. However, 
the 
existing 
network 
architectures 
for 
analog 
hardware 
implementations are limited by wiring complexity associated with 
the large number of crossover wirings resulting from its synaptic 
connections [1-3].  
In this Letter, we present the concept of a hardware-based 
cognitive memory network with architecture that has no crossover 
wiring. The cognitive functionality of the network is demonstrated 
through an example of deformed character recognition. 
 
Network Cell and Architecture: Fig. 1a shows a network cell that 
can be used in the network architecture shown in Fig. 1b. The 
input to the network are analog or digital voltages labeled by Vi (i 
= 1, 2, ..N). Parameters of the cell are the resistors Ri (i = 1, 2..N) 
and Ro, whereas the threshold voltage (VT) of the inverter is kept 
constant for consistency with the standard CMOS technology. 
The resistors Ri and Ro are memory elements (e.g. gate 
controlled Flash [4], MRAM [5], QsRAM [6] etc) to enable the 
network to learn the desired function for a given task. The inverter 
is used to provide binary outputs from the cells.  
 
Fig. 1 Memory network cell and architecture.  
a     The cell structure. 
b   The network architecture (each node represents a cell) with no 
crossover wiring. The cells are arranged in a hierarchical manner 
with NI >>NO. 
The network architecture having no crossover wiring is formed by 
many cells across several layers arranged in a hierarchical 
manner (Fig. 1b). The system architecture enables space-
dimensionality reduction, as illustrated by the larger number of 
inputs (NI) and the smaller number of digital outputs (NO).  The 
network is highly modular in terms of the arrangement of the cells 
between layers. Each cell can have different number of input 
resistors (Ri) within a layer or between the layers. This means 
that there can be many different ways of forming the network for 
the same given number of inputs and outputs. The parameters of 
the network are the complete set of resistor values used in the 
network, which are labeled as Rset. The inverters in the cell 
provide signal regeneration along the layers so that the network 
becomes almost immune to signal noise.  
 
Character recognition example: The aim of this example is to 
illustrate that by using an evolutionary process the parameters of 
the memory network can be trained to recognize printed 
characters with random deformations. Each character in Fig. 2a 
is represented as a matrix of 36×36 pixels in digital values, so 
that the total number of required inputs to the network at a time 
becomes 1296. This network has 3 layers with 6, 6, and 3 inputs 
per cell in the first, second and third layers, respectively. The 
network is set with 12 outputs, which means that 12 bit codes are 
used to classify the characters. There are 212 possible output 
codes, which allow more than one code to be assigned to each 
character. Although the network could function with a single code 
per character, the multiple-code approach can help to achieve 
better noise immunity. In this specific example, each character is 
assigned a main code and then the twelve codes that differ by 
one bit from the main code are added to form the set of codes for 
each character. 
The evolutionary process used to setup the values of the network 
resistors (Rset)  consists of selection, genetic, and training 
stages, as illustrated in Fig. 2b. These stages can be treated as a 
3 level training algorithm that can be implemented as peripheral 
circuits on the same chip within the network. The average bit 
error per character (ABE), which is the net average of all the 
output bit errors, is used as a measure for ranking the Rset’s 
generated at each level. 
 
Fig. 2 Character recognition using memory network 
a     Illustration of the memory network used for recognition of characters   
with random noise, rotation, shift, and scaling.  
b       Evolutionary process used to set the parameters of the memory 
network 
(Rset’s) 
that 
provide 
the 
character-recognition 
functionality. 
 
 
At the selection level, Rset’s are set to random values and the 26 
characters are applied one by one to the inputs of the network 
(Fig. 2b). The first 400 Rset’s that give unique binary output 
codes for each of the character are selected. Among these 400 
Rset’s, the five Rset’s with the lowest ABE that are processed 
against 12% standard salt and pepper noise are selected to be 
used in the genetic level.  
The genetic level is designed to accelerate the search for stable 
Rset combinations against the effects of noise by using a genetic 
algorithm with two random crossover points without mutation. At 

ELECTRONICS LETTERS 13th May 2010 Vol 46 Issue 10 p. 677-678 
 
the genetic level, 800 second generation of Rset’s are created 
and five of those with the lowest ABE are selected for the training 
level.  
Training phase consists of 26 capital printed characters with the 
following deformations: random (salt and pepper) noise, 
clockwise and anticlockwise rotation, scaling, and horizontal and 
vertical shifts (Fig. 2b). These deformations are randomly 
generated following a normal distribution with standard deviations 
(σ) and a range of ±3σ with σ values of 4% for random noise, 5o 
for clockwise and anticlockwise rotation, 5% for scaling, and 5 
pixels for horizontal and vertical shifts. The individual Ri’s that 
correspond to the outputs with the maximum bit errors are 
updated randomly until the network becomes immune to the 
character deformations. The resulting Rset’s provide a minimum 
binary spacing of 3 between the 26 main character codes. With 
this, the output codes that differ by 1 bit from the main codes can 
also be used for unambiguous recognition of the relevant 
character. 
To test the performance of the memory network, we generated 
and applied 104 test character sets with larger deformations 
compared to the deformation used during the training phase: σ 
values of 12% for random noise, ±15% for scaling, ±15o for 
rotation, and ±15 pixels for horizontal and vertical shifts.  ABE of 
less than 0.5 was achieved with maximum bit error of 1 and as a 
result, testing with 26×104 deformed characters resulted in 100% 
recognition accuracy. 
 
Discussion: A conventional analog hardware neural network, 
irrespective of its size, will have many crossover wirings. For 
example, a 3 layer network with 5 nodes per layer will have at 
least 6530 crossover wirings due to the connections to its weights 
(given that 25=32, 5 nodes are absolutely necessary to be able to 
code 26 characters). The demonstrated memory network with the 
architecture shown in Fig 1b does not have any crossover wirings 
within or across the layers. As a consequence, the nodes in the 
output layer of the memory network are independent from each 
other and each output node defines a group of weights 
associated with it across the layers. The character recognition 
example demonstrates that highly localized training is possible 
and that the interconnections between the nodes, which are the 
basic feature of neural networks, are not necessary. The 
advantage of a memory network without crossover wiring and a 
highly modular structure is that it enables large network 
architectures that are impossible to implement and train with 
conventional neural networks.  
Increasing the memory network size can enable application of the 
character recognition principle to other tasks, including face and 
speech recognition. These can be achieved by increasing the 
number of layers and inputs either in series or by replicating the 
network in parallel. The memory network can be integrated into 
camera systems for a broad range of applications. Offline 
applications require a limited number of programming cycles, 
which means flash memory can be used as the memory resistors, 
along with CMOS inverters integrated on a single chip. For real-
time applications, such as object motion detection, it would 
require memories that can do large number of cycles and exhibit 
long data retention time which may be possible with MRAM [5] or 
QsRAM [6]. MRAM is a mature technology but has limited 
capacity, however higher capacity could be achieved in hardware 
with emerging memory technologies, such as QsRAM. It is also 
worth mentioning that faulty memory elements in the memory 
network appear as input noise to that cell, however, a properly 
trained network is stable to the effects of input noise. Because of 
this and because of the fact that the majority of the memory 
elements appear in the initial layers of the network, the proposed 
cognitive memory networks also provide a degree of robustness 
to yield problems.  
 
Conclusion: This Letter demonstrated that cognitive memory 
networks with simple network cells and no crossover wiring, 
which removes a significant limitation of the conventional 
networks, can perform cognitive functions. The potential for 
increasing the system and functional complexity using the 
modular architecture of the memory network is enormous as the 
modern memory technologies can provide in excess of 109 
memory elements on a single chip. 
 
Acknowledgements: Funding support by Qs Semiconductors is 
gratefully acknowledged.
