ITHACA. A TOOL FOR INTEGRATING FUZZY
LOGIC IN UNITY
1st Alfonso Tejedor Moreno
Department of Computer Science
University of Almeria
Almeria 04120, Spain

2nd Jose A. Piedra-Fernandez
Department of Computer Science
University of Almeria
Almeria 04120, Spain

3rd Juan Jesus Ojeda-Castelo
Department of Computer Science
University of Almeria
Almeria 04120, Spain

4th Luis Iribarne Member, IEEE
Department of Computer Science
University of Almeria
Almeria 04120, Spain

Abstract—Ithaca is a Fuzzy Logic (FL) plugin for developing
artiﬁcial intelligence systems within the Unity game engine. Its
goal is to provide an intuitive and natural way to build advanced
artiﬁcial intelligence systems, making the implementation of such
a system faster and more affordable. The software is made up
by a C# framework and an Application Programming Interface
(API) for writing inference systems, as well as a set of tools
for graphic development and debugging. Additionally, a Fuzzy
Control Language (FCL) parser is provided in order to import
systems previously deﬁned using this standard.
Index Terms—Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Fuzzy Logic, Fuzzy Con-
trol Language, video games.
I. INTRODUCTION
G
RAPHICS is a relevant factor in terms of video games
and that fact is appreciated in the latest development of
video games and consoles. Each new generation of consoles
empower their resources such as a graphic card with a lot
of calculation, a processor with many cores and so forth.
Therefore, the video games are developed with very realistic
graphics and the users feel that they are part of a real
environment more than a virtual world. However, users are
more demanding and currently artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) plays
a signiﬁcance role in this ﬁeld since a video game is not really
popular if its graphics are spectacular but its AI is very low.
In fact, the quality of AI is an important feature in order to
increase the immersion and enjoyment of the players [1].
The AI has been a magniﬁcent contribution to the video
games sector since it has mastered games as Chess [2] or Go
[3]. Or even the algorithm developed by DeepMind which
is able to cooperate with human players or other machine
players [4]. These agents have been tested in the game Quake
III. According to Pirovano [5], the two most common AI
techniques found in games are Finite State Machines (FSM)
and Decision Trees (DT), far from the performance of more
complex techniques like Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANN)
and Genetic Algorithms (GA). Therefore our main goal is
making AI achievable for small and medium sized teams, pro-
viding a tool for implementing a technique halfway between
the easy to use of the FSM and the power and ﬂexibility of
the ANN. And right from the most used game engine, Unity 1
(Fast Facts - Unity) The AI in games is not only for the NPC
or that the player can make more decisions in the game if not
that AI is being used to remaster video games and improve
the quality of these products in hours.
On the other hand, most game developers work on huge
constraints of time and budget, thus the AI implemented
speciﬁcally in games by indie developers is naive at best, if
there is any at all. That is the reason that we have developed a
plugin with fuzzy logic in order to help the developers and so
forth to apply fuzzy logic in their projects in a easy way and
make the most of it. Moreover, this plugin was developed for
Unity because this game engine is operated from students or
hobbyists to professionals and game studios. Unity allows the
developers to create video games in multiple platforms, more
exactly 30 different platforms, such as mobile, PC or console.
As a result, this tool is very useful for people who wants
to learn how to develop games, people that they only want to
create a video game as a hobby or even in a more professional
level entrepreneurs who wants to set up their entertainment
company or create a professional game. Furthermore, this
plugin has been designed with the fundamental functions of
fuzzy logic and is very easy to use because it is aimed at
beginners without previous knowledge of the subject. And
this is possible because Unity is adapted to many needs being
its learning process very easy at the beginning although it
gets more difﬁcult if you want to do a complex game. These
features make that this game engine is used by a wider
population than other game engines as Unreal Engine 2 In
fact, John Riccitiello (Unity CEO) states that the half of all
the games has been developed on Unity 3.
The objectives of the project are:
1Unity - https://unity.com/
2Unreal Engine - https://www.unrealengine.com/en-US/
3Unity games developed - https://techcrunch.com/2018/09/05/unity-ceo-
says-half-of-all-games-are-built-on-unity/
arXiv:2301.00377v1  [cs.AI]  1 Jan 2023

This is a preprint and it is not the ultimate version.
• Create an easy to use tool that makes the Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence and Fuzzy Logic available to all game developers.
• The tool has to be simple and ﬂexible in order to be used
in any kind of projects and games.
• The user must be able to work with the tool using either
a Graphical User Interface (GUI) or an API.
• Be compliant with the FCL standard as deﬁned in IEC
61131-7 [6]
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section
II presents some background on Fuzzy Logic and Artiﬁcial In-
telligence. Section III describes the architecture and its Fuzzy
Logic foundations. Section IV shows the results obtained
by building a few small games. Section V summarizes the
conclusions and discusses the future work.
II. BACKGROUND
In 1940 Edward Uhler Condon presented a Math game at
the exhibition of Westinghouse. This human vs machine game
was played by thousands of people of which only 10% were
able to beat the machine. However, it was not until the 1970s
that video games began to commercialize on a large scale, as
in the case of the game developed by the Atari company: Pong
[7]. At that time, Neural Networks were not included in the AI
system of the video game, although simpler techniques such as
ﬁnite state machines were used. The next section will brieﬂy
describe the inﬂuence of AI in the world of video games.
A. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Games
In 1959 Arthur Lee Samuel introduced Artiﬁcial Intel-
ligence into the world of video games, more speciﬁcally
teaching a computer how to play the game of checkers [8].
Thereafter, other games were developed that included artiﬁcial
intelligence, highlighting the video game Space Invaders in the
70s and Pac-Man in the 80s. In Space Invaders, complexity
was added to the game by introducing hash functions that
”learned” from the player’s actions. The heart of the Pac-
Man game is the behavior of the ghosts that are the player’s
enemies, where each one has a different behavior [9] and it is
controlled by a state machine [10]. In the 90s video games
were booming due to the appearance of various consoles
such as Gameboy, SNES or PS One. This expansion also
produced the inclusion of more complex AI systems, with
special mention to the Half-life video game in which it existed
a cooperation between the enemies to kill the player [11].
In the 21st century AI has advanced considerably and its
algorithms are capable of defeating a human player in games
like Starcraft II [12], [13].
All these developments have in common, regardless of the
AI that they integrated, the improvement of the user experience
and for this objective AI is an outstanding candidate. AI can
be used in different aspects of a video game as pathﬁnding,
movement, making decision or learning [10], but probably
the one that stands out the most is the one that controls
the behavior of NPCs. The reason is because if the behavior
of these elements is realistic and resembles the real world,
the users will feel that he is not playing in an artiﬁcial and
predeﬁned world but in a world more similar to their own. In
reference to this last idea, it is important to remember that the
aim of the AI is not to beat the player always, since the fun and
motivation would be lost, but rather to create an experience as
realistic as possible.
There are even studies that have analyzed the feasibility of
Deep reinforcement learning for serious games [14]
In addition to Deep reinforcement learning, genetic algo-
rithms have brought improvements in this area. In [15] AI
characters for ﬁghting games can be generated with the help of
genetic algorithms and through a low-cost process. Moreover,
it has also been used in a soccer simulator (Robocup Soccer)
with the aim of improving decision making in the simulation
of soccer teams [16]. The result of the implementation of this
enhancement was that two of the three teams that made up
this system were top teams in the RoboCup competition. In
[17] sets out to apply genetic algorithms in real-time strategy
games to learn new and effective strategies for this type of
game. The problem is that these types of actions are usually
abstract for the player and for this reason in this work they
focus on learning strategies that can be easily interpreted by
people. Furthermore, this type of algorithms have also been
used in games such as Backgammon [18] or Chess [19].
In the previous paragraphs, a series of applications have
been shown that are far from the AI techniques used in the
ﬁrst video games, which were deﬁned by rule-based systems,
that constitute the most basic algorithms in AI. More complex
and innovative structures such as Deep learning or genetic
algorithms are currently integrated. However, there is an AI
technique called fuzzy logic that, despite not being as popular
as neural networks, is very useful for this type of development
and will be described below.
B. Fuzzy Logic
Fuzzy Logic is advisable for solving many problems where
the uncertainty is a main actor, for instance the uncertain
multi-criteria decision making problem [20]. It is broadly
used in controllers where it is hard to obtain a mathematical
model, or systems that need to work with some vagueness or
ambiguousness. Some applications created with fuzzy logic
would be medical applications [21], daily life applications
as the washing machine [22], natural interaction with face
recognition [23] and posture recognition [24] and lastly smart
cities. Perhaps the last one could be disconcerting, notwith-
standing the growth of cities has generated various problems in
them. The administration of aspects such as waste collection,
environmental pollution, trafﬁc, energy distribution or water,
becomes an increasingly complex task. Fuzzy logic has con-
tributed to energy efﬁciency in smart cities [25].
1) Fuzzy Logic in Games: Fuzzy logic, like other AI
techniques cited previously, has also contributed to video
games. In special needs, games have been developed specially
for autistic people. In [26] FL is used in order to rate the
social skills in autistic children and adapt the level of the
game to them. In the diagnoses of a patient’s autism level,
the patient has to carry out activities that will determine that
2

This is a preprint and it is not the ultimate version.
level. The authors of this work [27] have designed a game
that is able to calculate the player’s autism level using FL.
Nevertheless, apart from carrying out work with people with
autism, serious games have also been designed for people with
physical impairments, such as the example of this game called
ReHabGame [28] where a series of activities are conducted
for the upper and lower limbs, in order to evaluate and
improve motor and sensory faculties in patients who have
neuromuscular problems. This serious game allows the user
to interact with Kinect in order to obtain information on the
movement of their body during the performance of tasks and
thus the fuzzy logic system will be able to extract and analyze
the data corresponding to the positions of the users to satisfy
their needs. In addition to ReHabGame, other serious games
with different themes have also been developed, such as this
serious game, in which the authors have studied the variables
of throttle position sensor, engine rotation speed and car speed
to determine by FL whether the driving style is efﬁcient and in
this way improve driver behavior in front of the steering wheel
[29]. The authors expanded the work done integrating FL and
Random Forest in order to know which algorithm was best
for this type of serious game. The results indicated that the
advantage of FL was that it produced understandable linguistic
feedback while Random Forest predicted fuel consumption
more accurately [30]. Another work that is worth mentioning
for its novelty is the study conducted in [31] which aims to
create a game to induce emotions in students with the aim
of improving their learning process through inductive control.
This system integrates fuzzy logic to analyze the performance
and emotional state of the players through a voice analysis.
C. AI Plugins for Unity
Recently the Unity engine has ﬁnally embraced artiﬁcial
intelligence, adding Machine Learning (ML) to its pathﬁnding
tool. The most outstanding open-source plugin that this game
engine has it is called ML-Agents. This plugin enables games
and simulators to become a training environment to train
artiﬁcial intelligence agents through reinforcement learning
[32]. Anyhow, if a developer wants to implement another
technique the ﬁrst stop is the Unity’s Assets Store, ﬁlled
with thousand of plugins. But among all the variety of tools
available, those intended for implementing AI are scarce, and
only one of them is based on fuzzy logic. This plugin is just
a Fuzzy Logic layer for another tool aimed to build ﬁghting
games. The best solution is using an external library called
AForge.net (AForge.NET). Written in C#, is an AI library
that includes an API for working with Neural Networks,
Artiﬁcial Vision, and Machine Learning, among others. Given
the broad scope of the library, the Fuzzy Logic implementation
is shallow but easy to use. It has no Unity integration, so
it lacks of GUI and makes it harder to use by staff like
designers. The project is open source with a LGPLv3 license,
so it can be easily extended, but our tool already has most
of the elements it lacks like more membership functions,
operators, or defuzziﬁcation methods. Ithaca was built from
scratch thinking in Unity, so it implements components that
can be attached to game objects. It also has a GUI for deﬁning
a system and debugging it without writing a single line of
code. All these makes our solution more complete, more
powerful and ﬂexible, and thanks to its integration with Unity,
easier to use.
III. ITHACA
A. What is Ithaca
Ithaca is a tool for integrating a Fuzzy Logic Inference
System (FIS) on any project developed with the Unity engine.
It is written in C# but it is not compiled, so all code is available
to the developer for any needed modiﬁcation. This makes the
tool platform-independent, allowing to use it in any device
among the ones available in Unity. Its core consist in a Fuzzy
Rule Based System (FRBS) that evaluates a set of rules which
are formed by fuzzy sets and fuzzy logic.
B. Fuzzy Logic and Inference Engine
The fuzzy inference system implemented in Ithaca uses the
Mamdani model, where the consequent of the IF-THEN rules
is a fuzzy statement like this:
IF X is A and Y is B THEN Z is C
This way of writing rules is natural and intuitive, making it
more suitable for developing systems where we are trying to
simulate human decision making. This model is less efﬁcient
than the Sugeno model, where the consequent of the rules are
algebraic expressions [33] so the defuzzifying step is faster to
compute. For defuzzifying Mamdani FIS we implemented the
next methods:
• Centroid or Centre of Gravity (COG):
COG =
R max
min xµ(x)dx
R max
min µ(x)dx
• Centroid for Singleton (COGS):
COGS =
P
i xiµi
P
i µi
• Bisector or Centre of Area (COA):
COA = u′,
Z u′
min
µ(u)du =
Z max′
u′
µ(u)du
• Mean of Maximum (MOM):
MOM =
R
Amax xdx
R
Amax dx
• Right Most (RM):
RM = {x|x > x′, ∀x′ ∈Amax}
• Left Most (LM):
LM = {x|x < x′, ∀x′ ∈Amax}
For the fuzzifying interface we wrote twelve membership
functions, being some of them speciﬁc cases from more
general functions, but broadly used. Regarding the logical
3

This is a preprint and it is not the ultimate version.
connectives for the rules’ elements, conjunction can be deﬁned
by a set of different t-norm methods. The same happens to the
union, which may be deﬁned using one of various t-conorms.
All the methods implemented are:
• Membership functions:
– Singleton.
– Piecewise.
– Triangle.
– Trapezoid.
– Grade.
– Reverse grade.
– Gaussian.
– Double Gaussian.
– Bell.
– Cosine.
– Sigmoidal.
– Difference of sigmoidals.
• T-Norm (AND operation):
– Min (G¨odel-Dummett).
– Product
– Bounded Difference (Łukasiewicz).
• T-CoNorm (OR operation):
– Max.
– ASUM.
– BSUM.
– NSUM.
C. Architecture
The system architecture is divided in three subsystem;
the core, the graphics subsystem, and the parser. The core
subsystem has three main components (Figure 1):
Fig. 1: System architecture
1) The fuzziﬁer interface: this is where the crisp input
values are turned into fuzzy values depending on the
membership functions.
2) The inference system: all the rules are evaluated here.
The antecedents determine the value of the consequences
and the result is a fuzzy value.
3) The defuzziﬁer interface: the outputs are turned into
crisp values in order to be used in the game.
The graphics subsystem is formed by the classes for the GUI
and an additional set of classes, in a separated namespace, for
drawing the graphs for the membership functions (Figure 3).
Unity has no built-in system for drawing graphs, so we had to
build our own plugin. We made it decoupled from the rest of
the GUI so it could be used in other cases. At last, the parser
subsystem translates the FCL ﬁles to the Ithaca inner format.
The inference engine structure is based in the FCL’s def-
inition, where a system is represented by a Function Block
(FB), which in turn is deﬁned by a set of Linguistic Variables
(LV) as inputs and outputs, and a set of rules or Rule Block
(RB). Each LV represents a domain of knowledge, and if
declared as input has as many fuzzy sets as needed. Each
fuzzy set has a membership function that deﬁnes the degree of
correspondence of an input value to this set. On the other side,
if a LV is declared as output, it has an additional defuzziﬁer
method to translate the fuzzy values to crisp values. The rules
set is changeable in runtime, making it possible to adapt the
knowledge base depending of the needs.
Once a system is deﬁned using the API, GUI, or a FCL ﬁle,
the inference engine can be called during gameplay asking for
an output depending on the current value, or with a new value.
The GUI has a main window with three tabs (see Figure 2):
• One for creating/loading a system
• Another one for deﬁning input and output variables
• The last one to write sets of rules
Fig. 2: Ithaca window
The ﬁrst tab lets the user create a new system or import
one already deﬁned. The systems can be exported to JSON
format, and be loaded back from JSON and also from an
FCL ﬁle. This lets the users save and exchange systems in a
format trackable by version control software. Once the system
is created, an asset ﬁle is created in the Unity project. This is
a binary ﬁle with a serialization of the full system. If the asset
ﬁle is selected, it can be edited from this window. The second
tab is for declaring the input and output linguistic variables.
Once the LV is created, it can be edited in order to add the
fuzzy sets and its membership functions (Figure 3). The user
can declare the limits of the LV and its default value.
Finally, in the third tab, the user can deﬁne sets of rules
written in natural language (Figure 4). For each set of rules the
user can decide the methods for the operations. This operations
are:
4

This is a preprint and it is not the ultimate version.
Fig. 3: Linguistic variable editor
• The methods for the logic operations AND/OR, also
called aggregation operation. In order to satisfy De Mor-
gan’s law the methods must go in the following pairs:
– Min-Max
– Prod-ASUM
– BDIF-BSUM
• The methods for the activation operation. This operation
translates the result of the antecedent to the consequent.
– Min
– Prod
• The method for the accumulation operation. This oper-
ation takes the results from the consequent of all ﬁred
rules and combines its values to obtain one output.
– Max
– BSUM
– NSUM
If the used deﬁnes more than one set of rules, a default one
must be choosen. As we said, the RB can be changed during
runtime.
Fig. 4: Rules editor
There is also an additional window, the debugger. It lets the
developer debug both the graphs values and the rules that ﬁred
and its values. (Figure 5).
Fig. 5: Debug window
D. Features
The main features of the Ithaca tool are:
• A powerful GUI that allows to deﬁne a full system using
graphs.
• The inference system used is Mamdani, which uses fuzzy
sets as outputs for the rules. This way the output is easier
to use by the developer in most cases.
• Covers the most used membership functions, defuzziﬁer
methods, and operation expressions. The user can deﬁne
new functions, methods, or expressions.
• It is not compiled, thus the user can modify the code as
needed within Unity.
• A graphical debugging system that allow to check in real
time the input and output values, as well as the values of
every rule and if it was ﬁred.
• It can be used to build games in any platform available
in Unity.
IV. RESULTS
A. Crane
The goal of this test was to build a complex system using
our tool, and to check the compliance with the FCL standard.
So we decided to use the crane system deﬁned in the FCL
standard [6], that controls container crane that loads and
unloads containers from ships. The controller must moves the
containers taking care of the speed and angle(Figure 6). The
rules of the system were:
1) IF distance IS far AND angle IS zero THEN power IS
pos medium.
2) IF distance IS far AND angle IS neg small THEN power
IS pos high.
5

This is a preprint and it is not the ultimate version.
3) IF distance IS far AND angle IS neg big THEN power
IS pos medium.
4) IF distance IS medium AND angle IS neg small THEN
power IS neg medium.
5) IF distance IS close AND angle IS pos small THEN
power IS pos medium.
6) IF distance IS zero AND angle IS zero THEN power IS
zero.
The test demonstrated both the compliance with the FCL
standard and the usefulness of the tool for building complex
system using natural knowledge provided by specialists like a
crane operator.
Fig. 6: Crane simulation
B. Race car
The objective in this test was to develop an adversary AI
that looks natural and realistic, and to develop it entirely with
the GUI. Many times it is important to keep the illusion that
we are playing against a human to engage with the player,
even if it makes our AI less optimal. The vagueness of the
Fuzzy Logic makes it ideal for developing systems that act as
imprecise as a human would. In this case we built two race
cars, both with the same sensors and almost the same set of
rules. But one, called ”Classic car”, used classic logic, while
the ”Fuzzy car” used our inference system. The knowledge
base used was:
1) IF Front IS Normal THEN Steering IS Straight, Speed
IS Somewhat Fast.
2) IF Front IS Far THEN Steering IS Straight, Speed IS
Very Fast.
3) IF Left IS Close THEN Steering IS Right.
4) IF Right IS Close THEN Steering IS Left.
5) IF VeryLeft IS Close THEN Steering IS VeryRight.
6) IF VeryRight IS Close THEN Steering IS VeryLeft.
The results were that the fuzzy car was faster and its
trajectory was much more natural (Figure 7). As for the use
of the GUI, the system revealed itself as faster than using the
API.
Fig. 7: Paths followed by AI cars
V. CONCLUSIONS
After the experience of developing those tests and some
more small games, the power of our tool was clear. Its
installation and integration on the project are really simple
and straightforward, making the ﬁrst step as easy as possible
for any developer, especially the ones less experienced. This
point is noteworthy as many of the users of Unity are not
seasoned programmers.
The use of the GUI or the FCL makes building a Fuzzy
Logic AI more approachable for small teams or solo develop-
ers, who can spend more time designing the behaviour of the
agents rather than writing code. The use of natural language
for writing the rules and deﬁning the variable makes it easier
to involve staff that does not know how to code but has a great
knowledge of the matter. This allows these teams to focus on
what is perceived by the players, the gameplay and the way
of acting of its artiﬁcial intelligence.
Not only is it easy to develop, but it is also very simple
to debug and maintain. Using natural language the developer
is able to understand what is happening in the system at any
moment and know what to expect from it. The debugging
window is additional help on this task, as the user can read
the status of the system and its expected outcomes in a visual
way.
A. Future Work
• To implement Combs method for reducing the number of
rules needed by combining them.
• To add the option to create Fuzzy Finite State Machines
(FuFSM). The FSM is a very popular technique among
game developers and the use of FL can provide a degree
of uncertainty very valuable in some cases.
• To generate the knowledge base implementing Adaptive
Network-based Fuzzy Inference System (ANFIS) [34].
This would allow creating more powerful systems thanks
to the use of NN.
6

This is a preprint and it is not the ultimate version.
• To implement Takagi-Sugeno method for inference.
• To implement the new Fuzzy Markup Language (FML),
based on XML [35].
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was funded by the EU ERDF and the Spanish Min-
istry of Economy and Competitiveness (MINECO) under the
Project TIN2017-83964-R. This work also received funding
from the CEiA3 and CEIMAR consortium.
