From Prompt Engineering to Prompt Science
With Human in the Loop
Chirag Shah

University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
ABSTRACT
As LLMs make their way into many aspects of our lives, one place
that warrants increased scrutiny with LLM usage is scientific re-
search. Using LLMs for generating or analyzing data for research
purposes is gaining popularity. But when such application is marred
with ad-hoc decisions and engineering solutions, we need to be
concerned about how it may affect that research, its findings, or
any future works based on that research. We need a more scientific
approach to using LLMs in our research. While there are several
active efforts to support more systematic construction of prompts,
they are often focused more on achieving desirable outcomes rather
than producing replicable and generalizable knowledge with suffi-
cient transparency, objectivity, or rigor. This article presents a new
methodology inspired by codebook construction through qualita-
tive methods to address that. Using humans in the loop and a multi-
phase verification processes, this methodology lays a foundation for
more systematic, objective, and trustworthy way of applying LLMs
for analyzing data. Specifically, we show how a set of researchers
can work through a rigorous process of labeling, deliberating, and
documenting to remove subjectivity and bring transparency and
replicability to prompt generation process.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Computing methodologies →Information extraction; •
Human-centered computing →User centered design.
KEYWORDS
Large Language Models (LLMs), Prompt engineering, Qualitative
coding, Verification
ACM Reference Format:
Chirag Shah. 2023. From Prompt Engineering to Prompt Science With
Human in the Loop. In Proceedings of ACM Conference (Conference’17). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 7 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
1
INTRODUCTION
Large Language Models (LLMs), in the recent years, have become
more sophisticated and capable for them to be applicable in many
situations and tasks. These tasks are not limited to information
extraction and synthesis [13], but also expanded to analysis, cre-
ation, and reasoning [6]. Unsurprisingly, many researchers have
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
© 2023 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM.
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
found their uses for various research tasks. LLMs are being used
in identifying relevant papers [17], synthesizing literature reviews
[3], writing proposals [9], and analyzing data [30]. They have been
found effective and useful in investigative tasks such as drug discov-
ery [24, 34], and while such capabilities and wide applicability of
LLMs have opened up new avenues for supporting research, there
is a growing concern that a large portion of this success hinges
on prompt engineering, which is often an ad-hoc method to re-
vise prompts being fed into an LLM to achieve desired response or
analysis [23].
Using such a process for scientific research could be dangerous.
At best, there is a possibility of creating a feedback loop with self-
fulfilling prophesy. At worst, one may be overfitting hypotheses to
data, leading to untrustworthy claims and findings. In most cases,
over-reliance on prompt engineering could lead to unexplainable,
unverifiable, and less generalizable outcomes [18, 26], lacking a
scientific approach to research.
Here, we consider a scientific approach to be the one that is
well-documented and transparent, verifiable, repeatable, and free
of individual biases and subjectivity. We argue that most prompt
engineering techniques do not lead to a scientific approach to re-
search as they violate at least one of these principles. While such
ad-hocness can be bad in most situation, when it comes to scien-
tific research that expects a certain level of vigor, it is especially
problematic.
If we want to continue harnessing the powers of LLMs, we need
to do this in a responsible manner with enough scientific rigor.
For the purpose of this work, we will consider research areas and
applications where an LLM is used for labeling text data. Examples
involve identifying user tasks or intents, extracting sentiments, and
deriving issues from user reports. Building on an LLM’s ability to
summarize or synthesize data, many recent research projects have
deployed them for such tasks [23, 30]. There are also efforts to use
LLMs for generating datasets and benchmarks [19, 33]. These could
be foundations for future research. Therefore, it is paramount that
such outcomes from LLMs are thoroughly validated and proven
trustworthy.
In this article, we demonstrate how to do this by turning an
ad-hoc method of prompt engineering to verifiable and replica-
ble method of prompt science. Specifically, we take inspiration
from a rich literature and methods of qualitative coding to employ
human-in-the-loop for verifying (1) responses from LLMs; and (2)
systematically constructing prompts.
2
PROMPT ENGINEERING PROSPECTS AND
PROBLEMS
LLMs are built on transformer architecture that contain encoders
and decoders modules. They are trained on large amounts of text
arXiv:2401.04122v3  [cs.HC]  10 May 2024

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
Shah
corpora. A lot of what an LLM generates heavily depends on the
inner workings of this architecture and the data used for train-
ing. Most users and researchers do not have the ability to directly
change that architecture or the training process. However, they can
apply various techniques such as fine-tuning [8, 10] and prompt
engineering [32] to shape the outputs as they desire.
Figure 1: A typical flow of prompt engineering for research
process that involves labeling data.
Figure 1 shows a conceptual flow of a typical prompt revision or
engineering in a research setting. Here, a researcher is interested
in getting some input data analyzed or labeled for a downstream
application. To get the desired outcomes, the set of instructions or
the prompt provided to the LLM is interatively revised. This has
been used by many recent works such as [6, 14, 29, 37]. While this
could accomplish the task, it leaves us with many potential issues.
For instance, if the prompt is revised by a single researcher in ad-
hoc manner just to fine-tune the output, there may be personal
biases and subjectivity introduced. In addition, if this process is
not well-documented, it may be hard to understand or mitigate
these issues. This may also make it harder for someone to verify or
replicate the process. These issues may hinder scientific progress
that relies on systematic knowledge being generated, questioned,
and shared. There may also be issues of self-fulfilling prophecy or
feedback loop that are especially dangerous when we are dealing
with highly opaque systems such as an LLM.
When using LLMs for scientific research, we need some level of
reliability, objectivity, and transparency in the process. Specifically,
there are three problems we need to address: (1) individual bias
and subjectivity; (2) vague criteria for assessment of bending the
criteria to match LLM’s abilities; and (3) narrow focus to a specific
application instead of a general phenomenon. For this, we propose
the following steps.
(1) Ensure that at least two qualified researchers are involved
in the whole process.
(2) Before focusing on revising the prompt to produce desirable
outcomes, clearly and objectively articulate what makes a
desirable outcome. This will involve establishing a reliable
and if possible, community-validated metric for assessment.
(3) Discuss individual differences and biases with a goal of root-
ing them out and creating assessments and a set of instruc-
tions that can be understood and carried out by any re-
searcher with a reasonable set of skills to be able to replicate
the experiments and achieve similar results.
While a few recent works have shown promise in addressing
these desiderata, they still lack enough rigor to meet the require-
ments of transparency, objectivity, and replicability. For instance,
Shah et al. [5] use a verifying method for prompt generation, but
their approach lack verification of criteria as well as replicability
for different datasets.
3
METHODOLOGY
In this section we describe a new methodology for making prompt
engineering efforts to a scientific process that ensures reliability
and generalizability. The previous section described how a typical
prompt engineering process works; essentially, it involves revising
the prompt to an LLM in order to fit the desired response and/or
the downstream application. We identified that one of the problems
with this endeavor is that it is quite ad-hoc, unreliable, and not
generalizable. Even with enough documentation of how the final
prompt was generated, one could not ensure that the same process
will yield same quality output in a different situation – be it with
a different LLM or the same LLM in a different time. To overcome
these problems, we describe an approach that first iterates over the
criteria for assessing LLM’s response and then iterates over the
prompt in a systematic way using human in the loop. Our method
is inspired by a typical process of qualitative coding.
3.1
Qualitative coding with multiple assessors
The problem we are trying to address here is that of construction
of a prompt or a set of instructions that produces desired outcomes
for unseen data. This is similar to building a codebook in qualita-
tive research. Take for instance, work described in [15]. Here, the
authors were attempting to label user behaviors (data) with user
intents (discrete labels). For this, they needed to identify a finite
(and preferably a small) set of labels, and their desired descriptions.
This is called a codebook.
They began their process by having an initial codebook that was
inspired by prior work and literature. But now they need to fine-
tune and validate that codebook for the given application. For this,
they followed the qualitative coding process depicted in Figures 2
and 3.
Figure 2: Training portion of qualitative coding.
As shown, for a typical qualitative coding process two researchers,
who are sufficiently familiar with the task, use the initial codebook
and a small set of data to independently provide labels during
the training portion. The process continues until there is good
enough agreement or inter-coder reliability (ICR). Once that point
is reached, the codebook is considered to be ready for use. It can
now be used by the same or other researchers to independently
and non-overlapping label unseen data during the testing portion.
It is important to note that the value of this iterative process
with human-in-the-loop. During this process, it is not just the code-
book that is getting revised, but also the understanding in those

From Prompt Engineering to Prompt Science
With Human in the Loop
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
Figure 3: Testing portion of qualitative coding.
two researchers. Through their discussions of disagreements, they
are able to think through the task, the data, and the best ways
to describe that data. This enhanced understanding impacts the
codebook and vice versa. In other words, this process is used not
only to produce, but also to learn and discover for the researchers.
But this is not a simple form of brainstorming. The researchers
are discussing their differences and charting their way forward
bound by a rigorous set of criteria. For instance, in this example,
the researchers were aiming to produce a codebook with categories
that were clear, concise, comprehensive, and reliable. They had
specific definitions of these criteria, which they used during their
deliberations.
In short, such a process of qualitative coding ensures that individ-
ual subjectivity is dissolved to the extend possible while producing
a coding scheme that is robust, verifiable, and explainable. Next, we
show how this can be used for constructing a method for prompt
generation and verification.
3.2
Codebook building as a way to construct
prompts
We will now describe a new method for prompt generation inspired
by the qualitative codebook building process described above. Once
again, our objective is to generate a prompt for a given LLM in
order to achieve desired response. In addition, we need this prompt
to be systematically created with enough generalizability and ex-
plainability to be useful for same or similar experiments by other
researchers, by other LLMs, and in different times. We will describe
the abstract process in this section and its operationalization in the
next section. To begin, we list two primary desiderata:
(1) The desired response from the LLM must be verified along
a set of dimensions and for large enough sample size by at
least two humans.
(2) The prompt to generate must consistently generate the de-
sired responses and must be justifiable, explainable, and
verifiable.
To operationalize these two criteria, we propose a multi-phase
process, working backward in the pipeline of prompt to application
as shown in Figure 4. There are four phases to go through in this
method, each explained below.
Phase 1: Set up the initial pipeline. This can be done using anything
that is reasonable. For instance, the initial prompt could be a simple
and direct instruction to generate the desired response.
Phase 2: Identify appropriate criteria to evaluate the responses. Before
we can tweak the prompt, it is important to establish that we know
how to evaluate the response. Establishing the criteria for assessing
the outputs outside of prompt tuning process ensures that the
researchers are focused on the task and not the LLM’s capabilities.
A set of appropriate criteria could be obtained from prior work or
literature. But these criteria still need to be tested and validated for
the given application. Moreover, eventually we will need human
assessors to assess if the LLM is generating desired responses in
order to revise the prompt. For these reasons, we need to execute
our first human-in-the-loop assessment. To do so, follow the steps
below.
(1) Run the existing pipeline to generate a reasonable number
of responses. Give each assessors these responses, the ex-
isting set of criteria (codebook), and sufficient details of the
application. The assessors should review these things be-
fore starting their assessment. This can be supervised by the
lead researcher or an expert. Note that due to the interac-
tive learning and collaboration that takes place among the
human assessors as described in Section 3.1, they do not
need to have special qualifications other than being able to
understand the task at hand and discuss their disagreements.
(2) Each assessor applies the criteria on the given responses
independently.
(3) Compare the assessors’ outcomes and compute the level of
agreement. This could be using as simple as measuring the %
times when they agree, or using inter-coder reliability (ICR)
using an appropriate method such as Cohen’s kappa [35] or
Krippendorfff’s alpha [11].
(4) If the amount of agreement is not sufficient (this could vary
from application to application), bring the assessors together
to discuss their disagreement. This is a very important step as
it offers an opportunity to not only remove individual biases
and subjectivity, but also influences researchers’ collective
understanding of the task and the criteria for evaluation.
The discussion could result in resolution of conflict, but also
changes in the codebook. These changes could be about the
number or the description of the criteria for assessment. Now,
a new set of responses are generated for assessment using
the revised codebook and the above process is repeated.
(5) Once a sufficient level of agreement is achieved, the codebook
for assessing the responses is finalized. At this point the
assessors may still choose to make minor changes in the
codebook to enhance its readability with the idea that anyone
who did not participate in this process of developing it can
still understand and use it very much how those assessors
would.
Phase 3: Iteratively develop the prompt. Continuing to work back-
ward, now we come to the next phase of codebook development,
which happens to be the first phase of the pipeline depicted in
Figure 4. The objective here is to see if the LLM, with the current
version of the prompt, is meeting our criteria for the responses. If
not, we need to figure out what changes can be made to the prompt.
At this point, we know what makes a good response from our
LLM. More importantly, we have now trained at least two re-
searchers in reasonably objectively, consistently, and independently

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
Shah
Figure 4: Proposed methodology with multi-phase approach to response and prompt validations.
evaluating such responses. They could more effectively assess what
instructions could help produce desired responses. Follow the steps
below to iteratively develop the prompt.
(1) Run a reasonable number of data inputs using the current
prompt.
(2) Give the generated responses to the human assessors, ideally
the same ones who were involved in the previous phase.
However, this is not a requirement. These assessors should
use the codebook produced by the previous phase to assess
the responses.
(3) Have them assess if the generated responses meet the criteria
for the application in question.
(4) Compare the assessments by different assessors to find their
level of agreement. If that agreement is not sufficient, have
the assessors discuss their disagreements, possibly under the
supervision of a senior researcher or an expert, and revise
the codebook as necessary. Here, the codebook is the prompt
fed to the LLM. Repeat the above process.
(5) Once there is enough agreement among the assessors that
the prompt meets the objective of generating desired re-
sponses more than some threshold, this process is done. The
assessors or the supervising researcher may still make minor
adjustments to the prompt for improved readability, inter-
pretability, and generalization.
Phase 4: Validate the whole pipeline. As an optional and final valida-
tion phase, run through the whole pipeline using a portion of the
test data and evaluate random samples of the responses to ensure
the whole process still yields quality results that can be indepen-
dently and objectively validated. For this, it is ideal to use a different
set of assessors and have them independently label that same set of
randomly sampled responses. Compute their ICR on this sample to
see if (1) there is a good enough agreement among them on labeling;
and (2) the generated responses are meeting the desired criteria. If
either of these objectives are not met, take appropriate actions for
correction, based on phases 2 and 3.
As one can see, there are multiple checkpoints and validations
in this method that ensures removal of ad-hocness, subjectivity,
and opaqueness as much as possible. A proper documentation of its
execution will yield a more informative, meaningful, and scientific
communication that can help other researchers to trust the outputs
as well as test and build such pipelines themselves.
4
EXPERIMENTS
As a demonstration of the methodology explained in the previous
section, we will now walk through its execution for two specific
research applications.
4.1
Identifying user intents
One of the common problems in the areas of information retrieval
and recommender systems is that of understanding user intents
[36]. Doing so requires having a taxonomy of user intents and then
using such a taxonomy to label user queries, questions, or behaviors
with appropriate intents. However, as shown by Shah et al. [27], it
is very challenging to construct and use such intent taxonomies.
Taking one of the existing taxonomies could help with the former,
but may not be sufficiently comprehensive or accurate for the latter.
Similarly, creating a customized taxonomy for a given application
could help applicability, but would incur a high cost.
LLMs could help in constructing and applying taxonomies, but
are faced with the same challenges described in Section 1 – namely, a
lack of reliability and validation, a danger of creating feedback loops,
and issues with replicability and generalizability. To overcome these
issues, the author, with the help of a set of collaborators, applied
the method proposed here. The following are the specific steps
executed based on the pipeline presented in Figure 4 and described
in Section 3.2.
Phase 1: Set up the initial pipeline. A pipeline that included an initial
prompt and a small sample of log data from Bing Chat that could
create a user intent taxonomy (zero-shot approach) was set up for
initial testing.
Phase 2: Identify appropriate criteria to evaluate the responses. We
identified five criteria – comprehensiveness, consistency, clarity,
accuracy, and conciseness – for evaluating the quality of a user in-
tent taxonomy using prior work [20] as well as human assessments
as shown in Figure 4.

From Prompt Engineering to Prompt Science
With Human in the Loop
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
Phase 3: Iteratively develop the prompt. We first ran the zero-shot
approach to obtain initial taxonomy. Two researchers familiar with
the task of creating and using a user intent taxonomy assessed
the generated taxonomy through those five criteria. Appropriate
revisions were made in the original prompt and a new sample of
data was passed through the LLM (here, GPT4) to create a new
version of the taxonomy. The researchers repeated the process until
a good agreement (inter-coder reliability or ICR [7]) was obtained.
Phase 4: Validate the whole pipeline. Once the taxonomy was final-
ized (see details in [28]), we proceeded with the testing phase of
the pipeline. In this phase, the LLM was given new data and asked
to use the human-validated taxonomy to label user intents. A set of
two different researchers independently assigned their own labels
using the same taxonomy. We then compared the labels among
the human annotators as well as humans and LLM. We found high
enough ICR for all of them. Furthermore, we repeated this process
with two other LLMs – Mistral and Hermes – both open-sourced,
and found their labeling also had strong agreements with those ob-
tained from GPT4 as well as from human annotators. This indicates
that both the taxonomy and the process for using that taxonomy
through an LLM were robust and stable.
At this point, we have not only a reliable and robust pipeline for
generating and using a user intent taxonomy, but it is also validated
through a rigorous process with human-in-the-loop, making this
trustworthy and generalizable. The details of this work, along with
results and their discussions, can be found in [28].
4.2
Auditing an LLM
We now turn to a different type of problem involving LLMs, specif-
ically that of auditing an LLM. While there have been many recent
efforts in this area [16, 21], we still lack systematic and scientifically
rigorous approaches. We attempted to address this using a simple,
but effective method – probing the same question differently to the
given LLM to see how differently it responds. Different versions of
the same question could be generated by humans, but that would
hinder the scalability. Using an LLM (ideally, a different LLM than
the one being audited) could help as shown in [21], but like before,
we are faced with the challenge of ensuring that the generation of
those probes is reliable, robust, and generalizable. To meet these
challenges, we ran through the proposed method in Section 3.2.
Phase 1: Set up the initial pipeline. We started with setting up the ini-
tial version of the pipeline. The initial prompt was set as “Generate
five different questions for the following question that represent the
same meaning, but are different." for the LLM, we used Mistral and
the data for original questions came from TruthfulQA dataset [12].
Given the application – generating different versions of the same
question for auditing an LLM – we set the criteria for responses
generated by Mistral as relevance and diversity.
Phase 2: Identify appropriate criteria to evaluate the responses. We
used two researchers with a good understanding of the application.
Using the existing literature and the task at hand, it was determined
that a good set of probes will have two important characteristics:
(1) relevance or semantic similarity of each probe with the original
question; and (2) good enough diversity among the probes. As
the two researchers started independently assessing the generated
probes from a small set of data (10 original questions that resulted
in 50 probes) and then comparing their labels with each other,
two key things happened: they started firming up the definitions of
‘relevance’ and ‘diversity’, and they started getting more agreements
with their assessments. We had to go through three rounds of this
exercise to finalize our definitions of the two criteria as well as how
to label them.
Phase 3: Iteratively develop the prompt. We wanted to have a prompt
that consistently generates outputs (a set of questions) that could
achieve high enough relevance and diversity for their use in a
downstream application. We set the threshold for this to be 75%.
The same two researchers marked the generated responses for
relevance and diversity using a new set of input data. The initial
round of assessment showed that only around 50% of the outcomes
met the goal of relevance (medium or high) and diversity. To change
this, the original prompt was modified to include more details about
the application and the criteria. Then this process was repeated.
After two more iterations, the LLM was generating outcomes that
were relevant and diverse for at least 80% of the cases.
Phase 4: Validate the whole pipeline. A senior researcher tested
the whole pipeline with the final versions of the prompt and the
criteria with a few rounds of random samplings. They made a few
minor adjustments to the prompt for improved readability and
generalizability. The details of these experiments, along with a
demo, can be found in [2] and [1].
5
CONCLUSION
LLMs could simply be stochastic string generation tools [4] that are
effective at predicting next tokens. But for many researchers, they
are proving to be useful in many research problems that in general
involve labeling or classifying input data based on some analysis
or reasoning. However, using LLMs blindly for such research tasks
just because their outputs seem reasonable can be dangerous. It can
perpetual biases [25], create fabricated or hallucinated responses
[22], and provide unverifiable results [31]. All of these are harmful
for scientific progress.
Creatively or iteratively designing prompts to produce desirabile
outcomes, what is often referred to as prompt engineering, does
not address these concerns. In fact, prompt engineering may even
worsen the problems by focusing too much on bending the process
to generating the desired outcomes than to developing a verifiable,
validated, and replicable process. In this article, we showed how
prompt engineering can be turned into prompt science by introduc-
ing a multi-phase process with human-in-the-loop. Specifically, we
divided the prompt to application pipeline into two major phases
that provide two levels of verification: one for the criteria for eval-
uating the responses generated by the LLM, and the other for the
prompt for generating the responses. Through a method inspired
by qualitative coding for codebook development, we showed how
to have scientific rigor in developing a reliable prompt and getting
trustworthy response for a downstream application. This method
has been demonstrated in two different applications – generating
and using a user intent taxonomy and auditing an LLM.
We believe there are three main reasons this method provides
scientific rigor.

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
Shah
(1) It provides a systematic and scientifically verifiable way
of producing prompt templates, while removing individual
subjectivity and biases.
(2) Through the involvement of multiple researchers document-
ing their deliberations and decisions, it fosters openness and
replicability. This documentation can and should be made
available, much like the code for an open source tool, allow-
ing other researchers to validate, replicate, and extend the
work.
(3) In addition to producing a prompt template that can generate
desired outcomes reliably and consistently, the process also
adds to our knowledge about the problem at hand (applica-
tion), how to best assess what we need for that problem, and
how we could consistently and objectively analyze given
data.
Such a rigorous process comes at a cost. Comparing the typical
process of prompt engineering (Figure 1) to the proposed method
of prompt science (Figure 4), there is at least a 3-fold cost increase.
Guided deliberations and detailed documentation can also add to
the cost. Finally, the optional phase 4 calls for a lightweight, but
more continual cost to the whole pipeline to maintain its quality
and validity. We can compare this with an assembly line that is
primarily run through automated processes with some human su-
pervision. Depending on the risk of bad quality and the cost for
manual quality check, one could decide how often and how rigor-
ously humans should be involved. This then allows us to create
more automated systems with enough control and quality assur-
ance – going from copilot to autopilot mode with LLMs. The key,
as argued and demonstrated here, is to do so with enough human
agency and scientific rigor.
Even if the goal is to not turn into a fully automated pipeline, con-
sidering that the proposed method not only leads to a outputs with
higher quality, consistency, and reliability, but also an increased
understanding of the task and the data, we believe the added cost
is justifiable. The broader scientific community could also benefit
from exercising and perhaps insisting on such a rigor so we could
leverage LLMs ethically and responsibly in our research.
