Journal of Nonlinear Systems and Applications (2010)
Copyright c⃝2010 Watam Press
http://www.watam.org/JNSA/
A MULTIAGENT URBAN TRAFFIC SIMULATION
Pierrick Tranouez, ´Eric Daud´e and Patrice Langlois ∗†‡
Abstract.
We built a multiagent simulation of urban traﬃc to
model both ordinary traﬃc and emergency or crisis mode traﬃc.
This simulation ﬁrst builds a modeled road network based on
detailed geographical information. On this network, the simulation
creates two populations of agents:
the Transporters and the
Mobiles.
Transporters embody the roads themselves; they are
utilitarian and meant to handle the low level realism of the sim-
ulation. Mobile agents embody the vehicles that circulate on the
network. They have one or several destinations they try to reach
using initially their beliefs of the structure of the network (length
of the edges, speed limits, number of lanes etc.).
Nonetheless,
when confronted to a dynamic, emergent prone environment (other
vehicles, unexpectedly closed ways or lanes, traﬃc jams etc.), the
rather reactive agent will activate more cognitive modules to adapt
its beliefs, desires and intentions. It may change its destination(s),
change the tactics used to reach the destination (favoring less used
roads, following other agents, using general headings), etc.
We
describe our current validation of our model and the next planned
improvements, both in validation and in functionalities.
Keywords.
Multiagent,
urban
traﬃc
model,
simulation,
crisis management, risk management, emergence, complex systems
1
Introduction
One of the major interrogations in a catastrophe is: will
people react correctly to preserve their own security,
and doing so, preserve the security of all? This question
is most of the time linked with the idea of risk culture
and risk training, which are supposed to produce safe
reactions at the right time. Is risk education therefore
a key factor to preserve life?
Thinking so, we assume
that the description of behaviors in risk situations
should be engaged in term of personal dispositions,
which are mostly related to education. In society, norms
such as the highway code, or safety instructions in risk
situations, are supposed to govern citizen’s behaviors.
Do circumstances or local contexts produce diﬀerent
∗The authors would like to thank the GRR SER and the region
Haute-Normandie for the funding of the MOSAIIC program from
which this work stems from.
†Pierrick Tranouez is with Litis, Rouen University.

‡Patrice Langlois and
´Eric Daud´e are with UMR IDEES,
Rouen
University

and

behaviors than those acquired, and then alter global
vulnerability?
The relation between inherited-based
behaviors, which can be viewed here as a ”follow the
rule” behavior, and the circumstances-based behavior, is
an interesting perspective to study the question of the
vulnerability of populations.
Space is an important factor of risks situations, not
only as a support of activities and populations, but
also as an actor in itself of the situation. Risk is space
related. One deﬁnes risk as a probability of space-time
interactions between a source (ex: an industrial plant)
and a target (ex: an inhabitant building) [1, 2]. Space
can produce many diﬀerent contexts throughout its
organization.
The main diﬃculty to characterize and
manage the risk is then the huge amount of interactions
that links entities. Risk has spatial impacts : consider
the real estate value near or far from a chemical factory.
Risk management transforms the environment, it can
be perceived (e.g. type of allowed constructions, fences
etc.).
Risk sometimes outlast their management :
contaminated soil can remain contaminated decades
after the factory generating the contamination has dis-
appeared, along with its most active risk management.
This is all the more important in urban area which
concentrate a high number of activities, and then reveals
some tensions between them.
The sharing of a same
resource, space, implies some regulations tools in term
of laws, of infrastructures and of behaviors.
Risks are
multi-layered and imply diﬀerent kinds of actors, human
and non-human.
A catastrophe in an urban context
implies a large number of people and groups, each
endowed with their own skills, behaviors and resources.
Eﬀorts of public services made in order to mitigate the
outcome of the catastrophe are diﬀerent from, sometime
even in contradiction with, those followed by individuals
to save their life, but they occur at the same time and the
same place. And the same person can respond diﬀerently
to an event, depending of the context.
Furthermore,
risks are dynamic,
feedbacks and nonlinearities are
important.
One can observe a domino eﬀect as an
explosion in one site produces secondary accidents in the
neighborhood, due to the high concentration of activities.
The MOSAIIC project [3, 2] aims to observe and un-
derstand local and global eﬀects of individual behaviors
1
arXiv:1201.5472v1  [cs.AI]  26 Jan 2012

2
Pierrick Tranouez, ´Eric Daud´e and Patrice Langlois
in the dynamic of a transportation network system after
an industrial accident. Few researches take into account
the behaviors of group or individual when studying the
risk at the scale of a city. Physical aspects override the
measure of risk and population damage is a result of these
major forces. In this way, intensity of a toxic cloud or of
earthquake deﬁnes buﬀers that are used to estimate the
number of inhabitants and equipment implicated in the
event, and then gives an estimation of the vulnerability
of populations. Traditionally, the population dynamics,
its ability to move during a catastrophic event are not
considered to evaluate vulnerability of this population!
When human behaviors are investigated in a risk situ-
ation, it is mostly at a very ﬁne scale, for example rooms
or building [4], and one kind of behavior is particularly
studied: panic and escaping [5]. When macro scale is pre-
ferred, human behaviors are replaced by traﬃc behavior.
Macroscopic models consider parameters such as traﬃc
density or traﬃc ﬂow to compute road capacity and then
the distribution of traﬃc in the road network.
In risk
management, many studies have shown that early stages
of the phenomenon are critical on the level of the global
damage. This situation appears for example when the dif-
fusion of panic between some individuals produce a snow-
ball eﬀect on the entire population. This social contagion
assumes hypnotic eﬀects and selﬁsh behaviors [6]. But
individual behaviors in risk situations are not limited to
panic and escaping behaviors, even not to selﬁsh behav-
ior. If one considered Bhopal (1984) or Toulouse (2001)
accidents, the number of victims or the time of resilience
of the system have largely increased due to curiosity: in
some circumstances, people want to see the damage. In
some other circumstances, one can observe altruistic be-
havior when self-centered interest would have been ex-
pected [7]. The MOSAIIC project aims at modelling and
simulating all this complexity. We ﬁrst have to construct
a model of urban traﬃc which is able to capture the ur-
ban pulsation, i.e. the main circulation ﬂows of the city
during speciﬁc time periods. This ﬁrst step in the mod-
eling process is supposed to be the more parsimonious
as possible in term of related social data. Our hypoth-
esis is that we can use the structure of the network and
the norms (highway code) to deduce the ﬂow between
diﬀerent points in space and time. In this agent-based
model [17], agents-drivers are supposed to behave as re-
active agents, following the rules related to their plans.
The second step is to produce a cognitive architecture
for agent-drivers to manage speciﬁc context: congestion,
rerouting, actions due to a major accident, in fact every-
thing which is susceptible to modify its initial plan.
2
Dealing with human behaviors
in a traﬃc model
If traﬃc modeling is nearing a century of age, most
of these models belong to Operational Research (OR)
problems – ﬁnding an optimal solution balancing various
constraints.
In these models, roads and road users
were abstracted and aggregated, so as to become a
ﬂow problem that could then be optimized.
They can
answer interesting questions in urban or public transport
planning [8].
Sometimes considering average response to a problem
is not enough for the scientiﬁc problem at hand.
We
are interested in a dynamic modeling of urban traﬃc.
In this kind of problem, the actions of a few can have
a deﬁnite impact on the global traﬃc.
An accident
implicating half a dozen vehicles in a strategic crossroads
of a town can create a traﬃc jam wave that can aﬀect
thousands of vehicles.
This is the kind of complex
phenomenon we would like to be able to model and
simulate. Classic OR tools are not well suited to the task.
Although we are not the ﬁrst to make this statement
[9], models that tried to alleviate this too-large-scale limi-
tation, have mainly tried to use cellular automata for the
task.
They added some level of individual-based com-
ponents to their modeling, but still failed to encompass
all that could be needed.
Cellular automata are eule-
rian methods – intelligence is in one place, rules describe
the behavior of bits of space. Values linked to the cells
seem to simulate the entities of the modeled system, the
same way alternatively lit crystals in an LCD display can
give the illusion an object moves around a screen. This
contrasts with lagrangian descriptions, where entities of
an environment are distinguished, and their spatial co-
ordinates are but one of their describing characteristics.
Unlike what can be easily simulated in a CA, lagrangian
entities have a trajectory: even in a discretized space a
la CA, they can for example act according to something
that happened n time steps and m space steps before or
away, or according to a plan. This cannot practically be
done in a CA. Multiagent systems belong to this latter
category of modeling. As we try to build a model with a
grain ﬁne to the level of geometrically correct individual
vehicle behavior, from which at least town-quarters-level
ﬂow disturbance can arise, we believe this technique is
the right one for the task. We then have to build a urban
network structure to support these mobile agents.
3
From geometry to topology
3.1
Geographical databases
A Geographical Information System (GIS) is a system
designed for creating, storing, analyzing and managing

A multiagent urban traﬃc simulation
3
spatial data and associated attributes.
Although it
contains a relational database, it needs to go beyond
what is needed for classical alphanumerical databases to
manage geometrical information, which is continuous by
nature, as opposed to the discreteness of usual databases.
Indeed for example the database cannot contain all the
points of two segments in order to compute a possible
intersection: other storing and managing methods must
be used for the geometric data of the system.
A geographic database is generally comprised of layers
or coverage overlapping on a same spatial domain. Each
layer contains homogeneous spatial features such as the
limits of a city, the course of a river, the geometry of a
road etc. Each feature is described in two diﬀerent ways.
First the geometric and optionally topological informa-
tion is stored in diﬀerent binary ﬁles in the base. Second
the record description is a line in the record table; it con-
tains diﬀerent attributes and descriptions of the feature
(generally text or numbers).
3.2
ESRI Shapeﬁles
The ﬁrst step of the constitution of our system is the
constitution of a basic layer of geographic database. This
layer is built from the importation of shapeﬁles, a GIS
ﬁle format popularized by ESRI [10]. In order to build
a traﬃc simulation, we will build our model from data
relative to the road network and optionally from other
localized information such as living or working areas. A
shapeﬁle is mainly constituted of three ﬁles: one contains
the attribute table (.dbf), another contains the geometric
data (.shp) and the third is an index allowing matching
entries of the ﬁrst with those of the second.
A shapeﬁle contains only the geometric description of
objects through a collection of 2D or 3D coordinates that
represents, according to the layer type, a cloud of points,
open polygon lines for networks or closed polygon lines
to describe the boundary of surfaces.
The topological
information, which describes in geomatics the relation-
ships between the geometric entities, such as connections
of edges with nodes in a graph or the adjacency between
zones in a surface partition, is absolutely not present
in a shapeﬁle, and must therefore be computed by our
application form the raw geometry of the imported data.
To build a realistic representation of the traﬃc network
of an important urban agglomeration able to simulate the
circulation of tens of thousand of vehicles, we had to con-
ceive a network layer structure both complex and eﬃcient.
Furthermore, as the importation of data was coming from
existing data provider such as IGN, NAVTEQ or Tele At-
las, we had to deal with the way each of them modeled
things in their solutions.
3.3
Urban network structure speciﬁca-
tions
A road network is modeled according to speciﬁcations
that are in part common to any network and in part de-
pendent on decisions made according to the data
3.3.1
General speciﬁcations
A road network shares the properties of any geographic
network. It is constituted of two main geometric entities:
lines, linear components, comprised of several shape
points, and nodes, point components that join or termi-
nate lines.
These two entities are joined in an oriented multigraph
G = (S, A, f) where S is the set of vertices, associated to
the geometric nodes, while the set A of edges is associated
to the geometric lines, while function f : A →S × S
associates to each edge one initial and one ﬁnal vertex.
Unlike most other geographic information layer, a road
network may not be planar: two lines can intersect in
their planar projection without modeling an intersection
in the real world.
This happens when these lines are
at diﬀerent altitudes such as in bridges, tunnels, or
motorway embranchments.
Furthermore, geographic graph are topological graph,
which diﬀer from usual graphs in that they are associated
to one geometric representation, called the embedding
of the graph.
Only vertices of degree 3 or more are
considered to be true vertex, those of degree 2 being seen
as shape points, useful for the geometric information
they bring, but not ”true” connectors.
The geometric
representation of the graph is always present to the mind
of the geographer, which may create misunderstandings
with other scientists more used to a more abstract
representation of graph, with planar graph rather than
plane graph.
As previously said, it is also sometimes
extended to non planar graph: the geometric information
in the shapeﬁle represents in that case the projection on
a connected compact 2-manifold of a graph embedded in
a connected compact 3-manifold [11] (intuitively: a 3D
graph is drawn on a surface).
The attribute table associated to the network will con-
tain all the traﬃc related information, such as the num-
ber of lanes, speed limits, sense of travel etc. Nonethe-
less this information may not be associated to elementary
lines or nodes. For example major roads may contain dif-
ferent lines and important roundabout may contain dif-
ferent nodes and lines. We therefore deﬁned the notion
of super-nodes that relate to several nodes (and the as-
sorted sub-graph) and super-edges that relate to several
edges (and the assorted sub-graph). G is therefore a hy-
pergraph in these conditions. Whether these conditions

4
Pierrick Tranouez, ´Eric Daud´e and Patrice Langlois
are met or not depend on modeling decisions made by the
data provider.
3.3.2
Geographic data based speciﬁcations
There are diﬀerent ways of structuring the geographic
information in a shapeﬁle to model a network. For exam-
ple NAVTEQ chose in its Navstreets product to create
a node for each intersecting link, even if the road they
model are not connected. Another layer represents the
relative elevation of the entities of this ﬁrst layer. Both
must therefore be used to correctly build the road network
in our simulation. Another example is the orientation of
the edges, as the links are oriented following another con-
vention (called Reference nodes) than what could be used
in a shapeﬁle, and the edge must therefore be computed
following this convention.
3.4
Building the topology from the ge-
ometry
Building a topology from the geometric information con-
tained for example in a shapeﬁle depends on the kind of
spatial organization we want to represent.
3.4.1
Planar mesh
In the case of a surface mesh (ex: limits of countries, of
urban areas, of town quarters etc.), we aim at rebuilding
the boundaries and the junction nodes between them from
closed polygonal chains (a.k.a. polylines). The layer we
produce is thereafter structured around a planar multi-
graph of vertices, edges and faces, and with each oriented
edge associated to 2 vertices (initial and terminal) and to
2 faces (left and right).
The building algorithm uses a quadtree and a tree con-
necting each point, in which all the points of the shape-
ﬁle are organized. Each leaf of the quadtree contains a
point Pi and 4 branches for the 4 quadrants of space (NE,
SE, SW, NW) surrounding Pi. This structure allows for
a quick detection of the multiplicity of points. For ex-
ample, a point with a multiplicity of 3 or more will be
associated to a vertex, while a point of a multiplicity of 2
will be a shape point of an edge. Furthermore, the con-
nection tree allows the quick detection of adjacent points
along a polyline, and detecting the superposition of two
lines forming the boundaries of two zones, or the succes-
sion of angular sectors around a vertex common to three
polygons or more.
3.4.2
Networks
In order to build the structure of a planar network (for
example hydrographic or of roads), we do not store faces
but the polar order of succession in the edges.
Each
edge stores the next edge turning left and the prior edge
turning right. This structure is known as DCEL, Doubly
Connected Edge List [11].
The algorithm to generate
this topology uses the dynamic quadtree structure used
that was used to build the DCEL.
The road network often exists in 3D, although despite
the existence of this possibility in the format speciﬁ-
cation, most shapeﬁles only contain a 2D geometric
representation.
The data provider must in that case
model the altitude diﬀerently, and our algorithm must be
adapted to this. For example NAVTEQ’s Navstreets [12]
uses another layer called z-levels that must be consulted
to know whether a point corresponds to a node or not.
At the end of this step, we have a topological graph
that is structured like the road network, but without
its semantics. We will now build from it and from the
database part of the shapeﬁle a non-topological graph
that models this ontology.
3.5
From
static
topology
to
traﬃc-
oriented
3.5.1
Traﬃc oriented graph
Our traﬃc model is individual-based: each vehicle will
be modeled as an agent. This implies the creation of an
adapted environment for them, in terms both suitable to
their ontology and adapted to the geographic data we
reaped. For that a graph will be built, a transport graph
that will contain the necessary structures and values.
This ﬁrst version of our models is only interested in simu-
lating motor vehicle: pedestrians and bicycle are ignored.
The database contains the sense of travel and the traﬃc
restrictions for each topological edge. One oriented edge
is created for each sense of direction allowed for motor
vehicles. Edges and vertices of the transport graph are
called elements. To each element is associated a data con-
tainer and a vehicle transporter.
The data associated to an edge are for example its geo-
metric length, its number of lanes, its speed limits etc.
The data associated to a vertex is notably the size of the
container of its transporter, depending on the number
and the sizes of the edges connected to him.
Transporters are non-mobile agents associated to ele-
ments. They handle parts of the collective behavior of
the vehicles. They will be described in more depth in the
following section.
3.5.2
Routes in the graph
Mobile agents will try to reach destinations in the graph.
As we intend to simulate a realistic traﬃc of tens of thou-
sand of vehicles, we want to facilitate their computing of
their trajectory. To do that, we build a set of ”shortest”
path stored in the traﬃc graph.
We compute a weight on the edges that combines diﬀerent
parts of its data: its length, the speed it can reasonably be
driven upon, its estimated width based on the number of
lanes etc. to model the attractiveness of this edge. After

A multiagent urban traﬃc simulation
5
that we compute Dijkstra’s algorithms [13] from each ver-
tex to all the others, which we store in each vertex. This
data takes numberOfV ertices2 bytes of data, which is
important, but allows the computation of a good path
by an agent in constant time, which is a good thing as
hundreds of agents are generated at all time in the sim-
ulation (simulating vehicles entering the road network of
the simulated urban agglomeration).
4
Mobile agents on the network
Our agents are mainly so far car agents, trying to go from
one place to another.
4.1
Strategic behavior
Modeling in details the various detailed trajectories of car
users is a research problem in itself [14]. Nonetheless we
are not interested in who did what or why, but only in
what are the ﬂuxes in our network in typical scenarios.
When an agent is injected in the network, a starting point
and a destination are randomly chosen.
This randomness is not necessarily uniform. If we sup-
pose the agglomeration centered on its main town, like
the agglomeration of Rouen that we simulated more than
others, we can shape diﬀerent distribution, favoring the
likelihood of drawing rather a inner or an outer edge for
example. Traﬃc between 8:00 AM and 9:00 AM for ex-
ample starts mainly on the border or outside the agglom-
eration and ends to the same distance to the center (outer
edges): we can simulate traﬃc that do that. When shops
close in the town center, we have a traﬃc that is mainly
outer bound, with a more important center generation:
we can simulate that. We do not have to know what this
car and its driver did in the morning, we don’t have to
simulate realistically its history, as long as we model the
actual traﬃc ﬂuxes right. Once the agent knows where it
Figure 1:
3 diﬀerent scenarios of source/destination
pseudo-random choice
is, and what its destination is, it can use the best paths
stored in the traﬃc network to plan a trajectory. It then
drives here, adapting his path through its tactical behav-
ior, and managing its immediate surroundings through its
operational behavior.
4.2
Operational behavior
The planned trajectory of an agent is a succession of
edges.
Once in an edge the agent tries to drive to its
end, the next connection, where it will be able to choose
the next planned edge.
When it enters an edge, the agent ﬁrst chooses a lane if
several are available, based on the traﬃc density in each,
with a bias for the rightmost lane. As we have a good
geometric description of the lane, the driving behavior is
fairly detailed, incorporating the length of the car, its ca-
pacity/willingness to accelerate and brake, the taste of its
driver for long/short safety distance, its taste for follow-
ing or breaking speed limits etc. All this is incorporated
in a driving model inspired by Martin Treiber’s Intelligent
Driver Model [15]. IDM is a longitudinal traﬃc model, so
we had to expand it to handle multiple lanes and cross-
roads (the original IDM works for an unlimited one-way,
one-lane road) ; we did not use Treiber’s MOBIL lane
changing model as it is better adapted to motorways than
to urban lane changing decisions.
The data provided by geographic providers does not in-
clude right of passage or traﬃc lights at crossroads. We
therefore had to develop our own model aiming at the
simulation of crossroads in a heavy traﬃc.
When a vehicle reaches a crossroad, it slows down and
acts according to the ﬂuidity of traﬃc in the crossroad,
in the edge it is currently upon and in the edge it whishes
to go to. If they are encumbered, it will more often wait
in its way, but it may enter the crossroad and wait here,
thus encumbering it (with a more or less strong individual
tendency to do so). If the edge it is aiming at has multi-
ple lanes, it will watch both of them, to see if it could ﬁt
in one.
4.3
Tactical behavior
Although vehicles have an original plan, they will adapt it
to what they perceive of their environment. When stuck
in what they perceive is a jam, they will try to ﬁnd alter-
nate routes out of it to their destination.
The ﬁrst method we used is the simpler one. When a
vehicle doesn’t move enough to its liking – this satura-
tion is variable amongst agents – it tries to take alternate
paths as soon as possible, favoring the roads with least
dense circulation – although this is not absolute, so as
to avoid loops.
Once it estimates it’s far enough from
the jam that sprang this alternate behavior, it resumes
its standard behavior, using the best path table to ﬁnd a
suitable one to its destination.
The second one is more sophisticated, as it will have uses
beyond mere traﬃc avoidance.
Its intelligence is mod-
eled more in the Transporter agents than in the vehicles.
Transporters estimate their encumbrance.
To do that,
they employ direct measure – how many vehicles do they
contain over how many vehicles can they contain in aver-
age – but also statistics on the proportion of vehicles they
contain that are annoyed by the traﬃc – as described in

6
Pierrick Tranouez, ´Eric Daud´e and Patrice Langlois
the ﬁrst method – and information from the Transporters
around them. If based on this they decide they are en-
cumbered they also warn the Transporters around them
of their perception. This will lower the threshold for them
to feel encumbered.
Once encumbered, the nodes they are connected to will
recompute their best path table, using a huge weight for
the encumbered edges. When a vehicle arrives to one of
these nodes and wants to go to one of the jammed edges,
it is informed of the edge state, and it can recompute a
route around it, or take the edge anyway.
This mechanism is also theoretically interesting, as it is an
implementation of an emergent property: the interactions
of individual behavior aﬀect the behavior of an agent of
an higher scale, who alters his behavior, which in turns
transforms the behavior of the lower level vehicles. This
reiﬁes the perception an individual driver can have of the
state and dynamics of the traﬃc he is plunged in as a
whole.
A Transporter can also be barred, because of an accident
for example. In that case the same mechanism is used, ex-
cept that this time circumnavigating is mandatory. The
mechanism of these two states is especially useful in what
was the original purpose of our model and its main ap-
plication: simulating urban important accidents – such
as industrial accident – as the modeler can bar the edges
it wants as part of his scenario, and see how the traf-
ﬁc adapts to it in simulation real time, as the vehicles
discover the evolving road network and ﬂuxes.
5
Unexpected individual behav-
iors in risk situations
MOSAIIC is about situations where contextual mobil-
ity can occur and can diﬀuse or have large consequences
on the global circulation.
We call contextual mobility
a mobility which is associated to short-range goals (for
example to avoid a crowd or a jam) and whose results
diﬀer from the initial planning (for example changing the
planned trajectory). We will now consider an urban in-
dustrial accident.
This accident has a ﬁnite extension
area and a well-determined intensity, represented by a
buﬀer. Inside this buﬀer, a proportion of people, related
to intensity for example, want to change their initial plan.
Outside this buﬀer, behaviors are less reactive.
Some
want to escape, others want to see and for others ”show
must go on”, and they want to follow their way. In this
example we see that the same person might have diﬀerent
behaviors depending on its location related to the event,
or related to the behaviors of its neighbors.
5.1
Contextual mobility
We have then deﬁned diﬀerent kinds of behaviors and
methods related to diﬀerent short-term goals:
• Chicken behavior: the goal is to ﬁnd the opposite
direction of the source (the buﬀer), and to drive fol-
lowing this way;
• Spectator behavior: the goal is to ﬁnd the source of
danger and to go there. If agent is already in the
place, then he stays here;
• Pragmatic behavior: here the agent selects a new
destination in the network and tries to reach it. This
behavior simulates the fact that some people will
want to reach their children at school or husband
or wife at their working place;
• Wandering behavior: there is no goal, this behavior
is the sign of distress. At each time step, just select
a road and go there.
• Roadrunner behavior: this method consists in always
selecting the less congested road and to go there.
This method can be connected to the Chicken or By-
stander behavior;
• Sheep behavior: here agent follows the crowd what-
ever the direction.
We will discuss now how the behaviors themselves can be
implemented, not why or when one or the other will be
chosen.
5.2
Behaviors classiﬁcation
In order to implement them, we will distinguish three
categories of behavior: global, planar and local. These
categories are based on the actual behavior, and not on
the motivations behind it.
A global behavior is one that makes a reasoning about
the road network.
Pragmatic behavior falls in this
category: the agent will try to ﬁnd a good path to his
newly decided destination using his knowledge of the
network. Spectator can also fall here.
A planar decision also chooses a destination but tries to
reach it using orientation as if no roads existed, as if the
vehicle was on an open plan. Of course the network will
oﬀer constraints, but a general cardinal like direction
will guide the agent. Chicken and possibly Spectator will
fall in this category. This means there are two possible
implementations of this behavior.
A local decision is one based on local-only data: Wan-
dering, Roadrunner and Sheep will fall there.
5.3
Class implementation in the simula-
tion
Global behaviors are implemented in the agents to allow
them to reach their initial destination. The motivations
change between those two cases, but the underlying me-
chanics stay the same.

A multiagent urban traﬃc simulation
7
Local require little complexity.
Wandering is trivial,
Roadrunner and Sheep diﬀer only by the sign of their
optimization.
We also implemented a simple anti-loop
measure: Roadrunners for example will choose the less
congested road unless they already went recently through
this one.
Planar require the ability to choose an edge out of a node
based on a global direction. Depending on what the mod-
eler desires, he can choose a distance from the current
road intersection, and the agent will choose the intersec-
tion at less than the selected distance (expressed in Eu-
clidean distance or number of edges in a path leading to
it) that is the closest to the desired direction. An anti-
loop measure can be added.
The behaviors previously described are ways of coping
with an extraordinary situation. Most urban important
accidents will have their consequences felt locally at the
beginning, before it spreads. The evolution of the pertur-
bation will be like waves spreading from the initial locus
outward. If the extraordinary behaviors are the waves,
the metaphorical medium of this propagation is the ordi-
nary traﬃc ﬂow. We therefore need a sophisticated mod-
eling of the day-to-day activities of vehicles in an urban
agglomeration as we have seen before.
5.4
Example
Figure 2 depicts an example of the distribution of vehicles
in the main roads of the city. Starting at this point, we
generate an event in the city that is supposed to represent
an accident. This event, for the purpose of the simula-
tion, is perceived by all individuals and is considered as
a repulsive event. In ﬁgure 3, this event is a mouse-click
event located by the user without any consideration about
the reality of the area. As agents perceived the impact
zone (in fact its euclidean coordinates), they all change
their planned trajectory. Once in a crossroad, all mobiles
pick out the Chicken behaviors and pick an edge, choos-
ing the one whose other node forms the widest angle (as
close to π as possible) with their current node and the co-
ordinates of the explosion. This escaping behavior is for
instance not applied in concurrence with any other mo-
bility strategies or tactical behavior: they have not the
possibility to avoid traﬃc jam or loops. The main eﬀect of
the general application of this rule is purely the draining
of the transportation network. Of course this ”Hollywood
panic” scenario is not relevant in reality but let us test
implemented mechanisms. Vulnerability increases when a
certain quantity of actors changed their dynamics of mo-
bility, mainly after a shift in their goals. Beliefs, desires
and goals are then important to take into account in this
kind of model.
6
Discussion
One of the problems for the validation is that modeling
as seldom been taken to such a detail level. This level is
Figure 2: An example of traﬃc in a town before an acci-
dent occurs.
Figure 3: The same traﬃc after the accident occurs (red
circle). The agents are all adopting Chicken behavior (in
blue).

8
Pierrick Tranouez, ´Eric Daud´e and Patrice Langlois
Begin
Have I reached 
my ﬁnal 
destination ?
End
Do I have a 
trajectory ?
Yes
No
Edge or 
node ?
End of 
edge ?
Move
Yes
Edge
No
Can I reach 
my next 
edge ?
Node
Enter next 
edge
Annoyance 
grows
Yes
No
Am I cognitive or 
should I become 
cognitive ?
No
BDI module
Compute new 
trajectory to current 
destination
Yes
No
Figure 4: How our mobile agents think.
necessary because of the multi-level nature of traﬃc: the
decision of one driver can start a jam or jams for thou-
sands of drivers, half a town away, half an hour later, a
la butterﬂy eﬀect. Macro model of ﬂuxes, which domi-
nate the ﬁeld of traﬃc simulation, cannot do that. Their
validation for example is often based on the fundamental
diagram of traﬃc ﬂow of a few selected axes, for hourly
traﬃc. We can compute second by second fundamental
diagrams of each edge of our network. We can therefore
be an order or two of magnitude more precise in our mea-
sure, but what to do of all this information? Indeed, if we
describe in details the behavior of vehicles, one must not
lose sight that they are not what we are trying to model,
the traﬃc is what we are trying to model, that is their
behavior as a group. We ﬁne-tune individual behavior to
have the emerging group behavior right.
What we have ascertained so far is that:
• Most edges comply with the Fundamental Diagram
made over 5 minutes of time, most of the time. This
remains the case even once the measure-time unused
edges are taken out of the count We simulated our
university home agglomeration of Rouen with up to
50 000 vehicles, and traﬃc specialists ﬁnd the results
subjectively very satisfying
• We tried to compare the results of our simulations
with data we had about the traﬃc of the Rouen ag-
glomeration. The data dated from 2001, while the
geographic data we had for the network dated from
2006-2007. The western part of the road network had
changed too much during this period for any solid
conclusions to be drawn from it, despite superﬁcial
resemblances in other parts of the networks.
A PhD student has recently started a study to increase
our knowledge of the traﬃc in Rouen agglomeration, and
thus give us more data to compare our simulation to.
7
Further developments
We have deﬁned methods modeling mobility itself, but
we now need to model the decision processes for picking
or switching between these methods. In an ordinary sit-
uation, people follow their own planning and most of the
times never deviate of their schedule. But how to justify
and explain the fact that in some circumstances, people
shift from one behavior to another, from an ordinary be-
havior to one of the extraordinary described here such as
Sheep or Roadrunner?
We have so far described models that have been imple-
mented, simulated and whose results are being investi-
gated. We will now describe what we are currently build-
ing and improving : providing some cognitive abilities to
our agents to model their alternative strategical and tac-
tical decision making.
Beliefs 
Ordinary 
• Anger 
• Saturation 
• Short‐term memory 
• Jammed edges 
Crisis 
• Source 
• Satisfaction of past 
behaviors 
Desires 
Ordered list of 
destinations 
Intentions 
Changing 
behaviors 
Changing 
destinations 
Changing 
saturation 
Returning to a 
reactive state 
Figure 5: Beliefs, Desires and Intentions of our agents.
We use here a Beliefs - Desires - Intentions (BDI) [18]
description of the decision process of our agents. Our BDI
implementation is simple and homemade : although we
need to model some complexity of the decision making,
what we need to get right is the behaviour of a large crowd
of agents, not necessarily be psychologically realistic at
the agent level.
• Beliefs here model inner and outer perception (am I
happy or annoyed, is the circulation around me ﬂuid
or jammed), and also acts as a short term memory :
Crisis source : If I am in a crisis mode, what
caused it, where was it and when did I learn about
it ?

A multiagent urban traﬃc simulation
9
Anti-loop : have I used this road recently ?
Behavior satisfaction : Has my annoyance grown
or shrunk since I started using this behavior ?
• Desires are a list of destinations. Our mobile agents
always want to go somewhere. Initially they have a
list of destination (dropping the children at school,
fetching the laundry, going to work). This list can
be altered in case of a crisis ; ex : I stop trying to go
to work, go to my spouse job place to get her then
head to my children school, and ﬁnally ﬂee.
• Intentions mode the plans of action of our agents.
They know where they want to go, they have a per-
ception of their mental states and their surroundings,
now how do they reach their goals ? The tools we
give them for that is a possibility of switching their
tactical behaviors (cf. 4.3), changing their destina-
tions, and change their saturation (should I often try
new tactic or stick to one for a longer time?).
One of the main questions is then: how ﬁne a knowl-
edge and understanding of people mental procedures is it
necessary to have to simulate crowd dynamics and vul-
nerability of transportation network?
In other words,
what level of detail is needed in the modeling of indi-
vidual agent to accurately model the behavior of a crowd
of them?
