Robust Budget Allocation via Continuous Submodular Functions
Matthew Staib and Stefanie Jegelka
Computer Science and Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Abstract
The optimal allocation of resources for maximizing inﬂuence, spread of information or cover-
age, has gained attention in the past years, in particular in machine learning and data mining.
But in applications, the parameters of the problem are rarely known exactly, and using wrong
parameters can lead to undesirable outcomes. We hence revisit a continuous version of the Bud-
get Allocation or Bipartite Inﬂuence Maximization problem introduced by Alon et al. [2012]
from a robust optimization perspective, where an adversary may choose the least favorable pa-
rameters within a conﬁdence set. The resulting problem is a nonconvex-concave saddle point
problem (or game). We show that this nonconvex problem can be solved exactly by leveraging
connections to continuous submodular functions, and by solving a constrained submodular min-
imization problem. Although constrained submodular minimization is hard in general, here, we
establish conditions under which such a problem can be solved to arbitrary precision ϵ.
1
Introduction
The optimal allocation of resources for maximizing inﬂuence, spread of information or coverage, has
gained attention in the past few years, in particular in machine learning and data mining [Domingos
& Richardson, 2001; Kempe et al., 2003; Chen et al., 2009; Gomez Rodriguez & Sch¨olkopf, 2012;
Borgs et al., 2014].
In the Budget Allocation Problem, one is given a bipartite inﬂuence graph between channels
S and people T, and the task is to assign a budget y(s) to each channel s in S with the goal of
maximizing the expected number of inﬂuenced people I(y). Each edge (s, t) ∈E between channel
s and person t is weighted with a probability pst that, e.g., an advertisement on radio station s will
inﬂuence person t to buy some product. The budget y(s) controls how many independent attempts
are made via the channel s to inﬂuence the people in T. The probability that a customer t is
inﬂuenced when the advertising budget is y is
It(y) = 1 −
Y
(s,t)∈E[1 −pst]y(s),
(1)
and hence the expected number of inﬂuenced people is I(y) = P
t∈T It(y). We write I(y; p) = I(y)
to make the dependence on the probabilities pst explicit. The total budget y must remain within
some feasible set Y which may encode e.g. a total budget limit P
s∈S y(s) ≤C. We allow the
budgets y to be continuous, as in [Bian et al., 2017].
1
arXiv:1702.08791v2  [cs.LG]  13 Jun 2017

Since its introduction by Alon et al. [2012], several works have extended the formulation of
Budget Allocation and provided algorithms Bian et al. [2017]; Hatano et al. [2015]; Maehara et al.
[2015]; Soma et al. [2014]; Soma & Yoshida [2015].
Budget Allocation may also be viewed as
inﬂuence maximization on a bipartite graph, where information spreads as in the Independent
Cascade model. For integer y, Budget Allocation and Inﬂuence Maximization are NP-hard. Yet,
constant-factor approximations are possible, and build on the fact that the inﬂuence function is
submodular in the binary case, and DR-submodular in the integer case [Soma et al., 2014; Hatano
et al., 2015]. If y is continuous, the problem is a concave maximization problem.
The formulation of Budget Allocation assumes that the transmission probabilities are known
exactly.
But this is rarely true in practice.
Typically, the probabilities pst, and possibly the
graph itself, must be inferred from observations [Gomez Rodriguez et al., 2010; Du et al., 2013;
Narasimhan et al., 2015; Du et al., 2014; Netrapalli & Sanghavi, 2012]. In Section 4 we will see that
a misspeciﬁcation or point estimate of parameters pst can lead to much reduced outcomes. A more
realistic assumption is to know conﬁdence intervals for the pst. Realizing this severe deﬁciency,
recent work studied robust versions of Inﬂuence Maximization, where a budget y must be chosen
that maximizes the worst-case approximation ratio over a set of possible inﬂuence functions [He &
Kempe, 2016; Chen et al., 2016; Lowalekar et al., 2016].
The resulting optimization problem is
hard but admits bicriteria approximations.
In this work, we revisit Budget Allocation under uncertainty from the perspective of robust
optimization [Bertsimas et al., 2011; Ben-Tal et al., 2009]. We maximize the worst-case inﬂuence –
not approximation ratio – for p in a conﬁdence set centered around the “best guess” (e.g., posterior
mean). This avoids pitfalls of the approximation ratio formulation (which can be misled to return
poor worst-case budgets, as demonstrated in Appendix A), while also allowing us to formulate the
problem as a max-min game:
max
y∈Y min
p∈P I(y; p),
(2)
where an “adversary” can arbitrarily manipulate p within the conﬁdence set P. With p ﬁxed, I(y; p)
is concave in y. However, the inﬂuence function I(y; p) is not convex, and not even quasiconvex,
in the adversary’s variables pst.
The new, key insight we exploit in this work is that I(y; p) has the property of continuous
submodularity in p – in contrast to previously exploited submodular maximization in y – and can
hence be minimized by generalizing techniques from discrete submodular optimization Bach [2015].
The techniques in [Bach, 2015], however, are restricted to box constraints, and do not directly apply
to our conﬁdence sets. In fact, general constrained submodular minimization is hard [Svitkina &
Fleischer, 2011; Goel et al., 2009; Iwata & Nagano, 2009]. We make the following contributions:
1. We present an algorithm with optimality bounds for Robust Budget Allocation in the non-
convex adversarial scenario (2).
2. We provide the ﬁrst results for continuous submodular minimization with box constraints
and one more “nice” constraint, and conditions under which the algorithm is guaranteed to
return a global optimum.
1.1
Background and Related Work
We begin with some background material and, along the way, discuss related work.
2

1.1.1
Submodularity over the integer lattice and continuous domains
Submodularity is perhaps best known as a property of set functions. A function F : 2V →R
deﬁned on subsets S ⊆V of a ground set V is submodular if for all sets S, T ⊆V , it holds that
F(S) + F(T) ≥F(S ∩T) + F(S ∪T). A similar deﬁnition extends to functions deﬁned over a
distributive lattice L, e.g. the integer lattice. Such a function f is submodular if for all x, y ∈L,
it holds that
f(x) + f(y) ≥f(x ∨y) + f(x ∧y).
(3)
For the integer lattice and vectors x, y, x ∨y denotes the coordinate-wise maximum and x ∧y the
coordinate-wise minimum. Submodularity has also been considered on continuous domains X ⊂Rd,
where, if f is also twice-diﬀerentiable, the property of submodularity means that all oﬀ-diagonal
entries of the the Hessian are nonpositive, i.e.,
∂f(x)
∂xi∂xj ≤0 for all i ̸= j [Topkis, 1978, Theorem 3.2].
These functions may be convex, concave, or neither.
Submodular functions on lattices can be minimized by a reduction to set functions, more pre-
cisely, ring families Birkhoﬀ[1937]. Combinatorial algorithms for submodular optimization on lat-
tices are discussed in [Khachaturov et al., 2012]. More recently, Bach [2015] extended results based
on the convex Lov´asz extension, by building on connections to optimal transport. The subclass of
L♮-convex functions admits strongly polynomial time minimization [Murota, 2003; Kolmogorov &
Shioura, 2009; Murota & Shioura, 2014], but does not apply in our setting.
Similarly, results for submodular maximization extend to integer lattices, e.g. [Gottschalk &
Peis, 2015].
Stronger results are possible if the submodular function also satisﬁes diminishing
returns: for all x ≤y (coordinate-wise) and i such that y + ei ∈X, it holds that f(x + ei) −f(x) ≥
f(y + ei) −f(y).
For such DR-submodular functions, many approximation results for the set
function case extend [Bian et al., 2017; Soma & Yoshida, 2015; Soma et al., 2014]. In particular,
Ene & Nguyen [2016] show a generic reduction to set function optimization that they apply to
maximization. In fact, it also applies to minimization:
Proposition 1.1. A DR-submodular function f deﬁned on Qn
i=1[ki] can be minimized in strongly
polynomial time O(n4 log4 k · log2(n log k) · EO + n4 log4 k · logO(1)(n log k)), where k = maxi ki and
EO is the time complexity of evaluating f. Here, [ki] = {0, 1, . . . , ki −1}.
Proof. The function f can be reduced to a submodular set function g : 2V →R via [Ene & Nguyen,
2016], where |V | = O(n log k). The function g can be evaluated via mapping from 2V to the domain
of f, and then evaluating f, in time O(n log k · EO). We can directly substitute these complexities
into the runtime bound from [Lee et al., 2015].
In particular, the time complexity is logarithmic in k. For general lattice submodular functions,
this is not possible without further assumptions.
1.1.2
Related Problems
A sister problem of Budget Allocation is Inﬂuence Maximization on general graphs, where a set
of seed nodes is selected to start a propagation process. The inﬂuence function is still monotone
submodular and amenable to the greedy algorithm Kempe et al. [2003], but it cannot be evaluated
explicitly and requires approximation Chen et al. [2010]. Stochastic Coverage [Goemans & Vondr´ak,
2006] is a version of Set Cover where the covering sets Si ⊂V are random. A variant of Budget
Allocation can be written as stochastic coverage with multiplicity. Stochastic Coverage has mainly
3

been studied in the online or adaptive setting, where logarithmic approximation factors can be
achieved [Golovin & Krause, 2011; Deshpande et al., 2016; Adamczyk et al., 2016].
Our objective function (2) is a signomial in p, i.e., a linear combination of monomials of the
form Q
i xci
i . General signomial optimization is NP-hard [Chiang, 2005], but certain subclasses are
tractable: posynomials with all nonnegative coeﬃcients can be minimized via Geometric Program-
ming [Boyd et al., 2007], and signomials with a single negative coeﬃcient admit sum of squares-like
relaxations [Chandrasekaran & Shah, 2016]. Our problem, a constrained posynomial maximization,
is not in general a geometric program. Some work addresses this setting via monomial approxi-
mation [Pascual & Ben-Israel, 1970; Ecker, 1980], but, to our knowledge, our algorithm is the ﬁrst
that solves this problem to arbitrary accuracy.
1.1.3
Robust Optimization
Two prominent strategies of addressing uncertainty in parameters of optimization problems are
stochastic and robust optimization. If the distribution of the parameters is known (stochastic opti-
mization), formulations such as value-at-risk (VaR) and conditional value-at-risk (CVaR) Rockafel-
lar & Uryasev [2000, 2002] apply. In contrast, robust optimization [Ben-Tal et al., 2009; Bertsimas
et al., 2011] assumes that the parameters (of the cost function and constraints) can vary arbitrarily
within a known conﬁdence set U, and the aim is to optimize the worst-case setting, i.e.,
min
y
sup
u,A,b∈U
{g(y; u) s.t. Ay ≤b}.
(4)
Here, we will only have uncertainty in the cost function.
In this paper we are principally concerned with robust maximization of the continuous inﬂuence
function I(y), but mention some results for the discrete case. While there exist results for robust
and CVaR optimization of modular (linear) functions [Nikolova, 2010; Bertsimas & Sim, 2003],
submodular objectives do not in general admit such optimization Maehara [2015], but variants
admit approximations [Zhang et al., 2014]. The brittleness of submodular optimization under noise
has been studied in [Balkanski et al., 2016, 2017; Hassidim & Singer, 2016].
Approximations for robust submodular and inﬂuence optimization have been studied in [Krause
et al., 2008; He & Kempe, 2016; Chen et al., 2016; Lowalekar et al., 2016], where an adversary can
pick among a ﬁnite set of objective functions or remove selected elements Orlin et al. [2016].
2
Robust and Stochastic Budget Allocation
The unknown parameters in Budget Allocation are the transmission probabilities pst or edge weights
in a graph. If these are estimated from data, we may have posterior distributions or, a weaker
assumption, conﬁdence sets for the parameters. For ease of notation, we will work with the failure
probabilities xst = 1 −pst instead of the pst directly, and write I(y; x) instead of I(y; p).
2.1
Stochastic Optimization
If a (posterior) distribution of the parameters is known, a simple strategy is to use expectations.
We place a uniform prior on xst, and observe nst independent observations drawn from Ber(xst).
If we observe αst failures and and βst successes, the resulting posterior distribution on the variable
4

Xst is Beta(1 + αst, 1 + βst). Given such a posterior, we may optimize
max
y∈Y I(y; E[X]), or
(5)
max
y∈Y E[I(y; X)].
(6)
Proposition 2.1. Problems (5) and (6) are concave maximization problems over the (convex) set
Y and can be solved exactly.
Concavity of (6) follows since it is an expectation over concave functions, and the problem can
be solved by stochastic gradient ascent or by explicitly computing gradients.
Merely maximizing expectation does not explicitly account for volatility and hence risk. One
option is to include variance Ben-Tal & Nemirovski [2000]; Bertsimas et al. [2011]; Atamt¨urk &
Narayanan [2008]:
min
y∈Y −E[I(y; X)] + ε
p
Var(I(y; X)),
(7)
but in our case this CVaR formulation seems diﬃcult:
Fact 2.1. For y in the nonnegative orthant, the term
p
Var(I(y; X)) need not be convex or concave,
and need not be submodular or supermodular.
This observation does not rule out a solution, but the apparent diﬃculties further motivate a
robust formulation that, as we will see, is amenable to optimization.
2.2
Robust Optimization
The focus of this work is the robust version of Budget Allocation, where we allow an adversary to
arbitrarily set the parameters x within an uncertainty set X. This uncertainty set may result, for
instance, from a known distribution, or simply assumed bounds. Formally, we solve
max
y∈Y min
x∈X I(y; x),
(8)
where Y ⊂RS
+ is a convex set with an eﬃcient projection oracle, and X is an uncertainty set
containing an estimate ˆx. In the sequel, we use uncertainty sets X = {x ∈Box(l, u) : R(x) ≤B},
where R is a distance (or divergence) from the estimate ˆx, and Box(l, u) is the box Q
(s,t)∈E[lst, ust].
The intervals [lst, ust] can be thought of as either conﬁdence intervals around ˆx, or, if [lst, ust] = [0, 1],
enforce that each xst is a valid probability.
Common examples of uncertainty sets used in Robust Optimization are Ellipsoidal and D-norm
uncertainty sets Bertsimas et al. [2011]. Our algorithm in Section 3.1 applies to both.
Ellipsoidal uncertainty. The ellipsoidal or quadratic uncertainty set is deﬁned by
X Q(γ) = {x ∈Box(0, 1) : (x −ˆx)T Σ−1(x −ˆx) ≤γ},
where Σ is the covariance of the random vector X of probabilities distributed according to our
Beta posteriors. In our case, since the distributions on each xst are independent, Σ−1 is actually
diagonal. Writing Σ = diag(σ2), we have
X Q(γ) =
n
x ∈Box(0, 1) :
X
(s,t)∈E
Rst(xst) ≤γ
o
,
5

where Rst(x) = (xst −ˆxst)2σ−2
st .
D-norm uncertainty. The D-norm uncertainty set is similar to an ℓ1-ball around ˆx, and is
deﬁned as
X D(γ) =
n
x : ∃c ∈Box(0, 1) s.t.
xst = ˆxst + (ust −ˆxst)cst,
X
(s,t)∈E
cst ≤γ
o
.
Essentially, we allow an adversary to increase ˆxst up to some upper bound ust, subject to some
total budget γ across all terms xst. The set X D(γ) can be rewritten as
X D(γ) =
n
x ∈Box(ˆx, u) :
X
(s,t)∈E
Rst(xst) ≤γ
o
,
where Rst(xst) = (xst −ˆxst)/(ust −ˆxst) is the fraction of the interval [ˆxst, ust] we have used up in
increasing xst.
The min-max formulation maxy∈Y minx∈X I(y; x) has several merits: the model is not tied to
a speciﬁc learning algorithm for the probabilities x as long as we can choose a suitable conﬁdence
set. Moreover, this formulation allows to fully hedge against a worst-case scenario.
3
Optimization Algorithm
As noted above, the function I(y; x) is concave as a function of y for ﬁxed x. As a pointwise
minimum of concave functions, F(y) := minx∈X I(y; x) is concave.
Hence, if we can compute
subgradients of F(y), we can solve our max-min-problem via the subgradient method, as outlined
in Algorithm 1.
A subgradient gy ∈∂F(y) at y is given by the gradient of I(y; x∗) for the minimizing x∗∈
arg minx∈X I(y; x), i.e., gy = ∇yI(y; x∗). Hence, we must be able to compute x∗for any y. We
also obtain a duality gap: for any x′, y′ we have
min
x∈X I(y′; x) ≤max
y∈Y min
x∈X I(y; x) ≤max
y∈Y I(y; x′).
(9)
This means we can estimate the optimal value I∗and use it in Polyak’s stepsize rule for the
subgradient method Polyak [1987].
But I(y; x) is not convex in x, and not even quasiconvex. For example, standard methods
[Wainwright & Chiang, 2004, Chapter 12] imply that f(x1, x2, x3) = 1 −x1x2 −√x3 is not quasi-
convex on R3
+. Moreover, the above-mentioned signomial optimization techniques do not apply for
an exact solution either. So, it is not immediately clear that we can solve the inner optimization
problem.
The key insight we will be using is that I(y; x) has a diﬀerent beneﬁcial property: while not
convex, I(y; x) as a function of x is continuous submodular.
Lemma 3.1. Suppose we have n ≥1 diﬀerentiable functions fi : R →R+, for i = 1, . . . , n, either
all nonincreasing or all nondecreasing. Then, f(x) = Qn
i=1 fi(xi) is a continuous supermodular
function from Rn to R+.
6

Algorithm 1 Subgradient Ascent
Input: suboptimality tolerance ε > 0, initial feasible budget y(0) ∈Y
Output: ε-optimal budget y for Problem (8)
repeat
x(k) ←arg minx∈X I(y(k); x)
g(k) ←∇yI(y(k); x(k))
L(k) ←I(y(k); x(k))
U(k) ←maxy∈Y I(y; x(k))
γ(k) ←(U(k) −L(k))/∥g(k)∥2
2
y(k+1) ←projY(y(k) + γ(k)g(k))
k ←k + 1
until U(k) −L(k) ≤ε
Proof. For n = 1, the resulting function is modular and therefore supermodular. In the case n ≥2,
we simply need to compute derivatives. The mixed derivatives are
∂f
∂xi∂xj
= f′
i(xi)f′
j(xj) ·
Y
k̸=i,j
fk(xk).
(10)
By monotonicity, f′
i and f′
j have the same sign, so their product is nonnegative, and since each fk
is nonnegative, the entire expression is nonnegative. Hence, f(x) is continuous supermodular by
Theorem 3.2 of [Topkis, 1978].
Corollary 3.1. The inﬂuence function I(y; x) deﬁned in Section 2 is continuous submodular in x
over the nonnegative orthant, for each y ≥0.
Proof. Since submodularity is preserved under summation, it suﬃces to show that each function
It(y) is continuous submodular. By Lemma 3.1, since fs(z) = zy(s) is nonnegative and monotone
nondecreasing for y(s) ≥0, the product Q
(s,t)∈E xy(s)
st
is continuous supermodular in x. Flipping
the sign and adding a constant term yields It(y), which is hence continuous submodular.
Conjecture 3.1. Strong duality holds, i.e.
max
y∈Y min
x∈X I(y; x) = min
x∈X max
y∈Y I(y; x).
(11)
If strong duality holds, then the duality gap maxy∈Y I(y; x∗) −minx∈X I(y∗; x) in Equation (9)
is zero at optimality. If I(y; x) were quasiconvex in x, strong duality would hold by Sion’s min-max
theorem, but this is not the case. In practice, we observe that the duality gap always converges to
zero.
Bach [2015] demonstrates how to minimize a continuous submodular function H(x) subject to
box constraints x ∈Box(l, u), up to an arbitrary suboptimality gap ε > 0. The constraint set X in
our Robust Budget Allocation problem, however, has box constraints with an additional constraint
R(x) ≤B.
This case is not addressed in any previous work.
Fortunately, for a large class of
functions R, there is still an eﬃcient algorithm for continuous submodular minimization, which we
present in the next section.
7

3.1
Constrained Continuous Submodular Function Minimization
We next address an algorithm for minimizing a monotone continuous submodular function H(x)
subject to box constraints x ∈Box(l, u) and a constraint R(x) ≤B:
minimize
H(x)
s.t.
R(x) ≤B
x ∈Box(l, u).
(12)
If H and R were convex, the constrained problem would be equivalent to solving, with the right
Lagrange multipler λ∗≥0:
minimize
H(x) + λ∗R(x)
s.t.
x ∈Box(l, u).
(13)
Although H and R are not necessarily convex here, it turns out that a similar approach indeed
applies. The main idea of our approach bears similarity with [Nagano et al., 2011] for the set
function case, but our setting with continuous functions and various uncertainty sets is more gen-
eral, and requires more argumentation. We outline our theoretical results here, and defer further
implementation details and proofs to the appendix.
Following Bach [2015], we discretize the problem; for a suﬃciently ﬁne discretization, we will
achieve arbitrary accuracy. Let A be an interpolation mapping that maps the discrete set Qn
i=1[ki]
into Box(l, u) = Qn
i=1[li, ui] via the componentwise interpolation functions Ai : [ki] →[li, ui]. We
say Ai is δ-ﬁne if Ai(xi + 1) −Ai(xi) ≤δ for all xi ∈{0, 1, . . . , ki −2}, and we say the full
interpolation function A is δ-ﬁne if each Ai is δ-ﬁne.
This mapping yields functions Hδ : Qn
i=1[ki] →R and Rδ : Qn
i=1[ki] →R via Hδ(x) = H(A(x))
and Rδ(x) = R(A(x)). Hδ is lattice submodular (on the integer lattice). This construction leads
to a reduction of Problem (12) to a submodular minimization problem over the integer lattice:
minimize
Hδ(x) + λRδ(x)
s.t.
x ∈Qn
i=1[ki].
(14)
Ideally, there should then exist a λ such that the associated minimizer x(λ) yields a close to optimal
solution for the constrained problem. Theorem 3.1 below states that this is indeed the case.
Moreover, a second beneﬁt of submodularity is that we can ﬁnd the entire solution path for
Problem (14) by solving a single optimization problem.
Lemma 3.2. Suppose H is continuous submodular, and suppose the regularizer R is strictly in-
creasing and separable: R(x) = Pn
i=1 Ri(xi). Then we can recover a minimizer x(λ) for the induced
discrete Problem (14) for any λ ∈R by solving a single convex optimization problem.
The problem in question arises from a relaxation h↓that extends Hδ in each coordinate i to
a function on distributions over the domain [ki].
These distributions are represented via their
inverse cumulative distribution functions ρi, which take the coordinate xi as input, and output the
probability of exceeding xi. The function h↓is an analogue of the Lov´asz extension of set functions
to continuous submodular functions [Bach, 2015], it is convex and coincides with Hδ on lattice
points.
Formally, this resulting single optimization problem is:
minimize
h↓(ρ) + Pn
i=1
Pki−1
ji=1 aixi(ρi(xi))
s.t.
ρ ∈Qn
i=1 Rki−1
↓
(15)
8

where Rk
↓refers to the set of ordered vectors z ∈Rk that satisfy z1 ≥z2 ≥· · · ≥zk, the notation
ρi(xi) denotes the xi-th coordinate of the vector ρi, and the aixi are strictly convex functions given
by
aixi(t) = 1
2t2 · [Rδ
i (xi) −Rδ
i (xi −1)].
(16)
Problem (15) can be solved by Frank-Wolfe methods [Frank & Wolfe, 1956; Dunn & Harshbarger,
1978; Lacoste-Julien, 2016; Jaggi, 2013].
This is because the greedy algorithm for computing
subgradients of the Lov´asz extension can be generalized, and yields a linear optimization oracle for
the dual of Problem (15). We detail the relationship between Problems (14) and (15), as well as
how to implement the Frank-Wolfe methods, in Appendix C.
Let ρ∗be the optimal solution for Problem (15). For any λ, we obtain a rounded solution x(λ)
for Problem (14) by thresholding: we set x(λ)i = max{j | 1 ≤j ≤ki −1, ρ∗
i (j) ≥λ}, or zero if
ρ∗
i (j) < λ for all j. Each x(λ′) is the optimal solution for Problem (14) with λ = λ′. We use the
largest parameterized solution x(λ) that is still feasible, i.e. the solution x(λ∗) where λ∗solves
min
Hδ(x(λ))
s.t.
λ ≥0
Rδ(x(λ)) ≤B.
(17)
This λ∗can be found eﬃciently via binary search or a linear scan.
Theorem 3.1. Let H be continuous submodular and monotone decreasing, with ℓ∞-Lipschitz con-
stant G, and let R be strictly increasing and separable. Assume all entries ρ∗
i (j) of the optimal
solution ρ∗of Problem (15) are distinct. Let x′ = A(x(λ∗)) be the thresholding corresponding to the
optimal solution λ∗of Problem (17), mapped back into the original continuous domain X. Then x′
is feasible for the continuous Problem (12), and is a 2Gδ-approximate solution:
H(x′) ≤2Gδ +
min
x∈Box(l,u), R(x)≤B H(x).
Theorem 3.1 implies an algorithm for solving Problem (12) to ε-optimality: (1) set δ = ε/G,
(2) compute ρ∗which solves Problem (15), (3) ﬁnd the optimal thresholding of ρ∗by determining
the smallest λ∗for which Rδ(x(λ∗)) ≤B, and (4) map x(λ∗) back into continuous space via the
interpolation mapping A.
Optimality Bounds.
Theorem 3.1 is proved by comparing x′ and x∗to the optimal solution on
the discretized mesh
x∗
d ∈
argmin
x∈Qn
i=1[ki]:Rδ(x)≤B
Hδ(x).
Beyond the theoretical guarantee of Theorem 3.1, for any problem instance and candidate solution
x′, we can compute a bound on the gap between H(x′) and Hδ(x∗
d). The following two bounds are
proved in the appendix:
1. We can generate a discrete point x(λ+) satisfying
H(x′) ≤[H(x′) −Hδ(x(λ+))] + Hδ(x∗
d).
2. The Lagrangian yields the bound
H(x′) ≤λ∗(B −R(x′)) + Hδ(x∗
d).
9

Improvements.
The requirement in Theorem 3.1 that the elements of ρ∗be distinct may seem
somewhat restrictive, but as long as ρ∗has distinct elements in the neighborhood of our particular
λ∗, this bound still holds. We see in Section 4.1.1 that in practice, ρ∗almost always has distinct
elements in the regime we care about, and the bounds of Remark 3.1 are very good.
If H is DR-submodular and R is aﬃne in each coordinate, then Problem (14) can be represented
more compactly via the reduction of Ene & Nguyen [2016], and hence problem (12) can be solved
more eﬃciently. In particular, the inﬂuence function I(y; x) is DR-submodular in x when for each
s, y(s) = 0 or y(s) ≥1.
3.2
Application to Robust Budget Allocation
The above algorithm directly applies to Robust Allocation with the uncertainty sets in Section 2.2.
The ellipsoidal uncertainty set X Q corresponds to the constraint that P
(s,t)∈E Rst(xst) ≤γ with
Rst(x) = (xst−ˆxst)2σ−2
st , and x ∈Box(0, 1). By the monotonicity of I(x, y), there is never incentive
to reduce any xst below ˆxst, so we can replace Box(0, 1) with Box(ˆx, 1). On this interval, each Rst
is strictly increasing, and Theorem 3.1 applies.
For D-norm sets, we have Rst(xst) = (xst −ˆxst)/(ust −ˆxst).
Since each Rst is monotone,
Theorem 3.1 applies.
Runtime and Alternatives.
Since the core algorithm is Frank-Wolfe, it is straightforward to
show that Problem (15) can be solved to ε-suboptimality in time O(ε−1n2δ−3α−1|T|2 log nδ−1),
where α is the minimum derivative of the functions Ri. If ρ∗has distinct elements separated by η,
then choosing ε = η2αδ/8 results in an exact solution to (14) in time O(η−2n2δ−4α−2|T|2 log nδ−1).
Noting that Hδ + λRδ is submodular for all λ, one could instead perform binary search over
λ, each time converting the objective into a submodular set function via Birkhoﬀ’s theorem and
solving submodular minimization e.g. via one of the recent fast methods [Chakrabarty et al., 2017;
Lee et al., 2015]. However, we are not aware of a practical implementation of the algorithm in [Lee
et al., 2015]. The algorithm in [Chakrabarty et al., 2017] yields a solution in expectation. This
approach also requires care in the precision of the search over λ, whereas our approach searches
directly over the O(nδ−1) elements of ρ∗.
4
Experiments
We evaluate our Robust Budget Allocation algorithm on both synthetic test data and a real-world
bidding dataset from Yahoo! Webscope yah to demonstrate that our method yields real improve-
ments. For all experiments, we used Algorithm 1 as the outer loop. For the inner submodular
minimization step, we implemented the pairwise Frank-Wolfe algorithm of Lacoste-Julien & Jaggi
[2015]. In all cases, the feasible set of budgets Y is {y ∈RS
+ : P
s∈S y(s) ≤C} where the speciﬁc
budget C depends on the experiment. Our code is available at git.io/vHXkO.
4.1
Synthetic
On the synthetic data, we probe two questions: (1) how often does the distinctness condition of
Theorem 3.1 hold, so that we are guaranteed an optimal solution; and (2) what is the gain of using
a robust versus non-robust solution in an adversarial setting? For both settings, we set |S| = 6 and
10

0
50
100
0
0.014
0.028
D-norm, C = 0.4
0
50
100
0
0.005
0.01
Ellipsoidal, C = 0.4
0
50
100
0
0.013
0.026
D-norm, C = 4
0
50
100
0
0.005
0.01
Ellipsoidal, C = 4
Figure 1: Visualization of the sorted values of ρ∗
i (j) (blue dots) with comparison to the particu-
lar Lagrange multiplier λ∗(orange line). In most regimes there are no duplicate values, so that
Theorem 3.1 applies. The theorem only needs distinctness at λ∗.
|T| = 2 and discretize with δ = 0.001. We generated true probabilties pst, created Beta posteriors,
and built both Ellipsoidal uncertainty sets X Q(γ) and D-norm sets X D(γ).
4.1.1
Optimality
Theorem 3.1 and Remark 3.1 demand that the values ρ∗
i (j) be distinct at our chosen Lagrange
multiplier λ∗and, under this condition, guarantee optimality. We illustrate this in four examples:
for Ellipsoidal or a D-norm uncertainty set, and a total inﬂuence budget C ∈{0.4, 4}. Figure 3
shows all elements of ρ∗in sorted order, as well as a horizontal line indicating our Lagrange
multiplier λ∗which serves as a threshold. Despite some plateaus, the entries ρ∗
i (j) are distinct
in most regimes, in particular around λ∗, the regime that is needed for our results. Moreover, in
practice (on the Yahoo data) we observe later in Figure 3 that both solution-dependent bounds
from Remark 3.1 are very good, and all solutions are optimal within a very small gap.
4.1.2
Robustness and Quality
Next, we probe the eﬀect of a robust versus non-robust solution for diﬀerent uncertainty sets and
budgets γ of the adversary. We compare our robust solution with using a point estimate for x,
11

0
5
10
15
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
D-norm, C = 0.400
0
400
800
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Ellipsoidal, C = 0.400
0
5
10
15
0
0.5
1
1.5
D-norm, C = 3.740
0
400
800
0
0.5
1
1.5
Ellipsoidal, C = 3.740
Figure 2: Comparison of worst-case expected inﬂuences for D-norm uncertainty sets X D(γ) (left)
and ellipsoidal uncertainty sets X Q(γ) (right), for diﬀerent total budget bounds C. For any partic-
ular adversary budget γ, we compare minx∈X(γ) I(y; x) for each candidate allocation y.
i.e., ynom ∈argmaxy∈Y I(y; ˆx), treating estimates as ground truth, and the stochastic solution
yexpect ∈argmaxy∈Y E[I(y; X)] as per Section 2.1. These two optimization problems were solved
via standard ﬁrst-order methods using TFOCS Becker et al. [2011].
Figure 2 demonstrates that indeed, the alternative budgets are sensitive to the adversary and
the robustly-chosen budget yrobust performs better, even in cases where the other budgets achieve
zero inﬂuence. When the total budget C is large, yexpect performs nearly as well as yrobust, but
when resources are scarce (C is small) and the actual choice seems to matter more, yrobust performs
far better.
4.2
Yahoo! data
To evaluate our method on real-world data, we formulate a Budget Allocation instance on advertiser
bidding data from Yahoo! Webscope [yah]. This dataset logs bids on 1000 diﬀerent phrases by
advertising accounts. We map the phrases to channels S and the accounts to customers T, with an
edge between s and t if a corresponding bid was made. For each pair (s, t), we draw the associated
transmission probability pst uniformly from [0, 0.4]. We bias these towards zero because we expect
people not to be easily inﬂuenced by advertising in the real world. We then generate an estimate
12

Figure 3: Convergence properties of our algorithm on real data. In the ﬁrst plot, ‘p’ and ‘d’ refer to
primal and dual values, with dual gap shown on the second plot. The third plot demonstrates that
the problem-dependent suboptimality bounds of Remark 3.1 (x for x(λ+) and L for Lagrangian)
are very small (good) for all inner iterations of this run.
ˆpst and build up a posterior by generating nst samples from Ber(pst), where nst is the number of
bids between s and t in the dataset.
This transformation yields a bipartite graph with |S| = 1000, |T| = 10475, and more than
50,000 edges that we use for Budget Allocation. In our experiments, the typical gap between the
naive ynom and robust yrobust was 100-500 expected inﬂuenced people. We plot convergence of the
outer loop in Figure 3, where we observe fast convergence of both primal inﬂuence value and the
dual bound.
4.3
Comparison to ﬁrst-order methods
Given the success of ﬁrst-order methods on nonconvex problems in practice, it is natural to compare
these to our method for ﬁnding the worst-case vector x. On one of our Yahoo problem instances with
D-norm uncertainty set, we compared our submodular minimization scheme to Frank-Wolfe with
ﬁxed stepsize as in [Lacoste-Julien, 2016], implementing the linear oracle using MOSEK [MOSEK
ApS, 2015]. Interestingly, from various initializations, Frank-Wolfe ﬁnds an optimal solution, as
veriﬁed by comparing to the guaranteed solution of our algorithm. Note that, due to non-convexity,
there are no formal guarantees for Frank-Wolfe to be optimal here, motivating the question of global
convergence properties of Frank-Wolfe in the presence of submodularity.
It is important to note that there are many cases where ﬁrst-order methods are ineﬃcient or
do not apply to our setup. These methods require either a projection oracle (PO) onto or linear
optimization oracle (LO) over the feasible set X deﬁned by ℓ, u and R(x). The D-norm set admits
a LO via linear programming, but we are not aware of any eﬃcient LO for Ellipsoidal uncertainty,
nor PO for either set, that does not require quadratic programming. Even more, our algorithm
applies for nonconvex functions R(x) which induce nonconvex feasible sets X. Such nonconvex sets
may not even admit a unique projection, while our algorithm achieves provable solutions.
13

0
40
80
7500
8500
9500
10500
Figure 4: Convergence properties of Frank-Wolfe (FW), versus the optimal value attained with our
scheme (SFM).
5
Conclusion
We address the issue of uncertain parameters (or, model mis-speciﬁcation) in Budget Allocation or
Bipartite Inﬂuence Maximization [Alon et al., 2012] from a robust optimization perspective. The
resulting Robust Budget Allocation is a nonconvex-concave saddle point problem. Although the
inner optimization problem is nonconvex, we show how continuous submodularity can be leveraged
to solve the problem to arbitrary accuracy ε, as can be veriﬁed with the proposed bounds on the
duality gap. In particular, our approach extends continuous submodular minimization methods
[Bach, 2015] to more general constraint sets, introducing a mechanism to solve a new class of con-
strained nonconvex optimization problems. We conﬁrm on synthetic and real data that our method
ﬁnds high-quality solutions that are robust to parameters varying arbitrarily in an uncertainty set,
and scales up to graphs with over 50,000 edges.
There are many compelling directions for further study. The uncertainty sets we use are stan-
dard in the robust optimization literature, but have not been applied to e.g. Robust Inﬂuence
Maximization; it would be interesting to generalize our ideas to general graphs. Finally, despite
the inherent nonconvexity of our problem, ﬁrst-order methods are often able to ﬁnd a globally op-
timal solution. Explaining this phenomenon requires further study of the geometry of constrained
monotone submodular minimization.
