Wikiometrics: A Wikipedia Based Ranking System 
 Gilad Katz* and Lior Rokach† 
 
*University of California, Berkeley 

† Ben-Gurion University of the Negev 

 
 
Abstract 
We present a new concept—Wikiometrics—the derivation of metrics and indicators from 
Wikipedia. Wikipedia provides an accurate representation of the real world due to its size, 
structure, editing policy and popularity. We demonstrate an innovative “mining” 
methodology, where different elements of Wikipedia – content, structure, editorial actions 
and reader reviews – are used to rank items in a manner which is by no means inferior to 
rankings produced by experts or other methods. We test our proposed method by applying it 
to two real-world ranking problems: top world universities and academic journals. Our 
proposed ranking methods were compared to leading and widely accepted benchmarks, and 
were found to be extremely correlative but with the advantage of the data being publically 
available.  
 
1. Introduction 
Ranking is the process by which the relative standing of items is determined. This process is 
common in multiple domains, both scientific and not. Ranking is considered a difficult problem 
in many cases as there is no absolute "ground truth" to which the generated ratings can be 
compared. Nonetheless, multiple studies have been performed that utilize ranking in general 
and Wikipedia in particular. 
Wikipedia has been used in multiple scientific fields: computer science, medicine, physics, 
sociology etc. According to [1], a growing number of Wikipedia-related papers seems to be 
generated with each passing year. Wikipedia has several traits which constitute it as such a 
valuable source of information for research: 
 
Size and scope - As mentioned above, the English Wikipedia alone has over 4.6 million 
entries. Encyclopedia Britannica, one of the best-known "regular" encyclopedias, has 
40,000. This great difference in scope suggests that Wikipedia covers a multitude of 
fields and areas of interest that are not covered by curated encyclopedias. 
 
Timely and updated – Because of Wikipedia's open editing policy which enables any 
person to modify its content, the information it contains is almost always up-to-date. 
Case in point: In 2013, a few minutes after the election of the new pope, one of the 
authors of this study reviewed the relevant Wikipedia entries and found them to 
already be updated with the elected pope's new status. 
 
Tags and meta-data – Wikipedia contains multiple types of user-generated content 
(UGC); categories, links, redirect pages and infoboxes can all be used to infer the type, 
attributes and connections among the various entities represented in Wikipedia. 
 
Wisdom of the crowd – Since every person has the ability to contribute content to 
Wikipedia, it reflects the thoughts, ideas and perceptions of peoples, groups and 

societies [2]. This enables us to use Wikipedia to measure popularity, importance and 
influence. In a sense, Wikipedia is “representative of the real world.” 
We argue that Wikipedia's scope and open editing policy render it a representation of the real 
world. By representation, we mean that the "footprint" of an entity or a concept in Wikipedia 
is often indicative of its popularity or importance in the real world. It is our belief that by 
applying this approach to Wikipedia, researchers will be able to use it to address multiple real-
world challenges. This change of focus could be significant, as Wikipedia’s currently most 
utilized feature is its text.  
In this study we propose a novel concept – Wikiometrics – the derivation of metrics and 
indicators from Wikipedia. While entities ranking is often subjective, we argue that Wikipedia 
represents the "wisdom of the crowd" and can effectively reflect common perceptions. We 
propose using three Wikipedia features – infobox data, links and page views – and applying 
them to the ranking of two of the most widely studied tasks in scientometrics: the ranking of 
world universities and academic journals. In both cases we compare our results to those 
obtained by leading and widely-accepted rankings and show that the correlation between our 
proposed ranking and each of the baselines is similar to the correlation of the baselines among 
themselves.  
Our contribution in this study is twofold: first, we propose a novel approach to a previously 
unaddressed problem – the ranking of real-world objects. Secondly, we demonstrate how two 
underutilized Wikipedia features – the infoboxes and the page views – can be effectively used 
to address this challenge.  
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we review related work while 
in Sections 3 and 4 we present two case studies and evaluate the performance of the proposed 
methods. In Section 5 we present our conclusions and future research directions. 
2. 
Related Work 
In this section we review four topics. In Section 2.1 we describe existing ranking methods of 
world universities. In Section 2.2 we elaborate on the DBpedia project which aims to extract 
structured content from Wikipedia. In Section 2.3 we go over existing methods for the ranking 
of scientific journals. Finally, in Section 2.4 we describe the Academic Journals WikiProject, 
which aims to improve Wikipedia's coverage of scientific publications.  
2.1. International rankings of world universities 
Nowadays, several methods exist which are generally accepted for ranking world universities. 
In this section we review three such rankings, to which we later compare our proposed ranking 
methods: Academic Rating of World Universities1 (ARWU), Times Higher Education World 
University Ratings2 (THE) and the Webometrics Rating.3 
Academic Rating of World Universities (ARWU) 
The ARWU was the first attempt at establishing a worldwide university evaluation metric. 
Founded in 2003 by Shanghai Jiao Tong University, its initial goal was to provide a benchmark 
                                                          
 
1 http://www.shanghairanking.com/index.html 
2 http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/world-university-rankings/ 
3 http://www.webometrics.info/ 

for Chinese academic institutions. Over the years it has grown in popularity and today it is 
widely regarded as an accurate measurement tool. 
The weights that make up the ranking are as follows (as they appeared on the ranking's official 
website in May 2013): 
1) Alumni of an institution winning Nobel Prizes and Fields Medals – 10% 
2) Staff of an institution winning Nobel Prizes and Fields Medals – 20% 
3) Highly cited researchers in 21 broad subject categories – 20% 
4) Papers published in the journals Nature and Science – 20% 
5) Papers indexed in Science Citation Index-expanded and Social Science Citation Index 
– 20% 
6) Per capita academic performance of an institution – 10% 
The main advantage of this indicator is its clarity – the ranking method is simple, objective and 
transparent. On the other hand, its critics claim that it puts too great an emphasis on the 
natural sciences at the expense of the humanities and that it does not take quality of teaching 
into account. 
The Times Higher Education World University Ratings 
This rating system is a joint operation conducted by the Times Higher Education magazine4 
and Thomson-Reuters.5 Its evaluation metrics consist of 13 sub-categories that are grouped 
into five categories (as of May 2013):  
1) Teaching: the learning environment – 30% 
2) Research: volume, income and reputation – 30% 
3) Citations: research influence – 30% 
4) Industry income: innovation – 2.5% 
5) International outlook: staff, students and research – 7.5% 
This rating is also well accepted and currently considered to be one of the top-three most 
influential ratings of world universities. It has been criticized for assigning "unfair advantage" 
to institutions with a small number of undergraduate students and much like the ARWU, it is 
also criticized for favoring science-oriented universities. 
Webometrics Ranking of World Universities 
This ranking, founded in 2004, attempts to assess the quality of universities based on the 
volume, visibility and impact of their online content. The ranking is compiled by the 
Cybermetrics Lab of the Spanish National Research Council and is released twice a year. 
The rationale of this ranking system is that a university's quality is reflected in its online 
presence (i.e., the amount of content available on its domain) and the influence of its 
publications. This ranking is unique in that it ranks not only several hundreds of well-known 
universities, but thousands of institutions around the world. The ranking is composed of two 
categories of ratings, each consisting of 50% of the overall grade: 
1) Visibility – The visibility score is calculated by analyzing all links that point to the online 
content of the evaluated academic institution. This score is defined by the ranking's 
                                                          
 
4 http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/ 
5 http://thomsonreuters.com/ 

official website as "…recognizing the institutional prestige, the academic performance, the 
value of the information, and the usefulness of the services as introduced in the webpages 
according to the criteria of millions of web editors from all over the world." The creators 
of the ranking rely on two companies, Majestic SEO6 and Ahrefs,7 in order to obtain the 
relevant link information. 
 
2) Activity – This category is divided into three sub-categories, all with equal weight in the 
final rating (16.6% of the final rank). These three categories are: 
 
Presence – The total number of webpages hosted in the university's domain as 
indexed by Google. 
 
Openness – The number of recent publications (currently from 2008) that are 
hosted on the university's web domain, appear on Google Scholar and are 
publically accessible. 
 
Excellence – Counts the number of papers that members of the university have 
published and which are in the top 10% of the most cited papers in their 
respective fields. The data is provided by the Scimago Group.8 
An extensive analysis conducted by Aguillo et al. [3] shows that the greatest dissimilarity 
among the ratings systems is between the Webometric rating and that of the Times Higher 
Education. This is not surprising since the former relies heavily on bibliometrics while the latter 
takes many additional factors into account. 
It is important to note that one of our proposed metrics – the infoboxes-based one – is a 
combination of the ratings presented above. Very much like the Webometrics data, we use 
data available online in order to rate academic institutions; however Wikipedia is more 
accessible and more compact than the entire web. For example, it is possible to download all 
of Wikipedia without the need to use a web crawler.  Like the ARWU and THE, we take into 
account notable persons (through their Wikipedia pages) who are connected to the university. 
It should be noted, however, that it is irrelevant to our ranking whether these individuals 
pursue an academic career or not. Naturally, the differences in emphasis lead to differences 
in the ratings of various universities and we elaborate on this subject further in the evaluation 
section. 
2.2. DBpedia 
DBpedia is a collaborative effort to extract structured content from Wikipedia. It is arguably 
one of the easiest ways to access and utilize structured information extracted from the online 
encyclopedia. The extracted content is then made available through a database that enables 
complex queries (e.g., "Which cities in the United States have a population of over 4 million 
people?").  
 
The project was initiated in 2007 by teams at the Free University of Berlin and the University 
of Leipzig along with OpenLink Software.9  DBpedia was released under a free license, enabling 
others to reuse the code. It currently classifies close to 4 million objects, of which around 2.5 
million are part of a consistent ontology. In addition, it contains hundreds of thousands of 
links to external web pages, close to 200,000 links to other RDF databases (Auer et al., 2007) 
and over 8 million YAGO categories [4]. The generated ontology is diverse and includes 
persons, places, creations (music albums, movies, etc.), organizations and many other diverse 
                                                          
 
6 http://www.majesticseo.com/ 
7 https://www.ahrefs.com 
8 http://www.scimagoir.com/ 
9 www.openlinksw.com 

entities ranging from athletes, to anatomy to television shows. The 359 classes form a shallow 
ontology that has 1,775 properties. 
 
Wikipedia’s infoboxes are one of the main sources of valuable information. These boxes, 
located on the right side of many pages (see example in Figure 1) contain structured 
information that can be easily extracted and added to the database. For example, it is possible 
to easily discover the predecessor/successor of a particular monarch, length of reign, number 
of children and numerous other details.   
 
In this study we utilize the information found in the infoboxes to identify universities, faculty 
members and alumni in an attempt to produce an automatic ranking of world universities. As 
shown in many cases in the past (and in our evaluation in Sections 3 and 4), the "wisdom- of-
the-crowd" can sometimes serve as an excellent substitute for the opinion of experts.  
 
Figure 1.  An example of a Wikipedia infobox (note the "Alma mater" attribute, which is utilized by one of 
our proposed ranking methods). 
 
2.3. Journal Rankings 
Journals serve as the main outlets for publishing the results of scientific research. Journal 
rankings assist academic libraries in selecting which books and journals to purchase and are 
often used as a measure of research quality; given a journal’s ranking, researchers can target 
their papers to top-ranked journals and improve their chances for promotion.  
 
The four common approaches to generating journal rankings are a) opinion surveys; b) 
citations; c) author affiliation and; d) behavioral approaches. In expert opinion surveys, a 
number of scholars rank each journal according to a predefined set of criteria. The results 
reflect the cumulative peer opinion of a representative group of experts within a particular 
discipline or field. However, expert surveys have also been criticized for their subjectivity, the 
lack of clarity of their rating criteria [5], and various biases (such as preferring outlets that 

publish more articles per year [6]). Finally, establishing a valid expert survey that includes a 
sufficiently large number of qualitative responders can be time-consuming. 
Many citation-based measures have been suggested for ranking journals, including impact 
factors [7], the Eigenfactor [8], and the h-index and its variants [9]. The main advantage of 
these measures is their objectivity.  However, they have also been criticized, with some 
claiming that a few highly cited papers can skew the citation distribution [10] or that not all 
citations have the same significance [5]. Moreover, because citation patterns vary across 
disciplines, it is very difficult to evaluate multidisciplinary journals. Research shows that using 
citation-based measures tends to generate journal rankings that are only weakly correlated 
with expert surveys (see, for instance, [11] and [6] for a complete list). Even when a strong 
correlation can be found, there are still considerable differences in the ranking of certain 
journals [12]. 
The underlying premise of the university affiliation approach is that tenured faculty members 
of prominent research universities tend to publish their work in premier journals. The Author 
Affiliation Index (AAI) of a journal (or set of journals) is defined as the percentage of authors 
who publish in that journal (or set of journals) and are affiliated with a predetermined group 
of top-rated universities or university departments in the domain under study [13-15].  
 
Behavior-based approaches examine the actual publishing behaviors of tenured researchers 
at an independently determined set of prominent research universities. This approach 
assumes that these particular faculty members tend to publish their works in outlets which 
they regard as being of high quality in the field under study. The behavior of these researchers 
can be trusted because they have demonstrated a level of research excellence which is 
recognized by their peers (who have participated in their tenure and promotion committees). 
Rokach [16] has shown that the publication power approach (PPA) that was developed by [5] 
for identifying the premier journals can reliably rank AI journals.  
2.4.  The Academic Journals WikiProject 
A WikiProject is a general term for a collaborative project undertaken by members of the 
Wikipedia community. Currently, there are over 2,250 such projects10 underway, with a large 
diversity of goals.   
The Academic Journals WikiProject is an attempt to improve Wikipedia's coverage of scientific 
publications by expanding, categorizing, and cleaning up existing articles, as well as creating 
new ones. This is done by scanning four types of "citation tags" in Wikipedia - {{Citation}}, 
{{Cite journal}}, {{Vancite journal}}, and {{Vcite journal}}. This task is repeatedly performed by 
bots. 
Although the ranking is informative (and—as we prove later in this study—useful and 
indicative) it is by no means free from mistakes. The WikiProject's website11 describes several 
deficits of its rating system (we present only a few examples here; please see the website for 
the full list): 
 
Citations that are not in the formats specified above are not counted. 
 
Multiple citations on similar pages by the same author are given equal weight to all 
others. 
                                                          
 
10 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Database_reports/WikiProjects_by_changes 
11 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:WikiProject_Academic_Journals/Journals_cited_by_Wikipedia 

 
Multiple citations of the same journal on the same page will all be counted if the 
citation format is not identical. 
Despite all the above-mentioned deficiencies, our experiments show that the extracted data 
is still very valuable, although some simple heuristics had to be applied.  
3. 
First Case Study: University Ranking  
In this section we demonstrate how information extracted from DBpedia and Wikipedia can 
be used to accurately rank world universities. The proposed method consists of two phases – 
information extraction and ranking. During the information extraction phase, we query 
DBpedia and Wikipedia in order to extract a set of entities (academic institutions and persons 
affiliated with them).  We then use this information during the ranking phase in order to rank 
the extracted university entities.  
In order to extract all the relevant entities from Wikipedia, all that was needed was a simple 
DBpedia query for all entities of type "University." As this query resulted in tens of thousands 
of institutions we filtered this list, keeping only entities that appeared in at least two of the 
three rankings presented in Section 2.1. This step was also made necessary by the fact that 
there is large variance in the number of universities in each ranking: ARWU ranks 500, THE 
ranks only 400 and the Webometrics ranking rates over 12,000 universities. Following this 
decision, we were left with the task of ranking 389 universities – a large enough number to 
accurately calculate correlation. In Table 4 we present the top 20 universities ranked by each 
of the three baseline methods and the most successful variant of our Wikiometrics 
approaches. 
3.1. The Proposed Approaches 
We propose three distinct methods for the ranking of real world entities: a) links – the number 
of distinct Wikipedia pages which contain links pointing to the entity's Wikipedia page; b) 
Overall page views – the number of times a specific page was viewed over a certain period of 
time and; c) Relevant infobox attributes – the identification of various entities associated with 
each of the ranked items and the evaluation of their importance. Next, we describe these 
methods in detail. 
3.1.1. Links 
Let 𝑊 be the corpus of all Wikipedia entities and 𝑊𝑟 be a set of Wikipedia entities (i.e. pages) 
we wish to rank. For each ranked entity 𝑒, we count the number of entities in 𝑊 that contain 
links pointing to 𝑒 (see Equation 1). It should be noted that we count the number of entities, 
not links. Therefore, even if one entity contains multiple links to the ranked entity it will only 
be counted as a single link. This was done in order to prevent a small number of highly-detailed 
entities from affecting the ranking process. 
𝑅𝑎𝑛𝑘𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑘𝑠(𝑒) = ∑
{1
𝑤 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑠 𝑎 𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑘 𝑡𝑜 𝑒 
0
𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒
𝑤𝜖𝑊
 (1) 
This ranking method attempts to quantify the importance of an entity by measuring the 
number of other entities in Wikipedia that choose to cite it. This ranking is based on two 
hypotheses: a) Wikipedia contributors are more likely to refer to entities whose reputation or 

importance they judge to be the greatest; b) when choosing which entity to refer to, the first 
entities that are likely to come to the contributor's mind are those in which he or she holds in 
highest regard. In essence, this ranking method can be considered as the "Wikipedia version" 
of the visibility component of the Webometrics ranking method (discussed in Section 3). 
We present two variations of this ranking method – the one presented above, which we call 
incoming links, and another we call incoming-outgoing ratio. This measure is calculated by 
dividing the number of incoming links (shown above) by the number of links to other entities 
in the ranked entity's page (outgoing links). As in the incoming links, multiple outgoing links 
to the same entity are counted as one. This was done to correct for cases where an entity has 
associations or connections to multiple entities (collaborations, etc.) that may increase the 
number of links pointing to it. 
3.1.2. Page Views 
Let 𝑊 be the corpus of all Wikipedia entities and let 𝑊𝑟 be a set of Wikipedia entities we wish 
to rank. For each ranked entity 𝑒, we count the number of times it has been viewed 
throughout a certain period of time. It is important to note that the views of the redirect pages 
(pages which immediately transfer the user to another page) pointing to the entity are also 
counted in the entity's overcall count. 
The hypothesis behind this ranking method is that the more important/prestigious an entity 
is perceived to be, the more page views it is likely to have. In order to negate the effects of 
temporary "spikes" in popularity (due to news events, for example) the page views were 
aggregated over a period of several months. 
3.1.3. Infobox Attributes 
We use the information from the infoboxes in order to obtain for each academic institution 
the notable persons that are associated with it. As Wikipedia's editing policy requires that a 
person be "notable" to have an entry, we deemed this definition valid for all entities of type 
"Person" in DBpedia. In addition, we also extracted a general "visibility indicator" for each 
academic institution. The extracted features are as follows:  
 Faculty members – For each university, we count the number of people who have at least 
one of these attributes in their infoboxes: workInstitution, employer and workplaces. 
 Alumni – We count the notable alumni of each institution by counting the persons with at 
least one of the following attributes: alumnus, alumna, alma mater, education and 
training. 
 Other affiliations – This component is used to detect additional affiliations that can 
contribute to the reputation of an academic institution. Here, we counted all persons with 
at least one of the following attributes: visitorSchool, publisher, coachTeams and college 
 Visibility – The goal of this ranking component is to estimate the "prominence" of each 
university. It counts the number of articles in which each university's name was mentioned. 
It should be noted that this attribute is different from the one calculated in Section 2.1 as 
it does not take into account only links but any appearance of the term. This leads to 
difference in performance, as is shown later in this section. 
Following empiric experimentation and analysis, we chose to use the following formula: 

𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒= 0.5 ∗𝑊𝑜𝑟𝑘𝐼𝑛𝑃𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑒+ 0.3 ∗𝐴𝑙𝑚𝑎𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑟+ 0.1 ∗𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙𝑆𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑐ℎ+ 0.1 ∗𝐴𝑙𝑙𝑅𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛  
This formula resembles some of the components of the leading rating schemes presented in 
Section 2. As with ARWU, our approach allocates a sizeable part of the ranking to past and 
current staff. Like the Webometrics rating, we also take into account citations of the university 
(although not in a purely academic context) and like THE, we incorporate the university's 
image and connections to the outside world into the rating (although we do not limit these 
connections to those with industry, as is the case with THE).  
Table 1. The components of the three leading university rankings – Academic Rating of 
World Universities (ARWU), Times Higher Education (THE) and Webometrics. The weight 
assigned to each component is in bold. 
ARWU 
THE 
Webometrics 
Alumni who are 
Nobel laureates 
– 10% 
Teaching: the 
learning 
environment – 
30% 
Visibility: all links that 
point to the online 
content of the 
institution – 50% 
Faculty 
members who 
are Nobel 
laureates – 20% 
Research: 
volume, income 
and reputation – 
30% 
Presence: the number of 
webpages in the 
university's domain – 
16.6% 
Highly cited 
researchers – 
20% 
Citations: 
research 
influence – 30% 
Openness: the number 
of recent publications 
that are hosted on the 
university's domain and 
appear in Google 
Scholar – 16.6% 
Papers 
published in 
Nature & 
Science – 20% 
Industry income: 
innovation – 
2.5% 
Papers indexed 
in Science 
Citation Index-
Expanded – 
20% 
International 
outlook: staff, 
students and 
research – 7.5% 
Excellence: the number 
of papers published by 
faculty which are at the 
top 10% of their field – 
16.6% 
Per capita 
academic 
performance of 
the institution 
– 10% 
 
3.2. Results  
We evaluate our proposed ranking method by calculating its correlation to the leading and 
well-known university rankings reviewed above – ARWU, THE and Webometrics, all from 
2011. The Wikipedia version that was used was from December 2013, and the page views 
statistics were extracted from September-December 2013. Since each ranking method has a 
different number of universities, we left only universities that appeared in at least two of the 
three abovementioned rankings (390 in total). 

In Table 2 we present the Kendall tau rank correlation between the three existing ranking 
methods. It is clear that they are highly correlative (all correlations are statistically significant 
with p<0.001). In Table 3 we present the correlation of our proposed ranking approaches to 
each of the three original ranking methods. We also show the correlation of each of the 
components of the proposed methods, as well as that of a combined ranking consisting of all 
three approaches together. 
When the ranking method consisted of several components (namely, the Links and Infobox 
attributes and the Combined option presented in Table 3), we treated the problem of 
assigning weights to each component as a rank-based nonparametric regression task [17]. The 
purpose of this approach is to maximize the Kendall tau correlation with the dependent 
variable. As the three original rankings are highly correlative, we only present the results 
obtained with ARWU as the dependent variable (the results with the other rankings as the 
dependent variable are highly similar). The Nelder-Mead method [18] is used to assign the 
optimal values. 
Table 2. The Kendall tau correlation of the three "original" university ranking 
methods – Academic Rating of World Universities (ARWU), Times Higher Education 
(THE) and Webometrics – with each other. All the correlations are statistically 
significant (p<0.001). 
 
ARWU 
THE 
Webometrics 
ARWU 
 
0.565 
0.467 
THE 
 
 
0.435 
Webometrics  
 
 
 
Table 3. The Kendal tau correlation of our proposed rankings (in grey) and each of 
their components (in white) to the three original universities rankings. All 
correlations were found to be statistically significant (p<0.001). 
 
ARWU 
THE 
Webometrics 
Links 
0.372 
0.396 
0.475 
Incoming 
Links 
0.375 
0.474 
0.396 
Incoming-
outgoing 
links ratio 
0.295 
0.387 
0.295 
Page views 
0.357 
0.435 
0.423 
Infobox 
Attributes 
0.498 
0.451 
0.485 
Alma 
Mater 
0.402 
0.45 
0.427 
Faculty 
Members 
0.525 
0.468 
0.475 
Other 
Affiliations 
0.389 
0.477 
0.406 
Visibility 
0.388 
0.387 
0.42 
Combined 
0.501 
0.468 
0.477 
 

All the correlation results presented both in Tables 2 and 3 are statistically significant (p<0.01). 
These results are a clear indication that the three approaches presented in this paper can be 
used as simple and effective tools for ranking. In addition, it is clear that the more complicated 
method – the infobox attributes ranker – shows the best performance. This is not surprising, 
as its features were “handcrafted” for this ranking task. 
An interesting observation from Table 3 is that the Faculty Members component alone enables 
us to reach a correlation that is close or even better than the one obtained by combining all 
prediction methods together. This is an important observation that attests to the simple truth 
that the researchers of an institution (past and present) are the most important element in 
determining its quality. 
Finally, we would like to emphasize an important point: The statistical test used to determine 
ranking similarity assigns equal weight to all items on the list. This means that our proposed 
approaches fared well not only for the top 20 or top 100 world universities (which may be 
considered easier to rank) but also for lower-ranking universities. 
Table 4: The top 20 universities according to Wikiometrics and the three "benchmark" 
methods. 
Rank Wikiometric 
ARWU 
Webometrics 
Times Higher Education 
1 
Harvard University 
Harvard University 
Harvard University 
California 
Institute 
of 
Technology 
2 
Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology 
Stanford University 
Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology 
Harvard University 
3 
University 
of 
California, 
Berkeley 
Massachusetts 
Institute 
of Technology 
Stanford University 
Stanford University 
4 
University of Cambridge 
University of California, 
Berkeley 
University 
of 
California, 
Berkeley 
University of Oxford 
5 
University of Oxford 
University of Cambridge Cornell University 
Princeton University 
6 
Princeton University 
California 
Institute 
of 
Technology 
University of Michigan 
University of Cambridge 
7 
Stanford University 
Princeton University 
University of Minnesota 
Massachusetts 
Institute 
of 
Technology 
8 
Yale University 
Columbia University 
University of Washington 
Imperial College London 
9 
Columbia University 
University of Chicago 
University of Wisconsin – 
Madison 
University of Chicago 
10 
University of Chicago 
University of Oxford 
University of Texas at Austin 
University 
of 
California, 
Berkeley 
11 
University of Michigan 
Yale University 
University of Pennsylvania Yale University 
12 
Cornell University 
University of California, 
Los Angeles 
Pennsylvania 
State 
University 
Columbia University 
13 
University of Pennsylvania Cornell University 
Columbia University 
University of California, Los 
Angeles 
14 
University of Toronto 
University 
of 
Pennsylvania 
Carnegie Mellon University The Johns Hopkins University 
15 
The 
Johns 
Hopkins 
University 
University of California 
San Diego 
University 
of 
Illinois 
at 
Urbana–Champaign 
Swiss Federal Institute of 
Technology in Zurich 
16 
California 
Institute 
of 
Technology 
University of Washington 
University of California, Los 
Angeles 
University of Pennsylvania 
17 
University of California, Los 
Angeles 
University of California 
San Francisco 
Texas A&M University 
University College London 
18 
University of Wisconsin –
Madison 
The 
Johns 
Hopkins 
University 
University 
of 
Maryland 
College Park 
University of Michigan 
19 
New York University 
University of Wisconsin – 
Madison 
Purdue University 
University of Toronto 
20 
University 
of 
Illinois 
at 
Urbana–Champaign 
University 
College 
London 
University of North Carolina 
at Chapel Hill 
Cornell University 
 

3.3. Analysis and Discussion 
As it is clear that the infobox-based approach fared best out of the three approaches, we chose 
to perform an in-depth analysis of its performance. We begin our evaluation of the results by 
analyzing the ranking distribution. Then, in addition to the overall comparison presented in 
the previous section, we perform an additional analysis using only North American 
universities. The reason for this is the (relative) increased visibility of these institutions in the 
English Wikipedia—a fact which may skew the results. It should be noted again that all results 
reflect the ratings that were published in 2011. 
We began by analyzing the score distribution produced by our proposed approach. The results 
are presented in Figure 2. The purpose of this analysis was to determine whether the scores 
could be fitted to a known parametric distribution.  In particular, the null-hypothesis that the 
new measure is distributed as log-normal is accepted using the chi-square test with p-
value=0.27062.  
 
Figure 2: The distribution of the proposed measure and the fit to log-normal. 
Next, we present a scatter diagram of the rankings of the Wikiometrics and the Times Higher 
Education rankings. Figure 3 illustrates the log-fit correlation of the two measures, which was 
found to be statistically significant with r=0.6550. The visualization clearly demonstrates that 
the two rankings are very similar throughout the entire range of scores. Similar results were 
obtained with the other two baseline ranking methods.  
 
Evaluating North American Universities 
Since North America is home to many of the world's top universities, it could be argued that 
rankings such as Webometric and the one proposed in this paper are affected by the fact that 
these universities have a much larger Wikipedia (and overall web) exposure than those of 
other countries. This possible bias is presented in Table 5, which shows the number of North 
American universities in the top 100 and top 200 of the analyzed rankings. It can easily be 

seen that both the Webometrics and Wikiometrics methods are those with the largest number 
of North American universities. 
It should be noted that this bias exists despite the fact that DBpedia, which is used in this 
research, includes localized versions of Wikipedia in 111 languages. This might be the case due 
to the fact that the English version of Wikipedia is far richer than other language versions. For 
example, the English version contains 763,643 entries for persons while the French version 
contains only 62,942. Naturally, each language has a better coverage of prominent 
researchers expressing themselves in that particular language. By combining these two 
aspects (richness of the English version and the preference for those speaking one’s own 
native language), it is to be expected that native English speakers will be relatively better 
covered. 
For all the reasons mentioned above, we decided to also calculate the correlation of the 
various rankings while including only North American universities. The results are presented 
in Table 6 and clearly show that the correlation of Wikiometrics with existing rankings 
becomes even higher. This may indicate that Wikiometrics is more reliable when implemented 
in each area separately. While it might be worthwhile to mitigate the "over-exposure" of 
North American universities (by normalizing the counts, for example), we leave this issue for 
future research. 
 
Figure 3: Comparing the values of the proposed measure and the Times Higher Education 
measure. 
 
Table 5: North-American Universities in the Top 100 and 200 of our proposed method and 
the three "benchmark" methods. 
Ranking 
Top 100 
Top 200 
Times Higher Education 
56 
85 
Shanghai 
57 
87 
Webometrics 
74 
109 
Wikiometrics 
60 
98 

 
 
 
 
Table 6: The Spearman correlation results of the proposed method (and each of its 
components) to well-known ranking methods for North American universities. All scores 
indicate correlation with p<0.01. 
  
ARWU 
THE 
Webometrics 
Wikiometrics 
ARWU 
 
0.680223 
0.680341 
0.859634 
THE 
0.680223 
 
0.747693 
0.801552 
Webometrics 
0.680341 
0.747693 
 
0.773092 
Wikiometrics 
0.859634 
0.801552 
0.773092 
 
 
 
4. 
Second Case Study: Journal Ranking  
In this section we demonstrate that Wikipedia can be used to great effect for ranking academic 
journals. This task has proven more difficult than the ranking of top world universities, as 
many journals are not represented in the “regular” Wikipedia, but only in projects such as the 
WikiGroups described in Section 2.4.  This makes two of the approaches presented in the 
previous case study – the use of links and page views – not applicable. Therefore, we address 
this task by utilizing a weighted set of infobox attributes.  
We chose to focus on the artificial intelligence (AI) domain in order to compare our outcome 
to previously published results. Several rankings of AI journals are available in the literature. 
Cheng et al. (1996) and Serenko (2010) used citation-based measures while Serenko and 
Dohan (2011) reported on expert surveys in the field. Rokach (2012) used author-based 
rankings.  
4.1. Information Extraction 
As mentioned in Section 2.4, we utilized information from the Academic Journals WikiProject 
group as the basis of our ranking method. The measures used in this case study were: 
1. Citations: Number of times the journal was cited by Wikipedia 
2. Citers: Number of Wikipedia articles that have cited the journal (if the same Wikipedia 
article cited the journal twice then it was counted only once) 
3. Has Wikipedia Page – This is a binary indicator which gets the value of 1 if the journal 
has a dedicated Wikipedia page. Our assumption is that top-tier journals have a 
dedicated Wikipedia page (this, however, does not apply for all journals and is the 
reason for not using the links and page views ranking methods). 
In addition, we created a linear combination of all the above measures. In order to find the 
weights we used linear regression with the dependent (target) variable being the 5-year 
impact factor that was published by the Thomson-Reuters.  
As mentioned in Section 2.4, the values generated by Wikiometrics have two serious 
limitations. The first is that it cannot account for citations that are not annotated by the 

recommended "<REF>" tag. The second limitation is that even the slightest variation in name 
will be considered as a separate journal. An example of this problem is the journal IEEE 
Transactions on Patterns Analysis and Machine Intelligence. This journal appears in 13 
different variants, including: PAMI, PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, and 
IEEE Transaction On. Consequently, we used simple heuristics in order to aggregate entries 
that refer to the same journal. 
4.2. The Ranking Phase 
Our evaluation encompassed 108 peer-reviewed AI journals that were identified according to 
the sub-category “Computer Sciences – Artificial Intelligence” as indexed by the Thomson-
Reuters Web of Knowledge (WoK). This data refers to all journal publications of the 
benchmark scholar. 
We used linear regression in order to find the optimal weights for the abovementioned 
parameters. After scaling the values of Citation and Citers to [0,1], we arrived at the final 
formula: 
𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑗𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑛𝑎𝑙= 4.3848 ∗𝐶𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑠+ 4.42 ∗𝐶𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛+ 0.8238 ∗𝐻𝑎𝑠𝑃𝑎𝑔𝑒   (3) 
The measure that was used to evaluate the correlation of our proposed method to existing 
rankings was the Spearman rank order correlations. The results of the evaluation are 
presented in Table 7 (Correlations marked with an asterisk are significant at p <0.05).  As in 
the previous section, all results are based on rankings published in 2011. 
 
Analysis of the results clearly indicates the existence of a high correlation between 
Wikiometrics and existing rankings. Moreover, Wikiometrics was the only ranking method to 
be correlative with all other rankings with a p<0.01. While being correlative with all existing 
rankings (Power; 2-year Impact Factor; 5-year Impact Factor; Expert Survey Score) the highest 
correlation was found with the Expert Survey Score. 
 
Table 7: The Spearman correlation values of our proposed method and other well-known 
journal ranking methods (statistically significant results are marked with an asterisk (*)). 
 
Wikiometric  
Citers 
Wikiometric  
Citations 
Wikiometric  
HasPage 
Wikiometric 
Combined 
Power 
2 years 
Impact 
Factor 
5 years 
Impact 
Factor 
Expert Survey 
Score 
Wikiometric  
Citers 
 
0.991451* 
0.407459* 
0.935816* 0.533244*0.486636* 0.534429*
0.713065* 
Wikiometric  
Citations 
0.991451* 
 
0.404296* 
0.932995* 0.504644*0.488743* 0.535447*
0.667878* 
Wikiometric  
HasPage 
0.407459* 
0.404296* 
 
0.660699* 0.199476 0.221053 0.253653*
0.324381* 
Wikiometric 
Combined 
0.935816* 
0.932995* 
0.660699* 
 
0.485119*0.477281* 0.529575*
0.666104* 
Power 
0.533244* 
0.504644* 
0.199476 
0.485119* 
 
0.221165 0.223009 
0.517432* 
2 years Impact 
Factor 
0.486636* 
0.488743* 
0.221053 
0.477281* 0.221165 
 
0.941599*
0.533394* 
5 years Impact 
Factor 
0.534429* 
0.535447* 
0.253653* 
0.529575* 0.223009 0.941599* 
 
0.581586* 
Expert Survey 
Score 
0.713065* 
0.667878* 
0.324381* 
0.666104* 0.517432*0.533394* 0.581586*
 
 
5. 
Conclusions and Future Work  
In this paper we presented two case studies that demonstrate Wikipedia’s ability to provide 
valuable information regarding the real world, by capitalizing on the "wisdom-of-the-crowd" 

and extracting simple metrics from it. We showed that the opinions of tens of thousands of 
people (if not more) could constitute a surprisingly accurate alternative for the opinions of 
experts. 
 
We believe that the estimates provided by Wikiometrics could be further improved by a more 
elaborate processing of its contents. For example, for the journal ranking one can also take 
into account references that do not use the <Ref> template and extend the evidence used for 
the ranking. To this end, an appropriate references extraction would have to be developed for 
the correct identification of the journal title.  The university rankings could be improved in a 
similar way by taking into account the university affiliation of notable individuals even if this 
information is not indexed in the infobox but appears as biographical text. 
We are currently considering several directions for future work. The first direction is the 
attempt to generate Wikiometrics ratings for additional domains, particularly those 
completely unrelated to academia.  We hypothesize that Wikiometrics might serve as a low-
cost means for reliably measuring issues of interest. For example, Wikipedia could be used for 
ranking movies and even to predict box office success [19].  
 
An additional direction is the use of other types of attributes – network centrality and graph 
analysis – for the challenges presented in this paper.  Finally, we also consider "automating" 
the Wikiometrics ratings by implementing a machine learning approach that would utilize 
different facets and attributes of Wikiepedia in order to produce rankings on any domain 
specified by the user. 
 
6.
