Generative appearance replay for continual
unsupervised domain adaptation
Boqi Chen1,2*, Kevin Thandiackal1,2*, Pushpak Pati1 and Orcun Goksel2,3
1IBM Research Europe, Zurich, Switzerland
2Computer-assisted Applications in Medicine, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
3Department of Information Technology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden
Abstract
Deep learning models can achieve high accuracy when trained on large
amounts of labeled data. However, real-world scenarios often involve several
challenges: Training data may become available in installments, may origi-
nate from multiple different domains, and may not contain labels for training.
Certain settings, for instance medical applications, often involve further
restrictions that prohibit retention of previously seen data due to privacy
regulations. In this work, to address such challenges, we study unsupervised
segmentation in continual learning scenarios that involve domain shift. To
that end, we introduce GarDA (Generative Appearance Replay for continual
Domain Adaptation), a generative-replay based approach that can adapt a
segmentation model sequentially to new domains with unlabeled data. In
contrast to single-step unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA), continual
adaptation to a sequence of domains enables leveraging and consolidation of
information from multiple domains. Unlike previous approaches in incremental
UDA, our method does not require access to previously seen data, making it
applicable in many practical scenarios. We evaluate GarDA on two datasets
with different organs and modalities, where it substantially outperforms
existing techniques.
Keywords
Unsupervised domain adaptation, Continual learning, Optic disc segmen-
tation, Cardiac segmentation
1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have recently achieved
remarkable performance on various computer vision tasks with
natural images, such as classiﬁcation [1], [2], [3] and semantic
segmentation [4], [5]. However, there exist several challenges
that hinder DNNs from achieving similar success in other
domains, e.g., healthcare. First, to achieve high-performance,
DNNs require large amounts of labeled training images,
which are challenging to obtain for medical applications,
since annotations can only be provided by medical experts.
Annotating medical images is therefore more costly compared
to annotating natural images. This is particularly critical for
applications requiring dense annotations, such as semantic
segmentation. Thus, there is a strong need for unsupervised
DNN approaches in healthcare. Second, medical datasets usu-
ally contain a relatively small number of images [6], [7], [8],
[9] compared to large-scale natural image datasets, such as
ImageNet [10]. Models trained on such small datasets often
*The authors contributed equally to this work.
do not generalize well to unseen domains [11]. Unsupervised
Domain Adaptation (UDA) [12], [13] aims to address both
aforementioned challenges, by ﬁrst training a model on a
labeled source domain D0 and afterwards adapting it to an
unlabeled target domain D1, to alleviate annotation costs.
Real-world settings are often more complex than the above
scenario, and require long-term applicable solutions rather
than adapting to a single target domain alone. It is, for
example, typical that multiple datasets from different domains
D1, ..., DT become available at different time points. In such a
scenario, it is beneﬁcial to keep a single model that is sequen-
tially adapted to these different domains, thereby consolidating
useful knowledge from more than one domain. Since patient
data is bound to strict privacy regulations, data sharing and
indeﬁnite data storage are often not possible. Therefore such
medical scenarios are further complicated by the inability
to keep and access data from previously seen domains. In
the literature, this constrained learning problem is known as
continual learning (CL). In this work, we study a continual
UDA setting, where a model is adapted to a sequence of target
domains, the data of which is available only while training on
that respective domain for the ﬁrst time.
The main challenges in continual UDA are twofold. First,
the model should not suffer from catastrophic forgetting [14],
[15], i.e., it should maintain its performance on the source
domain as well as all previously seen target domains. Second,
without access to the source or previous target domains,
the model should adapt accurately to new target domains.
Although strict continual UDA has been largely unexplored in
the literature, some recent techniques have studied a scenario
with looser constraints, which we herein term as incremental
UDA. In contrast to continual UDA, in incremental UDA the
data from the source domain is stored and reused during the
introduction of each subsequent target domain, as illustrated
in Fig. 1.
As an incremental UDA method, [16] proposed Multi-Head
Distillation (MuHDi), which performs knowledge distillation
using either the source images (which are kept at all times) or
the images from the current target domain. This is sub-optimal
since knowledge from previously seen target domains cannot
be preserved effectively. Another method, more closely related
to our solution, is ACE (Adapting to Changing Environ-
ments) [17], which builds on the idea of transferring the style
arXiv:2301.01211v2  [cs.CV]  13 Feb 2023

...
...
Incremental UDA
...
...
Continual UDA
Fig. 1: Overview of incremental (top) and continual (bottom)
UDA workﬂows. In the latter, the segmentation model M
sequentially adapts to new domains without storing data from
any previously seen domain, including D0.
of unlabeled target images to known labeled source images
(which then again have to be kept indeﬁnitely). To address
forgetting, ACE generates images with the same content, i.e.,
segmentation ground truth, as a given source image, but the
style of a target image. In addition, ACE employs a memory
unit to replay images in previously seen target styles to
the segmentation model. However, as for MuHDi, ACE also
violates a strict continual UDA constraint, since it relies on
future access to the source data. Furthermore, ACE can only
replay the previous target styles that have been stored in the
memory unit, hence lacking the ability to sample those for
replay from the entire distribution of previously seen target
styles. This in turn affects the knowledge preservation from
these intermediate targets.
In this work, we address the above-mentioned shortcomings
by proposing GarDA (Generative Appearance Replay for con-
tinual Domain Adaptation). We employ generative replay [18],
[19], [20], [21] to substitute images from any previously-seen
but currently-inaccessible domain with synthetic images that
are generated via a generative adversarial network (GAN) [22].
This permits operation under a strict continual UDA setting,
i.e., even when the source and the intermediate target domains
become inaccessible after training on each. Importantly, for
replay we can arbitrarily sample images of any seen domain
via our generator, and are not limited by less expressive and
ﬁxed memory buffers, as in ACE. Furthermore, thanks to our
powerful GAN-based approach for transferring the appearance
of target domain images onto source domain images, we can
generate more representative samples for replay, achieving
more effective knowledge preservation.
In summary, our main contributions are three-fold: (1) We
propose GarDA as the ﬁrst segmentation technique that oper-
ates under a strict continual UDA setting, i.e., it mitigates
forgetting of the source and intermediate target domains
without storing any previously seen images. (2) We introduce
a novel combination of appearance transfer and generative
replay using a stochastic generator, which enables diverse
sampling from the entire distribution of all domains, and
is thus less prone to overﬁtting compared to methods em-
ploying separate memory buffers. (3) We achieve the new
state-of-the-art performance in continual UDA, demonstrated
herein through comprehensive benchmarking with two target
domains. To demonstrate the generalizability of GarDA, we
conduct experiments for two entirely different tasks: optic disc
segmentation in color fundus photography (CFP) images and
cardiac segmentation in magnetic resonance (MR) images.
2. Related work
Our work lies at the intersection of UDA and continual
learning, for which we provide below a brief overview with
relevant research.
2.1. Continual learning
Continual learning aims to simulate real-world data avail-
ability constraints in sequential learning, i.e., a model should
learn from a sequence of datasets without retaining any pre-
viously seen data and without forgetting previously acquired
knowledge [23], [15], [24], [25]. The research in continual
learning can be categorized into four major dimensions fo-
cusing on regularization [26], [27], [28], parameter isola-
tion [29], [30], [31], prototypical representations [32], [33],
[34], and generative replay [18], [19], [35], [36], [37], [38],
[20], [21]. Methods built on prototypical representations as
well as generative replay have been the most successful. The
former aims to store class-representative prototypes in feature
space to compensate any estimated drift when learning new
tasks. In the latter, a generative model learns to synthesize
images [18], [35], [36], [20], [21] or features [19], [37], [38]
of previously seen data, such that they can be replayed to
the classiﬁcation/segmentation model when the original data
is not available anymore. While these methods have achieved
state-of-the-art performance on class- and task-incremental
benchmarks, they have not been employed in the context of
continual UDA, to the best of our knowledge.
2.2. UDA
Over the last years, a myriad of methods have been proposed
to tackle UDA for both classiﬁcation and segmentation [12],
[13], with their common paradigm often being the domain
alignment. This aims to bring the source and target domain
representations closer, in terms of either the input images,
certain intermediate features, or the model outputs. If this is
done effectively, the classiﬁcation/segmentation models trained
on the source domain are expected to generalize to the target
domain. [39] were the ﬁrst to propose a Domain-Adversarial
Neural Network (DANN), where the main model’s feature
extractor uses the negative gradient of a domain classiﬁer to
obtain domain-invariant features. Similarly, other approaches

TABLE 1: Taxonomy of different domain adaptation settings.
Setting
Source
unavailable
after training
Multiple
target
domains
Unlabeled
target
domain(s)
Unsup. Domain Adaptation (UDA)



Domain-Incremental Learning (DIL)



Source-free UDA / UMA



Incremental UDA



Continual UDA



have adopted GAN-inspired adversarial training for feature
alignment [40], [41], [42], which has been effective also for
the segmentation of medical images such as MR and computer
tomography (CT) images [43], [44]. Other methods such as
AdaptSegNet [45] or AdvEnt [46] also employ adversarial
losses, but these aim at aligning the model output spaces of
source and target domains. Alternatively, CycleGAN [47] aims
to align domains in the image space. Cycle-Consistent Ad-
versarial Domain Adaptation (CyCADA) [48] and Synergistic
Image and Feature Alignment (SIFA) [49] propose to unify
feature-level and image-level domain alignment for UDA.
All the aforementioned UDA methods were designed to
adapt models from a single source domain to a single target
domain, and they do not operate in continual (or incremental)
learning settings. In this work, our goal is to tackle continual
learning settings, for reasons motivated earlier including the
limitations of access to medical data. Continual UDA, with
a sequence of multiple target domains, introduces additional
challenges to single-domain UDA.
2.3. Sequential UDA
In the literature, UDA for a sequence of multiple target
domains has been studied under different settings. We herein
group them collectively under the umbrella of sequential UDA,
and propose the taxonomy presented in Table 1 to clarify
the differences among the individual settings. We denote the
problem of learning multiple labeled target domains without
retaining previously seen data as domain-incremental learning
(DIL) [50], [51], [52], [53], [54], [55], [56], [57]. Another
sub-category called source-free UDA – sometimes referred
to as unsupervised model adaptation (UMA) – has recently
gained increasing attention for both classiﬁcation [58], [59],
[60], [61] and segmentation tasks [62], [63], [64], [65], [66].
These methods perform UDA from a source to a single target
domain without using the actual source data. Note that in
the literature, source-free and continual UDA have sometimes
been used interchangeably. Instead, we propose to separate
these terms as shown in Table 1, since source-free UDA
aims for adaptation to one target domain only, therefore not
having to consider resilience during further target adaptations
in the future. Naming this setting as continual UDA would
be indeed inconsistent with the remaining continual learning
literature [15], [25] that deals with scenarios involving multiple
classes/tasks in a sequence.
In contrast to the above, incremental UDA aims at adapting
models to multiple target domains in an unsupervised manner.
For instance, MuHDi [16] employs domain adversarial training
for adaptation, together with multiple distillation losses to
mitigate forgetting. As mentioned earlier, knowledge distilla-
tion is sub-optimal when enforced using the source images
and/or the current target images, as these do not directly
prevent forgetting of the previously seen target domains. Wu
et al. [17] proposed ACE, which uses a deterministic encoder-
decoder architecture to create images in a target domain
style for replay. To tackle forgetting, ACE employs a replay
memory buffer containing style information of previously
seen target domains. Although this can mitigate forgetting
to some extent, the memory buffer can only hold the style
information of few samples, thus not representative of the
complete distribution of all previous target domains/images. In
addition, both MuHDi and ACE require access to source data
throughout the adaptation sequence, making them incremental
UDA in our taxonomy.
In this work, we study continual UDA, a more challenging
scenario compared to those aforementioned: The source data
is available only once at the beginning of the sequence for
training on the source domain. Afterwards, the model adapts
to a sequence of unlabeled target domains without storing data
from any previous domain.
3. Method
In this section, we present our proposed framework for
continual UDA. A segmentation model M is ﬁrst trained
on images x0 ∈X0 ⊆RH×W ×C with segmentation label
maps y0 ∈Y0 ⊆{1, ..., L}H×W from the source domain
D0 = {(x0, y0)(i)}N0
i=1, where N0, L, C, H, and W denote the
number of images, labels, image channels, image height, and
image width, respectively. Following training on the source,
D0 is afterwards not accessible anymore while adapting M
to a sequence of T ≥1 target domains D1:T = {X1, ..., XT }
which are lacking labels. In other words, while training on
the t-th target domain, we only have access to the unlabeled
images from the current domain, i.e., xt ∈Dt, but we cannot
access samples from the source or previously encountered
target domains, i.e., D0:t−1. We substitute the missing D0:t−1
with synthetic data produced by a GAN and replay this data
to M to prevent forgetting. As new target domains are added,
the GAN (consisting of a generator G and a discriminator
D) and the segmentation model M are trained alternately, as
illustrated in Figure 2.
First, M and the GAN are trained independently on the
source domain (Section 3.1). Next, G is trained to synthesize
images with the appearance characteristics of a new target
domain (Figure 2(a)) while remembering how to generate
images of previous domains (Figure 2(b)). This training phase
is described in Section 3.2 and Section 3.3, respectively. From
such a generator G, at any point we can create pairs of
synthetic samples with the same content but with separate
appearances: one of the source domain and one of a target

(a) Adapt
(c) Adapt
trainable
frozen
Generator
Discriminator
Feature 
extractor
Segmentation
model
Feature map
Adapted
feature map
(b) Distill
real/fake
real/fake
Train
Train
...
Adapt + 
Distill
Adapt
...
Fig. 2: Overview of our method including (a) GAN adaptation (b) GAN distillation and (c) adaptation of the segmentation
model.
domain. We can then use these pairs to adapt the segmentation
model, by distilling the outputs of the previously trained model
Mp into the current model M, as seen in Figure 2(c). In
other words, the new M shall predict the same segmentation
map for a target-like image as the map predicted by Mp for
the corresponding source-like image. This step is described
in Section 3.4. The above process is repeated whenever data
from a new target domain becomes available.
3.1. Source training
Initially, we train a segmentation model M and a GAN (G,
D) separately on the source domain data. For an input image
x, M predicts a segmentation map. Speciﬁcally, we denote
the output logit of M for label l at pixel position (h, w) as
M (h,w,l)(x). The corresponding probability of belonging to
label l is computed via a softmax operation, i.e.,
m(h,w,l)(x) =
eM (h,w,l)(x)
PL
j=1 eM (h,w,j)(x) .
(1)
Given a source image and segmentation label map (x, y) ∈
D0, M is trained by minimizing the cross-entropy loss
LM = −
1
HW
H
X
h=1
W
X
w=1
L
X
l=1
1{y(h,w)=l}log

m(h,w,l)(x)

(2)
where 1{y(h,w)=l} denotes an indicator function that is 1 if
y(h,w)=l and 0 otherwise.
For the generative replay model, we employ a conditional
GAN consisting of a generator G and a projection discrimi-
nator D [67]. Given a randomly sampled noise vector z (that
aims to condition the image content) and a domain label τ
(for the corresponding appearance), G : (τ, z) 7→xτ|z learns
to generate synthetic samples xτ|z of domain Dτ. G is trained
by optimizing a non-saturating logistic loss [22]
LG =
E
z∼pz
h
a

−D
 0, G(0, z)
i
,
(3)
where a(·) is the softplus operation. During training, D
counteracts G by trying to distinguish synthetic from real
images, by minimizing
LD = E
z∼pz
h
a

D
 0, G(0, z)
i
+
E
x∼D0
h
a

−D
 0, x
i
+ λR1R1 ,
(4)
where R1 is the gradient penalty term Ex∼D0 ∥∇xD(0, x)∥2
2
[68], which is only computed for real images and weighted
with λR1.

3.2. GAN adaptation
The main challenge following the source training is the
unavailability of labeled target domain images, which prevents
the trivial solution of ﬁne-tuning M on the target domain.
However, the challenge can be addressed, e.g., if a mechanism
could create (pseudo-)labeled target domain images. To this
end, we propose to adapt our GAN to the target domain such
that synthetic images can be sampled with content similar to
the source and appearance similar to any target.
As presented in Figure 2(a), for a new target domain Dt, we
freeze the previously trained generator G0:t−1 and instantiate
a trainable generator Gt. For simplicity, we denote Gt being
trained as G, and frozen G0:t−1 for previous domains as Gp.
We initialize G with the weights of Gp.
We employ a discriminator D that operates on feature repre-
sentations extracted using a frozen pretrained feature extractor
F, i.e., instead of distinguishing between real and fake images,
our D distinguishes their feature representations. Accordingly,
we ﬁrst randomly sample a source-like image xp
0|z=Gp(0, z)
from Gp and a real image xt from the current dataset Dt.
These images are then passed through F, yielding feature
maps f p
0|z=F(xp
0|z), and ft=F(xt). We now aim to create a
target-like image xt|z=G(t, z) with features ft|z=F(xt|z) that
incorporates the content of xp
0|z and the appearance of xt. In
order to train G, we ﬁrst need to deﬁne an objective, i.e., what
the synthesized features ft|z should look like.
Inspired by [69], [17], we leverage the idea behind adaptive
instance normalization (AdaIN) that the instance-level statis-
tics (e.g., mean and variance) of a feature map represent the
appearance of the corresponding image. Using AdaIN, we can
re-normalize the instance-level statistics of f p
0|z to those of ft
and obtain a new feature map ˜f p
t|z that encodes the content of
xp
0|z and the appearance of xt. The said re-normalization is
computed as
˜f p
t|z =AdaIN

f p
0|z, ft

=σ(ft)


f p
0|z −µ

f p
0|z

σ

f p
0|z


+ µ(ft),
(5)
where µ(·) and σ(·) denote channel-wise mean and standard
deviation, respectively. During GAN training, discriminator D
is trained to identify ˜f p
t|z as real and ft|z as fake. To this end,
D optimizes the following objective:
Luda
D
= E
z∼pz
h
a

D

t, ft|z
i
+
E
z∼pz
xt∼Dt
h
a

−D

t,˜f p
t|z
 i
+ λR1R1 .
(6)
Meanwhile, G tries to confuse D while adapting to the new
domain by minimizing
Luda
G
=
E
z∈pz
h
a

−D

t, ft|z
 i
+ λconLcon ,
(7)
where the ﬁrst term encourages G to generate images with
realistic target appearance and the second term is a content
loss. The purpose of the content loss is for G to generate
two images with different appearance characteristics, but the
same content, when given the same z and two different domain
labels as input. That means that in the feature space, the only
difference between ft|z and f p
0|z should be the appearance
information, which we estimate through channel-wise mean
and variance. Thus, we deﬁne a content loss as the difference
between the synthesized target features after re-normalization
˜f0|z=AdaIN(ft|z, f p
0|z), and the source features f p
0|z, i.e.,
Lcon =
H
X
h=1
W
X
w=1
C
X
h=c

 f p (h,w,c)
0|z
−˜f (h,w,c)
0|z

2
2 ,
(8)
where H, W, and C are the height, width, and channels of
the feature maps.
3.3. GAN distillation
For continual UDA, in addition to adapting to a new target
domain, the generator G shall not forget any previously learned
knowledge, i.e., G should be able to generate data from
all previous domains D0:t−1. To counteract forgetting, we
introduce two distillation losses: Ldis
D and Ldis
G . As illustrated
in Figure 2(b), we sample uniformly from the previous do-
mains τ ∼U{0, t −1} and random noise vectors z ∼pz,
and feed these both to the previous generator Gp and the
current generator G. For distillation, we treat the images
generated by the previous generator xp
τ|z = Gp(τ, z) as
real and the corresponding images generated by the current
generator xτ|z = G(τ, z) as fake. The distillation loss for the
discriminator is
Ldis
D =
E
z∼pz
τ∼U{0,t−1}
"
a

D

τ, F
 G(τ, z)

+ a

−D

τ, F
 Gp(τ, z)
#
(9)
and for the generator
Ldis
G =
Ladv
G
z
}|
{
E
z∼pz
τ∼U{0,t−1}
"
a

−D

τ, F
 G(τ, z)
#
+ λimg
E
z∼pz
τ∼U{0,t−1}
"
∥G(τ, z) −Gp(τ, z)∥1
#
|
{z
}
Limg
G
.
(10)
The ﬁrst term Ladv
G
in Equation (10) is an adversarial (adv)
component evaluated at the feature level, while the second
term Limg
G
is an ℓ1 image (img) distillation loss at the image
level weighted by λimg. The combination of such image- and
feature-level distillation has been empirically demonstrated to
be effective for other continual learning tasks, e.g., class-
incremental learning [21].
In practice, GAN adaptation and distillation (Figure 2(a&b))
are optimized simultaneously by splitting a training batch into

two halves: one for adaptation to a new domain, and the other
for distillation of previous domains. This training strategy is
more efﬁcient as both the objectives are minimized in the same
forward pass. Then, the ﬁnal objectives for D and G become
LD = Luda
D
+ Ldis
D
and
LG = Luda
G
+ Ldis
G .
(11)
3.4. Segmentation training
Subsequent to adapting the GAN, the segmentation model
M is trained to perform segmentation also in the new target
domain Dt (see Figure 2(c)). When adapting to Dt, we freeze
the previously trained model, called Mp hereafter, that has
seen D0:t−1 and instantiate a trainable model M initialized
with the weights of Mp. M is trained in a supervised manner
with images synthesized by G and corresponding pseudo-
labels predicted by Mp. To this end, we employ the concept of
knowledge distillation [70], i.e., the current model M is trained
to make the same predictions as the previous model Mp. Since
labeled data is only available during the source training, as
described in Section 3.1, we assume that the predictions of
Mp on the source images are the most accurate compared to
images from other target domains. For knowledge distillation,
we ﬁrst pass a generated source image x0|z = G(0, z) to Mp
and obtain the pseudo segmentation map ˆm0 at each position
(h, w) as
ˆm(h,w,l)
0
=
eM (h,w,l)
p
(x0|z)/κ
PL
j=1 eM (h,w,j)
p
(x0|z)/κ ,
(12)
where κ is a temperature parameter that we set to 2, as
commonly used in the knowledge distillation literature [70].
This produces a softer probability distribution and encodes
more ﬁne-grained information compared to one-hot labels.
For the same noise input z, a generated source image x0|z
and an image xτ|z = G(τ, z) of any seen domain Dτ∈{0,...,t}
are expected to have the same content, i.e., the same ground-
truth segmentation map. We can thus utilize ˆm0 as a (silver-
standard/approximate) ground truth for xτ|z. Similarly as
in Equation (2), we then train the segmentation model M
with the pseudo-labeled samples (xτ|z, ˆm0) by minimizing the
cross-entropy loss
LM = −
1
HW
H
X
h=1
W
X
w=1
L
X
l=1
ˆm(h,w,l)
0
log

m(h,w,l)
τ

(13)
m(h,w,l)
τ
=
eM (h,w,l)(xτ|z)/κ
PL
j=1 eM (h,w,j)(xτ|z)/κ .
(14)
Since the images xτ|z are sampled uniformly from all
domains including both the previous ones and the current one,
M is trained to generalize across all of them, i.e., it adapts to
the new target domain Dt while retaining performance on the
previously seen domains D0:t−1.
TABLE 2: Summary of the datasets used in our continual
UDA experiments.
Task
Domain
Device
vendor
Training
images
Test
images
ODS
D0
Canon
640
160
D1
Kowa
54
27
D2
Nidek
278
70
CS
D0
Philips
58
16
D1
Siemens
76
19
D2
Canon
40
10
4. Experiments
We evaluate GarDA on two different tasks, namely optic
disc segmentation in CFP images and cardiac segmentation in
MR images. Below, we ﬁrst describe the employed datasets,
preprocessing steps, and implementation details in Secs. 4.1
to 4.3. Then, we present comparisons to the state of the art
in Secs. 4.5 and 4.6, and discuss further results and ablation
studies in Sec. 4.7.
4.1. Optic disc segmentation (ODS)
The task of segmenting the optic disc is challenging and
crucial for the clinical detection of glaucoma [71]. To evaluate
our method on this task, we consider three public CFP
image datasets, i.e., the Retinal Fundus Glaucoma Challenge
REFUGE [72], the Indian Diabetic Retinopathy Image Dataset
IDRiD [6], and the Retinal Image database for Optic Nerve
Evaluation for Deep Learning RIM-ONE DL [7]. The datasets
were acquired from multiple centers and countries, using
different scanners. Therefore, they allow to create a realistic
and representative benchmark for continual UDA.
To construct a continual sequence of domains, we select
subsets of the aforementioned datasets where each domain
is represented by images acquired with a different camera.
We consider as labeled source domain D0 the set of images
from REFUGE that were acquired with a Canon CR-2 camera.
For the ﬁrst unlabeled target domain D1, we use all images
from IDRiD, which were captured by a Kowa VX-10α digital
fundus camera. For a second unlabeled target domain D2, we
select the subset of images from RIM-ONE DL, which were
taken by a Nidek AFC-210 non-mydriatic fundus camera. The
samples from each domain/camera are then randomly split into
80% training images and 20% test images, as summarized
in Tab. 2. Note that we only employ a validation set (25% of
the training set) during source segmentation training, since for
the training on the target domains only generated images are
used. We follow the preprocessing pipeline employed in [73]
by ﬁrst locating the optic disc center using a simple boundary
detection algorithm [74]. Then, the images are cropped to a
size of 640×640 pixels around the estimated optic disc center
before being further resized to 256 × 256 pixels.

4.2. Cardiac segmentation (CS)
We also benchmark our method for CS in MR images,
where we segment three cardiac regions: the left ventricle (LV)
and the right ventricle (RV) cavities, and the left ventricle my-
ocardium (MYO). Note that the CS task provides an evaluation
setting different from ODS, as it contains higher dynamic-
range, grayscale images and aims at multi-class segmentation.
For CS, we use data from the Multi-Centre, Multi-Vendor
and Multi-Disease Cardiac Segmentation (M&Ms) challenge
[8]. It contains volumes from multiple hospitals in Spain and
Germany, acquired by 1.5T scanners of different vendors,
namely Philips, Siemens, and Canon. We select the labeled
subset of images obtained from the Philips scanner as the
source dataset, D0. The unlabeled target domains D1 and
D2 consist of all images acquired using Siemens and Canon
scanners, respectively. Similarly to ODS, we split the data
from each domain into 80% for training and 20% for testing,
where 25% of the training data is used as validation only
during the source segmentation training. The exact data distri-
bution is shown in Tab. 2, where “image” denotes a volume,
i.e., a set of multiple sequential 2D slices. Note that while
our model is trained on 2D slices, the evaluation is run in
3D. That is, at test time after 2D inference, the numbers of
correctly/falsely classiﬁed pixels from all 2D slices in a 3D
volume are aggregated to compute a 3D Dice score.
We preprocess the images by employing bias ﬁeld cor-
rection [75] and min-max intensity normalization where the
minimum and maximum values are the 5th and 95th intensity
percentiles, respectively. In addition, we resample the 2D
slices to an in-plane resolution of 1.2 × 1.2 mm, before
cropping or padding them to a ﬁxed size of 256 × 256 pixels.
4.3. Implementation details
We use a U-Net [76] segmentation model for GarDA and
all the competing methods. Both the encoder and the decoder
consist of ﬁve convolutional blocks. Skip connections are
added between each block of the encoder and the correspond-
ing block in the decoder. We employ the stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) optimizer with a learning rate of 0.0005.
Throughout all experimental settings, we use a batch size of
16 and a weight decay of 0.0005. Source domain training
is performed on all available real samples, whereas during
the introduction of target domains, arbitrarily many images
can be sampled from the generator for training. Therefore,
we measure the training duration for the source domain in
number of epochs (i.e., passes through the entire dataset) and
for adding target domains in number of iterations (i.e., batches
sampled from G). In particular, the model is trained for 100
epochs on the source domain and for 500 iterations for every
target domain addition.
For the generative module, a conditional GAN with a
projection discriminator D [67] is used. The discriminator
incorporates a mini-batch discrimination layer [77] for bet-
ter sample diversity. Note that two types of discriminators
TABLE 3: Summary of hyperparameter optimization ranges
for each method.
Method
Parameter Values
Description
GarDA
λcon
{1, 10}
Content loss
λimg
{1, 10}
Image distillation
λR1
{0.2, 2}
R1 regularization
AdaptSegNet
[45]
λcp
{1, 10, 20, 50}
Class prior loss
λseg
{1, 10, 20, 50}
Segmentation loss
AdvEnt
[46]
λcp
{1, 10, 20, 50}
Class prior loss
λseg
{1, 10, 20, 50}
Segmentation loss
MuHDi
[16]
λcp
{1, 10, 20, 50}
Class prior loss
λseg
{1, 10, 20, 50}
Segmentation loss
λFD
{0.01, 0.1, 1}
Feature distillation
λdd
{1, 10, 20, 50}
Distribution distillation
λprev
{0.1, 0.2, 0.5}
Distribution distillation
from previous model
ACE
[17]
λstyle
{0.1, 0.5, 1, 5} Style loss
λcont
{0.1, 1}
Content loss
λKL
{0.1, 1}
KL divergence loss
are utilized in GarDA. For the source domain training, the
discriminator distinguishes between real and fake images,
whereas during adaptation to target adaptation domains, D
discriminates features extracted by F. For the source training
on images, we use a D architecture with seven convolutional
layers. For target adaptation training, a smaller four-layer
backbone is used due to the lower dimensions of the feature
space. To extract these features, we follow previous work [69]
and utilize a frozen, pretrained VGG19 [78] architecture for
F.
Our generator G comprises two linear layers followed by
nine style-convolution layers [79] consisting of style modula-
tion, convolution, and noise injection. Besides, we compute an
exponential moving average (EMA) [80] of G’s parameters θ
over the training iterations n, i.e., θ(n)
EMA = βθ(n−1)
EMA + (1 −
β)θ(n) with θ(0)
EMA = θ(0) and β = 0.999. At the end of
the training, we construct a copy of G from these averaged
parameters, which is afterwards used to generate samples
for the training of the segmentation model. We found such
averaging to increase the robustness of G to avoid ending the
GAN training in a potentially poor local minimum. Both G
and D are trained with the Adam optimizer and an equalized
learning rate [77] of 0.0025. During training, images are
augmented with horizontal and vertical ﬂips as well as random
rotations (90◦/180◦/270◦). A summary of the loss weights
used for the content loss, image distillation, as well as the
R1 regularization in the discriminator is shown in Tab. 3.
4.4. Comparisons with the state of the art
We compare GarDA to two established non-sequential UDA
methods, i.e., AdaptSegNet [45] and AdvEnt [46], and two
incremental UDA methods, i.e., ACE [17] and MuHDi [16].
To enable a fair comparison, we adapt these methods to operate
under the continual UDA setting, i.e., they do not access real
data from the source domain when adapting to the target

TABLE 4: Domain-wise test Dice scores (%) for optic disc segmentation (ODS) and cardiac segmentation (CS), at the end of
the continual sequence D0 (Canon)→D1 (Kowa)→D2 (Nidek) for ODS, and D0 (Philips)→D1 (Siemens)→D2 (Canon) for
CS. For the latter, the tabulated results are averages over Dice scores from the end-diastolic (ED) and end-systolic (ES) phases.
All results are given as mean ± standard deviation (std. dev.) over 3 random initializations. The best and the second-best
results per column (excluding LB and UB) are in bold and underlined, respectively.
Training
Method
ODS: Test Dice Scores (%)
CS (ES + ED): Test Dice Scores (%)
D0
D1
D2
overall
D0
D1
D2
overall
D0
LB
95.5
76.2
44.6
72.1
84.6
70.9
58.3
71.3
D0 →D1 →D2
AdaptSegNet [45] 95.4 ± 0.0
72.4 ± 3.3
47.3 ± 3.1
71.7 ± 0.7
78.8 ± 0.7
62.0 ± 1.1
48.4 ± 1.8
63.1 ± 1.2
AdvEnt [46]
95.9 ± 0.0 68.6 ± 5.6
52.7 ± 3.4
72.3 ± 2.9
82.2 ± 0.1
67.7 ± 1.7
53.8 ± 1.3
67.9 ± 1.0
ACE [17]
87.8 ± 4.1
82.9 ± 1.6
57.4 ± 4.0
76.0 ± 2.6
82.0 ± 0.5
73.6 ± 1.1
58.6 ± 1.0
71.4 ± 0.9
MuHDi [16]
92.3 ± 3.9
84.1 ± 0.5
59.8 ± 5.9
78.7 ± 1.3
79.5 ± 1.2
71.0 ± 2.7
59.9 ± 5.9
70.1 ± 3.3
GarDA (ours)
94.6 ± 0.3 87.9 ± 0.1 65.2 ± 1.5 82.6 ± 0.4
82.8 ± 0.1 76.0 ± 0.2 67.2 ± 0.1 75.3 ± 0.1
D1
SD-UB
−
92.3
−
−
−
82.4
−
−
D2
SD-UB
−
−
93.1
−
−
−
85.5
−
D0 + D1 + D2
MD-UB
96.2
94.7
90.5
93.8
84.1
83.5
84.5
84.0
domains. Inspired by [81], we therefore use the generator
of GarDA that is trained on the source domain, to provide
synthesized instead of real source domain images to the above
methods. Apart from this modiﬁcation, we employ the meth-
ods as they were proposed originally. We implemented ACE
from scratch, and the other methods were based on the code
provided by MuHDi1 [16]. All models were implemented in
Pytorch [82] and trained on a single NVIDIA A100 GPU. The
hyperparameters for the methods are presented in Tab. 3. Since
source-free UDA methods only adapt to a single target domain
and DIL methods require labeled target domains, we do not
consider such methods for our experimental comparisons.
4.5. Experimental scenarios
Segmentation performances were evaluated using the Dice
score (aggregated over all foreground labels) achieved at the
end of the continual domain sequence D0→D1→D2, where
D0 denotes the labeled source domain and D1 & D2 represent
the unlabeled target domains. We present the domain-wise
Dice scores as well as an overall Dice score aggregated over all
domains, which enables the comparison of different methods
based on a single number. The domain-wise scores on the
target domains can be regarded as a performance measure for
adaptation. Comparisons between GarDA and the competing
methods are shown in Tab. 4 for ODS and CS. For each
method, we present the mean and standard deviation (std.
dev.) of Dice scores over three different random training
initializations. For reference, we also report lower bound (LB)
Dice scores for each domain, which are obtained by training
a segmentation model only on the source domain D0 and
then testing on all domains without any adaptation. We also
report single-domain upper bound (SD-UB) results, i.e., the
performance of a segmentation model that is trained in a
supervised manner (i.e., with labels) separately on either D1
or D2, and tested on the same corresponding domain. Finally,
1https://github.com/valeoai/MuHDi
the multi-domain upper bound (MD-UB) shows the Dice score
achieved by a model that is trained jointly in a supervised
fashion using data from all three domains.
4.5.1. ODS performance analysis. The results in Tab. 4 show
a large gap between LB and SD-UB, i.e., 16.1 pp (percentage
points) on D1 and 48.5 pp on D2, indicating that the seg-
mentation model can beneﬁt substantially from adaptation to
the target domains. GarDA is seen to surpass all competing
methods in terms of overall Dice score, as well as adaptation
performance, i.e., domain-wise scores for both target domains.
The non-sequential UDA method AdvEnt achieves the highest
Dice score on D0, but fails to adapt to the target domains. The
same observation can be made for AdaptSegNet. Among the
competing sequential UDA methods, MuHDi and ACE, the
former achieves better results on all domains, and overall the
second-best in adaptation after our method GarDA. Our ap-
proach outperforms MuHDi’s domain-wise mean Dice scores
on D0, D1, and D2 by 2.3 pp, 3.8 pp, and 5.4 pp, respectively.
This leads to an improvement of 3.9 pp in mean overall
Dice score – an improvement of almost 60% considering
that the previous state-of-the-art MuHDi is 6.6 pp above the
no-adaptation LB. Furthermore, such improvement brings the
state of the art in this task by over 25% closer to its upper
bound, given the initial gap of 15.1 pp from MuHDi to MD-
UB. It is also noteworthy to see that GarDA has by far
the smallest standard-deviations for adaptation, which shows
the robustness of our method to different initializations – a
very important quality for any deep-learning method and its
usability in practice.
4.5.2. CS performance analysis. In Tab. 4, we present the CS
results, which are averaged over the Dice scores computed on
images from the ED and the ES phases. Detailed results for
the individual ED and ES phases, as well as label-wise Dice
scores are reported in Appendix A. Similarly to ODS, CS
results in Tab. 4 also show a clear gap between LB and SD-UB,
i.e., 11.5 pp on D1 and 27.2 pp on D2. Compared to ODS, the

0
1
2
Step
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
Overall Dice [%]
MD-UB
AdaptSegNet
AdvEnt
ACE
MuHDi
Ours
(a) ODS
0
1
2
Step
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
Overall Dice [%]
(b) CS
Fig. 3: Evolution of the mean overall Dice score over the seen
domains after each training step in the continual sequence for
(a) ODS and (b) CS.
lower Dice scores for SD-UB suggest the higher complexity of
CS, which is plausible since the labels occupy relatively small
part of the imaged ﬁeld and the model aims to segment three
instead of one foreground label. GarDA is seen to outperform
all competing methods in all domain-wise and overall Dice
scores. On the source domain, AdvEnt performs comparably
to GarDA, but reaches signiﬁcantly lower adaptation perfor-
mance in both target domains. Similarly, AdaptSegNet fails to
adapt successfully to D1 and D2. After adapting to the two
target domains, both AdvEnt and AdaptSegNet in fact perform
inferior to LB. In comparison to ACE and MuHDi, our method
improves domain-wise Dice scores on the target domains D1
and D2 by, respectively, 2.4 pp and 7.3 pp or more. Indeed,
no competing method provides successful continual domain
adaptation, i.e., overall Dice scores better than LB, with only
ACE yielding 0.1 improvement, but with a standard-deviation
of 0.9; whereas GarDA achieves an overall Dice score that
is 3.9 pp higher than ACE’s – the second-best in this task.
Similarly to ODS, the standard deviations of GarDA are also
observed to be by far the lowest for any adapted domain
and overall, which shows the robustness of this method to
initialization.
4.5.3. Sequential performance analysis. In addition to the
Dice scores achieved at the end of the domain sequence, we
also analyze the evolution of overall segmentation performance
while the model adapts to each domain in Fig. 3. At each step
of the sequence, the overall Dice score is computed over all
domains seen up to that step. As seen in Fig. 3, the overall
scores decrease during the sequence as the models need to ad-
dress an increasing number of domains. It can be observed that
the non-sequential UDA baselines AdaptSegNet and AdvEnt
exhibit the largest drop in overall score compared to the initial
performance on D0. For ODS, both methods perform already
subpar compared to the other approaches after adapting to
D1, whereas for CS, AdaptSegNet still achieves a similar
overall score as ACE and our approach GarDA. However,
both AdaptSegNet and AdvEnt fail to adapt effectively to
D2 in the last step, which causes their ﬁnal overall score to
be the lowest among all methods. Note that since MuHDi
is a continual extension of AdvEnt, their performances up
until D1 are identical. The beneﬁts of MuHDi over AdvEnt
in a continual UDA setting are only seen in the last step,
by the gain in overall Dice score, i.e., 6.4 pp for ODS and
2.2 pp for CS. MuHDi outperforms ACE on ODS, but for CS,
attains slightly lower overall scores at the end of the sequence.
In comparison, our proposed method GarDA substantially
outperforms all other methods throughout the entire domain
sequence for both ODS and CS.
4.6. Qualitative results
In Fig. 4, we present test images for ODS and CS along with
the corresponding segmentation maps predicted by GarDA and
the competing methods. It can be observed that GarDA is
able to accurately segment the optic disc as well as cardiac
regions across different domains. As already highlighted in the
quantitative results, our method performs particularly better
on the last target domain in comparison to the other methods.
Although not perfect, GarDA is able to segment most of the
anatomical structures, whereas the other methods miss many
of the relevant parts; highlighted speciﬁcally by the results in
the last columns of D2.
To give an insight into how our GAN works, in Fig. 5 we
show examples of real images and images synthesized by our
generator after each adaptation step in the continual domain
sequence. It can be observed that the generator successfully
learns to create images with the appearance characteristics of
each domain. In particular, our generator captures the orange
tint of D1 as well as the darker appearance of D2 with
the more pronounced vessels in dark-red colors. Furthermore,
Fig. 5 shows that the content in the synthesized images stays
relatively consistent across domains, which is crucial for the
segmentation training to be effective. We can also see at step
t = 2 that, thanks to the GAN distillation losses, the generated
images of previously seen domains do not change signiﬁcantly
compared to t = 0 or t = 1, when the domains were ﬁrst
learned. Note that some of the generated images appear to
be rotated. It can be attributed to the employment of ﬂipping
and random rotations during GAN training, which causes the
generator to reproduce such augmentations. However, this is
not an issue since these images are merely used to train the
segmentation model, which can accommodate any orientation.
Analogously, we show in Fig. 6 our generated images for CS
after each step in the continual domain sequence. Therefore,
we include reference rectangles to better emphasize appear-
ance differences between the domains around the anatomy of
interest for segmentation. In particular, images from D1 tend to
be darker and sometimes blurry, while images from D0 appear
to be the brightest overall. As MR images are in grayscale and
with high-dynamic range, the differences between the domains
are not as evident to the human eye as in the case of retinal
RGB images. Nevertheless, the results we presented earlier
indicate that such differences still signiﬁcantly hinder gener-

Fig. 4: Examples of real test images and our corresponding predicted segmentation maps. For ODS (top), the predicted optic
disc is colored in blue. For CS (bottom), the left ventricle (LV) is colored in orange, the right ventricle (RV) in purple, and
the myocardium (MYO) in blue.

Fig. 5: Real sample images (left) from the ODS dataset domains, and (right) those sampled from GarDA’s generator at steps
t = 0, 1, 2.
Fig. 6: Real sample images (left) from the CS dataset domains, and (right) those sampled from GarDA’s generator at steps
t = 0, 1, 2. The pink rectangles serve as visual aid for the comparison of relevant anatomical structures between different
domains.

TABLE 5: Test Dice scores (%) for optic disc segmentation
(ODS) and cardiac segmentation (CS) on (a) D1 and (b) D2.
Results for CS are averaged over the end-diastolic (ED) and
end-systolic (ES) phases. Compared models are either adapted
to only a single domain (1st row) or continually adapted to
both target domains (2nd row). All results show the mean ±
std-dev over 3 random initializations. Superior results for the
column are shown in bold.
(a) D1
Training
Test Dice Scores (%) on D1
ODS
CS (ES + ED)
D0→D1
85.1 ± 0.2 75.8 ± 0.0
D0→D1→D2 87.9 ± 0.1 76.0 ± 0.2
(b) D2
Training
Test Dice Scores (%) on D2
ODS
CS (ES + ED)
D0→D2
63.9 ± 1.2 63.3 ± 0.2
D0→D1→D2 65.2 ± 1.5 67.2 ± 0.1
alization of models between domains, thereby necessitating
effective continual adaptation schemes. Similarly to ODS, our
generator is able to create CS images with different domain
characteristics for the same anatomical content. Additionally,
GarDA’s generator does not suffer from catastrophic forgetting
of previously seen domains.
4.7. Discussion
In the following subsections, we provide more insights into
our proposed method and the presented results. In particular,
we analyze the beneﬁts of continual UDA over single-step
UDA in Sec. 4.7.1 and discuss the advantages of GarDA over
ACE in Sec. 4.7.2, which also employs a form of appearance
transfer. Finally, we examine the effectiveness of each of our
proposed contributions via ablation studies in Sec. 4.7.3.
4.7.1. Forward and backward transfer. An alternative to
continually adapting to new domains would be to only perform
single-step UDA, i.e., D0→D1 or D0→D2. We show in Tab. 5,
that these alternatives are in fact inferior to the model that is
continually trained on all domains D0→D1→D2. For both
ODS and CS, the continually trained model achieves better
performance on D1 compared to UDA directly to D1, which
suggests that the adaptation to a later target domain (D2) can
indeed provide useful information and improved performance
for a previous target domain. This can also be observed in the
evolution of the domain-wise Dice scores in Fig. 7, especially
for ODS. In the continual learning literature, this phenomenon
is known as backward transfer [83] of learned information. In
addition, we see in Tab. 5b that the intermediate adaptation
to D1 helps to improve the ﬁnal Dice score on D2 for
both ODS and CS. This is known as forward transfer [83].
Both transfers indicate that, when effectively incorporated,
information from additional domains can improve the accuracy
and generalizability of a model also on other domains. Owing
to this, we ﬁnd continual UDA to overall perform superior to
single-step UDA. Furthermore, the continually trained model
is able to segment images from all involved domains, not only
two. This is generally beneﬁcial, as one needs to keep only
a single model with accumulated information. For instance,
0
1
2
Step
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
Dice per domain [%]
(a) ODS
0
1
2
Step
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
Dice per domain [%]
0
1
2
(b) CS
Fig. 7: Evolution of the mean domain-wise Dice scores on
D0, D1, and D2 after each step of training in the continual
sequence for (a) ODS and (b) CS.
when a care facility acquires a new imaging device, with
single-step UDA, they would need to ﬁnd the right model
suitable for this device (or collect new data to adapt from
source) but with continual UDA, they can obtain the latest
continual model and expect it to perform well out-of-the-box
if it has seen similar images earlier.
4.7.2. Comparison to ACE. In order to generate images
from previous target domains, ACE ﬁrst extracts feature maps
from a source image and re-normalizes them with appearance
statistics drawn from a memory buffer. The memory buffer
represents previously seen target domain images in the form of
mean and variance values of feature maps. The re-normalized
features are then fed to a decoder (an inverted VGG19 [78])
that maps the features to the desired target images. There are
several shortcomings with this approach: First, ACE stores
a ﬁxed number of mean and variance values in the memory
buffer, which cannot accurately represent the appearance infor-
mation of the entire distribution of target images. In contrast,
we employ a GAN trained to reproduce images from this
entire distribution. Indeed we illustrate in Fig. 8 the superior
quality of the images generated by our approach. While ACE’s
synthesized images exhibit severe checkerboard artifacts, the
images produced by our generator appear cleaner and closer
to real samples. Second, ACE always requires a source image
and a set of target domain statistics to generate a target image,
which limits the number and diversity of samples that can
be generated. On the other hand, our proposed generator is
able to produce arbitrarily many images from any domain
using a simple random noise vector input and a domain label.
Third, the inverted VGG decoder of ACE comprises more
than 140 million parameters, whereas our GAN (generator and
discriminator together) contains merely 23 million parameters.
Thus, the performance gain from our method GarDA also
comes at a lower budget.
4.7.3. Ablation study. We conduct ablation experiments for
each proposed component in GarDA to quantify their indi-

Fig. 8: Examples of cardiac magnetic resonance (MR) images synthesized given the same content z by ACE (top) and our
proposed generator (bottom).
TABLE 6: Test Dice scores (%) of ablations on optic disc
segmentation (ODS), at the end of the continual sequence
D0 (Canon) →D1 (Kowa) →D2 (Nidek). For clarity, mean
results are shown without std. dev. The difference between our
method and its variations with ablated components is shown
in parentheses.
Training
Method
Test Dice Scores (%)
D0
D1
D2
overall
D0
LB
95.5
76.2
44.6
72.1
D0→D1→D2
Ours −Lcon 85.9 (−8.8)
82.9 (−5.0)
72.0 (+6.8)
80.3 (−2.3)
Ours −Limg
G
82.2 (−12.5) 77.1 (−10.8) 52.9 (−12.3) 70.7 (−11.9)
Ours −Ladv 87.5 (−7.1)
76.8 (−11.1) 53.2 (−12.1) 72.5 (−10.1)
Ours
94.6
87.9
65.2
82.6
D1
SD-UB
−
92.3
−
−
D2
SD-UB
−
−
93.1
−
D0+D1+D2
MD-UB
96.2
94.7
90.5
93.8
vidual impact on the ﬁnal segmentation performance. This
evaluation is performed for ODS since the large gap between
lower and upper bound allows us to clearly demonstrate
performance gains. All results are summarized in Tab. 6.
The impact of the content loss can be seen in comparison
to the ablation “Ours−Lcon”. Omitting the content loss causes
the model to lose performance on previously seen domains,
exempliﬁed by drops in domain-wise Dice scores by 8.8 pp and
5.0 pp on D0 and D1, respectively. Interestingly, the removal
of the content loss increases the Dice score on the last target
domain by 6.8 pp. This is likely because the generator is less
constrained to retain the same content across domains, which
allows it to better reproduce the appearance of the newer (last)
domain. However, this then comes at the cost of a larger drop
in performance on the earlier domains.
Our
proposed
GAN
distillation
losses,
consisting
of
Ldis
G =Ladv
G +λimgLimg
G
for the generator (Eq. (10)) and Ldis
D
for the discriminator (Eq. (9)), are designed to prevent
forgetting of the source and intermediate target domains.
We analyze the individual effects of adversarial and non-
adversarial components. The only non-adversarial component
is the image distillation loss, the ablation of which we
tabulate as “Ours−Limg
G ”. The results show that omitting
image distillation has a major – indeed the biggest – impact
on the segmentation performance. Namely, the Dice scores
drop for all domains by more than 10.0 pp. For ablating the
adversarial components Ladv=Ladv
G +Ldis
D , we tabulate the
results as “Ours−Ladv”. The impact is similar to the image
distillation, but does not affect the source domain performance
as much. In summary, our ablation study conﬁrms that each of
the proposed components is essential to achieve our new state-
of-the-art segmentation performance for continual domain
adaptation.
5. Conclusions
In this work, we have proposed GarDA, a novel segmen-
tation method for continual UDA that can adapt to new
domains without forgetting previous ones. As GarDA employs
generative appearance replay, it does not require to store
previously seen data, neither from the source domain nor from
any intermediate target domains. To the best of our knowledge,
GarDA is the ﬁrst segmentation method for such strictly
continual UDA. This makes our approach widely applicable in
practice, where data from previous domains cannot be retained
indeﬁnitely. A potential limitation of our approach is the
duration of the GAN training, which may take several hours
depending on the desired quality of the domain appearance
adaptation. However, since new data from different domains
usually does not become available on a daily basis, this should
not be an issue in practice.
We evaluate the generalizability of our method by conduct-
ing comprehensive experiments for two very different tasks,
i.e., optic disc segmentation on color fundus photography im-
ages and cardiac segmentation on magnetic resonance images.
Our results demonstrate that GarDA substantially outperforms
all competing methods on both tasks. In addition, we provide
qualitative results showing that our proposed generator is able
to synthesize meaningful images from different domains that
enable the segmentation model to be trained continually. Our
ablation study highlights the impact of each proposed major

component in GarDA, i.e., the content loss, image distillation,
and adversarial distillation. Overall, the trends observed in our
experiments indicate GarDA to potentially yield better results
for increasingly longer domain sequences. In the future, when
new datasets from different domains become available, longer
continual sequences with more domains shall be studied.
