89 
Irrelevance and Independence Relations in Quasi-Bayesian Networks 
Fabio Cozman* 
Escola Politecnica, University of Sao Paulo 

Abstract 
This paper analyzes irrelevance and independence re­
lations in graphical models associated with convex 
sets of probability distributions (called Quasi-Bayesian 
networks). 
The basic question in Quasi-Bayesian 
networks is, How can irrelevance/independence rela­
tions in Quasi-Bayesian networks be detected, enforced 
and exploited? This paper addresses these questions 
through Walley's definitions of irrelevance and inde­
pendence. Novel algorithms and results are presented 
for inferences with the so-called natural extensions us­
ing fractional linear programming, and the properties 
of the so-called type-1 extensions are clarified through 
a new generalization of d-separation. 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
The theory of convex sets of distributions, variously 
called the theory of imprecise probabilities [28] or 
Quasi-Bayesian theory [14], is appropriate for robust­
ness analysis [1, 19, 29] and for representation of im­
precise/incomplete beliefs and opinions [20]. 
Quasi-Bayesian networks are multivariate structures 
that represent convex sets of joint distributions by 
directed acyclic graphs [3, 9, 27]. The key technical 
problem in Quasi-Bayesian networks is how to detect, 
enforce and exploit irrelevance and independence rela­
tions. The goal of this paper is to present novel results 
and algorithms that address these questions. This pa­
per adopts Walley's definitions of irrelevance and in­
vestigates two different methods to generate infereces 
from Quasi-Bayesian network: inferences from type-
1 extensions (Section 4), and inferences from natural 
extensions (Section 5). 
This research was conducted while the author was with 
the Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University. The 
project was partially supported by NASA under Grant 
NAGW-1175; the author was supported under a scholar­
ship from CNPq, Brazil. 
The overall contribution of this paper is a theory of lo­
cally defined Quasi-Bayesian networks that display the 
same flexibility and representational power of standard 
Bayesian networks. The results in this paper state the 
conditions that must be required or enforced to ex­
press judgements of irrelevance/independence through 
Quasi-Bayesian networks. 
2 
BACKGROUND MATERIAL 
2.1 
GRAPHICAL MODELS 
A popular graphical representation of probabilistic 
models in AI is the Bayesian network formalism, where 
a directed acyclic graph is used to specify a joint dis­
tribution over a set of variables X [18]. Each node of 
a Bayesian network is associated with a variable Xi; 
the parents of Xi are denoted by pa(Xi)· This paper 
deals with variables with a finite set of values. 
Each variable in a Bayesian network is associated with 
a conditional distribution p(Xijpa(Xi)). Such a graph­
ical structure defines a unique joint probability distri­
bution through the following expression [22]: 
(1) 
Inferences with Bayesian networks usually involve the 
calculation of the posterior marginal for a queried vari­
able Xq given evidence E [18]. 
Bayesian networks represent many independence re­
lations among the variables in the network. These 
relations can be analyzed through the concept of d­
separation: if Y d-separates X from Z, then X and Z 
are independent given events defined by Y [22, page 
117]. 
One difficulty with Bayesian networks is the require­
ment that all probability distributions must be pre­
cisely specified. 
Several non-probabilistic attempts 
have been made to relax the requirements of Bayesian 

90 
Cozman 
networks through alternative theories of inference 
(12, 25, 26], or through interval-valued probabilities 
(2, 11, 16, 15]. Interval representations have two prob­
lems. First, it is not always possible to apply Bayes 
rule to an interval-valued distribution and obtain an 
interval-valued posterior distribution (7, 15]. Second, 
there is no unique, accepted way to define indepen­
dence for interval-valued distributions (6]. 
Closed convex sets of distributions are also models 
for imprecision in probability values (1, 15, 24, 28]. 
Closed convex sets of distributions have several ad­
vantages when compared to interval-valued probabil­
ity because conditionalization and independence can 
be defined without technical difficulties. In this pa­
per, closed convex sets of distributions are employed 
as fundamental entities that reflect perturbations and 
imprecision about stochastic phenomena. 
One axiomatization of closed convex sets of distribu­
tions that is particularly concise and powerful is the 
Quasi-Bayesian theory of Giron and Rios (14]. This 
theory is summarized in the next section; several re­
cent definitions and results, not present in the original 
theory by Giron and Rios, are incorporated in the pre­
sentation. 
2.2 
QUASI-BAYESIAN THEORY 
Quasi-Bayesian theory (14] uses convex sets of distri­
butions to represent beliefs and to evaluate decisions. 
Credal sets 
The convex set of distributions main­
tained by an agent is called the agent's credal set, and 
its existence is postulated on the grounds of axioms 
about preferences (14]. 1 To simplify terminology, the 
term credal set is used only when it refers to a set 
of distributions containing more than one element. A 
closed convex set of joint distributions is called a joint 
credal set. 
This paper deals with credal sets that are defined as 
the convex hull of a finite number of probability dis­
tributions; such finitely generated credal sets are poly­
topes in the space of probability distributions. 
Lower and upper values 
Given a convex set K of 
probability distributions, a probability interval can be 
created for every event A by defining lower and upper 
bounds: 
p(A) = inf p(A), 
-
pEK 
p(A) = sup p(A). 
pEK 
1 An introduction to technical aspects of Quasi-Bayesian 
theory, with a larger list of references, can be found at 
http:/ jwww.cs.cmu.edu/-fgcozman/qBayes.html. 
Lower and upper expectations for a function f(X) are 
defined as ( Ep [f] is the expectation of the function f): 
E[f] = inf Ep[f], 
E[f] =sup Ep[f]. 
pEK 
pEK 
There is a one-to-one correspondence between lower 
(or upper) expectations and credal sets. Given a credal 
set, the set of all lower expectations for all arbitrary 
functions f(X) is unique, and vice-versa. 
Conditionalization 
Convex sets of conditional dis­
tributions are used to represent conditional beliefs. In­
ference is performed by applying Bayes rule to each 
distribution in a jont credal set. The posterior credal 
set is the union of all posterior distributions obtained 
in this process, and the vertices of the posterior credal 
set are obtained by applying Bayes rule to all vertices 
of the joint credal set (28]. Denote by K(X!Y) the col­
lection of credal sets K(XIA) for all events A defined 
by a variable Y .  
Independence 
There is no unique way to define in­
dependence relations with credal sets; in the most in­
depth study of this matter, Campos and Moral have 
reviewed five different possible types of independence 
(10]. The results presented in this paper adopt Wal­
ley's definition of independence (28]. Walley's original 
definition is stated in terms of lower expectations; to 
develop a theory of convex sets of distributions, it is 
important to recast Walley's definition using credal 
sets as follows. 
Consider sets of variables X, Y and Z and the credal 
sets K(X, Y, Z), K(X!Z), K(Y!Z), K(X!Y, Z) and 
K(YIX, Z). Note that distributions in K(XIZ) and 
K(XIY, Z) are defined over the same algebra of events 
once Y and Z are fixed; likewise, distributions in 
K(YIZ) and K(Y!X, Z) are defined over the same al­
gebra of events once X and Z are fixed. 
Definition 1 Variables Y are irrelevant to X given 
Z if K(X!Z) is equal to K(XIf', Z) regardless of the 
value of Y, Z. Variables X and Y are independent 
given Z if X is irrelevant to Y given Z and Y is irrel­
evant to X given Z. If Z is empty, suppress the "given 
Z" from this definition. 
This concept of independence does not imply that joint 
credal sets contain only joint distributions with inde­
pendent marginals, nor does it imply uniqueness for 
the joint credal set (28, Chapter 9]. 
3 
LOCALLY DEFINED 
QUASI-BAYESIAN NETWORKS 
This section defines Quasi-Bayesian networks that are 
generated from local models associated to a directed 

acyclic graph: 
Definition 2 A locally defined Quasi-Bayesian net­
work is a directed acyclic graph associated with: (1} 
either a single conditional distribution p(Xilpa(Xi)) 
or a local credal set K(Xilpa(Xi)) for each variable 
Xi, (2} a collection of irrelevance relations, and (3} a 
method for the combination of local credal sets. 
A joint credal set that satisfies all constraints and re­
lations in a Quasi-Bayesian network is called an exten­
sion of the network. 
The rationale for this definition is as follows. In a 
standard Bayesian network, irrelevance and indepen­
dence constraints are implicit in Expression (1); this 
expression guarantees that a variable is independent 
of all its non-descendants given its parents [22, page 
119]. There is no analogue to Expression (1) in Quasi­
Bayesian networks. Many extensions may satisfy all 
graphical d-separation relations in a network. It seems 
more appropriate to ask a decision maker to explic­
itly indicate which qualitative constraints are to be 
enforced in a Quasi-Bayesian network, and to ask for 
irrelevance constraints instead of independence con­
straints, because irrelevance and independence are not 
equivalent in Quasi-Bayesian models (Section 2.2). 
The key fact is that a directed acyclic graph and a 
collection of local credal sets may admit more than one 
extension; the next sections investigate two important 
types of extension. 
4 
TYPE-1 EXTENSION 
The most popular type of extension disussed in the 
literature is the type-1 extension [4, 27]. A type-1 ex­
tension is the convex hull of all the joint distributions 
formed by cross-multiplication of extreme points of lo­
cal credal sets; consequently, a type-1 extension is the 
largest joint credal set where all extreme points satisfy 
Expression ( 1). 
The appeal of type-1 extensions comes from their intu­
itive similarity with standard Bayesian networks. The 
following theorem formalizes this intuition using Wal­
ley's definition of independence: 
Theorem 1 Every graphical d-separation relation in 
a Quasi-Bayesian network corresponds to a valid con­
ditional independence relation in the type-1 extension 
of the network. (Proof in Appendix A.1.} 
This result demonstrates that type-1 extensions mimic 
the properties of standard Bayesian networks as 
independence-maps [22, page 119]. The theorem also 
complements results by Cano et al. [4]. They give 
Quasi-Bayesian Networks 
91 
conditions on independence concepts that satisfy d­
separation in type-1 extensions, but they do not pro­
vide any definition of independence to illustrate their 
result. The theorem demonstrates that Walley's inde­
pendence relations exhibit the desired correspondence 
with d-separation. 
D-separation has important algorithmic consequences. 
Graphical operations that are guaranteed by d­
separation can be performed in a type-1 extension. 
In particular, consider a query involving a variable 
X q and evidence E. 
All variables that do not af­
fect computation of p(XqiE) can be detected through 
d-separation computations [13]. This greatly reduces 
the computational effort in Quasi-Bayesian inferences 
with type-1 extensions both for exact (enumeration) 
and approximate (sampling, iterative) algorithms [9]. 
The theorem in this section completes that investiga­
tion with a formal proof that d-separation can (and 
should) be used to handle type-1 extensions. 
5 
NATURAL EXTENSION 
Type-1 extensions are not the only possible extension 
of a locally defined Quasi-Bayesian network. The nat­
ural extension of the network is the largest set of joint 
distributions compatible with local credal sets and ir­
relevance relations in the network. This terminology 
has been sugested by Walley [28, pages 453, 455], who 
explores properties of natural extensions but does not 
focus on multivariate structures. 
A Quasi-Bayesian network is defined by quantita­
tive constraints on probability values and by qual­
itative statements of irrelevance and independence. 
The quantitative constraints that define a credal set 
K(Xilpa(Xi)) are denoted by Ct (p(Xilpa(Xi))]. 
The objective of this section is to investigate and ex­
ploit the representation of qualitative statements of 
irrelevance and independence in natural extensions, 
particulary statements that involve variables and their 
nondescendants. 
Many different natural extensions 
can be created for a given directed acyclic graph 
through different statements of irrelevance (Section 3). 
The algorithms focus on irrelevance and independence 
conditional on the nondescendants of a node. This 
strategy follows common practice in Bayesian net­
works, which are based on the agreement between d­
separation and irrelevance/independence [22]; for nat­
ural extension, this strategy has a simple justification 
as follows. When stating irrelevance/independence re­
lations among variables, it is important to guarantee 
that a natural extension can actually be constructed. 
incompatible relations can lead to an empty natural 
extension. One strategy that always produces valid 

92 
Cozman 
natural extensions is to rely on graphical d-separations 
as the source of irrelevance/independence relations, 
because there is always at least one standard Bayesian 
joint distribution that complies with all constraints. 
This rationale suggests that irrelevance/independence 
relations among variables and their nondescendants 
are of primary interest. 
5.1 
SPECIF YING CONDITIONAL 
CREDAL SETS SEPARATELY 
The following algorithms assume that constraints 
on conditional distributions are defined separately 
for each value of the variable's parents. 
This 
means that, for any variable Xi, the constraints 
Cz[p(Xil[pa(Xi)]k1)] do not interfere with the con­
straints for Cz[p(Xil[pa(Xi)]k2)] when k1 =j:. kz. This 
restriction makes sense both during elicitation of mod­
els and representation of constraints, and the following 
derivations exploit this restriction to generate infer­
ence algorithms. 
Consider 
first 
the 
quantitative 
constraints 
Cz [p(Xil[pa(Xi)]k)]. 
Because all local credal sets 
have a finite number of vertices, all constraints 
Cz [p(Xil[pa(Xi)]k)] are linear in p(Xil[pa(Xi)]k)· Be­
cause the value of pa(Xi) is fixed in every constraint, 
all constraints are of the form: 
IX• I 
L rijklP(Xi = Xij, [pa(Xi)]k) :::; /iOklP([pa(Xi)]k), 
j==l 
(2) 
where /ijkl are constants that define the local credal 
sets. Note that these constraints are linear in p(X), 
because p(Xi, pa(Xi)) and p(pa(Xi)) are summations 
over p(X). 
Note that, if a single distribution q is specified for vari­
able }i, the only constraint imposed on the conditional 
distribution for Yi is: 
5.2 
LINEAR FRACTIONAL 
PRO GRAMMING IN NATURAL 
EXTENSIONS 
The objective here is to calculate posterior upper 
bounds (lower bounds are obtained by minimization): 
-ex IE)_ 
l:x.E(X\{Xq,E})P(x) 
p 
q 
- max 
-
Lx. E(X\E) p(X) 
(3) 
To guarantee that all credal sets contain valid distribu­
tions, the following unitary con.straint must be added: 
LxP(X) =I. 
The simplest natural extension is produced when no ir­
relevance relations are associated to a Quasi-Bayesian 
network [9]. In this case, the maximization in Expres­
sion (3), subject to linear constraints in Expressions 
(2) and the unitary constraint, is a linear fractional 
program. To guarantee that this linear fractional pro­
gram has a solution, it is necessary to check that p (E) 
is non-zero; if p (E) = 0, then the posterior lower en­
velope p (X q I E) is also zero [28]. Linear fractional pro­
grams can be reduced to linear programs by a variety 
of methods [17, 23]; consequently, Quasi-Bayesian in­
ferences (without irrelevance relations) can be solved 
by linear programming techniques. 
5.3 
REPRESENTATION OF 
IRRELEVANCE RELATIONS 
Suppose that a variable Xi is associated with a credal 
set K(Xdpa(Xi)) and that the variables Wi are judged 
irrelevant to Xi given pa(Xi)· To represent the irrel­
evance relation, it is necessary to expand each con­
straint Cz [p(Xilpa(Xi))] into a family of constraints 
Cz [p(Xilpa(Xi), Wi = Wij)]. Note that a new con­
straint is added for each value of wi. 
5.4 
IRRELEVANCE CONSTRAINTS FOR 
NONDESCENDANTS 
Consider the constraint that, for every variable Xi, 
nondescendants of xi are irrelevant to xi given 
the parents of Xi. 
For a variable Xi, denote the 
nondescendants of Xi by nd(Xi)· 
Irrelevance con­
straints are satisfied by extending the replicating 
Cz[p(Xil[pa(Xi))]k] for all the values of nondescen­
dants nd(Xi) such that pa(Xi) 
= [pa(Xi)]k. 
De­
note the set of constraints obtained in this manner 
by Cz[p(Xilnd(Xi))]. By construction, if a joint dis­
tribution satisfies constraints Cz[p(Xilnd(Xi))], then 
it satisfies constraints Cz[p(Xil[pa(Xi)]k)] (Appendix 
A.2). 
Lower bounds are calculated by forming a linear frac­
tional program with Expression (3) subject to lin­
ear constraints Cz[p(Xilnd(Xi))) and the unitary con­
straint. Even though irrelevance relations introduce a 
large number of constraints into this program, they 
also introduce simplifications into the problem, as 
demonstrated in the remainder of this section. 
Consider a Quasi-Bayesian network where a group of 
variables Z is associated with credal sets. Construct 
the set S containing all variables in Z and all variables 
that are predecessors of variables in Z. Call W the set 
of all variables that are not in S. 
Theorem 2 The calculation of Expression {3) can be 

done by the solution of the program: 
subject to Ls p(S) = 1 and 
IZ•I ( 
) 
L 'Yijkl 
L 
p(S) 
-
j=l 
Z, E( {S}\ {Z;, nd(Z;)}) 
'YiOkl 
L 
p(S) 
< 
0, 
Z,E(S\nd(Z;)) 
where the function q' is: 
{Proof in Appendix A. 3). 
(5) 
The linear fractional program in this theorem is not a 
problem on variables X, but a reduced maximization 
problem where only the values for p(S) are free to vary. 
A standard Bayesian network algorithm generates q' 
by essentially eliminating all variables in W. 
The consequence of the theorem is that networks 
where most local credal sets are on the "top" of the 
graph can profit from irrelevance constraints. This 
is particularly promising in practical applications, be­
cause in general the most imprecise distributions are 
the priors, which are associated with nodes without 
parents. 
5.5 
REPRESENTATION OF 
INDEPENDENCE RELATIONS 
To guarantee that Yi is independent of Xi given 
pa(Xi), it is necessary to enforce that: (1) Yi is ir­
relevant to Xi given pa(Xi), and (2) Xi is irrele­
vant to Yi given pa(Xi)· 
The first constraint has 
been addressed in the previous paragraph, but the 
second constraint introduces new complexities into 
the problem. For example, suppose that a variable 
x5 has variables xl' x3' x4 as nondescendants, and 
X2 as parent. The second irrelevance condition re­
quires that the credal sets K(X1, X3, X4IXz, X5) and 
K(X1, Xz, X4IXz) contain the same functions. The 
difficulty is that neither of these credal sets is directly 
specified on the network; there is no simple constraint 
that ties them together. 
Quasi-Bayesian Networks 
93 
0.4 ' p(f) ' 0.5 
p(llf) = 0.6 
p(tlr) = o.o5 
p(hld) = 0.6 
p(hW) = o.3 
0.4 ' p(b) ' 0.5 
p(dlf, b) = 0.8 
p(dlf, be) = 0.1 
p(dlr,b) = o.1 
p(dlr,bc) = 0.7 
Figure 1: Example network (graphical structure and 
probabilistic statements). 
5.6 
INDEPENDENCE CONSTRAINTS 
FOR NONDESCENDANTS 
Consider the constraint that, for every variable Xi, 
nondescendants of xi are independent from xi given 
the parents of Xi: The nondescendants of Xi must 
be irrelevant to xi, and xi must be irrelevant to 
its nondescendants given the parents of Xi. No ef­
ficient algorithm for inferences with such constraints 
is known; construction of a complex, non-linear op­
timization program is the only method that can be 
generally adopted at this point. 
6 
EXAMPLE 
To illustrate the results and algorithms described pre­
viously, a simple example is discussed in this section. 
This example is based on the example described by 
Charniak [5] and on the calculations presented by Wal­
ley [28, Section 9.3.4]. 
Consider the graph in Figure 1. There are five bi­
nary variables in the graph (the superscript c indicates 
negation). These relationships are summarized by the 
probabilistic model presented in Figure 1. Note that 
the probabilities for f and b are not specified exactly; 
instead, they are given as an interval (0.4, 0.5]. The 
question is how to evaluate the impact of this impre­
cision in probability values. To illustrate the various 
algorithms discussed in the paper, consider the calcu­
lation of l!. ( dll) and p ( dll). 
Type-1 extension 
The simplest method to obtain 
the bounds is to identify the vertices of the local credal 
sets and generate a type-1 extension. The type-1 ex-

94 
Cozman 
tension has four vertices, because both the credal sets 
K(f) and K(b) have vertices (0.4, 0.6) and (0.5, 0.5). 
By calculating p( djl) for these four vertices, the bounds 
on p(djl) are obtained: the lower bound on p(djl) is 
0.38615 and the upper bound is 0.44615. 
Natural extension without irrelevance relations 
If no irrelevance relation is stated concerning the net­
work, then the expressions in Figure 1 and the unitary 
constraint are the only restrictions on the natural ex­
tension. To generate lower and upper bounds on p(djl), 
it is necessary to write these thirteen linear constraints 
(nine are equality constraints and four are inequality 
constraints) and solve a linear fractional program with 
the objective function p(d, l)/p(l). The solution of this 
program produces the lower bound 0 and the upper 
bound 1 for p(djl), demonstrating that the absence of 
irrelevance relations can lead to inferences that are es­
sentially vacuous. 
Nat ural extension with irrelevance relations 
Consider the effect of adding irrelevance relations, in 
particular the statement that the nondescendants of a 
variable are irrelevant to the variable given the par­
ents of the variable. Four constraints represent this 
statement regarding credal sets: 0.4 ::; p(fjb) ::; 0.5 
and 0.4 ::; p(bjf) ::; 0.5. To simplify the calculation of 
lower and upper bounds, Theorem 2 can be used. The 
upper bound is obtained by solving the program: 
-3 
0 
2 
0 
0 
2 
0 
-2 
0 
0 
0 
-3 
0 
2 
X [  l 
0 
s.t. 
0 
2 
0 
-2 
< 
0 
-3 
2 
0 
0 
0 
2 
-2 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
-3 
2 
0 
0 
0 
2 
-2 
0 
and l:wi 
= 1 (w1 
= p(f, b), w2 
= p(f, bc), w3 
= 
p(jC, b), 
W4 
= p(jC, bC)). 
This program produces 
the upper bound 0.4509. By minimization, the lower 
bound 0.3818 is obtained. Note that these bounds are 
different from the bounds obtained by type-1 exten­
sion. 
Natural 
extension 
with 
independence 
con­
straints 
The strongest statement considered here 
is the independence of a variable and its non­
descendants given its parents. 
The natural ex­
tension is then derived from the full joint credal 
set K(f, b), which has six vertices: 1/4(1, 1, 1, 1), 
(0.36, 0.24, 0.24, 0.16), 1/10(2, 2., 3, 3), 1/10(2, 3, 2, 3), 
1/9(2, 2, 2, 3), 1/11(2, 3, 3, 3). Computation of p(djl) 
in each of the six joint distribution leads to the lower 
bound 0.3818 and the upper bound 0.4509. 
7 
CONCLUSION 
The central contribution of this paper is the applica­
tion of Walley's definitions of irrelevance and indepen­
dence to the study of locally defined Quasi-Bayesian 
networks. The main technical contributions are novel 
algorithms for inference with natural extensions; re­
search must now be conducted to limit the combi­
natorial explosion that occurs in the formulation of 
linear fractional programs for inferences with natural 
extensions. The paper also ties type-1 extensions to d­
separation; this result provides a formal basis for the 
conceptual and computational attractiveness of type-1 
extensions. 
This paper focused on the calculation of upper bounds 
for the posterior probability of the event {X q = X qj}. 
Other problems can be solved using the same algo­
rithms. For example, calculation of inferences for non­
atomic events A is immediate only by enlarging the 
summations that must be computed in the inference 
procedures. Algorithms presented in this paper also 
apply to calculation of lower and upper expectation, 
by enlarging summations and objective functions in 
linear programs. 
The results presented in this paper pose an intellec­
tually challenging question: Should we consider ir­
relevance or independence as a basic notion in the 
treatment of uncertainty? Both notions agree in stan­
dard probability theory, but they disagree in Quasi­
Bayesian theory. Irrelevance is a more basic notion, 
as it can be used to define independence, and irrele­
vance judgements are less forceful than independence 
ones but still quite powerful. Should irrelevance be a 
more fundamental notion? This question can only be 
answered as research and applications are developed 
using Quasi-Bayesian models. 
A 
PROOFS 
A.l 
THEOREM 1 
The following is a sketch for the proof of Theorem 1; 
a more detailed proof is available (8]. 
Consider three arbitrary disjoint sets of variables in 
the network, X, Y and Z, such that X is d-separated 
from Z given Y. Take the type-1 extension K(X, Y, Z) 
and obtain, by conditionalization, K(XjY, Z) and 
K(XjY). Call extK the set of extreme points of K. 
Given 
any function 
J(X) 
tain 
its 
lower 
expectation 
solely 
of 
X, 
E[f(X)jY, Z] 
ob-

minpEextK(XIf',z) (l:x f(X)p(X!Y, Z)) . The mm­
imum is attained at an extreme point of the type-1 
extension. Because every such extreme point satisfies 
Expression (1), p(X!Y, Z) = p(XrY) for these poiints 
(by d-separation), and the lower expectation is equal 
to E[f(X)!Y]. 
Because a lower expectation uniquely defines a convex 
set of distributions (Section 2.2), the lower expectation 
E[f(X)rY] uniquely defines K(XrY) and the lower ex­
pectation E[f(X)!Y, Z] uniquely defines K(X!Y, Z). 
Because both lower expectations are equal for arbi­
trary f, the underlying credal sets are the same. This 
argument guarantees that Z is irrelevant to X given 
Y; the same argument proves that X is irrelevant to 
Z given Y. So X is independent of Z given Y. 
A.2 
RELEVANT LEMMAS 
The following result is used in Section 5.4: 
Lemma 1 If a joint distribution satisfies con­
straints Ct[p(Xi/nd(Xi))], then it satisfies constraints 
Cl[p(Xi/pa(Xi))]. 
To prove this result, take W(Xi) = 0 in the following 
theorem. 
Lemma 2 Consider a joint distribution that satisfies 
constraints Cl[p(Xi/nd(Xi))], and for every node Xi, 
W(Xi) is a subset of nd(Xi) that does not overlap with 
the parents of Xi. Then the following constraints also 
satisfied: 
IX; I 
L "'!ijklP(Xi = Xij/[pa(Xi)]k> W(Xi)) :S "'!iOkl· 
(6) 
j=l 
Sketch of proof. Consider an arbitrary joint distribu­
tion satisfying constraints C![p(Xi/nd(Xi))]. Denote 
the set (nd(Xi)\{pa(Xi), W(Xi)}) by W1(Xi)· Ob­
tain by marginalization the distribution of W1(Xi), 
p(W1(Xi)). 
Select all constraints that are repetitions of a single 
original constraint for fixed [pa(Xi)]k. 
These con­
straints are all identical, except that values of W(Xi) 
and W1(Xi) vary across constraints. Multiply every 
one of these constraints by the appropriate value of 
p(W1 (Xi)), and add all constraints that refer to a par­
ticular value of W(Xi)i constraints (6) are then ob­
tained after algebraic manipulations. 
A.3 
THEOREM 2 
First note that the linear fractional program in the 
statement of the theorem is identical to the following 
Quasi-Bayesian Networks 
95 
program: 
-(X /E)
= 
(l:X;E(X\{Xq,E})p(X)) 
P
q
 
max 
_
,
 
l:x;E(X\E) p(X) 
(7) 
subject to constraints (5), l:sP(S) 
= 1 and p(X) = 
q(W/S)p(S), where 
q(W/S) = II q(Wi/pa(Wi)). 
(8) 
W;EW 
Note that q(W/S) is the unique joint distribution for 
W givenS. Uniqueness is guaranteed by the fact that 
the variables in W form a Bayesian network: (1) irrel­
evance is equal to independence in standard Bayesian 
networks; (2) Lemma 2 guarantees that all irrelevance 
conditions are valid when restricted to the network of 
W; (3) independence of a variable from its nondescen­
dants given its parents characterizes a unique Bayesian 
network [22]. 
The strategy of the proof is to demonstrate that the 
linear program expressed by (7) subject to constraints 
(5), (8) and l:s p(S) 
= 1, is identical to program 
(3) subject to C![p(Xi/nd(Xi))] and the unitary con­
straint. 
Start from program (3). Uniqueness of q(W/S) leads 
to constraints: 
which are equivalent to the constraints summarized 
by Expression (8). Use this equality in Expressions 
Cl[p(Xi/nd(Xi))] and the unitary constraint. Expres­
sion l:s p(S) 
= 1 is immediately obtained from the 
unitary constraint. For constraints C1[p(Xi/nd(Xi))], 
divide W in two sets of variables; W1 contains vari­
ables in w that are nondescendants of xi, and W11 
contains variables in W that are descendants of Xi. 
Constraints C![p(Xi/ nd(Xi))] become: 
IX•I ( 
) 
L "Yijkl 
L 
q(W11/S, W1)q(W1/S)p(S) 
j=l 
X\{X;,nd(X;)} 
-"'(iOkl L 
q(W11/S, W1)q(W1/S)p(S) :S 0. 
X\nd(X;) 
The summations involve all variables in W11, so these 
variables can be summed out. Variables in W1 are 
fixed and make no reference to Xi or any of its de­
scendants, so they can be taken out of the summation 
and cancelled. These operations reduce the inequality 
above to constraint (5). The only situation where this 
cancellation cannot occur is when a node has no nonde­
scendants; in this case, all other nodes are descendants 

96 
Cozman 
of the node and are summed out so the result holds. 
This proves that program (7) subject to (5), (8), and 
Ls p(S) 
= 1, is identical to program (3) subject to 
Ct[p(Xijnd(Xi))] and the unitary constraint.
