Internal representation dynamics and geometry in recurrent neural networks
Stefan Horoi 1 2 Guillaume Lajoie 1 2 Guy Wolf 1 2
Abstract
The efﬁciency of recurrent neural networks
(RNNs) in dealing with sequential data has long
been established.
However, unlike deep, and
convolution networks where we can attribute the
recognition of a certain feature to every layer, it
is unclear what ”sub-task” a single recurrent step
or layer accomplishes. Our work seeks to shed
light onto how a vanilla RNN implements a sim-
ple classiﬁcation task by analysing the dynamics
of the network and the geometric properties of its
hidden states. We ﬁnd that early internal represen-
tations are evocative of the real labels of the data
but this information is not directly accessible to
the output layer. Furthermore the network’s dy-
namics and the sequence length are both critical
to correct classiﬁcations even when there is no
additional task relevant information provided.
1. Introduction
Research has been done studying the geometry of internal
representations and its effect on classiﬁcation in deep neural
networks (Cohen et al., 2019). However, this was not studied
in RNNs where recurrent dynamics also play a signiﬁcant
role in the task completion. Therefore, our experiments
were chosen with two goals in mind: ﬁnding the geometric
properties of internal class representations and evaluating
the effects of the recurrent dynamics on the classiﬁcation
accuracy.
2. Methodology and Analysis tools
We trained a vanilla RNN to complete the well known se-
quential MNIST classiﬁcation task, where each input to the
network is a sequence of 28 lines (rows) each having 28
pixels. The RNN has a single recurrent layer of 200 tanh
neurons and its only parameters are the recurrent and input
weights (i.e., with no bias parameters to affect the recurrent
1Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Universit´e de
Montr´eal; 2Mila - Qu´ebec AI institute, Montr´eal, QC, Canada
Presented at MAIS 2019: the Montreal AI Symposium, Montr´eal,
Qu´ebec, Canada, 2019. Copyright 2019 by the authors.
dynamics). The output layer is linear and the network is
trained using the Adam optimization algorithm with a cross-
entropy loss function. After training the network for 30
epochs we achieve an accuracy of a little over 93% on the
test data. While this accuracy is far from the state-of-the-art,
it is sufﬁcient to ensure that our network is able to generalize
the information provided by the training data to the test data
and correctly classify the images in a majority of cases. The
code was implemented in Python using PyTorch and all the
experiments were conducted using the trained network and
the test data, which the network did not see during training.
All experiments reported below are conducted on networks
trained in the above manner.
For data analysis, PCA is used to estimate the linear dimen-
sionality of the internal representations of both the entire
data as a whole and of the classes. This is done by counting
the number of principal components necessary to explain at
least 90% of the variance in the data (or in a class). Also,
t-SNE (van der Maaten & Hinton, 2008) is used to create
a two dimensional representation of the network’s internal
states. In this representation, points that are close in the
original space will be mapped close together and distant
point will be mapped far from one another. The aim is to
see how early in the classiﬁcation process did the network
group together similar inputs. Ultimately, we want to see
how early does the network ”know”, in a sense, that a certain
input is of a speciﬁc class.
3. Experiments
Experiment 1: The ﬁrst experiment consists of modifying
the test images so that the last n lines of each image are
blank (value 0), this was done for n ranging from 1 to 27.
The part-blank images were then used as inputs for the
classiﬁcation task. This experiment aims to determine how
the recurrent dynamics alone help the classiﬁcation task.
Experiment 2: The second experiment consists of giving
the network only the ﬁrst n lines of the images and then
stopping, in contrast to Experiment 1. This allows to probe
the importance of early internal representations by the last
linear layer and to see whether or not the network relies on
a ﬁxed sequence length for classiﬁcation.
Experiment 3: In the third experiment, blank pixel rows are
added at the end of the full input sequences, increasing their
arXiv:2001.03255v2  [cs.LG]  14 Jan 2020

Internal representation dynamics and geometry in recurrent neural networks
length. This is in order to see how the network’s dynamics
affect the internal representations after the network was
provided with all the available information.
4. Discussion
Figure 1a shows that the network’s accuracy in experiments
1 and 2 behaves in very different manners. The network
dynamics seem to have a signiﬁcant role in the classiﬁcation
process even when the inputs are blank, as is the case in
experiment 1. Despite being shown the same number of
real pixel rows, the accuracy in experiment 1 is greatly
superior to experiment 2 for all amounts of shown rows.
This also indicates that the network’s classiﬁcation abilities
are highly dependent on the sequence length even when the
amount of relevant information in the sequence is exactly
the same. Figure 1b further emphasizes the importance
of the sequence length for proper classiﬁcation since the
accuracy dramatically drops as soon as additional blank
rows of pixels are added to the input sequences. The reason
we chose to plot the accuracy of the classiﬁcation for up
to 500 added blank rows is to display the highly dynamic
nature of the network which seems to begin an oscillatory
trajectory as can be deduced from the recurring pattern in
the accuracy.
Figure 3 shows that the tendency of neural networks to rely
on dimensionality expansions followed by dimensionality
reductions in order to perform their tasks which was dis-
cussed by (Recanatesi et al., 2019) and (Fusi et al., 2016)
seems to be maintained for recurrent neural networks.
Finally the t-SNE visualization is especially evocative when
the internal representations are colored according to their
real digit class. As early as time step 4 (Figure 4) the net-
work seems to create classiﬁcation relevant clusters in the
representation space. In particular, it seems to ”know” that
certain points are 6es (rightmost cluster) or either 6es or 2s
(middle cluster) and it separates them from the rest of the
points (leftmost cluster). This internal separation increases
in precision throughout the time steps as is shown in Fig-
ures 5 and 6, but the initial cluster of ”6es” is maintained
suggesting that the initial separation of this cluster from the
other points was correct.
5. Conclusion
Our results show that the network’s internal representation
is evocative of the real data classiﬁcation early in the input’s
sequence so the task is carried out as soon as relevant infor-
mation is available. Despite the separability of the internal
representations and the clusters formed in the representation
space, the task relevant information is only interpretable
by the output layer after a ﬁxed sequence length. If the
sequence length varies the network’s dynamics affects the
hidden states in a way that greatly hinders accuracy.
The retrieval of ”early classiﬁcations”, where the network
doesn’t wait for the whole input sequence, could be of great
impact in time sensitive real-world applications in which
a decision is needed as soon as possible. Further work is
required to determine how this information is retrievable
(see related work (Raghu et al., 2017) and (Alain & Bengio,
2017)). Also, machine learning visualization algorithms
show great promise in exposing the inner mechanisms of
neural networks and could greatly help in the understand-
ing of these ”black-box” algorithms. A great number of
vizualisation, dimensionality reduction and manifold learn-
ing techniques exist and their applicability in neural network
analysis should be evaluated more thoroughly.

Internal representation dynamics and geometry in recurrent neural networks
