arXiv:2401.01825v1  [cs.CL]  3 Jan 2024
Physio: An LLM-Based Physiotherapy Advisor
R´uben Almeida⋆1[0000−0002−1942−2399], Hugo Sousa⋆1,2[0000−0003−3226−9189],
Lu´ıs F. Cunha⋆1,2[0000−0003−1365−0080], Nuno Guimar˜aes1,2[0000−0003−2854−2891],
Ricardo Campos1,3,4[0000−0002−8767−8126], and Al´ıpio
Jorge1,2[0000−0002−5475−1382]
1 INESC TEC, Porto, Portugal
2 University of Porto, Porto, Portugal
3 University of Beira Interior, Covilh˜a, Portugal
4 Ci2 - Smart Cities Research Centre, Tomar, Portugal
{ruben.f.almeida,luis.f.cunha,hugo.o.sousa,

Abstract. The capabilities of the most recent language models have
increased the interest in integrating them into real-world applications.
However, the fact that these models generate plausible, yet incorrect
text poses a constraint when considering their use in several domains.
Healthcare is a prime example of a domain where text-generative trust-
worthiness is a hard requirement to safeguard patient well-being. In this
paper, we present Physio, a chat-based application for physical reha-
bilitation. Physio is capable of making an initial diagnosis while citing
reliable health sources to support the information provided. Further-
more, drawing upon external knowledge databases, Physio can recom-
mend rehabilitation exercises and over-the-counter medication for symp-
tom relief. By combining these features, Physio can leverage the power
of generative models for language processing while also conditioning its
response on dependable and veriﬁable sources. A live demo of Physio is
available at https://physio.inesctec.pt.
Keywords: Retrieval-augmented generation · Information extraction ·
Conversational health agents
1
Introduction
Although language models (LMs) have long been studied by the research commu-
nity, they only reached mainstream attention with the release of the ChatGPT
application by OpenAI [3]. This application granted the public access to a highly
eﬀective generative model, GPT-3.5 [15], that was capable of producing coherent
conversations on various topics, a novelty at the time. This development natu-
rally led to the emergence of numerous applications and discussions regarding the
potential applications of generative models in various domains, such as law [16],
education [17], and health [11,12]. However, these models also exhibited signif-
icant limitations that hindered their implementation in those domains. At the
⋆Equal contribution.

2
R. Almeida, H. Sousa, L. Cunha et al.
top of that list is the hallucination problem [14], i.e., their propensity to generate
incorrect yet convincing answers. This limitation prompted increased research
into grounding the text generated by these models on reliable sources, a task
known as retrieval-augmented generation [13]. The general approach starts by
retrieving documents relevant to the input query and subsequently using them
to generate an answer. By doing so, one can link the generated texts to the origi-
nal documents, thereby providing the user references where he/she can get more
information supporting the generated answer [9,10]. This research gave rise to
systems like BingChat [2] and Bard [1], search engines that combine the person-
alization of answers generated by LMs with the trustworthiness provided by the
retrieval component of the system. This concept can be taken one step further
to be applied to domain-speciﬁc applications by constraining the retrieval com-
ponent to a specialized set of documents. This is the main idea behind the demo
we present in this paper, Physio, a chat-based application tailored to help users
in physical rehabilitation. Physio’s answers are generated from an augmented
prompt that compiles the user input with documents from a curated knowledge
base speciﬁcally tailored to only contain reliable sources for physical rehabili-
tation. Furthermore, the sentences in the generated answer present references
to those documents. Apart from that, Physio’s answer can also contain exercise
and over-the-counter medication recommendations whenever appropriate. The
source code for Physio is open-source and available on GitHub5.
2
Physio
To some extent, Physio can be thought of as an initial step toward an artiﬁcial
intelligent physiatrist. To this end, we designed it to oﬀer functionalities akin to
those found in a physiatrist appointment, speciﬁcally: explaining/discussing the
problem that the user is querying; and recommending exercises and medication
when deemed appropriate. For the LM, Physio relies on OpenAI GPT-4 model
which is the most eﬀective LM at the time of development of this demo [14].
An example answer from Physio is illustrated in Figure 1 for the prompt “I feel
pain in my lower back. What can I do?” In the following sections, we explain
how Physio’s answer is built.
2.1
Knowledge-base Construction
The construction of the knowledge for Physio commenced by scraping the Rehab
Hero website [6]. This website boasts an extensive compilation of exercises, each
accompanied by an instructional video demonstrating execution, and informa-
tion on the speciﬁc physical conditions they address. After scraping this website,
we compiled all the physical conditions that we found on the Rehab Hero pages
and queried each of them in a set of 20 websites that provided more information
about the condition6. To ensure the reliability of our system the list of websites
5 https://github.com/liaad/physio
6 More details about the list of websites selected can be found on the GitHub reposi-
tory.

Physio: An LLM-Based Physiotherapy Advisor
3
Fig. 1: Screenshot from Physio web demonstration. The user input is in the grey
box, while the system answer is presented in the blue box.
was curated and validated by a physiotherapist and includes sources like Mayo
Clinic [4], NHS [7], and OrthoInfo [5]. For the medication-related aspects, we rely
on the DrugBank database [18]. The information obtained was then indexed in
a MongoDB database composed of three collections: exercises, webpages, and
medications. The ﬁrst two are indexed based on the associated condition, while
the last is indexed by drug name.
2.2
Data Pipeline
When a user submits a query in Physio, the text undergoes processing through
a data pipeline to generate a response. The initial step in this pipeline is to
verify if it is an English physiotherapy-related prompt. This validation
is achieved by using the LM and a predeﬁned validation prompt template that
assesses whether the user’s input is related to physiotherapy and written in En-
glish. The validation prompt template conditions the LM’s response to produce a
boolean output (either “True” or “False”) so that it can be programmatically in-
terpreted. If the input is deemed invalid, the system provides a default response.
Instead, if the input is validated, the application proceeds to the condition
identiﬁcation step, where it determines the condition in the user’s question.
This is accomplished by employing a few-shot template to instruct the LM to
identify the condition. For instance, when presented with the input “I have
sprained my ankle” the model should identify the condition as “ankle sprain.”
Once the condition is identiﬁed, it is linked to one of the entries in our
database. This linkage process ﬁrst attempts an exact match, followed by a
search in the list of aliases (for instance “lumbago” is in the list of aliases for
“back pain”), and, as a last resort, employs substring matching. In case no match
is found, the LM is prompted with the user query, and the answer is returned.
Otherwise, the pipeline advances to the generation of the answer and extraction
exercises and medication.

4
R. Almeida, H. Sousa, L. Cunha et al.
Answer Generation With the linked condition one can retrieve the list of
documents related to that condition from the webpages collection. Among the
pages available, we employ the BM25 retrieval model [8] to search and rank them
based on their relevance to the user’s input. The top ﬁve ranked documents are
subsequently provided to the generative model, along with the user’s input query,
using a prompt template designed to instruct the model to answer user questions
using the information contained in these pages.
To provide the user a way to verify the trustworthiness of the generated text,
a list of references is incorporated by ranking the sentences from the original
source pages in relation to the sentences in the generated text, again, using the
BM25 ranking method. Note that determining the optimal number of references
to include in the ﬁnal answer is not trivial. In our application, we establish a
heuristic to use as reference the top-N ranked sentence-document pairs, where
N is the number of generated sentences.7 However, the ﬁnal answer may not
necessarily contain the same number of references as sentences, as a generated
sentence can be highly similar to multiple sentences within a given document.
Exercise & Medication Extraction The linked condition is also used to
fetch the exercises directly from the exercises collection, as they are indexed
by condition. For the linked condition we randomly sample up to ﬁve exercises
to be presented in the web interface.
The ﬁnal element of the response pertains to medication recommendations.
This is accomplished by instructing the LM to provide medication suggestions
based on the user’s query, the linked condition, and the generated answer. The
prompt explicitly speciﬁes that the response should be in the form of a JSON-
parsable list of strings, where each string represents a medication. After pars-
ing these strings, we conduct a search for the recommended drugs within the
medication collection of our database, ﬁrst by exact matching and subsequently
with fuzzy matching.
The last task of the pipeline is to combine the three components of the
answer, send them to the frontend, and cache the result in the database.
Ethical Considerations Given the sensitive nature of this domain, ethical
considerations are paramount. As a result, we include a disclaimer on Physio’s
website, explicitly stating that it is a research demonstration, and we strongly
advise users to consult with a specialist before making any decisions regard-
ing their health. Furthermore, we have limited medication recommendations to
include only over-the-counter options.
Aknowledgments This work is ﬁnanced by National Funds through the Funda¸c˜ao
para a Ciˆencia e a Tecnologia, within the project StorySense (DOI 10.54499/2022.09312.PTDC)
and the Recovery and Resilience Plan within the scope of the Health From Portugal
project.
7 While this heuristic has been eﬀective in practice, ongoing research is aimed at
reﬁning the reference selection process based on similarity scores.

Physio: An LLM-Based Physiotherapy Advisor
5
