Neural Capacitance: A New Perspective of
Neural Network Selection via Edge Dynamics
Chunheng Jiang
CS Department, RPI

Tejaswini Pedapati
IBM Research

Pin-yu Chen
IBM Research

Yizhou Sun
CS Department, UCLA

Jianxi Gao
CS Department, RPI

Abstract
Efﬁcient model selection for identifying a suitable pre-trained neural network to a
downstream task is a fundamental yet challenging task in deep learning. Current
practice requires expensive computational costs in model training for performance
prediction. In this paper, we propose a novel framework for neural network selec-
tion by analyzing the governing dynamics over synaptic connections (edges) during
training. Our framework is built on the fact that back-propagation during neural
network training is equivalent to the dynamical evolution of synaptic connections.
Therefore, a converged neural network is associated with an equilibrium state of a
networked system composed of those edges. To this end, we construct a network
mapping φ, converting a neural network GA to a directed line graph GB that is
deﬁned on those edges in GA. Next, we derive a neural capacitance metric βeﬀ
as a predictive measure universally capturing the generalization capability of GA
on the downstream task using only a handful of early training results. We carried
out extensive experiments using 17 popular pre-trained ImageNet models and ﬁve
benchmark datasets, including CIFAR10, CIFAR100, SVHN, Fashion MNIST
and Birds, to evaluate the ﬁne-tuning performance of our framework. Our neural
capacitance metric is shown to be a powerful indicator for model selection based
only on early training results and is more efﬁcient than state-of-the-art methods.
1
Introduction
Leveraging a pre-trained neural network (i.e., a source model) and ﬁne-tuning it to solve a target
task is a common and effective practice in deep learning, such as transfer learning. Transfer learning
has been widely used to solve complex tasks in text and vision domains. In vision, models trained
on ImageNet are leveraged to solve diverse tasks such as image classiﬁcation and object detection.
In text, language models that are trained on a large amount of public data comprising of books,
Wikipedia etc are employed to solve tasks such as classiﬁcation and language generation. Although
such technique can achieve good performance on a target task, a fundamental yet challenging problem
is how to select a suitable pre-trained model from a pool of candidates in an efﬁcient manner. The
naive solution of training each candidate fully with the target data can ﬁnd the best pre-trained model
but is infeasible due to considerable consumption on time and computation resources. This challenge
motivates the need for an efﬁcient predictive measure to capture the performance of a pre-trained
model on the target task based only on early training results (e.g., predicting ﬁnal model performance
based on the statistics obtained from ﬁrst few training epochs).
Preprint.
arXiv:2201.04194v2  [cs.LG]  14 Jan 2022

In order to implement an efﬁcient neural network (NN) model selection, this paper proposes a
novel framework to forecast the predictive ability of a model with its cumulative information in
the early phase of NN training, as practised in learning curve prediction (Domhan et al., 2015;
Chandrashekaran & Lane, 2017; Baker et al., 2017; Wistuba & Pedapati, 2020). Most prior work on
learning curve prediction aims to capture the trajectory of learning curves with a regression function
of models’ validation accuracy. Some of the previous algorithms developed in this ﬁeld require
training data from additional learning curves to train the predictors (Chandrashekaran & Lane, 2017;
Baker et al., 2017; Wistuba & Pedapati, 2020). On the other hand, our model does not require any
such data. It solely relies on the NN architecture. Ranking models according to their ﬁnal accuracy
after ﬁne-tuning is a lot more challenging as the learning curves are very similar to each other.
The entire NN training process involves iterative updates of the weights of synaptic connections,
according to one particular optimization algorithm, e.g., gradient descent or stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) (Bottou, 2012; LeCun et al., 2015). In essence, many factors contribute to impact
how weights are updated, including the training data, the neural architecture, the loss function, and
the optimization algorithm. Moreover, weights evolving during NN training in many aspects can
be viewed as a discrete dynamical system. The perspective of viewing NN training as a dynamical
system has been studied by the community (Mei et al., 2018; Chang et al., 2018; Banburski et al.,
2019; Dogra, 2020; Tano et al., 2020; Dogra & Redman, 2020; Feng & Tu, 2021), and many attempted
to make some theoretical explanation of the convergence rate and generalization error bounds. In this
paper, we will provide the ﬁrst attempt in exploring its power in neural model selection.
One limitation of current approaches is that they concentrated on the macroscopic and collective
behavior of the system, but lacks a dedicated examination of the individual interactions between
the trainable weights or synaptic connections, which are crucial in understanding of the dependency
of these weights, and how they co-evolve during training. To ﬁll the gap, we study the system
from a microscopic perspective, build edge dynamics of synaptic connections from SGD in terms of
differential equations, from which we build an associated network as well. The edge dynamics induced
from SGD is nonlinear and highly coupling. It will be very challenging to solve, considering millions
of weights in many convolutional neural networks (CNNs), e.g., 16M weights in MobileNet (Howard
et al., 2017) and 528M in VGG16 (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014). Gao et al. (2016) proposed a
universal topological metric for the associated network to decouple the system. The metric will
be used for model selection in our approach, and it is shown to be powerful in search of the best
predictive model. We illustrate our proposed framework in Fig.1.
The main contributions of our framework can be summarized as follows:
• View NN training as a dynamical system over synaptic connections, and ﬁrst time investigate
the interactions of synaptic connections in a microscopic perspective.
• Propose neural capacitance metric βeﬀfor neural network model selection.
• Empirical results of 17 pre-trained models on ﬁve benchmark datasets show that our βeﬀ
based approach outperforms current learning curve prediction approaches.
• For rank prediction according to the performance of pre-trained models, our approach im-
proves by 9.1/38.3/12.4/65.3/40.1% on CIFAR10/CIFAR100/SVHN/Fashion MNIST/Birds
over the best baseline with observations from learning curves of length only 5 epochs.
2
Related Work
Learning Curve Prediction. Chandrashekaran & Lane (2017) treated the current learning curve (LC)
as an afﬁne transformation of previous LCs. They built an ensemble of transformations employing
previous LCs and the ﬁrst few epochs of the current LC to predict the ﬁnal accuracy of the current LC.
Baker et al. (2017) proposed an SVM based LC predictor using features extracted from previous LCs,
including the architecture information such as number of layers, parameters, and training technique
such as learning rate and learning rate decay. A separate SVM is used to predict the accuracy of an
LC at a particular epoch. Domhan et al. (2015) trained an ensemble of parametric functions that
observe the ﬁrst few epochs of an LC and extrapolate it. Klein et al. (2017a) devised a Bayesian NN
to model the functions that Domhan formulated to capture the structure of the LCs more effectively.
Wistuba & Pedapati (2020) developed a transfer learning based predictor that was trained on LCs
generated from other datasets. It is a NN based predictor that leverages architecture and dataset
2

(a)
(b)
Source Data
Layer 1
Layer K
Output Layer
Target Data
Layer 1
Layer K
New Layers
Output Layer
Neural Capacitance 
Probe (NCP)
GA
Fine-tuning
Bottom Layers
Randomly Initializing
Freezing Top Layers
Transfer 
Learning
Deep Neural Network GA
y1
y3
y2
x1
x2
x3
Inputs
Outputs
Hiddens
Synaptic Connections
Layer 1
Layer 2
Layer 3
Layer 4
5x
4x
7x
5x
wi
wj
Network Mapping 
ϕ : GA →GB
Line Graph GB
Weight Interactions 

ℬ
·wi = f(wi) + ∑
j
Pij g(wi, wj)
wi
wj
Epoch
Train βeff
0
βeff = 1TPP1
1TP1
Epoch
Validation Accuracy
Observed
Predicted
Learning Curve Prediction
(c)
Figure 1: Illustration of our framework. (a) An example multilayer perceptron (MLP) GA is mapped
to a directed line graph GB, which is governed by an edge dynamics B. Each node (dichromatic
square) of GB is associated with a synaptic connection linking two neurons (in different colors) from
different layers of GA. (b) A diagram of transfer learning from the source domain (left stack) to
a target domain (right stack). The pre-trained model is modiﬁed by adding additional layers, i.e.
installing a neural capacitance probe (NCP) unit, on top of the bottom layers. The NCP is frozen with
a set of randomly initialized weights, and only the bottom layers are ﬁne-tuned. (c) Observed partial
learning curves (green line segments) of validation accuracy over the early-stage training epochs and
the corresponding neural capacitance metric βeﬀduring ﬁne-tuning. The predicted ﬁnal accuracy at
βeﬀ→0 (red dot) is used to select the best one from a set of models. The metric βeﬀrelies on GB’s
weighted adjacency matrix P, which itself is derived from the reformulation of the training dynamics.
To predict the performance, a lightweight βeﬀof the NCP is used instead of the heavyweight one
over the entire network on the right stack of (b).
embeddings to capture the similarities between the architectures of various models and also the other
datasets that it was trained on.
Dynamical System View of NNs. There are many efforts to study the dynamics of NN training.
Some prior work on SGD dynamics for NNs generally have a pre-assumption of the input distribution
or how the labels are generated. They obtained global convergence for shallow NNs (Tian, 2017;
Banburski et al., 2019). System identiﬁcation itself is a complicated task (Haykin, 2010; Lillicrap
et al., 2020). In studying the generalisation phenomenon of deep NNs, Goldt et al. (2019) formulated
SGD with a set of differential equations. But, it is limited to over-parameterised two-layer NNs
under the teacher-student framework. The teacher network determines how the labels are generated.
Also, some interesting phenomena (Frankle et al., 2020) are observed during the early phase of NN
training, such as trainable sparse sub-networks emerge (Frankle et al., 2019), gradient descent moves
into a small subspace (Gur-Ari et al., 2018), and there exists a critical effective connection between
layers (Achille et al., 2019). Bhardwaj et al. (2021) built a nice connection between architectures
(with concatenation-type skip connections) and the performance, and proposed a new topological
metric to identify NNs with similar accuracy. Many of these studies are built on dynamical system
and network science. It will be a promising direction to study deep learning mechanism.
3
Preliminaries
Dynamical System of a Network. Many real complex systems, e.g., plant-pollinator interac-
tions (Waser & Ollerton, 2006) and the spread of COVID-19 (Thurner et al., 2020), can be described
3

with networks (Mitchell, 2006; Barab´asi & P´osfai, 2016). Let G = (V, E) be a network with node
set V and edge set E. Assuming n = |V |, the interactions between nodes can be formulated as a set
of differential equations
˙xi = f(xi) +
X
j∈V
Pijg(xi, xj), ∀i ∈V,
(1)
where xi is the state of node i. In real systems, it could be the abundance of a plant in ecological
network, the infection rate of a person in epidemic network, or the expression level of a gene in
regulatory network. The term P is the adjacency matrix of G, where the entry Pij indicates the
interaction strength between nodes i and j. The functions f(·) and g(·, ·) capture the internal and
external impacts on node i, respectively. Usually, they are nonlinear.
Let x = (x1, x2, . . . , xn). For a small network, given an initial state, one can run a forward simulation
for an equilibrium state x∗, such that ˙x∗
i = f(x∗
i ) + P
j∈V Pijg(x∗
i , x∗
j) = 0. However, when the
size of the system goes up to millions or even billions, it will pose a big challenge to solve the
coupled differential equations. The problem can be efﬁciently addressed by employing a mean-ﬁeld
technique (Gao et al., 2016), where a linear operator LP (·) is introduced to decouple the system. In
speciﬁc, the operator depends on the adjacency matrix P and is deﬁned as
LP (z) = 1T Pz
1T P1,
(2)
where z ∈Rn. Let δin = P1 be nodes’ in-degrees and δout = 1T P be nodes’ out-degrees. For a
weighted G, the degrees are weighted as well. Applying LP (·) to δin, it gives
βeﬀ= LP (δin) = 1T Pδin
1T δin
= δT
outδin
1T δin
,
(3)
which proves to be a powerful metric to measure the resilience of networks, and has been applied to
make reliable inferences from incomplete networks (Jiang et al., 2020b;a). We use it to measure the
predictive ability of a NN (see Section 4.3), whose training in essence is a dynamical system. For an
overview of the related technique, the readers are referred to Appendix H.
NN Training is a Dynamical System. Conventionally, training a NN is a nonlinear optimization
problem. Because of the hierarchical structure of NNs, the training procedure is implemented by two
alternate procedures: forward-propagation (FP) and back-propagation (BP), as described in Fig.1(a).
During FP, data goes through the input layer, hidden layers, up to the output layer, which produces
the predictions of the input data. The differences between the outputs and the labels of the input data
are used to deﬁne an objective function C, a.k.a training error function. BP proceeds to minimize C,
in a reverse way as did in FP, by propagating the error from the output layer down to the input layer.
The trainable weights of synaptic connections are updated accordingly.
Let GA be a NN, w be the ﬂattened weight vector for GA, and z be the set of activation values. As a
whole, the training of GA can be described with two coupled dynamics: A on GA, and B on GB,
where nodes in GA are neurons, and nodes in GB are the synaptic connections. The coupling relation
arises from the strong inter-dependency between z and w: the states z (activation values or activation
gradients) of GA are the parameters of B, and the states w of GB are the trainable parameters of
GA. If we put the whole training process in the context of networked systems, A denotes a node
dynamics because the states of nodes evolve during FP, and B expresses an edge dynamics because of
the updates of edge weights during BP (Mei et al., 2018; Poggio et al., 2020a;b). Mathematically, we
formulate the node and edge dynamics based on the gradients of C:
(A)
dz/dt ≈hA(z, t; w) = −∇zC(z(t)),
(4)
(B)
dw/dt ≈hB(w, t; z) = −∇wC(w(t)),
(5)
where t denotes the training step. Let a(ℓ)
i
be the pre-activation of node i on layer ℓ, and σℓ(·) be the
activation function of layer ℓ. Usually, the output activation function is a softmax. The hierarchical
structure of GA exerts some constraints over z for neighboring layers, i.e., z(ℓ)
i
= σℓ(a(ℓ)
i ), 1 ≤i ≤
nℓ, ∀1 ≤ℓ< L and z(L)
k
= exp{a(L)
k }/ P
j exp{a(L)
j
}, 1 ≤k ≤nL, where nℓis the total number
of neurons on layer ℓ, and GA has L + 1 layers. It also presents a dependency between z and w. For
example, when GA is an MLP without bias, a(ℓ)
i
= w(ℓ)T
i
z(ℓ−1), which builds an interconnection
from GA to GB. It is obvious, given w, the activation z satisfying all these constraints, is also a ﬁxed
point of A. Meanwhile, an equilibrium state of B provides a set of optimal weights for GA.
4

4
Our Framework
The metric βeﬀis a universal metric to characterize different types of networks, including biological
neural networks (Shu et al., 2021) (Section 3). Because of the generality of βeﬀ, we analyze how
it looks on artiﬁcial neural networks which are designed to mimic the biological counterparts for
general intelligence. Therefore, we set up an analogue system for the trainable weights. To the end,
we build a line graph for the trainable weights (Section 4.1), and reformulate the training dynamics in
the same form of the general dynamics (Eq. 1) (Section 4.2). The reformulated dynamics reveals
a simple yet powerful property regarding βeﬀ(Section 4.3), which is utilized to predict the ﬁnal
accuracy of GA with a few observations during the early phase of the training (Section 4.4). For a
detailed description of the core idea of our framework, see Appendix I.
4.1
Line Graph GB
We build a mapping scheme φ : GA 7→GB, from an NN GA to an associated graph GB. The
topology of the synaptic connections (edges) is established as a well-deﬁned line graph proposed by
Nepusz & Vicsek (2012), and nodes of GB are the synaptic connections of GA. More precisely, each
node in GB is associated with a trainable parameter in GA. For an MLP, each synaptic connection is
assigned a trainable weight, the edge set of GA is also the set of synaptic connections of GB. For a
CNN, this one-to-one mapping from neurons on layer ℓto layer ℓ+ 1 is replaced by a one-to-more
mapping because of weight-sharing, e.g., a parameter in a convolutional ﬁlter is repeatedly used in
FP and associated with multiple pairs of neurons from the two neighboring layers. Since the error
gradients ﬂow in a reversed direction, we reverse the corresponding links of the proposed line graph
for GB. In speciﬁc, given any pair of nodes in GB, if they share an associated intersection neuron
in FP propagation routes, a link with a reversed direction will be created for them. In Fig.1(a), we
demonstrate how the mapping is performed on an example MLP. We have the topology of GB in
place, but the weights of links in GB are not yet speciﬁed. To make up this missing components, we
reveal the interactions of synaptic connections from SGD, quantify the interaction strengths and then
deﬁne the weights of links in GB accordingly. Related technical details are disclosed in next section.
4.2
Edge Dynamics B
In SGD, each time a small batch of samples are chosen to update w, i.e., w ←w −α∇wC, where
α > 0 is the learning rate. When desired conditions are met, training is terminated.
We denote the activation gradients as δ(ℓ) = [∂C/∂z(ℓ)
1 , · · · , ∂C/∂z(ℓ)
nℓ]T ∈Rnℓ1 and the derivatives
of activation function σ for layer ℓas σ′
ℓ= [σ′
ℓ(a(ℓ)
1 ), · · · , σ′
ℓ(a(ℓ)
nℓ)]T ∈Rnℓ, 1 ≤ℓ≤L. To
understand how the weights W (ℓ) affect each other, we explicitly expand δ(ℓ):
δ(ℓ) = W (ℓ+1)T (W (ℓ+2)T (· · · (W (L−1)T (W (L)T (z(L) −y)) ⊙σ′
L−1) · · · ) ⊙σ′
ℓ+2) ⊙σ′
ℓ+1),
where ⊙is the Hadamard product. We ﬁnd that parameters W (ℓ) are associated with all accessible
parameters on downstream layers, and such recursive relation deﬁnes a high-order hyper-network in-
teraction (Casadiego et al., 2017) between any W (ℓ) and the other parameters. The Hadamard product
x⊙y has an equivalent matrix multiplication form, i.e. x⊙y = Λ(y)x, where Λ(y) is a diagonal ma-
trix consisting of the entries of y on the diagonal. Therefore, we have δ(ℓ) = W (ℓ+1)T Λ(σ′
ℓ+1)δ(ℓ+1)
and δ(ℓ) = W (ℓ+1)T Λ(σ′
ℓ+1)W (ℓ+2)T Λ(σ′
ℓ+2) · · · W (L−1)T Λ(σ′
L−1)W (L)T (z(L) −y). For a
ReLU σℓ(·), σ′
ℓis binary depending on the sign of the input pre-activation values a(ℓ) of layer ℓ. If
a(ℓ)
i
≤0, then σ′
ℓ(a(ℓ)
i ) = 0, blocking a BP propagation route of the prediction deviations z(L) −y
and giving rise to vanishing gradients.
Our purpose is to build direct interactions between synaptic connections. It can be done by identifying
which units provide direct physical interactions to a given unit and appear on the right hand side of its
differential equation B in Eq. 4, and how much such interactions come into play. There are multiple
routes to build up a direct interaction between any pair of network weights from different layers,
as presented by the product terms in δ(ℓ). However, the coupled interaction makes it an impossible
task, which is well known as a credit assignment problem (Whittington & Bogacz, 2019; Lillicrap
1In some literature δ(ℓ) is deﬁned as gradients with respect to a(ℓ), which does not affect our analysis.
5

et al., 2020). We propose a remedy. The impacts of all the other units on W (ℓ) is approximated by
direct, local impacts from W (ℓ+1), and the others’ contribution as a whole is implicitly encoded in
the activation gradient δ(ℓ+1).
Moreover, we have the weight gradient (see Appendix A for detailed derivation)
∇W (ℓ) = Λ(σ′
ℓ)δ(ℓ)z(ℓ−1)T = Λ(σ′
ℓ)W (ℓ+1)T Λ(σ′
ℓ+1)δ(ℓ+1)z(ℓ−1)T ,
(6)
which shows the dependency of W (ℓ) on W (ℓ+1), and itself can be viewed as an explicit description
of the dynamical system B in Eq. 4. Put it in terms of a differential equation, we have
dW (ℓ)/dt = −Λ(σ′
ℓ)W (ℓ+1)T Λ(σ′
ℓ+1)δ(ℓ+1)z(ℓ−1)T ≜F(W (ℓ+1)).
(7)
Because of the mutual dependency of the weights and the activation values, it is hard to make an
exact decomposition of the impacts of different parameters on W (ℓ). However, in the gradient ∇W (ℓ),
W (ℓ+1) presents as an explicit term and contributes the direct impact on W (ℓ). To capture such direct
impact and derive the adjacency matrix P for GB, we apply Taylor expansion on ∇W (ℓ) and have
P (l,l+1) = ∂2C/∂W (ℓ)∂W (ℓ+1),
(8)
which deﬁnes the interaction strength between each pair of weights from layer ℓ+ 1 to layer ℓ.
See Appendix B for detailed derivation of P on MLP, and Appendix C on general NNs. Let
w = (w1, w2, . . .) be a ﬂattened vector of all trainable weights of GA. Given a pair of weights wi
and wj, one from layer ℓ1, another from layer ℓ2. If ℓ2 = ℓ1 + 1, the entry Pij is deﬁned according
to Eq. 8, otherwise Pij = 0. Considering the scale of trainable parameters in GA, P is very sparse.
Let W (ℓ+1)∗be the equilibrium states (Appendix C), the training dynamics Eq. 7 is reformulated
into the form of Eq. 1 and gives the edge dynamics B for GB:
˙wi = f(wi) +
X
j
Pijg(wi, wj),
(9)
with f(wi) = F(w∗
i ) and g(wi, wj) = wj −w∗
j . The value of weights at an equilibrium state {w∗
j }
is unknown, but it is a constant and does not affect the computing of βeﬀ.
4.3
Neural Capacitance
According to Eq. 8, we have the weighted adjacency matrix P of GB in place. Now we can quantify
the total impact that a trainable parameter (or synaptic connection) receives from itself and the others,
which corresponds to the weighted in-degrees δin = P1. Applying LP (·) (see Eq. 2) to δin, we get a
“counterpart” metric βeﬀ= LP (δin) to measure the predictive ability of a neural network GA, as the
resilience metric (see Eq. 3) does to a general network G (see Dynamical System of a Network in
Section 3). If GA is an MLP, we can explicitly write the entries of P, hence a βeﬀexplicitly
βeﬀ=
PL−2
ℓ=2 [1T z(ℓ−2)] × 1T [z(ℓ−1) ⊙σ′
ℓ−1] × 1T [δ(ℓ) ⊙σ′
ℓ] × 1T [δ(ℓ+1) ⊙σ′
ℓ+1]
PL−1
ℓ=2 [1T z(ℓ−2)] × [1T σ′
ℓ−1] × 1T [δ(ℓ) ⊙σ′
ℓ]
.
(10)
For details of how to derive P and βeﬀof an MLP, see Appendix B. Moreover, we prove in Theorem
1 below that as GA converges, ∇(ℓ)
W vanishes, and βeﬀapproaches zero (see Appendix D).
Theorem 1. Let ReLU be the activation function of GA. When GA converges, then βeﬀ= 0.
For an MLP GA, it is possible to derive an analytical form of βeﬀ. However, it becomes extremely
complicated for a deep NN with multiple convolutional layers. To realize βeﬀfor deep NNs in any
form, we take advantage of the automatic differentiation implemented in TensorFlow2. Considering
the number of parameters, it is still computationally expensive, and prohibitive to calculate a βeﬀfor
the entire GA.
2https://www.tensorﬂow.org/
6

Algorithm 1 Implement NCP and Compute βeﬀ
Input: A pre-trained model Fs = {F(1)
s , F(2)
s } with
bottom layers F(1)
s
and output layer F(2)
s
, a target
dataset Dt, the maximum number of epochs T
1: Remove F(2)
s
from Fs and add on top of F(1)
s
an
NCP unit U with multiple layers (Fig.1b)
2: Initialize with random weights and freeze U
3: Train Ft = {F(1)
s , U} by ﬁne-tuning F(1)
s
on Dt
for epochs of T
4: Obtain P from U according to Eq. 8
5: Compute βeﬀwith P according to Eq. 3 or Eq. 10
Because of this, we seek to derive a surro-
gate from a partial of GA. As shown in Sec-
tion 4.4, we insert a neural capacitance probe
(NCP) unit, i.e., putting additional layers on
top of the beheaded GA (excluding the origi-
nal output layer), and estimate the predictive
ability of the entire GA using βeﬀof the NCP
unit. Therefore, in the context of model se-
lection from a pool of pre-trained models,
if no confusion arises, we call βeﬀa neural
capacitance.
4.4
Model Selection with βeﬀ
Here we show a novel application of our proposed neural capacitance βeﬀto model selection. In
speciﬁc, we transfer the pre-trained models by (i) removing the output layer, (ii) adding some layers
on top of the remaining layers (Fig.1b), and ﬁne-tune them using a small learning rate. As shown in
Algorithm 1, the newly added layers U on top of the bottom layers of Fs are used as an NCP unit.
The speciﬁcs of the NCP unit are detailed in Section 5. The NCP does not involve in ﬁne-tuning, and
is merely used to calculate βeﬀ, then to estimate the performance of GA over the target domain Dt.
According to Theorem 1, when the model converges, βeﬀ→0. In an indirect way, the predictive
ability of the model can be determined by the relation between the training βeﬀand the validation
accuracy I. Since both βeﬀand I are available during ﬁne-tuning, we collect a set of data points of
these two in the early phase as the observations, and ﬁt a regularized linear model I = h(βeﬀ; θ) with
Bayesian ridge regression (Tipping, 2001), where θ are the associated coefﬁcients (see Appendix E
for technical details). The estimated predictor I = h(βeﬀ; θ∗) makes prediction of the ﬁnal accuracy
of models by setting βeﬀ= 0, i.e., I∗= h(0; θ∗), see an example in row 3 of Fig.2. For full training
of the best model, one can either retain or remove the NCP and ﬁne-tune the selected model.
5
Experiments and Results
Pre-trained models and datasets. We evaluate 17 pre-trained ImageNet models implemented in
Keras3, including AlexNet, VGGs (VGG16/19), ResNets (ResNet50/50V2/101/101V2/152/152V2),
DenseNets (DenseNet121/169/201), MobileNets (MobileNet and MobileNetV2), Inceptions (In-
ceptionV3, InceptionResNetV2) and Xception, to measure the performance of our approach. Four
benchmark datasets CIFAR10, CIFAR100, SVHN, Fashion MNIST of size 32 × 32 × 3, and one
Kaggle challenge dataset Birds4 of size 224 × 224 × 3 are used, and their original train/test splits are
adopted. In addition, 15K original training samples are set aside as validation set for each dataset.
Experimental setup. To get a well-deﬁned βeﬀ, GA requires at least three hidden layers (see
Appendix C). Also, a batch normalization (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015) is usually beneﬁcial because it
can stabilize the training by adjusting the magnitude of activations and gradients. To this end, on top
of each pre-trained model, we put a NCP unit composed of (1) a dense layer of size 256, (2) a dense
layer of size 128, each of which follows (3) a batch normalization and is followed by (4) a dropout
layer with a dropout probability of 0.4. Before ﬁne-tuning, we initialize the NCP unit using Kaiming
Normal initialization (He et al., 2015).
We set a batch size of 64 and a learning rate of 0.001, ﬁne-tune each pre-trained model for T = 50
epochs, and repeated it for 20 times. As shown in Fig.2, the pre-trained models are converged after
the ﬁne-tuning on CIFAR10. For each model, we collect the validation accuracy (blue stars in row
1) and βeﬀon the training set (green squares in row 2) during the early stage of the ﬁne-tuning
as the observations (e.g., green squares in row 3 marked by the green box for 5 epochs), then use
these observations to predict the test accuracy unseen before the ﬁne-tuning terminates. For better
illustration, learning curves are visualized on a log-scale.
Evaluation. We apply the Bayesian ridge regression on the observations to capture the relation
between βeﬀand the validation accuracy, and to estimate a learning curve predictor I = h(βeﬀ; θ∗).
3https://keras.io/api/applications/
4https://www.kaggle.com/gpiosenka/100-bird-species
7

0.75
1.00
Accuracy
MobileNet
Train
Vali
Test
0.90
0.95
ResNet
0.90
0.95
DenseNet
0.93
0.97
Inception
0.90
0.95
VGG
100
101
Epoch t
0
5
|β|
100
101
Epoch t
0.0
0.5
100
101
Epoch t
0
2
100
101
Epoch t
0
2
100
101
Epoch t
0
2
10-1
100
101
Train |β|
0.6
0.8
Vali Accuracy
t0 = 2, BIC=3.2
Pred. Acc. (w/β)
Test Acc. (t = 50)

10-3
10-2
10-1
100
Train |β|
0.90
0.92
0.94
t0 = 3, BIC=3.3
10-1
100
Train |β|
0.90
0.92
0.94
t0 = 3, BIC=3.2
10-2
10-1
100
Train |β|
0.92
0.94
0.96
t0 = 2, BIC=3.3
10-2
10-1
100
Train |β|
0.88
0.90
0.92
t0 = 4, BIC=4.5
Figure 2: Learning curves of ﬁve representative pre-trained models w.r.t accuracy (row 1) and βeﬀ
(row 2). A regularized linear model h(·; θ) (blue curve in row 3) is estimated with Bayesian ridge
regression using a few of observations of βeﬀon training set and validation accuracy I during early
ﬁne-tuning. The starting epoch t0 of observations affects the ﬁt of h, and is automatically determined
according to BIC, and the true test accuracy at epoch 50 is predicted with I∗= h(0; θ∗).
0.92
0.94
0.96
Predicted Acc.
0.92
0.94
0.96
True Test Acc.
Spearman Corr.
ρ = 0.92
Pre-tranied
DenseNet
Inception
MobileNet
ResNet
VGG
Xception
(a)
5
10
15
Length of Learning Curve
0.6
0.8
1.0
Spearman Corr. ρ
1
3
5
7
9
Starting Epoch t0
(b)
5
10
15
Length of Learning Curve
0.6
0.8
1.0
Spearman Corr. ρ
10K
15K
25K
30K
35K
Size of Train Set
(c)
Figure 3: (a) Our βeﬀbased prediction of the validation accuracy versus the true test accuracy at
epoch 50 of seven representative pre-trained models. Each shape is associated with one type of
pre-trained models. Distinct models of the same type are marked in different colors. Because the
accuracy of AlexNet is much lower than others, we exclude it for better visualization. Its predicted
accuracy is 0.871, and the true test accuracy is 0.868. If it is included, ρ = 0.93 > 0.92. (b) Impacts
of the starting epoch t0 of the observations and (c) the number of training samples on the ranking
performance of our βeﬀbased approach.
The performance of the model is revealed as I∗= h(β∗
eﬀ; θ∗) with β∗
eﬀ= 0. As shown in row 3 of
Fig.2, the blue lines are estimated h(·; θ), the true test accuracy at T and the predicted accuracy are
marked as red triangles and blue stars, respectively. Both the estimates and predictions are accurate.
We aim to select the best one from a pool of candidates. A relative rank of these candidates matters
more than their exact values of predicted accuracy. To evaluate and compare different approaches,
we choose Spearman’s rank correlation coefﬁcient ρ as the metric, and calculate ρ over the true
test accuracy at epoch T and the predicted accuracy I∗of all pre-trained models. In Fig.3(a), we
report the true and predicted accuracy for each model on CIFAR10, as well as the overall ranking
performance measured by ρ. It indicates that our β-based model ranking is reliable with ρ > 0.9. For
the results on all ﬁve datasets, see Appendix Fig.F.4.
The estimation quality of h determines how well the relation between I and βeﬀis captured. Besides
the regression method, the starting epoch t0 of the observations also plays a role in the estimation.
As shown in Fig.3(b), we evaluate the impact of t0 on ρ of our approach. It goes as expected, when
the length of learning curves is ﬁxed, a higher t0 usually produces a better ρ. Since our ultimate
goal is to predict with the early observations, t0 should also be constrained to a small value. To
make the comparisons fair, we view t0 as a hyper-parameter, and select it according to the Bayesian
information criterion (BIC) (Friedman et al., 2001), as shown in row 3 of Fig.2.
Impact of size of training set. CIFAR10 has 50K original training and 10K testing samples.
Generally, the 50K samples are further split into 35K for training and 15K for validation. In studying
the dynamics of the NN training, it is essential to understand how varying the training size inﬂuences
the effectiveness of our approach. We select the ﬁrst {10,15,20,25,30}K of the original 50K samples
as the training set of reduced size, and the last 10K samples as the validation set to ﬁne-tune the
pre-trained models for 50 epochs. As shown in Fig.3(c), we can use a training set of size as small
8

as 25K to achieve similar performance to that uses all 35K training samples. It has an important
implication for efﬁcient NN training, because the size of required training set can be greatly reduced
(around 30% in our experiment) while maintaining similar model ranking performance. To be noted
that the true test accuracy used in computing ρ is the same test accuracy for the model trained from
35K training samples and it’s shared by all the ﬁve cases {10,15,20,25,30}K in our analysis.
Table 1: A comparison between our βeﬀbased approach and the baselines in model ranking. The no-
tation LLC represents the length of the learning curve, and Imprv represents the relative improvement
of our approach to the best baseline. Due to the failure of the supporting package6 of LC, there is a
missing ρ at LLC of 10, which does not affect our conclusions.
Dataset
CIFAR10
CIFAR100
SVHN
Fashion MNIST
Birds
LLC
5
10
5
10
5
10
5
10
5
10
Ours
0.93
0.98
0.77
0.80
0.84
0.88
0.95
0.89
0.74
0.79
BSV
0.86
0.89
0.55
0.80
0.74
0.78
0.53
0.60
0.52
0.61
LSV
0.85
0.87
0.55
0.80
0.73
0.70
0.49
0.45
0.48
0.45
BGRN
0.74
0.78
0.45
0.60
0.63
0.65
0.57
0.59
0.53
0.52
LC
0.85
0.85
0.50
0.58
0.44
0.10
0.55
0.61
0.50
–
Imprv (%)
9.1
10.2
38.3
-0.9
12.4
13.3
65.3
49.2
40.1
30.6
Ours versus baselines. We select BGRN (Baker et al., 2017) and CL (Chandrashekaran & Lane,
2017) as the baselines, as well as two heuristic rules of using the last seen value (LSV) (Klein et al.,
2017b) or the best seen value (BSV) of a learning curve for extrapolation.
We compare the performance of ours with the baselines. As shown in Table 1 and Appendix Fig.F.5,
using a few of observations, e.g., only 5 epochs, our approach can achieve 9.1/38.3/12.4/65.3/40.1%
relative improvements over the best baseline on CIFAR10/CIFAR100/SVHN/Fashion MNIST/Birds.
Running time analysis. Our approach is efﬁcient, especially for large and deep NNs. Different
from the training task that involves a full FP and BP, i.e. Ttrain = TFP + TBP, computing βeﬀonly
requires to compute the adjacency matrix P according to Eq. 8 on the NCP unit, Tβeff = TNCP.
Although the computation is complicated, the NCP is lightweight. The computing cost per epoch is
comparable to the training time per epoch (see Appendix Fig.G). Let Tβeff = c × Ttrain. If c > 1,
i.e., Tβeff is higher than Ttrain, vice versa. Considering the required epochs, our approach needs k
observations, and takes Tours = k × Tβeff. To obtain the ground-truth ﬁnal accuracy by running K
epochs, it takes Tfull = K × Ttrain. If Tfull > Tours, our βeﬀbased prediction is cheaper than “just
training longer”. It indicates that K × Ttrain −k × Tβeff = (K −c × k) × Ttrain > 0, saving us
K −c × k more training epochs.
We perform a running time analysis of the two tasks with 4× NVIDIA Tesla V100 SXM2 32GB, and
visualize the related times in Appendix Fig.G. On average c = Tβeff/Ttrain ≈1.3, computing βeﬀ
takes 1.3 times of the training per epoch. But the efforts are paying off, as we can predict the ﬁnal
accuracy by observing only k = 10 of K = 100 full training epochs, Tours is only 13% of Tfull.
When the observations are used for learning curve prediction, the heuristics LSV and BSV directly
take one observation (last or best) as the predicted value, so they are mostly computationally cheap but
have suboptimal model ranking performances. Relatively, BGRN and CL are more time-consuming
because both require to train a predictor with a set of full learning curves from other models. Our
approach also estimates a predictor, but does not need any external learning curves. Here we assume
that each model is observed for only k = 5 epochs, and conduct a running time analysis of these
approaches over learning curve prediction, including estimating a predictor. As shown in Appendix
Table G.2, our approach applies Bayesian ridge regression to efﬁciently estimate the predictor
I = h(βeﬀ; θ), taking comparable time as BGRN, signiﬁcantly less than CL, but performs best in
model ranking. In contrast, the most expensive CL, does not perform well, sometimes even worst.
6
Conclusion and Discussion
We present a new perspective of NN model selection by directly exploring the dynamical evolution of
synaptic connections during NN training. Our framework reformulates the SGD based NN training
dynamics as an edge dynamics B to capture the mutual interaction and dependency of synaptic
connections. Accordingly, a networked system is built by converting an NN GA to a line graph GB
6https://github.com/tdomhan/pylearningcurvepredictor
9

with the governing dynamics B, which induces a deﬁnition of the link weights in GB. Moreover, a
topological property of GB named neural capacitance βeﬀis developed and shown to be an effective
metric in predicting the ranking of a set of pre-trained models based on early training results.
There are several important directions that we intend to explore in the future, including (i) simplify the
adjacency matrix P to capture the dependency and mutual interaction between synaptic connections,
e.g., approximate gradients using local information (Jaderberg et al., 2017), (ii) extend the proposed
framework to NAS benchmarks (Ying et al., 2019; Dong & Yang, 2020; Dong et al., 2021; Zela et al.,
2020; Li et al., 2021) to select the best subnetwork, and (iii) design an efﬁcient algorithm to directly
optimize NN architectures based on βeﬀ.
