The final publication is available at Springer via https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-
3-030-35288-2_25 
Detecting depression in dyadic conversations with 
multimodal narratives and visualizations 
Joshua Y. Kim1, Greyson Y. Kim2, and Kalina Yacef1 
1 University of Sydney, Darlington NSW 2006, Australia 
2 Success Beyond Pain. Success WA 6164, Australia 

Abstract. Conversations contain a wide spectrum of multimodal information that 
gives us hints about the emotions and moods of the speaker. In this paper, we 
developed a system that supports humans to analyze conversations. Our main 
contribution is the identification of appropriate multimodal features and the inte-
gration of such features into verbatim conversation transcripts. We demonstrate 
the ability of our system to take in a wide range of multimodal information and 
automatically generated a prediction score for the depression state of the individ-
ual. Our experiments showed that this approach yielded better performance than 
the baseline model. Furthermore, the multimodal narrative approach makes it 
easy to integrate learnings from other disciplines, such as conversational analysis 
and psychology. Lastly, this interdisciplinary and automated approach is a step 
towards emulating how practitioners record the course of treatment as well as 
emulating how conversational analysts have been analyzing conversations by 
hand. 
Keywords: Multi-disciplinary AI, Conversational Analysis, Visualization, 
Multimodal Data. 
1 
Introduction 
When people speak, a lot of information is communicated at several levels. The con-
tent, as well as the way the speech is delivered, gives us hints about the emotions and 
moods of the speaker. To be a good listener in the conversation or a third-party conver-
sation analyst, one must consider a wide range of information, paying attention to the 
choice of words, attitudes, and emotions, for example. 
Analyzing conversations is complex and time-consuming. In specialized settings, 
such as a clinical psychology setting, expert insights are required to get a sense of what 
to look out for – both in terms of what was said and how it was said. For example, 
people who are clinically depressed tend to lose interest in things they were previously 
interested in [1] (which relates to what was said). Also, while responding, the clients 
tend to have a longer response time and/or have reduced affect display in facial expres-
sion [2, 3] (which relates to how it was being said). As an anecdotal example from one 
of our authors’ experience as a practicing clinical psychologist, his experience is 
aligned to the aforementioned literature and he also found that during the initial treat-
ment, depressed clients tend to employ avoidance coping, such as responding with am-
bivalence (e.g., I don’t know’) when they are asked to encounter their inner experience. 

2 
In another related discipline, conversational analysis, multimodal information from 
dialogs have been transcribed using a technical system developed by Jefferson [4]. This 
system encodes information about how it was being said in addition to what was being 
said. The challenge is that the manual encoding of such information is very time-con-
suming and susceptible to human error. 
In this paper, we alleviate the manual-intensive problem of representing and visual-
izing multimodal information. We customize our conversational analysis system so that 
it takes in temporal multimodal information, weaves them into the verbatim transcript 
and automatically generates a prediction score for the depression state of the individual. 
We discuss insights from current practices in the clinical psychology industry to help 
inform our construction of the multimodal narrative. With the help of current artificial 
intelligence (A.I.) algorithms, we extract features to accomplish a task that demands 
both attention and domain-specific expertise. The experiments show that our proposed 
method performs better than the baseline model. Lastly, we present an example of how 
the content of a conversation can be visualized and analyzed intuitively by humans. 
2 
Related Works 
2.1 
Textual multimodal representation 
Representations of multimodal information are typically vector-based, i.e., numerical. 
However, we are proposing a textual form of multimodal representation. There are two 
closely related tasks in the domain of machine learning – visual question-answering 
(VQA) [5] and dense video captioning [6] tasks. In these tasks, the model is trained to 
take in the video input and output a sequence of text that describes the video or answer 
questions. Our objective differs from these tasks, because our generated text is both 
used as an intermediary step for downstream models as well as a final product to be 
used in visualizations. Therefore, our objectives surrounding the generated text are (1) 
interpretability of the downstream model, and (2) whether the downstream model 
would be performant. Consequently, we are not concerned with the measures typically 
used in VQA and dense video captioning tasks to compare against the ground truth. 
Instead, our objective measure would be on the downstream model performance. 
 
2.2 
Detecting depression with automated conversational analysis 
Recently, there has been a growing interest in interdisciplinary research that assesses 
human conversations automatically. We focus on applications that detect depression 
and discuss past attempts at detecting depression in conversations. The Audio/Visual 
Emotion Challenge (AVEC), in the year of 2016, 2017 and 2019, has invited research-
ers to predict the level of depression severity (measured by the PHQ-8 questionnaire) 
from audio-visual recordings of a clinical interview. Since our dataset was also used in 
the AVECs, past attempts in the AVECs are highly relevant.  
Although the challenges were about analyzing conversations, we did not find any 
past accepted papers that were concerned with the textual presentation of the analysis. 
Many accepted papers did, however, use text as an input. Some used the verbatim 

3 
transcript in the text format as input into the model. Others extracted numeric features 
from the transcripts in three main ways – timings, keyword searches, and emotional 
indices. 
3 
Data 
3.1 
Data collection 
We used a publicly available multimodal dataset, Distress Analysis Interview Corpus 
[7]. It contains interviews of individuals conducted by a virtual human designed to help 
diagnosis of psychological distress conditions. Self-reported PHQ-8 scores are pro-
vided as the dependent variable, with an interval scale from 0 to 24, and larger scores 
indicate greater severity. In total, there are 219 participants. This dataset was also used 
in the AVEC 2019 challenge. The organizers have performed the digitization step to 
extract baseline features [8]. The scripts that replicate the baseline features extraction 
is publicly available1. Of the baseline features, we used the Geneva Minimalistic 
Acoustic Parameter Set (egemaps) and Facial Action Units (AU). 
 
3.2 
Feature extraction 
Using the provided data and features, we extracted more features and classified them 
into three different levels of inputs. Fig. 1 provides an overview of the prediction pro-
cess and the distribution of the PHQ score. The baseline level of input is the session-
level numeric features, followed by a session-level coarse summary. Lastly, the multi-
modal narrative comprised of both the verbatim transcript and multimodal information 
at the talk-turn level. The motivation is to produce an interpretable set of features that 
considers the temporal nature of conversational analyses. In total, there are nine features 
extracted at the session-level and four features extracted at the talk-turn level. 
 
 
Fig. 1. The high-level architecture of the pipeline (left) and distribution of PHQ score (right). 
3.2.1 Session-level numeric features 
We created three families of session-level inputs – prosody, actions, and demographics. 
Table 1 gives an overview of all features. Summary statistics refer to the maximum, 
minimum, average, and standard deviation of the feature for the entire session. 
 
1 https://github.com/AudioVisualEmotionChallenge/AVEC2019 
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
         
     

4 
Table 1. Session-level numeric features. 
Family 
Child 
Feature 
Demo-
graphics 
Talkativeness 
Total word count & Total distinct word count 
Big 5 Personality Percentile scores for each of the big 5 personality 
Gender 
Predicted Male/Female 
Actions 
Laughter 
Total laughter count 
Facial expression Summary statistics of the given AU intensity and 
count values 
Prosody 
Delay 
Summary statistics of time gaps between talk-turns 
Speech rate 
Average speech rate 
 
Firstly, for the family of demographics, we investigated the effects of talkativeness, Big 
5 Personality, Gender. Talkativeness is selected because depressed individuals have 
been found to show reduced response length and poor articulation of distinct words [9]. 
Of the Big 5 Personality, higher neuroticism and lower conscientiousness have been 
found to correlate with higher depression. In a meta-analysis that reviewed 851 effect 
sizes based on 175 articles, strong effect sizes have been observed in the correlations 
between depression and neuroticism (d = 1.33), and conscientiousness (d = -.90) [10]. 
Interestingly, it has been found that the Big 5 Personality did not correlate with psy-
chomotor retardation, while the Big 5 Personality correlates with the negative affect 
component in depression [11]. Hence, the present study included proxies of depression 
from both affective (Big 5 Personality) and physiological dimensions (Speech Delay, 
Speech Rate, Talkativeness). 
Gender differences exist in the manifestation of depression. Firstly, in a large study 
using about 80,000 individuals, women tend to report more depressive symptoms than 
men across all age groups [12]. Secondly, in perpetuating depression, chronic strain, 
low mastery, and rumination were reported to be more common in women than in men 
[13]. Therefore, the factor of gender is included to capture these possible systematic 
differences in depression manifestation. 
The method of extracting features for the family of demographics is as follows. Talk-
ativeness is measured by the total word count and total distinct word count from the 
supplied transcripts. Big 5 Personality is computed using the IBM Watson Personality 
Insights API, which returns the five percentile scores – one for each Big 5 personality 
– which are used as inputs. Gender is predicted by a regularized logistic regression 
model using the egemaps features supplied. Using all 16 egemaps variables, we ob-
tained an accuracy of 99.1% on the pooled predictions from the cross-validation. We 
used one-hot encoding to represent gender as a numeric feature. 
Secondly, for the family of actions, we investigated the effects of laughter and facial 
expressions. The reduction in laughter frequency has been found to be a symptom of 
depression, which may be linked to humor deficit and increased feelings of anhedonia 
observed in depressed patients [14]. Facial expressions of emotions are also expected 
to be reduced with depression [15].  
The method of extracting features for the family of actions is as follows. Laughter 
events were detected using the open-source algorithm [16]. We summed up the total 
number of laughter events per session. As for facial expressions, we computed 

5 
summary statistics for the intensity and count values of each AU. To limit the number 
of input features, we only computed summary statistics for four AU (AU5, 17, 20, 25) 
because these have been found to be effective in Yang et al. [17]. The description of 
each of the four AUs are – AU5: Upper lid Raiser; AU17: Chin raiser; AU20: Lip 
stretcher; AU25: Jaw drop [18].  
Lastly, for the family of prosody, we investigated the effects of delay and speech 
rate. These two features were selected because of the existing literature that suggests 
the following. Firstly, higher delays in responses (also known as speech pause time) 
have been found to positively correlate with higher depression scores [2, 3]. Secondly, 
a lower speech rate has also been found to also correlate with higher depression scores 
[19].  
The method of extracting features for the family of prosody is as follows. We com-
puted the summary statistics of time gaps between talk-turns. As for speech rate, the 
overall average speech rate is computed by dividing the total number of words spoken 
by the total number minutes of talk-turn duration. 
3.2.2 Session-level coarse summary 
In addition to numerical inputs, we investigated whether it is possible to represent the 
inputs in the form of text. The motivation is that in clinical psychology consultations, 
practitioners are ethically obligated to summarize session-level progress details, to in-
form subsequent assessments and interventions in the course of treatment (see 
https://www.psychology.org.au for example). This investigation is a step towards em-
ulating how practitioners record the course of treatment and provides insights on ana-
lyzing the session-level coarse summaries. In this section, we first explain the automatic 
generation of a text representation, then we motivate the extraction of a new family of 
input features – comprehension. The overview of templates for the session-level coarse 
summary is provided in Table 2. 
Table 2. Templates for the session-level coarse summary. 
Family 
Child 
ID Template 
Demo-
graphics 
Talkativeness 
1 ‘number of words high number of distinct words 
high’ 
Big 5 Personality 2 ‘openness very high’ 
Gender 
3 The participant is female. 
Actions 
Laughter 
4 ‘laughter counts high’ 
AU 
5 ‘minimum lip depressor very low maximum lip de-
pressor low average lip depressor low variance lip 
depressor low’ 
Prosody 
Delay 
6 ‘minimum delay very low maximum delay low av-
erage delay low variance delay low’ 
Speech rate 
7 ‘speech rate high’ 
Compre-
hension 
Yang et al. [17] 
8 See Table 3 
DSM-5 
9 See Table 3 
 

6 
The method of converting session-level features into text representation involves stand-
ardization of the numerical inputs across the training dataset. For each of the numerical 
inputs, we computed the standardized score (z-score) using the mean and standard de-
viation obtained from the training fold. Depending on the standardized score, we in-
serted templates 1 to 7 (except 3), where possible values in the bold-face were “very 
low” (z-score < -2), “low” (z-score < -1), “high” (z-score > 1) and “very high” (z-score 
> 2). We did not insert any templates when the z-score was within the normal range of 
-1 to 1 to keep the narrative succinct. As for template 3, we used the predicted gender 
from the logistic regression model. 
Since we are changing the representation of the session from numerical features to 
text features, we also investigated the addition of a new family of input features – com-
prehension. The recent progress of machine comprehension has prompted the research 
question of the benefits of using trained machine comprehension models to extract text 
features for downstream supervised learning. Machine comprehension models take in 
two inputs – the question and the passage – and return an extracted phrase from the 
passage that is most related to the question. In our application, we used the model as a 
targeted summarization tool. The comprehension input family consisted of two sets of 
questions which we discuss in turn. To extract the answers, we used the pre-trained 
Bidirectional Attention Flow model from AllenNLP [20]. We also set the minimum 
probability threshold to be 0.1, so that answers that are deemed to be low-confidence 
by the model are replaced by “not applicable”. 
The first set of comprehension questions were derived from Yang et al. [17], where 
the authors conducted a content analysis of the transcripts using keywords-matching to 
identify whether the participant is (a) previously diagnosed, (b) sleeping well, (c) shy 
or outgoing, (d) feeling bad or good. The second set of comprehension questions were 
derived from the DSM-5 [1]. The DSM-5 is widely used in Australia by psychologists 
and psychiatrists to make a diagnosis of depression. We present the set of derived ques-
tions along with a sample answer extracted from the transcripts in Table 3. 
Table 3. Sample comprehension features derived. 
Yang et al [17] 
DSM-5 [1] 
Question 
Sample answer Question 
Sample answer 
Am I diag-
nosed? 
no I never been 
formally diag-
nosed 
Do I feel depressed 
most of the day? 
no lately I've still been pretty 
depressed 
Am I sleep-
ing well? 
I have not been 
sleeping 
Do I lose interest? 
I was not interested in things 
that are that I would normally 
interested in and you know I 
was sort of withdrawn 
Am I shy? 
I'm not I'm not 
extremely shy 
Do I feel tired? 
fatigued I'm very tired 
How am I 
feeling 
lately? 
irritated tired 
lazy 
Do I feel worthless? 
I feel like invisible 
 
 
Do I feel like dying? I felt like I couldn't cope 

7 
3.2.3 Multimodal narrative 
In this section, we also investigated the effects of adding the entire transcripts, anno-
tated with multimodal information. In effect, we added information on what was being 
said as well as how it was being said at a talk-turn level.  
At the talk-turn level, we introduced two families of information – prosody, and ac-
tions. We weaved this information into the transcript to create the multimodal narrative. 
Table 4 gives an overview of the templates, the bold-face indicates a variable.  
Table 4. Templates for the multimodal annotations 
Family 
Child 
ID 
Template 
Actions Laughter 
10 
‘the participant laughed and said’ 
Prosody Delay 
11 
‘after two hundred milliseconds’ 
12 
‘a long delay’ 
Speech rate 13 
‘quickly said’ 
 
The laughter detection algorithm returns the time window of the detected laughter. Us-
ing this time window, we inserted template 10 if the window of the laughter is com-
pletely contained within the time window of the talk-turn. 
The method of computing delay is through the provided time window for each talk-
turn in the transcripts. The nominal values (template 11) of delay could be used by the 
model to compare the delay lengths across sessions; however the drawback of is that it 
does not help the model consider the within-session variation in delay. Therefore, to 
tackle this problem, we added template 12 where the template is dependent on the stand-
ardized duration of the delay “long” (1 ≤ z-score < 2) and “significantly long” (2 ≤ z-
score).  The mean and standard deviation of the delay are calculated using all talk-turn 
delays from the same session. Lastly, we appended template 13 to annotate speech rate 
variation within the session. Similar to template 12, the possible values of template 13 
are dependent on the standardized words per minute for each talk-turn – “very slowly” 
(z-score < -2), “slowly” (z-score < -1), “quickly” (z-score > 1), and “very quickly” (z-
score > 2). 
4 
Analysis 
4.1 
Evaluation Metric 
To evaluate the performance of the models, the Concordance Correlation Coefficient 
(CCC) was used, this was also the metric used in the official AVEC 2019 challenges 
[8]. The CCC is defined by: 
𝑟𝑐=
2𝑟𝜎𝑥𝜎𝑦
𝜎𝑥2+𝜎𝑦2+(𝜇𝑥−𝜇𝑦)2 
(1) 
where r represents the Pearson’s correlation coefficient (PCC) between two vectors 
(ground-truth and prediction), µ represents the mean of each vector, and σ represents 
the standard deviation of each vector.  

8 
4.2 
Ablation test design 
To investigate the benefits of including different families of input features, and different 
learning algorithms, we designed a series of ablation tests. We discuss the motivations 
for our ablation test design, as illustrated in Fig. 2. The dotted boxes correspond to the 
granularity of feature input, as described in Fig. 1. The grey boxes denote the learning 
algorithm. The white boxes denote the families of inputs that were common to our ex-
isting system; whilst the blue boxes denote the families of inputs that are newly added 
features in this paper. For each model, we start from the left, which uses only demo-
graphic features. The ablation test setup is such that we add one input family at a time, 
starting with A, then P and others. We discuss the four motivations for this design. 
 
Fig. 2. The high-level architecture of the prediction pipeline. 
The first motivation is the ability to compare the differences in performance between 
the two algorithms, keeping the input configurations similar. Therefore, in Fig. 2, we 
observe that it is possible to compare the performance of the decision tree versus the 
HAN for the first three configurations (D, DA, DAP). 
The second motivation is the ability to investigate the additional benefits of progres-
sively adding families of input into the configuration. Therefore, we have elected to add 
one family at a time. We have chosen demographics to be the starting configuration 
because this family of inputs is always populated for text inputs. In other words, be-
cause the other two families (actions and prosody) are only populated when they con-
tain high standardized values (see section 3.2.2), they are not suitable as the starting 
configuration. 
The third motivation is the ability to investigate the benefits of employing the pre-
trained machine comprehension model. Therefore, we have introduced a split at the end 
of the DAP configuration. On one path, we used the machine comprehension model to 
perform targeted summarization. On the other path, we used our automatically gener-
ated multimodal narrative, which includes both the multimodal information and verba-
tim transcript.  
Lastly, the fourth motivation is the ability to investigate the effects of using all ex-
tracted information in the form of text in the DAPNC configuration. 
4.3 
Regression tree 
The regression tree used is from the rpart package within R. We used the “anova” split-
ting method to train the regression tree. We tuned the hyperparameters minimum split, 
maximum depth, and cp through a grid search and the cross-validation. We report in 

9 
Table 5 the performance metrics using different inputs. The cross-validation is per-
formed on the entire dataset. 
4.4 
HAN 
With the text features, each word is represented by the set of Glove word embeddings 
(300-dimensions). We tuned the learning rate, number of GRU units, recurrent dropout, 
GRU dropout, and L2 regularization via random-search. We used the Stochastic Gra-
dient Descent optimizer. Batch size is set to 8. The training process consists of 350 
epochs, with no early stopping. We have also clipped the range of the predicted values 
to be between 0 and 24. The performances of HAN are also presented in Table 5. To 
facilitate all pairwise comparisons, we also computed whether the performance differ-
ences are statistically significant through bootstrapping the CCC differences (N=1000). 
At the 0.95 significance level, we found significant differences in two pairs - Tree-D 
vs. HAN-DAPN, and Tree-D vs. HAN-DAPCN. At the 0.90 significance level, we 
found a significant difference in one additional pair – Tree-D vs. HAN-DAPC. 
Table 5. Cross-validation results for regression tree and HAN. The standard deviation of per-
formance is presented in brackets. 
 
Regression Tree 
HAN 
Family 
CCC 
CCC 
D 
0.144 (0.065) 
0.171 (0.027) 
DA 
0.226 (0.125) 
0.200 (0.035) 
DAP 
0.234 (0.052) 
0.239 (0.056) 
DAPC 
N/A 
0.291 (0.118) 
DAPN 
0.297 (0.132) 
DAPNC 
0.302 (0.092) 
5 
Discussion 
For regression tree, we observe that the CCC cross-validation performance increases 
significantly from the D configuration (CCC=0.144) to the DA configuration 
(CCC=0.226) and then followed by a small increase in the DAP configuration 
(CCC=0.234). 
As for the HAN, the increase of CCC is almost linear as we progressively add the 
session-level inputs – from the D (CCC=0.171), to DA (CCC=0.200), and then the DAP 
configuration (CCC=0.239). When we added the comprehension features, the perfor-
mance increases markedly (CCC=0.291). After that, the performance of the DAPC con-
figuration is similar to DAPN (CCC=0.297) and the configuration of DAPNC, which 
contains all text features, is the best (CCC=0.302).  
The DAPC configuration is an efficient way to extract text features for this super-
vised learning task. This is evident from two observations. Firstly, the performance 
increase from the DAP to DAPC configuration is high. Secondly, the difference be-
tween the DAPC and DAPN configuration is small. However, we posit that the 

10 
challenge here is asking the machine comprehension model the right questions, which 
we attempted to overcome by using past research, including the DSM-5. 
When we hold the input configuration constant, we found that text representation 
had the same level of performance as the regression tree when representing session-
level inputs (DAP configuration). The CCC performances of other participants of the 
AVEC 2019 challenge – using the same number of observations and performance met-
ric (CCC) – are not published at the time of writing this paper.  
6 
HAN Visualization 
In the closing section, we demonstrate how the HAN model could be used to support 
humans analyze conversations, through using the attention weights. We used both the 
talk-turn as well as word-level attention weights to construct the visualization manu-
ally. Here, a talk-turn represents a question (answer) to (from) the machine comprehen-
sion model. We extracted and standardized attention weights from all talk-turns within 
the same session. Having computed the standardized talk-turn-level and word-level 
weights, we use the following style schemes to construct the visualization. 
 
z-
score Importance 
Word 
Talk-turn 
 
 
Color Size Color Label 
< 0 
Nil 
 
+0 
 
N 
< 1 
Low 
 
+1 
 
L 
< 2 
Medium 
 
+2 
 
M 
≥ 2 
High 
 
+3 
 
H 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 3. Conversation analysis example. 
In the visualization, the numbers on the left indicate the talk-turn number. The ana-
lyst could first get a sense of the relative importance of all talk-turns by looking at the 
talk-turn-level attention weights. Then, the analyst could dive deeper and analyze the 
relative importance of each word. 
We picked an example that has the actual PHQ score of 20, and the model predicted 
a score of 15. In Fig. 3, we illustrate a short extract from the DAPC configuration that 
has talk-turns with high attention weights. In the extract, we observed that only talk-
turn 4 are having high importance in making the prediction score of 15. More interest-
ingly, we noted that the words marked as high importance are concepts semantically 
related to depression. 

11 
7 
Conclusion 
In this paper, experiments on the DAIC-WOZ dataset [7] were presented, with a focus 
on the multimodal text representation. Our proposed approach constructs a text narra-
tive and then uses it as input to a model. Finally, both the model and the narrative are 
used to construct a visualization to analyze the dialog. 
We have demonstrated that this approach could accommodate customizations, al-
lowing the researcher to inject research findings from cross-disciplinary literature. In 
our application, we injected talkativeness, big 5 personality, laughter, delay, speech 
rate, comprehension information into our multimodal narrative. These selected features 
are guided by the psychology as well as the conversational analysis literature. 
The ablation tests showed that text representations perform just as well as the regres-
sion trees. However, the flexibility of text representation makes it possible to extract 
more information through the pre-trained machine comprehension model and achieve 
a cross-validation CCC of 0.291. Using all the information, our system achieves a cross-
validation CCC of 0.302. For future research directions, we would like to better under-
stand the effectiveness of the produced visualizations and text summaries as well as the 
time savings from this automated approach through user-studies. There is also future 
work to improve or widen the multimodal feature extraction to further improve the per-
formance of HAN. 
Lastly, the visualization is a step towards emulating the way human conversation 
analysts analyze conversations, and a step towards emulating how practitioners keep a 
text record of the course of treatment.
