1
A Review of Neural Network Based Machine
Learning Approaches for Rotor Angle Stability
Control
Reza Youseﬁan, Student Member, IEEE, S. Kamalasadan, Member, IEEE
Abstract—This paper reviews the current status and challenges
of Neural Networks (NNs) based machine learning approaches
for modern power grid stability control including their design
and implementation methodologies. NNs are widely accepted as
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) approaches offering an alternative way
to control complex and ill-deﬁned problems. In this paper various
application of NNs for power system rotor angle stabilization
and control problem is discussed. The main focus of this paper
is on the use of Reinforcement Learning (RL) and Supervised
Learning (SL) algorithms in power system wide-area control
(WAC). Generally, these algorithms due to their capability in
modeling nonlinearities and uncertainties are used for transient
classiﬁcation, neuro-control, wide-area monitoring and control,
renewable energy management and control, and so on. The
works of researchers in the ﬁeld of conventional and renewable
energy systems are reported and categorized. Paper concludes by
presenting, comparing and evaluating various learning techniques
and infrastructure conﬁgurations based on efﬁciency.
Index Terms—Adaptive Critic Designs, Neural Networks, Re-
inforcement Learning, Supervised Learning, Power System Sta-
bility, Wide Area Control.
I. INTRODUCTION
O
Ne important aspect of the power grid is its inter-
connection nature leading to a maximum use of the ex-
isting network. However, with the advent of renewable energy
resources and demand growth, power system has many modes
of oscillations with a large number of variables and systems
interacting. This inter-connected dynamics of power systems
along with nonlinear and time-varying elements makes their
operation complex and their control a challenging process.
Under these conditions, ensuring secure and stable operation of
large scale power systems exposed to different contingencies
is among the most formidable challenges that power engineers
face today.
Conventionally, algebraic and differential equations are used
to describe the behavior of power systems dynamics and to
create mathematical models to represent these process. In
general, a model is purposeful simpliﬁcation of a system for
solving a particular problem. However, the complexity of the
power system stability problem along with uncertainties and
nonlinearities makes the modeling non-practical or inaccurate
[2].
In power system stability control, all the classical designs
model the system linearized around an operating point, which
bounds the applicability of the process. Machine learning-
based or Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI)-based control architecture
R.Youseﬁan and S.Kamalasadan are with Power, Energy and Intelligent
Systems Laboratory, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University of North Carolina-Charlotte.
utilized under the umbrella term measurement-based tech-
niques has been long proposed to overcome some of the
aforementioned issues [3]. Most notable of them is the method
of Neural Networks (NNs), which is based on mimicking the
intelligence by which the human brain represents information.
The ﬁeld has evolved and matured in several directions since
introduction in 1943 [4]. The goal of building a system that
adapts to its environment and learns from interactions has
attracted researchers from many ﬁelds, including computer
science, engineering, mathematics, physics, neuroscience, and
cognitive science. Out of this research has come a wide variety
NN models such as deep neural networks, which has gained
considerable attention recently and is considered as break
through in the ﬁeld of AI [5]. It is worth noting that each model
has strengths and weaknesses, depending on the application
and the context in which it is being used. In the area of
engineering problems, NNs have been applied as a functional
approximators, system modeling, pattern recognition, anoma-
lies recognition, and classiﬁcation with the ability to generalize
while making decisions about imprecise input data.
Overall, the learning technique applied to these models
can be categorized as three sets of Supervised Learning
(SL), Reinforcement Learning (RL), and unsupervised learning
problems [6]. The former is frequently applied to the problems
involving static Input/Output (I/O) mappings assuming that full
knowledge of the problem is available. On the other hand,
RL is suited for problems involving sequential dynamics and
optimization of action in the course of process. Unsupervised
learning is a type of machine learning algorithm used to
extract the input and non-labeled outputs, mainly in clustering
analysis. These learning algorithms have gradually become one
of the most active research areas in machine learning, AI,
and NN topics. The ﬁeld has developed strong mathematical
foundations with impressive applications. However, the overall
problem of learning from interaction to achieve goals is still
far from being solved, but has improved signiﬁcantly [7]. It
should be noted that the learning algorithm is not limited to
the aforementioned methods, as other promising techniques
has emerged recently such as deep learning.
This paper reviews these learning algorithms applied to
power system stability and control. In power system, this
architecture has been employed in various control designs
including local synchronous generators, microgrid control,
and power system Wide-Area Control (WAC) in the form
of SL or RL. These structures have been investigated to
gain more efﬁciency for modeling the nonlinearity of the
system dynamics and uncertainty in the form of RL, especially
regarding the wide-area monitoring and control application.
arXiv:1701.01214v1  [cs.SY]  5 Jan 2017

2
Additionally, NNs has been implemented in various Transient
Stability Assessment (TSA) and control designs. The highly
nonlinear and time constraints inherited in transient stability
problem makes these designs well-suited for application in this
category of problems. Finally, unsupervised learning has been
employed mainly to extract the coherent areas in presence of
fault in online or ofﬂine analysis. These are few examples of
application of machine learning techniques in power system,
which will be discussed later in more detail. Although, these
techniques look promising in theory, host of problems make
them difﬁcult to implement in real life. These problems root in
heuristic nature of such controllers and dimentinality problems,
which causes reliability issues and cannot be fully trusted
to implement, especially in power system considering the
failure costs. However, recent developments in this area and
computational technologies have paved the for more advanced
power system control designs by means of these algorithms.
This paper reviews the current status and implementation of
NNs as a bulk power system controller for transient stability
improvement, WAC designs as one of the main applications,
and comparison to classical controllers. It begins with an
overview on the problem of the power system stability with
the focus on transient stability and rotor angle oscillations.
This is followed by an overview and evaluation of the current
classical techniques employed in control hierarchy of power
system. Furthermore, learning techniques for NNs is provided
in section IV, with a focus on the SL and RL. Application of
these learning-based techniques in power system stability is
presented later on, followed by the conclusion in sections IX.
II. ROTOR-ANGLE STABILITY
Initially, we elaborate the power system stability problem as
the ability of power system to regain the operating equilibrium
states after being subjected to a physical disturbance, with most
system variables bounded so that practically the entire system
remains intact [1]. In the context of rotor angle stability, the
dynamics of each synchronous generator bus can be can be
characterized by the complex terminal voltage Vt∠δ, where
δ is the rotor angle with respect to synchronously rotating
reference frame. The rotor speed is given by ω = ˙δ. Distur-
bances on power system components, e.g. power lines causes
the system to move away from the pre-fault equilibrium point
and experience a transition toward the post-fault dynamics.
Rotor angle stability as one of the main classiﬁcations of power
system stability, refers to the ability of synchronous machines
to remain in synchronism after being subjected to the fault.
Instability occurs in the form of increasing angular swings
of some generators leading to their loss of synchronism with
other generators. This behavior could be assessed by using a
simpliﬁed 2nd order synchronous generator model as,
∆˙δ
=
∆ω
(1)
M∆˙ω
=
Pm −Pe −D∆˙δ
(2)
where, ∆δ = δ −δ∗is the rotor angle deviation, ∆ω = ω −
ω∗the speed deviation, the symbol ”∗” denotes the post-fault
operating point, M the inertia constant of the synchronous
generator, D is the damping coefﬁcient, Pm the mechanical
power, and Pe the electrical power as,
Pej =
X
k∈Nj BjkVjVk sin(δjk)
(3)
where, Nj is the set of neighboring buses of the jth bus.
This power represents the power ﬂow through transmission
lines into the power network, which follows highly nonlinear
behavior.
In general, swing equation (2) can be resolved into two
components: synchronizing power component in phase with
∆δ and damping power component in phase with ∆ω. The
stability depends on the existence of both components of
torque for each of the synchronous machines. Rotor angle
stability can be characterized mainly into two categories:
• Small signal stability
• Transient stability
The consideration is based on the size of disturbance, time
span and involved devices as presented in [1].
A. Rotor Angle Stability Assessment
Rotor angle stability assessment can be categorized into
Small Signal Stability Assessment (SSAT) and Transient Sta-
bility Assessment (TSA). In general, small signal stability is
concerned with the ability of the power system to maintain
its synchronism under small disturbances, which allows the
linearization of system equations for purposes of analysis. The
stability of the system is assessed by the characteristics of the
eigenvalues of system matrix. This SSAT is usually performed
with the purpose of improvement in damping performance of
the system through employment of frequency-based continu-
ous controllers such as Power System Stabilizers (PSSs).
Transient instability occurs when the power system is sub-
jected to a severe disturbance. The resulting system response
involves large excursions of generator rotor angles and is
inﬂuenced by the nonlinear power-angle relationship. This
type of instability is usually due to insufﬁcient synchroniz-
ing torque, manifesting as ﬁrst swing instability [1]. TSA
is performed ofﬂine at pre-fault stage or online during the
fault. The literature in this category is respectively rich, with
various methods utilized, [2], [8]–[13]. TSA mainly focuses
on the critical clearing time of the faults in power system. A
comprehensive simulation of faults provides useful information
regarding the vulnerable points of the system and makes sure
of safe stability margin. Besides, these evaluations can provide
helpful database for real-time analysis to perform preventive
or emergency control actions. In this type of problems the
progress of the power system transient and oscillations are
monitored, and prediction of stability of swings is done to
classify the fault. Various conventional approaches for TSA
have been proposed in the power systems literature which is
listed brieﬂy in Table. I.
III. POWER SYSTEM CONTROL HIERARCHY
Rotor angle stability problems may be either local or global
in nature. Local oscillations are usually associated with rotor
angle oscillations of a single generator against the rest of

3
TABLE I: Transient Stability Assessment (TSA) Techniques
Technique
Characteristic
Numerical
• Weak performance in real-time implementation, as they require accurate information of the power network topology [14].
• It requires the post-fault system simulation to conclude the stability status [15].
Direct
• Based on direct calculation of the Transient Energy Function (TEF) [8].
• The numerical integration is required only on the fault-on state trajectory.
• Analytical TEF with detailed device models cannot be derived for multi-machine power system. Hence, such problem formulation may
lead to excessive simpliﬁcations.
Hybrid
• These approaches are mainly based on equivalent modeling, which can be integrated much faster than real-time [16].
• Their algorithms is complex.
∑ 
Governor
Exciter
∑ 
Δω 
Turbine
G
Power 
Network
PSS
AVR
+
-
+
VPSS
Vwac
ΔVref
Vt
ΔEf
Pref
Local 
control 
Power Sharing Feedback
Automatic Generation Controller (AGC)
Optimal Power Flow (OPF)
∑ 
Wide-area 
monitoring 
(e.g. PMUs)
Control Center
Wide-Area Control
Vref
+
Fig. 1: Schematic of synchronous generator local, secondary, tertiary, and
wide-are control
the power system; while, inter-area oscillations involve a
group of generators in one area swinging against another
group [17]. The characteristics of local and inter-area modes
depends on the strength of the transmission system, generator
excitation, control, and plant output. Synchronous generators
supply most of the electrical energy in the power system,
and are mainly responsible for maintaining the stability of the
electrical network. Therefore, effective control of these devices
is very critical [19].
A. Local Controllers
Local control is the ﬁrst control level in the control hierarchy
and has the fastest response [18]. This control responds to
local system dynamics and ensures that the variables track
their reference values. Local continuous feedback controls are
depicted in Fig. 1.
B. Secondary and Tertiary Controllers
In order to maintain the power quality and stability of
the generating units for longer term variables, the next level
controller is deployed to determine the set points for the
primary control. The secondary control works as a centralized
Automatic Generation Controller (AGC) and compensates the
steady-state errors of the voltage and frequency. This controller
makes use of communications and Wide-Area Monitoring
(WAM) systems to coordinate the action of all the generation
units within a given area. The time response of this control
level is in the range of minutes, thus having a slow dynamic
if compared with the local control. Finally, the tertiary control
level could be utilized for optimizing the operation of the
system [20].
C. Wide-Area Controllers
Generally, Wide-Area Control (WAC) coordinates the ac-
tions of a number of distributed agents using Supervisory
Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA), Phasor Measurement
Unit (PMU), or other sources of WAMs [21]–[23]. Several
control architecture is designed ( [24]–[27]) for such applica-
tions in the form of hierarchical designs, distributed control
methods, central designs, or multi-agent-based techniques.
Overall such designs have better controlability on inter-area
modes of oscillations due to better observability than local
controllers. Most of them use frequency domain methods and
root-locus criteria with signals including changes in tie line
ﬂows, inter-area angles and/or machine speeds. For instance,
in [28] a global PSS has been presented with a supplementary
input from PMUs, geographically spread over coherent areas
of power system. This design is built on top of the existing
local controller, resulting in a hierarchical control architecture
with signiﬁcant advantages in terms of reliability and oper-
ational ﬂexibility. Several other conventional techniques has
also been used to be applied for this application, such as robust
techniques [29] and optimal control methods [17].
In addition, it is known that transient instability may happen
in further swings due to lack of damping torques [1]. The
continuous control actions can also be used as the input to the
excitation system, to make the problem dynamic mitigating
and damping control. This type of control schemes are de-
signed not only to provide a stable ﬁnal state but also minimize
state excursions along the trajectory and increase the power
system stability margins [30]. Due to nature of this problem,
nonlinear designs should be applied for this application [31],
[32]. In [32] a new structures for stability enhancing excitation
controllers is designed using a nonlinear multi-machine system
model and Lyapunov’s direct method. The controller is design
to ensure the negativity of the derivative of Lyapunov function
deﬁned on third-order model of synchronous generator.
IV. MACHINE LEARNING ALGORITHMS
In general, the term ”learning” means adjusting the pa-
rameters or in the case of NNs, weights, to reduce the error
between the target outputs and the actual outputs. In this paper,

4
Input layer
Hidden layer
𝑌 𝑘 
Target Output
𝑋𝑘 
Input 
Vector
Output 
Vector
Fig. 2: Structure of Recurrent Neural Network
1.0
Input layer (i)
Hidden layer (h)
Φ(.) 
H
𝑌 𝑘 
𝑋𝑘−𝑛 
𝑋𝑘−1 
𝑋𝑘 
Output layer (j)
𝑋𝑘 
 Tapped Delay line
Input 
Vector
...
𝑊 
𝑉 
Fig. 3: Structure of Time Delay Neural Network
two main methods of SL and RL are investigated for their
application in power system control. Initially, a brief overview
of these methods is presented:
A. Supervised Learning (SL) Algorithm
SL methods are referred to problems involving static I/O
mappings and minimization of a vector error signal, with no
explicit dependence on how training examples are gathered.
In this category full knowledge of the problem context is
available. The system learns to perform its designated task with
assistance of a teacher. Availability of data pairs as an input
and desired outputs helps the system to update its parameters in
order to minimize the error. Generally, SL can be categorized
as:
• Regression problem
• Classiﬁcation Problem
These two types are discussed later for their application in
power system stability.
1) Neural Network Classes: There are mainly two classes
of NNs with several types each investigated in power system
control scheme:
• Static Neural Network
– Multi-Layer Perceptron Neural Network (MLPNN)
– Radial Basis Functions Neural Network (RBFNN)
– Functional link (FNL)
• Dynamic Neural Network
– Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) (Fig. 2)
– Simultaneous Recurrent Neural Network (SRN)
– Time Delay (TDL) Neural Network (Fig. 3)
Static NNs are characterized by node equations that are
memoryless; However, Dynamic NNs can be described by
differential equations. As a static network, it is shown that
the RBF is superior in classiﬁcation and pattern recognition
problems, while the MLP is more efﬁcient in function ap-
proximation [33].
Critic
Action
Environment
States
Action
Control
Control
Rewards
Supervised Learning
Reinforcement Learning 
Fig. 4: Supervised learning and reinforcement learning scheme.
In general, MLP is the simplest type of SL consisting of
Feed Forward Neural Networks (FFNNs) constructed with
three main layers of input, hidden, and output layers, each
consisting of input, feature, and decision units in the form
of perceptron architecture [34]. The FFNN is based on feed
forward activation, in which units of each layer pass on their
activation to next layer, until the output layer where the actual
response to the input layer is generated. Then, these outputs
are compared with the desired responses in the form of training
patterns. The output values of FFNN is computed by,
ˆY = ˆV T Φ( ˆW T X) + ϵ
(4)
where, ˆY is the approximated output vector, X is the input
vector, Φ(.) ∈ℜh is the corresponding nonlinear mapping
function, ˆW and ˆV are the parameter vector of approximated
weights of the FFNN, and ϵ is the NN functional approxima-
tion error.
2) Training: The SL is based on the back-propagation of
the error through the NN. In order to start the training process,
all the weights are initialized with small values. The output
values is computed based on the inputs in training set and the
weights. Further, the error is calculated in the form of norm 2
of output error
e(t) = ˆY (t) −Y ∗(t)
(5)
Then, the error at the output layer is used to compute for the
error at the hidden layer through back-propagation technique.
This is achieved by the gradient decent algorithm in which the
weights are updated along the negative gradient direction of the
mean square error. As a result, change of each NN weights can
be derived from the deviation of NN’s output to its optimal
value e by means of gradient descent via back-propagation
through the NN model. Considering the ﬁrst layer as ﬁxed
weights, this training could be in the form of
• Online learning: ∆V (t) = αe(t)Φ(X(t))
• Batch learning: ∆V = α P
t e(t)Φ(X(t))
where, α is small step size learning parameter. In the ﬁrst one,
the training data becomes available in a sequential order and
is used for training at each time t. On the other hand, in batch
learning the training is performed once the the entire training
data set is available.

5
B. Reinforcement Learning Algorithm
RL is often applied to problems involving sequential dy-
namics and optimization of a scalar performance objective,
with online exploration of the effects of actions [3], [35],
[36]. The key feature of RL is that training information from
the environment is used as an evaluative signal. The scheme
of this learning algorithm compared to SL is presented in
Fig. 4. This method has taken the attention in power system
control studies since it can achieve optimal solution requiring
no prior knowledge about the system and it can adapt itself to
ﬁt the changing environment [36]. In spite of SL, there is no
desired output available in this category. However, interacting
with environment can provide evaluative feedback, which can
further be used to update the learning system toward improving
its quality of performance. In other words, action system
maps from states to actions that optimizes some performance
criterion. The goal in RL is to ﬁnd a single input value that
maximizes the total amount of rewards over the sequence of
decision [37]. Taking actions in RL, the agent has to balance
two conﬂicting objectives, exploitation and exploration.
1) Adaptive Critic Designs (ACDs): ACDs are common
approach to handle RL, which are capable of optimization
over time and under conditions of noise and uncertainty.
Since actions should be taken at each time step and their
effect is not known until the end of the sequence, it is not
possible to design an optimal controller using the traditional
SL [38]. Several research works have been done in this area,
proposing different types of critics [38], [39]. In essence, the
adaptive critic method determines optimal control policy for a
system by successively adapting two NNs, called critic NN and
action NN which learn respectively the desired cost function
and desired control value based on the cost function. These
two NNs approximate the Hamilton Jacobi Bellman (HJB)
equation associated with optimal control theory [38]. The cost-
to-go function is given as follows:
J(t) =
X∞
k=0 γkU(t + k)
(6)
where, U is the utility function used for reward or punishment
in terms of RL concept or incremental cost function. This
function can be represented as,
U(t) = −∆x(t)T Q∆x(t) −u(t)T Ru(t)
(7)
where, x is the states of the system, u is the control action,
the weighting matrix Q and R are required to be positive-
deﬁnite, and ∆x = x −x∗, x∗being the operating points
derived from the reference model, u the control action, and
γ is the discount factor needed to maintain the solution as a
ﬁnite horizon problem with a limit on the upper bound of the
solution. By selecting an appropriate value of γ ∈(0, 1], we
can weight the future values of the utility function and affect
the convergence process [40].
2) Solutions to the Problem: Dynamic Programming (DP)
has gained much attention from many researchers in order to
obtain approximate solutions of the RL problem and the HJB
equation [41], [42]. Various techniques have been presented in
this area which use the (6) or derivatives of that as optimization
goal to be solved [43]. An alternative way of distinguishing
Critic
Action
Identifier
Utility Function
System Dynamics
𝑢(𝑡)
𝑥(𝑡) 
𝜕𝐽(𝑡)
𝜕𝑢(𝑡) = 0 
𝐽 𝑡  
𝑈 𝑡   
𝑢(𝑡) 
𝑥(𝑡+ 1) 
𝐽 𝑡 −𝑈 𝑡 −𝛾 𝐽(𝑡+ 1) = 0 
𝑥 𝑡 −𝑥 𝑡 = 0 
Cost function
𝑢(𝑡) 
𝑥(𝑡) 
Fig. 5: Structure of the Adaptive Critic Design
ACD methods is to consider the role of system models in the
training loops of each method [44]. In general, ACD methods
are categorized based on the critic training methods and effect
of system model in the training process. Various versions are
proposed which are Heuristic Dynamic Programming (HDP),
Dual Heuristic Programming (DHP), Action Dependent HDP
and DHP (ADHDP, ADDHP).
All these provided structures can realize the same function
that is to obtain the optimal control policy, while the computa-
tion precision and running time are different from each other.
The model based methods have been shown to be much more
efﬁcient for training neuro-controllers and to produce superior
designs to non-model based methods. Generally speaking,
the computation burden of HDP is low but the computation
precision is also low. On the other hand, DHP and ADDHP
have an important advantage over the simple ACDs since
their critic networks build a representation for derivatives of
through by being explicitly trained on them and area of model-
based control we usually have a sufﬁciently accurate and well-
deﬁned model network. Ref. [38] provides a full description
and analysis on these models.
3) Training: Considering HDP as a simplest method of
ACD technique, critic network represents the cost function
by being trained explicitly and directly based on the states
of the system. Three NNs are implemented in this method:
identiﬁer NN, critic NN, and action NN. General scheme of the
ACD controller is provided in Fig. 5. In particular, the training
process of the critic NN is based on DP, which estimates J
by updating its policy with respect to error, eC, with elements
of the rewards obtained from the environment, U(t), the cost
functions at current time step, J(t), and future time step,
J(t+1). Considering a simple FFNN with one layer of tunable
weights for critic network,
eC(t) = ˆV T
C ΦC(x(t)) −γ ˆV T
C ΦI(x(t + 1)) −U(t)
(8)
where, critic NN future outputs is based on predicted states
derived from identiﬁer NN. Training of the identiﬁer NN is
derived as,
eI(t) = x(t) −ˆV T
I ΦI(x(t))
(9)
and, the action training is based on minimizing the derivative
of the cost function to the chosen action. The purpose is to

6
have the action error equivalent to ∂J(t)
∂u(t) asymptotically goes
to zero in an iterative process. This can be derived as,
eA(t) = ∂U(t)
∂u(t) + γ ∂J(t + 1)
∂x(t + 1) .∂x(t + 1)
∂u(t)
(10)
It should be noted that back-propagation is one of the main
computational algorithms required to effectively train NNs in
this scheme. Essentially, this algorithm uses the chain rule for
calculating derivatives within the elements of the NN. It allows
the error existing in the NN output introduced above to be used
to correctly adjust the weights of the NNs. As the learning
procedure progresses with respect to iterations, it should be
able to achieve better representation of the model or policy
that is being implemented.
Remark: Optimal convergence of HDP or Approximate
Dynamic Programming (ADP) in the case of general nonlinear
systems has been discussed and proved in [45]. Additionally,
It has been shown [46] that RL could be used as an optimal
controller guaranteeing global optimal conditions for a non-
convex functions.
V. NN-BASED TRANSIENT STABILITY ASSESSMENT
NN and in general AI has shown encouraging application
potential in TSA due to their speed [47]. Various advanced AI-
based techniques as well as machine learning and data mining
approaches have been tried to develop TSA and promising
results have been obtained. These methods effectively learn
and map the process behavior from relationship between
speciﬁed inputs and outputs, without any prior understanding
of the process behavior. These tools are well-suited for the
TSA problem as numerous number of complex and nonlin-
ear power system algebraic equations should be solved fast
and accurately. The initial idea was introduced as a pattern
recognition in 1968 in [48]. Decision Tree (DT) algorithms
[49], Fuzzy Logic (FL) techniques [50], NNs, and Support
Vector Machines (SVMs) [49] have been widely used as the
benchmark for transient stability prediction, classiﬁcation, and
control. Overall, the main advantages of AI-based TSA over
numerical and direct methods are:
• Higher speed, which is critical feature for taking preven-
tive/emergency control in time.
• It can be generalized to wider domain of operating regions
including nonlinear domains.
• Less dependency on the parameters of the system or
model, as it can update the database from history and
interaction with the system.
• Provides information for control design.
The basics of the NN-based TSA and other AI-based tech-
nique are the same in TSA application. Fig. 6 depicts a uniﬁed
general scheme of these types of assessments and controllers.
As a machine learning method, ofﬂine training should be
performed before taking any action in real-time. The source
of the training is the stability database, which is constructed
based on historical events and excessive ofﬂine simulations
to cover a comprehensive operating regions. In this stage,
full batch training is performed which performs a full sweep
through the training database. After generating the database,
WAM
(Real-time Data 
Measurement, 
Synchronization)
Data processing
I/O Specification
(Stable/ NonStable, 
Indices, control Action)
Offline
Online
Machine Learning/
Training
(ANN, DT, FL, SVM,...)
Trajectory 
Prediction/ Classifier
TSA/ Control Action
Stability Information 
Database
(Historical Events and 
offline Simulations)
Fig. 6: Intelligent Transient Stability Assessment Scheme
I/O speciﬁcation based on the proposed method is set. The
input speciﬁcation can be WAM-based states, trajectories, and
indices. The outputs are classiﬁcation, preventive, or remedial
control actions. Further, ofﬂine training is performed based
on these I/O. In this stage, the learning models (NN, SVM,
DT, FL) are used to extract the knowledge on the mapping
relationship between input and output, and formulate the
knowledge as a classiﬁer, predictor, or control. In the online
process training is performed after each observed or training
case. These methods are very fast but again their accuracy
highly depends on ofﬂine training [14].
The main learning algorithm in TSA application is the SL
due to classiﬁcation properties and the ﬁxed I/O values. Ta-
ble II provides a brief list of real-time intelligent TSA methods
applied in power system research. As listed in the Table, NN is
one the common AI-based tools used in this area, adapting the
SL algorithm. The main drawback of these methods, incuding
NNs is the lack of capability to learn all I/O mapping functions
of this problem, leading to less consideration in the industrial
applications. Several methods such as parallel NN and SVMs
have been proposed to overcome this problem [49], [58].
SVMs have implicit feature for selection ability; however,
SVMs has been reported to encounter considerable error for
prediction of transient stability status without any solution
for the scenario analysis [49]. Another attempt to increase
the efﬁciency and accuracy of the NNs as the classiﬁers
is presented in [15], in which energy function elements are
considered as a set of pre-processed meaningful input features
to the machine learning algorithm.
VI. NN-BASED CONTROLLER
Intelligent controllers are capable of learning and modifying
their behavior while interacting with the system in form of
regression. Here, We will focus speciﬁcally upon NNs as a
type of AI-based controller that is capable of learning and

7
TABLE II: Supervised Learning Transient Stability methods
Input
Output
Design Approach
Ref.
δCOI, ωCOI, V , and f-domain criteria
Classiﬁcation
DT, FL
[51]
δCOI, ωCOI , and f-domain indices
Remedial Control
DT, Random Forest learning
[52]
δCOI, ωCOI , and f-domain indices
Classiﬁcation
T-D Simulation, FL and NN
[50]
δ, ω
Classiﬁcation, Remedial Control
ANN
[49]
δCOI
Classiﬁcation, Remedial Control
ANN
[53]
δCOI, velocity and acceleration
Classiﬁcation
Fuzzy hyper rectangular NN
[54]
V Trajectory
Classiﬁcation
Fuzzy C-mean Clustering, SVM
[55]
COI δ and ω
Classiﬁcation
SVM
[56]
Energy elements
Classiﬁcation
SVM
[15]
∆δ security Criterion
Classiﬁcation and corrective control
NN, Particle swarm optimization
[57]
controlling. With sufﬁcient neurons and training process, NN
is able to learn and represent any function [59]. This type of
nonlinear control problem has been shown in literature that
has considerable potential in power system stability study.
A. Application of Supervised Learning
The main application of SL-based NN control designs is the
modeling of nonlineaities inherited in power system network
equations. As a SL algorithm, the target or desired value for a
controller is known at the time. This desired control action can
be derived in the context of model reference adaptive control
[60]. In the work of [60], two schemes of nonlinear control
system have been presented:
• Direct methods
• Indirect methods
In direct method, the weights of NN controller is directly
adjusted by the error of plant output and the reference. In
the later, the controller training is performed based on the
estimated parameters of the plant. Similar method has been
employed in [61] to design an adaptive NN-based PSS. The
input to the controller is the rotor speed of the generator and
the output is the damping control fed to the excitation system.
Controller is trained based on the NN identiﬁer output error
from desired speed, which is constant. In [62] the idea has
been applied to one-step ahead predicted output error. The
same training is then performed by the chain rule through
identiﬁcation and control NNs. It should be noted that several
NN models have been proposed in this area such as General-
ized Neuron (GN) [62] or RNN [63] to address the generality,
robustness, and efﬁciency requirements of such designs.
Another sets of designs in this area is devoted to employing
the NNs to tune the conventional synchronous generators, such
as in [64] for AVR, and [65] for PSS. In [65] a RBFNN is
used to generate the desired PSS parameters in real-time based
on input vector of generator real power, reactive power output
and terminal voltage. This type of adaptive design is trained
ofﬂine for excessive number of operating points.
B. Application of Reinforcement Learning
The key advantage of RL-based controllers over SL methods
is that the new knowledge in the online process can improve
the training for further events or recursively at each iteration
[66]–[68]. This feature manifests itself in the stability problem
as a damping control schemes in addition to the case of cas-
cading failures. Additionally, they are well-suited to perform
optimal control algorithms, especially when multiple agents
are involved. This technique has been center of attention for
the wide range of power system applications in recent years.
However, the research in this area is still weak due to reliability
and practicality issues. RL-based designs such as ACDs have
been shown to be more robust for wider operating regions and
contingencies in comparison to the classical methods [69]. In
general, their main characteristics are:
• Requiring partial model of the system.
• I/O measurements of the system being sufﬁcient for
designing the controller.
• Wide operating regions and disturbances without prior
knowledge.
• Depending on disturbance measurements that are not
readily available.
• System measurements can be used but noisy measure-
ments requires an extra attention.
• The ofﬂine phase requires higher computational efforts.
The application of RL has been mainly investigated in wide-
area control domain when coordination of multiple units is
needed. This is presented in next section.
VII. NN-BASED WIDE-AREA CONTROL (WAC)
The only feasible way to implement the WAC has been to
monitor and communicate states and control signals between
each local substation and the control system through Wide-
Area Monitoring (WAM) system [70]. Integration of moni-
toring and controlling systems in the power grid electricity
infrastructure, has shown promising possibilities for more
advanced stability control schemes based on timely detection
of disturbances as they propagate through the network. With
these improvements, new ideas on power system stability
control specially in large scale oscillations has emerged [71],
[72]. In recent years, monitoring requirements, itself, has
gained considerable attention by researchers [73]–[76]. In
these works, the requirements and challenges of WAC designed
on WAM systems and the challenges in implementation is
discussed.
Overall, WAC coordinates the actions of several units in
power system including synchronous generators, FACTS de-
vices, or renewable resources to gain global stability (see
Fig. 7). It is very difﬁcult for an analytical control techniques to
perform a continuous supervisory level control of the system.
This is partly due to
• Classical control schemes depend on a mathematical
model of the plant, and this model is often based on

8
Power 
Network 
Dynamics
TDL
Wide-Area 
Control
...
+
MMPT/Droop
Wide area 
measurement
Wide area feedback
TDL
TDL
𝑢𝑙𝑜𝑐 
+
PSS/AVR
𝑢𝑙𝑜𝑐 
Synchronous 
Generators
Renewable 
Resources
+
FACTS/SVC
𝑢𝑙𝑜𝑐 
Transmission 
Lines
TDL
𝑢𝑤𝑎𝑐 
𝑢𝑤𝑎𝑐 
𝑢𝑤𝑎𝑐 
...
Fig. 7: Intelligent Transient Stability Assessment Scheme
linearization at a speciﬁc operating condition.
• Non-accurate component model parameters such as lines
[77] or exciters [78] may be prone to variation due to
the fault and have various impacts on the response of the
system.
• As the control scheme moves from a local controller to a
wide-area scheme, the complexity of the control system
is increased. This makes such designs more impractical.
• WAC performance is highly dependent on the quality of
data provided by WAM systems. Wide-area designs are
adversely affected by uncertain communication channels,
packets drop, time delays and lack of global power system
models and their time constants. Most of the works
proposed in this area ( [79]–[82]) treat the unknown
parameters as constants.
In general, for classical methods stability and generality is not
guaranteed. On the other hand, AI-based techniques can handle
such problems, which will be discussed next.
A. Application of Reinforcement Learning
RL has been widely proposed in literature for Wide-area
power system stabilization. For instance, [83] has applied
ACD for a UPFC that provides auxiliary signals to the real
and reactive power references of a UPFC series inverter in
order to achieve enhanced damping of system oscillations.
Further, this approach is used in [84] as a computational
tool as an optimal damping controller for a gate-controlled
series capacitor. The controller, using WAMs, for a gate-
controlled series capacitor is used to provide damping of
system modes. The design yields a ﬁxed weight nonlinear
controller, which is easier to implement in practical systems
in comparison to conventional controllers. Further, [85] has
focused on the design of the controller based on development
time and hardware requirements for real-time implementation.
A wide-area nonlinear damping controller is designed in this
work using an existing Static Var Compensator (SVC). Particle
swarm optimization is applied to tune the parameters of the
SVC external damping controller but based on some linearized
mathematical models of power systems. In [66] Q-Learning
based real-time decentralized control scheme is proposed based
on WAMs for excitation control of generators. Overall in these
works, the transient stability of the power system is enhanced
by mitigating angle instability, meanwhile damping of power
system oscillations is improved.
B. Wide-Area Identiﬁcation
Application of NNs in nonlinear system identiﬁcation, in
particular in WAM-based designs is reviewed here. The efﬁ-
cient and accurate training of NNs to approximate functions
has been an open topic for many years. It depends on several
parameters such as choosing appropriate model, learning rate,
noise in the data, size of the database, training algorithm,
minimization algorithm, and so on. For instance in [82] an
annealing learning rate scheme is used for NNs in order
to ensure that NNs adapt themselves to the plant dynamics
quickly and converge to new operating points.
As mentioned in section 4.1.1, the main characteristic of
MLP is that there are no connections between the neurons on
the same layer [86]. Additionally, in such a network every
output error has a direct impact on all the weights of the
input weight matrix, i.e. the outputs of MLP interact with one
another and the error in each one affects the others. Hence, a
control network designed using NNs creates unwanted inter-
actions between the controllers, whereas, the idea behind the
WAC is to augment each local controller based on the effect
of only that controller on the global cost function or objective
function [82]. Ref. [82] has tackled this issue by using a FNL
NN.
The error back-propagation algorithm can be utilized to
solve various problems. However, FFNN can only gain a static
mapping of the I/O space. In order to be able to model dynamic
systems, development of a NN that is able to store internal
states is required. These types of NNs are called RNN under
the umbrella term Dynamic NN, and their main characteristic
is the internal feedback or time-delayed connections. Although
RNN is biologically more realistic than FFNN, it is more
difﬁcult to train them due to the problems of exploding or
vanishing gradients. The difference between a conventional
RNN and SRN is that the feedback in RNNs are time-delayed,
whereas, in SRNs they are instantaneous. The SRN uses much
higher sampling rates to emulate instantaneous feedback. In
order to implement a SRN in real-time, the simultaneous
recurrences have to be carried on several times within one
time step of the measurements. The SRN-based WAC system
have been implemented with a new training algorithm and two
step training approach in [87]. Further, [88] has expanded the
design to a novel four dimensional scalable multi-rate cellular
NN architecture as WAMs. RNN is used as computational
engine for each cell as they have dynamic memory. By using
information from PMUs that are optimally located in a power
system, each layer predicts a state variable for one or more
time steps.

9
C. Scalable Designs
One of the main challenges of WAC designs, in speciﬁc AI-
based systems, is the problem of scalability and dimensional-
ity. Depending on the number of WAM measurements and the
signals to be analyzed, the volume of data for a typical system
could be enormous. Various techniques has been proposed in
power system research groups to tackle this problem based
on clustering and model reduction techniques to overcome the
problem of excessive data analysis for model reduction. Using
Feature selection or unsupervised learning techniques signals
can be grouped according to their resemblance to each other
reducing the computational cost. Due to the nature of rotor
angle stability, most of the WACs proposed are designed based
on center of inertia (COI), center of angle (COA), or center
of speed (COSP) [51].
The common coherency method based on pre-speciﬁed
number of areas is also used for the purpose real-time ACD
based WACs. For instance, in [68], a new concept called a
”virtual generator” is introduced which is simpliﬁed repre-
sentations of groups of coherent synchronous generators in a
power system. It allows WACs to exploit the realization that a
group of coherent synchronous generators in a power system
can be controlled as a single generating unit for achieving
wide-area damping control objectives. This implementation is
made possible by the availability of WAMs from PMUs. Also,
[89] has used the COI-based signals to monitor and control the
pre-deﬁned areas of the system, which limits the observability
to inter-area oscillations.
D. WAM Constraint Consideration
WAC systems are highly dependent on the performance
of the communication infrastructure, without which the func-
tionality of them will not be achieved. Knowing that time
delay affects wide-area power system stabilizer design, the
consequence of delayed input data and output signals in
WAC systems should be considered and modeled. Also, the
performance requirements posed on by time availability for
decision making and control actuation needs to be elicited.
The characteristics of time delays could be constant, bounded,
or even random, depending on the network protocols adopted,
distance, and the chosen hardware and could be in the range of
7ms to 1s. PMU data delay in WAM systems and their nature
has been analyzed in several research works; see [90]–[92] and
references therein.
RL algorithms are well suited, as mentioned before, to tackle
these uncertainties in the system. Ref. [82] has designed an
ACD-based controller to improve the damping of the rotor
speed deviations of the synchronous machines by providing
auxiliary reference signals for the AVR of the generators
as well as the line voltage controller of the STATCOM.
RBFNN-based identiﬁer is presented in this work to predict
the states in real-time in presence of transport lags associated
with the present communication technology for WAM. The
results provided indicates that the proposed WAC improves the
damping of the rotor speed deviations of the generators during
large scale disturbances. Ref. [80] take advantage of ACDs in
including the communication delays in implementation of real-
time WAC design with a single SRN. The NN serves a dual
Forward View
Backward View
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
x
u
t
x(T) 
x(0)
MC
DP
TD(λ)
t+td
t-td
Fig. 8: TD(λ) application in WAM delay (td) compensation
purpose of continuous identiﬁcation of the power system dy-
namics and generation of appropriate damping control signals.
Through such design damping of several modes of oscillations
in power system is provided.
Another sets of designs have focused on solving techniques
for RL problem to handle the WAM constraints. Several classes
of methods for solving the RL problem have been developed
and used including Dynamic Programming (DP), Monte Carlo
(MC), and Temporal-Difference (TD) methods [93], [94]. As
it is proven in modern control theory [41], DP is considered
as an efﬁcient method to optimize cost function over future
time for a nonlinear system. DP methods are well developed
mathematically, but a complete and accurate model of the
environment is needed, which is hardly achieved in practice.
On the other hand, MC methods don’t require a model and
are conceptually simple, but are not suited for incremental
problems. MC algorithms waits for the ﬁnal state to solve a
problem which is not desired. Finally, TD methods require
no model and are fully incremental, but are more complex
to analyze [6]. TD(λ) is considered as a bridge from TD to
MC and gain maximum beneﬁts in forward view. This method
has been exploited in [89] to widen the window of prediction,
accounting for communication network delays as in Model
Predictive Control (MPC). Ref. [6] provides comprehensive
research on this topic.
E. Real-time Implementation
Real-time implementation aims at bringing these AI-based
designs one step closer to practical applications. This technique
has been successfully developed in real-time benchmark in
several works [80], [82], [89], [95]. For instance, [89] has
presented a RL and temporal difference framework for de-
signing and implementing a coordinated WAC architecture
for improved power system dynamic stability. The control
algorithm is evolved from ACD and performed online at a
ﬁnite horizon through backward and forward view to enhance
the speed of training for the NNs and increase the efﬁciency
in real-time. In this paper, the ACD controller’s training and
testing are implemented on the Innovative Integration Picolo
card integrated to TMS320C28335 processor, and connected
to the power system model running in Real-Time Digital
Simulator (RTDS). In [95] the RL-based neuro-controllers

10
for turbo generators in a multi-machine power system has
been implemented on the Innovative Integration M67 card
consisting of the TMS320C6701 processor. The results showed
robustness in presence of system operation changes. Overall,
these works have encountered some challenges including data
communication quality, WAC calculation speed, and so on.
F. Transient Stability Enhancement Controller
As discussed in previous sections TSA is mainly used
for corrective or emergency control actions. It is shown in
literature that, the WAM temporal information can further
be used in WAC designs to perform real-time transient sta-
bility enhancement, which can improve the power transfer
capability of a transmission system and prevent the system
from generation or load disconnection, or catastrophic failure
following a sequence of disturbances in the system. Article
[96] have used the RL for preventing cascading failure (CF)
and blackout in smart grids by acting on the output power
of the generators in real-time. This article makes use of the
state-action policy update feature of RL algorithm, as it can
learn from interactions with the system. Furthermore, [97]
have exploited the optimality feature of RL. The cost function
of the RL is deﬁned based on Lyapunov energy function of
the system and enhanced the performance by controlling the
excitation system of synchronous generators in multi-machine
system.
G. Hybrid Designs
Generality is one of the challenges when using such AI-
based designs. Several works have tackled this issue by
designing a hybrid controller as linear and nonlinear based
controllers for power system stabilization [98]–[101]. The
main purpose of this design is using the known linear model
to mainly control the system, and exploit the NN designs to
be activated in the case of nonlineairty and uncertainties. This
technique also can mitigate the problem of over-ﬁtting in NNs
when the amount of training data is limited. Through this
algorithm so-called ”mixture of experts” one allows particular
models to specialize in a subset of the training cases [102].
Different controller conﬁgurations are used as a hybrid design
based on changing system dynamics, such as gain scheduling
and switching techniques. Combination of a linear and NN-
based nonlinear adaptive controller through switching law
is studied in [103]. An advanced reconﬁgurable controller
enhanced by multiple model architecture is proposed in [104]
to achieve fault tolerance. In [98], adaptive controller and a
NN-based controller with explicit neuro-identiﬁer is used to
merely augment the model-based controller performance. In
that design, parametric and functional adaptation has been
performed, and a hybrid controller that can be integrated with
conventional PSS is designed and illustrated.
There is a possibility that hybrid AI-based controller present
destabilizing interactions with the main controllers leading to
instability of the system during certain contingency situations
due to difference in policy or objective. A hybrid technique
called supervised RL has been proposed in [36], which is based
on the combination of experts to enhance optimality of the
control and generality of NN learning. This feature leads the
RL to merge faster towards supervised controller especially
early in the learning process when the critic has a poor estimate
of the optimal cost function based on the value priority criteria.
Hence, there are two sources of exploration provided for the
NNs. In the work of [105] this shift has been developed based
on the Lyapunov stability criteria. The proposed method allows
the system to dynamically shift between linear and intelligent
controllers and thus can be effectively utilized in a practical
set-up.
VIII. NN-BASED TECHNIQUES IN MODERN POWER
SYSTEM
With the increased penetration of renewables in transmission
system, the effective inertia of the system will be reduced
and system rotor-angle stability following large disturbances
could signiﬁcantly be affected [106]. Several works have been
done to address the impacts of renewable resources on power
system stability [106]–[115]. Generally, it is believed that the
renewable type do not signiﬁcantly affect the power system
oscillations. Rather, the penetration level will have a damping
effect due to reduction in the size of synchronous generators
that engage in power system oscillations [113].
The majority of these resources are interfaced to the grid
using Voltage-Sourced Converter (VSC) units. Voltage control
of a VSC in the dq-framework can be achieved in a nested loop
based on an inner current control loop and an outer voltage
control loop. The controller of the inner loop regulates the
converter current, and controller of the outer loop regulates
the output voltage [116]–[118]. Furthermore, Maximum Power
Point Tracking (MPPT) is usually applied to the generation
control to extract the maximum allowable power from the
wind turbines or PV arrays [119], along with power sharing
controllers.
The type of power control employed for the renewable
generation directly affects the rotor angle and speed of syn-
chronous generators [116]. For instance, [120] shows that
when active power ﬂows change, the way that the wind
turbine provides reactive power support to the system is
critical in maintaining rotor angle stability of conventional
units in the system and minimizing the deviation of ﬁeld
voltage. Same applies to the active power control, since the
oscillations are produced by active power differences between
generation and consumption. Therefore, the implementation of
appropriate control strategies in renewable sources, particularly
the terminal voltage control, can lessen the power requirements
of conventional synchronous units and help to mitigate large
rotor angle swings. There are several techniques applied for
this purpose such as optimal control methods, robust methods,
Energy function methods, and so on. Additionally, AI-based
designs have been investigated for the renewable-integrated
power system rotor angle stability control.
A. Supervised Learning (SL) Control
In the area renewable control, AIs such as NN and FL
methods have been also successfully applied in different
applications [121]–[125]. Generally, in the area of renewable

11
energy resources, NNs are mainly used as the prediction
tool for generation forecasting along with load prediction
in microgrid application [126]. A comprehensive review on
the application of NN in renewable energy systems can be
found in [121]. As a controller, in [122], a neuro-fuzzy gain
tuner is proposed to control a laboratory DFIG. The input
for each neuro-fuzzy system is the error value of generator
speed, active or reactive power. In [123], a method to design
an adaptive fuzzy system for for maximum energy extraction
from variable speed wind turbines is proposed and tested.
The proposed control techniques have low memory occupancy
and high learning capability, having advantage over classical
control methods; thus, could be well implemented on a micro-
controller. In [124], NN has been employed as rotor and grid
side convertor controllers gaining better dynamic characteris-
tics in comparison to conventional PID controllers. In the [125]
application of NNs to control a grid-connected rectiﬁer/inverter
is investigated. A NN-based control strategy is presented and
tested in this work in a more practical nested-loop control
condition. The NN implements a DP algorithm and is trained
by using back-propagation through time. Overall, NNs has
been shown in these works that have better performance
in comparison to conventional techniques regarding system’s
dynamic responses.
B. Reinforcement Learning (RL) Control
RL has also been subject of renewable control in recent
years. The application of NNs as an intelligent control algo-
rithm has been shown in [127] in microgrid with multiple
renewable resources. In general RL can provide predictive,
optimal, adaptive control designs for renewable-integrated
power systems. A DHP-based control system in a system wide
adaptive predictive WAC scheme is used to ensure the dynamic
performance and voltage dynamics of the micro grid as the
system operation conditions change. Ref. [116] has proposed
controller based on ADP techniques on the bench mark of
NNs to approximate the optimal control policy according to
the interaction between the controller and the power plant.
The method is developed for the DFIG-based wind farm to
improve the system transient stability under fault conditions
and has shown effective results. Furthermore, in [128], a
RBFNN is designed for WAM that identiﬁes the I/O dynamics
of the nonlinear power system with power system stabilizers, a
large wind farm, and multiple ﬂexible ac transmission system
(FACTS) devices. the proposed WAC design has shown better
performance during transient events, but without consider-
ing either multiple wind farms or communication time-delay
compensation. In [129] an ACD-based WAC is proposed for
a wind-integrated power grid. The proposed WAC augments
the excitation system of the synchronous generator and local
control of wind generator DFIG in order to mitigate inter-area
oscillations. Active and reactive power reference of the wind
turbine has been employed as the control actions to damp the
transient energy function of the system.
IX. CONCLUSION
From the above power system stability descriptions it is
clear that NNs have been applied in a wide range of ﬁelds
for modeling and control in power engineering systems. The
highly nonlinear, complex, uncertain environment of the power
system makes these machine learning techniques suited to
the problem. It is shown that these AIs are applied in the
forms of reinforcement and supervised learning for prediction,
transient stability clustering, damping controller, WAC designs,
and so on. The number of applications presented here is neither
complete nor exhaustive but is only a sample of applications
that demonstrate the usefulness of NNs. These methods, like
other techniques have relative advantages and disadvantages.
Based on the work presented here and recent progresses in the
ﬁeld it is believed that NNs have more capacity to offer in the
area of power system stability and control.
