International Journal in Foundations of Computer Science & Technology (IJFCST), Vol.5, No.2, March 2015 
 
DOI:10.5121/ijfcst.2015.5205                                                                                                                        47 
 
AN OPTIMIZED HYBRID APPROACH FOR PATH 
FINDING 
 
Ahlam Ansari1 and Mohd Amin Sayyed2, Khatija Ratlamwala2, Parvin Shaikh2 
 
1Assistant Professor at M.H.Saboo Siddik College of Engineering, University of Mumbai, 
India 
2Students of M.H.Saboo Siddik College of Engineering, University of Mumbai, India 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Path finding algorithm addresses problem of finding shortest path from source to destination avoiding 
obstacles. There exist various search algorithms namely A*, Dijkstra's and ant colony optimization. Unlike 
most path finding algorithms which require destination co-ordinates to compute path, the proposed 
algorithm comprises of a new method which finds path using backtracking without requiring destination 
co-ordinates. Moreover, in existing path finding algorithm, the number of iterations required to find path is 
large. Hence, to overcome this, an algorithm is proposed which reduces number of iterations required to 
traverse the path. The proposed algorithm is hybrid of backtracking and a new technique(modified 8-
neighbor approach). The proposed algorithm can become essential part in location based, network, gaming 
applications. grid traversal, navigation, gaming applications, mobile robot and  Artificial Intelligence. 
 
KEYWORDS 
 
Path finding algorithm,  path optimization.  
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
The path finding analysis has importance for various working such as logistics, operation 
management, transportation, system analysis and design, project management, game 
programming, network and production line. The shortest path analysis developed capability about 
think cause and effect, learning and thinking like human in artificial intelligence [1]. The path 
finding algorithm aims to minimize the cost from source to destination. There are various 
algorithm proposed for path finding.  A* algorithm is a heuristic based algorithm widely used in 
Artificial Intelligent it follows path having lowest known heuristic cost. Drawback of A* is it 
requires a large amount of CPU resources that is memory. Ant colony algorithm is based on 
behaviour of ants. In ant colony algorithm nodes are traversed in random fashion initially and cost 
of each node in the path is updated. The path which is used maximum time by ant is considered to 
be optimal. The main drawback of this algorithm is number of iteration required is more. 
Proposed algorithm exploits good properties of ant colony algorithm and A* algorithm to develop 
a new algorithm which is efficient than the original algorithms. The proposed algorithm traverses 
nodes in all eight directions of source node during each iteration and updates cost of each node 
which is the distance of that node from center. The algorithm uses traversal which is similar to 
flood fill algorithm. Flood fill algorithm is used to solve the robot maze problem[2]. The 
proposed algorithm is an optimized hybrid approach that can be used to solve robot maze 
problem. In addition to robot maze problem it can also find application in any problem that 
requires shortest path computation. 
 

International Journal in Foundations of Computer Science & Technology (IJFCST), Vol.5, No.2, March 2015 
 
48 
2. LITERATURE REVIEW  
 
2.1. Genetic Algorithm 
 
Genetic algorithm is used to find approximate optimal solution. It is inspired by evolutionary 
biology such as inheritance, mutation, crossover and selection [3]. Advantages of this algorithm 
are it solves problem with multiple solutions, it is very useful when input is very large. 
Disadvantages of GA are certain optimization problems cannot be solved due to poorly known 
fitness function, it cannot assure constant optimization response times, in GA the entire 
population is improving, but this could not be true for an individual within this population [4]. 
 
2.2. Heuristic Function 
 
Heuristic function maps problem state descriptor to a number which represents degree of 
desirability. Heuristic function has different errors in different states.  It plays vital role in 
optimization problem [5]. 
 
2.3. Depth-First-Search 
 
DFS uses Last-In-First out stack and are recursive in algorithm. It is simple to implement. But 
major problem with DFS is it requires large computing power, for small increase in map size, 
runtime increases exponentially [5]. 
 
2.4. Breadth-First-Search 
 
BFS uses First-In-First-Out queue. It is used when space is not a problem and few solutions may 
exist and at least one has shortest path. It works poorly when all solutions have long path length 
or there is some heuristic function exists. It has large space complexity [5]. 
 
2.5. A* algorithm 
 
A* combines feature of uniform-cost search and heuristic search. It is BFS in which cost 
associated with each node is calculated using admissible heuristic [6]. For graph traversal, it 
follows path with lowest known heuristic cost. The time complexity of this algorithm depends on 
heuristic used. Since it is BFS drawback of A* is large memory requirement because entire open-
list is to be saved [5]. 
 
2.6. Ant colony optimization 
 
ACO is meta-heuristic algorithm based on the behavior of real ant [7]. While traversing to 
destination each ant deposits chemical substance called pheromone. Each ant’s traverses in 
random fashion but when it encounters pheromone trail it has to decide whether to follow it or 
not.  If ant follows same path than amount of pheromone deposition increases. Thus the path 
followed by ant most has maximum pheromone deposition. An ant using shortest path to 
destination will reach source fast, as shortest path will have twice pheromone deposition than 
others [7]. If there is more than one optimal path, then ACO cannot decide optimal path [9]. 
 
2.7. Flood Fill Algorithm 
 
Robot maze problems are an important field of robotics and it is based on decision making 
algorithm [10]. It requires complete analysis of workspace or maze and proper planning [11]. 
Flood fill algorithm and modified flood fill are used widely for robot maze problem [2]. Flood fill 

International Journal in Foundations of Computer Science & Technology (IJFCST), Vol.5, No.2, March 2015 
 
49 
algorithm assigns the value to each node which is represents the distance of that node from centre 
[9]. The flood fill algorithm floods the the maze when mouse reaches new cell or node. Thus it 
requires high cost updates [9]. These flooding are avoided in modified flood fill [2]. 
 
3. PROPOSED SYSTEM 
 
Given a map, a source node and a destination node, a least cost path from source to destination is 
to be computed. The proposed system starts with source node and search in all eight directions of 
source. This process is continued until destination node is reached. In the process   cost of each 
node which is equivalent to number of iterations required to reach that node is stored. Now to find 
shortest-path backtracking is performed from destination node to source node by including nodes 
with minimum cost amongst other in the path. 
 
3.1. Algorithm 
 
STEP 1: Initialize source point 
STEP 2: Starting from source check upper row in the range ((iteration*2) +1) and assign 
iteration number to the node if node is “.”. 

till “.” (Pass through) is not found or till range is exhausted. 
2.2: If pass through is found mark it as new source a repeat from Step 2. 
STEP 3: Starting from source check upper row in the range ((iteration*2) +1) and assign iteration 
number to   the node if node is “.”. 

till “.” (Pass through) is not found or till range is exhausted. 
3.2: If pass through is found mark it as new source repeat from Step 3. 
STEP 4: For down repeat Step 2. 
STEP 5: For left repeat Step 3. 
STEP 6: Repeat from Step 2 to Step 5 till we find boundary on all four-sides or we find 
destination. 
STEP 7: If destination found check all neighbours of that node and select smallest weight node 
and store in path array. 
7.1: If node has more than one candidate having same minimum cost, make separate array for 
every path. 
STEP 8: Repeat Step 7 till source is found. 
STEP 9: Display path. 
STEP 10: End. 
 
3.2. Working 
 
The working of algorithm is illustrated using example. The example can also be considered as 
robot maze in which source and destination is defined and shortest path is to be computed 
avoiding obstacles. Consider Figure 1. as input to which algorithm is applied. The steps involved 
in solving this problem is describe in detail. 

International Journal in Foundations of Computer Science & Technology (IJFCST), Vol.5, No.2, March 2015 
 
50 
 
 
Figure 1. Input  
 
In the above figure notations used are as follows: 
 
# : Boundary of the path. 

S: Source 
D: Destination 
 
The goal is to find shortest path from source to destination avoiding hurdles in the path. In order 
to do this the proposed algorithm follows following steps starting from source node: 
 
 First iteration: 
 
 Traversing in upward direction of source node 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Traversing upwards 
 
Similarly traversal in all 8-neighbouring point of source is done in first iteration as shown in 
Figure 3. 

International Journal in Foundations of Computer Science & Technology (IJFCST), Vol.5, No.2, March 2015 
 
51 
 
 
Figure 3. Traversal in fist iteration 
 
As cost of each node is equal to number of iteration required to reach there,the cost of  all these 8- 
neighbour will be updated as 1 as shown in figure 4. 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Cost updated after first iteration 
 
 Second iteration: 
 
In second iteration, the next level nearest neighbour of the source will be traversed as shown in 
figure 5. 
 
 
Figure 5. Traversal in second iteration. 
 
The cost of the entire pass through “.”  will be updated as 2. In order to avoid obstacles from path 

checked till “.” (Pass through) is found. These pass through node will marked as new source. As 
shown in figure 6. 

International Journal in Foundations of Computer Science & Technology (IJFCST), Vol.5, No.2, March 2015 
 
52 
 
 
Figure 6. Marking of new source 
 
In figure 6, NS represents new source. From these sources the traversal of node is in same fashion 
as from the original source (i.e. 8 nearest neighbour). But the traversal from these new sources 
will not update the cost of already updated node (i.e. nodes that are updated by original source). 
Moreover, the traversal from these sources as well as from original source is done simultaneously 
(not shown in the figure). 
 
 Cost matrix after all iterations: 
 
The cost matrix after all iterations (3 in this case) is shown below in figure 7. 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Cost Matrix 
 Reverse traversal: 
  
In order to find shortest path reverse traversal is done from destination. All the neighbouring node 
of destination is checked and node with minimum cast is selected. This step is repeated until 
source is found. Figure 8 shows the nodes included in the shortest path. 
 
 
Figure 8. Finding of Shortest Path by Reverse traversal 

International Journal in Foundations of Computer Science & Technology (IJFCST), Vol.5, No.2, March 2015 
 
53 
3.3. Flowchart 
 
       Flowchart of map exploring i.e. path traversal and backtracking from destination to source to find 
shortest path is shown below. 
 
Figure 9 shows flowchart of map exploring i.e. how path is traversed. In proposed algorithm 
traversal is done in all eight directions of source node in one iteration and cost of each node is 
updated. If boundary is found in all four directions and destination is not found, then it indicates 
that destination is not reachable. If an obstacle is found while traversing, then its cost is updated 
to a higher value (infinity). 
 
 
 
Figure 9. Flowchart for map exploring 
 
Figure 10 shows flowchart for reverse traversing that is traversing back from destination node to 
source node in order to find shortest path. As seen in Figure 1 cost of each node is updated during 

International Journal in Foundations of Computer Science & Technology (IJFCST), Vol.5, No.2, March 2015 
 
54 
traversal. This cost is used for backtracking i.e. finding shortest path. To find shortest path 
backtracking is done from destination to source by selecting nodes with minimum cost than 
others. If ever there are two nodes with same minimum cast then there exists more than one 
shortest path. 
 
 
 
Figure 10. Flowchart for Reverse traversing (Shortest path) 

International Journal in Foundations of Computer Science & Technology (IJFCST), Vol.5, No.2, March 2015 
 
55 
4. RESULTS 
 
Here results are analyzed and comparison of existing algorithm with proposed algorithm in terms 
of time complexity is shown. 
 
4.1. Analysis of result 
 
4.1.1. Map exploring in simple case (without obstacle) 
 
The successive map exploring steps of A* and proposed algorithm in simple case where there no 
obstacles and few map exploring steps of A* and proposed algorithm in complex case in which 
obstacles are defined along the path. 
 
 
Figure 11. Map exploring (Simple case without obstacle) 
 
Figure 11 shows successive map exploring steps of A* and proposed algorithm in simple case 
where there no obstacles. The first map (left-side) shows traversal by A* algorithm and adjacent 
figure (right-side) shows traversal by proposed algorithm. In above figure, yellow square 
indicates source node, green square indicates destination node, white squares indicates path 
traversed by respective algorithm, red squares indicate nodes traversed by current iteration. The 
proposed algorithm traverses in all four directions in one iteration whereas A* traverses as per 
Euclidean heuristic. In simple case number of iteration required by both algorithms is same.The 
detailed description of above figure is given below: 
 
a: Initial condition is shown in which source and destination is defined. 
b: In first iteration A* traverses node as calculated by Euclidean heuristic whereas in proposed 
algorithm 8 nearest neighbour of source is traversed and cost of all these nodes is updated as 1. 
c: The traversal of A* is continued as per Euclidean heuristic and in proposed algorithm the 
second level neighbours from source is traversed. 
 
Similarly the traversal of both the algorithm is shown in consecutive iteration. At fifth iteration 
both the algorithm reaches destination. In proposed algorithm, the reverse traversal is done to find 
shortest path here after. 
 
 

International Journal in Foundations of Computer Science & Technology (IJFCST), Vol.5, No.2, March 2015 
 
56 
4.1.2: Map Exploring (With obstacles) 
 
Figure 12 shows few map exploring steps of A* and proposed algorithm in complex case in 
which obstacles are defined along the path. 
 
 
Figure 12. Map exploring (With obstacles) 
 
In above figure, black squares indicate obstacles. In this case, proposed algorithm reaches 
destination in 22 iterations (i.e.  Figure 12.i ) whereas A* reaches destination in 95 iteration (i.e. 
Figure 12.k). Thus proposed algorithm reaches destination faster than A* algorithm. The detailed 
description of above figure is given below: 
 
a: Initial condition in which obstacles, source and destination are defined in both cases. 
b: Nodes traversed in first iteration by both the algorithm is shown. A* traverses as per Euclidean 
heuristic. The proposed algorithm traverse in all eight direction of source node. 

International Journal in Foundations of Computer Science & Technology (IJFCST), Vol.5, No.2, March 2015 
 
57 
c: The traversal by both the algorithm is continued in respective manner.  
i: The proposed algorithm has reached destination. On the other hand A* has not yet reached 
destination and thus it continue the traversal. 
j: The traversal of A* is shown. The proposed algorithm has already reached destination in 22 
iterations. 
f: A* reaches destination in 95 iterations. 
 
4.2. Comparison with existing algorithm 
 
Table 1 shows comparative study of proposed algorithm and existing algorithm. From the above 
table it is observed that the proposed algorithm has less time complexity than other algorithms. 
 
Table 1. Comparitative Analysis 
 
Algorithm 
Time Complexity 
Abbreviation 
 
With 
Obstacle 
Without 
Obstacle 
 
Dijktra’s Shortest Path
O(|N|^2)
O(|N|^2)
N – Number of nodes
A* (Based on heuristic) 
O(bd) 
O((bd )  -
(b*d)) 
b - Branching factor 
d- Number of steps required to 
reach destination 
Proposed Algorithm
O(b*n +n)
 
O(2n)
b – Number of obstacles in the 
path. 
n – Number of steps required to 
reach destination. 
 
5. CONCLUSION 
 
The proposed path finding algorithm reduces number of iteration required to traverse the path, 
thus reducing time complexity. Moreover the proposed algorithm comprises of a new method 
which populates the map faster followed by backtracking returning an optimized path without 
requiring destination co-ordinates in computing path.
