A Bayesian neural network predicts the dissolution of compact planetary systems
Miles Cranmera,†, Daniel Tamayoa, Hanno Reinb,c, Peter Battagliad, Samuel Haddene,
Philip J. Armitagef,g, Shirley Hog,a,h, and David N. Spergelg,a
aPrinceton University, Princeton, New Jersey, USA
bUniversity of Toronto at Scarborough, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
cUniversity of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
dDeepMind, London, UK
eCenter for Astrophysics | Harvard & Smithsonian, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA
fStony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York, USA
gFlatiron Institute, New York, New York, USA
hCarnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA

Abstract
Despite over three hundred years of eﬀort, no solutions exist for predicting when a general planetary conﬁg-
uration will become unstable. We introduce a deep learning architecture to push forward this problem for
compact systems. While current machine learning algorithms in this area rely on scientist-derived instability
metrics, our new technique learns its own metrics from scratch, enabled by a novel internal structure inspired
from dynamics theory. Our Bayesian neural network model can accurately predict not only if, but also when a
compact planetary system with three or more planets will go unstable. Our model, trained directly from short
N-body time series of raw orbital elements, is more than two orders of magnitude more accurate at predicting
instability times than analytical estimators, while also reducing the bias of existing machine learning algo-
rithms by nearly a factor of three. Despite being trained on compact resonant and near-resonant three-planet
conﬁgurations, the model demonstrates robust generalization to both non-resonant and higher multiplicity
conﬁgurations, in the latter case outperforming models ﬁt to that speciﬁc set of integrations. The model
computes instability estimates up to ﬁve orders of magnitude faster than a numerical integrator, and unlike
previous eﬀorts provides conﬁdence intervals on its predictions. Our inference model is publicly available in
the SPOCK∗package, with training code open-sourced‡.
1
Introduction
The ﬁnal growth of terrestrial bodies in current theories of planet
formation occurs in a phase of giant impacts (1). During this stage, the
number of planets slowly declines as bodies collide and merge (2, 3).
Close planetary encounters and the wide dynamic range exhibited by
the times between consecutive collisions computationally limit current
numerical eﬀorts to model this process. Two theoretical roadblocks
impede the development of a more eﬃcient iterative map for modeling
planet formation. First, one must predict a distribution of instability
times from a given initial orbital conﬁguration. Second, one must
predict a distribution of post-collision orbital architectures (e.g., 4)
subject to mass, energy and angular momentum constraints. Towards
this end, we focus on the long-standing former question of instability
time prediction.
In the compact dynamical conﬁgurations that characterize the
planet formation process, the simpler two-planet case is understood
analytically. In this limit, instabilities are driven by the interactions
between nearby mean-motion resonances (MMRs), i.e., integer com-
mensurabilities between the orbital periods of the planets like the 3:2
MMR between Pluto and Neptune (5–8). While the general higher-
multiplicity case is not yet understood, two important results guide
our analysis and provide an important test for any model.
First,
when planets are initialized on circular orbits, chaos is driven by the
overlap of 3-body MMRs between trios of adjacent planets (9), and
theoretical estimates of the timescale required for the orbits to reach
∗https://github.com/dtamayo/spock
‡ https://github.com/MilesCranmer/bnn_chaos_model
orbit-crossing conﬁgurations accurately match numerical integrations
(10). As we show below, such analytical estimates perform poorly in
the generic eccentric case where the eﬀects of 2-body MMRs are
dominant (10, 11). However, analytical and empirical studies agree
that while the dynamical behavior changes strongly from the two to
three-planet case (3, 12–18), three-planet systems are the simplest
prototype for predictions at higher multiplicities in compact systems
(10, 11).
We recently presented a machine learning model, dubbed the Sta-
bility of Planetary Orbital Conﬁgurations Klassiﬁer, or SPOCK,
trained to classify the stability of compact planetary systems over
timescales of 109 orbits (11). This represented a long-term eﬀort to
exploit the substantial but incomplete current analytical understanding
(5, 6, 8, 19, 20) to engineer summary metrics that captured these sys-
tems’ chaotic dynamics; these features were then used by the machine
learning model to classify whether the input conﬁguration would be
stable over 109 orbits.
While simple binary stability classiﬁcation is eﬀective for con-
straining physical and orbital parameters consistent with long-term
stability (21), other applications like modeling terrestrial planet for-
mation require the prediction of continuous instability times. Ad-
ditionally, several ﬁelds in which it is challenging to ﬁnd eﬀective
hand-picked features—such as computer vision, speech recognition,
and text translation—have been revolutionized by neural networks in
the last decade (notable early breakthroughs include 22–24). Rather
than relying on domain expert input, these ﬂexible models learn
data-driven features that can often signiﬁcantly outperform human-
engineered approaches. A key theme with deep learning models is
1
arXiv:2101.04117v1  [astro-ph.EP]  11 Jan 2021

that their structure resembles the hand-designed algorithm, but with
added ﬂexibility parametrized by neural networks (for discussion, see
25). For example, modern computer vision models consist of learned
convolutional ﬁlters which take the place of hand-designed ﬁlters in
classic algorithms (26).
Pursuing a deep learning approach, we present a neural network
that, trained only on short-time series of the orbits in compact plane-
tary systems, not only improves on long-term predictions of previous
models based on engineered features (11, 27), but also signiﬁcantly
reduces the model bias and improves generalization beyond the train-
ing set. We design our model as a Bayesian neural network, which
naturally incorporates conﬁdence intervals into its instability time pre-
dictions, accounting both for model uncertainty as well as the intrinsic
uncertainty due to the chaotic dynamics. Finally, unlike previous ma-
chine learning models based on decision trees (11, 27), our model
is diﬀerentiable. That is, we can extract from the model estimates
of the derivatives of the predicted instability times with respect to
the parameters deﬁning the orbital conﬁguration in question. Such
gradient information can signiﬁcantly speed up parameter estimation
using Hamiltonian Monte Carlo techniques (28).
2
Model
2.1
Dataset generation
We focus on the regime leading to typical compact multi-planet sys-
tems observed to date, with mass ratios with the central star ranging
from 10−7 (roughly the ratio of the Moon-mass embryos thought to
initially characterize the giant impact phase, relative to the Sun) to
10−4 (roughly Neptune’s mass relative to the Sun). As detailed in
the appendix, we place planets on nearly coplanar orbits, with ad-
jacent planets spaced within 30 mutual Hill radii§ of one another
(e.g., 29). Orbital eccentricities in observed systems are often poorly
constrained, so we consider the range from initially circular to orbit-
crossing values.
We train our model on the set of 113,543 publicly available, com-
pact three-planet conﬁgurations in and near strong resonances from
(11). In particular, this “resonant” dataset initializes one pair of plan-
ets in or near a strong MMR, while the third planet’s orbital parameters
are chosen randomly. This choice focuses the training set on the nar-
row resonant regions of phase space where the dynamical behavior
changes most strongly, and we later test the model’s generalization to
non-resonant systems in section 3.
Each initial condition was integrated for 109 orbits of the innermost
planet using the WHFast integrator (30) in the REBOUND N-body
package (31). If at any point two planets came within a distance of one
another given by the sum of their Hill radii, the simulation was stopped
and the instability time was recorded. Because gravity is scale invari-
ant, the instability time 𝑡inst is most usefully non-dimensionalized by
the innermost orbital period 𝑃orb. Given the large dynamic range in
timescales over which instabilities can occur, we deﬁne the dimen-
sionless log instability time 𝑇≡log10(𝑡inst/𝑃orb). Conﬁgurations
with instability times longer than 109 orbits (𝑇> 9) were labeled as
stable, and integration was stopped.
2.2
Network architecture
To predict systems’ instability times, we perform a computationally
cheap numerical integration of the ﬁrst 104 orbits, and use this time
§The mutual Hill radius 𝑅𝐻is a relevant length scale within which the gravity of the
planets dominates that of the star 𝑅𝐻≈𝑎1(𝜇1 + 𝜇2)1/3, where 𝑎1 is the inner planet’s
semi-major axis, and 𝜇1 and 𝜇2 are each planet’s mass ratio relative to the star.
series to make long-term predictions. Each of the three planets’ 3D
positions and velocities correspond to six standard orbital elements
(the appendix), which we record at 𝑛𝑡= 100 equally spaced outputs
across the short integration. In addition we pass the three constant
mass ratios for each planet relative to the star, as well as the time
value, for a combined input matrix of real values 𝑋∈R3+19𝑛𝑡for a
given conﬁguration.
Because the dynamics of compact multi-planet systems are chaotic,
instability times for a given initial orbital conﬁguration are eﬀectively
non-deterministic. Nevertheless, numerical experiments (32, 33) have
shown that instability times for unstable, compact multi-planetary sys-
tems settle to well deﬁned, approximately log-normal distributions.
Thus, rather than predicting a single instability time for a given orbital
conﬁguration, our model maps from an input initial orbital conﬁgu-
ration to a predicted log-normal distribution of instability times, i.e.,
a Gaussian distribution of 𝑇with mean 𝜇and variance 𝜎2.
This
gives the network the ﬂexibility to both model the fundamental uncer-
tainties imposed by the chaotic dynamics, and to incorporate model
uncertainty into its predictions by assigning larger widths to conﬁgu-
rations it is less sure about.
In our initial eﬀorts, we experimented with various combinations
of convolutional neural networks (see reviews by 34–36), long short-
term memory networks (37), 1D scattering transforms (38), regular
multi-layer perceptrons (MLP, see 25) and gaussian processes (39).
All of these models underperformed or tended to overﬁt the data.
The fundamental challenge for making such predictions is the sharp
transitions in dynamical behavior at MMRs, where instability times
can change by several orders of magnitude (40) over sub-percent
changes in planetary orbital periods, i.e., in the original space of
orbital elements. We found substantially improved performance by
structurally splitting the problem into three components: 1) Find a
transformation from the sharply punctuated space of orbital elements
to new variables. 2) Calculate statistical summaries of the time series
in these transformed variables. 3) Use these summary features to
predict a log-normal distribution over instability times for the input
orbital conﬁguration, parametrized by mean 𝜇and variance 𝜎2. This
is illustrated in ﬁg. 1.
We model steps 1 and 3 with neural networks 𝑓1 and 𝑓2, respec-
tively. In step 2, we choose to use a well-motivated but non-standard
pooling operation, and calculate both the mean and variance for each
transformed time series (deep neural networks traditionally use one of
either sum, mean, or max pooling). This structure was motivated by
the hand-engineered approach of (11), whose features are means and
variances of theoretically-motivated instability metrics. In this case,
we give the machine learning model additional ﬂexibility to learn its
own instability metrics. This design process is analogous to how the
invention of convolutional neural networks was motivated by creat-
ing similar structures to hand-engineered algorithms which convolve
ﬁlters over an image.
2.3
Likelihood
Our model is parametrized by 𝑚neural network weights 𝜃≡
(𝜽1, 𝜽2), 𝜃∈R𝑚(𝜽1 for 𝑓1 and 𝜽2 for 𝑓2). Deﬁning the training
set 𝐷as the collection of input orbital conﬁgurations and their asso-
ciated N-body instability times, we seek the most likely set of model
parameters given the data, i.e., we maximize 𝑃(𝜃|𝐷), which is in turn
proportional to 𝑃(𝐷|𝜃)𝑃(𝜃).
Our model predicts a log-normal distribution of instability times for
any input orbital conﬁguration. For a given set of network weights 𝜃,
the likelihood 𝑃(𝐷|𝜃) is then simply the product of the probabilities
that each training set example’s output 𝑇𝑖is drawn from the associated
2

Time
Numerical
Integration:
System goes
unstable at
distant time  T
Short time
integration recorded
Time
1 2    3 ...
j
Single scalar
Orbital elements
over time:
...
Neural Network 1
( f1 )
1 2    3 ...
j
Learned features
over time:
...
Compute average and
variance over time
for each learned feature
...
...
Neural Network 2
( f2 )
Time
Figure 1: Schematic of our model. The model numerically integrates 10,000 orbits for a compact 3-planet system (top) and records orbital
elements at 100 times. Neural network 𝑓1 creates learned summary features from these elements at each time. Neural network 𝑓2 takes the
average and variance of these features as input and estimates a distribution over possible instability times.
3

Gaussian N (𝜇𝑖, 𝜎2
𝑖) predicted by the model. As discussed above,
this choice is motivated by the numerical result that the distribution
in 𝑇is normal, for diﬀerent conﬁgurations with a wide range of mean
instability times (33).
Note that we have 4 < 𝑇≤9 as a constraint for unstable simu-
lations: 𝑇< 4 simulations are not included in the training set, and
𝑇> 9 integrations were terminated at 𝑇= 9 and have an unknown
𝑇. Thus, we build a truncated normal distribution with a cutoﬀat
𝑇= 4, and the cumulative probability of the Gaussian above 𝑇= 9
being counted towards a classiﬁcation of stability. A mathematical
derivation of this likelihood is given in the appendix.
𝑃(𝜃) is a prior on the neural network’s parameters.
The per-
parameter prior here is unimportant: what matters is the prior induced
on the output of the model, and we use an uninformative Gaussian prior
on parameters to induce an uninformative prior on the output. See
(41) for a detailed discussion of priors in Bayesian deep learning.
2.4
Bayesian neural network implementation
By having our model predict a distribution of instability times with a
ﬁnite width, we account for intrinsic uncertainty (sometimes referred
to as “aleatoric” uncertainty). However, we also wish to include ex-
trapolation uncertainty (or “epistemic” uncertainty) for systems that
diﬀer from those found in the training set. To do this we marginal-
ize over potential model parameters, with what is referred to as a
“Bayesian Neural Network” (BNN). This is a neural network whose
parameters are distributions rather than point values, and is trained
with Bayesian inference. These models naturally fold in extrapolation
uncertainty via marginalization.
This concept is familiar in traditional statistical inference, where
one can marginalize out the internal nuisance parameters of a model
using Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) techniques.
The fact
that neural networks typically have millions of parameters renders
MCMC computationally prohibitive, and various practical simpliﬁca-
tions are adopted for implementing a BNN. The most common strategy
is Monte Carlo dropout (42, 43) which treats the neural network’s pa-
rameters as independent Bernoulli random variables, and has been
used in several astronomical applications (44–47).
A selection of
other techniques includes Bayes by Backprop (48), Bayesian Layers
(49), variants of normalizing ﬂows (e.g.,
50), Bayes by Hypernet
(51, 52), and many other strategies. One recently-proposed strategy,
named “MultiSWAG” (53, 54) learns a distribution over the posterior
of weights that best ﬁt the training set, without a diagonal covariance
assumption, and is much closer to standard MCMC inference. We
experimented with a selection of common techniques: Monte Carlo
dropout, Bayes by Backprop, and MultiSWAG, and found that “Mul-
tiSWAG” produced the best accuracy and uncertainty estimations on
the validation dataset.
To move beyond a single best-ﬁt set of parameters 𝜃, SWAG, or
“Stochastic Weight Averaging Gaussian” (53, 55), instead ﬁts a Gaus-
sian to a mode of the posterior over 𝜃, assuming a low-rank covariance
matrix. This was extended in (54) to “MultiSWAG,” which repeats
this process for several modes of the weight posterior, to help ﬁll out
the highly degenerate parameter space. This technique is summarized
below:
1. Train 𝑓1 and 𝑓2 simultaneously via stochastic gradient descent
until the parameters settle into a minimum of the weight posterior.
2. Increase the learning rate and continue training. This causes
the optimizer to take a random walk in parameter space near
the minima, which is assumed to look like a high-dimensional
Gaussian.
3. Accumulate the average parameters along this random walk as
well as a low-rank approximation of the covariance matrix.
4. The average parameters not only provide better generalization
performance (stochastic weight averaging or SWA), but we have
additionally ﬁt a Gaussian to a mode of the parameter posterior.
We can thus sample weights from this Gaussian to marginalize
over parameters. This is SWAG (53).
5. The next step is to repeat this process from a diﬀerent random
initialization of the parameters. This will ﬁnd another mode of
the parameter posterior.
6. Fit ∼30 diﬀerent modes of the parameter space. We can then
sample weights from multiple modes of the parameter posterior,
which gives us a more rigorous uncertainty estimates. This is
MultiSWAG (54).
Training a neural network through stochastic gradient descent is
approximately the same as Bayesian sampling of the weights (56, 57),
so this aforementioned process allows one to learn a Bayesian posterior
over the weights of a neural network 𝑃MultiSWAG(𝜃).
Once we have learned 𝑃MultiSWAG, we can draw from it to sample
a set of network weights 𝜃. This model then predicts a log-normal
distribution of instability times with mean 𝜇and variance 𝜎2 for the
given input orbital conﬁguration, from which we can ﬁnally sample a
log instability time T. We can write a forward model for this prediction
as follows:
(𝜽1, 𝜽2) ∼𝑃MultiSWAG(𝜃),
(1)
y𝑡= 𝑓1(x𝑡; 𝜽1)
for all
x𝑡≡𝑋: ,𝑡,
(2)
z ∼(E𝑡[y𝑡], Var𝑡[y𝑡]),
(3)
(𝜇, 𝜎2) = 𝑓2(z; 𝜽2),
(4)
𝑇instability = 10𝑇
for
𝑇∼N (𝜇, 𝜎2),
(5)
where 𝑡is a time step from 1 to 100. Here, we have labeled y𝑡as
the learned transformed variables for a single time step of the system
(brown cells in ﬁg. 1), and z as the average and variance of these trans-
formed variables over time. To account for statistical errors due to our
ﬁnite number of time series samples, we sample the z from normal
distributions with frequentist estimates of the variance in the sample
mean and variance: Var𝑡[y𝑡]
𝑛𝑡
and 2Var𝑡[y𝑡]2
(𝑛𝑡−1)
, respectively. A Bayesian
graphical model for this is shown in the appendix. Repeatedly sam-
pling in this way provides a predicted distribution of T given the input
orbital conﬁguration, marginalized over the posterior distribution of
network weights 𝜃.
We split our data into 60/20/20% train/validation/test, train our
model on 60% of our ≈100, 000 training examples of resonant and
near resonant systems, and validate it on half of the remaining data to
tune the hyperparameters. Hyperparameters for our model are given
in the supplementary material, and we also release the code to train
and evaluate our model.
With this trained model, we then explore its performance on the
remaining 20% holdout data from the resonant dataset, as well as
other datasets described below.
3
Results
3.1
Resonant test dataset
For a given orbital conﬁguration, our probabilistic model produces
one sample of 𝑇. If a given sample is above 𝑇= 9, we treat the
4

sample as a “stable” prediction. Since we are unable to make speciﬁc
time predictions above the maximum integration time in our training
dataset of 𝑇= 9, we resample from a user-deﬁned prior 𝑃(𝑇|𝑇≥9)
for each occurrence. For the purposes of this study, we assume a
simple analytic form for this prior, though followup work on this prior
is ongoing (see supplementary).
For all results, we sample 10,000 predicted values of the posterior
over 𝑇per planetary system. We compare our predictions against
several alternatives which are explained below. Since the models we
compare against can only produce point estimates while our model
predicts a distribution, we take the median of our model’s predicted
posterior over 𝑇.
This is used for plotting points, as well as for
computing root-mean-square prediction errors.
We ﬁrst compute the N-body versus predicted (median) 𝑇value
over the holdout test dataset of ≈20, 000 examples not seen during
training, which can be seen in the bottom middle panel of ﬁg. 2. We
reiterate that the N-body instability times measured for the various
orbital conﬁgurations in our training set are not ‘true’ instability times,
but rather represent single draws from the diﬀerent planetary systems’
respective instability time distributions, established by their chaotic
dynamics. To estimate a theoretical limit (bottom right panel of ﬁg. 2)
we use the results from (33), who ﬁnd that the T values measured
by N-body integrations (x-axis of ﬁg. 2) should be approximately
normally distributed around the mean instability time predicted by an
ideal model. We use a random standard deviation drawn from the
values measured empirically for compact systems by (33), which they
ﬁnd are sharply peaked around ≈0.43 dex, independent of whether or
not the system is near MMRs, and valid across a wide range of mean
instability times. We plot this representative intrinsic width of 0.43
dex as dotted lines on all panels for comparison.
While we defer a detailed comparison to previous work to the
following section, we measure a root mean square error (RMSE) of
1.02 dex for our model on the holdout test set. We note that while
the RMSE is an intuitive metric for comparing models, it does not
provide a full picture for a model that is trained on a diﬀerent loss
function to predict both 𝜇and 𝜎2, A model that can predict its own 𝜎2
will sacriﬁce worse 𝜇accuracy in challenging regions of parameter
space to better predict it on more easily predictable conﬁgurations.
For comparison, if we weight the RMSE by the predicted signal-
to-noise ratio (SNR), 𝜇2/𝜎2, the model achieves 0.87 dex, within a
factor of ≈2 of the theoretical limit. These uncertainties provide
conﬁdence estimates in the predicted values, and can indicate to a
user when to invest in a computationally costly direct integration.
We apply transparency to our predictions in ﬁg. 2 according to the
model-predicted SNR, highlighting that the poorest predictions were
typically deemed uncertain by the model.
Finally we quantitatively test whether the model-predicted uncer-
tainties 𝜎accurately capture the spread of N-body times around the
predicted mean values 𝜇. For each test conﬁguration, we predict 𝜇,
subtract it from its respective 𝑇measured by N-body integration, and
divide by the predicted 𝜎. If this distribution approximates a Gaussian
distribution of zero mean and unit variance, the model’s uncertainty
estimates are accurate. We ﬁnd that a Komolgorov-Smirnov test can-
not conﬁdently distinguish our predictions from this ideal Gaussian
(p-value of 0.056), and plot the two distributions in ﬁg. 8 of the
supplementary material.
3.2
Comparison to Previous Work
Guided by the dynamical intuition that short-timescale instabilities
are driven by the interaction of MMRs (5, 8, 11), we chose to train our
model on systems with particular period ratios and orbital elements
Resonant
Model
RMSE
Classif.
accur.
Bias†
(4, 5)
Bias
(8, 9)
Obertas et al. (2017)
2.12
0.628
1.04
-1.71
Petit et al. (2020)
3.22
0.530
3.99
0.54
Tamayo et al. (2020)
1.48
0.946
2.07
-0.62
Modiﬁed∗Tamayo+20
0.99
0.946
0.65
-0.60
Ours
1.02
0.952
0.29
-0.38
Ours, SNR-weighted
0.87
0.971
0.18
-0.25
Theoretical limit
0.43
0.992
0.05
-0.04
Random
Obertas et al. (2017)
2.41
0.721
2.15
-0.93
Petit et al. (2020)
3.09
0.517
4.17
0.50
Tamayo et al. (2020)
1.24
0.949
1.16
-0.59
Modiﬁed∗Tamayo+20
1.14
0.945
0.79
-0.70
Ours
1.20
0.939
0.40
-0.51
Ours, SNR-weighted
1.09
0.959
0.23
-0.49
Theoretical limit
0.44
0.989
0.06
-0.04
(dex)
(AUC)
(dex)
(dex)
†Average diﬀerence between predicted minus true 𝑇in given range
∗Modiﬁed and retrained for regression.
Table 1: Statistical summaries of each estimator applied to a holdout
test portion of the resonant dataset, and all of the random dataset.
in the narrow ranges near such resonances where the dynamical be-
havior changes sharply (40). It is therefore important to test how well
such a model generalizes to a more uniform coverage of parameter
space, given that most observed orbital architectures are not in MMRs
(possibly because such conﬁgurations typically have short lifetimes
and have been eliminated). Additionally, previous work has typically
ignored the sharp variations near MMRs to ﬁt overall trends in insta-
bility times (40), so a test on resonant systems would not provide a
fair comparison.
For this generalization test and comparison, we use the ‘random’
dataset of (11), 25,000 three-planet systems with the same mass ra-
tio and inclination distributions as above, and eccentricities drawn
log-uniformly from ≈10−3 to orbit-crossing. Rather than drawing
near-integer period ratios as in our resonant training set, the spacing
between adjacent planets is drawn uniformly between [3.5, 30] mutual
Hill radii (see 11).
We ﬁnd that our model exhibits only a minor loss in performance
(1.20 vs 1.02 dex RMSE) generalizing to this uniform distribution
of orbital conﬁgurations table 1.
This supports the assertion that
instabilities in compact systems within 109 orbits are dominantly
driven by the MMRs we focused on in our training sample (11).
To compare our results to the extensive set of past eﬀorts, we divide
previous approaches into three broad groups.
First, many authors have run N-body integrations along low-
dimensional cuts through the parameter space of compact orbital con-
ﬁgurations, and ﬁt simple functional forms to the resulting trends in
instability times. For example, several studies have highlighted the
steep dependence on interplanetary separation, while ﬁxing orbits to
be coplanar and initially circular, and planets to be equal mass and
equally separated from one another (12, 14, 16, 17, 40). We compare
the performance of the ﬁt from such a study (40), using ﬁve equally
spaced Earth-mass planets (mass ratio ≈3 × 10−6) on our random
5

The model of Obertas et al. (2017)
The model of Petit et al. (2020)
Tamayo et al. (2020), retrained for regression
Our model
Our model, applied to the resonant dataset
Theoretical limit
Figure 2: Density plots showing the predicted versus true instability times for various models on the random dataset. All predictions outside of
𝑇∈[4, 9] are moved to the edge of the range. For the plot showing the predictions of our model, transparency shows relative model-predicted
SNR. The theoretical limit, using the numerical experiments of (33), is given in the lower-right plot. The 0.43 dex RMSE average from this is
used to give the dotted contours in all plots.
test set in the top left panel of ﬁg. 2, with a resulting RMSE of 2.41.
Followup studies have incorporated the eﬀect of ﬁnite inclinations
and eccentricities (13, 15, 58, 59), but consider equal initial eccen-
tricities, planetary masses, etc. in order to ﬁt simple models. We
conclude that while such controlled experiments yield insight into the
underlying dynamics (9, 15, 60), instability times depend sensitively
on masses and several orbital parameters, rendering empirical ﬁts to
low-dimensional cuts in the parameter space of limited applicability.
In the following section we perform the converse generalization test,
where we ask our model to instead predict on the N-body simulations
used for the ﬁt by (40), and ﬁnd good agreement.
Second, previous authors have developed analytical instability time
estimates from ﬁrst principles. These have been most successful in
the limit of initially circular orbits, where three-body MMRs have
been identiﬁed as the dominant driver of chaos (9). Recent work (10)
has extended this theory to provide accurate instability time estimates.
We will compare the predictions of our model to this limit of initially
circular orbits in the next section. Here we simply emphasize the point
by (10) that such predictions perform poorly at ﬁnite eccentricities
(top middle panel of ﬁg. 2), likely due to the dominant eﬀects of
stronger two-body MMRs. The fact that the analytic model predicts
the vast majority of systems to be stable implies that most of our test
conﬁgurations would be stable on circular orbits, but that ﬁnite orbital
eccentricities strongly modulate instability times.
The ﬁnal approach is to make predictions across the high-
dimensional space of orbital conﬁgurations using machine learning
(11, 27). We consider two variants of (11) adapted for regression.
The ﬁrst, labeled ‘Tamayo et al. (2020)’, is to simply use an identical
model as (11), but map the probability estimates of stability past 109
orbits through an inverse cumulative distribution of a log-normal with
an optimized constant standard deviation. The second, labeled ‘Mod-
iﬁed Tamayo+20’, the model is an XGBoost (61) regression model
(rather than classiﬁcation) retrained on the same features as used in
(11).
We ﬁnd that our model achieves similar performance to the Modi-
ﬁed Tamayo+20 variant (top right panel of ﬁg. 2, table 1), though the
latter exhibits signiﬁcant bias. We quantify this bias for each model in
the range 𝑇∈(4, 5) and 𝑇∈(8, 9). As is evident in table 1 as well as
ﬁg. 2, the model introduced in this work exhibits signiﬁcantly reduced
bias compared to other models. Including SNR weighting further
reduces bias. Bias is a measure of the generalizability of a model
to out-of-distribution data (see chapter 7 of 62), so is an important
metric for understanding how these predictive models will extrapolate
to new data. Our model achieves predictions that are more than two
orders of magnitude more accurate than the analytic models in each
case: e.g., 102.41/1.09 ≈162× when comparing our SNR-weighted
model with (40) on the random dataset.
Finally, we can make a comparison to the original classiﬁcation
model of (11) by using our regression model as a form of classiﬁer.
We count the fraction of samples above 𝑇= 9 as the probability a
given system is stable, and measure the performance of the classiﬁer
with the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC
6

ROC) for a range of threshold probabilities for stability (table 1).
3.3
5-planet generalization with comparison
As a second generalization test of our model, we compare its per-
formance on the limiting case considered by (40). This case of ﬁve
equally spaced, Earth-mass planets on initially circular and coplanar
orbits diﬀers signiﬁcantly from our training set of resonant and near
resonant, eccentric and inclined conﬁgurations of three planets with
unequal masses. This dataset contains 17500 simulations numerically
integrated for 1010 orbits (40). This generalization to a limiting set of
higher multiplicity conﬁgurations provides a stringent test of whether
the model has learned features of the dynamics or whether it is naively
interpolating across the distribution of orbital conﬁgurations present
in our training dataset.
To extend our three-planet predictions to higher multiplicity sys-
tems, we perform the same short integration for all planets, but pass
time series for each adjacent trio of planets to the model separately.
The model samples a single instability time for each adjacent trio,
and the minimum across this set is adopted as the instability time for
the system, as an estimate of the time for the ﬁrst trio to go unstable.
This procedure is then repeated, and we record the median and conﬁ-
dence intervals of the resultant distribution in 𝑇. Such a reduction of
compact multi-planet systems to sets of adjacent trios has been pro-
posed on theoretical (9, 10) as well as empirical (11) grounds. This
is motivated by the fact that the perturbative eﬀects of planets on one
another fall oﬀexponentially with separation (9, 10), so non-adjacent
interactions can largely be ignored.
The predictions can be seen in ﬁg. 3, and are remarkably accu-
rate despite our model never seeing a system with ﬁve planets during
training. We overplot the analytical result of (10) in magenta devel-
oped from ﬁrst principles for such cases with initially circular orbits,
including a manual correction for ﬁve-planet systems. Our model
captures the same overall trend, but additionally identiﬁes the various
dips, which correspond to locations of diﬀerent MMRs (40).
We
emphasize that our model was trained on the general eccentric case
where the magenta model of (10) does not apply (ﬁg. 2), yet the gener-
alization to this limiting case is excellent. In addition to matching the
overall trend of (10), our model captures the additional instability time
modulations at MMRs, as can be seen more clearly in the residuals in
ﬁg. 5 of the appendix. Additionally, our new model generalizes much
better than the predictions of the modiﬁed regression model based on
(11) based on manually engineered features (gold).
3.4
Interpretation
In industry machine learning, one is focused on making predictions as
accurate as possible, even at the expense of a more interpretable model.
However, in physics, we are fundamentally interested in understanding
problems from ﬁrst principles.
Obtaining such an explicit interpretation of our model will be dif-
ﬁcult. However, as a ﬁrst step we consider the feature importances
of our model: what orbital elements is it using to make predictions,
and does this align with expectations? To do this feature analysis, we
exploit the diﬀerentiability of our model with respect to its input. We
calculate the gradient of the predicted 𝜇value our model with respect
to the input instantaneous orbital elements; this is also referred to as
a “saliency map” (25). This gives us a multi-dimensional array over
feature, simulation, time step, and model, representing how much the
predicted 𝜇value will change should that feature be inﬁnitesimally in-
creased. We compute the variance of the gradients over time and each
simulation, and then average these variances over sampled network
weights 𝜃. This gives us a coarse representation of the importance of
each feature. We show this visually in ﬁg. 4.
To compare these importances to other work, (11) argue empirically
that the short-timescale instabilities we probe here in compact systems
are driven speciﬁcally by the interactions between MMRs. A classical
result of celestial mechanics is that in the absence of such MMRs, the
long-term dynamics keeps the semi-major axes ﬁxed. Variations in
the semi-major axes during the short integrations thus act as a proxy
for the importance of nearby MMRs (27), and we see that indeed, the
semi-major axes exhibit the highest feature importance in our model
ﬁg. 4. The fact that the model ascribes comparable feature importance
to any given orbital element for each of the three planets also suggests
a physically-reasonable model.
We note that there is a small but nonzero signiﬁcance of the “Time”
instantaneous feature.
This can be interpreted as being important
because the model takes the ﬁrst 104 orbits as input, and can predict
instability for the system as low as 104.1. Thus, the orbital parameters
given at 104 orbits may be more important than the orbital parameters
at 100 orbits for predicting such unstable systems, and thus the time
feature is used. The time feature would be less important for a system
that goes unstable near 109 orbits, as the relative importance of the
system’s parameters at 104 orbits is comparable to that at 100 orbit.
Because we chose to structure our model to take means and vari-
ances of the times series of the learned transformed variables ﬁg. 7,
it may be possible to extract explicit interpretations of our model via
symbolic regression. Given that our approach is structurally similar to
that of a graph neural network (63), the frameworks of (64–66) would
be particularly applicable. This would be done by ﬁnding analytic
forms for 𝑓1, representing each of the transformed variables, and then
ﬁnding an analytic form for 𝑓2, to compute the instability time given
the transformed variables. This type of explicit analysis of the model
will be considered in future work.
4
Conclusion
We have described a probabilistic machine learning model—a
Bayesian neural network—that can accurately predict a distribution
over possible instability times for a given compact multi-planet ex-
oplanet system. Our model is trained on the raw orbital parameters
of a multi-planet system over a short integration, and learns its own
instability metrics. This is contrasted by previous machine learning
approaches which have given their models hand-designed instability
metrics based on specialized domain knowledge.
Our model is more than two orders of magnitude more accurate
at predicting instability times than analytical estimators, while also
reducing the bias of existing learned models by nearly a factor of three.
We also demonstrate that our model generalizes robustly to ﬁve-planet
conﬁgurations eﬀectively drawn from a one-dimensional cut through
the broad parameter space used to train the model. This improves on
the estimates of analytic and other learned models, despite our model
only being trained on compact three-planet systems.
Our model’s computational speedup over N-body integrations by
a factor of up to 105 enables a broad range of applications, such as
using stability constraints to rule out unphysical conﬁgurations and
constrain orbital parameters (21), and to develop eﬃcient terrestrial
planet formation models. Towards this end, our model will be made
publicly available through the SPOCK¶ package, with training code
also available in a separate repo‖.
Acknowledgements.
¶https://github.com/dtamayo/spock
‖https://github.com/MilesCranmer/bnn_chaos_model
7

Figure 3: The median instability time predictions of our model for the ﬁve-planet systems used in (40). These systems have ﬁxed interplanetary
separation between each body, which is labeled on the x-axis. Errorbars ﬁll out the 68% conﬁdence interval. The predictions from (10) and
(11) are overplotted. Residuals are shown in the supplementary material.
3
1
2
t
1
i1
i3
2
i2
3
1
3
2
e1
e3
e2
m1
m2
m3
a2
a1
a3
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
Feature importance
Figure 4: Feature importances in the model, calculated as the root-
mean-square of the gradients of the model’s output with respect to the
input features, and normalized.
Miles Cranmer would like to thank Andrew Gordon Wilson and
Dan Foreman-Mackey for advice on Bayesian deep learning tech-
niques, and Andrew Gordon Wilson, Dan Foreman-Mackey, and Se-
bastian Wagner-Carena for comments on a draft of this paper. Philip
Armitage, Shirley Ho, and David Spergel’s work is supported by the
Simons Foundation. This work made use of several Python software
packages: numpy (67), scipy (68), sklearn (69), jupyter (70),
matplotlib (71), pandas (72), torch (73), pytorch-lightning
(74), and tensorflow (75).
