Learning What Data to Learn
Yang Fan 1 Fei Tian 2 Tao Qin 2 Jiang Bian 2 Tie-Yan Liu 2
Abstract
Machine learning is essentially the sciences of
playing with data.
An adaptive data selection
strategy, enabling to dynamically choose differ-
ent data at various training stages, can reach a
more effective model in a more efﬁcient way.
In this paper, we propose a deep reinforcement
learning framework, which we call Neural Data
Filter (NDF), to explore automatic and adap-
tive data selection in the training process.
In
particular, NDF takes advantage of a deep neu-
ral network to adaptively select and ﬁlter im-
portant data instances from a sequential stream
of training data, such that the future accumula-
tive reward (e.g., the convergence speed) is max-
imized. In contrast to previous studies in data
selection that is mainly based on heuristic strate-
gies, NDF is quite generic and thus can be widely
suitable for many machine learning tasks. Tak-
ing neural network training with stochastic gra-
dient descent (SGD) as an example, comprehen-
sive experiments with respect to various neural
network modeling (e.g., multi-layer perceptron
networks, convolutional neural networks and re-
current neural networks) and several applications
(e.g., image classiﬁcation and text understand-
ing) demonstrate that NDF powered SGD can
achieve comparable accuracy with standard SGD
process by using less data and fewer iterations.
1. Introduction
Training data plays a critical role in machine learning. The
data selection strategy along the training process could sig-
niﬁcantly impact the performance of the learned model.
For example, an appropriate strategy of removing redun-
dant data can lead to a better model by using less compu-
tational efforts. For another example, previous studies on
1University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei,
China
2Microsoft Research,
Beijing,
China.
Correspon-
dence
to:
Fei
Tian

Yang
Fan

curriculum learning (Bengio et al., 2009) and self-paced
learning (Kumar et al., 2010) reveal some principles of
how tailoring data based on its ‘hardness’ can favor the
model training; that is, easy data instances are important at
the early age of model training, while at later age, harder
training examples tend to be more effective to improve the
model, since easy ones bring minor changes.
These facts reveal that how to feed training samples into a
machine learning system is nontrivial and feeding data in a
totally random order is not always a good choice. To ex-
plore a better data selection strategy for training, previous
works including curriculum learning (CL) and self-paced
learning (SPL) adopt simple heuristic rules, such as shuf-
ﬂing the sequence length to train language model (Bengio
et al., 2009), or abandoning training instances whose loss
values are larger than a human-deﬁned threshold (Kumar
et al., 2010; Jiang et al., 2014a). Such human-deﬁned rules
are a little restricted to certain tasks and cannot be general-
ized to broader learning scenarios, since different learning
tasks may yield different optimal data selection rules, and
even one learning task may need data with various prop-
erties to optimize at different training stages. Therefore it
remains an open problem how to automatically and dynam-
ically allocate appropriate training data at different stages
of machine learning?
To ﬁnd a solution to the above problem, we design two-
fold intuitive principles: on one hand, the data selection
strategy should be general enougg, such that it can be natu-
rally applied to different learning scenarios without further
particularly human-designed efforts; on the other hand, the
strategy should be forward-looking, in that its choice at ev-
ery step along the training leads to better long-term reward,
rather than temporarily ﬁtting to current stage.
Following these principles, we propose a new data se-
lection framework, based on deep reinforcement learning
(DRL). In this framework, the DRL based data selection
model acts at a teacher while the training process of the
target model is a student, and the teacher is responsible
for providing the student with the appropriate training data.
This teacher-student framework can not only make it possi-
ble to models the long-term reward along with training pro-
cess, but also be well generalized to most machine learn-
ing scenarios, since reinforcement learning approach can
arXiv:1702.08635v1  [cs.LG]  28 Feb 2017

Learning What Data to Learn
model data selection mechanism as a parametric policy that
can be adaptive, work on ﬂexible state spaces that cover
any signals used in previous work, and be automatically
optimized in an end-to-end way.
To better elaborate our proposal, we focus on applying
DRL to mini-batch stochastic gradient descent (SGD) that
is widely used to optimize a machine learning model in the
training process. Mini-batch SGD is a sequential process,
in which mini-batches of data D = {D1, · · · Dt, . . . , DT }
arrive sequentially in a random order.
Here Dt
=
(d1, · · · , dM) is the mini-batch of data arriving at the t-th
time step and consisting of M training instances. Given Dt,
the loss and gradient w.r.t. the current model Wt are respec-
tively denoted as Lt =
1
M
PM
m=1 l(dm) and gt =
∂Lt
∂Wt .
Then, mini-batch SGD updates the model as follows:
Wt+1 = Wt −ηtgt.
(1)
Here l(·) is the loss function and ηt is the learning rate at
t-th step.
By assuming the use of mini-batch SGD, our proposed
method aims at dynamically determining which instances
in mini-batch Dt are used for training and which are
abandoned, after receiving Dt from M training instances,.
Speciﬁcally, we use deep reinforcement learning to deter-
mine whether/how to ﬁlter the given mini-batch of training
data, which we call Neural Data Filter (NDF). In NDF,
as illustrated in Figure 1, the SGD training for the base
machine learning model (i.e., the trainee) is casted into a
Markov Decision Process (MDP) (Sutton & Barto, 1998).
In such an MDP, a state (namely s1, · · · , st, · · · ), charac-
terizing current state of training process, is composed of
two parts: the mini-batch of arrived data and the current
parameters of the trainee , i.e., st = {Dt, Wt}. In each
time step t, NDF receives a representation f(st) for the
current state from SGD, and outputs the action at specify-
ing which instances in Dt will be ﬁltered according to its
policy At. Afterwards, the remaining data determined by
at will be used by SGD to update the trainee’s state and
generate a reward rt (such as validation accuracy), which
will be conversely leveraged by NDF as the feedback for
updating its own policy.
We apply NDF to training various types of neural networks,
including MLP, CNN and RNN, with training data from
different domains including image and text. Experimental
studies demonstrates faster convergence speed caused by
NDF over baselines. Further analysis shows that :1) a well-
designed data selection policy beneﬁts deep neural network
training, which has not been fully explored in the commu-
nity. 2) The automatically learnt data selection policy based
on reinforcement learning is quite general, surpassing hu-
man designed efforts for each task.
Figure 1. The structure of SGD accompanied with NDF. Blue part
refers to SGD training process and yellow part is NDF.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section
2, in the context of mini-batch SGD algorithms, we intro-
duce the details of Neural Data Filter (NDF), including the
MDP language to perform training data ﬁltration, and the
policy gradient algorithms to learn NDF. Then in Section 3,
taking deep neural network training as example, we empir-
ically verify the effectiveness of NDF. We discuss related
work in Section 4 and conclude the paper in the last section.
2. Neural Data Filter
In this section, by assuming training machine learning
models with mini-batch SGD, we introduce the mathemat-
ical details of Neural Data Filter (NDF). As a summary,
NDF aims to ﬁlter certain amount of training data within
a mini-batch, such that only high-quality training data is
remained and better convergence speed for SGD training
is achieved. To achieve that, as introduced in Section ??
and Figure 1, we cast SGD training as a Markov Decision
Process (MDP), termed as SGD-MDP.
SGD-MDP: As traditional MDP, SGD-MDP is composed
of the tuple < s, a, P, r, γ >, illustrated as:
• s is the state, corresponding to the mini-batch data ar-
rived and current state of machine learning model (i.e.,
the trainee): st = (Dt, Wt).
• a represents the space of actions. For data ﬁltration
task, we have a = {am}M
m=1 ∈{0, 1}M, where M
is the batch size and am ∈{0, 1} denotes whether
to ﬁlter the m-th data instance in Dt or not1. Those
ﬁltered instances will have no effects to base model
training.
• Pa
ss′ = P(s′|s, a) is the state transition probability,
determined by two factors: 1) The uniform distribu-
1We consider data instances within the same mini-batch are in-
dependent with each other, and therefore for statement simplicity,
when the context is clear, a will be used to denote the remain/ﬁlter
decision for single data instance, i.e., a ∈{1, 0}. Similarly, the
notation s will sometimes represent the state for only one training
instance.

Learning What Data to Learn
tion of sequentially arrived training batch data; 2) The
optimization process speciﬁed by Gradient Descent
principle (c.f. Equation 1). The randomness comes
from stochastic factors in training, such as dropout
(Srivastava et al., 2014).
• r = r(s, a) is the reward, set to be any signal indi-
cating how well the training goes, such as validation
accuracy, or the loss gap for current mini-batch data
before/after model update.
• Furthermore future reward r is discounted by a dis-
counting factor γ ∈[0, 1] into the cumulative reward.
NDF samples the action a by its policy function A =
PΘ(a|s) with parameters Θ to be learnt. The policy A can
be any binary classiﬁcation model, such as logistic regres-
sion and deep neural network. For example, A(s, a; Θ) =
PΘ(a|s) = aσ(θf(s) + b) + (1 −a)(1 −σ(θf(s) + b)),
where σ(·) is the sigmoid function, Θ = {θ, b} and f(s) is
the feature vector to effectively represent state s, discussed
as below.
State Features: The aim of designing state feature vector
f(s) is to effectively and efﬁciently represent SGD-MDP
state. Since state s includes both arrived training data and
current base model state, we adopt three categories features
to compose f(s):
• Data features, contain information for data instance,
such as its label category (we use 1 of |Y | represen-
tations), (for texts) the length of sentence, linguistic
features for text segments (Tsvetkov et al., 2016), or
(for images) gradients histogram features (Dalal &
Triggs, 2005). Such data features are commonly used
in curriculum learning (Bengio et al., 2009; Tsvetkov
et al., 2016).
• Base model features, include the signals reﬂecting
how well current machine learning model is trained.
We collect several simple features, such as passed
mini-batch number (i.e., iteration), the average his-
torical training loss and historical validation accuracy.
They are proven to be effective enough to represent
current model status.
• Features to represent the combination of both data and
model. By using these features, we target to repre-
sent how important the arrived training data is for cur-
rent model. We mainly use three parts of such sig-
nals in our classiﬁcation tasks: 1) the predicted prob-
abilities of each class; 2) the loss value on that data,
which appears frequently in self-paced learning algo-
rithms (Kumar et al., 2010; Jiang et al., 2014a; Sachan
& Xing, 2016); 3) the margin value 2.
The state features f(s) are computed after the arrival of
each mini-batch of training data.
The whole process for training with NDF is listed in Al-
gorithm 1. In particular, we take the similar generaliza-
tion framework proposed in (Andrychowicz et al., 2016),
in which we randomly sample a subset of training data to
train the policy of NDF (Step 1 and 2) with policy gradient
method, and apply the data ﬁltration model to the training
process on the whole dataset (Step 3). The detailed algo-
rithm to train NDF policy will be introduced in the next
subsection.
Algorithm 1 SGD Training with Neural Data Filter.
Input: Training data D.
1. Randomly sample a subset of NDF training data D′
from D.
2. Optimize NDF policy network A(s; Θ) based on D′
by policy gradient (details in Algorithm 2).
3. Apply A(s; Θ) to full dataset D to train the base ma-
chine learning model by SGD.
Output: The base machine learning model.
2.1. Training Algorithm for NDF Policy
To obtain the optimal data ﬁltration policy, we aim to opti-
mize the following expected reward:
J(Θ) = EPΘ(a|s)[R(s, a)],
(2)
where R(s, a) is the state-action value function and Θ pa-
rameterizes the policy. Since R(s, a) is non-differentiable
w.r.t. Θ, we use REINFORCE (Williams, 1992), a Monte-
Carlo policy gradient algorithm to optimize the above
quantity in Equation (2):
∇Θ =
T
X
t=1
EPΘ(a1:T |s)[∇Θ log P(at|st)R(st, at)],
(3)
which is empirically estimated as:
T
X
t=1
∇Θ log P(at|st)vt.
(4)
In our scenario, vt is the sampled estimation of R(st, at)
from one episode execution of data ﬁltration policy
PΘ(a|s): vt = rt + γrt+1 + · · · + γT −trT , where rt is the
2The margin for a training instance (x, y) is deﬁned as
P(y|x) −maxy′̸=y P(y′|x) (Cortes et al., 2013)

Learning What Data to Learn
sampled reward (e.g., accuracy on a held-out validation set
in D′) at time-step t, and γ ∈[0, 1] is a discount factor. To
further reduce the high variance of the gradient estimation
in Equation (4), we use some variance reduction technique
such as substracting reward baseline function (Weaver &
Tao, 2001) and the details will be shown in subsection 3.1.
The ﬂow of training NDF policy is given in Algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2 Train NDF policy.
Input: Training data D′. Episode number L. Mini-batch
size M. Discount factor γ ∈[0, 1].
Randomly split D′ into two disjoint subsets: D′
train and
D′
dev.
Initialize NDF data ﬁltration policy A(s, a; Θ), i.e.,
PΘ(a|s).
for each episode l = 1, 2, · · · , L do
Initialize the base machine learning model.
Shufﬂe D′
train to get the mini-batches sequence
{D1, D2, · · · }.
T = 0.
while stopping criteria is not met do
T = T + 1.
Sample data ﬁltration action for each data instance
in DT = {d1, · · · , dM}: a = {am}M
m=1, am ∝
PΘ(a|sm), sm is the state corresponding to dm.
Update base machine learning model by Gradient
Descent based on the selected data in DT .
Receive reward rT computed on D′
dev.
end while
for t = 1, · · · , T do
Compute cumulative reward vt = rt+γrt+1+· · ·+
γT −trT .
Θ ←Θ + αvt
X
m
∂log PΘ(am|sm)
∂Θ
(5)
end for
end for
Output: The NDF policy A(s, a; Θ).
3. Experiments
In this section, taking neural networks training as an ex-
ample, we demonstrate NDF improves SGD’s convergence
performance by a large margin. The experiments are con-
ducted with three most commonly used neural networks:
multi-layer perceptron (MLP), convolutional neural net-
works (CNN) and recurrent neural networks (RNN), on
both image and text classiﬁcation tasks.
3.1. Experiments Setup
Different data ﬁltration strategies we applied to SGD train-
ing include:
• Unﬁltered SGD. The SGD training algorithm with-
out any data ﬁltration. Here rather than vanilla SGD
(c.f.
Equation (1)), we use its advanced variants
such as Adadelta (Zeiler, 2012) or Momentum-SGD
(Sutskever et al., 2013) to perform base model training
in each task.
• Self-Paced Learning (SPL) (Kumar et al., 2010). It
refers to ﬁltering training data by its hardness, as re-
ﬂected by loss value. Mathematically speaking, those
training data d satisfying l(d) > η will be ﬁltered out,
where the threshold η grows from smaller to larger
during the training process.
In our implementation, to improve the robustness of
SPL, following the widely used trick in common SPL
implementation (Jiang et al., 2014b), we ﬁlter train-
ing data using its loss rank in one mini-batch, rather
than the absolute loss value 3. That is to say, we ﬁlter
data instances with top K largest training loss values
within a M-sized mini-batch, where K linearly drops
from M −1 to 0 during training.
• NDF. SGD training with data ﬁltration mechanism
learnt by NDF, as shown in Algorithm 2.
The state features are constructed according to the
principles described in State Features of Section 2.
In our experiments, we deﬁne the reward in the fol-
lowing way: we set an accuracy threshold τ ∈[0, 1]
and for each episode l, record the ﬁrst mini-batch in-
dex iτ in which the accuracy on held-out dev set D′
dev
exceeds τ, then set the reward as rl = −log(τ/T ′),
where T ′ is a pre-deﬁned maximum iteration number.
Note that here only terminal reward exists. There are
many other ways to deﬁne the reward, and we will ex-
plore them in our future work.
We use a three-layer neural network as the data ﬁltra-
tion policy function. All the weight values in this net-
work are uniformly initialized between (−0.01, 0.01).
The bias terms are all set as 0 except for the bias in
the last-layer which is initialized as 2, with the goal
of not ﬁltering too much data in the early age. Adam
(Kingma & Ba, 2014) is leveraged to optimize the pol-
icy. The policy that achieves the best terminal reward
in all episodes is applied as the ﬁnal policy to the
full dataset (c.f., Line 3 in Algorithm 1). To reduce
estimation variance, a moving average of the histori-
cal reward values in previous episodes is set as a re-
3As we empirically tested, ﬁltering by loss value will lead to
quite slow and unstable convergence in model training.

Learning What Data to Learn
ward baseline for the current episode (Weaver & Tao,
2001). That is, switching Eqn. 5 to:
Θ ←Θ + α(rt −bl)
X
m
∂log PΘ(a|sm)
∂Θ
.
(6)
with the reward baseline bl for episode l, l
=
1, 2, · · · , L, computed as bl = 0.8bl−1+0.2rl, b0 = 0,
and vt is in fact computed as vt = rl.
• RandDrop. To conduct more comprehensive com-
parison, for NDF, we record the ratio of ﬁltered data
instances per epoch, and then randomly ﬁlter data in
each epoch according to the logged ratio. In this way
we form one more baseline, referred to as RandDrop.
For all strategies other than Unﬁltered SGD, we make sure
that the base neural network model will not be updated un-
til M un-trained, yet selected data instances are accumu-
lated. In this way, we guarantee that when updating neural
network parameters, the batch sizes are the same for every
strategy (i.e., M), and thus the convergence speed is only
determined by the quality of selected data, not by differ-
ent model update frequencies since data ﬁltration within a
mini-batch will (otherwise) lead to smaller batch size. The
model is implemented with Theano (Theano Development
Team, 2016) and run on one Tesla K40 GPU for each train-
ing/testing process.
For each data ﬁltration strategy in every task, we report
the test accuracy with respect to the number of effective
training instances. To demonstrate the robustness of NDF,
we set different hyper-parameters, both for NDF and SPL,
and then plot the curve for each hyper-parameter conﬁgura-
tion. Concretely speaking, for NDF, we vary the validation
threshold τ in reward computation. For SPL, we test differ-
ent speeds to embrace all the training data during training
process. Such a speed is characterized by a pre-deﬁned
epoch number S, which means all the training data will
gradually be included (i.e., K linearly drops from M −1
to 0) among the ﬁrst S epochs. All the experimental curves
reported below are the average results of 5 repeated runs.
3.2. MLP for MNIST
We ﬁrst test different data ﬁltration strategies for multi-
layer perceptron network training on image recognition
task. The dataset we used is MNIST, which consists of
60k training and 10k testing images of handwritten digits
from 10 categories (i.e., 0, · · · , 9). Momentum-SGD with
mini-batch size as 20 is used to perform MLP model train-
ing.
A three-layer feedforward neural network with layer size
784 × 500 × 10 and cross-entropy loss is used to classify
400000
600000
800000
1000000
1200000
1400000
Number of Accepted Training Instances
0.93
0.94
0.95
0.96
0.97
0.98
Test Accuracy
NDF −0. 94
NDF −0. 96
NDF −0. 98
SPL −80
SPL −120
SPL −160
RandDrop
UnfilteredSGD
Figure 2. Test accuracy curves of different data ﬁltration strate-
gies on MNIST dataset. Different hyper-parameter settings are
included: NDF with validation accuracy threshold set as τ =
0.94, 0.96 and 0.98, SPL with S respectively conﬁgured as
80, 120, 160. RandDrop uses the ﬁltered data information out-
put by NDF with τ = 0.98. The x-axis records the number of
effective training instances.
the MNIST dataset. tanh acts as the activation function for
the hidden layer. The subset D′ (c.f., Algorithm 1) contains
50k randomly selected images from the whole training set
and 5k instances in D′ serves as the held-out validation set
D′
dev. We train the policy network for L = 500 episodes
and we control training in each episode by early stopping
based on validation set accuracy. NDF leverages a three-
layer neural network with model size 25 × 12 × 1 as policy
network, where the ﬁrst layer node number 25 is the di-
mension of state features fs. tanh function is the activation
function for the middle layer.
The accuracy curves of different data ﬁltration strategies
on the test set are plotted in Figure 2. From Figure 2 we
can observe that NDF achieves the best convergence speed,
signiﬁcantly better than other policies. In particular, with
τ set as 0.98 , to achieve a fairly good classiﬁcation accu-
racy e.g, 0.97, SGD with NDF uses much less training data
(about 750k) than SGD without any data selection mecha-
nism (roughly 1.5M). SPL does not select important data
in model training, as reﬂected by the curves in scattered
dots.
To better understand the behaviors of NDF, in Figure 3,
we record the number of instances ﬁltered by NDF in each
epoch, and use ﬁve curves to denote the number of ﬁl-
tered instances corresponding to difference hardness lev-
els, which are measured by its rank of loss values among
all the data in its mini-batch. From this ﬁgure it is clearly
observed that the data selection strategy is quite different
from SPL: First, as the training goes on, more and more
data will be ﬁltered, which is opposite to that of SPL. Sec-
ond, hard data (with hardest category shown in the pur-
ple curve) tend to be selected for training, while easy ones

Learning What Data to Learn
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Epoch
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
Filter Number
Bucket 1 ∼4
Bucket 5 ∼8
Bucket 9 ∼12
Bucket 13 ∼16
Bucket 17 ∼20
Figure 3. The ﬁltered data numbers by NDF in each epoch of
MNIST training. Different curves denote the number of ﬁltered
data corresponding to different hardness levels, as indicated by
the ranks of loss on that ﬁltered data instance within its mini-
batch.
Concretely speaking, we category all the rank values
{1, 2, · · · , 20}, where 20 is the number of training instances in
each mini-batch, into ﬁve buckets. Bucket 1 ∼4 denotes the
hardest data instances whose loss values are largest (ranked top 1
to 4) among each mini-batch, while Bucket 17 ∼20 is the easiest
among each batch, with smallest loss values.
(with easiest category shown in the blue line) will proba-
bly be ﬁltered. We believe such a result well demonstrates
that training MLP on MNIST favors the critical data which
brings fairly larger effects to model training, whereas those
less informative data instances, with smaller loss values,
are comparatively redundant and negligible.
3.3. CNN for Cifar10
In this subsection, we conduct experiments on a larger
vision dataset than MNIST, with more powerful classi-
ﬁcation model than MLP. Speciﬁcally, we use CIFAR-
10 (Krizhevsky, 2009), a widely used dataset for image
classiﬁcation, which contains 60k RGB images of size
32 × 32 categorized into 10 classes. The dataset is par-
titioned into a training set with 50k images and a test set
with 10k images. Furthermore, data augmentation is ap-
plied to every training image, with padding 4 pixels to each
side and randomly sampling a 32 × 32 crop. ResNet (He
et al., 2015), a well-known effective CNN model for im-
age recognition, is adopted to perform classiﬁcation on
CIFAR-10. It is based on a public Lasagne implementa-
tion 4, containing 32 layers. The mini-batch size is set as
M = 128 and Momentum-SGD (Sutskever et al., 2013) is
used as the optimization algorithm. Following the learn-
ing rate scheduling strategy in the original paper (He et al.,
2015), we set the initial learning rate as 0.1 and multiply it
by a factor of 0.1 after the 32k-th and 48k-th model update.
Training in this way the test accuracy reaches about 92.4%.
4https://github.com/Lasagne/Recipes/blob/
master/papers/deep_residual_learning/Deep_
Residual_Learning_CIFAR-10.py
For training NDF, the sampled training data D′ contains
45k images, among which 5k randomly selected images
act as held-out D′
dev to provide the reward signal. The
other conﬁgurations for NDF training, such as state fea-
tures, policy network structure and optimization algorithm,
are almost the same as those in MNIST experiments, ex-
cept that we train the policy for 100 episodes since ResNet
training on Cifar10 is more computationally expensive.
0
500000
1000000
1500000
2000000
2500000
3000000
3500000
4000000
Number of Accepted Training Instances
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
Test Accuracy
NDF −0. 80
NDF −0. 84
NDF −0. 88
SPL −120
SPL −60
SPL −180
RandDrop
UnfilteredSGD
Figure 4. Test accuracy curves of training ResNet on Cifar-10
with different data ﬁltration policies. NDF hyper-parameter τ ∈
{0.80, 0.84, 0.88}, SPL hyper-parameter S ∈{60, 120, 180}.
RandDrop uses the ﬁltered data information output by NDF-
0.84.
Figure 4 records the curves of test accuracy varying with
number of effective training data instances, using differ-
ent data ﬁltration strategies. Once again, NDF outperforms
other strategies, as indicated by the fact that to achieve 0.85
classiﬁcation accuracy, SGD with NDF spends roughly half
training data as that used by SGD without any data selec-
tion policy (the Unﬁltered-SGD in Figure 4). In addition,
SGD with SPL performs almost the same as SGD with no
data ﬁltered, with a tiny gain after training with 3.5m in-
stances. However, SPL cannot catch up with NDF.
Similar to Figure 3, we plot the number of instances ﬁltered
by NDF varying with training epochs and different hard-
ness levels in Figure 5. One can clearly observe a similar
data ﬁltration pattern with that of MNIST, yet quite differ-
ent with that of SPL, since more and more training data
is ﬁltered during learning process and hard data instances
tend to be kept (shown by the purple line).
3.4. RNN for IMDB sentiment classiﬁcation
In addition to image recognition task, we also test those
data selection mechanisms in text related tasks. Here the
basic setting is using Recurrent Neural Network (RNN)
to conduct sentiment classiﬁcation. IMDB movie review

Learning What Data to Learn
0
5
10
15
20
Epoch
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
35000
40000
45000
Filter Number
Bucket 1 ∼26
Bucket 27 ∼52
Bucket 53 ∼77
Bucket 78 ∼103
Bucket 104 ∼128
Figure 5. The number of instances ﬁltered by NDF in each epoch
of Cifar10 training.
Similar to Figure 3, we separate ranks
{1, 2, · · · , 128} of loss values into ﬁve buckets to denote train-
ing data with different hardness levels.
dataset5 is a binary sentiment classiﬁcation dataset consist-
ing of 50k movie review comments with positive/negative
sentiment labels (Maas et al., 2011), which are evenly sep-
arated (i.e., 25k/25k) as train/test set. The sentences in
IMDB dataset are signiﬁcantly long, with average word
token number as 281. Top 10k most frequent words are
selected as the dictionary while the others are replaced
with a special token UNK. We apply LSTM (Hochreiter
& Schmidhuber, 1997) RNN to each sentence, taking ran-
domly initialized word embedding vectors as input, and the
last hidden state of LSTM is fed into a logistic regression
classiﬁer to predict the sentiment label (Dai & Le, 2015).
The size of word embedding in RNN is 256, the size of
hidden state of RNN is 512, and the mini-batch size is set
as M = 16. Adadelta (Zeiler, 2012) is used to perform
LSTM model training. The test accuracy is roughly 88.5%,
reproducing the result in previous work (Dai & Le, 2015).
For NDF training, from all the training data we randomly
sample 20k as D′
train and 3k as D′
dev to learn data ﬁltra-
tion policy. The episode number is set as L = 200. Early
stop on validation set is used to control training process in
each episode. The other conﬁgurations repeat those used in
policy network training in MNIST.
The detailed results are shown in Figure 6. From the ﬁg-
ure we have the following observations: First, NDF signif-
icantly boosts the convergence of SGD training for LSTM.
With much less data, NDF achieves satisfactory classiﬁca-
tion accuracy. For example, to achieve 80% test accuracy,
NDF needs about 75% training data (60k) as that of plain
Adadelta (about 80k). Second, NDF signiﬁcantly outper-
forms the RandDrop baseline, demonstrating the effective-
ness of learnt policies. At last, self-paced learning (shown
by the dashed line) helps for the initialization of LSTM.
5http://ai.stanford.edu/˜amaas/data/
sentiment/
0
20000
40000
60000
80000
100000
120000
140000
Number of Accepted Training Instances
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Test Accuracy
NDF −0. 80
NDF −0. 83
NDF −0. 86
SPL −80
SPL −100
SPL −120
RandDrop
UnfilteredSGD
Figure 6. Test accuracy curves of different data ﬁltration strate-
gies on IMDB sentiment classiﬁcation dataset.
NDF hyper-
parameter τ ∈{0.80, 0.83, 0.86}, SPL hyper-parameter S ∈
{80, 100, 120}. RandDrop uses the ﬁltered data information out-
put by NDF with τ = 0.80.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Epoch
0
50
100
150
200
250
Filter Number
Bucket 1 ∼4
Bucket 5 ∼7
Bucket 8 ∼10
Bucket 11 ∼13
Bucket 14 ∼16
Figure 7. The ﬁltered data numbers by NDF in each epoch of
IMDB training. The batch size is 16.
However, it seems not to help training after the middle
phase. Using reinforcement learning, NDF achieves both
better long-term convergence and faster initialization, al-
though the initialization is not as effective as SPL.
To better understand the advantages brought of NDF-
REINFOFCE, in Figure 7 we also give the curves record-
ing number of ﬁltered data instances in each epoch. One
can observe that the data selection pattern learnt by NDF
is signiﬁcantly different with that in MNIST and CIFAR.
Particularly, the learnt data selection mechanism is similar
with SPL, since hard data with larger loss values (by the
purple lines) are probably ﬁltered at the early age of LSTM
training, while gradually included into model update along
the training process. As shown by the better initialization
brought by NDF and SPL compared with no data selection,
training with only easy data in the early phase helps accel-
erating LSTM initialization, which has been identiﬁed as
a difﬁcult problem for LSTM training with long sequences
(Dai & Le, 2015; Wang & Tian, 2016). From this point of
view, it is necessary to start learning from easy data. Once
the model has grown into a mature state with stronger ca-

Learning What Data to Learn
pability of handling various inputs, the hard examples will
be gradually included.
However, from the global point of view for Figure 7, train-
ing LSTM on IMDB data favors easier data. Except for the
aforementioned difﬁculty of LSTM training, we conjecture
another reason for such behavior is compared with image
data, natural language contains more noise residing in both
the sentences and their labels. Data with large loss values
might imply high noise levels, which should be eliminated
in model training.
3.5. Discussion
We have the following discussions on the experimental re-
sults reported above.
• A good data selection mechanism can effectively ac-
celerate model convergence. For example, the data se-
lection policy learnt by NDF can help the SGD train-
ing of various neural networks to achieve fairly good
performances, with signiﬁcantly smaller number of
training data than SGD without data section.
• Different tasks and datasets may favor different data
selection policies, as indicated by Figures 3, 5 and 7.
In this sense, a heuristic data selection rule, such as
SPL, cannot cover all different scenarios. In contrast,
NDF acts in a more adaptive way and can successfully
handle diverse scenarios. This is because it covers a
lot of information in its state features that can indi-
cate the importance of a data instance, and it obtains
the target data selection policy based on reinforcement
learning.
• Furthermore NDF is not sensitive to the setting of
hyper-parameters. Policies trained with a wide range
of τ values can all lead to satisfactory performances.
• SPL typically works for shallow model training (Lee
& Grauman, 2011; Jiang et al., 2014a;b) that does
not involve frequent model updated. However, when
training deep models with SGD, SPL does not pro-
vide good data selection mechanism with its simple
and heuristic rule.
4. Related Work
Plenty of previous works talk about data scheduling (e.g.,
ﬁltration and ordering) strategies for machine learning. A
remarkable example is curriculum learning (CL) (Bengio
et al., 2009) showing that a data order from easy instances
to hard ones, a.k.a., a curriculum, beneﬁts learning pro-
cess. The measure of hardness in CL is typically deter-
mined by heuristic understandings of data (Bengio et al.,
2009; Spitkovsky et al., 2010; Tsvetkov et al., 2016). As
a comparison, self-paced learning (SPL)
(Kumar et al.,
2010; Lee & Grauman, 2011; Jiang et al., 2014a;b; Supan-
cic & Ramanan, 2013) quantiﬁes the hardness by the loss
on data. In SPL, those training instances with loss values
larger than a threshold η will be neglected and η gradually
increases in the training process such that ﬁnally all training
instances will play effects. Apparently SPL can be viewed
as a data ﬁltration strategy considered in this paper.
Recently with the revival of deep neural networks, re-
searchers have noticed the importance of data scheduling
for deep learning. For example, in (Loshchilov & Hut-
ter, 2016), a simple batch selection strategy based on the
loss values of training data is proposed for speeding up
neural network training.
(Tsvetkov et al., 2016) lever-
ages bayesian optimization to optimize a curriculum func-
tion for training distributed word representations. Sachan
& Xing (2016) investigate several hand-crafted criteria for
data ordering in solving Question Answering tasks based
on DNN. In computer vision, a hard example mining ap-
proach tailored for training object detection network is
proposed in
(Shrivastava et al., 2016).
Our work dif-
fers signiﬁcantly with these works in that 1) We ﬁlter
data in randomly arrived mini-batches in training process
to save computational efforts, rather than actively select
mini-batch through a feedforward process on all the un-
trained data, which is quite computationally expensive; 2)
We leverage reinforcement learning to automatically de-
rive the optimal data selection policy according to the feed-
back of training process, rather than use naive and heuris-
tic rules for each task. The latter one is limited and time-
consuming, as show by an example that the complicated
rules in (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2016) accelerate MNIST
training, but fail on Cifar10. In that sense, NDF belongs to
the category of meta learning (Schmidhuber, 1987; 1993),
a.k.a., learning to learn (Thrun & Pratt, 2012; Li & Malik,
2016; Andrychowicz et al., 2016).
The proposed Neural Data Filter (NDL) for data ﬁltration is
based on deep reinforcement learning (DRL) (Mnih et al.,
2013; 2016; Silver et al., 2016), which applies deep neu-
ral networks to reinforcement learning (Sutton & Barto,
1998). In particular, NDL belongs to policy based rein-
forcement learning, seeking to search directly for optimal
control policy. REINFORCE (Williams, 1992) and actor-
critic (Konda & Tsitsiklis, 1999) are two representative pol-
icy gradient algorithms, with the difference that actor-critic
adopts value function approximation to reduce the high
variance of policy gradient estimator in REINFORCE.
5. Conclusion
In this paper, we have introduced Neural Data Filter (NDF),
a reinforcement learning framework to adaptively perform
training data selection for machine learning. Experiments

Learning What Data to Learn
on several deep neural networks training by mini-batch
SGD have demonstrated that NDF boosts the convergence
of training process. On one hand, we have shown that such
reinforcement learning based adaptive approach is effec-
tive and general for various machine learning tasks; on the
other hand, we would like to inspire the community to ex-
plore more on data selection/scheduling for machine learn-
ing, especially for training deep neural networks.
As to future work, our ﬁrst goal is to provide more efﬁcient
way for NDF training, for example by optimality tighten-
ing (He et al., 2017), by Actor-Critic to collect more fre-
quent reward signals6, or by learning from pure scratch to
eliminate the feed-forward step in current design to obtain
the state features. We further aim to apply such a reinforce-
ment learning based teacher-student framework to other
strategy design problems for machine learning, such as
hyper-parameter tuning, structure learning and distributed
scheduling, with the hope of providing better guidance for
controlled training process.
