Information Governance as a Socio-Technical Process in the 
Development of Trustworthy Healthcare AI 
Nigel Rees1, Kelly Holding1, Mark Sujan2 
1Welsh Ambulance Service NHS Trust, St Asaph, UK 
2Human Factors Everywhere Ltd, Woking, UK 
Keywords: Artificial Intelligence, Information Governance, Safety, Assurance, Ergonomics, 
Healthcare 
Abstract 
In order to develop trustworthy healthcare artificial intelligence (AI) prospective and ergonomics 
studies that consider the complexity and reality of real-world applications of AI systems are needed.  
To achieve this, technology developers and deploying organisations need to form collaborative 
partnerships.  This entails access to healthcare data, which frequently might also include potentially 
identifiable data such as audio recordings of calls made to an ambulance service call centre.  
Information Governance (IG) processes have been put in place to govern the use of personal 
confidential data.  However, navigating IG processes in the formative stages of AI development and 
pre-deployment can be challenging, because the legal basis for data sharing is explicit only for the 
purpose of delivering patient care, i.e., once a system is put into service.   
In this paper we describe our experiences of managing IG for the assurance of healthcare AI, using 
the example of an out-of-hospital-cardiac-arrest recognition software within the context of the Welsh 
Ambulance Service.  We frame IG as a socio-technical process.   IG processes for the development of 
trustworthy healthcare AI rely on information governance work, which entails dialogue, negotiation, 
and trade-offs around the legal basis for data sharing, data requirements and data control.  
Information governance work should start early in the design life cycle and will likely continue 
throughout.  This includes a focus on establishing and building relationships, as well as a focus on 
organisational readiness deeper understanding of both AI technologies as well as their safety 
assurance requirements.      
 
1 
Introduction 
The development of data-driven Artificial Intelligence (AI) technologies, such as machine learning 
(ML), generally consists of three phases involving data capture and pre-processing, model building 
and validation, and real-world implementation and deployment (Coiera, 2019).  In the case of 
healthcare, AI developers require access to health and care data, which might also include potentially 
identifiable patient data.  Information Governance (IG) processes have been put in place to oversee 
the use of personal confidential data.  However, navigating IG processes in the formative stages of AI 
development and pre-deployment can be challenging because the mechanisms for data sharing for the 
purpose of assuring the safety of AI applications are complex and evolving.      
The uncertainty about IG processes governing access to health and care data is problematic not least 
because the development of trustworthy healthcare AI needs to be based on prospective and 

 
2 
ergonomics studies that enable iterative and incremental assessment of what happens when AI is 
introduced into the wider socio-technical system (Sujan, Pool and Salmon, 2022; Vasey et al., 2022).  
Many studies evaluating healthcare AI are retrospective and focus on the performance of algorithms 
rather than on the safety and assurance of the service within which the AI is going to be used (Sujan 
et al., 2019).  As a result, the evidence base for the safety and efficacy of these technologies remains 
weak and is at a high risk of bias (Nagendran et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2021).  Often, subsequent 
prospective evaluation studies demonstrate that one cannot assume that results from retrospective 
evaluation translate smoothly into successful adoption and deployment in clinical systems (Blomberg 
et al., 2021; Beede et al., 2020).    
Development and retrospective evaluation of healthcare AI are typically performed with a 
technology-centric focus, with an emphasis on technical issues such as data quality and the potential 
for bias in the data (Challen et al., 2019).  There is a risk that IG is regarded as a deterministic and 
external process rather than as an integral and formative part of the development life cycle.  From a 
Human Factors and Ergonomics (HF/E) perspective, the development, governance, and deployment 
of novel and disruptive technologies, such as healthcare AI, should be studied as interacting socio-
technical processes rather than as technical and procedural activities in isolation (Sujan et al., 2021).     
The contribution of this paper is a reflection on the practical experiences of managing IG processes 
for the development of trustworthy healthcare AI from a socio-technical systems perspective using 
the example of an AI system to support the recognition of out of hospital cardiac arrest (OHCA) calls 
in a Welsh ambulance service clinical contact centre.  The next section (Section 2) provides an 
overview of the current state of IG processes and requirements in Wales.  In Section 3 we describe 
the case study and interpret from a socio-technical systems perspective our experiences of managing 
IG.  Then, in Section 4 we propose recommendations for integrating IG practices into the 
development life cycle of trustworthy healthcare AI.  Concluding remarks are presented in Section 5.     
 
2 
The Role of Information Governance 
Information governance (IG) refers to frameworks and processes aimed at ensuring that information 
and data are handled in a secure, confidential, and appropriate manner.  Organisations processing 
health and care data need to consider whether they require and meet a legal basis to satisfy data 
protection legislation.  Within the context of the development and deployment of healthcare AI, IG 
processes are important to ensure data privacy and security, ethical use and appropriate data quality 
and accuracy.   
In Wales, IG processes need to ensure that the requirements of the UK GDPR (General Data 
Protection Regulation) and the common law duty of confidentiality (CLDC) are met.  The UK GDPR 
applies to personal data, whilst the CLDC applies to confidential patient data.  When processing 
confidential patient information, having a legal basis under the UK GDPR (Article 6 and Article 9) 
does not remove the need for an appropriate legal basis under the CLDC.  The CLDC legal basis that 
permits data sharing for the purpose of individual (or direct) care is implied consent. 
Patients expect their information to be accessed by those treating them, and therefore their consent 
can be presumed from that expectation.  Data sharing for individual care is limited to those within a 
patient’s health and care team, who have a legitimate relationship with that person (and therefore a 
need to access their information to treat them).  Even if a healthcare professional spends all their 
working hours providing direct care to many people, they only have a legitimate relationship with 

 
3 
those individuals for whom they care directly.  This limitation should not be seen as a barrier. It 
should be recognised as an important limit on what sort of data sharing can rely on implied consent 
as its legal basis.  It is a necessary boundary imposed to maintain patient trust in health professionals. 
The CLDC applies to confidential patient information.  To comply with the CLDC, a CLDC legal 
basis is required, i.e., implied consent, explicit consent, public interest, required by law, or permitted 
or approved under a statutory process that sets aside the CLDC, or in the best interests of a patient 
who lacks capacity.  Under Article 5 of the UK GDPR, personal data must be processed lawfully, 
fairly and in a transparent manner in relation to the data subject.  A lawful basis under UK GDPR 
Article 6 and Article 9 (for special category data including health data) is required, such as 
performance of a task carried out in the exercise of official authority of the controller.  The CLDC 
and UK GDPR are distinct legal regimes whereby different lawful bases apply and have different 
requirements.  
The boundaries of direct care are often difficult to interpret in practice, and this can cause confusion 
about whether the purpose for which the information being shared is, in fact, direct care (which has 
ramifications for the legal basis).  Furthermore, Article 5(1)(a) of UK GDPR requires personal data to 
be processed lawfully.  This includes statute and common law obligations, whether criminal or civil, 
and so processing will be unlawful under UK GDPR if it results in a breach of a duty of confidence, 
or a breach of the Human Rights Act 1998. 
The Confidentiality Advisory Group (CAG) provides authorisation, on behalf of the Secretary of 
State for Health, to lawfully hold identifiable data on patients without their consent.  CAG advises 
the Health Research Authority (for research) and the Secretary of State (for non-research) on whether 
there is sufficient justification to use the data.  CAG applies to England and Wales.  The CAG 
reviews research and non-research applications and advises whether there is sufficient justification to 
access the requested confidential patient information.  Using CAG advice as a basis for their 
consideration, the HRA or Secretary of State for Health will take the final approval decision.  This 
provides permission to implement Section 251 of the NHS Act 2006 (originally enacted under 
Section 60 of the Health and Social Care Act 2001), which allows identifiable patient information to 
be used without consent in very specific circumstances.   
In practice it can be challenging and contentious to navigate the requirements of the UK GDPR and 
the CLDC along with the boundaries between delivery of direct care and other related crucial 
activities such as ensuring trustworthiness of AI in use.  These practical challenges were highlighted 
in the high-profile case involving the Royal Free London NHS Foundation Trust and Google 
DeepMind (Iacobucci, 2017).  The Royal Free shared data from 1.6m patient records to enable 
Google DeepMind to test an app, which can support clinicians in identifying patients at risk of acute 
kidney disease.  The sharing of these data received criticism from the Department of Health’s senior 
advisor on data protection, who expressed concerns about the inappropriate legal basis.  Google 
DeepMind’s argument was that the arrangement was covered by the implied consent rule under the 
common law duty of confidentiality (CLDC), which allows the NHS to use and share data, including 
with third parties, on the basis of implied consent if it is for the purpose of direct patient care.  
However, the senior advisor Caldicott said that patients should have been informed because the data 
were initially used for testing the app which was not a direct care activity.  The Royal Free defended 
their position by arguing that it would not have been possible to sign off the product as clinically safe 
had it not been tested using real patient information, and that data used to develop it was crucial to 
demonstrate its safety before being made available for use.              

 
4 
It is tempting to regard the legal requirements set out by the UK GDPR and the CLDC as clear cut 
and static.  As the Royal Free and Google DeepMind case suggests, however, there are many 
uncertainties and complexities when the legislation is applied to a novel and developing field such as 
healthcare AI.  The legislation leaves room for interpretation, there are many different stakeholders 
with their own requirements and concerns, and collectively they must navigate the complexities of 
ensuring confidential, ethical, and appropriate use of data.  In the next section we illustrate this socio-
technical nature of IG processes through practical experiences from a project concerned with the 
development of safety assurance (safety case) for an AI application for use in an ambulance service 
context.   
 
    
3 
Information Governance from a Socio-Technical Systems Perspective 
3.1 
AI for OHCA Recognition 
Ambulance services are at the forefront of providing unplanned clinical care to patients and are often 
the first point of contact for patients presenting with a range of urgent and emergency conditions.  
The Welsh Ambulance Services NHS Trust (WAST) and many other ambulance services 
internationally have been exploring the use of Artificial Intelligence (AI) in the delivery of 
emergency medical services across many areas such as improved clinical decision-making, portable 
diagnostics, communications, and safety monitoring (Rees et al., 2021; Spangler et al., 2019).    
In collaboration with academic and industry partners, WAST has been studying prerequisites for the 
adoption of an AI system to support ambulance service call handlers in the recognition and early 
detection of out of hospital cardiac arrest (OHCA) (Sujan et al., 2022).  OHCA represents one of the 
most significant challenges for reducing premature deaths, with each minute of delay to defibrillation 
reducing the probability of survival by about 10% (Deakin, Shewry and Gray, 2014).  However, 
recognition of OHCA is difficult, and the evidence suggests that around 25% of OHCA are not 
picked up by call centre operators (Blomberg et al., 2019).  This OHCA recognition AI system is 
intended to identify important patterns in live audio from emergency calls in order to prompt clinical 
contact centre operators to initiate life-saving care earlier.   Retrospective studies of the AI system in 
Denmark and Sweden found that the AI outperformed call handlers in the recognition of OHCA 
(Blomberg et al., 2019; Byrsell et al., 2021).  While these results are encouraging, a prospective 
evaluation study concluded that the performance of call handlers supported by the AI system did not 
improve overall (Blomberg et al., 2021).  The evaluation study was not designed to explain the 
reasons for these findings, and further prospective and ergonomics studies are required to understand 
what happens when AI is introduced into the wider socio-technical system (Sujan et al., 2019; Sujan, 
Pool and Salmon, 2022).     
3.2 
The ASSIST Study – Safety Assurance of AI for OHCA Recognition in the Welsh Context  
The Welsh Ambulance Service was keen to explore the potential adoption of the OHCA recognition 
AI system.  However, the Welsh setting and context differ significantly from the settings where the 
previous evaluation studies had been undertaken.  For example, many areas of Wales are rural with 
significant travel times whereas the evaluation studies had been undertaken in urban, densely 
populated areas.  In addition, Welsh English differs from other local forms of the English language, 

 
5 
and there are also Welsh speakers who require consideration.  Hence, the ambulance service required 
assurance prior to adoption that the AI system was sufficiently trustworthy in the Welsh context.   
The ASSIST study aimed to frame the OHCA recognition AI system as part of the wider clinical 
system of the ambulance service.  The objectives of the study were to (1) explore ambulance service 
stakeholder perceptions on the safety of OHCA AI decision-support in call centres, and (2) to 
develop a clinical safety case (Sujan et al., 2016; Sujan and Habli, 2021) for the system.  
Development of the clinical safety case was considered service improvement and received approval 
by the Medical and Clinical Services Directorate of the Welsh Ambulance Service NHS Trust.   
In order to develop this assurance, it was necessary to customise and assess the OHCA recognition 
AI system with data representative of this Welsh context.  The system developer required, therefore, 
access to data from WAST, in this case access to emergency calls made to the clinical contact centre.  
These calls are routinely recorded and subsequently audited within WAST, which means the data 
would have been available.  However, IG processes needed to be managed to ensure that data were 
shared in a secure, confidential, and ethical way, and in accordance with legal requirements.     
3.3 
Negotiating data sharing, data requirements and data control 
From the outset, the project team were aware that data needed to be shared and that, consequently, IG 
processes would need to be followed.  However, early on it became apparent that this was not simply 
a matter of looking up the relevant legislation and guidance.  This was not least due to the uncertainty 
of everyone involved and everyone who was consulted about the specifics and detail of appropriate 
IG processes when applied to such a novel case.  We observed significant hesitation across many 
levels of stakeholders in the IG process, both within WAST and externally, to go beyond informal 
guidance and advice and to commit to binding decisions about data sharing arrangements.   
We realised, therefore, that IG processes would need to be negotiated and defined as the project 
unfolded.  This can be regarded as a form of “articulation work”, or in this case “information 
governance work”, i.e., activities that are required to make something work in practice, but which are 
often not explicitly recognised and designed as part of the innovation or intervention process (Elish 
and Watkins, 2020).  In this sense, IG becomes very much a socio-technical activity.       
3.3.1 Data sharing 
Clinical contact centres generate data through emergency calls and save these locally.  Some of these 
calls would have needed to be shared with the developer of the AI system in order to customise and 
test the system.  In addition, metadata would have needed to be made available, such as call 
characterisation, time, date, length of call etc.  Following a number of technical meetings between 
WAST and the technology developer it became clear that full anonymity of data could not be assured 
due to the volume and the format of the emergency call recordings.  Furthermore, voice in itself can 
be considered personal and potentially identifiable data even if all demographic data (e.g., name, 
location) has been removed, because voice might be used to identify gender, age, education, 
language, geographical and socio-cultural origins, and health.  Seeking explicit consent from callers 
to use their data was not considered feasible nor appropriate due to the psychological harm this may 
cause considering the potentially distressing, sensitive and life-threatening scenarios.  Implied 
consent did not appear to apply because safety assurance is not considered part of direct patient care.  
However, clinicians with whom we engaged both within WAST and externally suggested that 
survival from OHCA remains low, and hence there was an ethical duty to use such data for the public 
good, which may also be the expectation of patients.   

 
6 
These arguments were shared in informal meetings with the Information Commissioner’s Office 
(ICO), Digital Health Care Wales (DHCW) and others in regulatory and advisory roles, but no 
formal advice was received beyond recognition that this context did not fit easily within established 
guidelines and principles.  The diversity of priorities and perspectives of these stakeholders, and the 
evolving nature of the field suggest that constant dialogue and negotiation are required to interpret IG 
processes for a given context.  Such negotiations can be drawn out and, in the case of ASSIST, went 
on beyond 18 months.         
3.3.2 Data requirements      
Data sharing needs to be supported by Data Protection Impact Assessment (DPIA).  The DPIA would 
need to be completed by WAST who hold the data.  However, while drafting the DPIA relevant staff 
at WAST recognised that they did not possess technical details and technical knowledge to fully 
undertake and populate the DPIA.  Collaboration with the technology developer was required to fully 
determine data requirements, and to understand how these data could be acquired and shared.  This 
required significant amounts of organisational and technical effort and trust, supported by good 
governance and a suite of documents, including collaborators’ agreements and non-disclosure 
agreements that needed to be in place before technical details could be discussed.   
The initial understanding was that the machine learning model did not require patient identifiable 
data.  This was reflected in agreements with the technology developer, which stated that anonymised 
information would be used.  However, in discussions it became clear that further metadata was 
required and that effective anonymisation of emergency call data would not be feasible (see above).  
From an organisational perspective, WAST was not sufficiently prepared, nor did it possess suitable 
technical expertise, to foresee the technical nuances and complexities of the data requirements for the 
safety assurance of the AI system.  These needed to be discovered and subsequently negotiated with 
the technology developer over the course of several months.         
3.3.3 Data control 
A key requirement within UK GDPR (Article 4) is the identification of data controller and data 
processor.  The data controller is the person or entity determining the purposes and means of the 
processing of personal data.  The data processor is the person or entity processing personal data on 
behalf of the data controller.  Following informal discussions with the ICO and DHCW it was 
established that there needed to be strong control over the use of data.  This would entail uploading 
the AI software onto WAST systems and giving access to AI engineers from the technology 
developer to manage the AI system locally at WAST.  This arrangement would result in access to 
data rather than egress of data.   
In this arrangement, WAST is the controller of the data who are instructing the technology developer 
to process data locally within the WAST environment.  However, there is the risk that this assumes 
that safety assurance for the AI system is the responsibility of the user of the AI technology, and it 
might shift the burden of safety assurance from the AI developer to the deploying organisation.  In 
practice, neither the technology developer nor staff at WAST had prior experiences with this kind of 
structured safety assurance.  Therefore, they needed to rely on input from external safety engineering 
and human factors experts who required access to both WAST data as well as data from the 
technology developer.     
Furthermore, this surfaced differences in understanding and expectations of how the AI system 
would operate prior to formal deployment.  There were concerns and hesitation on part of the 

 
7 
technology developer about the feasibility of creating a local copy of the AI system, without 
integration into their own development platform and processes.  The initial agreements suggested that 
data would be supplied by WAST, and the technology developer could feed these into their usual 
customisation and testing processes. 
The lack of safety assurance expertise and the need to involve external experts, combined with 
changes in the processing arrangements for data caused considerable confusion, uncertainty and 
resulting hesitation among the different parties.  These relationships require trust, which needs to be 
developed over time in dialogue.         
 
4 
Integrating Information Governance Practices into the Development of Trustworthy 
Healthcare AI 
4.1 
Information governance work 
Information governance processes are critical for ensuring health and care data are used 
confidentially, ethically, and appropriately.  However, the complexities of IG processes can be 
difficult to manage and navigate because the field of healthcare AI is developing quickly, and new 
questions and challenges arise.  One such challenge is the development of safety assurance for 
healthcare AI products.  This requires collaboration between technology developers, healthcare 
providers exploring potential adoption, as well as other stakeholders such as regulators and, of 
course, patients.  Within the ASSIST study, most of the 2-year project period was spent on learning 
about IG and negotiating the legal basis for data sharing, details of data requirements, and appropriate 
data control.  IG processes for the development of trustworthy healthcare AI are not unambiguously 
defined, nor immediately obvious in their interpretation, and, hence, IG for such purposes might be 
best understood as a (longer-term) socio-technical process involving dialogue, negotiations, and 
trade-offs. 
This perspective aligns with the broader field of Science and Technology Studies (STS), which 
suggests that the development, governance, and deployment of novel technologies should be studied 
as interacting socio-technical processes rather than as technical activities in isolation.  For example, 
adopting an STS perspective, Elish and Watkins explored how the adoption of a deep learning AI 
system to improve the diagnosis and treatment of sepsis created gaps in the delivery of care and 
challenged established social structures and hierarchies, which needed to be bridged and repaired 
(Elish and Watkins, 2020).  They identified “repair work”, as an instance of articulation work, as an 
important component of the innovation process.  Similarly, Winter and Carusi identified “trust work” 
as an important part of building trust in AI, which arises from the socio-technical engagements 
between different stakeholders in the development and validation process of the AI (Winter and 
Carusi, 2022).  In this sense, the experiences reported here around negotiating data sharing, data 
requirements and data control could be conceptualised as “information governance work”.  Such 
information governance work is an essential part of the successful management of IG processes for 
the development of trustworthy healthcare AI.            
    
4.2 
Organisational readiness 
Through the information governance work, it became clear that all participating organisations 
(WAST, technology developer and regulatory bodies) would benefit from greater organisational 

 
8 
readiness for dealing with the specifics of IG processes for healthcare AI.  Organisational readiness 
refers to the willingness and the ability to adopt a change (Weiner, 2009), in this case related to the 
adoption of healthcare AI in an ambulance service context.  As far as WAST was concerned, the 
organisation certainly was very willing to explore the adoption of the AI system but lacked 
significantly in their ability to foresee what was required and what the potential impact might be.  
The deploying organisation needs to consider their data readiness, including contractual 
arrangements, processes for managing DPIA, and providing transparent information about AI 
partnerships to the public.  In addition, there needs to be greater technical awareness around AI 
technologies to enable deploying organisations to engage meaningfully with technology developers.     
Questions can also be asked about how familiar AI developers currently are with standards for safety 
assurance and the underpinning concepts, e.g., around clinical risk management and clinical safety 
cases.  Many developers of AI technology might not come from a medical device background, and 
they might have little prior experience with the design of health information technology (Habli et al., 
2018).  There is a need to build capacity and knowledge about safety assurance practices for AI and 
digital technologies within the health sector (Sujan and Habli, 2021).   
Greater organisational readiness underpinned by broader knowledge of AI technologies and their 
safety assurance is foundational for successful information governance.  This enables stakeholders to 
engage more constructively in dialogue and have a better understanding of how IG requirements 
might be interpreted in the development of trustworthy healthcare AI.           
 
5 
Conclusion 
We have framed our experiences of navigating the complexities of IG processes from a socio-
technical systems perspective.  IG processes for the development of trustworthy healthcare AI rely on 
information governance work, which entails dialogue, negotiation, and trade-offs around the legal 
basis for data sharing, data requirements and data control.  Information governance work should start 
early in the design life cycle and will likely continue throughout.  This includes a focus on 
establishing and building relationships, as well as a focus on organisational readiness and deeper 
understanding of both AI technologies as well as their safety assurance requirements.    
 
6 
Conflict of Interest 
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial 
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest. 
7 
Author Contributions 
NR: Conceptualization, Writing – Original Draft, Funding Acquisition; KH: Writing – Review and 
Editing; MS: Conceptualization, Writing – Original Draft, Funding Acquisition. 
8 
Funding 
This study received funding from the Assuring Autonomy International Programme, which is a joint 
initiative between the University of York and Lloyd’s Register Foundation.   

 
9 
9
