Nanoscale artiﬁcial intelligence: creating artiﬁcial neural
networks using autocatalytic reactions
Filippo Simini1
1Department of Engineering Mathematics, University of Bristol, Merchant Venturers Building, Woodland
Road, BS8 1UB, Bristol, UK.
A general methodology is proposed to engineer a system of interacting components (particles)
which is able to self-regulate their concentrations in order to produce any prescribed output
in response to a particular input. The methodology is based on the mathematical equivalence
between artiﬁcial neurons in neural networks and species in autocatalytic reactions, and it
speciﬁes the relationship between the artiﬁcial neural network’s parameters and the rate
coefﬁcients of the reactions between particle species. Such systems are characterised by a
high degree of robustness as they are able to reach the desired output despite disturbances
and perturbations of the concentrations of the various species.
Systems capable of performing different functions and tasks triggered by changes in en-
vironmental conditions or the presence of external stimuli are common in nature. The cell is
the fundamental building block of living organisms and represents a key example of such sys-
tems: it is composed by a large number of interacting biological components that participate in
multiple processes and reactions contributing to the system’s sustenance, reproduction and func-
tion [1]. Moreover, the cell is an open system in communication with the environment and it is
able to sense, respond, and adapt to changing external conditions. Other examples include the
1
arXiv:1602.09070v1  [nlin.AO]  29 Feb 2016

immune system [2,3], ecological communities [4–6], social and economic systems [7–10]. From
a mathematical perspective, these are complex systems out of equilibrium with many degrees of
freedom coupled in a non linear way and characterised by the emergence of order and collective
behaviour [11–13]. A typical feature of many biological and ecological systems is their capabil-
ity to be highly sensitive and responsive to small changes of the values of speciﬁc key variables,
while being at the same time extremely resilient to a large class of disturbances [14, 15]. The
possibility to build artiﬁcial systems with these characteristics is of extreme importance for the
development of nanomachines and biological circuits with potential medical and environmental
applications [16–18]. The main theoretical difﬁculty toward the realisation of these devices lies in
the lack of a mathematical methodology to design the blueprint of a self-controlled system com-
posed of a large number of microscopic interacting constituents that should operate in a prescribed
fashion [19–23]. In this paper I introduce a general methodology to engineer a system of particles
belonging to different species and interacting via autocatalytic reactions, which can automatically
adjust their concentrations in order to reach a desired output conﬁguration in response to a partic-
ular change of some input variable. The methodology is based on the mathematical equivalence
between a particular set of autocatalytic reactions and artiﬁcial neural networks. An artiﬁcial neu-
ral network is made of many interacting artiﬁcial neurons organised in a series of layers [24]. Each
neuron of layer l receives inputs from the neurons of layer l −1, performs a linear combination of
this input and produces as output a non linear function, a, of this linear combination:
x(l)
i
= a
 X
j
w(l−1)
ij
x(l−1)
j
+ b(l−1)
i
!
,
(1)
where x(l)
i
is the output of neuron i of layer l and the parameters w and b are called weights and
2

biases, respectively. The nonlinear function a(z) is called activation function and it is usually
chosen among the logistic function, a(z) = 1/(1 + e−z), the hyperbolic tangent a(z) = tanh(z),
and the rectiﬁer a(z) = max(0, z). The ﬁrst (bottom) layer of the network receives input from
external variables, while the last (top) layer corresponds to the output of the network. Artiﬁcial
neural networks can be efﬁciently trained to perform classiﬁcation tasks and to approximate com-
plex functions (regression). In supervised learning, optimisation algorithms are used to ﬁnd the
values of the network parameters (weights and biases) that minimise some loss function that mea-
sures the distance between the network’s output and the desired output over all input values. At the
heart of the proposed methodology is the mathematical equivalence between artiﬁcial neurons and
particles interacting via autocatalytic reactions: each artiﬁcial neuron is identiﬁed with a species of
particles and the neuron’s output corresponds to the concentration, i.e. number of particles per unit
volume, of that species. Similarly to artiﬁcial neurons in a neural network, species can be divided
into a series of layers such that the concentration (or number of particles) of a species in layer l is
determined only by the concentrations of species in layer l−1. Speciﬁcally, each species i interacts
with two sets of species, input and output species: the concentrations of species i’s input species
determine species i’s growth or decrease rate, while the concentration of species i determines the
growth or decrease rates of species i’s output species. The simplest example, shown in Fig. 1a, is
an artiﬁcial neural network with one neuron, which takes n input signals and produces one output
3

value. This corresponds to one species, i, characterised by the following reactions (see Fig. 1b):
2Yi
1→Yi
(2)
Yi
|bi|
→2Yi
if bi > 0
(3)
Yi
|bi|
→∅
if bi < 0 ,
(4)
where Yi denotes one particle of species i, and bi is a self-interaction rate. The interactions of
species i with the j = 1, . . . , n input species are speciﬁed by the reaction rates wij:
Yi + Xj
|wij|
→2Yi + Xj
if wij > 0
(5)
Yi + Xj
|wij|
→Xj
if wij < 0 .
(6)
Input particles Xj are not consumed or produced in reactions 5 and 6, but they collectively act
as activators (Eq. 5) or inhibitors (Eq. 6) of the production of Yi particles without changing the
number of particles of the input species. The set of reactions in Eqs. 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6, corresponds
to the following rate equation
d
dtyi =
 n
X
j=1
wijxj + bi
!
yi −y2
i = riyi −y2
i
(7)
where yi and xj indicate the concentration of particles of species i (output species) and j (input
species) respectively. These rate equations correspond to a predator-prey system with a Holling
type I functional response frequently used to model population dynamics of ecological systems
[25,26]. The solution of Eq. 7 is
yi(t) =
ri
1 + γ0 e−rit,
(8)
4

with ri =
Pn
j=1 wijxj + bi

and γ0 that depends on the number of particles of species i at t = 0,
yi(0). In the long time limit the concentration of particles of species i, y∞
i , has the following simple
expression
y∞
i
=









ri
if ri > 0
0
if ri ≤0
(9)
which is the rectiﬁer activation function of artiﬁcial neurons, a(z) = max(0, z). Equation 9 indi-
cates that the production (active state) or elimination (inactive state) of Yi particles is triggered by
the higher or lower concentration of particles i’s input species. In this simple example, it is pos-
sible to tune the reaction rates w and b such that the number of particles of species i is any linear
combination of the input values xj. The output of a generic artiﬁcial neural network with several
neurons and layers can be reproduced with the introduction of an equal number of species and
interactions. A fundamental result in artiﬁcial intelligence ensures that an artiﬁcial neural network
with a sufﬁciently large number of neurons and layers can approximate any function arbitrarily
well [27]. Assume for example that the desired output of the system of interest is to reproduce the
nonlinear function f(x) = x sin(10x) + 0.6 for any value of the input x between 0 and 1 (blue
curve in Fig. 2b). The artiﬁcial neural network of Fig. 2a composed by three layers with 4 neurons
and one output layer with a single neuron, all using the rectiﬁer activation function, can be trained
to provide a good approximation to the desired output function f(x) (red circles in Fig. 2b). The
equivalent system of reactions can then be obtained following the procedure outlined above. First,
a number of species equal to the number of neurons, 13 in this case, is considered. Second, the ini-
tial concentrations of the species are set to some positive values. Third, rate equation 7 is integrated
5

to obtain the concentrations of species as a function of time, noticing that the reaction rates, ri, of
species in layer l are computed using the weights wij and biases bi of the trained neural network,
and the concentrations xj of the species in layer l −1. The stationary value of the concentration
of the species in the top layer equals the neural network’s output value for any input x and for any
initial concentrations of the species (red circles in Fig. 2b). The time evolution of the concentration
of the species relative to input x = 0.8 shown in Fig. 2c demonstrates how the concentration of the
species in the top layer reaches a stationary state equal to the output value of the neural network,
f ∗(0.8) = 1.38, close to the desired output f(0.8) = 1.39. A similar result is obtained when,
instead of the deterministic rate equation, the concentrations of species are modelled using the
stochastic dynamic [28] described by the reactions in Eqs. 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6. Again, the mean value
of the concentration of the species in the top layer is compatible, within one standard deviation,
with the desired output value for any input x and for any initial concentrations of the species (red
circles in Fig. 3a). In order to test the resilience to disturbances, the dynamic of the system after
the concentrations of all species are set to random values is studied. Figures 3b and 3c show two
realisations of the stochastic dynamic relative to inputs x = 0.8 and x = 0.52, respectively, and
demonstrate that after the disturbance event the concentration of the output species (red line) re-
turns to oscillate around the desired output (dashed blue line) in both cases. This indicates that the
system is able to reach the desired output for any values of the initial concentrations of the species
and despite disturbances. In this framework, embedded control is naturally achieved by specifying
the desired system’s output in response to any possible value of the input variables, without the
need to analyse the response of all components in order to devise feedback and stabilisation loops,
6

or the intervention of external control signals. The requirement that input species in Eqs. 5 and
6 are not consumed can be relaxed by assuming a separation of time scales between reactions of
different layers. Indeed, if reactions in lower layers have characteristic time scales that are much
faster than reactions in the above layer, then the particles of species belonging to lower layers are
immediately replenished when consumed in the slower reactions with particles of the above layer
and the output does not substantially deviate from the output of the artiﬁcial neural network. The
extension of this methodology to multidimensional input and output is straightforward. Relating
concepts from artiﬁcial intelligence to dynamical systems, the results presented here demonstrate
the possibility to employ approaches and techniques developed in one ﬁeld to the other, bringing
potential advancements in both disciplines and related applications.
