A Scalable Method for Solving High-Dimensional
Continuous POMDPs Using Local Approximation
Tom Erez and William D. Smart∗
Computer Science and Engineering
Washington University in St. Louis
St. Louis, MO 63130, USA
Abstract
Partially-Observable Markov Decision Processes
(POMDPs) are typically solved by ﬁnding an
approximate global solution to a corresponding
belief-MDP. In this paper, we offer a new plan-
ning algorithm for POMDPs with continuous
state, action and observation spaces. Since such
domains have an inherent notion of locality, we
can ﬁnd an approximate solution using local op-
timization methods. We parameterize the belief
distribution as a Gaussian mixture, and use the
Extended Kalman Filter (EKF) to approximate
the belief update. Since the EKF is a ﬁrst-order
ﬁlter, we can marginalize over the observations
analytically. By using feedback control and state
estimation during policy execution, we recover
a behavior that is effectively conditioned on in-
coming observations despite the unconditioned
planning. Local optimization provides no guar-
antees of global optimality, but it allows us to
tackle domains that are at least an order of mag-
nitude larger than the current state-of-the-art. We
demonstrate the scalability of our algorithm by
considering a simulated hand-eye coordination
domain with 16 continuous state dimensions and
6 continuous action dimensions.
1
INTRODUCTION
Partially-Observable
Markov
Decision
Processes
(POMDPs) offer a framework for studying decision
making under uncertainty.
The optimal behavior in a
POMDP domain is expected to strike a balance between
exploring the partially-observable world and acting in a
goal-directed manner. Most of the POMDP literature is
concerned with discrete domains, but in the past few years,
as POMDP tools become more powerful, there is growing

interest in tackling continuous domains (Porta et al., 2006;
Brooks, 2009).
The standard approach to solving POMDPs is to ﬁnd an
approximate solution to the fully-observable belief-MDP,
whose states are probability distributions over the state
space of the original POMDP (Kaelbling et al., 1998). In
the discrete case, the resulting belief space is continuous
but ﬁnite-dimensional, and belief update can be carried out
exactly. However, the belief space of a continuous POMDP
is inﬁnite-dimensional, and must be approximated (Thrun,
2000).
The optimal value function of belief-MDPs is piecewise-
linear and convex in the discrete case (Sondik, 1971), and
this also holds for some cases of continuous state (Porta
et al., 2006), as long as the observations and actions are
discrete. This result was used to tackle domains with con-
tinuous hybrid-linear dynamics by Brunskill et al. (2008).
Other combinations of the discrete and the continuous do-
mains were also considered (Hoey & Poupart, 2005; Spaan
& Vlassis, 2005).
The richest domain tackled by con-
tinuous POMDPs is probably outdoor navigation (Brooks,
2009).
However, in all the examples mentioned above, the belief
domain is solved through global optimization. Since the
volume of state space grows exponentially with the dimen-
sion of the state, it is unrealistic to seek a globally-optimal
solution in domains above a certain size because of the
curse of dimensionality. Some studies (e.g., Feng & Zil-
berstein, 2004) try to offset some of the computational bur-
den by ﬁnding parts of belief space that can safely be ig-
nored, but the fundamental problem of exponential scaling
remains.
In contrast, continuous domains naturally admit a notion of
distance, which allows the application of local optimization
methods. Here, we present a method for approximating a
locally-optimal solution to a POMDP in which state, ac-
tion and observation space are continuous. This work is
a departure from the current POMDP literature, as it of-
fers a different trade-off between provable correctness and

scalability. Since we employ a local method, guarantees
or bounds for global optimality are impossible to obtain.
However, local optimization is not subject to the curse of
dimensionality, and can tackle domains that are outside the
reach of global approaches.
In this paper, we use Differential Dynamic Programming
(DDP) to solve for a locally-optimal policy (section 4).
While DDP optimizes the open-loop (“blind”) policy, it
also outputs a feedback policy (section 5) that is used to
adapt the execution-time behavior to the actual incoming
observations.
We approximate the belief space with a parametric distribu-
tion, speciﬁcally a Gaussian mixture, and use the Extended
Kalman Filter (EKF) for belief update (Stengel, 1994). By
virtue of the EKF being a ﬁrst-order ﬁlter, we can ana-
lytically marginalize the belief update over the observa-
tions. By focusing only on the most-likely observation,
we recover a deterministic update scheme (section 3). This
seems counter-intuitive, since the goal of solving POMDPs
is to generate behavior that responds to observations. How-
ever, note that observations are marginalized only for plan-
ning; during policy execution, the actual incoming observa-
tions are taken into account as they are used to estimate the
agent’s hidden state. By coupling state estimation and feed-
back control, the agent’s behavior is again conditioned on
incoming observations, allowing it to respond to the chang-
ing environment in real time.
POMDPs are often used to tackle domains with unilateral
constraints, such as contacts (e.g., Hsiao et al., 2007). Since
the EKF works by linearizing the dynamics, a single Gaus-
sian would not be descriptive enough to handle such dis-
continuities. Since the distribution of the hidden state is
truncated by a constraint manifold, we explicitly approxi-
mate the probability mass that aggregates on this manifold
with a Gaussian of lower rank (section 3.2). We analyti-
cally account for the ﬂow of probability mass between the
two Gaussians using the equations of truncated normal dis-
tributions (section 3.2.1). While these approximations are
used for belief propagation during planning, more accurate
state estimation (e.g., a particle ﬁlter) can be employed dur-
ing policy execution (section 5).
The scalability of the proposed method is unmatched by
any existing technique, and allows the use of POMDPs in
application domains that are too large to admit global solu-
tions. In section 6.2, we apply our method to a simulated
domain of hand-eye coordination with 16 continuous state
dimensions and 6 continuous action dimensions.
The principles of deterministic planning through marginal-
ized observations is not new: for example, Prentice & Roy
(2009) also employ a single-Gaussian approximation of
the belief state during planning. However, this approach
requires samples that span the entire state space, and is
hence bound by the curse of dimensionality. The notion
of marginalizing the observations during local optimiza-
tion has informed the solution method presented in Erez &
Smart (2009). The method we present here is very sim-
ilar to Miller et al. (2009), who used the term nominal-
belief optimization, and Platt et al. (2010), who used the
term maximum-likelihood observations. However, neither
approaches can tackle domains with unilateral constraints
(section 3.2).
2
DEFINITIONS
We consider a discrete-time POMDP deﬁned by a tuple
⟨S, A, Z, T, Ω, R, N⟩, where: S, A and Z are the state
space, action space and observation space, respectively;
T(s′, s, a) = Pr(s′|s, a) is a transition function describ-
ing the probability of the next state given the current state
and action; Ω(z, s, a) = Pr(z|s, a) is the observation func-
tion, describing the probability of an observation given the
current state and action; and R is a time-dependent reward
function Ri(s, a), with a terminal reward RN(s). In this
paper we consider an undiscounted optimality criterion,
where the agent’s goal is to maximize the expected cumu-
lative reward within a ﬁxed time horizon N. This formu-
lation is a deviation from the common focus on discounted
horizons, and we adopt it because it is useful for the local
optimal control algorithm we employ (section 4).
3
THE BELIEF DOMAIN
The belief state b ∈B is a probability distribution over
S, where bi(s) is the likelihood of the true state being s at
time i. In order to construct the belief domain of a given
POMDP, we need to ﬁnd a representation for b, and deﬁne
the reward function and dynamics (belief update) over this
space.
Given the current belief b, an action a and observation z,
the updated belief b′ can be calculated by applying Bayes’s
rule. In the continuous case B is inﬁnite-dimensional, and
Bayes’s rule yields an integral:
b′(s′) ∝
Z
s
b(s)T(s′, s, a)Ω(z, s, a)ds.
In order to make this function computationally tractable,
we must employ some approximation ˆb to the true belief
b, and commit to some state estimation ﬁlter to update the
approximated belief.
The reward associated with a belief is simply the expected
value over this state distribution:
Ri(b, a) = E
s∼b

Ri(s, a)

.
(1)
Since our optimality criterion employs a ﬁnite-horizon, our
optimization focuses on the time-dependent policy π(ˆb, i),

mapping beliefs and time to actions. The optimal policy
maximizes the cumulative reward:
π∗= argmax
π
E
h N
X
i=1
Ri(bi, π(bi, i))
i
.
(2)
3.1
CONTINUOUS DYNAMICS
In this section, we focus on nonlinear stochastic dynamics
ds = f(s, a)dt + q(s, a)dξ, where ξ is a Wiener process.
For a given state s and action a, integrating these dynamics
over a small time-step τ results in a normal distribution
over the next state s′:
T(s′, s, a) = N(s′|F(s, a), Q(s, a)),
where the mean is propagated with the Euler integration
F = s + τf(s, a),
(3)
and the covariance Q = τqTq is a time-scaling of the con-
tinuous process qdξ.
Similarly, we focus on observation distributions of the
form: Ω(z, s, a) = N(z|w(s), W(s, a)), where w deter-
ministically maps states to observations, and W describes
how the current state and action affect the observation
noise.
Given a Gaussian prior on the initial state, we approximate
the inﬁnite-dimensional b by a single Gaussian:
ˆb(s) = N(s|ˆs, Σ) =
1
(2π)
k
2 |Σ|
1
2 e−1
2 (s−ˆs)TΣ−1(s−ˆs),
and denote its parameterization by:
ν = {ˆs, Σ}
(4)
where the covariance Σ belongs to the space of symmetric,
positive-semideﬁnite matrices M ⊂Rn×n. Therefore, the
belief space ˆB is parameterized in this case by the product
space ν ∈S×M. In the limit of τ →0, this approximation
is accurate.
In order to approximate the belief update, we use the Ex-
tended Kalman Filter (EKF) (Stengel, 1994). Given the
current belief ˆb, action a and observation z, we calcu-
late the partial derivatives around ˆs: ws = ∂w/∂s and
Fs = ∂F/∂s. We ﬁnd the uncorrected estimation uncer-
tainty H = FsΣF T
s + Q(ˆs, a) and calculate the new mean
ˆs′ by the innovation process:
ˆs′ = F(ˆs, a) −K(z −w(ˆs)).
(5)
where K = Hws(wT
s Hws + W(ˆs, a))−1 is the Kalman
gain. Finally, the new covariance Σ′ is given by:
Σ′ = Ψ(ˆs, Σ, a) =
H −Hws(wT
s Hws + W(ˆs, a))−1wT
s HT.
(6)
The deterministic belief update is obtained by marginaliz-
ing equations (5) and (6) over the observation z. Equation
(5) is linear in z, and so we can take the expectation by
simply replacing z with its mean w(ˆs). The second term
of equation (5) vanishes, and so the mean follows (3). By
virtue of the EKF being a ﬁrst-order ﬁlter, the calculation
in (6) is independent of z. In summary, the deterministic
belief update is formed by the combination of (3) and (6):
ˆb′ = {F(ˆs, a), Ψ(ˆs, Σ, a)}.
(7)
3.2
UNILATERAL CONSTRAINTS
In the previous section, we made the assumption that F
and w can be linearized WRT s. However, this assump-
tion may be too restrictive for some domains; in particular,
it excludes discontinuous dynamics that occur due to uni-
lateral constraints. Since this category includes interesting
domains of disambiguation by contact, object manipulation
and locomotion, we extend our method to handle the non-
Gaussian beliefs that come about in such cases.
In this section we consider domains with non-penetration
constraints Γ:
ds
=
f(s, a)dt + Q(s, a)dξ,
Γ(s)
≥
0.
(8)
In the general case, the reaction forces that enforce these
constraints can be calculated using complementarity meth-
ods (Stewart, 2000) or penalty methods (Drumwright,
2008). When Γ(s) = 0, we say that the constraint is ac-
tive. In this paper, we consider domains where at most one
constraint is active at any one time, and so we may focus
on cases where Γ(s) is scalar.
The resulting belief b can no longer be described by a sim-
ple normal distribution: Γ describes an (n−1)-dimensional
constraint manifold, and the belief distribution is truncated
at this manifold, with some probability mass aggregating
on it. We approximate this truncated distribution with a
weighted mixture of two Gaussians: one describing the
belief distribution in the unconstrained volume, and the
other describing the aggregated belief on the constraint
(hence degenerate in the direction locally perpendicular to
the manifold). Using ν to parameteize a single Gaussian as
in (4), we denote the parameterized belief
ˆb(s) = αN(s|ˆs1, Σ1) + (1 −α)N(s|ˆs2, Σ2)
by the shorthand
ˆb = {ν1, ν2, α},
where α ∈[0, 1] is the relative weight of the ﬁrst Gaus-
sian. This is not an exact representation of the true belief;
a Gaussian has inﬁnite support, and therefore the uncon-
strained Gaussian has non-zero probability mass beyond

the constraint. However, this mass is small enough that,
in practice, it has had no noticeable effect on our results.
Belief update is done in two stages, as outlined in algo-
rithm 1. In the ﬁrst stage, we update the belief of each
Gaussian independently using (7).
Assuming that there
is noise in the direction locally-perpendicular to the con-
straint, the second Gaussian is now full-rank. In the sec-
ond stage, we re-approximate this two-Gaussian mixture,
ensuring that the resulting mixture maintains the form de-
scribed above — the probability mass above the constraint
manifold is approximated with one Gaussian, and the be-
lief that lies below the constraint is approximated with a
second, degenerate Gaussian that lies on the manifold. The
details of the computations required for the second stage
are detailed in the next two subsections.
3.2.1
Truncation
In order to re-adjust the belief to the constraint, we linearize
the constraint function Γ ≈Js + e ≥0 around the mean
of each Gaussian. We compute the distributions on either
side of the constraint analytically by considering truncated
normal distributions (Boutilier, 2002; Toussaint, 2009). We
can linearly rotate and re-scale the state space so as to en-
sure that the constraint manifold is locally perpendicular to
the kth dimension of s, and that the uncertainty in this di-
mension is independent of the others. Therefore, we can
focus our analysis on the one-dimensional case, assuming
without loss of generality that the constraint does not affect
any dimension but k.
Let x ∼N(µ, σ2). When bound to an interval x ∈[l, u],
its distribution becomes:
Pr(x) ∝
1
√
2πσ2 exp

−(x −µ)2
2σ2

Θ(x −l)Θ(u −x),
where Θ is the Heaviside function. The ﬁrst two moments
of the resulting distribution are:
E(X | l < X < u) = µ + σ φ(¯l) −φ(¯u)
Φ(¯u) −Φ(¯l)
(9a)
Var(X | l < X < u) =
σ2
"
1 +
¯lφ(¯l) −¯uφ(¯u)
Φ(¯u) −Φ(¯l) −
 φ(¯l) −φ(¯u)
Φ(¯u) −Φ(¯l)
2#
(9b)
where ¯l =
l−µ
σ , ¯u =
u−µ
σ , and φ(¯x), Φ(¯x) are the PDF
and CDF of the normal distribution with zero mean and
unit variance. The probability masses that aggregate on the
constraints are Φ(¯l) and 1 −Φ(¯u). We are interested in
distributions over one-sided intervals, so either l = −∞or
u = ∞, which further simpliﬁes (9).
Algorithm 1 Deterministic Belief Update with Unilateral
Constraints
Input: ˆb = {ν1, ν2, α}, action a
for i = 1, 2 do
Marginalized EKF: Calculate ν′
i by (7).
Truncation: Calculate {νu
i , νl
i, αu
i } by (9).
end for
Reduction: Calculate ν′′
1 , ν′′
2 by (10).
Adjustment: Project ν′′
2 onto constraint by (11).
Weight update: Calculate α′ by (12).
Output: ˆb′ = {ν′′
1 , ν′′
2 , α′}.
3.2.2
Mixture Reduction
We use the truncation procedure described above to split
each Gaussian in two, across the constraint.
In order
to maintain our form (one Gaussian unconstrained, one
Gaussian on the constraint manifold), we reduce this four-
Gaussian mixture back to two, and project the second
Gaussian onto the constraint.
Reducing a mixture of two Gaussians {ν1, ν2, α} results in
a single Gaussian whose mean ˆs and covariance Σ are:
ˆs = αˆs1 + (1 −α)ˆs2,
(10a)
Σ = αΣ1+(1−α)Σ2+α(1−α)(ˆs1−ˆs2)(ˆs1−ˆs2)T (10b)
Using these equations, we combine the two Gaussians
above the constraint into a single Gaussian ν′′
1 , and the two
Gaussians below the constraint into ν′′
2 . Assuming that the
constraint is locally perpendicular to the kth dimension as
above, we project ν′′
2 onto the constraint by setting:
(ˆs′′
2)k = Γ(ˆs′′
2), and (Σ′′
2)k,k = 0.
(11)
Finally, the weight of the unconstrained Gaussian in the
adjusted mixture is:
α′ = ααu
1 + (1 −α)αu
2.
(12)
4
PLANNING
The belief update schemes of the previous section (together
with (1)) deﬁne a problem of deterministic optimal control
in a high-dimensional continuous space, with non-linear
dynamics and non-quadratic reward. This can be solved
using a variety of techniques; Platt et al. (2010), for ex-
ample, use the multiple shooting method. We use a lo-
cal optimization scheme called Differential Dynamic Pro-
gramming (DDP), an algorithm that has been successfully
applied to real-world high-dimensional, non-linear control
domains (e.g., Abbeel & Ng, 2005; Tassa et al., 2008). The
interested reader may ﬁnd an in-depth description of the
algorithm in Jacobson & Mayne (1970).

The beneﬁt of using DDP is that in addition to the
locally-optimal trajectory and the open-loop action se-
quence which realizes this trajectory, it outputs a sequence
of linear feedback gain matrices. These parameterize the
policy (section 5) to create a feedback controller for the
original POMDP.
5
POLICY EXECUTION
Since a policy for a continuous POMDP is inﬁnite-
dimensional, it also needs to be parameterized. In this pa-
per we focus on policies that are locally-linear:
π(ˆb, i) = ¯ai + Li(ˆb −¯bi)
(13)
for some parameterized belief states ¯b1:N, actions ¯a1:N−1
and feedback gain matrices L1:N−1. This parameteriza-
tion corresponds to the output of Differential Dynamic Pro-
gramming, as described in the previous section.
The policy is executed post-planning, as the agent inter-
acts with the environment. Incoming observations are ﬁl-
tered by state estimation, and feedback control responds
to changes in the perceived state and reacts appropriately.
Thus, the agent’s behavior is conditioned on received ob-
servations even though these were marginalized during
planning.
At this stage, we are no longer committed to the belief up-
date schemes of section 3, and a more accurate ﬁlter (e.g.,
particle ﬁlter) can be used for state approximation. This
new ﬁlter may employ a different representation of the be-
lief state which may be richer than a single Gaussian.
6
RESULTS
First, we demonstrate key features of our method by con-
sidering an example of planar navigation, roughly corre-
sponding to domains considered by Roy & Thrun (1999)
and Brooks (2009). Then, we demonstrate the scalability
of our method by solving a 16-dimensional problem, ﬁrst
presented by Erez & Smart (2009).
6.1
PLANAR NAVIGATION
In this problem, a robot must move in a closed room from
a start point to a target while avoiding obstacles. The robot
cannot sense its position, but may localize itself by making
contact with the walls. Here, state, action and observation
are all two-dimensional, and the constraint is scalar. The
resulting optimal behavior (ﬁgure 1(a)) is found in less than
a minute: the robot avoids the obstacles by approaching the
side wall, and then “cut” the corner on its way to the target
at the target at the bottom wall. In order to study the effect
of linearizing the constraint, we tested a case where the
agent interacts with the curved segment of the constraint.
(a)
(b)
Figure 1: 2D navigation. (a) The robot (dashed blue line)
localizes itself by approaching the wall (black) while avoid-
ing the obstacles (X) and reaching the target (triangle).
Blue ellipses depict the covariance. (b) An optimal so-
lution that interacts with the curved part of the constraint
manifold.
As ﬁgure 1(b) shows, the optimal path in this case follows
the round corner without difﬁculty.
The disambiguating property of the contact with the wall is
termed “coastal navigation” (Roy & Thrun, 1999), and our
algorithm is able to identify and leverage this feature as it
emerges in the optimal solution. We cannot offer a direct
comparison of our results with Brooks (2009), since his ex-
periments were conducted on real robots. Note the qualita-
tive difference in our approach: Brooks’s method approxi-
mates the global optimum, and requires 8000 samples that
are processed in ∼25 minutes, while our method ﬁnds a
locally-optimal solution in less than one minute.
6.2
HAND-EYE COORDINATION
This problem illustrates the scalability of our algorithm,
since we believe it cannot be solved by any other POMDP
technique. In addition, we demonstrate reactive behavior
through feedback control. The resulting behavior is best
illustrated by the supplementary movie1.
This domain is similar to the one we solved in Erez & Smart
(2009), with few notable differences: ﬁrst, here we intro-
duce perceptual inhibition during saccadic motion; more
signiﬁcantly, the solution method of this paper is faster and
more robust than the minimax approach presented there,
since here we do not solve for the adversarial behavior.
This domain simulates the problem of an agent coordinat-
ing two “hands” and an “eye”. The task requires the agent
to bring the hands from their starting positions to a target
point at a speciﬁc time, while avoiding four obstacles in a
planar scene. State transitions are subject to a ﬁxed Gaus-
sian process noise. The obstacles’ positions are unknown,
1www.cse.wustl.edu/∼etom/uai2010.mp4

target
obstacles
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2: Hand-eye coordination. (a) A schematic of the scene. The hands (red and blue diamonds) aim for the target
(green triangle) while avoiding the obstacles whose position is uncertain (black blurs), assisted by the eye (middle). (b) An
illustration of the learned optimal trajectory. The size of the eye’s fovea is represented as a black circle around its starting
place (center of the ﬁgure). The eye’s trajectory alternates between following the hands in smooth pursuit (thick black line)
and saccadic motion (thin dashed line) between the hands and the obstacles. The uncertainty in the hands’ positions are
depicted as a series of circles – note that when the eye is smoothly following a hand, the uncertainty vanishes. (c) If the
positions of obstacles and target change from those during training (grey), feedback control and state estimation allow the
agent to adjust its behavior. These behaviors are best illustrated by the supplementary movie1.
so the agent must observe and estimate these as well.
The planar scene is illustrated in ﬁgure 2(a). The state is
deﬁned in terms of the following variables: se is the eye’s
two-dimensional position, sh1 and sh2 are the positions of
the hands, st is the target’s position, and {sli, i = 1 . . . 4}
are the positions of four obstacles.
Therefore, the state
space has 16 continuous dimensions. Every state s is a
concatenation of the 8 planar positions above. The action
space A is 6-dimensional, specifying planar velocities for
the hands and eye. As stated in the previous section, such a
domain is infeasible for global optimization, and cannot be
solved by any existing global POMDP algorithm.
Z, the observation space, is identical to the state space. The
observation noise covariance W is diagonal, allowing in-
dependent observation of each scene element. W is state-
and action-dependent: the eye has the capacity to produce
unambiguous observations in a small region around its cur-
rent position, conceptually modelling foveated vision. The
eye’s gaze locally reduces the observation noise:
W⋆(s, a) = 1 −e−∥se−s⋆∥2/2η + 0.01aT
e ae
(14)
where ⋆stands for one of the scene elements: h1, h2, t, or
any of the obstacles li. The parameter η determines the size
of the fovea, and ae is the current actuation of the eye. The
last RHS term in (14) models visual inhibition during sac-
cadic eye movement, effectively eliminating the eye’s dis-
ambiguating effect during high-velocity eye movements.
Thus, the eye produces valid observations only when it is
close to an object, and moving slowly.
The reward function is the same as in Erez & Smart (2009)
— it penalizes for distance between the hands and the tar-
get at the ﬁnal time step, and for proximity between the
hands and the obstacles at all other time steps; action (dis-
placement of hands and eye) incurs a quadratic cost, where
the eye’s action cost is negligibly small.
The covariance of the process noise Q is a constant diag-
onal matrix, where the noise in the X- and Y-direction are
equal for every scene element. The process noise that af-
fects the eye, obstacles and target is zero. From the agent’s
perspective, this means that once observed, the positions of
the target and obstacles can be trusted to remain unmoved,
allowing the eye’s position to provide grounding for locat-
ing all other elements of the scene. Since process noise
is uncorrelated between state dimensions and symmetric in
both planar directions, the belief covariance can be decom-
posed and succinctly represented by a single scalar vari-
ance for each scene element (but the eye, whose position is
certain). In all, ˆB has 23 dimensions.
Figure 2(b) shows the resulting locally-optimal trajectories
for both hands and the eye. Notice how the eye tracks each
hand in turn as it passes close the obstacles, and how the
hands time their approach to the obstacles to synchronize
with the eye. Interestingly, in the optimal solution we can
see the emergence of two distinct phases of eye behavior
– smooth pursuit, where the eye tracks the hand, and sac-
cades, where the eye rapidly moves from one gaze target
to another. This behavior is in accordance with biological
visual behavior (Cassin & Rubin, 2001).

To demonstrate the responsiveness of the resulting policy,
we tested the agent’s feedback control in a modiﬁed scene,
where the obstacles were shifted from their position dur-
ing planning. Figure 2(c) shows the resulting behavior: the
hands’ trajectories are adjusted as the eye perceives and up-
dates the estimated position of the obstacles and hands (us-
ing EKF). Since feedback is speciﬁed over belief space, the
behaving agent also responds to changes in the estimation
uncertainty.
In our initial experiments, we observed mis-convergence
to a local minimum, where the eye would not bother to
saccade between the two hands, instead sticking to only
one of them. This was remedied by employing a shaping-
continuation method (Erez & Smart, 2008) We ﬁrst found
a solution to a simpler problem, where the size of the no-
tional fovea is large (η = 10). There, the wide ﬁeld-of-
view allowed a relatively unambiguous view of the entire
scene, and enabled the formation of a trajectory that had
the right coarse features (a move to the left, then a move
to the right, then a move up), even as it was not required
to perform precise saccades. As learning progresses, the
size of the foveal region was gradually reduced, making
exact eye movements more important. Every new prob-
lem instance was solved using the previous solution as a
starting point. This process repeated for decreasing fovea
radius (η = [1, 0.3, 0.05]) until we generated a solution to
the original problem. The shaping sequence required run-
ning DDP to convergence 4 times, yet the optimal solution
for this 16-dimensional domain was found in less than 3
minutes of MATLAB running on a single-core desktop com-
puter.
7
DISCUSSION
This paper offers a new perspective on solving continu-
ous POMDPs. Instead of using global approximation in
a belief-MDP, we marginalize the observations and cast the
inﬁnite-dimensional, stochastic belief domain in terms of a
ﬁnite-dimensional optimal control problem. The approach
we present here applies to domains whose dynamics are
smooth (and hence Gaussian beliefs constitute a good ap-
proximation) or with one unilateral constraint (where we
use a speciﬁcally-structured two-Gaussian mixture); how-
ever, our approximations may not hold for domains with
more elaborate structure.
While this method scales very well with state dimension-
ality, we chose to focus on domains where only one con-
straint is active at a time. Such cases are amenable to an-
alytic manipulation using truncated normal distributions,
as described above. If we extended this type of analysis
to cases where more than one constraint may be active at
once, we would be assigning a Gaussian to every combi-
nation of active constraints, and accounting for the ﬂow of
probability mass between all of them. This would intro-
duce yet another set of approximations, and would be com-
putationally reasonable only for a small number of jointly-
active constraints.
One natural extension of this work could employ local opti-
mization from multiple starting points, creating a controller
that uses a trajectory library (Stolle & Atkeson, 2006; Tassa
et al., 2008). Such a scheme could extend the basin of at-
traction of our local controller (similar to Tedrake, 2009),
and produce a better approximation of the globally-optimal
policy. In particular, a multi-modal prior can be handled by
ﬁnding the optimal behavior for each of the modes, and us-
ing state estimation during policy execution to choose the
relevant case. If behavior is expected to encounter different
variants of the same environment, which vary along a sin-
gle parameter (e.g. ground incline, or object mass), we can
extend a single solution and create a manifold controller
(Erez & Smart, 2007) through some continuation approach.
In many real-life cases, an active constraint results in fric-
tional forces, in addition to the reaction forces that maintain
non-penetration. This can be incorporated into our method
by using a different dynamical model for the initial belief
update of the constrained Gaussian ν2, in particular one that
incorporates friction. In cases where making contact (i.e.,
collision) is associated with a non-negligible impact dy-
namics of other degrees of freedom beyond the constrained
one (e.g., foot-ground impact, or ball-racket impact), these
impulses can be considered as we project the Gaussian that
lies below the constraint manifold onto the linearized hy-
perplane.
