Applying Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Age Estimation in Digital Forensic
Investigations
Thomas Gr¨ubl, Harjinder Singh Lallie∗
WMG, University of Warwick, Coventry, CV4 7AL
Abstract
The precise age estimation of child sexual abuse and exploitation (CSAE) victims is one of the most
signiﬁcant digital forensic challenges.
Investigators often need to determine the age of victims by
looking at images and interpreting the sexual development stages and other human characteristics.
The main priority – safeguarding children – is often negatively impacted by a huge forensic backlog,
cognitive bias and the immense psychological stress that this work can entail.
This paper evaluates existing facial image datasets and proposes a new dataset tailored to the
needs of similar digital forensic research contributions. This small, diverse dataset of 0 to 20-year-old
individuals contains 245 images and is merged with 82 unique images from the FG-NET dataset, thus
achieving a total of 327 images with high image diversity and low age range density. The new dataset
is tested on the Deep EXpectation (DEX) algorithm pre-trained on the IMDB-WIKI dataset.
The overall results for young adolescents aged 10 to 15 and older adolescents/adults aged 16 to 20
are very encouraging - achieving MAEs as low as 1.79, but also suggest that the accuracy for children
aged 0 to 10 needs further work. In order to determine the eﬃcacy of the prototype, valuable input
of four digital forensic experts, including two forensic investigators, has been taken into account to
improve age estimation results. Further research is required to extend datasets both concerning image
density and the equal distribution of factors such as gender and racial diversity.
Keywords:
age estimation, digital forensics, CNN, child sexual abuse and exploitation, facial image
datasets
1. Introduction
One of the key challenges in the investigation of child sexual abuse and exploitation (CSAE)
material relates to the age estimation of both the abused and the abuser.
Humans can estimate
several facets, including age, height, weight, gender, ethnicity, and facial expressions reasonably easily.
However, human decision making in this area can be impacted by the size and volume of images to
be processed and also the trauma caused by the process of assessment.
Of equal concern are cognitive biases presented to the investigator. These are often induced by
traumatic stress and other psychological disorders caused by the regular examination and processing
of this type of evidence [78]. Distress and anxiety, or situations that create feelings of disgust can
render impaired decision-making [54] and negative emotions render risky decisions [40]. Furthermore,
human factors such as cognitive bias can also impede eﬀective decision-making [83]. The motivation
for saving a child can inﬂuence rational analyses [83]. In some cases, staﬀexposure to disturbing
material can lead to immense psychological stress [47].
∗Corresponding author

Preprint submitted to ARXiV
January 11, 2022
arXiv:2201.03045v1  [cs.CV]  9 Jan 2022

Machine learning (ML) techniques can aid the development of Decision Support Systems (DSS).
ML can help to increase estimation accuracy but also reduce human exposure time to CSAE material.
Algorithms must be trained intensively before they can achieve acceptable estimation accuracy [4],
however, generally, whenever a suitable algorithm is trained with suﬃcient sample images, it often
outperforms the human judgements [4, 5, 26, 73, 74].
ML techniques can serve as complementary tools for forensic investigators. These systems can
aid in identifying, restoring and gathering diﬀerent kinds of evidence, processing the material via
suitable reasoning modules (e.g. AI classiﬁers), and presenting the results to an investigator for ﬁnal
decision making [61, 45, 17]. A number of ML techniques have been proposed to provide accurate
age predictions using facial images [3, 5, 15, 26, 28, 73, 74]. However, ML techniques are rarely used
in day to day investigations. Perhaps one of the most promising techniques in the ﬁeld of ML are
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN), which are able to make predictions about a particular input
based on the training data they have received beforehand. In the case of age estimation in digital
forensics, CNNs are trained with facial images of CSAE victims and the corresponding age labels.
Depending on the size, quality and diversity of the training dataset, the neural network is able to
output accurate age estimation results on completely new testing images.
This study proposes a prototype that receives an input image and classiﬁes the image into an
age category. This research will beneﬁt both crime victims as well as digital forensic investigators.
Although a lot of further research must be done in this ﬁeld, the ﬁndings act as the ﬁrst step to faster,
more accurate, less biased and less emotionally draining digital forensic investigations.
2. Background
Current investigative techniques are steadily becoming obsolete, not only due to advancements in
technology but also a growth in cybercrime and limitations in time and resources [45]. To handle these
challenges, intelligent tools must be implemented, which help to tackle intricate problems. Researchers
have identiﬁed a number of important research challenges which include:
• Increasing demand to analyse the overwhelming bulk of evidence and resulting in signiﬁcant
delays in the judicial process [4, 12, 33, 41, 69].
• Lack of intelligent analytical approaches to investigations [6, 17, 32, 45, 49, 69].
• Staﬀexposure to disturbing material [10, 71, 78, 79].
These problems are long-standing digital forensic challenges. Although acknowledged for a while
that the application of ML techniques can yield improvements in digital forensic processes [7, 45],
practical research contributions in this ﬁeld are still limited and the lack of diverse approaches in the
recent literature can be interpreted as a stagnation of the research ﬁeld and needs to be addressed
immediately.
CSAE remains a high-volume oﬀence, with an upsurge in recorded incidents across the UK. Between
2017 and 2018, the number of reports of suspected CSAE material in the UK has risen by over a third
[63]. Similarly, the number of global reports to the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children
has risen by over 80%. The UK National Crime Agency reported that in 2019, over 300,000 individuals
in the UK alone were estimated to present a threat to children and 7,600 children were safeguarded
in relation to online CSAE material. Between January 2015 and March 2019, over 8.3 million unique
ﬁrst-generation images were added to the Child Abuse Image Database (CAID) [64]. From 2016 to
2017, the UK CSAE referrals bureau received, on average, over 4000 referrals per month, which is ten
times more than in 2010 [62]. However, the true scale of CSAE is suspected to be much higher than
recorded in oﬃcial statistics [63].
Some progress has been made in the auto detection and categorisation of CSAE material. These
systems use hash algorithms to match seized images and videos with pre-recognised images/videos.
2

Hashes of suspect images are compared with hashes stored in systems such as the Child Abuse Image
Database (CAID1), which facilitates the identiﬁcation of previously known CSAE material [48]. Not
only do the obtained images have to be bit-identical, but images not matched with CAID have to be
manually investigated and even where images match, a selection must be manually validated to ensure
consistency.
The victim’s age plays a crucial role in the prosecution of CSAE cases. Investigators must ascertain
whether a subject – the victim or suspect – is a child or an adult, and quite often an assessment is
made of the approximate age of the subject. The UK National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty
to Children [65] and the UK Crown Prosecution Service [18] deﬁne a child as a person under the age
of 18. The World Health Organisation (WHO) deﬁnes children as “a person 10 years or younger” and
adolescents as “a person aged 10 to 19 years inclusive” [90]. [48] provide a more granular deﬁnition.
They deﬁne the development stages of children as follows: early childhood (1-6), later childhood (6-
10), younger adolescent (10-16) and older adolescent (14-17). [48] deﬁnitions will be used throughout
since they comply with the NSPCC and CPS deﬁnitions.
2.1. Intelligent Forensics
The term intelligent forensics, originally coined by [45], refers to the ability of computers to learn
particular forensic tasks from data using “intelligent” methods, such as Machine Learning (ML), to
enhance digital forensic processes. Notwithstanding a number of early studies acknowledging the value
of AI in digital forensic investigations, there have been very few practical contributions and tools are
still largely user-dependent. However, more importantly, very little research has been published on
the optimisation of age estimation processes in DFIs.
[69] present an image and video classiﬁcation module for the identiﬁcation of CSAE content using
automatic ﬁlename categorisation, content classiﬁcation (RGB-based skin detection) and hash-based
detection. Their results suggest an accurate tool for the detection of CSAE material with false-positive
rates of 7.9% for images and 4.3% for videos.
This contribution may beneﬁt from the utilisation
of newer hashing algorithms, and reducing reliance on exact hash matching techniques given that
cropping/cutting CSAE materials will render a diﬀerent hash.
There appears to be a lot of scepticism for AI-based systems [27, 84]. Costantini et al. outlined
that while forensic techniques, such as DNA analysis, are broadly accepted and trusted, AI-based
support systems are still treated with mistrust and it may be diﬃcult to convince the involved parties
of the applicability of such support systems.
Unfortunately, these approaches do not provide a solution for the fundamental legal investigative
problem: the estimation of a victim’s age. Despite the importance of seizing and categorising CSAE
material, the estimation of age and subsequently, the identiﬁcation of victims is the central concern in
law enforcement. Hence, intelligent forensic techniques for reducing the forensic backlog, categorising
images, standardising information representation are, without a doubt, necessary and long overdue.
2.2. Human Factors in Digital Forensic Investigations
Cognitive Bias. Forensic experts do not always produce consistent results and are sometimes prone to
errors related to technological and human factors [83]. Technological errors include faulty timestamps,
data loss, and errors related to the lack of scientiﬁc data and research. Human factor related errors
include cognitive bias, intentional bias and inadvertent errors.
The sources of cognitive bias are strong emotions, such as anger, frustration or conﬁdence often
due to the “underpinning of expertise” [21]. Intentional bias and general errors are related to lack
1CAID is the UK’s national child abuse image database that has been developed by the Home Oﬃce in cooperation
with the police and industry partners [48].
3

of motivation, training or incompetence.
[83] suggest that potential countermeasures can include
psychological training, peer review or hypothesis-testing.
Psychological Stress. There is a growing body of research which outlines the psychological impact of
exposure to CSAE material. Investigators can develop traumatic stress caused by constantly pro-
cessing and examining CSAE material [78]. [71] investigated the impact of observing CSAE material
on 32 child exploitation investigators and found that this activity contributed to salient emotional,
psychological, social and behavioural consequences. Similar ﬁndings have been reported in a study
of 129 law enforcement oﬃcers by [79]. The results showed that contact with CSAE material cases
leads to low self-esteem, impaired concentration compared to other uninvolved investigators, and/or
Secondary Traumatic Stress (STS) which relates to symptoms which occur from observing or learning
about a traumatic event [10].
2.3. Age Estimation Techniques
While face recognition has been extensively studied [59, 67, 75, 86, 87], automatic and precise age
estimation is still a comparably new research ﬁeld. Recent deep learning age estimation techniques
[3, 5, 15, 25, 56, 73], which have built upon early work on exact age estimation [30, 37, 52, 51], have
shown promising results.
Recently, there has been an increase in studies that leverage deep neural networks for face detection,
classiﬁcation of gender and age estimation from facial images [35]. From simple examples, which use
3-layer neural networks [1], to other more sophisticated ones, which use multiple neural networks [20]
and/or networks that potentially consist of hundreds of layers [43], have also been used successfully
by numerous researchers.
Facial appearance is an essential trait in estimating human age [34]. Humans can usually accurately
determine facial information such as identity, gender and race; however, the estimation of age is more
challenging.
Recent progress in this ﬁeld can be ascribed to the developments in the area of deep learning and the
availability of large scale datasets [67]. Face recognition has beneﬁted immensely from comprehensive
and high-quality datasets, such as Labeled Faces in the Wild (LFW) and YouTube faces [23]. However,
facial image datasets such as LFW cannot be considered for age estimation tasks due to missing age
labels.
2.3.1. Facial Image Datasets
One of the most pressing issues in facial age estimation is the lack of suﬃcient training data for
many diﬀerent age groups [74].
Because age estimation methods commonly depend on a process
of learning and training, the selection of the right training data is a crucial step that deﬁnes the
subsequent performance of a classiﬁer [35]. In the case of the age estimation of CSAE victims, a
well-trained neural network can still be inaccurate if trained with the wrong age groups.
One of the oldest and largest databases are the MORPH albums which consist of 1724 and 55608
images, respectively, and can be mainly used for age-gap veriﬁcation (Figure 1). MORPH Album 2 has
a small age-gap issue compared to Album 1, which could pose a problem for the age gap veriﬁcation
accuracy.
The Face and Gesture Recognition Network (FG-NET) database was published in 2004 and is a
valuable and important contribution to the ﬁeld. The dataset contains 1002 images from 82 diﬀerent
individuals with ages ranging between 0 to 69. Approximately 61% of the images show subjects that
are younger than 16 and about 81% are younger than 25. The publisher’s aim, was to contribute
to research technology development in the ﬁeld of face recognition by providing a publicly available
dataset of facial images. However, one limitation of the FG-NET database is the lack of racial diversity
and the relatively small size.
4

Table 1: Comparison of diﬀerent facial image datasets.
Literary source
Dataset
Subjects (♀)
Images (♀)
Age
≤16
≤25
Max gap
P
A
[72]
MORPH Album 1
515(95)
1724(294)
N/A
N/A
N/A
29
Y
Y
[72]
MORPH Album 2
13618(2159)
55608(8551)
16-77
N/A
N/A
5
Y
Y
[53]
FG-NET
82(34)
1002(395)
0-69
61.07
80.94
45
Y
Y
[13]
CACD
2000
163446
16-62
N/A
N/A
10
Y
Y
[57]
CAFE
901
4659
N/A
N/A
58.04
N/A
Y
Y
[9]
LAP
1010
3828
N/A
N/A
N/A
80
Y
Y
[73]
IMDB-WIKI
22741
524230
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Y
Y
[25]
LAP
N/A
4699
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Y
N
[19]
CLF
919(315)
3682
2-18
N/A
100
6
N
N
[36]
ageCFBP
287(151)
1655
0-25
40
100
N/A
N
Y
[29]
MEDS
518(52)
1309
15-69
N/A
34.37
N/A
N
Y
[23]
OUI-Adience
2284
26580(12826)
0-60
N/A
38,67
N/A
Y
Y
[31]
UIUC-IFP-Y
1600(800)
8000(4000)
0-93
N/A
N/A
N/A
N
Y
[38]
FSAR
N/A
432
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Y
N
[16]
BERC
390
390
3-83
N/A
N/A
N/A
N
Y
[82]
VADANA
43(17)
2298
0-78
N/A
N/A
N/A
Y
Y
♀→female; P →Publicly available. A →Applicable to age estimation research
[73] proposed a new method called Deep Expectation (DEX) and crawled over 500,000 celebrity
images from both Wikipedia and IMDB to produce a database of images annotated with age and gender
labels. [73, 74] use a model with 101 output neurons, including age ranges of 0 to 100. The IMDB-WIKI
dataset beneﬁts from containing a high number of images. Unfortunately, the dataset suﬀers from a
lack of training images (training density) for low age ranges, i.e. it is inaccurate and therefore unhelpful
in facial age estimation of very young children. However, [73] achieve low MAEs in estimating the ages
of mid-to-late teenagers, which is particularly important when attempting to distinguish jurisdictional
boundaries, for example, distinguishing CSAE material from adult pornography. Furthermore, the
authors do not explicitly employ facial landmarks, which, as they state, could improve the performance
of DEX. Facial landmarks are ﬁducial facial key points that are used to analyse facial images. Facial
landmark detection algorithms automatically identify the locations of eyes, nose, mouth, wrinkles and
other unique features [91]. Yet, even without relying on landmarks and by handling small occlusions
robustly, DEX signiﬁcantly outperforms the human reference on facial age estimation of adults.
Table 1 shows a detailed list of facial image datasets for two diﬀerent purposes – age estimation and
age-gap veriﬁcation. Figure 1 shows the purpose of each dataset and the diﬀerent factors of diversity.
Although racial diversity would beneﬁt the overall accuracies of age estimation, it cannot be considered
as a diversity factor due to the limited information about race distributions in publications in this
domain. Hence, the diversity factor is calculated by considering the gender and age distributions.
[36] acknowledged that the accuracy of child age estimation suﬀers from lowered accuracies due to
the lack of training data for these speciﬁc age groups. The majority of available datasets do not oﬀer
images of individuals from birth to adulthood.
[36] chose to manually collect personal data of minors, instead of crawling publicly available data
from the internet. This method requires parental consent, involves fundamental legal considerations
and is not scalable, whereas related studies such as the research from [5] and [57] apply automated
data crawling methods to enhance the eﬃciency of the image collection process. The datasets of both
[5] and [36] have remained private.
The previous studies reveal that the lack of facial images of children poses a big problem for the
accuracy of age estimation techniques, which could be applied to DFIs. As [42] conclude, training
and testing face recognition and age estimation algorithms on highly diverse sets of faces is crucial
to achieving the best possible results. Hence, the value of studying the above areas of literature will
5

support this research on developing perfectly tailored datasets for juvenile age estimation.
Figure 1: Bubble diagram of facial image datasets showing the name, size, year, diversity and purpose.
2.3.2. Age Estimation Using Neural Networks
The estimation of a person’s age can be achieved using many diﬀerent methods. This section focuses
speciﬁcally on neural networks (NNs). A neural network is a neuron-connectivity pattern inspired by
the neural structure of mammals [92]. Neural networks ﬁrstly proved their ability in object recognition
in the ImageNet competition [50]. They can be used for many diﬀerent tasks that involve learning
from images, such as medical image analysis, exchange rate predictions but also age estimation. From
a high-level perspective, age estimation methods can be divided into machine learning approaches
based on feature sets and deep learning pattern recognition techniques [3].
Classiﬁcation and Regression. Age estimation can be seen as a classiﬁcation or regression problem
[15]. In an age classiﬁcation task, a facial image is assigned to a particular group by a multi-class
classiﬁcation algorithm. A regression task outputs a discrete age estimation value [20].
[73] argue that age estimation is a piece-wise regression problem, since age is a continuous variable,
although they still train convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for classiﬁcation into 101 year labels
[0...100]. When training for classiﬁcation, it is vital that each age range covers the same number of
years and is compromised of the same number of training images [74].
Classiﬁcation models include Support Vector Machines (SVM), CNNs, DNNs, Nearest Neighbours,
whereas common regression methods include Support Vector Regression (SVR) and Quadratic Regres-
sion (QR).
Convolutional Neural Networks. Deep CNNs have shown promising results for computer vision tasks
on images [66]. Recently, many studies have employed CNNs to predict the age of an individual from
a single facial image [3, 5, 15, 28, 73]. Their methodology is generally identical; by combining a series
6

of convolutional, pooling and fully or partially connected layers as well as activation functions, the
ﬁnal output value is calculated (see Figure 5).
CNNs apply, as the name suggests, discrete convolution (1) to extract a set of local features from
a facial image. A convolutional layer performs the mathematical convolution over the matrices of
preceding layers in order to extract facial features from the image. Facial features can be divided into
high-level, medium-level and low-level features which respectively describe the facial structure, more
detailed features (eyes, ears, nose, mouth) and very detailed features (edges, dark spots, wrinkles)
[55].
(f ∗g)(t) =
∞
X
τ=−∞
f(τ)g(t −τ)
(1)
Equation (1) describes the sum of the mathematical products of two (shifted) functions f(t) and
g(t) for every point τ in time. Convolution in digital image processing is performed with a ﬁlter array
(ﬁlter matrix). This ﬁlter array and every shifted version of the array are multiplied with the original
image. The result is a matrix that describes an extracted feature.
The pooling layers are responsible for down-sampling the image and thus reducing the complexity.
This process can be viewed as decreasing the resolution of an image. Max-pooling is one method that
is commonly used within CNNs and refers to summarising the distinct regions of an image to a single
value. Generally, a 2 × 2 pixel region is combined and the highest pixel value is forwarded to the
next layer [2]. [50] were using an overlapping pooling scheme for their famous ImageNet classiﬁcation.
This method, compared to non-overlapping pooling, can reduce error rates by overlapping the grids
with one another. Another advantage observed by the authors is that overlapping pooling layers are
slightly reducing the probability of overﬁtting, which CNNs are generally prone to.
A fully-connected layer, as the name suggests, directly connects each neuron in a layer to every
single neuron in another layer. In order to redirect the matrix output of the convolutional and pooling
layers into a dense layer, the layer needs to be ﬂattened ﬁrst. They are commonly placed at the rear
end of a CNN to produce the ﬁnal classiﬁcation decision [22]. A disadvantage of fully-connected layers
is the high computational complexity compared to partially-connected layers. Hence, many modern
networks are limiting the number of fully-connected layers to a minimum (including the VGG-16 CNN
used in this research).
Every convolutional or fully-connected layer usually feeds the output into the Rectiﬁed Linear Unit
(ReLU) non-linearity function [50]. To achieve non-linearity and therefore adjust the output values,
diﬀerent mathematical functions such as tanh, sigmoid, or ReLU can be applied. The latter is the
most commonly used in today’s CNNs since it is more computationally eﬃcient than other functions.
The ReLU ensures that all values that are ≤0 are becoming 0 and the remaining values stay in a 1:1
proportion.
When training a network, each iteration optimises the network by back-propagating the learned
information. The process of forward-propagation is merely feeding the input images into the network
and calculating a variable in the output layer. However, the weights in a network need to be adjusted
accordingly based on the accuracy of the output layer. Hence, the back-propagation of the errors is
necessary. The error value is determined by calculating the diﬀerence between the expected value and
the actual output value [80].
2.4. Summary
The background outlined herein highlights the need for the creation of more tailored datasets for
digital forensic investigations. Several datasets could be more applicable to DFIs if the creators paid
close attention to image diversity, especially as this factor is crucial for training deep neural networks.
7

Further research is required to gain a better understanding of the most eﬀective facial image dataset
composition for achieving more accurate age estimation results on CSAE images. The next stage of
this research will empirically evaluate the accuracy of an existing algorithm and determine the eﬃcacy
of the prototype.
3. Methodology
An age estimation prototype was developed and evaluated using statistical metrics to assess the
accuracy of the prototype and compare the results to existing age estimation solutions. Additionally,
we collected and analysed qualitative responses to determine the eﬃcacy and usefulness of the approach
to digital forensic practitioners. This was intended to help identify further improvements to the age
estimation prototype.
3.1. Framework for the Development of a Prototype
The availability of adequate datasets is a key challenge in this research area. There are a number
of strictures which prevent the gathering of such data. Children in the UK can give their own consent
under the GDPR at the age of 13. Any child younger than that relies on parental consent [44].
The background section revealed that there are existing datasets that can be considered for this
research. These datasets can be used to both serve as input data for training new models or ﬁne-tuning
pre-trained models. The large age estimation dataset “IMDB-WIKI” was chosen to serve as a basis
of the age estimation process.
We adopted the approach demonstrated by [51] and [57] and merged the dataset from [51] and
the newly collected dataset. This method has been selected because (a) no legal issues arise when
collecting public images2 and (b) several existing datasets have pertinent quality and quantity that
fulﬁls the requirements of this research.
However, some challenges arise with this approach, such as potential redundancies or missing
age labels. Redundant images can hardly be identiﬁed because the image hashes are almost always
diﬀerent for the newly collected dataset (due to crop sizes). Furthermore, missing age labels cannot
be reconstructed; hence some images might need to be discarded.
The newly collected dataset contained some redundancies that were removed based on the ﬁlename
structure ﬁrstname lastname age.ﬁletype to end up with one image per individual. The same approach
has been applied to the 1002-image FG-NET dataset.
3.2. Testing the Prototype Accuracy
3.2.1. Statistical Metrics
In order to quantitatively analyse the accuracy of the prototype, we applied selected statistical
methods.
Perhaps the most popular metric for evaluating systems of age estimation is the Mean Absolute
Error (MAE), which is deﬁned as a “mean value of absolute diﬀerences between predicted ages x-hat
and real (biological) ages”
[5]. The MAE (2) is the industry-standard measure for age prediction
errors [3, 5, 15, 73, 74]. The measurement can be described as follows:
MAE = 1
N
N
X
i=1
| ˆxi −x|
(2)
2As long as the dataset is not made public. If we decide to publish the collected dataset, legal factors such as copyright
must be taken into account.
8

In addition to the MAE, many researchers also adopt the Cumulative Score (CS) as a performance
measure [15, 39, 89]. The CS (3) indicates the percentage of images for which the error is less than a
certain number of years [39]. The higher the CS, the more accurate is the age estimation system. The
CS measurement can be implemented by either deﬁning an absolute age range (e.g. ±2 years) or a
neighbouring age range (e.g. the two neighbouring age classes). This measurement can be described
as follows:
CS(l) = Me≤l
M
(3)
Another commonly used metric is the ϵ-error (4).
This quantitative measure can be used for
datasets where there is no ground truth age, but instead, a group of people vote for the age label. The
error measures the standard deviation σ of the guessed age. The ﬁnal ϵ-error represents the average
over all images, 0 being a perfect prediction and 1 being a wrong prediction [74]. This measurement
can be described as follows:
ϵ = 1 −e−(x−µ)2
2σ2
(4)
MAE and CS were applied in this research. The ϵ-error was not used because no apparent age
estimation has been carried out. However, this metric could be appropriate for future research in this
area.
The MAE was used to evaluate the absolute accuracy of the prototype. A small MAE means that
the estimated age is close to the real age and thus a reasonable estimate. On the other hand, a high
MAE value indicates inaccurate results. The CS was used to evaluate the overall performance of the
age estimation prototype within a particular age interval. The higher the CS measurement, the more
accurate is the age estimation system.
In general, the validity and reliability of accuracy evaluation methods can be ensured by correlating
the diﬀerent statistical methods and thus proving the trustworthiness of the results. By combining
the MAE and the CS, a high level of quality concerning the consistency of the results can be achieved.
3.3. Testing the Prototype Eﬃcacy
The researchers were mindful that this was one of the ﬁrst contributions in this area and that it
was important to determine the value this might add to an investigation, thereby motivating further
development in this ﬁeld. To this eﬀect, qualitative interviews were conducted with two investigators
from West Midlands Police and two academic researchers in order to aid our understanding of the
eﬃcacy of our approach.
The interview transcripts were transcribed using manual intelligent verbatim transcription and
narrative content analysis was performed subsequently. Narrative content analysis is commonly used
to underline common themes between diﬀerent participants and is necessary to get initial insights into
the qualitative data.
3.4. Limitations and Potential Problems
As with the majority of studies, this research is also subject to limitations and potential problems
that arise from both limited access to data and time constraints. These constraints relate to racial
diversity in datasets and reliability issues.
The failure to test the prototype on a more diverse dataset could lead to racial bias due to unequal
distribution of images. Future research could mitigate this problem by collecting an image dataset
with a strong focus on the equal distribution of factors such as origin and skin colour of the subjects.
9

Table 2: Interview participant information.
Ref
Role
Department
Years
of
Experi-
ence
A1
Higher
Forensic
Analyst
Digital Forensic
Unit
14
A2
Higher Digital
Forensic
Oﬃcer
Digital Forensic
Unit
4
B
Director of
Research and
Development
Forensic Research
10
C
Principal
Lecturer
School of
Law/Policing/Social
Sciences
15
With more resources and time, the data collection process may be further optimised by developing
an automated dataset generator that selects the most useful images from various existing datasets
based on parameters such as age, race and image quality. This could beneﬁt the study with regard to
a more precise data distribution and a better overview of the correlation between a particular set of
input images and the outcome, i.e. the estimation accuracy.
Figure 2: IMDB-WIKI age distribution function [74].
Figure 3: FG-NET age distribution function.
The image preprocessing stage might be subject to reliability issues. Due to time constraints of
the study, we cannot accurately determine the perfect crop size and rotation angle for every image to
achieve the best possible estimation results. Thus, the CNN accuracy might deviate slightly from the
best possible accuracy. To mitigate this issue, future research could incorporate a more sophisticated
image preprocessing tool.
4. Experiment Design
The experiment tests the preliminary stage of an age estimation prototype that can be deployed
in DFIs. Furthermore, the experiment includes a performance analysis of a pre-trained CNN (with
the IMDB-WIKI dataset) and attempts to show how this CNN is performing on the newly collected
dataset.
The main features of the prototype can be described as follows:
1. Take an input image in any image format (.jpg, .png, .bmp, ...).
10

2. Classify the input image into an age category pre-deﬁned by the CNN (0-100 years, one for each
year).
3. Print out a single number age estimation result within the range 0-100.
4.1. Choice of Technology
The Debian 10.3 Linux distribution was used to set up the development environment. The Caﬀe
deep learning framework has several dependencies (Table 3). In addition, multiple libraries are needed
to process input images, present the data and build a GUI, the [73] pre-trained Caﬀe model for real
age estimation was used. The model “contains”
weights adjusted to over 500,000 training images.
Hence, using this Caﬀe model is a considerable time-saving.
4.1.1. Datasets
The characteristics of the IMDB-WIKI dataset have already been laid out in detail in the Back-
ground section. However, an important detail that helps with the interpretation of the results in the
subsequent chapter is the distribution of age within the IMDB-WIKI dataset as shown in Figure 2.
This plot gives insights into the age density of images. The testing data consists of the newly collected
Table 3: Required Python packages.
Package
Version
Description
Pillow
7.0.0
Python Imaging Library fork.
PyWavelets
1.1.1
Open source wavelet transform software.
cycler
0.10.0
Composable style cycles.
decorator
4.4.2
Signature-preserving function decorators.
imageio
2.8.0
Read and write image data.
kiwisolver
1.1.0
Cassowary constraint solving algorithm.
matplotlib
3.2.1
Creating static, animated, interactive visualisations.
networkx
2.4
Create and manipulate complex networks.
numpy
1.18.2
Package for scientiﬁc computing.
pip
19.0.3
Package installer for Python.
protobuf
3.11.3
Package for Google’s data interchange format
pyparsing
2.4.6
Create and execute simple grammars.
python-dateutil
2.8.1
Extends the standard datetime module.
scikit-image
0.16.2
Collection of algorithms for image processing.
scipy
1.4.1
Software for mathematics, science, and engineering
setuptools
40.8.0
Package for facilitating packaging Python projects.
six
1.14.0
Helps smoothing diﬀerences between Python versions.
Figure 4: Preliminary graphical user interface of the age estimation prototype.
11

dataset of 245 images and an existing dataset of 82 images. Images from the FG-NET dataset (fourth
highest diversity score) have been merged with the new dataset in order to achieve a high-quality
testing set (Figure 3). Since the FG-NET dataset contains images from 82 unique individuals, one
image per person has been randomly selected where the person depicted is 20 years old or younger.
4.1.2. Data Processing
The structure of the deep learning framework is presented as a high-level software component
diagram (Figure 6). Each component can be interpreted as a higher abstraction than a class. The
VGG-16 architecture and the built-in 16 convolutional weight layers, is a convolutional network for
large-scale image and video recognition. The Caﬀe deep learning framework was developed by [46] with
the Berkeley AI Research team and is one of the most widely used frameworks for image classiﬁcation.
The proposed model architecture, consisting of the pre-trained model and testing dataset, has two
main advantages over traditional training methods: (a) simplicity and low computational cost, because
Caﬀe is among the fastest CNN implementations available [46] and (b) the likelihood of overﬁtting in
future training processes is reduced by adopting a well-balanced pre-trained model. The main reason
why the Caﬀe framework has been selected over other platforms such as Tensorﬂow or PyTorch is that
the pre-trained model is readily available as a Caﬀe model. Furthermore, Caﬀe provides the option
of simply converting the model into Tensorﬂow. The image preprocessing has been conducted using
the [73] face extraction Matlab script. However, since many images were not cropped accordingly, the
image preprocessing stage also involves manual crops and resizes.
4.1.3. Network Architecture
This experiment uses a CNN with a VGG-16 architecture [74]. It has a deeper architecture than
its predecessors with 16 layers in total (13 convolutional and three fully-connected)3. A unique char-
acteristic of this network is its relatively small convolutional ﬁlters with a size of 3×3 pixels. This
enables the net to capture more superﬁcial geometrical structures rather than more complex ones.
Lastly, the expected value is computed by applying the Softmax normalisation function to the output
probabilities of the 101 neurons (one for each age class).
The network architecture is presented in Figure 5.
The network was created by running the
draw net.py script that is integrated into the Caﬀe framework:
python3 CAFFE\_DIRECTORY/python/draw_net.py \
MODEL\_DIRECTORY/age.prototxt \
OUTPUT\_DIRECTORY/network.png
4.2. Design and Development
The Caﬀe model and prototxt ﬁle were imported using the Python function estimate age(). This
function represents the core logic of the estimation prototype and includes loading the image, image
processing and computing the output values.
The prototype does not only provide an estimated age integer value but also a probability distri-
bution function, which was plotted using matplotlib. This graph, shown in Figure 8, represents each
age class (0-100) on the x-axis and the associated probability value (0-1) on the y-axis.
3A more detailed description of the diﬀerent CNN components can be found in the Background section.
12

Figure 5: IMDB-WIKI VGG-16 Convolutional Neural Network architecture (split into six parts).
13

Figure 6: High-level software component diagram of the deep learning age estimation prototype.
Image preprocessing 
+ Crop 
+ Resize
+ Rotate 
Caffe Framework 
+ Debian Installation 
+ Python Dependencies
 
Image
Storage
Data Collection 
Existing
Dataset (FG-
NET) 
New  
Dataset
Data Collection and Preprocessing 
Model Setup Phase 
Legend 
 
 
                   Required Interface
 
                   Provided Interface
 
      Component 
 
Dataset 
 
     Data Flow 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Age Estimation 
+ Testing / Validating the model 
    on the new dataset
+ Classification into 101 age  
   groups  
Reporting Component 
+ Presentation of the classification 
   results 
 
Model Testing Phase 
Caffe Model 
+ Pre-trained on IMDB-WIKI 
   dataset 
+ VGG-16 architecture 
Figure 7: Example of face images in the new testing dataset.
5. Results and Analysis
This chapter outlines the quantitative results from the evaluation of the pre-trained Caﬀe model
on the new testing set. First, the age estimation results of individuals aged 0 to 20 are presented.
Secondly, the corresponding MAEs and cumulative scores are reported. Lastly, the accuracy of the
prototype is evaluated and analysed.
5.1. Evaluation of Results
The results are displayed as single-number age estimation values that represent the output of the
age estimation prototype.
From a high-level perspective, results are varying across diﬀerent age classes and from image to
image. The obtained results underline the fact that the pre-trained model has a low image density
in the lower age ranges (0-16). This model characteristic is responsible for most of the inaccurate
classiﬁcations. The notably large errors can also partly be traced back to insuﬃcient image quality
and facial rotations that cannot be eliminated during the image preprocessing phase. A part of the
dataset was purposely ﬁlled with imperfect images to adequately reﬂect genuine DFIs. In the area
of age estimation, imperfect images include facial rotations, partial occlusions, zoomed faces, blurry
images and any other characteristic of an image that can reduce the accuracy of age estimation software
[24].
14

Figure 8: Age distribution example.
Another striking trend can be observed that the majority of estimations is higher than the real
age, which can be related to the high image density in the IMDB-WIKI dataset in the [30; 40] age
interval. The so-called estimation-shift is a common phenomenon amongst deep learning models that
lack training images in a certain range. This trend is especially prevalent amongst the children in the
age class (0-10) and younger adolescents (10-16). However, the lower age ranges are not particularly
relevant for DFIs because investigators are generally able to estimate the age of children correctly.
It can also be observed that images that are classiﬁed with a small error of ± 2 years are often
within the second or third “guess”
of the neural network. So, for example, when a 16-year-old is
estimated to be 15 years old (Figure 8), it is common that the real age class is within the three
highest probabilities in the age probability distribution function. The red bar represents the wrongly
calculated age of 15, the green bar shows the real age.
The ﬁndings also show that there is a correlation between the estimation accuracy and the distri-
bution of the age probability curve. Results that are relatively inaccurate, such as the age estimation
of very young children, often result in a ﬂat distribution, i.e. a probability curve that is evenly dis-
tributed. This outcome reﬂects the “indecisiveness” of the CNN. On the other hand, accurate results
usually produce a steep age distribution curve, as shown in Figure 8.
5.2. Performance Analysis
As Figure 10 depicts, the MAE between age ranges diﬀers greatly. Estimations in the lower age
ranges, in particular, are signiﬁcantly deviating from the ideal estimation line. One can suggest that
the low image density of the pre-trained model in the age range [0; 20] is likely a contributing factor to
the high MAEs shown in Table 4 and Figure 10. The proportion of images in the age range [0; 7] that
are correctly classiﬁed is 0%. This indicates that images in this age range are scarce in the training
dataset and thus the neural network does not know how to cope with this kind of input data. The
MAE peaked at x = 0 years old with a value of 14.00 and x = 17 accounts for the minimum MAE of
1.79. Although the plot shows MAEs ranging into the sub-zero range, estimations smaller than 0 are
not possible. This is merely a way of presenting the absolute value of the MAE.
These results are particularly advantageous since digital forensic investigators struggle the most
with images depicting younger and older adolescents (10-17), based on the interviews with digital
forensic investigators. In many cases, investigators are able to correctly estimate the age of children,
whereas the age estimation prototype makes mostly inaccurate decisions in this range. The MAE is
decreasing around the age of consent boundary and thus the estimation accuracy is increasing in this
15

Figure 9: Estimated vs real age of exemplar images.
critical range for investigators.
Table 4: Mean Absolute Errors and Cumulative Scores per age class.
Age
Class
MAE
CS=1
CS=2
CS=3
0
14.0
0
0
0
1
8.73
0
0
0
2
8.68
0
0
0
3
8.42
0
0
0
4
6.94
0
0
0
5
7.0
0
0
0
6
5.17
0
0
0
7
3.58
0
25
66.66
8
3.15
15.38
53.85
53.85
9
5.0
23.08
23.08
30.77
10
3.17
25
41.66
75
11
2.8
26.66
73.33
73.33
12
1.86
64.28
71.43
85.71
13
1.92
53.85
69.23
69.23
14
3.12
47.06
58.82
85.71
15
2.72
16.66
38.88
77.77
16
2.45
65
70
80
17
1.79
52.63
84.21
89.47
18
2.32
45.45
63.64
81.82
19
3.22
22.23
38.89
50
20
2.71
33.33
52.38
57.14
Since age estimation needs to be accurate, especially near the age of consent boundary, the re-
searcher decided to deﬁne a stringent CS threshold: the two neighbouring age classes. Any estimated
result that lies within that range of ± 1 year, gets counted as an accurate result. The results of the
CS are presented in Figure 11. It can be observed that the CS increases with the age of the depicted
individual and, therefore, correlates with the MAE. The performance can be summarised as follows:
The greater the integral of the CS function over a particular set of age classes, the higher the accuracy
within that age range.
The CS has been further divided into two additional sub metrics: CS scores with an interval range
of 2 years (Figure 12) and 3 years (Figure 13) respectively. This approach was inspired by multiple
digital forensics experts that have been interviewed in the course of this research (see Discussion and
Conclusion). The argument behind that approach is that a single CS cannot show the full picture of
classiﬁcation results. Three diﬀerent CS intervals provide digital forensic investigators with enhanced
intelligence about a set of images depicting the same individual. This can be particularly important
16

Figure 10: Age estimation results including the Mean
Absolute Error.
Figure 11: Cumulative Score of 1 per age class.
Figure 12: Cumulative Score of 2 per age class.
Figure 13: Cumulative Score of 3 per age class.
when images are imperfect.
Another factor that can negatively impact the CS values is over- and underﬁtting the model.
Since the pre-trained model in this experiment is likely to be overﬁtted on adults, overﬁtting can be a
contributing factor to low CS values and high MAEs in speciﬁc age ranges. Underﬁtting, on the other
hand, would be indicated by a high bias and thus a large diﬀerence between training and testing set.
5.3. Comparison with Recent Results in the Literature
In comparison, [74] have used their IMDB-WIKI as a training set and, inter alia, the FG-NET as
a testing set. The FG-NET, as well as the MORPH dataset, are used as their standard benchmark.
Their DEX method achieved a remarkable MAE of only 3.09 on the FG-NET with ﬁne-tuning and
4.63 without ﬁne-tuning. [88] achieved an MAE of 4.26 on the FG-NET dataset, whereas [14] had
attained an MAE of 4.67.
However, since the FG-NET dataset contains 1002 images but only 82 distinct individuals, [14],
[74] and [88] were eﬀectively testing their model on only 82 individuals. This implies that their testing
set is biased on 82 individuals, which result in poor testing quality. In contrast, this research is testing
the model with
327 individuals and with an (almost) evenly distributed age range from 0 to 20-
year-olds.
It is also fair to assume that the MAE in the age range [0; 20] was slightly higher, since the
estimation results for older individuals are more precise due to the age distribution of the IMDB-
WIKI pre-trained model.
The analysis and comparison of computational time is not particularly relevant for this research
because an existing pre-trained model was used and the model was run in a VM on the CPU. Other
17

authors have heavily focused on computational time and algorithmic performance [3], and therefore
the results cannot be compared to these publications.
The ﬁndings reveal that the age estimation performance is varying across diﬀerent age groups. In
particular, images depicting children and young adolescents are suﬀering from high MAE and low CS.
Although this suggests that the model performance is inadequate, the poor results in this age range
can be partly traced back to the overﬁtting of the facial image dataset of the pre-trained model and
the diversity of the testing dataset with regard to image quality, facial rotations and partial occlusions.
The results also show that the age estimation performance is increasing around the age of consent
boundary, which is especially important for digital forensic investigations. Some age ranges are even
showing lower MAEs compared to the results in recent literature. However, theses MAEs are calculated
over an entire dataset and not only a speciﬁc age range.
6. Discussion and Conclusions
From a quantitative perspective, the ﬁndings suggest that even the most diverse datasets can reveal
accuracy issues in certain age groups if not enough adequate training input is provided. For instance,
since images depicting ﬁve-year-old children are very scarce in the used training dataset, the neural
network is not able to process this kind of input accordingly. Hence, the achieved results stress the
need for more gender and racial diversity as well as an increased image density in the lower age ranges.
This study’s conclusion agrees with recent and inﬂuential literature in the ﬁeld [8, 60, 76, 77]. Since
every face is diﬀerent and reﬂects variations in, inter alia, race, ethnicity, gender, age and geography,
neural networks can be biased in favour of external characteristics. However, the accuracy of a neural
network should not vary because of these factors and, therefore, close attention needs to be paid to
developing balanced datasets that fairly represent the target group.
While there are diﬀerences in the experts’ backgrounds and ﬁelds, the results of the software
evaluation show that all interview participants are satisﬁed with the eﬃcacy of the prototype in the
following areas:
1. Presenting the age value as the key piece of information and supporting it with an age probability
distribution graph.
2. Providing additional information about the image itself in the form of metadata.
3. Using three diﬀerent cumulative scores to determine the eﬃcacy of the age estimation prototype.
The ﬁrst area is a crucial piece of information since digital forensic investigators do not support
the idea of solely presenting crisp age values. An age range is a better expression of accuracy and
conﬁdence intervals, which is also consistent with the presentation of results in the literature [4, 15, 20].
Moreover, an often overlooked aspect is the persuasiveness in court. For instance, if a digital forensic
investigator in a child abuse case is presenting evidence in court, they are never just relying on a single
age value and, therefore, a DSS such as an age estimation software should present the results in a
similar way.
Furthermore, the analysis of the narrative revealed that all four interview participants agree on
the provision of additional information in the form of metadata. Most age estimation solutions today
are displaying valuable information such as timestamps and ﬁle sizes in order to correlate diﬀerent
pieces of evidence with one another.
However, participant A1, A2, and B also point out that a functioning age estimation prototype
needs to have the ability to classify a group of images simultaneously and participants B and C stressed
the need for an increased age range in the dataset. These suggestions are perfectly reasonable as a DFI
usually comprises several gigabytes if not terabytes of image and video material and age classiﬁcation
is required for every single case. Increasing the age ranges of this particular research can be easily
achieved by merging additional datasets into the existing one if needed.
Since many facial image
18

Figure 14: Interview participants results and suggestions.
Results and Suggestions 
Non-technical
Technical
Black and White / 
Sepia pictures
Blindfold / Masks
New dataset needed
Variability of  
CSAE material
Blurry faces
New age assessment
methods needed
Full/partial 
occlusions
Encryption
challenges
Cloud access:  
legal issues
Expert opinion  
from paediatricians
Age ranges instead  
of discrete values
Solve racial bias 
issues
Need for better
mental health
support
Age of consent
boundary issues
Need for better
mental health
support
A1 & A2
B
C
datasets [9, 13, 57, 72] include a reasonable amount of images depicting individuals between the ages
of 20 and 30, existing datasets can be comfortably extended.
6.1. Enhancing Digital Forensic Investigations
The interview participants A1 and A2 give the most comprehensive feedback on both the technical
and non-technical aspects of this research. The main problems they have identiﬁed and how these
issues can be addressed are presented in Figure 14.
One main suggestion is to include black and white as well as sepia-style images into the dataset
since digital forensic investigators are often seizing images with colour ﬁlters. However, mixing up
coloured and clean-cut images with ﬁltered ones can reverse the positive eﬀects of a racially diverse
dataset. By including unnatural images, the neural network could adjust its weights in favour of black
and white images or vice versa if they represent a certain proportion of the total images. Referring
back to the quantitative ﬁndings of Chapter 5, it is evident that the ratio of images in a particular
subclass is decisive for the accuracy of the results, regardless of whether it is gender, racial, or age
diversity. This argument is also underlined by the research from [93] who studied the eﬀects of racially
balanced datasets and highlighted the importance of maintaining a balance between images depicting
black and white, male and female individuals. Hence, in order to cope with black and white/sepia
ﬁlters, independent datasets must be developed.
Another issue raised by the participants A1, A2 and B is the blindfolding and covering of victim’s
faces. This enables child abusers to conceal the identity of the victims and possibly stay undetected
for a longer period of time because diﬀerent cases cannot be related to one another based on the
child’s face. Even unintentional disguises of the face such as blurs and bad image quality, in general,
are causing problems for investigators as well as for age estimation software. In order to overcome the
problem of partial or full facial concealments, age assessment needs to progress in a diﬀerent direction.
Besides the face of an individual, many other features of the human body are carrying age information.
Few studies, including [58], are exploring age estimation from facial proportions, which still could be
eﬀective if victims are blindfolded or wearing masks. However, alternative methods, such as cranial
and dental age estimation as well as the age estimation based on the sexual development stages are
diﬃcult if not impossible to carry out by only having image and video material available.
As presented in Figure 14, participant B points out similar issues in digital forensic investigations:
Besides the massive backlog and racial bias, blurry images (intentional and unintentional face blurs), as
19

well as full/partial face occlusions are causing problems in age estimation. Furthermore, the thematic
analysis of interview B and C revealed that there is a need for better mental health counselling.
In contrast, participant A1 and A2 personally pointed out that they have always received adequate
mental health counselling and had various other opportunities to cope with work-related psychological
stress. In general, however, the data found in [79] suggests that the majority of individuals performing
duties related to CSAM are not adequately coping with work-related stress, based on a sample of
129 law enforcement oﬃcers. [11] support this view, who discovered that mental disorder symptoms
are more prevalent within public safety personnel than previously expected.
Hence, since human
investigators will remain a vital part of digital forensic investigations for the next decades, much more
attention needs to be paid to mental health counselling.
Participant C addressed the questions from a more generic point of view by highlighting the most
prevalent challenges in the digital forensics domain – the encryption and obfuscation of CSAM (Figure
14). This view is underlined by the ﬁndings of the Literature Review on the massive growth of cloud
forensics as well as the increase in encrypted image and video material.
Evidence collection and
recovery is challenging within a cloud environment, not only because of the sheer amount of data but
also due to jurisdiction problems that can occur [70].
From a non-technical point of view, the interview with participant C revealed that the age of
consent boundary needs to be more in the focus of researchers. Although the emphasis on the exact
age estimation of a victim remains important, the binary categorisation into adult or non-adult should
be the main target. This research already addresses this problem with the embedded age estimation
functionality.
6.2. Limitations and Future Work
The conﬁrmability and transferability of qualitative research could be further enhanced by test-
ing the prototype eﬃcacy more broadly. Currently, this research is solely aimed at studying digital
forensic age estimation in the UK. However, processes vary signiﬁcantly across diﬀerent countries and
legislations. To get a more profound picture of the potential eﬃcacy of the research, the age estimation
prototype needs to be tested in cooperation with multiple digital forensic departments across diﬀerent
countries. Hence, future research could overcome this problem by extending the qualitative interviews
and software evaluation to a survey with a larger sample size.
In future work, the testing dataset should be enlarged to get more accurate insights into the
underlying dynamics of various pre-trained age estimation models. New datasets can be collected that
particularly focus on black & white images as well as partial facial concealments. Unfortunately, since
many well-suited facial image datasets remain private, they cannot be merged with the new dataset.
The increase in demand for publicly-shared datasets is not only limited to this domain but can be
observed across many other scientiﬁc ﬁelds. In order to maximise the knowledge gain by researchers,
recent studies [68, 81] are reviewing options to apply blockchain technology to the secure distribution
of scientiﬁc datasets.
Furthermore, there is remaining opportunity for further research in the area of coalitions against
CSAE. A promising approach is presented by The Technology Coalition (2020). This organisation
brings together diﬀerent companies across the technology industry, such as Microsoft, Google and
Facebook, and relies on sharing best practices and coordinating eﬀorts to combat CSAE. In the last
decade, these companies have developed and consistently supported the research in the area of machine
learning. By leveraging their seemingly unlimited access to knowledge, computing power and other
resources, big coalitions are the most promising way to combat CSAE. Hence, researchers in the area
of age estimation should be on the lookout for ways to integrate their work and thus contribute to
existing coalitions in order to create more accurate solutions.
20

6.3. Conclusion
The aim of this research is to enhance digital forensic investigations by assessing current age
estimation solutions, reviewing facial image datasets and developing an age estimation prototype.
The results show that even very large publicly available facial image datasets and age estimation
models can be unsuitable for digital forensic investigations due to factors such as image scarcity in
lower age ranges and low image diversity.
By categorising, evaluating and critiquing the age estimation challenges as well as the surrounding
issues in the domain, this research shows that digital forensic investigations can beneﬁt from age
estimation software by reducing the mental stress on investigators and potential cognitive bias.
Based on the quantitative analysis of the age estimation results, it can be concluded that estimation
results around the age of consent boundary show comparable performance to state-of-the-art solutions.
Although the age estimation accuracy of young children is imprecise, it does not greatly aﬀect DFIs
since the approximate age of young children can generally be correctly determined by investigators.
The qualitative interview and software evaluation support this research with qualitative insights
from digital forensic experts. They aid the presentation of age estimation results with age probability
graphs and the accuracy evaluation using the CS. The ﬁndings also reveal that investigators are
concerned about racial bias, blurry images as well as full/partial face occlusions.
Returning to the original problem statement, this research further progresses digital forensic in-
vestigations towards fully-automated age estimation processes by showing the immense potential of
CNNs and highlighting the limitations of existing solutions. Research that is built upon this thesis
can enhance workﬂows in DFIs, reduce the psychological burden on investigators and thus ultimately
combat CSAE-related cybercrime.
