MSC ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
MASTER THESIS
Recoding latent sentence
representations
Dynamic gradient-based activation modiﬁcation in RNNs
by
DENNIS ULMER
11733187
August 9, 2019
36 ECTS
January 2019 - August 2019
Supervisors:
DIEUWKE HUPKES
Dr. ELIA BRUNI
Assessor:
Dr. WILLEM ZUIDEMA
INSTITUTE FOR LOGIC, LANGUAGE AND COMPUTATION
UNIVERSITY OF AMSTERDAM
arXiv:2101.00674v1  [cs.CL]  3 Jan 2021

Abstract
In Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs), encoding information in a suboptimal or
erroneous way can impact the quality of representations based on later elements
in the sequence and subsequently lead to wrong predictions and a worse model
performance. In humans, challenging cases like garden path sentences (an instance
of this being the infamous The horse raced past the barn fell) can lead their language
understanding astray. However, they are still able to correct their representation
accordingly and recover when new information is encountered. Inspired by this, I
propose an augmentation to standard RNNs in form of a gradient-based correction
mechanism: This way I hope to enable such models to dynamically adapt their
inner representation of a sentence, adding a way to correct deviations as soon as
they occur. This could therefore lead to more robust models using more ﬂexible
representations, even during inference time.
The mechanism explored in this work is inspired by work of Giulianelli et al., 2018,
who demonstrated that activations in a LSTM can be corrected in order to recover
corrupted information (interventions). This is achieved by the usage of “Diagnostic
Classiﬁers” (DG) (Hupkes et al., 2018), linear models that can help to identify the
kind of information recurrent neural networks encode in their hidden representa-
tions and correct them using their gradients. In this thesis, I present a generalized
framework based on this idea to dynamically adapt hidden activations based on local
error signals (recoding) and implement it in form of a novel mechanism. I explore
signals which are either based directly on the task’s objective or on the model’s
conﬁdence, leveraging recent techniques from Bayesian Deep Learning (Gal and
Ghahramani, 2016b; Gal and Ghahramani, 2016a; Pearce et al., 2018).
Crucially, these updates take place on an activation rather than a parameter level
and are performed during training and testing alike. I conduct different experiments
in the context of language modeling, where the impact of using such a mechanism is
examined in detail.

To this end, I look at modiﬁcations based on different kinds of time-dependent error
signals and how they inﬂuence the model performance. Furthermore, this work
contains a study of the model’s conﬁdence in its predictions during training and for
challenging test samples and the effect of the manipulation thereof. Lastly, I also
study the difference in behavior of these novel models compared to a standard LSTM
baseline and investigate error cases in detail to identify points of future research. I
show that while the proposed approach comes with promising theoretical guarantees
and an appealing intuition, it is only able to produce minor improvements over the
baseline due to challenges in its practical application and the efﬁcacy of the tested
model variants.
4
