AI Open 2 (2021) 143–159
Available online 29 July 2021
2666-6510/© 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co., Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Discrete and continuous representations and processing in deep learning: 
Looking forward 
Ruben Cartuyvels *, Graham Spinks 1, Marie-Francine Moens 
KU Leuven, Department of Computer Science, Celestijnenlaan 200A, Leuven, 3001, Belgium   
A R T I C L E  I N F O   
Keywords 
Artificial intelligence 
Deep learning 
Machine learning 
Representation learning 
Natural language processing 
A B S T R A C T   
Discrete and continuous representations of content (e.g., of language or images) have interesting properties to be 
explored for the understanding of or reasoning with this content by machines. This position paper puts forward 
our opinion on the role of discrete and continuous representations and their processing in the deep learning field. 
Current neural network models compute continuous-valued data. Information is compressed into dense, 
distributed embeddings. By stark contrast, humans use discrete symbols in their communication with language. 
Such symbols represent a compressed version of the world that derives its meaning from shared contextual in­
formation. Additionally, human reasoning involves symbol manipulation at a cognitive level, which facilitates 
abstract reasoning, the composition of knowledge and understanding, generalization and efficient learning. 
Motivated by these insights, in this paper we argue that combining discrete and continuous representations and 
their processing will be essential to build systems that exhibit a general form of intelligence. We suggest and 
discuss several avenues that could improve current neural networks with the inclusion of discrete elements to 
combine the advantages of both types of representations.   
1. Introduction 
Humans typically communicate with discrete symbols, and natural 
language is perhaps the most prominent example of such symbolic 
communication media. Despite the continuous nature of neural signals 
in the brain and transmission of language via continuous signals of 
sound, written language is communicated via discrete symbols. One 
potential underlying reason is the greater information-theoretic 
signaling reliability and efficiency in communication of symbols 
versus continuous signals (Shannon, 1948). With deep machine learning 
taking a central role in artificial intelligence (AI), natural language 
symbols but also perceptual content are encoded and communicated in 
the form of continuous representations (sometimes called subsymbolic 
representations). This is due to the fact that current neural networks are 
naturally fit to crunch large amounts of real - hence continuous - 
numbers. 
In this paper we will reflect on the role of discrete and continuous 
representations and processing in the deep learning era and on how 
discrete and continuous representations could work together, for 
instance, when humans interact with machines. The central argument in 
this paper is that both continuous and discrete processing are essential 
for achieving human-level AI. 
The definition of (artificial) intelligence is and has been a debated 
issue, but Pei Wang made a good attempt: "intelligence is the capacity of 
an information-processing system to adapt to its environment while 
operating with insufficient knowledge and resources" (Monett et al., 
2020; Wang, 2019). Wang further explains this definition: intelligent 
systems should hence be able to adapt and learn new skills and acquire 
new knowledge, they should be able to do so efficiently (insufficient 
resources) and under uncertainty (insufficient knowledge), they have 
embodied experience (they experience their environment), are 
open-ended and should operate in real-time. Other authors add ideas or 
emphasize different aspects, like social intelligence, which subsumes 
communication and hence language (Monett et al., 2020). A system can 
be said to have human-level AI if it has this capacity at least to the same 
extent that humans have it. Since the subject of this paper is artificial 
intelligence, and since humans exhibit intelligence, we will sometimes 
approach artificial intelligence starting from things we know of human 
intelligence. Even though the fact that humans exhibit intelligence does 
not imply that human intelligence has to be the only form of 
* Corresponding author. 

1 Joint first author. 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
AI Open 
journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com/journal/ai-open 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiopen.2021.07.002 
Received 21 May 2021; Accepted 25 July 2021   

AI Open 2 (2021) 143–159
144
intelligence, it is the form of intelligence that we know best and there­
fore it could provide us with useful insights, teach us about necessary 
characteristics, and so on, as it has often done before. 
Our position, namely that discrete and continuous processing are 
essential to human-level AI, is motivated by the fact that natural lan­
guage is spoken by humans around the world, and some even argue that 
it is innate to humans (Chomsky, 1959, 1965; Chomsky et al., 1988). 
Natural language is composed of discrete symbols or words. Humans not 
only take language symbols as input and produce them as output, but 
they also contemplate language and reason with it. In other words, they 
internally process symbols (Marcus, 2001). This suggests that the sym­
bols not only have a role in communication, but also that they might 
affect the thought process of a human in a much more intricate and 
important way. The language of thought hypothesis goes even further and 
postulates that all (human) thinking occurs in a mental language, or 
‘Mentalese’, so that thoughts have syntax, which lends them their 
compositional structure (Fodor, 1975; Pinker, 1994). Whether this in­
ternal symbol processing emerges from purely continuous neural hard­
ware or is supported by discrete or binary components is substance for 
discussion. Yet, what we do know is that we understand and produce 
language as part of human intelligence, and that on a functional level we 
are able to internally process language tokens. 
The above position is also motivated by the insight that humans 
clearly process continuous data. For instance, our feelings are impossible 
to classify into discrete buckets. We perceive reality as a stream of 
continuous data consisting of, for example, vision, hearing, taste, 
olfaction and touch. Our stream of thoughts, or at least the way we 
perceive it, surely feels continuous as well. Moreover, we have acquired 
language by grounding it in continuous perceptual signals. This conti­
nuity provides large representation power, which is essential when 
either communicating or reasoning about the real world. The language 
symbols, as we will argue, are a compression of the meaning they are 
meant to transmit and by themselves are not sufficient to accommodate 
understanding. Therefore, the discrete symbols need to be expanded 
with contextual information, mutual knowledge, expectations, and so on 
(Shannon and Weaver, 1949; Sperber and Wilson, 1986). 
A number of requirements for intelligent systems follow from the 
above insights. First, intelligent systems need to be able to handle 
discrete interfaces like language for efficient, effective and reliable 
communication with humans and potentially with other systems. To 
represent the real world in an encompassing manner and to reason about 
it, intelligent systems will inevitably also need continuous representa­
tion power. Expanding discrete symbols used in communication with 
contextual information gives the symbols meaning and makes them 
understandable. This is shown schematically in Fig. 1: human and ma­
chine understanding of communication can adhere to an analogous 
process. Apart from communication, human reasoning also involves 
both continuous data and discrete symbol manipulation. As mentioned, 
reasoning about the real world requires continuous representation 
power. Internal, cognitive symbol manipulation enables us to reason 
abstractly, to compose knowledge and understanding, and to generalize 
and learn efficiently. Although they have great potential, current deep 
learning systems still fall far short of humans in terms of these qualities. 
We argue that integrating elements of discrete symbol processing with 
continuous neural network processing could alleviate some of these 
shortcomings and hence lead to further progress in AI. This need for 
reasoning with continuous data, context, spatial and temporal infor­
mation and potentially symbols and explicit structure is illustrated in 
Fig. 2. 
Starting from the general claim that both continuous and discrete 
processing are essential for achieving human-level AI, we rely on the 
following hypotheses:  
● Communication with discrete symbols is inherent to human 
communication, and language is the most obvious example.  
● The discrete symbols are a compression of the real world and need to 
be expanded with contextual information (e.g., visual information) 
forming continuous representations.  
● Reasoning with discrete symbols is sufficient for certain applications, 
but often, when interacting with the real world, reasoning with 
continuous representations is more appropriate.  
● Humans learn by composing and decomposing representations. 
Disentangling continuous representations is not well studied yet, 
although it starts to emerge. In this process discrete representations 
can play a role to steer the composition process.  
● Continuous representations are good in representing meaning, 
however, we should find ways to link these representations to 
discrete symbols, the latter being commonly used in the communi­
cation with humans. 
To support the above hypotheses we have studied the recent litera­
ture on representation learning and the debates going on in the field. 
This leads to a number of insights on how to improve neural network 
based representations. These insights are evidenced by recent evolutions 
seen in the literature and demonstrated by our own published research. 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In section 2, we 
Fig. 1. Human language consists of discrete sym­
bols. To communicate with humans and to handle 
other discrete interfaces, intelligent systems need to 
be able to handle discrete symbols. These symbols 
are a compression of the message they are meant to 
transmit. For the message to be understandable, the 
symbols need to be expanded with continuous, 
distributed, contextual information. As we argue in 
this paper, discrete biases or structure should com­
plement otherwise purely continuous representa­
tions. The bottom row of the figure shows how 
human and machine language interpretation are 
analogous.   
R. Cartuyvels et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

AI Open 2 (2021) 143–159
145
introduce discrete representations and their properties. Continuous 
representations in deep learning are explained in section 3. We focus on 
how they can be learned and on the similarities and differences of the 
representations across modalities. In section 4, we discuss the limita­
tions of both discrete and continuous processing for reasoning and 
inference and argue for an integration of both. How we might progress 
towards such a fruitful integration is the topic of section 5. First, sub­
section 5.1 considers some problems with the currently widespread 
brute-force learning of representations from huge datasets. Next, in 
subsection 5.2, we suggest ideas and discuss current trends in inte­
grating continuous and discrete processing. In section 5.3 we focus on 
desirable properties of continuous representations that might particu­
larly benefit from discrete elements. 
2. Discrete representations 
2.1. Representations 
The term ‘discrete representation’, used throughout this paper, de­
notes a discretely valued variable that represents some concept, which 
can take on either a limited or a countably infinite number of distinct 
values. This definition is purposefully quite general as it remains an open 
question which type of discrete representation mechanisms might be 
useful in neural networks. We mostly refer to binary representations, 
indexes, letters, words or symbols. We use additional ‘structure’ in 
neural networks to denote other types of discrete components such as 
relational structures (graphs, matrices), disentanglement, higher- 
dimensional arrays, positional enforcing, and so on. When we write 
about a discrete representation, we generally do not refer to discrete 
parameters in neural networks such as the amount of layers, the amount 
of neurons, and so on. 
There are many examples of humans using discrete symbolic rep­
resentations in human-human communication and in interaction with 
machines. Natural language text is composed of strings of word tokens. 
These word tokens enable fast and exact processing. It is, for instance, 
straightforward to represent tokens in a computer by their indices in a 
sorted vocabulary list, that is, with a mapping from the domain of 
considered tokens to a subset of the natural numbers. Tokens and other 
discrete representations can also be encoded in one-hot vectors, where 
the presence of a token is indicated by the entry in the vector corre­
sponding to that token having a value of 1, while all other entries have a 
value of 0. Token equality can then simply be checked by comparing 
their indices. Moreover, discrete representations have the advantage of 
being readily interpretable. We can just inspect which word an index 
refers to. Very often in their communication with machines, humans use 
controlled language, such as ontologies or symbolic knowledge 
representations. Controlled language terms can, for instance, be struc­
tured in first-order logic, or in triplet structures of subject, object and 
predicate that populate a knowledge graph. 
As another example, mathematics is also described in a language full 
of symbols, which convey a certain mathematical meaning and interact 
with an unlimited range of numerical values. Music is encoded in notes 
and other symbols that are instructive of how the music should sound. 
Symbolic systems, although often associated with discrete variables (as 
in formal logic, computer programming), can also involve continuous 
variables. Evidently, mathematics contains many examples. However, 
the use of symbols, disregarding the values of the variables they repre­
sent, yields discrete parts to the wider system, namely, the symbols 
themselves, and their syntax or the rules for composing them into valid 
arrangements. 
2.2. Properties 
Language and other symbolic representations are by nature 
compositional. The syntactical structure of natural language allows for 
the replacement of words in sentences so that they acquire another 
meaning. Based on their compositional structure, humans can interpret 
sentences containing a combination of words that they have never seen 
before. Controlled languages aim at similar properties, making them 
powerful tools in automated reasoning. Our experience of the world 
around us is also compositional in nature. For instance, humans are able 
to make sense out of visual scenes even if they have never seen a certain 
configuration of known objects before. 
The meaning of symbolic representations is shared by the parties in 
the communication. For efficiency of the communication, they represent 
the perceived, or a relevant, world in a compressed format. In other 
words, the reality of the world is compressed and encoded in a symbolic 
language. According to the code model of communication from Shannon 
and Weaver (1949), transmitting a message from a sender to a receiver, 
including encoding it into a transmittable signal and decoding it back 
into the message, implies the mutual knowledge hypothesis. The hypoth­
esis states that if the receiver is to be sure of recovering the correct 
interpretation, the one intended by the sender, every item of contex­
tual information used in interpreting the message must be known 
mutually by the sender and receiver (Sperber and Wilson, 1986). A 
speaker takes into account his and the audience’s cognitive environ­
ments, and puts in a message just enough symbolic information for the 
audience to infer the intended meaning from the symbols themselves, 
together with their prior world knowledge, their expectations, the cur­
rent context and sensory input, and so on. 
Symbolic communication is efficient, because the receiver can either 
decode or infer much richer and more complex meaning than is 
Fig. 2. Continuous representations are essential when reasoning about the real world, for both humans and machines. Reasoning also involves other continuous 
information, like spatial and temporal data. At a functional level (as illustrated by the thought balloons), human reasoning involves symbol manipulation. As we 
argue, incorporating symbols and discrete structure or biases would bring additional benefits for machine reasoning. 
R. Cartuyvels et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

AI Open 2 (2021) 143–159
146
contained in the symbols themselves. Efficiency can additionally be 
recognized in Shannon and Weaver’s compression, and in Sperber and 
Wilson’s speaker who gives in words (symbols) only the minimal 
amount of information needed, counting on the audience to fill in the 
rest. The discrete nature of symbol communication additionally causes 
the potential for fault tolerance, making use of redundancy2, which 
renders the communication more reliable. In addition, recovery in 
human communication is facilitated by a finite vocabulary of symbols 
and syntax rules. More importantly, the above model points to the 
finding that symbols alone are not sufficient to capture the commu­
nicated content in a comprehensive way. The mutually known or 
otherwise contextual information is essential for recovery or inference of 
the correct meaning. This shows the need for richer representations, 
which is why continuous representations come into play. Fig. 1 shows 
both the need for symbolic communication and the need to give symbols 
meaning with context, mutual knowledge, feelings, etc. 
2.3. Processing 
Discrete processing consists of the application of any discrete func­
tion to input data. A discrete mathematical function has a domain, and 
hence a range, consisting only of discrete sets of values. Examples can be 
found in integer arithmetic, in computer programming languages and in 
first order logic. AI related examples are functions that convert language 
tokens into other language tokens or into embeddings. As deep models 
are currently trained using gradient descent, it is relevant to note that 
discrete functions are not differentiable (in any subset of their domain). 
They have no gradients and hence backpropagation is not applicable. An 
active area of research is concerned with making discrete components 
amenable to backpropagation by, for instance, replacing discrete func­
tions with continuous approximations (Maddison et al., 2017; Jang 
et al., 2017; Cuturi et al., 2019; Vlastelica et al., 2020). 
3. Continuous representations 
3.1. Representations 
In this paper, a continuous representation denotes a continuous, real 
valued variable, that can take on values in connected regions of Rn. 
These are generally vectors of real numbers, usually in the Euclidean 
space3, that represent a fragment of meaning, and of which the indi­
vidual dimensions usually have no prespecified meaning4. A piece of 
meaning that such a vector (embedding or distributed representation) en­
codes could be anything, like the meaning of a word token, a visual 
object or scene, or an audio fragment. These embeddings are usually 
dense, and they are thus meant to represent some meaning in a semantic 
representation space. 
For example, in Natural Language Processing (NLP), tokens are 
converted to embeddings, to enable semantic processing but also to 
reduce dimensionality5. This conversion to embedding vectors is usually 
an early step in the processing pipeline. If needed at all, the reconversion 
to tokens is one of the last steps. Thus, virtually all task-central pro­
cessing is done in the continuous domain. 
Since the domain is continuous and consequently has more degrees 
of freedom, a single embedding vector can represent more information 
and carry more meaning by itself than a token. With ‘by itself’ we mean 
disregarding the additional information held by communicators to 
interpret the token. Additionally, its continuous nature allows for 
nuance to be encoded or for meaning to gradually change. Consider an 
embedding vector for the token ‘dog’, of which the first entry encodes 
fur color. While in words the dog may be either brown or white, the 
embedding’s first entry can take on any real value, corresponding to an 
unlimited, and gradually changing, range of color hues between brown 
and white. Importantly, these continuous representations allow for 
contextual information (e.g., neighboring words, visual or auditory 
context) to be modelled jointly with the discrete symbols, resulting in a 
possibly more encompassing representation of reality. 
One of the costs of the semantic representation capacity is the loss of 
interpretability. This is not necessarily the case, but at least currently 
embedding vectors are typically not readily understandable by humans. 
Processing becomes inexact and considerably slower, partly because the 
embedding vectors are typically not sparse. Checking their similarity 
amounts to computing a distance in a metric space, which is more 
resource consuming than comparing two integers captured in a one-hot 
encoding vector. Of course, the exact properties of the continuous rep­
resentations are dependent of the way they are constructed. 
In computer vision, activations of final convolutional neural 
network layers are often used as visual embeddings. These embedding 
vectors, much like in NLP, represent visual concepts in a semantic space. 
The represented visual data can be entire images (Vinyals et al., 2015b), 
regions of images that a model estimates contain an object of interest 
(Anderson et al., 2018), video clips (Xie et al., 2018), and so on. As will 
be mentioned in section 3.3, data from numerous other modalities or 
types can also be converted to continuous representations (such as 
audio). The same remarks that were made for embedding vectors in NLP 
also apply to visual and other representations. For instance, their 
meaning can gradually change, they can encode nuance, and are diffi­
cult to interpret by humans. 
The use of continuous vectors itself is not free of bias. Using 
continuous vectors in a Euclidean space or in any other geometric space 
such as a hyperbolic space (Gulcehre et al., 2019) implicitly assumes 
that data points, or the relevant aspects of reality, can be meaningfully 
represented in the respective geometric space, which is not always true. 
3.2. Processing 
Analogous to the discrete case, continuous processing consists of 
applying continuous functions to input data. A continuous function is 
one that has an interval as domain and no discontinuities in its value, i. 
e., abrupt changes in value. Not all functions are either discrete or 
continuous. They may have discontinuities, while having intervals as 
domain (and not discrete sets of values). It will be convenient for us, 
however, to call a function continuous if it is continuous in most of its 
domain, thus potentially disregarding local discontinuities. We refer the 
2 Error correction codes are examples of redundancy for enhanced reliability 
in telecommunication. Even though more frequent - but non content bearing - 
words in natural languages like English are often shorter (Zipf, 1935), yielding 
higher efficiency, languages contain many redundancies (Shannon and Weaver, 
1949), making it, for instance, possible to understand written sentences of 
which part of the letters are occluded.  
3 Although the vectors may also lie in different spaces, like the hyperbolic 
space (Gulcehre et al., 2019).  
4 Works exist that attempt to learn disentangled continuous representations 
with dimensions that correspond to factors of variation in data, but the goal 
remains far from reached (Locatello et al., 2019). 
5 Although the number of dimensions of an embedding vector may be 
considerable, usually, and certainly historically, they are still low dimensional 
compared to one hot encodings of the tokens they represent (Pennington et al. 
(2014) use 300 dimensional vectors for a vocabulary of 400K to 2M words for 
GloVe, Devlin et al. (2019) use up to 1K dimensions with a vocabulary size of 
30K for BERT, while Brown et al. (2020) use up to 12K dimensions with a 
vocabulary size of 50K for GPT-3). 
R. Cartuyvels et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

AI Open 2 (2021) 143–159
147
reader to mathematical textbooks on analysis for a treatment of 
continuity. 
In our case, continuous processing will mostly denote (modern) 
neural network processing. Although neural networks epitomize 
continuous processing, they inevitably contain discrete elements. The 
number of token slots in a text transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017), the 
number of object slots in an object detection transformer (Carion et al., 
2020), or the number of nodes in a hidden layer, are discrete parameters. 
A function can thus be discrete in one variable and continuous in 
another. For gradient descent to work, the functions implemented by 
neural networks, as used during training, have to be differentiable 
functions of at least those parameters that we want to train. That is, the 
discrete neural network parameters mentioned above cannot be opti­
mized using gradient descent, but the network’s weights and biases can. 
It is worth noting that historically, many neural networks also featured 
discrete-valued nodes, like (restricted) Boltzmann machines or Hopfield 
networks (Little, 1974; Hopfield, 1982; Hinton and Sejnowski, 1983; 
Smolensky, 1986). 
Discrete and continuous functions can be composed. The resulting 
function may be continuous in some variables and parameters, but 
certainly not in all of them. Take for instance an NLP method that uses 
language tokens (discrete) as input, converts these to embeddings 
(continuous), applies a neural network (continuous), and reconverts 
computed logits into output tokens (discrete). The function imple­
mented by this method, that maps input tokens to output tokens via a 
number of intermediate steps, is a discrete function, and hence cannot be 
differentiated. The logits, however, typically are a continuous function 
of the input embeddings and of the neural network’s parameters (not of 
the input tokens). Gradients of a differentiable loss function that oper­
ates on the logits, and not only on the output tokens, can thus be 
backpropagated to the network’s parameters and the embedding 
vectors. 
Modern neural networks are representative of continuous process­
ing. First order logic or symbolic AI models are representative of discrete 
processing. Many AI models fall between those two poles, for instance, 
probabilistic graphical models, like the Boltzmann machines mentioned 
above. Here, we will not elaborate on probabilistic graphical models in 
general or other AI systems. Instead, we will focus on symbolic and 
distributed representations in the modern deep learning context6. 
3.3. Representations of natural language 
In the case of natural language, the unit symbols are words, char­
acters, sentences or documents. The embeddings represent these words 
(or characters, sentences, documents) in a semantic representation 
space. 
A word embedding can carry meaning beyond the precise meaning of 
the word it represents. For instance, it can capture the context the word 
usually appears in (like other words, or perceptual information), it can 
contain nuance, or it can convey information that would have been 
implicit, or assumed common knowledge, if transmitted in symbols only. 
Returning to the communication model of Shannon and Weaver (1949) 
and the mutual knowledge hypothesis, we could define a good 
continuous representation, for general purposes, as one that con­
tains all mutual, contextual information that the sender and 
receiver both need for encoding and recovering the correct mes­
sage into and from the signal (the signal being in this case a symbol or 
an encoding of it). 
3.3.1. Learning 
The learning of distributed vector representations for words has been 
studied for a long time (Elman, 1990; Bengio et al., 2003). This learning 
is often inspired by the distributional hypothesis, which states that words 
that occur in the same contexts tend to have similar meanings (Harris, 
1954; Firth, 1957). Following this hypothesis, Mikolov et al. (2013a) 
and others learned word embeddings by modelling words from their 
contexts, or contexts from words. They used the weights of a shallow, 
trained neural network as representations for individual words (Mikolov 
et al., 2013a,b; Pennington et al., 2014). Here, a context denotes a group 
of surrounding words, as encountered in a text corpus: The word “fox” 
might thus be predicted from a context “the fast … catches the mouse”, 
or vice versa. For inference, contexts are disregarded and words are 
replaced individually by their learned embeddings. The resulting pre­
trained embeddings proved useful for a wide variety of downstream NLP 
and multimodal tasks (Frome et al., 2013; Socher et al., 2013; Collell 
et al., 2017). 
While these approaches learn embedding vectors by considering the 
context in which a word usually appears, recent popular representation 
learning methods also take into account the context in which a word 
currently appears, both during training and inference (Deschacht et al., 
2012; Howard and Ruder, 2018; Peters et al., 2018; Devlin et al., 2019; 
Radford et al., 2019). Starting from individual word embedding vectors, 
which are context-independent, the representations are contextualized 
by undergoing changes modulated by the embedding vectors of other 
words in the current context. Hence, the word “fox” can have two 
entirely different contextualized representations in two different sen­
tences. This idea, together with the pretraining of big transformer 
models on massive amounts of text, further improved downstream re­
sults by large margins (Howard and Ruder, 2018; Peters et al., 2018; 
Devlin et al., 2019; Tenney et al., 2019; Raffel et al., 2020; Rosset, 2019; 
Brown et al., 2020). 
The above two embedding schemes are pretrained and provide 
general-purpose continuous representations that can be finetuned on 
downstream tasks. Task-specific representations are often learned as 
well, by starting from randomly initialized vectors and updating them 
with gradient signals from loss functions of downstream tasks (Sutskever 
et al., 2014; Vinyals et al., 2015b). 
3.3.2. Humans 
Interestingly, both neurology and cognitive psychology studies sug­
gest that hearing word tokens invokes a similar embedding process in 
human brains and minds. For instance, neurologists manage to predict 
activity levels across fine-grained brain regions while subjects listen to 
stories, from word embeddings of the words in the stories that were 
trained on text corpora (Mitchell et al., 2008; Huth et al., 2012, 2016; 
Abnar et al., 2018). 
Psychologists have repeatedly observed semantic and associative 
priming effects (Meyer and Schvaneveldt, 1971; Ferrand and New, 
2003), where, simply put, subjects recognize a word like ‘cat’ more 
quickly when they have first been shown a related word like ‘dog’, 
suggesting that hearing ‘dog’ already activates brain regions associated 
with ‘cat’. Both words that are semantically similar (‘dolphin’ and 
‘whale’) and words that have no similar meaning but are often associ­
ated (‘spider’ and ‘web’) are shown to prime each other. Models for 
language comprehension that explain these effects have been proposed 
(Collins and Loftus, 1975; McRae et al., 1997; Landauer and Dumais, 
1997) and support concept encoding by distributed representations. 
While the above studies generally concern single word priming effects, 
there are also accounts of contextualization of word meaning, where 
sentences, paragraphs or visual context facilitate comprehension 
(Bransford and Johnson, 1972; Barclay et al., 1974; Foss, 1982; Stano­
vich and West, 1983; McClelland et al., 2019). Although current ma­
chine language models do not fully mimic what we know of human 
language understanding (McClelland et al., 2019), we can conclude that 
there are several elements that the two have in common. 
6 However, many neural networks that estimate probabilities actually are 
probabilistic graphical models, from classifiers to VAEs (Kingma and Welling, 
2014). Goodfellow et al. (2016) elaborate on the connection in chapter 16 of 
their book. 
R. Cartuyvels et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

AI Open 2 (2021) 143–159
148
3.3.3. Limitations 
Distributed language embeddings are considered a compression of 
the information they contain. Typically, a large vocabulary is mapped to 
a fixed-length vector where meaning is distributed over various di­
mensions. Meaning is compressed to the extent that notions about 
contextual semantics and syntax are distributed among various di­
mensions (Mikolov et al., 2013a). A downside of such representations, 
however, is that access to the discrete information is lost. Additionally, it 
is unclear what the optimal compression dimension should be. Whereas 
traditional dimensionality-reduction methods, such as singular value 
decomposition or non-negative matrix factorization, provide a rationale 
for a choice of dimension size, no such interpretation exists for distrib­
uted language embeddings. A variable length representation would in 
fact be more logical for language. It appears unnecessary that frequently 
used words with little semantic meaning (e.g., ‘the’, ‘a’, ‘and’, etc.) 
should have the same length of embedding as more complicated, 
nuanced words. This limited flexibility in representation length does not 
extend to discrete representations. As an example, in natural language, 
frequently used function words are short with an easy pronunciation 
(Zipf, 1935). Additionally, due to the fixed length of distributed em­
beddings, neural networks have an enormous amount of parameters, as 
they need to process all possible combinations of all representation 
nodes. This is computationally intensive. It would perhaps make more 
sense to process only relevant meaning dimensions. Attention mecha­
nisms in language models (Bahdanau et al., 2015) address this issue to 
some extent by focusing on relevant dimensions. Sparsity and structure 
often found in discrete representations or components could also relieve 
computational complexity. We thus argue that discrete representa­
tions could compress meaning more sensibly and in a more easily 
manipulable manner, and hence complement continuous, distrib­
uted embeddings. Some of these aspects are also relevant for visual 
features, which we discuss in the following subsection. 
3.4. Representations of visual data 
Contrary to natural language, the visual world consists of continuous 
wavelengths within a visible spectrum. For graphics and imaging ap­
plications, this information is usually captured in individual pixels with 
a quantization of 256 values for red, green and blue color channels. For 
machine learning applications, these RGB values of the pixels are usually 
transformed and normalized into a continuous range to obtain a mean of 
0 and a standard deviation of 1. This representation then closely cor­
responds to the continuous nature of vision. As a side note, it is also 
possible to encode images into a more discrete representation for neural 
networks. This can be achieved, for example, by clustering RGB pixel 
values or visual embeddings with k-means. Models traditionally used for 
language sequences can then be applied to vision problems (Sun et al., 
2019; Chen et al., 2020). 
3.4.1. Learning 
It is widely accepted that locality is an important characteristic of 
visual data. To exploit this, convolutional operators are used to perform 
mappings that take regional information and patterns into account in a 
bottom-up manner (LeCun et al., 1989; Ciresan et al., 2011). By learning 
optimal filters, basic characteristics such as lines can thus be combined 
into more complicated patterns such as squares. When trained for a 
downstream task, eventually the network learns an embedding con­
taining features from which predictions can be made. This is often done 
in a classification setting, although many other settings are also 
possible7 (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Anderson et al., 2018; Jean et al., 
2019). 
The embedding vectors obtained from the penultimate layer of a 
fully trained convolutional neural network contain an abstract repre­
sentation of the original visual input and are frequently used as input 
features for complementary tasks (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Razavian 
et al., 2014; Simonyan and Zisserman, 2015; Xu et al., 2015; He et al., 
2016; Anderson et al., 2018; Sung et al., 2018). The idea is that they 
compactly represent relevant features of the input. Such features 
comprise patterns that are unique to certain objects, even if the object 
was never seen during the training of the original network. 
3.4.2. Lack of understanding/compositionality 
This mechanism shows some rough similarities with how humans 
perceive the world, in the sense that a vast amount of continuous input 
information is distilled into a compressed understanding. This 
compression is achieved based on the appearance and characteristics of 
objects and their relations. However, contrary to humans, such neural 
networks do not appear to have an adequate understanding yet of what 
discrete entities are present, nor how they relate to their surroundings. 
To the contrary, it can be shown that scrambling parts of the image does 
not impact the classification outcome for deep neural networks (Brendel 
and Bethge, 2018). Moreover, adding noise to images or removing 
source tags from images does change neural network predictions, while 
keeping the images perfectly recognizable for humans8 (Jo and Bengio, 
2017; Lapuschkin et al., 2019). This suggests that neural networks rely 
mostly on local patterns and textures rather than a fundamental un­
derstanding of the content. 
The lack of decomposed understanding forms a problem in many 
cases. A particular type of prize fish would be most accurately classified 
not by its anatomical features, but by the detection of fingers of the 
person holding it up for a photograph (Brendel and Bethge, 2018). While 
this example highlights the ability of continuous embeddings to take the 
current context and semantics into account, it also shows a failure to 
assimilate the composition of discrete entities that make up a scene. In 
contrast, humans are able to distinguish, count, track, identify and 
represent separately a number of distinct objects featured in their visual 
input (Xu and Chun, 2009). 
This failure inevitably leads to a lack of generalization capabilities 
outside the setting of the given dataset. Any fish that is held up by a 
person would likely be classified as that particular prize fish. Learning 
better representations that assimilate discrete, compositional in­
formation about the world is thus an important research direction for 
visual data. 
3.5. Representations of other modalities 
The above techniques can also be used to build continuous repre­
sentations of other modalities. For instance, given input speech signals, 
the layer right below the softmax layer of a deep neural architecture 
trained to estimate text from speech yields a compact representation of 
the input acoustics (Bengio and Heigold, 2014). Concurrently, word 
embeddings in an acoustic representation space are learned. Speech 
representations are pulled by the objective function towards the word 
embeddings of correct tokens in the joint acoustic representation space, 
while being pushed away from word embeddings of incorrect tokens. 
The speech and word embeddings in this work lie in a joint acoustic 
representation space, rather than in a semantic space, as in most of the 
works thus far mentioned in this paper. 
Continuous representations also play an important role in other 
audio processing techniques (Graves et al., 2006, 2013; Hannun et al., 
2014; Amodei et al., 2016; Chan et al., 2016). To make up for a lack of 
7 Interestingly, Jean et al. (2019) learn visual embeddings following the 
distributional hypothesis. Satellite image tiles are presumed to be predictive for 
other nearby tiles. This illustrates that many different settings are feasible and 
can still be explored. 
8 Similar results have been published in NLP, e.g., where a model’s ability to 
reason with natural language arguments is shown to be entirely accounted for 
by exploitation of unintended statistical cues (Niven and Kao, 2019). 
R. Cartuyvels et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

AI Open 2 (2021) 143–159
149
annotated training data, as in language and vision processing, audio 
embeddings can also be pretrained in a self-supervised way, to be used 
afterwards for downstream audio tasks (van den Oord et al., 2018; 
Jansen et al., 2018; Chung et al., 2019; Schneider et al., 2019). 
Continuous representations have the possibility to integrate different 
modalities in an intuitive and natural way, which will be discussed in the 
next section. An example is the Look, Listen, and Learn system, which 
produces audio embeddings trained through a self-supervised model of 
audio-visual correspondence in videos (Cramer et al., 2019). 
We have so far discussed language, vision and audio embeddings, but 
there are many other modalities that are transformed into representa­
tions by deep learning methods. Examples include (but are by no means 
limited to) action and state embeddings in reinforcement learning 
(Dulac-Arnold et al., 2015; Chandak et al., 2019), distributed repre­
sentations for atoms (Schütt et al., 2018), sequences of amino-acids in 
proteins (Alley et al., 2019), social network posts (Veliˇckovi´c et al., 
2019), tactile experience or touch (Gao et al., 2016; Yuan et al., 2017; 
Calandra et al., 2018) and abstract concepts grounded in olfaction (Kiela 
et al., 2015). 
3.6. Joint representations 
Recent work has also attempted to combine different modalities into 
one representation. This trend perhaps mimics the multimodal nature of 
human reality. Communication often involves multiple modalities (e.g., 
while a sentence has a particular content, its message is augmented with 
a particular intonation and body language) and is subject to a concrete 
context that is experienced through different senses (e.g., the location is 
seen, the temperature is felt, the music is heard, …). 
For many applications, different modalities offer complementary 
information that can lead to better performance. Combining visual and 
language features, for example, has been shown to be beneficial in lin­
guistic tasks (Lazaridou et al., 2015; Kiela and Bottou, 2014; Silberer and 
Lapata, 2014), visual question answering (Su et al., 2019; Lu et al., 
2019) and visual commonsense reasoning (Su et al., 2019; Lu et al., 
2019; Chen et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020). 
3.6.1. Learning 
There exist several methods to learn joint representations. Perhaps 
the most straightforward is to concatenate pretrained features from 
different modalities (Kiela and Bottou, 2014). These representations 
have a few downsides. The information from each modality is not 
aligned, and both visual and language representations need to be 
available for each example in the dataset. Alternatively, mappings be­
tween modalities have been proposed as a method to create informative 
features (Collell et al., 2017). Another method to obtain joint repre­
sentations is to learn them jointly, for instance, by extending skip-gram 
models to several modalities (Lazaridou et al., 2015). More recent works 
have focused on extending language transformer models to multimodal 
settings, for instance, text and visual features (Su et al., 2019; Lu et al., 
2019; Chen et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020; Tan and Bansal, 2020; Radford 
et al., 2021), or text and video (Sun et al., 2019). These joint multimodal 
embedding schemes operate similarly to the equivalent language 
embedding schemes in that they are pretrained, and they provide 
general-purpose embeddings for downstream tasks. 
3.6.2. Grounding 
One motivation to further pursue multimodal representations is the 
theory that language is grounded in the world and in human actions and 
experience (Glenberg and Kaschak, 2002; Barsalou, 2008; Bisk et al., 
2020). It implies that language and knowledge are acquired through our 
sensorial and social interaction with the world. Multimodal represen­
tations thus partly address this issue by learning concepts and infor­
mation in a joint manner. The training methodologies, however, mostly 
still focus on learning distributed representations of entities following 
the distributional hypothesis. This is done, for example, by extending the 
unimodal models to include other modalities (Hill and Korhonen, 2014; 
Lazaridou et al., 2015). While such continuous representations are adept 
at capturing both visual and textual contexts (Zablocki et al., 2018), a 
satisfactory grounding in the physical world has not been achieved so 
far. Multimodal representations have a similar makeup to the unimodal 
embeddings discussed earlier. They suffer from much of the same 
weaknesses, and thus they lack the capabilities we seek to represent and 
manipulate meaning adequately. Language grounding implies that lan­
guage is understood within a physical context that is compositional in 
nature and that consists of discrete entities that relate to each other in 
different ways. We argue that multimodal representations and 
embodiment thus also stand to benefit from the advantages of 
discrete components, structure and biases. 
4. Reasoning and inference 
Having discussed continuous and discrete representations and pro­
cessing, and how we might obtain these representations, we will now 
look at how they play a role in reasoning and inference. Primarily, we 
see reasoning as the general process of arriving at or moving towards 
conclusions, driven by arguments or intuition9 and based on information 
or knowledge. Inference is defined as the process of making steps in 
reasoning. These definitions are broad and leave room for the kind of 
fuzzy reasoning that, for instance, humans employ. Moreover, reasoning 
often brings to mind formal logic. As such, this reasoning with formal 
logic can be seen as a more formal subset of the above defined general 
reasoning. 
As humans, we perform all kinds of inference, including but also 
beyond induction and deduction, and the ability to do so should be a 
trait of any intelligent system, along with the ability to learn, plan, 
represent knowledge, perceive, interact, and so on (Russell and Norvig, 
2010). That places not only logical but also general reasoning at a 
central place for the entire field of AI. 
4.1. Symbol manipulation 
The connection between reasoning and symbol manipulation has 
been made by many philosophers, including Aristotle, Plato and Hobbes 
(Hobbes, 1914; Łstrokukasiewicz, 1951; Klein, 1989). The language of 
thought hypothesis mentioned in the introduction also supports the role 
of symbol manipulation for intelligence, as language consists of symbols, 
so thinking in language must manipulate symbols (Fodor, 1975; Pinker, 
1994). 
Early AI approaches were symbolic. They built upon the belief that 
intelligence could be reduced to pure symbol manipulation10. The pillars 
of these systems are formal logic, symbol manipulating rules and sym­
bolic knowledge bases. Symbolic AI approaches, both early and their 
modern descendants, are interesting for our discussion, because they are 
based on discrete representations and processing. Logic, procedures and 
symbolic knowledge bases all rely heavily on discrete variables, rules 
and patterns to which variables either adhere or not, and explicit 
structure. These discretely implemented symbol manipulation sys­
tems excel at effective, efficient abstraction and inference (Marcus, 
2018). Given a set of premises that hold and manipulation rules, a 
symbolic system deduces consequences that also hold and statements 
that can never hold. Abstractions, easily represented in symbols, further 
aid generalization. As mentioned, symbolic knowledge is compositional: 
the systems have clear prescriptions for how symbols and rules may or 
9 Aristotle already drew a distinction between logical reasoning (reason 
proper) and intuitive reasoning.  
10 See Russell and Norvig (2010); Crevier (1993) for an overview of the history 
of AI. Although the focus has shifted (Hao, 2020), pure symbol manipulation 
systems are still an active field of research in AI, and executing symbolic pro­
cedures on variables is ubiquitous in computer science in general. 
R. Cartuyvels et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

AI Open 2 (2021) 143–159
150
may not be composed. That compositionality permits to generalize by 
combining acquired knowledge as building blocks into new knowledge. 
As argued, as humans we also, at least partially, reason with symbols. 
This symbolic reasoning enables us to operate mentally on concepts of 
high abstraction levels and to generalize knowledge efficiently. We 
should thus require intelligent systems to be able to reason 
formally and manipulate symbols, at a functional level. This is also 
illustrated in Fig. 2. However, humans also incorporate non-discrete 
data in their reasoning, for instance, estimated probabilities, predic­
tive gut feelings we have about certain future courses, vivid visual 
memories, and so on. Reality, as we argued, is continuous, and language 
tokens are a compressed representation of it. The complexity of reality is 
too high to be accurately and completely encoded in tokens, and se­
mantics get lost in the compression. When reasoning about the real 
world, tokens are simply too rigid and rules too brittle while the lost 
semantics, nuance, context, etc., turn out to be essential. Hence, 
reasoning about reality will at least need more representation 
power supplied by continuous representations. The need for se­
mantic representation power is confirmed by the failure of purely 
symbolic AI to attain general intelligence. Methods failed to generalize 
to the real world, outside of either the toy worlds or the abstract tasks for 
which they were developed. We can thus correct the symbolic AI belief: 
Intelligence needs symbol manipulation, but cannot simply be reduced 
to it. 
4.2. Distributed representations 
Deep learning, distributed representations and statistical learning 
have brought progress towards solving the above problem. Due to their 
statistical nature, systems automatically learn patterns in data; it is no 
longer necessary to enter symbolic knowledge or world theories into a 
system manually. However, while they provide improved semantic 
representation, intuitive reasoning and perception, current neural 
networks leave room for improvement in terms of logical, abstract 
reasoning, compositionality and interpretability. We believe that 
their internal symbol manipulation capability is still limited and ham­
pers their reasoning power. 
Promising work has used continuous systems for abstract reasoning 
tasks (Weston et al., 2016; Santoro et al., 2017; Silver et al., 2017; 
Hudson and Manning, 2018; Chollet, 2019; Lample and Charton, 2020). 
One type of reasoning that might especially suit neural learning systems 
is nonmonotonic reasoning (Antoniou and Williams, 1997), where 
tentative conclusions can be drawn and later revised in light of further 
evidence, that is, data (Parisi et al., 2019). But in general, for now, 
continuous representations still fall far short of symbolic systems in 
terms of the abstract reasoning they facilitate. 
4.3. Integration 
Because symbol manipulation involving discrete processing and 
neural networks involving continuous processing both have properties 
that are essential to intelligence, AI could advance if we consciously 
integrate ideas from both methodologies. By designing systems that 
integrate elements from both types of representations and processing, 
we could take steps towards more human-like or general reasoning and 
intelligence. The semantic capacity and ability to process perception of 
continuous systems, as well as their ability to learn from data, could 
complement the ability of symbolic systems to operate on abstract 
concepts and to generalize. 
Inspiration could be drawn from discrete representations and their 
processing to relieve some of deep learning’s shortcomings. Properties 
underlying the strengths of symbol systems, such as sparsity and com­
positionality, could be identified, and one could attempt to transfer 
these to deep learning systems by imposing biases, adding structure, and 
so on. The following section 5 will elaborate on this. As a preliminary 
example, we argue that an intelligent system should to be able to 
manipulate symbols internally at a functional level. Apart from using 
discrete rule-based components (e.g., as constraints in differentiable 
objective functions), this need could be met by endowing neural net­
works with the ability to handle indirection, reference, variables, names 
and instances. Soft attention schemes take a potential step in that di­
rection, without being symbolic in the classical sense or constrained to 
strictly discrete representations (Bengio et al., 2019). 
In the case of a more direct integration, the counterpart of contin­
uous systems does not have to be symbolic AI: for instance, structured 
probabilistic methods like Bayesian networks might offer much of the 
structure, abstraction, sparsity and causality advantages of symbolic AI, 
while retaining the ability to learn from data (Pearl, 1989; Bengio, 2017; 
Hudson and Manning, 2019b). 
The conclusion from this section is that reasoning only with discrete 
representations will not be sufficient for systems to acquire a general 
type of intelligence. Rather, the use of continuous representations could 
offer better semantic representation for some aspects of reality. Such 
continuous representations could be integrated with symbolic, 
structured or other discrete processing methodologies, which offer a 
greater potential for efficient and effective abstraction and 
generalization. 
5. Improving neural network representations 
We have argued so far that intelligent systems need rich semantics 
like the ones offered by distributed representations, but that current 
continuous representations and methods still have shortcomings. We 
have further put forward two reasons why intelligent systems need 
discrete components: first, to communicate with humans, and second, 
because they might help tackle some of the shortcomings of continuous 
systems (e.g., compositionality or the functional ability to manipulate 
symbols). 
In this section we will have a further look at what is lacking in cur­
rent neural network representations and how they can be enhanced. We 
will discuss some concrete methods to combine discrete and continuous 
representations and their processing. Additionally, we will have a look 
at compositionality and generalization, and how they could be improved 
by infusing more structure. 
We do not intend to provide an exhaustive list of issues, examples, 
suggestions and possible ways to improve representations or processing. 
As discrete and continuous representations and processing, and the 
interaction between them, are omnipresent in contemporary AI, 
enumerating all relevant research would be infeasible. Instead, we focus 
on what we deem are important insights and offer some examples from 
the subfields where our own expertise lies. 
Finally, we note that disagreements between symbolic AI and con­
nectionism and statistical learning in general have occurred recurrently 
throughout the history of AI, as shown by Minsky and Papert (1969); 
Marcus (2018). Alongside those tensions, there have also been calls for 
the combination of elements of both fields (Fodor et al., 1988; Minsky, 
1991; Besold et al., 2017; Lake et al., 2017; Marcus, 2020), and corre­
spondingly, there have already been many attempts to do so (Sun and 
Bookman, 1994; d’Avila Garcez et al., 2009; Manhaeve et al., 2018; Yi 
et al., 2018). However, the message that we want to convey with this 
discussion, as summarized by the last sentences of section 4 and the first 
sentences of this section, is more general than a call for the integration of 
classical AI with connectionism. Additionally, we hope to shed light on 
this matter from the viewpoints of the most recent trends in deep 
learning. 
5.1. The interpolating brain 
With respect to the nature of human intelligence, there exists a train 
of thought that assumes that the brain applies brute-force fitting of data 
(Hasson et al., 2020). In this view the brain is essentially an over­
parameterized function that learns general and useful interpolations of 
R. Cartuyvels et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

AI Open 2 (2021) 143–159
151
observations from the world, very similar to neural networks. They 
argue that, when the sampling of the input space for a dataset is 
dense enough, interpolation between these input data can provide 
for adequate generalization, and generalizing by extrapolation is 
not required. Models of increasing capacities should be able to parse 
and interpolate better between data. In this view, the focus should not lie 
on clever engineering or extensive pre-processing, but rather on the use 
of general models with minimal inductive bias. With enough computing 
power and data, a better solution can be interpolated than can be hand 
designed. Many of the recent language models, trained on massive text 
datasets, are congruent with this line of thinking (Vaswani et al., 2017; 
Radford et al., 2018, 2019; Devlin et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020; Lu 
et al., 2021). Text is given as input to models as raw as possible, pre­
serving all conjugations and different word forms or synonyms, instead 
of being, e.g., lemmatized or grammatically annotated. Transformers 
function well as workhorses of semantic processing, because they make 
maximal use of meaning in sentences by letting every word influence all 
other words in ways dependent on the input itself, thus in a way 
maximizing intra-sentence contextualization. Without explicit structure, 
the language models used for processing natural language are suffi­
ciently powerful to induce the structure or grammar rules implicitly 
contained in language. Current methods appear to be powerful enough 
to at least handle sentence-level grammar consistently (Conneau et al., 
2018; Goldberg, 2019; Hewitt and Manning, 2019), and their repre­
sentations have already proven useful in a wide range of tasks (Brown 
et al., 2020; Lu et al., 2021). 
5.1.1. Pitfalls 
Despite the deep learning community’s great confidence in current 
continuous processing by transformers or other neural networks, there 
are a few pitfalls. Theoretically it might be possible to encode any 
discrete information into continuous embeddings. But current 
embedding approaches do not yet flawlessly capture all relational, 
temporal, spatial or other structure that is found in the real world 
(Hudson and Manning, 2019a; Liu et al., 2020; Agarwal and Mangal, 
2020; Conneau et al., 2018). We believe that this is one of the short­
comings that cause some challenging AI tasks, beyond, for instance, 
basic natural language understanding (NLU) or image classification 
benchmarks, to remain far from solved. As an example of a setting where 
more structure might help, current models struggle to remain on-topic 
when generating longer discourses (Brown et al., 2020). In visual 
question answering, previous progress can be partly attributed to 
exploiting biases in datasets (Johnson et al., 2017a; Hudson and 
Manning, 2019a). On a more balanced and challenging dataset, current 
models perform poorly, even though the best models make use of 
structure for compositional reasoning (Hudson and Manning, 2019b). 
The Abstraction and Reasoning Corpus requires models to make ab­
stractions and generalize from very few examples, which both current 
discrete and continuous models fail at11 (Chollet, 2019). Another 
consequent shortcoming is that current neural models have no effective 
way to distinguish causation from correlation (Marcus, 2018; Lake et al., 
2017). Feature co-occurrences in training examples are exploited, but 
underlying causal relations are not modelled. This has the adverse effect 
that models exploit unintended clues in data or “shortcuts” (Lapuschkin 
et al., 2019; Niven and Kao, 2019; Geirhos et al., 2020). In computer 
vision, it is not straightforward to represent distinct entities when 
analyzing images. Features in neural networks typically indicate the 
presence of a particular characteristic but do not indicate how many or 
which instances exhibit those features. It is thus not straightforward to 
identify object instances from the same category nor how different in­
stances interact (Liu et al., 2020; Agarwal and Mangal, 2020). As 
mentioned in section 3.2, current vision networks also have limited 
understanding of the 3D world as well as what objects are and how they 
relate to each other (Agarwal and Mangal, 2020; Tang et al., 2020). 
5.1.2. Beyond interpolation: the composing brain 
In response to the above pitfalls, a different train of thought has also 
formed in the deep learning community. The idea is that the brain 
employs a mechanism beyond interpolation or brute-force learning 
of correlations in data, which allows, inter alia, for causal model­
ling and compositionality. 
The ability to compose elements and their relations together into 
more complex elements, and vice versa, to decompose complex elements 
into simpler elements, is regarded as key to human intelligence (Batta­
glia et al., 2018). The ability to compose induces so-called combinatorial 
generalization, that is, small sets of known building blocks can be 
dynamically combined into limitless compositions, allowing to make 
“infinite use of finite means” (von Humboldt et al., 1999). By combining 
simpler, known elements into a combinatorial number of unknown 
compositions, an intelligent system can generalize to unknown situa­
tions. Given their combinatorial growth, it would never be possible to 
encounter all of these situations during training, which means general­
ization is the only way of dealing with them. Combinatorial general­
ization is what systems need to perform open-ended inference. 
Combinatorial generalization based on discrete symbols is straightfor­
ward, but when dealing with continuous representations, it is still an 
open problem (Marcus, 2018). 
Compositionality relates closely to sample efficiency. On tasks where 
computers have outperformed humans, the necessary number of 
training points for doing so is generally huge, often more than humans 
would ever be able to process in one lifespan (Silver et al., 2017). If an 
intelligent system that has learned smaller building blocks could 
compose these blocks indefinitely and draw inferences from the com­
positions, it would not need to be explicitly taught about the combina­
torial amounts of compositions. Intelligent systems not only have to 
generalize and perform well, but they should also be able to do so effi­
ciently, both in time and in the amount of data needed. Chollet (2019) 
even bases his measure of intelligence on efficiency of skill acquisition. 
Therefore compositionality has the potential to improve both general­
ization and sample efficiency drastically. 
With respect to language, for example, it is simply intractable to 
learn the meaning of all possible sentences or all possible dis­
courses separately. The closest we might get is to train on immense 
datasets, as demonstrated by some of the recent language models we 
discussed in the beginning of this section, such as GPT-3 (Brown et al., 
2020). As we already mentioned, these models do exhibit some 
compositional properties: They can generally generate syntactically 
correct sentences, which requires an ‘understanding’ of the rules of 
composing language: syntax. It is unclear, however, to which extent the 
network relies on pattern memorization rather than compositionality. 
Several studies of compositionality of language models have recently 
been published (Lake and Baroni, 2018; Loula et al., 2018; Hupkes et al., 
2020). The main outcome is that current models do not yet generalize by 
composition to a satisfying extent, although the tested models do not 
perform poorly on every aspect of compositionality. Instead, humans 
certainly do understand language by learning the meaning of words and 
composing more elaborate meanings with sentences and syntactical 
structures. That suggests that, in order to progress towards human-level 
language understanding, we need to improve the composing abilities of 
language models. 
We argue that this mechanism beyond interpolation could perhaps 
be replicated, or approximated, in neural networks by adding discrete 
representation power, processing and/or additional structure. The 
following two subsections will give some suggestions of how that could 
work. 
11 The best scoring submission in a 3-months Kaggle competition got an error 
rate of 79 % (Kaggle). 
R. Cartuyvels et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

AI Open 2 (2021) 143–159
152
5.2. Integrating discrete and continuous representations and processing 
5.2.1. Discrete intermediates 
One relevant question is whether a discrete representation could 
serve as a useful sole, intermediate representation in a processing 
pipeline. In our view, if meaning is important and the processing con­
cerns semantics, this is unlikely to be beneficial, since nuance, implicit 
information and context would be lost (cfr. the communication models 
discussed in section 2). The discrete semantic intermediate would 
become incapable of retaining sufficient meaning. As was already 
discussed, continuous representations in the form of embedding vectors 
are more fit than tokens as meaning-carriers. Below, we discuss some 
more promising ways of integrating discrete and continuous 
representations. 
5.2.2. A step towards integration: attention mechanisms 
A technique that could be seen as a step towards integrating discrete 
and continuous representations, and that is widely used today, is the 
attention mechanism. An attention mechanism typically outputs a 
weighted sum over a discrete number of input features (mostly distrib­
uted representations), where the weights are determined by a softmax 
over inner products of corresponding keys and a query, which are usu­
ally also distributed representations12. Hence, attention allows for a soft 
selection or combination of input features, modulated by a query. For a 
particular outcome, the attention weights can give an indication of the 
importance of an input feature (word embedding, pixel, visual feature, 
…), providing a form of interpretability of the network, that is, attri­
bution. Attention is used in systems handling different modalities, like 
language (Bahdanau et al., 2015; Vaswani et al., 2017) or images (Child 
et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2020). The query can also be taken from another 
modality, to fuse multimodal information. Accordingly, attention is 
often used in cross-modal applications such as text-to-image generation 
(Xu et al., 2018), visual question answering (Yu et al., 2019), or image 
captioning (Xu et al., 2015; Anderson et al., 2018). 
Apart from yielding a soft, continuous version of an otherwise 
hard, discrete select operation, attention has some further interesting 
properties. Attention allows to dynamically build outputs by 
choosing or combining features from a set of inputs, which pro­
vides some combinatorial power to build new meaning from 
smaller parts, a desirable feature for generalization (see also section 
5.3). By operating on sets of a discrete number of distinct representa­
tions, or “slots”, attention turns neural networks from vector processors 
into set processors. The ability to represent and compose distinct parts 
potentially leads to disentangled representations of compositions. 
Interestingly, the soft select can be used not just to combine given input 
features, but also to approximate other hard decisions in a soft manner, 
like what submodule to execute or which memory location to write to 
(Graves et al., 2016; Hu et al., 2018). A final insight is, as we already 
briefly suggested, that attention provides a level of indirection be­
tween a reference to an output variable slot and a number of input 
variables (Vinyals et al., 2015a; Hudson and Manning, 2018; Carion 
et al., 2020; Locatello et al., 2020; Bengio et al., 2019). Furthermore, the 
input variables can be seen as named (by their keys), and so can the 
output variable (by the query). These are properties reminiscent of 
symbolic systems such as programming languages, but the attention 
operation remains fully differentiable. 
5.2.3. Explainability 
A generally intelligent system should be able to explain its thought 
process and its decisions. Also for a better understanding of neural 
models, as well as for debugging and engineering, more transparent 
processing would be of value. We just mentioned that attention weights 
offer a limited form of explanations, by attributing relative importance 
in the realization of a given outcome to the different inputs. However, 
the explanation of reasoning and decisions of course constitutes a 
form of communication between machines and humans, and 
hence, inevitably, truly explainable systems will require symbols 
and therefore discrete representations. Explainability in neural networks 
constitutes a broad research subfield by itself, and for a thorough dis­
cussion the reader can refer to Marcinkevics and Vogt (2020). 
5.2.4. Other ways to combine continuous and discrete processing 
Apart from attention, there are a number of other techniques that are 
commonly used to make otherwise discrete, non-differentiable pro­
cessing amenable to gradient based learning. For instance, policy gra­
dients (Williams, 1992; Sutton et al., 1999) are frequently used to 
backpropagate through discrete decisions (Xu et al., 2015; Hu et al., 
2017). Reparameterization tricks, such as the Gumbel-Softmax distri­
bution, offer a differentiable mode of selecting one of several distinct 
categories in a sampling setting (Jang et al., 2017; Maddison et al., 2017; 
Kipf et al., 2018). Without doubt the most prevalent method to convert 
continuous representations into discrete output is by modelling a cate­
gorical probability distribution over the discrete elements, parameter­
ized by the continuous input (Bengio et al., 2003). The reverse mode is 
converting a discrete element like a word token in language or an action 
in reinforcement learning to a distributed representation. This is typi­
cally solved by extracting the right row or column, which is the wanted 
embedding, from an embedding matrix using the token index as index. 
5.2.5. Indexing systems and memory 
Indexing systems in information retrieval traditionally make use of 
discrete symbols for efficient and exact matching, but can benefit from 
continuous components and semantic matching, as suggested by Wei 
and Croft (2006); Mitra et al. (2017); Zamani et al. (2018). By imposing 
sparsity to continuous embeddings, Zamani et al. (2018) find a middle 
ground in terms of continuous and discrete qualities. The resulting 
representations exhibit improved interpretability and generalization, 
while at the same time they provide contextualized meaning. Interest­
ingly, there is evidence that the brain utilizes a similar mechanism in 
memory retrieval (Polyn et al., 2009; Yonelinas et al., 2019; McClelland 
et al., 2020). Concepts or objects are encoded not only through their 
semantic properties but also through the context they appear in. This 
means that concepts can be retrieved from memory in different manners. 
The first manner is based on the particular characteristics that an object 
has, the second manner retrieves the concept based on contextual in­
formation. Humans are often reminded of a concept by seeing associated 
content, rather than the concept itself. As a concrete example, the 
human mind draws from past experiences when encountering an ellipsis 
in a text, or when content is obfuscated in images. 
Likewise, continuous systems can benefit from (partially) discrete 
indexing components like an explicitly or sparsely indexed memory. A 
series of work has explored extending neural networks with external 
memories or tapes, which the network can read from and write to 
(Graves et al., 2014; Weston et al., 2015; Sukhbaatar et al., 2015; Graves 
et al., 2016). Typically, in order to keep the system end-to-end differ­
entiable, reads and writes are modelled by soft attention mechanisms 
(see above), so every memory location has a non-zero contribution to 
read results, and every location is accessed during the write operation. 
This leads to escalating time and memory footprints. Therefore, Rae 
et al. (2016) make these memory networks more scalable by making the 
attention weights sparse, in a similar vein to Zamani et al. (2018). Apart 
from the efficiency argument, Zaremba and Sutskever (2015) note that 
model capabilities could be further extended by learning how to 
interact with discrete interfaces (such as discrete memories, input and 
output), since many existing real-world interfaces are in fact 
discrete (databases, programs, search engines and, interestingly, also 
natural language). As we mentioned already, intelligent systems should 
be able to communicate with humans. Since human language is discrete, 
12 We refer the reader to Bahdanau et al. (2015) or Vaswani et al. (2017) for a 
more complete description of attention. 
R. Cartuyvels et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

AI Open 2 (2021) 143–159
153
machines need to be able to interact with discrete interfaces like lan­
guage. Gülçehre et al. (2018) test neural networks extended with both 
continuous and discrete access memories, and find that discrete mem­
ories often outperform their continuous analogues. Xu et al. (2015) 
reach a similar conclusion when comparing soft and hard attention over 
image regions for caption generation. 
5.2.6. Top-down and bottom-up 
Inducing theories from observations and deducing predictions about 
observations from abstract theories, are both goals for intelligent sys­
tems. To achieve both, systems could combine two different learning 
approaches. The first, which is bottom-up, is the widely used mechanism 
to minimize objectives from very large training sets, which has proven 
its value in many semantics tasks that operate on continuous represen­
tations. The second, which is top-down, would allow to reason about 
concrete examples starting from abstract information, an ability that is 
typically more easily achieved with discrete or structured approaches. 
One possible approach to achieve top-down learning from limited 
data is to use discrete representations of concepts and to apply cardinal 
minimization to an algebraic semilattice structure. This can be done in a 
parameter-free setting with simple heuristics without overfitting on the 
data (Martin-Maroto and de Polavieja, 2018). Various other top-down 
and bottom-up integrations could be conceived. Manhaeve et al. 
(2018), for instance, extend a probabilistic variant of a logic program­
ming language to integrate with and take output from low-level neural 
networks, where the neural network’s parameters and those of the 
probabilistic program can be learned. However, the structure from the 
high-level program remains fixed, hence it is not learnable, and it only 
operates on probabilities and symbolic variables, not on rich distributed 
representations. As another example, Hudson and Manning (2019b), 
drawing inspiration from Bengio (2017), predict a probabilistic de­
pendency graph for VQA that represents scenes in which nodes and at­
tributes have distributed representations. 
Generative models could alternatively instantiate the top-down part, 
implementing a mapping from abstract (e.g., class labels, text or latent 
representations) to concrete samples. Nair et al. (2018) provide an 
example: they use a generative network to generate goals, represented 
by disentangled embeddings, which they use as objectives for 
self-supervised learning. 
Such ideas, including the notable role for top-down learning, have 
received less attention in the deep learning literature, but have enor­
mous potential when combined with neural network representations. 
Yet they are at the essence of what we want to achieve by combining 
continuous and discrete representations/processing. With integrated 
top-down and bottom-up representation mechanisms, bottom-up 
learned concepts could be combined and composed within partic­
ular top-down contexts. As such, ideas could be generalized outside 
the contexts in which they were learned. This brings us to the related 
topic of compositionality and generalization. As we argued, they are two 
aspects in which current deep learning still falls short. 
5.3. Compositionality and generalization 
As we explained in section 5.1, composing and decomposing con­
cepts is an essential trait of intelligence, as it enables combinatorial 
generalization, and as a corollary, could drastically reduce the prob­
lematic sample complexities of current systems. Compositionality re­
lates to our discrete and continuous discussion, since language and other 
symbol systems comprising discrete representations are often inherently 
compositional, as discussed in section 2. In this section, we put forth 
some promising ideas and lines of research that aim at enhancing 
compositionality in deep learning systems. 
5.3.1. Structure 
Structure is abundant in the world, and can come in many shapes: 
temporal, spatial, compositional, relational, and so on. It is essential for 
humans to understand both the world and language, to assign meaning 
to its constituents correctly and to further process it. Recognizing and 
understanding structure in otherwise chaotic observations seems a 
valuable aid in simulating any sort of intelligence. 
Continuous representations of content that correctly capture a spe­
cific kind of structure can already be obtained by training models to 
extract that structure. Temporal structure can be learned by ordering 
events in text onto an absolute timeline (Leeuwenberg and Moens, 2018; 
Leeuwenberg and Moens, 2020). Spatial structure can be extracted from 
textual relationships (Collell et al., 2018). In addition, Hewitt and 
Manning (2019) and Goldberg (2019) show that embeddings computed 
by BERT can encode syntactic structure (Devlin et al., 2019). In contrast 
to the prior works about temporal and spatial structure, BERT was not 
trained explicitly to extract syntactic structure. Yet, how to capture the 
same variety of structure as humans from diverse observations in 
purely continuous embeddings remains unsolved. Part of the diffi­
culty originates from the fact that current methods obtain the repre­
sentations by optimizing an objective function related to a targeted 
downstream task. But such a loss is determined by many more factors 
than the ability of the obtained representations to capture structure, and 
thus might provide a noisy signal for the embedding method if the goal is 
to explicitly represent structure. 
These works show that structure, which is often characterized by 
discrete elements, can already be implicitly captured to some extent in 
continuous representations. This implicit structure could benefit com­
positionality, hence we believe further exploring it could prove 
worthwhile. 
5.3.2. Disentanglement 
While the concrete techniques to improve compositionality of 
continuous representations are not yet clearly established, one avenue is 
to improve the disentanglement and interpretation of the neural models. 
Recurrent neural networks, for example, can be shown to achieve basic 
compositionality on toy examples (Kharitonov and Chaabouni, 2020). 
They add an inductive bias towards sequential structure, which can be 
suited for temporally or otherwise sequentially structured data. It is 
therefore not unthinkable that more structure could be added to 
continuous representations by construction. 
A possible solution is to create disentanglement in continuous rep­
resentations of existing methods. As an example, representations in 
variational autoencoders can be encouraged towards disentanglement 
by imposing constraints (Higgins et al., 2017; Kim and Mnih, 2018). 
Similarly, a reconstruction error based on a Principal Component 
Analysis can drive structured features toward disentanglement in an 
autoencoder (Pandey et al., 2020). Additionally, structure can be 
imposed in a learning process by comparing discrete class labels with 
randomly chosen contextual dimensions (Spinks and Moens, 2020). 
Such representations offer interesting qualities, as they can be decom­
posed into meaningful components, modified and recomposed into a 
continuous representation. Disentanglement is thus in general a desir­
able property for compositionality. 
The term ‘disentanglement’ is often used to denote dimensions 
within one embedding that represent disentangled factors of variation. 
In a broader sense, observations could also be represented in a dis­
entangled manner by encoding different constituent factors or 
parts with their own continuous representation. Changing or 
substituting one constituent of the observation, while keeping the rest 
equal, yields a localized change in the corresponding representation; 
only the representation of that constituent changes, which is the goal of 
disentanglement. This idea is gaining importance, inter alia, in computer 
vision. Before, single representations of an entire image were used as 
input to downstream tasks (Vinyals et al., 2015b; Xu et al., 2015). Now, 
it is becoming standard to condition on an essentially disentangled 
representation of an image consisting of a set of representations of its 
most salient constituent objects (Anderson et al., 2018; Burgess et al., 
2019; Watters et al., 2019; Engelcke et al., 2020). This form of 
R. Cartuyvels et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

AI Open 2 (2021) 143–159
154
disentanglement fits well with the attention operation, that selects or 
merges information from the disentangled representation. When we 
additionally model relations between these constituents (that together 
form a set with a discrete number of elements), the structure we end up 
with is a graph. 
Disentanglement could also play a role in modelling causality. If 
causal factors are to have a delineated and recognizable effect, corre­
sponding changes in distributions, for instance, of input, outcomes or 
output variables, should be localized (Bengio et al., 2019). This would be 
hard to achieve if underlying factors, like agents or objects in a scene, 
are completely entangled in a representation. 
5.3.3. Graphs 
Other work suggests that for more complex tasks more structure in 
the neural architectures is required than disentangled (sets of) repre­
sentations (McCoy et al., 2020). That structure could be derived from the 
inherent compositionality of graphs, as advocated by Battaglia et al. 
(2018). Graphs and graph neural networks offer a structural bias to­
wards relational information, similarly to convolutional neural net­
works that impose a locality bias (Scarselli et al., 2008; Zhou et al., 
2018). Given the relational structure of many real-world systems, this 
structural bias might be a desirable property. The use of continuous 
representations as attributes in discretely structured graph repre­
sentations gives a form of hybrid representation and adds structure 
to neural network processing. For instance, recent research shows that 
symbolic models of the world can successfully be deduced from obser­
vations (Cranmer et al., 2020). By encouraging sparseness in graph 
neural networks, the authors manage to extract symbolic information 
about physical processes. This research direction aligns with our views, 
as it combines the advantages of both continuous representations and 
symbolic components. 
Interestingly, applying self-attention as in transformers (Vaswani 
et al., 2017) to a set of features can conceptually be seen as message 
passing between nodes in a fully connected graph, an analogy proposed 
by Veliˇckovi´c et al. (2018). In this view, (self-)attention can be used to 
construct arbitrary directed graphs from input nodes in a soft manner. 
Graphs, much like sets as used in attention, keep factors disentangled 
compared to representing everything at once (in a single vector), 
because nodes and edges are separately represented. This allows to 
model relational and causal systems, since localized changes can be 
computed resulting from cause and effect events (Kipf et al., 2020). 
Graphs have also found use in other applications, for instance, to 
generate images from language, as shown by Johnson et al. (2018). The 
method they propose converts a scene graph, which is a graph repre­
sentation of a sentence, into an image. They show that with the explicit 
structure of the graph, they are able to generate more semantically 
correct images than a method that converts raw text into images (Zhang 
et al., 2017). 
Finally, another representation related to graphs that appears very 
promising is a factor graph, that represents a factorization of a function. 
Any factor in such a graph creates a direct dependency between a set of 
variables. Such structures can potentially be used in representation 
learning tasks for high-level concepts, which would be essential for 
higher-level, abstract reasoning. A sparse factor graph would then model 
the joint distribution over high-level concepts. It has been suggested that 
such an approach mimics the functioning of human consciousness 
(Bengio, 2017). This idea shows promising results on a challenging vi­
sual question-answering dataset, although still performing much below 
human level (Hudson and Manning, 2019b). 
5.3.4. Approximate inference and guiding search 
Earlier in this paper, we and other authors have argued that more 
structured, sparser and probabilistic models, like hierarchical Bayesian 
models or hidden Markov models, might offer some of the qualities we 
seek to add to deep learning. They would still be trained from data and 
would remain compatible with distributed representations but could 
also enable higher-level, conscious processing, like abstract and causal 
reasoning (Lake et al., 2015; Bengio, 2017; Lake et al., 2017; Hudson 
and Manning, 2019b). However, these types of models often suffer from 
intractable exact inference. For instance, exact inference in Bayesian 
nets (Pearl, 1989) is proven to be NP-hard (Cooper, 1990). Approximate, 
Monte Carlo-based inference methods are used to cope with this factor, 
but in vast hypothesis spaces, with only few good solutions, inference 
remains difficult. As Lake et al. (2017) suggest13, humans are able to 
come up quickly with a small set of plausible solutions when faced with 
difficult problems or questions, hinting towards an intuitive or sub­
conscious mechanism to select hypotheses to test. This makes humans 
efficient at inference and search. Along these lines, one promising idea 
is to use the intuitive processing of neural networks for approxi­
mate, amortized inference in structured probabilistic models or for 
inference in settings characterized by vast hypothesis spaces with 
few solutions. 
This idea has already been explored by, for instance Heess et al. 
(2013); Eslami et al. (2016); Yoon et al. (2018); Satorras et al. (2019); 
Satorras and Welling (2020), but many possibilities remain for further 
work. Kingma and Welling (2014); Rezende et al. (2014) use neural 
networks for amortized inference, which learns an efficient mapping 
from samples to proposal distributions in probabilistic models. Y. Bengio 
makes a very similar argument in a recent talk (Bengio et al., 2019): 
Neural networks could guide efficient search in reasoning. The over­
whelming success of DeepMind’s Go-playing systems (Silver et al., 2016, 
2017) is also based on this principle. Instead of expanding random nodes 
in their Monte Carlo tree search, which would inevitably fail the system 
given the immense search space of Go, they select nodes predicted by a 
neural network. Since the search tree is a discrete structure with discrete 
states, by doing so, they make an interesting case for integrating discrete 
and continuous processing. 
5.3.5. Generative compositional models 
Progress has recently been made in guiding generative processes, 
implemented by neural networks, with discrete input. Xu et al. 
(2018); Pavllo et al. (2020b), for instance, generate realistically looking 
images, conditioned on natural language descriptions. Vedantam et al. 
(2018) achieve a similar effect but, they condition on sets of labels, and 
they incrementally refine the image by adding labels, going from ab­
stract to concrete labels. Although there is still room for improvement, 
changing one word in the conditioning description only changes the 
corresponding parts in the output image; hence, the generation can be 
compositionally controlled. Crucially, the input text has composi­
tional meaning, and the output image adheres to this composed 
meaning, entailing that the intermediate, continuous representa­
tions in the neural networks manage to capture compositionality to 
an extent. Pavllo et al. (2020b) generate objects in 3D by predicting both 
mesh and texture, with neural networks and continuous, distributed 
representations. Forcing the generation process to be congruent with the 
3D space naturally disentangles the shape of generated objects from 
their pose, facilitating a better semantic alignment between the input 
text and visual output. 
This direction of research has great potential. While currently this 
mainly works for rather simple images, it could be extended towards 
complex scenes and videos (Pavllo et al., 2020a). 
5.3.6. Composing modularized computations 
Another particularly relevant series of methods aims to learn com­
posable neural module networks for visual reasoning and visual ques­
tion answering. Each of these modules specializes in one subtask, and 
they can be composed into complex, deep networks (Andreas et al., 
2016b). The composition depends on what computations are required 
13 We refer to the paper of Lake et al. (2017) for a more thorough explanation 
and motivation. 
R. Cartuyvels et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

AI Open 2 (2021) 143–159
155
for answering a given natural language question, and in what order. This 
has the advantage that not every type of question needs to be learned 
from the beginning. Rather, the building blocks have to be trained, and 
one should learn how to compose these blocks. If those two skills can be 
acquired, the model can generalize to new types of questions by 
composing the learned blocks into new compositions. A series of studies 
start from this idea and improve upon the method in various ways 
(Andreas et al., 2016a; Hu et al., 2017; Johnson et al., 2017b; Hu et al., 
2018; Mascharka et al., 2018; Yi et al., 2018; Mao et al., 2019). Most of 
these methods are to some extent interpretable. Knowing which modules 
are executed and what input they attend to is informative for an 
outcome. The composable, specialized module networks can be con­
trasted to Hudson and Manning (2018)’s model for visual question 
answering, which repeatedly applies one complex general-purpose 
block to focus sequentially on different image parts and perform 
different operations. Although the above works apply the idea of 
composing neural modules to reasoning about visual data based on 
language queries, we believe that it could prove useful in a broad range 
of other settings. 
From the above we conclude that it is beneficial to explore a variety 
of approaches that would better mimic how the human brain processes 
both rich continuous information as well as discrete language. As dis­
cussed above, desirable properties, such as generalization and 
compositionality, can be achieved with hybrid discrete-continuous 
representations or structurally informed models. 
6. Conclusions 
Current AI systems still fall short of reaching real intelligence. In this 
paper we have postulated that an important cause is the way that ma­
chines represent natural language and other modalities and reason with 
these. Traditional symbolic representations, such as the discrete symbols 
found in language, are important in human-human and human- 
computer communication. However, they only provide a compressed 
representation of the real world and fail in capturing contextual infor­
mation, which is needed in human-like understanding and reasoning. 
Continuous representations succeed in capturing contextual informa­
tion, but they lack a transparent structure that would facilitate compo­
sition and generalization. As a result, they are learned by a brute force 
exploitation of huge data sets. Hence, there is a need to study the value 
of discrete and continuous representations with a view to their potential 
integration. 
This study is realized at a time of an ongoing debate among promi­
nent AI researchers (Bengio et al., 2019). Some deep learning adepts 
argue that symbolic processing should emerge from continuous pro­
cessing, which means that intelligent systems would eventually not need 
explicit discrete components. Others dispute this position and argue that 
purely continuous systems will never be able to reach intelligence by 
themselves and will always need symbolic higher-level reasoning com­
ponents. Careful analysis of the different arguments found in the liter­
ature and our own published research has led us to conclude that we 
need novel representations that integrate discrete and continuous 
components in order to simulate human-like understanding of language 
and other media. We drew inspiration from human intelligence, because 
human intelligence has both a continuous, reality processing, perceptual 
aspect and a symbolic aspect that reasons and processes language 
tokens. 
These findings open many venues for future research on topics such 
as how to fuse discrete and continuous processing in neural networks, 
how to integrate structure into the representations, how to impose 
sparsity to continuous representations, how to integrate general human- 
like reasoning, how to deal with top-down and bottom-up integration of 
representations and processing, how to enforce compositionality, and 
how to explain the resulting representations. We firmly believe that 
solutions to the above questions will advance the state of the art in AI, 
lead to many desirable properties including efficiency, reliability and 
explainability and enable improved reasoning and generalization 
capabilities. 
Funding 
The research leading to this paper received funding from the 
Research Foundation – Flanders (FWO) under Grant Agreement No. 
G078618N and from the European Research Council (ERC) under Grant 
Agreement No. 788506.
