ERBlox:
Combining Matching Dependencies
with Machine Learning for Entity Resolution
Zeinab Bahmania, Leopoldo Bertossia,∗, Nikolaos Vasilogloub
aCarleton University, School of Computer Science, Ottawa, Canada
bLogicBlox Inc., Atlanta, GA 30309, USA
Abstract
Entity resolution (ER), an important and common data cleaning problem, is
about detecting data duplicate representations for the same external entities,
and merging them into single representations.
Relatively recently, declara-
tive rules called matching dependencies (MDs) have been proposed for speci-
fying similarity conditions under which attribute values in database records are
merged. In this work we show the process and the beneﬁts of integrating four
components of ER: (a) Building a classiﬁer for duplicate/non-duplicate record
pairs built using machine learning (ML) techniques; (b) Use of MDs for support-
ing the blocking phase of ML; (c) Record merging on the basis of the classiﬁer
results; and (d) The use of the declarative language LogiQL -an extended form
of Datalog supported by the LogicBlox platform- for all activities related to data
processing, and the speciﬁcation and enforcement of MDs.
Keywords:
Entity resolution, matching dependencies, support-vector
machines, classiﬁcation, Datalog
2010 MSC: 00-01, 99-00
1. Introduction
Entity resolution (ER) is a common and diﬃcult problem in data cleaning
that has to do with handling unintended multiple representations in a database
of the same external objects.
This problem is also known as deduplication,
reference reconciliation, merge-purge, etc. Multiple representations lead to un-
certainty in data and the problem of managing it. Cleaning the database reduces
uncertainty. In more precise terms, ER is about the identiﬁcation and fusion
of database records (think of rows or tuples in tables) that represent the same
real-world entity [13, 25]. As a consequence, ER usually goes through two main
consecutive phases: (a) detecting duplicates, and (b) merging them into single
representations.
∗Corresponding author

Preprint submitted to Journal of LATEX Templates
January 19, 2017
arXiv:1602.02334v3  [cs.DB]  18 Jan 2017

For duplicate detection, one must ﬁrst analyze multiple pairs of records,
comparing the two records in them, and discriminating between: pairs of du-
plicate records and pairs of non-duplicate records. This classiﬁcation problem
is approached with machine learning (ML) methods, to learn from previously
known or already made classiﬁcations (a training set for supervised learning),
building a classiﬁcation model (a classiﬁer) for deciding about other record pairs
[16, 25].
In principle, in ER every two records (forming a pair) have to be compared
through the classiﬁer. Most of the work on applying ML to ER work at the
record level [41, 16, 17], and only some of the attributes, or their features,
i.e. numerical values associated to them, may be involved in duplicate detection.
The choice of relevant sets of attributes and features is application dependent.
With a classiﬁer at hand, ER may be a task of quadratic complexity since it
requires comparing every two records. To reduce the large number of two-record
comparisons, blocking techniques are used [45, 9, 32, 50]. Commonly, a single
record attribute, or a combination of attributes, the so-called blocking key, is
used to split the database records into blocks. Next, under the assumption that
any two records in diﬀerent blocks are unlikely to be duplicates, only every two
records in a same block are compared for duplicate detection.
Although blocking will discard many record pairs that are obvious non-
duplicates, some true duplicate pairs might be missed (by putting them in dif-
ferent blocks), due to errors or typographical variations in attribute values or
the rigidity and low sensitivity of blocking keys. More interestingly, similarity
between blocking key values alone may fail to capture the relationships that
naturally hold in the data and could be used for blocking. Thus, entity blocking
based only on similarities of blocking key values may cause low recall. This is a
major drawback of traditional blocking techniques.
In this work we consider diﬀerent and coexisting entities, for example Author
and Paper. For each of them, there is a collection of records. For entity Author,
records may have the form a = ⟨name, . . . , aﬃliation, . . . , paper title, . . .⟩; and
for Paper entity, records may be of the form p = ⟨title, . . . , author name, . . .⟩.1
Records for diﬀerent entities may be related via attributes in common and
referential constraints, something the blocking mechanism could take advan-
tage of. Blocking can be performed on each of the participating entities, and
the way records for an entity, say Author, are placed in blocks may inﬂuence
the way the records for another entity, say Paper, are assigned to blocks. This
is called “collective blocking”. Semantic, relational information, in addition to
that provided by blocking keys for single entities, can be used to state relation-
ships between diﬀerent entities and their corresponding similarity criteria. So,
blocking decision making forms a collective and intertwined process involving
several entities. In the end, the records for each individual entity will be placed
in blocks associated to that entity.
In our work, collective blocking is based on blocking keys and the enforcement
1For all practical purposes, think of records as database tuples in a single table.
2

of semantic information about the relational closeness of entities Author and
Paper, which is captured by a set of matching dependencies (MDs) [27]. So, we
propose “MD-based collective blocking”.
After records are divided in blocks, the proper duplicate detection process
starts, and is carried out by comparing every two records in a block, and classi-
fying the pair as “duplicates” or “non-duplicates” using the trained ML model
at hand.
In the end, records in duplicate pairs are considered to represent
the same external entity, and have to be merged into a single representation,
i.e. into a single record. This second phase is also application dependent. MDs
were originally proposed to support this kind of task, and their use in blocking
is somehow unexpected.
Matching dependencies are declarative logical rules that tell us under what
conditions of similarity between attribute values, any two records must have
certain attribute values merged (or matched), i.e. made identical [26, 27]. For
example, the MD:
DeptB[Dep] ≈DeptB[Dep] →DeptB[City] .= DeptB[City]
(1)
tells us that, for any two records for entity (or relation or table) DeptB that
have similar values for attribute Dep, their values for attribute City should be
merged, i.e. made the same.
MDs as introduced in [27] do not specify how to merge values.
In [11],
MDs were extended with matching functions (MFs). For a data domain, a MF
speciﬁes how to assign a value in common to two values. In this work, we adopt
MDs with MFs. In the end, the enforcement of MDs with MFs should produce
a duplicate-free instance (cf. Section 2 for more details).
MDs have to be speciﬁed in a declarative manner, and at some point en-
forced, by producing changes on the data. For this purpose, we use the LogicBlox
platform, a data management system developed by the LogicBlox2 company,
that is centered around its declarative language, LogiQL [31]. LogiQL supports
relational data management and, among several other features [3], an extended
form of Datalog with stratiﬁed negation [15]. This language is expressive enough
for the kind of MDs considered in this work.3
In this paper, we describe our ERBlox system.
It is built on top of the
LogicBlox platform, and implements entity resolution (ER) applying LogiQL
for the speciﬁcation and enforcement of MDs, and built-in ML techniques for
building the classiﬁer. More speciﬁcally, ERBlox has four main components or
modules:
(a) MD-based collective blocking: This phase is just about clustering together
records that might be duplicates of each other. Additional comparisons
between two records between will be performed within block, and never
with records from diﬀerent blocks. Blocking can be used before learning
2 www.logicblox.com
3For arbitrary sets of MDs, we need higher expressive power [11], such as that provided by
answer set programming [4].
3

a classiﬁer, to ascribe labels (duplicate/non-duplicate or ±1) to pairs of
records that will become training examples, or after the classiﬁer has been
learned, with new records in the database that have to be checked for
duplication with other records in the database.4 It may be the case that
two records in a same block may end up not being considered as duplicates
of each other. However, through blocking the number of pairwise record
comparisons of is reduced.
(b) ML-based classiﬁcation model construction: At this point any supervised
technique for classiﬁcation, i.e. for building the mathematical model for
classiﬁcation, could be used. This is the proper machine learning phase.
We used the support-vector machine (SVM) approach [21, 48].
(c) Duplicate detection: Having the new records in the database (as opposed
to training examples) already clustered in blocks, this phase is about ap-
plying the classiﬁcation model obtained in the previous phase to new pairs
of records, obtaining for each pair the outcome ±1. The classiﬁer could be
applied to any two records, or -if blocking techniques have been applied
to the database- only to two records in a same block. In our case, we did
the latter.
(d) MD-based duplicate merging:
The output of the preceding phase is just
a set of record-pairs with their newly created labels, ±1, indicating that
they are duplicates of each other, or not. This last phase merges duplicates
into single records. In our case, when and how to merge is speciﬁed by
matching dependencies, which invoke matching functions to ﬁnd the values
in common to be used in the records created by merging.
The blocking phase, (a) above, uses MDs to specify the blocking strategy.
They express conditions in terms of blocking key similarities and also rela-
tional closeness -the semantic knowledge- to assign two records to a same block,
by making their block identiﬁers identical. Then, under MD-based collective
blocking diﬀerent records of possibly several related entities are simultaneously
assigned to blocks through the enforcement of MDs (cf. Section 5 for details).
This is a non-traditional, novel use of MDs, whereas their intended use is the
application to proper merging phase, (d) above, [26].
It is important to emphasize that, in our work, MDs are not used for the
whole ER process, but only in two of the phases above. In principle, the whole
ER process could be based only on MDs. However, this would be a complete dif-
ferent problem, in particular, a completely diﬀerent machine learning problem:
the MDs for this application would have to be learned from scratch (implicitly
learning similarity relationships and a classiﬁer). Learning MDs is a rather un-
explored area of research (cf. [43, 44] for some work in this direction), which
is somehow closer to the areas of rule learning [29] and discovery of database
4In our case, the training data already came with labels. So, blocking was applied to the
unlabeled records before, but independently, from the learning and execution of the classiﬁer.
4

dependencies [40]. With our approach we can leverage, at a particular phase of
the ER process, available machine learning techniques that are fully integrated
with database management systems, as in the case of LogicBlox.
The sets of MDs used in (a) and (d) are diﬀerent, and play diﬀerent roles.
In both cases, they are application-dependent, and have a canonical represen-
tation in the system, as Datalog rules. The MDs are then enforced by applying
(running) those rules. Although in general a set of MDs may lead to alternative
ﬁnal instances through its enforcement [11], in our application of MDs both sets
of MDs lead to a single instance.
In the case of (a), this means that, for each entity, a unique set of disjoint
blocks is generated. The reason is that the combination of the set of MDs and
the initial database instance falls into a newly identiﬁed, well-behaved class,
the SFAI class, that we introduce in this work. (The main ideas and intuitions
around it are presented in the main body of this paper, but more speciﬁc details
are given in Appendix
A.)
In the case of (d), the set of “merge” MDs also
leads to a single, duplicate-free instance (as captured by the classiﬁer and the
merge MDs). This is because the MDs in the set turn out to be interaction-free
[11](cf. also Appendix A).
We use LogiQL to declaratively implement the two MD-based components
of ERBlox. As shown in [4, 6] in general, sets of MDs can be expressed by
means of answer-set programs (ASPs) [14]. However, both classes of MDs used
by ERBlox can be expressed by computationally eﬃcient fragments of ASPs,
namely Datalog with stratiﬁed negation [15], which is supported by LogiQL.
On the machine learning side (item (b) above), the problem is about build-
ing and implementing a model for the detection of pairs of duplicate records.
The classiﬁcation model is trained using record-pairs known to be duplicates
or non-duplicates. We independently used three established classiﬁcation al-
gorithms: SVM, k-nearest neighbor (K-NN) [20], and non-parametric Bayes
classiﬁer (NBC) [8]. We used the Ismion5 implementation of them due to the
in-house expertise at LogicBlox. Since the emphasis of this work is on the use
of LogiQL and MDs, we will refer only to our use of SVM.
For experimentation with the ERBlox system, we used as dataset a snapshot
of Microsoft Academic Search (MAS)6 that includes 250K authors, 2.5M papers,
and a training set. We also used, independently, datasets from DBLP and Cora
Citation. The experimental results show that our system improves ER recall
and precision over traditional, standard blocking techniques [33], where just
blocking-key similarities are used. Actually, MD-based collective blocking leads
to higher precision and recall on the given datasets.
Our work also shows the integration under a single system of diﬀerent forms
of data retrieval, storage and transformation, on one side, and machine learning
techniques, on the other. All this is enabled by the use of optimized Datalog-rule
declaration and execution as supported by the LogicBlox platform.
5http://www.ismion.com
6http://academic.research.microsoft.com. As of January 2013.
5

This paper is structured as follows. Section 2 introduces background on:
matching dependencies (including a brief description of the new SFAI class),
classiﬁcation, and collective blocking. A general overview of the ERBlox sys-
tem is presented in Section 3. Speciﬁc details about the components of our
methodology and ERBlox are given and discussed in Sections 4, 5, 6, and 7.
Experimental results are shown in Section 8. Sections 9 and 10 present related
work and conclusions, respectively.
In Appendix
A we provide the deﬁni-
tions and more details about relational MDs, the SFAI class, and other classes
with the unique clean instance property.7 This paper is a revised and extended
version of [5].
2. Preliminaries
2.1. Matching dependencies
We consider an application-dependent relational schema R, with a data do-
main U. For an attribute A, Dom(A) ⊆U is its domain. We assume predicates
do not share attributes, but diﬀerent attributes may share a domain. An in-
stance D for R is a ﬁnite set of ground atoms of the form R(c1, . . . , cn), with
R ∈R, ci ∈U. The active domain of an instance D, denoted Adom(D), is the
ﬁnite set of all constants from U that appear in D.
We assume that each entity is represented by a relational predicate, and its
tuples or rows in its extension correspond to records for the entity. As in [11],
we assume records have unique, ﬁxed, global record identiﬁers (rids), which are
positive integers. This allows us to trace changes of attribute values in records.
When records are represented as tuples in a database, which is usually the case,
we talk about global tuple identiﬁers (tids). Record and tuple ids are placed in
an extra, ﬁrst attribute for R ∈R that acts as a key. Then, records take the
form R(t, ¯c), with t the identiﬁer. Sometimes we leave tids and rids implicit. If
A is a sublist of the attributes for a predicate R, R[A] denotes the restriction
of an R-tuple (or the predicate R) to attributes in A.
MDs are formulas of the form [26, 27]:
ϕ:
^
j
R1[Xj
1] ≈j R2[Xj
2] −→
^
k
R1[Y k
1 ] .= R2[Y k
2 ],
(2)
where attributes (treated as variables) Xj
1 and Xj
2 (also Y k
1 , Y k
2 ) are comparable,
in the sense that they share the same data domain Domj on which a binary
similarity (i.e., reﬂexive and symmetric) relation ≈j is deﬁned. R1, R2 could be
the same predicate. The MD in (2) states that, for every pair of tuples (one
in relation R1, the other in relation R2) where the left-hand side (LHS) of the
arrow is true, the attribute values in them on the right-hand side (RHS) have
to be made identical. We can consider only MDs with a single identity atom
7The material in Appendix
A is all new, but, although important for ERBlox, departs
from the main thread of the paper.
6

(with .=) in the RHSs. Accordingly, an explicit formulation of the MD in (2) in
classical predicate logic is:8
ϕ:
∀t1t2 ∀¯x1¯x2(R1(t1, ¯x1) ∧R2(t2, ¯x2) ∧
^
j
xj
1 ≈j xj
2
−→
y1 .= y2),
(3)
with xj
1, y1 ∈¯x1, xj
2, y2 ∈¯x2. The ti are used as variables for tuple IDs. We
usually leave the universal quantiﬁers implicit.
LHS(ϕ) and RHS(ϕ) denote
the sets of atoms on the LHS and RHS of ϕ, respectively.
LHS(ϕ) contains,
apart from similarity atoms, atoms R1(t1, ¯x1) and R2(t2, ¯x2), which contain
all the variables in the MD, including those in the RHS(ϕ).
So, similarity
and identity atoms in ϕ involve one variable from predicate R1, and one from
predicate R2.
Example 1. Consider Paper(PID, Title, Year, CID, JID, Keyword, Bl#), a re-
lational predicate representing records for entity Paper. It includes a ﬁrst at-
tribute for a tuple identiﬁer, and a last indicating the block the tuple (record)
has been assigned to. The MD
Paper(pid1, x1, y1, z1, w1, v1, bl1) ∧Paper(pid2, x2, y2, z2, w2, v2, bl2) ∧
x1 ≈Title x2 ∧y1 = y2 ∧z1 = z2 −→bl1 .= bl2,
(4)
involves a similarity relation on the Title attribute, and equality as similarity
relation on attributes Year and CID. The MD speciﬁes that, when the conditions
expressed in the LHS are satisﬁed, the two block values have to be made the
same, i.e. the two records should be (re)assigned to the same block.
■
A dynamic, chase-based semantics for MDs with matching functions (MFs)
was introduced in [11], and we brieﬂy summarize it here.
Given an initial
instance D, the set Σ of MDs is iteratively enforced until they cannot be be
applied any further, at which point a resolved instance has been produced.
In order to enforce (the RHSs of) MDs, there are binary matching func-
tions (MFs) mA : Dom(A) × Dom(A) →Dom(A); and mA(a, a′) is used to
replace two values a, a′ ∈Dom(A) that have to be made identical.
For ex-
ample, for an attribute Address, we might have a MF mAddress, such that
mAddress(“MainSt., Ottawa”, “25 Main St.”) := “25 MainSt., Ottawa”.
MFs are idempotent, commutative, and associative, and then induce a partial-
order structure ⟨Dom(A), ⪯A⟩, with: a ⪯A a′ :⇔mA(a, a′) = a′ [11, 10]. It
always holds:
a, a′ ⪯A mA(a, a′). Actually, the relationship a ⪯A a′ can be
thought in terms of information contents:
a′ is at least as informative as a.9
This partial order allows to deﬁne a partial order ⊑on instances [11]. Accord-
ingly, when MDs are applied, a chain of increasingly more informative (or less
uncertain) instances is generated: D0 ⊑D1 ⊑· · · ⊑Dclean. In this work, MFs
are treated as built-in relations.
8Similarity symbols can be treated as regular, built-in, binary predicates, but the identity
symbol, .=, would be non-classical.
9Of course, this claim assumes that MFs locally assign an at least as informative value as
both of the two input values. MFs are application dependent.
7

Given a database instance D and a set of MDs Σ, there may be several
resolved instances for D and Σ [11]. However, there is a unique resolved instance
if one of the following holds [11, 6]:
(a) MFs used by Σ are similarity-preserving, i.e., for every a, a′, a′′ :
a ≈
a′ implies a ≈mA(a′, a′′).
When MDs use similarity-preserving MFs, we
also say that the MDs are similarity-preserving.
(b) Σ is interaction-free, i.e. no attribute (with its predicate) appears both in
a RHS and a LHS of MDs in Σ.
For example, the set Σ1 = {R[A] ≈T[B] →R[C] .= T[D],
T[D] ≈
S[A] →T[A] .= S[B]} is not interaction-free due to the presence of at-
tribute T[D].
Σ2 = {R[A] ≈T[B] →R[C] .= T[D],
T[A] ≈S[A] →
T[C] .= S[C]} is interaction-free.
(c) The combination of Σ and the initial instance D is similarity-free attribute
intersection (we say it is SFAI), if Σ is interaction-free, or, otherwise, for
every pair of interacting MDs ϕ1, ϕ2 in Σ, and, for every t1, t2, t3 ∈D, it
holds LHS(ϕ1) is not true in instance {t1, t2} or LHS(ϕ2) is not true in
instance {t2, t3}.
Consider, for example, predicate R(A, B, C), the instance D below, and
the set Σ of interacting MDs:
ϕ1 :
R [A] ≈R [A] −→R [B] .= R [B] ,
ϕ2 :
R [B] ≈R [B] −→R [C] .= R [C] .
R(D)
A
B
C
t1
a1
b1
c1
t2
a2
b2
c2
t3
a3
b3
c3
Assume that the only similarities
that holds in the data domain U
are a1 ≈A a2 and b1 ≈B b4, with
b4 ∈Dom(B) ∖Adom(D).
Since ϕ2 is not applicable in D (i.e. there is no pair of tuples making it
true), the combination of Σ and D is SFAI. Notice that b1 ≈B b4 does not
matter, because there is no tuple in D with b4 as value for R[B].
With general sets of MDs, diﬀerent orders of MD enforcements may re-
sult in diﬀerent clean instances, because tuple similarities may be broken
during the chase with interacting, non-similarity-preserving MDs, without
reappearing again [11]. With SFAI combinations, two similar tuples in the
original instance D -or becoming similar along a chase sequence- may have
the similarities broken in a chase sequence, but they will reappear later
on in the same and the other chase sequences. Thus, diﬀerent orders of
MD enforcements cannot lead in the end to diﬀerent clean instances.
The SFAI class had not been investigated before. It is a semantic class, as
opposed to syntactic, in that there is a dependency upon the initial instance.
See Appendix A for more details on this class.
8

The three classes above have the unique clean instance (UCI) property, i.e. it-
eratively and exhaustively enforcing them leads to a single clean, stable instance.
Even more, in these three cases, the single clean instance can be computed in
polynomial time in data, i.e. in polynomial time in |D|, the size of the initial
instance, leaving the set of MDs as a ﬁxed, external parameter for the compu-
tational problem that here receives database instances as inputs.10
In this work, for collective-blocking purposes, we will introduce and use a new
class of MDs, that of relational MDs, that extends the class of “classical” MDs
introduced earlier in this section. Actually, the three UCI classes of classical
MDs listed above can be extended to relational MDs, and preserving the UCI
property (cf. Appendix A for more details).
Relational MDs, the SFAI class, and the UCI property are all relevant for
this work. However, a detailed analysis of them is somehow beyond the scope
of this work. For this reason, and in order not to break the natural ﬂow of
the presentation, we provide in Appendix A, mainly for reference, some more
details about all these subjects.
2.2. Classiﬁcation with support-vector models
The support-vector machines technique (SVM) [48] is a form of kernel-based
learning.
SVM can be used for classifying vectors in an inner-product vector
space V over R. Vectors are classiﬁed in two classes, say with labels 0 or 1. The
classiﬁcation model is a hyper-plane in V: vectors are classiﬁed depending on
the side of the hyperplane they fall.
The hyper-plane has to be learned through an algorithm applied to a training
set of examples, say E = {(e1, f(e1)), (e2, f(e2)), (e3, f(e3)), . . . , (en, f(en))}.
Here, ei ∈V, and for the real-valued feature (function) f: f(ei) ∈{0, 1}.
(
d
li
t
)
H
< r1, r2, 1>
< r
r
0>
(r1 r2 duplicates)
< r3, r4, 0>
(r3 r4 not duplicates)
Figure 1:
Classiﬁcation hyperplane
The SVM algorithm ﬁnds an optimal hyperplane, H, in V that separates the
two classes in which the training vectors are classiﬁed. Hyperplane H has an
equation of the form w • x + b, where • denotes the inner product, x is a vector
variable, w is a weight-vector of real values, and b is a real number. Now, a new
10In data management it is common to measure computational complexity (in our case,
time complexity) in terms of the size of the underlying dataset, which is usually much larger
than that of any other ingredient, such as a query, a set of integrity constrains, a set of view
deﬁnitions, etc. If we bring the sizes of the latter into the complexity analysis, we talk of
combined complexity [1].
9

vector e in V can be classiﬁed as positive or negative depending on the side of
H it lies. This is determined by computing h(e) := sign(w • e + b). If h(e) > 0,
e belongs to class 1; otherwise, to class 0.
It is possible to compute real numbers α1, . . . , αn, the coeﬃcients of the
“support vectors”, such that the classiﬁer h can be computed through: h(e) =
sign(P
i αi · f(ei) · ei • e + b) [28].
As Figure 1 shows, in our case, we need to classify pairs of records, that is
our vectors are of record-pairs of the form e = ⟨r1, r2⟩. If h(e) = 1, the classiﬁer
returns as output ⟨r1, r2, 1⟩, meaning that they two records are duplicates (of
each other). Otherwise, it returns ⟨r1, r2, 0⟩, meaning that the records are non-
duplicates (of each other). For the moment we do not need more than this about
the SVM technique.
2.3. Collective blocking
Entity-resolution (and other machine learning tasks) use blocking techniques,
to group together input values for further processing. In the case of ER, records
that might be duplicates of each other are grouped under a same block, and
only records within the same block are compared. Any two records in diﬀerent
blocks will never be declared as duplicates.
Commonly, a single attribute in records, or a combination of attributes,
called a blocking key, is used to split records into blocks. If two records share
the same (or have similar) values for the blocking-key attributes, they are put
into the same block. For example, we could block employee records according
to the name and the city. If two of them share (or have similar) name and city
values, they go to the same block. Additional analysis, or the use of a classiﬁer,
will eventually determine if they are duplicates or not.
Blocking keys are rather rigid, and “local”, in that they are applied to records
for a single entity (other entities may have other blocking keys). Their use may
cause low recall. For this reason, it may be useful to apply blocking techniques
that take advantage of additional semantics and/or domain knowledge. Actu-
ally, collective blocking creates blocks for diﬀerent entities by exploiting the
relational relationships between entities. Records for diﬀerent entities are sep-
arately, but simultaneously blocked, in interaction. Accordingly, this approach
can be called semantic collective blocking.
Example 2. Consider two entities, Author and Paper. For each of them, there is
a set of records. For Author, they are of the form a = ⟨name, . . . , aﬃliation, . . . ,
paper title, . . .⟩, with {name, aﬃliation} the blocking key; and for Paper, records
are the form p = ⟨title, . . . , author name, . . .⟩, with title the blocking key.
We can block together two Author records on the basis of the similarities of
their values for the blocking key, in this case of authors’ names and aﬃliations.
(This blocking policy can be speciﬁed by means of an MD of the form (4) in
Example 1.)
However, if two Author records, say a2, a5, have similar names,
but not similar aﬃliations, they will not be assigned to the same block.
10

Authors
Papers
a =  <a1 , … , an>
p =  <p1 , … , pm>
a3
a6
a8
a1
a7
p1
p5
a7
a9
p3
p8
p10
p8
p10
Figure 2:
Collective blocking
An alternative approach, could create and assign blocks of Author records,
and also blocks of Paper records, at the same time, separately for each entity,
but in an intertwined process. In this case, the same Author records a2, a5, that
were assigned to diﬀerent blocks, may be the authors of papers, represented as
Paper records, say p3, p8, resp., which have been already be put in the same
block (of papers) on the basis of similarities of paper titles (cf. Figure 2). With
this additional information, we might assign a2 and a5 to the same block.
The additional knowledge comes in two forms:
(a) semantic knowledge,
about the relational relationships between records for diﬀerent entities, in this
case, the reference of paper titles appearing in Author records to paper titles in
Paper entities, and (b) “procedural” knowledge that tells us about blocks cer-
tain entities have been assigned to. As we will see, MDs allow us to express
both, simultaneously. In this case, we will be able to express that “if two papers
are in the same block, then the corresponding Author records that have similar
author names should be put in the same block too”. So, we are blocking Author
and Paper entities, separately, but collectively and in interaction. Similarly, and
the other way around, we could block Papers records according to the blocking
results for their authors (Author records).
■
3. Overview of ERBlox
A high-level description of the components and workﬂow of ERBlox is given
in Figure 3. In the rest of this section, numbers in boldface refer to the edges
in that ﬁgure. ERBlox’s main four components are:
1.
MD-based collective
blocking (path 1, 3, 5, {6, 8}),
2.
Classiﬁcation-model construction (all the
tasks up to 12, inclusive), 3.
Duplicate detection (continues with edge 13),
and 4. MD-based merging (previous path extended with 14, 15). All the tasks
in the ﬁgure, except for the classiﬁcation model construction (that applying the
SVM algorithm), are supported by LogiQL.11
11The implementation of in-house developed ML algorithms as components of the LogicBlox
platform is ongoing work.
11

TS
Similarity 
C
t ti
ML‐ Based  
Classification
Files
T
Import
Trained 
Classifier
(training)
1
2
4
7
9
10
11
13
MD‐Based 
Blocking
Computation
Files
D
Similarity 
Computation

M
D×D
3
5
6
8
12
13
MD‐Based 
Merging
14
ER 
Result
15
Figure 3:
Overview of ERBlox
The initial input data is stored in structured text ﬁles, which are initially
standardized and free of misspellings, etc. However, there may be duplicates.
The general LogiQL program supporting the above workﬂow contains rules for
importing data from the ﬁles into the extensions of relational predicates (tables).
This is edge 1. This results in a relational database instance T containing the
training data (edge 2), and instance D to be subject to ER (edge 3).
R
entity record
tuple r  for relation  R
r
entity class E
entity class E
rid
block
Figure 4:
Records
Entity records are represented as relational tuples as shown in Figure 4.
However, we will keep referring to them as records, and they will be generally
denoted with r, r1, ....
The next tasks require similarity computation of pairs of records ⟨r1, r2⟩
in T and (separately) in D (edges 4 and 5). Similarity computation is based
on two-argument similarity functions on the domain of a record attribute, say
fi : Dom(Ai) × Dom(Ai) →[0, 1], each of which assigns a numerical value to
(the comparison of) two values for attribute Ai, in two diﬀerent records.
These similarity functions, being real-valued functions of the objects under
classiﬁcation, correspond to features in the general context of machine learn-
ing.
They are considered only for a pre-chosen subset of record attributes.
Weight-vectors
w(r1, r2) = ⟨· · · , wi(fi(r1[Ai], r2[Ai])), · · · ⟩are formed by ap-
plying predeﬁned weights, wi, on real-valued similarity functions, fi, on a pair
of of values for attributes Ai (edges 4 and 5), as in Figure 5. (For more details
on similarity computation see Section 4.)
Some record-pairs in the training dataset T are considered as duplicates and
12

r1
r2
f1
f2
f3
w(r1,r2)  =  <w1(f1(r1,r2)),  … >
Figure 5:
Feature-based similarity
others as non-duplicates, which results (according to path 4, 7) in a “similarity-
enhanced” training database Ts of tuples of the form ⟨r1, r2, w(r1, r2), L⟩, with
label L ∈{0, 1}. Label L indicates if the two records are duplicates (L = 1) or
not (L = 0). These labels are consistent with the corresponding weight vectors.
The classiﬁer is trained using Ts, leading, through the application of the SVM
algorithm, to the classiﬁcation model (edges 9, 10) to be used for ER.
Blocking is applied to instance D, pre-classifying records into blocks, so that
only records in a same block will form input pairs for the trained classiﬁcation
model. Accordingly, two records in a same block may end up as duplicates (of
each other) or not, but two records in diﬀerent blocks will never be duplicates.
We assume each record r ∈D has two extra, auxiliary attributes: a unique
and global (numerical) record identiﬁer (rid) whose value is originally assigned
and never changes; and a block number that initially takes the rid as value. This
block number is subject to changes.
For the records in D, similarity measures are used for blocking (see sub-path
5, 8). To decide if two records, r1, r2, go into the same block, the weight-vector
w(r1, r2) can be used: it can be read oﬀfrom it if their values for certain
attributes are similar enough or not.
However, the similarity computations
required for blocking may be diﬀerent from those involved in the computation of
the weight-vectors w(r1, r2), which are related to the classiﬁcation model. Either
way, this similarity information is used by the blocking-matching dependencies,
which are pre-declared and domain-dependent.
Blocking-MDs specify and enforce (through their RHSs) that the blocks
(block numbers) of two records have to be made identical. This happens when
certain similarities between pairs of attribute values appearing in the LHSs of
the MDs hold. For example, (4) is a blocking-MD that requires the computation
of similarities of string values for attribute Title. The similarity-atoms on the
LHS of a blocking-MD are considered to be true when the similarity values are
above thresholds that have been predeﬁned for blocking purposes only.
Example 3. (ex. 2 cont.) With schema {Author(AID, Name, PTitle, ABlock),
Paper(PID, PTitle, Venue, PBlock) (including ID and block attributes), the fol-
lowing is a relational MD that captures a blocking policy that is similar to (but
13

more reﬁned than) that in Example 2:
ϕ:
Author(t1, x1, y1, bl 1) ∧Paper(t3, y′
1, z1, bl 4) ∧y1 ≈y′
1 ∧
Author(t2, x2, y2, bl 2) ∧Paper(t4, y′
2, z2, bl 4) ∧y2 ≈y′
2 ∧
x1 ≈x2 ∧y1 ≈y2 −→
bl 1 .= bl 2,
(5)
with Author-atoms as “leading atoms” (they contain the identiﬁed variables on
the RHS). It contains similarity comparisons involving attribute values for both
relations Author and Paper. It speciﬁes that when the Author-tuple similarities
on the LHS hold, and their papers are similar to those in corresponding Paper-
tuples that are in the same block (equality as an implicit similarity is captured
by the join variable bl4), then blocks bl1, bl2 have to be made identical. This
blocking policy uses relational knowledge (the relationships between Author and
Paper tuples), plus the blocking decisions already made about Paper tuples. ■
We can see from (5) that information about classiﬁcations in blocks of records
for the entity at hand (Author in this case) and for others entities (Paper in this
case) may simultaneously appear as conditions in the LHSs of blocking-MDs.
Furthermore, blocking-MDs may involve in their LHSs inter-entity similarity
conditions, such as y1 ≈y′
1 in (5)).
All this is the basis for our “semantically-
enhanced” collective blocking process.
The MD-based collective blocking stage (steps 5, 8, 6) consists in the enforce-
ment of the blocking-MDs on D, which results in database D enhanced with
information about the blocks to which the records are assigned. Pairs of records
with the same block form candidate duplicate record-pairs.
We emphasize that some blocking-MDs, such as (5), are more general than
those of the form (2) introduced in [27] or Section 2.1: In their LHSs, they may
contain regular database atoms, from more that one relation, that are used to
give context to the similarity atoms in the MD, to capture additional relational
knowledge. MDs of this kind are called relational MDs, and extend the so-called
classical MDs of Section 2.1. (Cf. Appendix A for more details on relational
MDs.)
A unique assignment of blocks to records is obtained after the enforcement
of the blocking-MDs. Uniqueness is guaranteed by the properties of the class
of MDs we use for blocking. Actually, blocking-MDs will turn out to have the
UCI property (cf. Section 2.1). (More details on this are given in Sections 5 and
Appendix A.)
After the records have been assigned to blocks, record-pairs ⟨r1, r2⟩, with
r1, r2 in the same block, are considered for the duplicate test. At this point, we
proceed as we did for the training data: the weight-vectors w(r1, r2), which rep-
resent the record-pairs in the “feature vector space”, are computed and passed
over to the classiﬁer (edges 11, 12).12
The result of applying the trained ML-based classiﬁer to the record-pairs is
a set of triples ⟨r1, r2, 1⟩containing records that come from the same block and
12Similarity computations are kept in appropriate program predicates. So, similarity values
computed before blocking can be reused at this stage, or whenever needed.
14

are considered to be duplicates. Equivalently, the output is a set M ⊆D × D
containing pairs of duplicate records (edge 13). The records in pairs in M are
merged by enforcing an application-dependent set of (merge-)MDs (edge 14).
This set of MDs is diﬀerent from that used for blocking.
Since records have kept their rids, we deﬁne a “similarity” predicate ≈id
on the domain of rids as follows:
r1[rid] ≈id r2[rid] iﬀ⟨r1, r2⟩∈M, i.e. iﬀ
the corresponding records are considered to be duplicates by the classiﬁer. We
informally denote r1[rid] ≈id r2[rid] by r1 ≈r2. Using this notation, the merge-
MDs are usually and informally written in the form:
r1 ≈r2
→r1 .= r2.
Here, the RHS is a shorthand for
r1[A1] .= r2[A1] ∧· · · ∧r1[Am] .= r2[Am],
where A1, . . . , Am are all the record attributes, excluding the ﬁrst and last,
i.e. ignoring the identiﬁer and the block number (cf. Figure 4).
Putting all
together, merge-MDs take the oﬃcial form:
r1[rid] ≈id r2[rid] −→r1[A1] .= r2[A1] ∧· · · ∧r1[Am] .= r2[Am].
(6)
Merging at the attribute level, as required by the RHS, uses the predeﬁned and
domain-dependent matching functions mAi.
After applying the merge-MDs, a single duplicate-free instance is obtained
from D (edge 15). Uniqueness is guaranteed by the fact that the classes of
merge-MDs that we use in our generic approach turn out to be interaction-
free. (More details are given in Section 7 and Appendix A. See also the brief
discussion in Section 2.1.)
More details about the ERBlox system and our approach to ER are found
in the subsequent sections.
4. Datasets and Similarity Computation
We now describe some aspects of the MAS dataset that are relevant for the
description of the ERBlox system components,13 and the way the initial data is
processed and created for their use with the LogiQL language of LogicBlox.
4.1. Data ﬁles and relational data
In the initial, structured data ﬁles, entries (non-relational records) for entity
Author relation contain author names and their aﬃliations. The entries for entity
Paper contain: paper titles, years of publication, conference IDs, journal IDs, and
keywords.
Entries for the PaperAuthor relationship between Paper and Author
entities contain: paper IDs, author IDs, author names, and their aﬃliations.
The entries for the Journal and Conference entities contain both short names of
the publication venue, their full names, and their home pages.
The dataset is preprocessed by means of Python scripts, in preparation for
proper ERBlox tasks. This is necessary because the data gathering methods
13We also independently experimented with the DBLP and Cora Citation datasets, but we
will concentrate on MAS.
15

in general, and for the MAS dataset in particular, are often loosely controlled,
resulting in out-of-range values, impossible data combinations, missing values,
etc. For example, non-word characters are replaced by blanks, some strings are
converted into lower case, etc. Not solving these problems may lead to later
execution problems and, in the end, to misleading ER results. This prepro-
cessing produces updated structured data ﬁles. As expected, there is no ER at
this stage, and in the new ﬁles there may be many authors who publish under
several variations of their names; also the same paper may appear under slightly
diﬀerent titles, etc. This kind of cleaning will be performed with ERBlox.
Next, from the data in (the preprocessed) structured ﬁles, relational pred-
icates and their extensions are created and computed, by means of a generic
Datalog program in LogiQL [3, 31]. For example, these rules are part of the
program:
ﬁle in(x1, x2, x3) −→string(x1), string(x2), string(x3).
(7)
lang : physical : ﬁlePath[‘ ﬁle in] = ”author.csv”.
(8)
+author(id1, x2, x3) ←ﬁle in(x1, x2, x3), string :int64:convert[x1] = id1. (9)
Here, (7) is a predicate schema declaration, in this case of the “ ﬁle in” predicate
with three string-valued attributes. It is used to automatically store the contents
extracted from the source ﬁle ”author.csv”, as speciﬁed in (8). In LogiQL in
general, metadata declarations use “→”. (In LogiQL, each predicate’s schema
has to be declared, unless it can be inferred from the rest of the program.)
Derivation rules, such as (9), use “←”, as usual in Datalog. It deﬁnes the author
predicate, and the “+” in the rule head inserts the data into the predicate
extension. The rule also makes the ﬁrst attribute a tuple identiﬁer.
Figure 6 shows three relational predicates that are created and populated in
this way: Author(AID, Name, Aﬃliation, Bl#), Paper(PID, Title, Year, CID,
JID, Keyword, Bl#), PaperAuthor(PID, AID, Name, Aﬃliation). The (partial)
tables show that there may be missing attribute values.
4.2. Features and similarity computation
From the general description of our methodology in Section 3, a crucial
component is similarity computation. It is needed for:
(a) blocking, and (b)
building the classiﬁcation model. Similarity measures are related to features,
which are numerical functions of the data, more precisely of the values of some
specially chosen attributes. Feature selection is a fundamental task in machine
learning [22, 46]; going in detail into this subject is beyond the scope of this
work.
Example 4 shows some speciﬁc aspects of this task as related to our
dataset.
In relation to blocking, in order to decide if two records, r1, r2 in D, go
into the same block, similarity of values for certain attributes are computed,
those that are appear in similarity conditions in the LHSs of blocking-MDs. All
is needed is whether they are similar enough or not, which is determined by
predeﬁned numerical thresholds.
16

Author
AID
Name
Aﬃliation
Bl#
659
Jean-P ierre Olivier de
Ecole des Hautes
659
2546
Olivier de Sardan
Recherche Scientiﬁque
2546
612
Matthias Roeckl
German Aerospace Center
612
4994
Matthias Roeckl
Institute of Communications
4994
Paper
PID
Title
Year
CID
JID
· · ·
123
Illness entities in West Africa
1998
179
205
Illness entities in Africa
1998
179
769
DLR Simulation Environment m3
2007
146
195
DLR Simulation Environment
2007
146
· · ·
· · ·
Keyword
Bl#
West Africa, Illness
123
Africa, Illness
205
Simulation m3
769
· · ·
Simulation
195
PaperAuthor
PID
AID
Name
Aﬃliation
123
659
Jean-Pierre Olivier de
Ecole des Hautes
205
2546
Olivier de Sardan
Recherche Scientiﬁque
769
612
Matthias Roeckl
German Aerospace Center
195
4994
Matthias Roeckl
Institute of Communications
Figure 6: Relation extensions from MAS using LogiQL rules
For model building, similarity values are computed to build the weight-
vectors, w(r1, r2), for records r1, r2 from the training data in T. The numerical
values in those vectors depend on the values taken by some selected record
attributes (cf. Figure 5).
Example 4. (ex. 2 cont.) Bibliographic datasets, such as MAS, have been
commonly used for evaluation of machine learning techniques, in particular,
classiﬁcation for ER. In our case, the features chosen in our work for the clas-
siﬁcation of records for entities Paper and Author from the MAS dataset (and
the other datasets) correspond to those previously used in [47, 17].
Experi-
ments in [35] show that the chosen features enhance generalization power of the
classiﬁcation model, by reducing over-ﬁtting.
In the case of Paper-records, if the “journal ID” values are null in both
records, but not their “conference ID” values, “journal ID” is not considered for
feature computation, because it does not contribute to the recall or precision
of the classiﬁer under construction. Similarly, when the “conference ID” values
are null. However, the values for “journal ID” and “conference ID” are replaced
by “journal full name” and “conference full name” values that are found in
Conference- and Journal-records, resp. Attributes Title, Year, ConfFullName or
JourFullName, and Keyword are chosen for feature computation.
For feature computation in the case of Author-records, the Name attribute is
split in two, the Fname and Lname attributes, to increase recall and precision
of the classiﬁer under construction.
Accordingly, features are computed for
attributes Fname, Lname and Aﬃliation.
■
Once the classiﬁer has been built, also weight-vectors, w(r1, r2) are com-
puted as inputs for the classiﬁer, but this time for records from the data under
17

classiﬁcation (in D).14
Notice that numerical values, associated to similarities, in a weight-vector
w(r1, r2) for r1, r2 under classiﬁcation, could be used as similarity informa-
tion for blocking. However, the attributes and features used for blocking may
be diﬀerent from those used for weight-vectors. For example, in our experi-
ments with the MAS dataset, the classiﬁcation of Author-records is based on
attributes Fname, Lname, and Aﬃliation. For blocking, the latter is reused as
such (cf. MD (13) below), but also the combination of Fname and Lname is
reused, as attribute Name in MDs (cf. MDs (13) and (15) below).
There is a class of well-known and widely applied similarity functions that
are used in data cleaning and machine learning [19]. For our application with
ERBlox we used three of them, depending on the attribute domains for the
MAS dataset. Long-text-valued attributes, in our case, e.g. for the Aﬃliation
attribute, their values are represented as lists of strings. For computing simi-
larities between these kinds of attribute values, the “TF-IDF cosine” measure
was used [42]. It assigns low weights to frequent strings and high weights to
rare strings. For example, aﬃliation values usually contain multiple strings, e.g.
“Carleton University, School of Computer Science”. Among them, some are
frequent, e.g. “School”, and others are rare, e.g. “Carleton”.
For attributes with “short” string values, such as author names, “Jaro-
Winkler” similarity was used [34, 51]. This measure counts the characters in
common in two strings, even if they are misplaced by a short distance. For
example, this measure gives a high similarity value to the pair of ﬁrst names
“Zeinab” and “Zienab”. In the MAS dataset, there are many author ﬁrst names
and last names presenting this kind of misspellings.
For numerical attributes, such as publication year, the “Levenshtein dis-
tance” was used [37]. The similarity of two numbers is based on the minimum
number of operations required to transform one into the other.
As already mentioned in Section 3, these similarity measures are used, but
diﬀerently, for blocking and the creation and application of the classiﬁcation
algorithm. In the former case, similarity values related to LHSs of blocking-MDs
are compared with user-deﬁned thresholds, in essence, making them boolean
variables. In the latter case, they are used for computing the similarity vectors,
which contain numerical values (in R). Notice that similarity measures are not
used beyond the output of the classiﬁcation algorithm, in particular, not for
MD-based record merging.
Similarity computation for ERBlox is done through LogiQL-rules that de-
ﬁne the similarity functions. In particular, similarity computations are kept in
extensions of program-deﬁned predicates. For example, if the similarity value
for the pair of values, a1, a2, for attribute Title is above the threshold, a tuple
14In our experiments, we did not care about null values in records under classiﬁcation.
Learning, inference, and prediction in the presence of missing values are pervasive problems
in machine learning and statistical data analysis. Dealing with missing values is beyond the
scope of this work.
18

Title-Sim(a1, a2) is created by the program.
5. MD-Based Collective Blocking
As described in Section 3, the Block attribute, Bl, in records takes integer
numerical values; and before the blocking process starts (or blocking-MDs are
enforced), each record in the instance D has a unique block number that coin-
cides with its rid. Blocking policies are speciﬁed by blocking-MDs, all of which
use the same matching function for identity enforcement, given by:
For i, j ∈N, with j ≤i,
mBl(i, j) := i.
(10)
A blocking MD that identiﬁes block numbers (i.e. makes them identical) in two
records (tuples) for database relation R (cf. Figure 4) takes the form:
R(¯x1, bl1) ∧R(¯x2, bl2) ∧ψ(¯x3) −→bl1 .= bl2.
(11)
Here, bl1, bl2 are variables for block numbers, R is a database predicate (repre-
senting an entity), the lists of variables ¯x1, ¯x2 stand for all the attributes in R
but Bl#, for which variables bli are used. The MD in (11) is relational when
formula ψ in it is a conjunction of relational atoms plus comparison atoms via
similarity predicates; including implicit equalities of block numbers (but not ≈-
similarities between block numbers). The variables in ψ(¯x3) may appear among
those in ¯x1, ¯x2 (in R) or in another database predicate or in a similarity atom.
We assume that (¯x1 ∪¯x2) ∩¯x3 ̸= ∅.
(Cf. Appendix
A for more details on
relational MDs.)
An example is the MD in (5), where the leading R1, R2-atoms are Author
tuples, the extra conjunction contains Paper atoms, non-block-similarities, and
an implicit equality of blocks through the shared use of variable bl4. There, ψ
is Paper(t3, y′
1, z1, bl4) ∧y1 ≈y′
1 ∧Paper(t4, y′
2, z2, bl4) ∧y2 ≈y′
2 ∧x1 ≈
x2 ∧y1 ≈y2.
Example 5. These are some of the blocking-MDs used with the MAS dataset.
The ﬁrst two are classical blocking-MDs, and the last two are properly relational
blocking-MDs:
Paper(pid1, x1, y1, z1, w1, v1, bl1) ∧Paper(pid2, x2, y2, z2, w2, v2, bl2) ∧(12)
x1 ≈Title x2 ∧y1 = y2 ∧z1 = z2 −→
bl1 .= bl2.
Author(aid1, x1, y1, bl1) ∧Author(aid2, x2, y2, bl2) ∧
(13)
x1 ≈Name x2 ∧y1 ≈Aﬀy2 −→
bl1 .= bl2.
Paper(pid1, x1, y1, z1, w1, v1, bl1) ∧Paper(pid2, x2, y2, z2, w2, v2, bl2) ∧(14)
PaperAuthor(pid1, aid1, x′
1, y′
1) ∧PaperAuthor(pid2, aid2, x′
2, y′
2) ∧
Author(aid1, x′
1, y′
1, bl3) ∧Author(aid2, x′
2, y′
2, bl3) ∧x1 ≈Title x2
−→bl1 .= bl2.
19

Author(aid1, x1, y1, bl1) ∧Author(aid2, x2, y2, bl2) ∧x1 ≈Name x2 ∧
(15)
PaperAuthor(pid1, aid1, x1, y1) ∧PaperAuthor(pid2, aid2, x2, y2) ∧
Paper(pid1, x′
1, y′
1, z′
1, w′
1, v′
1, bl3) ∧Paper(pid2, x′
2, y′
2, z′
2, w′
2, v′
2, bl3)
−→bl1 .= bl2.
In informal terms, (12) requires that, for every two Paper entities p1, p2 for
which the values for attribute Title are similar, and with the same publication
year and conference ID, the values for attribute Bl# must be made identical.
According to (13), whenever there are similar values for name and aﬃliation in
Author, the corresponding authors should go into the same block.
The relational blocking-MDs in (14) and (15) collectively block Paper and
Author entities. According to (14), a blocking-MD for Paper, if two authors are
in the same block, their papers p1, p2 having similar titles must be in the same
block too. Notice that if papers p1 and p2 have similar titles, but they do not
have same publication year or conference ID, we cannot block them together
using (12) alone. The blocking-MD (15) for Author is similar to that discussed
in Example 3.
■
For the application-dependent set, ΣBl, of blocking-MDs we adopt the chase-
based semantics [11], which may lead, in general, to several, alternative ﬁnal
instances. In each of them, every record is assigned to a unique block, but now
records may share block numbers, which is interpreted as belonging to the same
block.
In principle, there might be two ﬁnal instances where the same pair
of records is put in the same block in one of them, but not in the other one.
However, with a set of the relational blocking-MDs of the form (11) acting on
an initial instance D (created with LogicBlox as described above), the chase-
based enforcement of the MDs results in a single, ﬁnal instance, DBl. This is
because the combination of the blocking-MDs with the initial instance D turns
out to belong to the SFAI class, which has the UCI property (cf. Section 2.1
and Appendix A).
That the initial instance and the blocking-MDs form a SFAI combination is
easy to see. In fact, initially the block numbers in tuples (or records) are all
diﬀerent, they are the same as their tids. Now, the only relevant attributes in
records (for SFAI membership) are “block attributes”, those appearing in RHSs
of blocking-MDs (cf. (11)). In the LHSs of blocking-MDs they may appear only
in implicit equality atoms. Since all initial block numbers in D are diﬀerent, no
relevant similarity holds in D.
Due to the SFAI property of blocking-MDs in combination with the initial
instance, MD enforcement leads to a single instance that can be computed in
polynomial time in data, which gives us the hope to use a computationally
well-behaved extension of plain Datalog for MD enforcement (and blocking). It
turns out that the representation and enforcement of these MDs can be done
by means of Datalog with stratiﬁed negation [15, 1], which is supported by
LogiQL. Stratiﬁed Datalog programs have a unique stable model, which can
be computed in a bottom-up manner in polynomial time in the size of the
20

extensional database.15
In LogiQL, blocking-MDs take the form as Datalog rules:
R[ ¯X1]=Bl2,
R[ ¯X2]=Bl2
←−
R[ ¯X1] = Bl1,
R[ ¯X2] = Bl2,
(16)
ψ( ¯X3),
Bl1 < Bl2,
subject to the same conditions as for (11). The condition Bl1 < Bl2 in the rule
body corresponds to the use of the MF mBl in (10).
An atom of the form R[ ¯X]=Bl not only declares Bl as an attribute value for
R, but also that predicate R is functional on ¯X [3]: Each record in R can have
only one block number.
In addition to the blocking-MDs, we need some auxiliary rules, which we in-
troduce and discuss next. Given an initial instance D and a set of blocking-MDs
ΣBl, the LogiQL-program ΠBl(D) that speciﬁes MD-based collective blocking
contains the following rules:
1. For every atom R(rid, ¯x, bl) ∈D, the fact R[rid, ¯x] = bl. That is, initially,
the block number, bl, is functionally assigned the value rid.
2. Facts of the form A-Sim(a1, a2), where a1, a2 ∈Dom(A), the ﬁnite at-
tribute domain of an attribute A.
They state that the two values are
similar, which is determined by similarity computation. (Cf. Section 4.2
for more on similarity computation.)
3. Rules for the blocking-MDs, as in (16).
4. Rules specifying older versions of entity records (in relation R) after MD-
enforcement:
R-OldVer(r, ¯x, bl1)
←−
R[r, ¯x] = bl1, R[r, ¯x] = bl2, bl1 < bl2.
Here, variable r stands for the rid. Since for each rid, r, there could be
several atoms of the form R[r, ¯x] = bl, corresponding to the evolution of
the record identiﬁed by r through an MD-based chase sequence, the rule
speciﬁes as old those versions of the record with a block number that is
smaller than the last one obtained for it.
5. Rules that collect the records’ latest versions, to form blocks:
R-Block[r, ¯x] = bl
←−
R[r, ¯x] = bl, not R-OldVer(r, ¯x, bl).
The rule collects R-records that are not old versions.16
15General sets of MDs can be speciﬁed and enforced by means of disjunctive, stratiﬁed
answer set programs, with the possibly multiple resolved instances corresponding to the stable
models of the program [4]. These programs can be specialized, via an automated rewriting
mechanism, for the SFAI case, obtaining residual programs in Datalog with stratiﬁed negation
[6].
16LogiQL, uses “!” instead of not for Datalog negation [3].
21

Program ΠBl(D) as above is a Datalog program with stratiﬁed negation
(there is no recursion through negation). In computational terms, this means
that the program computes old version of records (using negation), and next
deﬁnitive blocks are computed. As expected from the SFAI property of blocking-
MDs in combination with the initial instance, the program has and computes a
single model, in polynomial time in the size of the initial instance. From it, the
ﬁnal block numbers of records can be read oﬀ.
Example 6. (ex. 5 cont.) We consider only blocking-MDs (12) and (14). The
portion of ΠBl(D) that does the blocking of records for the Paper entity has the
following rules (we follow the numbering used in the generic program):
2. Facts such as:
Title-Sim(“Illness entities in West Africa”, “Illness entities in Africa”).
Title-Sim(“DLR Simulation Environment m3”, “DLR Simulation
Environment”).
3. Paper[pid1, x1, y1, z1, w1, v1] = bl2, Paper[pid2, x2, y2, z2, w2, v2] = bl2 ←
Paper[pid1, x1, y1, z1, w1, v1] = bl1, Paper[pid2, x2, y2, z2, w2, v2] = bl2,
Title-Sim(x1, x2), y1 = y2, z1 = z2, bl1 < bl2.
Paper[pid1, x1, y1, z1, w1, v1] = bl2, Paper[pid2, x2, y2, z2, w2, v2] = bl2 ←
Paper[pid1, x1, y1, z1, w1, v1] = bl1, Paper[pid2, x2, y2, z2, w2, v2] = bl2,
Title-Sim(x1, x2), PaperAuthor(pid1, aid1, x′
1, y′
1), bl1 < bl2,
PaperAuthor(pid2, aid2, x′
2, y′
2), Author[aid1, x′
1, y′
1] = bl3,
Author[aid2, x′
2, y′
2] = bl3.
4. Paper-OldVer(pid, x, y, z, w, v, bl1) ←Paper[pid, x, y, z, w, v] = bl1,
Paper[pid, x, y, z, w, v] = bl2, bl1 < bl2.
5. Paper-Block[pid, x, y, z, w, v] = bl
←
Paper[pid, x, y, z, w, v] = bl,
not Paper-OldVer(pid, x, y, z, w, v, bl).
By restricting the model of the program to attributes PID and Block# of pred-
icate Paper-Block, we obtain blocks: {123, 205}, {195, 769}, . . .. That is, the
papers with pids 123 and 205 are blocked together; similarly for those with pids
195 and 769, etc.
■
The execution of the blocking-program ΠBl(D) will return in the end, for
each entity-relation R a list of subsets of the extension of R in D. These subsets
are blocks of R-records. Pairs of records in a same block will be inputs to the
classiﬁcation model, which has to be independently constructed ﬁrst.
6. Classiﬁcation Model Construction
For both, the classiﬁcation model construction and duplicate detection that
uses it, weight-vectors for record-pairs have to be computed. The numerical
values for these vectors come from features related to similarity comparisons
22

between attribute values for two records r1, r2.
Only a subset of record at-
tributes are chosen, those attributes that have strong discriminatory power, to
achieve maximum classiﬁcation recall and precision (cf. Section 4.2).
The input to the SVM algorithm (that will produce the classiﬁcation model)
is a set of tuples of the form
⟨r1, r2, w(r1, r2), L⟩, where r1, r2 are records
(for the same entity) in the training dataset T, L ∈{0, 1}, and w(r1, r2) is
the computed weight-vector for the record-pair. In the LogiQL program, that
input uses two deﬁned predicates. Predicate TrainLabel has two arguments:
One for pairs of rids, r1r2, together, which is called “the vector id” for vec-
tor w(r1, r2) = ⟨w1, . . . , wn⟩, and another to represents label L associated to
w(r1, r2). Predicate TrainVector contains one argument for vector ids, and n
arguments to represent entries wi in the weight-vectors w(r1, r2).
Several ML techniques are accessible from (or within) the LogicBlox plat-
form, through the BloxMLPack library that provides a generic Datalog interface.
Then, ERBlox can call a SVM-based classiﬁcation model constructor, through
the general LogiQL program.
In particular, the BloxMLPack wraps calls to the machine learning library in
a predicate-to-predicate mapping called mlpack, and manages marshalling the
inputs and outputs to the machine learning library from/to LogiQL predicates.
This is done via special rules in LogiQL that come in two modes: the learning
mode (when a model is being learned, in our case, a SVM classiﬁcation model),
and the evaluation mode (when the model is applied, for record-pair classiﬁca-
tion in our case) [36, 3]. We do not give here the formal syntax and semantics
for these rules, but just the gist by means of an example.
Assume that we want to train a SVM-model for Author-record classiﬁcation.
For invoking SVM from LogiQL, a relation InputMatrix[j, i] is needed. It con-
tains tabular data where each column (j) represents a feature of Author-records,
while each row i represents a vector id for which the tuple TrainVector(i, w1, w2,
w3) exists.
So, InputMatrix[j, i] represents the value of the feature j in the
weight-vector i.
The following rules are used in LogiQl to populate relation
InputMatrix: (They involve predicates Feature(“Fname”), Feature(“Lname”),
and Feature(“Aﬃliation”), associated to the three chosen attributes for Author-
records.
They appear in quotes, because they are constants, i.e. attribute
names.)
InputMatrix[“Fname”, i] = w1, InputMatrix[“Lname”, i] = w2,
InputMatrix[“Aﬃliation”, i] = w3 ←−TrainVector(i, w1, w2, w3),
Feature(“Fname”), Feature(“Lname”), Feature(“Aﬃliation”).
The following learning rule learns a SVM model for Author, and stores the re-
sulting model in the predicate SVMsModel(model):
SVMsModel(m) ←−mlpack ≪m = SVM (¯p), train ≫InputMatrix[j, i] = v,
Feature(j), TrainLabel(i, l).
Here, the head of the rule deﬁnes a predicate where the ML algorithm outputs
its results, while the body of the rule lists a collection of predicates that supplies
23

data for the ML algorithm. In the above rule, the required parameters ¯p for
running the SVM algorithm are speciﬁed by the user. The above rule is in the
training mode.
7. Duplicate Detection and MD-Based Merging
The input to the trained classiﬁer is a set of tuples of the form ⟨r1, r2, w(r1, r2)⟩,
where r1, r2 are record (ids) in a same block for a relation R, and w(r1, r2) is
the weight-vector for the record-pair ⟨r1, r2⟩. The output is a set of triples of
the form ⟨r1, r2, 1⟩or ⟨r1, r2, 0⟩.
Using LogiQL rules, the triples ⟨r1, r2, 1⟩form the extension of a deﬁned
predicate R-Duplicate.
Example 7.
(ex.
6 and 4 cont.)
Considering the previous Paper-records,
the input to the trained classiﬁer consists of:
⟨123, 205, w(123, 205)⟩, with
w(123, 205) = [0.8, 1.0, 1.0, 0.7]; and ⟨195, 769, w(195, 769)⟩, with w(195, 769) =
[0.93, 1.0, 1.0, 0.5].
In this case, the SVM-based classiﬁer returns
⟨[0.8, 1.0, 1.0, 0.7], 1⟩and
⟨[0.93, 1.0, 1.0, 0.5], 1⟩. Accordingly, the tuples Paper-Duplicate(123, 205) and
Paper-Duplicate(195, 769) are created.
■
The extensions of predicates R-Duplicate will be the input to the merging
process.
Record merging is carried out through the enforcement of merge-MDs, as
described in Section 3, where we showed that they form an interaction-free
set. Consequently, there is a single instance resulting from their enforcement.
These MDs use application-dependent matching functions (MFs), and can be
expressed by means of LogiQL rules. Actually, the generic merge-MDs in (6)
can be expressed in their Datalog versions by means of the above mentioned
R-Duplicate predicates. The RHSs of MDs in (6) have to be expressed in terms
of MFs, mAi. All these become ingredients of a Datalog merge-program ΠM.
Example 8. (ex. 4 cont.) Duplicate Paper-records are merged by enforcing the
merge-MD:
Paper[pid1] ≈Paper[pid2] −→Paper[Title, Year, CID, Keyword] .=
Paper[Title, Year, CID, Keyword].
■
The general LogiQL program, ΠM, for MD-based merging contains rules as
in 1.-4. below:
1. The ground atoms of the form R-Duplicate(r1, r2) mentioned above, and
those representing MFs, of the form mA(a1, a2) = a3.
2. For an MD R[r1] ≈R[r2] −→R[¯r1] .= R[¯r2], the rules:
R(r1, ¯x3), R(r2, ¯x3) ←−R-Duplicate(r1, r2), R(r1, ¯x1), R(r2, ¯x2),
m(¯x1, ¯x2) = ¯x3,
24

where ¯x1, ¯x2, ¯x3 stand for all attributes of relation R, except for the rid and
the block number (block numbers play no role in merging). m(¯x1, ¯x2) =
¯x3 is just a shorthand to denote the componentwise application of m
individual MFs mAi (cf. (6)).
At the end of the iterative application of these rules, there may be several
tuples with diﬀerent rids but identical “tails”. Only one of those tuples is
kept in the resolved instance.
3. As for the blocking-program ΠBl(D) of Section 5, we need rules specifying
the old versions of a record:
R-OldVer(r1, ¯x1) ←−R(r1, ¯x1), R(r1, ¯x2), ¯x1 ≺¯x2,
where ¯x1 stands for all attributes other than rid and the block number;
and ¯x1 ≺¯x2 means componentwise comparison of values according to the
partial orders deﬁned by the MFs. (Recall from Section 2.1, that each
application of a MF makes us grow in the information lattice: the highest
values are the newest values.)
4. Finally, we introduce rules to collect, in a new predicate R-ER, the latest
version of each record, to build the ﬁnal resolved instance:
R-ER(r, ¯x)
←
R(r, ¯x), not R-OldVer(r, ¯x).
This is a stratiﬁed Datalog program that computes a single resolved instance
in polynomial time in the size of the extensional database, in this case formed
by the contents of relations R-Duplicate and D.17
In our application to bibliographic datasets, we used as matching functions
“the union case” [10], which was investigated in detail in [11] in terms of MDs.
The idea is to treat attribute values as objects, i.e. sets of pairs attribute/value.
For example, the address “250 Hamilton Str., Peterbrook, K2J5G3” could be
represented as the set {⟨number, 250⟩, ⟨stName, Hamilton Str.⟩, ⟨city, Peterbrook⟩,
⟨areaCode, K2J5G3⟩}. When two values of this kind are merged, their union
is computed. For example, the two strings “250 Hamilton Str., K2J5G3” and
“Hamilton Str., Peterbook”, represented as objects, are merged into “250 Hamil-
ton Str., Peterbook, K2J5G3”
[11].
This generic merge function has the
advantage that, in essence, the older pieces of information are preserved, and
combined into a more complete value. In this example, the string “250 Hamil-
ton Str., Peterbook, K2J5G3” is more informative than the two strings initial
strings, “250 Hamilton Str., K2J5G3” and “Hamilton Str., Peterbook”. In the
case of two alternative values, the two versions will be kept in the union, which
may require some sort of domain-dependent postprocessing, essentially making
choices and possibly edits. In any case, working with the union case for matching
17As with the blocking-programs, the merge-programs can be obtained particularizing the
general programs in [4] to the case of interaction-free MDs [6].
25

dependencies is good enough for our purposes, namely to compare traditional
techniques with ours.
We point out that MD-based merging takes care of “transitive cases” pro-
duced by the classiﬁer. More precisely, if it returns ⟨r1, r2, 1⟩and ⟨r2, r3, 1⟩, but
not ⟨r1, r3, 1⟩, we still merge r1, r3 (even when r1 ≈r3 does not hold). Indeed, if
MD-enforcement ﬁrst merges r1, r2 into the same record, the similarity between
r2 and r3 still holds (it was pre-computed and stored, and not destroyed by the
updating of attribute values of r2). Then, the merge-MD will be applied to r3
and the new version of r2. Iteratively, r1, r2, r3 will end up having the same
attribute values (except for the rid).18
There might be applications where we do not want this form of full entity
resolution triggered by transitivity. If that is the case, we could use semantic
constraints on the ER result (or process). Actually, negative rules have been
proposed in [49], and discussed in [4] in the context of general answer set pro-
grams for MD-based ER. However, the introduction of constraints into Datalog
changes the entire picture. Under a common approach, if the intended model
of the program does not satisfy the constraint, it is rejected. This is not par-
ticularly appealing from the application point of view.
An alternative is to
transform constraints into non-stratiﬁed program rules, which would take us in
general to the realm of ASPs [14]. In any case, developing this case in full is
outside the scope of this work.
8. Experimental Results
In comparison with standard blocking (SB) techniques, our experiments with
the MAS dataset show that our approach to ER, in particular, through the use
of semantically rich matching dependencies for blocking result in lower reduction
ratio for blocking, and higher recall and precision for classiﬁcation. These are
positive results that can also be observed in the experimental results with the
DBLP and Cora Citation datasets. Cf. Figures 7, 9, and 8 (more details follow
below).
We considered three diﬀerent blocking techniques, shown, respectively, in
the sets of columns in Figure 7: (a) Standard Blocking (SB),
(b) MD-based
Standard Blocking (MDSB), and (c) MD-based Collective Blocking (MDCB),
which we now describe:
(a) According to SB, records are clustered into a same block when they share
the identical values for blocking keys [33].
(b) MDSB generalizes standard blocking through the use of blocking-MDs
that consider on the LHS exactly the same attributes (actually, keys) as in
SB. However, for some of the attributes, equality is replaced by similarity,
18Notice that there is certain similarity with the argument around the SFAI case of MDs in
Section 5. This not a coincidence: non-interacting MDs form a case of SFAI, for any initial
instance.
26

Figure 7: The experiments (MAS)
adding more ﬂexibility and the possibility of increasing the number of
two-record comparisons.
For example, the following could be an MD directly representing a blocking-
key rule:
Author(aid1, x1, y1, bl1) ∧Author(aid2, x2, y2, bl2) ∧x1 = x2 ∧
y1 = y2 −→
bl1 .= bl2;
and the following could be a relaxed version of it, a single-relation MD
where instead of equalities we now have similarities:
Author(aid1, x1, y1, bl1) ∧Author(aid2, x2, y2, bl2) ∧x1 ≈Name x2 ∧
y1 ≈Aﬀy2 −→
bl1 .= bl2.
In this case we had as many MDs as blocking keys in SB, and they are
each, single entity, such as (12) and (13) in Example 5).
(c) MDCB uses, in addition to single-entity blocking-MDs, also multi-relational
MDs, such as (14) and (15) in Example 5). In this case, the set of MDs
contains all those in MDSB plus properly multi-relational ones.
Reduction ratio refers to the record-blocking task of ER, and is deﬁned by
1 −S
N , where S is the number of candidate duplicate record-pairs produced
by the blocking technique, and N is the total number of possible candidate
27

duplicate record-pairs in the entire dataset. If there are n records for an entity,
then N = n × n for that entity.
Reduction ratio is the relative reduction in the number of candidate dupli-
cate record-pairs to be compared. The higher the reduction ratio, the fewer
the candidate record-pairs that are generated, but the quality of the generated
candidate record-pairs is not considered [18].
That the reduction ratio decreases from left to right in Figure 7 shows that
the use of blocking-MDs increasingly captures more potential record-pairs com-
parisons that would be missed otherwise.
Recall and precision are measures of goodness of the result of the classiﬁ-
cation task [18], in this case, of record-pairs as duplicate (i.e. containing dupli-
cates of each other) or not.
Recall is deﬁned by true positives/(true positives +
false negatives), whereas precision is deﬁned by true positives/ (true positives +
false positives).
Higher recall means more true (i.e. duplicate) candidate record-pairs have
been actually found; and higher precision, that more of the retrieved candidate
duplicate record-pairs are actually true. Since we want high recall and precision,
then we prefer a blocking technique that generates a small number of candidates
for false positives and false negatives.
Figure 8: The experiments (Cora)
Our experiments focused mainly on the recall and precision of the over-
all results after classiﬁcation (and before merging). They indirectly allows for
the evaluation of the blocking techniques, as well. Actually, recall measures
the eﬀectiveness a blocking technique through non-dismissal of true candidate
duplicate record-pairs. Similarly, a high precision reﬂects that the blocking tech-
nique generates mostly true candidate duplicate record-pairs. Inversely, a low
precision shows a large number of non-duplicate record-pairs is also considered,
through blocking, as candidate duplicate record-pairs.
We can see that it be-
comes crucial to verify that ﬁltering out record-pairs by a particular blocking
technique does not aﬀect the quality of the results obtained after classiﬁcation.
All the three above mentioned measures were computed by cross-validation,
on the basis of the training data. Approximately 70% of the training data was
used for training, and the other 30%, for testing. The MAS dataset includes
250K authors, 2.5M papers, and a training set. For the authors dataset, the
28

training and test sets contain 3,739 and 2,244 cases (author ids), respectively.
Figures 7, 9 and 8 show the comparative performances of ERBlox with the three
forms of blocking mentioned above, for three diﬀerent datasets. In all cases, the
same SVM technique was applied.
Figure 9: The experiments (DBLP)
In our concrete application domain, standard blocking based on key-equalities
of Paper-records of the MAS dataset used attributes Title, Publication Year, and
Conference ID, together, as one blocking key. The MD-version of this key, for
MD-based standard blocking and MD-based collective blocking, is the MD (12)
in Example 5. According to it, if two records have similar titles, with the same
publication year and conference ID, they have the same block numbers. Decid-
ing which attribute equalities become similarities is domain-dependent.
Standard blocking based on key-equalities has higher reduction ratio than
MD-based standard blocking, i.e. the former generates fewer candidate duplicate
record-pairs. Standard blocking also leads to higher precision than MD-based
standard blocking, i.e. we can trust more candidate duplicate record-pairs judge-
ments obtained via standard blocking. However, this standard blocking is very
conservative, and has a very low rate of recall, i.e. many of the true candidate
duplicate record-pairs are not identiﬁed as such.
All this makes sense since
with standard blocking based we only consider equalities of blocking keys, not
similarities.
Precision and recall of MD-based collective blocking are higher than the two
standard blocking techniques. This emphasizes the importance of MDs that
support collective blocking, and shows that blocking based on string similarity
alone fails to capture the semantic interrelationships that naturally hold in the
data. On the other side, MD-based collective blocking has lower reduction ratio
than standard MD-based blocking, which may lead to better ER results, but
may impact computational cost: larger blocks may be produced, and then, more
candidate duplicate record-pairs become inputs for the classiﬁer. In blocking,
this is a common tradeoﬀthat needs to be considered [18].
Overall, the quality of MD-based collective blocking dominates standard
blocking, both in its key-based and MD-based forms, for the three datasets.
29

9. Related Work
An unsupervised clustering-based approach to collective deduplication is pro-
posed in [12]. While traditional deduplication techniques assume that only sim-
ilarities between attribute values are available, in relational data the entities are
assumed to have additional relational information that can be used to improve
the deduplication process. This approach falls in the context of relational learn-
ing [30]. More precisely, in [12], a relationship graph is built whose nodes are
the entities (records), and edges indicate entities which co-occur. The graph
supports the propagation of similarity information to related entities. In partic-
ular, the similarity between two nodes is calculated as the weighted sum of the
attribute-value similarity and their relational similarity (as captured through
the graph). Experimental results [12] show that this form of collective dedupli-
cation outperforms traditional deduplication.
The approach to ER in [12] could be seen as implicitly involving collective
blocking, where relationships between entities and similarities between attribute
values are used to create the blocks of records. However, this form of collective
blocking does not take advantage of a declarative, logic-based semantics. In
contrast, a relationship graph is used for collective deduplication. In our case,
semantic information for this task is captured by matching dependencies. Most
importantly, the main focus of our approach to ER is MD-based collective block-
ing. For this reason, our experiments compare this approach with other blocking
techniques. A comparison of our whole approach to ER with other (whole) col-
lective approaches to ER, such as that in [12] has to be left for future research.
However, the results of such a comparison may not be very eloquent, because
our approach is based on crucial intermediate techniques, such as the use of
SVM for the classiﬁcation task, which is somehow orthogonal to the blocking
approach.
Dedupalog, a declarative approach to collective entity deduplication in the
presence of constraints, is proposed in [2]. Constraints are represented by a
form of Datalog language. The focus of this work is unsupervised clustering,
where constraints are an additional element.
Clusters of records make their
elements candidates for merging, but blocking per se or the actual merging are
not main objectives. However, this kind of clustering could be interpreted as a
form of blocking. The additional use of constraints could be seen as a form of
collective clustering. In [2], equality-generating dependencies were used as hard
constraints, and clustering-rules as weak constraints.
Our approach can also be seen as a form of relational learning. However, in
our case, the semantic relational information (constraints) are, in some sense,
implicitly captured through matching dependencies. Their semantics is non-
classical (it is chase-based as seen in Section 2.1), and involves directly the
blocking or merging processes, as opposed to having higher-level logical con-
straints “compiled” into them.
In our case, the proper learning part of the
30

process, i.e. classiﬁcation-model learning via SVM, is supervised,19 but it does
not use any kind of additional relational knowledge. In this regard, it is worth
pointing out to quite recent research proposing supervised ML-techniques for
classiﬁcation that involve semantic knowledge in the form of logical formulas in
kernels for kernel-based methods (such as SVM) [23].
Various blocking techniques have been proposed, investigated and applied.
See [9, 18, 24, 39, 45] for comprehensive surveys and comparative studies. To
the best of our knowledge, existing approaches to blocking are inﬂexible and
limited in that they: (a) allow blocking on only single entity types, in isolation
from other entity types, or (b) do not take advantage of valuable domain or
semantic knowledge. Possible exceptions are [38, 41]. Collective blocking in
[38] disregards blocking keys and creates blocks by considering exclusively the
relationships between entities. The relationships correspond to links in a graph
connecting entities, and blocks are formed by groping together entities within
neighborhoods with a predeﬁned (path) “diameter”. Under this approach, in
contrast with ours (cf. Example 2), relationships are not declarative, and block-
ing decisions on one entity do not have a direct, explicit impact on blocking
decisions to be made on another related entity.
In [41], similarity of blocking keys and relational relationships are consid-
ered for blocking in the context of identiﬁcation of duplicates (not the merging).
However, the semantics of relational relationships (or closeness) between block-
ing keys and entities is not fully developed.
10. Conclusions
We have shown that matching dependencies, a new class of semantic con-
straints for data quality and cleaning, can be proﬁtably integrated with tradi-
tional ML-methods, in our case for developing classiﬁcation models for entity
resolution. These dependencies play a role not only in their intended goal, that
of merging duplicate representations, but also in the record-blocking process
that precedes the proper learning task. At that stage they declaratively capture
semantic information that can be used to enrich the blocking activity.
MDs declaration and enforcement, data processing in general, and machine
learning can all be integrated using the LogiQL language. Actually, all the data
extraction, movement and transformation tasks are carried out via LogiQL, a
form of extended Datalog supported by the LogicBlox platform.
In this regards it is interesting to mention that Datalog has been around since
the early 80s, as a declarative and executable rule-based language for relational
databases. It was used mostly in DB research, until recently. In the last few
years Datalog has experienced a revival, and many new applications have been
found.
LogiQL, in particular, is being extended in such a way it can smoothly in-
teract with optimization and machine learning algorithms, on top of a single
19We refer to [35] for a discussion on supervised vs. unsupervised approaches.
31

Base Tables
P Å ...
Q Å ...
intentional
DB
extensional
DB
Deductive
DB
virtually
extended
DB
Datalog rules
(relational)
Datalog DB
LogicBlox DBMS
optimization
machine learning
↑
↑
↑
mixed-integer (linear) programming, regression (classical, logistic), SVMs
Figure 10: LogiQL and extended LogicBlox
platform. Data for optimization and ML problems stored as “extensions” for
a relational database (that is a component of LogicBlox), and Datalog predi-
cates. The results of those algorithms can be automatically stored in existing
database predicates or newly deﬁned Datalog predicates, for additional compu-
tations or query answering. Currently new ML methods are being implemented
as components of the LogicBlox system (cf. Figure 10).
Our work can be extended in several directions, some of which have been
mentioned in previous sections. A most interesting extension would consider
the use of more expressive blocking-MDs than those of the form 11. Actually,
they could have in their RHSs attributes other than Bl#, the block attributes.
As a consequence, blocking-MDs, together with making block numbers identi-
cal, would make identical pairs of application-dependent values for some other
attributes. Doing this would reﬁne the blocking process itself (modifying the
data for the next applications of blocking-MDs), but would also prepare
the
data for the next task, that of classiﬁcation for entity resolution.
Acknowledgments:
Part of this research was funded by NSERC Discovery Grant
#250279-2011, and the NSERC Strategic Network on Business Intelligence (BIN). Z.
Bahmani and L. Bertossi are very much grateful for the support from LogicBlox during
their internship and sabbatical visit.
