A Cybersecurity Risk Analysis Framework for Systems
with Artificial Intelligence Components
J.M. Camacho1, A. Couce-Vieira2, D. Arroyo3, and D. Rios Insua1
1Inst. Mathematical Sciences, ICMAT-CSIC, Spain
2University of Vigo, Spain
3Inst. Information Technology, ITEFI-CSIC, Spain
Abstract
The introduction of the European Union Artificial Intelligence Act, the NIST Arti-
ficial Intelligence Risk Management Framework, and related norms demands a better
understanding and implementation of novel risk analysis approaches to evaluate sys-
tems with Artificial Intelligence components. This paper provides a cybersecurity risk
analysis framework that can help assessing such systems. We use an illustrative example
concerning automated driving systems.
Keywords: Artificial Intelligence Systems, Risk Analysis, Adversarial Machine Learning,
Cybersecurity, Regulation.
1
arXiv:2401.01630v1  [cs.AI]  3 Jan 2024

1
INTRODUCTION
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is broadly understood as the study and implementation of com-
puter systems capable of carrying out activities that would typically need human intelligence.
Its importance is immediately appreciated if we think of its application to speed up processes
that previously took years of expensive research, as in drug discovery e.g. Gallego et al. (2021);
or to facilitate the introduction of radically new technologies like automated driving systems
(ADSs), e.g. Caballero et al. (2023). Huge investments by the European Union (EU), USA
or China, and big tech firms in AI also showcase its potential. Yet alongside its benefits, the
introduction of AI entails risks. Examples include deep fake technology employed to insert
celebrities’ faces onto pornographic content (Hasan & Salah, 2019), the use of AI to facilitate
the generation of biochemical weapons (Urbina et al., 2022), or the creation of fake content
preventing cyber-attribution (Leone, 2023). Moreover, risks are exacerbated by the growing
speed of AI progress. A popular report by the Center for Research on Foundation Models
(CRFM) (Stanford Center for Research on Foundation Models, 2021) emphasises the risks
associated with such type of models, large-scale, pre-trained deep learning networks provid-
ing multi-purpose AI, usually based on unprecedented natural language processing (NLP)
capabilities.
To shed some light on the production and deployment of AI-based systems, in particular
their safety and security, the EU has approved the AI Act (European Commission, 2021) (from
now on the Act), the first law globally regulating AI. However, implementing the Act posits
several challenges made evident by, e.g., ChatGPT (Helberger & Diakopoulos, 2023). The
Act classifies AI systems into four risk categories (unacceptable, high, limited or minimal)
accordingly demanding appropriate remedial actions (Madiega, 2021). The U.S. National
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has also released an initial version of an AI
Risk Management Framework (NIST, 2023) (AIRMF from now on) aimed to support how to
manage risks in the design, development, usage, and assessment of AI systems and services.
2

The Executive Order on the Safe, Secure, and Trustworthy Development and Use of Artificial
Intelligence (The White House, 2023) has also been recently published by the US government.
From a policy perspective, it is evident that AI risk management is attracting lots of attention
(Agarwala et al., 2020). However, most current approaches remain at a qualitative level,
frequently adopting at most risk matrices (Papadatos et al., 2023) for risk analysis purposes,
despite well-known shortcomings (Cox Jr, 2008). Clearly it is of capital importance to conduct
solid and trustworthy risk analysis to avoid the manipulation of misinformation attempts that
could be weaponized as part of disinformation campaigns (Thekdi & Aven, 2023).
Given the importance of the issue, we provide here a framework for cybersecurity risk
analysis in systems containing AI components. First, Section 2 remarks the novel risk analysis
issues that AI systems and components bring in. Section 3 then describes how such issues
may be addressed, illustrated with an example concerning ADS cybersecurity in Section 4.
We conclude by discussing some implications of our proposal. Software to reproduce the case
study results may be found in https://github.com/***.1
2
NOVEL RISK ANALYSIS ISSUES IN
SYSTEMS WITH AI COMPONENTS
Our approach stems from the cybersecurity risk analysis framework elaborated in R´ıos Insua
et al. (2021a; 2021b), based on the Information Security Forum (2016) proposal depicted in
Figure 1. The framework covers four basic elements: organization features, relevant threats
and impacts, and the adopted cybersecurity portfolio. The figure provides some details con-
cerning such components, e.g. impacts are segregated as insurable or non-insurable. Black
arrows identify novel risk issues brought in by the introduction of AI components as we
specify after a brief overview.
1Blinded for review process.
3

Figure 1: Main components in a cybersecurity risk management framework. Black arrows
indicate AI-affected elements. Adapted from R´ıos Insua et al. (2021b).
Overview.
AI systems, importantly those described as foundation models, bring along new
risks and increase others (CRFM, 2021). Their intricacy complicates understanding and con-
trol, bringing additional issues in terms of explainability, reliability, safety and accountability,
among others.
Emergent capabilities of AI entail challenges. In some cases, such capabilities are dis-
covered only after the system has been deployed, notably in Large Generative AI models
(LGAIMs), like ChatGPT, Stable Difussion or Bard, which have demonstrated impressive
results on a wide variety of NLP, reasoning and creative tasks. Dozens of emergent abili-
ties have been described, including multi-step arithmetic, or operating other AIs to generate
code. Yet they may also hallucinate, producing seemingly plausible but untrue statements.
The emergence of abilities is also affected by the fact that AIs are goal-oriented systems in
4

the sense that the goals specified by AI developers (upstream) and users (downstream) affect
how the system learns, its functionalities and interactions. Moreover, additional risks arise
from function creep, enabling non-valid uses affecting the dependability of the system, and
even unsafe, unfair or malicious actions.
Although risk analysis typically pays attention to emergent, or potentially emergent, fea-
tures of systems (e.g., failures, vulnerabilities, threats), the existence of emergent capabilities
in AI adds a layer of complexity. In addition, the Act emphasises the so-called high-risk AI
systems, including those used as safety components of a product or for purposes such as
biometric identification, categorization of persons, and critical infrastructure protection.
AI-related impacts.
Beyond conventional CIA (Confidentiality, Integrity, and Availabil-
ity) technical impacts (Ham, 2021), Couce-Vieira et al. (2020) (CV20 from now on) present a
broader vision of cybersecurity objectives, including business and societal elements. However,
several organizations have proposed additional impacts brought in by AI relevant in cyber-
security terms. To wit, let us mention the AIRMF and its technical (accuracy, reliability,
robustness, resilience), socio-technical (explainability, interpretability, privacy, safety, bias
manageability) and guiding (fairness, accountability, transparency) principles from which
novel impacts emerge. Notably, questions about safety, ethics, bias, privacy and fairness
have become a top concern in the digital world, including AI as it becomes a more popular
technology, and there is a need to adjust, match and, possibly, update earlier cybersecurity
objectives to cover the new impacts.
AI-based assets.
Many systems include AI blocks, or functional components heavily de-
pendent on AI, that are susceptible to attacks, in particular, the above-mentioned safety
components in the Act. A prime contemporary example are ADSs which have as core com-
ponents perception systems typically based on classifiers using convolutional neural networks
(Gallego & R´ıos Insua, 2022). As Boloor et al. (2019) describes, these have been the subject
of, e.g., data poisoning attacks with potentially catastrophic outcomes. Following Thekdi &
5

Aven (2023) and ETSI (2022), and given the relevance of hardware weaknesses, we adopt a
broad view and consider as well hardware assets backing AI components.
AI-based security and recovery controls.
Many systems include AI elements as part
of their security controls or safety components, susceptible to being fooled with malicious
purposes. One example are content filters, aimed to filtrate undesirable content. For instance,

et al., 2019) and malware detectors (Redondo & R´ıos Insua, 2020) are plagued with obfuscated
malware. AI-based recovery controls may be affected as well by attacks. As an example, an
AI-based managed backup system relying on an intrusion detection system (IDS) could see
its IDS fooled by an adversarial machine learning (AML) attacker poisoning data in tandem
with ransomware targeted to encrypt the backup database.
AI-based targeted attacks.
As in other domains, attacks against AI systems can be
generic (i.e., released in the wild) or targeted (due to being specially valuable for attackers
because of the stored information or the supported operations). In particular, attackers can
use for such purpose AI-based attacks as it happens, e.g., with employing poisoned images to
overcome an image recognition system (R´ıos Insua et al., 2023) or enable side-channel attacks
facilitating reverse engineering (Masure et al., 2020). Other attacks target AI systems (Sanyal
et al., 2022) by e.g. injecting poisonous information in the training data or taking advantage
of function creep to abuse the system. Moreover, cloud outsourcing in paradigms such as
ML-as-a-Service implies third-party dependence and risks like model stealing or the existence
of backdoors (Oliynyk et al., 2023) in the outsourced AI models (Goldwasser et al., 2022).
6

3
SOLUTIONS TO NEW RISK ANALYSIS
ISSUES IN SYSTEMS WITH AI COMPONENTS
This section suggests solutions to the issues identified in Section 2 including a broad AI-
related risk analysis framework (Section 3.2).
When elsewhere available, particularly in
Sections 3.3 and 3.4, we mainly summarise the literature with relevant pointers. Section 4
details a case illustrating most of the issues raised here.
3.1
Impacts
In order to adjust cybersecurity impact lists, in particular that in CV20, with those suggested
in emerging AI risk management guidelines, we focus our discussion on the AIRMF, some of
whose impacts are also present in the Act, the OECD AI Recommendation (2019) and the
CRFM report, albeit with somewhat different names or structures. The CV20 list is struc-
tured as a cybersecurity objectives (CSO) tree (Figure 2) including objectives measurable in
monetary terms (operational costs, income reduction, cybersecurity costs, personal economic
damage, other costs) and others not directly measurable in such terms (reputation, fatalities,
physical and mental injuries, injuries to personal rights, environmental damage).
The AIRMF focuses on the concept of trustworthiness. A trustworthy AI system should
be valid and reliable, safe, secure and resilient, accountable and transparent, explainable and
interpretable, privacy-enhanced and fair. Each of these features comprises additional sub-
features. For example, validity entails accuracy, reliability and robustness. Beyond these, the
AIRMF identifies potential impacts associated with AI risks, such as harm to people, orga-
nizations, and ecosystems. As examples, it mentions harm to personal rights; or impact over
democratic participation. The Act is more explicit identifying prohibited practices and high-
risk AI systems, including their potential impacts. For example, a forbidden functionality
for an AI system would be to employ subliminal techniques beyond a person’s consciousness
7

Figure 2: Cybersecurity objectives (CSO) tree in CV20. Dashed box, monetary objective;
solid line box, non-monetary.
in order to materially distort his/her behaviour.
Interestingly, with appropriate modifications, the CV20 CSO tree actually covers the
novel impacts identified in the AIRMF, the Act and the CRFM report. Such documents
emphasise people’s rights and physical risks in contrast to cybersecurity frameworks from
previous decades, in which those topics were less salient, even absent. Moreover, the CV20
tree was constructed with decision support purposes in mind, integrating different types of
objectives through multiattribute utilities and meeting standard requirements for decision
support attributes (comprehensive, measurable, non-overlapping, relevant, unambiguous and
understandable) (Keeney & Gregory, 2005). Thus, we can actually use the CV20 tree to map
those harms. For instance, impacts on critical infrastructure relate to the impacts on other
organizations in the tree, a large-scale impact that harms multiple organizations. Another
example is discrimination against groups; CV20 identified the UN Universal Human Rights
Index Database as a major source to identify specific damages to personal and social rights,
including discrimination against groups.
8

The AIRMF trustworthiness approach, implicit in the Act, would make for interesting
candidates to expand our original tree. However, impacts in terms of AI trustworthiness
features can also be translated into our objectives.
As mentioned, trustworthiness could
be interpreted by means of the CIA triad, taking into account additional points related to
resiliency, accuracy, safety, and privacy (ISO, 2020) and sustainability (McDaniel, 2022).
CV20 did not include them in the tree but rather integrated them into other objectives,
like confidentiality aspects such as personal (personally identifiable information) or property
rights (copyright, trademark, patent infringements), the organization’s income or reputation
(due to trade secret exposition) or noncompliance with cybersecurity regulations.
All in all, as Table 1 reflects, following a similar approach, we are able to map into the
CV20 tree the impacts related to the different trustworthiness characteristics identified by
AIRMF (and implicit in the EU and CRFM proposals).
3.2
A cybersecurity risk analysis framework for
systems with AI components
The basic structure in the originating framework (R´ıos Insua et al., 2021b) essentially used
a single block to conceptualize a cyber organization. Given the relevance of AI components
as reflected in Section 2 challenges, here we structure organizations with finer granularity in
terms of blocks or components, which could refer to hardware, software or hardware-software
elements. This section provides a broad description of the cyber risk analysis framework and
then reflect on the AI ingredients (assets and defenses) included.
3.2.1
Structure
Consider a cyber organization structured according to access, security and criticality levels,
much as in the Purdue Model for Industrial Control Systems (Williams, 1994), represented
through blocks in levels as Figure 3 exemplifies. Let G be the underlying graph with nodes
representing blocks and links, flows through which an attack could enter or be transferred.
9

Trustworthiness principles and subprinciples
Map to CSO Tree (Couce-Vieira et al., 2020)
Level 1
Level 2
Validitya
Accuracya: “closeness of results of observations,
computations or estimates to true values or values
accepted as being true.” e
Failing to achieve these characteristics involves a
degradation and maybe a malfunction or unavailability
of the AI system. These impacts may affect goals such
as operational costs, income reduction, other costs
(including non-compliance costs), reputational impact
or AI risk management costs.
Reliabilitya: “ability of an item to perform as
required, without failure, for a given time interval,
under given conditions.” e
Robustnessa,b: “ability of a system to maintain its
level of performance under a variety of circumstances.” e
Safetya,b: “property of a system such that it does not, under defined
conditions, lead to a state in which human life, health, property or
the environment is endangered.” e
Impacts on this characteristic affect goals related to harm
to people. Specifically, fatalities or injuries to physical
and mental health. Indirectly, it may also create economic
damage to persons, the organization and third parties.
Fairnessa,b
Bias is manageda,b: “systemic, computational, and
human [bias], all of which can occur in the absence
of prejudice, partiality, or discriminatory intent.” a
Impact on this characteristic may affect the reputation
impact goal (ethical degradation) and other costs
(non-compliance with AI regulation).
Diversitya,b: “reflect demographic diversity and broad
domain and user experience expertise.” a
Impact on these characteristics may affect goals related
to injuries to personal rights, personal economic damage
and even injuries to physical and mental health.
These consequences may also impact the organization
in terms of reputation (ethical degradation) and costs.
Risk of discrimination is minimizedb,c: “based on
any ground such as sex, race, color, ethnic or social
origin, genetic features, language, religion or
belief, political or any other opinion, membership
of a national minority, property, birth, disability,
age or sexual orientation.” d
Securitya,b
Protectiona,b: protocols to avoid, protect against,
respond to, or recover from attacks.” a
These characteristics are represented by the risk
management controls, affecting also the risk
management costs goal.
Resiliencea: “ability to return to normal
function after an unexpected adverse event.” a
AI Governance
Transparencya,b: “the extent to which information is
available to individuals about an AI system, if they
are interacting – or even aware that they are
interacting – with such a system.” a
Failing to achieve these characteristics involves a
reputational impact (ethical degradation) and may
include other costs for non-compliance.
Accountabilitya,b,c: “expectations of the responsible
party in the event that a risky outcome is realized.” a
Human oversightc: “natural persons can effectively
oversee the AI system during the period in which
the AI system is in use.” c
Understandability
Explainabilitya,b: “representation of the mechanisms
underlying an algorithm’s operation.” a
Failing to achieve these characteristics involves a
degradation and maybe a malfunction or unavailability
of the function performed by the AI system. Impacts
on these may affect goals of the organization such as
operational costs, income reduction, other costs
(including non-compliance costs), reputational impact
or risk management costs.
Interpretabilitya,b: “the meaning of AI systems’ output
in the context of its designed functional purpose.” a
Data governanceb
Data managementc: “data collection, data analysis,
data labelling, data storage, data filtration, data
mining, data aggregation, data retention and any
other operation regarding the data.” c
Privacya,b: “safeguard human autonomy, identity
and dignity.” a
Privacy affects the goal of injuries to personal rights
and may include other costs for non-compliance.
References:
a NIST AI Risk Management Framework (NIST, 2023),
b CRFM’s On the Opportunities and Risks of Foundation Models (Stanford Center for Research on Foundation Models, 2021),
c EU AI Act (European Commission, 2021),
d Article 21 of the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights (used in c) (European Parliament et al., 2012),
e ISO/IEC TS 5723:2002 (used in a) (International Organization for Standardization, 2022).
Table 1: Mapping trustworthiness features into cybersecurity objectives. Indices in terms
identify references addressing the principle. Indices in definitions identify source.
G might be cyclic at a given level. This representation provides a flexible method to model
cyber systems including AI components.
10

Example 1.
Consider an organization structured according to six blocks B1, B2, ..., B6,
distributed along three levels (Figure 3).
Figure 3: Cyber organization structured according to 6 blocks in three levels.
According to it, a certain type of attack might enter through B1, B2 (level-1 blocks), or B3
(level-2 block).
△
Formally, the parameters describing a system will be as follows, where, for the moment, we
assume there is just one type a of attack:
• The number k of levels.
• The number and name of blocks within each level




Level 1
B1, B2
· · ·
Bi1
i1 blocks,
Level 2
Bi1+1
· · ·
Bi2
i2 −i1 blocks,
...
...
...
...
Level k
Bik−1+1
· · ·
Bik
ik −ik−1 blocks.
Blocks within a level are numbered in an ascending manner (if a block precedes another
one, but not otherwise, its index is smaller). Importantly some of the blocks could refer
to AI-based assets, as we later reflect.
11

• The entrance probabilities, that is the probabilities with which the attack will attempt
to enter through various blocks (some of them could be 0),
h
i
P1 =
p1,
p2,
· · ·
,
pj,
· · ·
pik
of the attack entering just through block Bj,
P2 = [p12, p13, ..., p1ik, p23, · · · , p2ik, ..., pij, ..., pik−1,ik] just through blocks Bi and Bj,
simultaneously
...
h
i
Pik =
p12···ik
simultaneously through all the blocks,
with P
i pi + P
i<j pij + ... + p12···ik = 1. P will designate the union of P1, P2, . . . , Pik.
• Q = [qi], the probability of not protecting (PNP) block Bi from such type of external
attack, if attacked. Obviously, the probability of protecting it is 1 −qi.
• For level s (s = 1, 2, . . . , k), Qs = [qij] contains the PNPs block Bi from block Bj
(where j is at level s or (s −1)) if there is an attack following an information transfer
from Bj into Bi.
The q probabilities would refer to the type of defense considered, in particular to whether
they incorporate AI-based defense systems, as section 3.3 specifies.
Example 1 (cont).
For the system in Figure 3, we would have
• Blocks Bi, i ∈{1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6} distributed in levels s ∈{1, 2, 3}.
• p1, p2, p3: the probabilities of accessing the system just through one of the blocks B1,
B2, B3, (additionally, p4 = p5 = p6 = 0); p12, p13, p23: the probabilities of accessing the
system through just the pairs of blocks (B1, B2), (B1, B3), (B2, B3), respectively (the
remaining pij would be 0); p123: the probability of accessing simultaneously through B1,
12

B2 and B3 (the remaining pijk would be 0). As mentioned, P3
i=1 pi +P
ij∈{12,13,23} pij +
p123 = 1.
• q1, q2, q3 are the block PNPs if they are attacked externally. qij, (i, j) ∈{(1, 2), (2, 1),
(3, 1), (3, 4), (4, 1),(4, 2), (4, 3), (5, 3), (5, 4), (6, 3),(6, 4) } represent the PNPs of Bi
from block Bj.
△
3.2.2
A risk analysis pipeline for AI based systems
Using the above structure, we provide algorithms to simulate the propagation of an attack
and its eventual impacts on an AI based system, and employ them to perform risk analysis.
Attack transit simulation
Algorithm 1 simulates the transit of an attack within an
organization using the above structure. It outputs an indicator Ii for each block Bi, so that
Ii = 1 (0) if the block has (not) been successfully attacked. N
′ designates a sufficiently big
number (interpretable as the expected number of transits of the attack before detected or
before completing its function); if necessary, it may be replaced by parameter N
′
jh referring
to the transits between blocks j and h. N
′ or the N
′
jh would be generated randomly from
properly selected distributions, illustrated in the case study. Observe that if the graph is
acyclic, we would make N
′ = 1, there being just one transition.
Key points in the algorithm specification are:
• Step 2, simulating attack entry points. For a given facility with entrance probabilities
P, we generate one sample from a multinomial with such probabilities. A Dirichlet
distribution could be used to generate P, given the uncertainty about it.2 In principle,
this requires up to 2n −1 probabilities, with n the number of identified single entry
points, a shortcoming from a storage point of view. A realistic way to mitigate this is
to assume that, with a certain probability, say generated from a beta distribution, the
2This distribution, as the others considered in this manuscript, would evolve as data accumulates.
13

Algorithm 1 Attack transit simulation in a general facility
Input: G, P, Q, Qs
1: Ij = 0, ∀block Bj
2: Given P, simulate the attacked entries and assign Ij = 1 to them.
3: Given Q, assign Ij = 0 to non-successfully attacked entries.
4: if all Ij = 0 then
5:
Stop
6: else
7:
for h ∈{1, . . . , k} do
▷Loop in level-depth
8:
for u ∈{1, . . . , N
′} do
9:
for j ∈{ih + 1, . . . , ih+1 −1} do
10:
if Ij = 0 then
11:
Next j
12:
else
13:
for each successor h of block j do
14:
if Ih = 0 then
15:
if successor h successfully attacked from block j then
16:
Ih = 1
17: Return: Ij, ∀block j
attack is generic affecting all entry point blocks, whereas the remaining probability is
allocated equally to targeted attacks on the identified single entry points.
• Steps 3 and 15, simulate the success of an attack to a block, based on the PNP q of
such block from an attack. Typically q would be generated from beta distributions.
Section 3.3 discusses how to assess q, in particular for AI-based blocks.
Simulation and aggregation of impacts
Algorithm 1 outputs a configuration (I1, . . . , Iik)
indicating the blocks affected by the attack. We next focus on the associated impacts simu-
lating them at block or system level, depending on the scenario modeled: some impacts will
be global (one impact for the whole system), whereas others will be separable (one impact
per block). Separable impacts are aggregated through a rule b. Finally, multiple impacts are
aggregated with a rule g.
Example 1 (cont). Recalling Section 3.1, suppose the incumbent type of attack may cause
the following impacts:
financial (l1), equipment damage (l2), and downtime (l3). l1 is global,
14

whereas l2 and l3 are separable. Typical aggregating details would be:
• l2. If l21, . . . , l2ik are the corresponding equipment replacement costs (0 if no replace-
ment required), a plausible aggregation would be l2 = P
j l2j.
• l3. For aggregation purposes, multiply it by the cost of an hour of downtime for the
corresponding installation. If l31, . . . , l3ik are the downtimes, we would expect l3 =
max(l31, . . . , l3ik) × d,where d is the unit downtime cost.
Once the impacts are computed, we aggregate them through a rule l = g(l1, l2, l3) for example,
using a multi-attribute weighted value function g(l1, l2, l3) = P3
i=1 wi × li, where wi weighs
the importance of the i-th impact, and even transform it through, say, a risk-averse utility
function (Gonz´alez-Ortega et al., 2018).
△
At schematic level, simulating from the impact distribution based on (I1, . . . , Iik) would run
as in Algorithm 2, with the first L impacts assumed to be local and the remaining R −L,
global. The j-th impact, j = 1, ..., L would have its corresponding aggregation rule bj.
Algorithm 2 Simulation from impact distribution
Input: (I1, . . . , Iik)
1: l1, l2, ..., lR = 0
2: if max(I1, . . . , Iik) = 0 then
3:
l = 0
4: else
5:
for r ∈{L + 1, . . . , R} do
6:
Generate lr
7:
for h ∈{1, . . . , ik} do
8:
if Ih = 1 then
9:
for j ∈{1, . . . , L} do
10:
Generate lh
j
11:
for j ∈{1, . . . , L} do
12:
Aggregate lh
j with rule bj obtaining l
′
j
13:
Aggregate the l
′
j’s and lr’s with rule g obtaining l
14: Return: l
This procedure generates a sample of impacts that serves as a basis to build the loss curves
required for risk management.
15

General scheme for attack simulation
Algorithm 3 simulates the consequences associ-
ated with a specific attack of a given type a. For such type, a stochastic process Λ generating
attacks in the required risk analysis planning period would be called upon. Then, its routine
would be invoked for each generated attack. There would be a stochastic process for each
type of relevant attack with its own parameters, and the corresponding generating routine
defining its arrival process. M would be the sample size required to estimate the different
quantities (expected costs, utilities) used below to the desired precision.
Algorithm 3 Attack simulation in a general facility
Input: G, Λ, distributions for P,Q,Qs
1: for j ∈{1, . . . , M} do
2:
Generate number N of attacks using Λ
3:
for i ∈{1, . . . , N} do
4:
Generate P, Q, Qs
5:
Simulate attack transit using P,Q, Qs
▷Algorithm 1
6:
Simulate impact li from attack
▷Algorithm 2
7:
Aggregate lj = PN
i=1 li
8: Return: {lj}M
j=1
Risk assessment
Once we have obtained M samples from the impact distribution, we can
estimate
Probabilities.
The Ij outputs are used to estimate the attack probabilities on various
blocks by just counting the number of 1’s appearing for each block and dividing by the
number M of simulation iterations. This facilitates assessing the vulnerability of each block.
Losses.
The output {lj}M
j=1 is fit to a mixed-type distribution. Typically, it will have
a mass point at l = 0 and we would fit a density to the positive observations, through a
mixture of gamma distributions, for reasons outlined in Wiper et al. (2001). The estimated
model can be summarized through the probability of the zero part and the moments of the
positive part and quantities like the VaR or CVaR. If considered sufficiently risky, we would
proceed with risk management.
16

Beyond the global loss at system level, it will typically be interesting to analyze component
losses at block level for the separable impacts to assess their contributions.
Risk management
We next present an approach to risk management (RM) linked with
the methodology introduced and addressing these issues: includes the costs of the security
portfolio in the assessment; includes cyber insurance adoption as part of the risk management
process; caters for taking into account the organization’s risk attitude; introduces constraints
over portfolios; takes into account the uncertainty in portfolio evaluation due to sampling.
Let us formulate first the problem and then introduce a generic algorithm to solve it.
RM formulation
Cyber mitigation portfolios will be characterized by a vector c =
(c1, ...., cm) with ci ∈{0, 1, 2} indicating whether the i-th control: is (not) included in the
portfolio when ci = 1 (ci = 0); is already implemented when ci = 2. Some of the controls
might correspond to AI-based components; one of them could refer to a (cyber)insurance
product. To wit, an organization will typically have a few mitigations already implemented,
say the first r, that is c1 = . . . = cr = 2. Besides, for compliance reasons, some of the miti-
gations would be enforced, say from r + 1 to s, so that the initial configuration is designated
c∗0 = (2, ..., 2, 1, ..., 1, 0, ..., 0). The aim is to decide which of the controls (cs+1, ..., cm) should
be implemented additionally. For this, given a proposed configuration c, we shall have the
corresponding entrance probabilities P(c) and PNPs
 Q(c), Qs(c)

. A simulation routine as
in Algorithm 3 would provide a sample {l(c)j}M
j=1 of the loss if portfolio c is implemented.
Thus, the problem we aim to solve is
max
E(u(c))
(1)
s.t. ci ∈{0, 1, 2}; ci = 2, i ≤r, ci = 1, r + 1 ≤i ≤s,
h(c) ≤0,
17

where u is the utility function modeling preferences and risk attitudes, and h(c) ≤0 desig-
nates relevant constraints.
Concerning the objective function, we first integrate the portfolio cost(c) in the loss,
which adopts the form l(c) + cost(c), where cost(c) is typically based on the sum of the
included mitigation costs. Next, we adopt a constant absolute risk averse (CARA) utility
function (Gonz´alez-Ortega et al., 2018) whose form3 is u(c) = 1−exp(ρ(l(c)+cost(c))), with
ρ being the risk aversion coefficient. Two main types of constraints would refer to:
- Budget. Typically, there would be a constraint indicating the maximum budget C available
for cyber mitigation,
m
X
i=1
cost(ci) ≤C,
where cost(ci) is the cost of the i-th mitigation. Splits between maintenance and implemen-
tation costs could be introduced. If ic represents the maximum implementation budget, the
constraint would be
m
X
i=r+1
ci × icost(i) ≤ic.
Similarly, for mc representing the maximum maintenance budget, the constraint would be
m
X
i=1
sign(ci) × mcost(i) ≤mc.
- Compliance with laws, standards, and frameworks may enforce certain mitigations to be
implemented, as mentioned above, entailing a reduction in the budgets available.
Implementation
A first strategy would be to search the space of portfolios, find out
their corresponding probabilities P(c), Q(c), and Qs(c), obtain a sample from the loss l(c)
to estimate the expected utility of portfolio c, and optimize it, with the aid of a discrete
stochastic optimization method, see Powell (2019). This may become too cumbersome com-
putationally when the set of feasible portfolios is large.
3We aim at minimizing costs, therefore maximizing -costs.
18

Alternatively, based on the typical form of the loss curves, Figure 6, we would assume
that the loss could be modeled as a mixture4
L(c) ∼s(c)I0 +
 1 −s(c)

Gamma
 a, t(c)

(2)
where s(c) represents the probability of no loss if c is the implemented portfolio and t(c)
adopts a specific parametric form to adapt to the shape of positive losses. For the i-th mitiga-
tion, we have its implementation (icost(i)) and maintenance (mcost(i)) costs and parameters
describing its effectiveness (αi, βi). The parametric forms that we adopt for s(c) and t(c)
are
s(c) = 1 −s0 exp

−

m
X
i=1
αi × sign(ci)

, t(c) = t0 +
m
X
i=1
βi × sign(ci),
suggesting diminishing returns in cybersecurity investments, whereas the corresponding costs
will be
cost(c) =
m
X
i=r+1
ci × icost(i) +
m
X
i=1
sign(ci) × mcost(i).
The objective is therefore to provide M samples (cost1, . . . , costM) from the cost and, corre-
spondingly, from the utility (u1, . . . , uM).
We include now the algorithms that implement the RM setup. First, Algorithm 4 es-
timates, for a given portfolio c, its expected utility, updating the parameters given the
implemented controls, in particular, including its implementation (ticost) and maintenance
(tmcost) costs.
4A similar procedure would be followed when the gamma distribution in (2) is replaced by a mixture of
gamma distributions.
19

Algorithm 4 Compute expected utility
Input: c, s0, t0, α, β, a, M, ρ, mcost, icost
1: Compute tmcost and ticost
2: ancost = tmcost + ticost
3: util = 0
4: for i ∈{1, . . . , M} do
5:
if (c(i) = 1) OR (c(i) = 2) then
6:
s0 = s0 × exp
 −α(i)

7:
t0 = t0 + β(i)
8: s = 1 −s0
9: t = t0
10: for i = 1, . . . , M do
11:
Generate u ∼U(0, 1)
12:
if u < s then
13:
cost(i) = 0
14:
else
15:
cost(i) ∼Gamma(a, t)
16:
cost(i) = cost(i) + ancost
17:
util = util + (1 −exp
 ρ × cost(i)

)
18: Return: util/M
Algorithm 5 integrates the previous pieces. Given the portfolio, its feasibility is first assessed.
If feasible but not optimal, the portfolio is updated, where Algorithm * designates a generic
routine proposing a portfolio update for optimization purposes, see Powell (2019) for pointers
including simulated annealing.
Algorithm 5 Global scheme
1: Current c
2: Compute portfolio costs
3: if ”Infeasible Portfolio” then
4:
Stop
5: while not convergent do
6:
Compute portfolio costs
7:
if “Infeasible Portfolio” then
8:
Stop
9:
else
10:
Update s0 and t0
▷Algorithm 4
11:
Estimate expected utility of portfolio
▷Algorithm 4
12:
Update c
▷Algorithm *
20

3.3
AI based defenses
The PNP parameters q assessing the non-protection of blocks against attacks are key model
inputs. They are characteristic of each defense type against a particular attack type in a
given environment. We may have data and/or use expert judgment (Hanea et al., 2021) to
estimate and update them in the light of data.
When handling AI systems that are safety components of products, as with content
filters or computer vision systems (Comiter, 2019), a major information source to assess the
parameters are their security evaluation curves. This is part of the relatively recent domain of
AML, see Biggio & Roli (2018); Vorobeichyk & Kantarcioglu (2019); R´ıos Insua et al. (2023);
Gallego et al. (2023) for reviews. These curves depict the probability (1 −q) of succeeding
in protecting an ML algorithm from an attack of a certain type and intensity, given the
AI-based defense implemented. Hence, given a type of attack, its intensity and the chosen
defense, the parameter 1 −q would be estimated with the corresponding curve, from which
the PNP would be deduced.
As an example, Figure 4 illustrates the security evaluation curves of four ML defenses
(none, adversarial training (AT), adversarial logit pairing (ALP), adversarial risk analysis
(ARA)) over a classifier used in a computer vision task against a fast gradient sign method
(FGSM) (Szegedy et al., 2014) attack of increasing intensity. For a 0.06-intensity attack, the
estimated expected accuracy in the task would be around 0.93 (with ARA, AT and ALP
defenses) and about 0.87 with no defense and ˆq would be, respectively, 0.07 and 0.13. We
would complete the assessment acknowledging the uncertainty about the corresponding ˆq
with a beta distribution with, e.g., such value as mode.
3.4
Targeted attacks
As Section 3.2 described, other key inputs are the attack probabilities pi to blocks Bi from
external sources for a given type of attack as well as the stochastic process generating such
21

Figure 4: Security evaluation curve of a deep network for MNIST data under four defense
mechanisms (NONE, AT, ALP, ARA) against FGSM attack. From Gallego et al. (2023).
type of attacks. As in Section 3.3, we may have access to data and/or expert judgment which
allows us to model and estimate the corresponding probabilities and stochastic processes
parameters. Special emphasis should be placed on targeted attacks, since they entail strategic
calculations which further complicate the assessment of attack uncertainties. For this, we
appeal to ARA tools, overviewed in Banks et al. (2022), which require
1. Formulating the defender problem, that is, selecting a portfolio minimizing the po-
tential impact of attackers’ actions on our system. The uncertainties include whether
our system, taking into account the implemented portfolio, will be targeted or if, al-
ternatively, another system will be the focus. We also assess the uncertainties about
potential attack entry points.
2. Formulating the attackers’ decision problems, followed by gathering (typically partial)
information about the attackers’ beliefs and preferences, leading to his random proba-
bilities and random utilities from the defender’s perspective.
3. Simulating from the attackers’ problems to assess the attack probabilities and processes
over the system of interest. This entails sampling from their utilities and probabilities,
22

and assessing their optimal attacks (type, target and, if our system is the target, entry
points). This is iterated as much as requested (and computationally feasible). Based
on this sample we assess the probability of receiving an attack at various entry points.
4. The inclusion of such forecasts in the defender’s problem (step 1), and its solution to
select the optimal protection portfolio.
Note that whether targeted attacks are automated through AI systems or manually would
make little difference in modeling terms and we would just need to assess if the capabilities of
the attacker enable it to implement more sophisticated AI attacks or whether it has sufficient
resources to hire an AI-based attacking platform. In this sense, the seemingly ever-increasing
availability of such platforms, as in AI-based Crime-As-A-Service (Kaloudi & Li, 2020),
increases the importance of developing this type of models.
Thus, a key issue in relation to targeted attacks is whether the system under study would
be the target of interest of a specific attacker for a given attack. The framework sketched
may be used to answer such type of questions based on the principle that a system would
be targeted if the attacker derives higher expected utility from attacking to it than to its
competitors (and from not attacking). As a byproduct, we also determine the entry point
probabilities. To wit, the scenario is modeled as a sequential defend-attack game (R´ıos &
R´ıos Insua, 2012), where we posit that attackers operate as expected utility maximizers
and that they possess knowledge of the implemented portfolio for system protection before
initiating any action. Assume that the attacker can perpetrate the following actions compiled
in set A:
- a1
j,k, j ∈{1, . . . , J}, k ∈{1, . . . , K}: Attack of type j targeting the system’s k-th
(possibly multiple) entry, with J the number of attack types available, and K, the
number of relevant entry combinations. Our assumption is that the attacker will select
only one type of attack at any given moment (as opposed to employing multiple types
concurrently).
23

- ai
j, j ∈{1, . . . , J}, i ∈{2, . . . , n}: Attack of type j targeting another system i, with
{2, . . . , n} encompassing all other targets that the potential attacker may choose.
The expected utility ψA when the attacker opts to target via a1
(j,k) our system given portfolio
c is defined through
ψA(a1
(j,k), c) = pA(Y = 1|a1
(j,k), c)uA(Y = 1, a1
(j,k), c) + pA(Y = 0|a1
(j,k), c)uA(Y = 0, a1
(j,k), c),
where pA(Y = 1|a1
(j,k), c) denotes the probability that the attack successfully penetrates the
system, given c and the attack j targeting the k-th entry, and uA(Y = 1, a1
(j,k), c) designates
the utility of a successful attack j targeting block k, given c, for the attacker. Given the
limited knowledge of the attacker’s utilities UA and probabilities PA, we opt for a Bayesian
approach leading to random utilities and probabilities, which make up for the attacker random
expected utility
ΨA(a1
(j,k), c) = PA(Y = 1|a1
(j,k), c)UA(Y = 1, a1
(j,k), c) + PA(Y = 0|a1
(j,k), c)UA(Y = 0, a1
(j,k), c).
Similarly, from the defender’s perspective, the random expected utility when the attacker
targets the i-th system with attack aj is5
ΨA(ai
j) = PA(Y = 1|ai
j)UA(Y = 1, ai
j) + PA(Y = 0|ai
j)UA(Y = 0, ai
j).
Then, the random optimal action δ(c) selected by the attacker given c is the action maxi-
mizing the (random) expected utility arg maxx∈A(ΨA(x)). We proceed by Monte Carlo (MC)
to obtain the required probabilities. At each of V MC iterations v, we sample the random
utilities and probabilities and calculate δv(c) = arg maxx∈A(Ψv
A(x)). Using {δv(c)}V
v=1, we
estimate the predictive probability τ 1
j (c) that the attacker targets our system through any
entry point perpetrating attack j, given c, through
5Note that we do not account for changes in defenses of other systems, recognising a lack of detailed
knowledge about the security status of the other systems.
24

τ 1
j (c) = PD(A = a1
j,.|c) =
{δv(c) = a1
j}

V
and, similarly, for the probability τ i(c) of the attacker targeting any other system. Such
values are compiled in τ(c) = (τ 1
1 (c), . . . , τ 1
J(c), τ i(c)). 6
Additionally, for each attack j we compute
Γ1
j(c) =
 γ1
j,1, . . . , γ1
j,K

=
{δm′ = a1
j,1}V
v=1
 + 1, . . . ,
{δv = a1
j,K}V
v=1
 + 1

,
denoting the MC simulations in which the attacker targets each entry with attack j. Γ1
j(c)
defines the parameter vector for the Dirichlet distribution to compute entry probabilities for
each attack j given portfolio c in step 2 of Algorithm 1, determining the distribution of entry
probabilities P(c).7
Algorithm 6 expands upon Algorithm 3 by incorporating the previous ARA based method
to simulate the impacts of targeted attacks in the system under analysis.
Algorithm 6 Targeted attack simulation in a general facility
Input: G, Λ, distributions for Q,Qs
1: Estimate attacker behaviour (τ) and target block (Γ1
j) parameter distributions
2: for j ∈{1, . . . , M} do
3:
Generate number N of attacks using Λ
4:
for i ∈{1, . . . , N} do
5:
Choose target using τ
6:
if our system selected then
7:
Generate Γ1
j, Q, Qs
8:
Simulate attack transit using Γ1
j, Q, Qs
▷Algorithm 1
9:
Simulate impact li from attack
▷Algorithm 2
10:
else
11:
Impact li = 0
12:
Compute lj = PN
i=1 li
13: Return: {lj}M
j=1
6This vector serves as input to sample from a multinomial distribution to select whether the attacker
targets our system, and if so, which entry block is attacked.
7This implements Laplace smoothing (Manning et al., 2008), by adding 1 to each component of the vector,
to address the issue of null components when sampling from the Dirichlet distribution.
25

It first obtains the vectors τ and Γ1
j, then used to compute the impacts of the attacks on
the system.
We next simulate how many attacks the perpetrator will execute using the
arrival process distribution. Then, for each attack it is predicted whether or not the attacker
selects our system. If the attacker chooses our system, Γ1
j is used to select which block will
be targeted within the system. Subsequently, the impact on the system is computed using
Algorithms 1 and 2.
4
CASE STUDY
This section presents an illustration of the proposed methodology. It is a simplification of an
actual case but complex enough to reflect the required modeling steps. It concerns an ADS
fleet owner who uses them for rental purposes and wishes to improve their cybersecurity.
The key role of AI components in ADS architectures is described in Caballero et al. (2023).
Baylon (2017) provides a detailed analysis of cybersecurity issues in relation to ADS. Details
on the relevant parameters in this risk analysis over a one-year horizon planning may be
found in the Supplementary Materials (SM).
4.1
Problem description
Let us briefly describe the relevant elements of the problem. We first characterize the ADS
architecture through blocks and levels and specify the relevant impacts. Additionally, we
identify potential threats, distinguishing between non-adversarial and adversarial ones, rec-
ognizing their potential perpetrators. Finally, potential defenses not already implemented
are presented and we proceed to risk assessment and management.
ADS architecture.
The simplified architecture (Figure 5) includes two level-one blocks
susceptible of external attacks.
• Perception system, covering sensors (RADAR, LIDAR, Vehicle-to-Vehicle (V2V),...)
26

and processing subsystems allowing the ADS to determine its relative location with
respect to other cars, pedestrians, and obstacles.
• Location system, covering the systems (GPS,...) that estimate the vehicle global posi-
tion during operations.
Its architecture also includes a level-two block which cannot be attacked directly
• Decision/control system. Contains the AI applications processing data from previous
blocks to predict the behavior of nearby obstacles and decide appropriate speed and
direction to fulfill ADS needs.
Figure 5:
ADS architecture. Three blocks and two levels.
Threats.
We consider the following non-targeted and targeted threats.
Non-targeted threats.
There is a large set of these threats against ADS (Taslimasa
et al., 2023). We consider only two of them.
• Denial of Service (DoS). Traffic infrastructure may be infected to gain access to vehicles
through interaction, to prevent users from entering their vehicles by intervening in their
27

door-locking system demanding a ransom to regain access. Besides, attackers may also
obtain sensitive data from the location block.
• Software/hardware supply chain threats (SCTs). Rogue updates could make an ADS
non-operational. Importantly, such updates might not be assured beyond a deadline:
obsolescence may pose a threat in certain ADS scenarios (De Freitas et al., 2021).
Targeted threats.
We consider the following actors as potential attackers:
• Cyberterrorist group (Cy). They could modify traffic signals or interfere with V2V and
V2I communications to achieve political notoriety.
• Criminal gang (Cr). They carry out their attacks to obtain economic gains through
stolen sensitive information.
These groups may target the ADS through different attacks. We only consider:
• Adversarial attacks against ML algorithms (AML at). A perpetrator decides to alter
the data plane of vehicular communications or environmental elements to fool the ADS
ML algorithms. For instance, they might modify traffic signals (Wei et al., 2023) to
trick the perception block and maliciously perturb vehicle behavior.
• Wireless jamming on the control plane (wir jam). A malicious actor could send signals
to interfere with the proper functioning of devices such as the GPS system, potentially
causing accidents and damage to vehicles and users.8
Table 2 summarizes the attacks that actors are capable to carry out.
We assume that
attackers can execute only one type of attack at any given moment.9
Besides, two other companies in the market offer similar services.
8An interface posing a threat to the vehicle is the charging infrastructure for electric cars (K¨ohler et al.,
2023).
9This assumption is only relevant for the cyberterrorist group since, unlike the criminal gang, it has the
capability to execute both types of attacks.
28

Attacks/Attacker
Cyberterrorist group
Criminal gang
AML at
X
X
wir jam
X
Table 2: Attacks available to malicious actors.
Impacts
Following Section 3.1, the owner considers three relevant impacts in this case.
• Financial. They encompass all costs related to loss of sensitive information, including
that relevant to ADS users or the rental company. A related current and increasing
risk derives from the complexity of the legal ecosystem associated with ADS liability.10
Assessed in thousands of euros.
• Equipment damage. This refers to harm inflicted on any ADS component. Taking into
account the importance of software in these vehicles, it would be necessary to consider
all threats derived from firmware (Halder et al., 2020) and software management (see
ISO/IEC AWI 5888, ISO 24089:2023). Assessed in thousands of euros.
• Downtime, the time the ADS is unavailable due to an attack, measured in hours.
Table 3 displays the impacts induced by different types of attacks.
Attacks/Impacts
Financial
Equipment damage
Downtime
AML at (Cy)
X
X
X
AML at (Cr)
X
X
Wireless jam.
X
X
X
DoS
X
X
SCTs
X
X
X
Table 3: Impacts deemed relevant for targeted and untargeted threats.
Defenses
The defenses considered for risk management purposes not yet implemented in
the ADS are: a firewall and internet gateway (FwGw); a robust AML module (AML); and,
a patch management, IDS and vulnerability scanner (PmVs). Table 4 displays the defences
that are effective against various types of attacks.
10See the outcomes from UNECE W29: https://unece.org/wp29-introduction
29

Attacks/Defenses
FwGw
AML
PmVs
Adversarial attack
X
Wireless jamming
X
X
DoS
X
X
SCTs
X
X
X
Table 4: Defense effectiveness and costs.
Cyber insurance options are also available. Two products are considered: a basic one (A)
covering equipment damage occurring to the vehicle and an advanced one (B) that, addi-
tionally, covers costs related to downtime. Table 5 displays which impacts are mitigated by
each cyber insurance product.
Finan.
Equip.
damage
Downt.
A
X
B
X
X
Table 5: Impacts mitigated by each cyber insurance product and its cost.
Constraints
The maximum protection budget is 3400 euros. Legislation requires at least
a type A cyber insurance product to be included at the minimum.
4.2
Risk analysis
This section focuses on evaluating the risk associated with the system within its initial
configuration (absence of new protections and insurance product A). We apply the framework
detailed in Sections 3.2.2 and 3.4, utilizing the parametric setup outlined in the SM. The
objective is to identify the portfolio that displays the highest efficacy in mitigating the risks
within the system.
Risk assessment.
Figure 6 (dark blue line) illustrates the resulting loss curve in euros
(logarithmic scale) with the initial configuration, obtained with an MC sample size of 10,000.
The probability of experiencing no loss is zero, and positive losses are approximated through
30

a gamma distribution. From this distribution, we obtain a 95% VaR at 1.32 and a 95%
CVaR at 1.498 million euros. Given that the risk is considered too high, we proceed on to
determine the best security portfolio through a risk management stage.
Risk management.
Consider now the RM problem with parameters as in the SM. Only
12 portfolios out of 16 are feasible. As this number is small, it is reasonable to undertake the
evaluation of all 12 of them. 11 Their expected utilities are assessed by MC as in Algorithm
4. In principle, we use ρ = 10−7 as risk aversion coefficient and, again, an MC sample size
of 10000. Table 6 presents the three best portfolios together with their expected loss, cost,
and utility. The optimal portfolio consists of adopting Insurance A and installing the AML
and PmVs modules; the second best is (B, FwGw, AML), whereas (A, FwGw, AML) is the
third preferred portfolio.
Portfolio
Expected loss
Cost
Expected Utility
A, AML, PmV s
22834.59
2300
-0.0025
B, FwGw, AML
43918.99
2950
-0.0047
A, FwGw, AML
48185.75
1800
-0.0050
Table 6: Three best portfolios.
Figure 6 (red) displays the predictive loss curve for the best portfolio. Observe that the
probability of zero loss with the optimal portfolio is 0.174. The positive part is fit with
one gamma component. The 95% Var and 95% CVaR would be 59520 and 72756 euros,
respectively. Observe, therefore, the significant risk reduction attained when implementing
the selected portfolio, achieving a high level of protection given the budget available.
We performed extensive sensitivity analysis to assess the robustness of the output to
various parameters. In particular, we considered sensitivity to the risk aversion coefficient ρ
by varying it within a grid in the range [10−7, 10−3]. The same optimal portfolio is preserved
with only a switch between the second and third portfolios, as ρ gets bigger than 10−4,
suggesting robustness of the response.
11It takes about 10 minutes in a standard laptop.
31

Figure 6: ADS risk assessment loss curves on a logarithmic scale for initial (blue) and optimal
(red) portfolio configurations.
5
DISCUSSION AND OPEN ISSUES
Motivated by the EU AI Act, the NIST AIRMF and the CRFM report, we have described
new cybersecurity risk analysis issues that emerge in systems with AI components. In par-
ticular, we described the challenges that this technology brings in regarding assets, impacts,
controls, and targeted attacks and provided a broad framework for their risk analysis. Under
the proposed approach, we structure a system through blocks in different levels, with links
indicating potential attack transit flows through information or transaction exchanges. We
also introduced a scheme to simulate an attack transit within the system, allowing us to
obtain risk indicators and modeled the problem in which risk mitigations to be added to a
security portfolio have to be selected, including cyber insurance, to minimize system risks,
as illustrated with a case referring to ADSs.
Several measures have been developed recently to treat the safety, ethical, bias, privacy
and fairness threats that are becoming of major concern in the AI domain, including, for in-
stance, mechanisms to enforce anti-discrimination policies, privacy controls or the monitoring
of sensitive content to ensure safety. Although these are not exactly cybersecurity controls,
32

they can be actually integrated into our framework. The decision-support process regarding
their selection would be similar, aggregating them as procedural, technical, or physical con-
trols against unwarranted actions. This can be used in a broader risk analysis process that
includes not only cybersecurity, but also safe and fair uses of the AI system of interest.
Beyond as a risk analysis framework, we may use our risk assessment proposal to de-
termine where at the EU AI Act four tier risk ladder a system is. In particular, we could
study how vulnerable a system is and map its derived risks to one of the tiers, understanding
whether it is only advisable to implement additional security controls. The proposed method-
ology is flexible enough to cover the impacts, attacks, and defenses for AI components besides
constraints over the mitigations in relation to compliance with laws or standards. This flex-
ibility contributes to defining a robust framework to integrate advanced risk analysis and
protection methods for AI applications, but also to support certification programs as de-
manded in the EU Cybersecurity and Cyber-resilience Acts (Cihon, 2019). It may be used as
well in a proactive manner by checking the impact of protection measures over the assessed
risk through a what-if type of analysis.
As our case study shows, admittedly our proposed framework is rather technical and
demands intensive modelling work.
However, the values at stake are so important that
the extra effort should be definitely worth it when compared to the simplistic approaches
emerging in the field as replicas of major cybersecurity risk analysis standards. To facilitate
its implementation a system could be developed, possibly adopting the ENISA terminology
set up in Papadatos et al. (2023), extended with the novel AI ingredients reflected in this
document.
Importantly, most of these ingredients will be common across many systems
and their corresponding distributions will be similar for blocks with the same structure and
configuration, thus alleviating elicitation tasks and allowing the development of templates of
blocks and distributions.
An additional aspect of AI product protection is the inclusion of security as well as other
risk-related objectives (e.g., privacy, safety, fairness) in their design and development. Our
33

framework could be used to address the selection of secure or other risk-related features in
the design of AI based systems, thus embedding a security-by-design approach matching the
efforts in securisation and riskification (Backman, 2023) in the context of AI and cybersecu-
rity.
