Sequentially Controlled Text Generation
Alexander Spangher
University of
Southern California

Xinyu Hua, Yao Ming
Bloomberg
{xhua22, yming7}

Nanyun Peng
University of California
Los Angeles

Abstract
While GPT-2 generates sentences that are re-
markably human-like, longer documents can
ramble and do not follow human-like writing
structure. We study the problem of imposing
structure on long-range text.
We propose a
novel controlled text generation task, sequen-
tially controlled text generation, and identify a
dataset, NewsDiscourse as a starting point for
this task. We develop a sequential controlled
text generation pipeline with generation and
editing. We test different degrees of structural
awareness and show that, in general, more
structural awareness results in higher control-
accuracy, grammaticality, coherency and top-
icality, approaching human-level writing per-
formance. 1
1
Introduction
Imagine that you are tasked with: Write a “Related
Works” section. Would it help to know the past
structure of the article (e.g. it is coming after the
“Discussion” section)? How about the full struc-
ture of the article (e.g. after the “Introduction” but
before the “Problem Statement”)?
The macro-structure of text (i.e. its discourse
structure (Po¨ ttker, 2003)) impacts both human
and machine comprehension (Emde et al., 2016;
Sternadori and Wise, 2010; Lu et al., 2019; Zhou
et al., 2020). Although naive language models have
made impressive advancements and generate ﬂuent
text (Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020; Belt-
agy et al., 2020), the text is structurally dissimilar
to human-written text (Figure 2, Section 7). Even
the well-known Ovid’s Unicorn generation, which
seems like a natural news article, exhibits unnatural
structure (see Appendix F).
On the other hand, although numerous works
have focused on content planning using keywords
1This paper has been accepted to Findings of the 2022
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing.
Figure 1: We study the task of sequentially-controlled
generation: generating documents exhibiting structure
given by a sequence of local control codes. Shown is
a news article with it’s Van Dijk structure (Van Dijk,
2013) and headline. Our models take as input the head-
line and discourse tags and generate a sequence of sen-
tences. We explore the degree of structural awareness
(local, past-aware or full-sequence) for controlling each
sentence in the document, with the goal of generating
the most structurally faithful, coherent and topical text.
(Yao et al., 2019), plot-design (Rashkin et al., 2020)
and entity tracking (Peng et al., 2021), macro-
structural control has been relatively understudied.
So, in this work, we study (1) how to impose
macro-structural control on narrative text genera-
tion and (2) how much structural awareness during
generation contributes to well-structured and ﬂu-
ent text. We propose a novel task, sequentially
controlled text generation. In this task, the user
provides a prompt as well as a sequence of local
control codes, each of which guides the genera-
tion of a single sentence. (In our experiments, we
use headlines as prompts and Van Dijk (2013) dis-
course tags as control codes (Figure 1).)
We develop methods to address this task, ex-
panding prior work focused on single control code
generation (Keskar et al., 2019; Dathathri et al.,
2019; Yang and Klein, 2021). As in prior work,
the controlled generation problem is decomposed
into a discriminator and a generator. However, in
this work, the discriminator learns to incorporate
an entire sequence of control codes. We hypoth-
esize that information about structural intention
can positively impact generative output (intuition
arXiv:2301.02299v1  [cs.CL]  5 Jan 2023

(a) Structure of human-written articles. (b) Structure of naively generated GPT-2
articles
(c) Structure of sequentially controlled
GPT-2 articles.
Figure 2: Discourse structure (Van Dijk, 2013) of articles generated according to different processes. The likeli-
hood of a tag in the kth fraction of a news article is shown. Machine-generated structure is labeled by humans.
for this is given in the hypothetical at beginning
of this introduction). We show that our methods
improve structural cohesion and certain aspects of
coherence over naive GPT-2 output.
Next, we hypothesize that more structural aware-
ness improves generation. Again, we refer to the
introduction hypothetical: humans craft text ac-
cording to how it ﬁts into a document’s full struc-
ture (Chenlo et al., 2014), so a generative model
should similarly beneﬁt from having such infor-
mation. We test this hypothesis by varying the
discriminator’s conditional independence assump-
tions. We experiment with three different degrees
of control: local-only (where the discriminator is
only aware of the current sentences’ control code),
past-aware (where the discriminator is aware of
the current sentences’ control code and all previ-
ous control codes), and full-sequence (where the
discriminator is aware of the entire document’s se-
quence of control codes). We show that more struc-
tural awareness, especially of past structure, helps
generate the highest-quality text. Finally, we show
how to re-introduce a degree of local control by
combining structurally-aware generation methods
with a local sentence-level editing technique.
In summary, our novel contributions are:
• We propose a novel task, sequentially con-
trolled text generation and identify a dis-
course schema (Van Dijk, 2013) and dataset
(Choubey et al., 2020) to explore this task
(Sections 2, 4).
• We combine two different approaches in con-
trolled text generation: generation and editing,
and show that the highest-quality text is gener-
ated when both of these approaches are used
(Section 3).
• We use our methods to study the degree
of structural control that yields the highest-
quality text:
local, past-aware and full-
sequence control. We show that overall, full-
sequence produces optimal text over an array
of metrics (Section 7).
We see this work opening the door to a variety
of follow-on directions: giving users control over
the macro-structure of their generated output can
allow users to quickly prototype different struc-
tures for their work. It can allow them to work in
tandem with a generative algorithm to inﬁll miss-
ing structural components in a piece of writing2.
It might even allow them produce different ver-
sions of the same story for readers with different
reading preferences. Finally, we also see macro-
structural control providing a natural complement
to, and being used in tandem with, other forms
of controlled generation, like fact-aware genera-
tion (Logan IV et al., 2019) or creative generation
(Goldfarb-Tarrant et al., 2020; Tian and Peng, 2022;
Peng, 2022) to yield more engaging and useful gen-
erative content.
2
Problem Statement
We assume, as input, a headline sentence, X0, and
a sequence of control codes ⃗c = c1, ..., cS of length
S (i.e., one for each sentence we wish to generate
in the document. Adjacent codes can be of the same
type.) We wish to produce, as output, a document
X of length S as a sequence of sentences X =
X1, ..., XS, each composed of a sequence of words
Xk = x1, ..., xnk of length nk.
We deﬁne the sequentially controlled text gener-
ation objective as:
2Perhaps aiding in human-in-the-loop computational jour-
nalism (Cohen et al., 2011)

p(x|⃗c)
=
S
Y
k=1
nk
Y
i=1
p(xi|x<i, X<k,⃗c)
|
{z
}
t1: word likelihood
(1)
where xi is a word in sentence k, x<i are the
preceding words, X<k are the preceding sentences
(including the headline, X0). ck is the control code
for k. We assume that ⃗c, the entire sequence of
control-codes for a document, is given.
We use Bayes rule to factorize t1 into:
∝
p(xi|x<i, X<k)
|
{z
}
t2: naive word likelihood
p(⃗c|xi, x<i, X<k)
|
{z
}
t3: class likelihood
(2)
t2 is calculated using a standard pretrained lan-
guage model (PTLM) and t3 is calculated by a
trained discriminator. This allows us to maximally
re-use naively trained language models and, as we
show, is far more resource efﬁcient than ﬁne-tuning
a prompt-based model.
Three approximations for t3 are:
Local-Only
t3 ≈p(cs|xi, x<i, X<s)
(3)
In the local-only model, we assume each control
code ck is conditionally independent of other con-
trol codes given xi. Thus, our generator model t1
is made aware only of local structure: the control
code ck pertaining to the current sentence, k. Be-
cause of this conditional independence assumption,
local-only control is similar to prior work that used
only single-control codes, where the goal was to
generate a single sentence p(x|c) = Qn
i=1 p(xi|c)
(Keskar et al., 2019). However, we show that we
can remove these independence assumptions and
study more complicated structural control which,
as we show later, produces more coherent output.
Past-Aware
t3 ≈
k
Y
j=1
p(cj|xi, x<i, X<k, c<j)
(4)
In the past-aware model, we assume autoregres-
sive dependence between control codes, condi-
tioned on x. Control codes for future sentences,
c>k, are conditionally independent. In Equation
1, this results in xi being dependent on ck and the
sequence of control codes, c<k.
Full-Sequence
t3 =
S
Y
j=1
p(cj|xi, x<i, X<k, c<j)
(5)
In the full-sequence model, we make no condi-
tional independence assumptions.
We can restrict both the past-aware and the
full-sequence approximations to a sliding window
around sentence s3. We can also add a prior on
p(⃗c) to induce a discount factor4. This focuses the
generator on control code ck and down-weights
surrounding control codes.
In the next section, we show how to model these
objectives. We ﬁrst describe the discriminator we
use as our control-code model, the controlled gen-
eration techniques and the editing techniques we
adapt.
3
Methodology
As described in Section 2, we can efﬁciently do gen-
eration by combining a naively-trained language
model with a discriminator. Hence, the discrimina-
tor is the main architectural component that allows
us to incorporate inter-dependencies between con-
trol code sequences. We start by describing how
our discriminator models different degrees of struc-
tural awareness (Equations 3, 4 and 5) in Section
3.1.
We design a generation pipeline to balance struc-
tural and local awareness. The ﬂow we use to ac-
complish this is depicted in Figure 3. The ﬁrst step
is Generation. Here, we sample each word, xi us-
ing techniques described in Section 3.2 which allow
us to leverage our discriminator to impose struc-
tural control. When we have completed a sentence,
we move to Editing. Here, we edit the sentence
to further impose local control on each sentence,
updating x to optimize a variation of Equation 1:
p(xi|x−i, ck), discussed in Section 3.3.
3.1
Discriminator
The discriminator we construct takes as input a
sequence of sentences (X) and a sequence of lo-
cal control tags (⃗c). Our architecture combines a
sentence-classiﬁcation model, similar to that used
in (Spangher et al., 2021a), with a separate label
embedding architecture to incorporate knowledge
of c<j. Hence, we can make predictions for cj
based not only on x, but prior tags, c<j, allowing
us to model structural dependencies (Equation 2).
3i.e. t3 ranges only from j = k −w...k + w instead of
the full sequence of sentences. In practice, we use w = 3.
4The
form
of
our
prior
is:
t3
=
QS
j=1 m(i, j)p(cj|xi, x<i, X<k, c<j), where m(i, j)
=
b|i−j|. We experiment with b = [.33, .66, 1].

Figure 3: Generation process. First, we perturb the output of a language model using a structurally-aware classi-
ﬁer to approximate p(xi|x<i, X<k)p(⃗c|x<i, X<k) and generate word xi by sampling from the perturbed distribu-
tion . When we generate an < eos > token, we edit the sentence. We use a discriminator to identify class-salient
words to mask, generating masked sentence M, and inﬁll to boost class likelihood.
For a full description of architecture, see Appendix
A.
We train it to model local-only, past-aware and
full-sequence control variants expressed in Section
2: we train separate prediction heads to make pre-
dictions on ck−w, ...ck, ...ck+w, i.e. labels from
−w, ..., +w steps away from current sentence k5.
For local-only control (Equation 3) we only use
predicted probabilities from the main head, k. In
past-aware control (Equation 4), we multiply pre-
dicted probabilities from heads prior to the current
sentence < k, and for full-sequence control, we
multiply predicted probabilities from all heads.6
We now describe how we use these predictions.
3.2
Generation
We combine our discriminator’s predictions with a
naive PTLM to solve Equation 2 in two different
ways: Hidden-State Control, based on (Dathathri
et al., 2019) and Direct Probability, based on
(Yang and Klein, 2021).
Hidden-State Control (HSC): Wolf et al.
(2019)’s
GPT-2
implementation
caches
hid-
den states H to produce logits approximating
p(xi|x<i). We perturb these hidden states H, re-
sulting in ˆH that produce logits approximating
Equation 1 instead. We generate H from a naive
PTLM and use this to make a prediction ˆc using
our discriminator. We then calculate the loss L(ˆc, c)
and backpropagate to H to derive ˆH.
Direct-Probability Control (DPC): We calcu-
5Note: we still factor label-sequences autoregressively, as
in Equations 4 and 5 and learn each prediction head separately.
However, keeping separate heads allows the model more ﬂexi-
bility in predicting how attributes of a sentence might predict
future or past tags. Preliminary experiments show that this
approach outperforms learning a single head for all labels.
6For the editing operation, the discriminator is trained
without the contexualizing layer (i.e. Transformer and ai
layers are not used) because gradients need to be computed
that pertain only to the sentence being edited, not previous
sentences.
p-5
p-4
p-3
p-2
p-1
p
p+1
p+2
p+3
p+4
p+5
0.0
0.6
F1
Micro F1
Macro F1
Figure 4: Discriminator performance on test data. F1
scores for p(cj|X<k, x<i, c<j) predictions. Sentence
index k and word index i are ﬁxed: we show error for
using the current sentence to predict all past, current
and future labels.
late p(xi|x<i, X<s) to identify the 200 most likely
xi under the naive language model, |xi,j|200
j=0. Then
we calculate p(cs|xi,j, x<i, X<s, c−s) for each xi,j
using our discriminator. We directly multiply these
probabilities to calculate Equation 17.
Note that the HSC and DPC algorithms are ex-
tensions of previous work: the difference is that
here they are used to model control code sequences
rather than single tags. The key components that
allow this is our discriminator, which makes predic-
tions based on label sequences, and our algorithm
which, as shown in Figure 3, increments codes each
time an <eos> token is generated.
3.3
Editing
After we have ﬁnished generating a sentence, we
edit it to introduce more discourse markers of the
local control code.
We identify words in our input sequence that
have the most impact on control-code prediction
by using the gradient on our input sentence of the
discriminator’s loss onto tokens and masking full
words, following Ross et al. (2021). We use only
the current sentence prediction made by our dis-
criminator (i.e. Equation 3), so that we impose lo-
7Note that DPC has the advantage of being simpler to im-
plement and batch-parallelizable. However, the restriction to
the top k = 200 words selected according to p(xi|x<i, X<s)
means that we might be limiting discriminator perturbation of
word-selection.

Headline
UPDATE 1-Belarus food retailer lines up landmark overseas IPO
Main Event
SILVER SPRING, Colo. (AP) — A company in Finland is poised to list its ﬁrst international grocery chain
in the United States after a yearlong search, raising concerns about potential corporate conﬂicts of interest
and legal issues around using foreign intellectual property.<|endoftext|>
Previous Event
The world’s largest retailer of meat and ﬁsh products hopes to become one day the leader in convenience
groceries.<|endoftext|>
Expectation
It says it could become a leader in fresh fruits and vegetables, as well.<|endoftext|>
Evaluation
About 300 Finnish companies have applied to list on the New York Stock Exchange under a new plan to
bypass the U. S. government and create ”licenses” that allow them in many other countries, according to a
regulatory ﬁling.<|endoftext|>
Evaluation
The European Union prohibits using foreign intellectual property for purposes outside the country, and
Finland’s National Stock Exchange does not require approval before selling a company’lls share in its new
company.<|endoftext|>
Evaluation
"What’s at stake here is transparency, a sense of fairness to all the stakeholders.<|endoftext|>
Evaluation
I don’t think it’s right for companies to have intellectual property rights," says Michael Vakilainen, an
independent analyst who has tracked the company since 2008.<|endoftext|>
Expectation
He says there are potential conﬂicts of interest, because one partner is the government.<|endoftext|>
Expectation
"What if you’re a government contractor?"<|endoftext|>
Table 1: Sample document generated. Generation Method = Direct Prob. Control. Structure = Past Aware. Edited
= False. (Hyperparams = γ = .75, b = .33)
cal control on the sequence even in settings where
the generator imposes structural control.
We cull the high-gradient words based on heuris-
tics8 to encourage the editor to introduce explicit
discourse markers. We ﬁne-tune a label-aware in-
ﬁlling model (Raffel et al., 2019) to generate can-
didate edits9 given the masked input. We mask and
inﬁll until we have generated a sentence that has
an increased likelihood p(ck| ˆxk) > p(ck|xk), and
generate edit candidates (n = 10). We select edits
on the basis of class likelihood and perplexity10.
For more comparison and distinction from pre-
vious work for both Generation and Editing, see
Appendix D.1, E.
4
Datasets and Schema
The form of sequential control we study is dis-
course: i.e. the functional role sentences play in
a document’s larger argumentative purpose. We
use a news discourse schema proposed by Van Dijk
(2013). Choubey et al. (2020) apply this schema
and annotate a dataset, NewsDiscourse, consisting
of 802 articles from 3 outlets11, tagged on the sen-
8Words that are not proper nouns, named entities (except
the DATE class) or adjectives, as we ﬁnd these categories
are more likely to be topic words spuriously correlated with
control-codes.
9A
T5
model
trained
using
a
speciﬁc
input
template
incorporating
the
label.
E.g.
label:
Background.
text:
The senator <MASK>
to the courtroom to <MASK>.
10Perplexity of the entire generated document so far is used
as a selection criteria, PPL(xk ⊕X<k), to encourage edits
preserving the logical ﬂow of the document.
11nytimes.com, reuters.com and xinhuanet.com
tence level. Their schema consists of 9 classes: {
Main Event, Consequence, Current Context, Pre-
vious Event, Historical Event, Anecdotal Event,
Evaluation, Expectation }.12. Although each sen-
tence is tagged with a code, codes often repeat. For
example, an entire paragraph can be tagged with
Main Event sentences. We show a partial sample
in Figure 1. We adopt this schema to describe each
news article’s structure.
We also use a dataset of unlabeled news arti-
cles13 to ﬁne-tune a GPT-2 model for news. We
sample 30,000 documents from this dataset in a
manner so that the distribution of sentence-lengths
matches the distribution of sentence lengths in the
Choubey et al. (2020) dataset.
5
Implementation Details
We ﬁne-tune a GPT2-base model on a large
news corpus with a max word-piece length=204814.
We use this to generate naive PTLM language-
modeling as well as sentence-embeddings in our
Discrimination model. Further implementation de-
tails are discussed in Appendix A.
We discuss the discriminator results here brieﬂy.
As shown in Figure 4, the primary head, p, has
a Micro F1-score of .65, which approaches state-
12For a detailed class description, see Appendix F.1
13kaggle.com/snapcrack/all-the-news.
Dataset originally collected from archive.org. We ﬁlter
to articles from nytimes.com and reuters.com.
14Rather than 1024 in (Radford et al., 2019). We observe
that > 99% of human-generated news articles were shorter
than 2048 word pieces.

of-the-art on this dataset15. However, performance
degrades rapidly for heads farther from p. For more
results on discriminator performance, including
experimental variations, see Appendix A.1.
6
Experiments
We sample 10 documents from the test set of
our discourse dataset (n = 200) to test different
pipeline settings. The input to our models is a
headline (as a prompt) and the full sequence of
gold-truth discourse labels of that document.
Baselines
We
compare
our
experimental
pipelines (Section 3) with the following baselines:
(1) Naive GPT-2 generation given only the
headline as input (i.e.
no control codes), (2)
a ﬁne-tuned Prompting approach and (3) the
original Human-written articles.
For (2), we directly train a class-conditional lan-
guage model to generate text by including labels in
the prompt, as in (Keskar et al., 2019). Local-only
prompting is achieved by only including the local
control code (and prior generated sentences) in the
prompt, and updating the prompt to generate a new
sentence. For past-aware prompting, we include all
control codes prior to our current sentence in the
prompt, and update on every new sentence. Finally,
for full-sequence prompting, we including the full
sequence of control codes in the prompt. (See Ap-
pendix C for more details and examples of prompt
design.)
For each of these baselines, we test with and
without editing (with the human-written text being
edited by our algorithm in Human and with the
generated text in all other trials being edited).
Evaluation
For all pipelines, we select the best
hyperparameter conﬁgurations based on perplex-
ity and model-assigned class likelihood. Then, we
manually annotate each generated document for 4
metrics: Accuracy (0-1)16 Grammar (1-5)17, Logi-
cal Flow (1-5)18 and Topicality (1-5)19. We recruit
two expert annotators with journalism experience
to perform annotations blindly without awareness
15.71 Micro-F1 in Spangher et al. (2021a), which used
auxiliary datasets.
16Accuracy: how close a generated sentence matches the
discourse function of the gold-truth label for that sentence.
17Grammar: how grammatical and locally coherent a sen-
tence is
18Logical Flow: how well a sentence functions in the ﬂow
of the story
19How well each sentence corresponds to the original head-
line of the article.
to which generation pipeline was used, and ﬁnd
moderate agreement κ ∈[.36, .55] across all cat-
egories. For more details, see Appendix G. We
record model-dependent and non-model automatic
metrics used by See et al. (2019), described further
in Appendix B.
7
Results
Best Overall Trial
We show automatic and hu-
man metrics for the subset of pipelines with top-
performing hyperparameters in Table 2. In general,
the highest-performing generation pipelines are all
variations of DPC with either past-aware, or full-
sequence structural control.
We observe that DPC with past-aware control
and editing has the highest class-label accuracy,
nearly approaching the human trials. The top per-
forming pipelines for grammar and topicality are
DPC with full-Sequence control and without edit-
ing. GPT-2 performed best only for Logical Flow,
which was surprising but could perhaps be because
the unconstrained nature of GPT-2’s generation al-
lowed it to hallucinate a ﬂow that seemed consistent
even if it was poorly structured.
Effect of Different Pipeline Components
We
show the distributional shifts in performance across
all trials, in Figures 5, 620. Structural control has a
largely positive effect on generated text. In Figure
5, we ﬁnd that Full-Sequence models are, on aver-
age, able to generate the most label-accurate sen-
tences with the best grammar, logical ﬂow and topi-
cality. Finally, editing improves accuracy, grammar
and logical ﬂow (Figure 6.)
The original human-generated text is our gold-
standard, and it is highly class-accurate, grammat-
ical, coherent and topical. Interestingly, as seen
in Table 2, editing can also be applied to human-
written text to boost label accuracy, but at the ex-
pense of coherence.
8
Discussion
We set out to answer two questions in this research:
(1) whether we could impose structural control
over generated documents and (2) what kinds of
structural control (local-only, past-aware, or full-
sequence) had the greatest effect on discourse,
ﬂow, topicality and grammaticality.
Our novel
pipelines, which extend various discriminator-
based approaches for generation and editing, ap-
20And 10, in Appendix E.

Human-Annotated Metrics
Automatic Metrics
Gener-
ation
Struct-
ure
Label
Acc.
↑
(0-100)
Gram-
mar
↑
(1-5)
Logical
Flow
↑
(1-5)
On-
Topic
↑
(1-5)
Perplex. ↓
Diverse
Ngrams
↑(%)
Sent.
Len.**
Unseen
Words
↓(%)
Naive
GPT-2
20.0/64.4
4.2/4.5
4.7/4.3
4.6/4.2
48.2/45.4
7.1/8.3
24.9/38.8
4.7/3.2
Gen-Base:
Prompt
local
22.2/51.1
2.8/3.9
2.4/3.0
2.3/2.8
24.4/43.4
3.7/6.5
39.7/32.4
10.6/8.7
past
20.0/31.1
2.9/3.6
2.4/2.9
2.3/3.7
52.2/32.0
5.0/4.5
35.0/44.5
9.3/7.1
full
46.7/64.4
4.4/4.4
3.6/3.7
3.9/3.5
42.5/49.2
7.3/7.8
35.5/42.6
4.6/4.9
Method
#1: HSC
local
28.9/42.2
3.3/3.7
2.7/3.2
3.1/3.4
246.4/115.5 7.0/6.9
16.2/17.5
8.0/6.9
past
44.4/60.0
3.4/3.8
3.0/3.0
3.2/3.3
178.3/147.4 7.5/7.5
14.8/18.8
8.1/6.7
full
55.6/68.9
3.5/4.2
4.0/3.7
4.2/4.3
134.5/129.6 7.2/7.8
17.3/20.7
7.0/7.1
Method
#2: DPC
local
44.4/64.4
4.0/4.4
3.6/4.1
3.8/3.5
42.1/39.9
5.8/8.3
24.8/42.6
4.7/3.0
past
64.4/88.9
4.5/4.6
4.4/4.3
4.4/4.5
37.0/42.2
7.9/8.4
33.1/42.7
3.9/3.1
full
66.7/68.9
4.7/4.5
4.3/4.3
4.7/4.4
42.3/45.6
8.0/8.1
28.2/40.4
4.3/3.3
Human
93.3/95.6
4.9/4.7
4.9/4.7
4.9/4.9
34.2/41.0
8.7/8.7
37.9/39.6
4.2/4.5
Table 2: Metrics on different trial runs. Each cell shows Unedited/Edited variants. (Hyperparams = γ = .75,
b = .33). ** Optimal sentence length is determined relative human generation, i.e. min |x −37.9|.
0.25
0.50
0.75
Accuracy
Local
Past
Full
(a)
3
4
Grammar
Local
Past
Full
(b)
3
4
Logical Flow
Local
Past
Full
(c)
3
4
On Topic
Local
Past
Full
(d)
Figure 5: Comparison of different structural control
methods across different pipelines and hyperparame-
ters.
proach human-level performance. However, a gap
between our model’s output and human-generated
text still remains across all metrics, suggesting the
need for more research.
Insight #1: Some structural information im-
proves all metrics of quality.
Our structural ex-
ploration suggests that, for the best-performing
pipelines, past structural information (along with
editing) boosts class accuracy the most, but knowl-
edge of the full-sequence does not. In the analogy
given in the Introduction, this equates to: to write
a “Related Works” section, it helps to know that
it comes after the “Introduction” vs. the “Discus-
sion”, but not information of what sections come
after. This is perhaps because enough signal is
0.25
0.50
0.75
Accuracy
Unedited
Edited
(a)
3
4
Grammar
Unedited
Edited
(b)
3
4
5
Logical Flow
Unedited
Edited
(c)
3
4
5
On Topic
Unedited
Edited
(d)
Figure 6:
The effect of editing, across different
pipelines and hyperparameters.
already given by the past sequence and the full
sequence just adds more noise.
However, full-
sequence information does yield the best grammar
and topicality. This might indicate a regularizing
role played by the full-sequence. In general, we
suspect that past-aware modeling and editing both
push the model more towards the class label at
the expense of topicality, ﬂow and grammar, while
full-sequence does the opposite. In practice, some
combination of these pipeline components might
be desired.
Insight #2: Weak discriminators can still im-
pose accurate control.
At .61 macro F1, our dis-
criminator is a relatively weak classiﬁer. Previous
work in classiﬁer-based controlled text generation
used large training datasets and classiﬁers that rou-
tinely scored above .8 F1 (Dathathri et al., 2019;
Yang and Klein, 2021). The weakness of our dis-
criminator is one reason why HSC may have per-
formed poorly. However, in other trials we see

strong accuracy. Thus, even with a weak classiﬁer,
we can control generation. This might be because
even a weak discriminator can still give relative
differences between generation that does or does
match the control code.
Insight #3: Evaluating text candidates using
multiple model’s perplexity might result in bet-
ter selections.
Just as surprisingly, editing also
has an overall average positive effect on generation
accuracy and generation quality (Figure 6). We
had hypothesized that, because the editor makes
locally-aware inﬁlling decisions, it would improve
class-accuracy but hurt other metrics of document
quality, like topicality and ﬂow. Indeed, for the top-
performing trials, like DPC and Human, Editing
only improves class accuracy. However, grammar
and ﬂow improves in other trials. This could be
because, as mentioned in Section 3.3, we selected
candidates based on how well they make sense in
the document. This also suggests that using mul-
tiple PTLMs to select for better quality combines
different virtues of each model.
Error Analysis:
We observed that sentence tok-
enizing remained a huge challenge. Many of the
grammar errors that our annotators observed were
from sentences that ended early, i.e. after decimal
points. Indeed, the correlation between sentence-
length and grammar is relatively high (r = .34).
One reason for this could be that error-prone sen-
tence tokenizing models provided faulty training
data during pretrainining of LMs. This will con-
tinue to hinder document-level structural work,
which often relies on a model accurately ending
a sentence. Another observation, in Table 2, is
that perplexity doesn’t necessarily correlate with
human judgements of quality, especially for more
complex writing like Financial news reporting.
9
Related Work
Discourse-Aware Narrative Text Generation.
Generating narrative text, such as news articles
and scientiﬁc reports, has been a long standing
problem in NLP. Early work relies on template (Xu
et al., 2018; Wiseman et al., 2018), rules (Ahn et al.,
2016; Leppänen and Toivonen, 2021), or special-
ized architectures (Fan et al., 2018; Bosselut et al.,
2018) that are hard to generalize.
Recently, pre-trained Transformers have shown
impressive capabilities to produce ﬂuent text, and
there are few works that seek to adapt them to
document-level generation with appropriate dis-
course structures. One work, DiscoDVT (Ji and
Huang, 2021), uses a discrete variational auto-
encoder (VAE) with a latent space guided by ex-
plicit Penn Discourse Treebank (PDTB) relations
(Prasad et al., 2008). We are excited by this work,
which shows strong improvements in coherence.
While our work is able to learn from more abstract
structural tags rather than low-level PDTB rela-
tions, our approach is fully supervised. We are
excited by the semi-supervised nature of Ji and
Huang (2021)’s approach, which may allow it to
learn discourse structures that are less well anno-
tated. Also, possible extensions of this approach us-
ing hierarchical discrete VAEs (Razavi et al., 2019)
or diffusion models (Li et al., 2022) might provide
users’ control over higher-order macro-structures
in text, such as those explored in (Spangher et al.,
2021b).
Controlled Generation
The black-box nature
of neural generation models poses challenges for
many real-world applications (Wiseman et al.,
2017; Holtzman et al., 2019). Researchers have
designed various techniques to control the syn-
tactic structure (Goyal and Durrett, 2020), senti-
ment (Hu et al., 2017; Fu et al., 2018; Luo et al.,
2019), and language style (Niu and Bansal, 2018;
Cao and Wang, 2021). Most notably, the CTRL
model (Keskar et al., 2019) conditions the output by
incorporating textual control codes during the pre-
training stage. However, such training is resource-
intensive and requires large datasets. Alternatively,
PPLM (Dathathri et al., 2019), FUDGE (Yang
and Klein, 2021), GeDI (Krause et al., 2021), and
NADO (Meng et al., 2022) achieve inference-time
control through either directly manipulating the
generator’s hidden states, or adjusting the proba-
bilistic distribution over the output vocabulary. Our
work differs from prior work in that we tackle struc-
tured control instead of a single attribute. Our task,
though, can be relatively easily addressed by ex-
tensions to these frameworks, and we look forward
to future work that might improve further on the
results we showed.
Sequentially Controlled Generation
Sequen-
tial control for text generation has been explored
from many angles, from symbolic planning ap-
proaches (Meehan, 1976; Lebowitz, 1987), to
keyword-based approaches (Yao et al., 2019) and
concept, event and entity driven planning ap-

proaches (Rashkin et al., 2020; Peng et al., 2021;
Alabdulkarim et al., 2021; Han et al., 2022). We
are the ﬁrst, to our knowledge, to utilize a purely
latent control structure based off of discourse struc-
tures. There is increasing interest in exploring
how discourse can be used to guide generation
(Ghazvininejad et al., 2021; Cohan et al., 2018),
from early works developing discourse schemas
for generation (Mann, 1984; Stede and Umbach,
1998) to evaluating creative generation pipelines
(Hua and Wang, 2020). However, neither direction
allows discourse structures to be explicitly con-
trolled in generation.
Editing.
Most existing neural models generate
text in one-shot, from left to right. Recently, an
emerging line of research (Guu et al., 2018; Malmi
et al., 2019; Kasner and Dušek, 2020) has explored
editing as part of the generation pipeline to further
improve the output quality, or satisfy certain de-
sired constraints. Our work builds off of the MiCE
framework (Ross et al., 2021), which was origi-
nally designed for generating contrastive explana-
tions. Our observation that editing increased both
the discourse adherence and the coherence of the
generated text adds to a growing body of evidence
that editing can play an important and modularized
role in larger creative generation pipelines. We see
editors such as simpliﬁcation editors (Dong et al.,
2019), factual correction editors (Cao et al., 2020)
and stylistic editors (Kabbara and Cheung, 2021)
each aimed at different desired attributes of text
can possibly play a role in multi-attribute control
(Li et al., 2022).
Finally, we see overlaps as well to an earlier
paradigm of generative modeling: Bayesian mod-
els for text like Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA)
(Blei et al., 2003) and, more interestingly, sequen-
tial variants (Du et al., 2012). There is recent work
marrying PPLM-style controlled text generation
with topic modeling (Carbone and Sarti, 2020).
Such directions might lead to more hierarchical,
structural control.
10
Conclusion
We have formalized a novel direction in controlled
text generation: sequentially controlled text gen-
eration. We extended different techniques in con-
trolled text generation to ﬁt this direction, and have
shown how a news discourse dataset can be used to
produce news articles exhibiting human-like struc-
ture. We have explored what degrees of structural
awareness yield the most human-like output: more
structural control yields higher-quality output. And,
we shown how to combine structural control with
local editing. We have probed different parts of our
pipeline to show the effects of each part.
11
