1
Multiple Access Techniques for Intelligent and
Multi-Functional 6G: Tutorial, Survey, and Outlook
Bruno Clerckx, Fellow, IEEE, Yijie Mao, Member, IEEE, Zhaohui Yang, Member, IEEE, Mingzhe
Chen, Member, IEEE, Ahmed Alkhateeb, Member, IEEE, Liang Liu, Senior Member, IEEE, Min
Qiu, Member, IEEE, Jinhong Yuan, Fellow, IEEE, Vincent W.S. Wong, Fellow, IEEE, and Juan Montojo, Senior
Member, IEEE
(invited paper)
Abstract—Multiple access (MA) is a crucial part of any
wireless system and refers to techniques that make use of the
resource dimensions (e.g., time, frequency, power, antenna, code,
message, etc) to serve multiple users/devices/machines/services,
ideally in the most efficient way. Given the increasing needs
of multi-functional wireless networks for integrated communica-
tions, sensing, localization, computing, coupled with the surge of
machine learning / artificial intelligence (AI) in wireless networks,
MA techniques are expected to experience a paradigm shift in
6G and beyond. In this paper, we provide a tutorial, survey
and outlook of past, emerging and future MA techniques and
pay a particular attention to how wireless network intelligence
and multi-functionality will lead to a re-thinking of those
techniques. The paper starts with an overview of orthogonal,
physical layer multicasting, space domain, power domain, rate-
splitting, code domain MAs, and MAs in other domains, and
highlight the importance of researching universal multiple access
to shrink instead of grow the knowledge tree of MA schemes
by providing a unified understanding of MA schemes across all
resource dimensions. It then jumps into rethinking MA schemes
in the era of wireless network intelligence, covering AI for
MA such as AI-empowered resource allocation, optimization,
channel estimation, receiver designs, user behavior predictions
for different MA schemes, and MA for AI such as federated
learning/edge intelligence and over the air computation. We then
discuss MA for network multi-functionality and the interplay
between MA and integrated sensing, localization, and commu-
nications, covering MA for joint sensing and communications,
Bruno Clerckx is with the Department of Electrical and Electronic

Yijie Mao is with the School of Information Science and Tech-
nology,
ShanghaiTech
University,
Shanghai
201210,
China

Zhaohui
Yang
is
with
College
of
Information
Science
and
Elec-

Mingzhe Chen is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engi-
neering and Institute for Data Science and Computing, University of Miami,

Ahmed Alkhateeb is with the School of Electrical, Computer and Energy

Liang Liu is with the Department of Electronic and Information Engineer-

Min Qiu and Jinhong Yuan are with the School of Electrical Engineering
and Telecommunications, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW

Vincent W.S. Wong are with the Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4,

Juan Montojo is with Corporate R&D, Qualcomm Inc., San Diego, CA

multimodal sensing-aided communications, multimodal sensing
and digital twin-assisted communications, and communication-
aided sensing/localization systems. We finish with studying MA
for emerging intelligent applications such as semantic communi-
cations, metaverse, virtual reality, smart radio and reconfigurable
intelligent surfaces, and massive connectivity and random access
in Internet-of-Things, before presenting a roadmap toward 6G
standardization. Throughout the text, we also point out numerous
directions that are promising for future research.
Index Terms—Multiple Access, Orthogonal Multiple Access,
Non-Orthogonal Multiple Access, Space Division Multiple Ac-
cess, Code Domain Multiple Access, Rate-Splitting Multiple Ac-
cess, Universal Multiple Access, Artificial Intelligence, Machine
Learning, Integrated Sensing and Communications, Semantic
Communications, Reconfigurable Intelligent Surfaces, Metaverse,
Augmented Reality, Internet-of-Things, 6G.
I. INTRODUCTION
A. From Communication-centric 5G to Intelligent and Multi-
functional 6G
N
Ext generation wireless networks, such as 6G and be-
yond, will face mounting challenges such as higher data
throughput and (spectral/ energy) efficiency, enhanced relia-
bility, massive connectivity, global coverage across terrestrial
and non-terrestrial networks, and a growing heterogeneity in
the quality of service (QoS). Addressing those challenges is
essential to meet the demands of further-enhanced mobile
broadband (FeMBB) for augmented reality (AR) / virtual
reality (VR), extremely ultra reliable and low-latency commu-
nication (eURLLC) for full automation, control, and operation
in industrial environment and connected robotics, ultra massive
machine type communication (umMTC) for Internet-of-Things
(IoT), etc [1].
Importantly, future wireless networks will not only provide
communications services but also offer a wide range of
new functionalities such as sensing, intelligence, computation,
localization/navigation, powering. This tendency for multi-
functional networks is well exemplified by the increasing
number of research areas in the past decade that have looked
at various forms of wireless systems integration. Indeed, radio
waves can be used for numerous applications, most commonly
communications, but also power in the form of wireless
energy harvesting and wireless power transfer, sensing in
the form of radar, localization, etc. All of those areas have
traditionally been studied separately and have led to different
arXiv:2401.01433v1  [cs.IT]  2 Jan 2024

2
disciplines within Electrical and Electronic Engineering but
have also evolved into vastly different industry sectors [2]. In
the past decade, the community has progressively experienced
a paradigm shift in wireless network design, namely, unifying
transmission and processing of many quantities and functional-
ities, such as information, power, sensing, localization etc so as
to make the best use of the radio frequency (RF) spectrum and
radiation as well as the network infrastructure for the multi-
purpose of communicating, energizing, sensing, locating, com-
puting, but also for the synergies that all those disciplines can
bring to each other once properly integrated. This quest for
integration, convergence, and multi-functionality has led to the
new research areas of integrated sensing and communications
(ISAC), integrated sensing, localization, and communications,
wireless information and power transfer (WIPT), edge com-
puting and intelligence, and integrated artificial intelligence
(AI) and communications [1], [3]. Additionally, network in-
telligence, using AI and machine learning (ML), will become
pervasive in the design, control and optimization of the multi-
functional networks and the network itself will become the
underpinning tool to enable AI applications [4].
B. The Crucial Role of Multiple Access
Capturing multi-functionality and intelligence in future
wireless network design will enable using wireless to its full
potential, hence enabling trillions of future intelligent users to
sense, compute, connect, energize, analyze anywhere, anytime,
and on the move [5], [6]. One major challenge and opportunity
that such intelligent multi-functional 6G and beyond network
brings is that the notion of “wireless networks” and “users”
should be understood in a much more broader context com-
pared to 1G–5G era. With the emergence of integrated wireless
communications/power/sensing/computing/AI networks, users
refer to communication devices, sensing targets, devices to
be charged, AI nodes, training devices, or any other form of
services/functionalities that the network could provide.
At the core of wireless network design lies the multiple
access (MA) technique whose pivotal role is to serve and
process all these “users” and decide how to allocate them
resources, including time, frequency, power, space (e.g., an-
tennas, beams), signal (e.g., messages, codes, etc), in the
most efficient way. The design of future intelligent and multi-
functional networks brings new challenges and opportunities
for wireless network designers and in particular when it comes
to MA. It is crucial to comprehend how MA techniques
can address these future demands and how they need to be
re-thought in light of the network multi-functionality and
intelligence paradigms.
Time/frequency domain multiple access (TDMA/FDMA)
were popular in 2G, code-division multiple access (CDMA) in
3G, orthogonal frequency division multiple access (OFDMA)
coupled with space-division multiple access (SDMA) in 4G
and 5G. Though SDMA-OFDMA has remained the dominant
MA in the past 20 years, the past decade has also seen a
wide interest in other forms of MA schemes, often classified
into non-orthogonal multiple access (NOMA), making use of
the power domain, the code domain, or other domains [7],
[8]. Classifying MA techniques has been challenging due the
proliferation of new schemes in the past decade. Unfortunately,
the widely used classification into non-orthogonal MA vs
orthogonal MA, i.e., NOMA vs OMA, is over-simplistic and
tends to amalgamate many different MA schemes under the
non-orthogonal umbrella without contrasting them or truly
understanding the essence of all those schemes [9]. Such
classification has caused unnecessary confusions and misun-
derstandings in the past few years [10]. Instead of contrasting
orthogonal vs non-orthogonal, [9] suggested that a different
classification should be considered in next generation wireless
networks and showed that the fundamental question behind
MA design should instead be how to manage multi-user
interference. Answering this question shed the light on the
differences between various non-orthogonal approaches to MA
designs and on a new classification of MA schemes based on
how the interference is managed. Importantly, this exercise
brought to light the powerful and emerging Rate-Splitting
Multiple Access (RSMA) that unifies into a single MA scheme
four seemingly unrelated strategies, namely OMA, power
domain (PD)-NOMA, SDMA, and physical-layer multicas-
ting [11]. The capability of RSMA to unify and therefore
be more universal than other MA schemes makes practical
implementation and operation easier. Indeed, one could claim
that a single unified and general MA scheme would be easier
to implement and optimize than a combination of multiple
MA schemes, each optimized for specific conditions. This can
be increasingly important in multi-functional 6G and beyond
networks where the range and diversity of services, use cases,
and deployments explode.
C. Objectives and Organization
This paper has three objectives: 1) a tutorial paper to educate
the readers about the fundamentals of a wide range MA
schemes, 2) a survey paper to give the readers access to the
state-of-the-art MA schemes and literature, and 3) an outlook
paper to guide the readers with new research directions.
Specifically the paper contributes in the following ways.
First, we provide a tutorial and survey (in Section II)
of a wide range of MA techniques: OMA in the form
of TDMA/FDMA/OFDMA, SDMA [12], and PD-NOMA
[13]; RSMA [9], [14]; code-domain (non-orthogonal) mul-
tiple access (CD-NOMA) departing from traditional 3G
CDMA [15] including low-density spreading multiple access
(LDS-CDMA), sparse code multiple access (SCMA), multi-
user shared multiple access (MUSA), successive interference
cancellation amenable multiple access (SAMA); and other
multiple access schemes exploiting other domains such as
interleave-division multiple access (IDMA), pattern division
multiple access (PDMA), compute-forward multiple access
(CFMA), lattice-partition-based multiple access (LPBMA),
spatially coupled multiple access, layered-division multiplex-
ing (LDM), index modulation multiple access (IMMA), delay-
Doppler domain multiple access (DDMA), etc. The advantages
and disadvantages of those MA schemes and the interplay
between them are discussed, before drawing observations and
conclusions on how to rethink the role and design of MA

3
MUSA
CDMA
Multicasting
UMA
PD-NOMA
SDMA
SCMA
……
Unify as you move 
from leaves, to 
branches, to trunk
……
……
OFDMA
TDMA
FDMA
DDMA
Fig. 1. Shrinking the knowledge tree of MA by unifying MA schemes as we
move from leaves, to the branches, to the trunk. UMA, not yet found, would
be the holy grail of MA scheme unification.
schemes. This overview departs from the conventional discus-
sion on orthogonal versus non-orthogonal approaches found
in 5G [9] and recent tutorials [9], [10], [13], [14], [16]–[20]
whose focus was on RSMA and its sub-MA schemes OMA,
SDMA, PD-NOMA, but not on code domain approaches nor
on other domains MA.
Second, we discuss and motivate (in Section II-H) the
importance of shrinking the knowledge tree of the MA lit-
erature in order to identify MA schemes that can exploit
multiple dimensions and unify them. Inspired by RSMA to
that shrinks the knowledge tree by providing a unified and
conceptually simple understanding of a morass of results
on OMA, SDMA, PD-NOMA, physical-layer multicasting,
we motivate future research toward universal multiple access
(UMA). UMA should further shrink the knowledge tree of MA
schemes by unifying RSMA with all other dimensions, such
as code domain MAs, and ultimately provide a unified and
conceptually simple understanding of the current and future
morass of MA schemes as illustrated in Fig. 1. Clearly, there
is no UMA yet that optimally suits all applications and use
cases, but such scheme and research directions are expected
to become increasingly important in multi-functional 6G and
beyond networks where the range and diversity of services,
use cases, and deployments explode. This research avenue and
vision has not been discussed in prior works.
Third, we discuss MA in the era of network intelligence
and the interplay between AI and MA (in Sections III and
IV). We first identify how AI can be leveraged to enhance MA
designs (in Section III). This includes AI-empowered resource
allocation and optimization for different MA schemes, AI-
empowered channel estimation for different MA schemes, AI-
empowered receiver designs for advanced MA schemes, and
AI for user behavior predictions in MA. We then investigate
the converse, namely how to design MA schemes for AI
applications (in Section IV). We here touch upon MA for fed-
erated learning/edge intelligence and over the air computation.
We conclude the discussion by identifying further research
avenues on the interplay between MA and AI. Such treatment
significantly departs from other tutorials [9], [10], [14], [16]–
[19]. This is the first tutorial paper providing a comprehensive
review of the interplay between AI and MA, addressing both
AI for MA and MA for AI.
Fourth, we discuss MA in the era of network multi-
functionality and the interplay between MA and integrated
sensing, localization, and communications (in Section V).
We elaborate on how MA designs should be tailored for
joint sensing and communications, multimodal sensing-aided
communications, for multimodal sensing and digital twin-
assisted communications, and for communication-aided sens-
ing/localization systems. We identify the shortcoming of exist-
ing MA schemes in multi-functional networks and interesting
research topics for future works. This treatment differs from
other tutorials such as [18] that focuses on demonstrating
RSMA superiority over SDMA and NOMA in ISAC or [21]
that does not focus on MA designs for ISAC.
Fifth, we discuss MA designs for emerging intelligence
applications (in Section VI) such as semantic communications,
metaverse, virtual reality, smart radio and reconfigurable intel-
ligent surfaces, and massive connectivity and random access
in Internet-of-Things, before presenting a roadmap toward
6G standardization (in Section VII). This differs from other
tutorials such as [9], [14], [16] that focus on RSMA for some
of those applications.
Table I details the main abbreviations used throughout this
work.
II. AN OVERVIEW OF MULTIPLE ACCESS TECHNIQUES
In this section, we provide an overview and discuss pros
and cons of OMA, Physical Layer Multicasting, SDMA,
PD-NOMA, RSMA, CD-NOMA, and other MAs exploiting
other dimensions. We draw some general observations before
identifying possible paths toward UMA.
A. Orthogonal Multiple Access
Orthogonal multiple access (OMA) is a fundamental MA
technique that has been widely used in mobile communication
systems. In OMA, the radio resources at hand are strategically
divided into distinct, non-overlapping frequency bands, time
slots, or codes, each meticulously allocated to an individual
user. OMA adheres to a typical principle of interference
management, which is to prevent multi-user interference.
There are four well-established OMA strategies specifically
tailored for 1G to 4G communication systems, namely, fre-
quency division multiple access (FDMA), time division mul-
tiple access (TDMA), code division multiple access (CDMA),
and orthogonal frequency division multiple access (OFDMA)
[22]. Specifically, FDMA divides the available spectrum into
non-overlapping frequency bands, each accommodating one

4
TABLE I
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS.
BC
Broadcast Channel
(u)mMTC
(ultra) massive Machine-Type Communication
CDMA
Code Division Multiple Access
MU–LP
Multi-User Linear Precoding
CFMA
Compute-Forward Multiple Access
MU-MIMO
Multi-User Multiple-Input Multiple-Output
CoMP
Coordinated Multi-Point
MUSA
Multi-User Shared Multiple Access
CSI
Channel State Information
NOMA
Non-Orthogonal Multiple Access
CSIT/R
Channel State Information at the Transmitter/Receiver
NOUM
Non-Orthogonal Unicast and Multicast
C-RAN
Cloud-Radio Access Networks
OFDMA
Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiple Access
DDMA
Delay-Doppler Domain Multiple Access
OMA
Orthogonal Multiple Access
DoF
Degree-of-Freedom
PDMA
Pattern Division Multiple Access
DPC
Dirty Paper Coding
QoS
Quality of Service
DPCRS
Dirty Paper Coded Rate-Splitting
RF
Radio Frequency
(F)eMBB
(further-)enhanced Mobile Broadband Service
RIS
Reconfigurable Intelligent Surfaces
FDD
Frequency Division Duplex
RS
Rate-Splitting
FDMA
Frequency Division Multiple Access
RSMA
Rate-Splitting Multiple Access
F-RAN
Fog-Radio Access Networks
SAMA
Successive Interference Cancellation Amenable Multiple Access
GRS
Generalized Rate-Splitting
SC
Superposition Coding
HRS
Hierarchical Rate-Splitting
SCMA
Sparse Code Multiple Access
IDMA
Interleave-Division Multiple Access
SDMA
Space Division Multiple Access
IMMA
Index Modulation Multiple Access
SIC
Successive Interference Cancellation
ISAC
Integrated Sensing and Communications
SISO
Single-Input Single-Output
IRS
Intelligent Reconfigurable Surface
SNR
Signal-to-Noise Ratio
LDM
Layered-Division Multiplexing
SWIPT
Simultaneous Wireless Information and Power Transfer
LDS-CDMA
Low-Density Spreading Multiple Access
SIMO
Single-Input Multiple-Output
LPBMA
Lattice-Partition-Based Multiple Access
TDD
Time Division Duplex
MA
Multiple Access
TDMA
Time-Division Multiple Access
MAC
Multiple Access Channel
UMA
Universal Multiple Access
MIMO
Multiple-Input Multiple-Output
UAV
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles
MISO
Multiple-Input Single-Output
(e)URLLC
(extremely) Ultra-Reliable Low-Latency Communicati
user. TDMA partitions time into time slots allocated to dif-
ferent users. CDMA utilizes orthogonal, user-specific codes
to spread the modulated user symbols, serving multiple users
simultaneously in the same time-frequency resources without
causing multi-user interference (under ideal propagation con-
ditions). OFDMA divides the frequency and time resources
into narrow subcarriers and time slots, which are grouped into
resource units and allocated to the users.
While OMA has garnered widespread acceptance in past
communication systems, its efficacy becomes restricted in
light of the explosive expansion of wireless communication
worldwide. Here we outline the advantages and disadvantages
of OMA:
• Advantages:
1) Widespread adoption: OMA is well-established
and extensively utilized in current communication
systems, making it easier for facilitating smooth and
effortless network expansion.
2) Simplicity: OMA simplifies transceiver design, im-
plementation, and management.
3) Interference free: OMA prevents interference be-
tween users, enabling interference-free transmis-
sions and thereby enhancing the overall quality and
reliability of communications. It excels in managing
low to moderate user loads effectively. It is effective
for handling low to moderate user loads.
• Disadvantages:
1) Inefficient spectrum utilization: In OMA, there is
a risk that even low-rate users, such as IoT sensors
with minimal resource requirements, may occupy an
entire resource block, leading to inefficient spectrum
utilization.
2) Low capacity: OMA allocates each orthogonal
radio resource to an individual user. The system ca-
pacity is restricted by the total number of available
radio resources. This limitation hinders its ability to
accommodate the surging user demand experienced
in modern communication systems.
3) High signaling overhead: To enhance system per-
formance of OMA, it is essential to implement well-
designed user scheduling, which typically results in
a significant increase in signaling overhead.
B. Physical Layer Multicasting
Multicasting usually refers to the transmission of a message
intended to multiple users, i.e., one-to-all. Popular example are
radio and television where the message of interest to multiple
users is decoded by those users. However, multicasting can
also be understood in a wider context where the transmitter
transmits multiple unicast (i.e., one-to-one) messages, each
intended to one user, by encoding them jointly into one stream
to be decoded by all users. Users would then retrieve from
the decoded stream the part intended to them. The encoding
and transmission over the air is effectively a physical layer
multicasting since all messages are encoded into one multicast
stream to be decoded by all users. The difference with conven-
tional multicasting is that only part of the multicast stream is
intended to a given user, instead of the entire stream. Physical-
layer multicasting contrasts with OMA where messages are
encoded in independent streams and transmitted on orthogonal
resources.
• Advantages:
1) Coding gain: By combining messages and encoding
jointly multiple medium-size packets together into

5
a single stream, the encoded stream is longer and
the coding gain is increased, which leads to higher
reliability. Such feature is particularly useful in non-
terrestrial systems, such as geostationary satellite
communications based on DVB-S2X technology
[23], where each spot beam of the satellite serves
more than one user simultaneously by transmitting
a single coded frame. Since different beams illumi-
nate different group of users, such satellite system
follows a physical layer multigroup multicast trans-
mission [24].
2) Low latency: Since all messages are encoded
jointly into one stream to be decoded by all, users
can decode their messages simultaneously and do
not have to wait for their message to be transmit-
ted consecutively as in TDMA, therefore reducing
latency in the network.
3) Interference free: Multicasting prevents interfer-
ence between users since there is only one stream
transmitted, enabling interference-free transmission
and thereby enhancing the overall quality and reli-
ability of communications.
• Disadvantages:
1) Inefficient spectrum utilization: In multicasting,
all users, from the weakest to the strongest, need
to be able to decode the stream. Consequently the
transmission rate of the stream is always determined
by the weakest user, therefore leading to inefficient
spectrum and resource utilization. This can be frus-
trating to stronger users who could receive at higher
rates but are constrained by the weakest user in the
pool.
C. Space Division Multiple Access
In response to the limitations inherent in OMA and the
growing demand for higher data rates, improved QoS, and
increased network capacity, a new resource dimension - space
- has been introduced in modern wireless networks. This gives
rise to the widespread integration of multiple antennas in most
wireless access points, signifying the advent of the multiple-
input multiple-output (MIMO) paradigm since 4G networks.
MIMO has become indispensable in modern and future wire-
less networks, finding inclusion in nearly all high-rate wireless
standards such as WiMAX, 4G LTE, IEEE 802.11n, 5G NR,
etc. By leveraging the spatial dimension, MIMO networks
introduce a novel MA known as SDMA [22], [25], [26].
SDMA empowers multiple users to share the same time-
frequency resources, adhering to the interference management
principle of precanceling interference at the transmitter and
treating interference as noise at the receivers.
To mitigate interference at the transmitter, SDMA intro-
duces precoding techniques, which are typically classified into
two primary categories: non-linear and linear precoding. One
of the most renowned non-linear techniques is dirty paper
coding (DPC) [25], [27]. It attains the capacity region of
MIMO Gaussian broadcast channel (BC) when perfect channel
state information is available at the transmitter. However, its
application is hindered by the impracticality arising from its
high computational demands. In contrast, multi-user linear
precoding (MU-LP) offers a more practical alternative by
leveraging linear precoding techniques at the transmitter while
regarding multi-user interference as noise at the receivers [25],
[26]. Although MU-LP cannot achieve the capacity region
achieved by DPC, it is particularly useful when users possess
semi-orthogonal channels and comparable signal strengths
(and also perfect channel state information at the transmitter-
CSIT). Therefore, it plays a pivotal role in many transmission
techniques underpinning both 4G and 5G networks, including
multi-user MIMO (MU-MIMO), massive MIMO, networked
MIMO, and other advanced techniques.
While SDMA remains crucial in modern wireless networks,
the ongoing evolution of wireless technologies compels us to
scrutinize SDMA critically. In the following, we delineate the
advantages and disadvantages of SDMA:
• Advantages:
1) Enhanced spectrum efficiency: By utilizing the
spatial domain, SDMA allows multiple users to
efficiently share the same time-frequency resources,
thereby enhancing the spectrum efficiency when
CSIT is perfect and the network is underloaded.
2) Interference mitigation: With perfect CSIT and
an underloaded network, SDMA effectively elim-
inates or suppresses multi-user interference, achiev-
ing the maximum degrees-of-freedom in under-
loaded multi-antenna BC [28].
3) Low transceiver complexity: Thanks to the utiliza-
tion of linear precoding at the transmitter and each
receiver’s ability to directly decode the intended
message while treating interference as mere noise,
SDMA exhibits a relatively low level of hardware
complexity at both the transmitter and receivers.
• Disadvantages:
1) High sensitivity to CSIT inaccuracy: The ef-
fectiveness of SDMA is highly affected by the
inaccuracies in CSIT [29], [30]. While SDMA ex-
cels with perfect CSIT in underloaded network, its
performance significantly decreases with imperfect
CSIT due to residual interference from imprecise
interference mitigation strategies that are originally
designed for perfect CSIT.
2) Limited network load tolerance: SDMA performs
effectively in underloaded networks but experiences
degradation in overloaded systems due to the con-
straints posed by limited spatial resources. To ad-
dress this issue, user grouping is usually employed
in overloaded scenarios, but at the cost of reduced
QoS and increased latency.
3) Limited user deployment flexibility: SDMA is
sensitive to user deployment such as the angles
and strengths of user channels. It works well for
users with orthogonal channels and similar signal
strengths. However, its performance significantly
degrades when user channels become nearly aligned
or exhibit substantial variations in signal strengths.

6
4) Complex scheduling: Due to the limited user de-
ployment flexibility, precise scheduling is impera-
tive for SDMA, leading to extra complexity in user
scheduling. Moreover, the scheduling algorithms
to achieve the (near) optimal performance can be
challenging to implement and maintain.
5) High signaling overhead: The requirements for
channel estimation, scheduling, and interference
management in SDMA leads to substantial signaling
overhead, particularly in dynamic and densely pop-
ulated network environments or when employing a
massive number of antennas at the transmitter.
D. Power-domain Non-Orthogonal Multiple Access
PD-NOMA leverages the concept of superposition coding
(SC) at the transmitter and successive interference cancella-
tion (SIC) at the receivers to facilitate simultaneous sharing
of common resources, i.e., time, frequency, code, or space
among users [13], [31], [32]. This is achieved by allocating
users with varying power levels, and enabling signals from
different users superposed in the power domain. PD-NOMA
ensures the effective decoding of these signals at users by
empowering those with weaker power levels to decode the
messages of users with stronger power levels. This approach
is also referred to as SC-SIC, adhering to the interference
management principle of decoding interference.
It is well-established in the literature that PD-NOMA based
on SC–SIC achieves the capacity region for single-input
single-output (SISO) BC [33], and for the SISO multiple
access channel (MAC) [22], it is also capacity-achieving with
time-sharing. The performance merits of PD-NOMA over
OMA demonstrated in SISO BC/MAC has driven research into
MIMO NOMA. In the multi-antenna BC, to exploit the spatial
domain, MIMO NOMA typically separates users into distinct
groups. Interference from users within the same group is
managed by SC-SIC while interference from users in different
groups is treated as noise. When there exists only a single user
group, MIMO NOMA reduces to SC-SIC, requiring users to
decode and remove all interference [32].
PD-NOMA has not yet been incorporated into emerging
wireless standards, though it has been investigated as part of
a study item in 5G but was not considered any further in
5G because its gains compared to SDMA/MU-MIMO were
not found convincing [34]. As highlighted in [10], there exists
many confusions and misconceptions about PD-NOMA, which
impels us to look into its advantages and disadvantages in the
following:
• Advantages:
1) Enhanced spectrum efficiency: By utilizing the
power domain and advanced receiver techniques,
PD-NOMA allows multiple users with closely
aligned channels and diverse channel strengths in
the same time-frequency resources to efficiently
share the same time-frequency resources, thereby
enhancing the spectrum efficiency when the network
is extremely overloaded.
2) Enhanced user fairness: As PD-NOMA requires
power allocation favoring users with weaker chan-
nel strength to enable successful interference can-
cellation, it is capable of enhancing user fairness
than SDMA in extremely overloaded network with
closely aligned users and large channel strength
disparities.
• Disadvantages:
1) Inefficient use of spatial dimensions: As shown in
[10], the sum multiplexing gain of MIMO NOMA
always falls below or equals that of SDMA. This
implies that the slope of the sum-rate of MIMO
NOMA at high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) will
be lower than that of SDMA. This phenomenon
indicates that PD-NOMA makes an inefficient use
of the multiple antennas.
2) Inefficient use of SIC: In MIMO NOMA, the
number of SIC deployed at each user scales propor-
tionally with the number of users in that user group.
Consequently, compared to SDMA, MIMO NOMA
introduces two notable issues: a loss in multiplexing
gain and an increase in receiver complexity. This
observation underscores MIMO NOMA’s inefficient
utilization of SIC.
3) High sensitivity to CSIT inaccuracy: As the inter-
group interference management in MIMO NOMA
follows the approach employed in SDMA, akin to
SDMA, MIMO NOMA is also sensitive to CSIT
inaccuracy.
4) Limited network load tolerance: PD-NOMA has
been demonstrated as a capacity-achieving scheme
in SISO BC, rendering it effective in extremely
overloaded scenarios. However, as the number of
transmit antenna increases, MIMO NOMA suffers
from performance degradation primarily due to its
inefficient use of spatial dimensions. Therefore, PD-
NOMA is sensitive to the network load.
5) Limited user deployment flexibility: With perfect
CSIT and an underloaded network, SDMA effec-
tively eliminates or suppresses multi-user interfer-
ence, achieving the maximum degrees-of-freedom
in underloaded multi-antenna BC.
6) High transceiver complexity: In addition to the
hardware complexity introduced by SIC receivers,
PD-NOMA imposes substantial computational com-
plexity at both transmitter and receivers. Specifi-
cally, at the transmitter, the joint optimization of
user scheduling, user grouping, decoding orders,
and precoders is imperative for enhancing perfor-
mance. However, solving such resource allocation
problem is typically challenging with high compu-
tational complexity.
7) High signaling overhead: In PD-NOMA, extra
signaling overhead is required to convey information
such as the decoding order, user grouping result, and
power levels each user should use.

7
E. Rate-Splitting Multiple Access
RSMA has recently emerged as a promising non-orthogonal
transmission strategy for multi-antenna wireless networks,
owning to its capability to enhance the system performance
in a wide range of network loads, user deployment, and
CSIT qualities [14], [35]–[37]. RSMA is a generalized MA
scheme originally proposed in [35]–[37] for downlink and
in [38] for uplink. The key concept of RSMA is splitting
each user message into sub-messages at the transmitter. For
downlink RSMA, sub-messages are categorized into common
and private with the common sub-messages designed to be
decoded by multiple users, whereas private sub-messages are
intended to be decoded exclusively by their respective users.
For uplink RSMA, sub-messages of a given transmitter can
be decoded at the receiver in a non-consecutive manner.
This message split capability endows RSMA with a flexible
interference management strategy of partially decoding the
interference and partially treating the interference as noise.
Depending on the specific approaches used for message
splitting and combining, RSMA has a range of transmission
models, including linearly precoded 1-layer RS, 2-layer hi-
erarchical RS (HRS), and generalized RS (GRS), each of
which can be further extended to their respective non-linear
counterparts [14], [37], [39], and even to space-time designs
[40].
The most straightforward and practical downlink RSMA
scheme is 1-layer RS [35], [36], which is also the basic
building block of almost all existing RSMA schemes. In 1-
layer RS, each user message is split into one common sub-
message and one private sub-message (Fig. 2). All the common
sub-messages are combined and jointly encoded as a single
common stream to be decoded by all users, whereas the private
sub-messages are encoded individually as private streams. 1-
layer RS requires only one layer of SIC at each receiver. User
grouping and decoding order design is unnecessary since all
users decodes the unique common stream before decoding its
private stream.
HRS represents a more encompassing scheme compared
to 1-layer RS, as it introduces additional common streams
tailored for specific user groups (Fig. 2). In HRS, all users are
divided into separate groups, each comprising one or multiple
users. At the transmitter, each user message is split into
three sub-messages: an inter-group common sub-message, an
inner-group common sub-message, and a private sub-message
[41]. The inter-group common sub-messages and private sub-
messages respectively follow the common and private submes-
sages in 1-layer RS. The primary difference between HRS and
1-layer RS lies in the inner-group common sub-messages. The
inner-group sub-messages for users within the same group are
merged into a group-specific common message, subsequently
encoded into a inner-group common stream. The inner-group
common stream is decoded exclusively by users within the
corresponding user group, following their decoding of the
inter-group common stream. HRS requires two layers of SIC
at each receiver. Decoding order design in unnecessary since
each user follows the decoding order of inter-group stream,
inner-group stream, and private stream. In contrast to 1-layer
Fig. 2. Illustration of the downlink transmission frameworks for 1-layer RS,
HRS, and GRS with 3 users.
RS, the user grouping requires to be considered in HRS to
achieve a more flexible interference management capability
than 1-layer RS.
Unlike 1-layer RS and 2-layer HRS, which maintain a
constant number of message splits for each user message
regardless of the number of users, GRS takes a more com-
prehensive approach by utilizing all possible message splitting
and combining strategies to achieve generalized transmission
framework [37]. In GRS, during the message splitting and
combining process, all potential user grouping are explored
and the groups containing different number of users are
categorized into different layers (Fig. 2). For example, the
group in the first layer contains all users while each group in
the last layer only contains a single users. Each user message
is split into a number of common sub-messages. The common
sub-messages in the same group are combined and encoded
following the basic principle of HRS. At the user sides, a
number of SIC layers are employed at each user to decode all
common streams and the intend private stream. As all possible
user grouping has been considered in the message splitting and
combining process, only the decoding order among the groups
in the same layer need to be carefully designed. In Fig. 2,
a straightforward comparison of the three-user transmission
frameworks among 1-layer RS, HRS, and GRS is illustrated.
RSMA has been shown to generalize multicasting, OMA,
SDMA, and NOMA schemes [11], [14]. Specifically, when
all transmit power is allocated exclusively to the common

8
Fig. 3. Illustration of the two-user downlink transmission frameworks and beam shapes for multicasting, OMA, SDMA, PD-NOMA, and RSMA.
stream or one private stream, RSMA respectively simplifies to
the classical multicasting or OMA. When the transmit power
is solely allocated to the private streams, RSMA reduces to
SDMA. Furthermore, in the case where each user message
is totally encoded into distinct layers of common streams
and private stream within the GRS framework, RSMA re-
duces to PD-NOMA. For this reason, RSMA is a superset
and therefore always achieves equal or better performance
compared to OMA, SDMA, and NOMA. A simple two-user
downlink transmission framework comparison among multi-
casting, OMA, SDMA, NOMA, and RSMA is delineated in
Fig. 3, and the corresponding uplink transmission frameworks
are illustrated in Fig. 4.
The main advantages and disadvantages of RSMA are
summarized as following:
• Advantages:
1) Universality: RSMA is a comprehensive MA
framework encompassing OMA, SDMA, NOMA,
and multicasting as its constituent sub-schemes [11],
[37]. The universality of RSMA obviates the need
for a system to consider switching between OMA,
SDMA, NOMA, and multicasting.
2) Flexibility: RSMA is highly adaptable to varying
network loads, whether they are underloaded or

9
Fig. 4. Illustration of the two-user uplink transmission frameworks for OMA,
NOMA, and RSMA.
overloaded, as well as to diverse user deployments
characterized by varying channel directions and
strengths [37], [42], [43]. This remarkable advan-
tage of RSMA comes from its capability to flex-
ibly handle multi-user interference through partial
interference decoding and treating the remaining
interference as noise.
3) Robustness: The rapid growth of RSMA in multi-
antenna networks is primarily attributed to its capac-
ity to achieve an optimal spatial multiplexing gain
in the multi-antenna BC with imperfect CSIT [36],
[40], [44]–[47]. A multitude of extant research en-
deavors has substantiated RSMA’s resilience when
confronted with CSIT uncertainties stemming from
diverse sources of impairment, such as quantized
feedback [40], [48], pilot contamination [49], [50],
channel estimation inaccuracies, latency in feed-
back, user mobility [51], and even RF impairments
such as phase noise [52].
4) Enhanced spectrum efficiency: RSMA is guar-
anteed to achieve the best sum-degree of freedom
(DoF) in both perfect and imperfect CSIT, which
translates into superior spectral efficiency as well. In
other words, RSMA outperforms other MA schemes
in terms of spectral efficiency in both perfect and
imperfect CSIT [36], [37]. When CSIT is perfect,
the achievable rate region of RSMA is larger than
other MA schemes, and it approaches the capacity
region achieved by DPC [37]. When CSIT is im-
perfect, RSMA can achieve a larger rate region than
DPC [30]. RSMA’s enhanced spectrum efficiency is
not limited to conventional multi-user multiple-input
single-output (MISO) unicast transmissions, but also
holds for MIMO unicast [53], [54], multigroup
multicast [24], [42], [55], [56], non-orthogonal uni-
cast and multicast [57], non-terrestrial [24], [58],
[59], network slicing [60]. The benefits have been
demonstrated using link-level simulations [54], [61]
and real-world experimentation [62].
5) Enhanced energy efficiency: RSMA not only
boosts spectral efficiency but also energy efficiency
and their trade-offs across various applications with
different network loads and user deployments, as
evidenced in many existing works [57], [63].
6) Enhanced QoS and user fairness: RSMA achieves
the optimal max-min fair spatial multiplexing gain
in multi-antenna BC with both perfect and imperfect
CSIT. This advantage is reflected in the finite SNR
regime, where RSMA demonstrates its superior
max-min rate compared to the aforementioned MA
schemes. Furthermore, the substantial spectral effi-
ciency gain achieved by RSMA becomes even more
pronounced when stringent QoS rate constraints are
imposed on each individual user.
7) Low complexity: 1-layer RSMA stands out for its
simplicity at both transmitter and receivers design.
Its adaptability to varying network loads and user
deployments obviates the need for user ordering,
grouping, and scheduling at the transmitter. Each
user only necessitates a single SIC layer to decode
and cancel the common stream. This contrasts with
MIMO NOMA, which imposes stringent require-
ments for user grouping and ordering at the trans-
mitter along with multiple layers of SIC at each
user.
8) Coverage extension: RSMA with user relaying,
also known as cooperative rate-splitting (CRS) [64],
[65], has been demonstrated as a promising strategy
to amplify the data rates for users located at the
cell edge, offering substantial coverage extension
benefits [66]. CRS involves collaborative user re-
laying, enabling one user to decode and relay the
common stream to other users, thereby enhancing
user fairness particularly when jointly serving users
with substantial discrepancies in channel strengths.
9) Low latency: RSMA has demonstrated its prowess
in improving throughput compared to the afore-
mentioned MA schemes when employing finite-
length (e.g. polar) codes, as highlighted in [67]–
[69]. In other words, RSMA achieves the same
transmission rate as SDMA and NOMA but with
shorter block lengths, resulting in reduced latency.
Therefore, RSMA is a promising enabling technol-
ogy for significantly reducing latency in URLLC

10
services.
10) Security enhancement: RSMA can adjust the level
of confidentiality of its messages and consequently
trade off spectral efficiency with secrecy [70], [71].
This is not possible with PD-NOMA since the
message of the weaker user is always decoded by a
stronger user, which creates a secrecy threat.
• Disadvantages:
1) SIC
requirement
at
receiver:
Some
RSMA
schemes, such as GRS, exhibit a characteristic
where the number of SIC layers at each user in-
creases with the number of users. This trend not
only leads to considerable burden on receiver com-
plexity but also introduces the error propagation is-
sues. Promising SIC-free RSMA architectures have
recently been developed [61].
2) High encoding complexity: Compared with the
aforementioned MA schemes, RSMA requires more
date streams to be encoded due to the additional
common streams obtained from message splitting
and recombining.
3) High signaling burden: In RSMA, additional sig-
naling overhead is necessary to facilitate alignment
between the transmitter and receivers, ensuring they
possess a shared understanding of the methodology
for splitting and combining user messages.
4) High optimization burden: In terms of resource
allocation and precoder design, RSMA requires
the precoders (accounting for beamformer direc-
tions and power allocation) of the common and
private streams to be jointly optimized with the
common rate allocation. This joint optimization is
instrumental in unlocking the complete benefits of
RSMA. However, it’s worth noting that this ex-
panded optimization space places a more demanding
computational burden on RSMA in comparison to
conventional MA schemes.
F. Code-Domain Multiple Access
Code-domain NOMA (CD-NOMA) is inspired by the tradi-
tional CDMA [15]. It allows multiple users to share the same
time/frequency resources while dedicated interleavers and/or
code sequences are employed to multiplex users. However, un-
like CDMA, the spreading sequences in CD-NOMA are usu-
ally sparse or non-orthogonal low cross-correlation sequences.
In general, CD-NOMA can be divided into sparse NOMA
and dense NOMA [72], [73], depending on the sparsity of the
spreading sequences. In this section, we review some popular
CD-NOMA schemes and discuss their main advantages and
disadvantages.
1) Low-Density Spreading (LDS) MA: One of the early
CD-NOMA techniques is the LDS-CDMA [74], an extension
to the classical CDMA. In an LDS-CDMA system, the data
symbols of each user are spread by a unique LDS with
a small fraction of non-zero entries and then superimposed
before transmission. Compared to the classical CDMA, the
interference on each chip can be reduced in LDS-CDMA. In
particular, the multi-user interference pattern at the receiver
entails a low-density graph, where message passing algorithm
(MPA) or belief propagation (BP) [75] can be adopted for
efficient symbol detection [76]. To design LDS sequences,
a structural approach was proposed in [77]. Furthermore,
the capacity region of LDS-CDMA was investigated in [78],
where the impacts of spreading sequence density factor and
the maximum number of users associated with each chip on
the capacity were revealed. In addition, the idea of LDS-
CDMA was extended to OFDM (LDS-OFDM) [79] where
each user’s data symbols are spread across a number of care-
fully selected subcarriers. Significant improvement of peak-
to-average-power ratio (PAPR) the link-level performance was
reported for LDS-OFDM over OFDM [80], [81].
2) Sparse Code Multiple Access (SCMA): The concept of
code domain multiplexing in LDS-CDMA was extended to
SCMA [82]. In SCMA, each user is assigned a sparse code-
word according to its message. In other words, the modulation
symbol mapping and the spreading sequences are merged
together such that the bits are directly mapped to a sparse
vector of a multi-dimensional constellation. Hence, SCMA
improves the spectral efficiency of LDS through shaping gains
of multi-dimensional constellations. Meanwhile, it still inherits
the benefits of LDS in terms of overloading and moderate
complexity of detection. An example of a SCMA system with
6 users and 4 resources is illustrated in Fig. 5. Each user maps
its two bits to its SCMA codeword such that the superimposed
transmitted block spread over the 4 resource blocks as shown
in Fig. 5(a). The resultant SCMA system can be represented
by a factor graph depicted in Fig. 5(b), where every circle rep-
resents a user or a variable node (VN), every block represents
a resource or factor node (FN), and the edge between VN i
and a FN j means that user i’s data is mapped to the j-th
resource block j for i ∈{1, . . . , 6} and j ∈{1, . . . , 4}. The
factor graph is regular in the sense that each VN is of degree-2
while each FN is of degree-3. The SCMA codebook design
based on lattice constellations [83] was investigated in [84],
[85]. Similar to LDS-CDMA, the SCMA receiver adopts MPA.
To reduce the detection complexity of MPA, various detection
algorithms such as discretized MPA and sphere decoding
can be employed [85], [86]. Potential applications of SCMA
in 6G wireless communications systems were discussed in
[87]. However, the overloading performance is limited by the
number of sparse codewords and the sparsity.
3) Multi-User Shared Access (MUSA): MUSA was intro-
duced in [88] to support grant-free Internet of things [89].
In MUSA, the data symbols of each user are spread with
a short-length spreading sequence. The key principle is that
non-orthogonal complex spreading sequences are chosen by
multiple users autonomously for enabling grant-free trans-
missions on the same resources. It is also worth noting that
the same user can choose different spreading sequences for
different symbols to benefit from interference averaging. The
receiver exploits the low cross-correlation properties of spread-
ing sequences and uses SIC decoding. However, unlike LDS
multiple access schemes and SCMA, the spreading sequences
of MUSA are dense.

11
00
User 1
User 2
User 3
User 4
User 5
User 6
10
10
01
11
01
VN 1
VN 2
VN 3
VN 4
VN 5
VN 6
FN 1
FN 2
FN 3
FN 4
(a)
(b)
Fig. 5. Illustration of a SCMA system with 6 users and 4 resource blocks:
(a) mapping between each user’s two bits and SCMA codewords; (b) factor
graph corresponding to the SCMA system.
4) Successive Interference Cancellation Amenable Multiple
Access (SAMA): SAMA is based on the joint design of
the system signature matrix and the SIC-based MPA [90].
The symbols of different users are judiciously spread in the
frequency, which can be effectively exploited by the SIC-
based MPA and to obtain the diversity gain. Different from
the aforementioned LDS schemes, the spreading sequences in
SAMA have variable sparsity.
We summarize the main advantages and disadvantages of
CD-NOMA schemes as follows.
• Advantages:
1) Enhanced spectrum efficiency: CD-NOMA uti-
lizes the code domain to allow multiple users share
the same resources, e.g., time and frequency, ef-
ficiently. With advanced multi-user detectors, CD-
NOMA improves the spectrum efficiency when
CSIT is perfect and the network can be either
underloaded or overloaded.
2) Enhanced user fairness: User fairness in CD-
NOMA can be achieved by detecting strong users’
signals first in the multi-user detection. This is
because the early detected users only collect less
extrinsic information compared to the late detected
users [91]. In this way, more extrinsic information
together with interference cancellation performed in
the early detection steps can improve the detection
performance of weak users.
3) Flexibility: CD-NOMA is adaptable to various net-
work loads and channel conditions. This is owing to
the effective design of spreading code sequences in
terms of the correlation and sparseness for reducing
inter-user interference.
4) Low signaling overhead: CD-NOMA can allow
users to choose their spreading sequences au-
tonomously to reduce the signaling overhead and
latency. In this case, the spreading sequences need
to be carefully designed for the underlying multi-
user detectors to mitigate collisions.
• Disadvantages:
1) High receiver complexity: CD-NOMA requires
complex multi-user detection techniques. In partic-
ular, to achieve the promised gain of CD-NOMA,
iterative receiver architecture is often required. The
complexity scales proportionally with the number of
users and iteration numbers.
2) High design complexity: The key ingredient of
CD-NOMA is the spreading code sequence. How-
ever, finding the optimal design for the spreading
sequence is still a difficult problem, particularly
when the number of users is large.
3) High channel estimation complexity: Most ex-
isting CD-NOMA schemes assume perfect CSI
knowledge. To accurately estimate the channel for
each user, channel estimation is often performed
jointly with multi-user detection, which incurs a
high complexity.
4) High sensitivity to synchronization: Most existing
CD-NOMA schemes assume perfect synchroniza-
tion at the receiver. However, this is not always the
case in practice. A delayed signal from a user could
disturb the message exchange in the iterative multi-
user detection, leading to performance loss.
G. Multiple Access in Other Domains
In addition to the prominent SDMA, PD-NOMA, RSMA,
and CD-NOMA, a range of MA schemes in other domains
have been proposed in the literature. In particular, a full list
of MA schemes proposed during the study phase of 5G NR
were included in [7]. In what follows, we will review some
typical examples from [7] as well as some newly proposed
MA schemes.
1) Interleave-Division Multiple Access (IDMA):
IDMA
was introduced in [92] in 2003 and has gained considerable
interest in recent years. IDMA can be considered as a spectral
case of CDMA with all signature sequences reducing to
a single chip [93]. In other words, IDMA relies on user-
specific interleaving as the only means to distinguish the
signals from different users [94]. Moreover, the spreading
operations in CDMA can be replaced by low-rate forward error
correction codes in IDMA to provide increased coding gain.
It is also possible to have non-orthogonal interleavers. The
IDMA receivers adopt a chip-by-chip elementary signal esti-
mation, such that the total receiver complexity only increases
linearly with the number of users [95]. Advantages of IDMA
over CDMA in terms of performance and complexity under
practical considerations were demonstrated in [96]. Integration
of IDMA with other technologies such as OFDM and massive
MIMO were investigated in [97] and [98], respectively.
2) Pattern Division Multiple Access (PDMA): In PDMA
[99], the transmitted data symbols are mapped to a resource

12
group that can consist of time, frequency, and spatial resources
or any combination of these resources according to a pattern.
Data of multiple users can be multiplexed onto the same re-
source group with a different pattern to realize non-orthogonal
transmission. In addition, the pattern is designed with disparate
diversity order and sparsity such that the BP algorithm can be
efficiently employed for detection. To achieve the best possible
performance, an iterative turbo receiver architecture [100] can
be adopted, where the outer iteration process between the
detector and decoder is performed on top of the inner iteration
of the detection and decoder themselves. A gain of 500% in
terms of the number of supported users under the given system
packet drop rate of 1% was reported for PDMA over OFDMA
in the uplink [101]. In [102], the patterns of different users are
judiciously designed to exhibit appropriate diversity disparity
at the symbol level and power disparity at the physical resource
element level. In this way, the appropriate disparity in diversity
and power can be effectively exploited by the low-complexity
SIC-based BP detector with reduced error propagation during
interference cancellation.
3) Compute-Forward Multiple Access (CFMA): Compute-
and-forward (C&F) is a relaying strategy introduced in [103],
where the relay decodes a noisy linear combination of lattice
codewords. In contrast to the classic relaying strategies such as
amplify-and-forward and decode-and-forward, C&F exploits
interference to obtain significantly higher rates between users
in a network. Motivated by the benefits of C&F, [104] intro-
duced CFMA based on a modified C&F technique for the
Gaussian MAC. The receiver first decodes the sum of the
linear combination of lattice codewords. Upon recovering the
sum codewords, other users’ codewords can be successfully
decoded by using the sum as side information. It was proved
in [104] that whole capacity region of the two-user Gaussian
MAC is achievable by CFMA under lattice decoding [105],
provided that the SNR of both user is larger than 1+
√
2. It is
worth mentioning that any rate points on the dominant face of
the Gaussian MAC capacity region can be achieved by CFMA,
without the need of time-sharing [106, Ch. 15] or rate-splitting
[38]. However, random lattice codes were used in [104] as
the proof techniques, which can be difficult to implement in
practice. Practical implementation of CFMA based on off-the-
shelf binary low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes and sum-
product decoding was conducted in [107].
4) Lattice-Partition-Based Multiple Access (LPBMA) with-
out SIC: In [108], A lattice-partition framework of MA
without SIC, i.e., with single-user treating interference as noise
(TIN) decoding, was introduced for the K-user Gaussian BC.
Each user adopts a linear code [109] in conjunction with
an appropriately designed constellation carved from a multi-
dimensional lattice which includes the commonly adopted
one- and two-dimensional constellations, i.e., pulse ampli-
tude modulation (PAM) and quadrature amplitude modulation
(QAM), as special cases. Essentially, the design ensures that
the superposition of all users’ signalings still preserves the
lattice structure, which can be exploited to hardness inter-
user interference in TIN decoding. A two-user example is
illustrated in Fig. 6, where both users’ signal constellations
and the superimposed constellation preserve the same lattice
User 1 Decoder 
(no SIC)
User 2 Decoder
(no SIC)
Base Station
Encoder
Superimposed 
Constellation
User 1's 
Constellation
User 2's 
Constellation
Fig. 6.
An illustration of the lattice-partition-based multiple access with
single-user TIN decoding.
structure. It was proved that the scheme based on discrete
signaling and TIN is capable of achieving the whole capacity
region within a constant gap independent of the number
of users and channel parameters. Several new MA schemes
evolving from lattice-partition-based multiple access were
proposed for various channels, e.g., the Gaussian interference
channel, the Gaussian BC with heterogeneous blocklength and
error probability constraints, etc. [110]–[113], where carefully
designed discrete signalings with TIN decoding are shown to
be close to Gaussian signalings with perfect SIC decoding
analytically and numerically.
5) Spatially Coupled Multiple Access (SC-MA): Spatial
coupling [114] is a code construction technique to boost the
performance of uncoupled (weak) codes, e.g., regular LDPC
codes and turbo codes, all the way to capacity-achieving
[115]–[118]. Motivated by this, [119], [120] introduced a new
signaling formats for the Gaussian MAC, where the modulated
data streams are repeated, permuted, and transmitted with
regular time offsets (delays). Since the relations between
the data bits and modulation symbols transmitted over the
channel can be represented by a sparse graph, the receiver
observes spatial coupling of the individual graphs which
enables efficient demodulation/decoding. It was proved in
[119], [120] that coupling data transmission with a two-stage
demodulation/decoding in which iterative demodulation based
on symbol detection and interference cancellation followed
by parallel decoding achieves the Gaussian MAC capacity
asymptotically such that the gap to capacity vanishes as the
system’s SNR increases. Note that the feedback between the
decoder and the demodulator is not required. In contrast to
most NOMA receivers that have to demodulate/decode the
whole symbol block, sliding window demodulation/decoding
can be adopted thanks to the spatially coupled graph struc-
ture [121]. As a result, the demodulation/decoding latency is
limited, which can be suitable for streaming services. [122]
extended the spatially coupled transmission scheme to the
case of transmitted blocks with irregular delays. An example
for the transmission scheme is illustrated in Fig. 7, where
each user divides its transmission frame into sub-blocks and
delays the transmission by τ. However, the spatially coupled
transmission scheme can be sensitive to synchronization errors
and fractional delay.

13
2

Stream 1
Stream 2
Stream 5
Stream 7
Stream 3
Stream 4
Stream 6
3

4

5

6

7

User 1
User 2
User 3
User 4
time
Fig. 7. Examples of spatially coupled multiple access where data streams are
transmitted with different delays.
6) Layered-Division Multiplexing (LDM): LDM is a non-
orthogonal multiplexing technology adopted in the Advanced
Television Systems Committee standard (ATSC 3.0) [123],
which has never been implemented in previous broadcast
and broadband systems [124]. In an LDM system, a lay-
ered transmission structure is used to simultaneously transmit
multiple signals with different power levels and technologies
(channel coding, interleaving, modulation, multiple-antenna,
etc.) for different services [125]. At the receiver, the decoding
of signals from multiple layers requires SIC. The principle
of LDM is similar to PD-NOMA. Hence, its gain over the
conventional OMA schemes has been well understood. Note
that LDM is implemented on top of OFDM such that the
superposition of signals take place before OFDM modulations.
7) Index Modulation Multiple Access (IMMA): Index mod-
ulation is a technique of using the indices of resources to carry
extra information bits [126]. It can achieve higher spectral
and energy efficiency than conventional modulation schemes.
Motivated by this, IMMA was proposed to further improve
the spectral and energy efficiency of the traditional NOMA
scheme [127]. In IMMA, each user transmits additional infor-
mation bits (index bits) by partial resources, where the index
patterns can be the activation status of time slots, subcarriers,
transmit or receive antennas, spreading codes, power levels,
etc [128]. However, the detectors of these IMMA schemes are
joint maximum-likelihood detectors which can be challenging
to implement.
8) Delay-Doppler Domain Multiple Access (DDMA): Or-
thogonal time-frequency space (OTFS) modulation [129]–
[131] was introduced for high-mobility wireless applications,
which multiplexes data in the delay-Doppler (DD) domain
rather than the time-frequency domain as in conventional
multi-carrier modulations. OTFS has also stimulated new
research on delay-Doppler plane modulations. For instance,
the newly proposed orthogonal delay-Doppler division multi-
plexing (ODDM) [132] was proved to achieve orthogonality on
the DD plane’s fine resolutions with realizable pulses. Owing
to the orthogonality, ODDM itself can be potentially employed
as an OMA scheme on the DD domain. Another promising
research area is that other MA schemes such as SDMA and
RSMA can be combined with OTFS/ODDM, which can offer
high spectral efficiency with robust performance in high-
mobility channels.
9) Other Multiple Access: All the above discussion on MA
techniques is not exhaustive with new MA strategies disclosed
on a regular basis such as fluid antenna multiple access
(FAMA) [133], location division multiple access (LDMA) for
near-field communication [134], or orbital angular momentum
(OAM) multiplexing and multiple access.
H. Technology Outlook and Future Works
We draw several observations from the past subsections on
common challenges in MA designs and on MA dimensions
before giving an outlook of MA technology development
toward Universal Multiple Access.
1) Common Challenges in MA designs: Modern and emerg-
ing MA schemes share a number of common challenges,
namely their optimization complexity (of precoders and re-
source allocation), channel estimation complexity, receiver
complexity (involving highly complex operations at the re-
ceivers such as SIC), and sensitivity to various impairments
(can be synchronization or RF impairments).
2) MA dimensions:
Previous discussions highlight that
there are numerous dimensions that a MA scheme can exploit,
starting from the usual time, frequency, space, power, code, but
new dimensions have also appeared in recent years including
message, index, pattern, interleaver, etc. We have decided to
classify them all into five categories: time, frequency, power,
space, signal. Signal is a broad category that encompasses
multiple sub-dimensions such as message split and combiner,
channel coding, modulation, interleaver, spreading sequence,
etc. Table II displays a non-exhaustive list of dimensions
exploited by the aforementioned MA schemes and how afore-
mentioned MA schemes exploit those various dimensions.
Table II also highlights that MA techniques exploit one
or multiple of those dimensions. For instance, SDMA and
PD-NOMA exploit the space domain and the power domain,
respectively, while RSMA by opening the door to the mes-
sage dimension exploits the message combiner, message split,
power, and space domains to generalize and unify SDMA,
NOMA, and physical layer multicasting. PDMA exploits
space, time and frequency domains and CD-NOMA schemes
exploit the spreading code domain together with time and
frequency. All five domains would be exploited by OFDM(A)-
RSMA [135], [136].
3) RSMA - A First Step Toward Unification in 6G: The
beauty of RSMA is that it unifies into a single MA scheme
the seemingly unrelated strategies of PD-NOMA, SDMA,
and physical layer multicasting. This unification capability
translates in RSMA to be a superset of those three strategies
and can boil down to any of them by turning off some of the
streams. This was illustrated in Fig. 3 for a two user scenario
and has been discussed extensively in the NOMA and RSMA
literature [9], [10], [14] and demonstrated by the well known
message-to-stream mapping of [9], [11]. Consequently, RSMA
can softly bridge those three strategies, explore operating
points that are not achievable by any of them, and outperforms
them all. This gives RSMA an edge over other MA schemes as
demonstrated in over 40 applications in 6G [9], [14], including
in multi-functional networks such as ISAC [137].

14
TABLE II
MA DIMENSION CLASSIFICATION AND MAPPING OF MA SCHEMES TO MA DIMENSIONS. RSMA BASIC SCHEMES EXPLOIT SPACE, POWER, AND
MESSAGE SPLITTING DIMENSIONS, THOUGH SPACE-TIME AND SPACE-FREQUENCY RSMA SCHEMES EXIST [9], HENCE EXPLOITING A FOURTH
DIMENSION. IMMA HAS PRIMARILY TWO DIFFERENT SCHEMES, AND THE CURRENT DESIGNS UTILIZE THREE DIMENSIONS AT THE SAME TIME TO
DISTINGUISH USERS.
MA
Dimension
Time
Frequency
Space
Power
Signal
Message
Message
Channel
Modulation
Interleaver
Spreading
combiner
split
coding
sequence
TDMA
✓
FDMA
✓
OFDMA
✓
✓
SDMA
✓
PD-NOMA
✓
PHY Multicasting
✓
RSMA
✓
✓
✓✓✓
✓✓✓
✓✓✓
✓✓✓
CD-NOMA
✓
✓
✓
IDMA
✓
✓
PDMA
✓
✓
✓
CFMA
✓
✓
✓
LPBMA
✓
✓
✓
SC-MA
✓
✓
LDM
✓
✓
✓
IMMA
✓✓
✓
✓
✓✓
DDMA
✓
✓
✓
The capability of RSMA to unify MA schemes is crucial
for the long term research in the theory and practice of
communications and wireless systems. Recall indeed the wise
words in the acknowledgments section of the book of Prof.
David Tse and Prof. Pramod Viswanath “Bob Gallager’s
research and teaching style have greatly inspired our writing
of this book. He has taught us that good theory, by providing
a unified and conceptually simple understanding of a morass
of results, should shrink rather than grow the knowledge
tree.” [22]. In our context, as illustrated in Fig. 8 and by the
RSMA branch in Fig. 1, RSMA, by providing a unified and
conceptually simple understanding of a morass of results on
SDMA, PD-NOMA, physical layer multicasting, shrinks rather
grows the knowledge tree of MA schemes based on space,
power, signal dimensions. The capability of RSMA to unify
and therefore be more universal than other MA schemes makes
practical implementation and operation easier. Indeed a single
unified and general MA scheme would be easier to implement
and optimize than a combination of multiple MA schemes,
each optimized for specific conditions. This is increasingly
important in multi-functional 6G and beyond networks where
the range and diversity of services, use cases, and deployments
explode.
4) Toward Universal Multiple Access in Beyond 6G:
Though RSMA provides a good example of a unified theory
of MA schemes, RSMA does not unify all MA schemes and
therefore does not exploit all dimensions of time, frequency,
power, space (e.g. antennas, beams), signal (e.g. messages,
codes, etc).
This would then bring the central question for future re-
search on MA in beyond 6G: “What is Universal Multiple
Access (UMA)?”. Following the same wise philosophy of Prof.
Gallager, Prof. Tse, and Prof. Viswanath, UMA should further
shrink the knowledge tree of MA schemes by unifying RSMA
with all other dimensions, such as code domain MAs, and
ultimately provide a unified and conceptually simple under-
standing of the current and future morass of MA schemes.
This question, vision, and research philosophy is illustrated
in Fig. 8 and Fig. 1. Following the above question, come the
natural and important questions “How to design UMA?” and
“Why and when do we need UMA?”.
There are no answers to those quesitons yet since UMA
does not exist. Those questions nevertheless aim to trigger
discussions, give research directions, and motivate further
research. Addressing them is very timely for 6G and beyond
for two main reasons. First, the literature and the number of
MA schemes have exploded in the past decade and grown
non-organically, fueled by the sheer interest in making new
or better use of MA dimensions and the limited resources
but also by the large number of new wireless services of-
fered by multi-functional and intelligent 6G. Many of those
schemes claim to exploit new dimensions and presenting new
ideas, though it remains to be seen whether this is true or
whether those are a rebranding or twist of known concepts.
Second, the multi-functionality of wireless networks calls for
a more efficient, flexible and robust use of resources, better
management of interference, better handling of heterogeneity
of wireless services, unified and simplified hardware and
software architectures. As illustrated in Fig. 9, UMA should
shrink the knowledge tree by truly understanding the essence
of a unified MA design at exploiting in the most simple
way all five dimensions (time, frequency, space, power, sig-
nal) to efficiently provide intelligence and multi-functionality
(communications, sensing, localization, computation, energy
transfer and harvesting) in 6G and beyond network.
Many MA schemes exploiting the code domain have been
classified as CD-NOMA with LDS and SCMA being instance
of sparse CD-NOMA and MUSA and SAMA of dense CD-
NOMA. However, CD-NOMA here only stands for a col-
lection MA schemes exploiting various properties of codes
but CD-NOMA is not a MA scheme itself that unifies LDS,
SCMA, MUSA, SAMA, i.e., there is no MA scheme that

15
Fig. 8. From RSMA to UMA: How to further shrink the knowledge tree.
Fig. 9. UMA exploiting all five dimensions to enable multi-functional 6G.
unifies LDS, SCMA, MUSA, SAMA and enables to softly
bridge them all. Hence CD-NOMA does not have the same
unification capability as RSMA. Nevertheless, it is important
to observe that RSMA and CD-NOMA span different MA
dimensions, with e.g., RSMA not exploiting the spreading
code dimension. Shrinking the knowledge tree of MA schemes
to identify UMA would require a better understanding of how
all CD-NOMA schemes are linked to each other and whether
they form particular instances of a more general class of MA
schemes, and a better understanding of the interplay between
RSMA and CD-NOMA. Unfortunately such research avenues
remain largely unexplored. Indeed, a number of works have
attempted to combine CD-NOMA with other MA schemes.
The combination of PD-NOMA and SCMA was investigated
in [138]–[140]. The motivation is to allow the same SCMA
codeword to be used by multiple users simultaneously, thereby
increasing the number of supported users. At the receiver,
MPA combined with SIC decoder is employed. However, the
complexity would be higher than that of a single SCMA
or a PD-NOMA scheme. In [141], CD-NOMA is combined
with SDMA in the massive MIMO setting, where the cases
of CD-NOMA offering spectral efficiency improvement were
identified. The integration of CD-NOMA into RSMA was
suggested in [9]. Since the split common and private messages
in RSMA can be seen as virtual users, each virtual user can
be assigned a dedicated spreading sequence for enabling code-
domain multiplexing. However, such an idea has not been
explored further.
III. ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE FOR MULTIPLE ACCESS
In this section, we demonstrate how AI techniques can be
used to address some of the challenges highlighted in the
previous section. We start by providing an overview of AI
methods and delve into how they can be applied for resource
allocation and optimization for different MAs. We then discuss
AI-empowered channel estimation, receiver design, and user
behavior predictions, and finish the section by providing some
outlook of AI for UMA.

16
A. AI-empowered MA Resource Allocation and Optimization
In every wireless communication system, there is a constant
challenge: harnessing limited resources to achieve improved
performance while satisfying various QoS requirements such
as rate, latency, and reliability. Therefore, the allocation of
wireless resources is of critical importance in the pursuit
of optimized network performance and the fulfillment of
the multifaceted needs inherent to wireless communication
systems. Different MA schemes introduce distinct resources
for allocation. For instance, OFDMA introduces the challenge
of subcarrier allocation among users, TDMA involves time slot
allocation, NOMA introduces user pairing, grouping, decoding
order, and power allocation, SDMA incorporates beamform-
ing, power allocation, and user scheduling, RSMA centers
on beamforming, power allocation, common rate allocation
design, and SCMA deals with sparse code allocation among
users. Essentially, the choice of the optimal resource allocation
approach relies on various factors, including the specific MA
scheme, available resources, system requirements, and the
intricate interplay of these key factors.
Conventional resource allocation algorithms typically rely
on optimization theory and game theory. While these methods
can yield mathematically optimal, sub-optimal, or Nash equi-
librium solutions, they often come with a high computational
cost. In the future 6G wireless networks, the substantial
proliferation of communication devices and antennas, along
with the exponential growth in data traffic, brings formidable
optimization challenges at a large scale. As a result, these con-
ventional resource allocation algorithms will face an increased
computational burden.
The rapid advancement of AI in the past decades has
opened up a new approach to tackling the complex, non-
convex problems often encountered in resource allocation.
This approach allows the resource allocation scheme to be
learned directly from data samples or environment, eliminating
the need for complex mathematical models. Fig. 10 shows a
non-exhaustive search of the potential AI methods that can
be applied for resource allocation. Broadly, AI-based resource
allocation methods fall into three categories: traditional ML,
reinforcement learning (RL), and deep learning (DL). In the
following, we provide a concise overview of these three
methodologies and how those AI-based approaches can be
applied to diverse resource allocation scenarios, followed by
a summary of the advantages and disadvantages for using AI-
based approaches.
1) Machine learning: The term “machine learning (ML)”
originally referred to the development of algorithms that
enabled machines to learn and solve specific problems. With
the growing development of neural network-related methods,
ML now primarily refers to traditional learning approaches that
do not rely on neural network. Common ML methods include
support vector machine (SVM), K nearest neighbors (KNN),
and K-means clustering and principal component analysis
(PCA).
SVM is often used for resource allocation scenarios that
involve binary data classification. For instance, it can be ap-
plied to spectrum sensing in dynamic spectrum access (DSA)
systems. In this application, SVM is used to classify segments
of the spectrum as either occupied or available for secondary
users based on received signal characteristics, enabling effi-
cient spectrum utilization [142]. KNN works by finding the K
closest data points in the training data to a test data point, then
predicting or classifying based on the majority label or aggre-
gated values of those nearest neighbors. It’s non-parametric,
so it doesn’t make any assumptions about the data distribution.
In applications like user grouping, KNN helps clustering
or categorizing users based on their similarity in terms of
channel conditions or interference patterns [143]. SVM and
KNN are both supervised learning algorithms, and they share
common challenges when dealing with large datasets due to
their high computational complexity. For KNN, it suffers the
“curse of dimensionality” wherein data points tend to become
equidistant from each other in high-dimensional spaces, posing
difficulties in identifying meaningful nearest neighbors. In
contrast, both K-means clustering and PCA are unsupervised
learning algorithms. K-means clustering can be applied to
wireless resource allocation problems such as user grouping,
spectrum allocation. For example, a K-means based user
clustering algorithm is developed in [144] for NOMA by
exploiting the channel correlation among users. PCA is a
dimensionality reduction technique and itself is not a direct
resource allocation algorithm for wireless networks. However,
it plays a crucial role as a preprocessing and analysis tool
that enhances the quality of data used by resource allocation
algorithms [145].
All the aforementioned non-neural network-based ML al-
gorithms offer straightforward interpretations of results. How-
ever, their effectiveness is pronounced when dealing with
data characterized by straightforward relationships. They may
encounter difficulties in capturing intricate hierarchical repre-
sentations within complex data relationships. In such case, DL
or neural works demonstrate superior performance.
2) Deep Learning: The DL approach, powered by neural
networks, is one of the most renowned techniques in the field
of AI for its success in addressing various challenges, such
as image recognition and natural language processing. Within
the realm of wireless resource allocation, DL has shown to be
valuable thanks to its capacity to efficiently process vast and
intricate datasets. It facilitates intelligent and adaptive resource
allocation, continually optimizing network performance in
real-time. Popular neural networks mainly consist of dense
neural networks (DNN), convolution neural networks (CNN),
recurrent neural networks (RNN), and graph neural networks
(GNN). Each of these architectures has demonstrated its
prowess in addressing specific resource allocation challenges
for different MA schemes.
DNN: DNN is the most fundamental neural network ar-
chitecture, often referred to as multi-layer perception (MLP).
Within this architecture, neurons are associated with input
weights and incorporate an activation function to produce out-
puts. The computation unfolds layer by layer, with parameter
updates facilitated through the process of backpropagation. It’s
worth noting that this structural framework finds application
in various other types of neural networks as well. DNNs
have been employed to approximate the weighted minimum

17
Fig. 10. A non-exhaustive search of AI methods that can be applied for resource allocation.
mean square error (WMMSE) algorithm, a versatile non-
convex optimization technique for resource allocation, in an
end-to-end manner [146]. This pioneering approach signifies a
paradigm shift in optimization known as “learn to optimize”. It
has demonstrated that a three-layer DNN can closely approxi-
mate WMMSE while achieving significant computational time
reductions, often spanning orders of magnitude. Considering
the widespread adoption of WMMSE in wireless resource
allocation tasks such as beamforming and power allocation for
different MA schemes, this achievement implies that DNNs
can effectively address a broad range of resource allocation
challenges [147].
CNN: In contrast to DNNs, CNNs leverage convolutional
and pooling layers for specialized operations. By stacking
these convolutional and pooling layers alongside dense layers,
CNNs significantly reduce the number of parameters required
to achieve equivalent performance to that of DNNs. CNNs
excel in feature extraction and are notably easier to train com-
pared to DNNs. This advantageous has led to the widespread
adoption of CNNs in addressing resource allocation chal-
lenges. CNN has been trained to approximate WMMSE for
power allocation in [148], and for SDMA beamforming design

18
in [149]. In [150], the power control problem of NOMA is also
addressed by CNN.
RNN: RNNs take into account the impact of inputs from
the previous time steps. This distinctive feature allows RNNs
to maintain memory of prior inputs through their unique
network architecture. Therefore, RNNs are well-suited for
handling time-dependent data. This characteristic of RNNs
make them highly valuable to capture the temporal correla-
tions of data. In [151], RNN is used by each base station
to predict the spectrum allocation. Additionally, in [152], a
graph attention RNN is proposed for traffic prediction. The
RNN family includes various common variants, including long
short-term memory (LSTM) and gated recurrent unit (GRU),
among others. These variants have found highly effective in
tackling various resource allocation challenges. LSTM is used
to forecast the user mobility, and enhance the performance
of resource allocation [153]. In terms of beamforming design
for SDMA, LSTM emerges as a powerful tool for integrating
information from multiple preceding steps in order to refine the
current step, as evidenced in [154]. This contrasts to conven-
tional alternative optimization algorithms, which typically rely
solely on information from the present and the immediately
preceding step to influence their output. For GRU, it can serve
as a robust predictive model capable of consistently delivering
high levels of accuracy in forecasting resource requests [155].
GNN: GNNs are specifically built upon graph structures,
offering the capability to handle non-Euclidean data. GNNs
exhibit remarkable flexibility in accommodating input data
of varying dimensionality, making them a natural fit for the
dynamic nature of the wireless communication domain, where
the number of users and antennas can vary significantly. By
constructing directed/undirected graphs based on the structure
of the considered wireless networks with devices as nodes and
channels as edges, GNNs are capable to learn the wireless
network and enhance resource allocation [156], [157]. As an
alternative, GNNs can construct graphical models based on
the mathematical formulation of specific resource optimization
problems by defining node sets and incorporating parameters
as features, as evidenced in [158], [159]. By such means,
GNNs are promising for addressing large-scale resource al-
location problems for various MA schemes while enjoying a
high computational efficiency.
Other Methods: In addition to the previously mentioned
standard neural network architecture, numerous advanced DL
approaches have gained widespread adoption in addressing
resource allocation problems. These encompass a range of
techniques, such as the transformer [160], auto-encoder [161],
transfer learning [162], meta-learning [154]. The transformer
takes the advantage of the attention mechanism, which sets it
apart from RNNs. It is suitable for parallel computing, leading
to substantial performance enhancements when compared to
RNNs. An autoencoder, a neural network for unsupervised
learning, contains two parts: an encoder that compresses input
data into a simpler form, and a decoder that recreates the
original input from this simpler representation. In wireless
resource allocation, autoencoders are used to learn efficient
data representations that capture important patterns in com-
munication data. These learned representations improve the
efficiency of resource allocation methods like power control,
channel assignment, or user scheduling by giving decision-
making algorithms a more concise and informative input. The
fundamental concept behind transfer learning involves extract-
ing essential features from the source domain and fine-tuning
the pre-trained model for application in the target domain. By
leveraging its capability to transfer valuable prior knowledge
to new scenarios, transfer learning offers a promising solution
to address the challenge of task mismatch encountered in
practical wireless communication systems. The key to meta-
learning is the ability to “learn-to-learn” so that the trained
model can improve its learning ability and adapt to new tasks
or domains with minimal or no human intervention. This
approach facilitates rapid adaptation to new environments, thus
enabling more effective resource allocation decisions. In this
context, meta-learning was found to be a powerful compu-
tationally efficient alternative to WMMSE-based optimization
techniques to optimize precoders and resources allocation in
RSMA [163]. The performance obtained with meta-learning
is comparable to convex optimization-based approaches but
achieves a significantly lower running time. This is partic-
ularly helpful for large scale RSMA network settings with
many antennas and users, where WMMSE approaches are not
feasible due to the astronomic computational time, and low
complexity precoding algorithms achieve poor and clearly sub-
optimal performance.
Additionally, algorithm-driven methods like deep unfold-
ing/unrolling and learning to branch and bound (BB) have
also played significant roles in wireless resource allocation for
different MA schemes. As the resource allocation problems
are typically non-convex, one line of algorithm design is to
approximate the original non-convex problem to a sequence
of convex problems, and use an iterative algorithm to solve
the approximated problems. Deep unfolding/unrolling extends
this idea by unfolding the iterations of an iterative resource al-
location algorithm into a neural network architecture, allowing
for end-to-end training and optimization. Such approach has
been widely studied in beamforming design, user scheduling,
power allocation, etc [164], [165]. Another standard method
to deal with the non-convex optimization problem is to find
the global optimal solution based on BB, which is of high
computational complexity. To address this issue, a learning-
based BB is proposed that use neural network to learning the
BB algorithm [166].
3) Reinforcement Learning: RL involves the interaction
between agents and the environment, with the goal of optimiz-
ing a long-term objective. Among the most widely embraced
model-free RL algorithms, Q-learning is the most well-known
algorithm for computing an optimal policy that maximizes the
long-term reward. However, as system complexity deepens,
particularly when there exists hidden system states, calculating
and maintaining all Q-values becomes exceedingly imprac-
tical. This challenge, often referred to as the “curse of di-
mensionality”, makes Q-learning less suitable for the intricate
demands of ultra-dense and complex wireless networks [167].
To address this issue, deep RL (DRL) emerges as a powerful
solution that integrates traditional RL with deep learning
techniques.

19
TABLE III
AI-EMPOWERED RESOURCE ALLOCATION FOR DIFFERENT MULTIPLE ACCESS SCHEMES.
MAs
AI Method
Reference
Resource Allocation Problem
OFDMA
Deep Transfer Reinforcement Learning
[172]
beamforming and subcarrier assignment
DNN
[173]
subcarrier assignment
[174]
power allocation
[175]
user scheduling
DRL
[176]
subcarrier assignment and power allocation
TDMA
RNN (LSTM)
[177]
radio resource assignment
DRL
[178]
time-frequency resource block allocation
DRL (Q-learning)
[179]
power allocation
SDMA
K Nearest Neighbors
[180]
beamforming
K-means
[181]
user grouping
CNN
[182]
hybrid beamforming
[183]
beamforming
[149]
GNN
[184]
[185]
[186]
NOMA
GNN
[187]
user scheduling
DQN
[188]
user pairing and power allocation
DNN
[189]
joint beamforming and SIC decoding
RSMA
Transformer
[190]
beamforming
DNN and autoencoder
[191]
Meta-Learning
[163]
DRL
[192]
power allocation
Recent advances in DRL has made it a promising frontier
for resource optimization in wireless network for different
MA schemes [168]–[171]. DRL has found applications in
a wide range of resource allocation problems, such as user
scheduling, power control, beamforming design, and band-
width allocation. DRL demonstrates remarkable capability
in tackling the intricate challenges of sequential decision-
making within dynamic and large-scale networks, all without
relying on explicit models of the transmission environment.
This unique feature empowers agents to continually refine
their decision policies through interactions with the unknown
environment.
4) Advantages
and
Disadvantages:
A
non-exhaustive
search of existing works that use AI methods to allocate
resources for difference MA schemes is summarized in TA-
BLE.III. The advantages and disadvantages of these AI-
empowered algorithms are summarized as follows.
AI-empowered resource allocation algorithms offer the fol-
lowing advantages:
Superior Performance: Thanks to their data-driven features
and the well developed neural networks, AI-empowered re-
source allocation can discover communication patterns and
relationships that are too complex to identify precise math-
ematical model. Therefore, AI-empowered algorithms often
achieve better performance compared to traditional model-
based algorithms.
Generalization: AI-empowered resource allocation algo-
rithms can generalize from historical data to make predictions
or decisions on uncharted data. This capability empowers
these algorithms to flexibly adapt to rapidly changing wireless
environment and efficiently allocate resources.
Scalability: AI-empowered resource allocation algorithms
can efficiently handle and process larger volumes of data.
They possess the ability to accommodate growing demands
without compromising performance or efficiency. Therefore,
these algorithms are generally proficient in tackling resource
allocation challenges of diverse sizes and complexities.
Low computational complexity: AI inference demands only
a limited set of basic operations and can be executed in real-
time. This appealing characteristic allows these algorithms
to reduce processing time and require fewer computational
resources, making them practical and cost-effective solutions
for both online and offline resource allocation problems.
Robustness: As AI-empowered algorithms are data-driven,
they are typically robust to handle uncertainty in data or envi-
ronment, allowing them to make reliable decisions despite in-
complete or noisy information. This robustness is particularly
valuable in resource allocation problems because it ensures
that the algorithm can adapt and make sound decisions even
when operating in unpredictable or dynamic environments.
Although AI-empowered resource allocation solutions offer
numerous advantages, they also come with certain disadvan-
tages and challenges:
Lack of Interpretability: Directly replacing the conventional
resource allocation algorithm with a generic neural network
in an end-to-end fashion is often referred to as a “black-box”
approach, which lacks interpretability regarding the decisions
it makes. To address the issue, one can combine data-driven
and model driven algorithms, i.e., by unfolding an iterative
algorithm, it becomes possible to enhance interpretability.
Data Dependency: AI-empowered algorithms have a strong
dependence on data for both training and inference. When the
training data is biased, incomplete, or not representative, it can
result in suboptimal resource allocation decisions. As the wire-
less environment is changing rapidly, user channels, typically
used as input data, may shift to different distributions over
time. This can significantly impact the ability of the trained
neural network to generalize effectively to new conditions and
scenarios.
Training Overhead: Developing and training AI models

20
for wireless resource allocation can be time-consuming and
resource-intensive. This is especially evident when utilizing
traditional resource optimization algorithms, known for their
high computational complexity, to generate the training data,
leading to substantial time requirements. Furthermore, to
maintain optimal performance, periodic model updates may
also be a necessity.
B. AI-empowered MA Channel Estimation
CSI plays a pivotal role in wireless communications. On
one hand, precise CSIT facilitates the implementation of
adaptive resource allocation and user scheduling, leading to
substantial improvements in performance and efficiency. On
the other hand, accurate CSI at the receiver (CSIR) empowers
coherent detection and decoding processes. For acquiring
CSIR, downlink channel estimation is a necessity, where
the transmitter sents pilot signals to the receivers. This task
becomes particularly vital and challenging in OFDM systems
due to the temporal variability and frequency-selective char-
acteristics of wireless channels. In terms of CSIT acquisition,
in time division duplex (TDD) systems, CSI is obtained at the
transmitter through the exploitation of reciprocity. In this case,
uplink channel estimation is required, where users send pilot
signals, enabling the base station to estimate the uplink CSI.
However, tackling this task in massive access is challenging
due to the limited number of orthogonal pilot resources [193].
In frequency division duplex (FDD) systems, acquiring CSIT
involves sending the CSI estimated at the receiver back to the
transmitter through a feedback link. However, this becomes
challenging in massive MIMO setups due to the large dimen-
sions of the CSI, resulting in a substantial increase in feedback
overhead. To mitigate the overhead, it becomes imperative
to efficiently compress the CSI estimate at the receiver or
employ a codebook-based approach for quantizing the CSI
[194], [195].
AI can play a pivotal role in tackling the aforementioned
challenges and improving the quality of CSI obtained at either
the transmitter or receiver. This can be achieved through two
primary directions [196]:
1) Channel estimation: By modeling the channel estimation
problem as a regression task, we can create a neural
network-based channel estimator.
2) CSI compression: By modeling CSI compression as
a dimension reduction problem, we can develop AI
architectures specifically tailored to address this issue.
These two directions in general apply to different MA
techniques. Note that for different MA enabled channel estima-
tion, some additional problems might introduce. For example,
in TDD uplink NOMA, the same pilot might be shared by
multiple users. Additional power control issue is introduced,
which can also be addressed by AI methods [197]. In the
following, we will respectively discuss the existing works on
these two directions for different systems with different MA
schemes.
AI-enabled channel estimation: Deep learning enabled chan-
nel estimation is first studied in [198] for a point-to-point
OFDM system, where a DNN is employed to learn the char-
acteristics of frequency selective wireless channels. After that,
many existing works focus on using neural networks, such as
CNN, generative adversarial network (GAN) to tackle channel
estimation of MIMO networks [199]–[201]. As summarized in
the survey paper [202], most of existing works on channel esti-
mation consider point-to-point communication networks, only
limited studies have delved into the application of deep learn-
ing to uplink channel estimation in TDD multi-user MIMO
systems for achieving less pilot-aided channel estimation. In
[203], a deep learning based joint pilot design and channel
estimation scheme is proposed for uplink multi-user MIMO.
To mitigate inter-user interference received at the base station,
uplink NOMA is considered at the base station, which employs
SIC for channel estimation. To jointly design pilot and channel
estimation schemes, a two-layer neural network is proposed for
non-orthogonal pilot design and another deep neural network
is constructed for non-linear channel estimation. The proposed
approach is shown to achieve better performance than the
traditional MMSE estimator and the deep learning approach
without SIC. [204] further simplified the joint pilot signals
and channel estimator design by removing the use of SIC at
the base station. Furthermore, considering a millimeter wave
massive multi-user MIMO systems with limited number of RF
chains, a prior-aided Gaussian mixture learned approximate
message passing (GM-LAMP) approach is proposed in [205]
to exploit the sparsity of beamspace channels and deal with
the beamspace channel estimation problem. Simulation results
show that the proposed GM-LAMP network considering the
prior distribution can enhance estimation accuracy with a low
pilot overhead. Considering a grant-free NOMA transmission
network, the authors in [206] propose to deploy a DNN at the
base station for identifying the active devices and estimating
corresponding channels. Numerical results show that such
approach achieves a higher user activity detection success
probability and more accurate channel estimation compared
to the conventional approaches, especially in the small packet
transmission scenarios for the grant-free NOMA system.
AI-enabled CSI compression: In FDD massive MIMO sys-
tems, to reduce the CSI feedback overhead, one line of
works focuses on CSI compression methods and codebook
designs. While compression theories such as compressive
sensing have been applied to simply the CSI feedback or
codebook design [207], [208], the feedback signaling overhead
in these approaches remains heavy since the overhead typically
increases linearly with the number of antennas, imposing
practical limitations. Deep learning has shown to be highly
effective in addressing data compression challenges across var-
ious domains, including images, audio, and video [209], [210].
Recognizing CSI as an additional data source for compression,
deep learning techniques have been successfully applied to the
compression and feedback of CSI for massive MIMO systems
[211]–[217]. In [211], an autoencoder-based deep learning net-
work called CsiNet is proposed to handle CSI compression and
feedback. By deploying an encoder at each user to compress
the CSI into a unique codeword for efficient feedback and
a decoder at the base station to reconstruct the CSI from the
received codeword, CsiNet shows significant compression effi-

21
ciency enhancement compared with conventional compressive
sensing-based approaches. Built upon CsiNet, various deep
learning based approaches have been investigated for massive
MIMO CSI compression and feedback to enhance CSI recon-
struction accuracy while aligning with practical requirements.
Taking temporal dynamics into account, [212] further extends
CsiNet to handle time-varing channels by proposing a LSTM-
based deep learning network called CsiNet-LSTM. To address
the difficulties of transmitting continuous codeword values,
recent works incorporate feedback quantization into network
training so as to improve the network performance with low-
resolution feedbacks [213], [216], [217].
C. AI-empowered MA Receiver Design
Aforementioned MA schemes often require advanced re-
ceivers. For instance, PD-NOMA and RSMA commonly rely
on SIC, though other types of receivers can be used, as
demonstrated recently in [61] for RSMA where the tradeoff
between performance and receiver complexity of various in-
terference cancellation and joint demodulation and decoding
architectures have been compared.
One commonality in the design of advanced receivers for
RSMA or other types of MAs is the reliance on models
and assumption for the noise, interference, signal propagation,
etc [218]. It is nevertheless challenging to mathematically
relax those assumptions while maintaining a tractable model.
Indeed interference is often non-Gaussian with finite constel-
lations, SIC is imperfect leading to error propagation, CSIR
is imperfect, decoding delay and latency increases chance of
errors, etc. Those model-based receiver algorithms have so far
performed quite well [61] but take the risk to rely on accurate
prior model knowledge and potentially perform poorly if it is
not accurately acquired [218].
AI/BL-based receivers are able to directly extract mean-
ingful information from the unknown channel solely on ob-
servations, which is a major advantage. Therefore, AI/DL
is well suited for scenarios in which the underlying math-
ematical channel model is unknown, its parameters cannot
be acquired with precision, or when it is too complex to be
studied by model-based algorithms with low computational
resources [219]. Nevertheless, employing conventional AI/DL
techniques for wireless receivers presents substantial chal-
lenges. Firstly, the appeal of model agnosticism in AI/DL
approaches necessitates a complex network with numerous
nodes and layers, along with a sizable training set to acquire
a specific mapping. Consequently, this results in a substantial
computational burden at the receiver during the training phase.
Secondly, sharing a training set between the transmitter and
receiver introduces significant training overhead, potentially
causing delays in transmitting actual useful data to commu-
nication users. Lastly, due to the time-varying and dynamic
nature of wireless channels, periodic training of the DNNs
at the receivers becomes essential to accommodate channel
variations. However, this requirement renders the transmission
of large training sets highly impractical.
In an attempt to tackle the aforementioned challenges and
leverage the advantages of both conventional model-based
algorithms and model-agnostic DL approaches, model-based
deep learning (MBDL) has been introduced. This innovative
approach aims to combine the simplicity inherent in traditional
model-based algorithms with the model-agnostic nature of DL
techniques, as highlighted in [218]. To realize this integration,
MBDL systems are implemented by substituting specific steps
and computations in model-based algorithms, which rely on
precise channel model knowledge, with compact neural net-
works. These neural networks demand smaller training data
sets compared to conventional DL systems. In the realm of
wireless receivers, prior adaptations of the SIC receiver using
MBDL have been proposed for uplink and downlink NOMA
in [220], [221], as well as for downlink RSMA in [222].
In these studies, specialized DNNs are employed for tasks
such as interference cancellation and symbol classification.
The findings demonstrate that the MBDL approach surpasses
the performance of the conventional model-based SIC receiver
specifically in the context of NOMA and RSMA. The illus-
tration in Fig. 11 showcases an MBDL receiver designed for
RSMA, offering a visual comparison with the conventional
SIC approach.
D. AI for MA User Behavior Predictions
Due to the multi-functionality of wireless networks and
the heterogeneity of users, various user and communication
service requirements exist. Different services usually lead to
different QoS requirements and different resource manage-
ment schemes. However, conventional resource management
strategy adopts static average resource allocation methods and
ignores the disparity of service from different users, which
makes it hard to meet the QoS requirements of all services with
limited wireless resource. Thus, it is important to investigate
the user service behavior prediction to match the wireless
communication system configuration with the diverse service
QoS demands, thus improving system efficiency, decreasing
network delay, and guaranteeing the QoS demands of each
user.
According to [223], a base station captures user behavior
information such as user identity number, user Internet access
traffic costs, terminal brands, mobile product brands, user call
fees, network request base station latitude, network request
base station longitude, value-added service fee, mobile phone
operating system, call start time, call end time, call base station
latitude, call base station longitude, and network request time.
Through analyzing the obtained history user mobile broadband
information with the help of ML technology, the future user
behavior can be predicted and then future communication QoS
requirements can be further obtained [224]. Based on the
predicted communication QoS requirements, resource man-
agement such as bandwidth allocation, base station on-off
control, and transmit beamforming, can be configured in time,
thus providing seamless coverage. Moreover, to support a
wide diversity and number of users, different MA schemes
(including OMA, PD-NOMA, SDMA RSMA, CD-NOMA)
could be applied, which also pose design challenges in ML for
user behavior predictions due to different signal transmission
schemes in different MA schemes.

22
detection
Equalizer
LLR
Decoder
detection
Splitter
Encoder
Precoder
Channel
Interference cancellation
Equalizer
LLR
detection
Decoder
Combiner
+
-
Decoder
Splitter
Encoder
Decoder
Combiner
LPR
LPR
detection
Interference cancellation /
SIC receiver
MBDL receiver
Fig. 11. 1-Layer Model-Based Deep Learning RSMA receiver and relationship with 1-Layer SIC RSMA receiver [222].
Based on the types of predicted user behavior information,
the main research areas in ML for user behaviour predictions
in MA mainly include four aspects: user activity prediction,
wireless traffic prediction, content popularity prediction, and
user mobility prediction. In the following, we introduce these
four aspects with pointing the design difference in the aspect
of MA.
1) User Activity Prediction: User activity indicates that
the user is active or not. In the communication system,
the user activity information can reflect the total number of
served users. User activity prediction has first been studied in
cognitive radio networks, where, to efficiently utilize dynamic
spectrum resource in such networks, ML techniques can be
used to predict the primary users’ activity and the secondary
user can choose the idle channel [225]–[227]. ML techniques
for user activity prediction in OMA cognitive radio networks
such as TDMA are mainly supervised ML, including artificial
neural networks (ANN) and SVM [228]. Furthermore, for
the multi-channel multi-hop mobile cognitive radio networks,
the Probabilistic Suffix Tree based ML algorithm is used
to learn the primal user’s activity pattern [229]. Using the
history space-time access records in mobile broadband data,
the scalable online expectation-maximization based algorithm
to fast learn latent Dirichlet allocation has been studied for
user activity level prediction [230]. With the location-based
social network data, [231] shows the feasibility of using
ML algorithms for user activity prediction, which include
gradient-boosted trees, deep learning, logistic regression, and
generalized linear model.
Different from OMA, there exists interference among users
with NOMA. In particular, users need to be grouped for
forming NOMA transmission, which require the user activity
information. However, due to the dynamic channel gain, the
user grouping and user activity are always dynamic and
coupled, thus making it hard to predict the user activity in
NOMA. Through taking user activity as an unknown mapping,
the work in [232] uses the LSTM to approximate this mapping.
The framework that integrates LSTM into NOMA is shown to
improve the user activity performance in terms of reliability
and complexity.
2) Wireless Traffic Prediction: The wireless traffic includes
the traffic duration time and traffic data requirements, and
can be explored via reinforcement learning and other AI
techniques. Using reinforcement learning, in [233], the Duel-
ing deep-Q network is applied to obtain the wireless traffic
prediction and server load balance in OMA system. The
wireless traffic prediction models with AI are categorized
into statistical, ML, and DL models [234]. The ML models
include random forest, LightGBM, Gaussian progress regres-
sion, multiple linear regression (MLR), and Prophet, while the
deep learning models [235], [236] include feed-forward neural
networks (FFNNs), CNNs, and RNNs.
For random access (see Section VI-E), supervised learning-
based method is proposed to improve the access performance,
which uses the history data to obtain the time-varying trend
of wireless traffic [237], [238]. Besides, the LSTM-based
prediction algorithm can be used to characterize the time
related property of traffic, which is helpful in predicting the
locations of aerial base stations, such as unmanned aerial ve-
hicles (UAVs) [239]–[241]. With the predicted UAV locations,
various uplink MA schemes are considered in [241], such as
TDMA, FDMA, NOMA, and RSMA. To minimize the total
transmit power, it is found that RSMA can achieve the best
performance among all schemes since the RSMA can achieve
all points in the capacity region.
3) Content Popularity Prediction: The basic principle of
content-based content prediction is to obtain the user’s in-
terest preferences based on the user’s historical behavior,
and recommend objects similar to his interest preferences to
the user. Content prediction generally requires three steps,
namely constructing user feature representation based on user
information and user operation behavior, constructing subject
feature representation based on subject information, and repre-
senting user recommended subject based on user and subject
characteristics. Having predicted the content popularity, the
most preferred content can be cached near the intended users
in advance, thus improving the system performance including
delay and energy [242].
To design a comprehensive popularity prediction scheme
for OMA systems, a multi-head attention based popularity

23
prediction model is introduced in [243] to extract the multi-
dimension features. Since multiple users can be served si-
multaneously in NOMA and the content storage capacity is
always limited, these exists a tradeoff between the resource
for NOMA transmission and content caching [244]. To solve
this tradeoff, an autoencoder-based algorithm is proposed
in NOMA enabled fog radio access networks for content
popularity prediction in NOMA system [244].
4) User Mobility Prediction: The user mobility information
including speed, direction, and angle, plays a crucial role in
the prediction of the wireless environment [245]. Due to the
mobility of users and limited coverage area of one base station,
handover is needed to maintain the QoS requirement during
the whole moving process of the user. In [245], state-of-art
ML approaches for user mobility prediction are summarized
including the movement predictability, prediction outputs, and
performance metrics. Considering the wireless communication
protocol and standard, a ML based mobility prediction frame-
works is proposed in [246] in 5G core network. Further for
supporting the emerging applications such as automotive, the
framework of RNN together with LSTM is proposed in [247].
The time-varying property of user movements can be viewed
as a time-varying graph and a graph based ML network can
be used in [248] for user mobility prediction.
Since the user movement is always related to the physi-
cal environment, high-accuracy prediction of user movement
requires AI technology to obtain the relationship between
the user movement and environment information [249]–[251].
In order to solve the high complexity and spatio-temporal
correlation of user mobile behavior, multi-dimensional and
multi-scale user behavior prediction method based on ML aims
to fully capture the dynamic and complex spatio-temporal rela-
tionship between individual mobile behavior and the physical
environment.
In summary, by analyzing the history user behavior data
in different MA schemes, the ML approaches can predict
various kinds of behavior information, such as user activity,
wireless traffic, content popularity, and user mobility, as shown
in Fig. 12.
E. Technology Outlook and Future Works
AI-empowered resource allocation, optimization, channel
estimation, user behaviour predictions have been investigated
partially for some relatively simple MA schemes such as
OMA, but more needs to be done for more advanced MA
schemes, such as RSMA and CD-NOMA, for which the
literature still remains quite limited with a lot of new research
challenges and opportunities on the horizon.
AI-empowered resource allocation, optimization, and chan-
nel estimation is likely to play an even bigger role for UMA for
which the optimization space is enlarged due to the exploita-
tion of all five dimensions (and sub-dimensions). Moreover,
AI could also be helpful to complement communication and
information theory to discover and identify key ingredients of
UMA designs and architectures.
Building upon RSMA and CD-NOMA, UMA is likely to
benefit even more from AI-empowered receiver design for the
same reasons as RSMA but also because of the additional
complexity increase incurred by the the exploitation of the
code dimension.
AI for user behaviour predictions will also be helpful to
UMA to predict in advance the user activity, wireless traffic,
content popularity and user mobility and accordingly feed
those information to the AI-empowered resource allocation
and receiver architecture for most efficient use of all MA
dimensions of UMA.
IV. MULTIPLE ACCESS FOR ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
We now switch the role and assess how MA schemes can
be designed and tailored to serve AI applications. We focus
on MA for federated learning (FL), edge intelligence and over
the air computation.
A. MA for Federated Learning and Edge Intelligence
FL represents a decentralized method for training ML
models. It eliminates the need for transferring data from
client devices to global servers. Instead, the model is trained
locally using raw data on edge devices, thereby enhancing
data privacy. One challenge of deploying FL [252] over
wireless networks is the communication bottleneck, which
arises from several edge devices transmitting large sized
model parameters to a parameter server or a base station.
Moreover the heterogeneity of edge devices computing ca-
pabilities, communication rates, and amount and quality of
data can affect the training performance in terms of accuracy,
fairness and convergence time. Researchers have attempted
to reduce the resultant communication latency using different
approaches such as excluding slow devices (“stragglers”) [253]
or compressing FL model parameters by exploiting their
sparsity. In this section, we provide a detailed literature review
on the use of MA schemes for supporting FL deployment
over realistic wireless networks, with a specific emphasis on
OMA/SDMA/PD-NOMA/RSMA-based networks for wireless
FL performance optimization.
1) OMA for FL: Using OMA, devices must use different
spectrum resource for FL parameter transmission. Due to
limited resources in wireless networks, the wireless resource
(i.e., power, computational power, spectrum) allocated to each
user is limited, which may significantly limit the number of
devices that can participate in FL and increase FL convergence
time [254]–[256]. Consequently, it is necessary to optimize
resource allocation such that devices can efficiently complete
the FL training process. In [257], the authors implemented
FL over a hierarchical network architecture and they showed
that local training with the help of small base stations (SBSs)
can not only speed up the learning process but also increase
communication efficiency by frequency reuse across multiple
SBSs. The works in [258], [259] investigated the trade-off be-
tween local and global ML model updates to minimize the total
energy consumption used for local ML model transmission and
update. In [260], the authors used gradient statistics to select
the devices to join FL training per communication round. The
authors in [261] analyzed how user scheduling affects the FL
convergence and then optimized spectrum resource for the

24
Content Popularity
ML algorithm
User Activity
Wireless Traffic
User Mobility
Time
Traffic rate
Predicted
History data
Off
On
Content 1
Content 2
Fig. 12. An illustration of ML for user behavior predictions.
selected users. The work in [262] designed a FL algorithm for
devices with non independent and identically distributed data
and then optimized resource allocation to improve FL conver-
gence and training loss. In [263], the authors jointly optimized
resource allocation and device scheduling to maximize the
model accuracy within a training time constraint. The authors
in [264] designed a multi-armed bandit based method to select
FL participating devices without the knowledge of wireless
channel state information and data information of devices.
To further improve FL performance in OMA based networks,
current researchers also study the joint optimization of wireless
resource allocation and other advanced technologies such as
RIS [265], [266], MIMO [267], compression [268]. The main
drawback of OMA is that it does not scale well with the
number of devices. Specifically, the required radio resources
increase linearly with the number of transmitters, or else the
latency will grow linearly. This calls for the integration of FL
with other MA schemes.
2) SDMA for FL: To solve OMA drawback and enhance
the applications of FL, one can use MIMO and spatial do-
main techniques, which enable edge devices to use the same
time-frequency resources for FL parameter transmission thus
improving wireless resource utilization and FL convergence
speed. The authors in [269] studied the deployment of FL
over a cell-free MIMO based network and jointly optimized
the local FL training accuracy, transmit power, data rate, and
users’ processing frequency to minimize FL convergence time.
The authors in [270] studied the joint use of MIMO and
compression techniques for FL parameter transmission and
analyzed the reconstruction error of the designed method and
its impact on the FL convergence rate. The work in [271]
considered two unique characteristics of massive MIMO –
channel hardening and favorable propagation, and designed
a novel communication design for FL in a MIMO wireless
system. In [272], the authors considered the application of FL
in wireless networks featuring uplink multi-user MIMO, and
aimed at optimizing the communication efficiency during the
aggregation of client-side updates by exploiting the inherent
superposition of RF signals.
3) PD-NOMA for FL: To further improve the FL parameter
transmission efficiency, one can use NOMA to separate edge
devices into distinct groups and managed the interference
in each group by SC-SIC. Currently, the authors in [273]
exploited PD-NOMA together with adaptive gradient quan-
tization and sparsification to facilitate efficient FL parameter
transmission from edge devices to the parameter server. In
[274], the authors studied power allocation of PD-NOMA
for distributed gradient descent in wireless FL with the aim
of minimizing the learning optimality gap under privacy and
power constraints. The work in [275] jointly optimized IoT
device scheduling, transmit power allocation, and computation
frequency allocation for FL in a PD-NOMA and Relay enabled
wireless network. In [276], the authors studied the PD-NOMA
assisted FL in which a group of edge devices form a PD-
NOMA cluster to send their locally trained models to the
cellular base station for model aggregation and the base station
adopts wireless power transfer to power edge devices for their
data transmission and local training. They jointly optimized the
wireless power transfer of the base station, PD-NOMA based
FL parameter transmission schemes, the processing rates of the
base station and edge devices, as well as the training accuracy
of the FL, with the objective of minimizing the system-wise
cost accounting for the total energy consumption as well as
the FL convergence latency.

25
Gradient Compression 
and Modulation
Gradient 
Computation
Model Update at Edge Device
Gradient Compression 
and Modulation
Gradient 
Computation
Model Update at Edge Device
.
.
.
Local
Dataset
Local
Dataset
Parameter Server
Edge 
Devices
Broadcast of 
Global Gradient
Distributed 
Gradient Updates
Over the Air
Rate Splitting
Virtual 
Devices
Fig. 13. An illustration of an RSMA-based FL.
4) RSMA for FL: Since PD-NOMA decodes the interfer-
ence of all other users, it lacks in flexibility and the designed
FL algorithms in NOMA based networks may not be used
for scenarios where each user needs to transmit with a strict
rate demand due to the high dimension of model gradient.
Moreover, since the FL process requires multiple transmission
rounds and accurate knowledge of the CSI in all those time
slots is unlikely, the use of MA schemes robust to imperfect
CSI is important in FL applications. However, NOMA cannot
be well adapted to the imperfect CSI scenarios [10]. To
address these issues and benefit from the space and power
domains, one can use RSMA to efficiently balance the signal
and interference and cope with imperfect CSI. In particular,
due to the flexibility of signal design and decoding, RSMA
can achieve robust performance with imperfect CSI, which is
suited to the long-term transmission in FL. Fig. 13 shows an
illustration of an RSMA-based FL. In this figure, each device
is considered as two virtual devices that jointly transmit local
FL model with different data rates.
Currently, several works have focused on the use of RSMA
for FL performance optimization. In particular, the authors in
[277] designed an RSMA based uplink radio access scheme
for wireless clustering FL where the edge devices performing
local training are closely located in a cluster. By exploiting the
message split capability, RSMA has been shown not only to
significantly reduce the latency of clustering FL in comparison
to systems employing TDMA and NOMA, but also to be more
energy efficient, reaching a lower latency with less power than
the latter alternatives. Another promising scenario of RSMA
for FL is in a fog radio access network (F-RANs). F-RAN
leverages proximity edge nodes (ENs) to collect local model
parameters of wireless devices [278]. By splitting the message
in two parts in uplink RSMA as in Fig. 13, one part is
intended to be decoded by the ENs and the other part by
the cloud. By adjusting the content and the transmit power
of each part, one can softly combine the edge-decoding and
cloud-decoding approaches and consequently achieve a better
tradeoff between fronthaul overhead (communication cost) and
learning accuracy. The work in [279] designed an RSMA-
based Internet of Vehicles solution that jointly optimized
platoon control and FL training.
Gradient 
Computation
Model Update at Edge Device
Gradient 
Computation
Model Update at Edge Device
.
.
.
Local
Dataset
Local
Dataset
Parameter 
Server
Edge 
Devices
Broadcast of 
Global Gradient
Distributed 
Gradient Updates
Over the Air
Fig. 14. An illustration of an analog AirComp FL.
B. Over The Air Computation
In this section, we introduce an alternative MA approach –
over-the-air computation (AirComp) for wireless FL perfor-
mance optimization. In particular, AirComp enables edge
devices to achieve over-the-air FL parameter aggregation via
the waveform superposition property of a multi-access channel
[280]. Hence, when edge devices implement AirComp, the FL
transmission delay per iteration will not depend on the number
of edge devices thus improving FL convergence speed. Note
that AirComp uses “interference” among device transmission
for functional computation via uplink devices’ cooperation.
This contrasts with the usual uplink MA schemes that aim
at suppressing interference among transmitted messages as
devices transmit independent data and do not collaborate. In
this section, we first introduce the basic concept AirComp.
Then, we introduce the state-of-art of using AirComp for FL.
1) Analog AirComp: The main idea of AirComp is sum-
marized as follows. First, AirComp requires all edge devices
to simultaneously transmit FL parameters to a parameter
server (PS) such that their transmitted FL parameters can
be superimposed over-the-air and their weighted sum (global
FL parameters) is received by the PS and the weights of
each edge device’s FL parameters is determined by channel
coefficients, as shown in Fig. 14. To make the weights of edge
devices uniform and eliminate the bias of model aggregation,
AirComp based FL requires each device to modulate its
signal using linear analog modulation and to invert its fading
channel by transmit power control. AirComp based FL can
compute a broad class of nomographic functions [281] such
as polynomial, Euclidean norm, arithmetic mean, weighted
sum, and geometric mean. It was shown in [282] that Analog
AirComp can be optimal in terms of minimizing the mean
squared error (MSE) distortion if all the multi-access channels
and sources are Gaussian and independent.
A key requirement for implementing AirComp based FL
is time synchronization of devices’ transmissions. To address
this challenge, one can use timing advance methods which
have been used in several existing practical communication
systems (e.g., LTE). The timing advance technique requires
each edge device to estimate the FL parameter propagation
delay and then transmitting in advance to “cancel” the delay.
Thereby, different signals can overlap with sufficiently small

26
Gradient Compression 
and Modulation
Gradient 
Computation
Model Update at Edge Device
Gradient Compression 
and Modulation
Gradient 
Computation
Model Update at Edge Device
.
.
.
Local
Dataset
Local
Dataset
Parameter 
Server
Edge 
Devices
Broadcast of 
Global Gradient
Distributed 
Gradient Updates
Over the Air
Fig. 15. An illustration of a digital AirComp FL.
misalignment. The signal distortion of AirComp stems from
channel noise and interference of analog modulated signals.
Therefore, channel noise and interference will affect the model
updates of AirComp based FL. The impacts of channel noise
and interference on FL model updates can be evaluated by the
corresponding FL performance metrics.
The authors in [283] analyzed the convergence and opti-
mized the performance of analog AirComp based FL over
device-to-device communication networks. In [284], [285],
the authors optimized device selection and power allocation
for analog AirComp based FL. The work in [286] exploited
the use of intelligent reflecting surface to assist FL model
parameter transmission for analog AirComp based FL. In
[287], the authors designed the FL model parameter retrans-
mission schemes for analog AirComp FL. Finally, the authors
in [271] introduced a novel random orthogonalization scheme
for FL parameter transmission while considering two unique
characteristics of massive MIMO - channel hardening and
favorable propagation.
2) Digital AirComp: Analog AirComp uses discrete-time
analog transmission for FL parameter transmission and ag-
gregation. However, the performance of analog AirComp
is sensitive to the phase offsets among the super imposed
signal. In particular, if the signals cannot be synchronized,
the errors can also be accumulated thus leading to significant
aggregation errors. To address this problem, digital AirComp
is proposed which enables multiple devices to use non-
orthogonal subcarriers for data transmission. Different from
analog AirComp that relies on accurate channel precoding,
digital AirComp leverages digital modulation and channel
codes to combat channel impairments and phase misalign-
ments, thereby achieving accurate model aggregation even
when the signal phases of multiple edge devices are misaligned
at the parameter server. In particular, for digital AirComp
based FL, local FL model parameters must be preprocessed by
quantization, source coding, channel coding, and modulation.
Then, the pre-processed FL parameters will be transmitted
over wireless channels, and superimposed in the air. The
receiver will receive the aggregated FL parameters and decode
them instead of decoding the FL parameters transmitted from
several edge devices. Here, the receiver will first demodulate
phase-asynchronous symbols, and then removes the protection
of channel codes to get aggregation results. An illustration of
a digital AirComp FL is shown in Fig. 15.
Several works have studied the design of novel digital
AirComp FL. Specifically, the authors in [288] analyzed the
convergence rate of digital AirComp based FL. In [289], the
authors studied the use of MIMO and beamforming techniques
to aggregate FL model parameters over the air. Different
from the works on analog AirComp based FL that do not
process the FL model signals that will be transmitted to the
server, the work in [289] considered parameter quantization
and modulation before FL signal transmission and hence it can
be considered as digital AirComp based FL. The authors in
[290] presented an orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing
(OFDM)-based digital AirComp system for wireless FL, where
multiple edge devices transmit model parameters simultane-
ously using non-orthogonal OFDM subcarriers, and the server
aggregates data directly from the superimposed signal. The
work in [291] designed a digital broadband over-the-air aggre-
gation, which features one-bit gradient quantization followed
by digital quadrature amplitude modulation (QAM) at edge
devices and over-the-air majority-voting based decoding at
edge server.
C. Technology Outlook and Future Works
Different MA techniques have their own advantages and
disadvantages as discussed in Section II. For FL, the selection
of MA techniques depend on the number of participating edge
devices, wireless resource (i.e., spectrum, transmit power),
computational power, and hardware (i.e., CPU or GPU), FL
model architecture of each device. To find the optimal MA
schemes, one must first analyze the convergence of FL and
figure out how different MA schemes affect FL convergence.
However, in practice, the selection of MA schemes must
be performed before FL implementation. Hence, the central
controller (i.e., base station or parameter sever) may not
be able to know channel state information and FL model
setting information (i.e., gradient information), which may
increase the difficulty of MA scheme selection. Therefore, MA
scheme selection also depends on the available wireless and
FL setting information. The above discussion further motivates
the design of unified and universal schemes such as RSMA
and ultimately UMA, which would completely eliminate the
need for selection of MA schemes and whose design and
optimization could be fully integrated with FL. Also, the use
of over the air computation opens the door to other types of
uplink MA schemes that brings back analog computation into
MA design picture.
V. MULTIPLE ACCESS FOR INTEGRATED SENSING AND
COMMUNICATIONS
In this section, we discuss the use and design of MA
schemes for ISAC, including joint sensing and commu-
nications, multimodal sensing-aided communications, digi-
tal twin-assisted communications, communication-aided sens-
ing/localization systems

27
A. Joint Sensing and Communications
ISAC has gained increasing interest in recent years. This
is primarily motivated by the potential of sharing the same
spectrum and, hence, providing access to more bands for
both the communication and sensing systems. Operating at
the same band, however, requires careful coordination of the
various wireless resources and necessitates the development
of new communication and sensing systems as well as joint
processing frameworks. For multiple access, and when a base
station or access point is jointly serving communication users
and performing sensing functions, it is critical to efficiently
allocate the available resources in time, frequency, space,
code, power, etc., and optimize the waveform for both the
communication and sensing objectives. Next, we summarize
a few key directions for multiple access in ISAC systems and
highlight important challenges in the ISAC multiple access
design.
1) SDMA-Assisted ISAC: Based on the waveform diversity
of MIMO radar and the spatial degrees of freedom of SDMA,
[292] embeds information stream into radar pulses for target
detection at the mainlobe and performing communication
tasks at the sidelobe. The communication symbols at the
sidelobe level can be modulated via amplitude shift keying
(ASK) [292] or phase shift keying (PSK) [293]. That said,
the communication rate is limited by the Pulse Repetition
Frequency (PRF) in those works. To overcome this limitation,
[294] proposed a joint MIMO radar-communication system,
where a joint waveform shared by both radar and commu-
nication users is transmitted to serve both sensing and com-
munication purposes. To design the probing beampattern, the
precoders are designed using zero-forcing (ZF) beamforming
under the communication SINR constraints. [295] extended
the framework of [294] for probing multiple radar targets
and communicating to multiple users simultaneously, where
individual communication and radar waveforms are jointly
precoded to achieve the maximum DoF of the MIMO radar
waveform. The advantages of integrated dual-functional radar-
communication (DFRC) MIMO transmission over separated
antenna deployment for communication and sensing in terms
of better trade-off between communication and sensing per-
formance have been demonstrated in [21] and the references
therein. However, the ISAC systems based on SDMA may
not perform well in overloaded scenarios and the impacts of
imperfect channel estimation on sensing and communication
performance trade-off have not been fully investigated.
2) PD-NOMA Assisted ISAC: The concept of PD-NOMA
has been applied to ISAC for the uplink multiple access
channel and the downlink broadcast channel [296]. ISAC
schemes based on PD-NOMA can be characterized into two
types. The first type exploits the transmitted superimposed
signals intended for communications for sensing. As a design
example, [297] considered maximizing the weighted sum
of the communication throughput and the effective sensing
power by designing the beamformers. The second type further
exploits sensing signals for communications, where extra in-
formation is included in the sensing signals whose interference
to the communication users is removed by SIC. ISAC schemes
Fig. 16. RSMA-assisted dual-functional radar-communication systems with
one base station serving K users while tracking a target’s direction [300].
based on PD-NOMA can provide a better trade-off between
communication and sensing performance compared to the con-
ventional ISAC schemes based on OMA. However, the number
of SIC scales proportionally with the number of users, which
can increase the decoding latency and complexity and may
not be suitable for delay-sensitive sensing and communication
applications. In addition, SIC by fully decoding interference
as in PD-NOMA may not achieve the optimal multiplexing
gain when combined with multiple antennas [10], which leads
to a performance loss of PD-NOMA Assisted ISAC compared
to other multi-antenna MA schemes [18].
3) RSMA-Assisted ISAC: Inspired by the advantages of
RSMA in robust interference management, spectral efficiency,
and user fairness, the interplay between RSMA and DFRC sys-
tems was proposed in [137]. As illustrated in Fig. 16, a radar
sequence and RSMA-processed common and private commu-
nication streams are transmitted to achieve the dual function
of probing targets and communications. The precoder and
common stream of RSMA were carefully designed to achieve
optimal sensing and communication performance. In [18], it
was shown that RSMA-assisted ISAC has been extended to
the scenario with partial CSIT and users with mobility, satellite
systems with integration of communications and moving target
sensing in space networks [298], and the DFRC systems with
low-resolution digital-to-analog converter (DAC) on each RF
chain [299]. These works demonstrate that RSMA-assisted
ISAC is very effective in managing multi-user/inter-beam in-
terference while simultaneously performing radar functionality
with the required mean square error constraints. Importantly,
the RSMA-assisted DFRC framework unifies and embraces
existing SDMA and NOMA-based DFRC frameworks as sub-
schemes. Consequently, RSMA-assisted DFRC outperforms
the SDMA and NOMA counterparts [18]. However, the joint
optimization of precoding, common, and private stream rate
allocation can be a demanding computational burden at the
transmitter side.
4) Technology Outlook and Future Works: The design of
efficient MA techniques for ISAC systems is a challeng-
ing task. First, the joint optimization of the resources and
waveforms is typically associated with high computational
complexity. This complexity mainly stems from the differences
in the communication and sensing objectives and from the
various hardware and operation constraints on these systems.
This becomes more complicated in large-scale MIMO systems
which are main components in 5G, 6G, and beyond. Going

28
Fig. 17.
The figure illustrates the key idea of multi-modal sensing-aided
multiple access, where infrastructure-side and user-side multi-modal sensing
information from cameras, LiDARs, radars, position sensors, etc., is leveraged
to optimize the multiple access decisions.
from nodes to networks, it becomes critical to design multiple
access approaches for networks of integrated sensing and com-
munication nodes. This requires accounting for the possible
interference between different nodes in both the sensing and
communication signals. With that, it becomes interesting to
explore the trade-off between coordination performance gains
and complexity in multiple access ISAC networks. This results
in a set of approaches that range from no coordination to
fully coherent ISAC operation where the full network acts
as one cell, leading to cell-free ISAC systems [301]. How to
design multiple access in these coordinating ISAC networks
is an interesting research direction. Finally, the fundamental
trade-off between sensing and communication performance of
general ISAC systems with multiple access has not been fully
understood. Only a few prior works have characterized the
trade-off for very basic channel models with small numbers
of users, e.g., [302]. Hence, to gain more insights into coding,
signaling, and waveform designs for more general channels, it
is also important to study the fundamental trade-off in terms
of achievability and converse for these channels. Last but
not least, though RSMA-assisted ISAC has been shown to
outperform SDMA/NOMA-assisted ISAC thanks to RSMA
universality and flexibility advantages, it would be important
to explore how other MA domains could be exploited for ISAC
and get a complete picture of what UMA-assisted ISAC would
look like.
B. Multimodal Sensing-aided Communications
Two key trends in current and future communication sys-
tems are (i) the use of large numbers of antennas and (ii) the
increasing dependence on high frequency bands. The moti-
vation for using large antenna arrays ranges from increasing
the multiplexing gain, which is a main goal for sub-6GHz
massive MIMO, to ensuring high the array gain, which is a
key objective for millimeter wave (mmWave) and sub-terahertz
(THz) MIMO. Beyond the base stations, the use of large
antenna arrays is also a feature of the new network nodes
such as reconfigurable intelligent surfaces and holographic
MIMO repeaters. The other key trend is captured by the
increasing adoption of the mmWave band as a key pillar for
5G systems, and with the potential use of sub-THz bands in
6G and beyond. The key trends, while promising high data
rates, pose multiple challenges for the design and operation
of future communication systems. For example, the use of
large numbers of antennas increases the overhead of estimating
the channels or training the beams, making it hard for these
systems to support highly mobile applications. Further, the
use of high frequency bands makes the signal propagation
very sensitive to blockages, which challenges the reliability
and latency requirements for these networks.
While the use of large antenna arrays and high frequency
bands impose new challenges on these communication sys-
tems, they also make the communication links very dependent
on the user location and on the geometry of the surrounding
environment. Therefore, the knowledge of the user position
and surrounding environment could potentially aid the com-
munication system decisions. This motivated the use of various
multi-modal sensory data, collected for example from visual
cameras, LiDAR, radar, position/IMU sensors, etc., to assist
future communication systems [303]. Over the last few years,
researchers investigated the potential gain of leveraging multi-
modal sensing data in multiple problems. For example, [304]–
[311] showed that position, visual, radar, and LiDAR data
can guide the beam selection/alignment at the base station
and user, leading to significant reduction in the beam training
overhead. This was then extended to beam tracking where the
sensing data is utilized for predicting future beams, providing
a practical solution for relaxing the data capture, processing,
and prediction latency requirements [312], [313]. Multi-modal
sensing has also been leveraged to proactively predict future
blockages [314]–[320], predict channel statistics [321], design
codebooks [322], design MIMO precoding without traditional
CSI acquisition and feedback [320] among other interesting
applications.
Multi-modal sensing provides some perception about the
location and geometry of the user devices, infrastructure nodes,
and various elements of the environment. This perception
can enable more efficient multiple access operation in several
ways. First, multi-modal sensing may enable the base stations
and access points to intelligently select and schedule users
to maximize the multiple access system performance. For
example, leveraging the absolute or relative user position
information, obtained by GPS, radar, LiDAR, or camera, the
base station may schedule the users that are well-separated on
the same time-frequency resource to have less interference.
In dense deployment, the sensing information may also be
utilized to assign users to base stations/access points or to
proactively predict handover, which yields higher reliabil-
ity, less latency, and better session continuity. Beyond user
selection and scheduling, the underlying information cap-
tured by multi-modal sensing can guide the multiple access
resource allocation decisions. For example, in PD-NOMA,
multi-modal sensing data can potentially aid the optimization
of the transmit power of the different devices. Further, in
OMA, this sensing data may enable adaptive allocation of
the time, frequency, and spatial resources based on the users
relative positions, mobility patterns, and dynamic scatterers
in the environment. All that motivates investigating the var-

29
ious promising applications of multi-modal sensing in next-
generation multiple access systems.
Realizing the potential gains of multi-modal sensing aided
multiple access in practice, however, requires overcoming a
number of challenges. First, a fundamental challenge in using
sensors such as cameras, LiDARs, and radars is identifying
and differentiating the communication users in the sensing
scene. For example, for a given visual scene (photo) taken by
a camera installed at a base station, how could the base station
identify the mobile user from the other objects in the scene?
This task, which is defined as user identification [323], is a
key for enabling multi-modal sensing-aided communication in
realistic environments. Further, with multiple access, the scene
could typically have multiple users, which makes it impor-
tant for the communication system to differentiate between
the different users. Initial approaches for user identification
rely on augmenting other user-specific measurements such as
sparse/limited channel or beam power measurements [305],
[324]. In addition to user identification and differentiation,
the coverage mismatch between the multi-modal sensing and
communication systems raises critical challenges. Overcoming
that motivates the extension to distributed multi-modal sensing
which involves the design and coordination of distributed
sensors to optimize the multiple access objectives. Address-
ing these important challenges defines interesting directions
for future research in the interplay between multiple access
techniques and multi-modal sensing systems.
C. From Multimodal Sensing to Digital Twin-Assisted Com-
munications
Multi-modal sensing information provides the mobile de-
vices and communication network with some awareness about
what is happening in the environment. This awareness could
be leveraged, as discussed in Section V-B, to aid the various
communication decisions. Building upon this and targeting a
more comprehensive perception of the communication envi-
ronment, the concept of (near) real-time digital twins of the
physical environment has been proposed [325]. In these digital
twins, the multi-modal sensing information is fused with the
3D maps to construct real-time or near real-time maps of
the surrounding environment. Running real-time ray-tracing,
which could potentially be machine learning enhanced, on
these 3D maps leads to (near) real-time digital twins of the
physical communication system. Using these digital twins,
the communication systems can pre-train ML models for the
different communication tasks, optimize the various network
procedures, or directly make predictions for the real system.
This is particularly valuable when these digital twins are
sufficiently calibrated with the site-specific measurements.
The relationship between wireless communication and digi-
tal twins is mutually beneficial. With more efficient communi-
cation of the sensory data, more accurate and updated digital
twins can be constructed. Further, as presented in [325], the
digital twins with real-time 3D maps of the environment can be
jointly leveraged to optimize the communication networks and
to assist other applications such as autonomous driving, proac-
tive collision prediction, traffic management, surveillance, and
many other applications. Towards this objective, multiple
access techniques play a central role in communicating the
data from the distributed sensors in autonomous vehicles, IoT
devices, distributed infrastructure side units, etc., needed for
constructing and maintaining the digital twins. For example,
it is important to develop digital twin-specific multiple access
approaches that optimize the resource allocations among dif-
ferent sensors and modalities with the required digital twin
fidelity and freshness as objectives [326]. This is an inter-
esting and challenging research problem since these different
communication channels for the different sensors/modalities
may have different QoS requirements, especially when condi-
tioned on the final digital twin construction objectives. This
optimization needs also to be done in a way that ensures the
scalability of the network and the adaptability to the varying
digital twin requirements for the different tasks.
On the other side, these environment digital twins could also
be very beneficial for the optimization of the communication
networks and the design of multiple access solutions. In par-
ticular, the digital twins provide the communication network
with comprehensive perception, that is potentially near real-
time, about its surrounding environment including the loca-
tions of their users, the nearest stationary/dynamic scatterers,
sources of interference/blockages, etc. This perception can
assist the various resource allocation decisions. For example,
the digital twins could be leveraged to decide on what users to
schedule in a specific MA transmission based on their relative
locations, mobility patterns, and interaction with the nearest
blockages. They can also be leveraged to develop adaptive
and site-specific MA techniques that dynamically change their
parameters based on the specific site characteristics. The
perception provided by these digital twins can also enable the
communication networks to make proactive multiple access
and resource allocation decisions as they can extrapolate to
how the environment will change in the next few tens or
hundreds of milliseconds. This highlights the promising gains
when leveraging environment digital twins to assist multiple
access in future communication systems.
D. Communication-aided sensing/localization systems
Localization technologies have been embedded in mobile
communication systems for decades [327]. It is well known
that satellite-based positioning technologies, e.g., Global Navi-
gation Satellite Systems (GNSS), have been popular. However,
they suffer from severe degradation in indoors and urban
areas. To address these challenges, cellular-based localization
methods have been considered due to their natural advantages
of wide coverage, easy deployment, and low cost [328]. As we
have seen in the previous sections, multiple access schemes are
capable of providing larger spectral and energy efficiencies in
multi-user communications. Hence, under limited resources,
multiple access techniques can contribute to the potential im-
provement of positioning accuracy and coverage for multiple
users via efficient resource and interference management. In
what follows, we review the latest multiple access schemes
for communication-aided localization and discuss the research
challenges.

30
1) SDMA-Assisted Localization: MIMO positioning [329]
becomes popular since it provides high-angle resolution, which
results in a more accurate estimation of angle-of-arrival and
angle-of-departure. In [330], 3D MIMO was employed to
simultaneously support high-rate data communication and mo-
bile 3D positioning for multiple users in the downlink [330].
The transmit beamforming was optimized by minimizing the
sum-localization error under data rate, total transmit power
constraints, and imperfect CSI assumption. However, individ-
ual localization accuracy may not be guaranteed in this case.
Moreover, [330] assumes that localization is performed during
data transmission after pilot transmission. In [331], mmWave
MIMO system with cooperative base stations is considered
for joint communication and localization under imperfect
CSI and hybrid beamforming assumptions, where localization
is performed together with channel estimation during the
pilot transmission period. A joint beamforming and power
allocation optimization problem for maximizing the weighted
sum rate under individual localization accuracy constraints
was formulated and solved. A larger rate-accuracy region was
demonstrated in [331] compared to the conventional schemes.
2) PD-NOMA-Assisted Localization: PD-NOMA was con-
sidered for a communication-localization integration system
in [332]. Specifically, a multi-scale PD-NOMA system was
introduced in the multi-cell scenario for supporting continuous
positioning waveform and flexible configurations for users
with different locations to obtain higher positioning accu-
racy and less resource consumption. A convex optimization
problem of power allocation was formulated to minimize the
error rate for communication and the ranging accuracy for
positioning. Performance gains over the benchmark TDMA-
based localization were demonstrated. In [333], PD-NOMA
was combined with mmWave MIMO for localization to further
improve the positioning accuracy, where the users within
one beam form a local PD-NOMA group. However, these
works assume perfect SIC, which may not always be the
case in practice. SIC also introduces latency in localization.
In addition, PD-NOMA by fully decoding interference does
not achieve the optimal multiplexing gain in multi-antenna
settings [10]. Hence, further improvements on the schemes,
e.g., by using RSMA, are possible.
3) RSMA-Assisted Localization: The use of RSMA to assist
direct localization was investigated in [334], where multiple
base stations cooperatively communicate with multiple users
and directly estimate a target’s 3D locations simultaneously
through the RSMA framework via efficient interference man-
agement. An example with N cooperative base stations and
K users is shown in Fig. 18, where the splitting of common
and private messages are illustrated, and all base stations
are connected to a central processor via high-speed links. A
Pareto optimization framework is formulated to characterize
the sum rate of multiple users and the positioning error bound
of the radar target. In particular, communication-centric and
localization-centric optimization problems in their proposed
cooperative ISAC scheme are investigated to find the optimal
performance trade-offs. It was shown that the RSMA-assisted
cooperative ISAC system can achieve the best trade-off per-
formance among various baselines, e.g., the SDMA-assisted
Fig. 18. RSMA assisted direct localization with N cooperative base stations
serving K users while estimating a target’s location [334].
cooperative ISAC system.
4) Technology Outlook and Future Works: Using multiple
access for assisting localization is a new research area. In light
of the above works, a number of challenges are identified.
First, the above works assume static users. However, the
impacts of user movements and synchronization errors in MA-
assisted localization have not been fully investigated. Second,
the performance metric for measuring positioning accuracy is
generally based on the Cram´er–Rao bound. Explicit designs of
practical localization estimators to achieve this bound are still
lacking. Third, the MA-assisted localization schemes based
on SIC could cause some decoding latency, which may not be
desirable for delay-sensitive applications. To fully exploit the
benefits of MA-assisted localization in wider communication
scenarios, these challenges need to be addressed in future
works. Additionally, it is crucial to understand how one can
exploit all MA dimensions in the design of MA-assisted
localization beyond the SDMA/PD-NOMA/RSMA approaches
investigated so far and ultimately aim for a UMA-assisted
localization.
VI. MULTIPLE ACCESS FOR EMERGING INTELLIGENT
APPLICATIONS
A. Semantic Communications
Semantic communication (SeCom), regarded as an advance-
ment beyond the Shannon paradigm, strives to successfully
transmit semantic information from the source. Unlike the
conventional Shannon paradigm that focuses on precision in
receiving individual symbols or bits regardless of the meaning,
SeCom greatly enhances the communication efficiency and
reliability by prioritizing the transmission of meaningful infor-
mation [335]–[345]. In SeCom, it is typical for both the trans-
mitter and receiver to possess a shared knowledge base. This
shared knowledge enables the extraction of compact semantic
information at the transmitter and the reconstruction of the
original information from compressed semantic signal at the
receiver [346]. To handle additional knowledge information, it
is important to design the communication system to smartly
synergize MA schemes and SeCom. Besides, considering the

31
Base station 
User 1
Knowledge
OMA
SDMA
NOMA
RSMA
User  2
Data
Base station 
User 1
Knowledge
User  2
Data
Same resource block
Base station 
User 1
Knowledge
User  2
Data
Same resource block
User 2 as 
interference 
User 1 as 
interference 
Base station 
User 1
User  2
Data
Same resource block
Weak user 2 as 
interference 
Successively cancel the 
interference of strong user
Knowledge
Common message
Private message
First decode common message, 
then private message
No interference
Resource block 2
Resource block 1
Fig. 19. An illustration of SeCom with multiple MA schemes.
process of SeCom, proper MA design can greatly enhance the
performance of SeCom.
SeCom typically involves AI-related design. Unlike con-
ventional communication systems, it usually lacks a well-
defined performance metric, such as the Shannon capacity.
To determine the appropriate MA for SeCom, it is important
to identify the key performance indicator (KPI) for SeCom.
Broadly, there are two main kinds of KPI, i.e., simulation-
based KPI and analysis-based KPI. In simulation-based KPI,
the semantic rate expression is regraded as a function of
SINR. This function is obtained through data fitting in the
simulation results about semantic rate versus SINR [347]–
[349]. In analysis-based KPI for SeCom, one involves utilizing
the probability graph shared by both the transmitter and the
receiver, referred as the knowledge base [350], [351]. The
transmitter extracts the small-size semantic information based
on the probability graph, while the receiver recovers the
original information based on the shared probability graph.
By employing the probability graph [350], the semantic rate
is derived by modifying the Shannon capacity expression in
the following two aspects. In the first aspect, the reciprocal
of the semantic compression ratio is multiplied in front of
the Shannon capacity expression. Here, semantic compression
ratio is defined as the ratio of the bits of the extracted semantic
information to the bits of the original information. The reason
of multiplying the reciprocal of the semantic compression ratio
is that one bit of obtained semantic information can convey
more than one bit in the original information. In the second
aspect, the SINR expression is modified by reducing the com-
munication power. This adjustment is necessary as some power
needs to be allocated for the computation involved in semantic
information extraction. For a fair comparison between the
conventional communication and SeCom, it is essential to
maintain a fixed total power including both communication
and computation power. The precise SINR expression in in
SeCom is therefore obtained by theoretically demonstrating
that the computation power for semantic information extrac-
tion follows a linear segment function concerning the semantic
compression ratio. Furthermore, the communication power
in semantic communication can be derived by reducing the
computation power within the total power budget.
Based on the aforementioned KPIs, various existing works
delve into the MA design for SeCom. In general, the cur-
rect MA schemes for SeCom encompass OMA, PD-NOMA,
SDMA, RSMA, and some customized MA schemes, which
are summarized as follows:
1) OMA-aided SeCom: In OMA-aided SeCom, the base
station uses orthogonal resources to transmit both common
knowledge and data information to different users as shown in
Fig. 19. For OMA-aided SeCom with simulation-based KPI,

32
the spectral efficiency is maximized through optimizing the
channel assignment and number of semantic symbols [347],
[352]. Additionally, to address the energy efficiency issues,
[353], [354] explores the optimization of total energy con-
sumption under latency constraints. Combining with mobile
edge computing (MEC), the energy consumption is minimized
through jointly optimizing the semantic-aware division factor,
as well as communication and computation resource man-
agement [355], [356]. For OMA-aided SeCom with analysis-
based KPI [350], [357], the total energy of the whole system
can be optimized through optimizing the semantic compres-
sion ratio. The advantage of OMA-aided SeCom is easy to
deploy, while the disadvantage is the number of served users
is limited by the wirelress resource.
2) PD-NOMA-aided SeCom: In PD-NOMA-aided SeCom,
the base station can simultaneously transmit the semantic
information to different users as shown in Fig. 19. Moreover,
as illustrated in [348], [358], PD-NOMA can support the
coexistence of conventional bit-interested user and semantic
information-interested user. In particular, the far-user exploits
the SeCom, while the near-user employs the conventional PD-
NOMA-aided communication [358]. Furthermore, a unified
framework for NOMA-aided SeCom with general datasets
and data modalities is presented in [359]. The PD-NOMA-
aided SeCom system achieves the system performance gain
through jointly considering both conventional and SeCom
transmissions.
3) SDMA-aided SeCom: In SDMA-aided SeCom, the se-
mantic information can be simultaneously transmitted to mul-
tiple users through the strategic design of precoding in the
multiple-antenna assisted system as shown in Fig. 19. To
solve the semantic performance optimization problem for
SDMA-aided SeCom, the generalized power iteration pre-
coding algorithm is applied in [360]. Considering the signal
transmission characteristic of wireless communication, the
multimodal SDMA-aided SeCom system is investigated in
[361]. In SDMA-aided SeCom, the precoding scheme enables
efficient semantic information transmission for multiple users
through exploiting the space domain characteristics.
4) RSMA-aided SeCom:
In RSMA-aided SeCom, the
knowledge intended to multiple users can be encoded into
the common stream, while the individual data intended to
a specific user is encoded into the private stream [362], as
shown in Fig. 19. In NOMA-aided SeCom and SDMA-aided
SeCom, the common knowledge for each user is transmitted
and received in a unicast way, even though the common knowl-
edge is the same for all users. In RSMA-aided SeCom, the
common knowledge is transmitted in a multicast way. Using
multicast, the resource allocated for common knowledge can
be greatly reduced in RSMA-aided SeCom than NOMA-aided
SeCom and SDMA-aided SeCom. As a result, the overall
performance of RSMA-aided SeCom outperforms NOMA-
aided SeCom and SDMA-aided SeCom [362]. Taking into
account the URLLC, the weighted sum semantic information
transmission rate maximization problem is formulated in [363]
through jointly optimizing the semantic information extraction,
delivery duration, rate splitting, and transmit beamforming.
Besides, the authors in [364], [365] focus on optimizing the
quality of experience (QoE) for image transmission in the
RSMA-aided SeCom system. In RSMA-aided SeCom, the
common knowledge is transmitted in multicast, while the
individual data are transmitted in unicast. Due to the flexible
combination of multicast and unicast, the system performance
in RSMA-aided SeCom is superior over NOMA-aided SeCom
and SDMA-aided SeCom.
5) MDMA-aided SeCom: A novel MA called model di-
vision multiple access (MDMA) is proposed in [366]. This
innovative approach involves simultaneously serving multiple
users with distinct model information space resources. In
MDMA-aided SeCom, through analysing the resource of the
semantic domain in high-dimensional semantic space, the
information of different users can be recovered in the model
domain [366]. It is shown that MDMA-aided SeCom can
improve the performance over traditional FDMA and NOMA.
Due to the superior performance of MDMA, MDMA-aided
SeCom is applied in a point cloud based SeCom system to
solve the three-dimensional representation problem [367]. The
realization of MDMA requires learning-based design and the
authors in [368] utilize deep learning-based multiple access
(DeepMA) method by training SeCom models to construct
MDMA-aided SeCom.
6) Technology Outlook and Future Works:
In general,
OMA can be easily applied to SeCom and satisfy the require-
ments of knowledge information transmission and semantic
computation. By leveraging multiple antennas, SDMA-aided
SeCom can be used to further enhance the system perfor-
mance. For the weak user with low transmission rate, PD-
NOMA-aided SeCom can be flexibly applied. Recognizing
the inefficiency of knowledge transmission in PD-NOMA
and the superior performance gain of RSMA over OMA,
SDMA, and PD-NOMA, RSMA-aided SeCom is shown to be
more effective in balancing the interference during knowledge
information and data information transmissions. Moreover,
leveraging the unique properties of semantic space, new MA
schemes such as MDMA can be tailored for SeCom. Future
directions of MA schemes for SeCom should explore the
integration of MA design in semantic information extraction
and resource allocation for emerging MA schemes including
NOMA-aided SeCom, RSMA-aided SeCom, MDMA-aided
SeCom, and ultimately UMA-aided SeCom to exploit all MA
dimensions.
B. Metaverse
The Metaverse is considered to be the new generation of
the Internet, aiming to build a digital world where people can
meet and interact in real-time by integrating various emerging
technologies, such as digital twin (DT), extended reality (XR),
and holographic [369]–[372]. In particular, the physical de-
vices in the physical world transmit the sensed information to
the mobile edge servers, which partial/completely compute the
received information [373], [374]. Then, mobile edge servers
transmit the computed information to the cloud server for
further inference. In Metaverse, the information of the digital
world is updated in the cloud server to meet the real condition
of the physical world. Besides, the simulated information of

33
the digital world in Metaverse including the communication
system schedules and physical devices configurations can be
transmitted to the physical devices through communication
system. To support the immerse and intelligent-related re-
quirements of emerging applications in Metaverse including
education, military, healthcare, real estate, and manufacturing,
MA schemes must be considered [375]. Existing MA schemes
for the Metaverse applications include OMA, NOMA, SDMA,
and RSMA, which are respectively specified as follows.
1) OMA-aided Metaverse: In OMA-aided Metaverse, users
are supported with orthogonal resource. To support the im-
merse applications in Metaverse, a blockchain based OMA
scheme is proposed for ubiquitous access controls [376]. For
VR applications in the Metaverse, a learning-based system
can be applied [377]. Further considering the security in the
Metaverse [378], the covert communication technique is used
for OMA-aided Metaverse.
2) NOMA-aided Metaverse: Considering multiple physical
devices and limited wireless resource, NOMA-aided Meta-
verse can serve more physical devices than OMA-aided Meta-
verse. The QoE model for Metaverse application is explored
in [379] by incorporating factors such as the virtual distance
and network effect. To maximize the QoE utility within the
Metaverse system, a two-step joint resource allocation for
NOMA user channel allocation and Metaverse service selec-
tion scheme is proposed. In the first step, the resource alloca-
tion for NOMA is determined by the one-to-many matching
game, while a hedonic coalition formation game in the second
step is applied to solve the Metaverse service selection. The
two-step scheme is verified to improve the average QoE utility
of the system. In NOMA-aided Metaverse, the massive access
problem in Metaverse can be solved through serving multiple
users with the same time and frequency resource.
3) SDMA-aided Metaverse: In SDMA-aided Metaverse, the
beamforming technique is utilized to support the communi-
cation between the physical devices in the physical world
and the digitial devices in the Metaverse. Considering the
advantages of RIS, the RIS-assisted Metaverse system is
explored in [380]. Given the substantial communication rate
demands in the Metaverse, mmWave and THz communication
systems are required. To solve the beam prediction problem
introduced by the high-frequency system, the authors in [381]
propose a multimodal deep learning framework based on three-
dimensional convolutional transformers using both optical and
rad data. In SDMA-aided Metaverse, the huge communication
rate demand can be solved through proper beamforming design
in the mmWave and THz communication systems.
4) RSMA-aided Metaverse: Through dynamically treating
the power of power of interference and noise, RSMA-aided
Metaverse is a promising way to flexibly handle the dynamic
channel conditions between the physical world and digitial
world. In uplink RSMA-aided Metaverse, the multi-user ca-
pacity region can be approximated with lower complexity than
the conventional scheme such as dirty paper coding, which
is promising in the systems with a large number of users.
In downlink RSMA-aided Metaverse, thanks to robustness of
RSMA towards CSIT inaccuracy and user mobility, RSMA
achieved by RSMA can well support Metaverse applications
in particular for high-mobility scenarios.
5) Technology Outlook and Future Works: The Metaverse
applications require high-data transmission, immerse experi-
ences, and intelligent services. To meet the unique characteris-
tics of Metaverse, MA schemes can be applied to support mas-
sive connectivity, enhance low-latency immerse experience,
high spectral efficiency, and robustness. Comparing different
MA schemes for Metaverse, NOMA can support more physi-
cal devices than OMA at the cost of additional decoding com-
putation complexity. RSMA-aided Metaverse is more suited
to the Metaverse applications than other MA schemes espe-
cially for high-mobility scenarios. Future directions of MA-
aided Metaverse include the cross-layer design of considering
both the physical-layer OMA/NOMA/SDMA/RSMA resource
allocation and the application-layer scheduling, the design
of MA schemes that account for considering multiple time
slots in the Metaverse, as well as MA schemes that consider
both low-latency and prediction accuracy in the digital world.
Ultimately, the goal is to design UMA-assisted metaverse.
C. Virtual Reality
In VR video streaming, an immersive viewing experience
is provided for users by rendering 360-degree videos through
their head-mounted displays (HMDs). To accommodate the
growing demand for VR streaming and the increasing num-
ber of VR users, different challenges should be addressed
in wireless systems. The bit rate of the 360-degree videos
transmitted in VR streaming is much higher than that of
conventional two-dimensional (2D) videos. In VR streaming,
users may experience motion sickness due to a motion-to-
photon delay (from the user’s head movement to the time at
which the image gets updated on the VR screen) larger than
20 milliseconds (ms). This delay occurs when a user turns
its head to watch another part of the 360-degree video frame,
but that part has not been rendered for the user yet [382].
To meet the required low latency and high bit rate for VR
video streaming, different components of wireless systems,
such as radio resource allocation algorithms, MA schemes,
and network infrastructure, must be optimized and integrated.
Three MA schemes are widely used in the literature for VR
video streaming, namely OMA, NOMA, and RSMA.
1) OMA-aided VR: Both TDMA and OFDMA have been
used as OMA in VR video streaming. OMA scheme provides
VR users with a simple receiver, which can subsequently lead
to lower weight HMDs and extended battery life. A number
of works have focused on TDMA and OFDMA VR systems
discussed in the sequel.
TDMA was investigated in [383] for a 360-degree VR video
streaming with multicast opportunities. The authors aimed at
minimizing energy consumption by optimizing transmission
resource allocation and quality level selection. In [384] a
downlink TDMA system for multicast transmission of VR
video tiles from a server to multiple users is considered. A
globally optimal closed-form solutions for two formulated
non-convex optimization problems is provided: one aimed at
minimizing average transmission energy while maintaining
video quality, and the other focused on maximizing received
video quality within a given transmission energy budget.

34
OMA
NOMA
SDMA
RSMA
Metaverse 
(Digital world)
Physical world
Frequent 
information 
exchange 
with MA
User 1
Time
User 2
User 3
User 4
Frequency
Space
Time
Frequency
Space
User 1
User 4
…
Time
Frequency
Space
All users
Time
Frequency
Space
Private + common message 
/message from two virtual users
All users
Only individual message
Fig. 20. An illustration of Metaverse over communication systems with multiple MA schemes.
OFDMA was studied in [385] for 360-degree VR video
streaming across wireless networks. A multi-group multi-
cast optimization problem was formulated aiming at finding
the optimal beamforming, subcarrier allocation, transmission
power, and rate allocation. In [386], the resource allocation
problem in a buffer-aware OFDMA VR streaming network
was formulated as a stochastic game, where users bid for their
desired data rates to enhance their VR viewing experience. The
authors proposed a DRL algorithm for each user to solve this
problem in a distributed manner. In [387] OFDMA was used
in a DT-enabled wireless VR system. The authors formulated
an optimization problem to maximize the max-min QoE and
ensure fairness of the resource allocation among the users.
In [388], a VR video streaming using cooperative multicast
and unicast in an OFDMA-based heterogeneous cloud-radio
access network (H-CRAN) was studied, consisting of one
macro base station and several remote radio heads (RRHs).
The authors formulated a mixed-integer nonlinear problem to
maximize users’ QoE when the macro base station transmits
a specific version of the VR video to all users via multicast,
and the RRHs transmit enhanced versions of tiles based
on the predicted viewport to their corresponding users. The
authors in [389] proposed a ML-based scheduling and resource
allocation algorithm when an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV)
records live events with its 360-degree spherical camera, sends
the recorded video to a mobile edge computing (MEC) server,
and the live video is streamed from the MEC to users using
OFDMA. The authors aimed to maximize the QoS of the
live video for the users while maintaining an acceptable
QoS for other existing traffic types in the network. In [390],
OFDMA for VR video streaming was used in a UAV-aided
MEC wireless network, which includes one macro base station
and multiple UAVs. The authors considered that each VR
video comprises a base layer and several enhancement layers,
and aimed to maximize the users’ QoE by optimizing the
UAV placement, VR video layer assignment, and MEC and
radio resource allocation. In [391], the authors considered live
multicast streaming of 360-degree videos to mobile users by
allocating the available resource blocks in an OFDMA-based
wireless network. The authors first partition the users into mul-
ticast groups and allocate the available resource blocks among
them. Once the resource blocks are allocated to each group,
the users’ QoE is maximized by solving a tile quality selection
problem. In the aforementioned works, each orthogonal radio
resource (i.e., time slot or time-frequency resource block) is
allocated to only one VR user for unicast transmission. Thus,
the number of VR users that can be supported simultaneously
is restricted by the number of available orthogonal radio
resources.
2) PD-NOMA-aided VR: In NOMA, VR video tiles can be
transmitted to multiple users using the same radio resource.
Thus, compared to the OMA scheme, NOMA can support a

35
greater number of VR users and has been the focus of several
works discussed next.
In [392], a downlink PD-NOMA system is considered for
transmitting VR frames from a Metaverse server to multiple
VR users. The authors proposed a multi-agent DRL algorithm
called user-centric critic with heterogeneous actors (UCHA)
for optimizing channel access and downlink power allocation.
In [393], PD-NOMA is used to deliver VR videos in an
edge-enhanced wireless network, employing a multi-agent
DRL algorithm as a cooperative caching scheme in edge
base stations. To enhance content delivery efficiency, the
authors considered a combination of unicast and multicast, and
proposed a base station-multicast group matching algorithm.
In [394], a wireless network consisting of a base station,
UAVs, and VR users is considered. In this network, PD-
NOMA is employed to transmit video tiles from the base
station to UAVs, and also from the UAVs to VR users. The
authors aimed to optimize the selection of tiling patterns at
the base station, the grouping of VR users and UAVs, as well
as the allocation of computational resources and the duration
of NOMA transmissions. In [395], authors consider a UAV-
assisted cellular network in which PD-NOMA is employed
for content delivery from the UAVs to users. In particular,
two users that request the same content for their AR and
normal multimedia applications are grouped for PD-NOMA
transmission. In this work, the authors aimed to minimize
the content delivery delay by optimizing the user association,
power allocation of PD-NOMA, and UAVs deployment. Since
the PD-NOMA scheme manages the multi-user interference
with SIC, the receiver complexity is increased as the number
of VR users increases. Additionally, the grouping of VR users
and the decoding order play a crucial role in the performance
of the PD-NOMA scheme. Furthermore, due to the use of
SIC, the VR users’ physical layer privacy may be at risk in
a PD-NOMA system, necessitating additional privacy protec-
tion measures. Therefore, most of the existing works in the
literature have focused on utilizing PD-NOMA for VR video
multicasting. However, finding the optimal user grouping is a
challenging problem because it requires optimizing the number
of groups and the number of users within each group.
3) RSMA-aided VR: RSMA manages multi-user interfer-
ence by decoding a part of the interference, considering it
as the common message of VR users, while treating the
remaining part as noise, representing the private messages
of other VR users. An example of using RSMA for VR
applications is shown in Fig. 21. RSMA has been the focus
of recent VR studies. In [396], the authors proposed iterative
algorithms to optimize beamforming vectors and rates of
sub-messages in a multicast RSMA VR streaming system.
In [397], RSMA is employed in an reconfigurable intelligent
surface-aided VR streaming system. The authors proposed a
deep deterministic policy gradient (DDPG) algorithm with
imitation learning to jointly optimize beamforming vectors,
IRS phase shifts, rate-splitting parameters, and video tile
bit rate selection. In [398], RSMA is exploited for adaptive
streaming of tiled 360-degree videos from a multi-antenna
base station to multiple single antenna users. The authors
utilized the concave-convex procedure (CCCP) to optimize
Downlink 
transmission
User 1’s FoV
User 1’s FoV
User 2’s FoV
m0
m2
Overlapping
FoV
m1
Common and private 
messages
User 1
User 2
m0
m1
m0
m2
Common message
Private message for user 1
Private message for user 2
m0
m1
m2
Data retrieved by User 1
Data retrieved by User 2
Downlink 
transmission
Fig. 21.
An example of using RSMA for VR applications. Users 1 and 2
have overlapping field of view (FoV). The video tiles with overlapping FoV
are sent via the common messages. The video tiles with non-overlapping FoV
are sent via the private messages.
parameters such as the rates of common and private messages
in RSMA, as well as transmission beamforming vectors.
In [399], the users in a 360-degree video streaming system
are clustered into different groups based on their overlapped
field-of-view (FoV). Then, to effectively manage interference
among the users, the authors adopted a hierarchical RSMA
approach in which the messages are split and encoded into
three streams: super common stream, group common stream,
and private stream. All those works demonstrate the benefits
of RSMA over other MA schemes, such as SDMA and PD-
NOMA, in VR applications.
4) Technology Outlook and Future Works: Some potential
research challenges in MA design for VR streaming sys-
tems include designing a low-complexity receiver for VR
users while simultaneously preserving the VR users’ privacy
and considering the HMD characteristics. For example, it
is important to consider that HMDs have limited battery
and computational resources. HMDs should be lightweight.
Additionally, they may have multiple antennas, which raises
the challenge of designing RSMA for receivers with multiple
antennas.
For cache-enabled wireless networks, placing VR content
in the cache requires a larger timescale than delivering VR
content using an MA scheme. To enhance VR video streaming
performance, content placement and delivery should be jointly
optimized, leading to a multi-timescale optimization problem.
In UAV-assisted cellular networks, the deployment and tra-
jectory of UAVs should be designed according to the mobility
of VR users. This design is essential to manage interference
in NOMA and RSMA schemes and to prevent degradation in
VR streaming performance.
In IRS-aided VR streaming systems, it is important to
consider the impact of imperfectly estimated CSI for both the
IRS-user and BS-IRS links on the performance of the MA
schemes.
In VR video streaming, particularly in the case of live
VR streaming, multiple users may request the same part of
a 360-degree video frame due to their shared interests. This
correlated data presents the opportunity to design a more
efficient RSMA for VR streaming, in contrast to typical
scenarios in which the data requested by users are independent
and uncorrelated. However, RSMA should also perform well

36
when the requested tiles by users do not overlap and the users
watch distinct parts of the video frames. Therefore, the RSMA
parameters need to be optimized, considering all possible cases
in VR video streaming systems.
The integration of RSMA with other MA schemes, such as
OFDMA, has not yet been investigated to determine whether
RSMA performance can be further enhanced in VR video
streaming systems. This approach provides greater flexibility,
especially when dealing with multigroup multicasting prob-
lems, by pairing a group of users and serving them on a
designated resource block using RSMA. Beyond OFDMA-
RSMA, integration of CD-NOMA and RSMA would also be
of interest to address the need for bit rate in VR.
In VR streaming systems, certain information, such as users’
head movements, needs to be transmitted from the users to the
server. Using RSMA, users can share the uplink channel to
send their information simultaneously. Furthermore, federated
learning can be applied within a VR streaming system to
obtain a viewport prediction model for the users. In particular,
federated learning enables the users to train a shared viewport
prediction model, while their privacy is preserved without
sharing their historical head movement data [386], [400].
RSMA can be incorporated in federated learning to facilitate
model aggregation without compromising model accuracy.
Higher frequency bands, such as mmWave and THz, can
be employed in VR streaming systems to fulfill the bitrate
requirements of high-resolution 360-degree videos. The use
of RSMA in combination with beamforming design in these
high-frequency bands represents an interesting research area.
Moreover, communication in mmWave and THz bands faces
high path loss and blocking issues. It would be interesting to
explore how RSMA can be integrated with cooperative com-
munication to tackle these challenges in VR video streaming
systems.
6G wireless systems will provide various services, including
an evolved version of eMBB, known as eMBB+. The high
data rate and low latency requirements for VR video streaming
position it as one of the key eMBB+ services provided by 6G
systems. Whether RSMA is a promising MA scheme to meet
the hybrid requirements of VR users remains unknown and a
potential research direction.
D. Smart Radio and Reconfigurable Intelligent Surfaces
Reconfigurable intelligent surface (RIS) has garnered sig-
nificant recognition as a revolutionary technique for 6G. By
incorporating multiple passive reconfigurable elements with
tunable amplitudes and phases, RIS is capable of effectively
manipulating the direction and strength of the scattered signals,
thereby exerting a transformative impact on the propagation
environment. Recent advances on RIS has witnessed its evo-
lution from convention diagonal RIS (D-RIS)–where each
element is independently controlled by a tunable impedance
connected to ground, resulting in a diagonal scattering matrix–
to the generalized beyond diagonal RIS (BD-RIS) [401], [402].
BD-RIS facilitates interconnections among elements, leading
to a beyond diagonal scattering matrix. Figure 22 illustrates
the state-of-the-art RIS architectures as outlined in [403].
In general, RIS can be classified into D-RIS and BD-RIS
depending on the nature of the scattering matrix. Conventional
D-RIS is typically modeled as a diagonal phase shift matrix,
limiting its functionality to a reflection mode where incident
signals are exclusively reflected from one side of RIS. In
contrast, BD-RISs, with beyond diagonal scattering matrices,
are capable of creating group/fully-connected reconfigurable
impedance networks based on the same reflection model
as D-RIS. Moreover, to achieve full-space coverage, hybrid
and multi-sector modes are proposed for single/group/fully-
connected BD-RIS [402]. The hybrid mode enables partial
reflection and transmission of incident signals to different sides
of RIS, which is also known as intelligent omni-surface (IOS)
or simultaneous transmitting and reflecting RIS (STAR-RIS)
[404]. The multi-sector mode extends the hybrid model by
dividing the full space into sectors, allowing incident signals
from one sector to be partially reflected and scattered to
different sectors.
Thanks to its powerful capability for controlling wireless
propagation environments and manipulating signals spatially,
considerable research efforts have been dedicated to RIS-
assisted MA schemes, such as OMA, SDMA, NOMA, and
RSMA.
1) RIS-assisted OMA: The deployment of RISs was ini-
tially studied and implemented in OMA, focusing on point-
to-point communication with a single or multiple resource
blocks [405]–[419]. In this simplified context, the primary
research focus involved passive beamforming design [405]–
[408], channel modeling [409], channel estimation [407],
[410], [411], theoretical limits analysis [405], [412], [413], and
prototype development [414]–[419]. Despite the introduction
of additional challenges related to channel estimation and pas-
sive beamforming design, RIS-assisted OMA (OMA) shows
significant potential to cost-effectively enhance the spectrum
efficiency and extend coverage without requiring additional
energy consumption.
2) RIS-assisted SDMA: In multi-user scenarios, the most
commonly considered MA is SDMA. It is worth noting
that in RIS-assisted SDMA, maximizing the channel gain
is not the only objective due to the introduction of multi-
user interference. To achieve objectives, such as maximizing
spectral or energy efficiency and minimizing energy con-
sumption, transceiver design in RIS-assisted SDMA typically
involves the joint optimization of passive beamforming at the
RIS and active beamforming at the transmitter that require
tailored optimization methods and channel estimation meth-
ods. Numerous optimization techniques have been proposed
in existing literature addressing joint beamforming design
with continuous or discrete D-RIS phase shifts [420], or for
BD-RIS [401], [403], [421]. Concerning channel estimation,
multi-user channel estimation in RIS-assisted SDMA brings
additional research challenges due to the presence of inter-
user interference. Existing literature has focused on advanced
channel estimation techniques tailored to unstructured chan-
nels, which model low-frequency rich-scattering scenarios,
as well as structured channels designed for high-frequency
sparse channels [420], [422]. In terms of prototyping, most
of existing research on RIS prototypes considered a single-

37
Fig. 22. Illustration of the family of RISs.
user case. The design of RIS-aided multi-user prototypes is
still in its early stages. Recent work [423] introduced a novel
blind beamforming strategy for RIS-assisted SDMA, which
designs the phase shifts without relying on channel informa-
tion. Real-world trails have been conducted to demonstrate
the effectiveness of this strategy. In [424], a new prototype
that incorporates both channel estimation and beamforming
design is proposed. Experimental results highlight a notable
enhancement in spectrum efficiency with the proposed scheme,
marking a significant advancement of RIS-assisted SDMA
prototypes.
3) RIS-assisted PD-NOMA: In conventional PD-NOMA
without RIS, the efficacy of SIC decoding relies on a substan-
tial channel strength disparity between users. In RIS-assisted
PD-NOMA, the aid of an additional reflection/transmission
link helps to enhance the channel strength disparity, thereby
augmenting the benefits of SIC decoding. However, RIS intro-
duces challenges in the resource allocation as the optimal SIC
decoding order and user grouping depends on both the active
beamforming at the transmitter and the passive beamforming
at the RIS. The interplay between NOMA and RISs have
been summarized in [20]. The primary research focus in RIS-

38
assisted NOMA is on addressing the above challenges. Be-
sides, RIS offers significant advantages in addressing security
concerns within conventional NOMA by enhancing wireless
communication covertness at the physical layer [425]. An
interesting observation from [426] is that in the presence of
RIS, NOMA is not always a better option than OMA. Indeed
the minimum power needed to achieve a target rate may be
lower for TDMA than NOMA, i.e. NOMA may perform worse
than TDMA. This contrasts with the non-RIS deployment
where PD-NOMA is superior to TDMA.
4) RIS-assisted RSMA: The potential advantages of RSMA
and RIS have sparked interest in their combined use in recent
years [427], [428]. The synergy between D-RIS and RSMA
has been widely studied, and revealing substantial performance
advantages over RIS-aided SDMA, NOMA, OMA in terms
of spectrum efficiency [428]–[433], energy efficiency [434],
[435], user fairness [436], [437], outage probability [438],
[439] etc. Recent works have also delved into the interplay
between BD-RIS and RSMA, covering scenarios such as
STAR-RIS aided RSMA [440], [441], RSMA with group/fully
connected RIS in the reflection mode [442], [443], and RSMA
with multi-sector BD-RIS [444]. BD-RIS aided RSMA has
demonstrated significant advantages in extending coverage,
further boosting both spectrum and energy efficiency. Given
the absence of an RF chain at RISs, channel estimation is
a widely recognized challenge in RIS-assisted links. Con-
sidering the resilience of RSMA to CSI inaccuracies and
user mobility as shown in many existing works, RIS-assisted
RSMA emerges as a promising new paradigm to effectively
address and compensate for the channel estimation limitations
inherent in RIS [428]. RIS-assisted RSMA therefore offers
a mutually beneficial solution to both RSMA and RIS. This
advantage is distinctive to RIS-assisted RSMA, as RSMA
uniquely demonstrates robustness to CSI, which is not shared
by other conventional MA schemes.
5) Technology Outlook and Future Works: RIS can signifi-
cantly improve the performance of various MA schemes from
the following perspectives:
• Enhanced spectrum efficiency: By dynamically adjust-
ing the phase and amplitude of incident signals, RISs pro-
vide narrow beams directed towards users. This versatile
capability brings about various advantages in different
MA schemes:
– OMA: enhances the signal strength, thereby improve
the spectrum efficiency.
– SDMA: effectively redirects intended signals to their
respective users and mitigates multi-user interfer-
ence, thereby enhancing spectrum efficiency.
– NOMA: creates an accurate beam towards the serv-
ing users and enhances the channel strength disparity
between the users, and thereby enhancing the spec-
trum efficiency.
– RSMA: unifies the benefits for OMA, SDMA and
NOMA, leading to higher spectrum efficiency.
• Enhanced energy efficiency: RISs employ beamforming
techniques to concentrate signals on specific users. This
avoids spreading energy in multiple directions and leads
to more efficient energy utilization for all MA schemes.
• Improved coverage: RISs introduce a new paradigm
for enhancing coverage in wireless networks. Instead of
deploying additional energy-consuming infrastructure for
relaying and forwarding signals, RISs adaptively redirect
signals to navigate obstacles like trees and buildings,
thereby extending coverage for all MA schemes.
• Low complexity: RISs contribute to reduce the computa-
tional and hardware complexity for various MA schemes.
In terms of computational complexity, the ability of RIS
to generate narrow beams and mitigate multi-user inter-
ference allows for simplified signal processing techniques
at the transceivers for all MA schemes. As demonstrated
in [421], the transmitter employing classical regularized
zero-forcing (RZF) precoding can attain comparable per-
formance to a scenario where the transmitter utilizes
optimized precoders (based on fractional programming),
provided that the number of RIS elements is sufficiently
large. From the hardware complexity perspective, as
RIS can enhance the spectral efficiency, it is capable
of reducing the number of antennas at the transceivers
without influencing system performance. Moreover, for
RSMA, the integration of RIS empowers the use of sim-
plified schemes, i.e., 1-layer RS, to achieve performance
comparable to HRS/GRS without RIS. Therefore, RIS
contributes to reduce the receiver complexity [445].
E. Internet-of-Things Networks, Massive Connectivity, and
Random Access
For IoT communication network, the key is how to co-
ordinate the transmission of small packets between the base
station and a huge number of IoT devices in an reliable and
low-latency manner. This is in sharp contrast to the human-
type communication, which targets at high-speed transmission
to/from a medium number of users. Such a difference poses
new challenges for the MA design under IoT applications.
Specifically, if the number of users is huge, then access
collision is more likely to occur, which leads to long delay.
In IoT network, it is of paramount importance to design
innovative MA schemes that can greatly reduce the access
delay so as to facilitate the small-packet transmission from a
massive number of IoT devices. Generally speaking, in the
literature, there are two solutions for MA in IoT network: the
grant-based MA technique and the grant-free MA technique,
as shown in Fig. 23.
Grant-based MA technique are conventional for eMBB-like
services and relies on the base station to grant users the access
of the radio spectrum for data transmission.
In grant-free MA, or also called grant-free random access
(RA), the devices can access the channel without any prior
resource requests [89], [446]. In addition, the set of active
users is unknown to the receiver. Grant-free RA is suitable
for supporting a massive number of devices with sporadic
traffic, e.g., mMTC as in IoT, and can be divided into two
different paradigms, namely sourced and unsourced RA [447],
[448]. For sourced RA, the receiver is interested in both
messages and user identities. Since the active device detection

39
Metadata
(Preamble)
Data
3. Connection Request
1. Random Preamble
2. Random Access Response
4. Contention Resolution
IoT User
Base Station
(a) Grant-based Random Access
(b) Grant-Free Random Access
Fig. 23. Grant-based versus grant-free random access schemes.
for sourced random access is a typical sparse signal processing
problem, numerous compressed sensing (CS) and AI-based
approaches have been employed to handle the detection and
user identification problems [449]–[453]. For unsourced RA,
the receiver is interested in the transmitted messages only (user
identity is recovered at the higher layers of the communication
protocol rather than the physical layer).
In the sequel, we discuss grant-based MA, grant-free
sourced random access (based on compressed sensing and AI),
and grant-free unsourced random access.
1) Grant-based Random Access: First, with human-type
communication,
the
contention-based
grant-based
access
schemes, e.g., ALOHA, are widely used. Under this scheme,
there is a preamble pool consisting of lots of orthogonal
preambles. When a user becomes active, it will randomly
select a preamble from the poor. If an active users selects a
unique preamble that is not selected by other active users,
the base station will grant this user the access for data
transmission. Otherwise, if some active users select the same
preambles, the base station will detect their access collision
and not grant them the access for data transmission. Despite
of their simplicity, such schemes do work quite well in current
cellular network, where the number of users is moderate.
Therefore, it is not surprised that some efforts have been
paid in the literature to investigate how to modify the existing
grant-based access schemes according to the requirements of
IoT applications. Here, the main issue to directly apply grant-
based schemes in IoT network lies in delay - when there is a
huge number of IoT devices to compete for the transmission
grant from the base station, the possibility for collision is very
high. As a result, in the literature, some works have been done
to propose efficient methods for resolving the collisions. For
example, in [454], a strongest-user collision resolution scheme
was proposed for grant-free random access in IoT network.
The idea is that after a collision occurs, each colliding user will
make a decision about whether it is with the strongest channel
among all the colliding users. If a colliding user believes that
its channel is the strongest, it will send the access request to
the base station. Otherwise, it will be quiet for some time and
re-compete for the access. It was shown in [454] that under the
massive MIMO regime, the strongest-user collision resolution
scheme can resolve most of the access collisions in massive
connectivity.
2) Grant-Free Sourced Random Access based on Com-
pressed Sensing: Second, one may ask whether it is possible
to reduce the collision probability, rather than resolving the
collision, under IoT networks. The goal can be achieved via
the grant-free random access scheme [446]. Under the grant-
based random access scheme, collision arises from the case
when multiple users select the same preamble for transmission.
To mitigate collision, a natural idea is that each user is
allocated with a fixed preamble, while the preambles allocated
to different users are different. In this case, the preamble of
each user serves as the identification of this user. In other
words, after receiving the preambles sent from the active
IoT devices, the base station can detect which preambles are
received, and then know which users are active. This scheme is
called grant-free scheme because the base station just detects
which users are active, instead of sending grants to permit
some users to be active. However, detecting which preambles
are received is quite challenging in massive IoT connectivity,
because it is not possible to assign orthogonal preambles
to a huge number of users. Recently, a breakthrough was
made to tackle the above challenge arising from grant-based
random access based on the compressed sensing technique.
Specifically, although there is a huge number of IoT devices,
most of them are in the sleeping model to save the energy at
each time slot. Thanks to this activity sparsity, it was shown
in [449] that detecting the active devices, i.e., deciding which
preambles are received, can be cast into a compressed sensing
problem. More importantly, based on the state evolution,
[449] rigorously proved that in the asymptotic massive MIMO
regime where the number of antennas at the base station goes
to infinity, the activity detection error probability can go down
to zero when the approximate message passing algorithm is
used. This result theoretically justifies the effectiveness of the
compressed sensing based grant-free random access scheme
for IoT networks.
3) Grant-Free Sourced Random Access based on AI: In
massive IoT connectivity setup, the number of IoT devices
is huge. As a result, low-complexity multiple access design
suitable for large-scale IoT network is appealing. In this
sense, recently, AI-empowered multiple access schemes have
attracted more and more attention in the area of massive
machine-type communications.
On one hand, the performance of compressed sensing algo-
rithms introduced in the above heavily depend on the choice

40
of the sensing matrix, while most of the works on compressed
sensing based device activity detection assume that the sensing
matrix, which is determined by the pilot signals assigned
to IoT devices, is given. For example, many works assume
Gaussian pilots [449], [455], [456] such that the approximate
message passing (AMP) algorithm can be adopted to detect the
active devices and analyze the detection performance based on
the state evolution. Moreover, Reed-muller sequences based
pilots have been utilized for device activity detection in [457].
However, how to design the pilot signals that work the best
for device activity detection is still open. This difficulty lies
in the unknown relation between the sensing matrix and the
detection performance. It is well-known that AI techniques are
a good option to learn the complicated and unknown relations.
Therefore, recently, there is a growing interest in applying
AI to design the pilot signals for massive IoT connectivity.
For example, it was found in [458], [459] that if the deep
learning technique is used to design the pilot signals, the
device detection performance can be improved compared to
using Gaussian pilots and Reed-muller sequences based pilots.
On the other hand, deep learning technique can also be
applied to design efficient device activity detection algorithms,
when the dimension of the problem is huge due to the large
number of IoT devices. In general, these deep learning based
device activity detection methods can be classified into data-
driven based methods and model-driven based methods. Under
data-driven based methods, basic neural network architectures,
e.g., fully connected neural networks, CNNs, are utilized to
detect active devices [459], [460]. Under model-driven based
methods, existing algorithms, e.g., AMP, group LASSO, etc.,
are utilized to train the neural networks for better activity
detection performance [461]–[464].
To summarize, there is a theoretical gain of the grant-free
random access scheme over the grant-based random access
scheme in IoT networks, because the former scheme can
mitigate almost all the collisions in the massive MIMO region,
but the latter scheme can merely tackle some of the collisions.
But the theoretical gain is achieved with complicated device
activity detection algorithms, under both the compressed sens-
ing based scheme and the covariance based scheme.
4) Grant-Free Unsourced Random Access: For unsourced
RA [465], the receiver is interested in the transmitted messages
only (user identity is recovered at the higher layers of the com-
munication protocol rather than the physical layer). Moreover,
all users share a common codebook, which is motivated by
the practical scenario where millions of low-cost IoT devices
have their codebook hardwired at the moment of production. In
addition, the number of users grows with the blocklength. Only
per-user error probability is of interest. The fundamental limits
of the unsourced RA channel have been studied in [465]–
[467]. Various popular achievable schemes are proposed in the
literature, which are based on concatenated coding structures
[468], [469], ALOHA [470], random spreading [471], [472],
etc.
5) Technology Outlook and Future Works: There are still
many challenges for MA in IoT network that have not been
addressed. For example, most of the works assume that all
the IoT devices are perfectly synchronized, such that when
they become active, they transmit their preambles at the same
time. In practice, it is impossible to perfect synchronize a huge
number of low-cost IoT devices. In this case, how to make
the strongest-user collision resolution scheme work under the
grant-based random access scheme? How to formulate the
device activity detection and synchronization error estimation
problem as a compressed sensing problem under the grant-
based random access scheme? Whether the sample covariance
matrix of the received sequence is still a sufficient statistic
for device activity detection? All these questions should be
carefully addressed before the MA schemes can work in IoT
networks. Moreover, there exist correlation in user activity
along the temporal and spatial domain. For example, if there
is a fire, several sensors around the fire site tend to be active
together, and each of these sensors tend to be active for some
time. How to utilize these correlation as side information to
improve the activity detection accuracy is also a challenge.
VII. ROADMAP TO 6G STANDARDIZATION
3GPP is the standards body that introduced UMTS/W-
CDMA for 3G, LTE for 4G and NR for 5G. 3GPP also
introduced GSM for 2G even before being called 3GPP. While
6G work has not yet started in 3GPP, it is expected to quickly
intensify in the 2nd half of 2025.
At the highest conceptual level, 3GPP has delivered over
its history systems based on TDMA (2G GSM), CDMA
(3G UMTS) and (O)FDMA (4G LTE and 5G NR) closely
following any textbook description of basic MA schemes. In
this section we look ahead into what 3GPP may consider for
MA for 6G by looking back first into previous generations.
The work of 3GPP is structured in so-called Releases, the
first version of the 3G specifications was introduced in Release
99 towards the end of last millennium. Release 4 was the
subsequent Release after which Releases have been labeled
with increasing index. For example, the first version of 4G
LTE was introduced in Release 8 while the first version of
5G NR was introduced in Release 15. Release 18, the first
Release of 5G-Advanced, was finalized late 2023 and Release
19 started in early 2024. The study phase for 6G is expected
to launch in Release 20 in the second half of 2025. In turn,
the first 6G specifications are expected in Release 21 with a
completion date anticipated to be between the end of 2028
and the end of 2029 aiming at commercial 6G deployments
sometime around 2030.
MA is one of the main characteristics of any wireless
system. Indeed, it is one of the first decisions made when the
design of a new generation takes place as it relates closely to
the underlying waveform. It is important to note that, typically,
there is one main MA scheme which is supplemented by
other schemes for certain specific functions as we will discuss
shortly.
A. MA in 3G and 4G
In 3G systems, the MA scheme in the downlink is based
on CDMA with Hadamard or Walsh codes applied to coded
modulation symbols and orthogonally separating the various
channels in a given cell. Different codes can be used to

41
transmit data of different users and multiple codes can be used
to increase the data rate for a given user. The application of
these codes effectively expands the transmission bandwidth by
a factor called spreading factor. The spreading factor offers
the ability to boost the SINR at the receiver helping to cope
with multiple sources of interference, i.e., inter-cell, intra-cell
(ISI). However, the spreading factor decreased over time as the
target operating data rates increased. This trend increased the
need to use equalizers at the receiver, which, in turn, made
OFDM based transmissions more appealing as they would
not require equalization at the receiver. The application of a
cell-dependent scrambling based on long pseudo-noise (PN)
sequences onto the aggregated transmissions of a given cell
makes it appear as noise when received at neighboring cells
in full frequency reuse deployments.
For 4G, OFDMA was introduced in the downlink main-
taining intra-cell orthogonality while being more resilient to
ISI caused by the delay spread of the channel. In full fre-
quency reuse deployments, transmissions from different cells
are randomized through the application of a cell-dependent
scrambling based on long PN sequences similar to 3G.
In the transition from 3G to 4G, for the uplink we went from
a non-orthogonal MA with CDMA in 3G to orthogonal MA
with DFT-spread OFDM (DFT-S-OFDM) in 4G. Transitions
are typically somewhat blurred with inroads into new schemes
by way of extensions of the current scheme before an entirely
new scheme is introduced. For example, in the second half
of 3G days we experienced the migration from circuit switch
(CS) to packet switch (PS) communications. With that mi-
gration, we also moved from continuous downlink and uplink
transmissions to packetized transmissions which would need to
be scheduled by the network. Therefore, Release 5 introduced
scheduled downlink with much lower multiplexing capability
in the code domain (lower spreading factor) and aiming
more at time-domain-multiplexing (TDM’ing) transmissions
to multiple users with the goal to increase the instantaneous
individual user data rate with the so-called high speed down-
link packet access (HSDPA). Similarly, Release 6 introduced at
the time scheduled UL with what was called enhanced uplink
(eUL) or high speed uplink packet access (HSUPA). Release 7,
in turn, introduced discontinuous uplink transmissions which,
for the first time, enabled uplink transmissions to be gated
in time and hence favoring TDM’ing of transmissions from
different users supplemented with the possibility of non-
orthogonally multiplexing multiple users’ transmissions in the
code domain (CDMA).
The main driver for the switch of MA from 3G to 4G
was the uplink performance for cell-edge users for which
the introduction of frequency domain multiplexing (FDM’ing)
brought important performance gains in terms of uplink user
throughput [473]. The realization of FDM in the uplink of
4G was done via the introduction of DFT-S-OFDM, which
due to its single carrier properties was key to reduce the user
transmissions’ peak-to-average-power-ratio (PAPR) which di-
rectly entails a coverage gain for the uplink. Also, because of
its underlying block-based construction of OFDM, subframe
transmissions of 1ms simply meant transmissions of 14 sym-
bols facilitating TDM’ing of transmissions with a built-in time-
domain gating function which did not exist in 3G days.
While FDMA/TDMA was the main MA scheme for the
uplink enabling orthogonal access for users with the same
serving cell, it is not the only MA scheme used in 4G LTE.
Indeed, random access is performed via the Physical Ran-
dom Access Channel (PRACH) which, while orthogonalized
in time and frequency with the other uplink Physical Layer
(PHY) channels, PRACH transmissions from different users
overlap with each other yielding a CDMA-like MA for this
physical channel with possibility of recoverable or unrecover-
able inter-user collisions.
Furthermore, SDMA was envisioned to enable MU-MIMO
operation from the start of 4G. In this scenario, the spatial
dimensionality of the channel is exploited by enabling data
transmissions from different users to overlap in time and
frequency with each other relying on spatially separating them
at the multi-antenna base-station receiver. As a result, while
the data portion of the uplink transmission is merely spatial-
division-multiplexed (SDM’d) across users, their reference
signal transmissions are orthogonalized by virtue of different
cyclic shifts of the underlying Zadoff-Chu sequences used
to modulate the demodulation reference signals (DMRS). In
turn, that orthogonalization enables the possibility to perform
channel estimation for each user’s transmission off cleaner
DMRS samples without inter-user interference.
Moreover, uplink control channel transmissions typically
bear few bits of information which attempting to orthogonalize
solely in the frequency domain would very rapidly run out of
dimensions in the frequency domain (resource limitation). In
order to alleviate that limitation, the possibility to orthogonally
multiplex within the same time/frequency resources via differ-
ent cyclic shifts of underlying Zadoff-Chu sequences (similar
to DMRS) or time-domain orthogonal covers applied to each
uplink symbol was also introduced to increase the capacify
of the uplink control channel. Release 10 introduced the
possibility for SU-MIMO in the uplink of LTE still resorting
to DFT-S-OFDM for each of the transmitted layers.
Towards the latter part of LTE, multi-user superposition
transmission (MUST) was standardized for the downlink of
LTE in Release 14 after the conclusion of the corresponding
study item in the preceding release. The project attempted to
jointly optimize multi-user operation from both transmitter and
receiver’s perspective to improve the MU system capacity even
if the transmission/precoding was non-orthogonal. The out-
come of the study is captured in the technical report (TR) for
MUST in [8]. Three MUST categories were identified during
the study: 1) MUST Category 1: Superposition transmission
with adaptive power ratio on component constellations and
non-Gray-mapped composite constellation; 2) MUST Cate-
gory 2: Superposition transmission with adaptive power ratio
on component constellations and Gray-mapped composite con-
stellation; MUST Category 3: Superposition transmission with
label-bit assignment on Gray-mapped composite constellation.
B. MA in 5G and 6G
With the exception of MUST, all the schemes mentioned for
4G LTE were also adopted for 5G NR. Indeed, for the uplink

42
data channel, the earlier mentioned DFT-S-OFDM is only used
for single layer transmissions, while multi-layer transmissions
always resort to OFDMA to improve link efficiency at the cost
of an increased PAPR. The DMRS of the uplink data channel
for different layers of the same user and from different users
in the same cell are orthogonalized in time/frequency domain
by corresponding orthogonal covers.
5G NR while introduced in Release 15, had a project in
Release 16 to study NOMA [474] as a follow up to the
discussions during the 5G NR study of Release 14 [475].
The TR for NOMA is a good reference [7] to review the
schemes that were considered during the study with some of
them presented in this paper. The Release 16 NOMA study
investigated the application of NOMA techniques to mMTC,
URLLC, and eMBB communications.
The uplink NOMA transmitter was generalized so that it
would include all the different flavors being considered. Also,
different receivers were considered tailored to the different
schemes and incurring various levels of complexity.
The outcome of the Release 16 study was deemed to be
non-conclusive and a follow up work item was not approved
at the time. Part of the reason was the proliferation of schemes
during the study without a clear winner amongst them which
made it impossible to define the scope of a normative project
for only one scheme. Perhaps the scope of the project was too
broad aiming at NOMA for mMTC, URLLC and eMBB use
cases. Note that the mMTC use case of IMT-2020 is actually
served by LTE CatM (eMTC) and NBIOT originally developed
in Release 13 and evolved thereafter.
Indeed, it was discussed that NOMA could be enabled
in NR without specification impact provided that there was
adequate receiver processing. The possibility to expand the
number of orthogonal DMRS ports was discussed which, in
combination with multi-user detectors at the receiver, would
enable the possibility for processing fully overlapping data
transmissions from different users. Those transmissions from
multiple users could be resulting from dynamic scheduling
from the network (with individual grants to each of the users)
or from overlapping configured grants (pre-configured via L2
or L3 allocations).
In the absence of a normative projects for NOMA specifica-
tion, a minor improvement to the Random Access procedure
which used to take 4-steps was approved with the goal to
shorten it to 2-steps [476]. It is, however, likely that the
investigations that took part during Release 16 will be revisited
when NOMA is considered again in 3GPP in the future.
Clearly, there is no universal MA (yet) that optimally suits
all applications and use cases. The MA scheme aiming at op-
timizing individual user’s high throughput operation (eMBB-
like use case) is not the same as the one aiming at maximizing
multiplexing capability for low-rate applications of many,
many users (mMTC-like use case). To some extent, that trade-
off is already seen by looking into the nuanced MA scheme
used today for random access, uplink control channel, uplink
data channel, etc.
6G will see a resurgence of MA discussions. Though
traditionally there is one main MA scheme supplemented
by other schemes for certain specific functions, it is unclear
whether this approach will still hold for 6G with the pro-
liferation of schemes to cope with eMBB and mMTC but
also and mainly to enable new use cases fueled by emerging
intelligent and multi-functional applications. Aside the ones
already discussed as part of 5G, more recent MA schemes
have made their way toward standardization. This is the
case of RSMA whose ”universal” capability has been found
attractive by various industries and recently been proposed
for the first time for 6G for various use cases such as 1) to
boost the performance of unicast transmissions beyond what
has been achieved traditionally in 4G and 5G by SDMA-
multi-user MIMO [477], and 2) to enable non-orthogonal
unicast and multicast transmissions where multicast traffic
are superimposed over unicast traffic instead of being served
in orthogonal resources as in 4G and 5G [478]. It will be
interesting to see in the coming years whether 3GPP will
favour a single unified and general MA scheme as main MA
scheme instead of a combination of multiple MA schemes,
each optimized for specific conditions.
C. AI/ML in 5G and 6G
A Study Item for AI/ML applied to the NR Air Interface was
agreed for Release 18 [479]. The TR for this study is available
at [480] and constitutes a good reference to review what is be-
ing studied (project completion planned for December 2023).
While AI/ML first appeared in 3GPP for the purpose of users’
data collection, this project is the first time in 3GPP where the
direct application of AI/ML is sought for some fundamental
air interface problems. In order to avoid too abstract, high
level conceptual discussions and to give some shape to the
project, a number of pilot use cases was identified to be
analyzed for this project. Namely, CSI enhancements, beam
management (BM) and positioning accuracy enhancements.
Each of those three use cases was further refined into two
sub-use cases. Namely, CSI (spatial-frequency) compression
and CSI (temporal) prediction for CSI enhancement, Spatial
beam prediction and Temporal beam prediction for BM, direct
AI/ML positioning and AI/ML assisted positioning for Posi-
tioning accuracy enhancements. All sub use cases but CSI
compression rely on single-sided models at the user terminal
or the network, while CSI compression resorts to two-sided
AI/ML models with one part of the model running at the
user terminal side and the other at the network side. For the
CSI compression sub use case, the user terminal side performs
the encoding or compression of the CSI information, and the
network side performs the decoder or decompression to obtain
the terminal’s CSI.
It is expected that normative work to address the specifica-
tion impact of these use cases will be carried out as part of
Release 19. Moreover, further use cases, for example Mobility
enhancements, may be additionally investigated.
As indicated by the ITU-R WP 5D framework document for
IMT-2030 [481], Integrated AI and communication has been
identified as one of the usage scenarios for IMT-2030. As a
result, it is expected that 6G will be AI/ML native.
While nobody knows precisely what that will imply from
3GPP perspective, the foundational work on AI/ML for NR air

43
interface that is underway will for sure play a very important
role on how native 6G will be specified [482] [483] [484]
[485] [486].
The application of AI/ML techniques to MA may be inves-
tigated for 6G with the aim at figuring out the optimal MA
scheme for the given application and use case. Indeed, channel
access policies that fluently transition from contention- to
schedule-based depending on the use case and environment
are deemed desirable [484].
Similar to the Rel-18 study where single-sided and two-
sided (or cross-node) models are being considered depending
on the use case, different AI/ML functions for 6G will require
one or another approach. In particular, how the AI/ML engines
running at the terminals and the network will figure out the
optimal MA scheme is subject of research and will for sure
open up new opportunities for improved system performance
and user experience. Adaptability of the models through
further offline or even online training will also play a key
role in the end-to-end performance optimization.
As a result, the current investigations on join training
of two-sided models, as well as, their interoperability and
performance testing will be very relevant for the future native
AI work in 6G.
VIII. CONCLUSIONS
Wireless networks experience a paradigm shift with the
integration of multi-functionality and the rise of AI and ML.
6G and beyond will be AI-native and multi-functionality-
native, spurring the need to re-think multiple access techniques
to make use of the available time, frequency, space, power,
signal dimensions to serve users, devices, machines, services,
training nodes in the most efficient way and cope with those
new network advances. The paper highlighted that much work
is left for researchers in this area. Aside many other schemes,
RSMA has emerged in the past few years by providing a
unified and conceptually simple understanding of SDMA, PD-
NOMA, physical layer multicasting, and uniquely shrinks
rather grows the knowledge tree of MA schemes based on
space, power, signal dimensions. Consequently RSMA has
found numerous applications for 6G. Moving next, UMA
should further shrink the knowledge tree of MA schemes
by unifying RSMA with all other dimensions, such as code
domain MAs, and ultimately provide a unified and conceptu-
ally simple understanding of the current and future morass of
MA schemes. Such UMA does not exist yet. It is hoped that
the techniques and outlook presented in this article will help
inspiring future research in this exciting and important area
and pave the way for designing and implementing efficient
multiple access techniques in future wireless systems.
