Modular RADAR: An Immune System Inspired
Search and Response Strategy for Distributed
Systems
Soumya Banerjee1 and Melanie Moses1
Department of Computer Science, University of New Mexico, USA

Abstract. The Natural Immune System (NIS) is a distributed system
that solves challenging search and response problems while operating
under constraints imposed by physical space and resource availability.
Remarkably, NIS search and response times do not scale appreciably
with the physical size of the animal in which its search is conducted.
Many distributed systems are engineered to solve analogous problems,
and the NIS demonstrates how such engineered systems can achieve de-
sirable scalability. We hypothesize that the architecture of the NIS, com-
posed of a hierarchical decentralized detection network of lymph nodes
(LN) facilitates eﬃcient search and response. A sub-modular architec-
ture in which LN numbers and size both scale with organism size is
shown to eﬃciently balance tradeoﬀs between local antigen detection
and global antibody production, leading to nearly scale-invariant detec-
tion and response. We characterize the tradeoﬀs as balancing local and
global communication and show that similar tradeoﬀs exist in distributed
systems like LN inspired artiﬁcial immune system (AIS) applications and
peer-to-peer (P2P) systems. Taking inspiration from the architecture of
the NIS, we propose a modular RADAR (Robust Adaptive Decentral-
ized search with Automated Response) strategy for distributed systems.
We demonstrate how two existing distributed systems (a LN inspired
multi-robot control application and a P2P system) can be improved by
a modular RADAR strategy. Such a sub-modular architecture is shown
to balance the tradeoﬀs between local communication (within artiﬁcial
LNs and P2P clusters) and global communication (between artiﬁcial LNs
and P2P clusters), leading to eﬃcient search and response.
1
Introduction
Distributed systems are becoming increasingly important, for example in envi-
ronmental monitoring, disaster relief, military operations, multi-robot control,
wireless sensor networks and peer-to-peer systems [1]. Such systems typically
are distributed in physical space with limited resources like power and band-
width, and performance scalability is desirable. The natural immune system
(NIS) demonstrates that nearly scale invariant performance is possible, even
under constraints imposed by physical space and resource availability [2, 3].
arXiv:1006.3394v1  [cs.DC]  17 Jun 2010

The NIS searches trillions of host cells to ﬁnd small amounts of spatially local-
ized antigen. The search for antigen and response (neutralizing the pathogen) is
nearly invariant with respect to the size of the host [2, 3]. Search in the NIS occurs
in a hierarchical modular network of lymph nodes (LN) distributed throughout
the body. LNs are the primary locations in which populations of adaptive and
innate immune cells interact to recognize and respond to pathogens. We hypoth-
esize that this NIS architecture promotes modular RADAR (Robust Adaptive
Decentralized search with Automated Response).
Previous work [2, 3] shows how the architecture of the lymphatic network
enables the NIS to detect antigen and respond by producing antibodies in time
that is nearly invariant with animal size. Our analysis of data on experimental
infection by West Nile Virus (WNV) of a range of animals (from 30g sparrows to
300 kg horses) indicates that the NIS neutralizes WNV in approximately 3 days
regardless of body size [2, 3]. This is surprising in the light of two facts: First,
the NIS of a horse has to search for a needle (rare antigen) in a much larger
haystack (body) than the NIS of a sparrow. Second, experimental data indicates
that a critical concentration of WNV-speciﬁc antibody needs to be present in
the bloodstream to neutralize WNV. Since the volume of blood in an organism
is proportional to body mass [4], a horse will have to produce 10000 times more
antibody, in the same time, as a sparrow.
Hence the search and response problem is more challenging in larger or-
ganisms. We show that a semi-modular NIS architecture is capable of nearly
scale-invariant detection and response. We then use this as inspiration for search
and response strategies in other distributed systems. We show how the modular
RADAR architecture improves search and response in a LN inspired multi-robot
control application and a peer-to-peer content search system.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: we review relevant fea-
tures of the NIS, deﬁne attributes of the modular RADAR process, explain
our experimental data source, and then explain how a sub-modular architecture
makes scale-invariant search and response possible. We then demonstrate how
modular RADAR architectures improve search in two distributed systems, and
end with concluding remarks.
2
A Review of the Relevant Immunology
LNs reduce the physical space in which lymphocytes search for the particular
pathogens that they can recognize and neutralize, and hence they vastly speed
up the distributed search and response to novel pathogens. Without concentrat-
ing the search into a small volume of tissue, the distributed search for novel
pathogens by rare pathogen speciﬁc lymphocytes would be prohibitively slow.
We hypothesize that evolutionary pressures have shaped the number and size
of LN to minimize the time to unite rare antigen-speciﬁc lymphocytes (B-cells
and T-cells) with pathogens. LNs provide a small volume of tissue in which
lymphocytes, antigen-presenting cells and antigen encounter each other. The
area of tissue that drains into a LN is called its draining region (DR). Dendritic

cells (DCs) sample the tissue in DRs for pathogens, and upon encountering them,
migrate to the nearest LN to present antigen to T helper cells. Upon recognizing
cognate antigen on DCs, T-cells proliferate and build up a clonal population in a
process called clonal expansion. While proliferating, T helper cells also migrate
to the LN B-cell area to activate B-cells. B-cells are activated by antigen-bearing
DC and T helper cells. After activation, B-cells undergo clonal expansion and
diﬀerentiate into antibody-secreting plasma cells.
Cognate T-cells and B-cells speciﬁc to a particular pathogen are very rare
(1 in 106 cells will bind to a particular antigen [5]), thus the draining LN also
recruits B-cells from other LNs. The rate at which B-cells ﬂow into a particular
LN is determined by the cross sectional area of the High Endothelial Venule
(HEV) which is proportional to LN volume [5]. Rapid detection requires that
pathogens are quickly picked up by DC and carried to the LN for presentation to
T- and B-cells. Smaller DR reduce the time for DC to migrate to the LN. Rapid
response (in this case we consider antibody production as the response), requires
that suﬃcient numbers of B-cells are activated, ultimately to produce suﬃcient
antibody to neutralize the pathogen. Since both the number of B-cells resident
in a LN and the rate at which B-cells are recruited to a LN is proportional to
LN volume, larger LN reduce the time to activate a B-cell response.
3
Modular RADAR
LNs form a hierarchical distributed detection network that is modular (by di-
viding the search space into semi-independent modules or LNs), eﬃcient (since
search occurs in the small physical space of a LN as opposed to throughout the
body) and parallel (since there are many such small searches being conducted
in parallel). The size of a module (LN) is set by tradeoﬀs between local and
global communication. We mathematically determine the extent of modularity
required to conduct eﬃcient and nearly scale-invariant search and response. We
call this a modular RADAR (Robust Adaptive Decentralized search with Auto-
mated Response) strategy. Search and response in the NIS is characterized by
the following attributes:
1. Robust: There is redundancy and diversity among components, but the ex-
act role of a component is ﬂexible. Large numbers of individuals respond
probabilistically to information signals. While sometimes this can lead to
responses that grow out of control (i.e. cytokine storms in response to in-
ﬂuenza infection [6]), generally the wisdom of the crowd [7] is eﬀective even
when individuals make mistakes.
2. Adaptive: Adaptation occurs by individuals or populations of individuals
changing in response to environmental signals. When a B-cell binds to a
pathogen and is activated by other immune system cells, that B-cell produces
a large and variable population of daughter B-cells. Those that bind to the
pathogen most eﬀectively reproduce faster, so the population of cells gets
better at neutralizing the pathogen.

3. Decentralized search: Control is completely decentralized and communica-
tion between NIS cells is aggregated spatially, e.g. LNs concentrate interac-
tions and chemical signalling between NIS cells.
4. Automated Response: The response is as distributed as search. Individuals
act (e.g., kill an infected cell or move along a chemical gradient) by integrat-
ing local signals from their environment.
Much of the Artiﬁcial Immune System (AIS) literature focuses on abstracting
algorithms to confer adaptation, learning, memory and robustness from NIS
processes (e.g. negative selection, clonal selection algorithms, etc [8]). We do
not suggest new algorithms; rather, we propose that the physical division of
NIS search into LN and DR can inspire architectures that other distributed
algorithms can exploit to balance local and global communication.
4
Data Characterizing Immune Response Times
In previous work [2, 3], we analyzed data from a study of WNV infection. Animals
ranging from 0.03 kg sparrows to 300 kg horses, were experimentally infected
with WNV and the viral concentration in blood was measured on a daily basis.
A critical amount of WNV-speciﬁc antibody is required for neutralizing WNV
[9]. Previous studies have shown that the time to attain peak viral concentration
(tpv) coincides with the time taken to secrete a critical amount of WNV-speciﬁc
antibody [9]. For the experimental infection studies described above, tpv ranged
from 2 to 4 days post infection, and was uncorrelated with animal body size
(tpv vs. M, p-value = 0.35, where M is organism mass) [2, 3]. Since tpv is the
time taken to detect pathogens and secrete a critical amount of antibody, the
absence of a relationship of tpv with mass indicates that the NIS has nearly
scale-invariant detection and response.
5
Sub-Modular Architecture Balances TradeoﬀBetween
Local and Global Communication
5.1
Data on Lymph Nodes
Published empirical data suggest that the mammalian NIS has a sub-modular
architecture. LNs increase in both size and in numbers as animal size increases,
e.g. 20g mice have 24 LN averaging 0.004g each, and humans are 3000 times
bigger and have 20 times more LN, each 200 times bigger [10, 11]. Data from
elephants (with LN approaching the size of an entire mouse) and horses (with
8000 LN) also support the hypotheses that LN size and number both increase
with body size [11, 12]; however data for more species are required in order
to determine scaling exponents that quantitatively describe how LN size and
number change with body size.
We hypothesize that total LN volume (the number of LN multiplied by av-
erage LN volume) is linearly proportional to animal mass because most organ

and ﬂuid volumes (i.e heart, blood and liver volume) are linearly proportional to
mass [4]. The data are consistent with this hypothesis. This suggests a tradeoﬀ
between LN size and number. Since DR size equals animal volume divided by
LN number, there is also a tradeoﬀbetween DR size and LN size.
5.2
Mathematical Analysis
In previous work [2, 3] we hypothesized that the NIS is sub-modular because it
is selected not just to minimize time to detect pathogens, but also to minimize
the time to produce a suﬃcient concentration of antibody in the blood (Abcrit).
We hypothesize that the NIS has evolved to minimize two quantities: the time
to detect antigen and the time to recruit B-cells from other LNs and produce
absolute quantities of antibody (Ab), where Ab is proportional to M (organism
mass).
The smallest LN (e.g. in mice or sparrows) contain on the order of a single
B-cell that recognizes any particular pathogen [5]. If LNs in all organisms were
of a ﬁxed size (and therefore contained a ﬁxed number of B-cells), each LN
would serve a ﬁxed-size DR of tissue, and a parallel search for antigen in a ﬁxed
space would be repeated more times in a larger organism. This would achieve
scale-invariant search.
However, the NIS of larger organisms has to activate a number of B-cells
(Bcrit) ∝M, in order to build up the critical density of antibodies in a ﬁxed
period of time [9]. Activating Bcrit (which is proportional to M) to ﬁght an
infection like WNV that is initially localized in a single DR, requires recruiting
on the order of M B-cells from distant LN. We consider this activation of B-cells
from remote LN as global communication.
The number of LNs that a single infected site LN has to communicate with
(Ncomm) in order to recruit more B-cells is proportional to the critical number
of B-cells required to neutralize the pathogen (Bcrit) divided by the number of
antigen-speciﬁc B-cells resident in a LN (NumBcell): Ncomm ∝Bcrit/NumBcell.
Noting that Bcrit ∝M and NumBcell ∝VLN (volume of a LN) we have Ncomm ∝
M/VLN.
The rate at which new B-cells from other LN enter into infected LN through
the high endothelial vessels (ratecomm) is proportional to the volume of the
LN, ratecomm ∝VLN [5]. The time spent in communicating with other LNs
and recruiting and activating other B-cells (tcomm) is then given by tcomm =
Ncomm/ratecomm and tcomm ∝M/V 2
LN.
Hence if LNs in all organisms are of the same size (if VLN ∝M 0), and the
number of LNs scaled linearly with organism size, there are increasing costs to
communicating with other LN as the organism gets bigger (tcomm ∝M); the
NIS would conduct eﬃcient search but not eﬃcient antibody production.
An alternative is to have a ﬁxed number (N) of LN whose volumes increase
linearly with M: VLN ∝M 1 and N ∝M 0. This increases the rate of inﬂux of B-
cells (ratecomm ∝VLN ∝M) and also situates more NIS cells inside the infected
site LN. Since all the necessary NIS cells which need to be activated are within
the LN, this architecture has no communication cost. However, if the number of

LN is invariant, each LN in a larger organism services a larger volume of tissue.
Such an architecture would lead to DC migration times that are prohibitively
long for large animals (tDC
migrate ∝M 1/3) since antigen-loaded DCs would have
to migrate longer distances to reach the draining LN [3].
The architecture that strikes a balance between the two opposing goals of
antigen detection (local communication) and antibody production (global com-
munication) is found by minimizing tcomm and tmigrate which gives VLN ∝M 3/7
and N ∝M 4/7 where VLN is the size (volume) of a LN and N is the number of
LNs in an organism of mass M [3]. This is a sub-modular architecture in which
LN size and numbers both scale sub-linearly with organism size (Fig. 1).
These equations indicate that time for DC to carry antigen to LN scales as
M 1/7 (since tmigrate is proportional to the radius of the DR, whose volume is
M/N or M 3/7). Similarly, the time to recruit cognate B-cells to the infected site
is N divided by the rate of B-cell migration into the LN (which is proportional
to VLN), giving, again, M 1/7. In previous work [3] we use an agent based model
parameterized with empirical values to show that this scaling results in a total
time for the entire search and response process that diﬀers by less than 1 day
between horses and sparrows (which is in agreement with empirical data).
In summary, due to the requirement of activating increasing numbers of NIS
cells for antibody production in larger organisms, there are increasing costs to
global communication as organisms grow bigger. The sub-modular architecture
balances the opposing goals of detecting antigen using local communication and
producing antibody using global communication. Such a modular RADAR search
strategy leads to optimal antigen detection and antibody production time, and
makes the NIS robust and adaptive.
6
Applications to Artiﬁcial Immune Systems and Other
Distributed Systems
Spatially constrained networks are being increasingly used in environmental
monitoring, disaster relief and military operations [1]. These networks operate
under constraints similar to an NIS and hence their design can be informed by ar-
chitectural strategies employed by their biological counterpart. We incorporate
modular RADAR strategies for rapid search and response to two distributed
systems.
6.1
Application to Mobile Devices
Original System Our work has implications for the architecture of AIS algo-
rithms for multi-robot control [13–15]. The robots and their communication are
constrained by physical space, and scaling of performance with system size is
an important design criterion. These systems use computer servers (analogous
to LNs) to coordinate information exchange between mobile devices (analogous
to dendritic cells) in a physical area (analogous to the DR of a LN). When
the robots encounter obstacles (analogous to antigen), they communicate with

Fig. 1. A sub-modular detection network of lymph nodes. The shaded regions are LNs
and the unshaded regions are the DR. The hypothetical organism on the right is four
times as big as the one on the left. The number of LNs and their size both increase
with the size of the organism. The local communication (antigen loaded DC migration
to LN) is shown by a dotted arrow and the global communication (recruitment of NIS
cells from other LNs) is shown by solid arrows. The size of the incoming arrow into a
LN represents the size of the HEV (which is proportional to the size of a LN)
software agents (B-cells) residing in the local computer server (LN). The soft-
ware agents transmit actions to robots to help overcome their obstacles, and
agents also share information globally by migrating to other computer servers
(analogous to B-cells migrating between LN). Hence computer servers share eﬃ-
cient solutions locally with robots in their DR and globally with other computer
servers. The system is diagrammed in Fig. 2 (modiﬁed from [13]).
Modifying the Original System Using the Modular RADAR Architec-
ture By analogy with the NIS, a modular architecture can be used to minimize
the time taken by a robot to transmit information about an obstacle (local detec-
tion), the time taken by a computer server to transmit back an initial rule-set of
actions (local response) and the time taken by a computer server to communicate
good rule-sets to other agents (global response). There are two potential com-
munication bottlenecks: communication between robots and computer servers,
and communication between computer servers.
A bottleneck in (local) communication between robot and server demands
many small DRs. A bottleneck in (global) server communication requires a few
large servers. If both local and global communication are constrained, the ar-
chitecture which balances these opposing requirements is sub-modular, i.e. the
number of servers increases sublinearly with system size and the capacity of
each server (bandwidth, memory and number of robots serviced by each server)
increases sublinearly with system size (shown in Fig. 2).

Robot
Robot
Agent
Agent
Robot
Robot
Robot
Robot
Robot
Robot
Agent
Agent
Agent
Agent
Agent
Agent
Fig. 2. (A) Left Panel: a scaled down version of the multi-robot AIS system. The
shaded regions are artiﬁcial LNs (computer servers) and the unshaded regions are the
artiﬁcial DR. Light arrows denote communication between robots and servers (local
communication) and bold arrows denote communication between servers (global com-
munication). (B) Right Panel: a scaled up multi-robot AIS system with sub-modular
architecture. Note that the number of artiﬁcial LNs and their size (the number of robots
they service and the number of software agents they have in memory) both increase
with the size of the system.
The local communication time within an artiﬁcial DR is a function of the
number of robots (d) serviced by the artiﬁcial LN
tlocal = f(d)
(1)
The function f will depend on constraints on communication between robots
and servers, inﬂuenced, for example, by how robot requests are queued on the
server and the distance over which low power robots can send and receive mes-
sages. The global communication time between artiﬁcial LNs is also a function
of the number of LNs in the system (n/d) where n is the total number of robots
in the entire system
tglobal = g(n/d)
(2)
The function g depends on communication constraints between servers. For
low latency and high bandwidth connections among servers, tglobal may not scale
appreciably. However, low power servers distributed in remote environments,
may preclude broadcast communication such that tglobal increases with n/d.
An increase in the size of an artiﬁcial LN (and hence the number of robots
serviced, d) would reduce tglobal at the cost of tlocal. The size and number of
artiﬁcial LNs to balance local and global communication depends on the precise
functions f and g mediating local and global communication. We turn to another

application in peer-to-peer systems where local and global communication are
speciﬁed.
In summary, the incorporation of a modular RADAR strategy will lead to
faster search and response times (T = tlocal + tglobal) in such LN inspired AIS
applications. It would also improve robustness since there are more components
(robots in this case) in a single DR as the system grows larger, and hence failure
can be compensated by the presence of other redundant components.
6.2
Peer-to-Peer Systems
Peer-to-peer (P2P) systems are emerging as a signiﬁcant vehicle for providing
distributed services like search, content integration and administration. In such
systems, computer nodes store data or a particular service and no single node
has complete global information about the whole system. Hence these decentral-
ized systems present fundamental challenges during location of resources (data,
services, etc) distributed over a multitude of locations.
Original System Search for resources (data, services, etc) distributed over
multiple nodes in a P2P network, is similar to the search for pathogens by DCs
within a LN and the search for cognate B-cells between LN. Here we focus
on a speciﬁc P2P overlay network called Semantic Small World (SSW) that
supports eﬃcient context-semantic based search [16]. SSW represents objects by
a collection of attribute values derived from object content or metadata. The
SSW P2P overlay network aggregates data objects with similar semantics close
to each other in clusters in order to facilitate eﬃcient search.
Real-world applications require a large number of attributes to identify data
objects, so search is through a high-dimensional search space. SSW follows Klein-
berg [17] to understand how to conduct eﬃcient decentralized search when each
node only has information about its neighbours, and no nodes have global knowl-
edge about the location of resources. For such search to eﬃciently scale up to
large numbers of nodes, each node is required to maintain some long-distance
connections drawn from a particular probability distribution. Each node main-
tains l long-distance links each of which are drawn with probability proportional
to 1/d (d is the distance between two nodes) in addition to s short-distance
links. With such a small-world distribution of links, the network structure itself
provides latent structural cues, such that each node with only local information
can guide a message to a distant target [17].
Search across clusters (global search) proceeds via the short and long distance
links by comparing coordinates of the destination and subspaces of the traversed
nodes. Search within a cluster (local search) is by neighbour ﬂooding whereby
each node sends out a search request to all its nearest neighbours. The system is
diagrammed in Fig 3. The average time for search across clusters (global search)
is given by tglobal = O( log2(n/c)
l
) where n is the number of nodes, c is the size
of a cluster (number of nodes in a cluster) and l is the number of long distance
connections per node [16].

Modifying the Original System Using the Modular RADAR Archi-
tecture SSW keeps the size of a cluster (c) and the number of long-distance
links per node (c) constant, even as the number of nodes, n, increases. Our con-
tribution is to modify the system by varying the cluster size and the number of
long-distance links per node, analogous to the way that the NIS varies LN size
and communication between LN, respectively. We show that there exists a trade-
oﬀbetween local search time (within a cluster) and global search time (across
clusters), and the modular RADAR architecture eﬃciently balances them.
Fig. 3. (A) Left Panel: a P2P content search system showing clusters (big circles) and
nodes within them (small ovals). Short-distance links are shown by light arrows and a
long-distance connection is shown in bold arrows (shown only for a single node). (B)
Right Panel: a scaled up version of the P2P content search system with a sub-modular
architecture. Both the number of clusters and their size (number of nodes within them)
now increase with system size (total number of nodes). Note that there are also more
long-distance connections per node (shown only for a single node).
First we vary the number of long-distance connections per node as l =
O(log(n/c)). This sets the number of long-distance links per node to the log-
arithm of the number of clusters (n/c). This is an example of densiﬁcation [18]
in which the number of connections increases slowly with system size in order to
minimize the time to send a message to a distant node and also increases robust-
ness. Densiﬁcation is found empirically in technological networks [18]. The result-
ing average time for search across clusters is now given by tglobal = O(log(n/c)).
The worst case time taken to propagate a message within a cluster (local search)
using neighbour ﬂooding is given by tlocal = O(c1/2). This reﬂects the longest
message propagation distance (the diagonal) in a lattice of c elements. Thus, the
total time to search within and across clusters is given by
T = tlocal + tglobal = α1c1/2 + α2log(n/c)
(3)
where α1 and α2 are constants. Simplifying we have T = α1c1/2−α2logc+α2logn.
Since we desire a relation for c (cluster size) in terms of n (number of nodes),

intuitively we see that the expression containing c (α1c1/2−α2logc) must scale at
most as the term containing n (α2logn). Otherwise, the expression containing c
asymptotically dominates the expression containing n, and T would scale faster
than logn. To achieve better than logarithmic scaling with n, we set α1c1/2 and
α2logn equal to each other giving c = O(log2n). Making these notions concrete
we minimize T by diﬀerentiating with respect to c and have
dT
dc =
α1
2c1/2 −α2
n
dn
dc −α2
c = 0
(4)
Simplifying and integrating we have α2logc −α1c1/2 = α2logn + F where the
constant F subsumes all the constants of integration. Asymptotically the optimal
cluster size
c = O(log2n)
(5)
The resulting total time for search in the SSW overlay network is now
T = O(logn −loglogn)
(6)
Intuitively a larger cluster size reduces the number of clusters leading to a
reduction in global search time across cluster. However a larger cluster size also
increases local search time since there are more nodes. Our architecture balances
these tradeoﬀs and improves the scaling of search time (T) over prior P2P sys-
tems [19]. In addition to achieving rapid search, the modiﬁed P2P system is also
robust and adaptive. The system is robust to node failures since there is a cluster
of size O(log2n) leading to increased robustness by redundancy of similar data.
Additionally, if search for data residing on a particular node does not succeed
due to node failure, data similar to the one being searched for can be supplied
by neighbouring semantically clustered nodes. Each node has connections with
multiple clusters which leads to more redundant search pathways.
The system adapts by having progressively more long-distant connections
(l = O(logn)) in order to improve its search characteristics. Such densiﬁcation
properties are also observed in other technological networks (like the World Wide
Web, citation networks, and autonomous systems) [18] and arise as an emergent
property of these systems. The cluster size also adaptively changes to eﬃciently
balance local and global search performance.
In summary, we see that similar to an NIS, P2P systems exhibit tradeoﬀs
between local communication (search within a cluster of nodes) and global com-
munication (search across clusters). A sub-modular architecture in which the size
of a cluster increases with system size is shown to eﬃciently balance these op-
posing goals. We modiﬁed an existing P2P system by incorporating a modular
RADAR search strategy inspired by the natural immune system and demon-
strated that it can conduct eﬃcient search while being robust and adaptable.
7
Future Work
Future work will focus on augmenting two intrusion detection applications -
LISYS [20] and process Homeostasis (pH) [21], with a modular RADAR strategy.

In this context, a subnet of computers would be an artiﬁcial DR and a security
node in charge of the subnet would be analogous to a LN. A modular RADAR
architecture can balance local communication (intrusion detection) and global
communication (alert or patch propagation). This would further advance work
on the architecture of intrusion detection systems [22].
Such an approach may be particularly useful for security of low power dis-
tributed systems. For example, mobile phone viruses propagate by small hops
to neighbouring within-range devices, and hence physical proximity of devices
is much more important than in traditional computational domains [1]. Mobile
phone viruses also consume low power and bandwidth in order to evade con-
ventional detection mechanisms. Since mobile phones are constrained to com-
municate to nearby neighbors (e.g. through Bluetooth connections and local cell
towers), the NIS analogy can be extended to view mobile phone transmission
towers as LNs and the area of mobile phone users serviced by it as the DR.
Finally, mobile ad-hoc networks (MANETs) and disruption tolerant networks
(DTNs) [1] are of increasing interest. Such systems could also have a master-
slave relationship in which individual components report aggregated data to a
processing center (local communication) and processing centers distribute data
globally among all components (global communication) [23]. A modular RADAR
strategy can enhance message propagation times and increase robustness in such
systems.
In all of these systems, the balance between LN size and number depends on
the constraints on local and global communication. In the NIS, we considered
one scenario in which the pathogen is initially localized in the tissue of a single
DR, and the draining LN must recruit additional B-cells from other LN through
HEV that deliver blood. However this is one of several scenarios that the IS
architecture has evolved. For example, some pathogens propagate immediately
through blood and are exposed to multiple LN at once. In such a scenario there
is no need for recruitment to a single LN because the pathogen is distributed to
multiple LNs. In other scenarios, an infection may stay local, and again there is
no need for recruitment. Understanding how the semi-modular architecture of
the immune system balances these diﬀerent scenarios is another area for future
work.
8
Conclusions
The physical architecture of the immune system has co-evolved with the soft-
ware, i.e. dynamic interactions between immune system cells and signals to
achieve scalable Robust Adaptive Decentralized search and Automated Response
(RADAR). In this paper we have focused on how and why search is distributed
across LN, whose size and number increase sublinearly with animal size. We
have shown that such a design balances local antigen detection with global an-
tibody response to minimize total immune response time. As a result, immune
response times are nearly scale invariant, in sharp contrast to the vast majority
of biological rates that slow systematically as body size increases [24]. We have

suggested that modular design principles from the immune system can comple-
ment the AIS software approaches to distributed computation, particularly to
achieve scalable mobile device control, peer-to-peer networks, and potentially
computer security applications.
9
