HIGH-FIDELITY VECTOR SPACE MODELS
OF STRUCTURED DATA
A PREPRINT
Maxwell Crouse ∗
Qualitative Reasoning Group
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL

Achille Fokoue
IBM Research AI
Yorktown Heights, NY

Maria Chang
IBM Research AI
Yorktown Heights, NY

Pavan Kapanipathi
IBM Research AI
Yorktown Heights, NY

Ryan Musa
IBM Research AI
Yorktown Heights, NY

Constantine Nakos
Qualitative Reasoning Group
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL

Lingfei Wu
IBM Research AI
Yorktown Heights, NY

Kenneth Forbus
Qualitative Reasoning Group
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL

Michael Witbrock
IBM Research AI
Yorktown Heights, NY

March 2, 2022
ABSTRACT
Machine learning systems regularly deal with structured data in real-world applications. Unfortunately,
such data has been difﬁcult to faithfully represent in a way that most machine learning techniques
would expect, i.e. as a real-valued vector of a ﬁxed, pre-speciﬁed size. In this work, we introduce
a novel approach that compiles structured data into a satisﬁability problem which has in its set of
solutions at least (and often only) the input data. The satisﬁability problem is constructed from
constraints which are generated automatically a priori from a given signature, thus trivially allowing
for a bag-of-words-esque vector representation of the input to be constructed. The method is
demonstrated in two areas, automated reasoning and natural language processing, where it is shown
to produce vector representations of natural-language sentences and ﬁrst-order logic clauses that can
be precisely translated back to their original, structured input forms.
1
Introduction
How best to represent structured data such that it is compatible with machine learning algorithms is an open problem.
When support vector machines were the predominant approach of the machine learning community, the representations
of choice for ordered trees were that of tree-kernels, e.g. [1, 2, 3]. With the rise of deep learning, tree-structured LSTMs
have become a popular method to capture structural characteristics of natural language [4, 5]. These approaches are all
aimed at combining the expressive power of structured information that is inherent in naturally occurring data (such as
predicate-argument structures in natural language and hierarchical spatial information in images) with robust machine
learning methods. However, the transformations applied to structured data in order to adapt them to various machine
learning models often make the resulting real-valued vector representations opaque and difﬁcult (or impossible) to

arXiv:1901.02565v2  [cs.AI]  15 Jan 2019

A PREPRINT - MARCH 2, 2022
interpret. Furthermore, automatically learning these representations has the additional challenge of cultivating and
annotating the appropriate training data.
In this work, we describe a novel, implemented method for translating arbitrary structured data into vectors of a ﬁxed,
pre-determined length. In particular, this method can be applied to any data representable as (potentially disconnected)
directed-acyclic graphs containing both ordered and unordered nodes (e.g. sequences, trees, forests, etc.). This method
is not a model that is learned from data, but rather is a means of decomposing an input into a set of constraints that were
generated a priori from a given signature. The method allows for round-trips in the sense that it is possible to encode
data into vectors and to decode vectors into their source data. As such, our method has three main advantages when
compared to existing approaches. First, our characterization of graphs as a set of constraints is based on ﬁrst principles,
meaning that it does not require training data. Second, there is no opacity in how representations are constructed,
thus, we need not guess what a vector represents as we might with a neural model. Third, the representations of our
method leave little on the table; that is, the vectors produced by our method can be made to encode everything needed
to reconstruct only their original, structured input forms.
2
Related Work
2.1
Automated Reasoning
The work of [6] provides a summary of previously proposed methods for encoding ﬁrst-order formulae as feature
vectors. In addition, they introduce the use of a discrimination tree (containing all terms seen in a corpus of proofs)
as a means of constructing feature representations of an input clause. In [7], the features of a clause were deﬁned
to be triples (though their method could be extended to larger tuples) formed from outwards path walks of length 3
through the tree-structure of a clause. [8] extracts features from terms in a way that preserves ordering information.
Their method takes as input the literals of a clause and extracts patterns up to a maximum depth that encode at least all
non-variable symbols and their relative ordering. Each of the aforementioned works share the same ﬂaws, which are the
inability to reconstruct the input set of literals from a set of features and the inability to represent elements of a clause
past a ﬁxed depth.
2.2
Natural Language Processing
Representing language as vectors is a fundamental component of modern natural language processing, making it a
natural application for our approach. [9] introduced the popular Brown clustering technique, a greedy algorithm for
mapping words to binary vectors; the vectors for semantically- or syntactically-similar words are encouraged to share a
preﬁx, allowing larger clusters to be formed by truncating the vectors. At the level of a sentence, [10] gives a method
for computing features for syntactic parse trees. They deﬁne a new type of tree-kernel, the leaf-projection path, which
could be used to extract features from a syntactic parse tree. Leaf-projection paths are paths from leaf nodes to the root
of a tree, which they apply to the task of parse selection. Like most others, their method discards ordering information;
thus the process of translating from a set of features back to their original tree would be difﬁcult. More recent work by
[11] and [4] demonstrates how embedding sentences within a continuous vector space by recursing over their parse trees
can improve performance on sentence classiﬁcation tasks like sentiment recognition and semantic similarity. These
models are designed to capture the compositional nature of language more explicitly than recurrent neural networks
such as LSTMs [12].
2.3
Graph Decomposition Methods
Traditionally, graph kernels perform graph-level classiﬁcation by comparing sub-structures of graphs. These kernels
recursively decompose the graphs into small sub-structures, and then deﬁne a feature map over these sub-structures for
the resulting graph kernel. Sub-structures including random walks [13, 14], shortest paths [15], cycles [16], subtree
patterns [17, 18], tree fragments [19], and graphlets [20] have been widely used. Conceptually, these notable graph
kernels can be viewed as instances of a general kernel-learning framework called R-convolution for discrete objects
[21, 22]. However, these graph decomposition methods ignore the order information of the sub-structures, which makes
it hard to reconstruct the original inputs from their feature representations.
3
Preliminaries
For our method to deterministically encode a graph as a real-valued vector, the input graph must hold two properties.
First, there must be some notion of root nodes. That is, there must be nodes that characterize the beginning of a graph.
Second, the input graph must be directed and acyclic.
2

A PREPRINT - MARCH 2, 2022
We deﬁne a signature (i.e. all possible nodes a graph can be constructed from) to be the union of two sets, Σ = Π ∪Ω.
The elements of Π are root nodes and the elements of Ωare internal nodes. In application, there need not be a distinction
between Π and Ω, i.e. Π = Ω. However, allowing for such a distinction gives the freedom to construct more compact
representations when applicable. We refer to the number of children a node may have as its arity. Importantly, nodes
with the same label but different arities are treated as distinct. For most examples, our notation will be that which is
commonly seen in mathematical logic, e.g. for a tree with root f and children a and b, we write f(a, b). When we refer
to sets of root nodes and internal nodes, we will use the uppercase letters P and F, where P k and F k are used to denote
a set of root nodes and internal nodes, respectively, each member of which has arity k.
Our approach encodes graphs as satisﬁability problems. Given a graph, G, which has been generated from a signature
Σ, our approach constructs a satisﬁability problem that has a set of solutions which at least includes G.
4
Graph Encoding
Our method maintains two sets: a set of symbols, S, and a set of constraints, C. Recall, all graphs are constructed from a
signature Σ = Π ∪Ω. As our goal is to represent any graph with only elements from Σ, in the simplest case we have
S = Σ. In general, we maintain a distinction between S and Σ, as we may wish the correspondence between them to
be given by a mapping function. The set C consists of constraints that each node will be mapped to. We now describe
the construction of C.
4.1
Ordered Node Constraints
Let Πord ⊆Π and Ωord ⊆Ωbe the subsets of root and internal nodes which are ordered. First, all such root and
internal nodes are divided into sets by arity, i.e.
Pord = { P1, . . . , Pm | Pi : arity(p) = i, ∀p ∈Πord }
Ford = { F1, . . . , Fn | Fi : arity(f) = i, ∀f ∈Ωord }
Next, deﬁne a function split which takes as input a width w ∈N and a set M and randomly partitions M into at most
w equally-sized disjoint sets. Using split, we deﬁne a base to our constraints as follows:
P ord =
[
Pi∈Pord
split(w, Pi)
F ord =
[
Fi∈Ford
split(w, Fi)
From P ord and F ord (both of which are sets of sets) we deﬁne the set of all ordered constraints Cord to be
CP =
[
P k∈P ord
{P k(F1, . . . , Fk) | ∀F1, . . . , Fk ∈split(w, Ω)}
CF =
[
F k∈F ord
{F k(F1, . . . , Fk) | ∀F1, . . . , Fk ∈split(w, Ω)}
Cord = CP ∪CF
Notice that every constraint, i.e. each P k(. . .) and F k(. . .), is deﬁned with a separate invocation of split.
Each element of Cord should be thought of as a pattern that ground expressions will be matched against. To be
more concrete, matchability between an ordered pattern P k(F1, . . . , Fk) and some subgraph p(f1(. . .), . . . , fk(. . .)) is
deﬁned to be
1. The lead elements match, i.e. p ∈P k
2. Each immediate argument matches, i.e. fi ∈Fi, ∀i
The same deﬁnition holds for subgraphs that begin with internal nodes. Note that the deﬁnition of matchability as
presented above only considers the root or internal node and the internal nodes of its immediate arguments. Whether or
not an immediate argument has arguments itself has no bearing on whether it will match to some pattern.
3

A PREPRINT - MARCH 2, 2022
Figure 1: An ordered node constraint that matches
f(a, c) but does not match f(c, a).
Figure 2: An unordered node constraint that matches
s(x, y, z) and s(z, x, y) but does not match s(y, y, x)
4.1.1
Space Requirements
For an ordered node constraint with arguments drawn from a w-way random partitioning of Ω, all combinations of
possible arguments are needed. Thus, with a maximum arity of m across all ordered root nodes, a maximum arity of n
across all ordered internal nodes, and a width w, the number of ordered node constraints is given by
|Cord| = w
m
X
i=1
wi + w
n
X
i=1
wi
4.2
Unordered Node Constraints
Let Πunord ⊆Π and Ωunord ⊆Ωbe the subsets of root and internal nodes which are unordered. As before, all root
and internal nodes are ﬁrst divided into sets by arity, i.e.
Punord = {P1, . . . , Pm | Pi : arity(p) = i, ∀p ∈Πunord}
Funord = {F1, . . . , Fn | Fi : arity(f) = i, ∀f ∈Ωunord}
With split deﬁned as before, we construct a base to our set of unordered constraints as follows:
P unord =
[
Pi∈Punord
split(w, Pi)
F unord =
[
Fi∈Funord
split(w, Fi)
Enabling our approach to deterministically map an unordered node and its immediate arguments to a constraint is a
bit more involved than in the ordered case. First, our approach associates each element of P unord and F unord with a
unique random ordering of elements from Ω. To do this, deﬁne a function order, which takes as input a width w ∈N,
a length l ∈N, and a set M. order ﬁrst uses the split function to divide M into w random equally-sized disjoint
partitions, producing a set M
M = split(w, M) = { M1, . . . , Mw }
From M, order produces the set of all sequences of length l with elements drawn from M such that no Mi is placed
before an Mj where i > j, e.g. for w = 4 and l = 3 one such sequence is (M1, M1, M2) and another is (M3, M4, M4).
With Punord, Funord, and order deﬁned, we can now construct the set of all unordered constraints Cunord
CP =
[
P k∈P unord
{P k(F1, . . . , Fk) | ∀(F1, . . . , Fk) ∈order(w, k, Ω)}
CF =
[
F k∈F unord
{F k(F1, . . . , Fk) | ∀(F1, . . . , Fk) ∈order(w, k, Ω)}
Cunord = CP ∪CF
4

A PREPRINT - MARCH 2, 2022
As before, each element of Cunord is to be considered a pattern against which subgraphs will be matched. Consider a
particular subgraph, e.g. p(f1(. . .), . . . , fk(. . .)), and a pattern, P k(F1, . . . , Fk). The subgraph matches the pattern if
1. The lead elements match, i.e. p ∈P k
2. The set {f1, . . . , fk} can be put into a one-to-one correspondence with the set {F1, . . . , Fk} (where a corre-
spondence between fi and Fi is given by fi ∈Fi)
4.2.1
Space Requirements
Consider a length l sequence s with elements drawn from {M1, . . . , Mw} that satisﬁes the constraint that no Mi can
come before an Mj where i > j. Let mi be the number of times Mi is found in s. For our sequence of length l, it must
be the case that m1 + . . . + mw = l. Each solution to this equation corresponds to a single valid sequence, i.e. the
sequence beginning with m1 instances of M1, followed by m2 instances of M2, etc. The total number of solutions to
this equation is
 l+w−1
l

, and is given by the Stars and Bars theorem, where l indistinguishable balls (i.e. positions in s)
are split between w labeled urns (i.e. transitions from Mi to Mj where i < j).
With m being the maximum arity across all unordered root nodes, n the maximum arity across all unordered internal
nodes, and w being the number of random partitions speciﬁed for the split function, the number of unordered constraints
is given by
|Cunord| = w
m
X
i=1
i + w −1
i

+ w
n
X
i=1
i + w −1
i

4.3
Parent Constraints
Parent constraints are generated in much the same way as unordered node constraints. Letting m ∈N be the maximum
number of parents a node can have and w ∈N be a width, we ﬁrst deﬁne a set of pairs that will be used to build the
parent constraints from
F par =
m
[
i=1
[
F ∈split(w,Ω)
{ (i, F) }
Note that, because root nodes cannot have parents, there is no need to include them in this initial step of building the
parent constraints. Likewise, we know that leaf-nodes cannot have children, thus we deﬁne Σpar ⊂Σ to be the set of
all nodes that can be parents (i.e. non-leaf nodes). With order deﬁned as before and c ∈N deﬁned to be the parent
width, we construct the set of parent constraints Cpar as follows
Cpar =
[
(i,F )∈F par
{(F, S1, . . . , Si) | ∀(S1, . . . , Si) ∈order(c, i, Σpar)}
The conditions for matchability between a node and its parents with a parent constraint are analogous to what was
deﬁned for the constraints of Cunord. For a particular node f with parents p1, . . . , pi and a given pattern, (F, S1, . . . , Si)
drawn from Cpar, the conditions for matchability are
1. The child elements match, i.e. f ∈F
2. The set {p1, . . . , pi} can be put into a one-to-one correspondence with the set {S1, . . . , Si} (where a corre-
spondence between pj and Sj is given by pj ∈Sj)
4.3.1
Space Requirements
The space requirements of parent constraints is given by the same style of proof as with unordered node constraints.
Letting m be the maximum number of parents any internal node will have, the number of parent constraints is given by
|Cpar| = w
m
X
i=1
i + w −1
i

5

A PREPRINT - MARCH 2, 2022
Figure 3: A parent constraint that would match with a
node a being the child of three expressions f(a, c, b),
g(d, a), and g(a, c).
Figure 4: A sequence node constraint that would
match to the fourth word of "What is the state with
the largest population?"
4.4
Sequence Node Constraints
While sequence constraints are merely a special case of ordered node constraints, we give a distinct description of
them here because of how frequently sequences occur in domains of interest, e.g. language processing. To start, the
elements of a sequence can be thought of as zero-arity internal nodes, e.g. the word "state". The position of an element
in a sequence can then be thought of as a non-zero-arity internal node which takes zero-arity nodes as arguments as
well as a link to the next internal node, e.g. the third word of a sentence being "state" is given as f3(state, f4(. . .)).
We will distinguish between our zero-arity internal nodes (constants) as members of the set Ωconst. With a maximum
sequence length l ∈N, we then have our set of root nodes be Π = {f1}, and the remainder of our internal nodes be
Ωfunc = {f2, . . . , fl}, with Ω= Ωconst ∪Ωfunc.
Sequences need not be limited to having one constant per position. We allow every element of the sequence to have a
ﬁxed size t, e.g. for t = 4, one could specify a word, its preﬁx, its sufﬁx, and its part-of-speech in one position of a
sentence. Let Ωi ⊆Ωconst be the subset of constants that can be placed at index i of a particular position of a sequence,
and let w ∈N be a pre-speciﬁed width, then we deﬁne Cseq as
CP = { f1(split(w, Ω1), . . . , split(w, Ωt), ∅), f1(split(w, Ω1), . . . , split(w, Ωt), f2) }
CF = Sl−1
j=2{ fj(split(w, Ω1), . . . , split(w, Ωt), ∅), fj(split(w, Ω1), . . . , split(w, Ωt), fj+1) }
CL = { fl(split(w, Ω1), . . . , split(w, Ωt), ∅) }
Cseq = CP ∪CF ∪CL
The conditions for matchability are as one would expect. Consider the i-th element ei (where ei is a tuple of t elements,
i.e. (ei1, . . . , eit)) of a sequence s and a constraint fj(F1, . . . , Ft, lk). Matchability is given by
1. i = j
2. Each argument matches, i.e. eir ∈Fr, ∀r
3. If i = |s| then lk = ∅, otherwise lk = fj+1
4.4.1
Space Requirements
With w the number of random partitions, and s the maximum number of entries for each sequence node, the size of
Cseq is given by
|Cseq| = ws + 2
|Π|
X
i=1
ws + 2
|Ωfunc|−1
X
i=1
ws
4.5
Vector Space Representations of Structured Data
Recall, our method maintains two sets,
S = Σ
C = Cord ∪Cunord ∪Cpar
6

A PREPRINT - MARCH 2, 2022
The decomposition of a given graph G into a multi-set of symbols S and constraints C is fairly straightforward
S = every symbol in G
C = every constraint that matches a subgraph of G
The disjointness enforced by the function split in conjunction with the conditions for matchability described ensure that
at each ordered root node of G there will be exactly one matchable constraint from Cord. Similarly, for ordered internal
nodes with arguments, the aforementioned requirements will result in one matchable element from Cord. To ensure
that unordered nodes and parent relationships are associated with only one constraint from Cunord or Cpar, one simply
needs to select from the candidate elements of Cunord or Cpar that match with a particular node in a principled fashion.
For instance, one might select the constraint for which the one-to-one correspondence between it and the unordered
node is lexicographically least with respect to the argument ordering of the unordered node. It is critically important
that each node is associated with at most one ordered or unordered node constraint and at most one parent constraint.
A vector representation V can be constructed for G as follows: Assign every symbol and constraint an index in a vector
of size |S| + |C|. To convert a graph G into a feature vector, simply add the number of times a particular symbol in S
and constraint in C occurs to the appropriate index of V . The key property of this vector representation is that it is ﬁxed
in length across any input. That is, any graph that is representable with elements from S will be mapped to some vector
in R|S|+|C|.
4.6
Parallel Constraint Sets
At this point, we have what we need to deﬁne a satisﬁability problem that has a set of solutions which at least includes
the original input graph. To enable our approach to create more constrained problems, we add t parallel set of constraints
{ C1, . . . , Ct }, each of which is constructed with the same method described for the initial formulation of C. Now,
when producing a vector representation of a graph, S remains the same, but each Ci is the set of patterns applicable to
each node at constraint set i in the t parallel sets of constraints. Key to note is the fact that the randomness of split will
make each parallel set of constraints completely independent of the others. The vector associated with each graph will
now be a member of R|S|+Pt
i |Ci|.
5
Graph Decoding
Given a vector v ∈R|S|+Pt
i |Ci|, we wish to reconstruct its source graph, G, from S and C. For each j ∈[ |S| +
Pt
i |Ci| ], our approach ﬁrst extracts vj number of symbols or constraints (whichever is associated with index j). This
gives a multi-set of symbols, S, and a set of multi-sets of constraints, C = {C1, . . . , Ct}. Each node in S is either a
root node, an internal node with arguments, or a leaf node.
Recall that each vector represents a satisﬁability problem which has in its set of solutions at least the vector’s source
graph. Thus, we ﬁrst begin by describing what each propositional variable of the satisﬁability problem represents.
Every constraint should be considered a pattern formed by constituent subsets of S, e.g. ordered node constraints
maintain a set of symbols for the parent as well as sets of symbols for each argument. Consider just one of the parallel
sets of constraints for a given input, C′ = Ci. With C′node = C′ord ∪C′unord, every constituent set of our constraints
can be categorized as one of the following classes:
1. Lead sets
{S | S(. . .) ∈C′node}
2. Argument sets
{F | S(. . . , F, . . .) ∈C′node}
3. Parent sets
{F | (S, . . . , F, . . .) ∈C′par}
4. Child sets
{S | (S, . . .) ∈C′par}
For every symbol s ∈S, our approach maps over each constituent set type to collect all valid t way associations of
constituent sets. More concretely, it collects across all t parallel sets of constraints every combination of constituent sets
(with one set from each of the t parallel sets of constraints) such that each set contains s, i.e.
1. Leads
Γl = {(s, S1, . . . , St)|∀s ∈S : s ∈Si}
2. Arguments
Γa = {(s, F1, . . . , Ft)|∀s ∈S : s ∈Fi}
7

A PREPRINT - MARCH 2, 2022
Figure 5: A tuple representing an edge in G when t = 3
Figure 6: Two (not mutually-exclusive) tuples sharing s,
γc, γla
3. Parents
Γp = {(s, F1, . . . , Ft)|∀s ∈S : s ∈Fi}
4. Children
Γc = {(s, S1, . . . , St)|∀s ∈S : s ∈Si}
The elements from each of the Γ sets are collected into tuples which will underlie the propositional variables of the
satisﬁability problem our approach deﬁnes. A tuple (s, p, γp, γc, γlp, γa, γla) contains seven elements:
1. Argument symbol
s
2. Parent symbol
p
3. Parent association
γp = (p, F1, . . . , Ft) ∈Γp
4. Child association
γc = (s, S1, . . . , St) ∈Γc
5. Lead of parent
γlp = (p, S1, . . . , St) ∈Γl
6. Argument of parent
γa = (s, F1, . . . , Ft) ∈Γa
7. Lead of argument
γla = (s, S1, . . . , St) ∈Γl
For a tuple to be valid, two properties must hold. First, the sets in both γc and γp as well as in γlp and γa must be
constituent sets of the same constraints. Second, if the associated constraint of γlp and γa is an ordered constraint, then
the elements of γa must all be associated with the same argument position across each of the t underlying ordered
constraints. When the argument symbol is a leaf node, γla will be replaced with a skolem placeholder constant.
Similarly, when the argument symbol is a root node, p, γp, and γlp will be replaced with a skolem placeholder constant.
Figure 5 provides an example of a tuple.
Each tuple is associated with a propositional variable, i.e. r = (s, p, γp, γc, γlp, γa, γla), with Φ being the set of all
such variables. Let π be a function that takes a constituent set and returns all variables from Φ that are associated with a
tuple containing that set, e.g. for a parent set Pk
π(Pk) = {r ∈Φ | r = (s, p, γp, γc, γlp, γa, γla) : Pk ∈γp}
We deﬁne our ﬁrst conjunctions as follows
P =
^
γp∈Γp

^
Fk∈γp

M
r∈π(Fk)
r

A =
^
γa∈Γa

^
Fk∈γa

M
r∈π(Fk)
r

8

A PREPRINT - MARCH 2, 2022
Figure 7: A connection between two variables through parallel connectivity
Now deﬁne a function φ which returns all variables containing the given constituent set or symbol and returns a set of
sets of variables, where each internal set of variables share the exact same s, γla, and γc (Figure 6 provides an example
of two such tuples).
S =
^
s∈S
 M
R∈φ(s)
 _
r∈R
r

L =
^
γla∈Γl

^
Sk∈γla

M
R∈φ(Sk)
 _
r∈R
r

C =
^
γc∈Γc

^
Sk∈γc

M
R∈φ(Sk)
 _
r∈R
r

Taking inspiration from the theory of structure-matching presented in [23, 24, 25], we make use of multiple sets of
constraints through a notion of parallel connectivity. Our speciﬁcation of parallel connectivity constraints (which differs
slightly from that of the aforementioned works) enforces that, if a set of internal nodes across all t partitions match
together, then their parents must match together as well (see Figure 7). More concretely, consider a propositional
variable r and its associated tuple (s, p, γp, γc, γlp, γa, γla). Deﬁne a function σ which takes a propositional variable
and returns the set of all variables from Φ whose lead of argument element, i.e. γla, is the exact same set as the input
propositional variable’s lead of parent element, i.e. γlp, and whose argument symbol, i.e. s, is the exact same as
the input variable’s parent symbol, i.e. p. Parallel connectivity constraints are incorporated as implications, where a
propositional variable r with γlp and p being true enforces that at least one propositional variable from σ(r) is true.
PC =
^
r∈Φ

r ⇒

_
q∈σ(r)
q

5.1
Cycle Elimination
The aforementioned set of constraints is necessary but not sufﬁcient to guarantee a valid graph will be produced. In
particular, the constraints do not prevent cycles from occurring in reconstructed graphs (Figure 8 provides an example).
To avoid this, we enumerate all simple cycles (using the algorithm of [26]) from the directed graph formed by parallel
connectivity constraints, then assert all cycles as nogoods, i.e. the negation of a conjunction of variables. For instance,
9

A PREPRINT - MARCH 2, 2022
Figure 8: A cycle that leads to malformed expressions
if in the set of implications a cycle was found: (ri ⇒rj) ∧(rj ⇒rk) ∧(rk ⇒ri), the following negated conjunction
would be asserted ¬(ri ∧rj ∧rk). We deﬁne N to be the conjunction of all nogoods.
5.2
Reconstruction
The formula that is passed to the SAT-solver is then
P ∧A ∧S ∧L ∧C ∧PC ∧N
To see that the satisﬁability problem deﬁned above contains the input G in its set of solutions, we note the following
observations. First, each of P, A, S, L, and C only rule out solutions where a component of some constraint, e.g.
Fk ∈γa, is associated to more than one node in G. Clearly, because each node is associated with only one symbol, one
ordered or unordered node constraint, and one parent constraint, each component to a constraint will also be associated
to at most one node in G. Second, parallel connectivity constraints only rule out solutions where the child of some node
constraint, i.e. γla, is used but the lead element of that constraint, i.e. γlp, is not used. This, by construction, cannot
happen with G because such tuples are not valid and are discarded (as discussed in the beginning of the section). Lastly,
the inclusion of N only removes from the set of solutions those graphs that contain cycles consisting of only internal
nodes. Because the inputs to our approach are only graphs without cycles, the inclusion of N cannot restrict G from
being a possible solution to the problem.
6
Additional Methods
6.1
Determining Structural Similarity
At ﬁrst glance, it may be tempting to make similarity judgments over the |S| + P
i |Ci| dimensional vectors with a
simple dot product or cosine similarity. However, doing so would lose much of the beneﬁt gained by the use of multiple,
parallel sets of constraints. Instead, we deﬁne an irregular matrix with one row for each of the parallel sets of constraints
and one row for the set of symbols. Let φ be a similarity measurement (e.g. dot-product, cosine similarity, etc.) that
can be applied to two real-valued vectors. To compare two such matrices, M and N, representing graphs g and h, one
ﬁrst applies the comparison row-wise, i.e.
v =

φ(M1, N1), φ(M2, N2), . . . , φ(M1+|C|, N1+|C|)

The similarity of g and h is then given by the min of v, i.e.
Sφ(g, h) = mini vi
As each row of the matrix speciﬁes an independent decomposition of a given input, the overall similarity between two
matrices can be no larger than the similarity between any pair of parallel rows. This mirrors continuous logic [27],
where the min operation is used as a conjunction, which, in our case, is used to ensure similarity across all sets of
constraints.
10

A PREPRINT - MARCH 2, 2022
Figure 9: On the left is a tree that is ordinarily difﬁcult to represent, while on the right is the equivalent extended tree
with argument number and depth masks applied to internal nodes
6.2
Masking
The constraint encoding method as deﬁned above has difﬁculty reconstructing graphs that have several identical internal
nodes. To overcome this difﬁculty, one may either deﬁne deeper constraints, or masks can be applied to internal nodes
that reduce the likelihood of encountering identicality in an input. For instance, one can deﬁne a depth mask, which
extends a node’s label with the node’s depth in the source graph. Additionally, one might specify an argument number
mask, which extends the label of a non-leaf node (there is no beneﬁt to masking leaf nodes) with its place in the
argument list of its parent node. To incorporate these masks, one simply extends Ω(which then results in an extension
of S) with the possible masks a node could be given.
7
Experiments and Results
Experiments were performed in two domains we believed would beneﬁt from this approach, natural language processing
and automated reasoning. In all experiments, we deﬁned a placeholder signature a priori, from which the constraints
were generated. During testing, symbols were assigned to placeholders when they were ﬁrst encountered.
In the tables of results, |S| will refer to the size of the placeholder signature, P
i |Ci| will refer to the size of the
constraint sets and t will refer to the number of parallel sets of constraints. In the automated reasoning experiments, our
method was set to apply argument number masks to every input. CryptoMiniSAT [28] was used as the underlying SAT
solver for all experiments.
7.1
Reconstructing Natural Language Sentences
To test sentence reconstruction accuracy, we extracted 5,000 sentences (selected at random) from the Brown Corpus
and translated them into ordered binary trees, where each leaf node is either a word or an end of sequence token. The
average length of the extracted sentences was 22 tokens, with a median sentence length of 19 tokens, and a maximum
sentence length of 147 tokens. The signature consisted of a set of 20,000 constants to cover the full set of tokens, a
single predicate {f1}, and 149 functions (i.e. {f2, . . . , f150}, one for each word. The split function was called with
a width w = 5 for all experiments. A single test consisted of taking a sentence, converting it into a vector, and then
Table 1: Results for sentence reconstruction
t
|S|
P
i |Ci|
|S| + P
i |Ci|
CORR.
1
20150
1495
21645
15.5%
2
20150
2990
23140
71.5%
3
20150
4485
24635
98.9%
4
20150
5980
26130
99.9%
5
20150
7475
27625
100.0%
11

A PREPRINT - MARCH 2, 2022
Figure 10: The binary tree form of "What states border
Texas?"
Figure 11: g(x) ∨f(x, g(y), g(y)) ∨¬h(x, y, z) in
graph form
converting that vector back to a sentence. If the reconstructed sentence matched the original sentence perfectly, it was
counted as a success. All tests were given 5 seconds.
Results are shown in Table 1. As can be seen from the table, reconstruction accuracy increases very quickly with t. As
a loose justiﬁcation, consider that for any two words, the likelihood that both words are confused with each other is
roughly the likelihood that both words are in 2t constraints (t constraints for both of their positions in the sentence). A
back-of-the-envelope calculation of the collision probability of any two words in a sentence gives w−2t.
7.2
Reconstructing First-Order Logic Clauses
To test clause reconstruction, we extracted 5229 axioms in conjunctive normal form from the TPTP dataset [29]. Figure
11 shows the graph of a clause. The maximum number of parents for all nodes and arity for unordered nodes was set to
5, and the maximum arity for ordered nodes was 3. These caps were chosen to reduce the memory footprint. The width
for parent and unordered node constraints was 4 and for ordered node constraints was 5.
To handle variables, we ﬁrst note that a clause in conjunctive normal form contains only universally quantiﬁed variables.
We introduced n new constants (e.g. {var1, . . . , varn}) to Σ (variable placeholders). Then, any clause could be
replaced with a logically equivalent alphabetic variant using some subset of the n variable placeholders. Those nodes
with a label in {=, ̸=, ∨} were considered unordered nodes, and all other nodes were considered ordered.
Lastly, given the ubiquity and importance of negations applied to non-equality predicates, we had the constraint
generation procedure separate the negation symbol into its own set, e.g. operating over split(w, Ω\ {¬}) ∪{{¬}}
rather than split(w, Ω). Argument number masks bypassed negation nodes, instead applying to the argument of a
negation node (negation nodes have only one argument). A reconstructed clause was considered correct if its string
representation exactly matched the string of the original clause. All clause reconstructions were given 30 seconds to
complete.
Results are shown in Table 2. Of the 5229 clauses our method was given, 839 (i.e. 16.0%) had at least one node with
too many children or too many parents, and were thus unable to be represented (these were simply counted as failures).
As can be seen from the table, the failure modes for t = 2 and t = 3 were somewhat contrasting. We suspect that an
implementation of the satisﬁability problem generator in a lower level language may solve the issue of timeouts, as
actually solving the satisﬁability problem never contributed substantially to the runtime of our approach.
Table 2: Results for clause reconstruction
t
|S|
P
i |Ci|
CORR.
INCORR.
TIMEOUT
1
2000
4818
48.6%
25.6%
9.8%
2
2000
9636
71.8%
5.3%
6.8%
3
2000
14454
70.8%
2.1%
11.1%
12

A PREPRINT - MARCH 2, 2022
Figure 12: Similarity measurement comparisons
7.3
Clause Categorization
To see whether these representations could provide any utility beyond bag-of-words representations, we explored their
use for clause categorization. Starting from the same 5229 clauses used for the reconstruction experiments, we ﬁrst
removed all clauses not representable by the same graph decomposition code used for the previous experiment (i.e. the
839 clauses containing a node with too many parents or children). We then processed each clause to replace all variables
with a single consistent token and removed all duplicates from that set, leaving 4210 clauses to use for experiments.
The conversion of a clause into a vector representation was performed with the same decomposition code used for the
reconstruction experiments.
Given a clause, the task was to determine its source theory in the TPTP (e.g. the label RNG for a clause in the
Ring Theory domain). We wrote a simple 1-nearest neighbor classiﬁer that would categorize a test clause with the
same category as the most similar example from the training data (we found performance with both bag-of-words
and our representations degraded for larger neighborhoods, thus, we only report results for the 1-NN classiﬁer).
We explored similarity as a combination of structural and symbol similarities. That is, letting Bcos(g, h) be the
cosine similarity between bag-of-words representations of graphs g and h, we deﬁned the similarity of g and h to be
λScos(g, h) + (1 −λ)Bcos(g, h). Different values of λ ∈[0, 1] then led to different emphases on either structural or
symbol similarity (with λ = 0 being purely symbol, i.e. bag-of-words, similarity and λ = 1 being purely structural
similarity).
The average results for ﬁve-fold cross validation can be seen in Figure 12. As might be expected, more parallel sets of
constraints, i.e. higher t values, led to better performance. Purely symbol similarity led to 87.6% performance, purely
structural similarity (at t = 3) led to 90.2% performance, but a combination of the two (that leaned heavily towards
symbol similarity) led to the highest performance at 93.8%.
8
Conclusions and Future Work
In this paper, we introduced a method for producing high ﬁdelity, decodable, ﬁxed-length vectors of structured data. We
see two promising avenues for immediate future work. The ﬁrst is to extend this method to handle undirected graphs.
Second, the vectors presented in this work capture only coarse-grained, discrete similarity. For ﬁne-grained similarity,
these representations will likely to be more compositional and support continuous similarity.
