Noname manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)
Interpretable feature subset selection: A Shapley
value based approach
Sandhya Tripathi · N. Hemachandra ·
Prashant Trivedi
Received: date / Accepted: date
Abstract For feature selection and related problems, we introduce the notion of
classiﬁcation game, a cooperative game, with features as players and hinge loss
based characteristic function and relate a feature’s contribution to Shapley value
based error apportioning (SVEA) of total training error. Our major contribution
is (⋆) to show that for any dataset the threshold 0 on SVEA value identiﬁes feature
subset whose joint interactions for label prediction is signiﬁcant or those features
that span a subspace where the data is predominantly lying. In addition, our
scheme (⋆) identiﬁes the features on which Bayes classiﬁer doesn’t depend but
any surrogate loss function based ﬁnite sample classiﬁer does; this contributes to
the excess 0-1 risk of such a classiﬁer, (⋆) estimates unknown true hinge risk of a
feature, and (⋆) relate the stability property of an allocation and negative valued
SVEA by designing the analogue of core of classiﬁcation game. Due to Shapley
value’s computationally expensive nature, we build on a known Monte Carlo based
approximation algorithm that computes characteristic function (Linear Programs)
only when needed. We address the potential sample bias problem in feature se-
lection by providing interval estimates for SVEA values obtained from multiple
sub-samples. We illustrate all above aspects on various synthetic and real datasets
and show that our scheme achieves better results than existing recursive feature
elimination technique and ReliefF in most cases. Our theoretically grounded classi-
ﬁcation game in terms of well deﬁned characteristic function oﬀers interpretability
(which we formalize in terms of ﬁnal task) and explainability of our framework,
including identiﬁcation of important features.
Keywords Interpretable feature subset selection · Cooperative games · Shapley
value · Empirical risk minimization · Sample bias robustness · Linear programs
Sandhya Tripathi
Department of Anesthesiology
Washington Univeristy School of Medicine in St Louis, MO 63110

N. Hemachandra · Prashant Trivedi
Industrial Engineering and Operations Research
IIT Bombay, Mumbai, India 400 076

arXiv:2001.03956v3  [stat.ML]  25 Apr 2021

2
Sandhya Tripathi et al.
1 Introduction
“What is the guarantee that a given model uses important and relevant features
among the given features?” This question has been the topic of research for decades
in many learning areas, including supervised learning. To address this question in
a binary classiﬁcation task, we present a cooperative game-theoretic framework for
feature subset selection. We introduce a classiﬁcation game with features as players
and hinge loss based characteristic function (in terms of linear programs, LPs). As
the training error of a classiﬁer that does not use any features (players) is always
non-zero, the challenge in deﬁning a cost game is to deal with the requirement that
characteristic function’s value should be zero for the empty coalition. We overcome
this challenge by suitably deﬁning a value game and apportioning the total training
error of the hinge loss based linear classiﬁers using an aﬃne transformation of the
Shapley value of the value game. As Shapley value allocates the total training
error to each feature based on its proportional contribution (‘paid as per your
participation, no more, no less’), it is theoretically sound and has been famous
as a cost allocation measure ([18,22,23]) and in other areas as well ([34]). It also
captures the interactions among features by the marginal contribution of a feature.
Thus, it is a suitable choice for tasks like Feature Subset Selection (FSS). Further,
Shapley value is a core selector in convex games and hence has desirable properties
like stability in coalition formation. Our major contributions are:
1. Identiﬁcation of features whose joint contribution to label prediction is signif-
icant, as given in Section 3.1. The feature subset can either be determined by
a uniform threshold of 0 for all datasets on Shapley value based error appor-
tioning (SVEA) value or by ranking the SVEA values for a user-given feature
set size.
2. We explicitly deﬁne the notion of an interpretable FSS scheme (Deﬁnition 1)
and evaluate a range of FSS scheme w.r.t. the proposed deﬁnition. We observe
that our scheme satisﬁes all conditions required of an interpretable FSS scheme.
3. Identiﬁcation of features that span a subspace in which data lies with high
probability and hence crucial for label prediction, as given in Section 3.2. Unlike
many existing dimension reduction techniques, our scheme doesn’t transform
the feature space. Working with a feature subspace, rather than a transformed
space, is desirable for model interpretability and explainability.
4. In Section 3.3 and 3.4, we provide insights on the contribution of features
whose SVEA value is positive, to the excess 0-1 risk of a surrogate loss based
classiﬁer. We also provide an estimate of the unknown true hinge risk of each
feature.
5. To capture stable apportioning of training error in classiﬁcation tasks, we intro-
duce the set CE(m) that is analogous to the core and hence useful for feature
selection. We also study convex classiﬁcation games as Shapley values are core
selectors for such games and relate them to FSS (Section 3.5).
In addition to the above-listed contributions, we present a sampling-based ap-
proximation algorithm built on [6] that does not require computing characteristic
function (LP) for 2n subset of features all at once; instead, compute it only when a
particular subset of features is sampled. Also, in Section 3.6, we attempt to address
the sample bias issue by averaging over the Shapley value based error apportioning
across multiple sub-samples and provide t-distribution based conﬁdence intervals.

Interpretable feature subset selection: A Shapley value based approach
3
We also considered another variant where the linear classiﬁer based training error
is regularized and computationally observed that the feature subset selected is the
same as that of the unregularized model (details in Supplementary Material (SM)
D.3).
Our idea that thresholding the modiﬁed Shapley value of classiﬁcation game
at 0 identiﬁes the features with substantial joint contribution to the prediction
has following motivation. Suppose among a group of players (features), one player
has suﬃcient resources so that it has the power to work (classify) alone. Let us
call it a dominant player. Now, if the other players (features) ask this dominant
player to join their coalition (to form a classiﬁer), then it asks them for a payoﬀ.
Since, the quantity to be divided is an error (cost), for such dominant players, the
payoﬀis in the form of modiﬁed Shapley value being negative. We demonstrate
this phenomenon in Pima Diabetes dataset where, knowing the blood sugar level
(feature) is suﬃcient to decide whether the patient has diabetes or not.
An innate understanding of how our SVEA scheme possesses explainability
and interpretability (formally in Deﬁnition 1) is as follows. Explainability in our
scheme refers to its ability to provide a reason for selecting a feature as important
using its SVEA value; a feature with negative SVEA lowers the total training er-
ror. An important feature subset constituting such features makes FSS (using the
SVEA scheme) explainable. Interpretability in the context of the SVEA scheme
includes accounting for possible interactions among features using Shapley value,
using the training error similar to the one used in ﬁnal classiﬁcation task and
mapping SVEA (importance) value of a particular feature to an apportioning of
training error by the Shapley value of the well deﬁned classiﬁcation game. The
SVEA values can either be negative or positive; features with negative value can
be interpreted as the dominant ones (more details in Section 3.1).
1.1 Related work
In this section, ﬁrst, we provide some work on feature subset selection. Recursive
feature elimination by [24] and ReliefF by [25] are the most popular wrapper
and ﬁlter methods for feature subset selection. Recently, [38] present a graph-
theoretic clustering-based FSS scheme that ﬁrst clusters the features and then
chose a representative from each cluster to get the ﬁnal important feature set.
An interesting idea of instance dependent FSS for a general task (classiﬁcation
or regression), is presented in [5], where the authors compute saliency for each
feature by identifying a task and loss dependent gain function.
Cooperative game theory provides a compelling framework for understanding
the inﬂuence of a single feature or their interactions on the label/class. With
this motivation, we give a brief overview of how cooperative game theory has
been applied to solve various sub-problems arising in classiﬁcation. To avoid any
misunderstandings, we would like ﬁrst to present how our work is diﬀerent (in
purpose and approach) from some existing work, which uses similar ideas, along
with other contributions as well.
Our explicit game formulation in terms of training error (natural approach
of ERM) is novel; this further leads to understanding of non-important features’
contribution to excess 0-1-risk and provides an estimate of true hinge risk of each

4
Sandhya Tripathi et al.
feature. If the machine learning pipeline consists of 3 components, pre-processing
steps like feature selection, actual learning of the hypothesis (classiﬁer), and im-
plications (explainability, transparency), then [40] and [13] deal with the last com-
ponent and [11] deals with the ﬁrst component of the pipeline. Explainability,
transparency, and interpretability related work use the contribution of a feature
(via Shapley value) to understand the reasons for a given classiﬁer making a par-
ticular decision; in contrast, our objective is to use Shapley value to identify a
subset of features important for predictions or the feature dimensions spanning
the dataspace, and hence, belongs to the ﬁrst component of the pipeline. [11]
uses Shapley value on top of the iterative wrapper technique, whereas we only
use Shapley value (no iterations). Also, the former technique requires user given
threshold on the contribution value whereas for us the threshold of 0, to decide
feature subset is not user-given or tuned for but instead decided by the SVEA (in-
directly using tr er(∅, m) while apportioning). Explicitly, our work can be related
to broadly following ﬁve research areas.
Cooperative game theory in classiﬁcation and related tasks: [45] used
Shapley value to get the weights for a classiﬁer. [19] used cooperative game theory
where the classiﬁer used is predeﬁned, and Shapley value is directly proportional
to the power of a feature (gene).
Cooperative game theory in feature selection: Based on the search strategy
used, [8] classiﬁes the feature selection techniques into three categories viz., ﬁlter
techniques, wrapper techniques, and embedded methods. [10] proposed a contri-
bution selection algorithm that uses Shapley value to improve upon wrapper tech-
niques like backward elimination and forward selection. [42] and [41] used Shapley
value and Banzhaf index respectively to compute the importance of features which
is further used with the ﬁlter methods based on information-theoretic ranking cri-
teria. All the methods mentioned above use cooperative game theory mainly to
give additional information to either a wrapper or ﬁlter method. However, coop-
erative game theory is central to our scheme as it uses an aﬃne transformation
of Shapley value of the classiﬁcation game which further provides interpretability
and explainability to the selected feature subset.
Cooperative game theory for explaining a prediction: [40] provide a Shap-
ley value based explainability scheme and use feature contribution for explaining
prediction for a given data point; here feature’s contribution can change when a
diﬀerent data point is used. An axiomatic approach based on cooperative game
theory to deﬁne an inﬂuence measure is available in [12]. Instead of training classi-
ﬁers, the inﬂuence measure is used to decide which features inﬂuence the decision
of an unknown classiﬁer. [29] deﬁne a class of additive feature attribution methods
and use game theory results to explain a model’s prediction. [44] presented an
axiomatic attribution approach for deep neural networks. Unlike [40] and other
explainability methods, we are interested in apportioning the total training error
using Shapley value allocation. Based on this apportioning, we want to diﬀerentiate
the features as essential and inessential. Due to this, the training error functions
and value functions in our approach are entirely diﬀerent from the models in the
current literature; we also provide various other interesting interpretations of our
model.
Cooperative game theory for data valuation: Quantifying the value of data
in algorithmic predictions and decisions has become a fundamental challenge. [21]
study the problem of data valuation by utilizing the Shapley value and propose

Interpretable feature subset selection: A Shapley value based approach
5
two Shapley value estimation algorithms that exploit the structure of the utility
function of the game. [20] also proposes Monte Carlo and gradient-based meth-
ods to eﬃciently estimate data Shapley values in practical settings where complex
learning algorithms, including neural networks, are trained on large datasets. In
addition, the authors claim that their methods can identify outliers and corrupted
data and provide suggestions on how to acquire future data to improve the pre-
dictor. For both the above works, the player set for the underlying game is the
set of total data points available. This is in contrast to our scheme, where we use
the feature set as the player set. [1] proposes a mathematical model of a system
design for a data marketplace. They use Shapley value to divide the generated
revenue “fairly” among the training features, so sellers get paid for their marginal
contribution.
The diﬀerence between our work of using CGT for FSS (before training) and
existing work using it for explaining predictions (after training), has been also
clariﬁed and highlighted by [43], where they treat feature importance across all
the training data and attribution (explaining model prediction) as two separate
problems. CGT based data valuation work focuses on selection of the most rel-
evant data points to apportion the overall proﬁt among various contributors by
considering data points as players, unlike our work, where we model features as
players. We would like to emphasize that our scheme is not just a global version
of Shap [29] as the later scheme averages over the Shap values for every feature
across data points to get a summary importance. Instead, we have an explicit
game formulation (whose relevance has been already pointed out by [30] in a dif-
ferent setup of explaining predictions) whose Shapley values are used as feature
contribution to the training error. Hence, our deﬁnition is novel and takes natural
approach of Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM).
Interpretability in feature subset selection: Feature subset selection be-
ing an integral part of any learning model needs interpretable and explainable
methods too. A visual explanation and interpretation approach for dimension re-
duction is presented by [7]. Mutual information based feature selection method
that uses the unique relevant information and show its importance in health data
is given in [28]. Local information based interpretable feature subset selection is
also studied by [49]. Another more recent approach called Informative Variable
Identiﬁer (IVI) in FSS by ensemble category is proposed by [32] where they also
provide levels of interpretability in FSS. However, their scheme relies on statistical
properties of feature distribution to incorporate feature interactions. We provide
a single deﬁnition for an FSS algorithm to be interpretable in Deﬁnition 1. FSS
methods that mitigate the bias ampliﬁcation in linear models have been proposed
by [26] wherein the authors have presented two new feature selection algorithms for
mitigating bias ampliﬁcation in linear models, and show how they can be adapted
to convolutional neural networks eﬃciently. The inﬂuence function is used to re-
move the features which have bias towards the prediction. However, our focus is on
the feature subset selection. We have also addressed the issue of sample biasedness,
but that is diﬀerent from the biasness of the features towards the prediction.

6
Sandhya Tripathi et al.
1.2 Preliminaries
In this section, we introduce some classiﬁcation ([31], [39]) and cooperative game
([33],[37]) terminology and concepts to provide a better understanding of the con-
nection which we will be studying in rest of the paper.
Classiﬁcation setup: Let X be the feature space and Y be the label set. Let
D be the joint distribution over X×Y with X ∈X ⊆Rn and Y ∈Y = {−1, 1}. Let
the in-class probability and class marginal on D be denoted by η(x) := P(Y = 1|x)
and π := P(Y = 1) respectively. Let the decision function be f : X 7→R and
hypothesis class of all measurable functions be H. We consider linear hypothesis
class Hlin = {(w, b), w ∈Rn, b ∈R} for all real dataset based experiments in
this paper. This is because for non-linear models the basic assumption for Shapley
value is violated; more details are provided in Section 5.2. We have an i.i.d. sample
of size m from distribution D, viz., D = {(xi, yi)}m
i=1 where xi = (xi1, xi2, . . . , xin)
is the value of the feature and yi ∈{−1, 1} is the label for ith data point. We use
hinge loss based Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) setup because in addition
to many desirable properties such as classiﬁcation calibration and large margin it
imparts to classiﬁers, it leads to an LP which can be solved in polynomial time.
Cooperative game theory ([33,37]): The Transferable Utility (TU) co-
operative game is a pair (N, v) where N = {1, . . . , n} is a set of players and
v : 2N 7→R is the characteristic function, with v(∅) = 0. Shapley value ([33,
37]) is a unique, symmetric, and strongly monotonic solution concept deﬁned as a
mapping φ : R2n−1 7→Rn given below:
φj(v) =
X
S⊆N\{j}
|S|!(n −|S| −1)!
n!
[v(S ∪{j}) −v(S)],
∀j ∈N,
∀v ∈R2n−1.
Detailed interpretation of Shapley value axioms from classiﬁcation perspective is
available in SM B.
2 Training error based classiﬁcation game (N, v(·, m))
In this section, we deﬁne the training error incurred by using a subset of features
for classiﬁcation based on the standard ERM setting. Next, we describe a value
game and relate it to the training error via a one-to-one mapping.
2.1 Training error function
Given the dataset/sample D = {(xi, yi)}m
i=1 with features N = {1, . . . , n}, we
consider a training error function, tr er(S, m) associated with all possible subsets
S ⊆N when sample size is m. We deﬁne tr er(∅, m) as hinge loss based training
error of an intercept only classiﬁer and denote it by ˜c(m) := tr er(∅, m).
tr er(∅, m) =
min
b,{ξi}m
i=1
1
m
m
X
i=1
ξi
s.t. yib ≥1 −ξi,
∀i = 1, . . . , m
ξi ≥0,
∀i = 1, . . . , m.
(1)

Interpretable feature subset selection: A Shapley value based approach
7
Similarly, we deﬁne the training error, tr er(S, m) for any nonempty subset S =
{j1, j2, . . . , jr} of size r with r distinct elements/features. This would be minimal
hinge loss of the classiﬁer (w∗
j1, . . . , w∗
jr, b∗
r) obtained from the dataset projected to
r-dimensional subspace, i.e., dataset having feature values {xij1, . . . , xijr}m
i=1 and
label {yi}m
i=1.
tr er(S, m) =
min
wj1 ,...,wjr ,br,{ξi}m
i=1
1
m
m
X
i=1
ξi
s.t. yi

X
j∈S
wjxij + br

≥1 −ξi, ∀i ∈[m]
ξi ≥0,
∀i = 1, . . . , m.
(2)
When S = N, we have tr er(N, m) that is the minimal hinge loss based em-
pirical risk of the classiﬁer (w∗
N, b∗
N) when the given dataset is n dimensional, i.e.
all n feature values from the sample D are used. Note that the variables used in
each ERM are local to that optimization problem only.
As conventional cooperative games assume v(∅) = 0, training error function
tr er(·, m) with tr er(∅, m) ̸= 0 cannot be a valid characteristic function. To cir-
cumvent this problem, we deﬁne a payoﬀ/value game with characteristic function
v(S, m)1 given below:
v(S, m) = tr er(∅, m) −tr er(S, m), ∀S ⊆N.
(3)
v(S, m) represents the marginal improvement in the training error obtained due
to the presence of the features in S. As, v(∅, m) = 0, it is a valid characteristic
function also. This characteristic function along with the feature set N deﬁnes a
TU classiﬁcation game (N, v(·, m)). Further, the characteristic function v(S, m)
is monotonic w.r.t the coalitions, which is an important property from the perspec-
tive of allocation. This property is formalized in Proposition 1 with proof being
available in SM B.1.
Proposition 1 If (N, v(·, m)) is a classiﬁcation game, then the characteristic
function v(·, m) is monotonic, i.e.,
∀S ⊆T ⊆N,
v(S, m) ≤v(T, m).
(4)
2.2 Training error allocation using Shapley value
As Shapley value solution concept has the idea of allocation based on a feature’s
marginal contribution (no more, no less), it emerges as a suitable candidate for
apportioning of v(N, m) among the features in a classiﬁcation game. The Shapley
value of classiﬁcation game is given below:
φj(N, v(·, m)) =
X
S⊆N\{j}
|S|!(n −|S| −1)!
n!
[v(S ∪{j}, m)−v(S, m)], ∀j ∈N. (5)
1 Characteristic function as deﬁned here depends on sample size m, so we use m as an
argument in v(·, m).

8
Sandhya Tripathi et al.
Using this Shapley value, Theorem 1 provides an equitable training error allocation
among features. We refer to it as Shapley value based error apportioning
(SVEA) denoted by ej(tr er(N, m)), ∀j ∈N; as we see below, it is an aﬃne
transformation of Shapley value for feature j ∈N. A proof of Theorem 1 is avail-
able in SM A.1.
Theorem 1 There exists a Shapley value based error apportioning, e : R2n−1 →
Rn of the total training error among the features as given in the expression below:
ej(tr er(N, m)) = ˜c(m)
n
−φj(N, v(·, m)),
∀j ∈N.
(6)
For notational convenience, hereafter, we will denote the allocation of training
error to feature j, by ej(m) and Shapley value of feature j by φj(m) when the
sample size is m.
In general, the problem of computing Shapley value is known to be NP-hard
[17]. Also, it has high space complexity due to the space requirement of storing n!
permutations or 2n −1 characteristic functions. To bypass this issue, we adapt the
approximation algorithm given by [6] for computing the Shapley value of features
in the classiﬁcation game (N, v(·, m)). The advantage of using this algorithm is
that characteristic function is calculated for a coalition as and when required in
the marginal contribution sum. Note that the computation of required tr er(S, m)
for a coalition S is scalable as it is by an LP. Algorithm and related details are
available in SM C. In Section 4, we use this approximation for datasets with n ≥10.
To evaluate the quality of Shapley value estimates, we compute their diﬀerence
from the true Shapley value for datasets with n < 10 and observed that use of 100
Monte Carlo (MC) samples lead to a min 0.5 % and max 10% error over 10 trials
(diﬀerent train and test partitioning) across all datasets. If the MC samples are
increased to 1000, this error comes down to a max 4 percent. Since only the sign
of the apportioning via approx Shapley value matters, use of 100 MC sample is
suﬃcient as the sign is not aﬀected (tested empirically for more than 100 samples
too).
2.3 Properties of the classiﬁcation game (N, v(·, m))
As shown in Proposition 1 the characteristic function, v(S, m) is monotone as a
function of feature set S. Next, a rational player (feature) joins a coalition only if it
gets better than what it would get individually (by not forming a coalition), never
less (Individual Rationality (IR)). Also, there shouldn’t be any surplus from the
total value after allocation among the players (Collective rationality). As we are
ultimately interested in SVEA, ej(m), j ∈N, we show that it is IR in Theorem 2
(Proof is available in SM A.2).
Theorem 2 Shapley value based error apportioning {ej(m)}j∈N satisﬁes individ-
ual rationality, i.e.,
ej(m) ≤tr er({j}), ∀j ∈N.
(7)
This implies that the allocation of total training error to a feature is less than
the training error had it been used alone, which is desirable and reasonable to
expect. We observed on UCI datasets that various game theoretic properties for
classiﬁcation game don’t hold universally and are dataset dependent. A detailed
description of these properties along with counter examples is available in SM B.

Interpretable feature subset selection: A Shapley value based approach
9
3 Insights from Shapley Value based Error Apportioning (SVEA)
approach
As we are interested in apportioning of tr er(N, m) among features, it is possible
that for some feature j ∈N, ej(m) < 0. The intuition is as follows: suppose
a player (feature) is so dominant that it can work (classify) alone. Now, if the
other players (features) ask this dominant player to join their coalition (to form a
classiﬁer), then it asks them for a payoﬀ. Since, the quantity to be divided is an
error (cost), for such dominant players, the payoﬀis in the form of SVEA being
negative. We formally present this idea in Proposition 2 for the two player case
whose proof is available in SM A.3.
Proposition 2 Consider a 2-feature classiﬁcation game (N, v(·, m)) with training
error function tr er({1}, m) = g > 0, tr er({2}, m) = G > 0, tr er({1, 2}, m) =
g′ ≤min{g, G}. If G
2 > g, then SVEA of tr er({1, 2}, m) is such that e1(m) ≤0
and e2(m) ≥0.
If we generalize the notion of Proposition 2 then, apportioning {ej(m)}j∈N of
tr er(N, m) can provide us with various insights. Based on the above arguments,
we study the role of those features for which SVEA is negative, in FSS, in dimension
reduction, and in excess 0-1 risk decomposition of a ﬁnite sample-based classiﬁer.
Also, SVEA values can be interpreted as estimates of true unknown hinge risk of
a feature. Based on the above arguments, in this work, we study the role of those
features for which SVEA is negative in feature subset selection. In particular, we
show SVEA based decision of whether a feature is to be selected or not is easily
interpretable. To formalize the notion of interpretabilty in FSS, we deﬁne it as
follows:
Deﬁnition 1 A scheme for FSS is said to be interpretable if it satisﬁes following
conditions:
(P1) Transparency in the process: The process of ﬁnding the feature importance
should be transparent and it should be clear how the feature interactions are
being accounted for.
(P2) Relation to ﬁnal task: The feature importance computation should be based
on a criterion which takes into account their role in ﬁnal task (classiﬁcation).
(P3) Justiﬁable importance values: Feature importance values should have a
meaning/justiﬁcation in the context of the ﬁnal task in addition to being just
called feature contributions.
SVEA is interpretable as it satisﬁes all above conditions. It accounts for all
possible interactions among features using Shapley value (P1), uses the training
error similar to the one used in ﬁnal classiﬁcation task (P2) and SVEA (impor-
tance) value of a particular feature correspond to an apportioning of training error
by the Shapley value of the well deﬁned classiﬁcation game (P3). Figure 1 depicts
the steps of SVEA scheme in which the above properties are satisﬁed. Next, we
summarize which FSS methods satisfy the diﬀerent conditions from Deﬁnition 1
in Table 1.
Remark: The above deﬁnition of interpretablilty is fairly generic, as it can be
adopted for other schemes (other than FSS) in a broader task (other than classiﬁer
design).

10
Sandhya Tripathi et al.
Methods/Conditions
P1
P2
P3
ReliefF [25]
✓
✓
×
RFECV [24]
✓
✓
×
BanzhafI based [41]
✓
✓
×
ShapleyV based [42]
✓
✓
×
LFS [49]
✓
✓
×
IVI [32]
✓
✓
×
SVEA based FSS [32]
✓
✓
✓
Table 1: Table summarizing FSS methods w.r.t. interpretability from Deﬁnition 1.
Tr_D
Te_D
Char. fn. of game: Solve 
hinge loss based ERM 
that relates to the final 
classification task (P2)
Compute game’s Shapley 
value; transparency in 
process (P1) as accounts 
for feature interaction 
Find feature apportioning 
using 
Shapley 
value 
providing 
justifiable 
feature importance (P3)
Find 
SVEA_neg 
set 
of 
features 
with apportioning 
value < 0
Train & test a 
classifier 
only 
on features in 
SVEA_neg
Fig. 1: Flow chart describing interpretable FSS scheme SVEA with highlighted
properties, P1, P2, and P3 deﬁned in Def. 1. Here, Tr D and Te D denote train
and test dataset.
Before proceeding further, we would like to note the diﬀerence between FSS and
dimension reduction considered in this paper. FSS is a special case of dimension
reduction, and to perform FSS, we use the SVEA scheme where feature subset
to be used for the ﬁnal classiﬁer is identiﬁed based on the sign of SVEA value
of a feature (Section 3.1). However, there can be scenarios when some feature
dimensions do not play a role in spanning the dataspace as explained in Section
3.2; this is irrespective of learning task at hand, as seen in Fig 2 with the 2
dimensional data space being eﬀectively spanned by 1 dimension, i.e., x1.
3.1 Negative valued SVEA and FSS
We observed that the features for which SVEA is negative (set SV EAneg) are the
ones whose joint contribution in label prediction is signiﬁcant. To formalize this
idea, we introduce the notion of the power of classiﬁcation of a subset, say K, of
features, deﬁned below:
Deﬁnition 2 (Power of classiﬁcation of feature subset K, PSV (K)) Given
a training dataset D of size m with feature values {xi1, . . . , xin}m
i=1 and labels
{yi}m
i=1, the power of classiﬁcation of a set of features K = {j1, j2, . . . , jk} ⊂N
is deﬁned as follows:
PSV (K) =
mte
P
i=1
1[yif ∗
K(xij1 ,xij2,...,xijk )≥0]
mte
P
i=1
1[yif ∗
N (xi1,xi2,...,xin)≥0]
,
(8)

Interpretable feature subset selection: A Shapley value based approach
11
where f ∗
K(·) and f ∗
N(·) are the optimal linear classiﬁers in the respective subspaces
and mte (diﬀerent from D) is the number of sample points used for testing the
classiﬁers and 1[A] is the indicator function with value 1 if A holds; else has 0
value.
The higher the value of PSV (K), the higher is the joint inﬂuence of the subset
K in classiﬁcation. The powerful subset K = SV EAneg is not pre-decided but
determined by SVEA. Due to Shapley value’s property of identifying the important
players based on their contributions, SVEA scheme identiﬁes features that play a
dominating role in the task of classiﬁcation and forms a set K. We demonstrate
this FSS phenomenon using Synthetic dataset 2 (SD2) in SM D.2. We give details
about the FSS interpretation for UCI datasets with SVEA, {ej(m)}j∈N being
negative in Section 4. Besides, we observe as in SM D.5 that l1-regularized squared
hinge loss based ERM doesn’t identify important features for UCI datasets like
Heart, Pima diabetes, and Thyroid.
3.2 Relation between negative valued SVEA and dimension reduction
By dimension reduction from Rn to Rd, we mean that (n −d) feature dimensions
have zero class conditional expected values and minimal class conditional variance.
We consider a special structure on the distribution for dimension reduction and
provide the following result:
Theorem 3 Consider the random variables X ⊆Rn, Y ∈{−1, 1}. Let A :=
{k ∈N : E[Xk|Y = y] = 0, var(Xk|Y = y) ≤ϵ′
k, P[Xk ∩Xk′|Y = y] = P[Xk|Y =
y] × P[Xk′|Y = y], ∀k ̸= k′ ∈N, y ∈Y }. Also, Xj, j ∈Ac are independent of
Xk, k ∈A. Then,
P[(Xj, Xk) : Xj ∈R, |Xk| ≤ϵk, j ∈Ac, k ∈A] ≥
Y
k∈A

1 −var(Xk|Y = y)
ϵ2
k

.
(9)
Proof of Theorem 3 is available in SM A.4. Consider the R.H.S of Eq. (9). Since,
V ar(Xk|Y ) is very small, the cross product terms in the expansion of R.H.S can
be ignored. Hence, using the ﬁrst order approximation provides a high probability
(1−δ) bound with δ ≈P
k∈A
V ar(Xk|Y )
ϵ2
k
. The above analysis says that the dataset lies
in the lower sub-space whose basis corresponds to features with indices belonging to
Ac with high probability. We observed that in such datasets, ej(m) < 0 for feature
Xj, j ∈Ac. Hence, the lower dimensional subspace has basis corresponding to
features Xj with SVEA ej(m) < 0. We consider a 2-dimensional synthetic dataset
(generated using the technique given in [16]) to demonstrate the above aspect.
Synthetic dataset 1 (SD1): We ﬁrst generate 1000 binary labels Y uni-
formly at random and then, a 2-dimensional feature vector X for each label by
drawing a sample such that X|Y = 1 ∼N([0.3; 0], [0.1, 0; 0, 0.001]) and X|Y =
−1 ∼N([−0.3; 0], [0.1, 0; 0, 0.001]). SVEA ej(m), j = {1, 2} for 2 features is
[−0.073; 0.494]. Invoking Theorem 3, the probability of the event that feature
2’s value is within an ϵ-ball, i.e., P(|X2| ≤ϵ) is greater than

1 −var(X2|Y =y)
ϵ2

.
When ϵ = 0.03, we have |X2| ≤0.03 with probability more than 0.99 as evident
in Figure 2. Also, using SVM, 1-dimensional classiﬁer (trained on feature 1 only)

12
Sandhya Tripathi et al.
Fig. 2: Scatter plot of 50 data points from SD1. Here, P(X = (X1, X2) : X1 ∈R, |X2| ≤
0.03) ≥0.99, i.e., the data predominantly lies in 1-d subspace corresponding to feature 1 with
Shapley value based error apportioning e1(m) < 0.
has test accuracy of 0.85 which is same as that of 2-dimensional classiﬁer (test
accuracy = 0.855). Hence, SD1 is reducible to a subspace with basis as the fea-
ture (1 here) with e1(m) < 0. In SM D.2, we provide one more Synthetic dataset
3 (SD3) example where the 6-dimensional dataset is predominantly lying in a
3-dimensional subspace as identiﬁed by SVEA.
We would like to emphasis that this is diﬀerent from Principal Component
Analysis (PCA) in two aspects: ﬁrstly, unlike our method, PCA does not use the
labels, and secondly, the one-to-one mapping between the transformed dimensions
(reduced) and the features are well deﬁned in our scheme but not in PCA.
3.3 Identiﬁcation of non-important features for classiﬁcation by SVEA scheme
In this section, we attempt to understand what contributes to the excess 0-1 risk of
surrogate loss function based classiﬁers. In this direction, we ﬁrst consider a simple
distribution D and present an explicit form of in-class probability η(x). Following
lemma is a special case of result provided in [47]. For the sake of completeness, a
proof of Lemma 1 is available in SM A.5.
Lemma 1 Let Y has Bernoulli distribution with parameter p. Let X ⊂Rn be
such that X|Y = 1 ∼N(µ+, Σ) and X|Y = −1 ∼N(µ−, Σ). Let Ae = { even
numbers between 1 to n } and Ao = {odd numbers between 1 to n}. Also, µ−,j =
µ+,j
if j ∈Ae, µ−,j = −µ+,j
if j ∈Ao and Σ = aIn×n, a > 0. Then, the
in-class probability η(x) = P(Y = 1|X = x) is given as follows:
η(x) =

1 + 1 −p
p
exp

−2
a

X
j∈A0
xjµ+,j






−1
.
(10)
This implies that the Bayes classiﬁer f ∗
0-1(x) = sign(η(x) −1/2) ∈H doesn’t
depend on feature Xj, j ∈Ae. We observe that SVEA scheme is able to identify
those features which do not appear in the Bayes classiﬁer as the ones with ej(m) >
0. Computational evidence for this claim is available in SM D.2 using Synthetic

Interpretable feature subset selection: A Shapley value based approach
13
dataset 4 (SD4). This observation has following implication: ﬁnite sample and
surrogate loss based classiﬁers contribute to the excess 0-1 risk because coeﬃcients
of features of which η(x) is not a function, are non-zero and for such features
ej(m) > 0.
To support our observation, we ﬁrst provide a detailed interpretation of the
decomposition of excess 0-1 risk of a surrogate loss function l based classiﬁer
ˆfl = arg min
f∈Hlin
ˆRl(f) :=
1
m
m
P
i=1
l(xi, f(xi)). Let f ∗
l
∈H denote the minimizer
of true l-risk, Rl(f) := ED[l(x, f(x))]. Also, empirical 0-1 risk is ˆR0-1(f) :=
1
m
m
P
i=1
l0-1(xi, f(xi)). Consider the excess 0-1 risk of ˆfl as given below:
R0-1( ˆ
fl) −R0-1(f ∗
0-1) = R0-1( ˆ
fl) −R0-1(f ∗
l ) + R0-1(f ∗
l ) −R0-1(f ∗
0-1)
= ( ˆ
R0-1( ˆ
fl) −ˆ
R0-1(f ∗
l )) + (R0-1( ˆ
fl) −ˆ
R0-1( ˆ
fl) + ˆ
R0-1(f ∗
l ) −R0-1(f ∗
l ))
+(R0-1(f ∗
l ) −R0-1(f ∗
0-1))
= ( ˆ
R0-1( ˆ
fl) −ˆ
R0-1(f ∗
0-1))
|
{z
}
Error 1
+ (R0-1( ˆ
fl) −ˆ
R0-1( ˆ
fl) + ˆ
R0-1(f ∗
l ) −R0-1(f ∗
l ))
|
{z
}
Error 2
+ (R0-1(f ∗
l ) −R0-1(f ∗
0-1))
|
{z
}
Error 3
.
(11)
The last equality follows from the fact that for classiﬁcation calibrated loss
functions sign(f ∗
l ) = sign(f ∗
0-1) [51,3,39] and hence their 0-1 risks (both empirical
and true) are equal. This also implies that Error 3 is zero. Error 2 is the error due
to the use of a sample based risk instead of true risk. This term will vanish as the
sample size increases. Finally, we have Error 1 which is a combination of using a
ﬁnite sample, using a surrogate loss function and restricting the hypothesis class
to say linear class Hlin. After identifying the important features based on the sign
of SVEA ej(m), one can get some extra insight about Error 1’s decomposition.
We believe that Error 1 will also have error due to the following reason: in spite
of f ∗
0-1(x) not depending on features Xj, j ∈Ae, ˆfl can be a function of features
Xj, j ∈Ae (apart from those features Xj, j ∈Ao). This error could either be an
additional component in Error 1 or absorbed in the existing components explained
before.
For surrogate loss functions, we consider hinge loss (using SVM), logistic loss
(using Logistic regression) and exponential loss (using ExpERM given in [46]).
It was observed that none of the surrogate loss functions considered had zero
coeﬃcient corresponding to features Xj, j ∈Ae in a linear classiﬁer. This implies
that inclusion of such features is one of the contributors to the extra error (excess
risk) incurred by the surrogate loss function based classiﬁers in comparison to
Bayes classiﬁers, in particular, to Error 1 term. Details about these results are
provided in SM D.2 using Synthetic dataset 4 (SD4).
3.4 SVEA based decomposition of true hinge risk among features
In this section, we attempt to understand what one can say about the nature of
SVEA, {ej(m)}j∈N as sample size m increases. In various computational experi-
ments, we observed that the Shapley values of the classiﬁcation game, {φj(m)}j∈N
and SVEA, {ej(m)}j∈N, converge to limiting values, say {φj}j∈N and {ej}j∈N as

14
Sandhya Tripathi et al.
the sample size m increases. Since, {ej(m)}j∈N is the empirical hinge risk of fea-
ture j, we can interpret the limiting value {ej}j∈N as the true hinge risk of feature
j ∈N. In other words, {ej}j∈N represents the components in the decomposition
of minimum true hinge risk Rlhinge(f ∗
hinge), i.e., P
j∈N ej = Rlhinge(f ∗
hinge) where
Rl(f) := ED[l(x, f(x))]. As {ej(m)}j∈N is computed for a given sample, it can be
interpreted as an estimate of the true hinge risk of feature j ∈N. Also, since it
converges to {ej}j∈N as sample size m increases, one can expect it to be a consis-
tent estimate of {ej}j∈N. To illustrate this convergence, we provide an example
based on a 7-dimensional Synthetic dataset 5 (SD5) in SM D.2.
3.5 Stable SVEA and convex classiﬁcation games
In this section, we discuss additional properties of the allocation measure of classi-
ﬁcation games, in terms of stability and convexity of the games. Core, a well-known
solution concept in cooperative game theory, is deﬁned as the set of allocations
in the imputation set (allocations satisfying IR and collective rationality; details
in SM B.3), which are Coalitional Rational (CR). Such allocations are said to be
stable as no player or group of players objects to the allocations in the core. As
we are interested in apportioning of total training error, CR is desirable; so, we
extend the notion of the core to SVEA, denoted by CE(m), as follows:
CE(m) := {e′(m) ∈Rn|
X
j∈S
e′
j(m) ≤tr er(S, m), ∀S ⊆N,
X
j∈N
e′
j(m) = tr er(N, m)}.
Allocations belonging to CE(m) will also be stable in the sense that any feature
or group of features will not object to the error allocations e′
j(m), j ∈N. So,
we would like our SVEA to be an element of CE(m). However, as seen in Table
2 of SM B, whether SV EA ∈CE(m) or not depends on the dataset; IR and
Collective rationality holds, but, CR, P
j∈S ej(m) ≤tr er(S, m) may not hold for a
given dataset.
If a game is convex (deﬁnition in SM B), then its Shapley value belongs to the
core. As SVEA is an aﬃne transformation of Shapley value, one would expect that
for such games, SVEA belongs to core’s counterpart CE(m); true for Haberman
dataset as seen in Table 2 of SM B. Also, for the datasets (Thyroid, Pima, Magic,
and Banknote) in which ej(m) belongs to CE(m), there are some features for
which these ejs are negative; note that such features are unique for a given sample
of a dataset (as Shapley value is unique for a sample). As observed in Section
3.1, classiﬁers based on these features alone can yield the accuracy comparable to
those obtained with full feature set (PSV ≈1) and such a unique set of features
with allocations also in CE(m) have stable allocations.
3.6 Sample bias robustness of SVEA scheme
With the goal of being robust to sample bias, we provide interval estimates for
SVEA of features by using multiple sub-samples from a given dataset. A feature’s
joint contribution in label prediction is signiﬁcant if the interval estimate of SVEA
for a feature lies on the left of origin on R. The procedure is ﬁrst to partition the
dataset into multiple disjoint sub-samples and compute the apportioning for each

Interpretable feature subset selection: A Shapley value based approach
15
sub-sample. Then, a group of 30 such sub-samples is selected, and using CLT,
the average apportioning ¯eg
j, j ∈N for each group g is asymptotically normally
distributed with unknown mean µe and variance σ2
e. Next, using ¯eg
j, we compute
t-distribution based 100(1−α) conﬁdence intervals. By the deﬁnition of conﬁdence
intervals, we have following high probability statement:
P(ep
j ∈[¯¯ej ± t∗
α/2,G−1(sj/
√
G)]) ≥1 −α,
∀j ∈N,
where ep
j is the population mean for the error apportioning of feature j ∈N,
¯¯ej =
1
G
P
g ¯eg
j and sj = (
1
G−1
P
g(¯eg
j −¯¯ej)2)1/2 and t∗
α/2,G−1 is the upper α/2
critical value for the t distribution with G−1 degrees of freedom (G is the number
of groups). More details of this procedure are provided in SM D.1. Based on our
experiments in Section 4, we observe that the interval estimates also lead to the
same threshold of 0 while performing FSS. Also, the conclusions are robust to
sample bias due to multiple averaging. This shows that the behaviour of features
with SVEA¡0 mentioned in Section 3.5 is a property of the dataset and not of
a particular sample. In SM D.2, we implement the above technique on Synthetic
dataset 4 (SD4) and observe that the results are consistent with Section 3.3. The
above presented method is tailor-made for SVEA scheme. A more general frame-
work to address the instability issue, i.e., change in sample leading to change in
feature subset is presented in [35]. They ﬁrst show that any existing stability mea-
sure doesn’t possess all ﬁve desirable properties which a stability measure should
have. Then, taking a statistical approach they propose a novel measure which is
treated as an estimator of true stability. Note that the “stability of a feature se-
lection algorithm” considered in this sub-section is diﬀerent from the “stability of
an allocation” in Section 3.5.
4 Computational experiments
In this section, we empirically demonstrate the implications of SVEA being neg-
ative for some features on real-world datasets from [2,15]. For the FSS interpre-
tation, we train a classiﬁer using SVM (linear and rbf kernel), Logistic Regres-
sion (LR), Random Forest (RF) and Multi Layer Perceptron (MLP) to compute
PSV . We also compare our SVEA approach to Recursive Feature Elimination with
Cross-Validation (RFECV) and ReﬂiefF. Implementation of RFECV with 5-folds
was done in Scikit learn module of Python [36]. For ReliefF, we used the im-
plementation of [27] with neighbour parameter k = 2. All the above mentioned
algorithms are implemented in Python 3 with Gurobi 8.0.0 solver for LPs, on a
machine equipped with 4 Intel Xeon 2.13 GHz cores and 64 GB RAM. To account
for randomness, we repeat each experiment 5 times and report the average test
accuracy (and standard deviation).
Real datasets: Demonstration of FSS using PSV with threshold 0 on
SVEA values Out of the 14 benchmark dataset considered, 3 datasets namely,
WDBC, Banknote and Iris0 are almost linearly separable. We used Breastcancer,
German and Thyroid datasets from (http://theoval.cmp.uea.ac.uk/matlab).
First, we consider those UCI datasets in which some features have negative SVEA
and compute their Power of classiﬁcation, PSV . Let SV EAneg be the set of fea-
tures with ej(m) < 0 and PSV (SV EAneg) is the power of classiﬁcation of the

16
Sandhya Tripathi et al.
set SV EAneg. From Table 2, the value of PSV (SV EAneg) is close to 1 in most
of the cases. Hence, the features in the set SV EAneg have a large joint contribu-
tion towards classiﬁcation. Five diﬀerent types of classiﬁers support this behavior,
viz., SVM (linear), LR, RF, SVM(rbf) and MLP. Except for the Thyroid dataset,
the PSV value for a given dataset is similar across classiﬁers. Moreover, we have
also computed the PSV for all subsets of the SV EAneg set for Heart dataset and
observed that in comparison to its subsets, SV EAneg has the highest value of
PSV . For heart dataset, we observed that average accuracy (± s.d.) over three
trials with only feature 3 is 0.765 ± 0.046, with only feature 12 is 0.697 ± 0.043,
with only feature 13 is 0.77 ± 0.453, with features 3 and 12 is 0.771 ± 0.046, with
features 12 and 13 is 0.77 ± 0.045 and with features 3, 12 and 13, i.e., SV EAneg
set is 0.81 ± 0.008 which is highest among all the subsets.
In addition to the datasets reported in Table 2, we also implemented our SVEA
scheme on other large scale datasets like EEG-Eye state dataset (14 features, 14980
examples), Numerai dataset (21 features, 96320 examples). However, we did not
observe any feature with negative value of SVEA and hence in Table 2 we only
report datasets that had features with SVEA values less than zero.
Real datasets: Demonstration of FSS with a user given threshold
and comparison to RFECV and ReliefF For a user given feature size, say
l, with due justiﬁcation in terms of SVEA, our scheme can identify the l sized
feature set with best test accuracy based on the ranking of the SVEA values.
We demonstrate this property of SVEA scheme and compare it to RFECV and
ReliefF. To do this, we order the features based on the score/SVEA value for each
scheme and then plot the SVM test accuracy of linear classiﬁers learnt using ﬁrst l
features (Figure 3). Clearly, too few features leads to degradation in performance,
and too many features defeat the purpose of feature selection. In comparison to
other methods, our scheme achieves the highest accuracy when one looks for a
trade-oﬀby selecting a subset of features whose cardinality is neither too small
nor too large. Also, if the user given threshold on the number of features is l, then
SVEA has best accuracy as observed in Figure 3 for Magic, Heart and IJCNN
dataset with l = 2, 3, 5 respectively.
Using a statistical signiﬁcance test to compare our scheme to RFECV and Re-
liefF is not straight forward due to computation of incremental feature accuracy,
so we use the measure that given a ﬁxed number of features and a lower bound on
accuracy, a good scheme should identify feature subset leading to high accuracy.
However, for the sake of completeness, we still performed many Friedman tests
(using Scikit-posthocs package in python) by ﬁxing the number of features across
datasets and found no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the schemes at 5% level of sig-
niﬁcance except for the cases where SVEA is better as found by Nemenyi posthoc
test [14]. Comparative plots for other datasets and additional explanations (Ta-
ble 15) are provided in SM D.5. Using Pima Diabetes dataset, we show that the
high value of PSV (SV EAneg) in Table 2 is a case of FSS and not of dimension
reduction. Details of latter argument are presented in Table 13 of SM D.5.
Real datasets: Sample bias robust interval estimates In this section,
we demonstrate our idea of addressing the issue of sample bias while making con-
clusions based on the SVEA scheme. Since the technique requires partitioning the
whole dataset into many disjoint subsets, large sample sized datasets are con-
sidered. Figure 4 shows t-distribution based 95% conﬁdence intervals of SVEA
estimates for synthetic dataset SD4 (sdB) and real datasets Magic, IJCNN ([9])

Interpretable feature subset selection: A Shapley value based approach
17
and MINIBOONE ([48]). There is a partitioning of feature set into two subsets;
one in which the features have their SVEA’s conﬁdence intervals above origin and
other in which the features have their SVEA’s conﬁdence intervals below the ori-
gin. As PSV (SV EAneg) (given in Table 2) for the latter subset of features is high,
one can conclude that these features have a large contribution in label prediction.
Since the feature set partitioning is based on interval estimates, the conclusions
regarding important features are robust to sample bias.
Dataset
(m,n)
Clf
Avg Acc
(±std dev)
SV EAneg Avg Acc (±std dev)
SV EAneg
PSV
Thyroid
(215,5)
SVM
0.89±0.0145
{4}
0.83±0.0087
0.93
LR
0.89±0.0315
0.79±0.0328
0.89
RF
0.93±0.0400
0.76±0.0641
0.82
SVM K
0.95+-0.025
0.78+-0.0405
0.82
MLP
0.94
0.78+-0.0372
0.83
Pima
Diabetes
(768,8)
SVM
0.77±0.0060
{2}
0.75±0.008
0.98
LR
0.75±0.0075
0.73±0.0218
0.97
RF
0.73±0.0097
0.72±0.0230
0.98
SVM K 0.72+-0.0257
0.71+-0.0544
0.99
MLP
0.67+-0.0269
0.66+-0.0273
0.98
Magic
(19020,10)
SVM
0.79±0.0058
{9}
0.74±0.0060
0.93
LR
0.79±0.0058
0.73±0.0061
0.92
RF
0.75 ± 0.0035
0.73± 0.0097
0.97
SVM K 0.82+-0.0620
0.84+-0.0544
1.02
MLP
0.82+-0.007
0.73+-0.0075
0.89
Heart
(270,13)
SVM
0.84±0.0478
{3, 12, 13}
0.81±0.0080
0.96
LR
0.82±0.0381
0.79±0.0309
0.96
RF
0.82±0.0343
0.84±0.0578
1.02
SVM K 0.64+-0.0608
0.84+-0.0544
1.31
MLP
0.77+-0.0482
0.79+-0.0035
1.02
IJCNN
(126701,22)
SVM
0.91
{11, 12, 17,
18, 19}
0.90
0.99
LR
0.91
0.90
0.99
RF
0.90
0.90
1
SVM K
0.979
0.957
0.98
MLP
0.977
0.956
0.98
Table 2: Accuracies of the datasets having negative SVEA for features in SV EAneg
for SVM (linear kernel), LR, RF, SVM K (rbf kernel) and single layer MLP clas-
siﬁer. The sixth column has the accuracy of the classiﬁers learnt only on fea-
tures in SV EAneg. PSV is the ratio of accuracies in column 3 and column 5
when the important feature subset is (SV EAneg). SVM, LR, SVM K param-
eter C ∈{0.1, 1, 50, 500}, RF parameters n estimators ∈{0.1, 1, 50, 500} and
max depth = 2, SVM K parameter γ =
1
n∗V ar(X), MLP regularization parameter
α ∈{10−7, . . . , 10−1}, constant learning rate of 10−3, Relu activation and Adam
solver. m is the sample size and n is the number of features. No averaging is done
for IJCNN as the train-test (35000+91701) partitioning is already available from
the source.

18
Sandhya Tripathi et al.
(a) Dataset: Heart(270,13)
(b) Dataset: Magic(19020,10)
(c) Dataset: IJCNN(35000(tr),22)
(d) Dataset: Wdbc(569,30)
Fig. 3: Plot of test accuracy vs number of features used to train the linear classiﬁer using
SVM. For each scheme, we have 95% error bar computed over 5 iterations. Given a ﬁxed
number of features and a lower bound on accuracy, SVEA provides the feature subset which
leads to highest test accuracy in most of the cases. Number of trials in the plot for Magic
dataset is three; for other datasets number of trials is ﬁve.
5 Discussion
To interpret the inﬂuence of a single feature or their interactions on the label/class,
we use the framework of transferable utility cooperative games and introduce a
classiﬁcation game with features as players and hinge loss based characteristic
function (computed as LPs).
5.1 Summary
We propose SVEA scheme to apportion the total hinge loss based empirical risk
among the features. As Shapley value is computationally expensive, we build on
an approximation algorithm that does not compute the characteristic function
(an LP) for all subsets at one go but only when needed. From the perspective of
classiﬁcation, SVEA leads to the following contributions.

Interpretable feature subset selection: A Shapley value based approach
19
Fig. 4: Above plots depict 95% conﬁdence intervals for SVEA of features for 6 dimensional
synthetic dataset sdB and 3 UCI datasets. As the importance of a feature is based on intervals
of SVEA, we can say that on an average the population value of SVEA would lie inside the
interval estimates 95 out of 100 times (which are below 0) and hence important features via
SVEA is a pattern manifestation of underlying population.
Feature subset selection: Features with negative SVEA are the ones whose joint
contribution for label prediction is signiﬁcant. Identiﬁcation of lower-dimensional
subspace: Dataset lies in subspace with basis as features having negative SVEA
value. Our scheme uses a universal threshold of 0 on the SVEA value for all datasets
to identify both the sets mentioned above. Also, our scheme can also identify the
subset with the best accuracy based on ranking SVEA values if the feature set
size is user-given. Decomposition of excess 0-1 risk: under a special structure on
data distribution, only features (essential) with negative valued SVEA contribute
to Bayes risk. However, we empirically observe that any surrogate loss based clas-
siﬁer depends on features non-important for classiﬁcation also, and thereby in-
creasing the excess 0-1 risk of the classiﬁer. We also provide an estimate of the
unknown true hinge risk of each feature. We attempt to make our SVEA estimate
robust to sample bias by computing interval estimates by averaging over multiple
disjoint sub-samples. We demonstrate all the above contributions and our SVEA

20
Sandhya Tripathi et al.
scheme compares favourably with the existing feature selection schemes RFECV
and ReliefF on various synthetic and UCI datasets.
5.2 Characteristic function v(S, m) with regularization and kernels
Regularization to avoid over-ﬁtting is a natural thing to do in most of the learning
problems. We considered a l2-regularized version of tr er(S, m) deﬁned in Section
2.1 and used in Eq. (3) for deﬁning the characteristic function v(S, m). However,
this characteristic function turned out to be negative due to extra ∥w∥2 term in
tr er(S, m). To avoid this issue, we deﬁned the characteristic function vreg(S, m)
(using regularized tr er(S, m)) which was empirically observed to be positive on all
datasets. We compared the ﬁnal results (for feature subset selection in Section 3.1)
using v(S, m) and vreg(S, m) and found that using regularization doesn’t change
important feature set SV EAneg (veriﬁed across 5 trials on 2 real and 3 synthetic
datasets). Details with empirical results are available in SM D.3.
We also considered the case when non-linear classiﬁers (via kernels) are used
in the characteristic function. Note that regularization is necessary when using
kernels to get the dot product of feature mapping φ(x). We used Eq. (3) with
kernelized and regularized tr er(S, m) to obtain vk,reg(S, m). In the computa-
tional experiments, we observed variation in identiﬁcation of important feature
subset SV EAneg across trials, and in some cases, the important feature set (using
vk,reg(S, m)) did not have any common element with the set obtained using linear
classiﬁers. Also, in most of the datasets, the test accuracy (with kernels) using all
features did not improve over the linear case. One issue here is that vk,reg(S, m) is
negative in most of the cases, and the trick used to make the characteristic func-
tion positive used in the linear case is not applicable here. The variation across
trials could be attributed to the non-monotonic nature of vk,reg(S, m), which im-
plies that the implicit assumption for Shapley value that the grand coalition will
form is not satisﬁed. This issue is arising due to the use of regularization and
exists in linear cases too. However, it is more prominent with kernels because here
vk,reg(S, m) cannot be made positive. More details with supporting computational
experiments are available in SM D.4.
To summarize, in addition to the linear unregularized case that led to some
interesting insights, we also considered two other cases, viz., linear regularized,
and non-linear regularized. Even though the use of Shapley value in the linear
regularized case could be justiﬁed, its performance is the same as that of linear
unregularized and hence good. However, in the regularized kernel case, the per-
formance of the SVEA scheme is not good as far as feature subset selection is
considered; in fact, use of Shapley value can not be justiﬁed as the characteristic
function is not monotone.
5.3 Looking ahead
A comparison of SVEA from 0-1 loss function and other surrogate loss function
based classiﬁcation games would be interesting to explore; a ranking of surrogate
losses can be expected. A thorough study on more game-theoretic aspects like
understanding of dataset dependent properties of the game, modeling as NTU

Interpretable feature subset selection: A Shapley value based approach
21
game, etc., could be another direction. Finally, in classiﬁcation setup, a natural
extension would be to generalize binary classiﬁcation games to multi-class games.
In this paper, we have used linear and unregularized training error function,
which makes sure that v(·, m) is monotonic (Proposition 1) and use of Shapley
value is justiﬁed. However, if some problem does require using regularization for
feature subset selection, then our computational experience suggests that the char-
acteristic function v(·, m) has to be suitably deﬁned.
