Mitigating Unwanted Biases with Adversarial Learning
Brian Hu Zhang
Stanford University
Stanford, CA

Blake Lemoine
Google
Mountain View, CA

Margaret Mitchell
Google
Mountain View, CA

Abstract
Machine learning is a tool for building models that accurately
represent input training data. When undesired biases concern-
ing demographic groups are in the training data, well-trained
models will reﬂect those biases. We present a framework for
mitigating such biases by including a variable for the group
of interest and simultaneously learning a predictor and an ad-
versary. The input to the network X, here text or census data,
produces a prediction Y, such as an analogy completion or in-
come bracket, while the adversary tries to model a protected
variable Z, here gender or zip code.
The objective is to maximize the predictors ability to predict
Y while minimizing the adversary’s ability to predict Z. Ap-
plied to analogy completion, this method results in accurate
predictions that exhibit less evidence of stereotyping Z. When
applied to a classiﬁcation task using the UCI Adult (Cen-
sus) Dataset, it results in a predictive model that does not
lose much accuracy while achieving very close to equality of
odds (Hardt, et al., 2016). The method is ﬂexible and applica-
ble to multiple deﬁnitions of fairness as well as a wide range
of gradient-based learning models, including both regression
and classiﬁcation tasks.
1
Introduction
Machine learning leverages data to build models capable of
assessing the labels and properties of novel data. Unfortu-
nately, the available training data frequently contains biases
with respect to things that we would rather not use for de-
cision making. Machine learning builds models faithful to
training data and can lead to perpetuating these undesirable
biases. For example, systems designed to predict creditwor-
thiness and systems designed to perform analogy comple-
tion have been demonstrated to be biased against racial mi-
norities and women respectively. Ideally we would be able
to build a model which captures exactly those generaliza-
tions from the data which are useful for performing some
task which are not discriminatory in a way which the people
building those models consider unfair.
Work on training machine learning systems that output
fair decisions has deﬁned several useful measurements for
fairness: Demographic Parity, Equality of Odds, and Equal-
ity of Opportunity. These can be imposed as constraints or
Copyright c⃝2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
incorporated into a loss function in order to mitigate dis-
proportional outcomes in the system’s output predictions re-
garding a protected demographic, such as sex.
In this paper, we examine these fairness measures in the
context of adversarial debiasing. We consider supervised
deep learning tasks in which the task is to predict an out-
put variable Y given an input variable X, while remaining
unbiased with respect to some variable Z. We refer to Z
as the protected variable. For these learning systems, the
predictor ˆY = f(X) can be constructed as (input, output,
protected) tuples (X, Y, Z). The predictor f(X) is usually
given access to the protected variable Z, though this is not
strictly necessary. This construction allows the determina-
tion of which types of bias are considered undesirable for a
particular application to be chosen through the speciﬁcation
of the protected variable.
We speak to the concept of mitigating bias using the
known term debiasing1, following deﬁnitions provided by
Hardt et al. (2016) and reﬁned by Beutel et al. (2017).
Deﬁnition 1. DEMOGRAPHIC PARITY. A predictor ˆY sat-
isﬁes demographic parity if ˆY and Z are independent.
This means that P( ˆY = ˆy) is equal for all values of the
protected variable Z: P( ˆY = ˆy) = P( ˆY = ˆy|Z = z).
Deﬁnition 2. EQUALITY OF ODDS. A predictor ˆY satisﬁes
equality of odds if ˆY and Z are conditionally independent
given Y .
This means that, for all possible values of the true label
Y , P( ˆY = ˆy) is the same for all values of the protected
variable: P( ˆY = ˆy|Y = y) = P( ˆY = ˆy|Z = z, Y = y)
Deﬁnition 3. EQUALITY OF OPPORTUNITY. If the output
variable Y is discrete, a predictor ˆY satisﬁes equality of op-
portunity with respect to a class y if ˆY and Z are indepen-
dent conditioned on Y = y.
This means that, for a particular value of the true label
Y , P( ˆY = ˆy) is the same for all values of the protected
variable: P( ˆY = ˆy|Y = y) = P( ˆY = ˆy|Z = z, Y = y)
1Note that “debias” may not be quite the right word, as all bias
is not necessarily removed.
arXiv:1801.07593v1  [cs.LG]  22 Jan 2018

We present an adversarial technique for achieving
whichever one of these deﬁnitions is desired.2 A predic-
tor f will be trained to model Y as accurately as possible
while satisfying one of the above equality constraints. De-
mographic parity will be achieved by introducing an adver-
sary g which will attempt to predict a value for Z from ˆY .
The gradient of g will then be incorporated into the weight
update rule of f so as to reduce the amount of information
about Z transmitted through ˆY . Equality of odds will be
achieved by also giving g access to the true label Y , thereby
limiting any information about Z which ˆY contains beyond
the information already contained in Y .
We consider the case where the protected variable is a dis-
crete feature present in the training set as well as the case in
which the protected variable must be inferred from latent
semantics (in particular, gender from word embeddings). In
order to accomplish the latter we adapt a technique presented
by Bolukbasi et al. (2016) to deﬁne a subspace capturing the
semantics of the protected variable, and then train a model
to perform a word analogies task accurately, while unbiased
on this protected variable. A consequence of this technique
is that the network learns “debiased” embeddings, embed-
dings that have the semantics of the protected variable re-
moved. These embeddings are still able to perform the anal-
ogy task well, but are better at avoiding problematic exam-
ples such as those shown in Bolukbasi et al. (2016).
Results on the UCI Adult Dataset demonstrate the tech-
nique we introduce allows us to train a model that achieves
equality of odds to within 1% on both protected groups.
We also compare with the related previous work of Beutel
et al. (2017), and ﬁnd we are able to better equalize the dif-
ferences between the two groups, measured by both False
Positive Rate and False Negative Rate (1 - True Positive
Rate), although note that the previous work performs better
overall for False Negative Rate.
We provide some discussion on caveats pertaining to this
approach, difﬁculties in training these models that are shared
by many adversarial approaches, as well as some discussion
on difﬁculties that the fairness constraints introduce.
2
Related Work
There has been signiﬁcant work done in the area of debias-
ing various speciﬁc types of data or predictor.
Debiasing word embeddings: Bolukbasi et al. (2016) de-
vises a method to remove gender bias from word embed-
dings. The method relies on a lot of human input; namely, it
needs a large “training set” of gender-speciﬁc words.
Simple models: Lum and Johndrow (2016) demonstrate
that removing the protected variable from the training data
fails to yield a debiased model (since other variables can be
highly correlated with the protected variable), and devise a
method for learning fair predictive models in cases when the
learning model is simple (e.g. linear regression). Hardt et al.
2Achieving equality of odds and demographic parity are gen-
erally incongruent goals. See also Kleinberg, Mullainathan, and
Raghavan (2016) for incongruency between calibration and equal-
ized odds.
Figure 1: The architecture of the adversarial network.
(2016) discuss the shortcomings of focusing solely on DE-
MOGRAPHIC PARITY, present alternate deﬁnitions of fair-
ness, and devise a method for deriving an unbiased predic-
tor from a biased one, in cases when both the output variable
and the protected variable are discrete.
Adversarial training: Goodfellow et al. (2014) pioneered
the technique of using multiple networks with competing
goals to force the ﬁrst network to “deceive” the second net-
work, applying this method to the problem of creating real-
life-like pictures. Beutel et al. (2017) apply an adversarial
training method to achieve EQUALITY OF OPPORTUNITY in
cases when the output variable is discrete. They also discuss
the ability of the adversary to be powerful enough to enforce
a fairness constraint even when it has access to a very small
training sample.
3
Adversarial Debiasing
We begin with a model, which we call the predictor, trained
to accomplish the task of predicting Y given X. As in Fig-
ure 1, we assume that the model is trained by attempting to
modify weights W to minimize some loss LP (ˆy, y), using a
gradient-based method such as stochastic gradient descent.
The output layer of the predictor is then used as an input
to another network called the adversary which attempts to
predict Z. This is part of the network corresponds to the
discriminator in a typical GAN (Goodfellow et al. 2014).
We will suppose the adversary has loss term LA(ˆz, z) and
weights U. Depending on the deﬁnition of fairness being
achieved, the adversary may have other inputs.
• For DEMOGRAPHIC PARITY, the adversary gets the pre-
dicted label ˆY . Intuitively, this allows the adversary to try
to predict the protected variable using nothing but the pre-
dicted label. The goal of the predictor is to prevent the
adversary from doing this.
• For EQUALITY OF ODDS, the adversary gets ˆY and the
true label Y .
• For EQUALITY OF OPPORTUNITY on a given class y, we
can restrict the training set of the adversary to training
examples where Y = y.3
In order for gradients to propagate correctly, ˆY above
refers to the output layer of the network, not to the dis-
crete prediction; for example, for a classiﬁcation problem,
ˆY could refer to the output of the softmax layer.
We update U to minimize LA at each training time step,
according to the gradient ∇ULA. We modify W according
3This last technique of restricting the training set is discussed
at length by Beutel et al. (2017), so we only mention it here.

Figure 2: Diagram illustrating the gradients in Eqn. 1 and the
relevance of the projection term projhg. Without the projec-
tion term, in the pictured scenario, the predictor would move
in the direction labelled g+h in the diagram, which actually
helps the adversary. With the projection term, the predictor
will never move in a direction that helps the adversary.
to the expression:
∇W LP −proj∇W LA∇W LP −α∇W LA
(1)
where α is a tuneable hyperparameter that can vary at each
time step and we deﬁne projvx = 0 if v = 0.
The middle term proj∇W LA∇W LP prevents the predictor
from moving in a direction that helps the adversary decrease
its loss while the last term, α∇W LA, attempts to increase
the adversary’s loss. Without the projection term, it is pos-
sible for the predictor to end up helping the adversary (see
Fig. 2). Without the last term, the predictor will never try
to hurt the adversary, and, due to the stochastic nature of
many gradient-based methods, will likely end up helping the
adversary anyway. The result is that when training is com-
pleted the desired deﬁnition of equality should be satisﬁed.
Notice that our deﬁnitions and method make no assump-
tions about the nature of the output and protected variables:
in particular, they work with both regression and classiﬁca-
tion models, as well as with both discrete and continuous
protected variables.
4
Properties
We note several properties of the above method that we be-
lieve distinguish it from past work.
1. Generality: The above method can be used to en-
force DEMOGRAPHIC PARITY, EQUALITY OF ODDS, or
EQUALITY OF OPPORTUNITY as described in Hardt et
al. (2016). Further, it applies without modiﬁcation to the
cases when the output variable and/or protected variable
are continuous instead of discrete.
2. Model-agnostic: The adversarial approach described can
be applied regardless of how simple or complex the pre-
dictor’s model is, as long as the model is trained using a
gradient-based method, as many modern learning models
are. Further, as we will discuss later, at least in some situ-
ations, we suggest that the adversary does not need to be
nearly as complex as the predictor—a simple adversary
can be used with a complex predictor.
3. Optimality: Under certain conditions, we show that if the
predictor converges, it must converge to a model that sat-
isﬁes the desired fairness deﬁnition. Since the predictor
also attempts to decrease the prediction loss LP , the pre-
dictor should still perform well on the target task.
5
Theoretical Guarantees
Proposition 1. Let the predictor, the adversary, and their
weights W, U be deﬁned according to Section 3 Let
LA(W, U) be the adversary’s loss, convex in U, concave in
W,4 and continuously differentiable everywhere.
Suppose that:
1. When the predictor’s weights are W0, the predictor gives
the same output ˆY regardless of input X. (For example,
when W0 = 0).
2. There are some weights U0 that minimize LA when the
weights for ˆY have no effect on the output: For all W,
LA(W, U0) = minU LA(W0, U).
3. Predictor and adversary converge to W ∗and U ∗respec-
tively.
Then, LA(W ∗, U ∗) = LA(W ∗, U0). That is, the adver-
sary gains no advantage from using the weights for ˆY .
Proof. Since the adversary converges, LA(W ∗, U ∗)
≤
LA(W ∗, U0): otherwise, since LA is convex in U, the ad-
versary’s weights would move toward U0. In other words,
the adversary’s minimum is the point at which the adversary
gains an advantage from using ˆY . Similarly, since the pre-
dictor converges, LA(W ∗, U ∗) ≥LA(W0, U ∗): Otherwise,
the predictor would be able to increase the adversary’s loss
by moving toward W0, and the projection term and nega-
tive weight on ∇W LA in Eqn. 1 would push the predictor to
move towards 0. Then:
LA(W ∗, U0) ≥LA(W ∗, U ∗)
(as stated above)
≥LA(W0, U ∗)
(as stated above)
≥LA(W0, U0)
(by deﬁnition of U0)
= LA(W ∗, U0)
(by deﬁnition of U0)
so we must have LA(W ∗, U ∗) = LA(W ∗, U0).
Note that, in this proof, the adversary can be operating
in a few different ways, as long as it is given ˆY as one of
its inputs; for example, for demographic parity, it could be
given only ˆY ; for equality of odds, it can be given both ˆY
and Y .
We will show in the next propositions that the adversary
gaining no advantage from information about ˆY is exactly
the condition needed to guarantee that desired deﬁnitions of
equality are satisﬁed.
Proposition 2. Let the training data be comprised of triples
(X, Y, Z) drawn according to some distribution D. Sup-
pose:
1. The protected variable Z is discrete.
2. The adversary is trained for DEMOGRAPHIC PARITY; i.e.
the adversary is given only the prediction ˆy.
4We understand that these assumptions are not satisﬁed in most
use cases involving neural networks; however, as with most the-
oretical analyses of machine learning models (see, for example,
Goodfellow et al. (2014) or Kingma and Ba (2014); the former
makes even stronger assumptions), assumptions of concavity are
necessary for any proofs to work

3. The adversary is strong enough that, at convergence, it
has learned a randomized function A that minimizes the
cross-entropy loss E(x,y,z)∼D[−log P(A(ˆy) = z)]; i.e.
the adversary in fact achieves the optimal accuracy with
which you can predict Z from ˆY
4. The predictor completely fools the adversary; in particu-
lar, the adversary achieves loss H(Z), the entropy of Z.
Then the predictor satisﬁes DEMOGRAPHIC PARITY; i.e.,
ˆY ⊥Z.
Proof. Notice that if the adversary draws A(ˆy) according to
the distribution Z| ˆY = ˆy, then its loss is exactly the condi-
tional entropy
H(Z| ˆY ) = E[−log P(Z = z| ˆY = ˆy)]
= E[−log P(A(ˆy) = z| ˆY = ˆy)]
where the expectation is taken over (x, y, z) ∼D. Now
suppose for contradiction that ˆY is dependent on Z. Then
H(Z| ˆY ) < H(Z), so the adversary can achieve loss less
than H(Z), contradicting assumption (4).
Proposition 3. If assumptions (2)-(4) above are replaced
with the analogous equality of odds assumptions; in partic-
ular, that the adversary is given ˆy and y, and the adversary
cannot achieve loss better than H(Z|Y ) then the predictor
will satisfy EQUALITY OF ODDS; i.e., ( ˆY ⊥Z)|Y
Proof. Analogous to the above. Notice that if the adversary
draws A(ˆy, y) ∼(Z| ˆY = ˆy, Y = y), then its loss is exactly
the conditional entropy
H(Z| ˆY , Y ) = E[−log P(Z = z| ˆY = ˆy, Y = y)]
= E[−log P(A(ˆy) = z| ˆY = ˆy, Y = y)]
where the expectation is again taken over (x, y, z) ∼D.
But if ˆY is conditionally dependent on Z given Y , then
H(Z| ˆY , Y ) < H(Z|Y ), so the adversary can achieve loss
less than H(Z|Y ).
Note that Propositions 2 and 3 work analogously in the
case of continuous Y and Z, with the probability mass
function P replaced with the probability density function
p, and the discrete entropy H replaced by the differential
entropy h(X) = E[−log p(x)], since the relevant property
(h(A) = h(A|B) iff A ⊥B) holds for differential entropy
as well. They also work analogously when the adversary A
is restricted to a limited set of predictors.
For example, an adversary using least-squares regression
trying to enforce equality of odds can be thought of as one
that outputs A(ˆy, y) ∼N(µ(ˆy, y), σ2) where µ(ˆy, y) is
the output of the regressor, and σ2 > 0 is a ﬁxed con-
stant. Note now that the differential entropy h(Z| ˆY , Y ) =
E[−log p(z|ˆy, y)] is nothing more than the expected log-
likelihood, and so the function µ that minimizes this quantity
is the optimal least-squares regressor. Thus, for example, if
we restrict µ to be a linear function of (ˆy, y), and the other
conditions of Proposition 3 hold, then an analogous argu-
ment to the above propositions shows that ˆY has no linear
relationship with Z after conditioning on Y .
These claims together illustrate that a sufﬁciently power-
ful adversary trained on a sufﬁciently large training set can
indeed accurately enforce the demographic parity or equal-
ity of odds constraints on the predictor, if the adversary
and predictor converge. Guaranteed convergence is harder
to achieve, both in theory and practice. In the practical sce-
narios below we discuss methods to encourage the training
algorithm to converge, as well as reasonable choices of the
adversary model that are both powerful and easy to train.
6
Experiments
All models were trained using the Adam optimizer (Kingma
and Ba 2014) for both predictor and adversary.
Toy Scenario
We generate a training sample (x(i), y(i), z(i))
n
i=1 (where z
is the protected variable) as follows. For each i, let r ∈0, 1
be picked uniformly at random, and let v ∼N(ri, 1).
Let u, w ∼N(vi, 1) vary independently. Then x(i) =
(r, u), y(i) = [w > 0], z(i) = r. (where [ ] denotes an in-
dicator function). Intuitively, the variable that we are trying
to predict, y, depends directly on v and r. We are given as
inputs the protected variable r, and a noisy measurement of
v. The end goal would be to train a model that predicts y
while being unbiased on r, effectively removing the direct
signal for r from the learned model.
If one trains generically a logistic regression model to pre-
dict y given x, it outputs something like y = σ(0.7u+0.7r),
which is a reasonable model, but heavily incorporates the
protected variable r. To debias, We now train a model that
achieves DEMOGRAPHIC PARITY. Note that removing the
variable r from the training data is insuffucient for debias-
ing: the model will still learn to use u to predict y, and u
is correlated with r. If we use the described technique and
add in another logistic model that tries to predict z given
y, we ﬁnd that the predictor model outputs something like
y = σ(0.6u −0.6r + 0.6). Notice that not only is r not in-
cluded with a positive weight anymore, the model actually
learns to use a negative weight on r in order to balance out
the effect of r on u Notice that u −r ∼N(0, 2); i.e., it is
not dependent on r, so we have successfully trained a model
to predict y independently of r.
Word Embeddings
We train a model to perform the analogy task (i.e., ﬁll in the
blank: man : woman :: he : ?).
It is known that word embeddings reﬂect or amplify prob-
lematic biases from the data they are trained on, for exam-
ple, gender (Bolukbasi et al. 2016). We seek to train a model
that can still solve analogies well, but is less prone to these
gender biases. We ﬁrst calculate a “gender direction” g us-
ing a method based on Bolukbasi et al. (2016) which gives a
method for deﬁning the protected variable. We will use this
technique in the context of deﬁning gender for word em-
beddings, but, as discussed in Bolukbasi et al. (2016), the

biased
debiased
neighbor
similarity
neighbor
similarity
nurse
1.0121
nurse
0.7056
nanny
0.9035
obstetrician
0.6861
ﬁanc´ee
0.8700
pediatrician
0.6447
maid
0.8674
dentist
0.6367
ﬁanc´e
0.8617
surgeon
0.6303
mother
0.8612
physician
0.6254
ﬁance
0.8611
cardiologist
0.6088
dentist
0.8569
pharmacist
0.6081
woman
0.8564
hospital
0.5969
Table 1: Completions for he : she :: doctor : ?
technique generalizes to other protected variables and other
forms of embeddings. Following Bolukbasi et al. (2016), we
pick 10 (male, female) word pairs, and deﬁne the and de-
ﬁne the bias subspace to be the space spanned by the top k
principal components of the differences, where k is a tune-
able parameter. In our experiments, we ﬁnd that k = 1 gives
reasonable results, so we did not experiment further.
We use embeddings trained from Wikipedia to gener-
ate input data from the Google analogy data set (Mikolov
et al. 2013). For each analogy in the dataset, we let x =
(x1, x2, x3) ∈R3d comprise the word vectors for the ﬁrst
three words, y be the word vector of the fourth word, and
z be projgy. It is worth noting that these word vectors com-
puted from the original embeddings are never updated nor
is there projection onto the bias subspace and therefore
the original word embeddings are never modiﬁed. What is
learned is a tranform from a biased embedding space to a
debiased embedding space.
As a model, we use the following: let v = x2 + x3 −x1,
and output ˆy = v −wwT v, where our model parameter
is w. Intuitively, v is the “generic” analogy vector as is
commonly5 used for the analogy task. If left to its own de-
vices (i.e., if not told to be unbiased on anything), the model
should either learn w = 0 or else learn w as a useless vector.
By contrast, if we add the adversarial discriminator net-
work (here, simply ˆz = wT
2 ˆy), we expect the debiased pre-
diction model to learn that w should be something close to g
(or −g), so that the discriminator cannot predict z = projgy.
Indeed, both of these expectations hold: Without debiasing,
the trained vector w is approximately a unit vector nearly
perpendicular to g : wT g = 0.08, ||w|| = 0.82; with debias-
ing, w is approximately a unit vector pointing in a direction
highly correlated with g : wT g = 0.55, ||w|| = 0.96. Even
after debiasing, gendered analogies such as man : woman
:: he : she are still preserved; however, many biased
analogies go away, suggesting that the adversarial training
process was indeed successful. An example of the kinds of
changes in analogy completions observed after debiasing are
illustrated in Table 16.
5see e.g. Mikolov et al. (2013)
6The presence of nurse in the second position may seem wor-
rying, but it should be noted that in this particular set of word em-
beddings, nurse is the nearest neighbor to doctor; no amount of
Feature
Type Description
age
Cont
Age of the individual
capital gain
Cont
Capital gains recorded
capital loss
Cont
Capital losses recorded
education num
Cont
Highest
education
level
(numerical
form)
fnlwgt
Cont
# of people census takers believe that
observation represents
hours per week Cont
Hours worked per week
education
Cat
Highest level of education achieved
income
Cat
Whether individual makes > $50K an-
nually
marital status
Cat
Marital status
native country
Cat
Country of origin
occupation
Cat
Occupation
race
Cat
White,
Asian-Pac-Islander,
Amer-
Indian-Eskimo, Other, Black
relationship
Cat
Wife,
Own-child,
Husband,
Not-in-
family, Other-relative, Unmarried
sex
Cat
Female, Male
workclass
Cat
Employer type
Table 2: Features in the UCI dataset per individual. Features
are either continuous (Cont) or Categorical (Cat). Categori-
cal features are converted to sparse tensors for the model.
UCI Adult Dataset
To better align with the work in Beutel et al. (2017), we at-
tempt to enforce EQUALITY OF ODDS on a model for the
task of predicting the income of a person – in particular,
predicting whether the income is > $50k – given various
attributes about the person, as made available in the UCI
Adult dataset (Asuncion and Newman 2007).
Details on the features that the dataset provides are
available in Table 2. We use both categorical and con-
tinuous columns as given, with exception to the fnlwgt
feature, which we discard. We convert the remain-
ing columns into tensors where the categorical columns
are
sparse
tensors,
age
is
bucketized
at
boundaries
[18, 25, 30, 35, 40, 45, 50, 55, 60, 65], and the rest of the con-
tinuous columns are real-valued.
As discussed before, to enforce equality of odds, we give
the adversary access to the true label y. The adversary will
learn the relationship between y and z regardless of what the
predictor does; further, if the predictor’s predictions ˆy give
more information about z than is already contained in y, the
adversary will be able to improve its loss. Thus, the predic-
tor, in attempting to fool the adversary, will move toward
making sure that ˆy does not give such additional informa-
tion; in other words, toward equality of odds.
Our protected variable z is a binary-valued variable for
the two sexes annotated, MALE and FEMALE.
Our predictor model is straightforward logistic regres-
sion: ˆy = σ(w1·x+b), where σ is the sigmoid function. Our
adversary model takes the form of the following logistic-
regression-like model:
s = σ
 (1 + |c|)σ−1(ˆy)

ˆz = w2 · [s, sy, s(1 −y)] + b
debiasing will change this.

where c and b are learnable scalars, w2 is a learnable vec-
tor, and σ−1 is the inverse of the sigmoid function (logit
function) σ−1(t) = log t −log(1 −t). Intuitively, we want
our adversary to be able to learn functions of the form
ˆz = f(y, [ˆy > 0.5]) (i.e. dependent only on the boolean pre-
dicted value [ˆy > 0.5]), and thus enforce equality of odds.
Here, the adversary would learn such a function by making
c extremely large. We add 1 to |c| to make sure the adver-
sary never tries to ignore ˆy by setting c = 0, which could
be a difﬁcult local minimum for the adversary to escape7.
This adversary is both general enough to be used whenever
y and z are both discrete8, and powerful enough that devi-
ation from true equality of odds should cause the adversary
to be able to decrease its loss.
Without tweaking, this algorithm ran into issues with lo-
cal minima, and the resulting models were often closer to
demographic parity than equality of odds. We implemented
a technique that helped: by increasing the hyperparameter α
in Eqn. 1 over time, the predictor had a much easier time
learning to deceive the adversary and therefore more strictly
enforce equality of odds. We set α =
√
t (where t is the step
counter), and to avoid divergence we set the predictor’s step
size to η ∝1/t, so that αη →0 as is preferred for stochastic
gradient-based methods such as Adam.
We train the model twice, once with debiasing and once
without, and present side-by-side confusion matrices on the
test set for income bracket with respect to the protected vari-
able values Male and Female, shown in Table 3, and we
present the false positive rates (FPR) and false negative rates
(FNR) in Table 4. Note that false negative rate is equal to 1−
true positive rate, so the trade-offs are directly comparable
to the (x, y) values of an ROC curve.
Without Debiasing
With Debiasing
Female
Pred 0
Pred 1
Female
Pred 0
Pred 1
True 0
4711
120
True 0
4518
313
True 1
265
325
True 1
263
327
Male
Pred 0
Pred 1
Male
Pred 0
Pred 1
True 0
6907
697
True 0
7071
533
True 1
1194
2062
True 1
1416
1840
Table 3: Confusion matrices on the UCI Adult dataset, with
and without equality of odds enforcement.
We notice that debiasing has only a small effect on over-
all accuracy (86.0% vs 84.5%), and that the debiased model
indeed (nearly) obeys equality of odds: as shown in Table
4, with debiasing, the FNR and FPR values are approxi-
mately equal across sex subgroups: 0.0647 ≈0.0701 and
0.4458 ≈0.4349.
Although the values don’t exactly reach equality, neither
difference is statistically signiﬁcant: a two-proportion two-
tail large sample z-test yields p-values 0.25 for y = 0 and
7This value added to |c| is an adjustable hyperparameter; we
found reasonable results using the value 1 and thus not feel the
need to experiment further.
8If y and z are multi-class, then the sigmoid becomes a softmax,
but everything else remains the same.
Female
Male
Without
With
Without
With
Beutel et al. (2017)
FPR
0.1875
0.0308
0.1200
0.1778
FNR
0.0651
0.0822
0.1828
0.1520
Current work
FPR
0.0248
0.0647
0.0917
0.0701
FNR
0.4492
0.4458
0.3667
0.4349
Table 4: False Positive Rate (FPR) and False Negative Rate
(FNR) for income bracket predictions for the two sex sub-
groups, with and without adversarial debiasing.
0.62 for y = 1.
7
Conclusion
In this work, we demonstrate a general and powerful method
for training unbiased machine learning models. We state and
prove theoretical guarantees for our method under reason-
able assumptions, demonstrating in theory that the method
can enforce the constraints that we claim, across multiple
deﬁnitions of fairness, regardless of the complexity of the
predictor’s model, or the nature (discrete or continuous) of
the predicted and protected variables in question. We ap-
ply the method in practice to two very different scenarios: a
standard supervised learning task, and the task of debiasing
word embeddings while still maintaining ability to perform
a certain task (analogies). We demonstrate in both cases the
ability to train a model that is demonstrably less biased than
the original one, and yet still performs extremely well on the
task at hand. We discuss difﬁculties in getting these mod-
els to converge. We propose, in the common case of discrete
output and protected variables, a simple adversary that is us-
able regardless of the complexity of the underlying model.
8
Future Work
This process yields many questions that require further work
to answer.
1. The debiased word embeddings we have trained are still
useful in analogies. Are they still useful in other, more
complex tasks?
2. The adversarial training method is hard to get right and
often touchy, in that getting the hyperparameters wrong
results in quick divergence of the algorithm. What ways
can be used to stabilize training and ensure convergence,
and thus ensure that the theoretical guarantees presented
here can work?
3. There is a body of existing work for image recognition
using adversarial networks. Image recognition in general
can sometimes be subject to various biases such as being
more or less successful at recognizing the faces of people
of different races. Can multiple adversaries be combined
to create high accuracy image recognition systems which
do not exhibit such biases?
4. In general, do more complex predictors require more
complex adversaries? It would appear that in the case of y
and z discrete, a very simple adversary sufﬁces no matter
how complex the predictor. Does this also apply to con-
tinuous cases, or would a simple adversary be too easy to
deceive for a complex predictor?
