A Reinforcement Learning Based Encoder-Decoder
Framework for Learning Stock Trading Rules
Mehran Taghian1,1, Ahmad Asadi1,1, Reza Safabakhsh1,1,∗
Abstract
A wide variety of deep reinforcement learning (DRL) models have recently been
proposed to learn proﬁtable investment strategies. The rules learned by these
models outperform the previous strategies specially in high frequency trading
environments. However, it is shown that the quality of the extracted features
from a long-term sequence of raw prices of the instruments greatly aﬀects the
performance of the trading rules learned by these models. Employing a neural
encoder-decoder structure to extract informative features from complex input
time-series has proved very eﬀective in other popular tasks like neural machine
translation and video captioning in which the models face a similar problem.
The encoder-decoder framework extracts highly informative features from a long
sequence of prices along with learning how to generate outputs based on the ex-
tracted features. In this paper, a novel end-to-end model based on the neural
encoder-decoder framework combined with DRL is proposed to learn single in-
strument trading strategies from a long sequence of raw prices of the instrument.
The proposed model consists of an encoder which is a neural structure respon-
sible for learning informative features from the input sequence, and a decoder
which is a DRL model responsible for learning proﬁtable strategies based on
the features extracted by the encoder. The parameters of the encoder and the
decoder structures are learned jointly, which enables the encoder to extract
features ﬁtted to the task of the decoder DRL. In addition, the eﬀects of dif-
∗Corresponding author

Preprint submitted to Applied Soft Computing
January 12, 2021
arXiv:2101.03867v1  [q-fin.ST]  8 Jan 2021

ferent structures for the encoder and various forms of the input sequences on
the performance of the learned strategies are investigated. Experimental results
showed that the proposed model outperforms other state-of-the-art models in
highly dynamic environments.
Keywords:
Deep reinforcement learning, Deep Q-learning, Single stock
trading, Trading strategy, Encoder decoder framework
1. Introduction
Forming proﬁtable trading strategies ﬁtted on either a single ﬁnancial in-
strument or a set of instruments in a speciﬁc market, based on a vast historical
data is a critical problem for investors. Since the introduction of algorithmic
trading [1] and monitoring the trading process by computers, especially at high
frequency [2], there has been a widespread interest in designing a powerful model
to learn proﬁtable investment strategies.
In recent years, machine learning (ML) models and deep neural networks
(DNNs) have been widely used for learning proﬁtable investment strategies in
both single asset trading and portfolio management problems [3]. Among the
techniques used for learning asset-speciﬁc trading rules, genetic programming
(GP) and deep reinforcement learning (DRL) methods have been more inter-
esting for the research community[4].
Genetic programming was widely used to learn technical trading rules for
diﬀerent indices like S&P500 index ([5]), to learn appropriate trading rules to
beneﬁt from short-term price ﬂuctuations ([6]), to learn noise-tolerant rules
based on a large number of technical indicators ([7]), and to learn the trading
rules based on popular technical indicators like MACD ([8]).
Since genetic programming and its modiﬁcations are not able to evolve af-
ter task execution, reinforcement learning techniques have been widely used to
combine with evolutionary algorithms to cover this weakness. [9] combined the
SARSA algorithm with genetic programming to enable the model to change pro-
grams during task execution. [10] modiﬁed the GNP-SARSA model proposed
2

by [9] with augmenting new nodes called subroutines to make an appropriate
trade-oﬀbetween the eﬃciency and compactness of the model.
Considering the great performance of deep reinforcement learning (DRL)
models (deep neural networks trained with the reinforcement learning tech-
niques) in forming investment strategies, the proposed methods for portfolio
management are mainly based on DNN structures and DRL techniques. [11]
proposed a very-long short-term memory (VLSTM) network, to deal with ex-
tremely long sequences in ﬁnancial markets and explored the importance of
VLSTM in the context of high frequency trading. [12] proposed a DNN struc-
ture to forecast the next one-minute average price of an instrument given its
current time and n-lagged one-minute pseudo-returns to build a trading strategy
that buys (sells) when the next predicted average price is above (below) the last
closing price. [13] proposed a DNN model to learn the spatio-temporal model
of the input and developed a classiﬁcation rule to predict short-term futures
market prices using order book depth.
[14] proposed a DRL technique for forecasting the short-term trend in the
currency FOREX (FOReign EXchange) market to maximize the return on in-
vestment in an HFT algorithm. Jiang et al. [15] proposed a ﬁnancial model-free
reinforcement learning framework to provide a deep learning solution to the
portfolio management problem.
For single stocks trading, Wang et al.
[16]
employed deep Q-learning to build an end-to-end deep Q-trading system for
learning trading strategies.
[4] studied the DRL performance in learning single asset-speciﬁc trading
rules and concluded that: 1) the quality of extracted features from the input
can greatly aﬀect the performance of the learned strategy by DRL models,
and 2) proposing a good feature extractor from a long-term historical price
data sequence would obviously improve the proﬁtability of the resulting trading
strategy.
Considering the results from [4], proposing a model to learn good
features from a long-term price sequence would eﬀectively contribute to improve
the performance of DRL models.
Considering the results reported by [4], we combined the encoder-decoder
3

framework with the DRL techniques and proposed an end-to-end model to learn
informative features from a long-term price sequence of a speciﬁc ﬁnancial in-
strument and learn a proﬁtable trading strategy. The encoder-decoder frame-
work is one of the state-of-the-art neural structures applied in tasks requiring
extracting complex feature representation, specially in cases that the input is
presented in the form of a long-term time-series[17].
In this paper, we ﬁrst develop a DRL agent based on a deep Q-learning
algorithm to generate trading signals given a sequence of OHLC prices of each
instrument. Then, we design and implement an encoder-decoder based model
to improve the agent’s feature extraction performance. In addition, we exam-
ine the performance of diﬀerent DNN structures for the encoder module. The
time-series of candlesticks and raw OHLC input types are evaluated, and the
performance of models is tested using various stocks with diﬀerent behavior.
Furthermore, the inﬂuence of window size on the agent’s performance for the
windowed input type has been studied. Experimental results showed that our
model outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.
In the next section of this paper, we brieﬂy review the related work of learn-
ing ﬁnancial asset-speciﬁc trading strategies and discuss the advantages and
disadvantages of diﬀerent categories of the proposed methods. Section 3, dis-
cusses the model proposed in this paper. The model consists of an encoder part
for feature extraction and a decoder part for decision making. The details of the
architecture of both of these parts are discussed in Section 3. Section 4 provides
the experimental results and the conclusions are provided in Section 5.
2. Related Work
many researchers proposed methods based on reinforcement learning for de-
termining trading strategies.
[18] ﬁrst applied RL in portfolio management,
and proposed a method based on recurrent reinforcement learning for ﬁnancial
transactions. [19] proposed a method based on the RL framework which in-
corporates stock selection and asset management. [20] incorporate time-series
4

prediction with the decision making power of RL. They ﬁrst predict the future
prices using a CNN, and then feed the output to a policy gradient model along
with historical data to empower trading decisions.
[21] ﬁrst incorporate deep neural networks to learn policy directly from high
dimensional sensory inputs. The proposed method, termed deep Q-learning,
successfully played seven diﬀerent Atari games, three of which could outperform
the human level. Considering the successful performance of deep reinforcement
learning in playing Atari games, researchers have carried out many kinds of
research to apply DRL methods to the stock market environment.
[22] applied two diﬀerent CNN based function approximators with an actor-
critic RL algorithm called “Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient” (DDPG) to
ﬁnd the optimal policy. The proposed DDPG has two diﬀerent convolutional
neural network (CNN) function approximators. The input state to the model
is 18 diﬀerent technical indicators converted to multiple channels of 1D images
fed to the CNN model.
[23] proposed a novel RL based investment strategy consisting of three
phases: 1) extracting asset representation from multiple time-series using a
Long Short Term Memory with a History Attention(LSTM-HA) network, 2)
modeling the interrelationships among assets as well as the asset price rising
prior using a Cross-Asset Attention Network(CAAN), and 3) generating portfo-
lio and giving the investment proportion of each asset according to the output
winner scores of the attention network. The three components are optimized
end-to-end using a Sharpe ratio oriented RL.
[24] explored the training power of the Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient
to learn stock trading strategy. [25] proposed a method using the Q-learning
algorithm to ﬁnd the optimal dynamic trading strategy. They introduced two
models varied in their representation of the environment, the ﬁrst of which
represents environment states using a ﬁnite set of clusters, the second of which
used the candlesticks themselves as the states of the environment.
[26] presented a solution to the algorithmic trading problem of generating the
trading strategy for single stock based on the DQN algorithm with a Sharpe ratio
5

oriented manner. [27] used co-integrated stock market prices and incorporated
DQN to generate pairs trading strategy.
Following the methods attempting to apply RL and DRL techniques to gen-
erate stock market trading strategies and portfolio management, some methods
tried to improve various parts of the agent and environment to improve the RL
agent’s performance.
[28] used McShane-Whitney extension of the Lipschitz function ([29]) to fore-
cast the reward function based on its previous values. Besides, to support the
extension of the reward function, all the previous states, along with some arti-
ﬁcially generated states, called dream states, were combined to enrich learning.
[30] proposed an approach based on deep Q-learning for deriving a multi-
asset portfolio trading strategy. Instead of using a discrete action-space, which
might lead to infeasible actions, they introduced a mapping function to map
unreasonable and infeasible actions to similar valuable actions. Therefore, the
trading strategy would be more reasonable in the practical action space. Besides,
the dimensionality problem of the action space is taken care of by using deep
Q-learning.
Having considered the temporal essence of stock market data, some of the
researches have combined the temporal feature extraction power of recurrent
neural networks with DRL’s decision-making ability.
[31] applied the Gated
Recurrent Unit(GRU) to exploit informative features from raw ﬁnancial data
along with technical indicators to represent stock market conditions more ro-
bustly. Then they designed a risk-adjusted reward function using the Sortino
ratio proposed by [32]. Based on the state, action, and reward functions de-
signed, they proposed Deep Q-Learning and Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient
for quantitative stock trading.
[33] applied DRL for portfolio management and in order to distinguish the
critical time when the price changes, they proposed using a three-dimensional
attention gating network that gave higher weights on rising moments and assets.
Moreover, they applied the XGBoost method to quantify the importance of
features and output the three most relevant features from historical data to the
6

model: close price, high price, and low price.
[34] compared diﬀerent RL agents for trading ﬁnancial indices in a personal
retirement portfolio. The comparison included on-policy SARSA(λ) and oﬀ-
policy Q(λ) with discrete state and discrete action settings that maximize either
total return or diﬀerential Sharpe ratios, on-policy temporal diﬀerence learning,
and TD(λ) with discrete state and continuous action settings. They showed that
an adaptive continuous action agent has the best performance in predicting next
period portfolio allocations.
[35] incorporated particle swarm optimization algorithm to optimize portfo-
lio. Besides, they developed a recurrent reinforcement learning based method
for portfolio allocation and trading.
In our former work ([4]), we studied the performance of strategies based
on the candlestick patterns, SARSA(λ) algorithm, and deep Q-learning and
concluded that methods based o deep reinforcement learning could generate
more adaptive trading strategies speciﬁc to each asset.
The encoder-decoder framework, is one of the most popular neural structures
which is used to solve complex problems in an end-to-end menner ([17]).This
architecture was ﬁrst proposed in neural machine translation by [36]. It consists
of two sequential parts: 1) An encoder part which is responsible to lean a good
feature extraction from the input and 2) a decoder which is responsible for
generating appropriate output based on the extracted feature vector.
Since employing the encoder-decoder framework in neural machine transla-
tion has signiﬁcantly improved the performance of the models, it is widely used
in other complex tasks like image captioning (see [37] and [38] for more details),
and video captioning (see [39] for more details).
In this work, we dedicate focus on the following issues :
1. Proposing a model based on the encoder-decoder architecture where the
decoder is a DRL agent trained to generate a trading strategy based on
the representation of the market produced by the encoder model. The
encoder is a neural network structure responsible for exploiting features
7

from the raw input time-series data and generating feature vector.
2. Showing the importance of extracting time dependencies of the input
prices, and proposing diﬀerent encoder structures are proposed to improve
the quality of time dependencies extraction.
3. Investigating the impact of window-size on exploiting important features
and generating a proper representation of the market.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows: ﬁrst, we introduce the details
of the proposed method, deep Q-learning method, model architecture, and DNN
models used as encoder. Then, the performance of diﬀerent encoder models are
evaluated using various methods explained in detail in Section 4. Next, the
results of experiments are analyzed.
3. Proposed Method
3.1. Formulation
In ﬁnancial markets, a candlestick is used to represent the price ﬂuctuations
in a short time period, originating from Japanese rice traders and merchants
who used candlesticks to track the market prices[40]. A candlestick consists of
4 price elements, namely high (the highest stock price during a period - e.g.,
a day), low (the lowest price), open (the stock price at the beginning of the
period), and close(the stock price at the end of the period), abbreviated to
OHLC. A candlestick’s color can be either green/white, representing a bullish
candle(open price is lower than close price), or red/black representing a bearish
candle(close price is lower than open price). 1 shows a sample candlestick. (1)
shows a vector representing a candlestick. This vector consists of the Open,
High, Low, and Close prices.
ct = (popen, phigh, plow, pclose)
(1)
A candlestick chart is used to demonstrate the behavior of the asset price.
According to this concept, patterns in this chart show the buyers’ and sellers’
8

Figure 1: A candlestick representing the price behavior of an asset during a speciﬁc time
window [4]
behavior and their inﬂuence on the market. Thus, these patterns can be used
to analyze the price ﬂuctuations and use the analysis to devise trade strategies
on a ﬁnancial asset.
3.2. Model architecture
The proposed model is based on the encoder-decoder framework which con-
sists of following modules:
1. Encoder:
Encoder is the ﬁrst neural structure that takes the input of the model and
learns a good mapping from the input space to the feature space which
minimizes the decoders’ loss function.
2. Decoder:
Decoder is the second neural structure in the encoder-decoder framework,
that takes the features extracted by the encoder for each input record and
generates the appropriate output based on the input feature vector. The
gradients of the decoder are back propagated to the encoder and train its
weights along with the weights of the decoder during the training phase.
In the proposed model, the decoder part is a target or policy network used
in the deep Q-Learning based model proposed by [4] to learn trading strategies.
The encoder part is a deep neural network applied to extract deep features from
9

the candlestick chart representations. These features are categorized into the
following two groups:
1. Features directly learned from candlestick representations or raw OHLC
data.
2. Features representing the temporal relationships among a sequence of can-
dlesticks inside a time window.
For each category, NN models exist to eﬃciently analyze and extract those
features according to the Policy Network’s performance in trading. The encoder
part extracts features from the input and provides a state vector (feature vector)
for the decoder module, a deep Q-Learning agent that uses this state vector as
the state of the environment to produce trading signals. Based on the rewards
given to the DRL agent, the model is optimized towards producing higher prof-
its. This optimization is done in an end-to-end form, back-propagating error
from the decoder part to the encoder module. As a result, the encoder extracts
features based on the trading performance of the DRL. The model architecture
is shown in 2.
3.3. The decoder module
The decoder module is the trading agent of our model, and learns to produce
trading signals. This module’s architecture is based on the deep Q-Learning
algorithm proposed by [21] to play Atari games. The module’s input is a state
vector, containing the features of the market at time-step t.
These features
can be either vanilla input of OHLC prices or the feature vector produced by a
feature extractor model. We show the vector space of the input candles with C =
{c1, c2, . . . , cT }, where T is the ﬁnal time-step, and ci is the candle representation
of diﬀerent time-intervals (here daily). The feature extractor module φ gets
the vector space of candles as input, and generates the vector space of states
S = {s1, s2, . . . , sT }.
φ(C) = S
(2)
10

Figure 2:
In this architecture,
the state is given by the environment at each time
step, and the agent takes action according to the state and receives the reward and
next state.
The quadruples (CurrentState, Action, Reward, NextState) are saved in the
replay memory.
For the optimization part in each iteration, a batch of quadruples
(CurrentState, Action, Reward, NextState) is selected for the training after the step men-
tioned earlier. The encoder part’s output is common between policy and target networks and
is optimized in each iteration. The replay memory has a speciﬁc capacity, and after it is ﬁlled,
a random quadruple is substituted with a new quadruple
(2) represents φ, the feature extraction function. This function can be either
an identity function (state space is the candlesticks themselves) or a neural
network that extracts deep features from the input vector space of candlesticks
and produces a vector space of features. Each vector si denotes the state of
the environment at time-step t. This state is given to the DQN agent to use in
taking action. The action space of the DQN agent is A = {′buy′,′ sell′,′ noop′},
which are the signals of the trading strategy at each time-step. After taking
action, the agent would be given a reward based on the signal produced. The
rewards of buying and selling are a bit diﬀerent. (3) demonstrates the reward
function used by the environment. The ownShare parameter is used alongside
action ’noop’ showing that whether the money has already been invested on the
11

market or not.
Rt =









































((1 −TC)2×P2
P1
−1) × 100
if action = ’buy’ or
(action = ’noop’ and ownShare = True)
((1 −TC)2×P1
P2
−1) × 100
if action = ’sell’ or
(action = ’noop’ and ownShare = False)
(3)
Reinforcement learning is a framework used to learn a sequence of decision
tasks. In general, the RL agent interacts with the environment, observes the
state, takes action according to the policy and the observed state, and gets a
reward. In a sequence of decisions made by the RL agent, the agent learns a
policy π regarding the actions taken and rewards earned at each episode. Af-
terward, the agent should optimize its policy to maximize cumulative reward
after each episode. For this purpose, we used deep Q-learning, a critic based
reinforcement learning algorithm, which uses action-value function Q(S, A) de-
noting the expected cumulative reward in state S when action A is taken. More
formally, we use a multi-layered Perceptron to approximate the optimal action-
value function, which is demonstrated in (4).
Q∗(s, a) = max
π
E[rt + γrt+1 + γ2rt+2 + ...|st = s, at = a, π]
(4)
where γ is the discounting factor, rt is the reward at time-step t, π is the
behavior policy learned, s is the observed state, and a is the action taken. The
optimal action-value function obeys the Bellman equation:
Q∗(s, a) = Es′[r + γ max
a′ Q∗(s′, a′)|s, a]
(5)
In order to reduce the mean squared error in the Bellman equation, we use
two sets of parameters (Neural Networks). The target values are approximated
12

using the target network weights (from previous iterations) shown with θ−
i
at
iteration i. The policy network, which is being trained in each iteration to adjust
its parameters to reduce the mean squared error, is used to approximate the Q
function using parameters θi at iteration i. Thus, we have a sequence of loss
functions Li(θi) that changes at each iteration.
Li(θi) = Es,a,r[(Es′[y|s, a] −Q(s, a; θi))2]
= Es,a,r,s′[(y −Q(s, a; θi))2] + Es,a,r[Vs′[y]]
(6)
In order to further stabilize the deep Q-learning algorithm, we use the Huber
loss proposed by [41] instead of the Mean Squared Error, which pays attention
to large and small errors equally.
Huber(e) =





1
2e2
for |e| ≤1
(|e| −1
2),
otherwise
(7)
Furthermore, our agent stores the last c experiences in the replay memory.
The agent’s experience vector et = (st, at, rt, st+1) is saved in the Experience
Replay Memory Dt = {e1, e2, . . . , ec} (where c is the length of the Replay Mem-
ory) and used as a batch to optimize the policy network. When the model wants
to update, it samples a batch of experiences uniformly at random from D. The
steps of the deep Q-Learning algorithm used in our work are represented in
Algorithm 1.
13

Algorithm 1 Deep Q-Learning Algorithm used for training the agent
1: Initialize replay memory D to capacity N
2: Initialize action-value function Q with random weights θ
3: Initialize target action-value function ˆQ with weights θ−= θ
4: for episode from 1 to M do
5:
Initialize sequence s1 and preprocessed sequence φ1 = φ(s1)
6:
for t from 1 to T do
7:
With probability ϵ select a random action at
8:
Otherwise select at = argmaxaQ(φ(st), a; θ)
9:
Execute action at and observe reward rt and state st+1
10:
Set st+1 = st, at and preprocess φt+1 = φ(st+1)
11:
Store transition (φt, at, rt, φt+1)
12:
Sample random mini-batch of transitions (φj, aj, rj, φj+1) from D
13:
Set yj =





rj
if episode terminates at step j + 1
rj + γ maxa′ ˆQ(φj+1, a′; θ−)
otherwise
14:
Perform a gradient descent step on (yj −Q(φj, aj; θ))2 with respect
to the network parameters θ
15:
Every C steps reset ˆQ = Q
16:
end for
17: end for
3.4. The encoder part
So far, we have discussed the input data representation, diﬀerent parts of the
trading agent, and the deep Q-Learning algorithm, used by the agent to optimize
its policy to learn devise proﬁtable strategies. However, the essential part of each
RL algorithm is the representation of the environment. As mentioned before,
the environment tells the RL agent in which state it currently is, based on
which the agent would take actions and receive rewards from the environment.
A proper state representation can signiﬁcantly improve the performance of the
14

RL agent. Therefore, in this section, we want to concentrate on our model’s
feature extraction and state representation – the Encoder module.
We introduced the φ function, which given the input candlesticks, extracts
features and outputs the state space, which is then fed to the decoder module
– the DQN model.
The φ function can be either an identity function or a
deep neural network. We do not have any feature extraction in the ﬁrst case,
and candlesticks are directly fed to the DQN model. The DNNs we use as the
feature extractor are Multi-Layered Perceptron (MLP), Gated Recurrent Unit
(GRU)[36], 1-dimension Convolution in the direction of time (CNN)[42], and
GRU with 1-dimension Convolution in the direction of price (CNN-GRU).
The MLP model can extract features from candlesticks without considering
the temporal relationship among candles. In contrast, the other four models not
only pay attention to the structure of each candlestick, but they also consider
the temporal relationships. In this section, we explain the detailed architecture
of each feature extractor. We will compare the performance of these DNNs as
the feature extractor for the DQN later.
Before we dive into each model’s description, we need to explain diﬀerent
inputs to these models. Our inputs partition into two categories:
1. Vanilla:
The OHLC prices without any change. This kind of input contains only
the representation of candle ct at time-step t.
2. Windowed:
A series of candlesticks with size w are grouped together to form a window
of candles W = {c(t−w), c(t−w+1), . . . , ct} at time step t.
All models use the windowed input type, but the raw OHLC prices are only
for MLP encoder and DQN without any encoder models.
3.4.1. MLP
The MLP model is a NN with only one hidden layer. In order to regular-
ize the outputs of layers, we used Batch Normalization after the hidden layer.
15

The dimensions of layers are InputSize×128, BatchNormalization(128), 128×
FeatureV ectorSize. The MLP architecture takes both types of inputs. If the
raw OHLC is used, then InputSize = 4, and in case the input type is windowed,
then the InputSize would be equal to the size of the window.
3.4.2. GRU
The Gated Recurrent Unit is a recurrent neural network exerted on extract-
ing features from time-series data. This model’s input type is the Windowed
input, which contains a sequence of candles at each time step. The role of GRU
here is to extract features from each candlestick while considering the history
in each window. The architecture of the GRU model is represented in 3a.
3.4.3. CNN
The Convolutional Neural Networks has been widely used in image pro-
cessing to extract deep features from images, and also it is applied in signal
processing for analyzing signals. CNN has a kernel which can move in one, two,
or higher directions and extract features from multi-dimensional data. Here, our
input is the OHLC prices windowed to form time-series data. Thus, we have
a 2-dimensional input, the ﬁrst of which is the price(candles), and the second
one is time. The input channel size is the size of each candle vector (i.e., 4 for
OHLC), and the kernel size is 3 in the direction of time (i.e., w the window
size). This architecture is shown in 3b.
3.4.4. CNN-GRU
The combination of CNN and GRU model is proposed here, where the CNN
model’s kernel moves in the direction of candles and extracts candlestick fea-
tures. Then it outputs a sequence of features from the windowed input to the
GRU model. The GRU model here is responsible for the input’s temporal be-
havior, where it takes the candlesticks’ features in sequence from the CNN, and
extracts temporal features. The details of this architecture are represented in
3c.
16

(a) GRU model architecture
(b) CNN model architecture
(c) CNN-GRU model architecture
Figure 3: Architecture of diﬀerent models proposed to use as the encoder
17

4. Experimental Results
4.1. Dataset
All the models are tested on real-world ﬁnancial data, including stocks and
crypto-currencies. Data is chosen to be varied in the behavior like the bullish
trend, bearish trend, and side markets. Furthermore, the data length is chosen
to be 20 years with the last ﬁve years as test (trading) data, ten years with the
last two years as test data, and six years (BTC/USD) with the last two years
as test data. The interval of candlesticks in all data is chosen to be daily. All
data used in this work are available on Yahoo Finance and Google Finance. The
summary of the datasets is represented in 1.
Table 1: Data used along with train-test split dates
Data
Begin Date
Split Point
End Date
GOOGL
2010/01/01
2018/01/01
2020/08/25
AAPL
2010/01/01
2018/01/01
2020/08/25
AAL
‌ 2010/01/01
2018/01/01
2020/08/25
BTC-USD
2014/09/17
2018/01/01
2020/08/26
KSS
1999/01/01
2018/01/01
2020/08/24
GE
‌2000/01/01
2015/01/01
2020/08/24
HSI
‌2000/01/01
2015/01/01
2020/08/24
4 shows the condition of each dataset in diﬀerent periods. The AAL data
is bullish on the training-set and bearish on the test-set, market GE is both
bearish on the train and test sets, AAPL and GOOGL are both bullish; KSS
and HSI are examples of volatile markets, and BTC/USD is side on the test-
set. These datasets are selected to measure the ﬂexibility of diﬀerent models in
diﬀerent market conditions. A robust model can generalize its performance to
provide a proper strategy behaving proﬁtable on the test-set.
18

(a) Price history of AAL stock used to train and
test the model.
(b) Price history of GE stock used to train and
test the model.
(c) Price history of GOOGL stock used to train
and test the model.
(d) Price history of AAPL stock used to train and
test the model.
(e) Price history of KSS stock used to train and
test the model.
(f) Price history of HSI stock used to train and
test the model.
(g) Price history of BTC/USD stock used to train
and test the model.
Figure 4: Price histories used to test the models. The blue sections are used for training and
the red parts are used as testing sets.
19

4.2. Evaluation Metrics
The trading strategy proposed by each model is evaluated from three per-
spectives:
1. How proﬁtable is the proposed strategy
2. What is the risk of the proposed strategy
3. The eﬀect of hyper-parameters(e.g. window size) in proposing a strategy
for each asset.
The metrics are mentioned and described in detail as follows.
4.2.1. Proﬁt curve
This is a qualitative metric showing the percentage of proﬁt concerning the
initial investment. At each point of time t, if the current wealth Wt and the
initial investment is W0m then the percentage of the proﬁt at each time step is
calculated using (8).
%Ratet = Wt −W0
W0
× 100
(8)
The proﬁt curve compares the %Rate of proﬁt for each model at diﬀerent time
steps.
4.2.2. Arithmetic Return
This metric is the sum of the rate of increase or decrease in the current
investment due to the decisions made by the model (Buy, Sell, None). The rate
of wealth change at the current time-step if the model has already invested the
money (not sold before) is as in (9).
ARt = Wt −Wt−1
Wt−1
(9)
Using the (9), we can calculate the arithmetic return in (10).
AR =
T
X
t=1
ARt
(10)
which shows the cumulative return at each time step.
20

4.2.3. Time Weighted Return
The amount of return in diﬀerent periods are not independent of each other.
In other words, when the amount of loss is signiﬁcant at one time, then the
capital would be signiﬁcantly lower to invest afterward. For this purpose, we
use Time Weighted Return (TWR) which is calculated in (11).
TWR = (
n
Y
i=1
(xi + 1))
1
n −1
(11)
To avoid negative values, we add 1 to all the return values, then we remove
1 from the result.
4.2.4. Daily Return Variance
This metric is the variance of daily arithmetic returns.
RV =
PT
t=1(ARt −AR)2
T −1
(12)
where AR is the average arithmetic return and ARt is the arithmetic return at
time t.
4.2.5. Total Return
It is the percentage of the increase in the capital during trading time. Total
Return is calculated in (13) where W0 and WT are the initial and ﬁnal wealth,
respectively.
TR = WT −W0
W0
(13)
4.2.6. Value at Risk
The value at risk (V aR) is a metric to measure the quality level of ﬁnancial
risk within a portfolio during a speciﬁc period of time. V aR typically is mea-
sured with a conﬁdence ratio 1 −α (e.g., with a conﬁdence level of 95% where
α = 5) and measures the maximum amount of loss in the worst situation with
conﬁdence 1 −α in the corresponding time period. The higher the value of the
21

V aRα (i.e., the absolute value of V aRα) with a ﬁxed value of α, the higher the
level of the portfolio’s ﬁnancial risk.
There exist two main approaches to compute V aRα: 1) using the closed-form
which assumes the probability distribution of the daily returns of the portfo-
lio follows a Normal standard distribution, 2) using the historical estimation
method, which is a non-parametric method and assumes no prior knowledge
about the portfolio’s daily returns.
In this paper, we used the closed-form
method.
To calculate V aRα, we used Monte Carlo simulation by developing a model
for future stock price returns and running multiple hypothetical trials through
the model. The mean µ and standard deviation σ of the returns are calculated,
then 1000 simulations run to generate random outputs with a normal distribu-
tion N(µ, σ). Then the α percent lowest value of the outputs is selected and
reported as V aRα.
4.2.7. Daily Return Volatility
The volatility of the daily returns evaluates the risk level of trading rules by
calculating daily returns’ standard deviation. This metric is calculated for each
strategy using (14), where AR is the average daily arithmetic return, and AR
is the daily arithmetic return.
σp =
s
ΣT
i=1(ARi −AR)2
T −1
(14)
4.2.8. Sharpe Ratio
The Sharpe ratio (SR) was proposed ﬁrst by Sharpe et al. [43] to measure the
reward-to-variability ratio of the mutual funds. This metric displays the average
return earned in excess of the risk-free rate per unit total risk and is computed
here by (15) in which Rf is the return of the risk-free asset, and E{Rp} is the
expected value of the portfolio value. Here we assumed that Rf = 0.
SR = E{Rp} −Rf
σp
(15)
22

4.2.9. Window Size heat-map
This diagram illustrates the impact of window-size in extracting appropriate
patterns from the input candlesticks for each asset, which is reﬂected as the
total proﬁt earned by the agent corresponding to each window size.
4.2.10. Decision curve
In this curve, the trading signals to trade each asset are demonstrated over
that asset’s raw price curve. This chart gives insight into the quality of decision
making power of each model on each ﬁnancial asset.
4.3. Experimental setup
All the models are implemented using Pytorch library in Python. In order
to optimize the models, we used Adam optimizer. The mini-batch training is
also conducted using a batch size of 10, and the replay memory size is set to
20. The only regularization used in the experiments in the policy and target
networks is the Batch Normalization. The transaction cost is set to zero during
the training process; however, it may be non-zero during the evaluation.
4.4. Performance evaluation of the models
In this section, the overall performance of the diﬀerent models, along with
diﬀerent input types for the MLP and DQN models (i.e., raw OHLC and Win-
dowed candles) are compared using proﬁt curves and other risk and proﬁt eval-
uation metrics.
5 illustrates the proﬁt curves of models on the test set for diﬀerent datasets.
DQN-vanilla is the DQN model without any encoder and with the input of
raw OHLC. DQN-windowed is the DQN model with a window of candles as
input. MLP-vanilla and MLP-windowed are the same as DQN-vanilla and DQN-
windowed except that MLP contains an encoder part, which is an MLP model.
CNN, GRU, and CNN-GRUare models with the encoder part as described in
sections 3.4.3, 3.4.2, and 3.4.4, respectively with input type as a window of
candles(time series).
The general conclusions we reached from the experiments are reported in 5:
23

• Stocks can be categorized into two kinds: the one in which the sequence
of candlesticks have eﬀective temporal relationships and those with few
meaningful time dependencies.
• The most proﬁtable trading strategies for data with a high level of time-
dependency in their price history can be generated using windowed-input
models. The BTC/USD, GOOGL, AAPL, and GE, are of this kind. The
GRU, and CNN have the best performance on the BTC/USD model; The
CNN, DQN-windowed, and MLP-windowed have the best performance
on GE; The GRU, CNN-GRU, and MLP-windowed have the best per-
formance on GOOGL; MLP-windowed, GRU, DQN-windowed, and CNN
provided the most proﬁtable strategies for AAPL.
• On the other hand, we have data with a low level of dependency in time
among candlesticks, which leads to the models with raw OHLC input
having a better performance. AAL, HSI, and KSS are among this type of
data. By low level of dependency in time, we do not mean that models
with time-series inputs have poor performance. Their performance is very
good, but they behave a little poorly compared to models with raw OHLC
input.
2 represents the details of experiments with regards to both proﬁt and risk.
One crucial point that can be inferred from the results is that as the models’
total return increases, the Sharpe ratio increases correspondingly.
It means
that the models devise strategies in a risk-adjusted way. However, if we want
to examine the results in speciﬁc, on some data, the models with the highest
proﬁtability acted riskily. For example, in AAL, the best model in total return
is MLP-vanilla, but the Sharpe ratio and VaR(here we consider the absolute
value of VaR) of its strategy are, respectively, lower and higher than those
strategies proposed by windowed-input models. The same is true about GRU
in BTC/USD, where GRU has the highest total return, but CNN provided more
risk-adjusted strategies with respect to VaR and Sharpe ratio.
24

Another important conclusion deducted from comparing data diagrams and
the models’ performance is that stocks with highly volatile prices such as KSS,
AAL, and HSI can best be processed by models with raw OHLC inputs, whereas
other data with more stable prices are best analyzed with windowed-input mod-
els. Therefore, in order to select among feature extractors, we should pay careful
attention to the type of input data. The best feature extractor for stable stocks
would be windowed-input models, whereas, for highly volatile stocks, models
with raw OHLC can decide and change their behavior more quickly since they
only pay attention to the current candlestick, not the history of candles.
4.5. impact of window size
Now that we have examined the performance of diﬀerent feature extractor
models, it is time to dive deeper into the temporal feature extractor concept.
Feature extractors with windowed inputs can perform better on data with more
stable price movements (rather than highly volatile data). Moreover, consid-
ering 2 and 5, each windowed-input model has its best performance varying
from data to data.
We want to inspect the impact of window size for each
model diﬀerently using the data in which the model has its best performance.
We test the performance of GRU and CNN-GRU using GOOGL; CNN, MLP-
windowed, and DQN-windowed using GE. 6 demonstrate a heat-map showing
the relationship between the window size and the normalized total proﬁt earned
by the models with windowed input.
Window sizes vary from 3 to 75, and
the total proﬁt is normalized to bring between 0 and 1. Blocks having lighter
colors earned higher proﬁt than those with darker colors. As obvious from the
heat-map, the number of lighter colors in the interval of 10 to 20 is more than
other window sizes. Therefore, the best feature extraction using a sequence of
candlesticks can be done with window sizes between 10 and 20.
4.6. Sample Signaling
For each data, the trading strategy is illustrated in 7 based on the decisions
made at each time step by the most proﬁtable model.
The green, red, and
25

(a) Performance of diﬀerent models on AAPL
(b) Performance of diﬀerent models on GOOGL
(c) Performance of diﬀerent models on GE
(d) Performance of diﬀerent models on AAL
(e) Performance of diﬀerent models on KSS
(f) Performance of diﬀerent models on HSI
(g) Performance of diﬀerent models on BTC/USD
Figure 5: The proﬁt curve of the models diﬀerent from the viewpoint of encoder part and
input type.
26

Figure 6: The heat-map generated to show the impact of diﬀerent window sizes on the feature
extraction by calculating total return for each window size.
blue points represent the ’buy’, ’sell’, and ’none’ signals, respectively. When
the agent generates a signal, it will inﬂuence the next day’s investment.
In
other words, when the agent decides to buy a share, this action is actually done
the next day. As mentioned before, we use a parameter OwnShare, which tells
us whether the agent already bought the share or not. Thus, when the agent
bought a share at the time step t, the OwnShare parameter would become true,
and if the next action is none, the agent’s money will continue to be invested.
We begin by an initial investment at t0, and at each time-step, when the agent
decides to buy or sell, all the money would be invested or withdrawn.
As shown in 7, agents could generate signals properly in positions where the
trend of the market changes. In order to represent the strategy behavior for
each data, we select a period of 100 intervals. The stable markets such as GE,
GOOGL, and AAPL contain ’none’ signals in their strategy more than volatile
markets such as HSI and KSS. That can explain the fact that in stable markets,
the market trend changes less rapidly than highly volatile markets; therefore,
agents can produce more ’none’ action in their strategy.
4.7. Comparing models with similar works
Whenever possible, the proposed models in this paper are compared with
the state-of-the-art models of learning single asset trading rules. Since most of
these models’ implementations are not accessible, comparison with each baseline
model is accomplished just in cases that the model’s performance metrics are
27

(a) Trading strategy generated for AAL
(b) Trading strategy generated for GE
(c) Trading strategy generated for GOOGL
(d) Trading strategy generated for AAPL
(e) Trading strategy generated for KSS
(f) Trading strategy generated for HSI
(g) Trading strategy generated for BTC/USD
Figure 7: The histogram of strategies generated on each dataset for a period of time with
length 100 by the best model.
28

reported in the companion paper. The list of the used baseline models is as
follows.
i) Buy and Hold (B&H):
B&H is one of the most widely used benchmark strategies to compare the
performance of a model. In this strategy, the investor selects an asset and
buys it at the ﬁrst time step of the investment. The purchased asset is held
to the end of the period regardless of its price ﬂuctuations.
ii) GDQN:
Proposed by Wu et al. [31], uses the concatenation of the technical indi-
cators and raw OHLC price data of the last nine time steps as the input,
a two-layered stacked structure of GRUs as the feature extractor, and the
DQN as the decision-making module.
iii) DQT:
Proposed by Wang et al. [16], implements online Q-learning algorithm to
maximize the long-term proﬁt of the investment using the learned rules on
a single ﬁnancial asset. The reward function here is formed by computing
the accumulated wealth over the last n days.
iv) DDPG:
Proposed by Xiong et al. [24] uses Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient(DDPG)
as the deep reinforcement leaning approach to obtain an adaptive trading
strategy. Then, the model’s performance is evaluated and compared with
the Dow Jones Industrial Average and the traditional min-variance portfolio
allocation strategy.
Tables 3, 4, and 5 represent our models’ performance along with the state-
of-the-art models using the proﬁt metrics. According to the results reported in
3, the performance of the model with MLP encoder and raw OHLC input is
signiﬁcantly better than DQT and RRL on stocks HSI and S&P500 proposed
by Wang et al. [16]. For HSI, time-series models achieve a performance close to
MLP-vanilla, but they behave poorly on S&P500.
29

4 represents the Rate of Return (%) for our models with diﬀerent encoders
and models proposed by Wu et al. [31]. Wu et al.’s best model performance is
on AAPL stock with Rate of Return equal to 77.7, but the GRU model gains
the Rate of Return 438, which is signiﬁcantly better. Moreover, wherever the
models proposed by Wu et al. got a negative return, our model returns a highly
positive return. Consider stock GE, where the maximum return value in Wu
et al. is -6.39%, but the best strategy proposed by MLP with vanilla input is
130.4%. When examining the returns gained by diﬀerent models on IBM, it
is obvious that return values for time-series models are better than those with
raw OHLC input, and the GRU encoder gains the highest return of 174%. This
concept explains the existence of a temporal relationship in IBM stock in that
speciﬁc period.
5 shows the performance of DDPG, the model presented by Xiong et.al.
[24].
The ﬁnal portfolio value of models in our work is better than DDPG,
starting with an initial portfolio value of 10000. The CNN-GRU has the best
performance with a ﬁnal portfolio value of 21984, while the DDPG model’s ﬁnal
portfolio value is 19791.
As the results indicate, our models perform signiﬁcantly better than similar
models in proﬁtability, ranging from time-series models to raw OHLC inputs.
As previously mentioned, these papers’ codes were not available, and we had to
compare the performance according to common metrics.
5. Conclusion
In this work, we proposed a method based on the Encoder-Decoder frame-
work, where the encoder model is a DNN, which helps extract essential features
from the raw ﬁnancial data, and the decoder is a DRL agent which makes a
decision at each time-step and generates trading signals. The model is trained
end-to-end, and the encoder’s feature extraction function is optimized toward
the policy improvement of the DRL agent.
The DRL is based on the Deep Q-learning algorithm and consists of a policy
30

and a target network, both of which are multi-layered Perceptron networks. For
the encoder part, the feature extraction performance of various DNNs is evalu-
ated and compared. The proposed models for the encoder part are categorized
into two types: 1) The raw OHLC input, which receives candle OHLC prices
directly. 2) Time-series input, which concatenates a window of consecutive can-
dles and receives the window as input.
Based on experimental results, the performance of models depended on the
market behavior. When the market is highly volatile, meaning that the rate of
price ﬂuctuation is high, DQN and MLP model with the raw OHLC input had
the best performance since they are able to make decisions only based on current
input representation, disregarding to the historical changes of the market. On
the other hand, there are more stable markets where models with time-series
input can devise more proﬁtable trading strategies because the market behav-
ior enables them to exploit eﬃcient features from ﬁnancial data history. The
window size impact is further studied, and we concluded that window sizes in
the interval of 10 to 20 have the best feature extraction performance. Using the
trading strategies generated for each data, we understand that agents working
on stable stocks will generate none signal more frequently than in strategies
devised for highly volatile markets.
The future of the work can be viewed from diﬀerent perspectives.
• As we have experimented, if we could predict the next state of the envi-
ronment using the current state, and feed the predicted next state to the
DRL model, the performance would signiﬁcantly increase.
• The actor and actor-critic based DRL methods can be tested and com-
pared with the performance of critic based Deep Q-learning algorithm
used here.
• Working on oﬀering a metric used to describe the behavior of the market,
based on which, we can specify whether the time-series models can work
eﬃciently in rule extraction or not. Using this metric, we can distinguish
where to apply models with raw OHLC input or apply time-series input.
31
