Forming Predictive Features of Tweets for
Decision-Making Support
Bohdan M. Pavlyshenko
Ivan Franko National University of Lviv, Ukraine

Abstract. The article describes the approaches for forming diﬀerent
predictive features of tweet data sets and using them in the predic-
tive analysis for decision-making support. The graph theory as well as
frequent itemsets and association rules theory is used for forming and
retrieving diﬀerent features from these datasests. The use of these ap-
proaches makes it possible to reveal a semantic structure in tweets re-
lated to a speciﬁed entity. It is shown that quantitative characteristics of
semantic frequent itemsets can be used in predictive regression models
with speciﬁed target variables.
Keywords: predictive features, predictive analytics, frequent itemsets,
tweets.
1
Introduction
Tweets, the messages of Twitter microblogs, have high density of semantically
important keywords. It makes it possible to get semantically important infor-
mation from the tweets and generate the features of predictive models for the
decision-making support. Diﬀerent studies of Twitter are considered in the pa-
pers [3–6,9,15,17,19,23,31,34]. In [27,28], we study the use of tweet features for
forecasting diﬀerent kinds of events. In [25], we study the modeling of COVID-19
spread and its impact on the stock market using diﬀerent types of data as well
as consider the features of tweets related to COVID-19 pandemic.
In this paper, we study the predictive features of tweets using loaded datasets
of tweets related to Tesla company.
2
Graph structure of tweets
The relationships among users can be considered as a graph, where vertices de-
note users and edges denote their connections. Using graph mining algorithms,
one can detect user communities and ﬁnd ordered lists of users by various char-
acteristics, such as Hub, Authority, PageRank, Betweenness. To identify user
communities, we used the Community Walktrap Algorithm algorithm, which is
implemented in the package igraph [11] for the R programming language envi-
ronment. We used the Fruchterman-Reingold algorithm from this package for vi-
sualization. The Community Walktrap algorithm searches for related subgraphs,
arXiv:2201.02049v1  [cs.CL]  6 Jan 2022

2
Bohdan M. Pavlyshenko
also called communities, by random walk [30]. A graph which shows the relation-
ships between users can be represented by Fruchterman-Reingold algorithm [12].
We can assume that tweets could carry predictive information for diﬀerent busi-
ness processes. For our case study, we have loaded the tweets related to Tesla
company for some time period. Qualitative structure can be used for aggregating
diﬀerent quantitative time series and, in such a way, creating new features for
predictive models which can be used, for example, for stock prices forecasting.
Let us consider which features we can retrieve from tweet sets for the predictive
analytics. Figure 1 shows revealed users’ communities for the subset of tweets.
Figure 2 shows the subgraph for users of highly isolated communities. Revealing
Fig. 1. Revealed users’ communities for the subset of tweets
users’ communities makes it possible to analyze diﬀerent trends in tweet streams
which are forming by diﬀerent users’ groups.

Forming Predictive Features of Tweets for Decision-Making Support
3
Fig. 2. Subgraph for users of highly isolated communities
3
Analysis of tweets using frequent itemsets
The frequent set and associative rules theory is often used in the intelectual
analysis [1,2,7,10,14,16,24,32]. It can be used in a text data analysis to identify
and analyze certain sets of objects, which are often found in large arrays and
are characterized by certain features. Let’s consider the algorithms for detect-
ing frequent sets and associative rules on the example of processing microblog
messages on Twitter. We can specify a thematic ﬁeld which is a set of keywords
semantically related to domain area under study. Figure 3 shows the frequencies
of keywords for the thematic ﬁeld of frequent itemsets analysis. This will make
it possible to narrow the semantic analysis of messages to the given thematic
framework. Based on the obtained frequent semantic sets, we are going to an-
alyze possible associative rules that reﬂect the internal semantic connections of
thematic concepts in messages. In the time period when tweet dataset was being
loaded, the accident with solar panels manufactured by Tesla on Walmart stores
roofs took place. It is important to consider the reﬂection of trends related to this
topic in various processes, in particular, the dynamics of the company’s stock
prices in the ﬁnancial market. Using frequent itemsets and association rules, we
can ﬁnd a semantic structure in speciﬁed semantic ﬁelds of lexemes. Figures 4, 5
shows semantic frequent itmesets for speciﬁed topics related to Tesla company.
Figures 6, 7 show association rules represented by graph and by grouped ma-
trix. Figure 8 shows sentiment and personality analytics characteristics received
using IBM Watson Personality Insights [20].

4
Bohdan M. Pavlyshenko
Fig. 3. Keyword frequencies for the thematic ﬁeld of frequent itemset analyis
Fig. 4. Semantic frequent itemsets

Forming Predictive Features of Tweets for Decision-Making Support
5
Fig. 5. Semantic frequent itemsets
Fig. 6. Associative rules, represented by a graph

6
Bohdan M. Pavlyshenko
Fig. 7. Associative rules represented by a grouped matrix
Fig. 8. Sentiment and personality analytics characteristics

Forming Predictive Features of Tweets for Decision-Making Support
7
4
Predictive analytics using tweet features
Using revealed users’ graph structure, semantic structure and topic related key-
words and hashtags, one can receive keyword time series for tweet counts per day.
These time series can be considered as features in the predictive models. In some
time series, we can see when exactly the accident with solar panels on Walmart
roof appeared and how long it was being considered in Twitter. Figure 9 shows
the time series for diﬀerent keywords and hashtags in the the tweets. Figure 10
Fig. 9. Time series for diﬀerent keywords and hashtags in the the tweets
shows normalized keywords time series. Social networks inﬂuence the formation
of investment sentiment of potential stock market participants. Let us consider
the dynamics of shares of the Tesla company in the time period of the incident
with solar panels manufactured by Tesla. It is reﬂected in the keywords time
series on Figure 9. One can see that at the time of the Tesla solar panel incident,
the tweet activity is increasing over the time series of some keywords. Let us
analyze how this incident aﬀects the share price of Tesla. A linear model was
created, where time series of keywords and their time-shifted values (lags) were
considered as independent regression variables. As a target variable, we consid-
ered the time series of the relative change in price during the day (price return).
Using LASSO regression, weights were found for the analyzed traits. Figure 11
shows the dynamics of the stock price Tesla (TSLA ticker) in the stock market.
We created a linear model where keyword time series and their lagged values
were considered as covariates. As a target variable, we considered stock price

8
Bohdan M. Pavlyshenko
Fig. 10. Normalized keyword time series
Fig. 11. Dynamics of the stock price of Tesla (TSLA ticker)

Forming Predictive Features of Tweets for Decision-Making Support
9
return time series for ticker TSLA. Using LASSO regression, we found weight
coeﬃcients for the features under consideration. Figure 12 shows the stock price
return and predicted values. Figure 13 shows the regression coeﬃcients for the
Fig. 12. Stock price return real and predicted values
chosen features in the predictive model. We also conducted regression using
Fig. 13. Regression coeﬃcients for the chosen features in the predictive model
Bayesian inference. Bayesian approach makes it possible to calculate the distri-
butions for model parameters and for the target variable that is important for
risk assessments [8,13,18]. Bayesian inference also makes it possible to take into
account non-Gaussian distribution of target variables that take place in many

10
Bohdan M. Pavlyshenko
cases for ﬁnancial time series. In [26], we considered diﬀerent approaches of us-
ing Bayesian models for time series. Figure 14 shows the boxplots for feature
coeﬃcients in Bayesian regression model.
Fig. 14. Boxplots for feature coeﬃcients in Bayesian regression model
5
Q-learning using tweet features
It is interesting to use Q-learning to ﬁnd an optimal trading strategy. Q-learning
is an approach based on the Bellman equation [21,22,33]. In [29], we considered
diﬀerent approaches for sales time series analytics using deep Q-learning. Let us
consider a simple trading strategy for the stocks with ticker TSLA. In the sim-
plest case of using deep Q-learning, we can apply three actions ’buy’,’sell’,’hold’.
For state features, we used keyword time series. As a reward, we used stock price
return. The environment for learning agent was modeled using keywords and re-
ward time series. Figure 15 shows the price return for the episodes for learning
agent iterations. The results show that an intelligent agent can ﬁnd the an opti-
mal proﬁtable strategy. Of course, this is a very simpliﬁed case of analysis, where
the eﬀect of overﬁtting may occur, so this approach requires further study. The
main goal is to show that, using reinforced learning and an environment model
based on historical ﬁnancial data and quantitative characteristics of tweets, it
is possible to build a model in which an intelligent agent can ﬁnd an optimal
strategy that optimizes the reward function in episodes of interaction of learning
agent with the environment. It was shown that time series of keywords features
can be used as predictive features for diﬀerent predictive analytics problems.
Using Bayesian regression and tweets quantitative features one can estimate an
uncertainty for the target variable that is important for the decision making
support.

Forming Predictive Features of Tweets for Decision-Making Support
11
Fig. 15. Price return for the episodes for learning agent iterations
6
Conclusion
Using the graph theory, the users’ communities and inﬂuencers can be revealed
given tweets characteristics. The analysis of tweets, related to speciﬁed area,
was carried out using frequent itemsets and association rules. Found frequent
itemsets and association rules reveal the semantic structure of tweets related
to a speciﬁed area. The quantitative characteristics of frequent itemsets and
association rules, e.g. value of support, can be used as features in regression
models. Bayesian regression make it possible to assess the uncertainty of tweet
features and target variable. It is shown that tweet features can also be used in
deep Q-learning for forming the optimal strategy of learning agent e.g. in the
study of optimal trading strategies on the stock market.
