A Semantic Model for Historical Manuscripts 
Sahar Aljalbout, Gilles Falquet 
Centre Universitaire d’informatique, University of Geneva, Switzerland 

Abstract. The study and publication of historical scientific manuscripts are com-
plex tasks that involve, among others, the explicit representation of the text mean-
ings and reasoning on temporal entities.  In this paper we present the first results 
of an interdisciplinary project dedicated to the study of Saussure's manuscripts. 
These results aim to fulfill requirements elaborated with Saussurean humanists. 
They comprise a model for the representation of time-varying statements and 
time-varying domain knowledge (in particular terminologies) as well as imple-
mentation techniques for the semantic indexing of manuscripts and for temporal 
reasoning on knowledge extracted from the manuscripts.  
Keywords: Semantic Web, Digital Humanities, Historical Ontologies 
1 
Introduction  
The field of digital humanities is a collaborative and transdisciplinary area between 
digital technologies and the discipline of humanities [1]. This field is undergoing major 
changes in its methodology mainly because of the growing interest of scholars in high 
quality digital resources. In this paper, we present an advanced model to help humanists 
deal with the knowledge intensive tasks they must perform when studying historical 
scientific manuscripts. For this purpose we propose a set of evolving interconnected 
knowledge resources (ontologies, terminologies, transcriptions etc.) that represent the 
current state of our knowledge about a corpus of manuscripts. The model was applied 
on the manuscripts of Ferdinand de Saussure. 
Ferdinand de Saussure (1857-1913) is a Swiss linguist [2] and semiotician. He has 
been known for his work in general linguistics as well as for his contributions in the 
rather more exclusive field of comparative grammar. Despite his excellent reputation 
in the field of linguistic, he published very little. For instance, he never published the 
theory he developed in the course of general linguistics he taught three times and which 
is considered as the work of his life. It is on the basis of lecture notes of his students 
that the book Course in General Linguistics (Cours de linguistique générale CLG) was 
published in 1916. The legacy of Saussure is fortunately not limited to these mono-
graphs but includes a fund of about 50,000 handwritten pages deposited in the libraries 
of Geneva, Paris and Harvard. Recently, all these pages were photographed using a 
high definition digital camera to be used in the project. These manuscripts are of a major 
importance for the Saussureans (scholars working on Saussure’s manuscripts). They 
constitute the only way to reach a better understanding of Saussure’s ideas.  

The major challenge for Saussureans is to understand the content of these manu-
scripts. The difficulty of the manuscripts handling is a key issue. As of today, only 
5,000 manuscripts of the 50,000 pages have been transcribed, and published in several 
publications [3]. In order to be able to process the text contained in the manuscripts, we 
work directly on the transcriptions while keeping the direct reference to the correspond-
ing manuscripts. A study has been conducted with three internationally recognized 
Saussurean experts, who are members of the Cercle Ferdinand de Saussure1. The aim 
was to study the current methodology adopted by Saussureans to process manuscripts 
in order to discover their needs and to get familiar with the problems they face. Several 
needs were detected. The main problem with these manuscripts relates to the fact that 
they have been produced in different periods with several views and perspectives. They 
are sometimes incomplete or not well organized, what makes the meaning of data un-
clear without interpretations. Furthermore, due to drifting concepts in time, the context 
can be subject to different interpretations. In order to deal with the vast amount of data, 
a classification of the manuscripts into meaningful thematic categories would be re-
quired. In addition, one of the most important aims of the Saussureans is to tag the 
manuscripts with their writing time and space. This enrichment can help the historical 
or epistemological research work such as the establishment of a clear idea of Saussure’s 
work. It can be done by following the bibliographic references, names, events, and in-
stitutions that Saussure used to quote in his scriptures.  
 The remainder of this paper will be divided as follow. In section 2, we introduce the 
scholars’ requirements in terms of structures and operations. Section 3 reviews related 
works in the field of digital humanities. The proposed model is presented in section 4 
and the implementation issues are discussed in section 5. Finally, we conclude the work 
in section 6. 
2 
Requirements 
The analysis of the Saussurean’s requirements showed that they can be organized along 
four main dimensions: 
Retrieving and accessing. The scholars wants to look through the sources according 
to specific thematic categories. In this respect, the classification schemas designed by 
the archivists is clearly insufficient. Several search criteria have to be taken into con-
sideration. Tools for the visualization of the manuscripts are also required. 
Understanding. The terminology, in particular the definitions used by Saussure vary 
over time, making some texts hard to understand or leading to misunderstanding. This 
is indeed a very common fact in scientific works that span a long period of time and 
that explore (and define) new scientific areas. Furthermore, manuscripts contains ter-
minological knowledge with a dynamic temporal perspective that makes them difficult 
to understand. A recent work [11] shows the existence of 16 terminologies used by 
Saussure. The terminology is time bound, which makes formalization difficult and re-
sults dependent on different interpretations. 
                                                          
1 Two of them are members of the editorial board of the international journal "Cahiers Ferdinand 
de Saussure". 

Dating. The chronological order of the manuscripts is of paramount importance to 
understand the author’s work. The challenges here are on how to infer the dates from 
the existing entities. 
Publishing. Disclosing the author’s work by means of a scholarly publication of a 
set of manuscripts is also an important target. 
 
Refining this analysis then lead to structural and functional requirements. 
 
Structural requirements: a Multi-Knowledge Resource Model  
The manuscript knowledge base must contain representations of the manuscripts, their 
transcriptions, and domain knowledge related to the manuscript content. A key issue 
for the scholars when dealing with Saussure’s manuscripts is to precisely date them or 
at least to rebuild their writing sequence. Three basic types of indicators can help solv-
ing this problem: 1) references to persons, places, and events; 2) the terminology used 
by the author; 3) the bibliographic references to other works. Therefore the knowledge 
base (Fig.1) should contain: 
 Representation of the manuscript contents 
 Contextual knowledge that describe persons, places, events and other entities.  
 Terminological knowledge that describe the meaning the author associated with 
terms at a given point in time; 
 Terminological knowledge that describe the concepts of a scientific (sub)domain 
 Bibliographic knowledge about the works cited in the manuscripts. 
 
Functional Requirements 
These requirements are divided into four main functionalities. 
 
Creating ontologies as a mean to address the lack of formalization. The first problem 
we encountered when modeling historical information was the lack of ontologies to 
describe some historical facts. Although some ontologies like CIDOC-CRM2 (i.e. to 
describe concepts and relationships in cultural heritage) and Simple Event Model3 (i.e. 
to describe events) etc. were developed, they are insufficient to:  (a) describe the dif-
ferent time periods during which an entity holds and the reason that initiates and termi-
nates these different periods (b) reason on time or to compare time entities (c) model 
the interpretations and evidences required for historians (d) represent the temporal ter-
minology series.  
     Data integration using semantic linking operations. Linking datasets by mean of 
different type of semantic links enrich the information contained in them contributing 
to the goal of linked data. Different type of links should exist between documents and 
contextual/terminological entities. The requirement concerning these links is to provide 
automated or semi-automated tools to generate them. 
Inferencing of implicit knowledge using ontologies and documents. Historical ontol-
ogies are used to control the data models in which the data are represented.  But from 
                                                          
2 http://www.cidoc-crm.org/Version/version-6.2 
3 http://semanticweb.cs.vu.nl/2009/11/sem/semdoc.html 

the Semantic Web perspective, one of the main promises of these ontologies is to ex-
plicit implicit information by providing a way to express inference rules, in particular 
time related inferences. 
Information Retrieval and visualization. Sophisticated information needs semanti-
cally enhanced search operations that take advantage of the contextual and background 
knowledge associated to the manuscripts. These query based search operations must be 
complemented with navigation-based search that utilizes the semantic links between 
the resources. 
3 
Related Work  
Many systems are generally equipped with a web interface to access digital manuscript 
collections. The "Nietzsche Source4" project is dedicated to the scholarly publication 
of F. Nietzsche's works. It may be noted however that there is no link between the 
critical editions and digital reproductions. Furthermore, it features an efficient search 
engine on passages. We can find similar features in the PhiloLogic5 project which is 
used as the primary full text search and retrieval tool developed by the ARTFL6 project 
.The aim of the Bentham Project7 is to transcribe the manuscripts of the philosopher 
and jurist Jeremy Bentham using crowdsourcing. Transcripts are encoded with TEI8 
and the entire interface of the site is based on MediaWiki9 with a modified skin.  
On the other hand, the ontological approach has been adopted to improve the access 
quality to the manuscript content. They used such techniques in the Sharing Ancient 
Widsoms (SAWS) project in which semantic information is extracted from TEI docu-
ments [4]. These documents are the fundamental components of a conceptual network 
searchable by researchers. The general collection theme is about the ancient Greek and 
Arabic wisdom. Other projects [5] have semi-automatically built ontologies that gather 
knowledge about manuscripts. Some projects [6] worked on providing researchers with 
innovative ways for accessing and sharing digital manuscripts.    Knowledge represen-
tation techniques can also be used in particular formal or semi-formal ontologies to 
index, classify, represent the semantics of documents, or help performing knowledge 
intensive tasks. For instance, [7] describe an ontology-based digital library that allows 
researchers to describe and debate the contribution a document makes and its relation-
ship to the literature. 
Some of the above mentioned projects and others rely on TEI (Text Encoding Initi-
ative) which is a consortium whose purpose is to propose recommendations for encod-
ing digital documents [8]. The TEI document type definition provides a very precise 
description of many types of documents: general texts; poetry; speech transcription; 
dictionaries; manuscripts; tables; graphs; networks. 
                                                          
4 http://www.nietzschesource.org/ 
5 https://sites.google.com/site/philologic3/home 
6 http://artfl-project.uchicago.edu/ 
7 http://www.ucl.ac.uk/Bentham-Project 
8 http://www.tei-c.org/index.xml 
9 https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/MediaWiki 

An interesting review [12] covers current techniques on how to apply semantic tech-
nologies to historical research. The analysis of the historical field is divided into two-
fold: the identification of the problems and the presentation of several relevant projects. 
All the projects presented in the review show at some point that the semantic web tech-
nologies can solve various historical problem such as: knowledge formalization and 
enrichment, data integration, mapping and flexibility etc... Furthermore, a recent pro-
ject [13] provide metadata and links to directly access the digital content of various 
cultural heritage across Europe. The goals of the project are: (i) to transform metadata 
and content of cultural heritage into Europeana data model (EDM) and (ii) the creation 
of tools and services to reuse the data in digital humanities. 
4 
A Semantic Model for Historical Scientific Manuscripts 
In this section, we present a semantic model for a corpus of manuscripts. This model 
contains a set of evolving interconnected knowledge resources that represent the current 
state of our knowledge about the corpus. 
A UML class diagram of the proposed model is shown in Fig.1. One of our objec-
tives is to publish knowledge about the manuscripts as linked open data. The prerequi-
site of that is to formalize the model as OWL .The components of the model are the 
following. 
4.1 
Documents and Knowledge Resources 
Manuscripts. The manuscripts are the center of the model. A manuscript is com-
posed of writing surfaces (e.g. pages of a notebook, sides of a note card, etc.).  Librar-
ians assign each manuscript with a unique ID. This ID is used to create the URI of the 
manuscript. The surfaces may also be explicitly identified by a number that is unique 
within the manuscript. 
Transcriptions. We consider a transcription as the as exact as possible copies of the 
manuscripts, reproducing its content letter by letter. It can also reproduce the layout of 
the manuscript showing the subsequently made corrections. For each manuscripts we 
can have several transcriptions. An instance of the class Transcription represents the 
transcription of a single zone within a surface that belongs to a manuscript. The tran-
scription of all parts of the manuscript is a text made of a sequence of transcriptions. In 
many instances, this sequence does not correspond to the physical sequence of the sur-
faces or zones, it is a reconstruction of the intended text flow of the author.  
      Scientific Publications. They refer to published or unpublished books, articles, or 
other documents that have strong connection with the manuscripts. A scientific docu-
ment can be written by Saussure or referring to Saussure’s work.  
Annotations. Annotations are comments or clarifications made by the transcribers 
in order to explain better or comment a part of the transcription. 
Knowledge resources. A novel aspect of this infrastructure is its ability to store and 
interconnect different types of knowledge resources. Some might recommend the use 

of a single representation language, such as the OWL ontology language, to represent 
all the knowledge resource types. Nevertheless, this approach would reduce the 
 
Figure 1 Infrastructure Class Diagram 
usability and interest of these resources. In fact, as argued in [9], the diversity of 
knowledge representation must be preserved because each one of them has specific 
characteristics that cannot be represented with another one. For instance, the broader-
term hierarchical relations in a thesaurus may express a generic/specific relation, or a 
part/whole relation, or a class/instance relation. Similarly, for terminologies expressed 
in the standard TBX format there is no canonical mapping to OWL (e.g. concepts can 
be mapped to OWL classes with annotation properties or to individuals with object 
properties).  Therefore, we consider an abstract view of all these formalisms by consid-
ering the modeling primitives of each formalism as subclasses of the KnowledgeEntity 
class or as subproperties of the KnowledgeEntityRelation property. For example: 
For SKOS thesauri (sism: is the namespace for the Semantic infrastructure for sci-
entific manuscripts vocabulary): 
skos:ConceptScheme rdfs:subClassOf sism:KnowledgeResource . 
skos:Concept rdfs:subClassOf sism:KnowledgeEntity . 
skos:inScheme rdfs:subPropertyOf sism:inKnowledgeResource . 
skos:Scheme rdfs:subClassOf sism:KnowledgeResource . 
skos:semanticRelation rdfs:subPropertyOf sism:semanticRelation 
For OWL ontologies: 
owl:Ontology rdfs:subClassOf sism:KnowledgeResource . 
owl:NamedIndividual rdfs:subClassOf sism:KnowledgeEntity . 
owl:Class rdfs:subClassOf sism:KnowledgeEntity . 
owl:ObjectProperty rdfs:subClassOf sism:KnowledgeEntity . 
owl:DatatypeProperty rdfs:subClassOf sism:KnowledgeEntity . 

rdfs:subClassOf rdfs:subPropertyOf sism: semanticRelation. 
  
The co-existence of multiple conceptualizations in the same knowledge base raises 
the question of possible inconsistencis. What happens if two resources contain contra-
dictory assertions about the same concept?  The rather circumspect approach [9] we 
propose here is to consider that the concepts defined in different resources are all dif-
ferent. Nevertheless, entities in different resources may be interconnected through 
alignments made of correspondences of the form (entity1, entity2, relation, confidence) 
between entities. The alignments play at least two role: 1) the participate in the con-
sistency checking when loading new resources and 2) the help the user navigate among 
the resources. 
4.2 
Temporal Entities and Properties 
A critical problem for the representation of temporal knowledge in the semantic web 
domain is to deal with temporal properties whose value is likely to change. Thus we 
distinguish between static properties and the fluents10. We consider a fluent as a relation 
that takes place in an interval of time and not in others. For example, the statement 
“Saussure was born in 1857” is considered as a static statement, however the statement 
“Saussure lived in Germany between 1876 and 1881” is only true for a defined time 
interval (i.e. then false, then true again, etc.)  and is considered as a fluent. In a semantic 
web perspective, the problem of fluent representation is related to representation lan-
guages such as OWL which only support binary relations. The idea of the fluent repre-
sentation is to add an object FluentRelation between the subject and the object that will 
support the temporal properties.  In general, an event can initiates a fluent and can also 
terminate it.  
Figure 2 shows the various time-related entities of the model. For instance, docu-
ments in some cases have a writing date (that appears in the document) that is repre-
sented by the writingTime property. Otherwise, the date must be inferred using temporal 
reasoning. An inferred writing time is represented by the inferredWritingTime property.  
Understanding the text implies recognizing the meaning of words. However, since 
the corpus spans a long period of time, the meaning of some terms can vary greatly. 
Therefore, we propose to use a fluent uses that associates a person (an author in this 
case) with a terminology (composed of a set of terms and their definitions). By using 
the writing period of a document, it is then possible to find the meaning of the terms 
(since the terminologies are dated) used and thus to index them semantically in the most 
correct way. 
In addition to the terminologies, the contextual knowledge can typically be comprised 
of several ontologies such as: 
 people ontology : describe all the persons or characters cited in the manuscripts and 
the relations that can exist between them. Persons can be members of Saussure’s 
family or scholars he cites in his writings 
                                                          
10 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Event_calculus 

 literary people ontology: comprises all the literary personage whether religious, 
mythological or legendary that are cited in the manuscripts 
 events ontology: describe the events related to Saussure’s private life. An event can 
be personal, scientific or social event. It can also describe a series of events 
 
 
 
Figure 2 Enhanced Class Diagram 
 places ontology: describe all the places cited in the manuscript, ranging from streets 
to countries. These ontologies are typically derived from existing geographic on-
tologies like geonames11 
 Scientific network ontology: describing  the flow of bibliographic and citations enti-
ties that we can extract form the manuscripts 
5 
Service Implementation 
A set of services that correspond to the requirements identified with the Saussurean 
experts are provided on top of this infrastructure. The most important ones are: 
 
Importing knowledge resources. The model does not impose the use of a particular 
representation language as mentioned in section 5.1. As a consequence, the importing 
procedure must handle different formal languages (OWL, SKOS, RDFS, etc.) repre-
senting different resource categories (ontologies, terminologies, thesauri, etc.) and gen-
erate the corresponding knowledge resource and knowledge entities in the knowledge 
base. The import operation proceeds as follows: 
1. Create an RDF version of the resource file: assign semantically correct and non-
conflicting URIs to the resource elements (e.g. generate a concept URI from the lex-
ical form of a concept in a terminology); generate the necessary triples for defining 
                                                          
11http://www.geonames.org/ 

the knowledge entities and for associating them with their knowledge resource (this 
associations is explicitly defined in SKOS thesauri, but not in OWL ontologies); 
2. Import the RDF triples into the knowledge base 
3. Check for inconsistencies. If the resource uses its own independent vocabulary no 
inconsistency problem can arise (unless the resource itself is inconsistent). Other-
wise the resource, together with the already stored resources must be sent to a con-
sistency checker (e.g. an OWL reasoner) to detect possible inconsistencies. In this 
case, the correspondences in the alignments are considered as equivalence and sub-
sumption axioms that must be taken into account by the consistency checker.  
Fig. 3 shows a sample navigation through terminologies, reaching two different terms 
corresponding to the word "phonation". 
Semantic indexing. The semantic indexing of the manuscripts consists in connecting 
the words (or multi-word expressions) that appear in the transcriptions to the corre-
sponding concepts in the knowledge resources (in particular in terminologies.) 
As already mentioned, the difficulty of this task stems from the evolution of the 
terminology used by the author over his lifetime. Since the differences between two 
definitions of the same word in successive terminologies may be very subtle, it is ex-
tremely difficult to fully automate the semantic indexing process. Therefore, in the cur-
rent implementation, the indexer computes and stores scores for the word - concept 
associations, keeping all the meanings whose score is higher than a threshold. These 
scores can then be shown in the user interfaces and used to sort the results or to help 
experts decide on the correct meanings. 
 
The score of a word - concept association depends on two factors:  
1. The similarity between the word's context in the transcription and the "contexts of 
use" provided for the concept in the terminology (see Fig.3). This corresponds to 
evaluating the similarity in terms of distributional semantics (in fact a very rough 
approximation of it)  
2. If the writing time of a manuscript is known, the concepts that belong to terminolo-
gies used by the author at that time are given a higher score  
 
Temporal reasoning. For the majority of the manuscripts, we do not know the date of 
writing which hinders the establishment of a clear and logical sequence of ideas. One 
of the promises of this project, in the Saussureans’ perspective, is the enrichment of 
dataset with temporal knowledge. This enrichment can be done by using an inference 
system based on the bibliographic references, names, events… and institutions that 
Saussure used to quote in his scriptures. It is based on the generation of FluentRelation 
rules and purely temporal rules. Some inference rules can be directly expressed as 
SWRL rules, however, rules that generate fluent relations create new objects (new in-
stances of FluentRelation and time:Interval). Therefore they cannot be expressed in 
SWRL. The adopted solution is to express this kind of rule as a SPARQL construct 
query that generates blank node. The general structure of such a query, for a property p 
is 

 
Figure 3 Screenshot of the user interface 
construct {?X :p  
            [a :FluentRelation; :p ?Y; 
             :during [a time:Interval; ... ]] 
          } 
where { <<rule body>> 
  filter not exists{ <<subsuming fluent>> } 
} 
 
A typical example is the rule “if a manuscript M written by A is a letter to B and the 
writing time of M is [t1..t2] then A knows B during the interval [t1 .. end-of-considered-
period]”.  The corresponding query is  
construct {?A :knows  
     [a :FluentRelation ; :knows ?B ; 
      :during [a time:Interval ; time:hasBeginning ?t1 ; 
                time:hasEnd :end-of-considered-period] 
     ]} 
where { ?M a :Letter;  :author ?A; :to ?B;  
          :writingTime [time:hasBeginning ?t1] 
  filter not exists{ 
    ?t1 time:inXSDDate ?d1.  
    :end-of-considered-period time:inXSDDate ?d2. 
    ?A :knows  
     [a :FluentRelation ; :knows ?B ;  

      :during [time:hasBeginning/time:inXSDDate ?ed1; 
               time:hasEnd/time:inXSDDate ?ed2]] 
      filter(?ed1 <= ?d1 &&  ?d2 <= ?ed2)  
  } 
} 
The filter not exists {...} part of the query guarantees that the generated fluent is not 
already subsumed by or equivalent to a fluent that represents the same relationship be-
tween the same individuals during a wider or equal time interval. 
To ensure the completeness of the reasoning, once all the construct queries have 
been executed and the generated triples inserted into the knowledge base, the 
DL/SWRL reasoner is invoked, then the queries are re-executed, and so on until no new 
triple is generated. 
The process is guaranteed to terminate because 1) SWRL rules do not generate new 
nodes and 2) there is only a finite number of dates in the considered time period and 
hence a finite number of time intervals, therefore the construct queries generate only a 
finite number of FluentRelation instances (because the queries never generate equiva-
lent fluents). 
6 
Conclusion and future work 
In this paper, we presented a model illustrating how semantic technologies can be ap-
plied to historical datasets. A study carried out with humanists led to the modeling of a 
temporal infrastructure for the storage and publication of a corpus of scientific manu-
scripts. This work allowed us to examine how semantic technologies can help in solving 
some of the problems the humanists face when studying these manuscripts. In particu-
lar, we proposed a multi-knowledge resource structure to represent the evolving nature 
of an author's terminology. We showed that a semi-automated semantic indexing tech-
nique can be employed for these "terminological time series". We also focused on the 
representation of time-varying properties and implemented a notion of fluent relation, 
directly inspired by the event calculus, and an appropriate inference mechanism that 
utilizes SPARQL queries. 
We developed an experimental system that comprises an RDF knowlege base in 
which several hundred transcriptions and 15 terminological resources have been in-
gested. This system is coupled with the manuscript visualization and annotation system 
[10] that was developed in former project with the Saussurean experts.  
In the near future we will 1) evaluate the usability and performance of the semi-
automated semantic indexing technique and 2) work with the humanists to elicit tem-
poral inference rules and to test them on a new, extended, version of the knowledge 
base. An interesting challenge here is to design a temporal rule language that is usable 
by the humanists.
