Attention Option-Critic
Raviteja Chunduru1,2, Doina Precup1,2,3
1McGill University, 2Mila, 3Google Deepmind

Abstract
Temporal abstraction in reinforcement learning is the ability
of an agent to learn and use high-level behaviors, called op-
tions. The option-critic architecture provides a gradient-based
end-to-end learning method to construct options. We pro-
pose an attention-based extension to this framework, which
enables the agent to learn to focus different options on dif-
ferent aspects of the observation space. We show that this
leads to behaviorally diverse options which are also capa-
ble of state abstraction, and prevents the degeneracy prob-
lems of option domination and frequent option switching that
occur in option-critic, while achieving a similar sample com-
plexity. We also demonstrate the more efﬁcient, interpretable,
and reusable nature of the learned options in comparison with
option-critic, through different transfer learning tasks. Exper-
imental results in a relatively simple four-rooms environment
and the more complex ALE (Arcade Learning Environment)
showcase the efﬁcacy of our approach.
1
Introduction
Humans are effortlessly adept at many forms of abstraction.
We use a high-level of decision making, to plan using ab-
stract actions, which are typically composed of a sequence
of shorter, lower-level actions and last for an extended pe-
riod of time. This is known as temporal abstraction. When
observing our surroundings before making a decision, we
also rely and focus on the important aspects of our sensory
input, and ignore unnecessary signals. This is called state
abstraction.
Within the options framework (Sutton, Precup, and Singh
1999; Precup 2000), for temporal abstraction, the end-to-
end learning of hierarchical behaviors has recently become
possible through the option-critic architecture (Bacon, Harb,
and Precup 2017), which enables the learning of intra-option
policies, termination functions and the policy over options,
to maximize the expected return. However, if this is the sole
objective for option discovery, the beneﬁt that the learned
options have over primitive action policies becomes ques-
tionable. Indeed, the option-critic architecture eventually re-
sults in option degeneracy i.e. either one option dominates
and is the only one that is used, or there is frequent termina-
tion of and switching between options. Introduced to combat
this problem, the deliberation cost model (Harb et al. 2018)
Copyright © 2021, All rights reserved.
modiﬁes the termination gradient to assign a penalty to op-
tion termination. This leads to extended options, but relies
on a hard-to-interpret cost parameter. Alternatively, the ter-
mination critic algorithm (Harutyunyan et al. 2019) employs
a predictability objective for option termination to prevent
option collapse and improve planning.
In this paper, we adopt the view that options should be di-
verse in their behavior by explicitly learning to attend to dif-
ferent parts of the observation space. This approach would
solve the degeneracy problem by ensuring that options are
only used when their respective attentions are activated. This
is in line with the notion of options specializing to achieve
speciﬁc behaviors, and can be viewed as an approach that
simultaneously achieves state and temoral abstraction. Our
approach, in effect, relaxes the strong assumption – made by
most option discovery methods – that all options are avail-
able everywhere, and is a step towards learning the initiation
sets for options (Sutton, Precup, and Singh 1999), which are
otherwise inconvenient to directly learn using a gradient-
based approach. We present an algorithm which builds on
option-critic in order to develop options endowed with at-
tention, and evaluate it in several problems, showing both
quantitative beneﬁts, as well as qualitative beneﬁts, in terms
of the interpretability of the options that are acquired.
The view of bounded rationality (Simon 1957) can be
seen as one of the motivations for temporal abstraction. The
added capability of state abstraction takes this one step fur-
ther, and serves as an additional rationale for our work.
2
Background
A discrete-time ﬁnite discounted MDP (Markov Decision
Process) M (Puterman 1995; Sutton and Barto 1998) is de-
ﬁned as a tuple {S, A, R, P, γ}, where S is the set of states,
A is the set of actions, R : S × A →R is the reward func-
tion, P : S × A × S →[0, 1] is the transition probability
function which speciﬁes the dynamics of the environment,
and γ ∈[0, 1) is the scalar discount factor. A Markovian
stationary policy π : S × A →[0, 1] is a probabilistic
mapping from the set of states S to the set of actions A.
At each timestep t, the agent observes state st ∈S and
takes an action at ∈A according to policy π, thereby re-
ceiving reward rt+1 = R(st, at) and transitioning to state
st+1 ∈S with probability P(st+1|st, at). For policy π,
the discounted state value function is given by: V π(s) =
arXiv:2201.02628v1  [cs.LG]  7 Jan 2022

Eπ[P∞
t=0 γtrt+1|s0 = s] and the discounted action value
function by: Qπ(s, a) = Eπ[P∞
t=0 γtrt+1|s0 = s, a0 = a].
For a parameterized policy πθ with J(θ) = V π(s0) as the
objective function (where s0 is an initial state), the policy
gradient theorem (Sutton et al. 2000) can be used to derive
a learning algorithm for ﬁnding the optimal policy π∗
θ that
maximizes J(θ) as:
∇θJ(θ, s0) =
X
s
dπ(s|s0)
X
a
∇θπ(s, a)Qπ(s, a)
(1)
where dπ(s|s0) = P∞
t=0 γtP(st = s|s0, π) is the dis-
counted weighting of states with s0 as the starting state.
In actor-critic methods (Konda and Tsitsiklis 2000), the ac-
tion values Qπ
φ(s, a), parameterized by φ, are typically es-
timated by using temporal difference (TD) learning (Sut-
ton 1988). For instance, the update rule for 1-step TD(0)
is: φ = φ + αδt∇φQπ
φ(st, at) where the TD(0) error δt =
rt+1 + γQπ
φ(st+1, at+1) −Qπ
φ(st, at) and α ∈(0, 1) is the
learning rate.
2.1
The Options Framework
A Markovian option ω ∈Ω(Sutton, Precup, and Singh
1999) is a tuple that consists of an initiation set Iω ⊆S,
which denotes the set of states where the option can be ini-
tiated, an intra-option policy πω : S × A →[0, 1], which
speciﬁes a probabilistic mapping from states to actions, and
a termination condition βω : S →[0, 1], which signiﬁes
the probability of option termination in any state. Let Ω(s)
denote the set of available options for state s. An option ω
is available in state s if s ∈Iω. The set of all options is:
Ω= ∪s∈SΩ(s).
Similar to Bacon, Harb, and Precup (2017), we consider
call-and-return option execution. In this model, when the
agent is in state st, it chooses an option ω ∈Ω(st) accord-
ing to a policy over options πΩ. The intra-option policy πω
is then followed until the current option terminates accord-
ing to βω after which a new option that is available at the
new state is chosen by πΩ, and the process repeats. Like
many existing option discovery methods, we too make the
assumption that all options are available everywhere, i.e.,
∀s ∈S, ∀ω ∈Ω: s ∈Iω. However, we show that our
approach ends up relaxing this assumption, in effect, and
provides an elegant way to learn distinct initiation sets for
options.
The option-critic architecture (Bacon, Harb, and Pre-
cup 2017) provides an end-to-end gradient-based method to
learn options. For parameterized intra-option policies πω,θ
and option terminations βω,ν, the option-value function is:
QΩ(s, ω) =
X
a
πω,θ(a|s)QU(s, ω, a)
(2)
where QU : S ×Ω×A →R is the value of executing action
a in the context of state-option (s, ω):
QU(s, ω, a) = r(s, a) + γ
X
s′
P(s′|s, a)U(ω, s′)
(3)
and U : Ω× S →R is the option-value on arrival (Sutton,
Precup, and Singh 1999) and represents the value of execut-
ing option ω in state s′:
U(ω, s′) = (1 −βω,ν(s′))QΩ(s′, ω) + βω,ν(s′)VΩ(s′) (4)
where VΩ(s) = P
ω πΩ(ω|s)QΩ(s, ω) is the option-level
state value function.
The intra-option policies and option terminations can be
learned by using the policy gradient theorem to maximize
the expected discounted return (Bacon, Harb, and Precup
2017). The gradient of this objective with respect to intra-
option policy parameters θ when the initial condition is
(s0, ω0) is:
∇θJ(θ, s0, ω0) =
X
s,ω

µΩ(s, ω|s0, ω0)
×
X
a

∇θπω,θ(a|s)

QU(s, ω, a)
	
(5)
where µΩ(s, ω|s0, ω0) is the discounted weighting of state-
option pairs along trajectories that start with (s0, ω0):
µΩ(s, ω|s0, ω0) = P∞
t=0 γtP(st = s, ωt = ω|s0, ω0). Sim-
ilarly, the gradient with respect to option termination param-
eters ν with initial condition (s1, ω0) is:
∇νJ(ν, s1, ω0) = −
X
s′,ω

µΩ(s′, ω|s1, ω0)
×

∇νβω,ν(s′)

AΩ(s′, ω)
	
(6)
where AΩ(s, ω) = QΩ(s, ω) −VΩ(s) is the advantage of
choosing option ω in state s.
2.2
Attention
The attention mechanism was ﬁrst proposed in language
translation tasks (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015) but has
since been applied in vision (Mnih et al. 2014) and rein-
forcement learning (Sorokin et al. 2015) as well. It enables
the localization of important information before making a
prediction. In our approach, soft attention (smoothly vary-
ing and differentiable) is applied as a learnable mask over
the state observations.
3
Attention Option-Critic
One inspiration for using attention with options stems from
human behavior. Consider the situation of putting on a coat
that is hanging next to your front door, opening the door,
and heading out. Consider one option to be putting on your
coat and another to be opening the door, with a ﬁeld of view
where both coat and door are visible. When executing the
ﬁrst option, we do not focus on the door even though it is
visible. Similarly, when opening the door, we do not con-
sider our coat anymore. The high-level behavior that we ex-
hibit inﬂuences what we pay attention to, which in turn de-
termines whether a behavior can and should be executed in
that particular situation.
We introduce the Attention Option-Critic (AOC) architec-
ture in order to enable options to learn to attend to speciﬁc
features in the observation space, in order to diversify their
behavior and prevent degeneracy. An attention mechanism

Algorithm 1 Attention Option-Critic
Input: αθ, αν, αφ as learning rates for θ, ν and φ respec-
tively.
Initialize policy over options πΩ(o), intra-option policies
πω,θ, option terminations βω,ν, option attentions hω,φ
s ←s0
o ←{hω,φ(s) ⊙s : ω ∈Ω}
Choose ω according to ϵ-soft πΩ(o)
repeat
Choose a according to πω,θ(a|oω)
Take action a in s, observe s′, r
o′ ←{hω,φ(s′) ⊙s′ : ω ∈Ω}
1. Options evaluation:
δ ←r −QU(oω, ω, a)
if s′ is non-terminal then
δ ←δ + γ(1 −βω,ν(o′
ω))QΩ(o′
ω, ω)
+γβω,ν(o′
ω) max¯ω QΩ(o′
ω, ¯ω)
end if
QU(oω, ω, a) ←QU(oω, ω, a) + αδ
2. Options improvement:
θ ←θ + αθ

∇θ log πω,θ(a|oω)

QU(oω, ω, a)
ν ←ν −αν

∇νβω,ν(o′
ω)

QΩ(o′
ω, ω) −VΩ(o′
ω)

φ ←φ + αφ∇φ

QΩ(oω, ω) + L

if βω,ν terminates in s′ then
choose new ω according to ϵ-soft πΩ(o′)
end if
s ←s′
o ←{hω,φ(s) ⊙s : ω ∈Ω}
until s′ is terminal
hω,φ, parameterized by φ, is applied to the observation s
for each option ω as: oω = hω,φ(s) ⊙s where ⊙denotes
element-wise multiplication. hω,φ consists of values in [0, 1]
and is the same size as the original observation s. The result
oω is used to determine the value of the option, the intra-
option policy and the termination condition. This is done for
each option separately, and ensures only the required fea-
tures from the observation determine the option’s behavior.
We refer to o as the list of all attention-modiﬁed observa-
tions for each option o = {oω : ω ∈Ω}. The learning of the
option terminations and intra-option policies is performed
similarly to the option-critic architecture. The complete al-
gorithm is shown in Algorithm 1.
The attention for each option is learned to maximize the
expected cumulative return of the agent while simultane-
ously maximizing a distance measure between the atten-
tions of the options, so that the options attend to different
features. Additionally, some regularization is added to fa-
cilitate the emergence of desired option characteristics. The
attention parameters φ are updated with gradient ascent as
φ = φ + αφ∇φ

QΩ(oω, ω) + L

, where L denotes the sum
of the distance measure and the regularization, weighted by
their respective importance. More details are speciﬁed in the
next section.
The attention mechanism brings an aspect of explainabil-
ity to the agent, and allows one to easily understand each
option’s focus and behavior. Also, it provides a highly inter-
pretable knob to tune options since the characteristics of the
resulting options can be controlled by affecting how the at-
tentions of the options are learned during training. For exam-
ple, constraining attentions to be distinct enables the diver-
sity of options to be set explicitly as a learning objective. Al-
ternatively, penalizing differences in option attention values
for states along a trajectory results in temporally extended
options, achieving an effect similar to the deliberation cost
model (Harb et al. 2018), but in a more transparent way.
The resulting attention for each option also serves as an
indication of the regions of state space where that option
is active and can be initialized. Thus, along with the intra-
option policies and option terminations, AOC essentially
learns the initiation sets of the options, in that an option is
typically only initiated in a particular state when the corre-
sponding attention of that option in that state is high. This
prevents the options from degenerating. Since every option
cannot be executed or initiated everywhere, this prevents
both frequent option termination and switching, and also op-
tion domination (see section A.2), by ensuring that a single
option cannot always be followed.
3.1
Optimality of Learned Solution
Since each option receives different information, it is not im-
mediately obvious whether the solution that is learned by
AOC is ﬂat, hierarchically or recursively optimal (Dietterich
2000). However, each option learns to act optimally based on
the information that it sees, and apart from some constraints
enforced via option attentions, individual option optimality
is driven by the goal of the policy over options to maximize
the total expected return. Since there is no pseudo reward
or subtask assigned to each option, their attentions and ar-
eas of usage are learned to maximize this objective and we
reason that in the absence of attention constraints, a ﬂat op-
timal policy will be learned in the limit. In the presence of
constraints, the optimality of the learned options will depend
on the interactions between the multiple objectives. Even in
such cases, AOC is capable of achieving a ﬂat optimal solu-
tion, as shown empirically in the next section.
Figure 1: The shared network model for AOC in four-rooms.
The option attentions are observation independent. The ⊙
symbol represents element-wise multiplication.

(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2: An example of learned options in the four-rooms domain with goal at the north hallway (shown in green). (a) example
of degenerate options learned by OC. Darker color indicates more frequent option execution in that particular state. Option 1
dominates and is used 88.12% while Option 0 is used 11.88%. Options 2 and 3 are unused. (b) the resulting attention learned
for each option with AOC. (c) the options learned using AOC. The options are diverse and respect their attentions. The option
usage is relatively balanced at 19.5%, 34.3%, 8.1% and 38.1% respectively.
4
Experimental Results
In this section, we show the beneﬁt of combining attention
with options and empirically demonstrate that it prevents
option degeneracy, provides interpretability, and promotes
reusability of options in transfer settings.
4.1
Learning in the four-rooms environment
We start by showing the beneﬁt of attention in the four-
rooms navigation task (Sutton, Precup, and Singh 1999)
where the agent must reach a speciﬁed goal. The observation
space consists of one-hot-encoded vectors for every permis-
sible state in the grid. The available actions are up, down,
left and right. The chosen action is executed with probability
0.98 and a random action is executed with 0.02 probability.
The reward is +20 upon reaching the goal, and -1 otherwise.
The agent starts in a uniformly random state and the goal is
chosen randomly for each run of the algorithm.
We use 4 options for learning, with a discount factor of
0.99. The attention hω,φ for each option ω is initialized ran-
domly as a vector of the same length as the input observation
s. Thus, in this situation, the option attentions are indepen-
dent of the state observation. We employ a 3-layer shared-
parameter neural network with 3 individual heads, each of
which respectively estimates the intra-option policy, the op-
tion termination functions, and the option values. In our
implementation of AOC (for all experiments), the network
learns the option values QΩto which the ϵ-greedy strategy
is applied to determine the policy over options πΩ. Intra-
option exploration is enforced with entropy regularization.
The architecture is shown in Figure 1.
The option attentions, option values, intra-option policies
and option terminations are learned in an end-to-end man-
ner to maximize the total expected discounted return. The
cosine similarity between the option attentions is added to
the loss to ensure that the learned attentions are diverse. Fur-
(a) Training curves
(b) Goal transfer
(c) Blocked hallway
Figure 3: Learning and transfer (averaged over 10 runs) in the four-rooms domain with 4 options.

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 4: (a) and (b): resulting options learned by option-critic upon goal transfer and transfer with blocked hallway respec-
tively. (c) and (d): the resulting option attentions and usage upon goal transfer. (e) and (f): the resulting option attentions and
usage upon transfer with blocked hallway. For the goal transfer plots above, the goal is shifted from north hallway to the top
left state in the north west room. For blocked hallway transfer, the goal is kept ﬁxed as the north hallway, but the east hallway
is blocked. The transfer results shown here are with OC and AOC transfer I. The goal states are shown in green.
thermore, a regularization loss – the sum of absolute differ-
ences between attentions (for each option) of adjacent states
in a trajectory – penalizes irregularities in the option atten-
tions of states in close temporal proximity along trajectories.
This results in smooth attentions and leads to temporally
extended options by minimizing switching, and achieves a
similar effect to deliberation cost (Harb et al. 2018). Thus,
for the four-rooms domain, the L term in Algorithm 1 is en-
forced by adding w1L1 + w2L2 to the overall network loss
function, where L1 is the total sum of cosine similarities be-
tween the attentions of every pair of options, L2 is the tem-
poral regularization loss for option attentions, and w1 and
w2 are the respective weights for these additional objectives.
Through their inﬂuence on the option attentions, different
values for these weights allow options with the desired char-
acteristics to be obtained. We found that respective values
of 4.0 and 2.0 for w1 and w2 resulted in the most diverse
options, judged quantitatively (see section A.4) and qualita-
tively (Figure 2). Further details regarding hyperparameters
and reproducibility are given in section C.
The resulting option usage and their attentions are shown
in Figure 2. The learned options are distinct and specialized
in their behavior, and they perform state abstraction by fo-
cusing on a subset of the observation vector to perform their
speciﬁc tasks. The option usage respects the corresponding
area of attention, which indicates that the options are typi-
cally limited to this area and that their behavior can be rea-
sonably understood from their attentions. AOC also learns

stable options and the behavior and usage of options does
not vary signiﬁcantly during the course of training. This sta-
bility could be useful for effectively scaling options to more
abstract behaviors. This is in contrast to option-critic (OC),
which tends to learn degenerate options that are volatile and
continuously change. A qualitative comparison that demon-
strates AOC option stability is shown in section A.1.
Although AOC additionally needs to learn option atten-
tions, it learns faster than OC, as shown in Figure 3a. One
possible reason is that in AOC, options specialize to differ-
ent regions and enable quicker learning, because of smaller
overlap between their applicability regions. Furthermore, a
comparison between option domination in AOC and OC (see
A.2) during the course of training indicates that the latter
prevents it.
4.2
Transfer in the four-rooms environment
We perform two experiments to assess the transfer capa-
bility of AOC in the four-rooms domain, both after 30,000
episodes of training. The ﬁrst is goal transfer, where the goal
is moved to a new random location. The second is blocked
hallway, where the goal is the same but a random hallway is
blocked. To preserve the knowledge learned from the origi-
nal task, the main network body is frozen, and only the heads
and the attentions (in the case of AOC) are updated. AOC
transfer I and transfer II respectively represent the scenarios
where the weights w1 and w2 are kept unchanged or are set
to 0 to give priority to option learning over attention regular-
ization, before learning in the new task. From Figures 3b and
3c, it can be seen that in spite of the option volatility that aids
OC transfer, AOC is faster to recover. In the blocked hall-
way setting, both variants of AOC perform similarly while
OC fails altogether to transfer in multiple runs. This may be
explained by the fact that AOC needs to ﬂip only one option
policy around, while OC may need to relearn the entire pol-
icy for the new task, if the options had already degenerated
prior to transfer. Figures 3b and 3c also show that right after
transfer, AOC has a lower decline in performance, compared
to OC.
From another perspective, upon transfer, option-critic
completely relearns the options. Figure 4 shows a speciﬁc
instance of transfer. Comparing Figure 2a with Figures 4a
and 4b shows that there is little similarity between the option
behavior before and after transfer with OC. We argue that
for options to be beneﬁcial for generalization, they should
exhibit similar behavior upon transfer, so that previously
Figure 5: The shared network model for AOC in Atari envi-
ronments. The option attentions are observation dependent.
The ⊙symbol represents element-wise multiplication.
learned behaviors can be leveraged, and so that options can
be efﬁciently composed through abstract decisions. AOC ex-
hibits this quality. A comparison of Figures 2b and 2c with
Figures 4c to 4f shows that option attentions remain ﬁxed,
indicating that each option remains in its assigned space, and
that the option behavior remains relatively consistent upon
transfer. These properties of selective transfer and reusabil-
ity with AOC lead to modular options that speedup transfer.
4.3
Arcade Learning Environment
We now illustrate the performance of AOC in the Arcade
Learning Environment (Bellemare et al. 2013). We use 2
options with a discount factor of 0.99. The input observa-
tion s is a stack of 4 frames. The option attentions hω,φ are
state dependent and are learned with a convolutional neural
network (CNN). These option attentions are then applied to
the high level features that are also obtained from the CNN.
Each option’s attention has the same dimensions as the ﬂat-
tened feature vector. The option policies, values and termi-
nations are learned with a shared-parameter deep network,
as in option-critic. The architecture is shown in Figure 5.
Apart from maximizing the total expected return, the at-
tentions are constrained to exhibit some desired character-
istics. Attention diversity is enforced by maximizing the L1
norm between the option attentions and attention sparsity
is incentivized by applying an L1 regularizer on the option
attentions to penalize non-zero values. Frame stacking im-
plicitly enforces temporal regularization between attentions
of successive frames, so we do not specially account for
this. Thus, for the Atari domain, the L term in Algorithm
1 is enforced by adding w1L1 + w2L2 to the network loss
function, where L1 and L2 are the losses for attention di-
versity and sparsity respectively. w1 and w2, represent their
respective weights. More details regarding hyperparameters
are provided in section C.
For training in the ALE environment, we found that the
values 500 and 0.02 for the weights w1 and w2 respectively,
resulted in diverse attentions and good performance. Fig-
ure 6 shows the training curves, which indicate that AOC
achieves a similar sample complexity (and slightly better
ﬁnal performance) compared to OC, despite also having
to learn the state-dependent attention mechanism. We rea-
son that learning the attentions enables options to special-
ize early on in the training process, and hence speeds up
training, despite having more parameters to learn. Addition-
ally, attention sparsity allows the options to focus on only
the most important high-level features, which further speeds
up learning. For these values of w1 and w2, each option fo-
cuses on approximately 20% of the high level features. Fig-
ure 7 shows the option usage for Seaquest. The options have
learned to distinctly specialize their behavior (by learning to
focus on different abstract high-level features), and remain
relatively balanced in their usage, unlike OC, whose options
eventually degenerate as training progresses, since diversity
is not incentivized. Thus, AOC allows learning diverse op-
tions in complex environments as well. Additional Atari re-
sults are shown in section B.

(a) Seaquest
(b) Fishing Derby
(c) Krull
(d) Pooyan
Figure 6: Learning curves (averaged over 5 seeds) in the Arcade Learning Environment.
Figure 7: An example of AOC option usage in Seaquest over time. Option 0 (shown in white) is used about 70% of the time
and appears to focus on the ﬁsh and diver sprites near the middle. Option 1 (shown in black) is used about 30% of the time and
seems to focus on the oxygen bar and new sprites coming onto the screen along the edges.
5
Related work
There has been extensive research on the beneﬁt of tempo-
ral abstraction for reinforcement learning (Parr and Russell
1998; Dayan and Hinton 1993; Dietterich 2000; McGovern
and Barto 2001; Stolle and Precup 2002; Mann and Mannor
2014; Kulkarni et al. 2016). Speciﬁc to the options frame-
work (Sutton, Precup, and Singh 1999; Bacon, Harb, and
Precup 2017), there have been several recent approaches to
incentivize learned options to be diverse (Eysenbach et al.
2018), temporally extended (Harb et al. 2018), more abstract
(Riemer, Liu, and Tesauro 2018), and useful to plan (Haru-
tyunyan et al. 2019) and explore (Jinnai et al. 2019) with.
The interest option-critic method (Khetarpal et al. 2020)
provides a gradient-based approach towards learning where
to initiate options by replacing initiation sets with differen-
tiable interest functions. However, the initialization of the in-
terest functions is biased towards all options being available
everywhere. In contrast, our AOC approach is completely
end-to-end and does not require any special initializations,
and in effect, is able to learn distinct areas where options
can be initialized and remain active.
Deep skill chaining (Bagaria and Konidaris 2020) is an-
other approach that relaxes the assumption of universal op-
tion use. This method learns a chain of options by backtrack-
ing from the goal and ensuring that the learned initiation set
of one option overlaps with the termination of the preceding
option. Although each option performs state abstraction, the
resulting options are highly dependent on the given task and
must be relearned upon transfer. Furthermore, results were
mostly conﬁned to navigation-based tasks.
The MAXQ (Dietterich 2000) approach towards hierar-
chical reinforcement learning decomposes the value func-
tion of the target MDP into value functions of smaller MDPs.
Although this decomposition creates an opportunity to per-
form state abstraction, the overall approach is based on the
heavy assumption that the subtasks are speciﬁed beforehand.
6
Conclusion
To the best of our knowledge, our method is the ﬁrst to com-
bine temporal and state abstraction in a ﬂexible, end-to-end,
gradient based approach. It results in learned options that are
diverse, stable, interpretable, reusable and transferable. We
demonstrate that the addition of an attention mechanism pre-
vents option degeneracy, a major, long-standing problem in
option discovery, and also relaxes the assumption of univer-
sal option availability. It also provides an intuitive method to
control the characteristics of the learned options.
From the continual learning perspective, an interesting
future direction is to meta-learn the attentions and options
across a range of tasks from the same environment. This
could lead to faster transfer, while keeping the existing ben-
eﬁts of our approach. From the perspective of model-based
reinforcement learning, predictive approaches with option
attentions could allow for efﬁcient long-horizon planning,
by predicting option activation through predicted attentions.
Lastly, the approach we have presented is versatile and can
be applied to many existing option discovery methods. We
leave such avenues of possible combination as future work.
