“Brilliant AI Doctor” in Rural China: Tensions and Challenges in
AI-Powered CDSS Deployment
Dakuo Wang∗

IBM Research
USA
Liuping Wang∗
Institute of Software, Chinese
Academy of Sciences
University of Chinese Academy of
Sciences
China
Zhan Zhang
Pace University
USA
Ding Wang
Microsoft Research India
India
Haiyi Zhu
Carnegie Mellon University
USA
Yvonne Gao
The State University of New York at
Stony Brook
USA
Xiangmin Fan
Institute of Software, Chinese
Academy of Sciences
China
Feng Tian
Institute of Software, Chinese
Academy of Sciences
China
ABSTRACT
Artificial intelligence (AI) technology has been increasingly used
in the implementation of advanced Clinical Decision Support Sys-
tems (CDSS). Research demonstrated the potential usefulness of
AI-powered CDSS (AI-CDSS) in clinical decision making scenarios.
However, post-adoption user perception and experience remain
understudied, especially in developing countries. Through observa-
tions and interviews with 22 clinicians from 6 rural clinics in China,
this paper reports the various tensions between the design of an
AI-CDSS system (“Brilliant Doctor”) and the rural clinical context,
such as the misalignment with local context and workflow, the
technical limitations and usability barriers, as well as issues related
to transparency and trustworthiness of AI-CDSS. Despite these ten-
sions, all participants expressed positive attitudes toward the future
of AI-CDSS, especially acting as “a doctor’s AI assistant” to realize
a Human-AI Collaboration future in clinical settings. Finally we
draw on our findings to discuss implications for designing AI-CDSS
interventions for rural clinical contexts in developing countries.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Human-centered computing →Collaborative and social
computing.
∗Both authors contributed equally to this research.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan
© 2021 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-8096-6/21/05...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445432
KEYWORDS
AI; CDSS; China; Developing Country; Rural Clinic; Healthcare;
Decision Making; Clinical Decision Making; Implementation; AI
Deployment; Workflow; Future of Work; Human AI Collaboration;
Collaborative AI; Human AI Interaction; Trust AI
ACM Reference Format:
Dakuo Wang, Liuping Wang, Zhan Zhang, Ding Wang, Haiyi Zhu, Yvonne
Gao, Xiangmin Fan, and Feng Tian. 2021. “Brilliant AI Doctor” in Rural
China: Tensions and Challenges in AI-Powered CDSS Deployment. In CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’21), May 8–13,
2021, Yokohama, Japan. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 18 pages. https://doi.org/
10.1145/3411764.3445432
1
INTRODUCTION
Artificial intelligence (AI) technologies are increasingly being de-
veloped for a range of clinical circumstances [19, 20, 22, 84]. In
particular, using AI techniques to help clinicians make fast and
accurate diagnostic decisions is gaining momentum [10]. This ap-
plication of AI falls under the category of a clinical decision support
system (CDSS), which takes patient data as input and generates
patient-specific advice [47]. Unlike ‘traditional’ CDSS that relies on
expert-defined heuristics, modern AI-driven CDSS interventions
utilize state-of-the-art AI algorithms (e.g., deep neural networks and
knowledge graph) to train tremendously large datasets retrieved
from electronic health record (EHR) systems [44]. This new genera-
tion of CDSS can replicate the natural flow of clinical reasoning at
the point-of-care so that patient-specific recommendations are gen-
erated to augment clinician decision-making [46]. In this paper, we
use AI-CDSS to collectively represent the group of CDSS systems
that are powered by advanced AI algorithms [74].
Despite the seminal studies on the technical aspects of apply-
ing AI to enhance the performance and effectiveness of CDSS
(e.g., [10, 10, 11, 14, 38, 71, 76, 91, 95, 96]), very little is published on
the usage of AI-CDSS in practice [9, 32]. This research gap is criti-
cal because researchers need an in-depth understanding of how to
arXiv:2101.01524v2  [cs.HC]  12 Jan 2021

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan
Wang and Wang, et al.
appropriately implement AI-CDSS to increase user acceptance [22]
and system uptake [69]. Furthermore, the unique characteristics
of AI may hinder AI-CDSS adoption and thus, demanding further
studies [9]. For example, clinicians may resist accepting AI-CDSS
because of their perceptions that AI will replace them from their
jobs [25]. Another major barrier is the interpretability and trans-
parency of AI, that is, how AI-CDSS works to generate the recom-
mendation inside the algorithm “black box” [86] remains opaque to
clinicians [69]. Given these barriers, there is a general consensus
that social-technical context must be considered when develop-
ing and implementing AI-CDSS [58, 75], and evaluation of these
systems in real-world clinical context is essential for identifying
barriers that inhibit successful implementation [43, 48].
In addition to the lack of understanding of AI-CDSS usage and
intergration in practice, the second prominent research gap is that
the majority of research around AI-CDSS is situated in the context
of developed countries, where the implementation of CDSS has
been far earlier than the developing countries [64]. Despite some
developing countries have increased their investment in health in-
formation technologies (HITs) [39], these countries often face much
greater challenges compared to the developed countries in imple-
menting AI-CDSS interventions [79]. For example, CDSS normally
requires a robust EHR system for gathering patient data to generate
accurate diagnostic recommendations, but the implementation of
EHR systems is still very limited in many developing countries [64].
Furthermore, clinics in the rural areas of developing countries usu-
ally have even less access to well-integrated HITs. The clinicians
in these rural clinics also lack training opportunities to learn how
to use sophisticated HITs, which further limits the adoption of AI-
CDSS systems [39]. When it comes to the AI era, these social and
cultural factors can influence the success and outcome of AI-CDSS
introduction in developing countries [48]; therefore, these factors
need to be carefully examined to facilitate seamless implementation
of AI-CDSS in such settings [13].
In this work, we join the research effort of enriching empirical
understandings of clinicians’ perception and usage of AI-CDSS in
developing countries. To that end, we conducted a fieldwork in
clinics in a rural region of China, where an AI-CDSS system (“Bril-
liant Doctor”) was just deployed over six months before this study
took place 1. As the most populated country in the world, hundreds
of millions of Chinese still live in rural areas and they often have
low income and limited access to healthcare resources [42, 92]. We
believe the findings of this work can shed lights on how to design
and implement AI-CDSS systems for similar rural clinical contexts
in other developing countries.
Through this study, we make the following contributions:
• A field work examining how AI-CDSS is used in rural clinics
of developing countries, and how its usage is shaped by
social, cultural, and contextual factors;
• An empirical understanding of clinicians’ perceptions and
facing challenges with regard to the use of AI-CDSS in prac-
tice;
1We have no affiliation with the company that developed the system nor with the
government agency that decided to deploy the system. We read the news [30], then we
directly reached out to the clinics to interview their usage experience of the system.
Shortly after our study was completed, the Brilliant Doctor system was acquired by
Baidu Inc. https://01.baidu.com/cdss-basic.html
• Design implications and recommendations for increasing the
uptake and utilization of AI-CDSS to realize a Clinician-AI
Collaboration paradigm in rural areas of developing coun-
tries.
2
BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
In this section, we will review multiple strands of literature to
situate our work, including CDSS interventions, issues in the use
of AI-CDSS, and implementations of HITs in developing countries.
2.1
Clinical Decision Support Systems
CDSS interventions have been playing an important role in en-
hancing medical decision-making [54], such as assisting clinicians
in diagnosing patients [49], suggesting medication and treatment
options [93], and flagging potential adverse drug reactions and
allergies [50]. Over the past three decades, we have seen a dra-
matic evolution of CDSS in many ways. Early CDSS systems such
as QMR [45], DXplain [4], and Meditel [87] are all rule-based or
heuristic-based systems that heavily relied on human experts to
manually craft knowledge-bases and heuristics [6, 88]. While the
literature consistently demonstrated the potential of these systems
to support evidence-based practice, they have inherent limitations.
For example, they generally have limited number of disease states
or conditions and suffer from the difficulty of maintaining the rule
knowledge base in an up-to-date format [44]. In addition, they lack
the appropriate capability to interpret ambiguous patient cases
or unseen scenarios [37, 67, 72]. These challenges still persist to
the present day in many CDSS systems, leading to non-optimal
performance and low adoption rate [7].
In recent years, with the advent of artificial intelligence tech-
niques, such as neural network models [27] and knowledge graph [85],
there has been an explosion in the development of AI technologies
to improve CDSS performance and accuracy [56]. These new AI
methods, combined with the availability of large clinical datasets,
revolutionize CDSS interventions from rule-based approaches to-
ward a more “big data” and numeric-based approach [16, 41, 78].
It is expected that these new generations of CDSS that utilize AI
technologies may soon outpace the use of “traditional” methods
for clinical decision support rule generation [44].
However, these AI-driven CDSS systems are still in developmen-
tal phase and very few systems have been deployed in clinical set-
tings. Due to the lack of large-scale deployment, it remains unclear
about how such systems are perceived and used by their intended
users (e.g., clinicians), and what barriers and challenges exist in
their deployment. Gaining an in-depth, empirical understanding of
these aspects will help the designers and developers of AI-CDSS to
better understand and address potential issues in fitting AI-CDSS
into clinical practice. Our study contributes to bridging this knowl-
edge gap by examining the use of an AI-CDSS system in real world
settings.
2.2
Issues in the Implementation of AI-CDSS
Despite consistent findings demonstrating the potential of CDSS
to support evidence-based practice and improve patient outcomes,
the literature has shown that AI-CDSS applications may face dif-
ficulties when integrating into the real-world practice [60]. Many

“Brilliant AI Doctor” in Rural China: Tensions and Challenges in AI-Powered CDSS Deployment
CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan
barriers have been identified for the low usage of CDSS interven-
tions, including too frequent or false alarms, poor human interface
design, interference with established workflow, time pressures, and
inadequate training [57, 62, 63, 68, 97]. These prior studies provide
insights with regard to primary reasons for the failure of CDSS
implementation. However, given the increasing complexity of the
constantly developing AI technologies, the implementation of AI-
CDSS may have unique and unexpected barriers that need careful
and thorough investigation, which otherwise could easily leave
the new AI-CDSS system unused (just as the old ones), which is
one of the biggest issues faced by the developers and designers of
HITs [64, 75].
One major barrier of AI that is especially relevant to AI-CDSS
is the “black box” issue [9, 86]. That is, the inner workings of the
algorithm that include the rationale for how the predictions are
generated and how different clinical features are considered in the
model remain opaque to the medical professionals. This challenge
impedes users developing appropriate understanding and trust of
the output yielded by AI systems [10, 18, 74, 83]. One recent re-
search thread, Interactive Machine Learning [21], is a promising
solution to the “black box” issue of AI systems. Interactive machine
learning often relies on advanced visualization and interaction tech-
niques (e.g., [18, 51, 86]), allowing users to monitor, interpret, and
intervene the machine learning process so that they can establish
trust toward the algorithm outputs. In a similar vein, a group of
Google researchers recently built an experimental visualization sys-
tem to help physicians understand the AI interpretations of breast
cancer imaging data [10].
Another aspect of AI-CDSS that must be carefully navigated
is medical professionals’ feeling and perception of AI [9]. It is a
general consensus that medical professionals’ attitudes play an
important role in the adoption of CDSS [48]. But recent studies
documented medical professionals’ concerns about the possibil-
ity of AI replacing their jobs as AI becomes more powerful and
takes more initiatives [25]. This is related to the “professional au-
tonomy” concept—the clinicians need guarantee to freely operate
their professional judgement and decision-making in patient care
without any interference [77]. Prior work has suggested that the
perceived threat of a technology to professional autonomy and the
degree to which clinicians consider the use of a particular system
decreases their control over decision making are salient factors
that could directly affect clinicians’ willingness to use that technol-
ogy [24, 64, 80].
Both the “black box” concern and the “threat to professional au-
tonomy” concern highlight the emerging need of re-considering the
relationship between the agency of human users and the agency of
the more advanced, yet less transparent, AI technologies (e.g., [31,
34, 55, 83]). In a CHI’19 workshop entitled “Human-AI Collabora-
tion in Healthcare”, researchers discussed challenges of this new
paradigm, including the human bias and inequity of healthcare
resources that are amplified by the AI algorithm [55]. This work-
shop discussion echos the broad Human-AI Collaboration research
agenda happening in various application domains: education [90],
data science [81, 83], and workplace [40, 65]. One salient research
question arose across all these domains is whether and how we can
build cooperative AI systems that human users and AI can work
as partners? Our findings from this paper can also provide timely
insights for this critical research question.
In this work, we join the effort of ongoing work [5, 10, 55, 74, 91]
to design effective, interpretable, user-centered, and context-aware
AI-CDSS systems. As the beginning step of a larger scale research
project, we first conducted a field study to examine the use of a re-
cently implemented AI-CDSS system in practice. More specifically,
we aim to provide an empirical understanding of how clinicians
are using this system in their day-to-day work practices and what
barriers exist in the use of emerging AI-CDSS applications. The
findings from our study can shed lights on new research directions
for both HCI and AI communities, for example, how to design and
develop locally-adapted and clinician-accepted AI-powered health
technologies.
2.3
Healthcare Information Technologies in
Developing Countries
There has been growing investment in the implementation of HITs,
including CDSS, in developed countries. For example, in 2009, the
Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health
act was passed with $27 billion funding in the United States [66].
This trend has been driven by the premise that these systems can
help improve clinician performance and enhance the quality of
healthcare [3]. However, such heavy investment and the mere pro-
vision of the technology does not guarantee its uptake. A recent
study involving outpatient physicians in U.S. shows that CDSS is
being used only in 17% of the patient visits [61]. Also, clinicians
often reject the recommendations of CDSS, ignoring up to 96% of
its alerts [50]. Even more concerning is that the regional differences
in the adoption of HITs have been problematic in U.S. [29], where
under-served and rural areas are especially affected by less access
to HITs [36].
The uptake of advanced HITs is not great in rural areas of devel-
oped countries, but what about the situations in the global south?
Developed countries have adopted HITs and built healthcare sys-
tem infrastructure far earlier than the developing countries [64];
thus, it is not hard to picture that the developing countries face a
much greater challenge in implementing CDSS systems in prac-
tice [79]. For example, CDSS depends on EHR to gather relevant
patient data, but the implementation of EHR in developing coun-
tries is limited [23]. Shu et al. [70] investigated EHR adoption in
848 tertiary hospitals in China, and found that most hospitals have
only adopted a very basic EHR system and thus, the patient records
need to be printed out to be shared across hospital departments.
To address this issue, many hospitals in developing countries have
turned to personal digital communication tools for assistance. For
instance, Karusala et al. [35] described how WhatsApp is adopted in
an Indian hospital to facilitate the organizational communication by
nurses while [82] reported a case of a Chinese clinic using WeChat
as its patient-facing communication channel. Critical medical in-
formation is discussed and shared between patients and clinicians
using these personal chat tools [84]. However, the challenge is
that these discussions (including shared patient information) were
rarely transmitted into the EHR systems for formal documentation,
causing loss of patient data. The status quo of the implementation

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan
Wang and Wang, et al.
of EHR systems largely contributes to the low usage of CDSS in
developing countries.
Other cited barriers of implementing CDSS in developing coun-
tries included insufficient computer literacy of clinicians and the
significant cost associated with purchasing CDSS applications [13].
However, there has been very limited research focusing on the so-
cial, cultural, and contextual factors in this context. More recently,
researchers have begun emphasizing the importance of incorpo-
rating local stakeholders’ concerns and organizational contexts in
developing acceptable and successful AI systems [12, 98]. There-
fore, our work contributes to this line of work by examining the
interrelationship between the local practice culture and the use of
AI-CDSS in rural areas of China through a social-technical lens. In
particular, we are interested in how clinicians make use of and think
about AI-CDSS systems in rural clinics of developing countries.
3
METHOD
In early 2019, an AI-CDSS system, “Brilliant Doctor”, was intro-
duced to all the clinics in Pinggu county, a rural area in Beijing,
China [30]. Pinggu county has 18 villages, of which each has its
own first-tier clinic. In total, there are 18 rural clinics in this county.
In addition, this county also has 2 higher-tier care facilities (i.e., gen-
eral hospitals). By the time this study took place, these clinics have
deployed the “Brilliant Doctor ” AI-CDSS system for six months.
During the summer of 2019, we contacted all 18 first-tier clinics for
this research, and 6 of them accepted our request to conduct field
work on premise. The presidents of these six clinics coordinated
the study by helping us recruit clinicians as study participants and
secure IRB approvals. We collected data using ethnographic meth-
ods such as in-situ observations, semi-structured interviews, and
contextual inquiries. In this section, we first present details related
to data collection and analysis. Then, we briefly describe the user
interface of the Brilliant Doctor system, followed by an overview
of the research sites.
3.1
Research Participants
Our participants included 22 clinicians (9 females, 13 males) from
six different rural clinics (Table 1). The types of training as well
as years of experience varied across the participants. For example,
their years of experience range from 8 to 32 years. The majority
participants are physicians and surgeons with expertise in western
medicine, whereas a few of them (n = 4) are specialized in Tradi-
tional Chinese medicine (TCM). Note that we did not interview
patients in this study, as the directly-targeted users of AI-CDSS
system are clinicians. Therefore, we only focused on clinicians in
this study.
3.2
Data Collection
3.2.1
In-Situ Observations. We spent a total of 10 days, each day
with 4 to 6 hours in the clinics to study how AI-CDSS is used by
clinicians in real world settings. Observations focused on different
aspects of clinicians’ work, including the artifacts, types of activities,
and the use of systems. We collected a variety of materials, including
observational notes, photos of the artifacts and systems. After each
observation session, field notes were transcribed into an electronic
observation log that included detailed descriptions and reflections
Table 1: Interviewee Information Table (Female = F, Male =
M, Years of Practice = YOP )
Participants
Gender
YOP
Specialty
I1
F
20
Physician
I2
M
20
Surgeon
I3
M
6
Surgeon
I4
F
8
Physician
I5
M
20
Physician
I6
M
8
Physician
I7
M
8
Surgeon
I8
F
20
Physician
I9
F
20
Physician
I10
F
22
Physician
I11
M
23
Surgeon
I12
F
32
Traditional Chinese Medicine
I13
F
24
Physician
I14
M
28
Surgeon
I15
M
20
Traditional Chinese Medicine
I16
M
10
Surgeon
I17
F
30
Traditional Chinese Medicine
I18
M
8
Physician
I19
M
26
Physician
I20
M
10
Traditional Chinese Medicine
I21
M
10
Surgeon
I22
F
30
Physician
of what was observed. All photos were taken with consent from
clinicians and patients.
3.2.2
Semi-structured and Contextual Interviews. We conducted
formal, 40 minutes to 1 hour long semi-structured interviews with
22 participants. All of our interviews were conducted in Chinese
by native-language speakers in the research team. All the inter-
views were audio recorded with the permission from the partici-
pants. The interviews focused on work responsibilities, educational
background and experience, user experience and perceptions of
AI-CDSS, and concerns or barriers regarding the use of AI-CDSS
in practice. In addition to the semi-structured interviews, we also
conducted contextual inquiries during the observation. We asked
questions about certain work practices or artifacts that we found
interesting or did not understand, but only after the clinicians com-
pleted their task.
3.3
Data Analysis
We used an open coding technique to analyze the observation and
interview data. We first reviewed the electronic observation log
and interview transcripts to get an overview of the context. All the
transcripts are in Chinese, and the coding analysis is in Chinese
too. We only translate the codes and quotes being used in this
paper. In the subsequent stage, we transferred data into Nvivo for
further analysis. Two authors of the paper, who are fluent in both
Chinese and English, conducted an iterative open coding process
to identify themes, sub-themes, and representative quotes. Each
coder independently coded a few transcripts in the first round,
and then they discussed the codes to develop a codebook. In the

“Brilliant AI Doctor” in Rural China: Tensions and Challenges in AI-Powered CDSS Deployment
CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan
Figure 1: An illustration of the Brilliant Doctor system (to the right as a pop-up window) and the EHR system (to the left with
gray backgrounds) we studied in this paper. The patient identity is anonymized with fake name and fake ID numbers. The EHR
system has a patient’s background, current symptoms (with patient’s description and doctor’s diagnosis), medical history, and
other relevant information (e.g., allergy). The AI-CDSS system update its recommendation in realtime and suggest 3 options
in the chart: Acute myocardial infarction with 54.44% possibility, gastritis with 2.69% possibility and peptic ulcer with 2.69%
possibility. In the pop-up window, many of the boxs are gray with one blue box, those indicates the particular symptom feature
why AI made such suggestion. A full translated version of the screenshot is in Appendix.
second round of analysis, they used the codebook to analyze the
rest of transcripts. Our coding focused on work practices, patient-
clinician interactions, types of tools used, and how and when AI-
CDSS was used. After the second round of coding, we identified
major themes describing the facilitators and barriers of using AI-
CDSS in practice, as well as suggestions to improve the design
of AI-CDSS. This step was followed by identifying representative
quotes to support the claims. We also performed content analysis
of the photographs taken during fieldwork. This analysis provided
additional contextual information, complementing the analysis of
interviews and observation notes.
3.4
The AI-CDSS System: “Brilliant Doctor”
The AI-CDSS system, namely “Brilliant Doctor”2, is integrated with
the existing EHR system in the clinics. Its user interface (UI) is
merged with and placed next to the EHR window. As illustrated
in Figure 1, the integrated system has two main sections: the EHR
window (Fig. 1, Section A) and the AI-CDSS window (Fig. 1, Section
B).
2https://01.baidu.com/cdss-basic.html
The EHR interface has a structured text input design. The pa-
tient’s demographic information can be documented at the top.
Other three major sections of the EHR system include fields for doc-
tors to enter the patient’s symptoms and chief of complaint (Fig. 1,
Section A1), medical history and allergies (Fig. 1, Section A2), as
well as diagnosis, prescription, and treatment plan (if applicable)
(Fig. 1, Section A3).
The interface of “Brilliant Doctor” is located to the right of the
EHR system (Fig. 1, Section B). Its primary functionality is recom-
mending a list of diagnostic options based on the patient medical
context. Each diagnostic suggestion comes with a confidence score,
and the prediction is produced and updated in real-time. For ex-
ample, in Fig. 1 Section B1, “Brilliant Doctor ” suggests that this
patient may have Acute Myocardial Infarction with a confidence
score of 54.44%. Its second and third suggestions are Gastritis, and
Coronary Heart Disease, respectively (Fig. 1, Section B2). Besides
recommended diagnoses, AI-CDSS also suggests treatment plans,
appropriate laboratory tests, and medications. These suggestions
are organized into different sections which can be found by scrolling
down ( Fig. 1, Section B3).

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan
Wang and Wang, et al.
By design, this integrated system provides two interaction
mechanisms for clinicians to use:
• The system preserves clinicians’ existing way of using EHR,
which allows users to type in all the information (e.g., expe-
rienced symptoms, medical history) to the EHR UI in Fig. 1
Section A. The AI-CDSS module actively parse the entered
data and use that to highlight the symptoms in light blue
color in Section B1. In the meantime, AI-CDSS is generating
diagnostic suggestions which are constantly changing as
new information is entered. We call this approach as “Type-
In”.
• The second way of interaction requires clinicians to manu-
ally click through a list of pages to provide input to symptom-
related and medical history questions, as well as other screen-
ing questions (e.g., diet and emotional state). This approach
is designed to replicate the textbook workflow of clinical rea-
soning. We term this approach as “Click-Through”. Once
the clinician finishes all the questions, AI-CDSS will make
several predictions for the clinician to consider. When a
suggested diagnosis is chosen, the AI-CDSS system will au-
tomatically generate text content to populate the EHR form
in Fig. 1 Section A.
In addition to its primary diagnosis recommendation function,
“Brilliant Doctor ” has two other primary features. One is retrieving
and showing cases that are similar to the current patient, which
helped clinicians learn more about possible symptoms and effective
treatments. Another is a medical information search engine, which
allows clinicians to look up up-to-date information related to a
specific disease, a medicine, or a treatment option. This feature
was designed as a on-premise “Medical Wikipedia” for clinicians to
use, because all the EHR and AI-CDSS systems in these clinics are
disconnected from the Internet for security purpose.
3.5
Research Site
As mentioned previously, we conducted this field study at 6 clinics,
which are part of the 18 clinics providing healthcare services in
a rural region near Beijing, China (as shown in Fig. 2). In this
subsection, we introduce the study sites by situating in the Chinese
national healthcare system.
China’s healthcare service has a strict hierarchical infrastructure
where hospitals and clinics are categorized into three tiers accord-
ing to their size, location, specialties, and so on [1, 17, 89]. Tier-1
or the first tier is the lowest level, and tier-3 or the third-tier is the
highest level. First-tier health providers are small clinics that are of-
ten located in rural areas (e.g., villages) or inside resident apartment
complexes. They are designated to provide basic services such as
prevention care, first-aid medical treatment, prescription refill, and
rehabilitation. A few of these clinics may have a small in-patient
department, which usually has less than 100 beds. Second-tier and
third-tier providers comprised of general hospitals that are often
located in cities or large towns. Most of them also undertake edu-
cation and research responsibilities. Such a hierarchical healthcare
system leads to some unique characteristics of these rural clinics
including our research sites:
• Overflow of out-patient visits at rural clinics. By the
end of 2019, there are 888,000 first-tier clinics and only 34,000
higher-tier hospitals in China, suggesting that the rural clin-
ics (like our research sites) are predominant in China [52].
Even so, the healthcare resources are still far from enough to
serve the 1.4 billion people in China. According to [53], the
doctor-to-patient ratio is 2.77 clinicians per 1,000 patients
across China. To prevent patients squeezing into the top-tier
general hospitals for basic services, residents in rural areas
are not allowed to seek medical services in a higher-tier facil-
ity without first visiting their nearby clinics. This healthcare
policy results in an overwhelming amount of patient visits
to rural clinics every day. For example, in the rural area we
studied, there are only 18 first-tier clinics and 2 second-tier
hospitals; but these providers need to serve over 400,000
residents (best depicted in Fig. 2 (1)). The doctor-to-patient
ratio in this region roughly aligns with the nationwide ratio
in the report [53].
• Specialized clinicians also need to take the responsi-
bilities of general physicians. Because of the imbalanced
doctor-to-patient ratio in the first-tier clinics, all specialized
clinicians are required to take certification exams for general
physicians so that they can take care of out-patient visits to
reduce general physicians’ workload. This is a role similar
to primary-care physician in the U.S. system or the general
practitioner in the U.K. system. This policy leads to some
interesting work practices. For example, all the rural clinics
we visited have a Traditional Chinese Medicines (TCM) de-
partment. The TCM doctors also take patients from other
departments, and prescribe regular medicines beyond TCM
domain.
• Healthcare policy imposes strict regulations on first-
tier clinics. These first-tier clinics often do not have a labo-
ratory department so that they can not perform any labora-
tory tests or radiology imaging studies. Also, according to
the Chinese healthcare policy, the in-clinic pharmacy is not
allowed to stock certain types of medication, so it is often
that patients are not able to buy prescribed medicine in the
clinic. Given this limitation, clinicians create personal note
to help them remember what medicine can (or can not) be
prescribed, as shown in Fig. 2 (4). Another more important
restriction is that the clinicians in first-tier clinics are only
allowed to diagnose a limited number of diseases and health
conditions. For example, even if a clinician suspects a patient
has hypertension, he/she is only authorized to document the
symptom, such as “high blood pressure and need further
examination”, instead of putting down “hypertension” as
the diagnosis into the EHR system. The patient has to be
referred to a higher-tier facility for further examination.
• The insurance policy in China also has its own unique
characteristics. For example, patients with insurance are
still required to pay the co-pay fee before seeing a clinician
(also shown in Fig. 2 (1)). The clinic can periodically get
reimbursement for the deductible part from the insurance
company. But, if the diagnosis or the prescription triggers
alert (e.g., over-use of antibiotics), the insurance company
reserves the right to reject certain transactions, and conse-
quently, the clinicians who are responsible for the incidents

“Brilliant AI Doctor” in Rural China: Tensions and Challenges in AI-Powered CDSS Deployment
CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan
Figure 2: Photos from the Research Sites. From top left to bottom right, the first row shows 1) patients are waiting in line to pay
for copay before seeing a doctor; 2) a doctor prints his name and Wechat QR code on a name tag so that the patients can ask
him questions outside working hours; 3) a TCM doctor takes the pulse while typing into and interacting with the EHR system.
The second row shows 4) personal notes about the medications that are allowed to prescribe and in stock for that week in this
clinic; 5) anxious patients are crowded in a clinic room, and use the clinic room as a social place to chat with other patients; 6)
two wall signs—“do not smoke” and “use your own insurance card”.
need to pay out of their pockets. This medical insurance
policy is consistent across China.
• The patients in rural areas are often residents who are
less literate and financially vulnerable. Thus, they do
not understand highly technical medical terminologies, and
many of them speak in dialects. Clinicians have to use simple
terms to communicate with them. They may not follow rules
and regulations so that more than one patients could crowd
into the doctor office (Fig. 2 (5)), and they sometimes use
others’ ID card for a better insurance coverage (Fig. 2 (6)).
Many of them are also very sensitive to the expenses of the
treatment and medicine.
With these strict regulations, it is not surprising to see that clin-
icians in first-tier clinics face significant challenges serving such
a large population with only limited resources. In recent years,
several initiates have been implemented to improve the quality of
healthcare service in China, such as heavily investing in HITs [94].
These initiatives promote the deployment of “Brilliant Doctor” sys-
tem in first-tier clinics, including our research sites. It provides us
with a great opportunity to understand the use of AI-driven CDSS
in the context of rural clinics.
4
FINDINGS
In this section, we first report how the rural clinical context imposes
various challenges on the adoption of AI-CDSS. Then, we present
the technical issues and usability barriers in the “Brilliant Doctor”
case. Lastly, we describe our participants’ perceived benefits of the
AI-CDSS system, their opinions regarding the future of AI-enabled
CDSS systesm, and a set of suggested design considerations for
improving AI-CDSS.
4.1
The Contextual Challenges to Adopting
AI-CDSS in Rural Clinics
4.1.1
An “impossible” volume game. As described in the Research
Site section, the first-tier clinics in China primarily deal with ‘walk-
in’ patients and general healthcare needs. That is, patients can visit
these clinics anytime without making an appointment. Therefore,
a primary care physician in such settings has an extremely high
workload due to the high demand of healthcare services. For ex-
ample, a participant reported that in these rural clinics usually a
doctor need to take care of 75 patients in a typical day.
Due to the high patient volume, it is very common to have mul-
tiple anxious patients waiting in the doctor office at the same time
(Figure 2 (2) and (4)). As a consequence, often a doctor’s work is sub-
ject to constant interruptions from various anxious patients in the

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan
Wang and Wang, et al.
Figure 3: An abstracted view of the diagnosis workflow. A typical workflow consists of 6 steps: 1. inquiring patients to describe
symptoms or chief of complaint, 2. documenting patient information into EHR, 3. making a diagnosis decision, 4. recording the
diagnosis decision in the EHR system, 5. making a decision on laboratory test, treatment, or prescription, and 6. documenting
the treatment plan in EHR. To the left, (A) depicts a “textbook” diagnosis workflow where the procedure of diagnosing a
patient is clearly segmented. Each step is expected to take a few minutes so in theory a patient visit could take at least 10
minutes; To the right, (B) describes the actual workflow that the clinicians follow to work around the high volume of patients
in a rural clinic. There are lots of parralelization and the entire procedure takes “about 2 to 4 minutes”. AI-CDSS was designed
to support the “textbook” diagnosis workflow (A).
office asking questions and looking for clarification. As such, physi-
cians are left with little time and capacity to talk to patients and an-
swer their questions, let alone use the computing tools which were
also competing for their attention. As one participant explained:
“We are getting the most visits near the end of the
year, averaging 150 per day for two clinicians. If you
use AI-CDSS for every patient, the line will pile up. So
what we do is we use the template [of the EHR system]
, it will take two minutes to diagnose a person [with
chronic disease in most cases], including inquiry and
giving prescription.” (I4)
The participants believe that “Brilliant Doctor” is designed to
support the “textbook” diagnosis workflow, and they acknowledge
such workflow is more rigorous and legitimate. As depicted in Fig-
ure 3 A, for example, a typical workflow of patient consultation
consists of soliciting patient’ demographics or medical history in-
formation, then recording patient information in the EHR system,
making diagnosis, recording diagnosis decision in EHR, determin-
ing appropriate treatment plans and medicine to use, and finally
recording such treatment information in EHR. The AI-CDSS was
designed to support each individual step from Step 2 to Step 6 in
the workflow. For example, in Step 2, AI-CDSS is designed to allow
clinicians to click through 50 or so screening questions for diagno-
sis support. Also, in Step 5 and 6, the user can simply click on one
of the suggested treatment recommendation (Section B3 in Fig 1)
and the content is automatically populated into the EHR system.
However, it is simply impossible for these clinicians to follow the
textbook workflow. To workaround the high patient volume and the
constant interruptions in these clinics, clinicians had to multitask.
For example, they record symptoms and chief of complaint into
the EHR system (Step 2) while talking with the patient to inquire
their symptoms (Step 1) (Figure 2 (3)). When they finish typing the
symptoms, they already make a decision for the diagnosis (step 3)
so their hands do not stop but to record the diagnosis into EHR (step
4). The clinicians only stop when they discuss with the patients
about which treatment plan or medicine would they prefer, since
these patients are often financially vulnerable.
In order to generate suggestions, AI-CDSS needs detailed infor-
mation from the EHR system. In theory, the clinicians are required

“Brilliant AI Doctor” in Rural China: Tensions and Challenges in AI-Powered CDSS Deployment
CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan
to ask about patients medical history, check existing medicine us-
age and emotional status, and then document all such information
in the EHR system. However, in practice, due to high patient vol-
ume and time limits, our participants disclosed that they often do
not have time to ask these detailed questions and document them
properly. They believe these questions are “nice to have” but it is
“impossible to ask them all”, given the workload they already have
in the clinic 3.
What exacerbates the problem is that these rural clinics are
also experiencing shortage of medical staff, especially nurses, who
usually perform initial check-ups such as checking blood pressure,
recording the medical history, and taking the patient’s temperature,
etc. As such, it is impossible for the clinicians to capture sufficient
information for AI-CDSS to make accurate and comprehensive
diagnosis and in turn, the clinicians just do not use the system
often.
This multitasking and shortened workflow is illustrated in Fig 3 B.
The AI-CDSS system designers had followed the textbook workflow
and envisioned that clinicians would take time to process each step.
But the unique characteristics of rural clinics posed significant
challenges in the uptake of AI-CDSS, leading clinicians to have
rarely used the system in practice. Even when they were using the
system, they used the “Type-In” interaction approach rather than
the “Click-Through” approach, since the latter approach requires
much longer time to complete a diagnose process, even though
ironically the “Click-Through” approach was designed to make
clinician’s work easier and more efficient.
4.1.2
80% patients visit first-tier clinics for trivial cases. Participants
report that there are three types of patients who usually visit these
rural clinics. Firstly, there are patients with chronic diseases who
regularly visit the clinics to refill their medications. The second
type of patients have new symptoms and minor disease, and their
disease can be treated in first-tier clinics. Finally, there are also
patients with more severe and complex disease who need to be
referred to higher-tier hospitals for further examinations; but the
health regulations and insurance policies require such patients to
get a referral by visiting their local first-tier clinics first. Typically,
“80% of the patients” who visit the clinics belong to the first or the
third category that they either require a refill or a referral. These
cases do not require the clinician to provide a detailed diagnosis
every time, but the EHR records need to be completed. Therefore, to
speed up patient consultation, the clinicians always customize and
reuse EHR templates to fill patient information in a timely manner,
but AI-CDSS is barely used for these cases:
“We have a lot of patients that simply need to refill the
prescription for their hypertension. We don’t use it
[AI-CDSS] when patients just come to pick up refills
because AI-CDSS asks us to enter the necessary infor-
mation (e.g., medical history) for a medicine refill case
but we don’t have time to do so. I just directly open up
the EHR template I created for medicine refill.” (I19)
In addition, since our research sites are first-tier community
clinics, they are only capable of performing a limited number of
3Even if the clinicians did input all the information, there is a system interoperability
problem which is explained in detail in the next section
laboratory examinations (e.g., none of the research sites have CT-
scan equipment). They also have very limited medication resources
in stock. However, AI-CDSS would suggest a variety of laboratory
tests, and treatment and medicine options, which clinicians often
can not prescribe. In this case, theses recommendations are often
ignored by the clinician users. As one physician explained:
“Our clinics have very limited resources. We know
what kinds of laboratory tests we can do here so we
don’t really check AI-CDSS recommendations. We
can only perform some basic laboratory tests, such
as blood test, urine test, or electrocardiogram (ECG)
examination. That is it. For example, this senior pa-
tient [pointing to the patient] has a medical history of
bronchitis. Recently, he had a flu. He is experiencing
shortness of breath. It is possible that he has peneuno-
mia or emphysema. To further investigate, he needs
to do a CT scan or other advanced laboratory tests.
AI-CDSS is capable of suggesting the tests this patient
needs to take, but we can not do those here. So what
I would do is referring him to a higher-tier hospital
so he can take those tests.“ (I2)
4.1.3
The Interoperability Issue. Another major issue was associ-
ated with the interoperability between AI-CDSS and other health-
care information systems in the clinics. AI-CDSS needs different
kinds of data input in order to generate an accurate and reliable
diagnosis. For example, it needs patient information as well as
laboratory test results for diagnostic suggestions. However, in its
current form, AI-CDSS is not seamlessly integrated with the labora-
tory information systems. As such, the missing information about
laboratory tests could make the suggested diagnoses less accurate.
In a similar vein, AI-CDSS is not synchronized with systems used by
other departments in the clinic, such as the pharmaceutical system.
Some prescriptions recommended by AI-CDSS are not available in
their pharmacy, and what they have in the pharmacy sometimes are
not updated in the AI-CDSS system. Another extreme case is that
the AI-CDSS system seems to be designed for internal medicine
department only. There is no medical code for classifying TCM di-
agnosis in the system; none of the TCM medicine is available in the
recommendation either. Thus, TCM clinicians found the AI-CDSS
system less useful. These limitations could create a lot of confusion
when clinicians use AI-CDSS to prescribe medicine.
“I would recommend integrating AI-CDSS with our
systems, including our pharmaceutical system and
laboratory notification system. For example, AI-CDSS
suggests to do some laboratory tests. Ideally, I can
just simply click on these suggested test options and
the laboratory department should be able to receive
my orders. Also, our pharmacy may not have some
suggested medicine. If you can import our pharmacy’s
data into AI-CDSS, or just connect these two systems,
then it will be extremely useful for us. And in turn,
the usage rate of AI-CDSS will be significantly higher.”
(I8)
To deal with this challenge, many clinicians create hand-written
personal notes of the medicine that are available in stock for the

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan
Wang and Wang, et al.
week, as shown in Fig 2 (4). And they manually update the list
every week. Sometimes, if a clinician prescribes an out-of-stock
medication, the in-house pharmacy will make a phone call to the
clinician regarding this matter and ask the clinician to change the
patient’s prescription. The clinician will update his/her personal
note afterward.
4.2
Challenges related to Usability, Technical
Limitations, and Trustworthiness of AI
4.2.1
Usability Barriers of the AI-CDSS system. A primary issue of
AI-CDSS usability was that the system always “pop up” to occupy
one third of the screen, whenever the clinician opened a patient’s
medical record in EHR. If the monitor’s screensize is small, the
floating window of AI-CDSS may block the access to some EHR
features (e.g., data fields). This frustrated many participants. To
workaround this issue, clinicians had to minimize it while it was
not in use.
“It will pop up when a new patient record is opened.
But I don’t need to use it every single time so you
literally have to move it to the side. Even that, it will
block something, such as the “Save” or “Exit” button.
I don’t know if it is caused by the screen resolution
or something else.” (I7)
Another related issue is the display of system features. That is,
all the features are organized into one pop-up window (Figure 1,
Section B). For example, a set of features such as “Diagnostic Sugges-
tion”, “Physical Examination Recommendation”, “Laboratory Test
Recommendation”, “Medicine Suggestion”, and “Surgery Sugges-
tion”, are grouped into one tab. However, this style of information
architecture is problematic as a scroll box must be used to view
and use multiple functionalities. During our observations, we were
surprised to find out that a few participants did not know the exis-
tence of some features (e.g., Similar Cases), as those features were
not easy to discover. This issue was also evident in the display of
alerts. When there were too many alerts in the scroll down box,
such as “be caution to prescribing medicine A”, clinicians did not
read through them at all.
4.2.2
Technical Limitations of the AI-CDSS. Technical limitations
of “Brilliant Doctor” were frequently mentioned by our partici-
pants. For example, clinicians felt that the suggested three diag-
noses were “generally good”, but the top recommendation was not
always correct. Therefore, these recommendations did not provide
useful insights and usually took up too much time to be worthwhile.
Also, the confidence score of each suggested option could be pretty
low, such as 30%, making clinicians not willing to trust the recom-
mended diagnosis. The low accuracy may be caused by two reasons.
First, due to the interoperability issues between AI-CDSS and other
systems, AI-CDSS lacks effective way to gather sufficient informa-
tion, and thus, its outputs may not be presented with complete and
relevant patient information. Second, the current AI-CDSS system
is not capable of capturing subtle clues that can only be recognized
by clinicians. These clues, however, may be vital in the diagnostic
process:
“The patient’s facial expression or other hints might
indicate the severity of illness, but AI-CDSS was not
able to interpret that.” (I3) .
“Can you make it more precise, more intelligent. [...]
The same symptom can be associated with different
diseases or illnesses, and different patients have dif-
ferent medical histories and unique characteristics.
The system is protocolized and not able to provide
personalized diagnosis. Recommendations triggered
on symptom alone were often not quite accurate.” (I5)
Another issue is that some information, such as medicine infor-
mation, presented by AI-CDSS is not accurate either. Very often, the
information recorded in the system is not updated, as one physician
explained:
“The medicine description provided by AI-CDSS, such
as how much to take, is not always accurate. Take
’tamsulosin’ as an example, it is used to treat prostate
issues. AI-CDSS says take one pill per day so I fol-
lowed its guideline. But some older adults have very
serious prostate problem, just taking one pill is not
effective. Some of them decided to take two pills per
day without consulting us, but they said it works well.
Therefore, I went down to the pharmacy and checked
the description of this medicine, and found that it says
take one to two pills per day instead of strictly taking
one.” (I7)
Similar to the TCM example in the previous sub-section, almost
all of the surgeons complained that the system is not very useful.
The root cause of this problem is that AI-CDSS can not fully accom-
modate surgical issues, such as wound or fracture. One surgeon
voiced his frustration:
“For example, when a patient who has wound injury
comes in, this system doesn’t have a full coverage of
those surgical issues. The symptoms it can suggest
and recognize mainly related to internal medicine.
The last time I found it useful was when a patient who
had abdomen pain, but still it is not quite a surgical
issue.” (I3)
There are some other technical limitations brought up by the
participants. In particular, the AI-CDSS algorithm does not take into
consideration the patient’s individual information. For example, it
is not aware of a patient’s income or insurance information and
thus, the algorithm recommended medicine options may not be
affordable by the patient. Lastly, it is worth noting that the partici-
pants expressed concerns that the extensive use of AI-CDSS could
lead to overly reliance on the system and may even de-skill clini-
cian, which leads to our next point on trust in AI and professional
autonomy.
4.2.3
Trust in AI-CDSS and Professional Autonomy. All of our par-
ticipants indicated that clinical expertise of the healthcare providers
can not be easily replaced by an AI system, as one participant
stated—“diagnosis is not a formula”. The AI-CDSS system can make
mistakes too, thus the medical advice given by AI-CDSS should
always be verified by clinicians. After all, clinicians are accountable
for the treatment of their patients:

“Brilliant AI Doctor” in Rural China: Tensions and Challenges in AI-Powered CDSS Deployment
CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan
“Doctors and patients are friends, we usually have a
good relationship. It is possible that the prescription
we gave to the patient is not working. I’ll just recom-
mend them to go to higher-tier hospitals for further
examination. They understand us too, it is not like
I intentionally gave you a wrong medicine or made
you to be uncomfortable. [...] But if the AI system
[directly] gives him a prescription that is not work-
ing, or unfortunately it causes some adverse events.
The patient must complain about it. And more impor-
tantly, there is an accountability issue in there. Who
is responsible for that?”(I19)
Furthermore, the perceived trust of AI-CDSS was impacted by
the “Black Box” nature of AI. That is, even the system gives a cor-
rect recommendation, how it works inside the system, such as the
rationale for how different features were considered by the system,
remains opaque to clinicians. Therefore, clinicians had to spend
time evaluating the recommendations given by the AI-CDSS system.
One physician explained that the system often alerted the use of
medicine but did not show all of the relevant information, such as
why it gave such alerts. For example, some alerts are categorized as
“proceed with cautions” and some others are “critically forbidden”,
but the system did not provide enough explanatory information
as to why these alerts were generated and how severe they were.
This finding is consistent with previous studies showing that AI
systems need to provide explanations to increase human trust [91].
Lack of training session for the system may be another amplifier
to worsen the transparency and trust issue. Most of the participants
reported receiving very limited training on how to use the system,
thus they are not aware of many useful features. One clinician
voiced his frustration:
“They didn’t train us after the system was deployed.
We had to figure out how to use the system on our
own. No training sessions, no training materials, noth-
ing. Nobody explained how to use the system, what
features it has, where to find what, what feature is
used for what task, etc.” (I9)
In addition to trust issues, our findings also reveal that clinicians
considered the AI-CDSS system could challenge their professional
autonomy. For example, clinicians would like to rely on their knowl-
edge and experience to diagnose a patient rather than being guided
by the AI-CDSS system. That is another reason participants re-
ported why the “Click-Through” approach was rarely used. Not
only that clicking through different pages and answering all the
questions is time-consuming, but also the system forces the clin-
ician to follow its clinical reasoning process, eroding the natural
flow of clinicians’ work routines and diagnostic practice [80]. Our
participants also expressed that they felt uncomfortable when they
follow the detailed instructions and recommendations generated
by AI-CDSS that advise them on what to do and not to do:
“Seems like the system was designed to replace doc-
tors. It asks so many detailed questions one after an-
other that could take forever to complete a diagnosis
process. If you decide to use it, you have to provide an-
swers to all of the questions. For example, you have to
click through some questions that normally we don’t
ask, such as the patient’s marriage status. And some
other questions don’t really make sense to us. Usu-
ally we chose to not ask the patient those suggested
questions by AI-CDSS. But in order to get to the next
page, we have to check off “Not applicable”. Can you
imagine how time-consuming and frustrating that is?
So I just used this [click-through] feature a couple of
times, and then never use it again.” (I19)
4.2.4
Can AI Replace Human Clinicians? None of the participants
believe AI can replace human clinicians. As aforementioned, there
are accountability and legal issues with medical diagnosis and treat-
ment. Because clinicians are responsible for the final decision and
patient outcome, and they do not fully trust AI-CDSS. Also, all
participants argued that many patients from these rural areas do
not know how to use computers. In addition, the AI-CDSS system
user interface is full of medical terms and technical jargon. They
see no way that their patients can directly interact with such an
AI-CDSS system if it were an “AI doctor”, even in the future.
“You will have to stay in medical school for 3 years
in order to understand this [AI-CDSS UI].” (I10)
Some participants phrased that the diagnosis process is a highly
interactive, communicative, and social event. They do not believe
AI can ever replace human clinicians because they think AI can
never have such social bounding and interaction with the patient,
or to be a “friend to the patient” (I19), as clinicians did in this rural
area. The social interaction of the consultation process is a critical
part along with the diagnosis and treatment. Being inside a clinical
room and talking to a doctor, the patient feels the treatment is
reliable and authentic.
“[Sometimes] taking the medicine is like a placebo.
These patients just want to come to see a doctor and
have a conversation. Your words might be more effec-
tive than the medicine.” (I21)
During the interview, many clinicians expressed their expecta-
tion of AI-CDSS to be redesigned as a “Doctor’s Assistant” (I19),
as opposed to trying to substitute doctors’ work, or telling doctors
what to do or what not to do. They were not against to have more
AI supports in their workflow, but they suggested to prioritize the
design of the AI system as an assistant to take care of the low level
and non-critical tasks so that clinicians can spend more time on
patient examination and diagnosis.
“If you design and put it in the lobby as a receptionist
or information desk. It can take screening questions
and suggest the patient to visit which department. I
think it can work this way – to do some preparation
work for the diagnosis” (I5)
4.3
Perceived Usefulness of AI-CDSS
Despite all the challenges and barriers in the adoption of AI-CDSS,
almost all participants expressed their positive perceptions of AI-
CDSS and optimistic attitude towards its future. Most of the par-
ticipants (18/20) believed that the AI-CDSS system is already sup-
porting various tasks of their work. We identified four common
scenarios for which the AI-CDSS system play a critical role: sup-
porting diagnostic process, facilitating medical information search,

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan
Wang and Wang, et al.
providing an on-the-job training opportunity, and preventing ad-
verse events.
4.3.1
Supporting Diagnostic Process. Despite criticizing the AI-
CDSS’s functionality and user experience, participants actually con-
sidered AI-CDSS to be useful for some tasks in their diagnose and
decision making workflow. For example, participants acknowledged
that the system-generated diagnostic and treatment suggestions
can be used as a reference to consider other possibilities and alterna-
tives that otherwise they might have not thought about. This usage
of AI-CDSS is highly appreciated by our participants, as clinicians
in rural clinics do not often see complicated symptoms and they
may have cognitive inertia and treat a new disease as something
they are more familiar with. As our participants elaborated:
“It gives us a reminder. We don’t see many types of
diseases very often down here in our clinic, but if
someone has some diseases that have complex causes
or something we have little knowledge about, you can
use the system to assist your diagnosis. In particular,
it gives you several options that can help you think
about alternatives and take those into consideration.
If I diagnose a patient by myself, I might misdiagnose
him/her because I may overlook some aspects. Now
we have this [AI-CDSS], so I can reference to the
suggested diagnoses.” (I6)
“Because the system provides several diagnosis sug-
gestions, it is a huge help for expanding our thoughts.
In particular, the AI-CDSS system could facilitate the
diagnosis of uncommon disease for new patients. I do
feel it greatly improves our work.” (I7)
Many participants also explicitly pointed out that they frequently
used the AI recommendations to verify their own diagnoses. In this
way, AI-CDSS works as a reassurance mechanism in patient care. If
they notice any discrepancy between their own diagnosis and the
AI-CDSS’s suggestions, they would further investigate the issue
and check if something is wrong to prevent misdiagnosis. One
participant explained this aspect:
“The diagnostic suggestions of the system allow you
to verify your own diagnosis. More importantly, it
makes you feel more confident if your diagnosis is
consistent with the system suggestions.” (I7)
4.3.2
Facilitating Medical Information Search. The AI-CDSS system
provides a search engine for clinicians to look up information about
unfamiliar medicine or diseases. It works as an on-premise “Medical
Wikipedia” to broaden clinicians’ knowledge scope, and to save
them a significant amount of time from searching and evaluating
endless internet information. For example, before the implementa-
tion of AI-CDSS, clinicians used different mechanisms to find the
necessary medicine information. Similar to Figure 2(d), clinicians
created paper notes with detailed medicine instruction (e.g., how
many pills per day) and posted on the wall for quick reference. Or,
they often had to call or pay a visit to the pharmacy department
to check such instruction. Lastly, they also relied on their mobile
phone to search information online. These alternates, however, are
not as efficient as using the embedded search engine:
“We used the information search engine very often
to look up medicine information. The reason is that
there are a variety of medicine and the information
about each medicine (e.g., side effects, use instruc-
tions) keeps updating, which makes it nearly impossi-
ble to remember all of that. Before the implementation
of AI-CDSS, we had to create an excel sheet to doc-
ument all the information and used that as a “cheat
sheet” when seeing a patient. But now we just use
the search engine embedded in AI-CDSS to look up
medicine information in a timely manner. ” (I8)
4.3.3
On-the-Job Training Opportunity. It is interesting to learn
that some participants considered AI-CDSS as an opportunity for
on-the-job training. For example, the “Similar Case” feature allows
clinicians to look up similar patient cases to the case at hand, and
these similar cases are all from top-tier research hospitals. This
feature was perceived as not only useful for their diagnostic work,
but also helpful for clinicians to self-educate and learn, as one
participant noted:
“I usually use the “Similar Case” feature when encoun-
tering a rarely seen case. It can not only augment your
diagnosis, but also expand your knowledge pool. In
particular, I like to open it up even when I am not
seeing patients so that I can self-educate myself.” (I19)
Some of our participants echoed this statement and further noted
that AI-CDSS may be particularly useful for less experienced junior
clinicians. The diagnostic process is not only evidence-based, but
also heavily relied on clinicians’ years of experiences. When a
junior clinician does not have much prior experience with some
rarely seen symptoms, AI-CDSS could provide recommendations
for him/her to follow, and in turn, the clinician can gain knowledge
and experience:
“I think junior clinicians who just finished their resi-
dency can benefit a lot from using the AI-CDSS sys-
tem. It is very possible that they don’t have enough ex-
pertise to deal with some diseases or symptoms. They
can follow the suggestions presented by AI-CDSS to
come up with a diagnosis. During this process, they
will also learn a lot and gain experience.” (I22)
4.3.4
Preventing Adverse Events. Last but not least, AI-CDSS can
automatically detect and alert some common mistakes or risks in
the treatment plan or medication prescription. For example, if a
patient is pregnant but the clinician mistakenly ordered a comput-
erized tomography (CT) scan in the EHR system, the system will
automatically remind the clinician about the risk of performing
CT scan on a pregnant patient. Another example is that the AI-
CDSS can alert prescription errors or drug allergies. In this regard,
AI-CDSS acts as a safe guard to alert clinicians about potential mis-
treatments or mis-prescription of drugs, and to prevent adverse
events and improve patient safety.
“Doctors are responsible for any misdiagnosis or mis-
use of medicine. But we may make mistakes and
couldn’t pinpoint all potential risks. If we make a

“Brilliant AI Doctor” in Rural China: Tensions and Challenges in AI-Powered CDSS Deployment
CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan
mistake, it could adversely affect patients. The AI-
CDSS system could help us avoid such serious is-
sues. For example, if we prescribed both Dipyridamole
and Aspirin Enteric-coated tablets to a patient, that
would trigger an alert as these two medicine are not
quite compatible and could lead to adverse drug reac-
tion. Before AI-CDSS, we literally had to draw a table
and join lines for side effects and incompatibility of
medicine, and paste them on the wall for reference.”
(I6)
5
DISCUSSION
Participants believed that the AI-CDSS system has the potential
to support many aspects of their work. However, many challenges
inhibited effective and successful adoption and use of the system.
Those barriers include difficulty in integrating with rural clinical
context or with their diagnosis workflow in practice, lack of inte-
gration with other clinical systems, technical limitations, usability
barriers, and issues related to the trustworthiness of AI-CDSS and
clinicians’ professional autonomy. Below we discuss how to address
these issues.
5.1
Design Implications for Adapting AI-CDSS
to Local Context and Practice
Our study is situated in rural areas of China where first-tier clinics
are the primary healthcare resources for a significant number of
people. Echoing previous work [23, 70], in our study, we found the
“Brilliant Doctor”system was not used as extensive as predicted
in large part due to the lack of consideration of the local context
and work practices that define Chinese rural clinics. For example,
the low doctor-to-patient ratios in this context make it difficult for
clinicians to sufficiently address each patient’s needs and questions.
As described in our findings, these rural clinicians can only afford
to spend a few minutes with each patient, otherwise the waiting
patients who are also present in the doctor office may experience
and even express their emotional distress and frustration. On the
other hand, AI-CDSS takes more time to use. For example, the
“click-through” interaction approach of the system usually requires
at least 10 minutes for comprehensive data collection. This mis-
alignment between AI-CDSS design and local context limits the
clinicians’ ability to use AI-CDSS in real-time. We propose that the
AI-CDSS system can leverage the latest speech-recognition tech-
niques to develop a voice-based user interface for hands-free data
collection [8]. This feature can automatically transcribe patient-
provider conversations into text, parse the text, recognize and clas-
sify the contextual meaning of text utterances, and finally populate
the corresponding EHR sections (e.g., mentioning of allergy in the
dialog can be automatically added to the allergy history section in
EHR). This voice-based interface has the potential to save clinicians
from the time-consuming documentation during patient visits, al-
lowing them to spend more time to interact with each patient. This
design direction echoes the “unremarkable AI” design guideline
to seamlessly and naturally integrate AI-based systems into the
established workflow [91].
Consistent with the findings reported by [50], we noticed that
recommendations generated by AI-CDSS are sometimes dismissed.
One possible reason is that the system lacks personalized recom-
mendations for individual patients. That is, the system failed to
account for important contextual factors such as insurance policy.
In this rural context, many patients may not have insurance (or
their income is low) to cover certain types of medications. Thus,
patients are very sensitive to the cost of the medicine or the treat-
ment. It is a common practice in these rural clinics that clinicians
need to discuss with the patient before deciding on the treatment or
the prescription (as shown in Fig 3). Emerging work in the field of
shared decision making highlights the importance of considering
personal and contextual factors when determining care plans be-
tween healthcare providers and patients [73]. The AI-CDSS should
therefore follow the guidelines of shared decision-making frame-
work and take patients’ social, cultural, and personal context into
consideration in order to generate more personalized recommenda-
tions [2]. To promote a self-adaptation capability for the system,
system builders can leverage reinforcement learning algorithms,
so that AI-CDSS’s prediction errors or drifts can be detected and
resolved even after the system is deployed with a pre-trained model
in the real-world.
Lastly, the first-tier clinics are different from higher-tier health-
care organizations (e.g., general hospitals). Unlike the few patients
who need medical treatments or referrals, a majority of patients are
existing patients who only need regular check-ups or medication
refills for chronicle disease. But when they visit, they usually sign
up (and pay) to see an expert or senior clinician—a practice that
is completely unnecessary and consumes very valuable health re-
sources in rural clinics. We believe that it will be helpful to deploy
patient-facing, AI-powered self-serve triage systems, a technology
that has been gaining momentum since the outbreak of COVID-19
pandemic [33]. For example, a self-serve triage system (e.g., in the
form of kiosk or robot) could guide patients to enter their symp-
toms and reasons for the visit, and then direct them to different
departments and clinicians based on their needs. For medication
refills, patients only need to visit the pharmacy department. Simi-
larly, regular check-ups can be assigned to the clinicians who are
dedicated to these cases. By doing so, clinicians with specialists can
be freed up to treat complex conditions that usually require longer
time to allow for comprehensive examination. The self-serve triage
system should be built and integrated with the existing AI-CDSS
system so that the information collected by the triage system can
be transmitted to the AI-CDSS system for further use. Clinicians
therefore are able to instantly use AI-CDSS for decision support.
When designing such self-triage systems, designers and developers
should account for patients’ needs and unique characteristics in the
local context. For example, since our participants reported that a lot
of their patients (e.g., senior citizens) have limited health literacy
and technology proficiency, the system can use patient-friendly
language or provide a voice-based interface to facilitate the use of
the self-triage system.
5.2
Improving Technical Performance of
AI-CDSS
Our participants point out that the AI-CDSS system has many
technical limitations which impede its ability to provide accurate

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan
Wang and Wang, et al.
diagnostic suggestions for effective interventions. For example, pre-
vious work found that unlike healthcare providers, AI-based CDSS
is not capable of considering the “whole patient”. A key example
is that traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) clinicians usually rely
on inspection, auscultation, question, and pulse-taking as the four
major diagnostic methods to understand and diagnose the whole
body’s pathological conditions. These procedures, however, are not
modeled in the AI-CDSS system, making the system less usable
to TCM physicians. Similarly, surgeons also questioned the useful-
ness of AI-CDSS in their domain given the system was primarily
designed and developed for internal medicine use.
It is well recognized that improving the algorithm and reducing
the bias of training dataset (such as including more TCM and surgi-
cal clinical cases to train the models) are critical for increasing the
usefulness and user-acceptance of AI-CDSS systems [44]. However,
we also argue that as AI becomes more ingrained into day-to-day
clinical practice yet its technical limitations can not be fully ad-
dressed in the near future, one approach that might be useful to
increase the levels of user acceptance is informing front-line health-
care providers about the capabilities and limitations of AI-CDSS,
such as which disease the system is better suited to address [10].
All these considerations highlight the need of employing user-
centered design approach to address the needs and concerns of
clinicians as well as the barriers in integrating AI-CDSS to daily
workflow. For example, the AI-CDSS system should be integrated
with not only the EHR system but also other hospital systems
(e.g., pharmaceutical system or laboratory test notification system),
ensuring that the medications or laboratory tests recommended
by AI-CDSS are consistent with their availability in these first-tier
community clinics.
5.3
Designing Explainable, Trustworthy, and
Cooperative AI-CDSS for Human-AI
Collaboration in Clinical Scenarios
Clinicians expressed that they did not understand how AI-CDSS
generated recommendations for a given patient care. This issue may
affect their trust toward the system. If such trust issues persist, only
focusing on improving technical performance of the system is not
meaningful since AI recommendations that are delivered without
appropriate context can be easily ignored by the intended users [69].
Our participants expressed the interest to know the scientific and
clinical basis upon which the AI-CDSS system generates diagnostic
predictions and medical advice, so that they are better positioned to
evaluate the appropriateness of applying system recommendations
to the patient. Yet existing AI-driven clinical systems still function
as a “black box”, making it difficult for clinicians to understand
how and why a specific recommendation is made. Future studies
should explore how to design explainable AI systems for healthcare
providers.
We also found that the perceived threat to professional autonomy
could adversely affect clinicians’ intention to use the AI-CDSS
system. This suggests that there should be a clear boundary between
what tasks AI can automate and what tasks clinician should lead.
For example, our participants had little interest in letting AI guide
them through the clinical reasoning and diagnosis process. Instead
of designing AI to replace or replicate a doctor’s diagnosis work, AI
may just act as a “doctor assistant”. Some of the participants have
already started referring to the AI-CDSS system as an assistant,
instead of a tool.
Taken together, we argue that as more AI-based clinical sys-
tems are being developed and deployed in the near future, it will
likely form a new paradigm of work in medical domain: clinicians
and AI systems work together but with clear division of labor [59]
to provide healthcare services to the patients. This new clinician-
AI collaboration paradigm will extend the current human-in-the-
loop AI design philosophy [15] and the mixed-initiative design
approach [28]. To support this new human-AI collaboration par-
adigm, the AI system should be designed to meet the explainable
and trustworthy AI design guidelines; but more importantly, the AI
system should also be “cooperative” — it can work together with
human clinicians, fit into the local context, integrate with existing
IT systems, and improve work productivity in the workflow. Last
but not least, it is critical to define who is responsible for patient
outcome in this collaborative framework. Health policies and ini-
tiatives should be enacted to address the accountability issue of
AI-CDSS systems [26]. Our future work will involve clinicians in
the design process to explore what a cooperative “doctor assistant”
AI-CDSS system looks like.
5.4
Limitation
This qualitative study only focused on a rural area in Beijing, China.
Given the vast variations across regions in China, the result may
not be generalizable to other rural areas in China or to other de-
veloping countries. However, our findings and design implications
can provide valuable lessons and input for future studies looking
into this research area. We also want to note that the algorithm
of the studied system may not utilize the the-state-of-the-art AI
techniques, which may affect the system technical reliability and
accuracy. However, we do not believe an algorithm with higher
accuracy can alternate the findings of our paper. Nevertheless, we
urge machine learning and AI researchers to join the efforts and
work together in AI-CDSS design and development from a socio-
technical perspective.
We did not interview patients in this study, as the target users of
AI-CDSS are clinicians. Therefore, we only focused on clinicians’
usage and opinions in this paper. This is a limitation as the patients
are also potentially affected by the adoption of the system. Future
research is needed to gather patient voices.
6
CONCLUSION
In this work, we conducted an observational study and interviewed
22 clinicians at 6 clinics in a rural area in China to examine how
clinicians use a recently deployed AI-CDSS system in practice. We
found various challenges in users’ adoption of the system, such as
misalignment between the design of AI-CDSS and the local context
and workflow, technical limitations and user experience issues, as
well as trustworthiness of the system. We draw on these findings
to discuss design implications for future AI-CDSS interventions to
increase their uptake and adoption in rural clinics, and generalize
the discussion for the broad Human-AI Collaboration paradigm.

“Brilliant AI Doctor” in Rural China: Tensions and Challenges in AI-Powered CDSS Deployment
CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan
7
