Understanding the Importance of Single Directions
via Representative Substitution
Li Chen†, Hailun Ding‡, Qi Li↑, Zhuo Li↑, Jian Peng†, Haifeng Li†∗
†School of Geosciences and Info-Physics , ‡School of Software
↑School of Information Science and Engineering
Central South University
Changsha Hunan 410083 P.R. China

∗Corresponding author
Abstract
Understanding the internal representations of deep neural net-
works (DNNs) is crucal to explain their behavior. The in-
terpretation of individual units, which are neurons in MLPs
or convolution kernels in convolutional networks, has been
paid much attention given their fundamental role. However,
recent research (Morcos et al. 2018) presented a counterin-
tuitive phenomenon, which suggests that an individual unit
with high class selectivity, called interpretable units, has poor
contributions to generalization of DNNs. In this work, we
provide a new perspective to understand this counterintuitive
phenomenon, which makes sense when we introduce Rep-
resentative Substitution (RS). Instead of individually selec-
tive units with classes, the RS refers to the independence of
a unit’s representations in the same layer without any anno-
tation. Our experiments demonstrate that interpretable units
have high RS which are not critical to network’s generaliza-
tion. The RS provides new insights into the interpretation of
DNNs and suggests that we need to focus on the indepen-
dence and relationship of the representations.
Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have made remarkable
progress in various domains, such as image classiﬁcation,
word recognition, and language translation. Despite the sub-
stantial success of DNNs, their working mechanism, such
as the capability to memorize the entire datasets with low
generalization error, is still an open issue.
Inspired by neuroscience, recent works (Morcos et al.
2018) have demonstrated high interpretability units (HIUs),
which are important response to a class of objects and were
believed to play a crucial role in the performance of DNNs
in the past, actually have an inconsiderable contribution to
accuracy and even damage a network’s generalization per-
formance. Instead, weak interpretability units (WIUs) may
be important to improve the accuracy and generalization of
DNNs. Different experiments, such as ablation and pertur-
bation, show that a single direction has minimal importance
to generalization. Therefore, previous studies of understand-
ing the working mechanism of a network by analyzing HIUs
may be misleading (Radford, Jozefowicz, and Sutskever
Copyright c⃝2019, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2017; Nguyen et al. 2016; Zeiler and Fergus 2014). The re-
lationship among HIUs, WIUs, accuracy, and generalization
remains unclear.
Regardless of whether a unit is sensitive to class, latent
patterns are found with the corresponding unit when the unit
activation is large. Therefore, we take the activation max-
imization (AM) (Erhan et al. 2009) of units as their rep-
resentation in the feature space. This representation prop-
agates the image initialized with random noise to compute
the activation of certain unit and then passes the activation
backward to update the best direction of the input image.
This method prevents the impacts of class and limited data
samples in the activation space. We propagate the generated
image forward the network and record all activation in the
same layer. Although the generated image is optimized for
the target unit, many units’ activation is larger than that of
a certain unit. In this optimization direction, other units also
have the same representations.
We deﬁne Representative Substitution (RS), the ratio of
units with activation greater than that of a target unit to the
full layer, to quantify the independence of a unit’s represen-
tations in the same layer for understanding the behavior of
HIUs and WIUs and the inﬂuence of their interactions on
the accuracy and generalization of DNNs. We also improve
AM to obtain independent representations, which reduces
the inﬂuences of other units in the image generation pro-
cess. Regardless of what generates an image, the HIUs’ RS
is relatively high. When a unit is ablated, a large number
of other units can complement the loss representations in
the same layer; therefore, HIUs are inconsiderably impor-
tant. We ﬁnd why the relationship between class selectivity
and unit importance is negatively correlated or irrelevant.
The ﬁrst few layers of the network are for feature extrac-
tion, whereas the remaining layers are for feature integra-
tion. HIUs and WIUs’ importance differs in different layers.
The main contributions are summarized as follows:
(1) We forge a concept, called Representative Substitu-
tion, to indicate the independence of a unit’s representations
in the same layer. The importance of HIUs to the network is
explained through the perspective of feature space.
(2) The importance of HIUs is not a universal phe-
nomenon; instead, it heavily depends on the layers they are
located given different convolutional layers have different
functions, feature extraction, and feature integration.
arXiv:1911.05586v1  [cs.LG]  20 Jan 2019

(3) Our method is built on the representations of convo-
lution kernels without any information on classes or labels,
which give us a potential opportunity to analyze the intrinsic
features of convolution kernels. Our research suggests that
independent representations of convolution kernels may be
a promising way to explain the behavior of DNNs.
Methods
We propose an independent activation maximization (IAM)
which represents a unit in the feature space, and Represen-
tative Substitution (RS) which represents the independence
of the unit’s representations in the same layer, to understand
the characteristics of HIUs and WIUs and their impacts on
the network importance.
We introduce basic concepts before the IAM and RS are
discussed.
Class Selectivity. A metric is inspired by system neuro-
science to quantify the class selectivity of units (Morcos et
al. 2018). The selectivity index is calculated as follows:
selectivity(i) = ¯xi
max −¯xi
−max
¯ximax + ¯xi
−max
,
(1)
where ¯xi
max is the maximum mean activation of the i-th
unit under class and ¯xi
−max is the mean activation of the i-th
unit across all other classes. The i-th unit mean activation of
all samples under each class is calculated, and the vector of
dimension equals to the number of classes. The class selec-
tivity of the i-th unit can be obtained by Eq.1. The metric
varies from 0 to 1; 0 denotes that a unit activates identically
for all classes, whereas 1 denotes that a unit only activates
for a single class. In other words, a unit with high class se-
lectivity value is an HIU and a unit with low class selectivity
value is a WIU.
Activation Maximization. As shown in (Erhan et al. 2009),
the purpose of the algorithm is to visualize the representa-
tions of a network’s unit after the end of training. The acti-
vation maximization (AM) of the i-th unit is
AM(i) = arg max xi,
(2)
where xi is the activation of the i-th unit. In detail, we
put a random noise image forward the network to compute
the activation of the i-th unit and then propagate activation
backward through the network to compute the gradient of
the input image. After a few iterations, we can acquire the
generated image; thus, the activation of the i-th unit becomes
large. The generated image is considered as visual represen-
tations of the unit in the feature space.
Independent Activation Maximization. In the process of
image generation, the AM algorithm only follows consid-
eration of the maximum activation value of the target unit.
However, other units may also have high activation to the in-
put image, which makes the visual representations entangled
with other units. Thus, we modify the objective function to
generate the following IAM formula,
IAM(i) = arg max (xi −¯x−i),
(3)
where ¯x−i is the mean activation of all units without the
i-th unit in the same layer. The images are obtained by Eq.3,
which can maximize the activation value of the i-th unit
while the activation of other units is suppressed. Therefore,
images become the independent visual representations of the
unit.
Representative Substitution. We generate an image for a
certain unit by the IAM algorithm to obtain the units repre-
sentations and then pass the generated image to the network
for quantifying the impacts of other units on the representa-
tion of the target unit in the same layer. The activation of all
units in the same layer of a certain unit is recorded. The RS
is deﬁned by the number of units greater than the activation
of the certain unit divided by the total number of units in that
layer. The formula is
RS(i) = |{x
′ : x
′ > xi}|
|{x}|
s.t.
xi = f(IAM(i)),
(4)
where |{x}| represents the number of activation or units
and f(image) represents networks’ feedforward computa-
tion that the image can be obtained by IAM. The RS indi-
cates the degree to which visual representations of a unit is
activated by other units in the same layer. This metric varies
from 0 to 1; 0 indicates that the visual representations of the
i-th unit is independent and unique, whereas 1 indicating the
all units have the same representations with the i-th unit.
Experiments
Experimental settings
In the experiments, we use various DNNs, including an
MLP, a shallow convolutional network, VGG16 (Simonyan
and Zisserman 2014) under CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky and Hin-
ton 2009), and ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009) datasets. Each
layer of MLP contains 128, 512, 2048 and 2048 neurons.
The shallow convolutional network is trained on CIFAR-10
for 100 epochs. Its convolutional layer sizes are 64, 64, 128,
and 128. All kernels are 3×3, with strides of 1. CIFAR-10
contains 10 classes with 60,000 images, and ImageNet has
1.2 million images from 1,000 classes.
Relationship with class selectivity
We train a shallow convolutional network on Cifar-10 and
compute the class selectivity of all units. We then obtain
the RS results under the IAM and the AM algorithms for
comparison, and select two layers of the network, as shown
in Fig.1. The experimental results show that the RS is high
when the class selectivity of the convolution kernels in the
two layers is high.
The WIUs with low class selectivity also have low RS. A
low RS indicates independent and irreplaceable representa-
tions in the same layer. Therefore, the WIUs are important
to networks generalization. When the RS is obtained by the
AM algorithm, the lower left corner of the ﬁgure is dense,
whereas the upper right corner is sparse. This ﬁnding shows
that the representations of WIUs in this layer are difﬁcult to
replace, whereas HIUs are easy to replace. We use the im-
proved AM algorithm, the IAM algorithm, to compute the

(a) layer1
(b) layer3
Figure 1: The RS value of HIUs is high, whereas that RS
value of WIUs is low. Each point represents a convolution
kernel. Relation between RS and class selectivity under AM
and IAM algorithms in the ﬁrst layer of the shallow convo-
lutional network (a) and the third layer (b).
Figure 2: The HIU’s representations are simple com-
pared with the representations of other units. The HIU
has high class selectivity and RS.
units RS. Although the overall RS declines slightly, the ba-
sic trend is consistent with that of AM, and the same con-
clusions are reached. HIUs are unimportant because other
alternative representations exist. WIUs represent several in-
dependent features, and its ablation largely impacts the net-
work generalization.
We visualize an HIU and two units with higher activation
than the HIU by the IAM algorithm, as shown in Fig.2. The
representations of other units cover the HIU’s representa-
tions, but they are also given their own independent features.
Thus, HIUs with simple representations are unsuitable for
network generalization. In the latter experiment, we utilize
the IAM algorithm to acquire the RS.
Relationship with different layers
Unfortunately, a unit of a good network must be a single
class on the fully connected layer before the classiﬁer. Al-
though a HIU is given, its representations may not be substi-
tuted in the same layer. Therefore, we compute the RS and
class selectivity of the fully connected layer of the shallow
convolutional network, as shown in Fig.3(a). The results in-
dicate that the class selectivity of units in the fully connected
layer before the classiﬁer is large, and the RS is mostly zero.
HIUs are consequently inappropriate to indicate the qual-
ity of network generalization. The importance of HIUs is
related to which layer it locates. We conduct a Spearmans
correlation analysis of the RS and class selectivity of each
convolutional layer of the shallow convolutional network, as
(a) fully connected layer
before the classiﬁer
(b) correlation
between
RS and class selectivity
under different layers
Figure 3: The class selectivity and RS have different cor-
relations on different layers. (a) The units’ class selectivity
is high and the RS is low in the fully connected layer. (b) The
correlation between class selectivity and RS decreases as the
number of layers increases.
(a) shallow layers
(b) deep layers
Figure 4: The convolutional layers exhibit the functions of
feature extraction and integration. (a) shows the RS and
class selectivity of the ﬁrst and third layers. (b) is for the 9th
and 11th layers.
shown in Fig.3(b). The results demonstrate that the RS and
class selectivity are positively correlated, and the correlation
gradually decreases as the number of layers increases. So in
(Morcos et al. 2018), the importance of unit ablation under
different convolutional layers on the network is thus difﬁcult
to determine because the way of ablation is random. From a
feature space prospective, as the number of layers increases,
the independence of features on the unit gradually becomes
unrelated to the interpretability of the unit. Morcos et al.
clariﬁed that class selectivity has a strong relationship with
importance in the shallow layer, but it gradually decays as
layer deepens. The ﬁrst few layers of the convolutional net-
work have feature extraction capabilities; hence, the HIUs
in these layers are unimportant because their RS are high
and other convolution kernels can replace their representa-
tions. Therefore, too many HIUs will reduce the generaliza-
tion performance of the network. As the number of layers
increases, feature extraction is no longer part of the main in-
ﬂuencing factor of network performance. The network needs
to integrate features and provide semantic information. This
ﬁnding is consistent with theoretical observations (Raghu et
al. 2016).
We conduct the same experiments on VGG16 trained on
Cifar-10, as shown in Fig.4. Similarly, we conclude that

(a) layer1
(b) layer3
Figure 5: The MLP does not exist in the diversity of the
units’ RS. Relation between the RS and class selectivity in
the ﬁrst layer of the MLP (a) and the third layer (b).
(a) layer3 and layer11
(b)
correlation
between
the RS and class selectivity
under different layers
Figure 6: The RS and class selectivity are related in part
layers under the ImageNet dataset. (a) Relation between
the RS and class selectivity in the 3rd and 11th layers (b)
The correlation of the RS and class selectivity is irregular in
all convolutional layers.
WIUs have low RS in shallow layers. However, the units RS
presents a small value and no longer has diversity in deep
layers. This phenomenon starts from a certain layer, and its
division of the network layer is evident. The ﬁrst few layers
of the network are mainly used for feature extraction, and
the main functions of the latter layers are feature integration
for classiﬁcation.
We conduct experiments on an MLP trained on Cifar-10,
as shown in Fig.5. The RS is mostly the same and does not
change considerably in all layers. Depending on previous
conclusions, the function of the MLP is feature integration.
The MLP is prone to overﬁtting and poor generalization.
This ﬁnding explains that MLP performs poorly because it
has no layer to extract features.
We use the pre-trained VGG16 model and ImageNet to
perform the same experiments, as shown in Fig.6(a). The
results imply that a large number of WIUs assemble at the
bottom left of the ﬁgure, which provide many independent
representations of the network. The RS and class selectivity
in all layers are shown in Fig.6(b). The RS and class se-
lectivity show no correlation. This ﬁnding differs from our
observation. Further work will need to consider the impacts
of RS and class selectivity on the network.
Conclusions
This study clariﬁes the insigniﬁcant role of HIUs in DNNs
from a feature space perspective, which inspires us to pay
considerable attention to the independence and relationship
of representations for explaining the working mechanism of
DNNs. Convolutional layers actually have distinct functions,
although they have the same structure. We need to consider
the impact of the network structure when we study the inter-
pretability of the network. However, the correlation between
the RS and HIUs in a large dataset is not evident at the end
of the experiment. Using a single metric to understand the
internal representations of DNNs is thus unreasonable. Con-
sidering that negative values of images are meaningless, we
analyze outputs by positive values. Nevertheless, negative
activation in neuroscience can indicate an inhibition, which
may be considered in the future.
