Iranis: A Large-scale Dataset of Farsi License Plate 
Characters 
Ali Tourani  
Department of Computer Engineering, University of Guilan, Rasht, Iran 

Sajjad Soroori 
Department of Computer Engineering, University of Guilan, Rasht, Iran 

Asadollah Shahbahrami 
Department of Computer Engineering, University of Guilan, Rasht, Iran 

Alireza Akoushideh 
Shahid-Chamran College Technical and Vocational University, Guilan branch, Rasht, Iran 

Abstract— Providing huge amounts of data is a fundamental demand when dealing with Deep Neural 
Networks (DNNs). Employing these algorithms to solve computer vision problems resulted in the advent 
of various image datasets to feed the most common visual imagery deep structures, known as Convolutional 
Neural Networks (CNNs). In this regard, some datasets can be found that contain hundreds or even 
thousands of images for license plate detection and optical character recognition purposes. However, no 
publicly available image dataset provides such data for the recognition of Farsi characters used in car 
license plates. The gap has to be filled due to the numerous advantages of developing accurate deep 
learning-based systems for law enforcement and surveillance purposes. This paper introduces a large-scale 
dataset that includes images of numbers and characters used in Iranian car license plates. The dataset, 
named Iranis, contains more than 83,000 images of Farsi numbers and letters collected from real-world 
license plate images captured by various cameras. The variety of instances in terms of camera shooting 
angle, illumination, resolution, and contrast make the dataset a proper choice for training DNNs. Dataset 
images are manually annotated for object detection and image classification. Finally, and to build a baseline 
for Farsi character recognition, the paper provides a performance analysis using a YOLO v.3 object 
detector. 
Keywords— dataset, Iranian license plate, deep learning, Farsi/Arabic character. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) require precise and novel tools for urban traffic management 
and control. In this regard, cameras are considered as one of the best solutions to provide real-time data 
for surveillance and security, traffic congestion management, and law enforcement [1]. Employing 
computer vision techniques has provided the advantage of automatic information retrieval from still 
images and videos captured by the cameras [2]. Since deep learning approaches have shown superb 
outcomes and robust performance when dealing with classification challenges, they have been applied to 
computer vision applications in recent years [3]. Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), Deep Belief 
Networks (DBN), and Autoencoders are some of the well-known deep learning schemes used in the 
mentioned field [3-6]. Various applications of ITS, such as traffic estimation, automatic license plate 
detection, and vehicle speed measurement have been developed using the mentioned approaches in recent 
This work was supported by the Technology Incubation Center of the University of Guilan under grant UOG-IC-303,15/20493, date 2019-02-
18, and DadeKavan Khazar Pouya company. 

years [2]. In this respect, localization of vehicle license plates and extracting the characters inside them 
can assist authorities in their enforcement of traffic laws. 
There are two main layouts for vehicle license plates in Iran: typical and special. In the typical layout, 
the license plate includes two partitions, where the left part holds a string of numbers and letters, and the 
right part refers to a two-digit number that indicates the issuer province code. In this regard, the 
combination of the two parts shapes a unique identifier for each vehicle. On the other hand, the special 
layout devotes to the free trade zone vehicles. In contrast with the typical form, in which the license plates 
have European standard dimensions, the special type has a completely different width-to-height ratio. 
Furthermore, the plate is black on white and a blue section in the leftmost part holds the free trade zone’s 
logo, i.e. Anzali, Kish, Arvand, etc. It should be noted that in the newest design, the logo has been 
replaced by a two-digit code for each trade zone. The license plates in this category contain no letters and 
only five numbers along with their equivalent English are provided. Fig. 1 demonstrates the mentioned 
layouts in brief. 
 
The Farsi -i.e. Farsi/Arabic- letter in the typical license plate is used to distinguish the type of the 
plate. It should be noted that for the private cars of people with disabilities, there is a wheelchair symbol 
instead of the character. Additionally, the background of these plates may vary regarding the type and 
usage of the vehicle. For instance, white is used for private cars, while yellow indicates taxis and public 
vehicles. These variations make the license plate detection and character recognition process a 
challenging task. Fig. 2 shows different types of car license plates in Iran. 
 
Fig. 1. Layouts of Iranian car license plates: a) typical, b) special, and c) new design of the special layout. 

 
According to Fig. 1 and Fig. 2, the variety of layouts in Iranian car license plates and the similarity of 
some letters and numbers in the Farsi alphabet cause challenges for Automatic License Plate Detection 
and Recognition (ALPR) purposes. ALPR plays a key role in the functionality of camera-based ITS and 
smart cities, as various accurate and reliable systems are highly dependent on the correct recognition of 
characters of the license plates. In this regard, providing real-world data can be extremely vital for 
developing state-of-the-art applications, especially machine learning and deep learning approaches. 
In this paper, a large-scale dataset named Iranis, containing the images of Farsi characters is 
introduced. The authors believe that the mentioned dataset can deal with the lack of proper Farsi letters 
and numbers dataset for training robust ALPR applications. In this regard, the main contributions of the 
paper include building a multimodal, stable dataset for object detection and character recognition in 
Iranian car license plates and indicating its application in ALPR. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II describes the motivation of the paper and 
presents some related works. The introduction and discussion of the proposed dataset are accessible in 
Section III. In Section IV, we evaluate the functionality of the proposed dataset using a deep learning 
scheme. The paper ends with some conclusions in Section V. 
II. 
MOTIVATION AND RELATED WORKS 
Since collecting, labeling, and classifying visual data is a tough process and requires much effort and 
time, there has always been a pale interest among researchers to develop large-scale datasets for 
computer vision and machine learning. Although there are some standard datasets available for license 
plate detection [9-12] and character recognition [13-15], they cannot be employed to recognize Farsi 
characters in images. 
The authors of this paper have contributed to many computer vision and machine learning projects 
and proposed various approaches in the field of ITS. Some of these approaches include vehicle count 
using video processing [16], deep learning-based vehicle detection [17], vehicle speed measurement 
[18-19], license plate localization [8, 20], and Farsi character recognition [8]. Accordingly, we claim 
that we have felt the essence of reliable data for the development of domestic robust applications for 
 
Fig. 2. Variations of Iranianc car license plates [8]. 

ITS. This motivated us to make the proposed dataset and make it available for enthusiastic researchers. 
To the best of our analysis, there is no publicly available Farsi characters dataset extracted from real-
world Iranian license plate images with available annotation data for classification. Although some 
works were performed by various researchers [21-24], they have been developed for handwritten Optical 
Character Recognition (OCR) researches and text-processing applications. These datasets cannot be 
used to recognize license plate characters due to variations of handwriting styles. In contrast with the 
mentioned approaches, a dataset of Farsi license plate characters is introduced in [25] in which the letters 
and numbers are directly extracted from real-world license plate images. Although it covers all possible 
characters, the number of instances for each letter fluctuates between 200 and 580. Another similar 
dataset is introduced in [26] which suffers a lack of data and no object detection annotation is available 
for the instances. The mentioned features make it inappropriate for classification and deep learning 
approaches, where the variety of data samples plays a vital role. 
To cover the mentioned drawbacks, Iranis is developed to address the necessity of data requirement 
for Iranian ALPR systems and fill the mentioned gap to a large extent. It covers all commonplace 
variations of Farsi license plate characters and provides annotation data for classification. 
III. 
DATASET DESCRIPTION 
Iranis is a large-scale image set, collected from real-world license plate images. These images were 
captured by uncalibrated cameras under various illumination conditions and may vary in resolution, 
contrast, shooting angle, and distance. In this regard, the processes of image collection, filtering, 
labeling, and bounding-box drawing -i.e. image annotation- were accomplished by a group of 
researchers at the University of Guilan, Iran. Consequently, the dataset contains a wide range of samples 
for each letter or number used in Iranian car license plates. It should be noted that since license plates 
are used for the identification of individuals, we do not make the images of the license plates publicly 
available regarding the data protection and privacy law. 
To obtain characters from license plates, we have proposed a two-stage deep learning approach that 
localizes plates in images, and then segments and extracts the inside texts. Further information about 
these stages can be found in our recently published work [8]. Table I illustrates the characteristics of the 
dataset in detail. It should be noted that the data annotation process was accomplished through an 
automatic process with supervised validation. To label data, we utilized Ybat [28], a YOLO bounding 
box annotation tool. In this step, a group of graduate and undergraduate students were asked to label 
each letter or number found in the license plate area and ignore the characters that are unclear and unable 
to be recognized. To ensure the characters were correctly labeled and avoid any potential 
misclassifications, labels were double-checked by different students. Finally, the outputs were saved as 
JSON format for classification and validation. 

 
According to Table I, there are more than 38,000 instances of Farsi “numbers” with the numerical 
labels 0 to 9 in the dataset, while the number of Farsi letters is greater than 42,000. Hereby, Iranis 
contains 28 classes, including ten numbers, seventeen letters, and one symbol. Fig. 3 shows some 
instances of the dataset along with their corresponding class names. Additionally, some notes should be 
considered about the dataset instances: 
TABLE I.  
INSTANCES OF IRANIS IMAGE SET 
Type 
Label 
(class name) 
Corresponding character, 
digit, or symbol 
Number of 
instances 
Number 
0 
0 
2501 
1 
1 
3495 
2 
2 
3930 
3 
3 
2745 
4 
4 
5774 
5 
5 
3610 
6 
6 
5753 
7 
7 
3736 
8 
8 
3583 
9 
9 
3528 
Letter 
A الف 
2517 
B ب 
2511 
P پ 
2519 
J ج 
2505 
H ح 
2558 
D د 
2504 
Sin س 
2445 
Sad ص 
2515 
T ط 
2512 
Gh ق 
2482 
L ل 
2502 
M م 
2500 
N ن 
2558 
V و 
2509 
Y ی 
2491 
PuV ع 
2508 
Taxi ت 
2551 
Symbol 
PwD 
2502 
Total 
83,844 

• The dataset does not contain the English numbers used in free trade zone plates, 
• Motorcycle license plates have a completely different layout, font size, and dimensions, and have 
not been included in the proposed dataset, 
• We have ignored some extremely rare letters in data classification, like characters “ک” for 
agricultural cars, “ز” for the ministry of defense vehicles, and “D” for diplomatic and consular 
corps vehicles, 
• Some augmentation techniques such as multiply, rotation, and additive Gaussian noise were used 
according to [27] to increase the number of remaining scarce samples, like classes P for police and 
PwD for private cars of people with disabilities. The outcomes of the augmentation process are 
available in [8]. 
• Likewise, the number zero with class name 0, is only appeared in the rightmost place of the issuer 
province code section -e.g. 10, 20, and 70- and hence, the instances were scarce and have been 
augmented. 
 
However, as Fig. 3 shows, Iranis covers almost all commonplace letters found in license plates along 
with all variations of numbers used in both typical and special types. The ignored classes mentioned 
above can rarely be seen in urban areas, which makes the dataset appropriate for practical usage. 
IV. 
BENCHMARK 
To assess the applicability of our dataset, we have used it to train a YOLO version 3 [29] network. 
The network was implemented using Python 3, TensorFlow framework, and CUDNN. The train and test 
processes were accomplished on a machine with an Intel Core i7 processor, equipped with 48 Gigabytes 
of RAM and an 8 Gigabytes Nvidia GPU. We have presented the training process and experimental 
results are in our recent publication in [8]. 
To employ the proposed dataset, we have divided the data into train-set and test-set, containing 85% 
and 15% of data, respectively. Table II illustrates the experimental results of applying the proposed 
 
Fig. 3. Sample instances available in Iranis image set. 

YOLO network on Iranis dataset. The training process of the network took 45 epochs regarding the 
utilized hardware, and loss parameter did not increase from 2.46 after that. 
 
According to Table II, the precision and recall of the network proved that our dataset can be employed 
for practical applications of ALPR. It provides a wide range of data instances along with their 
corresponding bounding boxes for the training process, which makes Iranis a proper choice for Farsi 
character recognition applications. Fig. 4 shows the impact of employing the object detector on our 
dataset. 
 
The dataset is publicly available for academic usage on top sources for machine learning datasets. As 
for future works, our major goal is to focus on motorcycle license plates and collect more data to cover 
even the scarce letters that have been ignored for now. The updates will be available on the mentioned 
web page once in a while. In this regard, the authors encourage any contributions to improve the quality 
of the dataset. 
TABLE II.    UTILIZING YOLO VERSION 3 AS A BENCHMARK FOR TEST. 
Classes 
# of data 
Precision 
Recall 
Train set 
Test set 
Number 
32,857 
5,798 
0.965717 
0.980368 
Letter 
36,284 
6,403 
0.982975 
0.981258 
Symbol 
2,127 
375 
0.975676 
0.986339 
Total 
71,268 
12,576 
0.974804 
0.981003 
 
Fig. 4. Sample outcomes of applying YOLO v.3 on the dataset [8]. 

V. CONCLUSIONS 
Intelligent Transportation Systems play a key role in the development of smart cities, regarding their 
impacts on traffic and congestion control. One of the most important systems used in ITS is the automatic 
detection and recognition of vehicle license plates. To develop accurate and robust systems in this field, 
providing real-world data of the license plate images and letters used in the plates is vital. Considering 
the importance of data and since there is no available dataset with the mentioned characteristics that 
contain Farsi characters used in Iranian license plates, this paper introduced a large-scale dataset for 
Automatic License Plate Recognition applications. Iranis is a publicly available dataset and can be used 
by all computer vision researchers. The dataset contains more than 83,000 instances of letters and 
numbers that are classified into 28 classes, makes it a proper choice for Deep Learning purposes. In this 
regard, the annotation data, i.e. bounding boxes, of all instances is available for train and test stages. Since 
the instances of the dataset are cropped from real-world Iranian car license plates, training a model using 
this dataset is highly recommended for practical usage. The dataset may enlarge and improve overtime 
to cover potential issues and defects. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank the Technology Incubation Center of the University of Guilan, Guilan 
Science and Technology Park, and DadeKavan Khazar Pouya company for their kind supports. We also 
thank all the graduate and undergraduate students who contributed and were involved in acquiring and 
labeling data.
