UAI2001 
LAFFERTY & WASSERMAN 
293 
Iterative Markov Chain Monte Carlo Computation 
of Reference Priors and Minimax Risk 
John Lafferty 
School of Computer Science 
Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 

Abstract 
We present an iterative Markov chain Monte 
Carlo algorithm for computing reference priors 
and minimax risk for general parametric fami­
lies. Our approach uses MCMC techniques based 
on the Blahut-Arimoto algorithm for computing 
channel capacity in information theory. We give 
a statistical analysis of the algorithm, bounding 
the number of samples required for the stochastic 
algorithm to closely approximate the determinis­
tic algorithm in each iteration. Simulations are 
presented for several examples from exponential 
families. Although we focus on applications to 
reference priors and minimax risk, the methods 
and analysis we develop are applicable to a much 
broader class of optimization problems and iter­
ative algorithms. 
1 
Introduction 
Information theoretic measures play a key role in some 
of the fundamental problems of statistics, machine learn­
ing, and information theory. In statistics, reference pri­
ors in Bayesian analysis are derived from maximizing a 
distance measure between the prior and posterior distri­
butions. When the measure is based on the mutual in­
formation between the parameters and the predictions of 
a family of models, reference priors have several proper­
ties that make them attractive as "non-informative" priors, 
for which an experiment yields the greatest possible infor­
mation (Bernardo & Smith, 1994). In machine learning, 
the Bayes risk and minimax risk under log-loss are central 
quantities used to measure the relative performance of on­
line learning algorithms (Haussler, 1997). Minimax risk 
can be formulated in terms of the mutual information be­
tween the strategies of players in a two-person game. In 
information theory, the capacity of a noisy channel is given 
by the maximum, over all distributions on the messages to 
be communicated, of the mutual information between the 
Larry Wasserman 
Department of Statistics 
Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 

inputs and outputs of the channel (Shannon, 1948). 
For each concept-reference priors, minimax risk, and 
channel capacity--one is interested in a distribution p* (B) 
that maximizes the mutual information between the "input" 
random variable e and the "output" random variable yn. 
In the case of channel capacity, an iterative algorithm for 
determining p* when e is discrete was proposed in the 
early 1970s, independently by R. Blahut (Blahut, 1972a) 
and S. Arimoto (Arimoto, 1972). The Blahut-Arimoto al­
gorithm enables the practical computation of capacity and 
rate distortion functions for a wide range of channels. (The 
papers together won the IEEE Information Theory Best Pa­
per Award in 1974.) In contrast, very little work has been 
carried out on the closely related problems of computing 
reference priors and minimax risk for parametric families, 
where the input 8 is typically continuous. In Bayesian 
analysis and decision theory, the primary work that has 
been done in this direction concerns only the asymptotic 
behavior as n --> oo, where n is the number of trials that 
yield the output yn (Clarke & Barron, 1994) and this anal­
ysis is applicable only in special cases. 
In this paper we present a family of algorithms for com­
puting channel capacity, reference priors and minimax risk 
for general parametric families by adapting the Blahut­
Arimoto algorithm to use Markov chain Monte Carlo 
(MCMC) sampling. In order to compute reference priors or 
minimax risk for a statistical learning problem, where the 
parameter e is often a high-dimensional random variable, 
the Blahut-Arimoto algorithm requires the computation of 
intractable integrals. Numerical methods would, in many 
cases, be computationally difficult, and do not take into ac­
count the probabilistic nature of the problem. However, we 
show that the recursive structure of the algorithm leads to 
a natural MCMC extension. The MCMC approach to this 
problem, as well as our analysis of it, applies to other al­
gorithms such as generalized iterative scaling for log-linear 
models (Darroch & Ratcliff, 1972). 
Abstracting the problem slightly, we are concerned with it­
erative algorithms on probability distributions. The general 

294 
LAFFERTY & WASSERMAN 
UAI2001 
situation is that there is some optimization problem 
p* 
= argminO(p) 
pECCLl. 
for which an iterative algorithm of the form 
is derived, and proven to satisfy limt-+oo p(t) = p*, in an 
appropriate sense. Often the exact computation of Tt [p] re­
quires evaluation of an unwieldy integral or a large sum. 
In this case, one can often employ Monte Carlo methods 
to approximate the integral, or to sample from the desired 
distribution. However, in doing so, it is not clear that the re­
sulting stochastic iterative algorithm will converge, or how 
many samples need to be drawn in each iteration. 
The 
methods and analysis we develop here in the context of 
reference priors help to address these questions for a much 
broader class of iterative algorithms and optimization prob­
lems. 
In the following section we review the relationship between 
channel capacity, minimax risk, and reference priors. In 
Section 3 we present the main algorithm. A full analysis 
of the algorithm is quite technical and out of the scope of 
the current paper. However, in Section 4 we present the 
core ideas of the analysis, which gives insight into the al­
gorithm's properties, and the number of samples required 
for each iteration of MCMC in order to ensure global con­
vergence. One of the key ideas lies in the use of "com­
mon randomness" across iterations to avoid the accumula­
tion of stochastic error. Section 5 presents several exam­
ples of the algorithm applied to standard exponential fam­
ily models. While the examples are simple, even in these 
cases the finite-sample reference priors are unknown ana­
lytically, and the simulations reveal interesting properties. 
However, our approach will be of the greatest use for high­
dimensional inference problems. 
2 
Reference Priors and Minimax Risk 
The concepts of channel capacity, reference priors, and 
minimax risk are intimately related, and form important 
connections between information theory, statistics, and ma­
chine learning. 
In information theory, a communication 
channel is characterized by a conditional probability dis­
tribution Q(y I x) for the probability that an input random 
variable X is received as Y. The information capacity of 
the channel is defined as the maximum mutual information 
over all input distributions: 
C Ȗ max I(X, Y) 
pELl.x 
where .6.x is the simplex of all probability distributions on 
the input X E X. Shannon's fundamental theorem equates 
the information capacity with the engineering notion of ca­
pacity, as the largest rate at which information can be re­
liably sent over the channel; see, for example, (Cover & 
Thomas, 1991). 
In a statistical setting, the channel is replaced by a paramet­
ric family Q(y I B), for (I E e c JRn. We view the model 
as an "expert", distributed according to p( B). The expert 
generates a sequence of labels y 
= Yl, ... , Yn. indepen­
dently and identically distributed according to Q(y I B). A 
statistician, who does not have access to the expert, predicts 
the t-th label using an estimate p(yt I yt-l) that is formed 
based upon the previous labels. The risk at time t to the 
statistician, assuming that the expert parameter is B* E 8, 
is defined to be 
The cumulative risk for the first n labels is defined as 
n 
Rn,p(B*)  I>t,p(B*) 
= D(Q'O.Jifi) 
t=l 
where the second equality follows from the chain rule for 
the Kullback-Leibler divergence. 
Viewing the expert as an adversary, the statistician might 
choose to minimize his worst-case risk. Playing this way, 
the value of the game is the minimax risk 
and a distribution p that achieves this value is called a min­
imax strategy. 
In the Bayesian approach, the expert is chosen according to 
the prior distribution p( ()), and then the statistician attempts 
to minimize his average risk. The value of this game is the 
Bayes risk 
RBayes  inf 1 p(B) R -(B) dB 
n,p 
... 
n,p 
p 
9 
It is easy to show that a Bayes strategy for the log-loss is 
given by the predictive distribution 
Thus, the Bayes risk is equal to the mutual information be­
tween the parameter and the observations: 
RBayes 
= /(8 yn) 
n,p 
' 
There turns out to be a simple relationship between the 
Bayes risk and the minimax risk, first proved in full gen­
erality by Haussler (1997). 

---; 
UA12001 
LAFFERTY & WASSERMAN 
295 
Theorem (Haussler, 1997). The minimax risk is equal to 
the information capacity: 
Rminimax 
= 
sup RBayrs 
= 
sup I(8 yn) 
n 
n,p 
' 
p 
p 
where the supremum is over all p E Oe. Moreover, the 
minimax risk can be written as a minimax with respect to 
Bayes strategies: 
Rminimw: 
= 
inf sup D 
(0*) 
n 
-'ln,PBa\i.es 
P II•Ee -
where PBayes denotes the predictive distribution (Bayes strat­
egy) for p E Oe. 
In Bayesian analysis, it is often desirable to use "objec­
tive" or "non-informative" priors, which encode the least 
amount of prior knowledge about a problem. In such a set­
ting, even moderate amounts of data should dominate the 
prior information. In this paper we address the computa­
tional aspects of non-informative priors defined using an 
information-theoretic criterion. 
In the reference prior approach (Bernardo, 1979; Berger 
et aL, 1989; Bernardo & Smith, 1994), one considers an 
increasing number k of independent draws from Q(y I B), 
and defines the k-reference prior 7rk as 
where 
7rk 
= argmax 1(8, Yk) 
pEAe 
Bernardo ( 1979) proposes the reference prior as the limit 
1r( 0) 
= 
lim 
7rk ( O) 
k->oo 1fk(A0) 
when this exists, where A0 is a fixed set. In the case where 
8 c lR and the posterior is asymptotically normal, the 
reference prior is given by Jeffreys' rule: 7!"(0) ()( h(B)!, 
where h( 0) is the Fisher information 
h(O) 
= h Q(y I O) (-::2 log Q(y I O)) dy 
In the case of finite k, however, very little is known about 
the k-reference prior 1fk. For exponential families, Berger 
et al. 
(1989) show that the k-reference prior is a finite, 
discrete measure. However, determining this measure an­
alytically appears difficult. 
In fact, even for the simple 
case of a Bernoulli trial, while it is easy to show that 
1rl(O) = 1r1(l) = B.the prior 1fk is unknown fork > 1, 
prompting Berger et al. (1989) to remark that "Solving for 
7rk is not easy. Numerical solution is needed for larger k ... " 
In the following section we propose an iterative MCMC 
approach to calculating 7rk for general parametric families. 
3 
An Iterative MCMC Algorithm 
Although our methods apply to both the continuous and 
discrete cases, we begin by thinking of a classification 
problem and assuming that y E Y is discrete, taking a small 
number of values. In order to calculate the minimax risk or 
a reference prior for a parametric family { Q(y I O)}eEB• we 
are required to maximize the mutual information 
I(E>, Y) 
= L r p(O) Q(y I B) log Q I) dO 
YEY}e 
y 
as a function of p E be. We start with an arbitrary initial 
distribution p(o) E ȕe. and set t = 0. In the iterative step, 
the Blahut-Arimoto algorithm updates p(t) by setting 
where 
ex p(tl(O) exp (L Q(y I 0) log Q(y I B)) 
yEY 
Q(t)(y) 
Q(tl(y) == l pCtl(O)Q(yiO)dO 
and where the constant of proportionality is given by 
z(t+l) = r p(t)(O) exp (" Q(y I 0) log Q(y IO)) dO 
Je 
L. 
QCtl(y) 
yEY 
We can rewrite the recursion of the Blahut-Arimoto algo­
rithm in terms of log-likelihood ratios as follows: 
p(t)(B) 
pCt-ll(O) 
log p(tl(¢) 
= log p(t-ll(¢) + 
" 
Q(y I o) 
" 
Q(y I¢) 
L,Q(yiO)logQ(t-l)() - L.Q(y l¢)log Q(t-l)() 
yEY 
y 
yEY 
y 
Applying this relation recursively, we obtain 
p(tl (B) 
log pCtl(¢) 
= tH(Y I¢)- tH(Y I B) 
t-1 
+ L (Q(y I¢)- Q(y I 0)) LlogQC•l(y) 
yEY 
s=O 
where H (Y I B) is the entropy. 
Thus, we see that the t-th iterate p(t) has a convenient expo­
nential form. This leads naturally to an MCMC algorithm 
for estimating the maximum mutual information distribu­
tion, from which we can calculate a minimax strategy. For 
a given t > 0, suppose that we have samples 
O(t) B(t) 
B(t) 
1 > 2 , 
· · · '  N, 
from the current distribution. From this sample, we esti­
mate the t-th predictive distribution by 

296 
LAFFERTY & WASSERMAN 
UAI2001 
MCMC Blahut-Arimoto 
Input: Parameter space 8, label spaceY. and model Q(-/ B) 
Problem: Sample from p* = arg maxP 1(p, Q) 
Initialize: Letp(O) E Ȕe be arbitrary, with initial sample e«O)' e¬O) I •
•
•
 '(}12; set t = 0, wC-ll(y) = 0 
Iterate: 
I. Let Q<1l(y) 
= =' 2::?1 Q(y I eft)) 
2. Led.VCtl(y) 
= W(t-ll(y) +logQ(tl(y) 

p(t+ll(B) 
log p(t+l)(¢) 
= (t + l)(H(Y I¢)- H(Y I B)) + L (Q(y I¢)-Q(y I B)) W<tl(y) 
yEY 
5. t r- t + 1 
(t) 
(t) 
(t) 
Output: Sample eo , el , ... 'eN, 
Figure l: MCMC version of the Blahut-Arimoto algorithm 
Define 
t 
w(tl(y)  :l:logQ(sl(y) 
(t+l) (t+l) 
(t+l) . 
A new sample 81 
, 02 
, •
•
•
 , 8 N,+t 1s then calculated, 
using, for example, a Metropolis-Hastings algorithm, from 
the likelihood ratios 
p(t+ll(B) 
log p(t+ll(¢) 
(t + 1) (H(Y I¢)- H(Y I B)) 
+ 
I>Q(y/¢)-Q(y/B))W(t)(y) 
yEY 
The algorithm is summarized in Figure l. Note that the al­
gorithm requires only O(IYI) storage. Note also that since 
1(8, Y) = 1(8, S) for any sufficient statisticS, the com­
putation can be often simplified. This is important in com­
puting 1(8, Yk) for exponential families, as the number of 
trials k gets large. 
4 
Analysis of the Algorithm 
In this section we outline two statistical analyses of the al­
gorithm. First, we present an argument that makes use of a 
central limit theorem to compare the iterative MCMC algo­
rithm to the deterministic version. This argument appears 
to be difficult to make fully rigorous; the main problem 
is control of the stochastic error. However, the argument 
gives insight into the expected dependence on the num­
ber of samples required in each iteration. We then present 
a different approach that makes use of the Kolmogorov­
Smirnov distance and uses common randomness in the 
sampling across iterations, resulting in improved bounds 
on the number of samples required. Although the analysis 
becomes more technical, here we make some simplifying 
assumptions and demonstrate the key ideas. We will report 
the more general analysis in a future publication. 
4.1 
Using a central limit theorem 
In the n-th step of the algorithm, we want samples from 
p(•+ll(B) "' exp ( 
-(n + l)H(B)- Q(y I B)W(y) 
where W(y) 
= 
L:­=0logM(•l(y) and Q(•l(y) 
== 
fe Q(y I B) p(s) (B) dO. Instead, we have samples from the 
approximation 
with W(y) 
= 
L:®=0logQ<•l(y) and with Q(•l(y) 
= 
>. 2::;:::1 Q(y I 8;), where fh, .. . 'eN. is a sample from 
fj(•). Thus, we have 

UAI2001 
LAFFERTY & WASSERMAN 
297 
with 
C(B, ¢) 
- L (Q(y I 0)- Q(y I ¢)) (W(y)- W(y)) 
y 
Fixing¢, we'll show that C(B) rv A(B)Z where A( B) is an 
explicit function of I) and Z ,..., N(O, 1). Thus, in each it­
eration the algorithm samples using the true (but unknown) 
density with Gaussian noise added in the exponent. 
Using Metropolis-Hastings to implement the MCMC 
yields samples that are not independent, however a central 
limit theorem comes from reversibility; see, for example 
(Robert & Casella, 1999). Hence, we have that 
.jN; ( (j(•l -M(s))  N(O, A (s)) 
The matrix A (s) can be estimated from the simulation, by 
computing the sample variance. We can then write 
t 
C(B) 
= L (g(Q(s))- g(M(•))) 
•=0 
where 
g(u) 
= 
k 
( k-1 ) 
;; .6-Qo,<P(Y) logu(y) + .6-Qo.d>(k) log 1-?; u(y) 
Now, by the 8-method, we have that 
where 0'; 
= '\lg T A(•) Vg. In summary, we have 
where r2(B) 
= L:<=O J. CJ;(e), and where CJ;(B) is com­
puted in terms of the sample variance and an explicit func­
tion of e. 
To keep the variance r2 
bounded, 
we require that 
2:. N;1 < oo. 
Taking a sample size of N. 
= O(s2) 
will ensure this. 
4.2 
Using the Kolmogorov-Smimov distance 
For simplicity, we now take 8 
= {81, ... , Bm} to be fi­
nite, and we assume the sampling is done by independent 
simulation. 
Let D. be the simplex of probabilities on 8, and let T : 
!::. ----> !::. be the mapping defined by the Blahut-Arimoto 
algorithm: 
( 
Q(v I e) ) 
T[p](B) ex p(B) exp  Q(y I 0) log L:o Q(y I B) p(B) 
Given a starting vector p(o) we get a sequence p(1) 
= 
T[p<0l],p<2l 
= T[p(1l], .... Thus, p(n) 
= rn[p(O)] where 
Tn denotes then-fold composition ofT with itself. 
Let U1, •
.
.
 , UN be iid random variables that are uniformly 
distributed on [0, 1], and let p E .6.. For i 
= 
1, ... , N 
define Xi as follows: Xi 
= 81 if Ui E [0, p!), X; 
= 82 
if Ui E 
[p1,P1 + P2), ... , Xi 
= Bm if Ui E 
[p1 + 
···Pm-1,1]. ThenX1, ... ,XN areiid drawsfromp. Let 
p 
= (p1, ... ,pm) be the empirical distribution, that is, 
Pj 
= N-1 2::1 !(Xi 
= Bj) is the proportion of X;'s 
equal to Bj· To avoid accumulation of stochastic error, we 
use the same U1, ... , UN to do all random number genera­
tion during the algorithm. 
Notice that drawing X1, ... , XN 
rv p may be regarded 
as applying an operator UN to p. 
Specifically, define 
UN (p) 
= p. Setting q(o) := p(o), the stochastic version 
of the algorithm may then be represented as follows: 
(0) 
UN -(0) 
T 
(1) UN 
-( !-) 
T 
(2) 
UN Q-(n) 
q 
---'t q 
---'t q 
- q 
---'t q 
. .  . ---'t 
In practice, we only observe q<1l, ... , q(n). After n steps, 
the algorithm yields q(n) 
= [UNo T]n o UN(p<0l) where 
UNo T denotes the composition of the two operators. 
Let d be the Kolmogorov-Smimov distance on !::.: 
d(p, q) = max IP(x)- Q(x)l 
xEX 
where P(x) 
= I: <x Pj and Q(x) = L:j<x Qj· We shall 
assume that T sati9fies the following Lipschitz condition: 
there exists a finite f3 > 0 such that, for every p, q E !::., 
d(T[p], T[q]) ::; {3 d(p, q). 
In practice, T may need to be modified near the boundary 
of!::. to make this condition hold. 
Theorem. Assume that T satisfies the Lipschitz condition. 
Let 
where 
Then 
where 
N 
'Y; log(2/a) 
;:: 
2€2 
{ pn+l-1 
!3-1 
'Yn 
= 
n+l 
if (3 f. 1 
if (3 = 1. 
Proof Let G(c) = c for c E [0, 1] be the cumulative 
distribution function for the Uniform(O, 1) distribution and 
let GN(c) = N-1 L:;1 I(Ui ƙc) be the empirical distri­
bution function. Let 5 = c/'Yn· By the Dvoretzky-Kiefer­
Wolfowitz inequality, 
( 
-
) 
2N52 
Pr 
sup IG(c)- GN(c)l > 8 
::; 2e-
cE[D,1] 

298 
LAFFERTY & WASSERMAN 
UAI2001 
From the definition of o, we see that the right hand side is 
less than or equal to a. Hence, on a set AN of probability 
at least 1- a, we have supcE[O,l] IG(c) - G N(c) I :<:; o. On 
AN we have that suppEƸ d(p, p) :<:; o. Therefore, 
d(q{l),p(l)) < 
d(q(ll,q(l))+d(q(ll,p(l)) 
< 8 + d(q(ll,p(l)) 
8 + d(T[q<0l], T[p(0l]) 
< 0 + f3d(q(O) ,p(O)) 
0 + (38 = 8(1 + (3) 
Continuing recursively in this way, we see that, with prob­
abilityat least1-a,d(q(nl,p(n)) :<:; r5(1+f3+···+J3n) = 
8[n ==f. 
D 
If j3 > 1 then the theorem implies that N must be expo­
nentially large in the number of steps n. However, if the 
algorithm starts reasonably close top*, then we would ex­
pect j3 < 1 in which case N = O(n2). 
Extending the proof to the continuous case is not very diffi­
cult although the operator T needs to be extended so that it 
applies to discrete and continuous distributions. The only 
complication in extending the result to the MCMC case is 
that the operator UN is more complicated. Under appro­
priate mixing conditions, blocks of observations of suffi­
ciently large size B act essentially like an independent se­
quence sample size NIB. We expect similar results to hold 
with NIB in place of N. The details will be reported else­
where. 
5 
Examples: Exponential Families 
In order to demonstrate the algorithm empirically, we 
present several examples of computing k-reference pri­
ors 1rk for one-dimensional exponential families. 
While 
for these families the limiting Jeffreys distribution is, of 
course, well-known (see Figure 3), the finite sample dis­
tributions are unknown except for k 
= 1. The simula­
tions reveal interesting properties of the k-reference priors 
at the boundary of8, and suggest qualitatively how the fi­
nite sample case converges asymptotically. We emphasize 
that these examples are only illustrative; the significance 
of the approach lies in much more complicated modeling 
problems in higher dimension, and potentially in the esti­
mation of priors for structural components of models. 
Figure 2 displays a histogram of the MCMC Blahut­
Arimoto algorithm at several iterations, for the case of a 
single Bernoulli trial, 8 = [0, 1]. In this case, the limit­
ing prior is 1r1(0) 
= 7f1(1) 
= ƺ-
In Figure 4 we show 
the corresponding results for 20 trials. W hile it is known 
that the limiting distribution is finite, the exact number of 
atoms and their spacings appears to be unknown. Note that 
the algorithm estimates a continuous distribution in each it­
eration. In all of the simulations, Metropolis-Hastings was 
used with a uniform proposal distribution, and was run for 
10,000 steps in each iteration. 
Figures 5, 6, and 7 give example simulations for the nega­
tive binomial, Poisson, and normal (known variance). For 
the Poisson and normal, it can be seen that restricting the 
parameter to a compact interval results in accumulation of 
the reference prior on the boundary. Figure 8 shows the 
result of constraining the variance, introducing a Lagrange 
multiplier into the exponential model (Blahut, 1972a). In 
this case, the limiting distribution must be Gaussian (Cover 
& Thomas, 1991). 
6 
Summary 
We have presented a stochastic version of the Blahut­
Arimoto algorithm applied to the problem of computing 
reference priors and minimax risk. W hile a detailed analy­
sis of the algorithm is technical, an analysis under simpli­
fying assumptions indicates that if the number of samples 
grows quadratically in the iteration number, then the algo­
rithm will closely approximate the full deterministic algo­
rithm. The main limitation of the algorithm for computing 
k-reference priors is the complexity as k -+ oo. W hile 
the use of sufficient statistics simplifies the computation, it 
would be interesting to explore approximation techniques 
for the expectations on yk that the algorithm requires. 
We have focused on reference priors and the Blahut­
Arimoto algorithm, but our methods apply to a much larger 
class of algorithms. In particular, they apply directly to 
maximum likelihood estimation for exponential models us­
ing the Darroch-Ratcliff algorithm, as well as other alter­
nating minimization algorithms. 
Sequential Monte Carlo and "particle filtering" procedures 
arise in a number of other problem areas. Berzuini et aL 
(1997), for example, consider the problem of sampling 
from a posterior distribution when the data arrives sequen­
tially, and establish a variance estimate for a sequential 
sampling importance-resampling (SIR) procedure that sug­
gests a quadratic sample size bound, as in our analysis of 
Section 5. However, their approach does not remove the 
problem of accumulation of stochastic error. In future work 
we plan to investigate the usefulness of the Lipschitz bound 
approach for such problems.
