1
Video Coding for Machines: A Paradigm of
Collaborative Compression and Intelligent Analytics
Ling-Yu Duan, Jiaying Liu, Wenhan Yang, Tiejun Huang, Wen Gao
Abstract—Video coding, which targets to compress and recon-
struct the whole frame, and feature compression, which only
preserves and transmits the most critical information, stand at
two ends of the scale. That is, one is with compactness and
efﬁciency to serve for machine vision, and the other is with
full ﬁdelity, bowing to human perception. The recent endeavors
in imminent trends of video compression, e.g. deep learning
based coding tools and end-to-end image/video coding, and
MPEG-7 compact feature descriptor standards, i.e. Compact
Descriptors for Visual Search and Compact Descriptors for
Video Analysis, promote the sustainable and fast development
in their own directions, respectively. In this paper, thanks to
booming AI technology, e.g. prediction and generation models,
we carry out exploration in the new area, Video Coding for
Machines (VCM), arising from the emerging MPEG standardiza-
tion efforts1. Towards collaborative compression and intelligent
analytics, VCM attempts to bridge the gap between feature
coding for machine vision and video coding for human vision.
Aligning with the rising Analyze then Compress instance Digital
Retina, the deﬁnition, formulation, and paradigm of VCM are
given ﬁrst. Meanwhile, we systematically review state-of-the-art
techniques in video compression and feature compression from
the unique perspective of MPEG standardization, which provides
the academic and industrial evidence to realize the collaborative
compression of video and feature streams in a broad range of AI
applications. Finally, we come up with potential VCM solutions,
and the preliminary results have demonstrated the performance
and efﬁciency gains. Further direction is discussed as well.
Index Terms—Video coding for machine, video compression,
feature compression, generative model, prediction model
I. INTRODUCTION
In the big data era, massive videos are fed into machines
to realize intelligent analysis in numerous applications of
smart cities or Internet of things (IoT). Like the explosion
of surveillance systems deployed in urban areas, there arise
important concerns on how to efﬁciently manage massive
video data. There is a unique set of challenges (e.g. low latency
and high accuracy) regarding efﬁciently analyzing and search-
ing the target within the millions of objects/events captured
everyday. In particular, video compression and transmission
constitute the basic infrastructure to support these applications
from the perspective of Compress then Analyze. Over the past
decades, a series of standards (e.g. MPEG-4 AVC/H.264 [1]
and High Efﬁciency Video Coding (HEVC) [2]), Audio Video
coding Standard (AVS) [3] are built to signiﬁcantly improve
L.-Y. Duan, J. Liu, W. Yang, T. Huang, and W. Gao are with

1https://lists.aau.at/mailman/listinfo/mpeg-vcm
the video coding efﬁciency, by squeezing out the spatial-
temporal pixel-level redundancy of video frames based on the
visual signal statistics and the priors of human perception.
More recently, deep learning based video coding makes great
progress. With the hierarchical model architecture and the
large-scale data priors, these methods largely outperform the
state-of-the-art codecs by utilizing deep-network aided coding
tools. Rather than directly targeting machines, these methods
focus on efﬁciently reconstructing the pixels for human vision,
in which the spatial-temporal volume of pixel arrays can be
fed into machine learning and pattern recognition algorithms
to complete high-level analysis and retrieval tasks.
However, when facing big data and video analytics, existing
video coding methods (even for the deep learning based)
are still questionable, regarding whether such big video data
can be efﬁciently handled by visual signal level compression.
Moreover, the full-resolution videos are of low density in prac-
tical values. It is prohibitive to compress and store all video
data ﬁrst and then perform analytics over the decompressed
video stream. By degrading the quality of compressed videos,
it might save more bitrates, but incur the risk of degraded
analytics performance due to the poorly extracted features.
To facilitate the high-level machine vision tasks in terms of
performance and efﬁciency, lots of research efforts have been
dedicated to extracting those pieces of key information, i.e.,
visual features, from the pixels, which is usually compressed
and represented in a very compact form. This poses an alter-
native strategy Analyze then Compress, which extracts, saves,
and transmits compact features to satisfy various intelligent
video analytics tasks, by using signiﬁcantly less data than the
compressed video itself. In particular, to meet the demand for
large-scale video analysis in smart city applications, the feature
stream instead of the video signal stream can be transmitted.
In view of the necessity and importance of transmitting feature
descriptors, MPEG has ﬁnalized the standardization of com-
pact descriptors for visual search (CDVS) (ISO/IEC15938-13)
in Sep. 2015 [16] and compact descriptors for video analysis
(CDVA) (ISO/IEC15938-15) [17] in July 2019 to enable the
interoperability for efﬁcient and effective image/video retrieval
and analysis by standardizing the bitstream syntax of compact
feature descriptors. In CDVS, hand-crafted local and global
descriptors are designed to represent the visual characteristics
of images. In CDVA, the deep learning features are adopted to
further boost the video analysis performance. Over the course
of the standardization process, remarkable improvements are
achieved in reducing the size of features while maintaining
their discriminative power for machine vision tasks. Such
compact features cannot reconstruct the full resolution videos
arXiv:2001.03569v2  [cs.CV]  13 Jan 2020

2
for human observers, thereby incurring two successive stages
of analysis and compression for machine and human vision.
For either Compress then Analyze or Analyze then Com-
press, the optimization jobs of video coding and feature
coding are separate. Due to the very nature of multi-tasks for
machine vision and human vision, the intrusive setup of two
separate stages is sub-optimal. It is expected to explore more
collaborative operations between video and feature streams,
which opens up more space for improving the performance of
intelligent analytics, optimizing the video coding efﬁciency,
and thereby reducing the total cost. Good opportunities to
bridge the cross-domain research on machine vision and
human vision have been there, as deep neural network has
demonstrated its excellent capability of multi-task end-to-
end optimization as well as abstracting the representations of
multiple granularities in a hierarchical architecture.
In this paper, we attempt to identify the opportunities and
challenges of developing collaborative compression techniques
for humans and machines. Through reviewing the advance
of two separate tracks of video coding and feature coding,
we present the necessity of machine-human collaborative
compression, and formulate a new problem of video coding
for machines (VCM). Furthermore, to promote the emerging
MPEG-VCM standardization efforts and collect for evidences
for MPEG Ad hoc Group of VCM, we propose trial exem-
plar VCM architectures and conduct preliminary experiments,
which are also expected to provide insights into bridging the
cross-domain research from visual signal processing, computer
vision, and machine learning, when AI meets the video big
data. The contributions are summarized as follows,
• We present and formulate a new problem of Video
Coding for Machines by identifying three elements of
tasks, features, and resources, in which a novel feedback
mechanism for collaborative and scalable modes is intro-
duced to improve the coding efﬁciency and the analytics
performance for both human and machine-oriented tasks.
• We review the state-of-the-art approaches in video com-
pression and feature compression from a unique perspec-
tive of standardized technologies, and study the impact of
more recent deep image/video prediction and generation
models on the potential VCM related techniques.
• We propose exemplar VCM architectures and provide
potential solutions. Preliminary experimental results have
shown the advantages of VCM collaborative compression
in improving video and feature coding efﬁciency and
performance for human and machine vision.
The rest of the article is organized as follows. Section II
and III brieﬂy review previous works on video coding and
feature compression, respectively. Section IV provides the
deﬁnition, formulation, and paradigm of VCM. Section V
illustrates the emerging AI technique, which provides useful
evidence for VCM, After that, in Section VII, we provide
potential solutions for VCM problem. In Section VII, the
preliminary experimental results are reported. In Section VIII,
several issues, and future directions are discussed. In Sec-
tion IX, the concluding remarks are provided.
II. REVIEW OF VIDEO COMPRESSION: FROM PIXEL
FEATURE PERSPECTIVE
Visual information takes up at least 83% of all informa-
tion [18] that people can feel. It is important for humans
to record, store, and view the image/videos efﬁciently. For
past decades, lots of academic and industrial efforts have
been devoted to video compression, which is to maximize
the compression efﬁciency from the pixel feature perspective.
Below we review the advance of traditional video coding as
well as the impact of deep learning based compression on
visual data coding for human vision in a general sense.
A. Traditional Hybrid Video Coding
Video coding transforms the input video into a compact
binary code for more economic and light-weighted storage
and transmission, and targets reconstructing videos visually
by the decoding process. In 1975, the hybrid spatial-temporal
coding architecture [20] is proposed to take the lead and
occupy the major proportion during the next few decades.
After that, the following video coding standards have evolved
through the development of the ITU-T and ISO/IEC stan-
dards. The ITU-T produced H.261 [21] and H.263 [22],
ISO/IEC produced MPEG-1 [23] and MPEG-4 Visual [24],
and the two organizations worked together to produce the
H.262/MPEG-2 Video [25], H.264/MPEG-4 Advanced Video
Coding (AVC) [26] standards, and H.265/MPEG-H (Part 2)
High Efﬁciency Video Coding (HEVC) [27] standards.
The design and development of all these standards follows
the block-based video coding approach. The ﬁrst technical
feature is block-wise partition. Each coded picture is parti-
tioned into macroblocks (MB) of luma and chroma samples.
MBs will be divided into slices and coded independently. Each
slice is further partitioned into coding tree units. After that,
the coding unit (CU), prediction unit (PU), and transform
unit (TU) are obtained to make the coding, prediction and
transform processes more ﬂexible. Based on the block-based
design, the intra and inter-predictions are applied based on PU
and the corresponding contexts, i.e. neighboring blocks and
reference frames in the intra and inter modes, respectively. But
these kinds of designed patterns just cover parts of the context
information, which limits the modeling capacity in prediction.
Moreover, the block-wise prediction, along with transform and
quantization, leads to the discontinuity at the block boundaries.
With the quantization of the residue or original signal in
the transform block, the blockness appears. To suppress the
artifacts, the loop ﬁlter is applied for smoothing.
Another important technical feature is hybrid video coding.
Intra and inter-prediction are used to remove temporal and spa-
tial statistical redundancies, respectively. For intra-prediction,
HEVC utilizes a line of preceding reconstructed pixels above
and on the left side of the current PU as the reference for
generating predictions. The number of intra modes is 35,
including planar mode, DC mode, and 33 angular modes.
It is performed in the transform unit. For inter-prediction,
HEVC derives a motion-compensated prediction for a block
of image samples. The homogeneous motion inside a block is
assumed, and the size of a moving object is usually larger than
one block. Reference blocks will be searched from previously

3
coded pictures for inter prediction. For both intra and inter-
predictions, the best mode is selected by the Rate-Distortion
Optimization (RDO) [28]. However, the multi-line prediction
scheme and the block-wise reference block might not provide a
desirable prediction reference when the structures and motion
are complex. Besides, when the RDO boosts the modeling
capacity, the overhead of signaled bits and computation occur.
The target of optimizing the rate distortion efﬁciency is to
seek for the trade-off in bitrate and signal distortion. It can be
solved via Lagrangian optimization techniques. Coder control
ﬁnally determines a set of coding parameters that affect the
encoded bit-streams.
With tremendous expert efforts, the coding performance is
dramatically improved in the past decade that there is the rule
of thumb that, one generation of video coding standards almost
surpasses the previous one by up to 50% in coding efﬁciency.
B. Deep Learning Based Video Coding
The deep learning techniques signiﬁcantly promote the
development of video coding. The seminar work [29] in 2015
opened a door to the end-to-end learned video coding. The
deep learning based coding tools [30, 31] are developed since
2016. Beneﬁting from the bonus of big data, powerful architec-
tures, end-to-end optimization, and other advanced techniques,
e.g. unsupervised learning, the emerging deep learning excel
in learning data-driven priors for effective video coding. First,
complex nonlinear mappings can be modeled by the hierarchi-
cal structures of neural networks, which improves prediction
models to make the reconstructed signal more similar to the
original one. Second, deep structures, such as PixelCNN and
PixelRNN, are capable to model the pixel probability and
provide powerful generation functions to model the visual
signal in a more compact form.
The deep learning based coding methods do not rely on
the partition scheme and support full resolution coding, and
thereby removing the blocking artifacts naturally. Since the
partition is not required, these modules can access more
context in a larger region. As the features are extracted via
a hierarchical network and jointly optimized with the recon-
struction task, the resulting features tend to comprehensive and
powerful for high efﬁcient coding. More efforts are put into
increasing the receptive ﬁeld for better perception of larger
regions via recurrent neural network [32, 33] and nonlocal
attention [34, 35], leading to improved coding performance.
The former infers the latent representations of image/videos
progressively. In each iteration, with the previously perceived
context, the network removes the unnecessary bits from the
latent representations to achieve more compactness. The latter
makes efforts to ﬁgure out the nonlocal correspondence among
endpixels/regions, in order to remove the long-term spatial
redundancy.
The efforts in improving the performance of neural network-
aided coding tools rely on the excellent prediction ability
of deep networks. Many works attempt to effectively learn
the end-to-end mapping in a series of video coding tasks,
e.g., intra-prediction [7, 8], inter-prediction [4–6, 9, 10],
deblocking [11–14], and fast mode decision [15]. With a
powerful and uniﬁed prediction model, these methods obtain
superior R-D performance. For intra-prediction, the diversiﬁed
modes derived from RDO in the traditional video codec are
replaced by a learned general model given a certain kind
of context. In [7], based on the multi-line reference context,
fully-connected (FC) neural networks are utilized to generate
the prediction result. In [36], the strengths of FC and CNN
networks are combined. In [8], beneﬁting from the end-
to-end learning and the block-level reference scheme, the
proposed predictor employs context information in a large
scale to suppress quantization noises. For inter-prediction,
deep network-based methods [37, 38] break the limit of
block-wise motion compensation and bring in better inter-
frame prediction, namely generating better reference frames
by using all the reconstructed frames. For loop-ﬁlter, the
powerful network architectures and the full-resolution input
of all reconstructed frames [39, 40] signiﬁcantly improve the
performance of loop ﬁlters, say up to 10% BD-rate reduction
as reported in many methods.
The end-to-end learning based compression leverages deep
networks to model the pixel distribution and generate complex
signals from a very compact representation. The pioneering
work [33] proposes a parametric nonlinear transformation
to well Gaussianize data for reducing mutual information
between transformed components and show impressive results
in image compression. Meanwhile, in [29], a general frame-
work is built upon convolutional and deconvolutional LSTM
recurrent networks, trained once, to support variable-rate im-
age compression via reconstructing the image progressively.
Later works [32, 41–43] continue to improve compression
efﬁciency by following the routes. All these methods attempt
to reduce the overall R-D cost on a large-scale dataset. Due
to the model’s ﬂexibility, there are also more practical ways
to control the bitrate adaptively, such as applying the attention
mask [44] to guide the use of more bits on complex regions.
Besides, as the R-D cost is optimized in an end-to-end manner,
it is ﬂexible to adapt the rate and distortion to accommodate
a variety of end applications, e.g. machine vision tasks.
Although video coding performance is improved constantly,
some intrinsic problems exist, especially when tremendous
volumes of data need to be processed and analyzed. The low-
value data volume still constitutes a major part. So these
methods of reconstructing whole pictures cannot fulﬁll the
requirement of real-time video content analytics when dealing
with large-scale video data. However, the strengths in deep
learning based image/video coding, i.e. the excellent prediction
and generation capacity of deep models and the ﬂexibility of
R-D cost optimization, provide opportunities to develop VCM
technology to address these challenges.
III. REVIEW OF FEATURE COMPRESSION: FROM
SEMANTIC FEATURE PERSPECTIVE
The traditional video coding targets high visual ﬁdelity for
humans. With the proliferation of applications that capture
video for (remote) consumption by a machine, such as con-
nected vehicles, video surveillance systems, and video capture
for smart cities, more recent efforts on feature compression

4
target low bitrate intelligent analytics (e.g., image/video recog-
nition, classiﬁcation, retrieval) for machines, as transmission
bandwidth for raw visual features is often at a premium, even
for the emerging strategy of Analyze then Compress.
However, it is not new to explore feature descriptors for
MPEG. Back in 1998, MPEG initiated MPEG-7, formally
known as Multimedia Content Description Interface, driven
by the needs for tools and systems to index, search, ﬁlter, and
manage audio-visual content. Towards interoperable interface,
MPEG-7 [45] deﬁnes the syntax and semantics of various tools
for describing color, texture, shape, motion, etc. Such descrip-
tions of streamed or stored media help human or machine
users to identify, retrieve, or ﬁlter audio-visual information.
Early visual descriptors developed in MPEG-7 have limited
usage, as those low-level descriptors are sensitive to scale,
rotation, lighting, occlusion, noise, etc. More recently, the
advance of computer vision and deep learning has signiﬁcantly
pushed forward the standardized visual descriptions in MPEG-
7. In particular, CDVS [46] and CDVA [47] have been in the
vanguard of the trend of Analyze then Compress by extracting
and transmitting compact visual descriptors.
A. CDVS
CDVS can trace back to the requirements for early mobile
visual search systems by 2010, such as faster search, higher
accuracy, and better user experience. Initial research [48–
53] demonstrated that one could reduce transmission data
by at least an order of magnitude by extracting compact
visual features on the mobile device and sending descriptors
at low bitrates to a remote machine for search. Moreover, a
signiﬁcant reduction in latency could also be achieved when
performing all processing on the device itself. Following initial
research, an exploratory activity in the MPEG was initiated at
the 91st meeting (Kyoto, Jan. 2010). In July 2011, MPEG
launched the standardization of CDVS. The CDVS standard
(formally known as MPEG-7, Part 13) was published by
ISO on Aug. 25, 2015, which speciﬁes a normative bitstream
of standardized compact visual descriptors for mobile visual
search and augmented reality applications.
Over the course of the standardization process, CDVS has
made remarkable improvements over a large-scale benchmark
in image matching/retrieval performance with very compact
feature descriptors (at six predeﬁned descriptor lengths: 512B,
1KB, 2KB, 4KB, 8KB, and 16KB) [16]. High performance
is achieved while stringent memory and computational com-
plexity requirements are satisﬁed to make the standard ideally
suited for both hardware and software implementations [54].
To guarantee the interoperability, CDVS makes a normative
feature extraction pipeline including interest point detection,
local feature selection, local feature description, local feature
descriptor aggregation, local feature descriptor compression,
and local feature location compression. Key techniques, e.g.
low-degree polynomial detector [46, 55, 56], light-weighted
interest point selection [57, 58], scalable compressed ﬁsher
vector [59, 60], and location histogram coding [61, 62], have
been developed by competitive and collaborative experiments
within a rigorous evaluation framework [63].
It is worthy to mention that CDVS makes a normative
encoder (the feature extraction process is ﬁxed), which is
completely distinct from conventional video coding standards
in making a normative decoder. The success of CDVS stan-
dardization originates from the mature computer vision algo-
rithm (like SIFT [64]) on the reliable image matching between
different views of an object or scene. However, when dealing
with more complex analysis tasks in the autonomous drive and
video surveillances, the normative encoder process incurs more
risks of lower performance than those task-speciﬁc ﬁne-tuned
features directly derived from an end-to-end learning frame-
work. Fortunately, the collaborative compression of video and
feature streams is expected to address this issue, as we may
leverage the joint advantages of the normative feature encoding
process and the normative video decoding process.
B. CDVA
The bold idea of CDVA initiated in the 111th MPEG
meeting in Feb. 2015 is to have a normative video feature
descriptor based on neural networks for machine vision tasks,
targeting an exponential increase in the demand for video
analysis in autonomous drive, video surveillance systems,
entertainment, and smart cities. The standardization at the
encoder requires the deterministic deep network model and
parameters. However, due to fast-moving deep learning tech-
niques and their end-to-end optimization nature, there is a lack
of a generic deep model sufﬁcing for a broad of video analytics
tasks. This is the primary challenge for CDVA.
To kick off this standardization, CDVA narrows down to the
general task of video matching and retrieval, aims at determin-
ing if a pair of videos share the object or scene with similar
content, and searching for videos containing similar segments
to the one in the query video. Extensive experiments [65]
over CDVA benchmark report comparable performances of
the deep learning features with different off-the-shelf CNN
models (like VGG16 [66], AlexNet [77], ResNet [68]), which
provide useful evidence for normative deep learning features
for the task of video matching and retrieval. Due to the
hardware friendly merits of uniformly sized small ﬁlters (3x3
convolution kernel and 2x2 max pooling), and the competitive
performance of combining convolution layers of the small
ﬁlters by replacing a large ﬁlter (5 × 5 or 7 × 7), VGG16
is adopted by CDVA as the normative backbone network to
derive compact deep invariant feature representations.
The CDVA standard (formally known as MPEG-7, Part
15) was published by ISO in July 2019. Based on a previ-
ously agreed-upon methodology, key technologies are devel-
oped by MPEG experts, including Nested Invariance Pooling
(NIP) [65] for deep invariance global descriptor, Adaptive
Binary Arithmetic Coding (ABAC) based temporal coding of
global and local descriptors [47], the integration of hand-
crafted and deep learning features [17]. The NIP method
produces compact global descriptors from a CNN model by
progressive pooling operations to improve the translation, scale
and rotation invariance over the feature maps of intermediate
network layers. The extensive experiments have demonstrated
that the NIP (derived from the last pooling layer, i.e., pool5, of

5
Video Acquisition
(Reconstructed)
Features
Reconstructed
Video
Machine Intelligence
Human Perception
Video
Scalable
Feedback
VCM Encoder
VCM Decoder
Features
Encoder
Encoder
Collaborative
Feedback
Video Stream
Feature Stream
Model Stream

Generation
Nonlinear Mapping
Transform
Prediction
…
+
Fig. 1.
The proposed video coding for machines (VCM) framework by incorporating the feedback mechanism into the collaborative coding of multiple
streams including videos, features, and models, targeting the multi-tasks of human perception and machine intelligence.
VGG16) outperforms the state-of-the-art deep and canonical
hand-crafted descriptors with signiﬁcant gains. In particular,
the combination of (deep learning) NIP global descriptors
and (hand-crafted) CDVS global descriptors has signiﬁcantly
boosted the performance with a comparable descriptor length.
More recently, great efforts are made to extend the
CDVA standard for VCM. Smart tiled CDVA [69] targeting
video/image analysis of higher resolution input, can be applied
to rich tasks including ﬁne-grained feature extraction network,
small object detection, segmentation, and other use cases.
Smart sensing [70] is an extension of the CDVA standard
to directly process raw Bayer pattern data, without the need
of a traditional ISP. This enables all Bayer pattern sensors
to be natively CDVA compatible. SuperCDVA [71] is an
application of the CDVA standard for video understanding by
using the temporal information, in which each CDVA vector is
embedded as one block in an image, and the multiple blocks
are put in a sequential manner to represent the sequence of
video frames for classiﬁcation by a 2-D CNN model.
In summary, the new MPEG-7 standard CDVA opens the
door to exciting new opportunities in supporting machine-only
encoding as well as hybrid (machine and human) encoding
formats to unburden the network and storage resources for
dramatic beneﬁts in various service models and a broad range
of applications with low latency and reduced cost.
IV. VIDEO CODING FOR MACHINES: DEFINITION,
FORMULATION AND PARADIGM
The emerging requirements of video processing and content
analysis in a collaborative manner are expected to support both
human vision and machine vision. In practice, two separate
streams of compressed video data and compact visual feature
descriptors are involved to satisfy the human observers and
a variety of low-level and high-level machine vision tasks,
respectively. How to further improve the visual signal com-
pression efﬁciency as well as the visual task performance by
leveraging multiple granularities of visual features remains a
challenging but promising task, in which the image/video data
is considered as a sort of pixel-level feature.
A. Deﬁnition and Formulation
Traditional video coding targets visual signal ﬁdelity at
high bitrates, while feature coding targets high performance
of vision tasks at very low bitrates. Like CDVS and CDVA,
most of the existing feature coding approaches heavily rely on
speciﬁc tasks, which signiﬁcantly save bitrate by ignoring the
requirement of full-resolution video reconstruction. By con-
trast, the video codecs like HEVC focus on the reconstruction
of full-resolution pictures from the compressed bit stream.
Unfortunately, the pixel-level features from data decompres-
sion cannot sufﬁce for large-scale video analysis in a huge
or a moderate scale camera network efﬁciently, due to the
bottleneck of computation, communication, and storage [72].
We attempt to identify the role of Video Coding for Ma-
chines (VCM), as shown in Fig. 1, to bridge the gap between
coding semantic features for machine vision tasks and coding
pixel features for human vision. The scalability is meant to
incrementally improve the performance in a variety of vision
tasks as well as the coding efﬁciency by optimizing bit utility
between multiple low-level and high-level feature streams.
Moreover, VCM is committed to developing key techniques
for economizing the use of a bit budget to collaboratively
complete multiple tasks targeting humans and/or machines.
VCM aims to jointly maximize the performance of multiple
tasks ranging from low-level processing to high-level semantic
analysis, but minimize the use of communication and compu-
tational resources. VCM relates to three key elements:
• Tasks. VCM incurs low-level signal ﬁdelity as well as
high-level semantics, which may request a complex opti-
mization objective from multiple tasks. It is important to
ﬁgure out an efﬁcient coding scheme across tasks.
• Resources. VCM is committed to tackling the practical
performance issue, which cannot be well solved by tradi-
tional video coding or feature coding approaches solely,
subject to the constraints of resources like bandwidth,
computation, storage, and energy.
• Features. VCM is to explore a suite of rate distortion
functions and optimization solutions from a uniﬁed per-
spective of leveraging the features at different granular-

6
ities including the pixels for humans to derive efﬁcient
compression functions (e.g., transform and prediction).
Here we formulate the VCM problem. The features are
denoted by F =

F 0, F 1, ..., F z	
of (z + 1) tasks, where
V
:= F z is the pixel feature, associated with the task
of improving visual signal ﬁdelity for human observers. F i
denotes more task (non-)speciﬁc semantic or syntactic features
if 0 ≤i < z. A smaller i denotes that the feature is more
abstract. The performance of the task i is deﬁned as follows:
qi = Φi( ˆF i),
(1)
where Φi(·) is the quality metric related to task i and ˆF i is the
reconstructed feature undergoing the encoding and decoding
processes. Note that, certain compressed domain processing or
analysis may not require the complete reconstruction process.
We use C(·|θc), D(·|θd), and G(·|θg) to denote the processes
of compression, decompression, feature prediction, where θc,
θd, and θg are parameters of the corresponding processes. We
deﬁne S(·) to measure the resource usage of computing a
given feature, namely compressing, transmitting, and storing
the feature, as well as further analyzing the feature. By
incorporating the elements of tasks, resources, and features,
VCM explicitly or non-explicitly models a complex objective
function for maximizing the performance and minimizing the
resource cost, in which joint optimization applies. Generally,
the VCM optimization function is described as follows,
argmax
Θ={θc,θd,θg}
X
0≤i≤z
ωiqi,
subject to:
X
0≤i≤z
ωi = 1,
(2)
S (RF 0) +
X
i>0
min
0≤j<i

S
 RFi→j
	
+ S (RM) + S (Θ) ≤ST ,
where ST is total resource cost constraint, and ωi balances
the importance of different tasks in the optimization. The ﬁrst
two terms in the resource constraint are the resource cost
of compressing and transmitting features of all tasks with
feature prediction. Note that, RV = minj

S
 RFz→j
	
is the
resource cost to encode videos F z with feature prediction. The
third term in the resource constraint is the resource overhead
from leveraging models and updating models accordingly. The
last term S (Θ) calculates the resource cost caused by using a
more complex model, such as longer training time, response
time delay due to feedbacks, larger-scale training dataset.
Principle rules apply to the key elements as below,
RF 0 = C
 F 0|θc

,
(3)
RFi→j = C
 F i −G
 F j, i|θg

, for i ̸= 0,
(4)
bF 0 = D (RF 0|θd) ,
(5)
bF i = D
 RFi→j|θd

+ G

bF j, i|θg

, for i ̸= 0,
(6)
where G(·, j|θg) projects the input feature to the space of
F j. ˆ· denotes that, the feature decoded from the bit stream
would be suffering from compression loss. In practice, the
VCM problem can be rephrased in Eq. (2) by designing more
task speciﬁc terms C(·|θc), D(·|θd) and G(·|θg).
B. A VCM Paradigm: Digital Retina
As a VCM instance, digital retina [72–74] is to solve the
problem of real-time surveillance video analysis collabora-
tively from massive cameras in smart cities. Three streams are
established for human vision and machine vision as follows:
• Video stream: Compressed visual data is transmitted
to learn data-driven priors to impact the optimization
function in Eq. (2). In addition, the fully reconstructed
video is optionally for humans as requested on demand.
• Model stream: To improve the task-speciﬁc performance
and hybrid video coding efﬁciency, hand-crafted or learn-
ing based models play a signiﬁcant role. This stream
is expected to guide the model updating and the model
based prediction subsequently. The model learning works
on the task-speciﬁc performance metric in Eq. (1).
• Feature stream: This stream consisting of task-speciﬁc
semantic or syntactic features extracted at the front end
devices is transmitted to the server end. As formulated
in Eq. (2), a joint optimization is expected to reduce the
resource cost of video and feature streams.
Instead of working on video stream alone, the digital retina
may leverage multiple streams of features to reduce the band-
width cost by transmitting task-speciﬁc features, and balance
the computation load by moving part of feature computing
from the back end to the front end. As an emerging VCM
approach, the digital retina is revolutionizing the vision system
of smart cities. However, for the current digital retina solution,
the optimization in Eq. (2) is reduced to minimizing an
objective for each single stream separately, without the aid
of feature prediction in Eq. (4) and (6), rather than multiple
streams jointly. For example, state-of-the-art video coding
standards like HEVC are applied to compress video streams.
The compact visual descriptor standards CDVS/CDVA are
applied to compress visual features. The collaboration between
two different types of streams works in a combination mode.
There is a lack of joint optimization across streams in terms
of task-speciﬁc performance and coding efﬁciency.
Generally speaking, the traditional video coding standard-
ization on HEVC/AVS, together with recent compact feature
descriptor standardization on CDVS/CDVA, targets efﬁcient
data exchange between human and human, machine and
human, and machine and machine. To further boost the func-
tionality of feature streams and open up more room for collab-
orating between streams, the digital retina introduces a novel
model stream, which takes advantage of pixel-level features,
semantic features (representation), and even existing models
to generate a new model for improving the performance as
well as the generality of task-related features. More recent
work [73] proposed to reuse multiple models to improve the
performance of a target model, and further came up with a
collaborative approach [75] to low cost and intelligent visual
sensing analysis. However, how to improve the video coding
efﬁciency and/or optimize the performance by collaborating
different streams is still an open and challenging issue.
C. Reﬂection on VCM

7
Prior to injecting model streams, the digital retina [76]
has limitations. First, the video stream and feature stream
are handled separately, which limits the utilization of more
streams. Second, the processes of video coding and feature
coding are uni-directional, thereby limiting the optimization
performance due to the lack of feedback mechanism, which is
crucial from the perspective of a vision system in smart cities.
Beyond the basic digital retina solution, VCM is supposed
to jointly optimize the compression and utilization of feature,
video, and model streams in a scalable way by introducing
feedback mechanisms as shown in Fig. 1:
1) Feedback for collaborative mode: The pixel and/or se-
mantic features, equivalently video and feature streams,
can be jointly optimized towards higher coding efﬁ-
ciency for humans and/or machines in a collaborative
manner. That is, the features can be fed back to each
other between streams for improving the task-speciﬁc
performance for machines, in addition to optimizing
the coding efﬁciency for humans. Advanced learning-
based prediction or generation models may be applied
to bridge the gap between streams.
2) Feedback for scalable mode: When bit budget cannot
sufﬁce for video or feature streams, or namely, the qual-
ity of reconstructed feature and video are not desirable,
more additional resources are utilized, along with the
previously coded streams, to improve the quality of both
feature and video streams with a triggered feedback.
Therefore, the desired behavior of incrementally improv-
ing the performance of those human and machine vision
tasks subject to an increasing bit budget can be expected.
V. NEW TRENDS AND TECHNOLOGIES
The efﬁcient transition between the features of different
granularities is essential for VCM. In this section, we review
more recent advances in the image/video predictive and gen-
erative models.
A. Predictive Models
1) Image Predictive Models: Deep convolutional neural
networks [77, 78] have been proven to be effective to predict
semantic labels of images/videos. This superior capacity has
been witnessed in many visual tasks, e.g. image classiﬁca-
tion [78, 79], object detection [80, 81], semantic segmenta-
tion [82], pose estimation [83]. The key to the success of
these tasks is to extract discriminative features to effectively
model critical factors highly related to the ﬁnal predictions.
Deep networks have hierarchical structures to extract features
from low-level to high-level progressively. The features at
the deep layer are more compact and contain less redundant
information, with very sparse activated regions. As such, the
image predictive model can capture the compact and critical
feature from a single image, which provides an opportunity to
develop efﬁcient compression approaches.
2) Video Predictive Models: The deep networks designed
for video analytics pay additional attention to modeling tempo-
ral dynamics and utilizing complex joint spatial and temporal
correlations for semantic label prediction of videos. In [84],
several approaches extend the temporal connectivity of a
CNN to fully make use of local spatio-temporal information
for video classiﬁcation. In [85], a two-stream ConvNet ar-
chitecture incorporated with spatial appearance and motion
information is built for action recognition. Their successive
works are based on mixed architectures with both CNN and
RNN [86], and 3D convolutional networks [87] for action
recognition [88, 89], scene recognition [87], captioning, com-
menting [90]. These models are capable to extract discrimina-
tive and compact joint spatial and temporal features, potential
to beneﬁt squeezing out the redundancy in videos.
B. Generative Models
1) Generative Adversarial Networks: The advance of gen-
erative adversarial networks (GANs) [91] makes a signiﬁcant
impact in machine vision. Recent years have witnessed the
prosperity of image generation and its related ﬁeld [92–95].
In general, most of the existing methods can be categorized
into two classes: supervised and unsupervised methods. In
supervised methods [96–98], GANs act as a powerful loss
function to capture the visual property that the traditional
losses fail to describe. Pix2pix [99] is a milestone work based
on conditional GAN to apply the image-to-image translation
from the perspective of domain transfer. Later on, more
efforts [92, 100] are dedicated to generating high-resolution
photo-realistic images with a progressive reﬁnement frame-
work. In unsupervised methods, due to the lack of the paired
ground truth, the cycle reconstruction consistency [101–103]
is introduced to model the cross-domain mapping.
2) Guided Image Generation: Some works focus on guided
image generation, where semantic features, e.g. human pose
and semantic map, are taken as the guidance input. The early
attempt pays attention to pose-guided image generation and
a two-stage network PG2 [104] is built to coarsely generate
the output image under the target pose in the ﬁrst stage, and
then reﬁne it in the second stage. In [105], deformable skips
are utilized to transform high-level features of each body
part to better model shapes and appearances. In [106], the
body part segmentation masks are used as guidance for image
generation. However, the above-mentioned methods [104–106]
rely on paired data. To address the limitation, in [107], a
fully unsupervised GAN is designed, inspired by [101, 108].
Furthermore, the works in [109, 110] resort to sampling
from the feature space based on the data distribution. These
techniques bring in precious opportunities to develop efﬁcient
video coding techniques. The semantic feature guidance is
much more compact. With the support of the semantic feature,
the original video can be well reconstructed economically.
3) Video Prediction and Generation: Another branch of
generation models are for video prediction and generation.
Video prediction aims to produce future frames based on
previous frames of a video sequence in a deterministic manner,
in which recurrent neural networks are often used to model the
temporal dynamics [111–113]. In [111], an LSTM encoder-
decoder network is utilized to learn patch-level video repre-
sentations. In [112], a convolutional LSTM is built to predict

8
Human Perception
Video 
Acquisition
Compensating Visual Processor  
VCM
Intermediate Features
Task Specific Features
Task A
Task B
Task E
Task F
Task C
…
Learned 
Feature Extractor
Pretrained Models
…
…
Fig. 2. The key modules of VCM architecture, as well as the relationship between features and human/machine tasks.
video frames. In [113], a multi-layer LSTM is constructed to
progressively reﬁne the prediction process. Some methods do
not rely on recurrent networks, e.g. 3D convolutional neural
network [114, 115]. Some other methods [116–118] estimate
local and global transforms and then apply these transforms
to generate future frames indirectly.
Comparatively, video generation methods aim to produce
visually authentic video sequences in a probabilistic manner.
In the literature, methods based on GAN [119–122] and Vari-
ational AutoEncoder (VAE) [123–127] are built. The above-
mentioned methods just predict a few video frames. Later
works [128] target long-term video prediction. In [128], up
to 100 future frames of an Atari game are generated. The
future frame is generated with the guidance of the encoded
features by CNN and LSTM from previous frames. In [129],
a new model is proposed to generate real video sequences. The
high-level structures are estimated from past frames, which are
further propagated to those of the future frame via an LSTM.
In [130], an unsupervised method is built to extract a high-level
feature which is further used to predict the future high-level
feature. After that, the model can predict future frames based
on the predicted features and the ﬁrst frame.
Undoubtedly, inter prediction plays a signiﬁcant role in
video coding. The video prediction and generation models are
expected to leverage compact features to propagate the context
of video for improving coding efﬁciency.
C. Progressive Generation and Enhancement
Deep learning brings in the wealth of ‘deep’. That is, with
the hierarchical layer structure, the information is processed
and distilled progressively, which beneﬁts both high-level
semantic understanding and low-level vision reconstruction.
For VCM, an important property is scalability, a capacity of
feature prediction ranging from the extreme compactness to
the injection of redundant visual data for serving humans and
machines, which is closely correlated to the hot topics of deep
progressive generation and enhancement.
A series of works have been proposed to generate or en-
hance images progressively. In [147], a cascade of CNN within
a Laplacian pyramid framework is built to generate images
in a coarse-to-ﬁne fashion. In [148], a similar framework is
applied for single-image super-resolution. Later works reﬁning
features progressively at the feature-level, like ResNet [68], or
concatenating and fusing features from different levels, like
DenseNet [149], lead to better representations of pixels and
their contexts for low-level visions. The related beneﬁcial tasks
include super-resolution [96, 150–153], rain removal [154,
155], dehazing [151], inpainting [156], compression artifacts
removal [157], and deblurring [158]. Zhang et al. [151]
combined the structure of ResNet and DenseNet. Dense blocks
are used to obtain dense local features. All features in each
dense block are connected by skip connections, and then fused
in the last layer adaptively in a holistic way.
In video coding, there is also a similar tendency to pursue
a progressive image and video compression, namely, scalable
image/video coding [131], affording to form the bit-stream at
any bitrate. The bit-stream usually consists of several code
layers (one base layer and several enhancement layers). The
base layer is responsible for basic but coarse modeling of
image/video. The enhancement layers progressively improve
the reconstruction quality with additional bit-streams. A typ-
ical example is JPEG2000 [132], where an image pyramid
from the wavelet transform is build up for scalable image
reconstruction based on compact feature representations. Later
on, the extension of the scalable video codec is made in the
H.264 standard [133]. The base layer bit-stream is formed by
compressing the original video frames, and the enhanced layer
bit-stream is formed by encoding the residue signal.
VCM is expected to incorporate the scalability into the
collaborative coding of multiple task-speciﬁc data streams for
humans and/or machines. It is worthy to note that, the rapid
development of DNNs (deep neural networks) is proliferating
scalable coding schemes. In [32], an RNN model is utilized
to realize variable-bitrate compression. In [134], bidirectional
ConvLSTM is adopted to decompose the bit plane by efﬁ-
ciently memorizing long-term dependency. In [135], inspired
by the self-attention, a transformer-based decorrelation unit is
designed to reduce the feature redundancy at different levels.
More recently, several works [136–138, 140, 141] attempt to
jointly compress videos and features in a scalable way, which
shows more evidence for the scalability in VCM.
VI. VIDEO CODING FOR MACHINES: POTENTIAL
SOLUTIONS
In this section, we present several exemplar VCM solutions:
deep intermediate feature compression, predictive coding with

9
collaborative feedback, and enhancing predictive coding with
scalable feedback. Based on the fact that the pretrained deep
learning networks, e.g. VGG and AlexNet, can support a wide
range of tasks, such as classiﬁcation and object detection,
we ﬁrst investigate the issue of compressing intermediate
features (usually before pool5 layer) extracted from off-the-
shelf pretrained networks (left part of Fig. 2), less speciﬁc
to given tasks, via state-of-the-art video coding techniques.
In the next step, we explore the solution that learns to extract
key points as a highly discriminative image-level feature (right
part of Fig. 2) to support the motion-related tasks for both
machine and human vision with collaborative feedback in a
feature assisted predictive way. Finally, we attempt to pursue
a preliminary scheme to offer a general feature scalability to
derive both pixel and image-level representations and improve
the coding performance incrementally.
A. Deep Intermediate Feature Compression
In the VCM, features are the key bridge for both front
and back user-ends as well as high and low-level visions.
It naturally raises questions about the optimized feature ex-
traction and model updating in the VCM framework. For
deep model-based applications, the feature compression is
hindered by that, the models are generally tuned for speciﬁc
tasks, and that, the top-layer features are very task-speciﬁc
and hard to be generalized. The work in [139] explores a
novel problem: the intermediate layer feature compression,
reducing the computing burden while being capable to support
different kinds of visual analytics applications. In practice, it
provides a compromise between the traditional video coding
and feature compression and yields a good trade-off among
the computational load, communication cost, and the general-
ization capacity.
As illustrated in Fig. 2, VCM attempts to connect the
features of different granularities to the human/machine vi-
sion tasks from the perspective of a general deep learning
framework. The intermediate layer features are compressed
and transmitted instead of the original video or top layer fea-
tures. Compared with the deep layer features, the intermediate
features from shallow layers contain more informative cues in
a general sense, as the end-to-end learning usually makes the
deep layer features more task-speciﬁc with a large receptive
ﬁeld. To accommodate a wide range of machine vision tasks,
VCM prefers to optimize the compression of intermediate
features for general purposes. An interesting view is that, the
shallow layers closer to the input image/video, are supposed
to be less important than the deep layers, as the semantics
play a signiﬁcant role in data compressing even for humans.
As indicated in Fig. 2, VCM prefers to use the deep layers
features in improving coding efﬁciency for humans.
Beyond that, a further idea is to propose the problem of
feature recomposition. The features for different tasks are
with various granularities. It is worthwhile to explore how to
evaluate the feature coding performance of all tasks in a uniﬁed
perspective, and further decide to recompose the feature of
different tasks, sharing common features and organizing the
related compression in a more or less scalable way.
B. Predictive Coding with Collaborative Feedback
Fig. 3 (a) shows the overview pipeline of a joint feature and
video compression approach [140, 141]. At the encoder side,
a set of key frames vk will be ﬁrst selected and compressed
with traditional video codecs to form the bit-stream BI.
The coded key frames convey the appearance information
and are transmitted to the decoder side to synthesize the
reconstructed non-key frames. Then, the network learns to
represent V = {v1, v2, ..., vN} with the learned sparse points
F = {f1, f2, ..., fN} to describe temporal changes and object
motion among frames. We employ prediction model P (·) and
generation model G (·) to implement the feature transition
operation G(·) to convert the feature from a redundant form
to compact one and vice verse, respectively. More speciﬁcally,
P(·) and G(·) are the processes to extract key points from
videos and generate videos based on the learned key points.
To extract the key points, we have:
F = P (V, λ|θgp) ,
(7)
where θgp is a learnable parameter. F is a compact feature,
which only requires very fewer bit streams for transmission
and storage. λ is a rate control parameter. The compression
model CF (·|θcf) compresses F into the feature stream BF :
BF =CF (F|θcf) ,
(8)
where θcf is a learnable parameter.
Then, a motion guided generation network calculates the
motion based on these points and then transfers the appearance
from the reconstructed key frames to those remaining non-key
frames. Speciﬁcally, for the t-th frame to be reconstructed,
we denote its previous reconstructed key frame, previous
reconstructed key points, and the current reconstructed key
points by bvψ(t), bfψ(t) and bft: where ψ(t) maps the index of
the key frame of the t-th frame. The target frame evt ∈eV is
synthesized as follows:
evt = G

bvψ(t), bfψ(t), bft|θgg

,
(9)
where θgg is a learnable parameter. After that, the resid-
ual video R = V −eV
can be calculated, where eV
=
{ev1, ev2, ..., evN}. The sparse point descriptor and residual video
will be quantized and compressed to the bit stream BF and
BV for transmission. That is BV = {BI, BR}. We can adjust
the total bitrate via controlling the bitrates of BF and BV .
At the decoder side, the key frames will be ﬁrst recon-
structed from BI. The sparse point representations are also
decompressed as bF =
n
bf1, bf2, ..., bfN
o
from BF as follows,
bF=DF (BF |θdf) ,
(10)
where DF (·|θdf) is a feature decompression model, and θdf
is a learnable parameter. The videos are reconstructed via:
bV = eV + bR. Finally, bF along with bV serves machine analysis
and human vision, respectively.

10
-
High Quality
Videos
Residue
Videos
V
R
Compress
Compress
0101
Bit-Stream
Bit-Stream
F
C
V
C
F
B
V
B
0111
Key Point  
Extractor
Prediction
P
G
High Quality
Videos
Learned Sparse 
Points   
V
F
(a)
Feature
Upgrading
Key Point
Extractor P
Compress
Bit-Stream
F
C
F
B
0111
Learned Sparse 
Points   F
Compress
Bit-Stream
U
F
C
U
F
B
0111
-
Residue
Videos
/
U
R
R
Compress
0101
Bit-Stream
V
C
V
B
Prediction
/
U
G G
High Quality
Videos V
Upgraded 
Feature
U
F
High Quality
Videos 

/ 
V
V
Y
DV
B
(b)
Fig. 3. Two potential VCM solutions: (a) Predictive coding with collaborative feedback, and (b) Enhancing predictive coding with scalable feedback.
C. Enhancing Predictive Coding with Scalable Feedback
Fig. 3 (b) shows an optimized architecture for VCM, by
adding scalable feedback. Similarly, the key points of video
frames F are extracted. After that, the redundancy of the video
and key frames bvψ(t) is removed by applying feature-guided
prediction. Then, the residue video R is compressed into the
video stream, which is further passed to the decoder.
When the feature and video qualities after decompression
do not meet the requirements, a scalable feedback is launched
and more guidance features are introduced:
∆F = Y (F, V |θy) ,
(11)
F U = F + ∆F,
(12)
where θy is a learnable parameter. With the key points F in
the base layer (the result in the scheme in Fig. 3 (a)) and
the original video V , we generate the residual feature ∆F to
effectively utilize additionally allocated bits to encode more
abundant information and form the updated feature F U.
Then, GU is used to reﬁne V by taking the reconstructed
key points and video as its input:
∆eV = GU 
bF, ∆bF, bV |θh

,
(13)
where θh is a learnable parameter. Then, we can infer the
incremental residue video: RU = V −(eV + ∆eV ) −R, which
is compressed into the bit stream BDV . At the decoder side,
ˆRU is decompressed from BDV . Then, the video with a high
quality is inferred via: bV U = eV +∆eV + bRU + bR. This allows
to introduce more bits via launching scalable feedback.
TABLE I
LOSSY FEATURE COMPRESSION RESULTS FOR DIFFERENT TASKS
(COMP.RATE—FIDELITY2)
Feature
Classiﬁcation
Retrieval
Detection
QP
22
42
22
42
22
42
VGGNet
conv1
0.080 0.985 0.020 0.839 0.041 0.997 0.006 0.955 0.065 0.954 0.013 0.850
pool1
0.099 0.984 0.023 0.693 0.039 0.996 0.005 0.923 0.085 0.942 0.018 0.820
conv2
0.098 0.972 0.035 0.790 0.069 0.996 0.027 0.955 0.090 0.950 0.030 0.858
pool2
0.138 0.982 0.047 0.745 0.119 0.997 0.037 0.945 0.128 0.953 0.040 0.815
conv3
0.080 0.986 0.034 0.840 0.089 0.998 0.048 0.976 0.033 0.954 0.015 0.845
pool3
0.140 0.981 0.063 0.819
-
-
-
-
0.066 0.955 0.032 0.826
conv4
0.053 0.984 0.028 0.865 0.070 0.997 0.043 0.959 0.019 0.960 0.008 0.877
pool4
0.127 0.974 0.065 0.864
-
-
-
-
0.041 0.960 0.019 0.847
conv5
0.046 0.989 0.023 0.920 0.041 0.995 0.030 0.952 0.023 0.956 0.005 0.741
pool5
0.129 0.986 0.075 0.908 0.200 0.996 0.146 0.960
-
-
-
-
ResNet
conv1
0.041 0.935 0.005 0.356 0.018 0.964 0.001 0.792 0.029 0.915 0.002 0.713
pool1
0.043 0.937 0.004 0.087 0.025 0.963 0.002 0.720 0.030 0.889 0.002 0.470
conv2
0.095 0.986 0.014 0.765 0.027 0.939 0.001 0.554 0.107 0.949 0.016 0.660
conv3
0.134 0.989 0.028 0.854 0.041 0.986 0.003 0.551 0.118 0.971 0.021 0.684
conv4
0.170 0.992 0.034 0.932 0.035 0.997 0.012 0.799 0.056 0.964 0.008 0.833
conv5
0.131 0.998 0.063 0.961 0.040 0.999 0.014 0.992
-
-
-
-
VII. PRELIMINARY EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
In this section, we provide preliminary experimental results
from the perspectives of intermediate deep feature compres-
sion and machine-human collaborative compression.
A. Deep Intermediate Feature Compression for Different Tasks
1) Compression Results: We show the compression per-
formance on the intermediate features for different tasks in
Table I. The compression rate is calculated by the ratio
of original intermediate deep features and the compressed
bit-streams. As to the ﬁdelity evaluation2, the reconstructed
2https://github.com/ZoomChen/DeepFeatureCoding/tree/master/Coding and
Evaluation

11
TABLE II
LOSSY FEATURE COMPRESSION RESULTS FOR DIFFERENT TASKS.
DD-CHANNEL CONCATENATION DENOTES CHANNEL CONCATENATION BY
DESCENDING DIFFERENCE. (COMP.RATE—FIDELITY2)
Feature
Channel Concatenation
DD-Channel Concatenation
Channel Tiling
QP
12
42
12
42
12
42
conv1
0.100 0.991 0.006 0.666 0.100 0.992 0.006
0.694
0.116 0.998 0.020 0.839
pool1
0.124 0.987 0.006 0.401 0.124 0.986 0.005
0.412
0.145 0.993 0.023 0.686
conv2
0.116 0.989 0.012 0.343 0.116 0.988 0.012
0.455
0.130 0.992 0.035 0.781
pool2
0.166 0.991 0.014 0.260 0.165 0.991 0.014
0.369
0.184 0.996 0.045 0.756
conv3
0.093 0.989 0.013 0.586 0.093 0.990 0.013
0.617
0.100 0.995 0.033 0.835
pool3
0.164 0.990 0.023 0.477 0.164 0.994 0.023
0.541
0.163 0.992 0.053 0.791
conv4
0.059 0.992 0.012 0.700 0.059 0.988 0.012
0.706
0.051 0.993 0.021 0.857
pool4
0.140 0.990 0.030 0.624 0.142 0.991 0.028
0.611
0.100 0.993 0.042 0.855
conv5
0.046 0.995 0.016 0.809 0.046 0.990 0.015
0.812
0.028 0.996 0.010 0.920
pool5
0.127 0.992 0.055 0.776 0.127 0.994 0.053
0.746
0.054 0.996 0.024 0.903
features are passed to their birth-layer of the original neural
network to infer the network outputs, which will be compared
with pristine outputs to evaluate the information loss of the
lossy compression methods. More results and details on the
evaluation framework can be found in [142].
From Table I, several interesting observations are reached.
First, the potential of lossy compression is inspiring. In the
extreme case, for example in image retrieval, ResNet conv2
feature achieves at least 1000× compression ratio at QP 42,
while the lossless methods usually provide 2-5×. Second, for
each feature type, the ﬁdelity metric decreases with a larger
QP value. Third, QP 22 generally provides high ﬁdelity and
fair compression ratio. Forth, upper layer features, like conv4
to pool5, tend to be more robust to heavy compression.
2) Channel Packaging: Deep features have multiple chan-
nels. It needs to arrange these features into single-channel or
three-channel maps and then compress them with the existing
video codecs. Three modes are studied: channel concatena-
tion, channel concatenation by descending difference, and
channel tiling. For channel concatenation, each channel of
the feature map corresponds to a frame in the input data of a
traditional video encoder. The height and width of the feature
map are ﬁlled to the height and width that meet the input
requirements of the video encoder. The feature map channel
order is the original order and remains unchanged. In this
mode, inter-coding of HEVC is applied. For channel concate-
nation by descending difference, to obtain higher compression
efﬁciency, the channel of the feature map is reordered before
being fed into a traditional video encoder. The ﬁrst channel
is ﬁxed, and the remaining channels are arranged according
to the L2 norm of the different between the current channel
to the previous one. For channel tiling, multiple channels are
tiled into a two-dimensional map, serving as an input to a
video encoder. The result is presented in Table II. These results
are preliminary and more efforts are expected to improve the
efﬁciency of compressing deep feature maps.
B. Joint Compression of Feature and Video
Let us evaluate the effectiveness of the potential solu-
tion: feature assisted predictive coding with the collaborative
feedback. We show the results of compression for machine
vision, including action recognition, human detection and
compression for human vision, video reconstruction.
TABLE III
ACTION RECOGNITION ACCURACY
OF DIFFERENT METHODS AND
CORRESPONDING BITRATE COSTS.
Codec
Bitrate (Kbps)
Accu.(%)
HEVC
16.2
65.2
Ours
5.2
74.6
TABLE IV
SSIM COMPARISON BETWEEN
DIFFERENT METHODS AND
CORRESPONDING BITRATE COSTS.
Codec
Bitrate (Kbps)
SSIM
HEVC
33.0
0.9008
Ours
32.1
0.9071
1) Experimental Settings: PKU-MMD dataset [143] is used
to generate the testing samples. In total, 3317 clips, each
sampling 32 frames, are used for training, and 227 clips,
each sampling 32 frames, are used for testing. All frames
are cropped and resized to 512 × 512. To verify the coding
efﬁciency, we use HEVC, implemented in FFmpeg version
2.8.153, as the anchor for comparison by compressing all
frames with the HEVC codec in the constant rate factor mode.
To evaluate the performance of feature assisted predictive
coding, the sparse motion pattern [144] is extracted to serve
machine vision. For a given input frame, a U-Net followed by
softmax activations is used to extract heatmaps for key point
prediction. The covariance matrix is additionally generated
to capture the correlations between the key points and its
neighbor pixels. For each key point, in total 6 ﬂoat numbers
including two numbers indicating the position and 4 numbers
in the covariance matrix are used for description. The selected
key frames are compressed and transmitted, along with the
sparse motion pattern to generate the full picture for human
vision. In the testing process, we select the ﬁrst frame in each
clip as the key frames. At the encoder side, the key frame is
coded with the HEVC codec in the constant rate factor mode.
Besides the key frame, 20 key points of each frame form the
sparse motion representation. Each key point contains 6 ﬂoat
numbers. For the two position numbers, a quantization with
the step of 2 is performed for compression. For the other 4
ﬂoat numbers belonging to the covariance matrix, we calculate
the inverse of the matrix in advance, and then quantize the 4
values with a step of 64. Then, the quantized key point values
are further losslessly compressed by the Lempel Ziv Markov
chain algorithm (LZMA) algorithm [145].
2) Action Recognition: We ﬁrst evaluate the efﬁciency of
the learned key points for action recognition. Although each
key point is represented with 6 numbers, we only use two
quantized position numbers for action recognition. To align
with the bitrate cost of the features, the clips are ﬁrst down-
scaled to 256 × 256 and then compressed with the constant
rate factor 51 with HEVC. All 227 clips are used in the
testing. Table III has shown the action recognition accuracy
and corresponding bitrate costs of different kinds of data. Our
method can obtain considerable action recognition accuracy
with only 5.2 Kbps bitrate cost, superior to that by HEVC.
3) Human Detection: Apart from action recognition, hu-
man detection accuracy is also compared. The original skele-
ton information in the dataset is used to form the ground
truth bounding box and a classical detection algorithm YOLO
v3 [159] is adopted for comparison. All 227 clips are used in
3https://www.ffmpeg.org/

12
(a) GT
(b) YOLO v3
(c) Proposed
Fig. 4. Subjective results of human detection. The coding cost represents the
bits required to code the corresponding testing clip.
0
5
10 15 20 25 30
Bitrate (Kbps)
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
IoU
0.6586
0.5429
0.2471
0.7216
0.8155
Fig. 5. Human detection IoU under
different bitrates.
25
30
35
Bitrate (Kbps)
8.5
9
9.5
10
10.5
SSIM (dB)
HEVC
Proposed
Fig. 6.
Rate distortion curves of
HEVC and the proposed method.
the testing. The testing clips are down-scaled to different scales
of 64×64, 128×128, 256×256 and 512×512 and compressed
by HEVC with the constant rate factor 51 to form the input
of YOLO v3. Fig. 5 has shown the Intersection over Union
(IoU) of different methods and their corresponding bitrates.
Our method can achieve much better detection accuracy with
lower bitrate costs. Some subjective results of human detection
are shown in Fig. 4, we can see that our method can achieve
better detection accuracy with fewer bit costs.
4) Video Reconstruction: The video reconstruction quality
of the proposed method is compared with that of HEVC.
During the testing phase, we compress the key frames with a
constant rate factor 32 to maintain a high appearance quality.
The bitrate is calculated by considering the compressed key
frames and key points. As for HEVC, we compress all frames
with a constant rate factor 44 to achieve an approaching bitrate.
Fig. 7.
The visual results of the reconstructed videos by HEVC (left panel)
and our method (right panel), respectively.
(a) Ground Truth
(b) HEVC
(c) Proposed
Fig. 8. Video reconstruction results of different methods.
Table IV has shown the quantitative reconstruction quality
of different methods. SSIM values are adopted for quantitative
comparison. It can be observed that, our method can achieve
better reconstruction quality than HEVC with lower bitrate
cost. The subjective results of different methods are shown
in Fig. 8. There are obvious compression artifacts on the
reconstruction results of HEVC, which heavily degrade the
visual quality. Compared with HEVC, our method can provide
far more visually pleasing results.
Moreover, we add a rate distortion curve for comparison.
HEVC is used as the anchor undergoing four constant rate
factors 44, 47, 49 and 51. For our method, the key frames are
compressed respectively under constant rate factors 32, 35,
37 and 40. The rate distortion curve is shown in Fig. 6. Our
method yields better reconstruction quality at all bitrates.
VIII. DISCUSSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
A. Entropy Bounds for Tasks
Machine vision tasks rely on features at different levels of
granularity. High-level tasks prefer more discriminative and

13
compact features, while low-level tasks need abundant pixels
for ﬁne modeling. As VCM is to explore the collaborative
compression and intelligent analytics over multiple tasks, it is
valuable to ﬁgure out the intrinsic relationship among a variety
of tasks in a general sense. There’s some preliminary work
to reveal the connection between typical vision tasks [146].
However, there is no theoretical evidence to measure the
information associated with any given task. We may resort
to extensive experiments on the optimal compression ratio
vs. the desired performance for each speciﬁc task. But the
empirical study hinders the collaborative optimization across
multiple tasks due to the complex objective and the heavy
computational cost. Moreover, the proposed VCM solution
beneﬁts from the incorporation of collaborative and scalable
feedback over tasks. How to mathematically formulate the
connection of different tasks helps to pave the path to the
completeness in theory on the feedback mechanism in VCM.
In particular, the theoretical study on entropy bounds for
tasks is important for VCM to improve the performance and
efﬁciency for machine and human vision in a broad range of
AI applications.
B. Bio-Inspired Data Acquisition and Coding
Recently, inspired by the biological mechanism of human
vision, researchers invent the bio-inspired spike camera to con-
tinuously accumulate luminance intensity and launch spikes
when reaching the dispatch threshold. The spike camera brings
about a new capacity of capturing the fast-moving scene in
a frame-free manner while reconstructing full texture, which
provides new insights into the gap between human vision
and machine vision, and new opportunities for addressing the
fundamental scientiﬁc and technical issues in video coding
for machines. Valuable works have been done to investigate
the spike ﬁring mechanism [160], spatio-temporal distribution
of the spikes [161], and lossy spike coding framework for
efﬁcient spike data coding [162]. The advance of the spike
coding shows other potentials for VCM.
C. Domain Shift in Prediction and Generation
By employing the data-driven methods, the VCM makes
more compact and informative features. The risk is that those
methods might be trapped in the over-ﬁtting due to the domain
shift problem. Targeting more reliable VCM, how to improve
the domain generalization of the prediction and generation
models, and how to realize the domain adaptation (say, via
online learning) are important topics.
IX. CONCLUSION
As a response to the emerging MPEG standardization efforts
VCM, this paper formulates a new problem of video coding for
machines, targeting the collaborative optimization of video and
feature coding for human and/or machine visions. Potential
solutions, preliminary results, and future direction of VCM are
presented. The state-of-the-art video coding, feature coding,
and general learning approaches from the perspective of pre-
dictive and generative models, are reviewed comprehensively
as well. As an initial attempt in identifying the roles and
principles of VCM, this work is expected to call for more
evidence of VCM from both academia and industry, especially
when AI meets the big data era.
