Explainable Software Analytics
Hoa Khanh Dam
University of Wollongong, Australia

Truyen Tran
Deakin University, Australia

Aditya Ghose
University of Wollongong, Australia

ABSTRACT
Software analytics has been the subject of considerable recent at-
tention but is yet to receive significant industry traction. One of
the key reasons is that software practitioners are reluctant to trust
predictions produced by the analytics machinery without under-
standing the rationale for those predictions. While complex models
such as deep learning and ensemble methods improve predictive
performance, they have limited explainability. In this paper, we
argue that making software analytics models explainable to soft-
ware practitioners is as important as achieving accurate predictions.
Explainability should therefore be a key measure for evaluating
software analytics models. We envision that explainability will be a
key driver for developing software analytics models that are useful
in practice. We outline a research roadmap for this space, building
on social science, explainable artificial intelligence and software
engineering.
KEYWORDS
Software engineering, software analytics, Mining software reposi-
tories
ACM Reference Format:
Hoa Khanh Dam, Truyen Tran, and Aditya Ghose. 2018. Explainable Soft-
ware Analytics. In Proceedings of ICSE, Gothenburg, Sweden, May-June 2018
(ICSE’18 NIER), 4 pages.
https://doi.org/XXX
1
INTRODUCTION
Software analytics has in recent times become the focus of consid-
erable research attention. The vast majority of software analytics
methods leverage machine learning algorithms to build prediction
models for various software engineering tasks such as defect pre-
diction, effort estimation, API recommendation, and risk prediction.
Prediction accuracy (assessed using measures such as precision,
recall, F-measure, Mean Absolute Error and similar) is currently the
dominant criterion for evaluating predictive models in the software
analytics literature. The pressure to maximize predictive accuracy
has led to the use of powerful and complex models such as SVMs,
ensemble methods and deep neural networks. Those models are
however considered as “black box” models, thus it is difficult for
software practitioners to understand them and interpret their pre-
dictions.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
ICSE’18 NIER, May-June 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden
© 2018 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN XXX...$15.00
https://doi.org/XXX
The lack of explainability results in the lack of trust, leading
to industry reluctance to adopt or deploy software analytics. If
software practitioners do not understand a model’s predictions,
they would not blindly trust those predictions, nor commit project
resources or time to act on those predictions. High predictive per-
formance during testing may establish some degree of trust in the
model. However, those test results may not hold when the model
is deployed and run “in the wild”. After all, the test data is already
known to the model designer, while the “future” data is unknown
and can be completely different from the test data, potentially mak-
ing the predictive machinery far less effective. Trust is especially
important when the model produces predictions that are different
from the software practitioner’s expectations (e.g., generating alerts
for parts of the code-base that developers expect to be “clean”). Ex-
plainability is not only a pre-requisite for practitioner trust, but also
potentially a trigger for new insights in the minds of practitioners.
For example, a developer would want to understand why a defect
prediction model suggests that a particular source file is defective
so that they can fix the defect. In other words, merely flagging a file
as defective is often not good enough. Developers need a trace and
a justification of such predictions in order to generate appropriate
fixes.
We believe that making predictive models explainable to soft-
ware practitioners is as important as achieving accurate predictions.
Explainability should be an important measure for evaluating soft-
ware analytics models. We envision that explainability will be a key
driver for developing software analytics models that actually de-
liver value in practice. In this paper, we raise a number of research
questions that will be critical to the success of software analytics
in practice:
(1) What forms a (good) explanation in software engineering
tasks?
(2) How do we build explainable software analytics models and
how do we generate explanations from them?
(3) How might we evaluate explainability of software analytics
models?
Decades of research in social sciences have established a strong
understanding of how humans explain decisions and behaviour to
each other [20]. This body of knowledge will be useful for develop-
ing software analytics models that are truly capable of providing
explanations to human engineers. In addition, explainable artificial
intelligence (XAI) has recently become an important field in AI.
AI researchers have started looking into developing new machine
learning systems which will be capable of explaining their decisions
and describing their strengths and weaknesses in a way that human
users can understand (which in turn engenders trust that these
systems will generate reliable results in future usage scenarios). In
order to address these research questions, we believe that the soft-
ware engineering community needs to adopt an inter-disciplinary
approach that brings together existing work from social sciences,
arXiv:1802.00603v1  [cs.SE]  2 Feb 2018

ICSE’18 NIER, May-June 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden
Hoa Khanh Dam, Truyen Tran, and Aditya Ghose
state-of-the-art work in AI, and the existing domain knowledge
of software engineering. In the remainder of this paper, we will
discuss these research directions in greater detail.
2
WHAT IS A GOOD EXPLANATION IN
SOFTWARE ENGINEERING?
Substantial research in philosophy, social science, psychology, and
cognitive science has sought to understand what constitutes ex-
plainability and how explanations might be presented in a form
that would be easily understood (and thence, accepted) by humans.
There are various definitions of explainability, but for software
analytics we propose to adopt a simple definition: explainability or
interpretability of a model measures the degree to which a human
observer can understand the reasons behind a decision (e.g. a predic-
tion) made by the model. There are two distinct ways of achieving
explainability: (i) making the entire decision making process trans-
parent and comprehensible; and (ii) explicitly providing explanation
for each decision. The former is also known as global explainabil-
ity, while the latter refers to local explainability (i.e. knowing the
reasons for a specific prediction) or post-hoc interpretability [18].
Many philosophical theories of explanation (e.g. [25]) consider
explanations as presentation of causes, while other studies (e.g.
[17]) view explanations as being contrastive. We adapted the model
of explanation developed in [27], which combines both of these
views by considering explanations as answers to four types of why-
questions:
• (plain fact) “Why does object a have property P?”
Example: Why is file A defective? Why is this sequence of
API usage recommended?
• (P-contrast) “Why does object a have property P, rather than
property P’?”
Example: Why is file A defective rather than clean?
• (O-contrast) “Why does object a have property P, while object
b has property P’?”
Example: Why is file A defective, while file B is clean?
• (T-contrast) “Why does object a have property P at time t, but
property P’ at time t’?”
Example: Why was the issue not classified as delayed at the
beginning, but was subsequently classified as delayed three
days later?
An explanation of a decision (which can involve the statement
of a plain fact) can take the form of a causal chain of events that
lead to the decision. Identify the complete set of causes is however
difficult, and most machine learning algorithms offer correlations
as opposed to categorical statements of causation. The three con-
trastive questions constitute a contrastive explanation, which is
often easier to produce than answering a plain fact question since
contrastive explanations focus on only the differences between two
cases. Since software engineering is task-oriented, explanations in
software engineering tasks should be viewed from the pragmatic
explanatory pluralism perspective [6]. This means that there are
multiple legitimate types of explanations in software engineering.
Software engineers have have different preferences for the types of
explanations they are willing to accept, depending on their interest,
expertise and motivation.
3
EXPLAINABLE SOFTWARE ANALYTICS
MODELS
One effective way of achieving explainability is making the model
transparent to software practitioners. In this case, the model itself
is an explanation of how a decision is made. Transparency could
be achieved at three levels: the entire model, each individual com-
ponent of the model (e.g. input features or parameters), and the
learning algorithm [18].
Explainability
Prediction accuracy
Deep Learning (Neural Networks)
SVMs
Ensemble Methods (e.g. Random Forests)
Graphical Models (e.g. Bayesian Networks)
Decision Trees, Classification Rules
Figure 1: Prediction accuracy versus explainability
The Occam’s Razor principle of parsimony suggests that an soft-
ware analytics model needs to be expressed in a simple way that
is easy for software practitioners to interpret [19]. Simple models
such as decision tree, classification rules, and linear regression tend
to be more transparent than complex models such as deep neural
networks, SVMs or ensemble methods (see Figure 1). Decision trees
have a graphical structure which facilitate the visualization of a
decision making process. They contain only a subset of features
and thus help the users focus on the most relevant features. The
hierarchical structure also reflect the relative importance of differ-
ent features: the lower the depth of a feature, the more relevant
the feature is for classification. Classification rules, which can be
derived from a decision tree, are considered to be one of the most
interpretable classification models in the form of sparse decision
lists. Those rules have the form of IF (conditions) THEN (class)
statements, each of which specifies a subset of features and a corre-
sponding predicted outcome of interest. Thus, those rules naturally
explain the reasons for each prediction made by the model. The
learning algorithm of those simple models are also easy to compre-
hend, while powerful methods such as deep learning algorithms
are complex and lack of transparency.
Each individual component of an explainable model (e.g. parame-
ters and features) also needs to provide an intuitive explanation. For
example, each node in a decision tree may refer to an explanation,
e.g. the normalized cyclomatic complexity of a source file is less
than 0.05. This would exclude features that are anonymized (since
they contain sensitive information such as the number of defects
and the development time). Highly engineered features (e.g. TF-IDF

Explainable Software Analytics
ICSE’18 NIER, May-June 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden
that are commonly used) are also difficult to interpret. Parameters
of a linear model could represent strengths of association between
each feature and the outcome.
Simple linear models are however not always interpretable. Large
decision trees with many splits are difficult to comprehend. Feature
selection and pre-processing can have an impact. For example,
associations between the normalized cyclomatic complexity and
defectiveness might be positive or negative, depending on whether
the feature set includes other features such as lines of code or the
depth of inheritance trees.
Future research in software analytics should explicitly address
the trade-off between explainability and prediction accuracy. It is
very hard to define in advance which explainability is suitable to
a software engineer. Hence, a multi-objective approach based on
Pareto dominance would be more suitable to sufficiently address
this trade-off. For example, recent work [1] has employed an evo-
lutionary search for a model to predict issue resolution time. The
search is guided simultaneously by two contrasting objectives: max-
imizing the accuracy of the prediction model while minimizing its
complexity.
The use of simple models improves explainability but requires a
sacrifice for accuracy. An important line of research is finding meth-
ods to tune those simple models in order to improve their predictive
performance. For example, recent work [9] has demonstrated that
evolutionary search techniques can also be used to fine tune SVM
such that it achieved better predictive performance than a deep
learning method in predicting links between questions in Stack
Overflow. Another important direction of research is making black-
box models more explainable, which enable human engineers to
understand and appropriately trust the decisions made by software
analytics models. In the next section, we discuss a few research
directions in making deep learning models more explainable.
4
EXPLANATIONS FOR DEEP MODELS
Deep learning, an AI methodology for training deep neural net-
works, has found use in a number of recent developments in soft-
ware analytics. The power of deep learning mainly comes from
architectural flexibility, which enables design of neural nets to fit
almost any complex software structures (e.g., those found in ‘Big
Code’ [23]). Recent examples include code/text sequences [5], AST
[16], API learning [10], code generation [22] and project depen-
dency networks [21].
This flexibility comes at the cost of explainability. Deep learning
methods were primarily developed for distant credit assignments
through a long chain of nonlinear transformations. Thus under-
standing model’s decision becomes a great challenge. Even when
it is possible to understand, great care must be taken to interpret
the results because deep networks can fit noise and find arbitrary
hypotheses [28].
To address this lack of explainability in deep learning, there
has been a growing effort to turn a black–box neural net into a
clear–box, which we discuss below.
4.1
Seeing through the black-box
This strategy involves looking into the inner working of existing
neural nets. A deep neural net is constructed by stacking primitive
components known as neurons. A neuron is a simple non-linear
function of several inputs. The entire network of neuron forms a
computational graph, which allows informative signals from data
to pass through and reach output nodes. Likewise, training signals
from labels back-propagate in the reverse directions, assigning
credits to each neuron and neuron pair along the way.
A popular way to analyse a deep net is through visualization of
its neuron activations and weights. This often provides an intuitive
explanation of how the network works internally. Well-known
examples include visualizing token embedding in 2D [4], feature
maps in CNN [26] and recurrent activation patterns in RNN [15].
These techniques can also estimate feature importance [14] e.g., by
differentiating the function f (x,W ) against feature xi.
4.2
Designing explainable architectures
An effective strategy is to design new architectures that self-explain
decision making at each step. One of the most useful mechanisms
is through attention, in which model components compete to con-
tribute to an outcome (e.g., see [3]). Examples of components in-
clude code token in a sequence, a node in an AST, or a function in
a class.
Another method is coupling neural nets with natural language
processing (NLP), possibly akin to code documentation. Since nat-
ural language is, as the name suggests, “natura” to humans, NLP
techniques can help make software analytics systems more explain-
able. This suggests a dual system that generates both prediction
and NLP explanation [11]. However, one should interpret the lin-
guistic explanation with care because we can derive explanation
after-the-fact, and what is explained may not necessarily reflect the
true inner working of the model. A related technique is to augment
a deep network with interpretable structured knowledge such as
rules, constraints or knowledge graphs [13].
4.3
Using external explainers
This strategy keeps the original complex net intact but tries to
mimic or explain its behaviours using another interpretable model.
The “mimic learning” method, also known as knowledge distillation,
involves translating the predictive power of the complex net to
a simpler one (e.g., see [12]). Distillation is highly useful in deep
learning because neural networks are often redundant in neurons
and connectivity. For example, a popular training strategy known
as dropout uses only 50% of neurons at any training step. A typi-
cal setup of knowledge distillation involves first training a large
“teacher” network, possibly an ensemble of networks, then using
the teacher network to guide the learning of a simpler student
model. The student model benefits from this setting due to knowl-
edge of the domain already distilled by the teacher network, which
otherwise might be difficult to learn directly from the raw data.
Another method aims at explaining the behaviours of the com-
plex net using an interpretable model. A successful case is LIME
[24], which generates an explanation about a data instance locally.
For example, given a sequence “for(i=0; i < 10; i++)”, we can locally
change the input to “for(i=0; i < 10;)” and observe the behaviour of
the network. If the behaviour changes, then we can expect that “++”
is a relevant feature, even if the network does not work directly on
the space of tokens.

ICSE’18 NIER, May-June 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden
Hoa Khanh Dam, Truyen Tran, and Aditya Ghose
5
EVALUATION OF EXPLAINABILITY
Prediction accuracy can be quantified into a number of widely-used
measures such as precision, recall, F-measure, and Mean Absolute
Errors. Explainability however refers to the qualitative aspect of
a software analytics system, and thus it is difficult to measure ex-
plainability. We believe that for the explainable software analytics
field to move forward, further research is needed to formalize the
measures and methods for evaluating explainability of software ana-
lytics systems using evidence-based approaches. In this section, we
sketch some potential directions for the evaluation of explainability.
A simple measure for explainability is the size of a model. The
assumption here is that as the model grows in its size, it becomes
harder for human engineers to understand it. The model size can be
defined as the number of parameters (for linear regression models),
the number of rules (for classification rule models), or the depth, the
width, the number of edges, or the number of nodes (for decision
trees or other graphical structure models) as used in some previous
work (e.g. [1]).
However, using the size of a model as an explainability indicator
suffers from several limitations [8]. First, the model’s size captures
only a syntactical representation of the model. It does not reflect
the semantics of the model, which is an important factor in the
model’s explainability. In addition, previous experiments [2] with
100 non-expert users found that larger decision trees and rule lists
were in fact more understandable to users. Similar experiments can
be done with software practitioners.
Conducting experiments with practitioners is the best way to
evaluate if an software analytics model would work in practice.
Those experiments would involve an analytics system working
with software practitioners on a real task such as locating parts
of a codebase that are relevant to a bug report. We would then
evaluate the quality of explanations in the context of the task such as
whether it leads to improved productivity or new ways of resolving
a bug. Machine-produced explanations can be compared against
explanations produced by human engineers when they assist their
colleagues in trying to complete the same task. Other forms of
experiments can involve: (i) users being asked to select a better
explanation between two presented; (ii) users being provided with
an explanation and an input, and then being asked to simulate
the model’s output; (iii) users being provided with an explanation,
an input, and an output, and then being asked how to change the
model in order to obtain to a desired output [7]. Human study is
however expensive and difficult to conduct properly.
6
DISCUSSION
We have argued for explainable software analytics to facilitate
human understanding of machine prediction as a key to warrant
trust from software practitioners. There are other trust dimensions
that also deserve attention. Chief among them are reproducibility
(i.e., using the same code and data to reproduce reported results),
and repeatability (i.e., applying the same method to new data to
achieve similar results). Further, should software analytics travels
the road of AI, then perhaps we want AI-based analytics agents
that are not only capable of explaining themselves but also aware
of their own limitations.
