arXiv:1106.0823v4  [cs.CV]  19 Jul 2012
Recovering Epipolar Geometry from Images of
Smooth Surfaces
Oleg Kupervasser
Industrial Engineering and Management
The Technion,
Haifa 32000, Israel
Abstract. We present four methods for recovering the epipolar geometry from
images of smooth surfaces. In the existing methods for recovering epipolar ge-
ometry corresponding feature points are used that cannot be found in such im-
ages. The ﬁrst method is based on ﬁnding corresponding characteristic points cre-
ated by illumination (ICPM - illumination characteristic points method). The sec-
ond method is based on correspondent tangency points created by tangents from
epipoles to outline of smooth bodies (OTPM - outline tangent points method).
These two methods are exact and give correct results for real images, because
positions of the corresponding illumination characteristic points and correspond-
ing outline are known with small errors. But the second method is limited ei-
ther to special type of scenes or to restricted camera motion. We also consider
two more methods which are termed CCPM (curve characteristic points method,
green curves are used for this method on Figures) and CTPM (curve tangent
points method, red curves are used for this method on Figures), for searching
epipolar geometry for images of smooth bodies based on a set of level curves
(isophoto curves) with a constant illumination intensity. The CCPM method is
based on searching correspondent points on isophoto curves with the help of cor-
relation of curvatures between these lines. The CTPM method is based on prop-
erty of the tangential to isophoto curve epipolar line to map into the tangential
to correspondent isophoto curves epipolar line. The standard method termed SM
(standard method, blue curves are used for this method on Figures) and based
on knowledge of pairs of the almost exact correspondent points, has been used
for testing of these two methods. The main technical contributions of our CCPM
method are following. The ﬁrst of them consists of bounding the search space
for epipole locations. On the face of it, this space is inﬁnite and unbounded. We
suggest a method to partition the inﬁnite plane into a ﬁnite number of regions.
This partition is based on the desired accuracy and maintains properties that yield
an efﬁcient search over the inﬁnite plane. The second is an efﬁcient method for
ﬁnding correspondence between points of two closed isophoto curves and ﬁnding
homography, mapping between these two isophoto curves. Then this homography
is corrected for all possible epipole positions with the help of evaluation function.
A ﬁnite subset of solution is chosen from the full set given by all possible epipole
positions. This subset includes fundamental matrices giving local minimums of
evaluating function close to global minimum. Epipoles of this subset lie almost
on straight line directed parallel to parallax shift. CTPM method was used to
ﬁnd the best solution from this subset. Our method is applicable to any pair of
images of smooth objects taken under perspective projection models, as long as
assumption of the constant brightness is taken for granted. The methods have

2
been implemented and tested on pairs of real images. Unfortunately, the last two
methods give us only a ﬁnite subset of solution that usually includes good solu-
tion, but doesnt allow us to ﬁnd this good solution among this subset. Exception
is the case of epipoles in inﬁnity. The main reason for such result is inaccuracy
of assumption of constant brightness for smooth bodies. But outline and illumi-
nation characteristic points are not inﬂuenced by this inaccuracy. So, the ﬁrst pair
of methods gives exact results.
Key Words: Level curves; Isophoto curves; Occluding contour; Homography;Epipo-
lar geometry; Smooth surfaces.
1
Introduction
Recovering a three-dimensional shape from a sequence of 2D images has many appli-
cations in areas as diverse as autonomous navigation, object recognition, and computer
graphics. Solving this problem requires appropriate camera parameters and correspon-
dence between points in different images. Epipolar geometry plays a central role in
extracting correspondence between points in different images. For each point in one
image epipolar geometry determines a single line, called an epipolar line, in the other
image on which its corresponding point is incident.
This paper presents methods for determining the epipolar geometry of a pair of
images under weak (epipoles in inﬁnity) and full perspective projection models. We
assume uncalibrated images of smooth surfaces. The pair of images may be taken from
any two viewpoints distant from each other as long as they satisfy the assumption of
constant brightness which presupposes that corresponding points in the different images
have the same value of intensity. This assumption holds when the reﬂectance model of
the imaged surface is independent of the viewpoint. We also discuss less general cases
such as the weak perspective projection model, calibrated cameras, and a setup similar
to the one suggested by [2], where the images contain a plane whose homography can
be computed.
Epipolar geometry is often represented by the fundamental matrix [3,13,4] The stan-
dard method for recovering the epipolar geometry is that by computing the fundamental
matrix from a set of corresponding features in the two images such as points or lines
(e.g., [6,14,13,9,16,15]). However, for images of smooth surfaces which we consider in
this paper, reliable extraction of image features is often impossible.
The ﬁrst pair of method gives exact result for real, practical images. The ﬁrst method
is based on ﬁnding corresponding characteristic points created by illumination (ICPM).
The second method is based on correspondent tangency points created by tangents from
epipoles to outline of smooth bodies (OTPM). The second method for recovering the
epipolar geometry of smooth objects is based solely on the objects outline (e.g., [1,2,8]).
Such method is limited to either restricted motion or to a relatively rich scene with
sufﬁcient number of special points along the objects outline. The second pair of methods
is general and independent of the occluding contour and the camera motion. However,
in these methods a signiﬁcantly larger space search must be considered, so it can work
only when the assumption of constant brightness is satisﬁed.

3
The second pair of methods offered by us termed as CCPM and CTPM is for search-
ing epipolar geometry for images of smooth bodies. The CCPM method is based on
searching correspondent points on isophoto curves with the help of correlation of cur-
vatures between these lines. The CTPM method is based on property of the tangential to
isophoto curve epipolar line to map into the tangential to a correspondent epipolar line
of isophoto curves. The standard method termed SM and based on knowledge of pairs
of the almost exact correspondent points was utilized for testing these two methods.
The main technical contributions of our method are following. The ﬁrst one is an ef-
ﬁcient method for ﬁnding correspondence between points of two closed isophoto curves
and ﬁnding homography, mapping between these two isophoto curves. Then this ho-
mography is corrected for all possible epipole positions with the help of the evaluation
function. A ﬁnite subset of solution is chosen from the full set given by all possible
epipole position. This subset includes fundamental matrices giving local minimums of
evaluating function close to the global minimum. Epipoles of this subset lie almost on
straight line directed parallel to parallax shift. CTPM method was used to ﬁnd the best
solution from this subset.
The next contribution consists of bounding the search space for epipole locations.
On the face of it, this space is inﬁnite and unbounded. We suggest a method to par-
tition the inﬁnite plane into a ﬁnite number of regions (see Figure 1). The suggested
plane partition maintains desired resolution of the system, when possible. In addition, it
maintains a probabilistic equal hit measure of epipolar lines. Roughly speaking, proba-
bilistically the size of each subset of epipolar lines we assigned for each region is equal.
This property contributes to the efﬁciency of the search
δθ
r2 
r3 
Fig.1. A schematic drawing of the inﬁnite plane partitioned into regions.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We begin by presenting the ﬁrst pair
of method for recovering the epipolar geometry from a pair of uncalibrated images of
smooth surfaces (Section 2). The next step is the second pair of methods (Section 3).
The method is presented for images taken under the perspective projection model. The
implementation of these method and the results of running correspondent algorithms
on real images are presented in Subsection 3.4. Finally we summarize and conclude in
Section 4.

4
2
The ﬁrst pair of exact methods.
2.1
Method of characteristic points of illumination intensity for smooth bodies
(ICPM)
For searching epipolar geometry corresponding points on two images are used. The
assumption of constant brightness was used. This means that illumination intensity of
the corresponding points on the both images is identical. Usually the corresponding
points are some corner points of bodies. As on smooth bodies such points are lacking,
it is usually assumed that this procedure is not applicable. However, it is not absolutely
true. Though the corner points on smooth bodies are really lacking, illumination of
smooth bodies creates similar characteristic points. For example, even illumination of
a spherical body creates a point of maximum of illumination intensity which is easily
registered on a pair of the images. We will describe here all characteristic points which
illumination creates on smooth bodies.
1) A point of minimum of illumination intensity.
2) A point of maxima of illumination intensity.
3) A saddle point of illumination intensity.
4) A positive cusp (peak) point: a point with a high and positive value of a curvature
radius on a level curve of constant illumination intensity.
5) A negative cusp (peak) point: a point with a high and negative value of a curvature
radius on a level curve of constant illumination intensity.
6) A curvature point of inﬂexion: a point on a level curve in which change of the
sign of curvature radius occurs.
The characteristic points types 1-3 are searched as a point with zero derivatives
along axes x and y. Curvature in points 4-5 is searched by selection of a series of level
lines with some certain step on illumination intensities and searching on these lines of
extremes of a curvature radius with a value of curvature radius more than some chosen
threshold. For calculation of a curvature radius in points on a level curve the formula 1 is
used. Points of the type 6 are registered by changing of a sign of a curvature radius. After
all characteristic points are discovered, it is necessary to discover their correspondence
for two images. It can be made by the following methods:
1) Corresponding points should have the same types described above.
2) They should have almost equal illumination intensity.
3) For corresponding points of 1-3 types the two principal curvature radiuses should
be close in values. (Curvature radiuses calculated for an illumination intensity surface
as functions of x and y in these points).
4) For corresponding points of 4-5 types curvature radii of a level curve should be
close in values.
5) For corresponding points the nearest characteristic points along a level curve
should correspond to the similar points on the second image and have the same types
with them.
6) Comparing local neighborhoods of points, also as it is made in method SIFT
[10,11,12].
After determination of corresponding points their ﬁnal correspondenceand the epipo-
lar geometry is searched by the method RANSAC [7]. But it is better to use the speciﬁc

5
version of this method [5]. It is appropriate for the case when the majority of the dis-
covered points can lie close to a single plane and only small part of these points is
considerably out of this plane. It is a frequent case for smooth bodies.
2.2
Implementation of the ﬁrst method (ICPM) for real images
Numerical calculation demonstrates that the method SIFT [10,11,12] discovers many
of the characteristic points featured above (Figure 2).
Fig. 2. Correspondent points on two images.
In Figure 2 about 30 pairs of the corresponding points are marked by yellow color.
These points are found by SIFT method and part of them lie on smooth bodies (sculp-
tures). But all these points on smooth bodies concern to one of 1-5 types of the char-
acteristic points featured above. Correspondence of the points was found by the 6th
method (from the six methods featured above). Numerical calculation shows that these
pairs of points give enough information to precisely calculate the epipolar geometry by
the usual methods. This result conﬁrms efﬁciency of the described method. This efﬁ-
ciency is explained by the fact that the characteristic points are found with split-hair ac-
curacy. Indeed, intensity of illumination along these bodes varies slowly and smoothly,
except for the cases of characteristic points featured above. It results in small errors for
the epipolar geometry.
2.3
Method of tangents to an outline of smooth bodies (OTPM)
However, there is one more method that has also split-hair accuracy - a method of tan-
gents to the outline of smooth bodies. (This method is discoursed in details in [1,2,8].)
Let A be the tangency point of a tangent to a smooth bodies outline from the epipole on
the ﬁrst image. And B is the tangency point of the correspondent tangent to the corre-
spondent outline of smooth bodies from the second epipole on the second image. It is

6
proved in [8], [7] that these two points are correspondent points of the images. Suppose
that we have many smooth bodies and, consequently, many outlines of smooth bodies.
Then, by dividing image planes on meshes we consider all possible methods for putting
epipoles to these meshes. It is possible to ﬁnd pair epipoles giving the minimal error for
the described property of tangents. The described method is very similar to a method of
tangents to level curves of illumination intensity described below (CTPM). However,
the method described here is much more exact than the method described below. Re-
ally, level curves of illumination intensity are found insufﬁciently precise both because
of inexactness of assumption of constant brightness and because of noise. This noise
leads to major errors in deﬁnition of corresponding points, especially for smooth bodes.
Indeed, intensity of illumination along these bodes varies slowly and smoothly, except
for the cases of characteristic points featured above, and outlines of smooth bodies. This
fact results in the split-hair accuracy of the described here two methods with respect to
the two methods described below. In case of a small number of smooth bodies, the de-
scribed here method of tangents can be used only for validation and improvement of the
method of characteristic points or for only ﬁnding a set of possible epipolar geometries.
The second pair of two methods described below (CCPM and CTPM; these methods
use level curves of constant illumination intensity) ﬁnd corresponding points with much
bigger errors. It occurs because assumption of constant brightness is not exact. That
results in serious errors during ﬁnding epipolar geometry. Therefore, these methods can
be used only for validation and improvement of the present method, or only for ﬁnding
a set of possible epipolar geometries.
3
Two methods using level curves of illumination intensity
In this section we present our method for recovering the epipolar geometry of two
images, by determining the fundamental matrix F. (A pair of corresponding points in
the two images, x and x′, must satisfy to xFx′T = 0.) The purpose of methods stated
in this section is reconstruction of epipolar geometry of two 2D images of 3D smooth
bodies photographed from various positions. For ﬁnding epipolar geometry in a case of
non-smooth bodies we use correspondence of the reference points, such as corners, for
example. In case of smooth bodies these corner points are primely not present which
makes ﬁnding correspondence quite a problem to solve. Nevertheless, it can be tried to
be solved. A basis for this purpose is assumption of constant brightness. It is supposed
that corresponding points in different images have one and the same value of intensity.
This assumption is proved for the following conditions [7]:
1) The Lambert law of reﬂections of surfaces.
2) An invariance of position and intensity of irradiating sources and also objects
position invariance during shooting.
3) A small angle between an optical axis and a direction on any of object point, i.e.
the object should be near to the optical axis and have small angular sizes.
4) Constant interior camera calibration for both images.
It is necessary to note that because of infraction of these requirements and also be-
cause of presence of noise the assumption of constant brightness is carried out very

7
approximately. It creates all further problems. The curve wherein all points have iden-
tical intensity is called an isophoto curve. Correspondence of reference points as was
in the case of non-smooth bodies, is exchanged by correspondence isophoto curves for
smooth bodies. We shall see further that the same inexactness of assumption of constant
brightness leads to similar problems in the next methods too
3.1
Description of the two methods for ﬁnding correspondence and
reconstruction of epipolar geometries.
The ﬁrst method presented by us allows passing from correspondence isophoto curves
to correspondence of points on these lines. We shall call this method CCPM. For ﬁnd-
ing this correspondence we shall use closed isophoto curves. Generally lines on object
of shooting which image are isophoto curves, they are complicated space curves. How-
ever, in a large number of practical cases all points of such curve almost lie in the same
plane and, accordingly, connection between isophoto curves on various images is very
close to homography. In this case homography cusp transfers in cusp, and the inﬂection
point transfers in an inﬂection point. Accordingly, for the composite curve with strongly
varying curvature there is a correlation between quantities of curvature in the correspon-
dent points. Moreover, in the majority of practical cases homography between isophoto
curves is very close to the similarity of transformation including translation, rotation
in plane and scaling. Curvature of curves in the correspondent points is identical up
to constant for similarity transformation. For ﬁnding isophoto curves, curvature in any
point is not necessary to be searched for the shape of this line. There is a simple for-
mula allowing ﬁnding curvature on the basis of intensity distribution in a neighborhood
of this point:
k = −div
 ▽φ
| ▽φ|

(1)
, where k is curvature of isophoto curve and φ is intensity.
Assuming that correspondence between isophoto curves is close to similarity trans-
formation, choosing complicate closed isophoto curves with strongly changing curva-
ture k and carrying out rescaling by multiplying curvature on length of the curve (the
formula 2, 3) we can ﬁnd correspondence between these curves.
kr = k × L
(2)
A mean value of rescaled curvature kr doesnt depend on length L of the curve
krmean = 1
L
Z L
0
kr dl = 1
L
Z L
0
k × L dl =
Z L
0
k dl =
Z 2π
0
dϕ = 2π
(3)
It can be achieved by ﬁnding correlation between two functions: the rescaled cur-
vature k × L as functions of the rescaled distance
r
L from the some point on some
chosen isophoto curves, and the similar function for the correspondent isophoto curve

8
where the rescaled distances are calculated from a some chosen correspondent point
on this correspondent isophoto curve. Some correspondence between these two points
which gives the maximum of correlation of these two functions is considered as cor-
rect correspondence. Other correspondent points are on the identical rescaled distances
from the already found pair of correspondent points. That is the property of similarity
transformation. It is also necessary to note that all the above-mentioned concerns to the
smoothed image and functions; otherwise the noise disturbs all correlations. I.e. it is
required to use ﬁltration of images before searching isophoto curves and ﬁltration of
functions for the rescaled curvature for searching maximum of correlation.
For testing of correspondence instead of function of the rescaled curvature in cur-
rent point, the rescaled distance from a centre of gravity for current point can be used.
Such function should give a maximum of correlation approximately under the same
requirements as the function of the rescaled curvature. Choosing various pairs of cor-
respondent isophoto curves, we get a set of correspondent points. The problems is that
for any alone smooth body all these points lie in very close to almost parallel planes.
These planes lie on almost identical distance from the camera, i.e. the parallax will be
very small, and the fundamental matrix determining epipolar geometry will be deﬁned
ambiguously. To solve this problem, we chose two smooth bodies located on various
distance from the camera, and the parallax is large enough for isophoto curves on these
bodies. It is necessary to note, that this correspondence between points is found on the
basis of assumption about similarity and, hence, is not exact. These errors are added to
the errors caused by inexactness of assumption of constant brightness. Therefore, the
fundamental matrix received by conventional methods on the basis of these pairs of the
correspondent points is far from its true value. For ﬁnding its more precise value it is
necessary to involve additional reasons. First of them is connected with the fact that
in most cases points of a 3D-prototype isophoto curves usually lie almost in the same
plane. Accordingly, connection between isophoto curves, as we already noted above,
is close to homography. Knowing pairs of the correspondent points, we can ﬁnd 3 × 3
matrix homography H, linking these pairs of points. For this purpose a normalized DLT
algorithm is used [7]. The result can be improved by minimization of the function de-
termined as the sum of absolute values of distances between homographic mappings of
isophoto curve points to nearest points on correspondent isophoto curve. Then this sum
is added to the sum, received by the same way but two images are interchanged, and
mean value of these errors is calculated:
S =
 N
X
i=1

min
j
d(x′
j, Hxi) + min
j
d(xj, H−1x′
i)
!,
2N
(4)
, where d(a, b) = ((a1/a3 −b1/b3)2 + (a2/a3 −b2/b3)2)1/2
Where d is distance between points with homogeneous coordinates, xi, x′i are ho-
mogeneous vectors of correspondent points on isophoto curves. Points xi are on the
ﬁrst image, points x′
i are on the second image. N - number of pair of correspondent
points, H- evaluated homography between closed isophoto curves. Making value of a
corner element of matrix H(3, 3) equal to unity, we search for the local minimum of

9
function deﬁned by formula 4 with respect to other elements of this matrix. For the
initial iteration the value of matrix H will be used which is already found above by nor-
malized DLT algorithm. For search of the local minimum we use standard function of
MATLAB package fminsearch().The received minimal value of function deﬁned by
formula 4 , we shall denote as Smin. It is necessary to note that resulting homography
is found by non-exact methods and, accordingly, also is not exact.
Suppose that we know homogeneous coordinates of epipole on the second image.
Using also the homography found above, we can calculate a fundamental matrix from
the following formula:
F = [e′]×H
(5)
where [e′]× =


0
−e′
3 e′
2
e′
3
0
−e′
1
−e′
2 e′
1
0


Where e′ - is a homogeneous vector of epipole on the second image, H is some
homography between two images. For search of candidates in epipole we divide the
plane into a ﬁnite number of regions as it is described in the second part of this section.
In each region we select just one epipole. Lets choose a function for evaluation of
quality of a fundamental matrix. We will map each point on the ﬁrst image to an epipolar
line in the second image. Then we shall calculate the absolute value of distance from
the correspondent point on the second image to this epipolar lines. We shall take the
sum of all these distances, and then we shall add this sum to the similar sum received
by the same way but with interchange of images. Then we shall ﬁnd the mean value for
components of these sums.
Z =
 N
X
i=1
 dl(x′
i, Fxi) + dl(xi, F T x′
i)

!,
2N
(6)
, where dl(x, l) = (
|xTl|
x3
p
l2
1 + l2
2
)
Where dl distance between a point with homogeneous coordinates and an epipolar
line,xi, x′i are homogeneousvectors of correspondent points on isophoto curves. Points
xi are on the ﬁrst image, points x′
i are on the second image. N - number of pair of
correspondent points, F- evaluated fundamental matrix. Choosing some candidate in
epipole and having taken as initial value for homography matrix H found as described
above by minimization with help formula 4, we can carry out further iterations for and
ﬁnd a local minimum of the function described by the formula 6.
Found homography will be more precise then its initial value, because initial ho-
mography was only the ﬁrst approximation. In order not to run too far from initial
homography, we shall assume that deviation S determined by the formula 4 cannot be

10
more then 1.5Smin where Smin is its minimal value found above. It can be achieved
by introduction of the additional term in the formula 6 equal to zero for S < 1.5Smin
and fast increasing for S > 1.5Smin. Search of a local minimum can be carried out
with use of the above mentioned function of MATLAB package fminsearch().For
each candidate in epipole with the number i we ﬁnd optimum fundamental matrix Fi.
The best of them can be deﬁned as giving a minimum of function 6. We shall term this
minimum value as Zmin.
Unfortunately, since the found pairs of the correspondent points are only approxi-
mate, the minimum of function 6 can not give the true value of a fundamental matrix.
To improve the result we can take not alone fundamental matrix relevant to Zmin, but
all local minimums of function Z (Fi) from argument i (epipole correspondent to i=1
is in the center of image and run away from center to maximal allowed distance along
spiral curve for larger i (yellow spiral on ﬁgure 8 (h)) ) , where i is a serial number of
epipole. From all found local minimums we choose only that Z < 1.34Zmin, where Z
is calculated from formula 6.
It will give us not hust one solution but a large set of candidates for the solution.
For ﬁnding of the best of them the second reason and the second method of search of a
fundamental matrix which we shall term CTPM can be used. It is based on the following
property of epipolar geometry that is correct for assumption of constant brightness:
epipolar line tangential to isophoto curves maps to epipolar line, is also tangential to
correspondent isophoto curves. To evaluate how precisely this property carried out, we
can introduce the following function:
Z =
 N1
X
i=1
min
j∈M′
i
dl(y′tangent
j
, Fxi) +
N2
X
i=1
min
j∈Mi dl(ytangent
j
, F T x′
i)
!,
(N1 + N2)
(7)
, where dl(x, l) = (
|xTl|
x3
p
l2
1 + l2
2
)
Where dl distance between a point with homogeneous coordinates and an epipolar
line, xi, x′i are homogeneous vectors of globalmaximum points of intensity on epipolar
lines. Points xi are on the ﬁrst image, points x′
i are on the second image. N1 - number
of points on ﬁrst image that have correspondent tangent points y′tangent
j
on the second
image with respect to condition described below. N2 - number of points on second
image that have correspondent tangent points ytangent
j
on the ﬁrst image with respect to
condition described below. F- evaluated fundamental matrix. Lets choose a certain set
of epipolar lines on the ﬁrst image transiting through a smooth body.We shall consider
intensity along pieces of epipolar lines lying inside the image of a smooth body. Points
of extremum give us a point of tangency epipolar line with the isophoto curve. We
shall choose some epipolar line, and among points of extremum we shall choose a
global maximum. We shall ﬁnd the correspondent epipolar line on the second image.
Also we shall ﬁnd all isophoto curves on the second image having the same quantity of
intensity, as in the point of a global maximum found above on the ﬁrst image. Lets carry
out all possible tangential to these isophoto lines from epipole on the second image.

11
Among all points of a tangency we shall choose what is closest to epipolar line and
we shall ﬁnd its distance to the epipolar line. We shall make the same calculations for
all epipolar lines, and then we shall calculate the sum of all found distances. Then we
shall ﬁnd the similar sum, by images interchanging. Then we shall add together these
sums and then we shall calculate the mean value of distance. Thus, we get evaluation
for precision of performance of the tangential epipolar lines property described above.
However, the algorithm as described above works with big outliers. Actually, among all
points of a tangency found on the second image should there is a point correspondent
to a global maximum on the ﬁrst image. Its distance to the correspondent epipolar line
gives a current error of a method. Other points of tangency can improve only the result
and reduce an error if one of them lies closer to epipolar lines, than this true point of
tangency. However, the situation is much more difﬁcult. The true point of tangency
can in general miss on the second image. It can be closed by others parts of smooth
bodies or can be not found because of an error in assumption of constant brightness.
In this situation a point of tangency the closest to epipolar lines can lie very far from
this epipolar line because it has no relation to the true tangency correspondent point.
Such tangency point consequently gives outlier to evaluated function. To prevent such
situation, we offer the following method. We shall take outline curves on the ﬁrst and
second image. We shall ﬁnd homography, mapping these curves by the same method
which we found homography, mapping isophoto curves. We shall ﬁnd with help of this
homography on the second image mapping of a global maximum point, deﬁned above
and we shall consider a small circular neighborhood around this mapping ( 3 percents
from the area occupied with a smooth body projection on the second image)(ﬁgure 3).
The true point of tangency should lie in this neighborhood. Therefore, we shall
view only the points of a tangency lying in this neighborhood. If any point of tangency
in this neighborhood is not present, we throw out this case from our consideration. This
method will prevent appearance of outliers in evaluated function. The similar method
can be used for search correspondent isophoto curves. Actually, if we have one isophoto
curve on the ﬁrst image, it usually corresponds to not alone but several isophoto curves
on the second image. Which one of them to choose? The one which is closest to a
homographic mapping of the ﬁrst image isophoto curve. We use homography received
from outline curves. We can use the above described CTPM evaluation method that
excludes outliers to evaluate all possible fundamental matrixes and choose the one what
gives the minimal error. However, it is a too long way. For testing by the second CTPM
method we shall choose only those fundamental matrixes which have passed the ﬁlter
of the ﬁrst CCPM method. Thus, we get a ﬁnal evaluation of fundamental matrixes.
Precision of this evaluation is restricted only to precision of assumption of constant
brightness.
3.2
Searching for epipoles
In this section we present a partition of the inﬁnite plane into a ﬁnite number of regions.
All points in a given region will be treated, under this partition, as a single epipole.
Therefore, all lines intersecting a given region will be members of its epipolar line
set. As we explained below, the size of each region is proportional to its location with
respect to the image.

12
Fig. 3. Finding correspondent tangential point.
Our plane partition is deﬁned by concentric circles with a set of radii {ri}k
i=1, where
ri ≥ri+1 for each 1 ≤i ≤k and r1 = ∞. The center of these circles is the image
center. Let each region be deﬁned by the 4-tuple, (θ, δθi, ri, ri+1), where θi and θi+δθi
are two angles, and ri and ri+1 are two radii (see Figure 1). The parameters of this
partition are the set of r′
is and the set of δθ′
is. For a given ring, there are two degrees of
freedom to deﬁne the set of regions in that ring: the ring length, ri −ri+1 and the region
width, δθi. These parameters are set so that the partition maintains the system resolution
and the equal hit measure. Later we deﬁne these two properties. For simplicity, we
assume a circular image with radius of one.
System resolution: Any vision system is limited by the accuracy of the measurements.
We deﬁne system resolution to be γ if it does not discriminate between two image lines
passing through a point when the difference in the line directions is γ0 ≤γ.
We say that the partition maintains the system resolution when the system cannot
discriminate between two candidate epipoles which are located in the same region.
Formally, Assume the system resolution is . Let G be a given region and e1, e2 ∈G
be two points (see Figure 4 ). Let l1 and l2 be two lines connecting an image point q
and the two points e1 and e2, respectively. When the angle between l1 and l2 is less
than the system resolution γ, the system cannot discriminate between these lines. More
generally, for a given region G we deﬁne αG(q) to be the maximal angle between the
image point q and any two points in the region. Let αG =
max
q∈Image αG(q) then the
system resolution is maintained for G.
Note that the system resolution cannot be maintained in regions which overlap the
image or are very close to the image. The closer the point q is to the region G the larger
αG(q) becomes. In particular when q ∈G then αG(q) = 2π.
Hit measure: Roughly speaking, the equal hit measure property guarantees that the
number of epipolar lines considered for each region is probabilisticly equal. We de-
ﬁne the hit measure of a region, HM(G), to be the probability of a random epipolar
line intersecting a region G. Each candidate epipolar line we consider is deﬁned by an

13
 e1
 e2
 p1
l1
l2
 p1
 p2
 p3
 p4
 q
β
 O
δθ
Image
 G
Fig. 4. q is an image point, e1 and e2 are two points in a given region G. The angle
β = acos((e1 −q)(e2 −q)T /||(e1 −q)||||e2 −q||). If β < γ where γ is the system
resolution, then the system cannot discriminate between the epipoles e1 and e2.
image point and a single direction. We assume that these epipolar lines are generated
by a uniform distribution of points in the image and uniform distribution of directions.
Formally, the following integral computes HM(G).
HM(G) = 1
2π
ZZ
x2+y2≤1
αG(x, y)dxdy
(8)
By changing the integral variables from x and y to the polar coordinates of the
image points, φ and r, we obtain:
HM(G) = 1
2π
Z 1
0
Z 2π
0
rαG(r cos(φ), r sin(φ))dφdr
(9)
(r is the determinant of the Jacobian of the exchange variables).
In order to have a probabilistically equal number of points in each region, we would
like HM(G) to be identical for all regions.
In the Appendix we describe how to set the partition parameters, ri and δθi, in or-
der to maintain the above conditions. We distinguish between three types of regions
which we analyze separately. They include inﬁnite regions on the outermost ring, re-
gions within the image and close to the image such that the system resolution condition
cannot be maintained and intermediate regions. The parameters depend on the desired
resolution of the system, γ.
3.3
Functions for testing of correspondence.
Lets assume that we have some fundamental matrix. We shall introduce three ways of an
evaluation as far as it is close to the true fundamental matrix. The ﬁrst evaluation shall be
termed CCPM. It is based on a set of the correspondent points found from correlation of
curvatures for isophoto curves and given by the formula 6. The second evaluation shall
be termed CTPM by us. It is based on property of the tangential to isophoto curves
epipolar lines to map also into the tangential to correspondent isophoto curves epipolar

14
line and is given by the formula 7. The third evaluation shall be termed SM. It is based
on a set of almost precise correspondent points received by covering smooth bodies
with a fabric with a texture of a chess board (ﬁgure 5). Then we photograph pair of
images of this fabric from the same points of shooting from which images of smooth
bodies have been received also. Evaluated function is given by the following formula:
B =
 N
X
i=1
 dl(z′
i, Fzi) + dl(zi, F T z′
i)

!,
2N
(10)
, where dl(x, l) = (
|xTl|
x3
p
l2
1 + l2
2
)
Where dl is distance between a point with homogeneouscoordinates and an epipolar
line, zi, z′i are homogeneous vectors of correspondent points on fabric with a texture
of a chess board. Points zi are on the ﬁrst image, points z′
i are on the second image.
N - number of pair of correspondent points, F- evaluated fundamental matrix. From
this almost precise set of the correspondent points by a method of the normalized 8-dot
algorithm (for number of points n > 8) [2]. almost precise fundamental matrix can be
received. We shall term this third standard method for fundamental matrix ﬁnding as
SM.
Fig. 5. Covering smooth bodies with a fabric with a texture of a chess board.
3.4
Implementation
For testing of algorithms nine pairs of images of a pair of smooth bodies have been
made. A female head and a female bust were used as smooth bodies. Accordingly, we
have nine various cases of algorithms implementation. Images differ with an arrange-
ment of the camera position or an arrangement of smooth bodies. In cases 3,4, and 6

15
two subcases are chosen, distinguished by a choice of isophoto curves on the basis of
which calculation of the correspondent points by a CCPM method was made. As result
of use of this method we get a ﬁnite set of candidates for a role of a fundamental matrix
as it has been described earlier in Section 3. For each of cases or subcase, eight ﬁgures
are given:
1) In the ﬁrst ﬁgure we can see a set of almost precisely correspondent points and a
set of correspondent to them epipolar lines of a fundamental matrix received by almost
precise SM method.
2) In the second ﬁgure we can see a set of almost precisely correspondent points
and a set of correspondent to them epipolar lines of a fundamental matrix. This matrix
is one component of the complete set of candidates on the fundamental matrix, received
by a CCPM method. SM evaluation gives a minimum for this matrix among all matrices
of this set.
3) In the third ﬁgure we can see a set of almost precisely correspondent points and a
set of correspondent to them epipolar lines of a fundamental matrix. This matrix is one
component of the complete set of candidates on the fundamental matrix, received by a
CTPM method. CTPM evaluation gives a minimum for this matrix among all matrices
of this set.
4) In the fourth ﬁgure we can see a set of almost precisely correspondent points and
a set of correspondent to them epipolar lines of a fundamental matrix. This matrix is one
component of the complete set of candidates on the fundamental matrix, received by a
CCPM method. CCPM evaluation gives a minimum for this matrix among all matrices
of this set.
5) In the ﬁfth ﬁgure we can see a set of the correspondent points lying on corre-
spondent isophoto curves and received by a CCPM method.
6) In the sixth ﬁgure we can see CCPM evaluation for a fundamental matrix as
function of the epipole number. This epipole located on the second image. All epipoles
lie in regions; the method of division into these regions is described in the Section 3.
The ﬁrst epipole lies at center of a ﬁgure and with increase of the number moves from
center along spiral ﬁgured by yellow color in the eighth ﬁgure. Fundamental matrixes
are received by a CCPM method. Red asterisks designate the set of candidates giving
the best CCPM evaluation.
7) In the seventh ﬁgure we can see CTPM, CCPM and SM evaluation for a set of
the candidates marked by red asterisks in the sixth ﬁgure. The asterisks lying on curves,
mark points of a minimum. The asterisks not lying on curves and located after graphics
mark CTPM, CCPM and SM evaluation for almost precise fundamental matrix. This
matrix is received by a SM method.
8) In the eighth ﬁgure by red daggers are marked centre and edges of the second
image. The yellow spiral connects regions in which we place epipoles. Epipoles are lo-
cated along this spiral, since center of the image. By red asterisk it is designated epipole
on the second image of almost precise fundamental matrix received by a SM method.
Red, green and blue circles are designated epipoles, correspondent to the fundamen-
tal matrixes minimizing a CTPM, CCPM and SM evaluation function among a set of
candidates, received by a CCPM method and marked by red asterisks in the sixth ﬁgure.
Case1.

16
Case1 includes the following ﬁgures: ﬁgure 8 (a)(b)(c)(d)(e)(f)(g)(h).
Case2.
Case2 includes the following ﬁgures: ﬁgure 9 (a)(b)(c)(d)(e)(f)(g)(h).
Case3a.
Case3a includes the following ﬁgures: ﬁgure 10 (a)(b)(c)(d)(e)(f)(g)(h).
Case3b.
Case3b includes the following ﬁgures: ﬁgure 11 (a)(b)(c)(d)(e)(f)(g)(h).
Case4a.
Case4a includes the following ﬁgures: ﬁgure 12 (a)(b)(c)(d)(e)(f)(g)(h).
Case4b.
Case4b includes the following ﬁgures: ﬁgure 13 (a)(b)(c)(d)(e)(f)(g)(h).
Case5.
Case5 includes the following ﬁgures: ﬁgure 14 (a)(b)(c)(d)(e)(f)(g)(h).
Case6a.
Case6a includes the following ﬁgures: ﬁgure 15 (a)(b)(c)(d)(e)(f)(g)(h).
Case6b.
Case6b includes the following ﬁgures: ﬁgure 16 (a)(b)(c)(d)(e)(f)(g)(h).
Case7.
Case7 includes the following ﬁgures: ﬁgure 17 (a)(b)(c)(d)(e)(f)(g)(h).
Case8.
Case8 include follow ﬁgures: ﬁgure 18(a)(b)(c)(d)(e)(f)(g)(h).
Case9.
Case9 includes the following ﬁgures: ﬁgure 19 (a)(b)(c)(d)(e)(f)(g)(h).
For these ﬁgures:
(a) the set of exact correspondent points (almost exact set found from the chesslike
fabric) and epipolar lines found from a fundamental matrix, received by the SM from
these points
(b) the set of exact correspondent points and epipolar lines found from a funda-
mental matrix. This matrix gives a minimum error for set of epipoles candidates deﬁned
on ﬁgure f (Red asterisks) and for the exact set of correspondent points.
(c) the set of exact correspondent points and epipolar lines found from a funda-
mental matrix. This matrix gives a minimum error for set of epipoles candidates deﬁned
on ﬁgure f (Red asterisks) and for the correspondent points set deﬁned by the CTPM
and current epipoles.
(d) the set of correspondent points (almost exact set) and epipolar lines found from
a fundamental matrix. This matrix gives a minimum error for set of epipoles candidates
deﬁned on ﬁgure f (Red asterisks) and for the correspondent points set deﬁned by the
CCPM.
(e) the set of the correspondent points lying on correspondent isophoto curves and
received by the CCPM.
(f) the error of a fundamental matrix as function of the epipoles set index. These
epipoles located on the second image. All epipoles lie in regions; the method of division
into these regions is described in the Subsection 3.2 . The ﬁrst epipole lies at center of a
ﬁgure and with increase of the index moves from center along spiral ﬁgured by yellow
color in the ﬁgure h. Fundamental matrixes are received form the CCPM correspondent

17
points sets and current epipoles positions. Red asterisks designate the set of candidates
giving the minimal local errors.
(g) errors of fundamental matrices as a function of index in subset of the can-
didates to epipoles marked by red asterisks in ﬁgure f. The fundamental matrices are
found from current candidates to epipoles and correspondent points sets(set deﬁned by
the CTPM and current epipoles(red line), set deﬁned by CCPM (green line) and exact
set (blue line)). Errors are calculated with respect to the same relevant correspondent
points sets. Asterisks on the lines mark minimums. The three asterisks (not lying on
curves and located after graphics) mark error of the exact fundamental matrix. The ex-
act fundamental matrix is found by SM from the exact set of correspondent points.
Errors are found for sets of correspondent points (set deﬁned by the CTPM and ex-
act epipoles (red asterisk), set deﬁned by CCPM (green asterisk) and exact set (blue
asterisk)).
(h) marked by red daggers are the center and edges of the second image. The
yellow spiral connects regions in which we place epipoles. Epipoles are located along
this spiral, from center of the image. Designated by red asterisk is the epipole on the
second image from exact fundamental matrix received by the SM. Rosy points mark the
set of epipoles candidates. This set is received by the CCPM and marked by red asterisks
in ﬁgure f. Circles are designated epipoles, correspondent to the fundamental matrixes,
witch are correspondent to minimum errors (between all rosy points) for CTPM (red
circle), CCPM (green circle) and exact (blue circle) correspondent points sets.
From the given ﬁgures it is possible to draw the following conclusions:
1) The CCPM method gives the full set of candidates on the true solution. Epipoles
of these matrixes lie approximately on straight line. What is this straight line? We
shall take homography (relevant to evaluation Smin in a CCPM method) between two
isophoto curves, lying on a sculpture of the female head on two images. We use this
homography to ﬁnd on the second image mapping of isophoto curve belonging to a
bust on the ﬁrst image. This mapping is shifted with respect to correspondent isophoto
curve belonging to a bust on the second image, because of a parallax. The direction of
this shift gives us the required straight line.
2) Almost always (in 10 cases from 12, and besides two bed subcases actually cor-
responding to the same pair of pictures) among set of solutions found by CCPM method
there is a solution which is very close to the almost precise solution received by a SM
method. This solution gives minimum of a SM evaluation for this set.
3) The solutions correspondent to a minimum of a CTPM or CCPM evaluations for
this set, less than in 50 percents of cases are close to almost precise minimum (in 5
cases from 12 for CTPM and in 3 cases from 12 for a CCPM evaluation).
4) CTPM or CCPM evaluations for almost precise solution, received by the SM
method are not in minimum while SM evaluation always corresponds to a minimum.
These three (CTPM, CCPM and SM) evaluations for SM method solution are compared
to similar evaluations for the set solution received by CCPM method.

18
4
Summary and discussion
We present four methods for recovering the epipolar geometry from images of smooth
surfaces. The existing methods for recovering epipolar geometry use corresponding fea-
ture points that cannot be found in such images. The ﬁrst method is based on ﬁnding
corresponding characteristic points created by illumination (ICPM illumination charac-
teristic points method). The second method is based on correspondent tangency points
created by tangents from epipoles to outline of smooth bodies (OTPM outline tangent
points method). These two methods are exact and give correct results for real images,
as positions of the corresponding illumination characteristic points and corresponding
outline are known with small errors. But the second method is limited either to special
type of scenes or to restricted camera motion.
The level curves of constant illumination intensity (used for the second pair of meth-
ods) are found precise but insufﬁciently both because of inexactitude of constant bright-
ness assumption and because of noise. This noise leads to major errors in deﬁnition
of corresponding points found from the level curves especially for smooth bodes. In-
deed, illumination intensity along these bodes varies slowly and smoothly, except for
the cases of illumination characteristic points used for the ﬁrst method, and outlines of
smooth bodies. This fact results in the split-hair accuracy of the described here ﬁrst pair
of methods with respect to the second pair of methods described below. In case of a
small number of the smooth bodies, the second method of tangents can be used only
for a validation and an improvement of the method of characteristic points or for only
ﬁnding a set of possible epipolar geometries.
Two more methods are also offered, named CCPM and CTPM, for searching epipo-
lar geometry of images of smooth bodies. The CCPM method is based on search of
correspondent points on isophoto curves with the help of correlation of curvatures be-
tween these lines. The CTPM method is based on property of the tangential to isophoto
curve epipolar line to map into the tangential to correspondent isophoto curves epipolar
line. The standard method termed SM and based on knowledge of pairs of the almost
exact correspondent points, has been used for testing of these two methods. From dis-
cussion of results of these methods in Section 3.4 we can conclude that these methods
for searching epipolar geometries allow us to ﬁnd in most cases only a set of the so-
lutions containing the solution close to the true solution, but do not allow us to ﬁnd
this good solution among this set. An exception is given for a case when epipoles lie
in inﬁnity (that truly, for example, for translation of the camera parallel to plane of the
image and in for some other cases). Since epipoles for all solution of chosen set lie
approximately on one straight line (a direction of a parallax) in a case epipoles on in-
ﬁnity, their position is determined uniquely by direction of this straight line. The reason
of ambiguity in other cases is generally deﬁned by the errors imported by inexactness
of assumption of constant brightness. An additional error is also imported with inex-
actness of a CCPM method, but it is not the main reason of our problem. Among the
found (by CCPM method) set almost always there is a solution close to precise, but it
can not be found with the help of a CTPM evaluation because of the errors imported by
inexactness of assumption of constant brightness.

19
Appendix: Setting the partition parameters
Further we describe how to set the partition parameters, ri and δθi, in order to maintain
the system resolution and the equal hit properties. We distinguish between three types
of regions: regions on the outermost ring, regions within the image and close to the
image such that the system resolution condition cannot be maintained and intermediate
regions. The parameters depend on the desired system resolution, γ.
Outer ring regions: For regions in the outer ring the epipolar lines are almost parallel.
In this case the regions are deﬁned such that, r1 = ∞and G1i = (θi, δθ, ∞, r2). We
next show that it is possible to choose r2 and δθ and δθ such that the region, G, satisﬁes
the system resolution.
Image
 O
t1
 p1
G
t2
 p2
 q1
αG( q1)
 q2
δθ
αG( q2)
Fig. 6. This ﬁgure shows a region in the outermost ring, G. The maximal angle between
an image point and two points in the region, αG, is obtained at one of the two image
points q1 or q2. The point q1 is the intersection of the image circle with the angle
bisector δθ. The point q2 is a point on the image circle such that the tangent to the
image circle through q2 passes through p1.
Using trigonometric considerations, it can be shown that for an outer ring region, G,
the maximal angle between an image point and two points in the region, αG, is obtained
at one of the two image points q1 or q2 as illustrated in Figure 6 (the point at which the
maximum is obtained depends on r2 and δθ). We next deﬁne these points. Let t1 and
t2 be the rays that deﬁne an outer region, G. Let p1 and p2 be the delineating points of
the region (the intersection points of the region rays and the circle r2). The point q1 is
the intersection of the image circle with the bisector of the angle δθ. The point q2 is the
intersection point of the image circle with the tangent from the point p1 to the circle .
It can be shown using trigonometric considerations that αG = max(αG(q1), αG(q2))
where
αG(q1) = 2tg−1(
r2 sin( δθ
2 )
r2 cos( δθ
2 ) −1)
and
αG(q2) = δθ + sin−1(1/r2)
(11)
It is therefore possible to set one of the two variables, r2 or δθ, and compute the
other variable such that αG < γ where γ is the system resolution. In our system we set

20
δθ1, and solve for r2. The hit measure, HM(G), is then set to the value computed on
G (using formula 9). This value depends on the initial choice of δθ1.
Intermediate regions: Two parameters deﬁne an intermediate region, ri+1 and δθ. We
next show how to deﬁne these parameters based on the system resolution, γ , and the
hit measure, HM(G). Similarly to the outer ring case, at an intermediate ring region
G, αG = max(αG(q1), αG(q2)), where q1 is deﬁned as in the outer region case, and
q2 will be deﬁned next.
 q2
 m
 o
Image
 G
 p1
 p3
 p4
δθ
Fig. 7. This ﬁgure shows an intermediate region, G. The point q2 satisﬁes that the cir-
cumscribed circle of the points p1, p4 and q2 is tangent to the image bounding circle.
The angle αG(q2) = p1, q1, p4 is maximal for all image points which are outside the
circular section deﬁned by δθ.
Let Cimage be the set of image points on the image bounding circle, outside the
image section deﬁned by θi and δθ. It can be shown that αG(q2) = max{αG(q)|q ∈
Cimage}, if the circumscribed circle of the points p1, p4 and q2 is tangent to the image
bounding circle (see Figure 7). This is true since at this point the circumscribed circle
has the smaller radius, and therefore the angle ̸ (p1, q1, p4) is maximal (by the sine
theorem). It is now possible to write down the equations that deﬁne q2. Let m be the
circumscribed circle center of q2, p1, p4. Assume that the image center is at (0, 0) and
the image radius is one, in this case, ||p1|| = ri+1, ||p4|| = ri, and q2 =
m
||m||. Under
this setup the radius of the circumscribed circle and the angles δθ and γ are given by:
cos(δθ) =
p1p4T
||p1||||p4||
cos(γ) = (p1−q)(p4−q)T
||p1−q||||p4−q||
||p1 −m|| = ||p4 −m|| = ||m|| −1
(12)
Given ri and γ and one of the region parameters ri+1 or δθ it is possible to solve
these equations for the other parameter, as long as ri+1 is large enough. The region
must also satisfy the equal hit measure, which is deﬁned in formula 9. Our system solves

21
these non linear equations by numerical methods yielding values of the parameters ri+1
and δθi.
Inner regions : In the inner regions, the system resolution constraint cannot be main-
tained. We can only maintain the equal hit measure. We therefore have only one con-
straint. We set one of the unknown parameters, ri+1 and δθi, arbitrarily, and solve for
the other one. In our system we set δθi to be a constant equal to the last computed value,
and solve for ri+1.
Acknowledgment
We would like to thank Ilan Shimshoni for his supervision and many fruitful ideas used
in this paper.
