Towards an Understanding of Neural Networks in Natural-Image Spaces
Yifei Fan
Anthony Yezzi
Georgia Institute of Technology
85 5th Street, NW Atlanta, GA 30308 USA

Abstract
Two major uncertainties, dataset bias and adversar-
ial examples, prevail in state-of-the-art AI algorithms with
deep neural networks. In this paper, we present an intuitive
explanation for these issues as well as an interpretation of
the performance of deep networks in a natural-image space.
The explanation consists of two parts: the philosophy of
neural networks and a hypothetical model of natural-image
spaces. Following the explanation, we 1) demonstrate that
the values of training samples diﬀer, 2) provide incremental
boost to the accuracy of a CIFAR-10 classiﬁer by introduc-
ing an additional “random-noise” category during train-
ing, 3) alleviate over-ﬁtting thereby enhancing the robust-
ness against adversarial examples by detecting and exclud-
ing illusive training samples that are consistently misclas-
siﬁed. Our overall contribution is therefore twofold. First,
while most existing algorithms treat data equally and have
a strong appetite for more data, we demonstrate in contrast
that an individual datum can sometimes have dispropor-
tionate and counterproductive inﬂuence and that it is not al-
ways better to train neural networks with more data. Next,
we consider more thoughtful strategies by taking into ac-
count the geometric and topological properties of natural-
image spaces to which deep networks are applied.
1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the rapid development of
artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) and deep learning.
Deep net-
works distinguish themselves in various types of computer-
vision challenges such as ImageNet [1] and COCO [2], and
some AI algorithms even outperform humans on certain
tasks and test sets [3], [4]. However, two major issues re-
main and prevent us from establishing robust real-world ap-
plications with current algorithms. One is dataset bias [5],
meaning that a machine-learning algorithm that performs
well on one dataset may fail on another. The other is ad-
versarial examples [6], which shows that tiny modiﬁcations
on inputs may lead to incorrect outputs by deep networks,
even though the perturbations are almost imperceptible by
humans.
In this paper, we present our understanding of neural net-
works in natural-image spaces and a model of natural-image
spaces which manage to explain the uncertainties. The con-
tributions of the paper are as follows:
• We provide a uniﬁed explanation for dataset bias and
adversarial examples, the two prevailing uncertainties
in neural networks, from the perspective of variational
calculus and properties of natural-image spaces.
• We illustrate that the values of training samples diﬀer.
Training with more samples does not guarantee higher
accuracy, and even random noise can sometimes help
improve the performance of neural-network classiﬁers.
• We present a hypothetical model for natural-image
spaces. The model can potentially guide a network
to alleviate over-ﬁtting and enhance robustness against
adversarial examples, as well as improve accuracy.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2
reviews related studies. Section 3 illustrates the philosophy
of neural networks, explains in theory why the training pro-
cess is data-dependent and zero-constrained, and speciﬁes
the ﬂaw arising from limited options in data labels. Section
4 examines the characteristics of image data and presents
the hypothetical image-space model. Sections 5 and 6 fol-
low with experiments and discussion, respectively. All rele-
vant materials that accompany this paper will subsequently
be available on GitHub.
2. Related Work
Dataset bias: The dataset bias issue was ﬁrst pointed
out in [5], after the authors became aware that researchers
who had worked in object and scene recognition could eas-
ily guess which images came from which dataset. They
claimed that such a diﬀerence among datasets could even
be captured by a classiﬁer and reﬂected in the diagonal pat-
tern of the confusion matrix. Although the purpose of com-
puter vision datasets is to oﬀer unbiased representations of
1
arXiv:1801.09097v2  [cs.CV]  11 Feb 2019

the world, they seem to express them with a strong built-in
bias. A follow-up study [7] exploited dataset bias during the
training phase. The authors proposed two sets of weights,
bias vectors and visual world weights to undo the damage of
dataset bias. They demonstrated the beneﬁt of explicitly ac-
counting for bias when multiple datasets are involved. An-
other study [8] provided a large-scale analysis of the issue
with twelve databases. However, as most previous studies
have addressed the issue on dataset level, they do not help
explain or eliminate such a bias in practice. It is possible
that the data samples we collect resemble multiple datasets
at the same time. Thus, stating the characteristics of images
that lead to such bias is beneﬁcial. One apparent bias stems
from the size of targets. The evaluation metric of COCO
[2] challenges, which emphasizes the eﬀects of iconic and
non-iconic objects, accounts for the size factor.
Adversarial examples: As an intriguing property ﬁrst
discovered by [6], a hardly-perceptible perturbation on in-
puts could lead to misclassiﬁcation. Since then, researchers
have been working on methods of attacking/fooling or de-
fending deep networks. On the attackers’ side, the authors
of [9] forced the network to generate high-conﬁdence pre-
dictions for images that are even unrecognizable by hu-
mans. With DeepFool [10], we can easily change the output
label for an image with unnoticeable perturbations. Fur-
thermore, we can fool the network with very few pixels
[11]. In general, two types of perturbations exist: adversar-
ial and universal [12]. While the former depends on indi-
vidual image, the latter is a uniform perturbation applied to
all images. The existence of universal perturbation implies
important characteristics of the geometry of the decision
boundaries in high-dimensional space [13]. In [14], uni-
versal perturbations are computed without any knowledge
of the target data. On the defenders’ side, eﬃcient defenses
against adversarial attacks are provided in [15]. The idea
is to stabilize the prediction by reinforcing the weak points
of the network. A recent study [16] proposed methods for
training networks with improved resistance to adversarial
attacks. In practice, studies do not agree on the extent of the
eﬀects of these attacks. Perturbations for object detection
in autonomous vehicles is not a concern [17]. New attacks,
however, generate more subtle adversarial examples [18].
Nevertheless, the combat between attackers and defenders
will guide us to more robust and secure networks.
Image manifold: The idea of the image manifold comes
from smooth manifold in mathematics [19]. A topological
space M is a topological n-manifold if it is 1) a Hausdorﬀ
space, 2) second countable, and 3) locally Euclidean of di-
mension n. Manifold M has important topological prop-
erties, including the following: 1) It is connected if and
only if it is path connected, and 2) it is locally compact.
It is assumed that natural images are embedded in a mani-
fold whose dimension is much lower than that of the images
themselves. Such a formulation consists of two key compo-
nents: a distance metric and a map from parameter (or fea-
ture, latent) space to the image space. In computer vision,
researchers manage to approximate the image manifold via
learning [20]. The generative adversarial network (GAN)
is used in the state-of-the-art approximation of the image
manifold [21]. However, such approximation may not fully
account for that spaces of images are vast and sparsely pop-
ulated [22].
3. Philosophy of Neural Networks
In this section, we analyze the high-level in machine
learning from the view of variational calculus and reveal
potential reasons for uncertainties in neural networks.
3.1. The Variational Perspective on Learning
The learning process is generally based on the idea of
gradient descent [23]: If f(·) is deﬁned and diﬀerentiable in
the neighborhood of point a, then f(x) decreases fastest if
one goes from a in the direction of the negative gradient of
f at a (i.e., −∇f(a)). In other words, if an+1 = an −γ∇f(an)
for small enough γ, then f(an) ≥f(an+1). As a result, gradi-
ent descent algorithms are likely to ﬁnd an extremum point
of f(·). However, one crucial diﬀerence exists between the
function f(·) and the underlying target function h(·) to be
learned by neural networks. Here f(·) is the objective func-
tion that we maximize/minimize. After iterations, we ob-
tain an extremum point a∗and its corresponding extremum
f(a∗). In contrast, according to the geometric view taken
in functional analysis, the target function h(·) itself is an
extremum point similar to a∗, whose values may be ex-
plained as components of an inﬁnite-dimensional vector in-
dexed1 by its domain X, that is, (hx)x∈X. On the contrary, the
objective/loss functions in machine learning correspond
to functionals L(h(·)) in calculus of variations.
A functional is a special type of function that takes an-
other function as its input. A simple example of a functional
is as follows.
L( f, x) =
Z 1
0
f(x) −y(x) dx,
y(·) is given
(1)
We can easily discretize a functional and obtain a loss func-
tion for neural networks.
MSE(h, x) = 1
m
m
X
i=1
(h(xi) −yi)2
(2)
The output of a functional depends on not only the inte-
grand/summand f(·), but also the interval (i.e., the data) for
integration/summation, which theoretically explains why
1E.g., the index set of v = (v1, v2, v3) is {1, 2, 3}
2

0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
x
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
f(x)
Figure 1: Training samples aﬀect the geometry of the ap-
proximated space. Blue: 40,000 from [0.4, 0.6); orange:
20,000 from [0, 0.1) and 20,000 from [0.9, 1).
the training process is heavily data-dependent, and deﬁcien-
cies in data themselves and data usage will impact learning-
based algorithms. Although based on the Universal Approx-
imation Theorem [24], deep networks can approximate the
“inﬁnite-dimensional vector” h(·) with suﬃcient computa-
tion resource, they cannot resolve issues from data.
3.2. The Point-function Duality
We introduce the point-function duality of target func-
tions to emphasize that the training process is zero-
constrained. From the point perspective, f(·), as a point in
the domain of loss functional L( f), cannot determine what
its actual domain and range are. From the function per-
spective, the topological property of its domain and range
matters, especially if we apply f : X →Y to other inputs.
For example, a regression algorithm ﬁts the curve by mini-
mizing square errors. The obtained function, however, dif-
ferent from admissible functions in calculus of variations,
sets no restrictions on the value of its inputs and outputs.
In some cases, the target function might be locally valid
around training data. As equation (2) suggests, the output
of the loss function depends on input data {x} as well. If the
function is trained using data within a certain neighborhood,
dataset bias will occur. Figure 1 shows the curve ﬁtting re-
sults of function 3 with diﬀerent training data.
f(x) =

0,
x ≤0.5
1,
x > 0.5
(3)
The shape of learned curves and boundaries is deter-
mined by training data and sometimes cannot be controlled
directly by learning algorithms.
Similarly, the decision
boundaries for image classiﬁers will shift as training sam-
ples diﬀer. Therefore, instead of resulting from insuﬃcient
data, dataset bias is an intrinsic property due to the point-
function duality of target functions.
3.3. The Logic of Neural Networks
When you have eliminated all which is impossible, then
whatever remains, however improbable, must be the truth.
Sherlock Holmes
We claim that uncertainties in neural networks might be
related to a ﬂaw in current data usage, that is, limited op-
tions. Let’s put ourselves in the shoes of neural networks
and rethink the reason for adversarial examples. Although
output labels change dramatically after perturbation, net-
works may not agree that they are fooled as they still predict
correct probabilities for most but not all of the remaining
categories. In this sense, the networks are “innocent” as the
“winner-takes-all” rule of picking the label with the maxi-
mum likelihood is speciﬁed by network designers. We keep
assuming casually that machine learning algorithms should
always learn and follow the exact concepts (e.g., object
classes) from human, but overlook the possibility that al-
gorithms may require multiple classes to fully comprehend
a human-level concept. Speciﬁcally, in an algorithm’s per-
spective, it is possible that instances in one dataset are “es-
sentially” diﬀerent from instances in another dataset, even
though they correspond to the same concept according to
humans. Therefore, we add a random-noise class for excep-
tions in section 5.2 and more equivalence classes with a tree
structure in the last experiment of section 5.3 to break these
constraints.
We can analyze adversarial examples from the com-
pletely opposite perspective. During training, neural net-
works not only learn what an object “is” but also capture
what “is not” an instance of a category. The mechanism of
successful perturbations is to meet the criteria of “is not.”
When a classiﬁer eliminates all impossible categories with
Sherlock’s logic, it has to pick the remaining category as
the ﬁnal output. Unfortunately, no category for exceptions
exists. Consequently, the classiﬁer assumes that the tar-
get function is deﬁned on all samples from the input space,
which is rarely true. In addition, to classify the input space
smoothly, the decision boundaries are deformed. Figure 2
presents an interesting experiment in which the pretrained
AlexNet [25] is asked to classify hybrid images 2 [26] com-
posed of high-frequency component of one image and low-
frequency component of the other. Under current rules, the
classiﬁer has to choose one category from 1,000 available
options; but neither ground-truth category is selected.
4. Models of Natural-image Spaces
As the training process is heavily data-dependent, we
deem that the characteristics of the input space are worth
2Selected from https://www.cc.gatech.edu/classes/AY2016/
cs4476_fall/results/proj1/
3

tricycle
(a) bike +
motorbike: tricycle
patas
(b) cat + dog: patas
Pekinese
(c) dog + cat:
Pekinese
kit fox
(d) lion + cat:
kit fox
tiger shark
(e) ﬁsh +
submarine: tiger
shark
great white shark
(f) ﬁsh + torpedo:
great white shark
Figure 2: Classiﬁcation for hybrid images.
studying. Another motivation is that unlike decision trees,
neural networks cannot classify even and odd numbers,
which implies that the topological properties of the input
space matter. In this section, we study the topological and
geometric property of the natural-image spaces, as well
as their consequences on computer-vision algorithms using
neural networks. It is worth mentioning that both sections
3 and 4 aim at providing motivation and intuition of this
work, which guide the experiment design in section 5. Re-
lated studies of the image space discussed in this section
include image generation and translation with GANs [27].
4.1. Image Manifold in a Discrete Form
The hypothesis of the continuous image manifold has
been popular for decades. Before the deep-learning era,
most classical computer-vision algorithms started from the
continuous world by building features with physical mean-
ing. Researchers have studied mappings from the image
space to a target space, to solve tasks such as classiﬁca-
tion and segmentation. Because of recent developments in
computation, estimating the reverse mapping, or even to tra-
verse the image manifold [21] is possible. However, there
is no guarantee that all important topological and geometric
properties in the continuous domain are preserved in such a
discrete estimation unless we have a complete picture of the
image space. In fact, although GANs can generate amazing
images, the failure cases remain uncontrollable and some-
times diﬃcult to explain. To match the discrete settings in
GAN, we address natural image spaces in a completely dis-
crete manner, hoping that we will gain a better understand-
ing of current algorithms:
Concept 4.1 Discrete natural-image space: Let Z[l,u] de-
note the set of integers from l to u. Given an image I with
(a) Panoramic view
(b) Details
Figure 3: Intuitive illustration on the connectivity of natural
image space. Points represent natural images.
resolution w × h and d channels, the image is considered as
a point of the Zw×h×d
[0,255]- based natural image space Iw×h×d if
I appears to be natural.
The essence of the concept is to consider a space for each
resolution as a “chart” of the manifold, and these spaces are
not necessarily smooth.
4.2. Properties of Natural-image Spaces
In this subsection, we will describe what discrete natural-
image spaces look like by listing important properties.
Sparsity and the scale-space eﬀect:
Obviously, the
space is sparse as the probability that a random sample
in Zw×h×d
[0,255] falls on the corresponding natural-image space
Iw×h×d is small. When image resolution increases, the total
number of cases increases exponentially. Similar to the ef-
fect in scale-space theory [28], humans are more sensitive
to images with higher resolutions than to those with lower
resolutions, meaning that ﬂaws in high resolutions tend to
be identiﬁed more easily. Hence, natural-image spaces are
denser in lower resolutions because the quantity of valid
natural images increases more slowly than that of possible
cases. Such properties are consistent with results that show
algorithms for image generation and translation appear to
be more natural in images with relatively low resolutions.
Connectivity: Based on the sparsity, we infer that two
images that belong to the same category are not always
“path-connected” through adjacent grid points in Zw×h×d
[0,255].
We claim that a natural-image space can be regarded as a
quotient space consisting of numerous equivalence classes
of path-connected images that can be derived from each
other via non-destructive operations (e.g., using ﬁlters). In
a classiﬁcation task, one category contains multiple equiv-
alence classes.
These equivalence classes, however, are
not necessarily connected. Figure 3 shows the conceptual
model of a natural-image space in which each small darker
disk represents a natural image, and images from the same
equivalence class are connected. Under such settings, nat-
ural images do not share the same manifold; instead, each
equivalence class has its own.
4

4.3. Approximation Challenge for Neural Networks
One gap exists between a labeled natural-image space
(i.e., a quotient space) and the one approximated by a neu-
ral network, because the regions classiﬁed by the network
tend to be connected [29]. We claim that such a gap is
one of the key reasons for uncertainties in neural networks
and provide more experimental details in section 5.3. In-
tuitively, neural networks excel at drawing smooth decision
boundaries in the input space, whereas they lack the abil-
ity to slice the space and glue separate pieces together. To
connect separate regions, a network needs to deform the de-
cision boundary, creating somewhat arbitrary bridges that
pass through uncertain regions in between. In contrast, de-
cision trees can easily handle separated equivalent classes,
which explains why they understand even and odd numbers
better than neural networks.
4.4. Reinterpretation of Existing Work
At the end of this section, we explain existing work from
the viewpoint of this paper without proof. The essence of
the explanation is to refresh our understanding towards ex-
periment results from a uniﬁed yet nonexclusive perspec-
tive.
The following opinions are provided as alternative
and supplementary rather than a correction of the origi-
nal claims. While image translation can be interpreted as
ﬁnding a mapping between two points in a natural-image
space, image generation seeks the reverse mapping from a
latent space to a natural-image space. The major diﬃculty
lies in the need for designing an appropriate loss func-
tional that indirectly regulates the performance of its
extremum (i.e., the target function). Eﬀective approaches
are found in recent studies such as those in [30] and [31].
Speciﬁcally, L1 norm forces the image to be suﬃciently
sharp, which prevents the output from leaving a natural-
image space. Strict rules for coloring adopted by the facade
dataset [32] limits the cases of outputs, leading to a denser
output space. Cycle loss manages to ensure the bidirectional
property of the mapping, so that it obtains a more stable bi-
jection. In [33], the network ﬁrst locates natural-image clus-
ters at lower resolutions, which is comparatively easier as
the space is denser. With these coarse locations, outputs in
higher resolutions are more likely to stay on natural-image
spaces. The network then grows the scale progressively to
reﬁne outputs for better details. In [34], stability-loss guar-
antees that the target function is locally consistent within
the neighborhood of each image, providing buﬀer zones
between images and decision boundaries. The authors of
[35] proposed a subnetwork that distinguishes genuine data
from perturbed ones, shrinking the natural-image spaces for
the subsequent classiﬁer. By assigning weights to training
data, RetinaNet [36] detects objects more accurately at a
fast speed.
Table 1: Evaluation metrics used in experiments.
Metric
Explanation
A
Average test accuracy
σA
Standard deviation of test accuracy
Pc
Average conﬁdence of correctly classiﬁed samples
Pi
Average illusiveness (i.e., conﬁdence) of misclassi-
ﬁed samples
Pg
Average probability of the ground-truth category for
misclassiﬁed samples
N
Average number of test samples that are misclassi-
ﬁed as “noise” (per 10,000)
5. Experiments
We present experimental results that support our state-
ments on the impact of training samples and the bene-
ﬁts of utilizing the topological and geometric properties of
natural-image spaces. As classiﬁcation is the basis for ad-
vanced tasks, we set up CIFAR-10 [37] image classiﬁcation
experiments with a neural network adapted from the exam-
ple code provided by MATLAB [38] and Keras [39]. To
demonstrate the eﬀect of training samples, we design the
experiments in a controlled manner and follow default con-
ﬁgurations on the neural networks. For each experiment,
we obtain ﬁnal results by averaging results of 50 executions
with ﬁxed training data. Table 1 describes the evaluation
metric. We assume that the probability of each category is
negatively correlated with the distance from the sample to
the centroid of that category.
5.1. Impact of Training Samples
After training, we categorized the training samples into
two classes: those that were correctly classiﬁed by the clas-
siﬁer and those that were misclassiﬁed by the classiﬁer.
We further sorted correctly-classiﬁed samples according to
their conﬁdence and select two subgroups with relatively
higher (S hc) and lower conﬁdences (S lc), respectively. Sim-
ilarly, we further selected two subgroups with higher illu-
siveness (S hi) and lower illusiveness (S li) from the misclas-
siﬁed training samples. With all subgroups the same size,
we then retrained the network with the selected subgroups
to illustrate the impact of diﬀerent training samples. Table 2
shows the performance of the classiﬁer after retraining with
subgroups of the original training data.
We observe the following on Table 2. More training sam-
ples do not guarantee a higher accuracy. High-conﬁdence
images are required for higher test accuracy, especially
when a limited number of training samples are provided.
Highly illusive images are misleading when the size of the
training set is small; as the training set expands, however,
such adverse images become valuable and lead to even
higher accuracy than training with low-illusiveness ones.
One possible explanation is that highly illusive images, as
5

Table 2: Performance of the classiﬁer retrained with subgroups of training data. S p
c: the top p percent of training samples
selected with criteria c. The number of uniformly distributed noise samples are 5× the number of legitimate samples.
Training set
A
σA
Pc
Pi
Pg
Training set
A
σA
Pc
Pi
Pg
N
S .25
lc ∪S .25
li
27.12%
2.40%
26.56%
22.91%
14.65%
S .25
lc ∪S .25
li ∪noise
30.82%
2.11%
28.31%
24.14%
15.43%
2.1
S .25
lc ∪S .25
hi
19.26%
0.92%
24.68%
22.86%
13.67%
S .25
lc ∪S .25
hi ∪noise
21.32%
0.91%
25.27%
23.40%
14.30%
1.08
S .25
hc ∪S .25
li
53.61%
1.23%
79.67%
58.00%
12.73%
S .25
hc ∪S .25
li ∪noise
55.27%
0.86%
79.24%
58.60%
12.86%
5.36
S .25
hc ∪S .25
hi
51.49%
1.29%
66.57%
44.77%
14.57%
S .25
hc ∪S .25
hi ∪noise
53.26%
1.06%
67.22%
44.81%
14.87%
2.78
S .50
lc ∪S .50
li
52.16%
1.58%
45.73%
36.39%
18.61%
S .50
lc ∪S .50
li ∪noise
53.11%
1.36%
46.70%
37.26%
19.23%
0.9
S .50
lc ∪S .50
hi
41.07%
1.18%
35.11%
30.86%
17.99%
S .50
lc ∪S .50
hi ∪noise
40.82%
1.10%
35.05%
31.23%
18.55%
0.68
S .50
hc ∪S .50
li
65.78%
0.58%
88.08%
70.23%
11.41%
S .50
hc ∪S .50
li ∪noise
66.37%
0.53%
88.56%
70.03%
11.61%
1.12
S .50
hc ∪S .50
hi
60.48%
0.67%
75.62%
50.50%
15.92%
S .50
hc ∪S .50
hi ∪noise
65.13%
0.65%
76.10%
50.47%
16.16%
0.72
S .75
lc ∪S .75
li
68.76%
1.16%
74.25%
52.34%
18.36%
S .75
lc ∪S .75
li ∪noise
70.03%
0.81%
73.88%
53.26%
18.42%
0.14
S .75
lc ∪S .75
hi
60.55%
1.31%
58.33%
43.00%
20.33%
S .75
lc ∪S .75
hi ∪noise
61.95%
1.38%
54.95%
43.80%
20.69%
0.50
S .75
hc ∪S .75
ls
70.81%
0.31%
92.67%
76.09%
10.28%
S .75
hc ∪S .75
li ∪noise
71.05%
0.54%
92.43%
75.64%
10.54%
0.22
S .75
hc ∪S .75
hi
70.85%
0.47%
80.45%
55.76%
16.24%
S .75
hc ∪S .75
hi ∪noise
71.42%
0.55%
80.94%
55.75%
16.48%
0.34
outliers, force the network to adjust, which lowers loss. In
this sense, the highly illusive images contain higher entropy
(more information) than low-illusiveness images after a cer-
tain number of iterations. Classiﬁers trained with S hc ∪S li
are determined (smaller σA) and conﬁdent (higher Pc, Pi)
about what they predict, regardless of whether they are right
or wrong. By contrast, classiﬁers trained with S lc ∪S hi are
relatively hesitant (larger σA) in that the average probabil-
ities for the output category (Pc, Pi) are lower; moreover,
even if the prediction is wrong, they still assign a certain
probability on the ground-truth category (Pg). In summary,
the results demonstrate that the performance of classiﬁers
depends on the training data. In other words, dataset bias
occurs even within the same dataset because it is an intrin-
sic property of the learning scheme.
5.2. Training with a Random-Noise Class
Adding random noise samples to training data is the eas-
iest way to change the topology of the input space. The
use of random noise in training neural networks dates back
to the 1990s. Researchers have injected noise into inputs
and weights to improve the generalization [40], avoid lo-
cal minima, and speed up backpropagation [41]. A recent
study [34] used random perturbation to stabilize the net-
works.
However, researchers have never treated random
noise as independent training samples containing informa-
tion that can be directly employed for training neural net-
works. In this work, we add an extra category of random
noise as negative samples, retrain the network, and test the
classiﬁer on the original test set that does not contain sam-
ples of random noise. Surprisingly, with random noise, we
slightly improve the test accuracy at almost no extra cost
except slightly longer computation time.
We start testing with the most-common Gaussian ran-
dom noise under four controlling parameters: mean, stan-
dard deviation, quantity, and scale (correlation among pix-
els).
We design the experiments in a controlled manner
to evaluate the eﬀect of each factor. Figure 4a shows that
Gaussian random noise improves test accuracy as long as
the standard deviation is suﬃciently large.
As the stan-
dard deviation increases, Gaussian noise becomes more uni-
formly distributed.
Figure 4c shows that test accuracy varies with diﬀerent
numbers of random-noise training samples. This ﬁnding
suggests that random noise might contain a certain amount
of information that could teach the classiﬁer what “is not”
a natural image. Such information, however, becomes sat-
urated as the number of random-noise samples increases.
With an excessive number (e.g., 100×) of noise samples,
neural networks may become overwhelmed, spending much
longer time in training but obtaining little enhancement.
We further repeat the experiments in section 5.1 with the
additional category of uniformly distributed random-noise
training samples, and report results at the right half of Ta-
ble 2. Similar results with Gaussian random noise are pro-
vided in the supplementary materials. Comparing Tables 2
and 2, we observe the following: Training classiﬁers with
random noise tends to increase test accuracy, but such an
eﬀect is more obvious with fewer training samples. Despite
the introduction of a new risk of “misclassiﬁcation as ran-
dom noise”, it vanishes as the number of training images
increases. In general, classiﬁers trained with random noise
tend to be more determinant (higher Pc, Ps, lower σA); sur-
prisingly, for misclassiﬁed samples, the probability of the
ground-truth category also increases (higher Pg).
The motivation of adding random noise is to change the
topology of natural-image space by specifying the invalid
zones that do not belong to the space. As a result, if we
subtract the region of random noise from the input space of
the classiﬁer, then the input space is no longer “dense” and
has more holes. Geometrically, to avoid such holes, random
noise tends to push the decision boundaries towards the cen-
troid of each category. In addition, feeding neural networks
with random-noise samples that are completely unnatural
can help them learn what “is not” an object. However, as
the scale of Gaussian noise increases, more pixels are cor-
6

(a) Average accuracy (A) vs. standard deviation (std).
1× noise samples centered at 127, scale 0
(b) Average accuracy (A) vs. mean.
1× noise samples with std 70, scale 0
(c) Average accuracy (A) vs. rate.
Noise samples with mean 127, std 70, scale 0
(d) Average performance (A, N) vs. scale.
5× noise samples with mean 127, std 70
Figure 4: Controlled experiments demonstrating the eﬀectiveness of each factor in random noise.
related and samples become less unnatural. Therefore, the
eﬀect is weakened by Gaussian noise with larger correla-
tions among pixels.
At the end of this experiment, we report two cases that
lead to interesting results. In one case, the test accuracy
drops if we train the classiﬁer with images of solid col-
ors. The set of solid-color images can be interpreted as
an embedded sub-hyperplane that 1) has the same or even
lower dimension as decision boundaries, and 2) spreads
across the entire input space. Classifying such sets in lower
dimensions is diﬃcult because their boundaries reside in
even lower dimensions.
For a better understanding, we
may consider solving a curve-ﬁtting problem with classiﬁ-
cation instead of regression. In the other case, test accuracy
also drops in cases of Gaussian random noise with various
means, standard deviations, and scales. Such mixed sam-
ples come from several separated clusters in the input space.
Since neural networks group samples into path-connected
regions [29], mixed noise becomes a more diﬃcult case.
Before we move on to the next experiment, it is worth
reiterating that the major discovery here is not the marginal
improvement on classiﬁcation with a random-noise class.
Instead, the existence of these unusual samples is much
more inspiring, and they do not have to be random noise
at all times. These samples used to be considered as “oﬀ-
the-manifold” and completely irrelevant to the classiﬁcation
task. After obtaining the experiment results, we look for-
ward to seeking more hidden samples that may complement
data augmentation, especially when training samples are in-
suﬃcient.
5.3. Training in the Natural-image Spaces
In addition to changing the topology of the labeled input
space with an artiﬁcial class, we can also improve the clas-
siﬁer by slicing the connected regions learned by a network
classiﬁer to match the quotient-space model. This subsec-
tion continues the discussion on the quotient space in sec-
tion 4.3 and provides quantitative experiments that support
our claim. Let us ﬁrst recognize that a network with a given
architecture and hyper-parameters has a limited, ﬁnite ca-
pability of approximating the quotient space. As a result of
this, there will often be training samples that are incorrectly
classiﬁed during training, sometimes even with very high
conﬁdence. Henceforth, we will refer to these samples as
illusive samples. Higher-order statistics of the training pro-
cess, including the number of times that a training sample
has been correctly classiﬁed, indicate crucial characteristics
of the learned space. We then conduct experiments based
on the higher-order statistics collected during training.
We begin by retraining the network without these so-
called illusive training samples that are consistently mis-
classiﬁed. As Figure 5 shows, despite a slight drop in test
accuracy during early epochs, over-ﬁtting is alleviated. If
we further remove test samples that are consistently mis-
classiﬁed (i.e., we “cheat” a bit as our goal is studying the
topological properties of the input space rather than achiev-
ing state-of-the-art accuracy), over-ﬁtting is weakened even
more.
A correlation seems to exist between over-ﬁtting
and the illusive samples that cannot be mapped to the right
equivalence classes. Moreover, the rationale behind dataset
bias and over-ﬁtting may essentially be the same; the dif-
ference is that over-ﬁtting occurs at equivalence classes that
are already observed whereas dataset bias happens at un-
7

Figure 5: Training without consistently misclassiﬁed sam-
ples help prevent over-ﬁtting.
Table 3: Test accuracy (in %) from CleverHans. n: num-
ber of training epochs; ϵ: max-norm eps; Aleg/Aadv: average
test accuracy (20 runs) on legitimate/adversarial samples;
A∗
leg/A∗
adv: average accuracy without illusive training sam-
ples.
n
ϵ
Aleg
A∗
leg
Aadv
A∗
adv
n
ϵ
Aleg
A∗
leg
Aadv
A∗
adv
6
.3
78.90
78.88
10.84
11.74
50
.3
90.39
88.81
10.37
10.40
6
.1
78.73
78.22
9.34
11.31
50
.1
90.51
88.77
10.75
14.35
6
.05 78.98
78.21
11.16
13.87
50
.05 90.53
88.91
13.28
21.88
6
.01 78.84
78.73
45.47
48.39
50
.01 90.33
88.90
39.03
48.50
seen locations in the input space.
Following the statements in section 4.3, another conse-
quence of removing illusive training samples is that clas-
siﬁers sacriﬁce less the space in between to connect sepa-
rated equivalence classes, which could potentially enhance
the robustness against adversarial examples. We retrain the
CIFAR-10 demo in CleverHans [42] and obtain results in
Table 3 as expected. Similarly to the results from other so-
phisticated adversarial training techniques that require care-
fully crafted adversarial loss, we achieve higher accuracy on
adversarial examples with a slightly lower accuracy on le-
gitimate samples, simply by training the classiﬁer without
illusive samples that are consistently misclassiﬁed.
Our last experiment is a pure proof-of-concept, in which
we assume regardlessly that prior knowledge is available
of whether a test sample is illusive. During training, we
compute the cumulative confusion matrix based on training
samples. If an illusive training sample is consistently mis-
classiﬁed and appears to be one of the top confusion (i.e.,
large numbers in the cumulative confusion matrix), we rela-
bel the sample with a new category. From the perspective of
the quotient-space model, the network successfully learns
that the illusive sample belongs to a particular equivalence
class, but failed to connect the equivalence class with others
in the same category due to limited capability of approxi-
mating the image space. Thus, as shown in Figure 6, we
slice the equivalence class with a new label, train another
separate classiﬁer based on the illusive samples, and glue
the equivalence class to easy ones with a look-up table (or
dictionary/decision tree). When illusiveness of test samples
is available as prior knowledge, we can select which clas-
siﬁer to apply at test time. According to test results, the
proposed strategy can potentially increase test accuracy by
3% without requiring additional hardware. In addition, we
can train networks with larger learning rate (i.e., faster) be-
cause over-ﬁtting is weakened by complying with the image
space approximated by the network.
6. Discussion
The primary contribution of this paper is the intrinsic and
uniﬁed explanation of uncertainties in neural networks that
are applied to images. All experiments are designed by fol-
lowing the explanation. In contrast, the results of the ex-
periments are just the tip of the iceberg. As the training
process is data-dependent and zero-constrained, the learned
classiﬁer may suﬀer from dataset bias. Several key topolog-
ical and geometric properties of smooth manifolds are miss-
ing in the discrete natural-image spaces adopted by neural
networks, which we believe is part of the reason for ad-
versarial examples as well as baﬄing outcomes from im-
age translation and generation. Under current settings, the
networks take it for granted that natural-image spaces are
dense and simply return the most-likely output from lim-
ited options. Restrictions on the input domain and output
range of neural networks are lacking. Experiment results
suggest that adding an additional category of negative train-
ing data to handle exceptions might be helpful. Other results
demonstrate that training networks according to the proper-
ties of the input space suggested from higher-order statistics
has the potential to mitigate over-ﬁtting, enhance robustness
against adversarial examples, and improve the test accuracy
for a given network structure without much more computa-
tion resource. These phenomena lead to the following ques-
tions: What data composition is better for training more ro-
bust classiﬁers and detectors? How do we measure the value
or impact of training samples? What other characteristics of
the input space can guide the training process?
We hope the paper will stimulate discussion in the com-
munity regarding the intrinsic properties of the input space
to which deep networks are applied. Open problems in-
clude the entropy of training samples, features of the de-
cision boundaries, equivalent relation among images, and
better representation of the image space.
Understanding
the topological and geometric properties of natural-image
spaces with a rigorous model will help us interpret the per-
formance of state-of-the-art deep neural networks. More-
over, it may provide a more comprehensive understanding
of the theoretical basis for deep neural networks. In prac-
tice, we may enhance the performance of neural networks
by improving the quality of training samples or altering how
we use data.
8

(a) Connected regions classiﬁed by a neural network
(b) The actual quotient space of the images
Category
Equivalence
class(es)
red

green

blue
 
(c) Look-up table for
equivalence classes
Figure 6: Illustration on the potential of improving classiﬁcation with the quotient-space model
7. Acknowledgement
We thank Dr. James Hays for the inspiring discussion in
CS 7476 and the chance to present part of the work in class.
