Harmony Search Algorithm for Curriculum-Based 
Course Timetabling Problem 
 
Juliana Wahid 
School of Computing 
Universiti Utara Malaysia 
Kedah, Malaysia 

Naimah Mohd Hussin 
Faculty of Computer Science and Mathematics 
Universiti Teknologi MARA 
Perlis, Malaysia 

 
 
Abstract— In this paper, harmony search algorithm is applied to 
curriculum-based course timetabling. The implementation, 
specifically the process of improvisation consists of memory 
consideration, random consideration and pitch adjustment. In 
memory consideration, the value of the course number for new 
solution was selected from all other course number located in the 
same column of the Harmony Memory. This research used the 
highest occurrence of the course number to be scheduled in a new 
harmony. The remaining courses that have not been scheduled 
by memory consideration will go through random consideration, 
i.e. will select any feasible location available to be scheduled in 
the new harmony solution. Each course scheduled out of memory 
consideration is examined as to whether it should be pitch 
adjusted with probability of eight procedures. However, the 
algorithm produced results that were not comparatively better 
than those previously known as best solution. With proper 
modification in terms of the approach in this algorithm would 
make the algorithm perform better on curriculum-based course 
timetabling. 
Keywords-Harmony Search Algorithm; Curriculum-based 
Course Timetabling; 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The university course timetabling is the administrative 
tasks that allocate the set of courses offered by the university 
to particular rooms and time slots. The allocating process 
needs to satisfy several constraints so that timetable can 
actually be carried out (feasible). There are two categories of 
constraints in timetabling such as hard and soft constraints [1]. 
Hard constraints or constraints which may not be broken 
consist of matters that need rigidly be fulfilled in the timetable 
such as courses must be allocated into different time slots in 
order to avoid students and staffs clashes. While soft 
constraints are matters reflecting the preferences and 
teaching/learning comfort expectations of the students and 
staffs which are not necessarily essential. Some examples of 
soft constraints are such as avoiding students having to attend 
three or more courses in successive time slots, and stopping 
students from having only one course in any day. 
The university course timetabling as described in 
International 
Timetabling 
Competition 
website 
(www.cs.qub.ac.uk/itc2007/) fall into two versions. The first 
version is the Post Enrolment, which the timetable is 
constructed based on student enrolments i.e. after students 
have selected which lectures they wish to attend. The second 
version is the curriculum-based course timetabling (CB-CTT). 
This version will construct the timetable according to curricula 
published by the university.   
University course timetabling problem (UCTP) that fall 
into group of non deterministic polynomial (NP) problem can 
be formulated as a combinatorial optimization problem (COP) 
[2-3], in which the larger the number of lectures to be 
scheduled and the diversity of constraints need to be 
considered, the harder the problem to be solved.  
The works towards solving course timetabling problems 
have started in year 1960’s, whereby the problem is modeled 
as a graph coloring approach [4]. Since then, various methods 
and approaches have been explored and proposed to solve the 
problems. In year 1970’s, Barham and Westwood [5] have 
attempted to use heuristic methods. Moving forward to year 
1980’s, Mulvey [6] solved the university course-scheduling 
problem using network flows while Werra and Hertz [7] have 
tested tabu search methods. As in 1990’s, the works in this 
problems are more unleashed where variety of methods are 
proposed. Yu [8] used artificial neural networks to solve the 
timetabling problem. In the other hand, Downsland [9] and 
Dige et al. [10] solved the timetabling problem by simulated 
annealing, while Deris et al. [11] exhibited constraint-based 
reasoning method in a case study of university timetabling 
problem. The active timetable research in this era also was 
contributed by the First International Conference on the 
Practice and Theory of Automated Timetabling (PATAT) held 
in 1995. In this era also, the evolutionary algorithms [12] in 
timetabling problem are proposed. In the new millennium era, 
the works continue. Constraint based programming [13],  
hyper heuristic methods [14-15], and metaheuristic methods 
[16] has been introduced and become an interesting approach 
for solving timetabling problems.  
Even though enormous effort expended over the last forty 
years to discover efficient methods and approaches for solving 
timetabling problems, these problems are nevertheless still the 
focus of intense research [17]. For course timetabling 
problems, the solutions algorithms are usually problem-
specific; that is, no general solution can solve different 

problem instances. Even though the problem has been widely 
researched, there is still no definitive solution approach that is 
able to provide excellent solutions across the broad spectrum 
of problem instances. This is parallel with the No Free Lunch 
theorem [18] that says if we cannot make any prior 
assumptions about the optimization problem we are trying to 
solve, no strategy can be expected to perform better than any 
other. Indeed, Gomes & Williams [19] stated that NP-hard 
problems are inflexible, which means that there does not exist 
an efficient algorithm that is ensured to find an optimal 
solution for this kind of problems. 
This study has interest on examining specific algorithm 
i.e. harmony search algorithm (HSA). There are several 
components that can be improved in finding solution to 
university course timetabling problem (UCTP). HSA was 
successfully adapted to UCTP by Al-Betar, Khader, & Abdul 
Gani [20]. In their work, Al-Betar, et al. [20] described the 
adaptation of HSA for UCTP using five steps of HSA such as 
1: Initialize HSA parameters and UCTP parameters, 2: 
Initialize Harmony Memory (HM) with random feasible 
timetables based on Harmony Memory Size (HMS) 
Parameter, 3: Improvise new harmony solution, 4: Update 
harmony memory, and 5: Stop Criteria. The HSA can find 
near optimal solutions for UCTP and produces better results 
than several others in the previous literature. 
In their later work [21], the modified harmony search 
algorithm (MHSA) was produced to enhance the basic HSA 
for UCTP whereby the basic memory consideration of basic 
HSA is changed to modified memory consideration, and pitch 
adjustment with random walk as an acceptance rule of basic 
HSA is changed to pitch adjustment with side walk and first 
improvement acceptance rule.  
In the same year, works on HSA for UCTP focused on 
pitch adjustment operator produced whereby eight pitch 
adjustment procedures were proposed to enhance the solution 
quality of the UCTP [22].  
A year before the producing of MHSA, the hybridization 
of HSA with hill climbing optimiser (HCO) and particle 
swarm optimization (PSO) was produced by Al-Betar & 
Khader [23]. The role of HCO in the hybridization is as new 
operator (located at step 3) to improve the quality of new 
harmony vector relative to the number of improvisations (NI) 
in each run with probability of hill climbing rate (HCR). The 
PSO was also located at step 3, used to modify the memory 
consideration operator to imitate the best harmony among the 
HM vector to construct new harmony.  
As according to Al-Betar & Khader [23], the HSA 
exploits the advantages of population-based methods by 
identifying the potential regions in the search space using the 
memory consideration and random consideration operator. It 
also utilizes the advantages of local search-based methods by 
fine tuning the search space region using the pitch adjustment 
operators. So far in the literature, the works on HSA for UCTP 
carried out mostly focussed on the first version of UCTP, i.e. 
the Post Enrolment. None so far focussed on the curriculum-
based course timetabling. 
From this point of view, this study will explore the 
implementation of harmony search algorithm (HSA) into CB-
CTT.  
This paper is organized as follow: section 2 describes 
literature review on the curriculum-based course university 
timetabling problem and the details of the harmony search 
algorithm, section 3 presents the methodology used in the 
paper followed by section 4 that explains the details of 
implementation of harmony search algorithm for CB-CTT. 
Section 5 discusses the experimental results and compares 
them with the best known solution in the literature. The 
possible future approach for improvement also discussed in this 
section. Section 6 shows some conclusions. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
A. Curriculum-based course timetabling (CB-CTT) 
The curriculum-based course timetabling (CB-CTT) 
problem is an alternative of an university timetabling problem 
which creating a weekly timetable by allocating lectures for 
several university courses to a certain number of rooms and 
time periods based on curricula. The available constraints for 
this variant of university timetabling problem are solely based 
on the definition of the curricula [24]. Opposite to post-
enrolment based course timetabling problems in which 
students specifically register for courses they wish to attend.  
The curriculum-based course timetabling problem has 
been selected as one of the competition tracks of the 
International Timetabling Competition 2007 (ITC2007). This 
study used problem definition presented in Bonutti, De Cesco, 
Di Gaspero, & Schaerf  [25] which extended from technical 
description in  the ITC2007 web site and the corresponding 
technical report from Di Gaspero et al. [26]. The CB-CTT 
problem definition consists of the following basic entities: 
Days – number of teaching days in the week (typically 5 or 6). 
Timeslots - Each day is split into a fixed number of timeslots, 
which is equal for all days. 
Periods - a pair composed of a day and a timeslot. The total 
number of scheduling periods is the product of the days times 
the day timeslots. 
Courses and Teachers - Each course consists of a fixed 
number of lectures to be scheduled in distinct periods, it is 
attended by a given number of students, and is taught by a 
teacher. For each course there is a minimum number of days 
that the lectures of the course should be spread in, moreover 
there are some periods in which the course cannot be 
scheduled. 
Rooms - Each room has a capacity, expressed in terms of 
number of available seats, and a location expressed as an 
integer value representing a separate building. Some rooms 
may not be suitable for some courses (because they miss some 
equipment). 

Curricula - A curriculum is a group of courses such that any 
pair of courses in the group have students in common. Based 
on curricula, we have the conflicts between courses and other 
soft constraints. 
The CB-CTT problem consists in scheduling lectures of a 
set of courses into a weekly timetable, where each lecture of a 
course must be assigned a period and a room in accordance 
with a given set of constraints. A feasible timetable is one in 
which all lectures have been scheduled at a timeslot and a 
room, so that the hard constraints such as follows are satisfied: 
H1 - Lectures: Each lecture of a course must be scheduled in 
a distinct period and a room. 
H2 - Room occupancy: Any two lectures cannot be assigned 
in the same period and the same room. 
H3 - Conflicts: Lectures of courses in the same curriculum or 
taught by the same teacher cannot be scheduled in the same 
period, i.e., no period can have an overlapping of students nor 
teachers. 
H4 - Availability: If the teacher of a course is not available at 
a given period, then no lectures of the course can be assigned 
to that period. 
In addition, a feasible timetable satisfying the four hard 
constraints incurs a penalty cost for the violations of the four 
soft constraints such as follows: 
S1 - Room capacity: For each lecture, the number of students 
attending the course should not be greater than the capacity of 
the room hosting the lecture. 
S2 - Room stability: All lectures of a course should be 
scheduled in the same room. If this is impossible, the number 
of occupied rooms should be as few as possible. 
S3 - Minimum working days: The lectures of a course should 
be spread into the given minimum number of days. 
S4 - Curriculum compactness: For a given curriculum, a 
violation is counted if there is one lecture not adjacent to any 
other lecture belonging to the same curriculum within the 
same day. 
Then, the objective of the CB-CTT problem is to 
minimize the number of soft constraint violations in a feasible 
solution. 
B. Harmony search algorithm (HSA) 
The harmony search algorithm (HSA) is a new 
metaheuristic algorithm that impersonates the musical 
improvisation process in which a group of musicians 
improvise their instruments’ pitch by searching for a perfect 
state of harmony according to audio-aesthetic standard [27]. 
The equivalent terms between musical scenario and 
optimization problems that obtained from Al-Betar & Khader 
[21] are as the following: 
 
Improvisation ↔ Generation or construction 
 
Harmony ↔ Solution vector 
 
Musician ↔ Decision variable 
 
Pitch ↔ Value 
 
Pitch range ↔ Value range 
 
Audio-aesthetic standard ↔ Objective function 
 
Practice ↔ Iteration 
 
Pleasing harmony ↔ (Near-) optimal solution 
The HSA consists of several steps such as 1) problem 
formulation, 2) algorithm parameter setting, 3) random tuning 
for memory initialization, 4) harmony improvisation (memory 
consideration, random consideration, and pitch adjustment), 5) 
memory update, 6) performing termination, and 7) cadenza 
[28]. Figure 1 shows the pseudo-code of the HSA with five 
main steps in which STEP1 consists of problem formulation 
and algorithm parameter setting, STEP2 consists of random 
tuning for memory initialization, STEP3 consists of harmony 
improvisation (memory consideration, random consideration, 
and pitch adjustment), STEP4 consists of memory update and 
STEP5 consists of performing termination and cadenza. The 
details of each step will further discussed in section 4.  
 
 
Fig. 1. Pseudo Code of Harmony Search Algorithm Source: [21] 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
This section list the steps used to achieve the objective in 
this study such as follows: 
A. Initial Phase 
This phase concentrates on studying and understanding 
the HSA and CB-CTT from literature that can be found in 
section 2. 
 
 
 

B. Preprocessing Phase 
This phase focuses on understanding the original data file 
and transferring them into related matrixes, such as conflict 
matrix that represents a conflict between courses, where 
Lectures of courses in the same curriculum or taught by the 
same teacher must be all scheduled in different periods. 
C. Construction Phase 
This phase focuses on finding feasible initial solutions 
that satisfy all hard constraints related to each data instances. 
D. Improvement Phase 
This phase aims to improve solutions generated from the 
construction phase, where the HSA are employed. 
The details of step ii, iii and iv are covered in the next section. 
E. Analysis Phase 
This phase evaluates the quality of the solutions obtained 
from the improvement phase against the other methods in the 
literature which can be seen in section 5. 
IV. 
THE HARMONY SEARCH ALGORITHM FOR CB-CTT 
This section describes details of steps as shown earlier in 
Figure 1in implementing HSA into CB-CTT as follows: 
A.  CB-CTT formulation and HSA parameter setting 
The problem formulation of CB-CTT is based on the data 
instances 
provided 
by 
ITC2007 
available 
on 
http://tabu.diegm.uniud.it/ctt. The details of the data instances 
are describes in Table 1. 
TABLE 1. Description of CB-CTT Instances Source:[25] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The problem formulation of CB-CTT was to minimize the 
cost of soft constraints such as room capacity, room stability, 
minimum working days and curriculum compactness.The 
timetable solution for CB-CTT in HSA is represented by a 
vector of courses x = (x1, x2, . . . , xN), each lecture for each 
course must be scheduled in a feasible location. For example, 
in the first data problem instances established by ITC2007, the 
number of courses C = 30 which have number of lectures that 
sum up to total lectures L = 160, the number of rooms R = 6, 
the number of period per day P = 6 and the number of days D 
= 5. The possible timeslots of each lectures that represent by 
courses is within the range between 0 to 179 (R X P X D = 6 
X 6 X 5=180). As shown in Figure 2, first course denotes by 0 
located at first room in period 0, 1, 3 and 4 in Day 0,  and 
period 0 and 2 in Day 1. These locations equivalent to timeslot 
0, 1, 3, 4, 6, and 8. Solution with value -1 shows that the 
timeslot is empty. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2. Structure of Timeslots against Solution 
As for the preprocessing phase, the following data 
structures are used to build a CB-CTT solution: 
- 
Course Correlation matrix: is a matrix with size C x 
C where the element > 0 if courses in the same 
curriculum and if more then one course tought by 
same  teacher or 0 otherwise. 
- 
Course period matrix: is a binary matrix with size C x 
P where the element contains either 1 if and only if 
course C not available in period P or 0 otherwise.  
- 
Course room matrix: is a binary matrix with size C x 
R where the element contains either 1 if and only if 
course C and room R is compatible with both aspects 
of size and features or 0 otherwise.  
- 
Courseperiodavail matrix C x (P xR) contains either 
1 if and only if course C available in period P in 
room R or 0 otherwise.  
The following parameters of the HSA that identified by 
Geem [28] which required to solve the optimization problem 
are also specified in this step:  
 
Harmony memory size (HMS) - number of solution 
vectors concurrently handled. 
 
Harmony memory considering rate (HMCR) – (0 ≤ 
HMCR ≤ 1) where HSA picks one value randomly 
from memory.  
 
Pitch adjusting rate (PAR) - (0 ≤ PAR ≤ 1) is the rate 
where HSA fine-tunes the value which was originally 
picked from memory.  

 
Maximum improvisation (MI) - number of iterations 
or stopping criterion. 
The harmony memory (HM) is a memory location where 
all the solution vectors (sets of decision variables) and 
corresponding objective function values are stored. The 
function values are used to evaluate the quality of solution 
vectors. In CB-CTT, the HM consists of sets of timetable 
solution and corresponding of costs of soft constraints i.e. 
room capacity, room stability, minimum working days and 
curriculum compactness. As surveyed by Geem [29], HMS of 
value range from 30 to 100 was frequently used in literature. 
The HSA parameter setting used in this study are as 
follows: 
 
Harmony memory size (HMS) - 50 
 
Harmony memory considering rate (HMCR) – 0.9 
 
Pitch adjusting rate (PAR) – 1.0, with  multi pitch 
with eight procedures [22] such as follows: 
o 
Move-timeslot: 0< U(0 ,1 ) ≤ 0.10xPAR 
o 
Swap-timeslot: 0.10xPAR<U(0,1)≤ 0.20xPAR 
o 
move-location: 0.20xPAR<U(0,1)≤ 0.30xPAR 
o 
swap-location:0.30xPAR<U(0,1 ) ≤ 0.40xPAR 
o 
exchange-location:0.40xPAR<U(0,1)≤ 
0.50xPAR 
o 
swap-distinct-timeslots : 0.50xPAR< U(0 ,1 ) ≤ 
0.60xPAR 
o 
move-room : 0.60xPAR< U(0 ,1 ) ≤ 0.70xPAR 
o 
Swap-room : 0.70xPAR< U(0 ,1 ) ≤ 0.80xPAR 
o 
do nothing : 0.80xPAR< U(0 ,1 ) ≤ 1 
 
Maximum improvisation (MI) – first phase: 10, 
Second phase: 50 
B. Random tuning for memory initialization 
In this step, the harmony memory (HM) matrix is filled 
with as many randomly generated solution vectors as the 
HMS. In the CB-CTT model, the randomly generated solution 
vectors undergo a validation process to verify that they 
feasible i.e. not violated the hard constraints (lectures, 
conflicts, availability and room occupation). 
This step constructs maximum feasible timetabling 
solutions for CB-CTT as determined by HMS. HM is filled 
with these solutions and sorted according to the minimum total 
cost of soft constraints. The technique used to generate 
random HM solutions is assigning the courses by using the 
combination of graph heuristic that produced maximum 
numbers of solutions proposed by Juliana & Naimah [30] 
which combines saturation degree with largest degree. In this 
technique, the course with the least available period and 
largest number soft conflicting students is scheduled first.  
C. Harmony improvisation (memory consideration, random 
consideration, and pitch adjustment) 
1) Memory consideration 
The memory consideration selects feasible locations of 
the courses to be scheduled in the new harmony solution, x_ = 
(x1, x2, . . . , xN), from the solutions stored in HM with the 
probability of HMCR. In memory consideration, the value of 
the course number for new solution was selected from all 
other course number located in the same column of the HM. 
This research used the highest occurrence of the course 
number to be scheduled in a new harmony with probability of 
HMCR. In certain situations, if there are same numbers of 
highest occurrence for any course number, the least available 
period and highest conflicts for that course were used to 
choose between the course numbers. If the operators cannot 
find a feasible timetable (this happens in some medium and 
large data instances), the algorithm initiates a neighborhood 
search to find feasible timetable, such as find an empty 
timeslot for unassigned course number and swapping between 
course numbers. 
2) Random consideration 
The remaining courses that have not been scheduled by 
memory consideration will select any feasible location 
available to be scheduled in the new harmony solution with 
probability (1-HMCR). 
3)  Pitch adjustment 
In CB-CTT the pitch adjustment operator works similar to 
neighborhood structures in local search-based methods into 
eight procedures [22] as follows: 
a) The pitch adjustment move-timeslot. An event that 
meets the probability of 10%×PAR is randomly 
moved to any feasible timeslot where the room is not 
changed. 
b) The pitch adjustment Swap-timeslot. An event that 
meets the probability between 10%×PAR and 
20%×PAR is swapped with the timeslot of another 
event, while the rooms of both events are not 
changed. 
c) The pitch adjustment move-location. An event that 
meets the probability between 20%×PAR and 
30%×PAR is randomly moved to any free feasible 
location in the new harmony solution. 
d) The pitch adjustment swap-location. An event that 
meets the probability between 30%×PAR and 
40%×PAR is randomly swapped with another event 
while the feasibility is maintained. 
e) The pitch adjustment exchange-location. An event 
that meets the probability between 40%×PAR and 
50%×PAR is randomly exchanged with another two 
events while the feasibility is maintained. 
f) 
The pitch adjustment swap-distinct-timeslots. An 
event that meets the probability between 50%×PAR 
and 60%×PAR is adjusted as follows: (1) select all 
the events that have the same timeslot as first event. 
(2) select a timeslot in random . (3) simply swap all 
the events in timeslot with all the events in other 
timeslot without changing the rooms. 

g) The pitch adjustment move-room. An event that 
meets the probability between 60%×PAR and 
70%×PAR is moved to any free feasible room while 
the timeslot is not changed. 
h) The pitch adjustment Swap-room. An event that 
meets the probability between 70%×PAR and 
80%×PAR swaps its room with a room of another 
event in the same timeslot while reserving the 
feasibility. 
Each course scheduled out of memory consideration is 
examined as to whether it should be pitch adjusted with 
probability by the above eight procedures. 
4) Repair process 
Due to large size of data instances, some courses may not 
able to find feasible locations in the new harmony. This extra 
step needs to be carried out to ensure all courses are scheduled 
in the new harmony solutions. The repair process used here is 
based on a one-level backtracking process by Al-Betar & 
Khader [21] with some modification such as follows: 
a) Select an unscheduled course. 
b) Find all feasible locations for the unscheduled course 
which is currently occupied by other courses in the 
new harmony solution. 
c) Delete the course that held the feasible location and 
add it to the unscheduled list. 
d) Schedule the unscheduled course to new harmony 
solution in the feasible location and remove it from 
the unscheduled list. 
The above steps of repair process are carried out in 
iterative manner, however if the predefined iterations cannot 
find a complete feasible timetable, the improvisation process 
of new harmony is restarted with a new random seed and 
discarded the current new solution. 
D. Memory update 
If the new harmony vector, x_ = (x1, x2, . . . , xN) , is 
better than the worst harmony stored in HM in terms of the 
objective function value, the new harmony vector is included 
to the HM, and the worst harmony vector is excluded from the 
HM. 
E. Performing termination  
Steps 4.3 and 4.4 of HSA are repeated until the number of 
maximum improvisation (MI) is met. For the purpose of this 
study two cycles of iterations, i.e. 10 and 50, were used to 
observe whether the solutions are improving or not. 
V. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 
In this section, the performance of HSA for solving the 
CB-CTT problem was evaluated using 21 data instances 
generated in ITC-2007. The proposed method is coded using 
C++ in Microsoft Visual 2008 under Windows Vista on an 
Intel Machine with Core TM and a 2.16GHz processor and 
1GB RAM. Table 2 shows the experimental results of HSA 
algorithm for 10 iterations and 50 iterations together with the 
best known results solution. As there are several instances that 
not improving from 10 iterations to 50 iterations such as 
comp05, comp07, and comp12, the higher iterations e.g. 100, 
150, and so on were not carried out yet to enhance the 
proposed method. The time complexity of each iteration also 
not yet described as this paper shows only low level number of 
iterations. 
So far, the result demonstrates that HSA could be tailored 
to solve CB-CTT problems. However, our approach is still not 
able to achieve results comparable with the best known 
solution. An improvement (which is currently ongoing, with 
optimism) is required, in order to enhance the performance of 
the proposed method to produce desired outcomes better than 
those currently in use. There several issues that needed to be 
considered in enhancing the approach such as in the memory 
consideration, perhaps the used of smallest occurrence for 
course number can be applied. Another issue could be the 
process of repairing after improvisation process. A method to 
ensure all new solutions after improvisation process is feasible 
without to restart with a new random seed also be needed. 
 
The method used in this study provide alternative way of 
solving curriculum-based course timetabling, as this type of 
data instance not yet focused by other researcher that involved 
in this HSA. 
TABLE 2. Experimental Result of HSA for CB-CTT 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
This paper presented the harmony search algorithm for 
solving the CB-CTT problems. Results from the experiments 
have shown that the algorithm is capable of solving 
timetabling problems. Although the results produced by the 
algorithm in this study are presently not comparatively better 
than those already reported in the literature, there are rooms 
for improvement. Further works need to be considered to 
improve the HSA performance. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This study was funded by Ministry of Higher Education 
of Malaysia.
