1
Goal-guided Transformer-enabled Reinforcement
Learning for Efficient Autonomous Navigation
Wenhui Huang, Student Member, IEEE, Yanxin Zhou, Xiangkun He, Member, IEEE, and Chen Lv, Senior
Member, IEEE
Abstract—Despite some successful applications of goal-driven
navigation, existing deep reinforcement learning (DRL)-based
approaches notoriously suffers from poor data efficiency issue.
One of the reasons is that the goal information is decoupled from
the perception module and directly introduced as a condition
of decision-making, resulting in the goal-irrelevant features of
the scene representation playing an adversary role during the
learning process. In light of this, we present a novel Goal-guided
Transformer-enabled reinforcement learning (GTRL) approach
by considering the physical goal states as an input of the scene
encoder for guiding the scene representation to couple with the
goal information and realizing efficient autonomous navigation.
More specifically, we propose a novel variant of the Vision
Transformer as the backbone of the perception system, namely
Goal-guided Transformer (GoT), and pre-train it with expert
priors to boost the data efficiency. Subsequently, a reinforcement
learning algorithm is instantiated for the decision-making system,
taking the goal-oriented scene representation from the GoT
as the input and generating decision commands. As a result,
our approach motivates the scene representation to concentrate
mainly on goal-relevant features, which substantially enhances
the data efficiency of the DRL learning process, leading to
superior navigation performance. Both simulation and real-world
experimental results manifest the superiority of our approach in
terms of data efficiency, performance, robustness, and sim-to-
real generalization, compared with other state-of-the-art (SOTA)
baselines. The demonstration video (https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=aqJCHcsj4w0) and the source code (https://github.com/
OscarHuangWind/DRL-Transformer-SimtoReal-Navigation) are
also provided.
Index Terms—Autonomous navigation, deep reinforcement
learning, goal guidance, transformer, data efficiency.
I. INTRODUCTION
R
EINFORCEMENT Learning (RL) algorithms have sig-
nificantly contributed to a wide range of domains over
the past years, including but not limited to autonomous driving
[1, 2, 3], unmanned ground vehicle (UGV) navigation [4, 5],
and computer games [6]. With the representative capability
of handling high-dimensional states, recent RL algorithms,
e.g., deep Q-learning (DQN) [7, 8], deep deterministic policy
gradient (DDPG) [9, 10], and soft actor-critic (SAC) [11, 12]
are increasingly adopted by the robotics community to address
decision-making problems, especially for autonomous naviga-
tion.
Conventional autonomous navigation methods that rely on
prior knowledge of maps have been well-studied thanks to the
W. Huang, Y. Zhou, X. He, and C. Lv are with the School of Mechan-
ical and Aerospace Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Sin-

Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) technique
[13, 14]. In reality, however, such an approach significantly
depends on the map’s precision and might even fail in an un-
known environment. Therefore, developing a simple mapless
navigation strategy directly utilizing sensor input, such as laser
scan [15, 16] or visual images [17, 18] is an emerging field
that is garnering significant attention in current UGV research.
Especially having the advantage of visual fidelity, depth image-
based autonomous navigation has been intensively studied by
several works [19, 20]. Similarly, segmentation images [21] are
often employed in mapless end-to-end navigation as well due
to their powerful representative capability [22, 23]. In order
to approach a target position, the approaches mentioned above
train their models in a goal-conditional learning manner [24],
directly concatenating the physical goal information (i.e., goal
location in polar coordinate) with the latent states from the
perception system (i.e., convolutional neural network) and feed
into subsequent networks. Despite various degrees of success,
these methods decouple the goal information from the scene
representation, leading to poor data efficiency. For instance,
latent states from the goal information-less scene encoder may
include certain mismatched features that are unnecessary for
reaching a goal position and thus play an adverse role during
the RL training process.
Self-attention-based approaches, especially Transformers
[25], have become the dominant model of choice in the
natural language processing field. Motivated by adapting a
standard Transformer architecture to images with the fewest
modifications, a variant named Vision Transformer (ViT) [26]
that can deal with image input is proposed in the computer
vision community and has been applied to various domains,
such as robotic manipulation [27] and autonomous driving
[28]. However, there has yet to be an existing work that
develops ViT-enabled DRL algorithms to UGV for realizing
mapless autonomous navigation, especially for goal-driven
tasks.
In
light
of
this,
we
present
a
novel
Goal-guided
Transformer-enabled reinforcement learning (GTRL) approach
by considering the physical goal states as an input of the scene
encoder for guiding the scene representation to couple with the
goal information and achieving efficient autonomous naviga-
tion. To realize a ViT architecture that treats both physical
and visual states as the input, we propose a novel ViT variant
with minimal modifications, which we call Goal-guided Trans-
former (GoT) for the rest of the paper, as the backbone of our
perception system. Then, we instantiate a GoT-enabled actor-
critic algorithm, namely GoT-SAC, for the decision-making
arXiv:2301.00362v2  [cs.RO]  24 Sep 2023

2
system, receiving the goal-oriented scene representation from
the perception system and generating decision commands
for the UGV. To boost the data efficiency, we pre-train the
GoT with expert priors and then learn the decision-making
with the subsequent RL process. As a result, our method
makes the scene representation more interpretable in terms
of reaching the goal information, which is confirmed through
qualitative and quantitative evaluations. Most importantly, such
an approach motivates the scene representation to concentrate
mainly on goal-relevant features, which substantially enhances
the data efficiency of the DRL learning process, leading
to superior navigation performance. Therefore, the proposed
approach is an efficient DRL-based autonomous navigation
method for UGV from the goal-driven task perspective. We
summarize the main contributions of this paper as follows:
1) A novel and Transformer architecture-based DRL ap-
proach, Goal-guided Transformer-enabled reinforcement
learning (GTRL), is realized to achieve an efficient goal-
driven autonomous navigation for the UGV.
2) A novel Transformer architecture is proposed, which
we call Goal-guided Transformer (GoT) in this paper,
through minimal modifications of ViT to handle the
multimodal input: physical goal states and visual states.
Most importantly, the GoT enables the scene representa-
tion to concentrate mainly on the goal-relevant features,
significantly enhancing the data efficiency of the DRL
learning process from the goal-driven task perspective.
3) As for the practical contribution, we instantiated a
concrete GoT-enabled DRL algorithm for the proposed
method and validated it both in simulation and the
physical world. The experimental results demonstrate
the clear superiority of the proposed approach in data
efficiency and performance compared with other SOTA
baselines. Moreover, the investigation of goal-driven
navigation in the unknown environment confirms our
approach’s robustness and sim-to-real transferability.
II. RELATED WORKS
Due to the powerful representative capability to high dimen-
sional states and superior data efficiency, DRL algorithms are
gaining increasing attention among the robot community [29],
especially for autonomous navigation of the UGV. Several
works that infer the decision and control commands from
laser scans have been proposed thanks to their robust transfer
performance from the simulation to the real world. For in-
stance, [30] trains the Asynchronous Advantage Actor-Critic
(A3C) algorithm with intrinsic reward signals measured by
curiosity to achieve mapless navigation. In [31], the steering
angle is discretized into seven actions and trained together
with the forward commands by the Advantage Actor-Critic
(A2C) algorithm, and the trained model is applied to real-
world obstacle avoidance. Similarly, [32] presents goal-driven
mapless navigation based on an asynchronous Deep Deter-
ministic Policy Gradient (DDPG) algorithm and successfully
generalizes the learned model to the physical environment. In
order to reduce the training time, [4] proposes to pre-train
the Constrained Policy Optimization (CPO) algorithm with
imitation learning (IL) and then continuously train it in the
RL manner.
Nevertheless, laser scans cannot provide sufficient infor-
mation to describe the environment in some cases [18], and
thus scholars turn their attention to visual sensors-based ap-
proaches. In [20], a DDPG algorithm that considers depth
images as input is employed to train the control policy
by switching the different controllers. Similarly, work from
[33] utilizes the same depth-based information but combines
Behavior Cloning (BC) and Generative Adversarial Imitation
Learning (GAIL) to demonstrate the enhanced performance
of the social force-driven path planning. [22] presents a deep
learning model consisting of the Convolutional Networks
(ConvNets) and Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) network
to make a decision among seven commands based on se-
mantic segmentation images in real-time. However, existing
works mainly learn goal-driven tasks in a goal-conditional
learning manner which is mentioned in [24]. Though this
work focuses on conditional imitation learning (CIL), the logic
behind utilizing goal information is similar to the DRL-based
methods, treating the physical goal information as a condition
of the decision-making and directly concatenating to the latent
states provided by the perception system. On the contrary, we
consider the physical goal information as an input of the scene
encoder, rather than a condition, to extract matching features
w.r.t. the goal-driven autonomous navigation and improve the
DRL data efficiency.
ViT-based architecture has been a dominant choice not only
for computer vision (CV) tasks but also for robotic research to
achieve better scene representation and analysis. In [27], the
ViT is utilized as one of the encoders to measure the stability
of their manipulation approach. Similarly, [34] proposes a
temporal multi-channel ViT to classify the hand motions for
achieving better control of the bionic hands. To learn a more
effective global context of the scene, [28] presents a perception
utilizing ViT instead of ConvNets architecture, handling with
the birds-eye-view (BEV) images. The simulation results indi-
cate that such an encoder can identify the significant surround-
ing cars for the ego car to learn a safe and effective policy
in complex environments. Another ViT-based work related
to Vehicle-to-Everything (V2X) is presented in [35]. They
propose a robust cooperative perception framework by means
of building a holistic attention model, effectively integrating
information across road users. Despite various degrees of
success in the above domains, to our best knowledge, no
current work develops ViT-enabled DRL algorithms for UGV’s
mapless autonomous navigation, especially for goal-driven
tasks. Despite the superior representation capability, ViT is
insufficient for achieving goal-driven autonomous navigation,
as our task requires the scene encoder to handle the multi-
modality of sensors. Several works related to multimodal
ViT have recently been proposed to address computer vision
tasks and achieve SOTA performance [36, 37]. The primary
motivation of these approaches for employing multimodal
inputs is that supplying the RGB images with rich comple-
mentary information [38]. In contrast, our approach focuses
on leveraging the input’s multi-modalities to filter out goal-
irrelevant information rather than enriching it. We accomplish

3
this by fusing RGB images with physical goal states at the
input level, extracting significant features oriented towards the
goal.
III. PRELIMINARIES
A. Reinforcement Learning
The objective of goal-driven autonomous navigation is that
infers the linear and angular velocity of the UGV from
the input states, including images and goal information. We
consider such a task as a standard Markov decision process
(MDP) formulated by a tuple < 𝒮, 𝒜, 𝒫, ℛ>, where 𝒮is
a set of states denoting the possible condition of the agent
and environment, 𝒜represents action space, 𝒫models the
transition of the environment, and ℛis the reward function
evaluating the future overall payoff. At each time step t, the RL
agent percepts the state 𝑠𝑡∈𝒮and executes an action 𝑎𝑡∈𝒜,
receiving an immediate reward 𝑟𝑡= ℛ(𝑠𝑡, 𝑎𝑡) : 𝒮× 𝒜→R,
as well as next state 𝑠𝑡+1 ∈𝒮based on the transition proba-
bility 𝒫(𝑠𝑡+1|𝑠𝑡, 𝑎𝑡) : 𝒮× 𝒜→[0, 1]. Usually, the RL agent
selects an action based on a policy 𝑎𝑡∼𝜋(·|𝑠𝑡) : 𝒮→𝒜,
which represents a probability distribution denoting the belief
that the agent holds about its decision at each time step. The
target of the RL agent is to maximize the discounted total
return along the future from an initial state 𝑠, i.e., 𝑉𝜋(𝑠),
denoted as:
𝑉𝜋(𝑠) =
E
𝑠𝑡∼𝒫[
𝑇
Õ
𝑡=0
𝛾𝑡· 𝑟𝑡],
(1)
where 𝑉𝜋is called value function and 𝛾is the discounting
factor constrained by 0 < 𝛾≤1. Similarly, the state-value
function 𝑄𝜋based on the state 𝑠𝑡and the action 𝑎𝑡at time
step t is defined as:
𝑄𝜋(𝑠𝑡, 𝑎𝑡) = 𝑟𝑡+ 𝛾·
E
𝑠𝑡+1∼𝒫[𝑉𝜋(𝑠𝑡+1)]
= 𝑟𝑡+ 𝛾·
E
𝑠𝑡+1∼𝒫, 𝑎𝑡+1∼𝜋[𝑄𝜋(𝑠𝑡+1, 𝑎𝑡+1)].
(2)
In the actor-critic method, an optimal policy 𝜋∗can be
obtained by maximizing the overall future payoff for all states
along one trajectory. Additionally, an entropy term can be
augmented to the objective to prevent the policy from trapping
in the local optima in the early stage [39]:
𝑚𝑎𝑥
𝜋
E
𝑠𝑡∼𝒫,𝑎𝑡∼𝜋[
𝑇
Õ
𝑡=0
𝛾𝑡(𝑟𝑡+ 𝛼ℋ(𝜋(·|𝑠𝑡)))]
(3)
where 𝛼is the temperature parameter that balances between
overall future payoff and Shannon entropy of the policy.
B. Deep Imitation Learning
As one technique of behavior cloning method in imitation
learning (IL) field, deep imitation learning (DIL) aims at
directly mimicking the decision policy given a set of image
state-action pairs 𝒟= {< 𝑠𝑖, 𝑎𝑖>}𝑁
𝑖=1, where N represents
the number of samples. Therefore, it is a supervised learning
problem by minimizing the statistical distance between action
𝑎𝑖and parameterized function approximator F(𝑠𝑖; 𝜓):
𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑚𝑖𝑧𝑒
𝜓
𝑁
Õ
𝑖=1
ℒ(F(𝑠𝑖; 𝜓), 𝑎𝑖)
(4)
Goal-guided
Transformer
Latent
Features
Goal-oriented
Scene 
Representation
Soft 
Actor-Critic
Input
Goal State
RGB Images
Interactive
Environment
State 
Transition
Goal-guided Transformer-enabled 
Reinforcement Learning (GTRL)
Visual Attention Flow
RGB Image
Multi-Head Self-Attention
Qualitative Analysis
Quantitative Analysis
Goal-oriented Scene Representation
Gini
Coefficient
Shannon-Wiener 
Index
Metrics
Fig. 1: The overall framework of the proposed approach. The
goal state in the polar coordination system is considered as
input of the proposed approach through the entire learning
process, guiding the scene representation to couple with the
goal information and boosting the subsequent decision-making
process. The goal-oriented scene representation is evaluated
through both qualitative and quantitative analysis.
where ℒindicates loss function. Usually, we assume the action
𝑎E is directly from a human expert which means the Eq. 4 can
be reformulated as:
𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑚𝑖𝑧𝑒
𝜓
𝑁
Õ
𝑖=1
ℒ(F(𝑠𝑖; 𝜓), 𝑎E
𝑖)
(5)
C. Vision Transformer
The main idea behind ViT is splitting the images into
patches and mapping them into linear embeddings in the same
way the standard Transformer architecture treats tokens in
natural language processing (NLP). Given an input image
𝑥∈R𝐻×𝑊×𝐶, the ViT first reshapes it into a sequence of
symbol representation (𝑥1, 𝑥2, ...𝑥𝑛), where (𝐻, 𝑊, 𝐶) are the
resolution and channel dimension of the input image 𝑥and
𝑥𝑛∈R𝑁×(𝑃2·𝐶) is a representation of flattened 2D patches with
the resolution 𝑃. Therefore, the total number of 2D patches
can be calculated as follows:
𝑁= 𝐻· 𝑊
𝑃2
(6)
Then, the input of the ViT encoder can be obtained by
augmenting the position embeddings E𝑝𝑜𝑠∈R(𝑁+1)×𝐷to D-
dimensional flattened 2D patches:
𝑧0 = [𝑥0; LP(𝑥1); LP(𝑥2); · · · ; LP(𝑥𝑛)] + E𝑝𝑜𝑠
(7)
where LP represents linear projection, and 𝑥0 ∈R1×𝐷is
an extra learnable embedding called class token. By feeding
the embedded patches into the classic Transformer encoder,

4
Human
Decision
Visual State
Input 
Tokens
· 0
· 1
· 2
· 3
· 4
· 5
· 6
· 7
· 8
· 9
Embedded
Tokens
Linear Projection of Patch-Tokens
Goal-guided Transformer Encoder
Layer Normalization
MLP
Layer Normalization
Fully Connected Layer
Multi-head Attention
Multi-head Attention
Multi-head Attention
Multi-head Attention
Perception
Imitation 
Learning
Expert
Priors
Decision
Decision Making
Goal
Information
Physical State
MLP
Hierarchical 
Architecture
Human 
Expert
Fig. 2: Goal-guided Transformer Architecture and Pre-train with Expert Priors. The physical goal state is encoded to the goal
tokens; thus, the input tokens consist of both goal and visual information. Then the final inputs of the GoT are obtained by
performing position embeddings on the input tokens and fed into GoT encoder. Next, the GoT extracts goal-relevant latent
features by coupling the scene representation with the goal information and delivers them to the subsequent decision-making
network. Finally, the GoT is pre-trained with expert priors through the DIL technique to boost data efficiency.
we can get multi-head self-attention (MSA) through the self-
attention (SA) mechanism:
𝑀𝑆𝐴(𝑄, 𝐾, 𝑉) = LP([ATT1(𝑄, 𝐾, 𝑉); ATT2(𝑄, 𝐾, 𝑉); · · · ; ATT𝑘(𝑄, 𝐾, 𝑉)])
(8)
where 𝑘denotes k-th head and ATT indicates self-attention
(SA) mechanism. As demonstrated in [25], we compute SA
through the query Q, keys K, and values V:
ATT(𝑄, 𝐾, 𝑉) = 𝑠𝑜𝑓𝑡𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝑄𝐾𝑇
p
𝑑𝑘
)𝑉
[𝑄, 𝐾, 𝑉] = LP(𝑧)
(9)
where z represents a set of embedded patches and 𝑑𝑘is a
scaling factor.
IV. METHODOLOGY
A. Framework
The main aim of the goal-driven autonomous navigation
task is to successfully navigate to a specific target instance
within an unknown environment. Realizing such mapless
navigation requires the DRL-based approach to understand
and analyze the goal information. One possible solution is
to treat the parameterized goal states as an input rather than
a condition, feeding it together with the visual input, such
as raw RGB images, to enhance the capability of the scene
representation. Specifically, we learn the goal-oriented scene
representation through a novel Transformer-based architecture
that considers multimodal (i.e., physical goal states and visual
states) input as a sequence of continuous representations. In
light of this, we term the backbone of our perception system
Goal-guided Transformer (GoT). Once the goal-oriented latent
features are extracted, we motivate the SAC algorithm to
learn the decision policy for approaching the goal position
by interacting with the environment. Therefore, the two main
ingredients, GoT and Transformer architecture-based SAC
algorithm, complete our approach that we term Goal-guided
Transformer-enabled reinforcement learning (GTRL).
The overall framework of our approach is depicted in Fig. 1.
In our case, the input consists of two parts, i.e., goal position
in polar coordinates and raw fisheye RGB images stacked
over four frames. In the first stage, they are flattened into the
same dimension and fed into the GoT encoder. Then, these
embedded patches are encoded to goal-relevant latent features
through the MSA and provided to the subsequent decision-
making system. Finally, the GoT-SAC algorithm makes a
decision according to the goal-relevant latent features, and
the UGV executes the decision command to trigger the state
transition of the environment. After the algorithm converges,
we qualitatively (visual attention flow maps) and quantitatively
(Gini coefficient and Shannon-Wiener Index) evaluate the
trained model in terms of the SA mechanism to analyze and
interpret the significance of the goal-oriented scene represen-
tation (Section V).

5
Fig. 3: RGB images from the fisheye camera stacked for most recent four frames. The upside pair of figures show the raw
RGB images, whereas those on the downside illustrate pixel-level Gaussian noise-augmented images after preprocessing.
B. Goal-guided Transformer
In order to deal with the multimodality of the input, i.e.,
the goal states and visual images, we propose a novel variant
of the ViT that we term GoT in this paper. In model design,
We construct the architecture of the GoT by the minimum
modification of ViT for the purpose of a simple setup. Specif-
ically, inspired by BERT [40], we define a special goal token
𝒢∈R1×𝐷that is mapped from input goal states 𝑠𝑔𝑜𝑎𝑙∈R1×2
through a multilayer perception (MLP) network:
𝒢= MLP(𝑠𝑔𝑜𝑎𝑙)
(10)
Therefore, the embeddings of GoT can be formulated as:
𝑧
′
0 = E𝑖𝑛𝑝𝑢𝑡(𝑠, 𝒢)
𝑧0 = 𝑧
′
0 + E𝑝𝑜𝑠
(11)
where E𝑖𝑛𝑝𝑢𝑡and E𝑝𝑜𝑠represent input embeddings and po-
sition embeddings. By feeding the embeddings to the GoT
encoder:
𝑧
′
𝑙= MSA(LN(𝑧𝑙−1)) + 𝑧𝑙−1
𝑧𝑙= FC(LN(MLP(𝑧
′
𝑙) + 𝑧
′
𝑙))
(12)
where l indicates the l-th block. We decide the depth of GoT
as two blocks in this work, and hence, the latent features can
be obtained from the output of the second block, denoted as:
ℎ= 𝑮𝒐𝑻(𝑠, 𝒢; 𝜑)
(13)
where 𝜑represents parameters of the GoT.
Figure 2 illustrates an overview of the GoT architecture
and pre-train process. As the figure shows, the input consists
of two modalities: goal information as the physical state and
raw RGB images as the visual state. The physical state is
fed into MLP network and encoded as feature patches while
the visual state is decomposed to eight by eight small image
patches (we illustrate this process with three by three image
patches in the figure due to limited space). Therefore, we
can obtain complete input tokens by integrating both kinds of
patches. Furthermore, we add position embeddings for each
input token and fix the one encoded from goal information
to the first position in particular. As for the GoT encoder, it
consists of an MSA block, the MLP, the fully connected layer
(FC), the layer normalization operation [41], and the resid-
ual connections [42]. Considering the limited computational
power and lightweight design, we employ two blocks of the
encoder with only four heads per block. Having the latent
features from perception and the subsequent decision system,
we are able to perform DIL through expert demonstration data
to pre-train the GoT, enabling the hot-start initialization in the
subsequential training process. In a standard DIL, in terms of
the goal-driven end-to-end navigation problem, the function
approximator depends on the environment state 𝑠𝑖and goal
state 𝑠{𝑔𝑜𝑎𝑙, 𝑖}:
𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑚𝑖𝑧𝑒
𝜓, 𝜓𝑠
𝑁
Õ
𝑖=1
ℒ(F(F𝑠(𝑠𝑖; 𝜓𝑠), 𝑠{𝑔𝑜𝑎𝑙, 𝑖}; 𝜓), 𝑎E
𝑖)
(14)
where 𝜓and 𝑁are the parameters of the function approxi-
mator and the number of samples. In our proposed approach,
however, the goal state is no longer a condition but an
input. Thus, the objective of goal-oriented imitation learning
becomes:
𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑚𝑖𝑧𝑒
𝜓
𝑁
Õ
𝑖=1
ℒ(F(𝑮𝒐𝑻(𝑠𝑖, 𝒢𝑖); 𝜓), 𝑎E
𝑖)
(15)
In our case, such a design is essential since we aim to
guide the scene representation to couple with the physical goal
information so that the perception can extract goal-relevant and
rational features to promote the data efficiency of the subse-
quent goal-driven decision process. To clearly demonstrate the
point, we visualize goal-oriented scene representation through
visual attention flow maps [43] and quantitatively evaluate
the reliability of our approach in section V. Additionally, this
design allows us to generalize the Transformer architecture to
the multimodal input while keeping the original characteristics.

6
Algorithm 1 Goal-guided Transformer-enabled Reinforcement
Learning (GTRL)
Initialize Goal-guided Transformer (GoT) network with pre-
trained parameters: 𝜑∗.
Initialize actor and critic network parameters: 𝜙, 𝜃.
Initialize entropy parameters: 𝛼.
Initialize batch size N and replay buffer 𝒟←∅.
Assign target parameters: 𝜃𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡←𝜃.
for episode=1 to E do
Initialize the environment state: 𝑠𝑡∼𝐸𝑛𝑣
Initialize the goal state: 𝑠{𝑔𝑜𝑎𝑙, 𝑡} ∼𝐸𝑛𝑣
for step=1 to S do
Map goal token: 𝒢𝑡= MLP(𝑠{𝑔𝑜𝑎𝑙, 𝑡})
Scene Representation:
ℎ𝑡←𝑮𝒐𝑻(𝑠𝑡, 𝒢𝑡; 𝜑∗)
Sample an action: 𝑎𝑡←𝜋𝜙(𝑎𝑡|ℎ𝑡)
Interact with the environment:
𝑟𝑡, 𝑠𝑡+1, 𝑠{𝑔𝑜𝑎𝑙, 𝑡+1} ∼𝐸𝑛𝑣
Store the transition:
𝒟←𝒟∪(𝑠𝑡, 𝑠{𝑔𝑜𝑎𝑙, 𝑡}, 𝑎𝑡, 𝑟𝑡, 𝑠𝑡+1, 𝑠{𝑔𝑜𝑎𝑙, 𝑡+1})
If time to update critic then
Sample a batch of the data:
(𝑠𝑖
𝑡, 𝑠𝑖
{𝑔𝑜𝑎𝑙, 𝑡}, 𝑎𝑖
𝑡, 𝑟𝑖
𝑡, 𝑠𝑖
𝑡+1, 𝑠𝑖
{𝑔𝑜𝑎𝑙, 𝑡+1})
𝑁
𝑖=1 ∼𝒟
Compute critic (MBSE) loss: ℒ(𝜃) based on Eq. 23.
Update parameters of critic network.
end if
If time to update actor then
Sample a batch of the data:
(𝑠𝑖
𝑡, 𝑠𝑖
{𝑔𝑜𝑎𝑙, 𝑡}, 𝑎𝑖
𝑡, 𝑟𝑖
𝑡, 𝑠𝑖
𝑡+1, 𝑠𝑖
{𝑔𝑜𝑎𝑙, 𝑡+1})
𝑁
𝑖=1 ∼𝒟
Compute actor loss: ℒ(𝜙) based on Eq. 25.
Update parameters of actor network.
If automatic tune is True then
Update temperature parameter 𝛼.
end if
end if
If time to update target network then
Update target network: 𝜃𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡←𝜃.
end if
end for
end for
C. Goal-guided Transformer-enabled Reinforcement Learning
As mentioned in section IV-A, the input of GTRL consists
of two ingredients: visual states with raw RGB images and
goal states in polar coordinates. In this work, we employ
160 × 120 raw RGB images from a fisheye camera with a
FOV of 220 degrees and stack the four most recent frames.
Additionally, we augment a pixel-level noise to the input
images to learn a more robust and transferable decision policy
for the sim-to-real experiments. Figure 3 demonstrates the
difference between the original images and our input. The
upside pair of four figures show the most recent four raw
RGB images from the fisheye camera, whereas those on the
downside illustrate Gaussian noise-augmented images that are
utilized for training our algorithm. As for the goal state 𝑠𝑔𝑜𝑎𝑙,
we provide it in a 2-dimensional manner with the relative
(a) Gazebo Environment.
(b) UGV.
Fig. 4: Laboratory environment and UGV model.
distance and heading error. Specifically, we define the first
dimension of the goal state as the normalized relative distance
and compute it as:
𝑑𝑡= min(
∥𝑝<𝑥,𝑦>
𝑡
−𝑞<𝑥,𝑦>∥2
𝜆
, 1.0)
(16)
where 𝑝<𝑥,𝑦>
𝑡
denotes the real-time position of the UGV,
𝑞<𝑥,𝑦> indicates an arbitrary location of the goal point, ∥· ∥2
represents euclidean norm operation, and 𝜆is a constant
normalizer that maps the relative distance in the range of [0,
1]. Correspondingly, we associate the second dimension of the
goal state as the heading error between UGV’s orientation and
the directional vector points to the goal position:
Δ𝜑𝑡= atan (𝑞<𝑦> −𝑝<𝑦>
𝑡
), (𝑞<𝑥> −𝑝<𝑥>
𝑡
) −𝜓𝑡
(17)
where 𝜓𝑡represents the heading angle of the UGV. Similar to
the relative distance, we normalize the heading error as:
Δ𝜑𝑡=


Δ𝜑𝑡−2𝜋
𝜋
,
𝑖𝑓Δ𝜑𝑡> 𝜋
Δ𝜑𝑡+2𝜋
𝜋
,
𝑖𝑓Δ𝜑𝑡< −𝜋
Δ𝜑𝑡
𝜋,
𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒
(18)
Receiving the above-mentioned input, the GTRL outputs
decision commands 𝑎𝑡= [𝑣𝑡, 𝜔𝑡], i.e., linear velocity 𝑣𝑡∈
[0, 1] and angular velocity 𝜔𝑡∈[−𝜋
2 , 𝜋
2 ], and delivers them
to the UGV through the Robot Operating System (ROS).
The target of autonomous navigation is to demonstrate
a goal-driven decision and collision-free path planning for
reaching the goal position. Therefore, we carefully design
the reward function in combination with the continuous and
sparse reward to boost the converge efficiency of the GTRL.
More specifically, the overall payoff consists of four individual
ingredients as follows:
𝑟𝑡= 𝑟ℎ+ 𝑟𝑎+ 𝑟𝑔+ 𝑟𝑐
(19)
where 𝑟ℎdenotes heuristic reward, 𝑟𝑎represents action reward,
𝑟𝑔indicates reward for arriving the goal position, and 𝑟𝑐is the
collision penalty. The heuristic reward is designed to motivate
the UGV to move toward the goal position:
𝑟ℎ= 𝜂ℎ× (∥𝑝<𝑥,𝑦>
𝑡−1
−𝑞<𝑥,𝑦>∥2 −∥𝑝<𝑥,𝑦>
𝑡
−𝑞<𝑥,𝑦>∥2)
(20)

7
0
100
200
300
400
500
300
200
100
0
100
200
GoT-SAC w/ Pre-Train
GoT-SAC w/o Pre-Train
ViT-SAC (Goal Conditional)
ConvNet-SAC (Goal Conditional)
Reward
Episode
Fig. 5: Convergence curve comparison. The red dotted line
and solid lines represent the average rewards of our algorithms
and baselines per episode, while the shaded areas depict the
variances over five runs.
where 𝜂ℎis a constant weight. Similarly, we design the action
reward to drive the UGV to approach the goal position as
soon as possible but with the minimum number of steering
operations:
𝑟𝑎= 𝑣𝑡−𝜂𝑎× abs(𝜔𝑡)
(21)
where abs is an absolute value operation. Last but not least,
two sparse rewards, i.e., the goal reach reward and the collision
penalty, are designed as follows:
𝑟𝑔=
(
100,
𝑖𝑓𝑑𝑡<= 𝜉
0,
𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒
𝑟𝑐=
(
−100,
𝑖𝑓𝑐𝑜𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛
0,
𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒
(22)
where 𝜉represents a constant margin w.r.t. the goal position.
Subsequently, given the extracted latent features ℎ𝑡from
GoT at a specific timestep t, the SAC algorithm learns the de-
cision policy 𝜋(𝑎𝑡|ℎ𝑡) based on the reward function mentioned
above. One common technique widely utilized in the SAC
algorithm is double Q-networks to tackle the over-estimation
issue. Hence, the parameters of the critic network of GoT-
SAC are updated by minimizing the mean bellman-squared
error (MBSE) loss function:
ℒ(𝜃𝑖) =
E
ℎ𝑡∼𝒫,𝑎𝑡∼𝜋∥𝑄𝜋
𝜃𝑖(ℎ𝑡, 𝑎𝑡) −(𝑟𝑡+ 𝛾· ˆ𝑄𝜋)∥2
(23)
where ˆ𝑄𝜋is the state-action value of the next step from double
target Q-networks and calculated by:
ˆ𝑄𝜋=
E
ℎ𝑡+1∼𝒫,𝑎𝑡+1∼𝜋
h
min
𝑖=1,2𝑄𝜋
𝜃𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡
𝑖
(ℎ𝑡+1, 𝑎𝑡+1) −𝛼· 𝑙𝑜𝑔𝜋(𝑎𝑡+1|ℎ𝑡+1)
i
(24)
where 𝛼is a temperature parameter that trades off between
the stochasticity of the optimal policy and the state-action
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
ViT-SAC
   GoT-SAC 
ConvNet-SAC
w/  Pre-Train
Success  Rate
   GoT-SAC 
w/o Pre-Train
Fig. 6: Success Rate Boxplot. The black-solid line and ”star”
located at the box body denote the median and average, while
the hollow circles represent the outliers.
value. Accordingly, the actor network updates its parameters
by maximizing the soft state-action function:
ℒ(𝜙) =
E
ℎ𝑡∼𝒫,𝑎𝑡∼𝜋
h
min
𝑖=1,2𝑄𝜋
𝜃𝑖(ℎ𝑡, 𝑎𝑡) −𝛼· 𝑙𝑜𝑔𝜋𝜙(𝑎𝑡|ℎ𝑡)
i
(25)
The detailed implementation of our approach is provided in
Algorithm 1.
V. EXPERIMENTS
A. Baseline Algorithms
To benchmark the proposed GTRL method for trustworthy
end-to-end autonomous navigation, we employ state-of-the-art
RL and DIL algorithms as baselines to compare the qualitative
and quantitative performance both in simulation and the real
world.
1) ConvNet-SAC [11]: A SOTA off-policy DRL algorithm
that employs ConvNets as its scene representation en-
coder. We augment the physical goal state to the latent
features encoded from ConvNets in a goal-conditional
manner.
2) ViT-SAC: This baseline is derived from a SOTA ViT-
based DRL algorithm called ViT-DQN [28], which em-
ploys ViT-DINO as the backbone of the DQN encoder.
Without losing the original vital characteristics, we re-
place the DQN with SAC to fit the end-to-end navigation
demand and call it ViT-SAC in the rest of the paper.
3) MultiModal CIL [44]: A SOTA conditional IL (CIL)
algorithm that considers the human command or goal
vector as a condition in the learning process. We select
the command-input method among two architectures
proposed in the original work to fit the goal-driven
autonomous navigation task.
4) MoveBase Planner: A conventional planner widely uti-
lized in UGV for goal-driven autonomous navigation. To
be fair enough, we turn off the global map while keep-
ing an eight-by-eight local map for real-time obstacle
avoidance.

8
(a) Scenario I.
(b) Scenario II.
(c) Scenario III.
Fig. 7: Attention Flow Visualization. The left pair of diagrams for each subfigure shows the original RGB image and goal
information, while the right side diagram depicts the revised RGB image masked by the attention flow. A red square highlights
the queried image patch, and the attention level is represented through a color transition from blue (low) to red (high). a)
Scenario I: query for 59th image patch occupied with drivable space, b) Scenario II: query for 60th image patch occupied with
drivable space, c) Scenario III: query for 34th image patch occupied with obstacles.
TABLE I: Quantitative statistics of the self-attention mechanism behavior for the three goal-driven tasks. The data highlighted
in bold denotes better results, i.e., higher Gini coefficient and lower Shannon-Wiener index, which depicts the attention are
more concentrative on the significant image patches.
Model
Episode I
Episode II
Episode III
Gini Coefficient
Shannon-Wiener Index
Gini Coefficient
Shannon-Wiener Index
Gini Coefficient
Shannon-Wiener Index
GoT-SAC
0.927
0.896
0.848
1.133
0.901
0.984
ViT-SAC
0.802
1.613
0.616
1.807
0.695
1.545
In addition, we employ vanilla GoT-SAC to learn the policy
from scratch without any expert priors during the reinforce-
ment training process to validate our proposed algorithm’s data
efficiency thoroughly.
B. Expert Priors
In order to pre-train the GoT, we asked the human par-
ticipants to perform the demonstration in terms of the goal-
driven navigation task and collected the data in image state-
action pairs formation. During each episode, participants were
given access to a randomly assigned goal position and were re-
quired to navigate toward it without collisions by continuously
monitoring the fish-eye images displayed from a first-person
perspective. More specifically, we provide the Logitech G29
driving set to the participants, allowing them to control the
linear and angular velocity by manipulating the pedal/braking
and steering wheel. To ensure the collection of reliable demon-
strations, we selected two participants possessing valid driving
licenses for the experiment. Additionally, a 10-minute training
session was provided prior to the experiments to familiarize
participants with the interaction devices and environments.
Consequently, we obtained a total of 200 trajectories from
human demonstrations, comprising 17,215 state-action pairs.
These expert demonstrations were then divided into training
and validation datasets, with a ratio of eight to two, resulting
in 13,372 and 3,443 pairs, respectively, for use in the DIL
process. The learning process terminates either when the
maximum iteration limit is reached or when the validation loss
turns to increase. The best model, determined by the lowest
validation loss, is selected for the subsequent decision-making
learning process.
C. Simulation Assessment
All algorithms are trained on a computer equipped with an
Intel Core i7-10700 CPU, 64 GB of RAM, and an NVIDIA
GTX 1660 SUPER graphics card. A high-fidelity autonomous
navigation simulator, Gazebo, is employed to build the realistic
laboratory environment and the UGV model for goal-driven
mapless navigation, shown in Fig. 4. We train the instantiated
algorithm for 500 episodes with a maximum of 200 steps for
each. An episode ends when the goal position is reached,
a collision occurs, or the UGV runs out of maximum step
numbers. To well generalize the DRL-based policy and achieve
better sim-to-real transferability, we not only augment a pixel-
level Gaussian noise to the RGB image but also vary the
initial location and goal position for each episode. Though
the proposed algorithm only needs one fisheye camera for
autonomous navigation, we also set a laser sensor in the sim-
ulation to detect the collision (4(b)). Furthermore, we employ
the Robot Operating System (ROS) open-source platform to
communicate with Gazebo and derive the goal information
through subscribing to odometry messages.
Figure 5 illustrates the learning curves of GoT-SAC and
all the DRL-based baselines. We run each algorithm with five
different random seeds to measure statistics and evaluate the
robustness. Specifically, the red dotted line and solid lines
represent the average rewards of our algorithms and baselines
per episode, while the shaded areas depict the variances over

9
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Normal
Success  Rate
Attention
Perturbation
Perturbation
w/ 10% Attention
w/ Avg. Attention
Fig. 8: Success Rate Comparison in terms of the different
attention levels. The black-solid line and ”star” located at the
box body denote the median and average, while the hollow
circles represent the outliers.
five runs. As the figure shows, both versions of GoT-SAC
achieve higher reward levels with relatively lower variances
than those of goal-conditional DRL-based algorithms, which
indicates the significance of the goal-oriented scene repre-
sentation. Moreover, both GoT-SAC models exhibit a faster
convergence and enhance the training efficiency by over 129%
and 86% compared with the ViT-SAC model. It should be
noticed that though the convergence pace of ConvNet-SAC at
the early stage is slightly faster due to its relatively small
number of parameters, the average episode return is much
lower than our proposed algorithm. Overall, the convergence
curve confirms the better data efficiency of the proposed
approach, that is, achieving an enhanced performance (a higher
reward level) by consuming less amount of the data (fewer
training episodes) compared to other baselines.
To evaluate the performance, we validate all the trained
policies with 20 random seeds and run for 50 episodes for
each seed. The success rate, which is obtained as the number of
goal-reached episodes divided by the total runs, is employed as
the metric for the evaluation. From Fig. 6, we can observe the
dominant success rate and superior robustness of the proposed
algorithm compared with other baselines regardless of varying
a wide range of random seeds.
D. Attention Visualization and Evaluation
Besides the superior efficiency and performance, the GTRL
approach also possesses a significant advantage in model in-
terpretability thanks to the goal-oriented scene representation.
To analyze the rationale behind fast convergence and excellent
performance of our algorithm, we extract the attention from
the GoT encoder w.r.t. randomly sampled RGB images and
visualize it in Fig. 7. As the figure shows, the left pair of
diagrams for each subfigure shows the original RGB image
and goal information, while the right side diagram depicts
the visual attention flow map [43] masked by the extracted
0
100
200
300
400
500
Episode
200
100
0
100
200
300
Reward
block=2, head=4
block=2, head=8
block=2, head=16
block=4, head=4
block=4, head=8
block=4, head=16
block=8, head=4
block=8, head=8
block=8, head=16
Fig. 9: Convergence curve for different combinations of SA
head and encoder block parameters.
attention. The queried image patch is highlighted by a red
square, and the attention level is represented through a color
transition from blue (low) to red (high). In Scenario I (Fig.
7(a)), the UGV is facing the oncoming T intersection, and
the goal position locates on the left side behind the office
chair and table. From the visual attention flow map, we can
observe that the overall attention generates a visual path by
mainly focusing on goal-oriented image patches. It should be
noticed that the orientation of such a visual path obviously
towards the goal position though the right turn is also feasible
in this scenario, which proves that the scene representation
successfully couples with the goal information. Similarly, a
clear goal-driven visual path is shown in Scenario II (Fig.
7(b)). In Fig. 7(c), different from the previous two scenarios,
we query for the image patch that occupies an obstacle (office
chair) instead of drivable space. We surprisingly find that the
attention highlights most of the adjacent obstacles, evidently
pointing out the undrivable regions. Therefore, we qualitatively
verify that our approach can provide a clear explanation of how
the UGV analyzes the scene and arrives at the destination with
a collision-free path.
Furthermore, we quantitatively evaluate and compare our
approach with the ViT-SAC (goal-conditional) model to sup-
port the above conclusion. Specifically, we run each model
with three random episodes and measure the statistical char-
acteristics by averaging the whole frame. Realizing that this
is an unsupervised task since there do not exist labels or
ground truth for comparing, we employ two unsupervised
metrics: Gini coefficient for measuring the evenness of the
attention weights distribution [45] and Shannon-Wiener in-
dex for evaluating the concentration of the attention [46]
in this experiment and the results are reported in Table I.
The Gini coefficient and Shannon-Wiener index are widely
utilized metrics for measuring statistical dispersion intended
to represent the evenness and diversity of distribution. From
the table, we can observe that both metrics clearly reveal that
the attention of the GoT-SAC model is sparser and tends to be

10
TABLE II: Computational efficiency of selected parameter settings.
Settings
Algorithm
Complexity Metrics
FLOPs (M)
Params (M)
Inference (ms)
Train (hr)
2 Blocks & 4 Heads
GoT-SAC
36.9
0.46
0.24 ± 0.02
3.16 ± 0.1
ViT-SAC
36.2
0.45
0.23 ± 0.03
3.10 ± 0.15
Xavier NX
Stereo Camera
Fisheye Camera
9-axis IMU
(a) SCOUTMINI.
(b) Robotics Research Center.
Fig. 10: The real UGV platform and sim-to-real experiment
environment. a) SCOUTMINI: an omnidirectional steering
mobile robot from Agilex. b) Robotics research center: an
indoor laboratory space in Nanyang Technological University.
more concentrated on task-related image patches, proving that
better interpretability is achieved through goal-oriented scene
representation.
Last but not least, we also investigate the impact of the
significant attention through perturbation-based method [47]
to observe how modifications of critical attention affect the
navigation task performance. In light of this, we measure
the success rate of the GoT-SAC model over another twenty
random seeds with fifty episodes for each by dynamically
replacing the essential attention (weights higher than 0.995)
with a moving average and 10% of the original value. The
boxplot illustrated in Figure 8 shows the overall result. We
can observe that the performance of the GoT-SAC model, the
one that decreases the significant attention to 10%, degrades
catastrophically (62.5%) in terms of the success rate. Though
the success rate of the model employing the average perturba-
tion method is slightly higher than the previous one, it is still
clearly lower than the normal GoT-SAC model, indicating the
significance of the attention learned by our approach.
E. Ablation Study of Goal-guided Transformer Parameters
Acknowledging the significance of the attention mechanism
discussed in the preceding section, it is of value to examine
the influence of the architecture of the GoT, specifically the
quantity of self-attention (SA) heads and encoder blocks. Thus,
here we analyze the training performance of the GTRL in
terms of the abovementioned two parameters. We fixed a
random seed and tested the nine combinations of SA head
and encoder block, shown in Fig. 9. From the figure, we can
observe that all of the combinations successfully converge at
a similar pace, though the overall performance slightly grows
up as the number of SA heads and encoder blocks increases.
More specifically, the group of eight blocks and sixteen heads
demonstrates the fastest convergence speed and achieves the
highest reward performance among nine combinations, while
the worst one originated by the setting of two blocks and
sixteen heads. Considering the principle of lightweight design
and limited computation power of the hardware platform in the
sim-to-real experiments, we employ two blocks of the encoder
with four heads per block in this work. Table II illustrates the
quantitative comparison of computational efficiency between
GoT-SAC and ViT-SAC algorithms with selected parameters.
F. Sim-to-Real Assessment
In addition to evaluating the feasibility and performance
of the algorithm in a virtual simulation environment, we
also expect to apply our approach in real-world navigation
tasks. In terms of the UGV, we use the omnidirectional
steering mobile platform from Agilex called SCOUTMINI.
The SCOUTMINI equips with an edge computing platform
NVIDIA Jetson Xavier, a ZED2i stereo camera, an inertial
measurement unit (IMU), and a fisheye camera with an ultra-
wide FOV of 220 degrees (Fig. 10(a)). Regarding the software,
we deliver the goal information and raw fisheye RGB images
to the UGV through ROS. Then, the GoT-SAC sends the real-
time decision inference to the UGV chassis via controller
area network (CAN) communication to realize motion control.
In this real-world experiment, all the algorithms are applied
at the Robotics Research Center at Nanyang Technological
University to complete a loop navigation task, as shown in
Fig. 10(b). More specifically, we design four destinations that
motivate the UGV to reach one by one with a small break after
each arrival and finally return to the vicinity of the starting
point. This experiment aims to test the algorithm’s ability
to avoid static obstacles and quickly navigate to given goal
positions.
It should be mentioned that, unlike the evaluation in the
simulation environment, our sim-to-real experiment involves
the utilization of visual simultaneous localization and mapping
(VSLAM) techniques to provide the ego-pose of the UGV
and visualization of the environment. For this purpose, we
have implemented the VINS-Fusion framework [48], which
has been proven to demonstrate commendable performance
within indoor settings. Notably, upon rigorous evaluation using
benchmark datasets such as EuRoc [49], the VINS-Fusion
framework has yielded a root square mean error (RSME)
of approximately 0.1 meters for the absolute trajectory error
(ATE). This level of precision signifies a considerable achieve-

11
(a) GoT-SAC.
(b) ViT-SAC.
(c) ConvNet-SAC.
(d) MultiModal CIL.
(e) MoveBase.
Fig. 11: Qualitative measurement of proposed algorithm and baselines. The solid blue line depicts the ground truth of the
trajectory, while the solid red line represents the human-engaged path.
TABLE III: Quantitative performance of proposed algorithm compared with baselines. The data highlighted in bold denotes
better results, i.e., relatively lower mean and variance in terms of the traveling distance and time.
Approach
Goal Position
Avg. Dist.
Var. Dist.
Avg. Time.
Var. Time
Success Rate
Engage Number
GoT-SAC
1st
6.044
± 0.049
14.048
± 0.282
100%
0
2nd
5.747
± 0.110
11.987
± 0.368
100%
0
3rd
6.171
± 0.036
12.821
± 0.076
100%
0
4th
6.360
± 0.113
13.902
± 1.287
100%
0
ViT-SAC
1st
5.958
± 0.036
15.274
± 0.394
100%
0
2nd
6.506
± 0.189
15.432
± 0.741
100%
0
3rd
6.226
± 0.015
22.502
± 1.601
100%
0
4th
7.274
± 0.210
16.449
± 0.722
100%
0
ConvNet-SAC[11]
1st
6.150
± 0.294
17.918
± 2.563
100%
4
2nd
6.780
± 0.252
20.735
± 1.519
100%
5
3rd
6.322
± 0.245
18.757
± 2.683
100%
6
4th
5.971
± 0.123
13.550
± 0.414
100%
0
MultiModal CIL[44]
1st
5.852
± 0.021
13.458
± 0.180
100%
0
2nd
9.868
± 0.480
57.263
± 6.026
60%
5
3rd
6.666
± 0.134
75.121
± 12.019
20%
5
4th
6.913
± 0.217
28.893
± 4.475
100%
0
MoveBase
1st
5.822
± 0.063
12.180
± 0.088
100%
0
2nd
7.070
± 0.529
23.446
± 9.388
100%
4
3rd
6.092
± 0.141
14.010
± 3.122
100%
1
4th
6.510
± 0.517
24.098
± 5.442
100%
5
ment and holds practical viability for real-world inference
applications.
Figure 11 illustrates the qualitative measurement of per-
formance for each algorithm. We plot both trajectories from
the UGV and the human with two different colors, blue for
ground truth and red for human engagement, respectively. As
shown in the figure, the GoT-SAC policy performs smooth
and collision-free navigation, while the other three algorithms
(ConvNet-SAC, MultiModal CIL, and MoveBase) all need
human engagement to arrive at the destinations. Surprisingly,
we find that ViT-SAC policy also demonstrates an equally
excellent performance despite the low average success rate
during the evaluation in the simulation environment. It is
reasonable since we select the best model for each algorithm
for sim-to-real transfer assessment. It may also indicate the
significance of the self-attention mechanism for goal-driven
autonomous navigation.
To compare the performance and robustness of the policies
in a deeper sight, we employ six statistical metrics for each
goal-driven task: the average and variance of traveling dis-
tance, average and variance of navigation time, success rate,
and engagement number. Especially the successful arrival is
determined if the UGV reaches each goal position within one
minute, and we actively engage the UGV control once the col-
lision is likely to happen. A detailed quantitative measurement
is reported in the Table. III. It is clear that the GoT-SAC model
demonstrates dominant performance and robustness from all
the domains compared with other baselines, including ViT-

12
1
2
3
4
5
0
0 →1
1 →2
2 →3
3 →4
4 →5
Real-time Pose
Goal Pose
Fig. 12: Office Environment. The initial and goal positions
are labeled by yellow circles, and the performed trajectory is
highlighted with the solid blue line.
SAC and MoveBase planner. The performance of ViT-SAC
is also comparably excellent, besides the longest navigated
distance for the fourth destination and high average time for
the third goal position. The worst performance is provided
by the MultiModal CIL model, whose success rate is only
20% for reaching the third goal position. We can observe a
similar performance from the statistical result of the ConvNet-
SAC model in terms of the number of engagements, which is
15 in total. As for the MoveBase planner, the performance
highly depends on the local cost-map quality, especially in
the turning cases (the second and fourth goal position). For
instance, the local cost-map occurs false detection frequently
due to limited field of view and occlusion from the obstacles,
leading to improper path planning. Overall, both quantitative
and qualitative results in this sim-to-real experiment highlight
the superiority of the proposed algorithm compared with other
baselines, including against SOTA leaning-based approaches
and the classic UGV navigation method.
Additionally, our approach is tested in an unknown envi-
ronment to validate the generalization capability thoroughly.
Due to the unstable connection and limitation of hardware,
we select an unseen office environment rather than an outdoor
space. It is worthwhile to test the generalization and trans-
ferability of the proposed algorithm in such an environment
since it has a number of corner cases to be addressed, such
as planning a collision-free path in narrow corridors, handling
unseen obstacles (in terms of shape and color), and performing
U-turn operation in order to reach the goal position. Figure 12
demonstrates the details of the experiment, where the yellow
circle labels the initial and goal positions, and the performed
trajectory is highlighted with the solid blue line. In particular,
the UGV has to pass a narrow corridor to reach the first two
destinations and perform 90-degree-turn and U-turn operations
to arrive last two goal positions. Nevertheless, the GoT-SAC
model can still approach all five goals without collision or
engagement, indicating the excellent generalization capability
and transferability of our approach.
VI. CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSIONS
This paper presents a Transformer-enabled DRL approach,
namely GTRL, to realize efficient goal-driven autonomous
navigation. Specifically, we first propose a novel Transformer-
based architecture called Goal-guided Transformer (GoT) for
the perception to consider the goal information as an input
of the scene representation rather than a condition. For the
purpose of boosting data efficiency, deep imitation learning
is employed to pre-train the GoT. Then, a GoT-enabled soft
actor-critic algorithm (GoT-SAC) is instantiated to train the de-
cision policy based on the goal-oriented scene representation.
As a result, our approach motivates the scene representation to
concentrate mainly on goal-relevant features, which substan-
tially enhances the data efficiency of the DRL learning process,
leading to superior navigation performance. Both simulative
and sim-to-real transfer experiments confirm our approach’s
superiority in data efficiency, performance, robustness, and
sim-to-real generalization.
Despite the superior performance demonstrated by the pro-
posed approach compared to other SOTA baselines, instances
of failure were observed during the experiments. This can be
attributed to the ground reflection resulting from the lighting
conditions. Specifically, under strong lighting, the ground re-
flection introduces a substantial deviation between the original
appearance and the RGB images captured by the fisheye
camera, consequently leading to unfavorable navigation per-
formance. Furthermore, the current approach exhibits degraded
navigation performance when encountering dynamic obstacles,
particularly pedestrians wearing clothes in a similar color to
the ground, since it has never encountered such obstacles
during the training phase.
In light of this, our future objective is to transfer the nav-
igation environment from indoor to outdoor and incorporate
a more diverse range of input modalities for our model. The
navigation task becomes significantly more complex in the
outdoor environment as the UGV must handle varying lighting
conditions and highly dynamic pedestrians. To address these
challenges, the adoption of multiple input modalities, such as
occupancy flow or segmentation images, could be considered
to perform interactive fusion for segmenting the drivable
area explicitly, filtering out irrelevant information and thereby
enhancing subsequent outdoor navigation performance. More-
over, we intend to incorporate abnormal detection and re-
localization functions to mitigate the impact of position errors
on navigation performance in the future. These mechanisms
will help identify and handle situations where position errors
exceed acceptable thresholds, maintaining a reliable and con-
sistent navigation performance even in challenging scenarios.
