220 
Hierarchical Solution of Markov Decision Processes using Macro-actions 
Milos Hauskrecht, 
Nicolas Meuleau 
Leslie Pack Kaelbling, Thomas Dean 
Computer Science Department, Box 1910 
Brown University, Providence, RI 02912 

Abstract 
We investigate the use of temporally abstract 
actions, or macro-actions, in the solution of 
Markov decision processes. Unlike current mod­
els that combine both primitive actions and 
macro-actions and leave the state space un­
changed, we propose a hierarchical model (using 
an abstract MDP) that works with macro-actions 
only, and that significantly reduces the size of the 
state space. This is achieved by treating macro­
actions as local policies that act in certain regions 
of state space, and by restricting states in the ab­
stract MDP to those at the boundaries of regions. 
The abstract MDP approximates the original and 
can be solved more efficiently. We discuss sev­
eral ways in which macro-actions can be gen­
erated to ensure good solution quality. Finally, 
we consider ways in which macro-actions can be 
reused to solve multiple, related MDPs; and we 
show that this can justify the computational over­
head of macro-action generation. 
1 
Introduction 
Markov decision processes (MDPs) [11, 22] have proven 
tremendously useful as models of stochastic planning and 
decision problems. 
However, traditional dynamic pro­
gramming remains computationally intractable for practi­
cal problems, requiring time polynomial in the size of the 
state and action spaces, but where these spaces are gener­
ally too large to be explicitly enumerated. Considerable 
research has been directed toward the solution of Markov 
decision processes (MDPs) with large state and action 
spaces. These include function approximation [2], reach­
ability analyses [5] and aggregation techniques [7, 3, 4]. 
Despite these advances, little attention has been paid to the 
reuse of policies or value functions generated for one MDP 
in the solution of a related MDP. While such reasoning is 
Craig Boutilier 
Department of Computer Science 
University of British Columbia 
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4, Canada 

common in classical planning-for instance, through the 
use of macros [8, 16, 13] or plan repair strategies [15]-its 
application in stochastic settings is less common. Suitable 
techniques of this type could lead to the amortization of 
solution costs over a large number of problems, and the 
ability to solve future problem instances quickly, which is 
critical to on-line reasoning. 
One of the few models to deal with solution reuse within 
the MDP framework is the Skills model of Thrun and 
Schwartz [24], which attempts to learn how to reuse policy 
fragments (or skills) for different tasks. Another is found 
in the work of Sutton and his colleagues [23, 20, 2 1], who 
have developed models of macro-actions for MDPs that 
can be reused to solve multiple MDPs when objectives (or 
goals) change. In particular, macros are viewed as "local" 
policies that are implemented until some termination con­
dition is met, at which point a new macro (or any other ac­
tion) can be applied. Key to the success of this framework 
is the ability to construct models of macro-actions that al­
low them to be treated as if they were ordinary actions in 
the original MDP. 
In this paper, we continue the investigation of the use of 
macros in MDPs; specifically, we focus on the problem of 
planning with macro-actions addressed by Precup, Sutton 
and Singh [21]. Our main aim is the development of a dif­
ferent model for planning with macros that deals with some 
of the computational problems associated with this earlier 
model (the PSS model). In particular, while the PSS model 
allows macros designed for one MDP to be applied to a re­
lated MDP, it still relies on explicit dynamic programming 
over the state space of the related MDP (and a larger ac­
tion space). Thus it does nothing to alleviate the problem 
of large state spaces. Furthermore, the use of macros is not 
guaranteed to reduce the time required to find an optimal 
solution. 
We present in Section 2 a hierarchical model for the use of 
macro-actions that specifically addresses the difficulties of 
large state and action spaces. We take a macro to be a local 
policy, defined over a region of state space, that terminates 
when that region is left. We show how an abstract MDP 

can be constructed that consists only of states that lie on the 
borders of adjacent regions, and whose solution determines 
a policy that consists of macros only. Hierarchical models 
similar to the one we propose have been investigated by 
Forestier and Varaiya [9], and recently by Parr [18, 19]. 
Two limitations of this model are then addressed. The first 
relates to solution quality. Since the policy generated by 
solving the abstract MDP can contain only macros, certain 
behaviors cannot be realized, thus the resulting policy may 
be suboptimal. In Section 3, we identify conditions un­
der which the set of macros that comprise the action space 
of the abstract MDP give rise to an .::-optimal policy for 
the original MDP. We then consider both systematic and 
heuristic techniques for macro generation that ensure high 
quality behavior. 
The second limitation relates to solution time, specifically 
the time needed to generate a set of good macros. This 
generally requires that we perform some form of dynamic 
programming within specific regions of the state space. 
Since our regions cover the state space and macros should 
capture a variety of control behaviors in different regions, 
macro generation can become computationally more inten­
sive than solving the original MDP.1 This problem can be 
diminished if we can generate macros off-line for fast on­
line reasoning, or reuse them to solve multiple problems. In 
Section 4, we briefly analyze the requirements for feasible 
macro reuse and describe a hybrid model in which changes 
in the original MDP (either in the reward function or the 
system dynamics) lead to an expansion of some parts of 
the abstract MDP, which can then be solved. Since this hy­
brid MDP consists primarily of abstract states and macro­
actions, it can be solved effectively and provide for fast, 
on-line response to changes in problem specification. The 
use of macros for the on-line solution of multiple related 
MDPs is the main advantage of our hierarchical model. 
2 
A Hierarchical Model of Macro-actions 
2.1 
Markov Decision Processes 
A (finite) Markov decision process is a tuple (S, A, T, R) 
where: S is a finite set of states; A is a finite set of actions; 
Tis a transition distribution T: S x A x S --7 [0, 1], such 
that T(s, a,·) is a probability distribution over S for any 
s E S and a E A; and R : S x A --7 R is a bounded 
reward function. Intuitively, T( s, a, w) denotes the proba­
bility of moving to state w when action a is performed at 
states, while R(s, a) is the immediate reward associated 
with action a in s. 
Given an MDP, the objective is to construct a policy that 
maximizes expected accumulated reward over some hori-
1We note that aggregation and approximation techniques can 
be used within a region, though we do not address this issue here. 
Hierarchical MDPs 
221 
zon of interest. We focus on infinite horizon, discounted 
decision problems, where we adopt a policy that maximizes 
E(L:6o f3t ·rt), where rt is a reward obtained at timet and 
0 < f3 < 1 is a discount factor. In such a setting, we restrict 
our attention to stationary policies of the form rr : S --7 A, 
with rr( s) denoting the action to be executed in states. The 
value of a policy 1r can be shown to satisfy [11] 
V1r(s) == R(s, rr(s)) + {3 L T(s, rr(s), t) · V1r(t). 
tES 
A policy 1r is optimal if V1r ( s) 2: V1r' ( s) for all s E S 
and policies rr'. The optimal value function V* is the value 
function for any optimal policy. 
A number of techniques for constructing optimal policies 
exist. An especially simple algorithm is value iteration [1]. 
We produce a sequence of value functions vn by starting 
from an arbitrary V0, and defining 
Vi+1(s) = max{R(s, a)+ f3 L T(s, a, t). V;(t)}. (1) 
aEA 
tES 
The sequence of functions V; converges to V* in the limit. 
Each iteration is known as a Bellman backup. After some 
finite number n of iterations, the choice of maximizing ac­
tion for each s forms an optimal policy 7r and vn approxi­
mates its value. 
2.2 
Macro-actions and their Models 
Sutton [23] has argued that it is crucial to be able to model 
MDPs at multiple time scales. The ability to determine 
the value-within an underlying MDP-of a complex se­
quence of actions or program is important in, say for ex­
ample, robot programming. 
In the navigation problem 
illustrated in Figure 1(a), a programmer may have provided 
a program (or partial policy) that enables the robot to exit 
one of the rooms through a particular door. Integrating such 
a partial policy into the decision process is a difficult task 
given that: (a) the robot usually "commits" to the execution 
of this program; and (b) the program extends over some 
period of time. To deal with this problem, Precup, Sutton 
and Singh [23, 20, 21] have developed multi-time models 
and applied them to planning with MDPs. In what fol­
lows, we draw heavily on the use of these multi-time mod­
els. Parr and Russell [ 17] have proposed a related model in 
which a (partial) policy is modeled using a finite-state ma­
chine. These policies are then "abstracted" hierarchically 
and treated as primitive actions to be invoked by higher­
level behaviors. 
While such temporally abstract actions, or macro-actions, 
are useful for modeling constrained behavior-such as par­
tially specified policies-we also view them as a useful tool 
that allows the reuse of a solution generated for one MDP 
in the solution of another. However, this perspective casts 

222 
Hauskrecht, Meuleau, Kaelbling, Dean, and Boutilier 
j_; I : 
i 
, •.• , 
'-l1--f-
I• •1 ! 
, 
• 
• 
Te : +7 
• 
·• 
• 
u---. 
,. •I 
, . .  
• 
, . • 
• 
••• 
r 
• 
• • •• 
• 
• 
• 
.. 
b • 
Figure 1: (a) Test problem Maze 121. Shaded squares de­
note locations with higher cost, patterned squares represent 
areas in which moves are more uncertain (a move in the 
intended direction is less likely). Shaded circles denote ab­
sorbing states with a finite positive cost, G stands for a zero 
cost goal state; (b) peripheral states for the partitioning into 
11 rooms (regions). 
macros in a very different light. While Sutton and his col­
leagues have not explicitly considered how macros arise, 
we focus on the issues associated with the automatic gen­
eration of macro actions. Rather than supposing a tempo­
rally abstract behavior has been provided, we imagine that 
the decision maker will be forced to deal with a number 
of related problem-solving episodes, and desires a set of 
macros that will help solve these MDPs more quickly. Thus 
the effort required to generate these macros (something not 
considered in the PSS model) will "pay for itself" either 
with decreased reaction time to changing circumstances, or 
with total computational savings over multiple problem in­
stances. The Skills model of Thrun and Schwartz [24] has 
a similar motivation, though they do not address the use of 
multi-time models for learned skills. Parr [18, 19] has inde­
pendently investigated the use of hierarchical models with 
an eye toward macro generation, and has considered many 
of the same problems we address here. 
Formally, our model relies on a region-based decomposi­
tion of a given MDP (S, A, T, R) as defined by Dean and 
Lin [6]. 
Definition 1 A region-based decomposition II of an MDP 
M = (S, A, T, R) is a partitioning II = {SI. · · ·, Sn} of 
the state space S. We call the elements S; of II the regions 
of M. For any region S;, the exit periphery of S; is 
XPer(Si )  = {t E S-S; : T(s,a,t) > Ofor somea,s E S;}. 
The entrance periphery of S; is 
EPer(S i) = {t E S; : T(s, a, t) > Ofor some a, s E S-Si}. 
We call elements ofXPer( S;) exit states for S; and elements 
of EPer( S;) entrance states. The collection of all peripheral 
states is denoted 
Perrr(S) = Ui{EPer(S;): i :S n} = Ui{XPer(S;): i :S n}. 
Figure 1 (b) shows the set of peripheral states obtained if we 
partition the problem of Figure 1(a) into the eleven regions 
corresponding to different rooms . 
A macro-action is simply a local policy defined for a par­
ticular region S;. Intuitively, this policy can be executed 
whenever an agent is in the region and terminates when the 
agent leaves the region (if ever). 
Definition 2 A macro-action for region S; is a local policy 
7r; : S; -+A. 
Our definition is much more specific than that of PSS, 
who define macros using arbitrary starting and termination 
conditions, and allow mappings that depend on the time 
elapsed or the trajectory followed since the macro action 
was initiated. Within our framework, the starting condition 
for macro 1r; would simply be st E S; (we are in the re­
gion) and the termination condition would best (j. S; (we 
are out of the region). 
A key insight of PSS (which finds its roots in earlier work 
by Sutton [23]) is that one can treat a macro-action of this 
type as a primitive action in the original MDP if one has 
an appropriate reward and transition model for the macro. 
They propose the following method of modeling macros. 
Definition 3 A discounted transition model T;(·, 1r;, ·) for 
macro 1r; (defined on regionS;) is a mapping T; : S; x 
XPer(S;) -+ [0, 1] such that 
T;(s,1r;,s') 
Er(f3r-l · Pr(sr = s' I s0 = s, 7r;)), 
00 
Lpt-l · Pr (r = t, st = s' I s0 = s, 1r;) 
t=l 
where the expectation is taken with respect to time T of ter­
mination of7r;. A discounted reward model R;(·, 1r;) for 1r; 
is a mapping R; : S; -+ R s.t. 
T 
R;(s,1r;) = Er(Lf3tR(st,7r;(st)) I s0 = s,7r;), 
t=O 
where the expectation is taken with respect to completion 
time T of 1r;. 
The discounted transition model is a standard stochastic 
transition matrix specifying the probability of leaving S; 
via a specific exit state given that 1r; was initiated at a spe­
cific state inside the region, with one exception: the proba­
bility is discounted according to the expected time at which 
that exit occurs. As demonstrated by PSS, this clever addi­
tion allows the transition model to be used as a normal tran­
sition matrix in any standard MDP solution technique, such 
as policy or value iteration. 2 The discounted reward model 
is similar, simply measuring the expected accrued reward 
during execution of 1r; starting from a particular state in S;. 
20ur definition of the discounted transition model differs 
slightly from that of PSS: their transition model is obtained by 

2.3 
Constructing Macro Models 
Since we are concerned with the automatic generation of 
macros, we now consider the construction of discounted 
transition and reward models for macros. Issues related to 
the macro-model construction are discussed also in [19]. 
Let 1r; be a macro defined on S;. The discounted tran­
sition probability 1i(s, 1r;, s') for s E S;, macro 1r; and 
s' E X Per(S;) satisfies: 
T;(s, 1r;, s') = 
T(s, 1r;(s), s') + f3 L T(s, 1r;(s), s")T;(s", 1r;, s'). 
s"ES; 
This leads to IX Per(S;) I systems of linear equations, one 
set for every exit state. Each system consists of IS; I equa­
tions with IS; I unknowns. The systems can be solved either 
directly or using iterative methods. Thus, the time com­
plexity of finding all transition probability parameters is 
O(IX Per(S;) liS; 13). 
We can construct the reward model in a similar fashion. Let 
R;(s, 1r;) be the expected discounted reward for following 
the policy 1r; starting at states E S;. Then we have: 
R;(s, 1r;) = R(s, 7r;(s))+f3 L T(s, 1r;(s), s')R;(s', 1r;). 
s'ES; 
This defines a set of IS; I linear equations, which can be 
solved in O(IS;I3) time. 
Overall, the computation of macro parameters takes 
O((IXPer(S;)I + l)IS;I3) time per macro. Note that an 
overhead for generating macros (finding suitable policies 
defining macros and computing their parameters) may be­
come, in many instances, computationally more expensive 
than solving the original MDP problem. Thus we must 
carefully consider what kinds of planning situations justify 
the computational effort. 
2.4 
The Hierarchical Solution ofMDPs with Macros 
Suppose we are given an MDP M, a decomposition II, and 
a set of macros A; = { 1r[, · · · , 1r5'} for each region S; 
associated with this partition. There are two reasonably 
direct ways in which these can be used to solve M more 
efficiently. 
First, we can simply add these macro-actions to M; let 
Ma denote the augmented MDP constructed by extending 
the action space from A to A U  A1 U · · · U An, assuming 
that macro models are used to determine transitions and re­
wards associated with these new actions. Ma can be solved 
multiplying our variable T; by the constant /3. Our definition is 
consistent with the update formula in Equation 1, while PSS use 
a formula where the discount factor is folded into the transition 
model (this requires multiplying the one-step transition probabil­
ities by j3 before using them). 
Hierarchical MDPs 
223 
by standard methods, such as value iteration. Because all 
base level actions (those in A) are present, the policy so 
constructed is guaranteed to be optimal. Furthermore, the 
presence of macros can enhance the convergence of value 
iteration, as demonstrated by Sutton et al. [20, 21]. This 
is due to the fact that the single "application" of a macro 
can propagate values through a large number of states and 
over a large period of time in a single step. In general, this 
model requires more work per iteration because of the in­
creased action space, but potentially fewer iterations. We 
note that this savings does not account for the overhead as­
sociated with generating macros and constructing the mod­
els for each macro. 
We also note that, depending on the initial value function 
used to begin value iteration, macros can actually increase 
the number of steps required for convergence compared to 
the value iteration with primitive actions alone. Specifi­
cally, Hauskrecht [10] showed that if V0 is an upper bound 
on the optimal value function V*, value iteration in the aug­
mented MDP is guaranteed to require at least as many iter­
ations as in the original MDP (the same holds for a lower 
bound and minimization of costs). An empirical demon­
stration of this phenomenon is provided in next section. 
Alternatively, we can imagine a reduced MDP, Mr, formed 
by replacing A with A1 U · · · U An. Mr will generally be 
more efficiently solvable because there are fewer actions 
to consider, and convergence will be enhanced as above. 
However, because the possible behaviors one can consider 
are limited to the application of these macros, there is no 
guarantee that the resulting solution is optimal: this will 
depend crucially on the macros introduced. 
While these models offer some advantages, they do not use 
macros to alleviate the problem qf state space size. Each 
method requires explicit value iteration over the state space, 
with possibly a larger number of actions. We instead wish 
to solve a much smaller MDP, taking advantage of the fact 
that, by committing to the execution of a macro, decisions 
need only be made at peripheral states, not at states that 
lie strictly within a region. To capture this intuition, we 
consider the hierarchical application of macro operators 
within a high-level, or abstract, MDP. This model is closely 
related to the "landmark" technique developed by Kael­
bling [12] for learning policies for hierarchical stochastic 
shortest path problems. 
Definition 4 Let II = { S1, · · · ,  Sn} be a decomposition of 
MDP M = {S, A, T, R), and let A = {A; : i Þ n} be a 
collection of macro-action sets, where A; = { 1rf, · · · ,  1r5'} 
is a set of macros for regionS;. The abstract MDP M' = 
{S', A', T', R') induced by II and A, is given by: 
• S' = Perrr(S) = U{EPer(S;): i Þ n}; 
• A' = U;A; with 7rf E A; feasible only at states s E 
EPer(S;); 

224 
Hauskrecht, Meuleau, Kaelbling, Dean, and Boutilier 
Room] 
Room2 
0 0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 0 
Room3 
Room4 
Figure 2: Abstract MDP for a four-room example. Grey 
circles mark peripheral states of the original MDP, i.e. 
states of the abstract MDP. 
• T' ( s, 11'f, t) is given by the discounted transition 
model for11'f, for anys E EPer(Si) andt E XPer(S;); 
T' (s, 11'f, t) = 0 for any t ¢ XPer(Si); 
• R' ( s, 11'7) is given by the discounted rew ard model for 
11'f,for anys E EPer(S;). 
The transition and reward models required by the abstract 
MDP are restricted to peripheral states and make no men­
tion of states "internal" to a region. Due to discounting in 
T' these definitions do not describe an MDP, but they do 
preserve the Markov property;3 thus, we may use dynamic 
programming techniques to solve the abstract MDP. An 
abstract MDP for a simple four-room navigation problem 
is shown in Figure 2. Regions are formed by the rooms 
and the peripheral states make up the abstract MDP. We as­
sume macros exist that can take the robot out of any room 
through any door, accounting for the connectivity of the 
abstract MDP. 
Notice that the abstract MDP induced by a given decompo­
sition can be substantially smaller than the original MDP, 
especially if the problem can be decomposed into a num­
ber of regions with relatively small peripheries-this is the 
case in our running example, and in the types of domains 
considered in [20, 21]. 
We call a policy 1!'1 
: S' -+ A' for M' that maps periph­
eral states to macro-actions a macro-policy. Such a policy 
1!'1, when considered in the context of the original MDP M, 
defines a non-M arkovian policy 11'; that is, the choice of 
action at a state s can depend on previous history. In par­
ticular, the action 11'( s) to be executed at some state s E S; 
will generally depend on the state se by which S; was most 
recently entered: 11'( s) = 1!'1 ( se) ( s) .4 
3Specifically, the probability of moving from any entrance 
state to an exit state for a given macro is independent of previ­
ous history. 
4Note that the macro-policy does not dictate the actions to take 
if the process begins in an internal state s of some region S;. To 
deal with this, we can use a greedy macro choice with regard to 
the "intermediate macro models;' R; and T;, and the values of 
the abstract MDP at XPer( S;). This is required only for the initial 
state, all other decisions are made at peripheral states in the ab­
stract MDP. Note that the greedy approach can be applied also to 
Once a set of macros has been provided, along with their 
models, our hierarchical approach induces a problem with 
a considerably smaller state space (and often a smaller ac­
tion space). This computational advantage comes at a price 
however-the possibility of generating a suboptimal pol­
icy. This is due to the fact that the abstract MDP allows 
the decision maker to consider only a limited range of be­
haviors. Therefore it is important to ensure that the macros 
provided (or generated) offer a choice of behaviors that are 
of acceptable value. We will turn our attention to this issue 
in Section 3. 
2.5 
Experimental results 
To demonstrate the computational savings made possible 
by our hierarchical approach to planning with macros, we 
have performed experiments on the simple navigation prob­
lem in Figure 1. The agent can move in any compass di­
rection to an adjacent cell or stay in place. The move ac­
tions are stochastic, so the agent .can move in an unintended 
direction with some small probability. The objective is to 
minimize the expected discounted cost incurred by navigat­
ing the maze, with each state, except the zero-cost absorb­
ing goal state, incurring some cost. The costs and transition 
probabilities are not uniform across the maze. 
We compared the results of value iteration for the original 
MDP, the augmented MDP and the abstract MDP, the latter 
two formed using the rooms in the problem as regions. The 
macros were formed heuristically using the simple strategy 
described in Section 3.2, giving IX Per(Si) I + 1 macros 
for every region S;. Figure 3 shows how the estimated 
value (minimal expected cost) of a particular state improves 
with the time (in seconds) taken by value iteration on each 
of the three models. When th_e initial value function es­
timate is an upper bound, both the augmented MDP and 
the abstract MDP lead to faster convergence of the value 
function. In the augmented MDP, the ability of macros to 
propagate value through a large number of states produces 
large changes in the value function in a single iteration step, 
overcoming the increased number of actions. Note, how­
ever, that when the initial estimate of the value function is a 
lower bound, the augmented MDP actually performs worse 
than the original MDP. These effects would be reversed if 
we were maximizing rewards instead of minimizing costs. 
The abstract MDP has significantly reduced state and ac­
tion spaces sizes. Although in general, macros can lead 
to suboptimal value functions (and subsequently policies), 
in our example, the abstract MDP produced nearly optimal 
policies (and did so very quickly). The average time (in 
seconds) taken per value iteration step in this example is 
0.045 for the original MDP, 0.12 for the augmented MDP, 
and 0.019 for the abstract MDP. This reflects the increased 
action space of the augmented MDP and the reduced action 
generate a markovian policy for all states in the region (see [1 0] 
for details). 

140 
120 I 
i 
100 ' 
! 
: 80 ! 
60\ 
401 
I 20 p-qr---":s·-.... $---:::·:.:..:····················· 
base level MDP -
augmented MDP ---· 
abstract MOP ······· 
oL---------- 
0 
3 time 
140 
120 
100 
80 
60 
40 
Hierarchical MDPs 
225 
base level MDP -
augmented MOP -·--· 
abstract MDP ····-·· 
: [---····-·--- --·-···-··-··--· 
0 
1 
2 
3 time 
Figure 3: Solution quality versus time for various models. Results using a properly initialized value function (w.r.t. the 
augmented MDP) are shown on the left. Results for a poor initial function are shown on the right. In the latter case, the 
augmented MDP converges more slowly than the original MDP. 
and state spaces for the abstract MDP, as expected. 
3 
Construction and Quality of a Macro Set 
While macros can speed up computation, the question re­
mains just how good the resulting policies will be. In par­
ticular, within our hierarchical model, the space of policies 
that can be considered is severely restricted. Thus, we wish 
to ensure that the macros used admit the "flexibility" of be­
havior needed to discover good policies. The problem is 
less pressing for augmented MDPs-since base actions are 
available, optimality is assured-but still important if con­
vergence is to be enhanced. 
A primary goal of a macro-selection strategy is to find a 
small set of good macros, that is, macros that are likely 
to produce, when combined, a good approximation of the 
optimal solution. 
3.1 
Macro Generation using Peripheral Values 
Suppose we offer the robot in our running example two 
macros for possible execution in Room 1 of Figure 2, each 
corresponding to a policy that attempts to leave the room by 
one of the two exits. We are making an implict assumption 
that one of these two behaviors is desirable, and thus that 
there is no good reason to hang around in that room. We 
may prescribe rather different local policies for the room 
containing the goal; there is a reason not to leave the region. 
This suggests a general way to automatically generate 
macro actions for region S;. We want to trade off the re­
wards associated with the states in S; with the values of 
leaving the region via some exit state. This tradeoff is 
naturally modeled and analyzed as a local MDP where re­
wards are attached to states in S; and estimated values are 
attached to elements of its exit periphery. 
Definition 5 Let S; be a region of MDP M 
, 
--
--
1 
<J: I. 
• --I 
5-6r;;--
<X • 
Region 
Absorbing 
State 
Figure 4: A Local MDP for Macro Generation 
(S, A, T, R}, and let <T : XPer(S; ) -t R be a seed func­
tion/or S;. The local MDP M; ( <T) associated with S; and u 
consists of: (a) state spaceS; UXPer( S;) U{ a}; (b) actions, 
dynamics and rewards associated with S; as in M; (c) a 
reward u(s) associated with each s E XPer(Si ); and (d) 
a single cost-free action applicable at each s E XPer(S;) 
that leads with certainty to a (a cost-free absorbing state). 
The local MDP is depicted graphically in Figure 4. Solving 
M; ( <T) results in a local policy rr; whose behavior is opti­
mal if the seed function <T reflects the true value of reaching 
specific exit states. 
Intuitively, if we could seed the exit periphery of each local 
MDP using a function u within c: of the true value function 
at these states, we could generate a single macro for each 
region, and "string them together" to obtain an approxi­
mately optimal policy. More precisely, we have: 
Theorem 1 Let II = { S1, · · · , Sn} be a decomposition of 
MDP M, and let V be the optimalvalue function for M. 
Let A = U{ A; : i Þ n} be a set of macro actions such 
that each A; contains some macro rr; generated by the 
local MDP Mi(u;) where lu;(s) - V(s)l Þ c:for all s E 
XPer(S;). If M' is the abstract MDP induced by II using 
action set A, and V' is the optimal value function for M', 

226 
Hauskrecht, Meuleau, Kaelbling, Dean, and Boutilier 
then 
2cj3 
IV'(s)- V(s)i Þ 1 _ j3 
for all s E S' (the abstract state space). Furthermore, ifr 
is a lower bound on the completion time of all macros, then 
2cj3r 
IV'(s)- V(s)i Þ 1_ ;3r. 
Note that more precise error bounds can be found when "ef­
fective" discounting rates are considered for every macro 
transition. 
3.2 
Construction of Macro Sets 
The previous result indicates that knowledge of the (op­
timal) value function for an MDP can give rise to good 
macros. Of course, such prescience is rare: if we knew 
the value function, we would have no decision problem to 
solve. However, we often have heuristic knowledge regard­
ing the range of the value function at certain states, or con­
straints on its possible values. It is precisely this type of 
knowledge that comes into play when one imposes partial 
policies (say, in the form of a control routine). Even some 
information can be used to construct a good set of macros 
that guarantees approximately optimal performance. We 
consider several methods for exploiting such knowledge. 
If one knows the range of the value function, this can be 
used to construct a set of macros systematically. For in­
stance, when constructing macros for Room I in Figure 2, 
suppose our knowledge of the value function is sparse-all 
we know is that the values of the two exit states lie be­
tween Vmin and Vmax·5 In order to generate a set of macros 
for Room 1 that is guaranteed to contain a good macro, 
we can use the coverage technique: intuitively, for each 
of the two exit states, we consider values that lie in the 
range [Vmin, Vmax] spaced some 6 apart; that is, we con­
sider a grid or mesh covering (Vmin, VmaxF. By construct­
ing macros for each a lying on a grid point, we are assured 
that one such a is within 96 of the optimal value function 
and that (assuming other regions have "good" macros from 
which to choose) close-to-optimal behavior results when 
the abstract MDP is solved. 
This coverage technique can be extremely expensive: given 
such generic knowledge of the value function, we will 
generate [(Vmax- Vmin)/6)]lXPer(S;)I macros per region. 
However, we can often do much better. First, the number 
of macros is usually smaller than the number of grid points 
covering [Vmin, Vmaxl· Thus it is often more appropriate 
to search a local policy space. One technique for doing 
so was suggested recently by Parr [18]. Second, we can 
apply various forms of domain-specific knowledge. For in­
stance, the values of several exit states for a region Si may 
5Such bounds are easily obtainable using the maximum and 
minimum rewards. 
not be known, but we may know that these values are (ap­
proximately) the same (e.g., they are equidistant from any 
rewarding or dangerous states). This effectively reduces 
the dimensionality of the required grid. Tighter constraints 
on the value function can reduce the range of values that 
need to be tried. Furthermore, in circumstances where no 
reward can be obtained within the region, only differences 
in the relative values of exit states impact the local policy: 
this too can reduce the number of macros needed. 
The systematic coverage technique can lead to a genera­
tion of a large number of macros per region. Thus, unless 
tight constraints are known on the value function, this can 
involve substantial overhead and, in many instances, be un­
profitable. Heuristic methods for macro generation can al­
leviate this difficulty if they require the construction of a 
small number of macros. One such strategy, suggested by 
Sutton et al. [21] for robot navigation problems such as 
our example, involves creating macros for each region Si 
that try to lead the agent out of si via different exit states. 
To do so requires seeding a local MDP such that one exit 
state gets high value and all others get low value. We de­
scribed experiments with this heuristic technique in the pre­
vious section, but we also added a stay-in-region macro that 
keeps the agent in the region, by seeding all exit states with 
low values. This technique leads to a set of IXPer( Si) I + 1 
macros per region. 
In general, the above heuristic strategy assures that exits 
and potential goals within the region will not be overlooked 
while planning at the abstract level. Note, however, that 
this technique does not guarantee that the necessary cover­
age will be obtained. For example, while implementing a 
policy to exit in one way, the agent may find itself actually 
"slipping" closer to another exit due to uncertainty in its 
actions. However, the policy will ensure the agent persists 
in its attempt to leave as planned. If both exit states have 
equal value, forcing the agent to choose one or the other can 
be far from optimal. Instead, we would like to use a third 
macro that takes the agent to the nearest exit. However, we 
cannot discard the original macros unless we know in ad­
vance that the values are similar. In addition, unless one ac­
counts for potential variability in the actual value assigned 
to an exit state, sound decisions to stay within a region or 
leave it cannot be made. 
Finally, we mention the possibility of using iterative refine­
ment techniques for macro construction. A simple refine­
ment strategy uses the value function produced by solv­
ing the abstract MDP as seeds for an entirely new set of 
macros. In particular, we choose an initial set of seeds, 
generate a single macro per region, then solve the induced 
abstract MDP. The resulting value function is used as a seed 
to generate a new set of macros (again one per region), 
and the new abstract MDP is solved. This iterative macro­
refinement method is a special case of asynchronous policy 
iteration [2] and is similar to Dantzig-Wolfe (D-W) decom-

position techniques [6, 14]. D-W techniques can be viewed 
as iterative schemes for evaluating and modifying macro 
sets generated by assigning values to peripheral states. 
In general, iterative macro-refinement methods overcome 
the threat of poor initial seeding (and the generation of poor 
macros) by gradually improving the macro set using infor­
mation as it becomes available. These approaches require 
the repeated construction of new macros, which may limit 
their applicability. We leave deeper investigation of itera­
tive techniques for future work. 
4 
Multiple MDPs and the Reuse of Macros 
4.1 
Hybrid MDPs 
As discussed above, generating macro-actions and con­
structing their transition and reward models is an intensive 
process, requiring explicit state space enumeration. If a 
large number of macros is generated, the overhead asso­
ciated with this process will outweigh any speed-up pro­
vided by macros during value iteration. Thus our hierar­
chical approach (or any approach requiring macro model 
generation) may not be worthwhile as a technique to solve 
a single MDP. 
The main reason to incur the overhead of macro construc­
tion lies in the reuse of macros to solve multiple related 
MDPs. In our running example, the robot may have con­
structed a policy that gets it to the goal consistently, but at 
some point the goal location might change, or the penal­
ties associated with other locations may be revised, or per­
haps the environment (or its abilities) changes so that the 
uncertainty associated with its moves -at particular loca­
tions increases. Any of these changes requires the solution 
of a new MDP, reflecting a change in reward structure or 
change in system dynamics. However, the changes to the 
MDP are often local: the reward function and the dynam­
ics remain the same in all but a few regions of state space. 
For instance, it may be that the goal location moves within 
Room 3, but no other part of the reward function changes. 
Local changes in MDP structure can induce global changes 
in the value function (and can induce dramatic qualitative 
changes in the optimal behavior). If macros have been gen­
erated for a region such that they cover a set of different 
behaviors, they can be applied and reused in solving these 
revised MDPs. However, there is one impediment to the 
application of macroactions to revised MDPs, namely, the 
fact that revising an MDP requires that the local informa­
tion (rewards or dynamics) for some region must change. 
In our example, the macros for most regions can be reused; 
but those generated for Room 3 do not reflect the revisions 
in reward or transition probabilities described above. One 
possibility would be to generate new macros for revised 
regions. However, this could lead to computational ineffi­
ciencies and delays as discussed earlier. Instead, it is often 
Hierarchical MOPs 
227 
Figure 5: A Hybrid MDP 
• Abstract 
Statu 
0 Baselevel 
States 
easier to solve revised MDPs using a hybrid MDP, contain­
ing both abstract and base level states. 
Definition 6 Let TI = { S1, · · ·, Sn} be a decomposition of 
MDP M = (S, A, T, R), and let M' = (S', A', T', R') be 
the abstract MDP induced by TI and macro set A = {A; : 
i :::; n }. Let M = (S, A, T, R) be a local revision of M 
with regard to regionS;; that is, T(8, a, t) = T(8, a, t) and 
R(8, a) = R(8, a) for all 8 ¢ S;. The hybrid expansion 
M* = (S*, A*, T*, R*) of M' by M is: 
• S* = Pern(S) US;; 
• A* = U{ Aj E A : j =f. i} U A, where 1rj E Aj is 
feasible only at states 8 E EPer( Sj ), and a E A is 
feasible only at S;; 
• T* (8, 1rj, t) is given by the discounted transition 
model for 1rj ,for any 8 E EPer( Sj) and t E XPer( Sj) 
(j =f. i); T*(8,1rj,t) = Ofor any t ¢ XPer(Sj); 
T* (8, a, t) = T(8, a, t) for any 8 E S; andt E S*; 
• R* (8, 1rj) is given by the discounted reward model for 
1rj for any 8 E Sj (j =f. i), while R* (8, a) = R(8, a) 
for any 8 E S;. 
Thus the hybrid MDP M*, constructed when the structure 
within region S; changes, consists of the original abstract 
MDP with the abstract states in EPer(S;) replaced by the 
region S; itself. This is depicted graphically in Figure 5. 
We note that this expansion is easily defined for changes in 
any number of regions. 
While there may be substantial overhead in creating 
macros, these can be reused to solve multiple problems, 
thus amortizing the cost over a number of problem-solving 
episodes. More importantly, the use of hybrid MDPs has 
considerable advantages when real-time response is re­
quired to changing circumstances. Given a new MDP 
Mk that differs from a base MDP M0 in a single region 
S; (or, more generally, some small set of regions), this 
new problem can be solved using a hybrid MDP of size 
I S'l + IS; - EPer( S;) I (recall S' is the set of peripheral 
states, or states in the abstract MDP). For example, if an 
MDP is partitioned into k regions of roughly uniform size, 

228 
Hauskrecht, Meuleau, Kaelbling, Dean, and Boutilier 
IIAZE3& 
I 
• •L 
• 
I• 
• 
• 
• • }-
IIAZEK 
' 
•• 
• 
• 
• • 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
MAZE121 
• 
• ••• 
• 
• 
• 
Figure 6: Problems used to test the benefits of macro-reuse. 
Circles denote peripheral states assumed by the hybrid­
MDP method. 
and the average size of the entrance periphery of any re­
gion is p, then a hybrid MDP with one expanded region has 
roughly kp +  states. Without the use of macros and ab­
stract/hybrid MDPs, the solution of a new problem requires 
value or policy iteration over the entire state space of size 
I Sl. Thus a new problem can be solved much more quickly. 
The off-line generation of macros can lead to very efficient 
on-line solution of new problem instances. 
4.2 
Experimental results 
To illustrate the potential for speed-up in on-line response 
time for multiple related MDPs using macro actions and 
our hybrid MDP model, we compared response time of 
value iteration for both the base level MDP and the hybrid 
MDP on three sequences of related problems. We exam­
ined three robot navigation problems of increasing com­
plexity, shown in Figure 6: Maze 36 with 36 states and 4 re­
gions; Maze66 with 66 states and 7 regions; and Maze 121 
with 121 states and 11 regions. In each instance, the un­
derlying MDP was modified locally by changing the goal, 
represented by a zero cost absorbing state (this required 
changes to both the dynamics and reward model). 
Table 1 summarizes results obtained for 25 problem in­
stances (using different randomly selected goal states) and 
two value iteration methods working with the base level 
MDP and the hybridMDP. A heuristic set of macro-actions, 
described in Section 3.2, was used for the hybrid MDP. 
Value iteration was started using the solution obtained for 
the original (locally unmodified) MDP and stopped when a 
fixed precision (0.01 cost units) was achieved. 
The results illustrate that the hybrid MDP model, given 
suitable macros, can solve new problem instances much 
more quickly than resolving the MDP with the original 
state and action spaces. We also see that the savings offered 
by the hybrid model are greater for larger problems, exactly 
as expected. This is due to the fact that local changes affect 
a significantly smaller proportion of the original model. For 
a hybrid MDP this means that most of the structure of the 
abstract MDP is preserved and only the regions in which 
the change has occured are elaborated. 
A disadvantage of the hybrid MDP framework is that one 
has to generate and precompute a set of macros, which can 
be computationally very costly.6 However, if the macro 
construction process is performed in advance (off-line), this 
delay may be unimportant in relation to the improved abil­
ity to solve new problem instances quickly. Alternatively, 
the delay can be justified when the computational cost 
could be amortized over multiple problem instances. For 
example, based on our test results, the hybrid MDP method 
in this example would start to dominate (in terms of a total 
solution time, which counts both the delay and time to solve 
n tasks) after 22, 23, and 24 tasks are solved for Maze 36, 
Maze 66, and Maze 121, respectively. Notice that amor­
tization threshold (the number of tasks after which macro 
preparation "pays off") increases slowly with problem size, 
even though this sequence of problems is such that a more 
complex maze has roughly double the state space size of 
its predecessor. This trend seems promising for the appli­
cation of macros in very large domains with many possible 
tasks or goals. 
The hybrid MDPs used in our experiments rely on a set 
of heuristically generated macros (see Section 3.2). The 
macro set is relatively small and performed very well on 
the set of maze navigation problems we tested. This is 
documented by comparing AEC scores, measuring aver­
age expected cost for all peripheral states and for 25 ran­
domly generated goal tasks. The increase in the cost score 
for larger problems is caused by an increase in distances 
between peripheral and possible goal states. The practical 
creation of good macro sets for different types of problems 
remains an interesting open issue. 
5 
Conclusions 
We have proposed a new hierarchical model for solving 
MDPs using macro actions. Our abstract MDP allows po­
tentially dramatic reductions in the size of state and ac­
tion spaces. This requires commitment to the execution 
of macro actions-they cannot be reconsidered at each 
stage-thus leading to potentially inflexible, suboptimal 
behavior. We have elaborated conditions and macro con­
struction techniques that provide guarantees on solution 
quality. Within this model, anytime tradeoffs can be made 
rather easily. Furthermore, with hybrid MDPs, we have a 
technique that allows macros to be reused to solve multiple 
MDPs, providing for fast, on-line decision making, and al­
lowing macro construction costs to be amortized over many 
problem solving episodes. 
There are a number of questions and open issues that re­
main to be addressed within this framework and many in­
teresting directions in which this work can be extended. We 
have ignored the question of where partitionings of state 
6We note that approximation techniques can be used to allevi­
ate this problem. 

I 
II 
Maze 36 
II delay 1 av.t1me 
AEc 
delay 
I base MDP Jl 0 
1 1.22 
5.96 
0 
I hybrid MDP II 5.52 I 0.96 
6.01 
12.62 
Maze 66 
av.t1me 
AEC 
delay 
2.61 
8.55 
0 
2.04 
9.73 
24.47 
Hierarchical MDPs 
229 
Maze 121 
av.time 
AEC 
5.94 
9.96 
4.89 
10.72 
Table 1: Results obtained by base and hybrid MDP methods on 25 randomly selected goals and three navigation problems. 
The delay (in seconds) measures the time spent to prepare macroactions, av. time is the average time (in seconds) to 
converge to a solution of required precision (0.01), ABC measures the solution quality, and is computed by averaging 
expected cost over all peripheral states and task instances. 
space come from: apart from handcrafted decompositions, 
one can imagine several strategies for automatic decompo­
sition. However, there are several dimensions along which 
partitionings can be compared: larger regions often lead to 
smaller peripheries, which result in smaller abstract MDPs 
(which in turn can be solved more readily), and increase 
the odds that a revision of the MDP will be localized to a 
small number of regions; smaller regions, in contrast, al­
low macros to be generated more quickly when revisions 
are required and often lead to smaller hybrid MDPs (fewer 
base states are added to the expanded MDP). These trade­
offs need to be addressed in a systematic fashion. 
Other interesting questions surround the use of concise 
MDP representations (e.g., Bayes nets) to form decomposi­
tions and to solve local, abstract and hybrid MDPs. Related 
is the need to concisely represent macros and macro models 
without explicit enumeration of the state space. 
The reuse of macros naturally suggests an extension of the 
analysis provided here, and the questions posed above, to 
deal with known distributions over problem instances. If 
we have information pertaining to the ways in which sys­
tem dynamics and reward functions may be revised, we 
would like to exploit it in forming our decomposition of 
state space and the macros one provides.
