Autodetection and Classiﬁcation of Hidden Cultural City Districts from
Yelp Reviews
Harini Suresh1 and Nick Locascio2
Abstract— Topic models are a way to discover underlying
themes in an otherwise unstructured collection of documents.
In this study, we speciﬁcally used the Latent Dirichlet Allo-
cation (LDA) topic model on a dataset of Yelp reviews to
classify restaurants based off of their reviews. Furthermore,
we hypothesize that within a city, restaurants can be grouped
into similar “clusters based on both location and similarity.
We used several different clustering methods, including K-
means Clustering and a Probabilistic Mixture Model, in order
to uncover and classify districts, both well-known and hidden
(i.e. cultural areas like Chinatown or hearsay like “the best
street for Italian restaurants”) within a city. We use these
models to display and label different clusters on a map. We also
introduce a topic similarity heatmap that displays the similarity
distribution in a city to a new restaurant.
I. INTRODUCTION
Cities are often deﬁned by their domineering cultural
characteristics. However, particular cities themselves harbor
a large variety of different cultural districts. Streets separated
by just a few blocks may give very different impressions.
These
implicit
boundaries
and
classiﬁcations
are
not
documented on ofﬁcial maps, and usually are only learned
with much time and experience living in a particular city.
A. Motivation
We believe that having a sense of these districts is
valuable to a much wider population. Some examples are:
1. New Businesses: For business-owner or entrepreneur
looking to open a new restaurant or expand to a different
location, knowing which areas of a city harbor restaurants
very similar to or different than that particular business is
doubtless a valuable insight.
2. Newcomers: For tourists, people moving in, or anyone
else new to the city, it is often an arduous and daunting
task to get a sense of things such as where they are most
likely to ﬁnd a good Thai restaurant, the block to go for
Dim Sum, or the best area for a dressy, upscale dinner with
good wine.
3. Anyone looking to explore: Even people who have
already have a sense of the city can be surprised by a hole-
in-the-wall cafe or undiscovered area. The LDA model we
describe can identify the most highly weighted classiﬁcation
*This work was supported by Joshua Tenenbaum
1H. Suresh is an Undergraduate in Computer Science, Massachussets
Insititude of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA hsuresh at
mit.edu
2N. Locascio is an Undergraduate in Computer Science, Massachus-
sets Insititude of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA njl at
mit.edu
for a particular area as well as secondary classiﬁcations.
This allows it to uncover more hidden characteristics of a
particular area besides the most highly weighted. This is
interesting information in itself, but can also be used as a
backbone of a recommendation system. If a person really
enjoys a particular area of town, this model could discover
and rank other non-obvious areas that share similar traits.
From a cognitive science point of view, we think trying
to model these questions is an interesting experiment to test
the accuracy of methods like LDA and Probabilistic Mixture
Models to model human cognition. Recent cognitive science
research has had major successes in probabilistic generative
models of human cognition [12, 13]. Speciﬁcally, research
by Tenenbaum shows strong support for Bayesian concept
learning [14] and Sanborn et. al. use Dirichlet Process
Mixture Models for category learning that emulates human
learning [15]. Using techniques like these in this paper, we
try to recreate the kind of map a local might build up in
their head over time of the different subsections of their city.
B. The Yelp Dataset
The Yelp Academic dataset was released in 2013 and
has grown to include over 42,000 businesses with over 1
million reviews [9]. The dataset has been used in academic
papers for sentiment analysis, word layout systems, and
recommendation engines, among other research areas. The
quality and sheer size of the dataset is of high value to our
research and its natural language user reviews are pivotal to
our cultural detection and classiﬁcation system.
II. METHODS
A. The LDA Model
Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA), ﬁrst introduced by Blei
et. al. in 2003 [1], has been applied to numerous and diverse
ﬁelds: from computer vision [2,3] to recommendation
systems [4] to spam ﬁltering [5]. LDA hypothesizes that
a collection of documents D can be treated as a ”bag
of words” where each document d is generated by the
following process, given hyperparameters α and β:
1. Assume each topic k has a ﬁxed distribution over all
words in D that is φk ∼Dirichlet(β)
2. Choose the document’s topic distribution θd
∼
Dirichlet(α)
3. To generate each word w:
a. Choose a topic zi from Discrete(θd)
arXiv:1501.02527v1  [cs.CL]  12 Jan 2015

b. Choose a word wi from Discrete(φzi)
Using this model, LDA is able to learn the topic mixtures,
p(z|d), for the documents on which it is trained, in an
unsupervised manner.
B. Training LDA
To implement LDA, we used tools from the Python
Library Gensim, which provides functionality to analyze
semantic structure in texts [6]. Based off of the results of
the Expectation Maximization algorithm used by Huang et.
al. [7] to determine the optimal number of topics for Yelp
restaurant reviews in Phoenix, we chose K = 50 as the
number of topics to extract. We used hyperparameters α
and β with symmetric 1.0/K priors.
We cleaned the reviews to remove punctuation, numbers,
and a list of stopwords made up of the “English Stop Words”
list in the Scikit-learn python library [11]. Additionally, we
speciﬁed that after this initial cleaning, the model should
only consider the 40,000 median frequency words. This
eliminated words that only appeared a handful of times,
as well as generic food-related words that appeared many
times. These words provide little information gain and
removing them dramatically increased the convergence time
of our LDA training.
We trained the model on all restaurant reviews (around 1.1
million) from Las Vegas. Training uses the online inference
algorithm described by Hoffman et. al. [8] and results in
an LDA topic model object that can be queried with new,
unseen documents to return an optimal topic distribution. We
used our model to predict topic weights for each restaurant.
In addition, the model contains the static word distributions
φk for each topic.
C. Training Examples
Our LDA model produced 50 topics. Each topic is
a collection of word-weight couples. Words with high
corresponding weight values are most representative of the
topic. The topic word weights are normalized such that
W
P
wi
wi = 1. Table I is a small sampling of selected topics our
model generated. Table I displays the topic #, the label we
chose for the topic based on its word distribution, and the
word distribution. The full list of topics and their weights
can be viewed in the Appendix.
D. LDA Inference
We used our trained LDA model to predict topic dis-
tributions for each of the 3855 restaurants. A restaurant’s
topic distribution is a collection of coupled topic numbers
and corresponding weights. Topics with high corresponding
weight values are most representative of the restaurant. These
TABLE I: Selected Topic Assignments
Topic
#
Label
Words Distribution
2
Mexican Food
0.043*tacos + 0.037*taco +
0.026*asada + 0.024*carne +
0.024*mexican +
0.019*burrito + 0.010*salsa
+ 0.009*fries + 0.009*beans
+ 0.008*roberto’s
7
Night Club
0.013*music + 0.012*fun +
0.009*club + 0.007*cool +
0.006*party + 0.006*lounge
+ 0.005*group + 0.005*ﬂoor
+ 0.004*dance + 0.004*girls
45
Casino
0.027*hotel + 0.022*casino
+ 0.020*room + 0.010*stay
+ 0.009*downtown +
0.006*staying + 0.006*pool
+ 0.005*street +
0.005*stayed +
0.005*fremont
TABLE II: Selected Topic Prediction Results
Restaurant
Top 2 Topic #’s
Top Words from Top
Topic
Pho
Vietnam
Restau-
rant
4, 15
pho, vietnamese, rolls,
broth
Myxx
Hookah
Lounge
7, 15
music, fun, club, cool,
party
Romano’s
Maca-
roni
Grill
24, 30
pasta, italian, bread,
server
topic distribution weights are normalized such that
W
P
wi
wi =
1. A sampling of topic predictions is shown in Table II.
E. Clustering Preparation
We tested several clustering methods in order to group
restaurants
into
appropriate
clusters.
We
assume
that
culinary districts in a city are characterized by closeness
and similarity of restaurants. In our model, therefore,
we represent each restaurant as a combined vector of its
coordinate position and its LDA assigned topic weight
distribution. This vector has 52 dimensions, 2 of which
represent the spatial location of the restaurant, and 50 of
which represent the restaurant’s LDA topic weights.
1. Scaling Procedure
Since the spatial coordinates and topic weights are
measured in different spaces, their values are on different
scales. To prevent our results being arbitrarily skewed by
these different units of scale, we used a scaling procedure,
multiplying the topic weight distributions by a constant S.
By varying S, we can give the topic weights more or less
inﬂuence over the clustering. When S = 0, the clustering

is equivalent to clustering based only on location. As S
increases, topic weights are given more control over the
clustering. When S >> coordinates, the clustering is done
purely by topic similarity.
Our goal was to ﬁnd an S such that close-together clusters
of restaurants would be grouped into a single cluster, and
points on the outer edges of these clusters would identify
themselves with the cluster that best matched their topic
distribution. In this way, we allow for a Chinese restaurant
to ’escape’ a nearby cluster of Italian restaurants.
Since we are not using pure spatial features, our clustering
may result in some clusters overlapping and interweaving.
This allows our model to be representative of the real world
of cultural mixing and fuzzy cultural boundaries.
To determine a reasonable scaling factor S, we constructed
a plausible scenario. A Chinese Restaurant (CR) lies betwen
two clusters - a primarily Italian cluster (I) and a primarily
Chinese cluster (C). CR is 0.25 mi from I’s center and
0.75 mi from C’s center. We want to choose an S such that
Dist(CR,C) < Dist(CR, I): that is, we want the Chinese
restaurant to be classiﬁed into the “Chinese Restaurant”
cluster despite it being closer in spatial coordinates to the
Italian cluster’s center. The Dist function is a Euclidean
distance metric between the two vectors. Let’s assume C
and CR share the same topic distributions, and that CR
and I share zero topics in their distributions. We deﬁne
Dist(CR, C) as
Dist(R, Cluster) =
v
u
u
t(∆x)2 + S ∗
T
X
tj
(∆tj)2
(1)
So our goal is to ﬁnd an S such that:
Dist(CR, C) < Dist(CR, I)
(2)
p
(0.75)2 + (0.0)2 <
p
(0.25)2 + (S ∗1.0)2 + (S ∗1.0)2
0.75 <
p
(0.25)2 + 2S2
0.5625 < 0.0625 + 2S2
0.5 < 2S2
0.25 < S2
(3)
S > 0.5
(4)
This calculation of S, however, assumes topic distributions
are all-or-none, when in fact most restaurants are a mixture
of a few topics. In fact, we determined the mean # of
topics assignments a restaurant received to be 5. We found
a typical restaurant to have 1 dominating topic comprising
of at least 0.5 of the weight and 4 subtopics comprising
of the rest of the weight. We performed a more advanced
analysis of the same scenario and found S > 0.913. The
analysis can be found in Equation 10 of the appendix.
2. Normalization
Since some topics are inherently more common than other
topics due to the high prevalence of some restaurant types,
we wanted to avoid our model becoming unfairly skewed by
very common topics such as a “pizza” topic. There are 355
pizza restaurants in Las Vegas, comprising of 9.2% of all Las
Vegas restaurants. To avoid the scenario where all clusters
are labeled as “pizza” simply because of the uniformly large
number of these restaurants across all clusters, we vertically
normalize the topic weights for each restaurant. We deﬁne w
to be a 50 dimensional topic weight vector of a restaurant,
and N to be the number of restaurants. We deﬁne
V Norm(w) = wi
W i
(5)
where
W i =
N
X
j=1
wi
j
(6)
This normalization can be thought of as dividing out the
’background’ of a city’s restaurant distribution, ensuring
clusters will be dominated by notable exceptions to the
average: we don’t want to point out that pizza restaurants
are pretty much evenly distributed in high quantities all
around Vegas, but rather discover when they, or another
type of restaurant, are appear in notably high quantities. We
then horizontally re-normalize each topic vector so that the
values remain at the same scale.
3. Determining the Number of Clusters
To determine the optimal number of clusters, we ﬁrst
used the ’Elbow Method’, which looks at the percentage of
variance explained as a function of the number of clusters.
The idea is that we should choose a number of clusters
such that adding more clusters doesn’t signiﬁcantly improve
the modeling. We performed clustering with C = 5 to C
= 35 clusters and plotted the variance quantity Wk vs. C,
where Wk is the sum of the normalized intra-cluster sums
of sqaures [16]. Figure 1 shows a plot of log(Wk) vs. C.
The Elbow Method involves visually choosing the ’elbow’
of the graph where the slope changes most drastically. We
determined our elbow happens at C
= 30. However,
determining the elbow of a graph is not a well-deﬁned
process, and in fact this is one of the known weaknesses of
the Elbow Method.
Because of the shortcomings of the elbow method, we
also used the Gap Statistic [10, 16] to determine the optimal
C with which to cluster. The Gap Statistic is a way to

Fig. 1: Elbow Graph
Fig. 2: Gap Statistic Graph
to standardize the comparison of the “variance explained”
metric used in the Elbow Method. The Gap Statistic takes
the approach of standardizing the variance explained against
a null reference distribution of the data (distribution with
no apparent underlying clusters). The Gap Statistic method
involves calculating the difference between the variance
explained for the dataset and the variance explained for
the null reference distribution. This difference is known as
the Gap Statistic. The C value that yields the greatest Gap
Statistic (greatest difference in variance) is the optimal C
value for clustering the data. Figure 2 shows the results of
the Gap Statistic.
The Gap Statistic predicts that C=30 is the optimal
number
of
clusters
for
our
data.
This
conﬁrms
our
identiﬁcation of the ’elbow’ was indeed correct.
F. Clustering
1. K-means Clustering
K-means clustering is a clustering algorithm that will ﬁnd
C centroids to cluster a data set. The K-Means algorithm
converges
on
a
centroid
distribution
that
minimizes
the sum of squares of distances between cluster centroids
and the corresponding data points that are classiﬁed by them.
Using tools from the Python library Scikit-learn [11], we
performed K-means clustering on all 3855 Vegas restaurants
with random K++ means initialization and 300 iterations,
specifying C = 30 and S = 0.913. We used a Euclidean
distance metric for our clustering and classiﬁcation of the 52-
dimensional restaurant vectors. The result of this clustering
can be seen in Figure 3.
Fig. 3: Las Vegas K-means Clusters
The clusters have a median of 148 members in each with
a standard deviation of 80.
2. Gaussian Mixture Model
A Gaussian mixture model (GMM) is a probabilistic
generative model that assumes all the data points are
generated from a mixture of a ﬁnite number of Gaussian
distributions. The GMM, in principle, is a weighted sum of
C component Gaussian densities. Each Gaussian distribution
can be thought of as a cluster that can classify data points.
Also using tools from the Python library Scikit-learn,
we trained our GMM with the Expectation Maximization
Algorithm on 3855 restaurants specifying C = 30 and
S = 0.913. The result of this clustering can be seen in
Figure 3. The GMM clusters have a median of 200 members
each, with mean 158 members and standard deviation of 40
members.
Most notably, GMM clusters varied from the K-means
clusters in shape: the K-means clusters were nearly always

spherical in shape, due to K-means minimizing distance.
The Gaussian Mixture Model, however, is not limited to
spherical clusters, as the Gaussian distributions that deﬁne
its clusters are shaped by variances in each dimension. This
results in some elongated elliptical clusters.
Some of the clusters consists of only restaurants that lie
on a particular street. It may be that this behavior is actually
beneﬁcial. Oftentimes cultural districts within a city are
highly street based, and the GMM model is ﬂexible enough
to detect clusters like this. The result of the GMM clustering
can be seen in Figure 4.
Fig. 4: Las Vegas Gaussian Clusters
G. Determining a Cluster’s Label
Once we determine relevant spatial and topical clusters,
we are tasked with labeling the clusters. To determine the
labeling of a cluster, we take the average topic vector for all
restaurants in the cluster. We then chose the top two topics
that describe a cluster and use their human-attributed labels.
These labels overlayed atop their cluster distributions are
shown in Figure 5.
We chose to display the top two labels to uncover not
only the most frequent topic within a cluster but also
underlying categories which might be less obvious.
Using our Gaussian Mixture Clustering, we were able
to enhance these labeling with appropriate orientations3.
Since each cluster is represented by a Gaussian with two
3Unfortunately, the label rotations often result in the collision of labels.
If this system were to be implemented as an analytics interface, this issue
could be mitigated by a zoomable display, hiding of colliding labels, or
other methods. Our paper, however, is concerned more with the exploration
of these methods than the user interfacing and experience.
Fig. 5: Las Vegas K-means Clusters with Labelings
Fig. 6: Las Vegas Gaussian Clusters with Oriented Labelings
dimensional variances, we are able to rotate the labelings
to align with the direction of maximum Gaussian variance.
These rotated labels have a tendency to orient with streets.
The Wafﬂes/Brunch label in the top left displays this rather
useful property. These oriented labels overlayed atop their
Gaussian cluster distributions are shown in Figure 6.
H. Cultural HeatMap and Optimal Placement for New
Restaurants
While clustering restaurants on space and topics illumi-
nates a city’s many cultural centers, it does not show how a
speciﬁc topic is distributed throughout the city. To show this

distribution for a given topic we plotted topic similarity in a
heatmap. We ran our LDA inference on a novel restaurant’s
reviews. From this we got a topic distribution of that novel
restaurant. We divided the city into a a 20X20 grid of
squares. For each square we calculated the average topic
similarity from the center of the square to all restaurants in
the city. We used a Gaussian Weight metric to scale topic
similarity by proximity. For each square we calculated a
similarity metric Sim(center, novel) where:
Sim(center, novel) =
1
∥R∥
R
X
ri
2
√
2 −dist(novel, ri) ∗Gw(center, ri)
(7)
where
R
= all restaurants in city
novel = the topic distribution of the novel restaurant
dist
= euclidian distance metric for topic distributions
and
Gw(square, restaurant) = G(x, σ, µ)
(8)
where
µ
= the center of the square
σ
=
√
2 ∗square width
x
= the position of the restaurant
G(x, σ, µ) =
1
σ
√
2π e−(x−µ)2/2σ2
(9)
Our similarity metric takes in to account topic similarity
of the novel restaurant to each other restaurant in the city.
We use a Gaussian weight to scale these topic similarities
by distance. This allows restaurants near the square’s center
location to have most of the inﬂuence over the square’s
color. We calculated our similarity metric for every square in
our grid and colored our Heat Map red for high values and
blue for low values. The results of our heatmap generated
by comparing the topics of the Restaurant ”Pho Vietnamese
Restaurant” to the restaurants of Vegas are shown in Figure 7.
In Figure 8, the X indicates the actual location of the
the restaurant (the similarity calculations were conducted
without including this restaurant). Our Heat Map shows that
the restaurant is in an area of high topic similarity, which
is accurate (Pho Vietnamese Restaurant is located in Las
Vegas’s Chinatown District).
III. DISCUSSION & APPLICATIONS
A. Evaluation of Results
We found that the resultant LDA topics (Appendix Table
III) were well-deﬁned and descriptive. We observed that the
Fig. 7: Pho Vietnamese Topic Similarity Heatmap
words within a given topic ﬁt well into a particular category
of food type or culture, and we had very little trouble
labeling them based off of the given words and weights.
Additionally, the topics themselves seem reasonably distinct
from each other with only few overlapping topics. The
general area in which we saw the most overlap was the
buffet restaurants topic. Topics #0, #5, #48 each concerned
buffet restaurants. However, looking at the words in each,
we were able to distinguish “Seafood/Buffet” (#5) and
“Upscale/Buffet”(#0) from a more general “Buffet” topic
(#48).
Looking
at
the
K-means
clustering
of
Las
Vegas
restaurants, we observed that our clustering classiﬁes areas
deﬁned beforehand: it put labels of “Pho” and “Dim Sum”
on
Chinatown,
and
“Luxe”,
“Steakhouse”,
“Upscale”,
and “Seafood/Buffet” over the Strip. Interestingly, it also
split these clusters into smaller subclusters, for example
separating a “Dim Sum” and “Ramen” cluster from a “Pho”
and “Soup” cluster. This behavior may or may not be ideal:
it may be identifying actual sub-districts, or future work
may involve a ﬁnal cluster merge step in which two clusters
close in distance and topic similarity can be merged in to a
single cluster.
The GMM also distinguished these already-known cultural
areas. The shape and sizes of the clusters themselves were
slightly more varied and often alligned with a particular
street. This ability is interesting because oftentimes districts
may be very street-based.
As all this learning was unsupervised, we are very
interested in ﬁnding a metric to quantitatively determine
accuracy across these different models. One potential way
to do this would be to conduct cognitive studies with

people who live in or are familiar with particular cities. For
example, we could compare our map with maps described
by Las Vegas residents, or get a measure of how accurate
they believe our map is.
B. Applications of Automatic Cluster Labeling
The automatic spatial and topical clustering and labeling
approach outlined above is a general method that can be
applied to any city. Figure 8 in the Appendix shows the
results of labeling 2 other cities (Phoenix and Endinberg)
with this method. These maps can be analytical tools with
various applications including but not limited to determining
new restaurant placement, understanding cultural regions of
a city, discovering unexplored areas of one’s city, choosing
where to live, or what route to take on a stroll to the park.
C. Applications of Topic Heat Map
Like the automatic cultural labeling method, the Topic
Heat Map can be used as a useful analytics tool. This
map can be used to determine certain cultural hotbeds, both
known and hidden. A hidden cultural hotbed may present a
market opportunity for continued growth. The Topical Heat
Map of a city may be an especially valuable asset to a new
restaurant or chain looking to strategize where exactly to
place a new store location. The Heat Map could actually be
used to perform a detailed analysis on what kind of location,
for different types of restaurants, is optimal (see IV part 3
for more detail).
IV. FURTHER RESEARCH
1) Using the timestamps on reviews, it is possible to ﬁlter
reviews based on when they were written. This would allow
for creating dynamic maps using reviews within a moving a
time window to see how culture changes: how new clusters
emerge, split and merge.
2) In our study we use the Elbow Method and Gap
Statistic to predetermine an appropriate number of clusters
to use. Instead, it may prove valuable to use a Nested
Chinese Restaurant Process to learn a hierarchy of clusters
and subclusters. For example, this could split Chinatown
into various subclusters under the general Chinese cluster.
This could be used to label the graphs at various scales
and zoom levels. Additionally, using a Chinese Restaurant
Process as part of a Nonparametric Mixture Model would
allow the model to ﬂexibly add more clusters as needed, and
may be more likely to ﬁnd the optimal number of clusters.
3) The similarity heatmap we developed along with Yelp
star ratings could be used to analyze what kind of placement
makes a restaurant successful. For example, it may be that
placing a restaurant right in the center of an area of very
high similarity creates direct competition and comparison
that is actually detrimental. At the same time, it may be
that placing a restaurant in an area where it is completely
out of place is also a bad idea. A detailed analysis of where
restaurants with varying star ratings fall on a similarity
heatmap could provide valuable insight to businesses about
what kind of placement is optimal.
4) Using Yelp user data and the classiﬁcations from this
model, it is possible to create a recommendation system. Rec-
ommendations could be general areas or speciﬁc restaurant
suggestions: for example, if a user likes several restaurants
in a speciﬁc area/cluster, we imagine recommending to them
another restaurant or area that shares similar topics.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank Joshua Tenenbaum for supporting
this work.
