Adaptive Skills Adaptive Partitions (ASAP)
Daniel J. Mankowitz
Electrical Engineering Department,
The Technion - Israel Institute of Technology,
Haifa 32000, Israel

Timothy A. Mann
Google Deepmind
London, UK

Shie Mannor
Electrical Engineering Department,
The Technion - Israel Institute of Technology,
Haifa 32000, Israel

Abstract
We introduce the Adaptive Skills, Adaptive Partitions (ASAP) framework that (1)
learns skills (i.e., temporally extended actions or options) as well as (2) where to
apply them. We believe that both (1) and (2) are necessary for a truly general skill
learning framework, which is a key building block needed to scale up to lifelong
learning agents. The ASAP framework can also solve related new tasks simply by
adapting where it applies its existing learned skills. We prove that ASAP converges
to a local optimum under natural conditions. Finally, our experimental results,
which include a RoboCup domain, demonstrate the ability of ASAP to learn where
to reuse skills as well as solve multiple tasks with considerably less experience
than solving each task from scratch.
1
Introduction
Human-decision making involves decomposing a task into a course of action. The course of action is
typically composed of abstract, high-level actions that may execute over different timescales (e.g.,
walk to the door or make a cup of coffee). The decision-maker then chooses actions to execute to
solve the task. These actions may need to be reused at different points in the task. In addition, the
actions may need to be used across multiple, related tasks.
Consider, for example, the task of building a city. The course of action to building a city may involve
building the foundations, laying down sewage pipes as well as building houses and shopping malls.
Each action operates over multiple timescales and certain actions (such as building a house) may need
to be reused if additional units are required. In addition, these actions can be reused if a neighboring
city needs to be developed (multi-task scenario).
Reinforcement Learning (RL) represents actions that last for multiple timescales as Temporally
Extended Actions (TEAs) (Sutton et al., 1999), also referred to as options, skills (Konidaris & Barto,
2009) or macro-actions (Hauskrecht, 1998). It has been shown both experimentally Precup & Sutton
(1997); Sutton et al. (1999); Silver & Ciosek (2012) and theoretically (Mann & Mannor, 2014) that
TEAs speed up the convergence rates of RL planning algorithms. TEAs are seen as a potentially
viable solution to making RL truly scalable. TEAs in RL have become popular in many domains
including RoboCup soccer (Bai et al., 2012), video games (Mann et al., 2015) and Robotics (Fu et al.,
2015). Here, decomposing the domains into temporally extended courses of action (strategies in
RoboCup, strategic move combinations in video games and skill controllers in Robotics for example)
has generated impressive solutions. From here on in, we will refer to TEAs as skills.
arXiv:1602.03351v2  [cs.LG]  7 Jun 2016

Table 1: Comparison of Approaches to ASAP
Automated Skill
Automatic
Continuous
Learning
Correcting
Learning
Skill
State
Reusable
Model
with Policy
Composition
Multitask
Skills
Misspeciﬁcation
Gradient
Learning
ASAP (this paper)
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
da Silva et al. 2012
✓
×
✓
×
×
Konidaris & Barto 2009
×
✓
×
×
×
Bacon & Precup 2015
✓
×
×
×
×
Eaton & Ruvolo 2013
×
×
✓
×
×
Masson & Konidaris 2015
×
×
×
×
×
A course of action is deﬁned by a policy. A policy is a solution to a Markov Decision Process (MDP)
and is deﬁned as a mapping from states to a probability distribution over actions. That is, it tells the
RL agent which action to perform given the agent’s current state. We will refer to an inter-skill policy
as being a policy that tells the agent which skill to execute, given the current state.
A truly general skill learning framework must (1) learn skills as well as (2) automatically compose
them together (as stated by Bacon & Precup (2015)) and determine where each skill should be
executed (the inter-skill policy). This framework should also determine (3) where skills can be reused
in different parts of the state space and (4) adapt to changes in the task itself. Finally it should also be
able to (5) correct model misspeciﬁcation (Mankowitz et al., 2014). Model misspeciﬁcation is deﬁned
as having an unsatisfactory set of skills and inter-skill policy that provide a sub-optimal solution to
a given task. This skill learning framework should be able to correct the set of misspeciﬁed skills
and inter-skill policy to obtain a near-optimal solution. A number of works have addressed some of
these issues separately as shown in Table 1. However, no work, to the best of our knowledge, has
combined all of these elements into a truly general skill-learning framework.
Our framework entitled ‘Adaptive Skills, Adaptive Partitions (ASAP)’ is the ﬁrst of its kind to
incorporate all of the above-mentioned elements into a single framework, as shown in Table 1, and
solve continuous state MDPs. It receives as input a misspeciﬁed model (a sub-optimal set of skills and
inter-skill policy). The ASAP framework corrects the misspeciﬁcation by simultaneously learning a
near-optimal skill-set and inter-skill policy which are both stored, in a Bayesian-like manner, within
the ASAP policy. In addition, ASAP automatically composes skills together, learns where to reuse
them and learns skills across multiple tasks.
Main Contributions: (1) The Adaptive Skills, Adaptive Partitions (ASAP) algorithm that automati-
cally corrects a misspeciﬁed model. It learns a set of near-optimal skills, automatically composes
skills together and learns an inter-skill policy to solve a given task. (2) Learning skills over multiple
different tasks by automatically adapting both the inter-skill policy and the skill set. (3) ASAP can
determine where skills should be reused in the state space. (4) Theoretical convergence guarantees.
2
Background
Reinforcement Learning Problem:
A Markov Decision Process is deﬁned by a 5-tuple
⟨X, A, R, γ, P⟩where X is the state space, A is the action space, R ∈[−b, b] is a bounded re-
ward function, γ ∈[0, 1] is the discount factor and P : X × A →[0, 1]X is the transition
probability function for the MDP. The solution to a MDP is a policy π : X →∆A which is a
function mapping states to a probability distribution over actions. An optimal policy π∗: X →∆A
determines the best actions to take so as to maximize the expected reward. The value function
V π(x) = Ea∼π(·|a)

R(x, a)

+ γEx′∼P (·|x,a)

V π(x′)

deﬁnes the expected reward for following
a policy π from state x. The optimal expected reward V π∗(x) is the expected value obtained for
following the optimal policy from state x.
Policy Gradient: Policy Gradient (PG) methods have enjoyed success in recent years especially
in the ﬁelds of robotics (Peters & Schaal, 2006, 2008). The goal in PG is to learn a policy πθ that
maximizes the expected return J(πθ) =
R
τ P(τ)R(τ)dτ, where τ is a set of trajectories, P(τ) is
the probability of a trajectory and R(τ) is the reward obtained for a particular trajectory. P(τ) is
deﬁned as P(τ) = P(x0)ΠT
k=0P(xk+1|xk, ak)πθ(ak|xk). Here, xk ∈X is the state at the kth
timestep of the trajectory; ak ∈A is the action at the kth timestep; T is the trajectory length. Only
the policy, in the general formulation of policy gradient, is parameterized with parameters θ. The
2

idea is then to update the policy parameters using stochastic gradient descent leading to the update
rule θt+1 = θt + η∇J(πθ), where θt are the policy parameters at timestep t, ∇J(πθ) is the gradient
of the objective function with respect to the parameters and η is the step size.
3
Skills, Skill Partitions and Intra-Skill Policy
Skills: A skill is a parameterized Temporally Extended Action (TEA) (Sutton et al., 1999). The
power of a skill is that it incorporates both generalization (due to the parameterization) and temporal
abstraction. Skills are a special case of options and therefore inherit many of their useful theoretical
properties (Sutton et al., 1999; Precup et al., 1998).
Deﬁnition 1. A Skill ζ is a TEA that consists of the two-tuple ζ = ⟨σθ, p⟩where σθ : X →∆A is
a parameterized, intra-skill policy with parameters θ ∈Rd and p : X →[0, 1] is the termination
probability distribution of the skill.
Skill Partitions: A skill, by deﬁnition, performs a specialized task on a sub-region of a state space.
We refer to these sub-regions as Skill Partitions (SPs) which are necessary for skills to specialize
during the learning process. A given set of SPs covering a state space effectively deﬁne the inter-skill
policy as they determine where each skill should be executed. These partitions are unknown a-priori
and are generated using intersections of hyperplane half-spaces. Hyperplanes provide a natural way
to automatically compose skills together. In addition, once a skill is being executed, the agent needs
to select actions from the skill’s intra-skill policy σθ. We next utilize SPs and the intra-skill policy for
each skill to construct the ASAP policy, deﬁned in Section 4. We now deﬁne a skill hyperplane.
Deﬁnition 2. Skill Hyperplane (SH): Let ψx,m ∈Rd be a vector of features that depend on a state
x ∈X and an MDP environment m. Let βi ∈Rd be a vector of hyperplane parameters. A skill
hyperplane is deﬁned as ψT
x,mβi = L, where L is a constant.
In this work, we interpret hyperplanes to mean that the intersection of skill hyperplane half spaces
form sub-regions in the state space called Skill Partitions (SPs), deﬁning where each skill is executed.
Figure 1a contains two example skill hyperplanes h1, h2. Skill ζ1 is executed in the SP deﬁned by the
intersection of the positive half-space of h1 and the negative half-space of h2. The same argument
applies for ζ0, ζ2, ζ3. From here on in, we will refer to skill ζi interchangeably with its index i.
Skill hyperplanes have two functions: (1) They automatically compose skills together, creating
chainable skills as desired by Bacon & Precup (2015). (2) They deﬁne SPs which enable us to
derive the probability of executing a skill, given a state x and MDP m. First, we need to be able
to uniquely identify a skill. We deﬁne a binary vector B = [b1, b2, · · · , bK] ∈{0, 1}K where bk is
a Bernoulli random variable and K is the number of skill hyperplanes. We deﬁne the skill index
i = PK
k=1 2k−1bk as a sum of Bernoulli random variables bk. Note that this is but one way to
generate skill partitions. In principle this setup deﬁnes 2K skills, but in practice, far fewer skills
are typically used (see experiments). Furthermore, the complexity of the SP is governed by the
VC-dimension. We can now deﬁne the probability of executing skill i as a Bernoulli likelihood in
Equation 1.
p(i|x, m) = P
"
i =
K
X
k=1
2k−1bk
#
=
Y
k
pk(bk = ik|x, m) .
(1)
Here, ik ∈{0, 1} is the value of the kth bit of B, x is the current state and m is a description of the
MDP. The probability pk(bk = 1|x, m) and pk(bk = 0|x, m) are deﬁned in Equation 2.
pk(bk = 1|x, m) =
1
1 + exp(−αψT
(x,m)βk), pk(bk = 0|x, m) = 1 −pk(bk = 1|x, m) .
(2)
We have made use of the logistic sigmoid function to ensure valid probabilities where ψT
x,mβk is
a skill hyperplane and α > 0 is a temperature parameter. The intuition here is that the kth bit
of a skill, bk = 1, if the skill hyperplane ψT
x,mβk > 0 meaning that the skill’s partition is in the
positive half-space of the hyperplane. Similarly, bk = 0 if ψT
x,mβk < 0 corresponding to the negative
half-space. Using skill 3 as an example with K = 2 hyperplanes in Figure 1a, we would deﬁne the
Bernoulli likelihood of executing ζ3 as p(i = 3|x, m) = p1(b1 = 1|x, m) · p2(b2 = 1|x, m).
3

Intra-Skill Policy: Now that we can deﬁne the probability of executing a skill based on its SP, we
deﬁne the intra-skill policy σθ for each skill. The Gibb’s distribution is a commonly used function
to deﬁne policies in RL (Sutton et al., 1999). Therefore we deﬁne the intra-skill policy for skill i,
parameterized by θi ∈Rd as
σθi(a|s) =
exp (αφT
x,aθi)
P
b∈A exp (αφT
x,bθi) .
(3)
Here, α > 0 is the temperature, φx,a ∈Rd is a feature vector that depends on the current state x ∈X
and action a ∈A. Now that we have a deﬁnition of both the probability of executing a skill and an
intra-skill policy, we need to incorporate these distributions into the policy gradient setting using a
generalized trajectory.
Generalized Trajectory: A generalized trajectory is necessary to derive policy gradient update
rules with respect to the parameters Θ, β as will be shown in Section 4. A typical trajectory is
usually deﬁned as τ = (xt, at, rt, xt+1)T
t=0 where T is the length of the trajectory. For a generalized
trajectory, our algorithm emits a class it at each timestep t ≥1, which denotes the skill that was
executed. The generalized trajectory is deﬁned as g = (xt, at, it, rt, xt+1)T
t=0. The probability
of a generalized trajectory, as an extension to the PG trajectory in Section 2, is now, PΘ,β(g) =
P(x0) QT
t=0 P(xt+1|xt, at)Pβ(it|xt, m)σθi(at|xt), where Pβ(it|xt, m) is the probability of a skill
being executed, given the state xt ∈X and environment m at time t ≥1; σθi(at|xt) is the probability
of executing action at ∈A at time t ≥1 given that we are executing skill i. The generalized trajectory
is now a function of two parameter vectors θ and β.
4
Adaptive Skills, Adaptive Partitions (ASAP) Framework
The Adaptive Skills, Adaptive Partitions (ASAP) framework simultaneously learns a near-optimal
set of skills and SPs (inter-skill policy), given an initially misspeciﬁed model. ASAP automatically
composes skills together and allows for a multi-task setting as it incorporates the environment m into
its hyperplane feature set. We have previously deﬁned two important distributions Pβ(it|xt, m) and
σθi(at|xt) respectively. These distributions are used to collectively deﬁne the ASAP policy which is
presented below. Using the notion of a generalized trajectory, the ASAP policy can be learned in a
policy gradient setting.
ASAP Policy: Assume that we are given a probability distribution µ over MDPs with a d-dimensional
state-action space and a z-dimensional vector describing each MDP. We deﬁne β as a (d + z) × K
matrix where each column βi represents a skill hyperplane, and Θ is a (d × 2K) matrix where each
column θj parameterizes an intra-skill policy. Using the previously deﬁned distributions, we now
deﬁne the ASAP policy.
Deﬁnition 3. (ASAP Policy). Given K skill hyperplanes, a set of 2K skills Σ = {ζi|i = 1, · · · 2K},
a state space x ∈X, a set of actions a ∈A and an MDP m from a hypothesis space of MDPs, the
ASAP policy is deﬁned as,
πΘ,β(a|x, m) =
2K
X
i=1
pβ(i|x, m)σθi(a|x) ,
(4)
where Pβ(i|x, m) and σθi(a|s) are the distributions as deﬁned in Equations 1 and 3 respectively.
This is a powerful description for a policy, which resembles a Bayesian approach, as the policy takes
into account the uncertainty of the skills that are executing as well as the actions that each skill’s
intra-skill policy chooses. We now deﬁne the ASAP objective with respect to the ASAP policy.
ASAP Objective: We deﬁned the policy with respect to a hypothesis space of m MDPs. We now
need to deﬁne an objective function which takes this hypothesis space into account. Since we assume
that we are provided with a distribution µ : M →[0, 1] over possible MDP models m ∈M, with a
d-dimensional state-action space, we can incorporate this into the ASAP objective function:
ρ(πΘ,β) =
Z
µ(m)J(m)(πΘ,β)dm ,
(5)
4

where πΘ,β is the ASAP policy and J(m)(πΘ,β) is the expected return for MDP m with respect to
the ASAP policy. To simplify the notation, we group all of the parameters into a single parameter
vector Ω= [vec(Θ), vec(β)]. We deﬁne the expected reward for generalized trajectories g as
J(πΩ) =
R
g PΩ(g)R(g)dg, where R(g) is reward obtained for a particular trajectory g. This is a
slight variation of the original policy gradient objective deﬁned in Section 2. We then insert J(πΩ)
into Equation 5 and we get the ASAP objective function
ρ(πΩ) =
Z
µ(m)J(m)(πΩ)dm ,
(6)
where J(m)(πΩ) is the expected return for policy πΩin MDP m. Next, we need to derive gradient
update rules to learn the parameters of the optimal policy π∗
Ωthat maximizes this objective.
ASAP Gradients: To learn both intra-skill policy parameters matrix Θ as well as the hyperplane
parameters matrix β (and therefore implicitly the SPs), we derive an update rule for the policy
gradient framework with generalized trajectories. The derivation is in the supplementary material.
The ﬁrst step involves calculating the gradient of the ASAP objective function yielding the ASAP
gradient (Theorem 1).
Theorem 1. (ASAP Gradient Theorem). Suppose that the ASAP objective function is ρ(πΩ) =
R
µ(m)J(m)(πΩ)dm where µ(m) is a distribution over MDPs m and J(m)(πΩ) is the expected
return for MDP m whilst following policy πΩ, then the gradient of this objective is:
∇Ωρ(πΩ) = Eµ(m)

EP (m)
Ω
(g)
H(m)
X
i=0
∇ΩZ(m)
Ω
(xt, it, at)R(m)

,
where Z(m)
Ω
(xt, it, at) = log Pβ(it|xt, m)σθi(at|xt), H(m) is the length of a trajectory for MDP m;
R(m) = PH(m)
i=0
γiri is the discounted cumulative reward for trajectory H(m) 1.
If we are able to derive ∇ΩZ(m)
Ω
(xt, it, at), then we can estimate the gradient ∇Ωρ(πΩ). We will
refer to Z(m)
Ω
= Z(m)
Ω
(xt, it, at) where it is clear from context. It turns out that it is possible to derive
this term as a result of the generalized trajectory. This yields the gradients ∇ΘZ(m)
Ω
and ∇βZ(m)
Ω
in
Theorems 2 and 3 respectively. The derivations can be found the supplementary material.
Theorem 2. (Θ Gradient Theorem). Suppose that Θ is a (d × 2K) matrix where each column θj
parameterizes an intra-skill policy. Then the gradient ∇θitZ(m)
Ω
corresponding to the intra-skill
parameters of the ith skill at time t is:
∇θitZ(m)
Ω
= αφxt,at −
α
P
b∈A φxt,bt exp(αφT
xt,btΘit)

P
b∈A exp(αφT
xt,btΘit)

,
where α > 0 is the temperature parameter and φxt,at ∈Rd×2K is a feature vector of the current
state xt ∈Xt and the current action at ∈At.
Theorem 3. (β Gradient Theorem). Suppose that β is a (d + z) × K matrix where each column βk
represents a skill hyperplane. Then the gradient ∇βkZ(m)
Ω
corresponding to parameters of the kth
hyperplane is:
∇βk,1Z(m)
Ω
= αψ(xt,m) exp(−αψT
xt,mβk)
 1 + exp(−αψTxt,mβk)
 , ∇βk,0Z(m)
Ω
= −αψxt,m + αψxt,m exp(−αψT
xt,mβk)
 1 + exp(−αψTxt,mβk)

(7)
where α > 0 is the hyperplane temperature parameter, ψT
(xt,m)βk is the kth skill hyperplane for
MDP m, βk,1 corresponds to locations in the binary vector equal to 1 (bk = 1) and βk,0 corresponds
to locations in the binary vector equal to 0 (bk = 0).
Using these gradient updates, we can then order all of the gradients into a vector ∇ΩZ(m)
Ω
=
⟨∇θ1Z(m)
Ω
. . . ∇θ2k Z(m)
Ω
, ∇β1Z(m)
Ω
. . . ∇βkZ(m)
Ω
⟩and update both the intra-skill policy parameters
and hyperplane parameters for the given task (learning a skill set and SPs). Note that the updates
occur on a single time scale. This is formally stated in the ASAP Algorithm.
1These expectations can easily be sampled (see supplementary material).
5

5
ASAP Algorithm
We present the ASAP algorithm (Algorithm 1) that dynamically and simultaneously learns skills, the
inter-skill policy and automatically composes skills together by learning SPs. The skills (Θ matrix)
and SPs (β matrix) are initially arbitrary and therefore form a misspeciﬁed model. Line 2 combines
the skill and hyperplane parameters into a single parameter vector Ω. Lines 3 −7 learns the skill
and hyperplane parameters (and therefore implicitly the skill partitions). In line 4 a generalized
trajectory is generated using the current ASAP policy. The gradient ∇Ωρ(πΩ) is then estimated in
line 5 from this trajectory and updates the parameters in line 6. This is repeated until the skill and
hyperplane parameters have converged, thus correcting the misspeciﬁed model. Theorem 4 provides
a convergence guarantee of ASAP to a local optimum (see supplementary material for the proof).
Algorithm 1 ASAP
Require: φs,a ∈Rd {state-action feature vector}, ψx,m ∈R(d+z) {skill hyperplane feature vector},
K {The number of hyperplanes}, Θ ∈Rd×2K {An arbitrary skill matrix}, β ∈R(d+z)×K {An
arbitrary skill hyperplane matrix}, µ(m) {A distribution over MDP tasks}
1: Z = (|d||2K| + |(d + z)K|) {Deﬁne the number of parameters}
2: Ω= [vec(Θ), vec(β)] ∈RZ
3: repeat
4: Perform
a
trial
(which
may
consist
of
multiple
MDP
tasks)
and
obtain
x0:H, i0:H, a0:H, r0:H, m0:H {states, skills, actions, rewards, task-speciﬁc information}
5: ∇Ωρ(πΩ) =
P
m
PT (m)
i=0 ∇ΩZ(m)(Ω)R(m)

{T is the task episode length}
6: Ω→Ω+ η∇Ωρ(πΩ)
7: until parameters Ωhave converged
8: return Ω
Theorem 4. Convergence of ASAP: Given an ASAP policy π(Ω), an ASAP objective over MDP
models ρ(πΩ) as well as the ASAP gradient update rules. If (1) the step-size ηk satisﬁes lim
k→∞ηk = 0
and P
k ηk = ∞; (2) The second derivative of the policy is bounded and we have bounded rewards.
Then, the sequence {ρ(πΩ,k)}∞
k=0 converges such that lim
k→∞
∂ρ(πΩ,k)
∂Ω
= 0 almost surely.
6
Experiments
The experiments have been performed on four different continuous domains: the Two Rooms (2R)
domain (Figure 1b), the Flipped 2R domain (Figure 1c), the Three rooms (3R) domain (Figure 1d) and
RoboCup domains (Figure 1e) that include a one-on-one scenario between a striker and a goalkeeper
(R1), a two-on-one scenario of a striker against a goalkeeper and a defender (R2), and a striker against
two defenders and a goalkeeper (R3) (see supplementary material). In each experiment, ASAP is
provided with a misspeciﬁed model; that is, a set of skills and SPs (the inter-skill policy) that achieve
degenerate, sub-optimal performance. ASAP corrects this misspeciﬁed model in each case to learn
a set of near-optimal skills and SPs. For each experiment we implement ASAP using Actor-Critic
Policy Gradient (AC-PG) as the learning algorithm 2.
The Two-Room and Flipped Room Domains (2R): In both domains, the agent (red ball) needs to
reach the goal location (blue square) in the shortest amount of time. The agent receives constant
negatives rewards and upon reaching the goal, receives a large positive reward. There is a wall
dividing the environment which creates two rooms. The state space is a 4-tuple consisting of the
continuous ⟨xagent, yagent⟩location of the agent and the ⟨xgoal, ygoal⟩location of the center of the
goal. The agent can move in each of the four cardinal directions. For each experiment involving the
two room domains, a single hyperplane is learned (resulting in two SPs) with a linear feature vector
representation ψx,m = [1, xagent, yagent]. In addition, a skill is learned in each of the two SPs. The
intra-skill policies are represented as a probability distribution over actions.
Automated Hyperplane and Skill Learning: Using ASAP, the agent learned intuitive SPs and skills
as seen in Figure 1f and g. Each colored region corresponds to a SP. The white arrows have been
2AC-PG works well in practice and can be trivially incorporated into ASAP with convergence guarantees
6

Figure 1: (a) The intersection of skill hyperplanes {h1, h2} form four partitions, each of which
deﬁnes a skill’s execution region (the inter-skill policy). The (b) 2R, (c) Flipped 2R, (d) 3R and (e)
RoboCup domains (with a varying number of defenders for R1,R2,R3). The learned skills and Skill
Partitions (SPs) for the (f) 2R, (g) Flipped 2R, (h) 3R and (i) across multiple tasks.
superimposed onto the ﬁgures to indicate the skills learned for each SP. Since each intra-skill policy
is a probability distribution over actions, each skill is unable to solve the entire task on its own. ASAP
has taken this into account and has positioned the hyperplane accordingly such that the given skill
representation can solve the task. Figure 2a shows that ASAP improves upon the initial misspeciﬁed
partitioning to attain near-optimal performance compared to executing ASAP on the ﬁxed initial
misspeciﬁed partitioning and on a ﬁxed approximately optimal partitioning.
Multiple Hyperplanes: We analyzed the ASAP framework when learning multiple hyperplanes
in the two room domain. As seen in Figure 2e, increasing the number of hyperplanes K, does
not have an impact on the ﬁnal solution in terms of average reward. However, it does increase the
computational complexity of the algorithm since 2K skills need to be learned. The approximate points
of convergence are marked in the ﬁgure as K1, K2 and K3, respectively. In addition, two skills
dominate in each case producing similar partitions to those seen in Figure 1a (see supplementary
material) indicating that ASAP learns that not all skills are necessary to solve the task.
Multitask Learning: We ﬁrst applied ASAP to the 2R domain (Task 1) and attained a near optimal
average reward (Figure 2c). It took approximately 35000 episodes to get near-optimal performance
and resulted in the SPs and skill set shown in Figure 1i (top). Using the learned SPs and skills, ASAP
was then able to adapt and learn a new set of SPs and skills to solve a different task (Flipped 2R -
Task 2) in only 5000 episodes (Figure 2c) indicating that the parameters learned from the old task
provided a good initialization for the new task. The knowledge transfer is seen in Figure 1i (bottom)
as the SPs do not signiﬁcantly change between tasks, yet the skills are completely relearned.
We also wanted to see whether we could ﬂip the SPs; that is, switch the sign of the hyperplane
parameters learned in the 2R domain and see whether ASAP can solve the Flipped 2R domain (Task
2) without any additional learning. Due to the symmetry of the domains, ASAP was indeed able to
solve the new domain and attained near-optimal performance (Figure 2d). This is an exciting result as
many problems, especially navigation tasks, possess symmetrical characteristics. This insight could
dramatically reduce the sample complexity of these problems.
The Three-Room Domain (3R): The 3R domain (Figure 1d), is similar to the 2R domain regarding
the goal, state-space, available actions and rewards. However, in this case, there are two walls,
dividing the state space into three rooms. The hyperplane feature vector ψx,m consists of a single
fourier feature. The intra-skill policy is a probability distribution over actions. The resulting learned
hyperplane partitioning and skill set are shown in Figure 1h. Using this partitioning ASAP achieved
near optimal performance (Figure 2b). This experiment shows an insightful and unexpected result.
Reusable Skills: Using this hyperplane representation, ASAP was able to not only learn the intra-skill
policies and SPs, but also that skill ‘A’ needed to be reused in two different parts of the state space
(Figure 1h). ASAP therefore shows the potential to automatically create reusable skills.
RoboCup Domain: The RoboCup 2D soccer simulation domain (Akiyama & Nakashima, 2014) is
a 2D soccer ﬁeld (Figure 1e) with two opposing teams. We utilized three RoboCup sub-domains
3 R1, R2 and R3 as mentioned previously. In these sub-domains, a striker (the agent) needs to
learn to dribble the ball and try and score goals past the goalkeeper. State space: R1 domain -
the continuous locations of the striker ⟨xstriker, ystriker⟩, the ball ⟨xball, yball⟩, the goalkeeper
⟨xgoalkeeper, ygoalkeeper⟩and the constant goal location ⟨xgoal, ygoal⟩. R2 domain - we have the
addition of the defender’s location ⟨xdefender, ydefender⟩to the state space. R3 domain - we add the
locations of two defenders. Features: For the R1 domain, we tested both a linear and degree two
3https://github.com/mhauskn/HFO.git
7

Figure 2: Average reward of the learned ASAP policy compared to the approximately optimal SPs
and skill set as well as the initial misspeciﬁed model. This is for the (a) 2R, (b) 3R, (c) 2R learning
across multiple tasks and the (d) 2R without learning by ﬂipping the hyperplane. (e) The average
reward of the learned ASAP policy for a varying number of K hyperplanes. (f) The learned SPs and
skill set for the R1 domain. (g) The learned SPs using a polynomial hyperplane (1),(2) and linear
hyperplane (3) representation. (h) The learned SPs using a polynomial hyperplane representation
without the defender’s location as a feature (1) and with the defender’s x location (2), y location
(3), and ⟨x, y⟩location as a feature (4). (i) The dribbling behavior of the striker when taking the
defender’s y location into account. (j) The average reward for the R1 domain.
polynomial feature representation for the hyperplanes. For the R2 and R3 domains, we also utilized
a degree two polynomial hyperplane feature representation. Actions: The striker has three actions
which are (1) move to the ball (M), (2) move to the ball and dribble towards the goal (D) (3) move
to the ball and shoot towards the goal (S). Rewards: The reward setup is consistent with logical
football strategies (Hausknecht & Stone, 2015; Bai et al., 2012). Small negative (positive) rewards for
shooting from outside (inside) the box and dribbling when inside (outside) the box. Large negative
rewards for losing possession and kicking the ball out of bounds. Large positive reward for scoring.
Different SP Optimas: Since ASAP attains a locally optimal solution, it may sometimes learn
different SPs. For the polynomial hyperplane feature representation, ASAP attained two different
solutions as shown in Figure 2g(1) as well as Figures 2f, 2g(2), respectively. Both achieve near
optimal performance compared to the approximately optimal scoring controller (see supplementary
material). For the linear feature representation, the SPs and skill set in Figure 2g(3) is obtained and
achieved near-optimal performance (Figure 2j), outperforming the polynomial representation.
SP Sensitivity: In the R2 domain, an additional player (the defender) is added to the game. It is
expected that the presence of the defender will affect the shape of the learned SPs. ASAP again learns
intuitive SPs. However, the shape of the learned SPs change based on the pre-deﬁned hyperplane
feature vector ψm,x. Figure 2h(1) shows the learned SPs when the location of the defender is not used
as a hyperplane feature. When the x location of the defender is utilized, the ‘ﬂatter’ SPs are learned
in Figure 2h(2). Using the y location of the defender as a hyperplane feature causes the hyperplane
offset shown in Figure 2h(3). This is due to the striker learning to dribble around the defender in
order to score a goal as seen in Figure 2i. Finally, taking the ⟨x, y⟩location of the defender into
account results in the ‘squashed’ SPs shown in Figure 2h(4) clearly showing the sensitivity and
adaptability of ASAP to dynamic factors in the environment.
7
Discussion
We have presented the Adaptive Skills, Adaptive Partitions (ASAP) framework that is able to
automatically compose skills together and learns a near-optimal skill set and skill partitions (the
inter-skill policy) simultaneously to correct an initially misspeciﬁed model. We derived the gradient
update rules for both skill and skill hyperplane parameters and incorporated them into a policy
gradient framework. This is possible due to our deﬁnition of a generalized trajectory. In addition,
ASAP has shown the potential to learn across multiple tasks as well as automatically reuse skills.
These are the necessary requirements for a truly general skill learning framework and can be applied
to lifelong learning problems (Ammar et al., 2015; Thrun & Mitchell, 1995). An exciting extension
of this work is to incorporate it into a Deep Reinforcement Learning framework, where both the skills
and ASAP policy can be represented as deep networks.
8
