Tisane: Authoring Statistical Models via Formal Reasoning from Conceptual
and Data Relationships
EUNICE JUN, University of Washington, USA
AUDREY SEO, University of Washington, USA
JEFFREY HEER, University of Washington, USA
RENÉ JUST, University of Washington, USA
Proper statistical modeling incorporates domain theory about how concepts relate and details of how data were measured. However,
data analysts currently lack tool support for recording and reasoning about domain assumptions, data collection, and modeling choices
in an integrated manner, leading to mistakes that can compromise scientific validity. For instance, generalized linear mixed-effects
models (GLMMs) help answer complex research questions, but omitting random effects impairs the generalizability of results. To
address this need, we present Tisane, a mixed-initiative system for authoring generalized linear models with and without mixed-effects.
Tisane introduces a study design specification language for expressing and asking questions about relationships between variables.
Tisane contributes an interactive compilation process that represents relationships in a graph, infers candidate statistical models, and
asks follow-up questions to disambiguate user queries to construct a valid model. In case studies with three researchers, we find that
Tisane helps them focus on their goals and assumptions while avoiding past mistakes.
ACM Reference Format:
Eunice Jun, Audrey Seo, Jeffrey Heer, and René Just. 2022. Tisane: Authoring Statistical Models via Formal Reasoning from Conceptual
and Data Relationships. In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’22), April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA,
USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 25 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3491102.3501888
1
INTRODUCTION
Statistical models play a critical role in how people evaluate data and make decisions. Policy makers rely on models to
track disease, inform health recommendations, and allocate resources. Scientists use models to develop, evaluate, and
compare theories. Journalists report on new findings in science, which individuals use to make decisions that impact
their nutrition, finances, and other aspects of their lives. Faulty statistical models can lead to spurious estimations of
disease spread, findings that do not generalize or reproduce, and a misinformed public. The challenge in developing
accurate statistical models lies not in a lack of access to mathematical tools, of which there are many (e.g., R [63],
Python [52], SPSS [58], and SAS [24]), but in accurately applying them in conjunction with domain theory, data
collection, and statistical knowledge [26, 38].
There is a mismatch between the interfaces existing statistical tools provide and the needs of analysts, especially
those who have domain knowledge but lack deep statistical expertise (e.g., many researchers). Current tools separate
reasoning about domain theory, study design, and statistical models, but analysts need to reason about all three together
in order to author accurate models [26]. For example, consider a researcher developing statistical models of hospital
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on

© 2022 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
1
arXiv:2201.02705v1  [cs.AI]  7 Jan 2022

To Appear, CHI 2022, USA
Eunice Jun, Audrey Seo, Jeffrey Heer, and René Just
expenditure to inform public policy. They collect data about individual hospitals within counties. Based on their domain
knowledge, they know that counties have different demographics and that hospitals in these counties have different
funding sources (private vs. public), all of which influence hospital spending. To model county-level and hospital-level
attributes, the researcher may author a generalized linear mixed-effects model (GLMM) that accounts for clustering
within counties. But which variables should they include? How do they account for this clustering? The three most
common mistakes in modeling hierarchical data [9] lead to miscalibrated statistical power, “ecological fallacies” [49],
and/or results that may not generalize, which impact not only the validity of research findings [3] but also enacted
policies. How can the researcher avoid these issues?
To reduce threats to validity and improve analytical practices, how might we derive (initial) statistical models
from knowledge about concepts and data collection? Inferring a statistical model raises two challenges: (1) How
do we elicit the information necessary for inferring a statistical model? and (2) How do we infer a statistical model,
given this information? We present Tisane, a system for integrating conceptual relationships, data collection
details, and modeling choices when specifying generalized linear models (GLMs) and generalized linear
mixed-effects models (GLMMs). GLMs and GLMMs are meaningful targets because they are commonly used (e.g.,
in psychology [9, 35], social science [29], and medicine [3, 5]) yet are easy to misspecify for statistical experts and
non-experts alike [3, 9]. We designed Tisane to support researchers who are domain experts capable of supplying
conceptual and data collection information but lack the statistical expertise or confidence to author GLM/GLMMs
accurately.
Tisane provides a study design specification language for expressing relationships between variables. For example,
the public health researcher can express that average county income is associated with hospital spending based on health
economics theory or specify that hospitals exist within counties. Tisane compiles the explicitly stated relationships
into an internal graph representation and then traverses the graph to infer candidate GLMs/GLMMs. In this process,
Tisane engages analysts in interactive compilation. Analysts can query Tisane for a statistical model that explains
a specific dependent variable from a set of independent variables. Based on the input query, Tisane asks analysts
disambiguating questions to output a script for fitting a valid GLM/GLMM. Interactive compilation enables analysts to
focus on their primary variables of interest as the system checks that analysts do not overlook relevant variables, such
as potential confounders or data clustering that could compromise generalizability. Figure 1 provides an overview of
this process.
To examine how Tisane affects real-world analyses, we conducted case studies with three researchers. The
researchers described how Tisane focused them on their research goals, made them aware of domain assumptions, and
helped them avoid past mistakes. Tisane even helped one researcher correct their model prior to submitting to the
ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing (CHI). These findings corroborate those from an earlier pilot study
that informed our design process (see supplemental material).
We contribute (1) a study design specification language and graph representation for recording and reasoning about
conceptual relationships between variables and data collection procedures (Section 5), (2) an interactive compilation
process that asks disambiguating questions and outputs code for fitting and visualizing a GLM/GLMM (Section 6), and
(3) three case studies with researchers that demonstrate the feasibility and benefit of prioritizing variable relationships
to author linear models (Section 7). We also provide an open-source Python implementation of Tisane.1
1Tisane is available for download on pip, a popular Python package manager. The source code is available at https://github.com/emjun/tisane.
2

Tisane: Authoring Statistical Models via Formal Reasoning from Conceptual and Data Relationships
To Appear, CHI 2022, USA
import tisane as ts
𝑌= 𝛽0 + 𝛽1𝑋1 + · · · + 𝛽𝑛𝑋𝑛
−5
0
5
−2
0
2
Output Code
Graph IR
Disambiguation
Input Study Design Specification
Interactive Compilation
Fig. 1. Overview of the Tisane system. Analysts specify a set of variable relationships (Input Study Design Specification). Tisane
represents these in an internal graph (Graph IR). To infer a statistical model, Tisane engages analysts in an interactive compilation
process that elicits additional input from analysts in a disambiguation process (Disambiguation) and outputs a script for fitting a valid
GLM and visualizing its residuals (Output Code).
2
BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
We first provide brief background about data analysis practices, GLMs/GLMMs, and causal analysis. Then, we discuss
how Tisane extends prior work on tools for conceptual reasoning, study design, and automated statistical analysis.
2.1
Data Analysis Practices
Studies with analysts have found that data analysis is an iterative process that involves data collection; cleaning and
wrangling; and statistical testing and modeling [21, 31, 32]. To formalize their hypotheses as statistical model programs,
analysts engage in a dual-search process involving refinements to their conceptual understanding and iterations on
model implementations, under constraints of data and statistical knowledge [26]. Analysts incorporate and refine their
domain knowledge, study design, statistical models, and computational instantiations of statistical models while creating
statistical model programs. Tisane facilitates one formalization cycle in this iterative process: deriving statistical models
from conceptual knowledge and data measurement specifications.
2.2
Generalized Linear Models and Generalized Linear Mixed-effects Models
Tisane supports two classes of models that are widely applicable to diverse domains and data collection settings [3, 5, 35]:
Generalized Linear Models (GLMs) and Generalized Linear Mixed-effects Models (GLMMs). Both GLMs and GLMMs
consist of (i) a model effects structure, which can include main and interaction effects and (ii) family and link functions.
The family function describes how the residuals of a model are distributed. The link function transforms the predicted
values of the dependent variable. This allows modeling of linear and non-linear relationships between the dependent
variable and the predictors. In contrast to transformations applied directly to the dependent variable, a link function
does not affect the error distributions around the predicted values. The key difference between GLMs and GLMMs is that
GLMMs contain random effects in their model effects structure. Random effects describe how individuals (e.g., a study
participant) vary and are necessary in the presence of hierarchies, repeated measures, and non-nesting composition
(subsubsection 5.2.2)2.
2Traditionally, the term “mixed effects” refers to the simultaneous presence of “fixed” and “random” effects in a single model. We try to avoid these terms
as there are many contradictory usages and definitions [18]. When we do use these terms, we use the definitions from Kreft and De Leeuw [29].
3

To Appear, CHI 2022, USA
Eunice Jun, Audrey Seo, Jeffrey Heer, and René Just
Both GLMs and GLMMs assume that (i) the variables involved are linearly related, (ii) there are no extreme outliers,
and (iii) the family and link functions are correctly specified. In addition, GLMs also assume that (iv) the observations
are independent. Tisane’s interactive compilation process guides users through specifying model effects structures,
family and link functions to satisfy assumption (iii), and random effects only when necessary to pick between GLMs
and GLMMs and satisfy assumption (iv).
2.3
Causal Analysis
There are multiple frameworks for reasoning about causality [44, 50]. One widespread approach is to use directed
acyclic graphs (DAGs) to encode conditional dependencies between variables [20, 45, 56, 57]. If analysts can specify a
formal causal graph, Pearl’s “backdoor path criterion” [44, 46] explains the set of variables that control for confounding.
However, in practice, specifying proper causal DAGs is challenging and error-prone for domain experts who are not
also experts in causal analysis [60] due to uncertainty of empirical findings [61] and lack of guidance on which variables
and relationships to include [67]. Accordingly, Tisane does not expect analysts to specify a formal causal graph. Instead,
analysts can express causal relationships as well as “looser” association (not causal) relationships between variables in
the study design specification language.
Prior work in the causal reasoning literature shows how linear models can be derived from causal graphs to make
statistical inferences and test the motivating causal graph [56, 57]. Recently, VanderWeele proposed the “modified
disjunctive cause criterion” [66] as a new heuristic for researchers without a clearly accepted formal causal model to
identify confounders to include in a linear model, for example. The criterion identifies confounders in a graph based
on expressed causal relationships. Tisane applies the modified disjunctive cause criterion when suggesting variables
to include in a GLM or GLMM. Tisane does not automatically include variables to the statistical models because
substantive domain knowledge is necessary to resolve issues of temporal dependence between variables, among other
considerations [66]. To guide analysts through the suggestions, Tisane provides analysts with explanations to aid their
decision making during disambiguation.
Finally, GLMs are not formal causal analyses. Tisane does not calculate average causal effect or other causal estimands.
Rather, Tisane only utilizes insights about the connection between causal DAGs and linear models to guide analysts
towards including potentially relevant confounders in their GLMs grounded in domain knowledge.
2.4
Tools for Conceptual Reasoning and Study Design
Tools such as Daggity [64] support authoring, editing, and formally analyzing causal graphs through code and a visual
editor. Daggity requires users to specify a formal causal graph, which may not always be possible [60, 61, 67]. Although
a knowledgeable analyst could use Daggity to identify a set of variables that control for confounding to include in a
linear model, Daggity does not provide this support directly. In contrast, Tisane aims to (i) help analysts may not be
able to formally specify causal graphs and (ii) scaffold the derivation of GLMs and GLMMs from causal graphs.
Several domain-specific languages [1, 55] and tools specialize in experiment design [4, 15, 62]. A primary focus is
to provide researchers low-level control over trial-level and randomization details. For example, JsPsych [13] gives
researchers fine-grained control over the design and presentation of stimuli for online experiments. At a mid-level of
abstraction, Touchstone [36] is a tool for designing and launching online experiments. It also refers users to R and JMP
for data analysis but does not help users author an appropriate statistical model. Touchstone2 [15] helps researchers
design experiments based on statistical power. At a high-level of abstraction, edibble [62] helps researchers plan their
data collection schema. Edibble aims to provide a “grammar of study design” that focuses users on their experimental
4

Tisane: Authoring Statistical Models via Formal Reasoning from Conceptual and Data Relationships
To Appear, CHI 2022, USA
manipulations in relation to specific units (e.g., participants, students, schools), the frequency and distribution of
conditions (e.g., within-subjects vs. between-subjects), and measures to collect (e.g., age, grade, location) in order to
output a table to fill in during data collection. While Tisane’s study design specification language uses an abstraction
level comparable to edibble, Tisane is focused on using the expressed data measurement relationships to infer a statistical
model. Additionally, Tisane’s SDSL provides conceptual relationships that are out of the scope of edibble but important
for specifying conceptually valid statistical models.
2.5
Tools for Automated Statistical Analysis
Researchers have introduced tools that automate statistical analyses. Given a dataset, the Automatic Statistician [34]
generates a report listing all “interesting” relationships (e.g., correlations, statistical models, etc.). Although apparently
complete, the Automatic Statistician may overlook analyses that are conceptually interesting and difficult, if not
impossible, to deduce from data alone. In contrast, Tisane prioritizes analyst-specified conceptual and data measurement
relationships and uses them to bootstrap the modeling process. As a result, Tisane aims to ensure that statistical analyses
are not only technically correct but also conceptually correct.
AutoML tools automate machine learning for non-experts. Tools such as Auto-WEKA [65], auto-sklearn [16], and
H2O AutoML [30] aim to make statistical methods more widely usable. Tisane differs from AutoML efforts in its focus
on analysts who prioritize explanation, not just prediction, such as researchers developing scientific theories. As a result,
Tisane provides support for specifying GLMMs, which some prominent AutoML tools, such as auto-sklearn [16], omit.
Tisane ensures that inferred statistical models respect expressed conceptual relationships. Thus, Tisane programs can
serve a secondary purpose of recording and communicating conceptual and data measurement assumptions. In addition,
Tisane explains its suggestions to users and guides them in answering disambiguation questions whereas AutoML
tools do not by default. Tisane’s explanations are grounded in the variable relationships analysts specify. Although
H2O AutoML offers a model explainability module [14], these “explanations” take the form of plots without conceptual
exposition.
Tea [27] elicits end-user expertise through explicit hypotheses and study designs to automatically infer a set of
valid Null Hypothesis Significance Tests. Tisane differs from Tea in three key ways. First, Tisane enables analysts to
express more complex study designs, such as nested hierarchies that necessitate mixed effects modeling, which are not
available in Tea. Second, because statistical modeling requires more conceptual expertise and oversight, Tisane is a
mixed-initiative system while Tea is not. Third, Tisane outputs a single statistical model, whereas Tea outputs a set of
statistical tests.
Recent work in the database community helps researchers answer causal questions about multilevel, or hierarchical,
data [28, 51]. CaRL [51] provides a domain-specific language to express causal relationships between variables and a
GUI to show researchers results. Like CaRL, Tisane leverages the insight that researchers have domain knowledge that
a system can use to infer statistical methods. Whereas CaRL is focused on answering specific queries about average
causal effect, Tisane supports authoring GLMs and GLMMs, which can address a range of non-causal questions.
In summary, whereas prior systems have supported reasoning about either concepts, study designs, or statistical
models, Tisane integrates all three. Existing theories of data analysis [26, 38] illustrate how all three concerns are
necessary and interconnected. Thus, a tool for integrating these concerns seems a promising way to reduce errors and
the cognitive burden involved in model specification.
5

To Appear, CHI 2022, USA
Eunice Jun, Audrey Seo, Jeffrey Heer, and René Just
3
USAGE SCENARIO
To illustrate how a researcher might use Tisane, we compare two hypothetical researchers analyzing the same dataset.
This scenario (simplified from [9]) illustrates workflow differences between Tisane and current tools (statsmodels in
Python and lmer in R). Michael and Bridget are health experts studying the effects of a new exercise regimen they
have developed on weight loss. Their research question is “How much does the exercise regimen affect weight loss?”
They recruited 386 adults to be part of 40 exercise groups focused on diet and weight management. The researchers
randomly assigned 16 groups a control regimen and the other 24 groups an experimental regimen. The researchers
measured the adults’ motivation scores for weight loss at the beginning of the experiment and their total weight loss at
the end of the experiment. Michael uses statsmodels [47] to analyze the data3. Bridget uses Tisane. While both are
experienced researchers, familiar with their shared field of study, Michael and Bridget are not statistics experts. They
have both used GLMs in the past but neither has heard of GLMMs.
3.1
Workflow in Python using statsmodels
Michael takes a first attempt at creating a model. He loads the data and casts regimen_condition and group as
categorical variables. The first model (Listing 1) that Michael tries has the dependent variable pounds_lost and the
independent variables regimen_condition (control vs. treatment) and motivation.
1 import statsmodels.formula.api as sm
2 import pandas as pd
3
4 data = pd.read_csv("data.csv")
5 data['regimen_condition '] = data['regimen_condition ']. astype('str').astype("category")
6 data['group '] = data['group ']. astype('str').astype("category")
7
8 m1 = sm.glm("pounds_lost ~ regimen_condition + motivation", data=data)
Listing 1. Michael’s first model attempt, from the usage scenario (Section 3). Michael specifies pounds_lost as his dependent variable,
and regimen_condition and motivation as his independent variables.
Although this model includes the primary variable of research interest (regimen_condition) and a likely confounder
(motivation), Michael realizes that this model overlooks the fact that the adults exercised in groups. The groups likely
had group support and accountability, among other benefits of group cohesion that are difficult to measure and not
included in the data.
In his second model (Listing 2), Michael adds group as an additional independent variable. Considering that this
model accounts for variables pertaining to individual adults (i.e., pounds_lost, motivation) and to groups (i.e.,
regimen_condition), Michael supposes this model is good enough and accepts it as his final model.
9 m2 = sm.glm("pounds_lost ~ regimen_condition + motivation + group", data=data)
Listing 2. Michael’s second model attempt. Building on his first model (Listing 1), Michael adds an additional independent variable,
group.
3The workflow in R is almost identical to the workflow in Python using statsmodels.
6

Tisane: Authoring Statistical Models via Formal Reasoning from Conceptual and Data Relationships
To Appear, CHI 2022, USA
3.2
Workflow with Tisane
Bridget starts by listing the variables of interest. Lines 3-8 in Listing 3 show how variables are declared with a data
type, the name of the column in the data that corresponds to the variable. The observational units are adult and group.
The measures motivation and pounds_lost pertain to individual adults while exercise regimen_condition was
administered to exercise groups. The Tisane program makes these details explicit. Because Bridget has data, she does
not need to specify the cardinality of variables.
1
import tisane as ts
2
3 # Variable declarations
4 adult = ts.Unit("member")
5
motivation = adult.numeric("motivation")
6
pounds_lost = adult.numeric("pounds_lost")
7 group = ts.Unit("group")
8
regimen_condition = group.nominal("regimen_condition") # control vs. treatment
Listing 3. The first snippet of the example Tisane program, written in the study design specification language, from the usage scenario
(Section 3). After importing tisane, Bridget specifies her observed variables.
By expressing how the variables relate to one another, Bridget becomes more consciously aware of the assumptions
the research team has made about their domain. In line 10 of Listing 4, Bridget specifies that regimen_condition directly
causes pounds_lost while in line 11 motivation is associated with, but not necessarily a cause of, pounds_lost. She
also expresses that adults were nested in groups in line 12.
10
regimen_condition.causes(pounds_lost)
11
motivation.associates_with(pounds_lost)
12 adult.nests_within(group)
Listing 4. A continuation of the snippet in Listing 3. Bridget specifies the relationships between her observed variables using the
methods causes, associates_with, and nests_within.
Next, in line 14 of Listing 5, Bridget specifies a study design with pounds_lost as the dependent variable and
regimen_condition and motivation as the independent variables of interest and assigns data to the design. Bridget
uses this design to query Tisane for a statistical model in line 15.
13 # Query Tisane for a statistical model
14
design = ts.Design(dv=pounds_lost , ivs=[ regimen_condition , motivation ]).assign_data("data.csv")
15 ts.infer_model(design=design)
Listing 5. The final snippet of the example Tisane program, continuing from Listing 4. Bridget queries Tisane for a statistical model by
specifying her study design’s most important variables and assigning data. Based on the complete program, consisting of this listing
as well as Listing 3 and Listing 4, Bridget engages in a disambiguation process (see Figure 2) to generate a final output statistical
modeling script.
Tisane launches a GUI in the browser after executing the program.4 In the GUI, Tisane asks Bridget to look over
her choice of variables (Figure 2). As seen in panel B, there are no additional variables to consider. Bridget continues
to the next tab, interaction effects (panel D). Tisane explains that interaction effects do not make sense for her model
given that she did not express any moderating relationships. In this way, Tisane prevents her from adding arbitrary
interaction effects without conceptual foundation. In the next tab (E), Bridget sees that Tisane has automatically included
4As explained in subsection 6.3, if Bridget had executed the script in a Jupyter notebook, the GUI would open in the notebook.
7

To Appear, CHI 2022, USA
Eunice Jun, Audrey Seo, Jeffrey Heer, and René Just
Fig. 2. Example Tisane GUI for disambiguation from usage scenario. Tisane asks analysts disambiguating questions about variables
that are conceptually relevant and that analysts may have overlooked in their query. (A) The left hand panel gives an overview of
the model the analyst is constructing. (B) Based on the variable relationships analysts specify (Listing 4), Tisane infers candidate
main effects that may be potential confounders. Tisane asks analysts if they would like to include these variables, explaining in a
tooltip (C) why the variable may be important to include. (D) Tisane only suggests interaction effects if analysts specify moderating
relationships in their specification. This way, Tisane ensures that model structures are conceptually justifiable. (E) From the data
measurement relationships analysts provide (line 15 in Listing 4), Tisane automatically infers and includes random effects to increase
generalizability and external validity of statistical findings. (F) Tisane assists analysts in choosing an initial family and link function
by asking them a series of questions about their dependent (e.g., Is the variable continuous or about count data?). To help analysts
answer these questions and verify their assumptions about the data, Tisane shows a histogram of the dependent variable.
exercise group as a random intercept. (Tisane does not include a random slope for group because there is only one
observation per adult in a group, see subsubsection 6.2.3.) Bridget has not heard of a random intercept before, but she
reads the explanation, which explains that accounting for exercise groups is necessary since adults were in groups
and groups received the regimen_conditions. In the last tab, Bridget answers questions about the the dependent
variable pounds_lost to identify family and link functions. She specifies that the dependent variable is continuous.
She chooses the Gaussian family with the default link function. Finally, Bridget clicks on the button to generate code.
Tisane’s output script contains code to fit the statistical model and plot model residuals to inspect it. Tisane helped
Bridget author the following GLMM:
1
model = Lmer(
8

Tisane: Authoring Statistical Models via Formal Reasoning from Conceptual and Data Relationships
To Appear, CHI 2022, USA
2
formula="pounds_lost ~ regimen_condition + motivation + (1| group)",
3
family="gaussian",
4
data=df,
5
)
Listing 6. Bridget’s output statistical model from using Tisane. Tisane suggests a GLMM with group as a random intercept. The
output script contains code for fitting this model and inspecting it using a residuals plot.
3.3
Key differences in workflows and statistical results
Even with experience modeling in Python, Michael makes two common mistakes in authoring linear models [9, 29]:
disaggregating observations and artificially inflating statistical power (model 1) and using a “fixed effects approach to
clustering” that compromises the generalizability of findings [3] (model 2). Despite knowing all the pertinent information
about the domain and data collection for constructing a valid statistical model, Michael is not able to leverage it without
additional statistical expertise, and, as a result, arrives at different statistical results than Bridget.
In contrast, Bridget and other analysts using Tisane express their knowledge using the study design specification
language, answer a few disambiguating questions with guidance, and receive as output a script for executing a statistical
model. Tisane helps researchers like Bridget leverage their conceptual and data collection knowledge to author statistical
models that optimize for statistical conclusion and external validity, avoiding errors and reducing the cognitive burden
along the way.
Once fit, Michael’s and Bridget’s final models (see Table 1) disagree on the precise effect sizes of regimen_condition
and motivation, which are pertinent to their motivating research question. Michael concludes that regimen_condition
and motivation are less important than they really are. Additionally, the coefficients and standard errors for each
group suggest that Michael’s model overlooks important group differences. Therefore, using a GLM instead of the
appropriate model, a GLMM, leads Michael to answer the research question differently than Bridget, artificially inflates
statistical power [9], and compromises the generalizability of his findings [3].5
𝛽regimen_condition
𝑝
𝛽motivation
𝑝
𝛽group
𝑝
Michael
1.628
.046
3.119
.000
Various
Various
Bridget
1.659
.005
3.193
.000
N/A
N/A
Table 1. The coefficients for each of the independent variables in Michael’s and Bridget’s models. The complete output tables for
Michael’s and Bridget’s models are included in supplemental material.
4
DESIGN GOALS
We articulated four design goals based on prior research and our formative work. The supplemental material details our
design process.
DG1 - Prioritize conceptual knowledge. Current tools require analysts to transition back and forth between their
conceptual concerns and their statistical model specifications using math and/or code [26]. Analysts’ conceptual
knowledge remains implicit and hidden [38]. As a result, analysts may resort to familiar but sub-optimal statistical
methods [26] or accidentally overlook details that lead to conceptually inaccurate statistical models. One solution is to
5Another common mistake, not shown here, is to aggregate observations and use group means of the independent variables in the model, artificially
deflating statistical power (“ecological fallacy” [49]). Kreft and De Leeuw [29] share an example where disaggregating vs. aggregating data lead to different
signs for a fitted parameter. Unfortunately, we could not access the data to illustrate this here.
9

To Appear, CHI 2022, USA
Eunice Jun, Audrey Seo, Jeffrey Heer, and René Just
provide tools at a higher level of abstraction that allow analysts to express their conceptual knowledge directly. However,
a higher level of abstraction alone is not enough. Tools must then leverage the expressed conceptual knowledge to
guide analysis authoring.
Tisane provides a high-level study design specification language that captures the motivation behind a study
(Section 5). Tisane represents the specification in an internal graph representation to derive only conceptually accurate
statistical model candidates. To arrive at an output statistical model, Tisane asks analysts disambiguating questions and
provides them with suggestions and explanations based on their expressed variable relationships (Section 6). Importantly,
Tisane does not fit or show modeling results during disambiguation to discourage statistical fishing. Although Tisane
does not prevent researchers from re-starting and iterating on their Tisane program to attain specific statistical model
findings, Tisane programs act as documentation for conceptual relationships that others could audit.
DG2 - Prioritize the validity of models. At present, the burden of valid statistics lies entirely on analysts. Tisane divides
some of this burden by (i) ensuring correct application of methods (i.e., GLM vs. GLMM) and (ii) inferring models
that increase the generalizability of results for GLMMs [2, 3]. Tisane helps analysts author GLMs and GLMMs that
satisfy two assumptions: (i) observational dependencies and (ii) correct family and link functions. First, Tisane infers
and constructs maximal random effects that account for dependencies due to repeated measures, hierarchical data,
and non-nesting compositions. Maximal effects structures account for within-sample variability and thereby mitigate
threats to external validity due to sampling biases from the choice of observational units and settings [54]. Second,
Tisane narrows the set of viable family and link functions to match the dependent variable’s data type (e.g., numeric).
Tisane’s GUI asks follow-up questions to determine the semantic type of variables (e.g., counts), further narrowing
analysts’ family and link function choices. The output script also plots model residuals against fitted values and provides
tips (as comments) for interpreting the plot. The family and link functions Tisane suggests are intended to bootstrap an
initial statistical model that analysts can examine and, if necessary, revise. This is how Tisane helps analysts avoid four
common threats to statistical conclusion and external validity [11]: (i) violation of statistical method assumptions, (ii)
fishing for statistical results, (iii) not accounting for the influence of specific units, and (iv) overlooking the influence of
data collection procedures on outcomes.
DG3 - Give analysts guidance and control. Analysts may have insight into their research questions and domain that
a system cannot capture. At the same time, analysts, especially those with less statistical experience, may lack the
knowledge to select among many possible statistical models, which may inadvertently encourage cherry-picking based
on observed results. Thus, Tisane adopts an interaction model that asks analysts specific questions to resolve modeling
ambiguity rather than show multiple statistical models at the same time. Tisane also does not automatically select a a
“best” model (e.g., highest R2, easiest to interpret) but rather gives analysts suggestions and explanations to help them
come to a statistical model that is valid and appropriate for their goals.
DG4 - Facilitate statistical planning without data. Experimental design best practices, such as pre-registration,
encourage researchers to plan their statistical analyses prior to data collection. In accordance, Tisane does not require
analysts to provide data. If analysts do not have data, analysts must specify the cardinality of variables at declaration.
Without data, Tisane cannot validate variable declarations but otherwise guide analysts through the same interactive
compilation process. The output Tisane script will include an empty file path and a comment directing analysts to
specify a data path prior to execution. Analysts could attach this output Tisane script to their pre-registrations. Once
analysts collect data, they can re-run their previously specified Tisane program to validate and inspect their data. If
Tisane does not issue any validation errors, analysts can proceed to generate an identical script or provide a file path in
the pre-registered script and execute it.
10

Tisane: Authoring Statistical Models via Formal Reasoning from Conceptual and Data Relationships
To Appear, CHI 2022, USA
5
STUDY DESIGN SPECIFICATION LANGUAGE AND GRAPH REPRESENTATION
Tisane provides a study design specification language (SDSL) for expressing relationships between variables. There
are two key challenges in designing a specification from which to infer statistical models: (1) determining the set
of relationships that are essential for statistical modeling and (2) determining the level of granularity to express
relationships.
In Tisane’s SDSL, analysts can express conceptual and data measurement relationships between variables. Both are
necessary to specify the domain knowledge and study designs from which Tisane infers statistical models.
5.1
Variables
There are three types of data variables in Tisane’s SDSL: (i) units, (ii) measures, and (iii) study environment settings.
The Unit type represents entities that are observed and/or receive experimental treatments. In the experimental
design literature, these entities are referred to as “observational units” and “experimental units,” respectively. Entities
can be both observational and experimental units simultaneously, so the SDSL does not provide more granular unit
sub-types. The Measure type represents attributes of units and must be constructed through their units, e.g., age
= adult.numeric('age'). Measures are proxies (e.g., minutes ran on a treadmill) of underlying constructs (e.g.,
endurance). Measures can have one of the following data types: numeric, nominal, or ordinal. Numeric measures have
values that lie on an interval or ratio scale (e.g., age, minutes ran on a treadmill). Nominal measures are categorical
variables without an ordering (e.g., race). Ordinal measures are ordered categorical variables (e.g., grade level in school).
We included these data types because they are commonly taught and used in data analysis. The SetUp type represents
study environment settings that are neither units nor measures. For example, time is often an environmental variable
that differentiates repeated measures but is neither a unit nor a measure of a specific unit.
5.2
Relationships between Variables
In Tisane’s SDSL, variables have relationships that fall into two broad categories: (1) conceptual relationships that
describe how variables relate theoretically and (2) data measurement relationships that describe how the data was, or will
be, collected. Below, we define each of the relationships in Tisane’ SDSL and describe how Tisane internally represents
these relationships as a graph (as illustrated in Figure 3). Figure 4 shows the graph representation constructed from the
usage scenario.
Tisane’s graph IR is a directed multigraph. Nodes represent variables, and directed edges represent relationships
between variables. Tisane internally uses a graph intermediate representation (IR) because graphs are widely used for
both conceptual modeling and statistical analysis, two sets of considerations that Tisane unifies.
Tisane’s graph IR differs from two types of graphs used in data analysis: causal DAGs and path analysis diagrams.
Unlike causal DAGs, Tisane’s graph IR allows for non-causal relationships, moderating relationships (i.e., interaction
effects), and data measurement relationships that are necessary for inferring random effects. Unlike path analysis
diagrams that allow edges to point to other edges to represent interaction effects, Tisane represents interactions as
separate nodes and only allows nodes as endpoints for edges. These design decisions simplify our statistical model
inference algorithms and their implementation.
5.2.1
Conceptual relationships. Tisane’s SDSL supports three conceptual relationships: causes, associates with, and
moderates. Analysts can express that a variable causes or is associated with (but not directly causally related to)
another variable. Variables associated with the dependent variable, for example, may help explain the dependent variable
11

To Appear, CHI 2022, USA
Eunice Jun, Audrey Seo, Jeffrey Heer, and René Just
even if the causal mechanism is unknown. If analysts are aware of or suspect a causal relationship, they should use
causes.
We chose to support both causal and associative relationships because formal causal DAGs are difficult for domain
experts to specify [60, 61, 67], prior work has observed that researchers already use informal graphs that contain
associative relationships when reasoning about their hypotheses and analyses [26], and GLMs/GLMMs can represent
non-causal relationships. Finally, analysts can also express interactions where one (or more) variable (the moderating
variables) moderates the effect of a moderated variable on another variable (the target variable).
Mediation relationships (where one variable influences another through a middle variable) are another common
conceptual relationship. Tisane does not provide a separate language construct for mediation because mediations are
expressible using two or more causal relationships. Furthermore, mediation analyses require specific analyses, such as
structural equation modeling [23], that are out of Tisane’s scope.
In the graph IR, a causes relationship introduces a causal edge from one node, the cause, to another node, the effect
(Figure 3(a)). Because a variable cannot be both the cause and effect of the same variable, any pair of nodes can only
have one causal edge between them. Furthermore, from a formal causal analysis perspective, associations may indicate
the presence of a hidden, unobserved variable that mediates the causal effect of a variable on another or that influences
two or more variables simultaneously. Thus, rather than inferring or requiring analysts to specify hidden variables,
which may be unknown and/or unmeasurable, the associates_with relationship introduces two directed edges in
opposing directions, representing the bidirectionality of association (Figure 3(b)). A moderates relationship creates a
new node that is eventually transformed into an interaction term in the model, introduces associative edges between
the new interaction node and the target (variable) node, creates associative edges between the moderated variable’s
node and the target node, and adds associative edges between the moderating variables’ nodes and the target node if
there is not a causal or associative edge already (Figure 3(c)). Furthermore, each interaction node inherits the attribution
edges from the nodes of the moderating variables that comprise it. This means that every interaction node is also the
attribute of at least one unit.6
v1
v2
causes
v1
v2
assoc.
assoc.
m3
m1*m2
m1
m2
assoc.
assoc.
assoc.
assoc.
assoc.
assoc.
u1
u2
nests
u
m
has
v1.causes(v2)
v1.associates_with(v2)
m1.moderates(m2, on=m3)
u1.nests_within(u2)
u.has(m)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Fig. 3. Code snippets of conceptual and data measurement relationships written in Tisane’s study design specification language and
their representation in Tisane’s graph IR. Variables are named with u for units, m for measures, and v for data variables that can be
either units or measures. All edges depicted are those that are added due to the relationship. In the moderates example, we assume
that m1 and m2 both belong to the same unit, and for simplicity, the attribution edge (labeled as “has”) from m1 and m2’s unit is not
shown. For more complex examples, see the supplemental materials.
6In statistical terms, this means that within-level interactions have one unit while cross-level interactions may have two or more units.
12

Tisane: Authoring Statistical Models via Formal Reasoning from Conceptual and Data Relationships
To Appear, CHI 2022, USA
5.2.2
Data measurement relationships. Study designs may have clusters of observations that need to be modeled
explicitly for external validity. For example, in a within-subjects experiment, participants provide multiple observations
for different conditions. An individual’s observations may cluster together due to a hidden latent variable. Such clustering
may be imperceptible during exploratory data visualization of a sample but can threaten external validity. GLMMs can
mitigate three common sources of clustering that arise during data collection [8, 19, 29]:
• Hierarchies arise when one observational/experimental unit (e.g., adult) nests within another observational/-
experimental unit (e.g., group). This means that each instance of the nested unit belongs to one and only one
nesting unit (many-to-one).
• Repeated measures introduce clustering of observations from the same unit instance (e.g., participant).
• Non-nesting composition arises when overlapping attributes (e.g., stimuli, condition) describe the same
observational/experimental unit (e.g., participant) [19].
The above sources of clustering pose three problems for analysts. First, analysts must have significant statistical
expertise to identify when data observations cluster. Second, they must know how to mitigate these clusters in their
models. Third, with this knowledge, analysts must figure out how to express these types of clustering in their analytical
tools. Even if analysts are not able to identify clustered observations, they are knowledgeable about how data were
collected.
Thus, Tisane addresses the three problems by (i) eliciting data measurement relationships from analysts to infer
clusters and (ii) formulating the maximal random effects structure, optimizing for external validity (Section 6). Below,
we describe language features for expressing data measurement relationships.
Nesting relationships: Hierarchies. Hierarchies arise when a unit (e.g., an adult) is nested within another unit (e.g.,
an exercise group). Researchers may collect data with hierarchies to study individual and group dynamics together
or as a side effect of recruitment strategies. To express such designs, Tisane provides the nests_within construct.
Conceptually, nesting is strictly between observational/experimental units, so Tisane type checks that the variables that
nest are both Units. In the graph IR, a nesting relationship is encoded as an edge between two unit nodes (Figure 3(d)).
There is one edge from the nested unit (e.g., adult) to the nesting unit (e.g., group) 7.
Frequency of measures: Repeated measures, Non-nesting composition. When a measure is declared through a unit,
Tisane adds an attribution edge (“has’) from a unit node to a measure node (Figure 3(e)). A unit’s measure can be
taken one or more times in a study. The frequency of measurement is useful for detecting repeated measures and
non-nesting composition. In repeated measures study designs, each unit provides multiple values of a measure, which
are distinguished by another variable, usually time. Non-nesting [19] composition arises when measures describing
the same unit overlap. For example, HCI researchers studying input devices might design them to utilize different
senses (e.g., touch, sight, sound). Participants in the study may be exposed to multiple different devices, which act as
experimental conditions of senses. The conditions are intrinsically tied to the devices, and participants can be described
as having both conditions and devices, which overlap with one another. Such study designs introduce dependencies
between observations [7] and hence violate the assumption of independence that GLMs make.
When analysts declare Measures, they specify the frequency of the observation through the number_of_instances
parameter. This parameter accepts an integer, variable, a Tisane Exactly operator, or a Tisane AtMost operator. By
default, the parameter is set to one. The Exactly operator represents the exact number of times a unit has a measure.
7The code base contains examples with nesting relationships.
13

To Appear, CHI 2022, USA
Eunice Jun, Audrey Seo, Jeffrey Heer, and René Just
The AtMost operator represents the maximum number of times a unit has a measure. Both operators are useful for
specifying that a measure’s frequency depends on another variable, which is expressible through the per function. For
example, participants may use two devices per condition assigned: device = subject.nominal('Input device',
number_of_instances=ts.Exactly(2).per(condition)). The per function uses the Tisane variable’s cardinality
by default but can instead use a data variable’s number_of_instances by specifying use_cardinality=False as a
parameter to per. Moreover, specifying a measure’s number_of_instances to be an integer is syntactic sugar for using
the Exactly operator. Specifying a variable is syntactic sugar for expressing ts.Exactly(1).per(variable).
To determine the presence of repeated measures or non-nesting composition, Tisane computes the number_of_instances
of measures and their relationship to other measures. Measures that are declared with number_of_instances equal to
one are considered to vary between-unit. Measures that are declared with number_of_instances greater than one
or a variable with cardinality greater than one are considered to vary within-unit as repeated measures. If there are
instances of a measure per another measure sharing the same unit, the measures are non-nesting.
group
member
motivation
condition
pounds_lost
causes
assoc.
assoc.
Fig. 4. The graph representation of the variables and relationships from the usage scenario. causes edges are labeled with “causes”.
associates_with edges are labeled with “assoc.” Dashed edges indicate nests_within relationships, and dotted edges indicate has
relationships.
6
STATISTICAL MODEL INFERENCE: INTERACTIVELY QUERYING THE GRAPH IR
After specifying variable relationships, analysts can query Tisane for a statistical model. Queries are constructed by
specifying a study design with a dependent variable (the value to be predicted) and a set of independent variables
(predictors). Tisane processes the query and generates a statistical model in four phases: (1) preliminary conceptual
checks that validate the study design, (2) inference of possible effects structures and family and link functions, (3) input
elicitation to disambiguate possible models, and (4) generation of a record of decisions during disambiguation and the
final executable script. Given that the interactive process begins with an input program using Tisane and outputs a
script for fitting a GLM or GLMM, we call this process interactive compilation.
6.1
Preliminary checks
At the beginning of processing a query, Tisane checks that every input study design is well-formed. This involves
two conceptual correctness checks. First, every independent variable (IV) in the study design must either cause or be
14

Tisane: Authoring Statistical Models via Formal Reasoning from Conceptual and Data Relationships
To Appear, CHI 2022, USA
associated with the dependent variable (DV) directly or transitively. Second, the DV must not cause any of the IVs, since
it would be conceptually invalid to explain a cause from any of its effects. If any of the above checks fail, Tisane issues
a warning and halts execution. By using these two checks, the Tisane compiler avoids technically correct statistical
models that have little to no conceptual grounding (DG1 - Conceptual knowledge). If the checks pass, Tisane proceeds to
the next phase.
6.2
Candidate statistical model generation
A GLM/GLMM is comprised of a model effects structure, family function, and link function. The model effects structure
may consist of main, interaction, and random effects. Tisane utilizes variables’ conceptual relationships to infer candidate
main and interaction effects and data measurement relationships to infer random effects. Tisane infers family and link
functions based on the data type of the DV in the query. The candidate statistical models that Tisane generates based
on the graph and query seeds an interactive disambiguation process.
The purpose of identifying candidate main effects beyond the ones analysts may have specified is to provoke
consideration of erroneously omitted variables that are conceptually relevant and pre-empt potential confounding and
multicollinearity issues that may arise.
6.2.1
Deriving Candidate Main Effects. In a query to infer a statistical model, analysts specify a single dependent
variable and a set of one or more IVs. After passing the checks described in subsection 6.1, the query’s independent
variables are considered candidates. In addition, Tisane derives three additional sets of candidate main effects intended
to control for confounding variables in the output statistical model8. The first two sets below are from the “modified
disjunctive cause criterion” [66]:
• Causal parents. For each IV in the query, Tisane finds its causal parents (see Figure 5(a)).
• Possible causal omissions. Tisane looks to see if any other variables not included as IVs cause the DV (see
in Figure 5(b)). They are relevant to the DV but may have been erroneously omitted.
• Possible confounding associations. For each IV, Tisane looks for variables that are associated with both the
IV and the DV (see in Figure 5(c)). Because associations between variables can have multiple underlying causal
structures, Tisane recommends variables with associative relationships with caution. Tisane issues a warning
describing when not to include such a variable in the GUI (see Figure 3 in supplemental material).
IV
IV
IV
CP
CME
CP
CME
CP
CME
CME
DV
IV
DV
CME
assoc.
assoc.
assoc.
assoc.
assoc.
assoc.
(a) causal parents
(b) possible causal omissions
(c) possible confounding associations
Fig. 5. Graphs demonstrating causal parents, possible causal omissions, and possible confounding associations. In graphs (a) and (b)
(left and middle), all edges are causal. Independent variables are marked “IV”, discovered candidate main effects “CME”, dependent
variables “DV”, and causal parents “CP”.
8Tisane currently treats each input IV as a separate “exposure” variable for which to identify confounders. Tisane then combines all confounders into one
statistical model.
15

To Appear, CHI 2022, USA
Eunice Jun, Audrey Seo, Jeffrey Heer, and René Just
Using the above rules, Tisane suggests a set of variables that are likely confounders of the variables of interest
expressed in the query. There may be additional confounders due to unmeasured or unexpressed variables that are
either not known or excluded from the graph. Tisane never automatically includes the candidate main effects in the
output statistical model. Analysts must always specify a variable as an IV in the query or accept a suggestion (DG3 -
Guidance and control).
If a graph only contains associates edges then the candidate main effects Tisane suggests are those that are directly
associated with both the DV and an IV. If a graph has only causal edges, Tisane would suggest variables that directly
cause the DV but were omitted from the query and the causal parents of IVs in case the parents exert causal influence
on the DV through the IV or another variable that is not specified.
The total set of main effects, including variables the analyst has specified as IVs in their query and candidate main
effects, are used to derive candidate interaction effects and random effects, which we discuss next.
6.2.2
Deriving Candidate Interaction Effects. An interaction between variables means that the effect of one variable
(the moderated variable) on a target variable is moderated by another (non-empty) set of variables (the moderating
variables). Tisane’s SDSL already provides a primitive, moderates, to express interactions. As such, Tisane’s goal in
suggesting candidate interaction effects is to help analysts avoid omissions of conceptual relationships that are pertinent
to an analyst’s research questions or hypotheses (DG1 - Conceptual knowledge). Candidate interaction effects are the
interaction nodes whose (i) moderated and moderating variables include two or more candidate main effects and (ii)
target variable is the query’s DV.
6.2.3
Deriving Candidate Random Effects. Random effects occur when there are clusters in the data, which occur
when we have repeated measures, nested hierarchies, or non-nesting composition (as defined in Section 5.2.2). Tisane
implements Barr et al.’s recommendations for specifying the maximal random effects structure of linear mixed effects
models for increasing the generalizability of statistical results [2, 3].
To derive random effects, Tisane focuses on the data measurement edges in the graph IR. Using the graph IR, Tisane
identifies unit nodes, looks for any nesting edges among them, and determines within- or between-subjects measures
based on the frequency of observations for units. From these, Tisane generates random intercepts of units for the unit’s
measures that are between-subjects as well as the unit’s measures that are within-subjects where each instance of the
unit has only one observation per value of another variable. Tisane generates random slopes of a unit and its measure
for all measures that are within-subjects where each instance of the unit has multiple observations per value of another
variable. For interaction effects, random slopes are included for the largest subset of within-subjects variables (see [2]).
Tisane handles correlation of random slopes and intercepts during disambiguation (section 6.3). Maximal random effects
may lead to model convergence issues that analysts address by later removing or adding independent variables and
random effects. Nevertheless, starting with a maximal, valid model is important for ensuring that future revisions are
also valid (DG2 - Validity).
6.2.4
Deriving Candidate Family and Link Functions. The DV’s data type determines the set of candidate family and
link functions. For example, numeric variables cannot have binomial or multinomial distributions. Similarly, nominal
variables are not allowed to have Gaussian distributions. Furthermore, each family has a set of possible link functions.
For example, a Gaussian family distribution may have an Identity, Log, or Square Root link function. The statistics
literature documents possible combinations of family and link functions for specific data types [41].
16

Tisane: Authoring Statistical Models via Formal Reasoning from Conceptual and Data Relationships
To Appear, CHI 2022, USA
Tisane includes common family distributions as candidate families and their applicable link functions. In its current
implementation, Tisane relies on statsmodels [53] for GLMs and pymer4 [25] for GLMMs. As such, Tisane is limited
to the family and link function pairings implemented in these libraries. As statsmodels’ and pymer4’s support for
GLMs grows in the future, Tisane can be extended.
6.3
Eliciting Analyst Input for Disambiguation
The disambiguation process provides an opportunity for analysts to explore the space of generated models based on
their original query. Given our design considerations to prioritize conceptual knowledge (DG1 - Conceptual knowledge)
and give analysts guidance (DG3 - Guidance and control), we designed a GUI to scaffold analysts’ reasoning and elicit
their input. For versatility, we implemented Tisane’s GUI using Plotly Dash [10]. Analysts can either execute their
Tisane programs and use the GUI inside a Jupyter notebook (no additional widgets needed) or run their Tisane programs
in an IDE or terminal, in which case Tisane will open the GUI in a web browser. Figure 2 gives an overview of the GUI.
Candidate statistical models are organized according to (i) independent variables (main effects and interaction effects),
(ii) data clustering (random effects), and (iii) data distribution (family and link functions). In the main effects tab, Tisane
asks analysts if they would like to include additional or substitute main effects that Tisane infers to be conceptually
relevant. In the interaction effects tab, Tisane suggests moderating relationships to include but does not automatically
include them because analysts may not have specific hypotheses involving interactions (DG3 - Guidance and control).
If analysts do not specify any moderating relationships, Tisane does not suggest any interaction effects, preventing
analysts from including arbitrary interactions that may be conceptually unfounded (DG1 - Conceptual knowledge, DG2 -
Validity).
In the data clustering tab, Tisane shows analysts which random effects it automatically includes based on the selected
main and interaction effects. Unlike main and interaction effects, Tisane automatically includes random effects in order
to maximize model generalizability (DG2 - Validity). If there is a random slope and random intercept pertaining to the
same unit, Tisane asks analysts if they should be correlated or uncorrelated. We provide this option because analysts
may have relevant domain expertise to make this decision (DG3 - Guidance and control). By default, Tisane correlates
the random slope and random intercept.
The final tab, data distribution, helps analysts examine their data and select an initial family and link function to
try. Appropriate selection of family and link functions depends on the data type of the dependent variable and the
distribution of model residuals. Therefore, the selection can only be assessed after choosing a family and link function
in the first place.
For an initial statistical model to consider, Tisane narrows the set of family functions considered based on the
declared data type of variables (see subsubsection 6.2.4) and lightweight viability checks, such as ensuring that a Poisson
distribution is only applicable for variables that have nonnegative integer values. Tisane asks questions designed to
uncover more semantically meaningful data types (e.g., counts) than are provided at variable declaration. Analysts
without data can answer these questions as they are planning their studies (DG4 - Statistical planning). For the selected
family candidate, Tisane automatically selects the default link function based on the defaults for statsmodels [47] and
pymer4 [25]. Analysts can then choose a different link function, as long as it is supported9.
9See supplemental material for a complete listing of Tisane’s supported family and link function pairings.
17

To Appear, CHI 2022, USA
Eunice Jun, Audrey Seo, Jeffrey Heer, and René Just
6.4
Output
There are two outputs to interactive compilation: (i) a log of GUI choices and (ii) an executable modeling script. To
increase transparency of the authoring process, Tisane provides a log of user selections in the GUI as documentation,
which the analyst can include in pre-registrations, for example (DG4 - Statistical planning). In the output script, Tisane
includes code to fit the model and plot residuals against fitted values in order to assess the appropriateness of family
and link functions, as is typical when examining family and link functions. The output script also includes a comment
explaining what to look for in the plots and an online resource for further reading. Should analysts revise their choice
of family and link functions, they can re-generate a script through the Tisane GUI.
7
CASE STUDIES WITH RESEARCHERS
Given Tisane’s novel focus on deriving and guiding analysts toward valid statistical models, we assessed how Tisane
affects data analysis practices in three case studies with researchers. The following research questions guided the
evaluation:
• RQ1 - Workflow How does Tisane’s programming and interaction model affect how analysts author models?
Specifically, what does Tisane make noticeably easier or more difficult when conducting an analysis?
• RQ2 - Cognitive fixation Where do researchers report spending more time or attention when using Tisane?
How does this compare to their fixation during analyses typically?
• RQ3 - Future possibilities When do researchers imagine using Tisane in future projects, if at all? What
additional support do researchers want from Tisane?
We recruited researchers through internal message boards and individual contacts. We intentionally recruited
researchers at different stages of the research process—study planning, data analysis for publication, and ongoing model
building and maintenance. We believed this could help us more holistically evaluate Tisane’s impact on data analysis. We
met with researchers over Zoom (R1, R3) and in person (R2) to discuss their use cases, observe them use Tisane for the
first time, and ask for open-ended feedback. We pointed researchers to the Tisane tutorial for installation instructions
and examples but otherwise encouraged the researchers to work independently. We answered any questions researchers
had while using Tisane. Each study session lasted approximately 2 hours. At the end, two of the three researchers (R1,
R3) said they planned to use Tisane again over the next two months.
7.1
Case Study 1: Planning a new study
R1, a clinical psychology PhD student, had recently submitted a paper and was planning a follow-up. R1 reported that
she had never taken a formal class on modeling techniques but taught herself for her last paper. Her general workflow
involved consulting with and mirroring what others in her research group did even if she did not completely understand
why. R1 did not program often but said she had “enough coding experience to understand this kind of...[sample program].”
Although familiar with Python, R1 preferred M+ [39] and SPSS [58]. She was interested in using Tisane to brainstorm
new studies and research questions.
Using Tisane. After installation, R1 read through one of the computational notebook examples available in the Tisane
GitHub repository. While reading, R1 asked clarifying questions about the variable types and syntax. R1 explained that
the Design class felt novel because she had never seen the concept of a study design in data analysis code before. When
the first two authors explained that it was supposed to be the equivalent of the statement of a study design in a paper,
18

Tisane: Authoring Statistical Models via Formal Reasoning from Conceptual and Data Relationships
To Appear, CHI 2022, USA
R1 remarked that usually, she “[kept] that in [her] head, which [she] probably shouldn’t” (RQ2 - Cognitive fixation).
Without a concrete data set, R1 preferred to walk through more examples rather than author a script of her own.
While reading an example, R1 drew a parallel between the tabs in SPSS dialogs for specifying models and the tabs
in the Tisane GUI, noting that SPSS had a tab for control variables. R1 also wanted the ability to distinguish between
“control variables” and other independent variables in the Tisane GUI. R1 explained that this would map more closely to
how psychologists think about analyses. Future work could incorporate additional language constructs, such as a new
data type for controls, for different groups of users (RQ3 - Future possibilities).
At the end of the study session, R1 remarked how Tisane “fills in a lot of the...gaps” in data analysis (RQ1 - Workflow,
RQ2 - Cognitive fixation). The first gap R1 discussed was the programming gap between scientists and statistical
tools. R1 believed that, for scientists who were not comfortable with programming, “they should probably be running
less complex models, or first learn how to code” even if the complex models would be most appropriate. The second
gap R1 discussed was the statistical knowledge gap in tools. R1 explained that in her experience, R provides support
for more complex models but little guidance for what those models or statistical tests should be, requiring “top down
assumption[s].” Thus, to R1, Tisane bridged the gap between tools like SPSS and R by requiring minimal programming
and providing modeling support. Put another way, Tisane bridged the gulf of execution [43] for R1 that previous tools
had not.
7.2
Case Study 2: Analyzing data for a paper submission
R2, a computer science PhD student, had conducted a within-subjects study where 47 participants used four versions of
an app for one week each (four weeks total). The motivating research question was how the different app designs led to
psychological dissociation. Although R2 had expected to collect multiple survey responses for each participant each
day, they only had aggregate daily self-report measures due to an error in the database management system. In the past,
R2 reported having extensively explored their data and consulting others, but for this paper, they had not explored their
data prior to fitting models because they felt more confident in their modeling skills. For analyses, R2 preferred R but
had general Python programming experience. Prior to using Tisane, R2 had authored linear mixed effects models in R
for their study. They were interested in using Tisane to check their analyses prior to submitting their paper to CHI.
Using Tisane. R2 wrote their scripts by adapting an example from the Tisane GitHub repository. As R2 considered
which conceptual relationships to add, they reasoned aloud about if they should state causal or associative relationships
between various measures and dissociation (RQ2 - Cognitive fixation). After some deliberation, they said, “I don’t
feel comfortable [making a causal statement],” and instead specified associates_with relationships. R1’s hesitation
to assert causal relationships confirms prior findings that specifying formal causal graphs is difficult for domain
researchers [60, 61, 67] and our design choice to allow for association edges. In addition, R2 was initially unsure about how
to specify the number_of_instances for their measures since their original study design was unbalanced. After asking
for clarification about number_of_instances, R2 declared all the measures with the parameter number_of_instances
set equal to date.
Next, R2 ran their script and used the Tisane GUI in a browser window. Based on Tisane’s recommended family and
link functions, R2 realized the models they had previously authored in R using a Gaussian family were inappropriate.
Due to a bug that we have since fixed, Tisane suggested a Poisson family that R2 used to generate a script, but this was
an invalid choice given that not all dependent variable values were nonnegative integers. R2 explored other family
distributions and generated a new script using an Inverse Gaussian family. When executed, the second output script
19

To Appear, CHI 2022, USA
Eunice Jun, Audrey Seo, Jeffrey Heer, and René Just
issued an error due to the model inference algorithm failing to converge. R2 made a note to look into this model further
on their own.
Once finished using Tisane, R2 commented that their analysis with Tisane was more streamlined (RQ1 - Workflow)
in contrast to their very first paper where they had tried “every single kind of model that [they] could” until finding
“the one that fits best,” even if it was “one that no one would have heard of.” R2 also stated they would be interested in
using Tisane earlier in their analysis process in the future (RQ3 - Future possibilities). Based on their experience
with Tisane, R2 questioned their previously authored linear mixed effects model, and said it was “unnerving” to discover
an issue so close to a deadline. At the same time, they expressed, “if it’s incorrect, I should know before I submit.” A day
after the study, R2 contacted the authors to inform them that they had decided to update their analyses from linear
mixed effects models to generalized linear mixed effects models. They reported using the Inverse Gaussian family after
visualizing and checking the distribution of residuals with help from the output Tisane script. The Inverse Gaussian
family was appropriate because their dependent variable’s values were all nonnegative and displayed a slight positive
skew. R2’s experience with Tisane suggests that Tisane can help researchers catch errors and lead them to re-examine
their data, assumptions, and conclusions.
7.3
Case Study 3: Developing models to inform future models
Employed on a research team, R3 analyzes health data at the county, state, and national levels to estimate health
expenditure and inform public policy. R3 develops initial models that are used to validate and generate estimates for
larger, more comprehensive models. Due to the scale of data and established collaborative workflows, R3 typically works
in a terminal or RStudio through a computing cluster and had very little experience with Python. Despite working
on statistical models every day, R3 described himself as “not...a great modeler.” R3 was interested in using Tisane to
determine what variables to include as random effects in a model.
Using Tisane. R3 used Tisane in a local Jupyter notebook as well as on his team’s cluster. R3 used the Tisane API
overview reference material on GitHub to start writing his program, which involved copying and pasting the functions
with their type signatures and then modifying them to match his dataset and incrementally running the program. The
most common mistake R3 made while authoring his Tisane program was to refer to variables using the string names in
the dataset (e.g., "year") instead of the variable’s alias (e.g., year_id), an idiom common in R but not in Python.
While authoring his Tisane program, R3 found the number_of_instances parameter redundant, especially because
his data is always “square.” Every state_name in his data set had 30 rows of data, corresponding to the year_ids 1990-
2019. This is in contrast to R2, whose study design was unbalanced and resulted in variable numbers of observations per
participant that needed to be aggregated. Based on R3’s feedback, we added functionality to infer number_of_instances
for each unit, which analysts can inspect by printing the variable.
While giving open-ended feedback on Tisane, R3, similar to R1, liked how Tisane helped “fill [the] gap in...[his]
knowledge” (RQ2 - Cognitive fixation). Given the diversity of models R3 works with, R3 found Tisane’s focus on
GLMs and GLMMs a “little limiting” and also wished to make Tisane “run without...the mouse” in a script, as is typical
in his workflow (RQ1 - Workflow). Specifically, R3 described how he and his collaborators typically want to explore
a space of models and run them in parallel. Nevertheless, R3 foresaw using Tisane in three types of modeling tasks
common in his work: (i) exploratory modeling to determine if there are any interesting relationships between variables,
(ii) authoring and comparing multiple models for prediction, and (iii) working out the precise model specification after
identifying variables of interest (RQ3 - Future possibilities).
20

Tisane: Authoring Statistical Models via Formal Reasoning from Conceptual and Data Relationships
To Appear, CHI 2022, USA
7.4
System changes and Takeaways
We fixed bugs and iterated on Tisane’s GUI based on feedback from researchers. The largest change we made was to the
data distributions tab. The data distributions tab we tested with researchers visualized the dependent variables against
simulated distributions of family functions and included the results of the Shapiro-Wilk and D’Agostino and Pearson’s
normality tests. All three researchers reported becoming more aware of their data due to the visualizations. However,
researchers’ enthusiasm for the feature made us wary that visualizing the simulated data could mislead less careful
analysts to believe that family and link functions pertain to variable distributions rather than the distributions of the
model’s residuals. To avoid such errors while still helping analysts become more aware of their data, we removed the
simulated visualizations and normality tests and instead provide questions about the semantic nature of the dependent
variable collected, as discussed in subsection 6.3.
Overall, Tisane streamlines the analysis process (RQ1 - Workflow) in part because researchers report formalizing
their conceptual knowledge into statistical models more directly (R1, R2). Although Tisane does not eliminate the need
for model revision, Tisane may scope the revisions analysts consider to significant issues instead of details that may
detract from the analysis goals (R2). Additionally, researchers reported a perceived shift in their attention from keeping
track of and analyzing all possible modeling paths to their research questions and data assumptions (RQ2 - Cognitive
fixation) while planning a new study and analysis (R1) as well as while preparing a research manuscript (R2). Future
adoption of Tisane may depend on the complexity of analyses (RQ3 - Future possibilities) (R3). For instance, Tisane
may provide a streamlined alternative to false starts due to misspecifications for simpler analyses (R1, R2, R3). For more
complex models and studies, Tisane may act more as a prototyping tool for statistical models, helping researchers start
at a reasonable model that they can then revise (R2, R3).
8
DISCUSSION
In this work, our motivating question was “How might we derive (initial) statistical models from knowledge
about concepts and data collected?” This question presented two challenges: (i) how to elicit the information
necessary to author a GLM/GLMM and (ii) how to computationally infer a valid statistical model given this information.
To address the first challenge, we designed and developed Tisane’s study design specification language. To address
the second challenge, we developed a graph representation that Tisane traverses to derive candidate statistical
models. We also developed a novel interaction model that involves interactive compilation to address both challenges.
Throughout the design process, we employed statistical methods and theory, theories of how people analyze data, and
an iterative design process with researchers. When using Tisane, researchers in our case studies reported focusing more
on their analysis goals and becoming more aware of their assumptions and even identified and avoided previous analysis
mistakes. Below, we reflect on future opportunities for Tisane to further enhance statistical practice, interpretation of
results, and the end-to-end data analysis pipeline.
Design for statistical validity. Campbell’s theory of validity – encompassing statistical conclusion, internal, external,
and construct validity [6, 11] – has influenced disciplines widely (e.g., [54]), including epidemiology (e.g., [37]), software
engineering (e.g., [42]), and psychology (e.g., [6]). Viewed through the Campbellian framework, Tisane helps analysts
avoid four common threats to statistical conclusion and external validity: (i) violation of statistical method assumptions,
(ii) fishing for statistical results, (iii) not accounting for the influence of specific units, and (iv) overlooking the influence
of data collection procedures on outcomes [11].
21

To Appear, CHI 2022, USA
Eunice Jun, Audrey Seo, Jeffrey Heer, and René Just
Tisane fills a need to align analysts’ conceptual models with the statistical models they want to implement but find
difficult to express with the current tools available. By integrating conceptual, data, and statistical concerns, Tisane
facilitates the hypothesis formalization [26] process, which can be an error-prone and cognitively demanding process
that existing tools do not yet support.
In the future, we plan to develop additional strategies for enhancing the validity of analyses authored with Tisane.
As discussed in Section 6.3, our current approach to family and link functions is only an initial step. We look forward
to developing and comparing multiple strategies for scaffolding the family and link function selection and revision
process. For example, what if the Tisane GUI allowed analysts to fit multiple models that varied in their family and link
functions, plotted each model’s residuals against the predicted values, and gave analysts visual guides for comparing
models? To avoid false discovery rate inflation, Tisane could partition analysts’ data, fit models to only a subset, and
output a script for fitting a selected model using another subset. Although possible for large datasets, this strategy
would encounter limited statistical power for smaller datasets. Alternatively, what if Tisane calculated Bayes factors
for variables in the models [12, 17, 48] after analysts tried multiple family and link combinations? Carefully balancing
statistical rigor and usefulness to domain researchers who may be statistical non-experts deserves careful consideration.
Prevent p-hacking. Tisane generates a space of possible models from a set of conceptual and data measurement
relationships. By querying Tisane for a model, analysts will only consider a set of models that are compatible with
these relationships. As a result, Tisane helps analysts avoid unintentional p-hacking. Especially motivated p-hackers
could specify questionable conceptual and data measurement relationships to manipulate the space of models Tisane
generates. However, in this case, review or inspection of the Tisane program during pre-registration or peer-review, for
example, could identify such malicious practices. In these ways, we believe that p-hacking is more difficult in Tisane
than in existing analysis tools.
Future work to further discourage p-hacking could extend Tisane to conduct a sensitivity analysis on the space of
possible models and only report models and results that are robust across the space. A challenge in this approach is that
statistical non-experts may need more scaffolding to understand and interpret the results of sensitivity analyses.
Scaffold interpretation of statistical results. Tisane’s focus is on authoring GLMs/GLMMs, but accurate interpretation
is also necessary. For instance, analysts may need help interpreting what their statistical models and results mean
in relation to their input conceptual models. Do the results suggest their conceptual model is correct? What kind of
inferences should they make? Future work should address these interpretation challenges, which may require eliciting
hypotheses and expected results from analysts.
Although researchers in our pilot or case studies did not presume Tisane helped with formal causal analysis, the
ability to express causal relationships (causes) may lead some analysts to erroneously assume that their models
assess causality. Changing the name of the language construct and/or building out support to interpret GLM/GLMM
results may resolve this concern. One way to support accurate interpretation and reporting could be to output a figure
representing the input conceptual model along with visual summaries of the data and/or statistical model for direct
inclusion in publications. Tisane could also allow analysts to annotate their disambiguation decisions with their own
rationale and provide a richer log of selections than currently supported. Tisane could even accept these augmented
logs to save the state of the GUI in between analysis sessions.
22

Tisane: Authoring Statistical Models via Formal Reasoning from Conceptual and Data Relationships
To Appear, CHI 2022, USA
Provide discipline-specific language support. When designing Tisane’s study design specification language, we analyzed
and developed language constructs common across existing libraries for study design (see supplemental material). In
our case studies, we found that researchers had different conventions for describing their data (“unbalanced” (R2) vs.
always “square” (R3)) and models (e.g., “controls” (R1) vs. “covariates” (R3)). This observation suggests opportunities to
increase the usability of Tisane’s SDSL by providing syntactic sugar that may be more familiar to users. In the future,
we plan to formally assess usability and identify “natural” programming [40] constructs that differ across disciplines.
An additional strategy for supporting more discipline-specific programming models and analysis needs is to integrate
Tisane with existing study design libraries. For example, HCI researchers may find the lower-level randomization details
that Touchstone2’s interface [15] provides more natural. A system could summarize these details into the higher-level
data measurement relationships in Tisane to bootstrap interactive compilation and output a possible statistical model.
In this way, Tisane’s graph IR can provide a “shared representation” [22] between study design tools and Tisane.
Integrate into end-to-end analysis workflows. Researchers in our case study were more comfortable with R. R1 and R3
expressed it could be helpful to have Tisane in R as an RStudio plug-in, for example, to fit into their workflows. As
more users adopt Tisane, we will add an implementation in R.
Moreover, analysts may need to add or remove variables from Tisane’s generated statistical models in order to
accommodate model convergence failures, new data, or changing domain knowledge. However, adding or removing
variables may subtly change the hypotheses analysts can test statistically. We look forward to extending Tisane to
support model iteration, which presents two technical challenges: (i) recognizing when conceptual revisions are
necessary and (ii) identifying and suggesting model changes that maintain conceptual validity or, at the very least,
quantify conceptual shifts. Furthermore, in the model revision process, analysts may consider multiple alternatives. As
R3 described, he preferred to run multiple variations of a model and compare them, a workflow akin to a multiverse
analysis [59]. Given that Tisane already generates a combinatorial space of candidate statistical models, Tisane could
generate a multiverse script for Boba [33] instead. A multiverse could help check the robustness of findings, and Boba’s
visual analyzer could help analysts further develop an understanding of their data and modeling choices. A multiverse
may also help analysts explore and compare family and link combinations as well.
Tisane is one tool designed to enable analysts with limited statistical expertise to author valid statistical models.
Tisane enables future possibilities and raises open research questions for creating an ecosystem of analysis tools that
align tool interfaces with analysts’ conceptual goals.
