Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research 44 (2012) 179-222
Submitted 10/10; published 05/12
Improving Statistical Machine Translation
for a Resource-Poor Language
Using Related Resource-Rich Languages
Preslav Nakov

Qatar Computing Research Institute
Qatar Foundation
Tornado Tower, Floor 10, P.O. Box 5825
Doha, Qatar
Hwee Tou Ng

Department of Computer Science
National University of Singapore
13 Computing Drive
Singapore 117417
Abstract
We propose a novel language-independent approach for improving machine translation
for resource-poor languages by exploiting their similarity to resource-rich ones. More pre-
cisely, we improve the translation from a resource-poor source language X1 into a resource-
rich language Y given a bi-text containing a limited number of parallel sentences for X1-Y
and a larger bi-text for X2-Y for some resource-rich language X2 that is closely related
to X1. This is achieved by taking advantage of the opportunities that vocabulary overlap
and similarities between the languages X1 and X2 in spelling, word order, and syntax oﬀer:
(1) we improve the word alignments for the resource-poor language, (2) we further augment
it with additional translation options, and (3) we take care of potential spelling diﬀerences
through appropriate transliteration. The evaluation for Indonesian→English using Malay
and for Spanish→English using Portuguese and pretending Spanish is resource-poor shows
an absolute gain of up to 1.35 and 3.37 BLEU points, respectively, which is an improve-
ment over the best rivaling approaches, while using much less additional data. Overall, our
method cuts the amount of necessary “real” training data by a factor of 2–5.
1. Introduction
Recent developments in statistical machine translation (SMT), e.g., the availability of eﬃ-
cient implementations of integrated open-source toolkits like Moses (Koehn, Hoang, Birch,
Callison-Burch, Federico, Bertoldi, Cowan, Shen, Moran, Zens, Dyer, Bojar, Constantin, &
Herbst, 2007), have made it possible to build a prototype system with decent translation
quality for any language pair in a few days or even hours. This is so in theory. In practice,
doing so requires having a large set of parallel sentence-aligned texts in two languages (bi-
texts) for that language pair. Such large high-quality bi-texts are rare; except for Arabic,
Chinese, and some oﬃcial languages of the European Union (EU), most of the 6,500+ world
languages remain resource-poor from an SMT viewpoint.
c⃝2012 AI Access Foundation. All rights reserved.

Nakov & Ng
The number of resource poor languages becomes even more striking if we consider lan-
guage pairs instead of individual languages. Moreover, even resource-rich language pairs
could be poor in bi-texts for a speciﬁc domain, e.g., biomedical.
While manually creating a small bi-text could be relatively easy, building a large one is
hard and time-consuming. Thus, most publicly available bi-texts for SMT come from parlia-
ment debates and legislation of multi-lingual countries (e.g., French-English from Canada,
and Chinese-English from Hong Kong), or from international organizations like the United
Nations and the European Union. For example, the Europarl corpus of parliament pro-
ceedings consists of about 1.3M parallel sentences (up to 44M words) per language for 11
languages (Koehn, 2005), and the JRC-Acquis corpus provides a comparable amount of Eu-
ropean legislation in 22 languages (Steinberger, Pouliquen, Widiger, Ignat, Erjavec, Tuﬁs,
& Varga, 2006).
Due to the increasing volume of EU parliament debates and the ever-growing European
legislation, the oﬃcial languages of the EU are especially privileged from an SMT perspec-
tive. While this includes “classic SMT languages” such as English and French (which were
already resource-rich), and some important international ones like Spanish and Portuguese,
many of the rest have a limited number of speakers and were resource-poor until a few years
ago. Thus, becoming an oﬃcial language of the EU has turned out to be an easy recipe for
getting resource-rich in bi-texts quickly.
Our aim is to tap the potential of the EU resources so that they can be used by other non-
EU languages that are closely related to one or more oﬃcial languages of the EU. Examples
of such EU–non-EU language pairs include Swedish–Norwegian, Bulgarian–Macedonian1,
Romanian-Moldovan2 and some other. After Croatia joins the EU, Serbian, Bosnian, and
Montenegrin3 will also be able to beneﬁt from Croatian gradually turning resource-rich (all
four languages have split from Serbo-Croatian after the breakup of Yugoslavia in the 90’s
and remain mutually intelligible). The newly-made EU-oﬃcial (and thus not as resource-
rich) Czech and Slovak languages are another possible pair of candidates. Spanish–Catalan,
Irish-Gaelic Scottish, Standard German–Swiss German, and Italian–Maltese4 are other good
examples. As we will see below, even such resource-rich languages like Spanish and Por-
tuguese can beneﬁt from the proposed approach. Of course, many pairs of closely related
languages that could make use of each other’s bi-texts can also be found outside of Europe:
one such example is Malay–Indonesian, with which we will be experimenting below. Other
non-EU language pairs that could potentially beneﬁt include Modern Standard Arabic–
Dialectical Arabic (e.g., Egyptian, Levantine, Gulf, or Iraqi Arabic), Mandarin–Cantonese,
Russian–Ukrainian, Turkish–Azerbaijani, Hindi–Urdu, and many other.
1. There is a heated linguistic debate about whether Macedonian represents a separate language or is a
regional literary form of Bulgarian. Since there are no clear criteria for distinguishing a dialect from a
language, linguists are divided on this issue. Politically, the Macedonian language is not recognized by
Bulgaria (which refers to it as “the oﬃcial language of the Republic of Macedonia in accordance with its
constitution”) and by Greece (mostly because of the dispute over the use of the name Macedonia).
2. As with Macedonian, there is a debate about the existence of the Moldovan language. While linguists
generally agree that Moldovan is one of the dialects of Romanian, politically, the national language of
Moldova can be called both Moldovan and Romanian.
3. There is a serious internal political division in Montenegro on whether the national language should be
called Montenegrin or just Serbian.
4. Though, Maltese might beneﬁt from Arabic more than from Italian.
180

Improving SMT for a Resource-Poor Language
Below we propose using bi-texts for resource-rich language pairs to build better SMT
systems for resource-poor pairs by exploiting the similarity between a resource-poor lan-
guage and a resource-rich one. More precisely, we build phrase-based SMT systems that
translate from a resource-poor language X1 into a resource-rich language Y given a small
bi-text for X1-Y and a much larger bi-text for X2-Y , where X1 and X2 are closely related.
We are motivated by the observation that related languages tend to have (1) similar word
order and syntax, and, more importantly, (2) overlapping vocabulary, e.g., casa (‘house’)
is used in both Spanish and Portuguese; they also have (3) similar spelling. This vocab-
ulary overlap means that the resource-rich auxiliary language can be used as a source of
translation options for words that cannot be translated with the resources available for the
resource-poor language. In actual text, the vocabulary overlap might extend from individ-
ual words to short phrases (especially if the resource-rich languages has been transliterated
to look like the resource-poor one), which means that translations of whole phrases could
potentially be reused between related languages. Moreover, the vocabulary overlap and
the similarity in word order can be used to improve the word alignments for the resource-
poor language by biasing the word alignment process with additional sentence pairs from
the resource-rich language. We take advantage of all these opportunities: (1) we improve
the word alignments for the resource-poor language, (2) we further augment it with ad-
ditional translation options, and (3) we take care of potential spelling diﬀerences through
appropriate transliteration.
We apply our approach to Indonesian→English using Malay and to Spanish→English
using Portuguese and Italian (and pretending that Spanish is resource-poor), achieving
sizable performance gains (up to 3.37 BLEU points) when using additional bi-texts for
a related resource-rich language.
We further show that our approach outperforms the
best rivaling approaches, while using less additional data. Overall, we cut the amount of
necessary “real” training data by a factor of 2–5.
Our approach is based on the phrase-based SMT model (Koehn, Och, & Marcu, 2003),
which is the most commonly used state-of-the-art model today. However, the general ideas
can easily be extended to other SMT models, e.g., hierarchical (Chiang, 2005), treelet
(Quirk, Menezes, & Cherry, 2005), and syntactic (Galley, Hopkins, Knight, & Marcu, 2004).
The remainder of this article is organized as follows: Section 2 provides an overview
of related work, Section 3 presents a motivating example in several languages, Section 4
introduces our proposed approach and discusses various alternatives, Section 5 describes
the datasets we use, Section 6 explains how we transliterate Portuguese and Italian to look
like Spanish automatically, Section 7 presents our experiments and discusses the results,
Section 8 analyses the results in more detail, and, ﬁnally, Section 9 concludes and suggests
possible directions for future work.
2. Related Work
Our general problem formulation is a special case of domain adaptation. Moreover, there are
three basic concepts that are central to our work: (1) cognates between related languages,
(2) machine translation between closely related languages, and (3) pivoting for statistical
machine translation. We will review the previous work on these topics below, while also
mentioning some other related work whenever appropriate.
181

Nakov & Ng
2.1 Domain Adaptation
The Domain adaptation (or transfer learning) problem arises in situations where the train-
ing and the test data come from diﬀerent distributions, thus violating the fundamental
assumption of statistical learning theory. Our problem is an instance of the special case of
domain adaptation, where in-domain data is scarce, but there is plenty of out-of-domain
data. Many eﬃcient techniques have been developed for domain adaptation in natural lan-
guage processing; see the work of Daum´e and Marcu (2006), Jiang and Zhai (2007a, 2007b),
Chan and Ng (2005, 2006, 2007), and Dahlmeier and Ng (2010) for some examples.
Unfortunately, these techniques are not directly applicable to machine translation, which
is much more complicated, and leaves a lot more space for variety in the proposed solutions.
This is so despite the limited previous work on domain adaptation for SMT, which has
focused almost exclusively on adapting European parliament debates to the news domain as
part of the annual competition on machine translation evaluation at the WMT workshop.
To mention just a few of the proposed approaches, Hildebrand, Eck, Vogel, and Waibel
(2005) use information retrieval techniques to choose training samples that are similar to
the test set as a way to adapt the translation model, while Ueﬃng, Haﬀari, and Sarkar
(2007) adapt the translation model in a semi-supervised manner using monolingual data
from the source language. Snover, Dorr, and Schwartz (2008) adapt both the translation
and the language model, using comparable monolingual data in the target language. Nakov
and Ng (2009b) adapt the translation model for phrase-based SMT by combining phrase
tables using extra features indicating the source of each phrase; we will use this combination
technique as part of our proposed approach below. Finally, Daum´e and Jagarlamudi (2011)
address the domain shift problem by mining appropriate translations for the unseen words.
2.2 Cognates
Cognates are deﬁned as pairs of source-target words with similar spelling (and thus likely
similar meaning), for example, d´eveloppement in French vs. development in English. Many
researchers have used likely cognates co-occurring in parallel sentences in the training bi-text
to improve word alignments and ultimately build better SMT systems.
Al-Onaizan, Curin, Jahr, Knight, Laﬀerty, Melamed, Och, Purdy, Smith, and Yarowsky
(1999) extracted such likely cognates for Czech-English, using one of the variations of the
longest common subsequence ratio or LCSR (Melamed, 1995) described by Tiedemann
(1999) as a similarity measure.
They used these cognates to improve word alignments
with IBM models 1–4 in three diﬀerent ways: (1) by seeding the parameters of IBM model
1, (2) by constraining the word co-occurrences when training IBM models 1–4, and (3) by
adding the cognate pairs to the bi-text as additional “sentence pairs”. The last approach
performed best and was later used by Kondrak, Marcu, and Knight (2003) who demon-
strated improved SMT for nine European languages. It was further extended by Nakov,
Nakov, and Paskaleva (2007), who combined LCSR and sentence-level co-occurrences in
a bi-text with competitive linking (Melamed, 2000), language-speciﬁc weights, and Web
n-gram frequencies.
Unlike these approaches, which extract cognates between the source and the target
language, we use cognates between the source and some other related language that is
diﬀerent from the target. Moreover, we only implicitly rely on the existence of such cognates;
182

Improving SMT for a Resource-Poor Language
we do not try to extract them at all, and we leave them in their original sentence contexts.5
Note that our approach is orthogonal to this kind of cognate extraction from the original
training bi-text, and thus the two can be combined (which we will do in Section 7.7).
Another relevant line of research is on using cognates to adapt resources for one language
to another one. For example, Hana, Feldman, Brew, and Amaral (2006) adapt Spanish
resources to Brazilian Portuguese to train a part-of-speech tagger.
Cognates and cognate extraction techniques have been used in many other applications,
e.g., for automatic translation lexicon induction. For example, Mann and Yarowsky (2001)
induce translation lexicons between a resource-rich language (e.g., English) and a resource-
poor language (e.g., Portuguese) using a resource-rich bridge language that is closely related
to the latter (e.g., Spanish).
They use pre-existing translation lexicons for the source-
to-bridge mapping step (e.g., English-Spanish), and string distance measures for ﬁnding
cognates for the bridge-to-target step (e.g., Spanish-Portuguese). This work was extended
by Schafer and Yarowsky (2002), and later by Scherrer (2007), who relies on graphemic
similarity for inducing bilingual lexicons between Swiss German and Standard German.
Koehn and Knight (2002) describe several techniques for inducing translation lexicons
from monolingual corpora. Starting with unrelated German and English corpora, they look
for (1) identical words, (2) cognates, (3) words with similar frequencies, (4) words with
similar meanings, and (5) words with similar contexts. This is a bootstrapping process,
where new translation pairs are added to the lexicon at each iteration.
More recent work on automatic lexicon induction includes that by Haghighi, Liang,
Berg-Kirkpatrick, and Klein (2008), and Garera, Callison-Burch, and Yarowsky (2009).
Finally, there is a lot of research on string similarity that has been applied to cognate
identiﬁcation: Ristad and Yianilos (1998) and Mann and Yarowsky (2001) use the min-
imum edit distance ratio or MEDR with weights that are learned automatically using a
stochastic transducer. Tiedemann (1999) and Mulloni and Pekar (2006) learn automati-
cally the regular spelling changes between two related languages, which they incorporate in
similarity measures based on LCSR and on MEDR, respectively. Kondrak (2005) proposes
a formula for measuring string similarity based on LCSR with a correction that addresses
its general preference for short words. Klementiev and Roth (2006) and Bergsma and Kon-
drak (2007) propose discriminative frameworks for measuring string similarity. Rappoport
and Levent-Levi (2006) learn substring correspondences for cognates, using the string-level
substitutions framework of Brill and Moore (2000). Finally, Inkpen, Frunza, and Kondrak
(2005) compare several orthographic similarity measures for cognate extraction.
While cognates are typically extracted between related languages, there are words with
similar spelling between unrelated languages as well, e.g., Arabic, Chinese, Japanese, and
Korean proper names are transliterated to English, which uses a diﬀerent alphabet. See
the work of Oh, Choi, and Isahara (2006) for an overview and a comparison of diﬀerent
transliteration models, as well as the proceedings of the annual NEWS named entities work-
shop, which features shared tasks on transliteration mining and generation (Li & Kumaran,
2010). Transliteration can be modeled using character-based machine translation techniques
(Matthews, 2007; Nakov & Ng, 2009a; Tiedemann & Nabende, 2009), which are related to
the character-based SMT model of Vilar, Peter, and Ney (2007), and Tiedemann (2009).
5. However, in some of our experiments, we extract cognates for training a transliteration system from the
resource-rich source language X2 into the resource-poor one X1.
183

Nakov & Ng
2.3 Machine Translation between Closely Related Languages
Yet another relevant line of research is on machine translation between closely related lan-
guages, which is arguably simpler than general SMT, and thus can be handled using word-
for-word translation and manual language-speciﬁc rules that take care of the necessary mor-
phological and syntactic transformations. This has been tried for a number of language pairs
including Czech–Slovak (Hajiˇc, Hric, & Kuboˇn, 2000), Turkish–Crimean Tatar (Altintas &
Cicekli, 2002), and Irish–Scottish Gaelic (Scannell, 2006), among others. More recently, the
Apertium open-source machine translation platform at http://www.apertium.org/ has
been developed, which uses bilingual dictionaries and manual rules to translate between
a number of related languages, including Spanish–Catalan, Spanish–Galician, Occitan–
Catalan, and Macedonian-Bulgarian. In contrast, we have a language-independent, sta-
tistical approach, and a diﬀerent objective: translate into a third language X.
A special case of this same line of research is the translation between dialects of the
same language, e.g., between Cantonese and Mandarin (Zhang, 1998), or between a dialect
of a language and a standard version of that language, e.g., between some Arabic dialect
(e.g., Egyptian) and Modern Standard Arabic (Bakr, Shaalan, & Ziedan, 2008; Sawaf,
2010; Salloum & Habash, 2011). Here again, manual rules and/or language-speciﬁc tools
are typically used.
In the case of Arabic dialects, a further complication arises by the
informal status of the dialects, which are not standardized and not used in formal contexts
but rather only in informal online communities6 such as social networks, chats, Twitter and
SMS messages. This causes further mismatch in domain and genre.
Thus, translating from Arabic dialects to Modern Standard Arabic requires, among
other things, normalizing informal text to a formal form. In fact, this is a more general
problem, which arises with informal sources like SMS messages and Tweets for any language
(Han & Baldwin, 2011). Here the main focus is on coping with spelling errors, abbrevia-
tions, and slang, which are typically addressed using string edit distance, while also taking
pronunciation into account. This is diﬀerent from our task, where we try to reuse good,
formal text from one language to help improve SMT for another language.
A closely related relevant line of research is on language adaptation and normalization,
when done speciﬁcally for improving SMT into another language. For example, Marujo,
Grazina, Lu´ıs, Ling, Coheur, and Trancoso (2011) described a rule-based system for adapt-
ing Brazilian Portuguese (BP) to European Portuguese (EP), which they used to adapt BP–
English bi-texts to EP–English. Unlike this work, which heavily relied on language-speciﬁc
rules, our approach is statistical and largely language-independent; more importantly, we
have a diﬀerent objective: translate into a third language X.
2.4 Pivoting
Another relevant line of research is improving SMT using additional languages as pivots.
Callison-Burch, Koehn, and Osborne (2006) improved phrase-based SMT from Spanish
and French to English using source-language phrase-level paraphrases extracted using the
pivoting technique of Bannard and Callison-Burch (2005) and eight additional languages
from the Europarl corpus (Koehn, 2005).
6. The Egyptian Wikipedia is one notable exception.
184

Improving SMT for a Resource-Poor Language
For example, using German as a pivot, they extracted English paraphrases from a par-
allel English-German bi-text by looking for English phrases that were aligned to the same
German phrase: e.g., if under control and in check were aligned to unter controlle, they were
hypothesized to be paraphrases with some probability. Such Spanish/French paraphrases
were added as additional entries in the phrase table of an Spanish→English/French→English
phrase-based SMT system and paired with the English translation of the original Span-
ish/French phrase. The system was then tuned with minimum error rate training (MERT)
(Och, 2003), adding an extra feature penalizing low-probability paraphrases; this yielded
huge increase in coverage (from 48% to 90% of the test word types when 10K training
sentence pairs were used), and up to 1.8 BLEU points of absolute improvement.
Unlike this kind of pivoting, which can only improve source-language lexical coverage,
we augment both the source- and the target-language sides. Second, while pivoting ignores
context when extracting paraphrases, we do take it into account. Third, by using as an
additional language one that is related to the source, we are able to get increase in BLEU
that is comparable and even better than what pivoting achieves with eight pivot languages.
On the negative side, our approach is limited in that it requires that the auxiliary language
X2 be related to source language X1, while the pivoting language Z does not have to be
related to X1 nor to the target language Y . However, we only need one additional parallel
corpus (for X2-Y ), while pivoting needs two: one for X1-Z and one for Z-Y . Finally, note
that our approach is orthogonal to pivoting, and thus the two can be combined (which we
will do in Section 7.8).
We should note that pivoting is a more general technique, which has been widely used
in statistical machine translation, e.g., for triangulation, where one wants to build a French-
German machine translation system from a French-English and an English-German bi-text,
without an access to a French-German bi-text.
In that case, pivoting can be done at
the sentence-level, e.g., by cascading translation systems, ﬁrst translating from French to
English, and then translating from English to German (de Gispert & Mario, 2006; Utiyama
& Isahara, 2007) or at the phrase-level, e.g., using the phrase table composition, which
can be done oﬀ-line (Cohn & Lapata, 2007; Wu & Wang, 2007), or it can be integrated in
the decoder (Bertoldi, Barbaiani, Federico, & Cattoni, 2008). It has been also shown that
pivoting can outperform direct translation, e.g., translating from Arabic to Chinese could
work better using English as a pivot than if done directly (Habash & Hu, 2009). Moreover,
it has been argued that English might not always be the optimal choice of a pivot language
(Paul, Yamamoto, Sumita, & Nakamura, 2009). Finally, pivoting techniques have been also
used at the word-level, e.g., for translation lexicon induction between Japanese and German
using English (Tanaka, Murakami, & Ishida, 2009), or for improving word alignments (Filali
& Bilmes, 2005; Kumar, Och, & Macherey, 2007). Pivot languages have also been used for
lexical adaptation (Crego, Max, & Yvon, 2010).
Overall, all these more general pivoting techniques aim to build a machine translation
system for a new (resource-poor) language pair X-Y , assuming the existence of bi-texts X-Z
and Z-Y for some auxiliary pivoting language Z, e.g., they would be useful for translating
between Malay and Indonesian, by pivoting over English. In contrast, we are interested
in building a better system for translating not from X to Y but from X to Z, e.g., from
Indonesian to English. We further assume that the bi-text for X-Z is small, while the one
for Z-Y is large, and we require that X and Y be closely related languages.
185

Nakov & Ng
Another related line of research is on statistical multi-source translation, which focuses
on translating a text given in multiple source languages into a single target language (Och
& Ney, 2001; Schroeder, Cohn, & Koehn, 2009). This situation arises for a small number
of resource-rich languages in the context of the United Nations or the European Union, but
it could hardly be expected for resource-poor languages.
3. Motivating Example
Consider Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights:
All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed
with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of
brotherhood.
and let us see how it is translated in the closely related Malay and Indonesian and the more
dissimilar Spanish and Portuguese.
3.1 Malay and Indonesian
Malay (aka Bahasa Malaysia) and Indonesian (aka Bahasa Indonesia) are closely related
Astronesian languages, with about 180 million speakers combined.
Malay is oﬃcial in
Malaysia, Singapore and Brunei, and Indonesian is the national language of Indonesia.
The two languages are mutually intelligible to a great extent, but they diﬀer in orthogra-
phy/pronunciation and vocabulary.
Malay and Indonesian use a uniﬁed spelling system based on the Latin alphabet, but
they exhibit occasional diﬀerences in orthography due to diverging pronunciation, e.g.,
kerana vs. karena (‘because’) and Inggeris vs. Inggris (‘English’) in Malay and Indonesian,
respectively. More rarely, the diﬀerences are historical, e.g., wang vs. uang (‘money’).
The two languages diﬀer more substantially in vocabulary, mostly because of loan words,
where Malay typically follows the English pronunciation, while Indonesian tends to follow
Dutch, e.g., televisyen vs. televisi, Julai vs. Juli, and Jordan vs. Yordania. For words
of Latin origin that end on -y in English, Malay uses -i, while Indonesian uses -as, e.g.,
universiti vs. universitas, kualiti vs. kualitas.
While there are many cognates between the two languages, there are also some false
friends, which are words identically spelled but with diﬀerent meanings in the two languages.
For example, polisi means policy in Malay but police in Indonesian. There are also many
partial cognates, e.g., nanti means both will (future tense marker) and later in Malay
but only later in Indonesian. As a result, ﬂuent Malay and ﬂuent Indonesian can diﬀer
substantially. Consider, for example, the Malay and the Indonesian versions of Article 1 of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (from the oﬃcial website of the United Nations):
• Malay: Semua manusia dilahirkan bebas dan samarata dari segi kemuliaan
dan hak-hak. Mereka mempunyai pemikiran dan perasaan hati dan hendak-
lah bertindak di antara satu sama lain dengan semangat persaudaraan.
• Indonesian: Semua orang dilahirkan merdeka dan mempunyai marta-
bat dan hak-hak yang sama. Mereka dikaruniai akal dan hati nurani dan
hendaknya bergaul satu sama lain dalam semangat persaudaraan.
186

Improving SMT for a Resource-Poor Language
Semantically, the overlap is substantial, and a native speaker of Indonesian can under-
stand most of what the Malay version says, but would ﬁnd parts of it not quite ﬂuent.
In the above example, there is only 50% overlap at the individual word level (overlapping
words are underlined). In fact, the actual vocabulary overlap is much higher, e.g., there
is only one word in the Malay text that does not exist in Indonesian: samarata. Other
diﬀerences are due to the use of diﬀerent morphological forms, e.g., hendaklah vs. hendaknya
(‘conscience’), both derivational variants of hendak (‘want’).
Of course, word choice in translation is often a matter of taste, and thus not all diﬀer-
ences above are necessarily required. To test this, we asked a native speaker of Indonesian
to adapt the Malay version to Indonesian while preserving as many words as possible. This
yielded the following, arguably somewhat less ﬂuent, Indonesian version, which only has six
words that are not in the Malay version:
• Indonesian (closer to Malay): Semua manusia dilahirkan bebas dan mem-
punyai martabat dan hak-hak yang sama.
Mereka mempunyai pemikiran dan
perasaan dan hendaklah bergaul satu sama lain dalam semangat persaudaraan.
Note the increase in the average length of the matching phrases for this adapted version.
3.2 Spanish and Portuguese
Spanish and Portuguese also exhibit a noticeable degree of mutual intelligibility, but diﬀer
in pronunciation, spelling, and vocabulary. Unlike Malay and Indonesian, however, they
also diﬀer syntactically and exhibit a high level of spelling diﬀerences; this can be seen from
the translation of Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights:
• Spanish: Todos los seres humanos nacen libres e iguales en dignidad y
derechos y, dotados como est´an de raz´on y conciencia, deben comportarse fra-
ternalmente los unos con los otros.
• Portuguese: Todos os seres humanos nascem livres e iguais em dignidade
e em direitos. Dotados de raz˜ao e de consciˆencia, devem agir uns para com os
outros em esp´ırito de fraternidade.
We can see that the exact word-level overlap between the Spanish and the Portuguese
is quite low: about 17% only. Still, we can see some overlap at the level of short phrases,
not just at the word level.
Spanish and Portuguese share about 90% of their vocabulary and thus the observed level
of overlap may appear surprisingly low. The reason is that many cognates between the two
languages exhibit minor spelling variations. These variations can stem from diﬀerent rules
of orthography, e.g., senhor vs. se˜nor in Portuguese and Spanish, but they can also be due
to genuine phonological diﬀerences. For example, the Portuguese suﬃx -¸c˜ao corresponds to
the Spanish suﬃx -ci´on, e.g., evolu¸c˜ao vs. evoluci´on. Similar systematic diﬀerences exist
for verb endings like -ou vs. -´o (for 3rd person singular, simple past tense), e.g., visitou vs.
visit´o, or -ei vs. -´e (for 1st person singular, simple past tense), e.g., visitei vs. visit´e. There
are also occasional diﬀerences that apply to a particular word only, e.g., dizer vs. decir,
M´ario vs. Mario, and Maria vs. Mar´ıa.
187

Nakov & Ng
Going back to our example, if we ignore the spelling variations between the cognates in
the two languages, the overlap jumps signiﬁcantly:
• Portuguese (cognates transliterated to Spanish):
Todos los seres humanos nacen libres e iguales en dignidad y en derechos.
Dotados de raz´on y de conciencia, deben agir unos para con los otros en
esp´ırito de fraternidad.
All words in the above sentence are Spanish, and most of the diﬀerences from the oﬃcial
Spanish version above are due to diﬀerent word choice by the translator; in fact, the sentence
can become ﬂuent Spanish if agir unos par is changed to comportarse los unos con.
4. Method
The above examples suggest that it may be feasible to use bi-texts for one language to im-
prove SMT for some related language, possibly after suitable transliteration of the cognates
in the additional language to match the target spelling.
Thus, below we describe two general strategies for improving phrase-based SMT from
some resource-poor language X1 into a target language Y , using a bi-text X2-Y for a
related resource-rich language X2: (a) bi-text concatenation, with possible repetitions of
the original bi-text for balance, and (b) phrase table combination, where each bi-text is
used to build a separate phrase table, and then the two phrase tables are combined. We
discuss the advantages and disadvantages of these general strategies, and we propose a
hybrid approach that combines their strengths while trying to avoid their limitations.
4.1 Concatenating Bi-texts
We can simply concatenate the bi-texts for X1-Y and X2-Y into one large bi-text and use
it to train an SMT system. This oﬀers several potential beneﬁts.
First, it can yield improved word alignments for the sentences that came from the X1-Y
bi-text, e.g., since the additional sentences can provide new contexts for the rare words in
that bi-text, thus potentially improving their alignments, which in turn could yield better
phrase pairs. Rare words are known to serve as “garbage collectors” (Brown, Della Pietra,
Della Pietra, Goldsmith, Hajiˇc, Mercer, & Mohanty, 1993) in the IBM word alignment
models. Namely, a rare source word tends to align to many target language words rather
than allowing them to stay unaligned or to align to other source words. The problem is not
limited to IBM word alignment models (Brown, Della Pietra, Della Pietra, & Mercer, 1993);
it also exists for the HMM model of Vogel, Ney, and Tillmann (1996). See Graca, Ganchev,
and Taskar (2010) for a detailed discussion and examples of the “garbage collector eﬀect”.
Moreover, concatenation can provide new source-language side translation options, thus
increasing lexical coverage and reducing the number of unknown words; it can also provide
new useful non-compositional phrases on the source-language side, thus yielding more ﬂuent
translation output. It also oﬀers new target-language side phrases for known source phrases,
which could improve ﬂuency by providing more translation options for the language model
to choose from. Finally, inappropriate phrases including words from X2 that do not exist in
X1 will not match the test-time input, while inappropriate new target-language translations
still have the chance to be ﬁltered out by the language model.
188

Improving SMT for a Resource-Poor Language
However, simple concatenation can be problematic. First, when concatenating the small
bi-text for X1-Y with the much larger one for X2-Y , the latter will dominate during word
alignment and phrase extraction, thus hugely inﬂuencing both lexical and phrase translation
probabilities, which can yield poor performance. This can be counter-acted by repeating
the small bi-text several times so that the large one does not dominate. Second, since the bi-
texts are merged mechanically, there is no way to distinguish between phrases extracted from
the bi-text for X1-Y from those coming from the bi-text for X2-Y . The former are for the
target language pair and thus probably should be preferred, while using the latter should
be avoided since they might contain inappropriate translations for some words from X1.
For example, a phrase pair from the Indonesian-English bi-text could (correctly) translate
polisi as police, while one from the Malay-English bi-text could (correctly for Malay, but
inappropriately for Indonesian) translate it as policy. This is because the Malay word polisi
and the Indonesian word polisi are false friends.
We experiment with combining the original and the additional training bi-text in the
following three ways:
• cat×1: We simply concatenate the original and the additional training bi-text to form
a new training bi-text, which we use to train a phrase-based SMT system.
• cat×k: We concatenate k copies of the original and one copy of the additional training
bi-text to form a new training bi-text. The value of k is selected so that the original
bi-text approximately matches the size of the additional bi-text.
• cat×k:align: We concatenate k copies of the original and one copy of the additional
training bi-text to form a new training bi-text. We generate word alignments for this
concatenated bi-text. Then we throw away all sentence pairs and their alignments,
except for one copy of the original bi-text. Thus, eﬀectively we induce word alignments
for the original bi-text only, while using the concatenated bi-text to estimate the
statistics about them. We then use these alignments to build a phrase table for the
original bi-text.
The ﬁrst and the second method represent simple and balanced bi-text concatenation,
respectively. The third method is a version of the second one, where the additional bi-text
is only used to improve the word alignments for the original bi-text, but is not used for
phrase extraction. Thus, it isolates the eﬀect of improved word alignments from the eﬀect
of improved vocabulary coverage that the additional training bi-text can provide. cat×1
and cat×k:align will be the basic building blocks of our more sophisticated approach below.
4.2 Combining Phrase Tables
An alternative way of making use of the additional training bi-text for the resource-rich
language pair X2-Y in order to train an improved phrase-based SMT system for X1 →Y is
to build separate phrase tables from X1-Y and X2-Y , which can then be (a) used together,
e.g., as alternative decoding paths, (b) merged, e.g., using one or more extra features to
indicate the bi-text each phrase pair came from, or (c) interpolated, e.g., using simple linear
interpolation.
189

Nakov & Ng
Building two separate phrase tables oﬀers several advantages.
First, the preferable
phrase pairs extracted from the bi-text for X1-Y are clearly distinguished from (or given
a higher weight in the linear interpolation compared to) the potentially riskier ones from
the X2-Y bi-text. Second, the lexical and the phrase translation probabilities are combined
in a principled manner. Third, using the X2-Y bi-text, which is much larger than that
for X1-Y is not problematic any more: it will not dominate as was the case with simple
concatenation above. Finally, as with bi-text merging, there are many additional source-
and target-language phrases, which oﬀer new translation options. On the negative side, the
opportunity is lost to improve word alignments for the sentences in the X1-Y bi-text.
We experiment with the following three phrase table combination strategies:
• Two-tables: We build two separate phrase tables, one for each of the two bi-texts,
and we use them as alternative decoding paths (Birch, Osborne, & Koehn, 2007).
• Interpolation: We build two phrase tables, Torig and Textra, for the original and for
the additional bi-text, respectively, and we use linear interpolation to combine the
corresponding conditional probabilities: Pr(e|s) = α Prorig(e|s) + (1 −α) Prextra(e|s).
We optimize the value of α on the development dataset, i.e., we run MERT for merged
phrase tables generated using diﬀerent values of α, and we choose the value that gives
rise to the phrase table that achieves the highest tuning BLEU score. In order to
reduce the search space, we only try ﬁve values for α (.5, .6, .7, .8 and .9), i.e., we
reduce the tuning to this discrete set, and we use the same α for all four conditional
probabilities in the phrase table.
• Merge: We build two separate phrase tables, Torig and Textra, for the original and for
the additional training bi-text, respectively. We then concatenate them, giving prior-
ity to Torig as follows: We keep all source-target phrase pairs from Torig, adding to
them those source-target phrase pairs from Textra that were not present in Torig. For
each source-target phrase pair added, we retain its associated conditional probabil-
ities (forward/reverse phrase translation probability, and forward/reverse lexicalized
phrase translation probability) and the phrase penalty.7 We further add up to three
additional features to each entry in the new table: F1, F2, and F3. The value of F1 is
1 if the source-target phrase pair originated from Torig, and 0.5 otherwise. Similarly,
F2=1 if the source-target phrase pair came from Textra, and F2=0.5 otherwise. The
value of F3 is 1 if the source-target phrase pair was in both Torig and Textra, and
0.5 otherwise. Thus, there are three possible feature value combinations: (1;0.5;0.5),
(0.5;1;0.5) and (1;1;1); the last one is used for a phrase pair that was in both Torig and
Textra. We experiment with using (1) F1 only, (2) F1 and F2, and (3) F1, F2, and F3.
We set the weights for all phrase table features, including the standard ﬁve and the
additional three, using MERT. We further optimize the number of additional features
(one, two, or three) on the development set, i.e., we run MERT for phrase tables with
one, two, and three extra features and we choose the phrase table that has achieved
the highest BLEU score on tuning, as suggested in the work of Nakov (2008).
7. In theory, we should also re-normalize the probabilities since they may not sum to one. In practice, this
is not that important since the log-linear phrase-based SMT model does not require that the features be
probabilities at all, e.g., F1, F2, F3, and the phrase penalty are not probabilities.
190

Improving SMT for a Resource-Poor Language
4.3 Proposed Approach
Taking into account the potential advantages and disadvantages of the above two general
strategies, we propose an approach that tries to get the best from each of them, namely: (i)
improved word alignments for X1-Y , by biasing the word alignment process with additional
sentence pairs from X2-Y , and (ii) increased lexical coverage, by using additional phrase
pairs that the X2-Y bi-text can provide. This is achieved by using Merge to combine the
phrase tables for cat×k:align and cat×1. The process can be described in more detail as
follows:
1. Build a balanced bi-text Brep, which consists of the X1-Y bi-text repeated k times
followed by one copy of the X2-Y bi-text. Generate word alignments for Brep, then
truncate them, only keeping word alignments for one copy of the X1-Y bi-text. Use
these word alignments to extract phrases, and build a phrase table Trep trunc.
2. Build a bi-text Bcat that is a simple concatenation of the bi-texts for X1-Y and X2-Y .
Generate word alignments for Bcat, extract phrases, and build a phrase table Tcat.
3. Generate a merged phrase table by combining Trep trunc and Tcat. The merging gives
priority to Trep trunc and uses extra features indicating the origin of each entry in the
combined phrase table.
5. Datasets
We experiment with the following bi-texts and monolingual English data:
• Indonesian-English (in-en):
– train: 28,383 sentence pairs (0.8M, 0.9M words);
– dev: 2,000 sentence pairs (56.6K, 63.3K words);
– test: 2,000 sentence pairs (58.2K, 65.0K words);
– monolingual English enin: 5.1M words.
• Malay-English (ml-en):
– train: 190,503 sentence pairs (5.4M, 5.8M words);
– dev: 2,000 sentence pairs (59.7K, 64.5K words);
– test: 2,000 sentence pairs (57.9K, 62.4K words);
– monolingual English enml: 27.9M words.
• Spanish-English (es-en):
– train: 1,240,518 sentence pairs (35.7M, 34.6M words);
– dev: 2,000 sentence pairs (58.9K, 58.1K words);
– test: 2,000 sentence pairs (56.2K, 55.5K words);
– monolingual English enes:pt: 45.3M words (the same as for pt-en and it-en).
191

Nakov & Ng
• Portuguese-English (pt-en):
– train: 1,230,038 sentence pairs (35.9M, 34.6M words).
– dev: 2,000 sentence pairs (59.3K, 58.5K words);
– test: 2,000 sentence pairs (56.5K, 55.7K words);
– monolingual English enes:pt: 45.3M words (the same as for es-en and it-en).
• Italian-English (it-en):
– train: 1,565,885 sentence pairs (43.5M, 44.1M words);
– dev: 2,000 sentence pairs (56.8K, 57.7K words);
– test: 2,000 sentence pairs (57.4K, 60.3K words);
– monolingual English enes:it: 45.3M words (the same as for es-en and pt-en).
The lengths of the sentences in all bi-texts above are limited to 100 tokens. For each of
the language pairs, we have a development and a testing bi-text, each with 2,000 parallel
sentence pairs.
We made sure the development and the testing bi-texts shared no sen-
tences with the training bi-texts; we further excluded from the monolingual English data
all sentences from the English sides of the development and the testing bi-texts.
The training bi-text datasets for es-en, pt-en, and it-en were built from v.3 of the
Europarl corpus, excluding the Q4/2000 portion of the data (2000-10 to 2000-12), out of
which we created our testing and development datasets.
We built the in-en bi-texts from comparable texts that we downloaded from the Web.
We translated the Indonesian texts to English using Google Translate, and we matched8
them against the English texts using a cosine similarity measure and heuristic constraints
based on document length in words and in sentences, overlap of numbers, words in up-
percase, and words in the title. Next, we extracted pairs of sentences from the matched
document pairs using competitive linking (Melamed, 2000), and we retained the ones whose
similarity was above a pre-speciﬁed threshold. The ml-en bi-text was built similarly.
For all pairs of languages, the monolingual English text for training the language model
consists of the English side of the corresponding bi-text plus some additional English text
from the same source.
Note that the monolingual data for training an English language model is the same
for Spanish, Portuguese, and Italian since the es-en, pt-en, and it-en are from the same
origin: in fact, with very few exceptions, the sentences in these bi-texts can be aligned
over English to make a es-en-pt-it four-text, since they are all translations (from English
and other languages) of the same original parliamentary debates. Thus, the English side of
es-en, pt-en, and it-en, and of the unaligned English sentences have the same distribution.
This is not the case, however, for Malay and Indonesian, which come from diﬀerent
sources and are on diﬀerent topics – they discuss issues in Malaysia and Indonesia, re-
spectively. In particular, they diﬀer a lot in the use of named entities: names of persons,
locations, and organizations that they talk about. This is why we have separate monolin-
gual texts to train English language models for ml-en and in-en; as we will see below, they
do indeed yield diﬀerent performance for SMT.
8. Note that the automatic translations were used for matching only; the ﬁnal bi-text contained no auto-
matic translations.
192

Improving SMT for a Resource-Poor Language
6. Transliteration
As we mentioned above, our approach relies on the existence of a large number of cog-
nates between related languages. While linguists deﬁne cognates as words derived from a
common root9 (Bickford & Tuggy, 2002), computational linguists typically ignore origin,
deﬁning them as words in diﬀerent languages that are mutual translations and have a sim-
ilar orthography (Melamed, 1999; Mann & Yarowsky, 2001; Bergsma & Kondrak, 2007).
Here we adopt the latter deﬁnition.
As we have seen in Section 3, transliteration can be very helpful for languages like
Spanish and Portuguese, which have many regular spelling diﬀerences. Thus, we build a
system for automatic transliteration from Portuguese to Spanish, which we train on a list
of automatically extracted pairs of likely cognates. We apply this system on the Portuguese
side of the pt-en training bi-text.
Classic approaches to automatic cognate extraction look for non-stopwords with similar
spelling that appear in parallel sentences in a bi-text (Kondrak et al., 2003). In our case,
however, we need to extract cognates between Spanish and Portuguese given pt-en and
es-en bi-texts only, i.e., without having a pt-es bi-text. Although it is easy to construct a
pt-es bi-text from the Europarl corpus, we chose not to do so since, in general, synthesizing
a bi-text for X1-X2 would be impossible: e.g., it cannot be done for ml-in given our training
datasets for in-en and ml-en since their English sides have no sentences in common.
Thus, we extracted the list of likely cognates between Portuguese and Spanish from
the training pt-en and es-en bi-texts using English as a pivot as follows: We started with
IBM model 4 word alignments, from which we extracted four conditional lexical translation
probabilities: Pr(pj|ei) and Pr(ei|pj) for Portuguese-English, and Pr(sk|ei) and Pr(ei|sk)
for Spanish-English, where pj, ei, and sk stand for a Portuguese, an English and a Spanish
word, respectively. Following Wu and Wang (2007), we then induced conditional lexical
translation probabilities Pr(pj|sk) and Pr(sk|pj) for Portuguese-Spanish as follows:
Pr(pj|sk) = P
i Pr(pj|ei, sk) Pr(ei|sk)
Assuming pj is conditionally independent of sk given ei, we can simplify this:
Pr(pj|sk) = P
i Pr(pj|ei) Pr(ei|sk)
Similarly, for Pr(sk|pj), we obtain
Pr(sk|pj) = P
i Pr(sk|ei) Pr(ei|pj)
We excluded all stopwords, words of length less than three, and those containing digits.
We further calculated Prod(pj, sk) = Pr(pj|sk) Pr(sk|pj), and we excluded all Portuguese-
Spanish word pairs (pj, sk) for which Prod(pj, sk) < 0.01.
The value of 0.01 has been
previously suggested for ﬁltering phrase pairs obtained using pivoting (Callison-Burch, 2008,
2012; Denkowski & Lavie, 2010; Denkowski, 2012). From the remaining pairs, we extracted
likely cognates based on Prod(pj, sk) and on the orthographic similarity between pj and sk.
Following Melamed (1995), we measured the orthographic similarity using the longest
common subsequence ratio (lcsr), deﬁned as follows:
9. E.g., Latin tu, Old English thou, Greek s´u, and German du are all cognates meaning ‘2nd person singular’.
193

Nakov & Ng
lcsr(s1, s2) =
|LCS(s1,s2)|
max(|s1|,|s2|)
where lcs(s1, s2) is the longest common subsequence of s1 and s2, and |s| is the length of s.
We retained as likely cognates all pairs for which lcsr was 0.58 or higher; this value
was found by Kondrak et al. (2003) to be optimal for a number of language pairs in the
Europarl corpus.
Finally, we performed competitive linking (Melamed, 2000), assuming that each Por-
tuguese wordform had at most one Spanish best cognate match. Thus, using the values of
Prod(pj, sk), we induced a fully-connected weighted bipartite graph. Then, we performed
a greedy approximation to the maximum weighted bipartite matching in that graph, i.e.,
competitive linking, as follows: First, we accepted as cognates the cross-lingual pair (pj, sk)
with the highest Prod(pj, sk) in the graph, and we discarded the words pj and sk from fur-
ther consideration. Then, we accepted the next highest-scored pair, and we discarded the
involved wordforms and so forth. The process was repeated until there were no matchable
word pairs left.
Note that our cognate extraction algorithm has three components: (1) orthographic,
based on lcsr, (2) semantic, based on pivoting over English, and (3) competitive linking.
The semantic component is very important and makes the extraction of “false friends”
very unlikely. Consider for example the Spanish-Portuguese word pairs largo – largo and
largo – longo.
The latter is a pair of true cognates, but the former is a pair of “false
friends” since largo means long in Spanish but wide in Portuguese. The word largo appears
8,489 times in the es-en bi-text and 432 times in the pt-en bi-text.
However, having
diﬀerent meanings, they do not get aligned to the same English word with high probability,
which results in very low scores for the conditional probabilities: Pr(pj|sk) = 0.000464 and
Pr(sk|pj) = 0.009148; thus, Prod(pj, sk) = 0.000004, which is below the 0.01 threshold.
As a result, the “false friend” pair largo – largo does not get extracted. In contrast, the
true cognate pair largo – longo does get extracted because the corresponding conditional
probabilities for it are 0.151354 and 0.122656, respectively, and their product is 0.018564,
which is above 0.01 (moreover, lcsr = 0.6, which is above the 0.58 threshold).
The competitive linking component helps prevent issues related to word inﬂection that
cannot be handled using pivoting alone. For example, the word for green in both Spanish
and Portuguese has two forms: verde for singular, and verdes for plural. Without com-
petitive linking, we would extract not only verde – verde (Prod(pj, sk) = 0.353662) and
verdes – verdes (Prod(pj, sk) = 0.337979), but also the incorrect word pairs verde – verdes
(Prod(pj, sk) = 0.109792) and verdes – verde (Prod(pj, sk) = 0.106088). Competitive link-
ing, however, prevents this by asserting that no Portuguese and no Spanish word can have
more than one true cognate, which eﬀectively eliminates the wrong pairs.
Thus, taken together, the semantic component and competitive linking make the extrac-
tion of “false friends” very unlikely. Still, occasionally, we do get some wrong alignments
such as intrusa – intrusas, where a singular form is matched with a plural form, which
occurs mostly in the case of rare words like intrusa (‘intruder’, feminine) whose alignments
tend to be unreliable, and for which very few inﬂected forms are available to competitive
linking to choose from.
Note that the described transliteration system is focusing more on precision and less
on recall. This is because the extracted likely cognate pairs are going to be used to train
194

Improving SMT for a Resource-Poor Language
an SMT-based transliteration system.
This system will have a translation component,
which should be able to generate many options, and a target language model component,
which would help ﬁlter those options. The translation component should tend to generate
good options, and thus it needs to be trained primarily on instances of systematic, regular
diﬀerences, such as evolu¸c˜ao – evoluci´on, from which the suﬃx change -¸c˜ao – -ci´on can be
learned. Occasional diﬀerences such as dizer – decir cannot be generalized and thus are
less useful (they are also less frequent, and thus missing some of them is arguably not so
important), but they can be simply memorized by the model as whole words and still used.
We should also note that our focus on precision of cognate pair extraction does not mean
that we are going to extract primarily cognate pairs with very few spelling diﬀerences. As
we explained above, spelling is just one component of our cognate pair extraction approach;
there are also a semantic and a competitive linking component, which could eliminate many
candidates with close spelling and prefer others with more dissimilarities (recall the correct
choice of largo – longo over the wrong largo – largo).
Note that the generality of our transliteration approach is not necessarily compromised
by the fact that LCSR requires that the languages use the same writing system. For ex-
ample, Cyrillic-written Serbian and Roman-written Croatian can still be compared using
LCSR, after an initial letter-by-letter mapping between the Cyrillic and the Roman alpha-
bets, which is generally straightforward. Of course, even when using the same alphabet,
languages can have diﬀerent orthographical conventions, which might make them look more
divergent than what the actual phonetics would suggest, e.g., compare qui/chi, gui/ghi,
glio/llo in Spanish and Italian. Even though LCSR between the Italian-Spanish cognates
chi and qui is lower than our threshold of 0.58, the correspondence between them as strings
can still be learned from longer cognates, e.g., macchina and m´aquina. This would then
allow the transliteration system to convert chi into qui as a word.
Going back to the actual experiments, as a result of the cognate extraction procedure,
we ended up with 28,725 Portuguese-Spanish cognate pairs, 9,201 (or 32.03%) of which had
spelling diﬀerences. For each pair in the list of cognate pairs, we added spaces between any
two adjacent letters for both wordforms, and we further appended the start and the end
characters ^ and $. For example, the cognate pair evolu¸c˜ao – evoluci´on became
^ e v o l u ¸c ˜a o $ — ^ e v o l u c i ´o n $
We randomly split the resulting list into a training (26,725 pairs) and a development
dataset (2,000 pairs), and we trained and tuned a character-level phrase-based monotone
SMT system similar to Finch and Sumita (2008) to transliterate a Portuguese wordform
into a Spanish wordform. We used a Spanish language model trained on 14M word tokens
(obtained from the above-mentioned 45.3M-token monolingual English corpus after exclud-
ing punctuation, stopwords, words of length less than three, and those containing digits):
one per line and character-separated with added start and end characters as in the above
example. We set both the maximum phrase length and the language model order to ten;
we found these values by tuning on the development dataset. We tuned the system using
MERT, and we saved the feature weights. The tuning BLEU was 95.22%, while the baseline
BLEU, for leaving the Portuguese words intact, was 87.63%.
195

Nakov & Ng
Finally, we merged the training and the tuning datasets and we retrained. We used the
resulting system with the saved feature weights to transliterate the Portuguese side of the
training pt-en bi-text, which yielded a new ptes-en training bi-text.
We repeated the same procedure for Italian-English.
We extracted 25,107 Italian-
Spanish cognate pairs, 14,651 (or 58.35%) of which had spelling diﬀerences.
Then, we
split the list into a training (23,107 pairs) and a development dataset (2,000 pairs), and
trained a character-level phrase-based monotone SMT system as we did for Spanish-English;
the tuning BLEU was 94.92%. We used the resulting system to transliterate the Italian
side of the training it-en bi-text, thus obtaining a new ites-en training bi-text.
We also applied transliteration to Malay into Indonesian, even though we knew that
the spelling diﬀerences between these two languages were rare. We extracted 5,847 likely
cognate pairs, 844 (or 14.43%) of which had spelling diﬀerences, which we used to train a
transliteration system. The highest tuning BLEU was 95.18% (for maximum phrase size
and LM order of 10), but the baseline was 93.15%. We then re-trained the system on the
combination of the training and the development datasets, and we transliterated the Malay
side of the training ml-en bi-text, which yielded a new mlin-en training bi-text.
7. Experiments and Evaluation
Below we describe our baseline system, and we further perform various experiments to assess
the similarity between the original (Indonesian and Spanish) and the auxiliary languages
(Malay and Portuguese). We then improve Indonesian→English and Spanish→English SMT
using Malay and Portuguese, respectively, as auxiliary languages.
We also take a closer look at improving Spanish→English SMT, performing a number of
additional experiments. First, we try using an additional language that is more dissimilar
to Spanish, substituting Portuguese with Italian. Second, we experiment with two auxiliary
languages simultaneously: Portuguese and Italian. Finally, we combine our method with
two orthogonal rivaling approaches: (1) using cognates between the source and the target
language (Kondrak et al., 2003), and (2) source-language side paraphrasing with a pivot
language (Callison-Burch et al., 2006).
7.1 Baseline SMT System
In the baseline, we used the following setup: We ﬁrst tokenized and lowercased both sides of
the training bi-text. We then built separate directed word alignments for English→X and
X→English (X∈{Indonesian, Spanish}) using IBM model 4 (Brown, Della Pietra, Della
Pietra, & Mercer, 1993), we combined them using the intersect+grow heuristic (Koehn
et al., 2007), and we extracted phrase pairs of maximum length seven. We thus obtained
a phrase table where each phrase pair is associated with the ﬁve standard parameters:
forward and reverse phrase translation probabilities, forward and reverse lexical transla-
tion probabilities, and phrase penalty. We then trained a log-linear model using standard
SMT feature functions: trigram language model probability, word penalty, distance-based10
distortion cost, and the parameters from the phrase table.
10. We also tried lexicalized reordering (Koehn, Axelrod, Mayne, Callison-Burch, Osborne, & Talbot, 2005).
While it yielded higher absolute BLEU scores, the relative improvement for a sample of our experiments
was very similar to that achieved with distance-based re-ordering.
196

Improving SMT for a Resource-Poor Language
We set all weights by optimizing BLEU (Papineni, Roukos, Ward, & Zhu, 2002) using
MERT on a separate development set of 2,000 sentences (Indonesian or Spanish), and we
used them in a beam search decoder (Koehn et al., 2007) to translate 2,000 test sentences
(Indonesian or Spanish) into English. Finally, we detokenized the output, and we evaluated
it against a lowercased gold standard using BLEU.
7.2 Cross-lingual Translation Experiments
#
Train
Dev
Test
LM
10K
20K
40K
80K
160K
1
ml-en
ml-en
ml-en
enml
44.93
46.98
47.15
48.04
49.01
2
mlin-en
ml-en
ml-en
enml
38.99
40.96
41.02
41.88
42.81
3
ml-en
ml-en
in-en
enml
13.69
14.58
14.76
15.12
15.84
4
ml-en
in-en
in-en
enml
13.98
14.75
14.91
15.51
16.27
5
ml-en
in-en
in-en
enin
15.56
16.38
16.52
17.04
17.90
6
mlin-en
in-en
in-en
enin
16.44
17.36
17.62
18.14
19.15
Table 1: Malay-Indonesian cross-lingual SMT experiments: training on Malay
and testing on Indonesian for diﬀerent number of training ml-en sen-
tence pairs. Columns 2-5 present the bi-texts used for training, development,
and testing, and the monolingual data used to train the English language model.
The following columns show the resulting BLEU (in %) for diﬀerent numbers of ml-
en training sentence pairs. Lines 1-2 show the results when training, tuning, and
testing on Malay, followed by lines 3-6 on results for training on Malay but testing
on Indonesian. Here mlin stands for Malay transliterated as Indonesian, and enml
and enin refer to the English side of the ml-en and in-en bi-text, respectively.
Here, we study the similarity between the original and the auxiliary languages.
First, we measured the vocabulary overlap between the original and the auxiliary lan-
guages. For Spanish and Portuguese, this was feasible since our training pt-en and es-en
bi-texts are from the same time span in the Europarl corpus and their English sides largely
overlap. We found 110,053 Portuguese and 121,444 Spanish word types in the pt-en and es-
en bi-texts, respectively, and 44,461 of them were identical, which means that 40.40% of the
Spanish word types are present on the Portuguese side of the pt-en bi-text. Unfortunately,
we could not directly measure the vocabulary overlap between Malay and Indonesian in the
same way since the English sides of the in-en and ml-en bi-texts do not overlap in content.
Second, following the general experimental setup of the baseline system, we performed
cross-lingual experiments, training on one language pair and testing on another one, in
order to assess the cross-lingual similarity for Indonesian-Malay and Spanish-Portuguese,
and the potential of combining their corresponding training bi-texts. The results are shown
in Tables 1 and 2. As we can see, this cross-lingual evaluation – training on ml-en (pt-en)
instead of in-en (es-en), and testing on in (es) text – yielded a huge decrease in BLEU
compared to the baseline: three times (for Malay) to ﬁve times (for Spanish) – even for
very large training datasets, and even when a proper English LM and development dataset
were used: compare line 1 to lines 3-5 in Table 1, and line 1 to lines 3-4 in Table 2.
197

Nakov & Ng
# Train
Dev
Test
LM
10K
20K
40K
80K
160K
320K 640K 1.23M
1
pt-en
pt-en
pt-en
enes:pt
21.28
23.11
24.43
25.72
26.43
27.10
27.78
27.96
2
ptes-en pt-en
pt-en
enes:pt
10.91
11.56
12.16
12.50
12.83
13.27
13.48
13.71
3
pt-en
pt-en
es-en
enes:pt
4.40
4.77
4.57
5.02
4.99
5.32
5.08
5.34
4
pt-en
es-en
es-en
enes:pt
4.91
5.12
5.64
5.82
6.35
6.87
6.44
7.10
5
ptes-en es-en
es-en
enes:pt
8.18
9.03
9.97
10.66
11.35
12.26
12.69
13.79
6
es-en
es-en
es-en
enes:pt
22.87
24.71
25.80
27.08
27.90
28.46
29.51
29.90
7
es-en
es-en
pt-en
enes:pt
2.99
3.14
3.33
3.54
3.37
3.94
4.18
3.99
Table 2: Portuguese-Spanish cross-lingual SMT experiments: training on Por-
tuguese and testing on Spanish for diﬀerent number of training pt-en
sentence pairs. Lines 1-2 show the results when training, tuning, and testing
on Portuguese, lines 3-5 are for training on Portuguese but testing on Spanish,
and lines 6-7 are for training on Spanish and testing on Spanish or Portuguese.
Columns 2-5 present the bi-texts used for training, development, and testing, and
the monolingual data used to train the English language model. The following
columns show the resulting BLEU (in %) for diﬀerent numbers of training sen-
tence pairs. Here ptes stands for Portuguese transliterated as Spanish. The English
LMs for pt-en and es-en are the same (marked as enes:pt).
For Portuguese-Spanish, we further show results in the other direction, training on
Spanish and testing on Portuguese: compare line 6 to line 7 in Table 2. The results show a
comparable, slightly larger, drop in BLEU for that direction. We did not carry out reverse
direction experiments for Malay-Indonesian since we do not have enough parallel in-en data.
Third, we experimented with transliteration changing Malay to look like Indonesian
and Portuguese to look like Spanish. This caused the BLEU score to double for Spanish
(compare line 5 to lines 3-4 in Table 2, but improved far less for Indonesian (compare line 6 to
lines 3-5 in Table 1). Training on the transliterated data and testing on Malay/Portuguese
yielded about 10% relative decrease for Malay but 50% for Portuguese11: compare line 1 to
line 2 in Tables 1 and 2. Thus, unlike Spanish and Portuguese, we found far less systematic
spelling variations between Malay and Indonesian. A closer inspection conﬁrmed this: many
extracted likely Malay-Indonesian cognate pairs with spelling diﬀerences were in fact forms
of a word existing in both languages, e.g., kata and berkata (‘to say’).
One interesting result in Table 1 is that switching the language model trained on enml
to one trained on enin yields signiﬁcant improvements (compare lines 4 and 5 in Table 1).
This may appear striking since the former monolingual English text is about ﬁve times
bigger than the latter one, yet, this smaller language model yields better results. This is
due to a partial domain shift, especially, with respect to named entities: even though both
texts are in English and from the same domain, they discuss events in diﬀerent countries,
which involve country-speciﬁc cities, companies, political parties and their leaders; a good
language model should be able to prefer good English translations of such named entities.
11. Interestingly, as lines 2 and 5 in Table 2 show, a system trained on 1.23M transliterated ptes-en sentence
pairs performs equally well when translating Portuguese and Spanish input text: 13.71% vs. 13.79%.
198

Improving SMT for a Resource-Poor Language
7.3 Improving Indonesian→English SMT using Malay
Figure 1: Impact of k on BLEU for cat×k for diﬀerent number of extra ml-en
sentence pairs in Indonesian→English SMT. Shown are BLEU scores for
diﬀerent numbers of k = 1,2,. . .,16 repetitions of in-en when concatenated to
10000n pairs from ml-en, n ∈{1,2,4,8,16}.
First, we study the impact of k on cat×k. for Indonesian→English SMT using Malay
as an additional language. We tried all values of k such that 1≤k≤16 with 10000n extra
ml-en sentence pairs, n∈{1,2,4,8,16}. As we can see in Figure 1, the highest BLEU scores
are achieved for (n; k)∈{(1;2),(2;2),(4;4),(8;7),(16;16)}, i.e., when k ≈n. Thus, in order to
limit the search space, we used this relationship between k and n in our experiments (also
for Portuguese and Spanish). We should note that there is a lot of ﬂuctuation in the results
in Figure 1, which is probably due to the small sizes of the training corpora. Given this
ﬂuctuation, the results should not be over-interpreted, e.g., it may be just by chance that
there are peaks in the diﬀerent curves at just the “right” places. Still, the overall tendency
is visible: we need to keep the balance between the original and the auxiliary bi-texts.
Tables 3 and 4 show the results for experiments on improving Indonesian→English SMT
using 10K, 20K, . . ., 160K additional pairs of ml-en parallel sentences. Table 3 compares
the performance of our approach to the baseline and to the three concatenation meth-
ods described in Section 4.1: cat×1, cat×k, and cat×k:align, while Table 4 compares
the performance of our approach to various alternative ways of combining two phrase ta-
bles, namely, using alternative decoding paths, phrase table interpolation, and phrase table
merging, which were introduced in Section 4.2.
199

Nakov & Ng
in-en
ml-en
Baseline
cat×1
cat×k
cat×k:align
Our approach
28.4K
10K
23.80<
24.29<
24.29<
(1)
24.01<
(1)
<24.51(2;1) (+0.72)
28.4K
20K
23.80<
24.37<
≤24.48(2)
<24.35<
(2)
<24.70(2;2) (+0.90)
28.4K
40K
23.80<
24.38≤
≤24.54(4)
<24.39<
(4)
<24.73(4;2) (+0.93)
28.4K
80K
23.80<
24.17<
≤24.65<
(8)
24.18<
(8)
<24.97(8;3) (+1.17)
28.4K
160K
23.80<
≤24.43<
<25.00(16)
≤24.27<
(16)
<25.15(16;3) (+1.35)
Table 3: Improving Indonesian→English SMT using diﬀerent numbers of addi-
tional Malay-English sentence pairs (varying the amount of additional
data): concatenations, repetitions, truncations, and our approach. The
baseline is for 28,383 in-en sentence pairs only. Shown are the BLEU scores (in %)
for diﬀerent approaches. A subscript shows the best parameter value(s) found on
the development set and used on the test set to produce the given result: the ﬁrst
value is the number of repetitions of the original bi-text while the second value,
if any, is the number of extra features added to the phrase table.
The BLEU
scores that are statistically signiﬁcantly better than the baseline/our approach are
marked on the left/right side by < (for p < 0.01) or ≤(for p < 0.05).
in-en
ml-en
Baseline
Two Tables
Interpolation
Merge
Our approach
28.4K
10K
23.80<
≥23.79<
23.89<
(.9)
23.97<
(3)
<24.51(2;1) (+0.72)
28.4K
20K
23.80<
24.24<
24.22<
(.8)
≤24.46<
(3)
<24.70(2;2) (+0.90)
28.4K
40K
23.80<
24.27<
24.27<
(.8)
24.43≤
(3)
<24.73(4;2) (+0.93)
28.4K
80K
23.80<
24.11<
≤24.46<
(.8)
<24.67(3)
<24.97(8;3) (+1.17)
28.4K
160K
23.80<
<24.58<
<24.58<
(.8)
<24.79≤
(3)
<25.15(16;3) (+1.35)
Table 4: Improving Indonesian→English SMT using diﬀerent numbers of addi-
tional Malay-English sentence pairs (varying the amount of additional
data): comparing our approach to various alternatives. The baseline is
for 28,383 in-en sentence pairs only. Shown are the BLEU scores (in %) for dif-
ferent approaches. A subscript shows the best parameter value(s) found on the
development set and used on the test set to produce the given result: for merging
methods, the ﬁrst value is the number of repetitions of the original bi-text while
the second value, if any, is the number of extra features added to the phrase table;
for interpolation, we show the weight of the phrase pairs from in-en. The BLEU
scores that are statistically signiﬁcantly better than the baseline/our approach are
marked on the left/right side by < (for p < 0.01) or ≤(for p < 0.05).
Several interesting general observations about Tables 3 and 4 can be made.
First,
using more additional Indonesian-English sentences yields better results. Second, with one
exception, all experiments yield improvements over the baseline. Third, the improvements
are always statistically signiﬁcant for our approach, according to Collins, Koehn, and
Kuˇcerov´a’s (2005) sign test.
200

Improving SMT for a Resource-Poor Language
Overall, among the diﬀerent bi-text combination strategies, our approach performs
best, followed by cat×k, merge, and interpolation, which are very close in performance;
these three strategies are the only ones to consistently yield higher BLEU as the number of
additional ml-en sentence pairs grows. Methods like cat×1, cat×k:align, and two-tables
are somewhat inconsistent in that respect. The latter method performs worst and is the
only one to go below the baseline (for 10K ml-en sentence pairs).
One possible reason for the relatively bad performance of two-tables could be that it
has to tune more weights compared to the other models: each phrase table has its own
feature weights, which means ﬁve additional features. It is well known that MERT cannot
handle too many features (Chiang, Knight, & Wang, 2009; Hopkins & May, 2011), and
we believe this is our case as it takes 30–35 iterations to ﬁnish, while the other methods
normally only need 7–8 iterations. A closer look at MERT revealed two further issues: (1)
The n-best list had many identical translations, i.e., spurious ambiguity became an even
bigger problem. (2) In MERT, identical translations had diﬀerent feature values, which
could have confused the optimization. We believe these problems were caused by the fact
that often two identical translations would be found that use the same phrases but from
the diﬀerent tables and thus with diﬀerent scores.
Note also the high values of the interpolation parameter α in Table 4: 0.8–0.9. They
indicate that the original bi-text needs to be weighted higher than the auxiliary one, thus
supporting the need for balanced concatenations with repetitions of the original bi-text,
and indirectly explaining why cat×k performs better than cat×1 in Table 3.
7.4 Improving Spanish→English SMT using Portuguese
Next, we experiment with using Portuguese to improve Spanish→English SMT.
The results are shown in Tables 5 and 6. Overall, they are consistent with those for
Indonesian→English SMT using the additional Malay-English bi-text (shown in Tables 3
and 4 above). We can further observe that, as the size of the original bi-text increases, the
gain in BLEU decreases, which is to be expected. Note also that here transliteration is very
important: it doubles the absolute gain in BLEU achieved by our method.
Table 7 compares the performance of our technique for 160K vs.
1.23M additional
pt-en parallel sentence pairs, with and without transliteration for training bi-texts with
diﬀerent numbers of parallel es-en sentence pairs (10K, 20K, . . ., 320K). The table shows
the importance of transliteration, which is responsible for about half of the improvement
over the baseline brought by our method. In fact, for small original es-en bi-texts (10K,
20K, 40K), using 160K of transliterated additional pt-en sentence pairs works better than
using 1.23M additional non-transliterated pt-en sentence pairs (which is eight times bigger).
For example, given 10K of original training es-en sentence pairs, going from 160K to 1.23M
additional pt-en sentence pairs improves BLEU by 0.25% only (from 23.98% to 24.23%),
while using 160K of transliterated pt-en data yields an improvement of 1.75% (from 23.98%
to 25.73%). The impact of transliteration should not be surprising: we have already seen
it in Table 2, where, comparing lines 4 and 5, we can see that transliterating Portuguese
to look like Spanish eﬀectively doubles the BLEU score: from 4.91% to 8.18% for 10K, and
from 7.10% to 13.79% for 1.23M parallel training sentence pairs.
201

Nakov & Ng
es-en pt-en Translit.
Baseline
cat×1
cat×k
cat×k:align
Our method
10K
160K
no
22.87<
<23.54<
<23.83<
(16)
22.93<
(16)
<23.98(16;3) (+1.11)
yes
22.87<
<25.26
<25.42(16)
<23.31<
(16)
<25.73(16;3) (+2.86)
20K
160K
no
24.71<
<25.19<
<25.29<
(8)
24.91<
(8)
<25.65(8;2) (+0.94)
yes
24.71<
<26.16≤
<26.18≤
(8)
24.88<
(8)
<26.36(8;3) (+1.65)
40K
160K
no
25.80<
26.24<
25.92<
(4)
25.99<
(4)
<26.49(4;2) (+0.69)
yes
25.80<
<26.78
<26.93(4)
25.88<
(4)
<26.95(4;3) (+1.15)
80K
160K
no
27.08≤
27.23
27.09<
(2)
27.01<
(2)
≤27.30(2;2) (+0.22)
yes
27.08<
27.26<
≤27.53(2)
27.09<
(2)
<27.49(2;3) (+0.41)
160K 160K
no
27.90
27.83<
27.83<
(1)
27.94(1)
28.05(1;3) (+0.15)
yes
27.90
≤28.14
≤28.14(1)
28.06(1)
28.16(1;2) (+0.26)
Table 5: Improving Spanish→English SMT using 160K additional Portuguese-
English sentence pairs (varying the amount of original data): concatena-
tions, repetitions, truncations, and our method. The ﬁrst column contains
the number of original (es-en) sentence pairs. Column 3 shows whether translit-
eration was used; the following columns list the BLEU scores (in %) for diﬀerent
methods. A subscript shows the best parameter value(s) found on the develop-
ment set and used on the test set to produce the given result: the ﬁrst value is
the number of repetitions of the original bi-text while the second value, if any, is
the number of extra features added to the phrase table. The BLEU scores that
are statistically signiﬁcantly better than the baseline/our method are marked on
the left/right side by < (for p < 0.01) or ≤(for p < 0.05).
Note that the impact of transliteration diminishes as the size of the es-en bi-text grows.
This should not be surprising: as the size of the good original es-en bi-text grows, there is
less and less to be learned from the additional pt-en bi-text, regardless of whether with or
without transliteration.
7.5 Improving Spanish→English SMT Using Italian
Here, we experiment with Italian as an auxiliary language for improving Spanish→English
phrase-based SMT. Figure 2 shows the results when using Italian and Portuguese as auxil-
iary languages in our method with transliteration. We can see a major consistent drop in
BLEU score when using Italian instead of Portuguese. For example, for 10K es-en sentence
pairs and 160K additional pt-en/it-en sentence pairs, there is an absolute drop in BLEU
by about 0.9%: we have 25.73% vs. 24.82%, respectively. Moreover, for 160K original es-en
sentence pairs, our method goes slightly below the baseline (by -0.05) when using it-en
while there is a small improvement (by +0.26) for pt-en.
Still, Figure 2 shows that Italian, which is more dissimilar to Spanish than Portuguese, is
useful as an auxiliary language for smaller sizes of the original es-en training bi-text. Thus,
we can conclude that while the degree of similarity between the auxiliary and the source
language does matter, more dissimilar languages are still potentially useful as auxiliary
languages.
202

Improving SMT for a Resource-Poor Language
es-en pt-en Translit.
Baseline
Two tables
Interpol.
Merge
Our method
10K
160K
no
22.87<
<23.81
<23.73(.5)
<23.60(2)
<23.98(16;3) (+1.11)
yes
22.87<
<25.29≤
<25.22<
(.5)
<25.16<
(2)
<25.73(16;3) (+2.86)
20K
160K
no
24.71<
<25.22
≤25.02<
(.5)
<25.32≤
(3)
<25.65(8;2) (+0.94)
yes
24.71<
<26.07≤
<26.07(.7)
<26.04<
(3)
<26.36(8;3) (+1.65)
40K
160K
no
25.80<
25.96<
26.15<
(.6)
25.99<
(3)
<26.49(4;2) (+0.69)
yes
25.80<
<26.68
<26.43(.7)
<26.64(3)
<26.95(4;3) (+1.15)
80K
160K
no
27.08≤
≥26.89<
27.04<
(.8)
27.02<
(3)
≤27.30(2;2) (+0.22)
yes
27.08<
27.20<
27.42(.5)
27.29≤
(3)
<27.49(2;3) (+0.41)
160K 160K
no
27.90
27.99
27.72(.5)
27.95(2)
28.05(1;3) (+0.15)
yes
27.90
28.11
≤28.13(.6)
≤28.17(2)
28.16(1;2) (+0.26)
Table 6: Improving Spanish→English SMT using 160K additional Portuguese-
English sentence pairs (varying the amount of original data): comparing
our method to various alternatives. The ﬁrst column contains the number
of original (es-en) sentence pairs. Column 3 shows whether transliteration was
used; the following columns list the BLEU scores (in %) for diﬀerent methods.
A subscript shows the best parameter value(s) found on the development set and
used on the test set to produce the given result: for merging methods, the ﬁrst
value is the number of repetitions of the original bi-text while the second value, if
any, is the number of extra features added to the phrase table; for interpolation,
we show the weight of the phrase pairs from in-en. The BLEU scores that are
statistically signiﬁcantly better than the baseline/our method are marked on the
left/right side by < (for p < 0.01) or ≤(for p < 0.05).
7.6 Improving Spanish→English SMT Using Both Portuguese and Italian
After having seen that both Portuguese and Italian are useful as auxiliary languages, we
tried to use them both together. The experiments were carried out in the same way as when
we used a single auxiliary language, except that now we had to double the usual number
of repetitions k of the original bi-text so that the auxiliary bi-texts do not dominate it
for cat×k:align. For example, for 10K original es-en training sentence pairs and 160K
auxiliary pt-en and 160K it-en sentence pairs, we need to include 32 copies of the original
bi-text instead of 16, as we were doing before.
The results for the combination are shown in Figure 2. Comparing them to the results
when using pt-en data only, we can see that there is a small but consistent improvement. For
example, for 10K original es-en sentence pairs, 160K additional pt-en and 160K additional
it-en sentence pairs, there is an absolute increase in BLEU scores by 0.18%: from 25.73%
to 25.91%. The size of the absolute improvement when using 20K, 40K, 80K, and 160K
additional pt-en and it-en sentence pairs is comparable: about 0.10-0.20% on average.
Thus, there are potential gains when using multiple auxiliary languages simultaneously.
203

Nakov & Ng
System
10K
20K
40K
80K
160K
320K
baseline
22.87
24.71
25.80
27.08
27.90
28.46
our method: 160K pt-en pairs
23.98∗
25.65∗
26.49∗
27.30⋄
28.05
28.52
– improvement
+1.11∗
+0.94∗
+0.69∗
+0.22⋄
+0.15
+0.06
our method: 1.23M pt-en pairs
24.23∗
25.70∗
26.78∗
27.49
28.22⋄
28.58
– improvement
+1.36∗
+0.99∗
+0.98∗
+0.41
+0.32⋄
+0.12
our method: 160K pt-en, translit.
25.73∗
26.36∗
26.95∗
27.49∗
28.16
28.43
– improvement
+2.86∗
+1.65∗
+1.15∗
+0.41∗
+0.26
-0.03
our method: 1.23M pt-en, translit. 26.24∗
26.82∗
27.47∗
27.85∗
28.50∗
28.70
– improvement
+3.37∗
+2.11∗
+1.67∗
+0.77∗
+0.60∗
+0.24
Table 7: Spanish→English: testing our method using 160K vs. 1.23M additional
pt-en sentence pairs, with and without transliteration. Shown are BLEU
scores (in %) and absolute improvement over the baseline for training bi-texts
with diﬀerent numbers of parallel es-en sentence pairs (10K, 20K, . . ., 320K) and
a ﬁxed number of additional pt-en sentence pairs: 160K and 1.23M. All statistically
signiﬁcant improvements over the baseline are marked with a ∗(for p < 0.01) and
with a ⋄(for p < 0.05).
7.7 Combining Our Method with the Cognate Extraction Technique of
Kondrak et al. (2003)
Next, we combined our method with the cognate extraction technique of Kondrak et al.
(2003), where pairs of likely cognates are extracted from the original training bi-text and
then added to that bi-text as additional 1-word-to-1-word sentence pairs.
System
10K
20K
40K
80K
160K
320K
baseline
22.87
24.71
25.80
27.08
27.90
28.46
cognates
23.50
25.22
26.31
27.38
28.10
28.74
– improvement (baseline)
+0.63∗
+0.51∗
+0.51∗
+0.30⋄
+0.20
+0.28⋄
our (1.23M pt-en pt-en) + cognates
24.55
25.98
26.73
27.67
28.33
28.90
– improvement (baseline)
+1.68∗
+1.27∗
+0.93∗
+0.59∗
+0.43∗
+0.44∗
– improvement (our: 1.23M pt-en)
+0.32⋄
+0.28⋄
-0.05
+0.18
+0.11
+0.32⋄
our (1.23M pt-en, transl.) + cognates
26.35
26.78
27.34
27.79
28.50
28.68
– improvement (baseline)
+3.48∗
+2.07∗
+1.54∗
+0.71∗
+0.60∗
+0.22⋄
– improvement (our: 1.23M, transl.)
+0.11
-0.04
-0.13
-0.06
+0.00
-0.02
Table 8: Spanish→English: combining our method with the cognate extraction
technique of Kondrak et al. (2003).
Shown are BLEU scores (in %) and
absolute improvements (over the baseline and over our method) for training bi-
texts with diﬀerent numbers of parallel es-en sentence pairs (10K, 20K, . . ., 320K)
and ﬁxed number of additional pt-en sentence pairs (1.23M), with and without
transliteration. The statistically signiﬁcant improvements are marked with a ∗(for
p < 0.01) and with a ⋄(for p < 0.05).
204

Improving SMT for a Resource-Poor Language
22.5
23.5
24.5
25.5
26.5
27.5
28.5
10K
20K
40K
80K
160K
baseline
+it-en
+pt-en
+it-en +pt-en
Figure 2: Improving Spanish→English SMT using 160K Italian-English and
160K
Portuguese-English
additional
sentence
pairs
(varying
the
amount of original data) and transliteration.
The results for adding these cognates to the training es-en bi-text, i.e., for our re-
implementation of their algorithm, are shown in the top lines of Table 8. We can see an
absolute improvement of 0.5% BLEU for es-en of size up to 40K, and the improvement is
statistically signiﬁcant.
Next, we combined our method with the cognate extraction method as follows: ﬁrst, we
augmented the original es-en bi-text with cognate pairs, and then we used this augmented
bi-text instead of es-en in our method. Table 8 shows the results for the combination of
our method with cognate extraction (BLEU scores in % and absolute improvements over
the baseline and over our method) for training bi-texts with diﬀerent numbers of parallel
es-en sentence pairs (10K, 20K, . . ., 320K) and ﬁxed number of additional pt-en sentence
pairs (1.23M), with and without transliteration. As we can see, it is worth combining our
method with the cognate extraction technique of Kondrak et al. (2003) for small original
es-en datasets, e.g., 10K or 20K (in which cases statistically signiﬁcant improvements occur
over using our method only), but only when our method does not use transliteration.
205

Nakov & Ng
We found it interesting that combining our method with the cognate extraction tech-
nique of Kondrak et al. (2003) does not help so much when we used transliteration compared
to when we do not use it. Thus, we further analyzed the case of 10K es-en sentence pairs
and 1.23M pt-en pairs. The cognate extraction technique yielded 25,362 Spanish-English
likely cognate pairs, including 10,611 unique Spanish words. The Portuguese side of the
1.23M pt-en data contained only 14 or 0.13% of these 10,611 unique Spanish words. Thus,
the information that these Spanish-English likely cognates provide for word alignments
and phrase pairs is clearly complementary to what the pt-en bi-text gives. However, after
transliteration, the source side of the 1.23M ptes-en bi-text contained 8,867 or 83.56% of
the 10,611 unique Spanish words in the Spanish-English likely cognate pairs. This drastic
jump means that the Spanish-English likely cognate pairs have little to add on top of what
ptes-en already provides, and explains the lack of improvement when combined with our
method when transliteration is used.
7.8 Combining Our Method with the Phrase Table Pivoting Technique of
Callison-Burch et al. (2006)
Finally, we combined our method with the phrase table pivoting technique of Callison-Burch
et al. (2006) since they are orthogonal.
First, we tried to reproduce the phrase table pivoting experiments of Callison-Burch
et al. (2006), which turned out to be complicated (even though we used their original
code to do the pivoting) because of various diﬀerences in our experimental setups: (1) we
used Moses instead of Pharaoh for translation; (2) we used IRSTLM instead of SRILM
for language modeling; (3) we used diﬀerent tokenization; (4) we used a maximum phrase
length of up to seven instead of ten; (5) we created our training/dev/test dataset out of
Europarl v.3, which is diﬀerent from the version of the Europarl corpus that was available
in 2006 (which also implies a diﬀerent baseline, etc.).
The results are shown in Table 9. The bottom three lines show the results reported
by Callison-Burch et al. (2006), while the top three lines report the BLEU scores for our
reproduction of their experiments, in which about 1.3M pairs were used for each of eight
additional pivot languages: Danish, Dutch, Finnish, French, German, Italian, Portuguese,
and Swedish. While our BLEU scores are lower, they are good enough for studying the
potential of combining the two methods.
The combination was carried in the following way: after we had built the ﬁnal merged
phrase table for our method, we paraphrased its source side through pivoting using the
method of Callison-Burch et al. (2006).
The middle lines of the table show the BLEU
scores (in %) of the combined method and absolute improvements (over the baseline and
over our method) for training bi-texts with diﬀerent numbers of parallel es-en sentence pairs
(10K, 20K, . . ., 320K) and ﬁxed amount of additional pt-en pairs (160K and 1.23M pairs),
with and without transliteration.
The results show that it is worth combining our method with phrase table pivoting for
small es-en datasets, e.g., 10K or 20K (in which cases, statistically signiﬁcant improvements
occur over using our method only), but only when our method does not use transliteration,
as was the case for the cognate extraction technique of Kondrak et al. (2003).
206

Improving SMT for a Resource-Poor Language
Our Experiments
10K
20K
40K
80K
160K
320K
baseline
22.87
24.71
25.80
27.08
27.90
28.46
Pivoting (+8 pairs × ∼1.3M)
23.33
24.88
26.10
27.06
28.09
28.49
– improvement (baseline)
+0.46∗
+0.17
+0.30⋄
-0.02
+0.19
+0.03
our (160K pt-en) + pivoting
24.32
25.95
26.70
27.36
28.02
28.56
– improvement (over the baseline)
+1.45∗
+1.24∗
+0.90∗
+0.28⋄
+0.12
+0.10
– improvement (over our method)
+0.34⋄
+0.30⋄
+0.21
+0.06
-0.03
+0.04
our (1.23M pt-en) + pivoting
24.64
26.18
26.87
27.60
28.35
28.69
– improvement (over the baseline)
+1.77∗
+1.47∗
+1.07∗
+0.52∗
+0.45∗
+0.23
– improvement (over our method)
+0.41∗
+0.48∗
+0.09
+0.11
+0.13
+0.11
our (160K pt-en, transl.) + pivoting
25.82
26.49
27.06
27.51
28.35
28.58
– improvement (over the baseline)
+2.95∗
+1.78∗
+1.26∗
+0.43∗
+0.45∗
+0.12
– improvement (over our method)
+0.09
+0.13
+0.11
+0.02
+0.19
+0.15
our (1.23M pt-en, transl.) + pivoting
26.39
27.01
27.53
27.77
28.58
28.66
– improvement (over the baseline)
+3.52∗
+2.30∗
+1.73∗
+0.69∗
+0.68∗
+0.20
– improvement (over our method)
+0.15
+0.19
+0.06
-0.08
+0.08
-0.04
Callison-Burch et al. (2006)
baseline
22.6
25.0
26.5
26.5
28.7
30.0
Pivoting (+8 pairs × ∼1.3M)
23.3
26.0
27.2
28.0
29.0
30.0
– improvement (over the baseline)
+0.7
+1.0
+0.7
+1.5
+0.3
+0.0
Table 9: Spanish→English: combining our method with the phrase table pivoting
technique of Callison-Burch et al. (2006). Shown are BLEU scores (in %)
and absolute improvements (over the baseline and over our method) for training
bi-texts with diﬀerent numbers of parallel es-en sentence pairs (10K, 20K, . . .,
320K) and ﬁxed amount of additional pt-en pairs: (1) about 1.3M pairs for each
of eight additional languages in pivoting, and (2) 160K and 1.23M pairs for one
language (Portuguese) for our method (with and without transliteration). The
last three lines show the results of the phrase table pivoting experiments reported
in Callison-Burch et al. (2006) while the ﬁrst three lines show our reproduction of
these experiments. The statistically signiﬁcant improvements are marked with a
∗(for p < 0.01) and with a ⋄(for p < 0.05).
Again, we found it interesting that pivoting does not help so much with transliteration
as without it. Thus, we had a closer look at the interaction of pivoting and transliteration
for 10K es-en sentence pairs and 160K pt-en pairs. In particular, we looked at the number
of usable phrase pairs with respect to the test data, i.e., those phrase pairs whose source side
matches the test data, and we found that without pivoting, using transliteration increases
this number from 657,541 to 1,863,950, i.e., by 183.47%, while using pivoting and transliter-
ation increases this number from 819,324 to 2,214,580, i.e., by 170.29%. This lower relative
increase in the number of usable phrases is one possible explanation of the corresponding
lower increase in BLEU: which is +0.34 and +0.09 absolute, respectively, without and with
transliteration.
207

Nakov & Ng
8. Analysis and Discussion
Below, we perform deeper analysis of our method and of the obtained results.
8.1 Merging Phrase Tables
Here we compare merging cat×k:align and cat×1 (with 1-3 extra features, as was described
above), to two simpler alternatives: (a) substituting cat×1 with ml-en, and (b) merging
the phrase tables derived from the original bi-texts, in-en and ml-en.
We further implement and evaluate the following alternative to our method: (c) train
the alignment models on the combined bi-text that consists of k copies of in-en and one
copy of ml-en, then truncate the alignments appropriately, and build two separate phrase
tables. The ﬁrst table is cat×k:align as in our method (built on one copy of in-en), and the
second one is a similar phrase table that corresponds to ml-en. Unlike (a) above, the word
alignments in that second phrase table are inﬂuenced by the k copies of in-en. We will refer
to this second phrase table as ml:cat×k:align. The motivation for trying this alternative
is that it is (1) a bit simpler to implement, and (2) somewhat symmetric for both phrase
tables. Yet, just like in our method, the alignment models beneﬁt from more data, while
the phrase tables remain language-speciﬁc and thus can be combined using extra features.
Table 10 compares our method (line 3) to the above-described three alternatives, (a),
(b) and (c), for diﬀerent numbers of training ml-en sentence pairs. As we can see, overall,
our method (line 3) performs best, while the newly described alternative (c), shown on line
4, is ranked second. Merging phrase tables derived from the original bi-texts in-en and
ml-en is worst (line 1), which can be explained by the fact that it cannot beneﬁt from
improved word alignments for the small in-en bi-text (unlike the other combinations, and
most notably the one at line 2). However, it is not so easy to explain from this table alone
why our method is better than the other two alternatives.
Thus, we looked into the phrase tables and the unknown words, for the case of 160K
ml-en additional sentence pairs. The results are shown in Table 11, which oﬀers a very good
insight: the two good performing combinations at lines 3-4 simply have larger phrase tables
compared to those on lines 1-2. More importantly, this translates into a higher number
of phrase pairs that are potentially usable for translating the test sentences, i.e., match
the input at test time. Naturally, more translation options mean a larger search space and
thus more opportunities to ﬁnd better translations, which explains the better performance
of the combinations at lines 3-4. The table also compares the number of unknown word
types and word tokens when translating the test data. We can see that our method has the
lowest number of unknowns, which can explain its good performance. On the other hand,
the numbers of unknown words are comparable for the other three methods.
In summary, Table 11 shows two important factors inﬂuencing BLEU: (i) total and used
number of phrase pairs, and (ii) number of unknown word types and tokens at translation
time. Our method ranks best in both criteria, while the second best method at line 4 ranks
second on the ﬁrst factor but last on the second one (but close to the other methods).
Thus, we could conclude that the impact of unknown words on BLEU is limited when the
diﬀerences are small. The phrase table size seems to correlate somewhat better with BLEU,
at least for the two best performing methods. Finally, comparing line 2 to lines 3-4, we can
further conclude that using the in-en bi-text to help align the ml-en bi-text is beneﬁcial.
208

Improving SMT for a Resource-Poor Language
To get even better insight, we looked at the characteristics of the tables that are being
combined: (1) phrase table sizes and overlap, (2) number of distinct source phrases and
overlap, and (3) average diﬀerences in the four standard scores in the merged tables for
shared phrase pairs: inverse phrase translation probability φ(f|e), inverse lexical weighting
pw(f|e), direct phrase translation probability φ(e|f), and direct lexical weighting pw(e|f).
The results are shown in Table 12. The table shows that our method combines phrase
tables that have a much higher overlap (10-50 times higher!), both in terms of number of
phrase pairs and number of distinct source phrases. Moreover, the absolute diﬀerences in
the scores for the shared phrase pairs are about halved (i.e., they are very similar) for the
two phrase tables that are combined by our method, cat×1 and cat×k:align, compared
to those for phrase tables combined by the three alternative approaches, as the last four
columns in Table 12 show. This high similarity in the scores for cat×1 and cat×k:align
could be one possible explanation of their very similar performance as shown in Table 3.
Thus, our method wins by combining two tables that have already been made more
similar, and thus more appropriate for combination. A key element of this is to build the
second table from a concatenation of the ml-en and the in-en bi-texts, where the in-en bi-
text has a minor inﬂuence on word alignment (it is simply much smaller), but much more
inﬂuence on phrase extraction and scoring. This makes the resulting phrase table much
more similar to the ﬁrst phrase table (which has also been made similar to the second table,
but via word alignments only), but also much bigger than if trained on ml-en data only
(14M vs. 11M phrase pairs); this in turn yields a larger merged phrase table despite the
higher overlap between the tables that are being merged.
Merged Phrase Tables
10K
20K
40K
80K
160K
1
in-en
ml-en
23.97
24.46
24.43
24.67
24.79
2
cat×k:align
ml-en
24.11
24.56
24.54
24.62
25.02
3
cat×k:align
cat×1
24.51
24.70
24.73
24.97
25.15
4
cat×k:align
ml:cat×k:align
24.14
24.54
24.65
24.72
25.08
Table 10: Merging phrase tables for Indonesian-English SMT: BLEU scores.
BLEU shown in % for diﬀerent numbers of training ml-en sentence pairs.
8.2 Transliteration
Here we have a closer look at transliteration: studying how many words it aﬀects and its
impact on the number of unknown words (also known as OOVs, out-of-vocabulary words).
First, we look at the number of word types and word tokens that changed in the process
of transliteration of the source side of the additional training bi-text. The results are shown
in Table 13.
We can see that transliterating Malay to Indonesian aﬀects a very small
number of words: 7.61% of the word types and 5.78% of the word tokens. This should not
be surprising since the spelling diﬀerences between Malay and Indonesian are very limited,
as we explained in Section 3.1. In contrast, transliterating Portuguese to Spanish changes
44.71% of the word types and 23.17% of the word tokens, which agrees with our observations
in Sections 3.2 and 6. Italian is even more aﬀected by transliteration than Portuguese: with
70.45% of the word types and 34.37% of the word tokens changed.
209

Nakov & Ng
Phrase Pairs
Unknown
Merged Phrase Tables
Total
# Used
% Used
Types
Tokens
BLEU
1
in-en
ml-en
14.23M
1.28M
9.02%
1411
1917
24.79
2
cat×k:align
ml-en
14.07M
1.25M
8.88%
1413
1906
25.02
3
cat×k:align
cat×1
15.83M
1.70M
10.71%
1300
1743
25.15
4
cat×k:align
ml:cat×k:align
14.92M
1.37M
9.17%
1445
1933
25.08
Table 11: Merging phrase tables derived from in-en and ml-en (160K): number
of phrase pairs and unknown words. Shown are the total number of phrase
pairs in the merged phrase table and the number of phrase pairs used to decode
the test data, followed by the number of unknown word types and tokens, and
the BLEU score (in %).
Phrase Pairs
Source Phrases
Avg. Score Diﬀ.
Merged Phrase Tables
PT1
PT2
both
PT1
PT2
both
φ(f|e) pw(f|e) φ(e|f) pw(e|f)
1
in-en
ml-en
3.2M 11.1M 72.1K
1.1M 7.7M 10.3K
0.40
0.18
0.19
0.10
2.23%
0.65%
0.91%
0.13%
2
cat×k:align
ml-en
3.1M 11.1M 77.1K
1.2M 7.7M 11.1K
0.40
0.18
0.19
0.10
2.51%
0.70%
0.95%
0.14%
3
cat×k:align
cat×1
3.1M 14.0M
1.2M
1.2M 8.8M
0.6M
0.21
0.05
0.13
0.05
39.39%
8.67%
49.40%
6.54%
4
cat×k:align
ml:cat×k:align
3.1M 11.9M 87.6K
1.2M 7.6M 11.6K
0.40
0.18
0.18
0.09
2.85%
0.73%
0.99%
0.15%
Table 12: Comparison of the phrase tables merged in Tables 10 and 11. Shown
are the number of phrase pairs / source phrases in each phrase table and the
number/percent of them that appear in both tables.
The last four columns
show the average absolute diﬀerences in the four standard phrase table scores for
phrase pairs that appear in both tables; these scores are inverse phrase translation
probability φ(f|e), inverse lexical weighting pw(f|e), direct phrase translation
probability φ(e|f), and direct lexical weighting pw(e|f).
One important reason for this higher number of changes would be that, unlike Spanish
and Portuguese, Italian does not form plural for nouns and adjectives by adding an -s
but by a vowel change. For example, the singular form of the adjective meaning green is
verde in all three languages: Spanish, Portuguese, and Italian. However, its plural form
diﬀers: it is verdes regardless of gender in both Spanish and Portuguese, but it is verdi
(plural masculine) or verde (plural feminine) in Italian. Thus, transliterating Portuguese
to Spanish would leave verdes intact, but for Italian, changes would be needed.
Given
the frequency of the use of plural for nouns and adjectives, we can expect many more
diﬀerences for Italian–Spanish than for Portuguese–Spanish. Overall, the small number of
word types/tokens changed explains why transliteration was of limited use for Malay but
so important for Spanish and Italian.
210

Improving SMT for a Resource-Poor Language
Word Types
Word Tokens
Transliteration
Changed
Total
Changed
Total
1
Malay→Indonesian
8,259
108,595
316,444
5,472,372
7.61%
5.78%
2
Portuguese→Spanish
52,303
116,989
8,315,835
35,889,877
44.71%
23.17%
3
Italian→Spanish
88,767
126,005
14,962,680
43,530,246
70.45%
34.37%
Table 13: Transliteration: number of words in the training data that changed.
Shown are the number of word types and word tokens that changed, compared
to the total number of word types and tokens on the source side of the diﬀerent
training bi-texts.
Unknown
Bi-text(s)
Sentences
Types
Tokens
BLEU
1
ml-en
160K
3,115
7,101
17.90
2
mlin-en
160K
2,912
7,288
19.15
3
in-en
28.4K
1,547
2,101
23.80
4
in-en+ml-en
28.4K+160K
1,170
1,532
24.43
5
in-en+mlin-en
28.4K+160K
1,182
1,544
24.72
Table 14: Unknown words for the Indonesian test dataset. Shown are the number of
unknown word types and word tokens, and Bleu score in % for diﬀerent training
bi-texts and simple bi-text concatenations (cat×1). The counts are with respect
to the training bi-text; the actual number of unknown words at translation time
can diﬀer. Indonesian bi-texts were for tuning and testing and enin monolingual
data was used for language modeling.
Next, we studied the impact of transliteration on the number of unknown words for
the test data.
Table 14 shows the results for Indonesian, using Indonesian bi-texts for
tuning and testing and enin monolingual data for language modeling. Comparing lines 1
and 2, we can see that transliteration has a very limited impact on reducing the number
of unknown word types when training on Malay data: the number of unknown word types
drops only slightly from 3,115 to 2,912, while the number of unknown word tokens actually
grows, from 7,101 to 7,288. Yet, there is an improvement in BLEU, from 17.90 to 19.15.
This improvement is consistent for all n-gram scores included in BLEU: 1-gram (48.46 vs.
50.12), 2-gram (22.09 vs. 23.46), 3-gram (12.49 vs. 13.54), and 4-gram (7.67 vs. 8.44).
Thus, apparently, the number of unknown word types is more important than the number
of unknown word tokens. Moving down to line 3, we can see that the number of unknown
word types is only halved when training on Indonesian instead of Malay, which conﬁrms
once again the similarity between Indonesian and Malay. Comparing lines 4 and 5, we can
see that when we concatenate the Malay and Indonesian training bi-texts, the impact of
transliteration is minimal: both in terms of word types/tokens and BLEU.
211

Nakov & Ng
Unknown
Bi-text(s)
Sentences
Types
Tokens
Bleu
1
pt-en
160K
3,973
17,580
6.35
2
ptes-en
160K
1,574
10,337
11.35
3
it-en
160K
5,529
23,088
4.06
4
ites-en
160K
2,413
13,492
9.38
5
es-en
160K
362
440
27.90
6
es-en+it-en
160K+160K
347
406
27.65
7
es-en+ites-en
160K+160K
316
374
27.69
8
es-en+pt-en
160K+160K
273
295
27.83
9
es-en+ptes-en
160K+160K
240
257
28.14
10
es-en+pt-en+it-en
160K+160K+160K
264
280
27.89
11
es-en+ptes-en+ites-en
160K+160K+160K
221
232
28.02
Table 15: Unknown words for the Spanish test dataset. Shown are the number of
unknown word types and word tokens, and Bleu score in % for diﬀerent training
bi-texts and simple bi-text concatenations (cat×1). The counts are with respect
to the training bi-text; the actual number of unknown words at translation time
can diﬀer. Spanish bi-texts were used for tuning and testing.
The relative diﬀerences in the number of unknown words are much more sizeable when
transliterating Portuguese/Italian to Spanish, as Table 15 shows. Comparing lines 1-2 and
3-4, we can see the number of unknown word types/tokens is about halved, while BLEU
doubles. This conﬁrms once again the importance of transliteration for these languages.
Going down to line 5, we can see a 10-15 times drop in the number of unknown word types
when training on the Spanish bi-text. This drop looks drastic compared to that for Malay in
Table 14, but it can be partly explained by the larger size of the training es-en bi-text, which
contains 160K sentence pairs compared to only 28.4K pairs for in-en. Since the es-en bi-text
has reduced the number of unknown word types to 362, it becomes very hard to reduce this
number further. Still, as lines 6-11 show, concatenating es-en with pt-en and it-en yields
sizable improvements over using es-en only. Moreover, transliteration helps consistently in
reducing the number of unknown words further and these reductions are bigger than those
for Malay not only in relative, but also in absolute terms. Still, these reductions in the
number of unknown words are not so great in absolute terms, and thus the corresponding
diﬀerences in BLEU are small. Yet, transliteration yields consistent improvement for all
concatenations: Spanish+Italian, Spanish+Portuguese, and Spanish+Portuguese+Italian.
Overall, we can conclude that large relative drops in the number of unknown words
correspond to sizable improvements in BLEU; however, the results for small relative diﬀer-
ences are less conclusive: they correspond to small ﬂuctuation in BLEU for Portuguese and
Italian but to somewhat larger diﬀerences for Malay. This could be a feature of the much
lower token/type ratio for Malay, which is an agglutinative language, and thus quite rich in
wordforms: as Table 13 shows, the token/type ratio is only about 50 for Malay, while it is
about 307 and 345 for Portuguese and Italian, respectively.
212

Improving SMT for a Resource-Poor Language
8.3 Relative Improvement
Finally, we address the important question of how much “real” data our method saves.
Figure 3 compares graphically the improvements over the baseline using our method
with 160K vs. 1.23M pt-en sentence pairs and transliteration for diﬀerent number of original
training es-en sentence pairs. We can see from this ﬁgure that, with 10K “real” training
es-en sentence pairs, using 160K additional pt-en and our method yields a BLEU score
that is comparable to what is achieved with 40K “real” es-en sentence pairs, i.e., we cut
the necessary “real” data by a factor of four. We can further see that using 1.23M pt-en
sentence pairs improves this factor to ﬁve. Similarly, for 20K “real” es-en training sentence
pairs, our method achieves a BLEU score that would require 3–3.5 times as much “real”
training es-en data for the baseline system to match.
Figure 4 summarizes these statistics, showing how many times more “real” data would
be needed for the baseline to match the performance of our method. We can see that we cut
this by a factor of 1.5–4 and 2–5, when using 160K and 1.23M additional pt-en sentences.
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
10K
20K
40K
80K
160K
320K
baseline
our method: 160K
our method: 1.23M
Figure 3: Spanish→English: improvements over the baseline using our method
with 160K vs. 1.23M pt-en sentence pairs and transliteration for diﬀerent
number of original training es-en sentence pairs.
213

Nakov & Ng
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
10K
20K
40K
80K
160K
our method: 160K
our method: 1.23M
Figure 4: Trade-oﬀbetween Spanish→English and Portuguese→English data.
Shown is the number of times we need to grow the original es-en training data in
order to achieve the same BLEU score as when using our method and 160K/1.23M
additional pt-en sentence pairs with transliteration.
9. Conclusion
We have proposed a novel language-independent method for improving statistical machine
translation for resource-poor languages by exploiting their similarity to related resource-rich
ones. We have achieved signiﬁcant gains in BLEU, which improve over the best rivaling
approaches, while using much less additional data.
We further studied the impact of using a less closely related language as an auxiliary
language (Italian instead of Portuguese for improving Spanish→English SMT), we tried
using both Portuguese and Italian together as auxiliary languages, and we combined our
method with two orthogonal rivaling approaches: (1) using cognates between the source
and the target language, and (2) source-language side paraphrasing with a pivot language.
All these experiments yielded statistically signiﬁcant improvements for small datasets.
214

Improving SMT for a Resource-Poor Language
Based on the experimental results, we can make several interesting conclusions:
1. We have shown that using related languages can help improve SMT: we achieved up
to 1.35 and 3.37 improvement in BLEU for in-en (+ml-en) and es-en (+pt-en).
2. While simple concatenation can help, it is problematic when the additional sentences
out-number the ones from the original bi-text.
3. Concatenation can work very well if the original bi-text is repeated enough times so
that the additional bi-text does not dominate.
4. Merging phrase tables giving priority to the original bi-text and using additional
features is a good strategy.
5. Part of the improvement when combining bi-texts is due to increased vocabulary
coverage but another part comes from improved word alignments. The best results
are achieved when these two sources are ﬁrst isolated and then combined (our method).
6. Transliteration can help a lot in case of systematic spelling variations between the
original and the additional source languages.
7. Overall, we reduce the amount of necessary “real” training data by a factor of 2–5.
In future work, we would like to extend our approach in several interesting directions.
First, we want to make better use of multi-lingual parallel corpora, e.g., while we had access
to a Spanish-Portuguese-English corpus, we used it as two separate bi-texts Spanish-English
and Portuguese-English. Second, we would like to try using auxiliary languages that are
related to the target language. Finally, we would like to experiment with more sophisticated
ways to get the auxiliary language closer to the source that go beyond simple transliteration.
