A Formalization of the Turing Test 
Evgeny Chutchev 
1. 
Introduction 
The Turing test was described by A. Turing in his paper [4] as follows: An interrogator questions 
both Turing machine and second participant of the test (a person), each of which tries to appear 
human. The interrogator does not know from whom exactly he receives answers and has the 
objective to tell the Turing machine from the person (for more details, see, for example, [3]). 
In this paper, we consider a formalization of the Turing test and obtain the following 
results (Figure 1.1): 
 
Figure 1.1. Summary of results 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: 
Section 2 gives definitions and introduces notations. 
Section 3 considers tests with arbitrary Turing machines. 
Section 4 considers tests with Turing machines of some special classes. 
Section 5 considers the strict Turing test. 
Section 6 presents the conclusion. 
Section 7 contains a list of definitions and notations. 
Section 8 contains references. 
Section 9 is an appendix, where we consider a random answers model for the second 
participant of the test that does not follow an algorithm. 
2. 
General definitions and notations 
2.1. 
Words and numbers 
1. 
Suppose 𝔸 is a finite alphabet and symbol θ does not belong to 𝔸. By 𝔸∗ denote all words 
over 𝔸, including the empty word λ. By λ𝑛 denote the sequence of 𝑛 empty words λ. 
2. 
Denote by ℕ the set of all natural numbers (excluding zero), and put ℕ0 ≝ℕ∪{0}. We will 
not make any distinction between the elements of ℕ0 and their notations over the alphabet 𝔸, 
assuming ℕ0 = 𝔸∗\*λ+. 
3. 
Fix some letter 𝑎∈𝔸, and for each word ω ∈𝔸∗ denote by ω the word 𝑎ω. 
                                                
                  
For every test in the shaded area, an appropriate Turing 
machine passes the test (Theorems 3.1 and 5.1) 
Every Turing machine 
fails a certain test from 
this area 
 (Theorem 3.2) 
Every Turing machine 
that answers any 
questions and is limited in 
response time or memory 
fails certain tests from 
this area  
(Theorems 4.2 and 4.3) 
Every Turing machine 
that answers any 
questions fails a certain 
test from this area 
(Theorem 4.1) 
Second
participant
follows 
some
algorithm
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Interrogator follows 
some algorithm 
Interrogator does not 
follow an algorithm 
                                                
                  
Second
participant
does not
 follow
an algorithm
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

2 
 
4. 
Put 𝔹≝𝔸∪{}. 
2.2. 
Turing machines 
1. 
We assume that: 
 
Turing machine (TM) starts on the work tape that contains a finite string of symbols, 
which may be blank. 
 
TM has several final states; some of them may be marked with “Left” or “Right”. 
 
Along with conventional work head, TM has three additional heads and three tapes 
each of which has a leftmost cell but is infinite to the right. 
We name these additional heads as the oracle interface, the input and the output of TM, 
considering that the oracle interface and the input can only read out symbols from 𝔹, and the 
output can only print symbols from 𝔹, while θ stands for the blank symbol. 
The tape of the oracle interface is blank (we shall use it for oracle TM; see Item 2.4.1 below), 
and both input and output tapes are replaced with new tapes when TM starts up or when TM is 
transferred to the initial state. 
2. 
Denote by 𝕄 the set of all TMs that we have described. We shall not distinguish between 
TMs and their descriptions (in the form of the words over 𝔸) suitable for realization on the 
universal TM. 
3. 
Let us consider the functioning of TM as an exchange of questions and answers. 
 A question is sent to TM only when it is in the initial state or in the final state (in the latter 
case, TM is moved to the initial state, but the content of the work tape does not change). The 
question is a word over 𝔹 recorded at the beginning of the new input tape. After installation of the 
input tape, TM starts up, and if TM halts, the maximum length word over 𝔸, placed at the beginning 
of the output tape, is the answer to the question (thus the answer may be equal to λ). 
4. 
We say that: 
 
TM 𝔐 answers the questions 1, … , 𝑛 if 𝔐 calculates those answers in a finite number 
of cycles. In the specified case denote by 𝔐 1, … , 𝑛  the answer of 𝔐 to the last 
question 𝑛; denote the reverse case by the formal equation 𝔐 1, … , 𝑛 = ∞ 1. 
 
TM 𝔐 recognizes TM 𝔑 if 𝔐 answers the question 𝔑. 
 
TM 𝔐 is communicable if 𝔐 answers any sequence of questions, each of which belongs 
to 𝔸∗. 
 
TM 𝔐 is autonomous if the answers of 𝔐 do not depend on the content of the 
questions. 
 
TM 𝔐 is the generator if 𝔐 is simultaneously communicable and autonomous. 
Denote by ℂ the set of all communicable TMs. For generator ℌ and 𝑛∈ℕ 
put ℌ,𝑛- ≝ℌ 1, … , 𝑛 , where 1, … , 𝑛 are some questions. 
5. 
Assign to each TM 𝔐 the generator 𝔐
  that operates under the following principle: For 
each 𝑛∈ℕ, put 𝔐
 ,𝑛- ≝ , if 𝔐(𝑛) = ∞,             
𝔐(𝑛) in another case.
  
6. 
We call TM ℰ the enumerator if ∀𝑛∈ℕ(ℰ(𝑛) ∈𝕄).  
7. 
For every enumerator ℰ, put ℰ*𝑁+ ≝ {ℰ(𝑛):  𝑛=  1, … , 𝑁}. Fix the enumerator 𝒜 that 
enumerates all TMs: 𝒜*∞+ = 𝕄. Put 𝔄𝑘≝𝒜(𝑘). 
8. 
Assign to every enumerator ℰ that enumerates some communicable TMs (ℰ*∞+ ⊆ℂ) the 
generator ℰ that is constructed by analogy with Cantor's diagonal method: ℰ,𝑛- ≝ℰ(𝑛)(𝑛). 
                                                             
1 Assuming ∞∉𝔸. 

3 
 
2.3. 
Oracles 
1. 
Denote by oracle the content of the oracle interface tape, the cells on which contain symbols 
from 𝔹. 
2. 
Denote by 𝛱 the oracle that contains the lexicographic ordered notations 𝔐𝔑 for all 
TMs 𝔐 and 𝔑 such that 𝔐 recognizes 𝔑. 
3. 
Denote by 𝛩 the blank oracle. 
2.4. 
Oracle Turing machines 
1. 
We shall understand the construction from Item 2.2.1, where the oracle interface tape may 
be non-blank, as oracle Turing machine (OTM). Denote OTM by 𝔐𝛷, where 𝔐 is TM and 𝛷 is oracle 
(thus 𝔐𝛩= 𝔐). 
2. 
Extending the concepts from Items 2.2.3 and 2.2.4 to OTMs, we call OTMs 𝑈 and 𝑉 
as 𝑁-similar if for every 𝑛≤𝑁 and for any questions β = 1, … , 𝑛 the equality 𝑈() = 𝑉() holds. 
Two OTMs 𝑈 and 𝑉, which are 𝑁-similar for every 𝑁∈ℕ, we call similar and denote this by 𝑈≈𝑉. 
3. 
We say that OTM 𝑄 reduces to TM 𝔐 if 𝑄≈𝔐. Denote the type of OTM by notation ≻𝕄 if 
OTM reduces to some TM and in another case use the notation ⊁𝕄. 
2.5. Testers 
1. 
Any pair  𝐼, 𝑄 , where 𝐼 and 𝑄 are OTMs, we call the tester. For the specified tester we call 𝐼 
the interrogator, and 𝑄 the second participant (SP). 
2. 
Denote the tester type by notation (type of interrogator, type of SP). 
3. 
We say that interrogator is dumb if its answer to any consequence of questions is . 
2.6. 
Tests 
1. 
Consider tester 𝑇=  𝐼, 𝑄  and TM 𝔐 and define the following procedure as the left 
(the right) test: 
 
At the beginning of the test, the question  enters the interrogator 𝐼 input. 
 
Each answer of interrogator serves as the question for both 𝑄 and 𝔐 (we call such a 
question the test question). 
 
The question α𝑄α𝔐 (or the question α𝔐α𝑄 for the right test), where α𝑄 and α𝔐 are 
the answers of 𝑄 and 𝔐 to the last test question, enters 𝐼 input. We interpret this as 
receiving the first test answer from the “left” subject of the test, and receiving the 
second test answer from the “right” one.  
 
Whenever 𝐼 has reached the final state marked with “Left” (“Right”), the test is finished 
and the result of the test is “SP is on the left” (“SP is on the right”). 
Denote by ,𝑇, 𝔐, ℓ- (by ,𝑇, 𝔐, 𝓇-) the left (the right) test described above and denote 
by ,𝑇, 𝔐,∗- any of these tests. 
2. 
We say that: 
 
TM 𝔐 fails the left test , 𝐼, 𝑄 , 𝔐, ℓ- (the right test , 𝐼, 𝑄 , 𝔐, 𝓇-) if either 𝔐 does not 
answer some test question that SP 𝑄 has answered or if this test is finished with the 
correct result. 
 
TM fails the test ,𝑇, 𝔐- if it fails both the left test ,𝑇, 𝔐, ℓ- and the right test ,𝑇, 𝔐, 𝓇-2. 
The statement that TM 𝔐 fails the test ,𝑇, 𝔐- we denote in short by 𝔐⋫𝑇; the 
converse statement we denote by 𝔐⊳𝑇. 
3. 
We say that tester 𝑇 is successful for a given set 𝕃⊆𝕄 if ∀𝔐∈𝕃(𝔐⋫𝑇). 
4. 
Assign to each SP 𝔔∈𝕄 the dumb interrogator ℑ𝔔∈𝕄 who completes the 
test   ℑ𝔔
𝛷, 𝔔 , 𝔐,∗  for any oracle 𝛷 only in the case when the test answers from 𝔔 and 𝔐 are 
different, and in this case ℑ𝔔
𝛷 calculates α = 𝔔(𝑛), where 𝑛 is a number of the current test step, 
and indicates the location of SP as the source of reply α. Note that ℑ𝔔
𝛷 performs operations that do 
not depend on 𝛷. 
Put 𝑇𝔔
𝛷≝ ℑ𝔔
𝛷, 𝔔  and 𝕋𝛷≝ 𝑇𝔔
𝛷:𝔔∈𝕄 . 
2.7. 
Comments 
1. 
The handling of every question by certain TM with the input head and the output head can 
be described as the functioning of an arbitrary TM with only one head and with initial content of the 
                                                             
2 See also the strict test in Section 5. 

4 
 
work tape equal to the question (see [2]). Then note that in accordance with § 42 [1], there is an 
elementary arithmetic formula 𝒻(𝑥, 𝑦) with free occurrence of variables 𝑥 and 𝑦, which is true 
for 𝑥∈𝕄 and 𝑦∈𝕄 if and only if 𝑥 and 𝑦 are on the tape 𝛱. 
2. 
We consider SP as the tester constituent and explain this as follows. 
The original description of the test offered by A. Turing assumes the loyalty of SP to 
interrogator. Now if interrogator gives in his zero numbered test question the instructions on how 
SP should operate (for example, instructions in the form 𝔐𝒻 for OTM 𝔐𝛱), then SP, due to his 
loyalty, will fulfill these instructions. The instructions to simulate the OTM equipped with 
computable oracle are executable by a human. The problem of simulation of OTM equipped with 
non-computable oracle is beyond the scope of this paper. 
3. 
Tests with arbitrary Turing machines 
We shall consider tests under various conditions of reducibility of interrogator and SP to TM 
(Theorems 3.1 and 3.2) and prove at first the following lemma. 
LEMMA 3.1. 
1. For each enumerator ℰ that enumerates some communicable TMs3 and for each oracle 𝛷, 
the tester 𝑇ℰ
𝛷 is successful for ℰ*∞+.  
2. Tester 𝑇ℰ
𝛷 will finish the test 𝜏=  𝑇ℰ
𝛷, ℰ(𝑛),∗  not later than at the 𝑛th step. 
PROOF. The interrogator ℑℰ
𝛷 is mute, and due to inequality ℰ,𝑛- ≠ ℰ(𝑛) (λ𝑛), this 
interrogator successfully completes the test 𝜏 not later than at the 𝑛th step.  
 
              □ 
THEOREM 3.1. 
1. For each tester with SP that reduces to TM, the specified TM can pass the test; hence, 
any such tester is not successful for 𝕄 4. 
2. For each tester T of the type (≻𝕄, ≻𝕄), some generator ℌ can pass the test ,𝑇, ℌ-. 
3. The problem of constructing the generator ℌ that can pass the test , ℑ, 𝔔 , ℌ-, where ℑ 
and 𝔔 are arbitrary TMs, is algorithmically unsolvable. 
PROOF. The proof of Item 1 of the theorem arises from the definition of TM’s ability to pass 
the test. 
To prove Item 2 of the theorem consider ℌ= 𝔐
 , where TM 𝔐 is defined as follows: If 𝔍 
and 𝔔 are TMs, to which interrogator and SP are reduced, then 𝔐 is an autonomous TM that 
simulates , ℑ, 𝔔 , 𝔔,∗- and gives the answers that are the same as those of 𝔔 in this test. 
In order to prove Item 3 of the theorem assume that there exists TM 𝔅 such that 
generator ℌ= 𝔅(ℑθ𝔔) can pass the test , ℑ, 𝔔 , ℌ-. Then consider the following enumerator ℰ that 
enumerates 
generators: ℰ(𝑛) ≝𝔅 ℑ𝔄𝑛θ𝔄𝑛 . 
According 
to 
the 
definition 
of 
ℰ, 
we 
have ∀𝑛∈ℕ ℰ(𝑛) ⊳𝑇𝔄𝑛
𝛩  and thus ∀𝑇∈𝕋𝛩∃𝑛(ℰ(𝑛) ⊳𝑇). But Item 1 of Lemma 3.1 implies 
that ∃𝑇∈𝕋𝛩∀𝑛(ℰ(𝑛) ⋫𝑇).           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
              □ 
THEOREM 3.2. Some tester of the type (≻𝕄, ⊁𝕄) with dumb interrogator is successful 
for 𝕄. 
PROOF5. Let us describe the desired tester 𝑇=  𝐼, 𝑄 , where 𝑄 is equipped with oracle 𝛱: 
SP 𝑄, after receiving the 𝑛th test question, acts as follows: 
 
𝑄 calculates 𝔄𝑛 and queries its oracle 𝛱 whether 𝔄𝑛 recognizes itself. 
 
If the oracle answers in the affirmative, 𝑄 simulates the work of 𝔄𝑛 with question 𝔄𝑛, 
calculates the number 𝑡 of cycles that is necessary for 𝔄𝑛 to compute 𝔄𝑛(𝔄𝑛), and gives 
the answer 𝑡. 
                                                             
3 Note that if there is an enumerator ℰ that enumerates all communicable TMs, then ℰ*∞+ would 
include all generators, and then any generator would be similar to some element in ℛ*∞+,  
where ℛ(𝑛) ≝ℰ(𝑛)
 , but ℛ∉ℛ*∞+. 
4 Thus, for the successfulness of such tester either SP should not reduce to TM (see Theorem 3.2) or SP, 
which reduces to TM, should not belong to the class of TMs that are subjects of the test (see Section 4). 
5 The idea of the proof is based on Subsection 3 of Section 6 of [4]. 

5 
 
 
If the oracle answers negative, 𝑄 gives the answer 0. 
Interrogator 𝐼, after receiving the answers to the 𝑛th test question, follows the next 
procedure: 
 
If the answers are equal, 𝐼 continues the test. 
 
Otherwise, 𝐼 treats each nonzero answer as a notation of some natural number 𝑡, 
calculates 𝔄𝑛 and verifies, whether 𝔄𝑛 will answer the question 𝔄𝑛 for 𝑡 cycles; at 
negative result of verification 𝐼 finishes the test, locating SP as the source of another 
answer. 
If some TM 𝔑 passes the test ,𝑇, 𝔑-, then the problem of recognition of TMs not recognizing 
themselves is solvable by 𝔑, but it is well known that this is impossible (see, for example, § 42 [1]). 
To complete the proof, note that reducibility of 𝑄 to TM contradicts Item 1 of Theorem 3.1.               □ 
4. 
Testing for special classes of Turing machines 
In this section, we consider the tests for all communicable TMs, and the tests for communicable 
TMs with time or memory limitation (we can suppose that these TMs are close-to-reality models of 
computer programs). 
4.1. 
Testing for communicable Turing machines 
THEOREM 4.1. 
1. Any tester of the type (≻𝕄, ≻𝕄) is not successful for ℂ. 
2. Some tester of the type (≻𝕄, ⊁𝕄) is successful for ℂ. 
3. Some tester of the type (⊁𝕄, ≻𝕄) is successful for ℂ. 
PROOF. Items 1 and 2 of the theorem follow from Item 2 of Theorem 3.1 and from 
Theorem 3.2, respectively. To prove Item 3 of the theorem we shall describe the desired 
interrogator 𝐼, which is equipped with oracle 𝛱, and SP 𝔔∈𝕄. 
During the test 𝐼 makes use of parameter 𝑟∈ℕ0, supposing 𝑟= 0 at the beginning of the 
test. At the 𝑛th step of the test (𝑛∈ℕ) interrogator, by means of oracle 𝛱, finds the minimal 𝑘𝑛> 𝑟, 
at which: 
 
If 𝑛= 1, then 𝔄𝑘𝑛 recognizes itself. 
 
If 𝑛> 1, then 𝔄𝑘𝑛 answers the questions µ1, µ2, … , µ𝑛−1, 𝔄𝑘𝑛, where µ1, µ2, … , µ𝑛−1 are 
the previous test questions (each of which belongs to 𝕄). 
Thereafter 𝐼 assigns the value 𝑘𝑛 to 𝑟 and puts the 𝑛th test question µ𝑛≝𝔄𝑘𝑛
 
6. 
SP 𝔔 gives the answer µ𝑛(µ1, µ2, … , µ𝑛) to the 𝑛th test question. For the first time when 𝐼 
received two different answers, 𝐼 calculates the answer of 𝔔 and completes the test, locating 𝔔 as 
the source of its answer. 
Now consider the test , 𝐼, 𝔔 , ℭ- for arbitrary ℭ∈ℂ. The proof of the theorem follows 
from ℭ= 𝔄𝑘𝑛 for some 𝑛, while the reducibility of 𝐼 to TM contradicts Item 1 of this theorem, which 
is already proved7. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
              □ 
4.2. 
Testing for Turing machines limited in time 
We say that communicable TM ℭ is limited in time if there is an upper bound for number of cycles 
required to calculate each following answer of ℭ . 
THEOREM 4.2. Some tester of the type (≻𝕄, ≻𝕄) with dumb interrogator is successful for 
all communicable limited in time TMs. 
PROOF. For each TM 𝔐 and each 𝑡∈ℕ denote by  𝔐 𝑡 TM 𝔐 that operates under the 
control of special supervisor TM. The supervisor observes how 𝔐 processes with questions , and 
at the first time when 𝔐 has not provide an answer for 𝑡 work cycles, supervisor shuts down 𝔐 and 
gives  as the answer of  𝔐 𝑡 to the current and all subsequent questions. 
                                                             
6 Note that the interrogator's questions do not depend on the receiving answers. 
7 Note that Item 1 of  Theorem 3.1 implies that 𝔔∉ℂ, and this is also clear from the principle of how 𝔔 
works: If 𝔔∈ℂ, then 𝔔(µ1, µ2, … , µ𝑛) = 𝔔(µ1, µ2, … , µ𝑛) for some 𝑛. 

6 
 
Now construct an enumerator ℰ that enumerates  𝔐 𝑡 for all 𝔐∈𝕄 and all 𝑡∈ℕ. For 
each ℭ∈ℂ that is limited in time, an arbitrary TM in ℰ*∞+ is similar to ℭ , whereby the theorem 
statement follows from Item 1 of Lemma 3.1 8. 
 
 
                
 
              □ 
4.3. 
Testing for Turing machines limited in memory 
Consider a class of communicable TMs limited in memory, namely, TMs with a uniform upper 
bound for the number of states and a uniform upper bound for the length of the work tape segment 
that TM may scan in the processing of empty questions. 
THEOREM 4.3. Some tester of the type (≻𝕄, ≻𝕄) with dumb interrogator is successful for 
all communicable limited in memory TMs. 
PROOF. We need the following definitions: 
 
Denote by 𝕃 the set of all TMs that satisfy the specified limitation for the number of states and 
for the length of the initial content of the work tape. 
 
Denote by 𝕂 the set of all TMs from 𝕃∩ℂ that satisfy the specified limitation for the length of 
the work tape segment that TM makes use of in the processing of empty questions. 
Now calculate such 𝑁 that 𝕃⊆𝒜*𝑁+
 and put 𝕃𝑁≝*𝔐∈𝕃: 𝔐(λ𝑁) ≠∞+ (note 
that 𝕂⊆𝕃𝑁). Observing the work of 𝔐∈𝕃 that calculates 𝔐 𝑁 , it is possible to reject those 𝔐 
for which: 
 
The length of the work tape segment that 𝔐 makes use of indicates that 𝔐∉𝕂. 
 
At the processing of current question , the configuration of 𝔐 (i.e. the combination (state 
of 𝔐, position and content of the work tape)) was repeated, whence it follows that 𝔐∉𝕃𝑁. 
Thus we can reject all TMs from 𝕃\𝕃𝑁 and some TMs from 𝕃𝑁\𝕂. Then it is possible to 
construct an enumerator ℛ, based on 𝒜, on the definition of 𝕃, and on the described above 
rejection, such that 𝕂⊆ℛ*𝑁+ ⊆𝕃𝑁. Finally, it is possible to construct the following enumerator ℰ 
that enumerates generators:  
If 𝑛≤𝑁, then 
ℰ(𝑛),𝑘- ≝ ℛ(𝑛) λ𝑘  if 𝑘≤𝑁,
λ if 𝑘> 𝑁;                
  
and if 𝑛> 𝑁, then ∀𝑘∈ℕ(ℰ(𝑛),𝑘- ≝𝜆). 
For each ℭ∈𝕂 there is an arbitrary TM in ℰ*𝑁+ that is 𝑁-similar to ℭ , whereby the theorem 
statement follows from Item 2 of Lemma 3.1 9. 
 
 
 
 
 
             □ 
5. 
The strict Turing Test 
5.1. 
Definition of the strict Turing Test 
TM that is the subject of the test has some advantages: If this TM does not answer the test 
question simultaneously with SP, it passes the test (see Item 2.6.2). The choice of this condition is 
rather arbitrary and that allows us to consider the “strict” Turing test: 
 
TM fails the left (the right) strict test if either TM does not answer some test question 
(regardless whether SP has answered this question) or this test is finished with the 
correct result. 
 
TM fails the strict test if it fails both the left and the right strict test. 
We introduce for the strict tests notations  𝑇, 𝔐, 𝑙 ,  𝑇, 𝔐, 𝓇 ,  𝑇, 𝔐,∗ ,  𝑇, 𝔐 , 𝔐⊵𝑇,  
and 𝔐⋭T by analogy with the notations ,𝑇, 𝔐, 𝑙-, ,𝑇, 𝔐, 𝓇-, ,𝑇, 𝔐,∗-, ,𝑇, 𝔐-, 𝔐⊳𝑇, and 𝔐⋫T for 
the ordinary tests. 
It is clear that if 𝔐⋫𝑇, then 𝔐⋭𝑇. Therefore, the statements of Lemma 3.1, Theorems 3.2, 
4.2, 4.3, and Items 2 and 3 of Theorem 4.1 are extended to the case of the strict test. A different 
situation arises with the statement of Theorem 3.1 (and its corollary, Item 1 of Theorem 4.1): If SP 
of the tester 𝑇 reduces to TM 𝔔, then 𝔔 may fail the strict test  𝑇, 𝔔  (take for example TM 𝔔 that 
                                                             
8 Note that Item 1 of Theorem 3.1 implies that SP of the described tester is not limited in time, and this 
is also clear from the principle of how this SP works. 
9 Note that from Item 1 of Theorem 3.1 it follows that SP of the described tester does not belong to 𝕂, 
and this is also clear from the principle of how this SP works. 

7 
 
does not answer any question). However, the modified Theorem 3.1, given in following subsection, 
is valid for the strict test. 
5.2. 
Successfulness of the testers for the strict Turing test 
THEOREM 5.1. 
1. For each tester, which SP is reducible to TM, an arbitrary TM can pass the strict test 
with this tester10. 
2. For each tester T of the type (≻𝕄, ≻𝕄) some generator ℌ can pass the strict 
test  𝑇, ℌ 11. 
3. For each tester T of the type (≻𝕄, ≻𝕄) some communicable TM ℭ can pass the strict 
test  𝑇, ℭ 12. 
4. For a given oracle 𝛷 and for any TMs ℑ and 𝔔, the problem of constructing the TM 𝔐 
that can pass the strict test   ℑ𝛷, 𝔔 , 𝔐  is algorithmically unsolvable13. 
PROOF OF ITEMS 1, 2, AND 3 OF THEOREM 5.1. 
For an arbitrary tester 𝑇, denote by 𝔔 the TM to which SP of this tester is reduced, and 
consider the strict test 𝜏=  𝑇, 𝔔,∗ . If 𝔔 answers all test questions, then the proof of Items 1 and 2 
of the theorem coincides with the proof of Items 1 and 2 of Theorem 3.1. Assume now that 𝔔 does 
not answer the 𝑛th test question in the test 𝜏, where 𝑛∈ℕ. Then 𝔔 fails the test 𝜏, but generator ℌ, 
which first 𝑛– 1 answers are equal to those of 𝔔 in the test and the following answers are equal to , 
will pass the test  𝑇, ℌ,∗ . That completes the proof of Items 1 and 2 of Theorem 5.1. 
Finally, generator is a communicable TM and hence Item 3 of Theorem 5.1 is the corollary of 
Item 2 of Theorem 5.1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          □ 
5.3. 
Lemmas 
To prove Item 4 of Theorem 5.1 let us: 
 
Fix the oracle 𝛷 from the hypothesis of this item. 
 
Assume the existence of TM 𝔉 that was specified in Item 4 of the theorem: 
𝔉(ℑ𝔔) ⊵ ℑ𝛷, 𝔔 . 
 
Prove the following lemmas. 
LEMMA 5.1. For each SP 𝔔 and each TM 𝔐, the following values are equal for  𝑇𝔔
𝛷, 𝔐, ℓ  
and  𝑇𝔔
𝛷, 𝔐, 𝓇 : 
1. The numbers of tests' steps. 
2. The numbers (maybe infinite) and contents of answers of 𝔔. 
3. The numbers (maybe infinite) and contents of answers of 𝔐. 
PROOF. By definition of interrogator ℑ𝔔
𝛷, it treats the answers of the subjects of the test 
symmetrically, and that proves Item 1 of the lemma. Items 2 and 3 of the lemma follow from Item 1 
of this lemma and from the dumbness of  ℑ𝔔
𝛷. 
 
 
 
 
 
              □ 
Taking Lemma 5.1 into account for the strict tests with a tester that has a form of 𝑇𝔔
𝛷, we 
shall discuss the number of the steps in the test and the answers of the subjects of the test without 
specifying the orientation of the test (the left one or the right one). 
To formulate and prove Lemmas 5.2, 5.3, 5.4, and 5.5 we need the following definitions and 
notations. 
 
Denote by    the number of words in the sequence  of words over 𝔸; we say that 
sequences of words  and  satisfy the relation ⥽ if any of the following cases holds: 
 
0 =   <  μ . 
 
∞≠  <  μ  and  is the beginning of . 
 
  =  μ = ∞ and  = . 
                                                             
10 An analogue of Item 1 of Theorem 3.1. 
11 An analogue of Item 2 of Theorem 3.1. 
12 An analogue of Item 1 of Theorem 4.1. 
13 That accentuates the difference between the strict and the ordinary tests: See Item 1 of Theorem 3.1. 

8 
 
 
Fix some SP 𝔔 and put 𝔔0 ≝𝔔, 𝔔𝑛+1 ≝𝔉 ℑ𝔔𝑛𝔔𝑛 , 𝐼𝑛≝ℑ𝔔𝑛
𝛷, 𝑇𝑛≝𝑇𝔔𝑛
𝛷, where 𝑛∈ℕ0. 
 
For 𝑛> 0 and the strict test  𝑇𝑛–1, 𝔔𝑛 : 
 
Denote by (𝑛) the sequence of answers of SP 𝔔𝑛−1 in this test. 
 
Denote by (𝑛) = γ1
(𝑛), γ2
(𝑛), … the sequence of answers of TM 𝔔𝑛 that is the subject of 
this test. 
LEMMA 5.2. ∀𝑛∈ℕ (𝑛) ⥽(𝑛) . 
PROOF. For 𝑛> 0, 𝔔𝑛⊵𝑇𝑛–1. Thus, owing to the specificity of how interrogator 𝐼𝑛 operates, 
only the two following cases are possible: 
1. The number of test steps is infinite, and moreover, (𝑛) = (𝑛). 
2. SP 𝔔𝑛–1 has not answered to the 𝑗th (𝑗≥1) test question that has been answered by 
TM 𝔔𝑛. Thus  γ(𝑛) =  (𝑛) + 1 and this implies that for 𝑗= 1, the equation  (𝑛) = 0 is satisfied, 
and for 𝑗> 1,  (𝑛) = γ1
(𝑛), γ2
(𝑛), … , γ𝑗−1
(𝑛) . 
 
 
                
  
 
              □ 
LEMMA 5.3. ∀𝑛∈ℕ (𝑛) ⥽(𝑛+1) . 
PROOF. Consider the tests  𝑇𝑛–1, 𝔔𝑛,∗  and  𝑇𝑛, 𝔔𝑛+1,∗ . The interrogators 𝐼𝑛−1 and 𝐼𝑛 are 
dump, and 𝔔𝑛+1 ⊵𝑇𝑛. Thus (𝑛) = (𝑛+1) or (𝑛) ⥽(𝑛+1), due to the definition of 𝐼𝑛. Then the proof 
follows from Lemma 5.2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
              □ 
LEMMA 5.4. ∀𝑛∈ℕ( γ(𝑛) ≥𝑛). 
PROOF. Lemma 5.2 implies that  γ(1) > 0, and for 𝑛> 1 the statement of the lemma follows 
from Lemma 5.3. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               
              □ 
LEMMA 5.5. For each 𝑛∈ℕ and for every 𝑘, where 0 < 𝑘≤ γ(𝑛) , the word γ𝑘
(𝑛) is 
calculated algorithmically. 
PROOF. Owing to definition of ℑ𝔐, this TM can be algorithmically constructed from TM 𝔐. 
Then, due to definition of 𝔔𝑛, every ℑ𝔔𝑛 and thus every 𝔔𝑛 can be algorithmically constructed from 
TM 𝔔. Finally, γ𝑘
(𝑛) = 𝔔𝑛 λ𝑘 .  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
              □ 
5.4. 
Proof of Item 4 of Theorem 5.1 
To prove Item 4 of Theorem 5.1 assign to each 𝔔∈𝕄 the following generator ℌ𝔔: ℌ𝔔,𝑛- ≝γ𝑛
(𝑛) 
(ℌ𝔔 is well defined due to Lemmas 5.4 and 5.5). Now, if  is the sequence of all answers of ℌ𝔔, then 
according to Lemmas 5.3 and 5.4, (1) ⥽, hence  𝔔1 ⊵𝑇𝔔
𝛷 ⇒ ℌ𝔔⊵𝑇𝔔
𝛷 ⇒ ℌ𝔔⊳𝑇𝔔
𝛷 . Now 
construct the following enumerator ℰ that enumerates generators: ℰ(𝑛) ≝ℌ𝔄𝑛. We 
have ∀𝑛∈ℕ ℰ(𝑛) ⊳𝑇𝔄𝑛
𝛷  and thus ∀𝑇∈𝕋𝛷∃𝑛(ℰ(𝑛) ⊳𝑇). However, according to Item 1 of 
Lemma 3.1, ∃𝑇∈𝕋𝛷∀𝑛(ℰ(𝑛) ⋫𝑇). This contradiction proves that 𝔉 does not exist. 
      
              □ 
6. 
Conclusion 
The summary of results is given in Figure 1.1 (see Section 1). Note that some results can be 
extended to the case when each participant of the test can be an oracle Turing machine. 
7. 
Definitions and notations 
In tables given below, the global definitions and notations (terms) are shown with 
specifying the number of the subsection, where the corresponding definition or notation was 
denoted. 
7.1. 
Definitions and notations 
Sets 
Symbols, words, and 
related concepts 
Special TMs 
Testers, interrogators, tests 
𝔸, 𝔸* 
2.1.1 
θ 
2.1.1 
𝔐
  
2.2.5 
 𝐼, 𝑄  
2.5.1 
𝔹 
2.1.4 
λ 
2.1.1 
𝔄𝑘 
2.2.7 
𝑇𝔔
𝛷 
2.6.4 

9 
 
ℕ, ℕ0 
2.1.2 
λ𝑛 
2.1.1 
ℰ*𝑁+ 
(ℰ*∞+) 
2.2.7 
𝑇𝑛 
5.3 
𝕄 
2.2.2 
ω 
2.1.3 
𝒜 
2.2.7 
ℑ𝔔 
2.6.4 
ℂ 
2.2.4 
(𝑛) 
5.3 
ℰ 
2.2.8 
𝐼𝑛 
5.3 
𝕋𝛷 
2.6.4 
(𝑛), γ𝑘
(𝑛) 
5.3 
𝔔𝑛 
5.3 
,𝑇, 𝔐, ℓ-, ,𝑇, 𝔐, 𝓇-, ,𝑇, 𝔐,∗- 
2.6.1 
Relations 
   
5.3 
𝔉 
5.3 
,𝑇, 𝔐- 
2.6.2 
 
2.4.3 
Oracles, OTM 
Formula 
 𝑇, 𝔐, 𝑙 ,  𝑇, 𝔐, 𝓇 , 
 𝑇, 𝔐,∗ ,  𝑇, 𝔐  
5.1 
≻, ⊁ 
2.4.3 
𝛱 
2.3.2 
𝒻 
2.7.1 
Answers of (O)TM to questions 
⊳, ⋫ 
2.6.2 
𝛩 
2.3.3 
 
𝑉(), 𝑉() = ∞ 
2.2.4, 
2.4.2 
⊵, ⋭ 
5.1 
𝔐𝛷 
2.4.1 
 
ℌ,𝑛- 
2.2.4 
⥽ 
5.3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.2. 
Terms 
answer of (O)TM 
2.2.3, 2.4.2 
left (right) test 
2.6.1 
reducible to TM 
2.4.3 
answers to the 
questions, that, (O)TM 
2.2.4, 2.4.2 
limited in memory, TM 
4.3 
similar OTMs 
2.4.2 
autonomous TM 
2.2.4 
limited in time, TM 
4.2 
SP 
2.5.1 
communicable TM 
2.2.4 
N-similar OTMs 
2.4.2 
strict test 
5.1 
dumb interrogator 
2.5.3 
oracle 
2.3.1 
successful tester 
2.6.3 
enumerator 
2.2.6 
oracle interface of (O)TM 
2.2.1, 2.4.1 
test question 
2.6.1 
fails the test, that, TM 
2.6.2 
OTM 
2.4.1 
tester 
2.5.1 
generator 
2.2.4 
output of (O)TM 
2.2.1, 2.4.1 
TM 
2.2.1 
input of (O)TM 
2.2.1, 2.4.1 
question to (O)TM 
2.2.3, 2.4.2 
type of OTM 
2.4.3 
interrogator 
2.5.1 
recognition of TM 
2.2.4 
type of tester 
2.5.2 
8.
