arXiv:1301.5513v2  [cond-mat.mes-hall]  8 Feb 2018
Structural phase transition and band gap of uniaxially deformed (6, 0) carbon nanotube
Nikolai A. Poklonskia,∗, Sergey V. Ratkevicha, Sergey A. Vyrkoa, Eugene F. Kislyakova, Oleg N. Bubel’a, Andrei M. Popovb,
Yurii E. Lozovikb,c, Nguyen Ngoc Hieud, Nguyen Ai Viete
aPhysics Department, Belarusian State University, 220030 Minsk, Belarus
bInstitute of Spectroscopy, 142190 Troitsk, Moscow Region, Russia
cMoscow Institute of Physics and Technology, 141701, Dolgoprudny, Moscow Region, Russia
dPhysics Department, Sai Gon University, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam
eInstitute of Physics and Electronics, Hanoi, Vietnam
Abstract
The atomic and band structures of the (6, 0) zigzag carbon nanotube at its axial elongation are calculated by semiempirical molecular
orbital and by tight-binding methods. The ground state of the nanotube is found to have a Kekule structure with four types of bonds
and diﬀerence between lengths of long and short bonds of about 0.005 nm. The structural phase transition is revealed at ≈9%
elongation, resulting in a quinoid structure with two types of bonds. This structural phase transition is followed by the transition
from a narrow gap to moderate gap semiconductor. Validity of the semiempirical PM3 method is discussed.
Keywords: Zigzag carbon nanotube, Molecular orbital calculations, Kekule structure, Phase transition, Tight-binding
approximation, Band gap
1. Introduction
The studies of structural, electronic and elastic properties of
carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are actual in connection with per-
spectives of their applications in nanoelectronic devices and in
composite materials [1]. These properties are also of fundamen-
tal interest, particularly for physics of phase transitions. For ex-
ample, such structural phase transitions as the commensurate–
incommensurate phase transition in doublewalled CNTs [2, 3]
and the spontaneous symmetry breaking with formation of cor-
rugations along nanotube axis [4] have been considered.
The possibility of Peierls transition in CNTs was ﬁrst con-
sidered in [5]. As a result of this transition, metallic CNTs
become semiconducting at low temperature and Peierls distor-
tions of the nanotube lattice lead to a Kekule structure (see
Fig. 1a). The Kekule structure can arise in a (m, n) CNT in
the case that m −n is multiples of 3 [6]. The Peierls gap [6–
8], Peierls transition temperature [5, 6, 8–12] and bond lengths
changes [6, 7, 13] due to Peierls distortions were estimated for
(n, n) armchair CNTs. Static twist deformation of the (5, 5)
armchair nanotube lattice at the Peierls transition was also pre-
dicted [11, 12]. The other type of Peierls distortions was found
for the semiconductor chiral CNTs [6, 14]. The Kekule struc-
ture of the ground state was found for the ﬁnite length armchair
CNTs using density functional theory [15–17] and semiempir-
ical molecular orbital [17] calculations. X-ray crystallographic
analysis of chemically synthesized short (5, 5) CNTs shows the
Kekule bond length alternation pattern for their structure [17].
∗Corresponding author

Although the Kekule structure can arise in (n, 0) zigzag
CNTs, if n is multiples of 3, such possibility has not yet been
considered.
The density functional theory calculations per-
formed for short zigzag CNTs show that pattern of short and
long bonds arise [18, 19], however this pattern cannot be as-
signed to the Kekule structure (as it is deﬁned in [6, 20]). Previ-
ously [13] we have revealed the Kekule structure of the ground
state of (5, 5) armchair CNT by semiempirical molecular or-
bital calculations and found two deformational structural phase
transitions connected with spontaneous symmetry breaking and
controlled by uniaxial deformation of the CNT.
In the present Letter we consider the possibility of the Kekule
structure of the ground state and structural phase transitions
in (3n, 0) zigzag CNTs on the example of the inﬁnite (6, 0)
CNT. We present the semiempirical molecular orbital PM3 [21]
calculations of the internal energy and atomic structure of a
uniaxially deformed inﬁnite (6, 0) CNT up to 12% elonga-
tion.
For calculated atomic structure we use simple tight-
binding (H¨uckel) [22] calculations to gain qualitative insight
into changes of the electron energy band structure of a uniaxi-
ally deformed (6, 0) CNT at structural phase transitions. Geom-
etry optimization of an inﬁnite (6, 0) CNT was also performed
by density functional theory (DFT) calculations.
2. Methodology
Semiempirical molecular orbital method PM3 [21] modiﬁed
for one-dimensional inﬁnite periodic structures [23] is used to
calculate the internal energy and atomic structure of the (6, 0)
CNT under uniaxial strain. Calculations were performed using
the MOPAC2007 code [24].
Preprint submitted to Chem. Phys. Lett.
June 25, 2018

The adequacy of the PM3 parameterization of the Hamilto-
nian has been already demonstrated [25] by the calculation of
bond lengths of the C60 fullerene with Ih symmetry: the cal-
culated values of the bond lengths coincide with the measured
ones [26] at the level of experimental accuracy of 10−4 nm at
liquid helium temperature. The PM3 parameterization gives
also correct bond length in graphite [27]. Comparison of dif-
ferent types of semiempirical calculations [28] shows that the
PM3 parameterization gives the best accuracy for structure and
internal energy of carbon nanostructures.
To check the convergence of calculated quantities versus the
size of the computational cell the structure of the ground state
of the inﬁnite undeformed (6, 0) CNT is obtained with the use
of computational cells comprising 72, 96 and 120 atoms cor-
responding to three, four and ﬁve translational periods of the
CNT, respectively. The results presented below are obtained for
the computational cell comprising 96 atoms that allows to cal-
culate the internal energy and bond lengths with the accuracy
within 0.4% and 0.1%, respectively. Calculations were per-
formed for the inﬁnite CNT with the use of Born–von Karman
boundary conditions along the nanotube axis with full geome-
try optimization (without any symmetry constraints) including
the computational cell length.
For the computational cell comprising 96 carbon atoms, we
have also performed DFT calculations of the nanotube geome-
try within package Quantum-ESPRESSO (program PWscf for
plane wave pseudopotential method) [29]. Periodic boundary
conditions along the nanotube axis with full geometry optimiza-
tion were used, spin-polarization was not taken into account.
PWscf program was conﬁgured to use Perdew–Zunger [30]
local density approximation (LDA) of exchange-correlation en-
ergy (pseudopotential C.pz-vbc.UPF). Energy cutoﬀof plane
waves was set to 408 eV. Geometry optimization was performed
within a quasi-Newton scheme combined with the Broyden–
Fletcher–Goldfarb–Shanno algorithm for Hessian updating (see
also [31]).
We have also checked DFT calculations by use
of Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) parametrization [32] of
the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) of exchange-
correlation energy. It was found no signiﬁcant diﬀerence be-
tween the results of GGA and LDA calculations.
In order to check the accuracy of the used DFT method we
have calculated geometry of fullerene C60 and compared ob-
tained bond lengths with the experiment [26]. Geometry opti-
mization by PWscf showed certain dimerization of C–C bond
lengths in C60 molecule. The deviation of the PWscf calcula-
tions from the average measured values was within 1.3%, while
for PM3 it was less than 0.2%.
3. Ground state structure of (6, 0) nanotube
Contrary to the armchair CNTs [6, 13], the multiplication of
the translational period along the nanotube axis is not necessary
for zigzag CNTs with the Kekule structure. In the work [33] a
possibility of Peierls gap opening was considered in the elec-
tron energy spectrum of the (3n, 0) CNTs in the dynamic regime
(due to the interaction of electrons with longitudinal optical
y
x
a
b
b
c
d
d
lt
b
a
lt
a
a
a
b
b
a
Nanotube axis
phase B
phase A
Figure 1: The translational unit cell of the (6,0) nanotube, unfolded on the
ﬁgure plane, at the ground state without deformation (a) and at relative axial
elongation ε = 10% (b); lt is the translational period along the nanotube axis
y. Bond lengths: (a) Kekule structure: a = 0.1393 nm, b = 0.1408 nm and
c = 0.1433 nm, d = 0.1447 nm; (b) quinoid structure: a′ = 0.1449 nm and
b′ = 0.1541 nm.
phonons at the boundary of the Brillouin zone). Since the wave-
length of such phonons is twice as large as a translational period
of the CNT, this leads to the doubling of the translational pe-
riod of the system. In order to check whether the static Peierls
distortions are realized for the (6, 0) CNT, we performed PM3
calculations with the length of computational cell equal to four
translational periods of the CNT. These calculations as well as
the calculations with the length of computational cell equal to
three and ﬁve periods reveal ordinary translational period along
nanotube axis for the (6, 0) CNT.
Our calculations give the Kekule structure for the (6, 0) CNT
at the ground state (ε = 0), see Fig. 1a. There are four types of
bonds which are arranged alternatively in the lattice. The bonds
a and c are directed along and the bonds b and d are skewed
with respect to the nanotube axis. The considerable diﬀerence
of 0.005 nm approximately is found between lengths of short
bonds a ≈b and long bonds c ≈d.
Contrary to the PM3 method, the DFT calculations show
only the quinoid structure of the (6, 0) CNT and do not show
the Kekule structure for any elongation of the nanotube. How-
ever, the DFT method seems to be less accurate in geometry
calculations of carbon nanostructures than the PM3 method as
being compared to experimental data (see the last paragraph of
the methodology section).
4. Deformational structural transition in (6, 0) nanotube
The structure and internal energy of the (6, 0) CNT are cal-
culated with full geometry optimization for relative axial elon-
gations of the CNT ε = 0–12% (ε = (l −l0)/l0, where l is the
length of the computational cell and l0 = 1.703 nm is the length
of the computational cell at the ground state). The computa-
tional cell comprising N = 96 carbon atoms with the length
of four translational periods of CNT along the nanotube axis is
used.
The high kinetic barrier for formation of Stone–Wales de-
fects excludes their spontaneous formation at room temperature
up to the elongation ε = 15% [34] (see also consideration of
2

0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0.14
0.145
0.15
0.155
b
a
aCC, nm
phase A
phase B
3%
0.16
d
c
b
a
, %
t ≈ 9%
Figure 2: Dependence of the bond lengths a, b, c, d, a′ and b′ of the (6, 0)
nanotube on the relative axial elongation ε. Phase A corresponds to the Kekule
structure, phase B corresponds to the quinoid structure. Left vertical dotted line
indicates the lost of stability for the metastable phase B at the relative elongation
ε ≈3%. Right vertical dotted line indicates the phase transition at the critical
relative elongation εt ≈9%.
these defects formation at bending deformation of CNT [35]).
Thus, we do not consider nanotube structures with Stone–Wales
defects. Note also that we consider CNTs at elongations which
are well under the fracture value (ε = 16% according to AM1
calculations [36] and ε = 20% according to PM3 and density
functional theory-based calculations [37]).
The following phases with diﬀerent symmetries of the struc-
ture have been found for the uniaxially deformed (6, 0) CNT:
the phase A with the Kekule structure at all considered elon-
gations ε from 0% to 12% and the phase B with the quinoid
structure at the elongations ε from 3% to 12%. The quinoid
structure of the CNT at the great elongation is shown in Fig. 1b.
The PM3 calculated dependences of the bond lengths on the
elongation ε are presented in Fig. 2.
The PM3 calculations of the nanotube internal energy U of
the (6, 0) CNT at zero temperature as a function of square of
the relative elongation is shown in Fig. 3a. Since we study the
system at constant length and temperature, the ground state is
determined by the minimum of the system internal energy. The
diﬀerence of the internal energies UA−UB of the phases A and B
is shown in Fig. 3b. The change of sign of the energy diﬀerence
UA −UB means that the structural phase transition takes place
at zero temperature at the critical elongation εt ≈9%. Thus, at
zero temperature, the phase A is stable at the elongation ε < εt
and the phase B (see Fig. 1b) is stable at ε > εt. The phase A
at elongation ε > εt and the phase B at elongation ε < εt are
metastable.
The dependence of the bond lengths (Fig. 2) on the elonga-
tion ε demonstrates that the transition from the Kekule structure
with four types of bonds to the quinoid structure with two types
of bonds takes place with abrupt change of the structure of the
CNT. Thus, ﬁrst-order structural phase transition controlled by
the nanotube elongation takes place, at zero temperature at the
critical elongation εt ≈9% where the internal energies of the
phases coincide (see Fig. 3). At nonzero temperature, phase
transitions in one-dimensional systems have a crossover char-
2
4
8
−10
−5
5
UA − UB, meV  atom
0
12
0
50
100
0
0.2
U − U0, eV  atom
0.4
150
phase B
phase A
10
6
Kekule
quinoid
a
b
, %
(  , %)2
t ≈ 9%
t ≈ 9%
Figure 3: Dependence of the internal energy U of the (6, 0) nanotube on the
square of the relative elongation ε2 at zero temperature (a) and dependence of
the diﬀerence of the internal energies of the phases A and B on the elongation
ε (b). Vertical dotted line indicates the phase transition at the critical relative
elongation εt ≈9%.
acter (see discussion for structural phase transitions in armchair
CNTs in [13] and references therein). The elastic constants (co-
eﬃcient of elasticity, Poisson ratio, torsion modulus) and spe-
ciﬁc heat of the CNT also abruptly change at the phase transi-
tion. Thus, the structural phase transition can be determined by
peculiarities of these quantities on temperature or the elonga-
tion.
The dependence of the internal energy U on the length l =
(1+ε)l0 of the computational cell is interpolated by the Hooke’s
law for the elongation range ε = 0–1%
U −U0 = ν(l −l0)2
2N
= νε2l2
0
2N ,
(1)
where ν is the coeﬃcient of elasticity of a CNT with the length
l0 = 1.703 nm at the ground state and number of atoms N.
Taking into account the coeﬃcient of elasticity ν deﬁned by
Eq. (1), the Young’s modulus of a CNT at the elongation ε = 0
has the following form:
Y =
νl0
2πRw,
(2)
where R = 0.241 nm is the radius of the CNT correspond-
ing to the elongation ε = 0 and w = 0.34 nm is the eﬀective
3

0
0.5
0
2
4 a
1
1
2
1
E, eV
0.25
0
0.5
0
2
4 b
0.25
0
0.5
0
2
4 c
0.25
0
0.5
0
2
4 d
0.25
0
0.5
0
2
4 e
0.25
2
2
2
1
2
2
2
1
2
2
k, 2    lt
k, 2    lt
k, 2    lt
k, 2    lt
k, 2    lt
Figure 4: The band structure of the (6,0) nanotube with the Kekule structure (a–c), the quinoid structure (d), and the structure with all equal bond lengths (e) at
diﬀerent elongations: (a) ε = 0 (ground state), (b) ε = 2.3%, (c) ε = 8%, (d) ε = 10%, (e) ε = 0. The numbers in parts (a), (d) and (e) indicate degeneracy of
energy bands. Only conduction bands are shown. The valence bands are the same as the conduction bands, but with opposite sign. Insets show corresponding bond
alternation patterns.
thickness of the wall [37–41]. (In Eq. (2) the quantity 2πRw is
the cross-section area of a nanotube.) As a result, the value
Y ≈1.2 TPa is calculated. The obtained value of Young’s
modulus of the (6, 0) CNT with the Kekule structure is in good
agreement with the values for this CNT with the quinoid struc-
ture: 0.9 TPa by ﬁnite element modelling based on molecu-
lar mechanics [38], 1.42 TPa by molecular dynamics simula-
tion using LAMMPS [39] and 0.95 TPa by our PWscf DFT
calculations. In addition, it agrees well with experimentally
determined value 1.25 TPa for singlewalled CNTs of diame-
ters about 1 nm [40, 41]. Note, that this result correlates also
with calculations for another zigzag nanotubes: 1.1 TPa for the
(10, 0) CNT by PM3 calculations [37], 1.14 TPa for the (9, 0)
CNT by Hartree–Fock method [42], 1.05 TPa for the (10, 0)
CNT [43], 0.94 TPa for the (10, 0) CNT [37] and 1.04 TPa for
the (9, 0) CNT [44] by density functional theory-based calcula-
tions.
Since the radius R depends on the elongation ε, it is not con-
venient to use Eq. (2) for strained CNTs. Moreover, the co-
eﬃcient of elasticity ν is the quantity which can be measured
experimentally. Thus, we have calculated the abrupt change
of the coeﬃcient of elasticity at the structural phase transition:
νB = 0.97νA, where νA and νB are the coeﬃcients of elasticity
for the phases A and B, respectively (the coeﬃcients of elastic-
ity are calculated for the elongation range ε = 8–10%).
5. Electronic structure of deformed (6, 0) CNT
Both zigzag and armchair CNTs with the Kekule structure
are semiconducting at the ground state with the band gap being
proportional to the diﬀerence of the hopping (resonance) inte-
grals corresponding to bonds of diﬀerent types [20], while the
same CNTs with all bonds of equal length are metallic [20].
(Note, that tight-binding calculations, which take into consid-
eration not only three nearest atoms but also two next-nearest
ones [45], also give zero band gap for (6, 0) zigzag CNT with
all equal bond lengths.) Thus, the accurate calculations of the
atomic structure of the deformed CNT are necessary to calcu-
late the band structure. To gain a qualitative insight in the en-
ergy spectrum of π-electrons in the uniaxially deformed (6, 0)
CNT, we perform the tight-binding calculations [22] for the
PM3 calculated atomic structure.
Only interaction between
nearest-neighbour atoms is taken into account. The hopping
integral is used in the Harrison’s form [46] t = t0(a0/aCC)2,
where t0 = 2.6 eV is the standard value of the hopping integral
in a CNT for the C–C bond length a0 = 0.142 nm [47, 48], and
aCC is the calculated bond length.
The band structure of the deformed (6, 0) CNT with the bond
lengths and angles taken from the PM3 calculations is obtained
by the diagonalization of the matrixes (A.2) and (A.3) for ε =
0–9% and ε > 9%, respectively, and shown in Fig. 4. It is
revealed that the deformed (6, 0) CNT is semiconducting for all
considered elongations.
All (3n, 0) zigzag CNTs with equal bond lengths were found
to be metallic at zero elongation [22] (the calculated band struc-
ture of the (6, 0) CNT with all bonds of equal length aCC =
0.142 nm is shown in Fig. 4e). Here we have performed the
tight-binding calculations of the band structure of the uniaxi-
ally deformed (6, 0) CNT with equal bond lengths (that is the
atomic structure changes only due to the changes of angles be-
tween bonds,
γ = 2 arcsin[(3(ε + 1))1/2/2]),
while bond lengths remain equal. It is found that the band struc-
ture of such CNT does not change with the elongation.
The calculated band gap (in the center of the Brillouin zone)
in the electron energy spectrum of the (6, 0) CNT as a function
of the elongation ε is shown in Fig. 5. For the Kekule structure
the band gap linearly increases (from 187 meV to 311 meV)
with the elongation for the elongation range ε = 0–2.3% and
linearly decreases (from 311 meV to 88 meV) for the elonga-
tion range ε = 2.3–9%. The bond lengths linearly increase with
the elongation. The phase transition from the narrow band gap
(≈0.1 eV) to the moderate band gap (≈0.5 eV) semiconductor
4

0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Eg, eV
, %
t ≈ 9%
Figure 5: The band gap Eg in the π-electron energy spectrum of the uniaxially
deformed (6, 0) CNT versus its axial elongation ε. (The solid line is a guide to
the eye).
occurs in the electron subsystem of the CNT at the elongation
εt ≈9% corresponding to the structural phase transition. Un-
like the Kekule structure, the band gap of the quinoid structure
increases (from 513 meV to 730 meV) with the elongation for
the considered elongation range ε = 9–12%.
6. Strain sensor based on zigzag CNT
At present, the standard methods of the nanometer-scale de-
tection of strain are based on micrometer size silicon piezoresis-
tors or MOS transistors with piezoresistive channels [49]. Re-
cently, a strain sensor based on commensurate-incommensurate
phase transition in the double-walled CNTs was proposed [2].
Since the resistance of an undoped (intrinsic) semiconductor
depends exponentially on the band gap, the predicted eﬀect of
the abrupt band gap change at the structural phase transition
controlled by the axial elongation of the (6, 0) CNT can be de-
tected by measurements of the CNT resistance. Thus, a strain
sensor based on measurements of the resistance of the uniax-
ially stretched (6, 0) CNT can be proposed. The preliminary
stretched (6, 0) CNT with the initial elongation εini can be at-
tached to electrodes which are positioned on controlled object
(see Fig. 6). If this object is compressed or extended, the elon-
gation of the CNT is ε = εini + εobj, where εobj is the object
elongation. At the object elongation εobj = εt −εini, which cor-
responds to the phase transition in the CNT, the abrupt change
of the resistance can be detected. The proposed strain sensor
can be used for detection both compression and extension of
the object for the initial elongations of the CNT εini > εt and
εini < εt, respectively. Since the value of a typical diameter of
a single-walled CNT is within several nm, a minimal size of a
strain sensor is limited mainly by a minimal possible width of
the electrodes.
The (6, 0) CNT is considered here as an example of (3n, 0)
zigzag CNTs. We believe that the phase transition from a nar-
row gap to a moderate gap semiconductor is possible also at
elongation of other (3n, 0) CNTs. Thus, the proposed strain
sensor can be based also on (3n, 0) CNTs as well as on (n, n)
armchair CNTs, where a narrow gap semiconductor to metal
transition is predicted at elongation [13]. A set of (3n, 0) or
Object to be controlled  (insulator)
(6,0) CNT
Electrode
 =   ini +   obj
Figure 6: The nanometer-scale strain sensor based on the stretched (6, 0) CNT.
If initial nanotube elongation is less than critical one εini < εt, then the strain
sensor operates for registering an extension of an object (εobj > 0), and if εini >
εt, it operates for registering a compression of an object (εobj < 0).
(n, n) with diﬀerent chiral indices (and thus with diﬀerent criti-
cal elongations εt) or with identical chiral indices but with dif-
ferent initial elongations εini can be attached to the same pair of
the electrodes. For such a scheme of the strain sensor, the tran-
sitions take place for diﬀerent CNTs at diﬀerent elongations of
the controlled object, therefore the sensor can be used not only
to detect the presence of strain in the controlled object but also
to measure the value of this strain.
7. Conclusions
The ﬁrst order deformational structural phase transition at
zero temperature is revealed at the critical uniaxial elongation
εt ≈9% of the (6, 0) carbon nanotube by semiempirical PM3
molecular orbital calculations. Namely, it is found that the (6, 0)
nanotube has the Kekule structure with four types of bonds and
the quinoid structure with two types of bonds for the elonga-
tions less and greater than the critical value εt, respectively.
Geometry optimization by the semiempirical PM3 method is
found to be better than the DFT results as compared to exper-
imental data on the C60 molecule. Tight-binding band struc-
ture calculations show that this structural phase transition is
followed by the transition in the electron subsystem from the
narrow gap (≈0.1 eV) to the moderate gap (≈0.5 eV) semi-
conductor. A strain sensor of nanometer size based on mea-
surements of resistance of the uniaxially stretched nanotube is
proposed.
