Limits of Preprocessing∗
Stefan Szeider
Vienna University of Technology, Vienna, Austria

Abstract
We present a ﬁrst theoretical analysis of the power of polynomial-time preprocessing for important
combinatorial problems from various areas in AI. We consider problems from Constraint Satisfaction,
Global Constraints, Satisﬁability, Nonmonotonic and Bayesian Reasoning. We show that, subject to a
complexity theoretic assumption, none of the considered problems can be reduced by polynomial-time
preprocessing to a problem kernel whose size is polynomial in a structural problem parameter of the
input, such as induced width or backdoor size. Our results provide a ﬁrm theoretical boundary for the
performance of polynomial-time preprocessing algorithms for the considered problems.
Keywords:
Fixed-Parameter Tractability, Constraint Satisfaction, Global Constraints, Satisﬁability,
Bayesian Networks, Normal Logic Programs, Computational Complexity.
1
Introduction
Many important computational problems that arise in various areas of AI are intractable. Nevertheless,
AI research was very successful in developing and implementing heuristic solvers that work well on real-
world instances. An important component of virtually every solver is a powerful polynomial-time prepro-
cessing procedure that reduces the problem input. For instance, preprocessing techniques for the proposi-
tional satisﬁability problem are based on Boolean Constraint Propagation (see, e.g., E´en and Biere, 2005),
CSP solvers make use of various local consistency algorithms that ﬁlter the domains of variables (see,
e.g., Bessi`ere, 2006); similar preprocessing methods are used by solvers for Nonmonotonic and Bayesian
reasoning problems (see, e.g., Gebser et al., 2008, Bolt and van der Gaag, 2006, respectively).
Until recently, no provable performance guarantees for polynomial-time preprocessing methods have
been obtained, and so preprocessing was only subject of empirical studies. A possible reason for the lack
of theoretical results is a certain inadequacy of the P vs NP framework for such an analysis: if we could
reduce in polynomial time an instance of an NP-hard problem just by one bit, then we can solve the entire
problem in polynomial time by repeating the reduction step a polynomial number of times, and P = NP
follows.
With the advent of parameterized complexity (Downey, Fellows, and Stege, 1999), a new theoretical
framework became available that provides suitable tools to analyze the power of preprocessing. Param-
eterized complexity considers a problem in a two-dimensional setting, where in addition to the input
size n, a problem parameter k is taken into consideration. This parameter can encode a structural aspect
of the problem instance. A problem is called ﬁxed-parameter tractable (FPT) if it can be solved in time
f(k)p(n) where f is a function of the parameter k and p is a polynomial of the input size n. Thus, for
FPT problems, the combinatorial explosion can be conﬁned to the parameter and is independent of the
input size. It is known that a problem is ﬁxed-parameter tractable if and only if every problem input can
be reduced by polynomial-time preprocessing to an equivalent input whose size is bounded by a function
of the parameter (Downey, Fellows, and Stege, 1999). The reduced instance is called the problem ker-
nel, the preprocessing is called kernelization. The power of polynomial-time preprocessing can now be
benchmarked in terms of the size of the kernel. Once a small kernel is obtained, we can apply any method
∗Research funded by the ERC (COMPLEX REASON, Grand Reference 239962).
1
arXiv:1104.5566v2  [cs.AI]  11 Aug 2011

of choice to solve the kernel: brute-force search, heuristics, approximation, etc. (Guo and Niedermeier,
2007). Because of this ﬂexibility a small kernel is generally preferable to a less ﬂexible branching-based
ﬁxed-parameter algorithm. Thus, small kernels provide an additional value that goes beyond bare ﬁxed-
parameter tractability.
In general the size of the kernel is exponential in the parameter, but many important NP-hard optimiza-
tion problems such as Minimum Vertex Cover, parameterized by solution size, admit polynomial kernels,
see, e.g., (Bodlaender et al., 2009) for references.
In previous research several NP-hard AI problems have been shown to be ﬁxed-parameter tractable.
We list some important examples from various areas:
• Constraint satisfaction problems (CSP) over a ﬁxed universe of values, parameterized by the induced
width (Gottlob, Scarcello, and Sideri, 2002).
• Consistency and generalized arc consistency for intractable global constraints, parameterized by the
cardinalities of certain sets of values (Bessi`ere et al., 2008).
• Propositional satisﬁability (SAT), parameterized by the size of backdoors (Nishimura, Ragde, and
Szeider, 2004).
• Positive inference in Bayesian networks with variables of bounded domain size, parameterized by
size of loop cutsets (Pearl, 1988; Bidyuk and Dechter, 2007).
• Nonmonotonic reasoning with normal logic programs, parameterized by feedback width (Gottlob,
Scarcello, and Sideri, 2002).
However, only exponential kernels are known for these fundamental AI problems. Can we hope for
polynomial kernels?
Results
Our results are throughout negative. We provide strong theoretical evidence that none of the
above ﬁxed-parameter tractable AI problems admits a polynomial kernel. More speciﬁcally, we show that
a polynomial kernel for any of these problems causes a collapse of the Polynomial Hierarchy to its third
level, which is considered highly unlikely by complexity theorists.
Our results are general: The kernel lower bounds are not limited to a particular preprocessing tech-
nique but apply to any clever technique that could be conceived in future research. Hence the results
contribute to the foundations of AI.
Our results suggest the investigation of alternative approaches to polynomial-time preprocessing; for
instance, preprocessing that produces in polynomial time a Boolean combination of polynomially sized
kernels instead of one single kernel.
2
Formal Background
A parameterized problem P is a subset of Σ∗× N for some ﬁnite alphabet Σ. For a problem instance
(x, k) ∈Σ∗× N we call x the main part and k the parameter. We assume the parameter is represented in
unary. For the parameterized problems considered in this paper, the parameter is a function of the main
part, i.e., k = π(x) for a function π. We then denote the problem as P(π), e.g., U-CSP(width) denotes
the problem U-CSP parameterized by the width of the given tree decomposition.
A parameterized problem P is ﬁxed-parameter tractable if there exists an algorithm that solves any
input (x, k) ∈Σ∗× N in time O(f(k) · p(|x|) where f is an arbitrary computable function of k and p is
a polynomial in n.
A kernelization for a parameterized problem P ⊆Σ∗× N is an algorithm that, given (x, k) ∈Σ∗× N,
outputs in time polynomial in |x| + k a pair (x′, k′) ∈Σ∗× N such that (i) (x, k) ∈P if and only if
(x′, k′) ∈P and (ii) |x′| + k′ ≤g(k), where g is an arbitrary computable function, called the size of the
kernel. In particular, for constant k the kernel has constant size g(k). If g is a polynomial then we say that
P admits a polynomial kernel.
2

Every ﬁxed-parameter tractable problem admits a kernel. This can be seen by the following argument
due to Downey, Fellows, and Stege (1999). Assume we can decide instances (x, k) of problem P in time
f(k)|n|O(1). We kernelize an instance (x, k) as follows. If |x| ≤f(k) then we already have a kernel of
size f(k). Otherwise, if |x| > f(k), then f(k)|x|O(1) ≤|x|O(1) is a polynomial; hence we can decide
the instance in polynomial time and replace it with a small decision-equivalent instance (x′, k′). Thus
we always have a kernel of size at most f(k). However, f(k) is super-polynomial for NP-hard problems
(unless P = NP), hence this generic construction is not providing polynomial kernels.
We understand preprocessing for an NP-hard problem as a polynomial-time procedure that transforms
an instance of the problem to a (possible smaller) solution-equivalent instance of the same problem. Ker-
nelization is such a preprocessing with a performance guarantee, i.e., we are guaranteed that the prepro-
cessing yields a kernel whose size is bounded in terms of the parameter of the given problem instance. In
the literature also different forms of preprocessing have been considered. An important one is knowledge
compilation, a two-phases approach to reasoning problems where in a ﬁrst phase a given knowledge base
is (possibly in exponential time) preprocessed (“compiled”), such that in a second phase various queries
can be answered in polynomial time (Cadoli et al., 2002).
3
Tools for Kernel Lower Bounds
In the sequel we will use recently developed tools to obtain kernel lower bounds. Our kernel lower bounds
are subject to the widely believed complexity theoretic assumption NP ̸⊆co-NP/poly (or equivalently,
PH ̸= Σ3
p). In other words, the tools allow us to show that a parameterized problem does not admit a poly-
nomial kernel unless the Polynomial Hierarchy collapses to its third level (see, e.g., Papadimitriou, 1994).
A composition algorithm for a parameterized problem P ⊆Σ∗× N is an algorithm that receives as
input a sequence (x1, k), . . . , (xt, k) ∈Σ∗× N, uses time polynomial in Pt
i=1 |xi| + k, and outputs
(y, k′) ∈Σ∗× N with (i) (y, k′) ∈P if and only if (xi, k) ∈P for some 1 ≤i ≤t, and (ii) k′ is
polynomial in k. A parameterized problem is compositional if it has a composition algorithm. With each
parameterized problem P ⊆Σ∗× N we associate a classical problem
UP[P] = { x#1k : (x, k) ∈P }
where 1 denotes an arbitrary symbol from Σ and # is a new symbol not in Σ. We call UP[P] the unpa-
rameterized version of P.
The following result is the basis for our kernel lower bounds.
Theorem 1 (Bodlaender et al., 2009, Fortnow and Santhanam, 2008). Let P be a parameterized problem
whose unparameterized version is NP-complete. If P is compositional, then it does not admit a polynomial
kernel unless NP ⊆co-NP/poly, i.e., the Polynomial Hierarchy collapses.
Let P, Q ⊆Σ∗× N be parameterized problems. We say that P is polynomial parameter reducible
to Q if there exists a polynomial time computable function K : Σ∗× N →Σ∗× N and a polynomial
p, such that for all (x, k) ∈Σ∗× N we have (i) (x, k) ∈P if and only if K(x, k) = (x′, k′) ∈Q, and
(ii) k′ ≤p(k). The function K is called a polynomial parameter transformation.
The following theorem allows us to transform kernel lower bounds from one problem to another.
Theorem 2 (Bodlaender, Thomass´e, and Yeo, 2009). Let P and Q be parameterized problems such that
UP[P] is NP-complete, UP[Q] is in NP, and there is a polynomial parameter transformation from P to Q.
If Q has a polynomial kernel, then P has a polynomial kernel.
4
Constraint Networks
Constraint networks have proven successful in modeling everyday cognitive tasks such as vision, language
comprehension, default reasoning, and abduction, as well as in applications such as scheduling, design,
diagnosis, and temporal and spatial reasoning (Dechter, 2010). A constraint network is a triple I =
3

(V, U, C) where V is a ﬁnite set of variables, U is a ﬁnite universe of values, and C = {C1, . . . , Cm} is
set of constraints. Each constraint Ci is a pair (Si, Ri) where Si is a list of variables of length ri called
the constraint scope, and Ri is an ri-ary relation over U, called the constraint relation. The tuples of Ri
indicate the allowed combinations of simultaneous values for the variables Si. A solution is a mapping
τ : V →U such that for each 1 ≤i ≤m and Si = (x1, . . . , xri), we have (τ(x1), . . . , τ(xri)) ∈Ri. A
constraint network is satisﬁable if it has a solution.
With a constraint network I = (V, U, C) we associate its constraint graph G = (V, E) where E
contains an edge between two variables if and only if they occur together in the scope of a constraint.
A width w tree decomposition of a graph G is a pair (T, λ) where T is a tree and λ is a labeling of the
nodes of T with sets of vertices of G such that the following properties are satisﬁed: (i) every vertex of G
belongs to λ(p) for some node p of T; (ii) every edge of G is is contained in λ(p) for some node p of T;
(iii) For each vertex v of G the set of all tree nodes p with v ∈λ(p) induces a connected subtree of T;
(iv) |λ(p)| −1 ≤w holds for all tree nodes p. The treewidth of G is the smallest w such that G has a
width w tree decomposition. The induced width of a constraint network is the treewidth of its constraint
graph (Dechter and Pearl, 1989). We note in passing that the problem of ﬁnding a tree decomposition of
width w is NP-hard but ﬁxed-parameter tractable in w.
Let U be a ﬁxed universe containing at least two elements. We consider the following parameterized
version of the constraint satisfaction problem (CSP).
U-CSP(width)
Instance: A constraint network I = (V, U, C) and a width w tree decomposition of the constraint
graph of I.
Parameter: The integer w.
Question: Is I satisﬁable?
It is well known that U-CSP(width) is ﬁxed-parameter tractable over any ﬁxed universe U (Dechter and
Pearl, 1989; Gottlob, Scarcello, and Sideri, 2002) (for generalizations see Samer and Szeider, 2010). We
contrast this classical result and show that it is unlikely that U-CSP(width) admits a polynomial kernel,
even in the simplest case where U = {0, 1}.
Theorem 3. {0, 1}-CSP(width) does not admit a polynomial kernel unless the Polynomial Hierarchy
collapses.
Proof. We show that {0, 1}-CSP(width) is compositional. Let (Ii, Ti), 1 ≤i ≤t, be a given sequence
of instances of {0, 1}-CSP(width) where Ii = (Vi, Ui, Ci) is a constraint network and Ti is a width
w tree decomposition of the constraint graph of Ii. We may assume, w.l.o.g., that Vi ∩Vj = ∅for
1 ≤i < j ≤t (otherwise we can simply change the names of variables). We form a new constraint
network I = (V, {0, 1}, C) as follows. We put V = St
i=1 Vi ∪{a1, . . . , at, b0, . . . , bt} where ai, bi are
new variables. We deﬁne the set C of constraints in three groups.
(1) For each 1 ≤i ≤t and each constraint C = ((x1, . . . , xr), R) ∈Ci we add to C a new constraint
C′ = ((x1, . . . , xr, ai), R′)) where R′ = { (u1, . . . , ur, 0) : (u1, . . . , ur) ∈R } ∪{(1, . . . , 1)}.
(2) We add t ternary constraints C∗
1, . . . , C∗
t where C∗
i = ((bi−1, bi, ai), R∗) and R∗= {(0, 0, 1),
(0, 1, 0), (1, 1, 1)}.
(3) Finally, we add two unary constraints C0 = ((b0), (0)) and C1 = ((bt), (1)) which force the
values of b0 and bt to 0 and 1, respectively.
Let G, Gi be the constraint graphs of I and Ii, respectively. Fig. 1 shows an illustration of G for t = 4.
We observe that a1, . . . , at are cut vertices of G. Removing these vertices separates G into independent
parts P, G′
1, . . . , G′
t where P is the path b0, b1, . . . , bt, and G′
i is isomorphic to Gi. By standard techniques
(see, e.g., Kloks, 1994), we can put the given width w tree decompositions T1, . . . , Tt of G′
1, . . . , G′
t and
the trivial width 1 tree decomposition of P together to a width w + 1 tree decomposition T of G. Clearly
(I, T) can be obtained from (Ii, Ti), 1 ≤i ≤t, in polynomial time.
We claim that I is satisﬁable if and only if at least one of the Ii is satisﬁable. This claim can be
veriﬁed by means of the following observations: The constraints in groups (2) and (3) provide that for
any satisfying assignment there will be some 0 ≤i ≤t −1 such that b0, . . . , bi are all set to 0 and
4

b0
b1
b2
b3
b4
a1
a2
a3
a4
. . .
V1
. . .
V2
. . .
V3
. . .
V4
Figure 1: Constraint graph G.
bi+1, . . . , bt are all set to 1; consequently ai is set to 0 and all aj for j ̸= i are set to 1. The constraints in
group (1) provide that if we set ai to 0, then we obtain from C′ the original constraint C; if we set ai to 1
then we obtain a constraint that can be satisﬁed by setting all remaining variables to 1. We conclude that
{0, 1}-CSP(width) is compositional.
In order to apply Theorem 1, it remains to establish that the unparameterized version of
{0, 1}-CSP(width) is NP-complete. Deciding whether a constraint network I over the universe {0, 1}
is satisﬁable is well-known to be NP-complete (say by reducing 3-SAT). To a constraint network I on n
variables we can always add a trivial width w = n−1 tree decomposition of its constraint graph (taking a
single tree node t where λ(t) contains all variables of I). Hence UP[{0, 1}-CSP(width)] is NP-complete.
5
Satisﬁability
The propositional satisﬁability problem (SAT) was the ﬁrst problem shown to be NP-hard (Cook, 1971).
Despite its hardness, SAT solvers are increasingly leaving their mark as a general-purpose tool in areas
as diverse as software and hardware veriﬁcation, automatic test pattern generation, planning, scheduling,
and even challenging problems from algebra (Gomes et al., 2008). SAT solvers are capable of exploiting
the hidden structure present in real-world problem instances. The concept of backdoors, introduced by
Williams, Gomes, and Selman (2003) provides a means for making the vague notion of a hidden structure
explicit. Backdoors are deﬁned with respect to a “sub-solver” which is a polynomial-time algorithm that
correctly decides the satisﬁability for a class C of CNF formulas. More speciﬁcally, Gomes et al. (2008)
deﬁne a sub-solver to be an algorithm A that takes as input a CNF formula F and has the following
properties: (i) Trichotomy: A either rejects the input F, or determines F correctly as unsatisﬁable or
satisﬁable; (ii) Efﬁciency: A runs in polynomial time; (iii) Trivial Solvability: A can determine if F is
trivially satisﬁable (has no clauses) or trivially unsatisﬁable (contains only the empty clause); (iv.) Self-
Reducibility: if A determines F, then for any variable x and value ε ∈{0, 1}, A determines F[x = ε].
F[τ] denotes the formula obtained from F by applying the partial assignment τ, i.e., satisﬁed clauses are
removed and false literals are removed from the remaining clauses.
We identify a sub-solver A with the class CA of CNF formulas whose satisﬁability can be determined
by A. A strong A-backdoor set (or A-backdoor, for short) of a CNF formula F is a set B of variables
such that for each possible truth assignment τ to the variables in B, the satisﬁability of F[τ] can be
determined by sub-solver A in time O(nc). Hence, if we know an A-backdoor of size k, we can decide
the satisﬁability of F by running A on 2k instances F[τ], yielding a time bound of O(2knc). Hence SAT
decision is ﬁxed-parameter tractable in the backdoor size k for any sub-solver A. Hence the following
problem is clearly ﬁxed-parameter tractable for any sub-solver A.
SAT(A-backdoor)
Instance: A CNF formula F, and an A-backdoor B of F of size k.
Parameter: The integer k.
Question: Is F satisﬁable?
We are concerned with the question of whether instead of trying all 2k possible partial assignments we
can reduce the instance to a polynomial kernel. We will establish a very general result that applies to all
possible sub-solvers.
5

Theorem 4. SAT(A-backdoor) does not admit a polynomial kernel for any sub-solver A unless the
Polynomial Hierarchy collapses.
Proof. We will devise polynomial parameter transformations from the following parameterized problem
which is known to be compositional (Fortnow and Santhanam, 2008) and therefore unlikely to admit a
polynomial kernel.
SAT(vars)
Instance: A propositional formula F in CNF on n variables.
Parameter: The number n of variables.
Question: Is F satisﬁable?
Let F be a CNF formula and V the set of all variables of F. Due to property (ii) of a sub-solver, V is
an A-backdoor set for any A. Hence, by mapping (F, n) (as an instance of SAT(vars)) to (F, V ) (as an
instance of SAT(A-backdoor)) provides a (trivial) polynomial parameter transformation from SAT(vars)
to SAT(A-backdoor). Since the unparameterized versions of both problems are clearly NP-complete, the
result follows by Theorem 2.
Let 3SAT(π) (where π is an arbitrary parameterization) denote the problem SAT(π) restricted to
3CNF formula, i.e., to CNF formulas where each clauses contains at most three literals. In contrast
to SAT(vars), the parameterized problem 3SAT(vars) has a trivial polynomial kernel: if we remove
duplicate clauses, then any 3CNF formula on n variables contains at most O(n3) clauses, and so is a
polynomial kernel. Hence the easy proof of Theorem 4 does not carry over to 3SAT(A-backdoor). We
therefore consider the cases 3SAT(HORN-backdoor) and 3SAT(2CNF-backdoor) separately, these cases
are important since the detection of HORN and 2CNF-backdoors is ﬁxed-parameter tractable (Nishimura,
Ragde, and Szeider, 2004).
Theorem 5. Neither 3SAT(HORN-backdoor) nor 3SAT(2CNF-backdoor) admit a polynomial kernel
unless the Polynomial Hierarchy collapses.
Proof. Let C ∈{HORN, 2CNF}. We show that 3SAT(C-backdoor) is compositional. Let (Fi, Bi), 1 ≤
i ≤t, be a given sequence of instances of 3SAT(C-backdoor) where Fi is a 3CNF formula and Bi is a
C-backdoor set of Fi of size k. We distinguish two cases.
Case 1: t > 2k. Let ∥Fi∥:= P
C∈Fi |C| and n := maxt
i=1 ∥Fi∥. Whether Fi is satisﬁable or not can
be decided in time O(2kn) since the satisﬁability of a Horn or 2CNF formula can be decided in linear time.
We can check whether at least one of the formulas F1, . . . , Ft is satisﬁable in time O(t2kn) ≤O(t2n)
which is polynomial in t + n. If some Fi is satisﬁable, we output (Fi, Bi); otherwise we output (F1, B1)
(F1 is unsatisﬁable). Hence we have a composition algorithm.
Case 2: t ≤2k. This case is more involved. We construct a new instance (F, B) of 3SAT(C-backdoor)
as follows.
Let s = ⌈log2 t⌉. Since t ≤2k, s ≤k follows.
Let Vi denote the set of variables of Fi. We may assume, w.l.o.g., that B1 = · · · = Bt and that
Vi ∩Vj = B1 for all 1 ≤i < j ≤t since otherwise we can change names of variable accordingly. In
a ﬁrst step we obtain from every Fi a CNF formula F ′
i as follows. For each variable x ∈Vi \ B1 we
take two new variables x0 and x1. We replace each positive occurrence of a variable x ∈Vi \ B1 in Fi
with the literal x0 and each negative occurrence of x with the literal ¬xs. We add all clauses of the form
(¬xj−1 ∨xj) for 1 ≤j ≤s; we call these clauses “connection clauses.” Let F ′
i be the formula obtained
from Fi in this way. We observe that F ′
i and Fi are SAT-equivalent, since the connection clauses form an
implication chain. Since the connection clauses are both Horn and 2CNF, B1 is also a C-backdoor of F ′
i.
We take a set Y = {y1, . . . , ys} of new variables. Let C1, . . . , C2s be the sequence of all 2s possible
clauses (modulo permutation of literals within a clause) containing exactly s literals over the variables
in Y . Consequently we can write Ci as (ℓi
1 ∨· · · ∨ℓi
s) where ℓj
i ∈{yi, ¬yi}.
For 1 ≤i ≤t we add to each connection clause (¬xj−1 ∨xj) of F ′
i the literal ℓi
j ∈Ci. Let F ′′
i denote
the 3CNF formula obtained from F ′
i this way.
6

For t < i ≤2s we deﬁne 3CNF formulas F ′′
i as follows. If s ≤3 then F ′′
i consists just of the
clause Ci. If s > 3 then we take new variables zi
2, . . . , zi
s−2 and let F ′′
i consist of the clauses (ℓi
1 ∨ℓi
2 ∨
¬zi
2), (ℓi
3 ∨zi
2 ∨¬zi
3), . . . , (ℓi
s−2 ∨zi
s−3 ∨¬zi
s−2), (ℓi
s−1 ∨ℓi
s ∨zi
s−2). Finally, we let F be the 3CNF
formula containing all the clauses from F ′′
1 , . . . , F ′′
2s. Any assignment τ to Y ∪B1 that satisﬁes Ci can be
extended to an assignment that satisﬁes F ′′
i since such assignment satisﬁes at least one connection clause
(xj−1 ∨xj ∨ℓi
j) and so the chain of implications from from xo to xs is broken.
It is not difﬁcult to verify the following two claims. (i) F is satisﬁable if and only if at least one of
the formulas Fi is satisﬁable. (ii) B = Y ∪B1 is a C-backdoor of F. Hence we have also a composition
algorithm in Case 2, and thus 3SAT(C-backdoor) is compositional. Clearly UP[3SAT(C-backdoor)] is
NP-complete, hence the result follows from Theorem 1.
6
Global Constraints
The success of today’s constraint solvers relies heavily on efﬁcient algorithms for special purpose global
constraints (van Hoeve and Katriel, 2006). A global constraint speciﬁes a pattern that frequently occurs
in real-world problems, for instance, it is often required that variables must all take different values (e.g.,
activities requiring the same resource must all be assigned different times). The ALLDIFFERENT global
constraint efﬁciently encodes this requirement.
More formally, a global constraint is deﬁned for a set S of variables, each variable x ∈S ranges over
a ﬁnite domain dom(x) of values. An instantiation is an assignment α such that α(x) ∈dom(x) for each
x ∈S. A global constraint deﬁnes which instantiations are legal and which are not. A global constraint
is consistent if it has at least one legal instantiation, and it is domain consistent (or hyper arc consistent)
if for each variable x ∈S and each value d ∈dom(x) there is a legal instantiation α with α(x) = d. For
all global constraints considered in this paper, domain consistency can be reduced to a quadratic number
of consistency checks, hence we will focus on consistency. We assume that the size of a representation of
a global constraint is polynomial in P
x∈S |dom(x)|.
For several important types T of global constraints, the problem of deciding whether a constraint of
type T is consistent (in symbols T -Cons) is NP-hard. Examples for such intractable types of constraints
are NVALUE, DISJOINT, and USES (Bessi`ere et al., 2004). An NVALUE constraint over a set X of
variables requires from a legal instantiation α that |{ α(x) : x ∈X }| = N; ALLDIFFERENT is the
special case where N = |X|. The global constraints DISJOINT and USES are speciﬁed by two sets of
variables X, Y ; DISJOINT requires that α(x) ̸= α(y) for each pair x ∈X and y ∈Y ; USES requires
that for each x ∈X there is some y ∈Y such that α(x) = α(y). For a set X of variables we write
dom(X) = S
x∈X dom(x).
Bessi`ere et al. (2008) considered dx = |dom(X)| as parameter for NVALUE, dxy = |dom(X) ∩
dom(Y )| as parameter for DISJOINT, and dy = |dom(Y )| as parameter for USES. They showed that
consistency checking is ﬁxed-parameter tractable for the constraints under the respective parameteriza-
tions, i.e., the problems NVALUE-CONS(dx), DISJOINT-CONS(dxy), and USES-CONS(dy) are ﬁxed-
parameter tractable. We show that it is unlikely that their results can be improved in terms of polynomial
kernels.
Theorem 6. The problems NVALUE-CONS(dx), DISJOINT-CONS(dxy), USES-CONS(dy) do not admit
polynomial kernels unless the Polynomial Hierarchy collapses.
Proof. We devise a polynomial parameter reduction from SAT(vars). We use a construction of Bessi`ere
et al. (2004). Let F = {C1, . . . , Cm} be a CNF formula over variables x1, . . . , xn. We consider the
clauses and variables of F as the variables of a global constraint with domains dom(xi) = {−i, i},
and dom(Cj) = { i : xi ∈Cj } ∪{ −i : ¬xi ∈Cj }. Now F can be encoded as an NVALUE
constraint with X = {x1, . . . , xn, C1, . . . , Cm} and N = n (clearly F is satisﬁable if and only if the
constraint is consistent). Since dx = 2n we have a polynomial parameter reduction from SAT(vars) to
NVALUE-CONS(dx). Similarly, as observed by Bessi`ere et al. (2009), F can be encoded as a DISJOINT
constraint with X = {x1, . . . , xn} and Y = {C1, . . . , Cm} (dxy ≤2n), or as a USES constraint with
X = {C1, . . . , Cm} and Y = {x1, . . . , xn} (dy = 2n). Since the unparameterized problems are clearly
NP-complete, the result follows by Theorem 2.
Further results on kernels for global constraints have been obtained by Gaspers and Szeider (2011).
7

7
Bayesian Reasoning
Bayesian networks (BNs) have emerged as a general representation scheme for uncertain knowledge
(Pearl, 2010). A BN models a set of stochastic variables, the independencies among these variables, and
a joint probability distribution over these variables. For simplicity we consider the important special case
where the stochastic variables are Boolean. The variables and independencies are modelled in the BN by
a directed acyclic graph G = (V, A), the joint probability distribution is given by a table Tv for each node
v ∈V which deﬁnes a probability Tv|U for each possible instantiation U = (d1, . . . , ds) ∈{true, false}s
of the parents v1, . . . , vs of v in G. The probability Pr(U) of a complete instantiation U of the variables
of G is given by the product of Tv|U over all variables v. We consider the problem Positive-BN-Inference
which takes as input a Boolean BN (G, T) and a variable v, and asks whether Pr(v = true) > 0. The
problem is NP-complete (Cooper, 1990) and moves from NP to #P if we ask to compute Pr(v = true)
(Roth, 1996). The problem can be solved in polynomial time if the BN is singly connected, i.e, if there
is at most one undirected path between any two variables (Pearl, 1988). It is natural to parametrize the
problem by the number of variables one must delete in order to make the BN singly connected (the deleted
variables form a loop cutset). In fact, POSITIVE-BN-INFERENCE(loop cutset size) is easily seen to be
ﬁxed-parameter tractable as we can determine whether Pr(v = true) > 0 by taking the maximum of
Pr(v = true | U) over all 2k possible instantiations of the k cutset variables, each of which requires
processing of a singly connected network. However, although ﬁxed-parameter tractable, it is unlikely that
the problem admits a polynomial kernel.
Theorem 7. POSITIVE-BN-INFERENCE(loop cutset size) does not admit a polynomial kernel unless
the Polynomial Hierarchy collapses.
Proof. (Sketch.) We give a polynomial parameter transformation from SAT(vars) and apply Theorem 2.
The reduction is based on the reduction from 3SAT given by Cooper (1990). However, we need to allow
clauses with an arbitrary number of literals since, as observed above, 3SAT(vars) has a polynomial kernel.
Let F be a CNF formula on n variables. We construct a BN (G, T) such that for a variable v we have
Pr(v = true) > 0 if and only if F is satisﬁable. Cooper uses input nodes ui for representing variables
of F, clause nodes ci for representing the clauses of F, and conjunction nodes di for representing the
conjunction of the clauses. We proceed similarly, however, we cannot represent a clause of large size with
a single clause node ci, as the required table Tci would be of exponential size.
Therefore we split clauses
containing more than 3 literals into several clause nodes, as indicated in Figure 2. It remains to observe that
u1
u2
u3
u4
c1
c2
c3
Figure 2: BN representation of a clause on four literals.
the set of input nodes E = {u1, . . . , un} is a loop cutset of the constructed BN, hence we have indeed a
polynomial parameter transformation from SAT(vars) to POSITIVE-BN-INFERENCE(loop cutset size).
The result follows by Theorem 2.
8
Nonmonotonic Reasoning
Logic programming with negation under the stable model semantics is a well-studied form of nonmono-
tonic reasoning (Gelfond and Lifschitz, 1988; Marek and Truszczy´nski, 1999). A (normal) logic pro-
gram P is a ﬁnite set of rules r of the form
h ←−a1 ∧· · · ∧am ∧¬b1 ∧· · · ∧¬bn
where h, ai, bi are atoms, where h forms the head and the ai, bi from the body of r. We write H(r) = h,
B+(r) = {a1, . . . , am}, and B−(r) = {b1, . . . , bn}. Let I be a ﬁnite set of atoms. The GF reduct P I of
8

a logic program P under I is the program obtained from P by removing all rules r with B−(r) ∩I ̸= ∅,
and removing from the body of each remaining rule r′ all literals ¬b with b ∈I. I is a stable model of P
if I is a minimal model of P I, i.e., if (i) for each rule r ∈P I with B+(r) ⊆I we have H(r) ∈I, and (ii)
there is no proper subset of I with this property. The undirected dependency graph U(P) of P is formed
as follows. We take the atoms of P as vertices and add an edge x −y between two atoms x, y if there is
a rule r ∈P with H(r) = x and y ∈B+(r), and we add a path x −u −y if H(r) = x and y ∈B−(r)
(u is a new vertex of degree 2). The feedback width of P is the size of a smallest set V of atoms such that
every cycle of U(P) runs through an atom in V .
A fundamental computational problems is Stable Model Existence (SME), which asks whether a
given normal logic program has a stable model. The problem is well-known to be NP-complete (Marek
and Truszczy´nski, 1991). Gottlob, Scarcello, and Sideri (2002) showed that SME(feedback width) is
ﬁxed-parameter tractable (see Fichte and Szeider (2011) for generalizations). We show that this result
cannot be strengthened with respect to a polynomial kernel.
Theorem 8. SME(feedback width) does not admit a polynomial kernel unless the Polynomial Hierarchy
collapses.
Proof. (Sketch.) We give a polynomial parameter transformation from SAT(vars) to SME(feedback
width) using a construction of Niemel¨a (1999). Given a CNF formula F on n variables, we construct a
logic program P as follows. For each variable x of F we take two atoms x and ˆx and include the rules
(ˆx ←¬x) and (x ←¬ˆx); for each clause C of F we take an atom c and include for each positive literal
a of C the rule (c ←a), and for each negative literal ¬a of C the rule (c ←ˆa); ﬁnally, we take two
atoms s and f and include the rule (f ←¬f ∧¬s) and for each clause C of F the rule (s ←c). F is
satisﬁable if and only if P has a stable model (Niemel¨a, 1999). It remains to observe that each cycle of
U(P) runs through a vertex in V = { x, ˆx : x ∈vars(F) }, hence the feedback width of P is at most 2n.
Hence we have a polynomial parameter transformation from SAT(vars) to SME(feedback width). The
result follows by Theorem 2.
9
Conclusion
We have established super-polynomial kernel lower bounds for a wide range of important AI problems,
providing ﬁrm limitations for the power of polynomial-time preprocessing for these problems. We con-
clude from these results that in contrast to many optimization problems (see Section 1), typical AI prob-
lems do not admit polynomial kernels. Our results suggest the consideration of alternative approaches.
For example, it might still be possible that some of the considered problems admit polynomially sized
Turing kernels, i.e., a polynomial-time preprocessing to a Boolean combination of a polynomial number
of polynomial kernels. In the area of optimization, parameterized problems are known that do not admit
polynomial kernels but admit polynomial Turing kernels (Fernau et al., 2009). This suggests a theoretical
and empirical study of Turing kernels for the AI problems considered.
