Fast Hierarchical depth map computation from stereo 
Vinay Kaushik, Brejesh Lall 
Dept. of Electrical Engineering 
IIT Delhi, India 
India 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract—Disparity by Block-Matching stereo is usually used 
in applications with limited computational power in order to get 
depth estimates. However, the research on simple stereo methods 
has been lesser than the energy-based counterparts which promise 
a better quality depth map with more potential for future 
improvements. Semi-global-matching (SGM) methods offer good 
performance and easy implementation but suffer from the 
problem of very high memory footprint because it’s working on 
the full disparity space image. On the other hand, Block-matching 
stereo needs much less memory. In this paper, we introduce a 
novel multi-scale-hierarchical-block-matching approach using a 
pyramidal variant of depth and cost functions which drastically 
improves the results of standard block matching stereo techniques 
while preserving the low-memory footprint and further reducing 
the complexity of standard block matching. We tested our new 
multi-block-matching 
scheme 
on 
the 
Middlebury 
stereo 
benchmark. For the Middlebury benchmark we get results that 
are 
only 
slightly 
worse 
than 
state-of-the-art 
SGM 
implementations. 
Keywords—multi scale hierarchical block matching, disparity 
map 
computation, 
zero-mean 
normalized 
cross-correlation, 
Gaussian pyramid. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Estimating depth information from a stereo-camera is still 
one of the most versatile solutions for 3-D sensing with a wide 
application range in robotics[1][2], intelligent vehicles and also 
space science. The drawback of estimating depth with a stereo 
camera system, with respect to direct systems like LIDAR or 
time-of-flight, is the comparably high computational effort 
which is necessary to extract the depth Information from the 
stereo images by finding correspondences. On the benefit side 
stereo cameras provide depth information with a very high 
spatial resolution which is a prerequisite for obstacle avoidance 
or path planning. Furthermore, the images provided by the 
cameras allow for other usage like object recognition or ego-
motion estimation. In the literature there are two main categories 
of algorithms for finding the stereo correspondences: local and 
global methods. Local methods typically find correspondences 
by matching patches of one stereo image to the other image. In 
contrast, global methods typically optimize for an energy 
function that describes the best transformation of one image into 
the other[3]. Usually this involves some smoothness or 
regularization terms in order to tackle NP-completeness for 
feasible processing. Apart from these two large groups there is 
one method that is located in between: semi-global-matching 
(SGM)[4]. On the one hand SGM is also based on an energy-
functional, on the other hand it does not employ a fully global 
optimization but optimizations along one-dimensional paths. 
This semi-global optimization scheme has a depth accuracy that 
comes close to global stereo methods but with a much lower 
computational complexity. Due to this, SGM has become very 
popular, especially in the domain of intelligent vehicles. One 
major drawback of SGM is its high memory footprint because it 
requires the full disparity space image (DSI). This property 
makes it very challenging to bring SGM to low-energy hardware 
means like FPGA. 
In contrast, local stereo methods based on block-matching 
are very easy to port to various hardware architecture because 
they need only a small part of the DSI at a time and the 
processing is embarrassingly parallel. The downside of local 
methods is a generally lower accuracy and density of the 
resulting depth maps. In this paper, we will introduce a novel 
multi-scale-hierarchical-block-matching (MSIBM) scheme that 
uses the smallest scale Gaussian stereo pair to compute the 
reduced depth map and uses the depth at that lower scale to 
optimally compute the depth at higher scale. This goes on 
hierarchically to get the final depth.   
This scheme leads to a significant improvement in both 
speed and accuracy over standard block-matching (BM) stereo 
while still preserving the low-memory and high-parallelization 
properties. Moreover, it is more robust to image noise. Our 
experiments with this novel block-matching scheme on the 
Middlebury stereo benchmark show a major improvement with 
respect to standard BM stereo. 
II. PROBLEMS IN STEREO BLOCK-MATCHING 
The basic idea of standard block-matching (BM) stereo is 
very simple. By correlating image patches (called blocks or 
filters) 
between 
the 
left 
and 
right 
stereo 
images, 
correspondences between the images are found. The position 
difference of a correspondence is called disparity and is 
inversely coupled to the distance. There is a large bunch of cost 
functions [10] used as matching criteria; however, typically sum 
of absolute difference (SAD), normalized cross-correlation 
(NCC), rank transform (RT)[5], census transform (CT)[6] zero-
mean normalized cross-correlation (ZNCC)[7] are used.  
Disparity is defined as the distance between similar points in 
2 images. To find those similar points various standard block 
matching approaches have been defined. The similarity is 
defined on some mathematical score such as correlation, sum of 

absolute difference (SAD), sum of squared difference (SSD), 
NCC and ZNCC. For a NxN image having maximum disparity 
D, the disparity of a point is computed by comparing the pixel 
in right image to a pixel in the left image (on the same epipolar 
line) D number of times. Considering a block of size MxM, the 
complexity of the program to compute disparity map is an order 
of ‘D’. There are several disadvantages of standard block 
matching techniques. Computing depth maps on higher 
resolution images not only takes time, but also creates artefacts. 
Little noise can lead to a very poor disparity map. Many post 
processing steps (filters) such as WLS filter and anisotropic 
median filter are applied to improve the generated map. This 
post processing is not possible in real time applications. Not only 
it takes time but excessive global filtering also leads to loss of 
useful depth information.  
We propose a novel depth map computation mechanism 
using a Stereo-Gaussian pyramid that eliminates the 
requirement of post-processing (filtering) of depth images, takes 
less time and creates maps for different spatial resolution that 
are more accurate than standard block matching methods. 
We compute depth maps from stereo images that are 
accurate as well as take minimal time as compared to other 
algorithms. Using parallelization at its root level helps in 
performing optimizations in parallel and saves crucial time. We 
use a Stereo-Gaussian pyramidal variant to compute depth maps 
of multiple spatial resolution and hierarchically fuse them to 
compute a map that is more accurate and needs less 
computations than standard block matching scheme. 
III. APPROACH 
A standard block matching algorithm uses a cost function for 
matching image patches along epipolar lines to find the best 
match, thus defining the disparity of the point. For every pixel, 
the algorithm searches from 0 to dmax, where dmax is the 
maximum disparity level for that stereo pair. The computation 
is not only time consuming, but the disparity filtering is done 
as a post processing step to the disparity image. There have 
been various ways which reduce the disparity search along the 
epipolar lines, but all such methods consider certain 
probabilistic assumptions and are themselves an overhead for 
the system. We define a novel algorithm which drastically 
reduces the number of comparisons required to compute the 
disparity for a pixel. 
For a stereo image pair, we first define a Depth Search Image 
(DSI) as follows: 
                    𝐸{𝑖,𝑗}
𝑘
(𝑧) = 𝑓𝑍𝑁𝐶𝐶(𝐿{𝑖,𝑗}, 𝑅{𝑖,𝑗+𝑧})                           (1) 
This defines the matching cost for pixel (i,j) in left image at 
disparity z, where 𝑧∈{𝑁+; 0 ≤𝑧≤𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥}  and 𝑓𝑍𝑁𝐶𝐶 
computes a zero-mean normalized cross-correlation between 
patches L and R.  
The ZNCC is defined as: 𝑍𝑁𝐶𝐶(𝐼1, 𝐼2, 𝑢1, 𝑣1, 𝑢2, 𝑣2, 𝑛) ≔
1
2𝑛+1 ∑
∑
 𝜋𝑡=1
2
𝑗=𝑛
𝑗=−𝑛
(𝐼𝑡(𝑢𝑡+𝑖,𝑣𝑡+𝑗)− 𝐼̅(𝑢𝑡,𝑣𝑡,𝑛))
𝑖=𝑛
𝑖=−𝑛
𝜎1(𝑢1,𝑣1,𝑛).𝜎2(𝑢2,𝑣2,𝑛)
                             (2) 
 
Where, 𝐼1 and 𝐼2 are stereo images and the patches 𝐿 and 𝑅 are 
of size 2𝑛+ 1 with (𝑢𝑖, 𝑣𝑖) as patch centres. 
 
Fig. 1. Block Diagram of Pyramidal Disparity Map Computation Method 
 
We construct a K-level Gaussian pyramid for both left and right 
pair of stereo images. The maximum disparity at 𝑘𝑡ℎ level is 
defined as 𝑑max  
𝑘
=
𝐷𝑚𝑎𝑥
2𝑘
, where  𝐷𝑚𝑎𝑥 is the maximum 
disparity level for the original image. 
The matching block size for kth level decreases by a factor of 2 
at every level of Gaussian pyramid. The disparity map 
computation is further divided into 2 parts. Fig. 1 gives the 
block diagram of the disparity map computation scheme. 
Taking the highest level image, we perform standard block 
matching at that scale to find its disparity map. We further 
refine the map by performing optimization of pixels with poor 
matching cost.  
A. Selecting Disparity for highest Gaussian level stereo pair 
Taking the highest level image, we perform standard block 
matching at that scale to find its disparity map. We further 
refine the map by performing optimization of pixels with poor 
matching cost.  
We compute disparity as the best cost match from the Disparity 
Search Image. Thus,  
                             𝑑𝑖,𝑗
′𝑘= argmax
𝑧𝜖(0,𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥
𝑘
)
𝐸𝑖,𝑗
𝑘(𝑧), and                       (3) 
                             𝐶𝑖,𝑗
′𝑘=
max
𝑧𝜖(0,𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥
𝑘
){𝐸𝑖,𝑗
𝑘(𝑧)}                           (4) 
 
Here, 𝑑𝑖,𝑗
′𝑘 is the calculated disparity for the pixel(𝑖, 𝑗) and  𝐶𝑖,𝑗
′𝑘 
is the matched cost for pixel(𝑖, 𝑗). 
 
B. Disparity Refinement 
For disparity refinement, we compute an average DSI for every 
pixel with low matching cost and select the disparity with 
maximal average matching cost, thus considering disparity as 
correct if multiple disparity searches around the neighborhood 
of the point lead to same disparity. Thus, 
                          𝐸𝑖,𝑗
𝑘
̂ (𝑧) = ∑
𝐸𝑚,𝑛
𝑘
(𝑚,𝑛)𝜖𝑁(𝑖,𝑗)
(𝑧)                   (5) 
Here, 𝐸𝑖,𝑗
𝑘
̂ (𝑧) is the average DSI for the pixel(𝑖, 𝑗).  
The final disparity at level 𝑘 is given by: 
    𝑑𝑖,𝑗
𝑘= {
𝑑𝑖,𝑗
′𝑘                           , 𝑖𝑓 𝐶𝑖,𝑗
′𝑘> 𝛼
argmax
𝑧𝜖(0,𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥)
𝐸𝑖,𝑗
𝑘
̂ (𝑧)                𝑒𝑙𝑠𝑒               (6) 
Similarly, the matched cost at level 𝑘 is given by: 
           𝐶𝑖,𝑗
𝑘= {
𝐶𝑖,𝑗
′𝑘                                       𝑖𝑓 𝐶𝑖,𝑗
′𝑘> 𝛼
max
𝑧𝜖(0,𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥) 𝐸𝑖,𝑗
𝑘
̂ (𝑧)                𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒  
         (7) 

Here, 𝑑𝑖,𝑗
𝑘 is the final disparity for the pixel(𝑖, 𝑗) and  𝐶𝑖,𝑗
′𝑘 is the 
matched cost for pixel(𝑖, 𝑗).  
 
C. Hierarchical Disparity Computation 
We then upsample the smaller depth map as well as the cost 
map using nearest neighbour and bi-cubic interpolation 
respectively as interpolation method to generate a depth and 
cost map for lower Gaussian level of stereo pair. Thus, 
𝑑𝑖,𝑗
𝑘
̂ = 𝑁𝑁(𝑑𝑖′,𝑗′
𝑘+1)  and 𝐶𝑖,𝑗
𝑘
̂ = 𝐵𝐼(𝐶𝑖′,𝑗′
𝑘+1) are the interpolated 
depth and cost values at 𝑘𝑡ℎlevel. Here, NN is the nearest 
neighbor interpolation method and BI is the Bi-cubic 
interpolation method.  
This disparity image is not an optimal one but acts like a prior 
for computing the disparity map at this level. Depending on the 
interpolated cost, we divide the disparity computation in 2 
steps. 
                   𝑑𝑖,𝑗
′𝑘=
{
 
 
argmax
𝑧𝜖(𝑑𝑖,𝑗
𝑘
̂ −1,𝑑𝑖,𝑗
𝑘
̂ +1)
𝐸𝑖,𝑗
𝑘(𝑧)  𝑖𝑓 𝐶𝑖,𝑗
𝑘
̂ > 𝛽 
argmax
𝑧𝜖(0,𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥
𝑘
)
  𝐸𝑖,𝑗
𝑘(𝑧)     𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒
           (8) 
                 𝐶𝑖,𝑗
′𝑘= {
max
𝑧𝜖(𝑑𝑖,𝑗
𝑘
̂ −1,𝑑𝑖,𝑗
𝑘
̂ +1)
𝐸𝑖,𝑗
𝑘(𝑧)  𝑖𝑓 𝐶𝑖,𝑗
𝑘
̂ > 𝛽 
max
𝑧𝜖(0,𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥
𝑘
)  𝐸𝑖,𝑗
𝑘(𝑧)     𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒
           (9) 
Here, 𝑑𝑖,𝑗
′𝑘 is the computed disparity at level 𝑘 with matching 
cost 𝐶𝑖,𝑗
′𝑘. 
To compute the optimal depth map at 𝑘𝑡ℎ level, instead of 
performing comparisons till maximum disparity, we use 
standard block matching only if the pixel’s matching cost is 
very low (i.e. a bad match in case of ZNCC). For most of the 
pixels with good matching cost, we perform disparity 
refinements i.e. we begin matching near the disparity obtained 
from the interpolated image. The number of comparisons for 
refinement per pixel depends on the level of the image, and in 
our case since we halved the image to construct Gaussian 
pyramid, it takes just 3 comparisons per pixel to find the 
optimal disparity of the larger stereo pair. 
After this step, selective median filtering is applied to every bad 
pixel to further optimize the disparity map.  
D. Selective Median Filtering 
 
 
       a)                                                                          b) 
Fig. 2. a) Cost match for a 5x5 patch   b) Disparity Map for a 5x5 patch. 
Median filtering is performed on selected green colour disparity values. 
To further refine the disparity image, we apply a variant of 
median filtering on the pixels with low matching cost. For every 
such pixel, we apply a 5x5 patch around it and discard the pixels 
with bad matching cost from that patch. As shown in the above 
Fig. 2, we select only those pixels which have good matching 
coast and find their median and assign it to the centre pixel.  
 
 
𝑑𝑖,𝑗
𝑘= {
𝑑𝑖,𝑗
′𝑘                       𝑖𝑓 𝐶𝑖,𝑗
𝑘> 𝛼
median
(𝑚,𝑛)𝜖𝑁(𝑖,𝑗) 𝑑𝑖,𝑗
′𝑘     𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒   
       (10) 
 
Here 𝑑𝑖,𝑗
𝑘 is the optimal disparity map of the 𝑘𝑡ℎ level. We 
follow this approach hierarchically to compute the disparity map 
for the original image.  
The above approach incorporates the best of information 
from the lower scale level of Gaussian pyramid and block 
matching at current scale to compute a disparity map which is 
more robust as well as faster than the standard block matching 
mechanisms. 
IV. RESULTS 
Middlebury V3 dataset [8] is used for experimentation. It 
consists of 15 test images. It introduces more challenging 
scenarios such as high-resolution stereo pair images, varying 
exposure and lighting settings, imperfect rectification, etc. We 
compare our technique with several other state of the art BM and 
SGM methods. We also provide the runtime evaluations on the 
methods which run on CPU based platforms (Table I). 
TABLE I.  
AVERAGE RUNTIME EXECUTION 
Method 
Environment 
Average 
Runtime (in min) 
BM stereo  
MATLAB 
50 
BM stereo (multithreaded) 
MATLAB 
10 
Displets v2 [9] 
MATLAB + C/C++ 
4 
PSPO [10] 
MATLAB + C/C++ 
5 
PRSM [11] 
C/C++ 
5 
ISF [12] 
C/C++ 
10 
Ours 
MATLAB 
2 
Our method performs resonably well in terms of both speed as 
well as accuracy. The method is comparable to the best SGM 
methods and outperforms all BM methods. We evaluate our 
method on basis of average error computed by the Middlebury 
Eval 3.0 toolkit (Table II). We use a block size of 11x11 for the 
lowest level disparity image. The theresholding parameters 
include 𝛼 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝛽. If 𝛼, 𝛽 tends to 0, although the method takes 
less time but there is no disparity refinement. If 𝛼, 𝛽 tends to 1, 
it recomputes the disparity of every pixel on the basis of its 
neighbors 
which 
increases 
computational 
complexity 
drastically and softens disparity boundaries. Thus we select 𝛼 
and 𝛽 as 0.9 for our experiments as it gives the optimal result. 
Since it is at the highest level, it needs less number of 
comparisons. And since we use a Gaussian blur over original 
image, the matching is robust to some amount of noise in the 
image. Fig.3 shows the disparity maps of few example images 
of the Middlebury V3 dataset.  

 
Fig. 3. 1st and 2nd Row: Original Image, 3rd and 4th Row: Disparity Map  
TABLE II.  
AVERAGE DISPARITY ERROR 
Adirondack|28.61 
ArtL|33.21 
Playroom|37.61 
Shelves|30.08 
MotorcycleE|36.43 
Piano|26.79 
Playtable|33.52 
Teddy|27.41 
Jadeplant|65.64 
PianoL|26.79 
PlaytableP|33.65 
Vintage|61.66 
Motorcycle|36.43 
Pipes|31.46 
Recycle|25.68 
Average|:35.6 
 
V. CONCLUSION 
We have proposed multi scale hierarchical block matching 
algorithm using pyramidal variant of depth and cost maps. We 
exhaustively evaluate it against disparity computation 
techniques which require low processing power and 
demonstrate that the proposed approach achieves high accuracy 
while having low computational cost. This can be attributed to 
the selective cost optimizations using lower scale depth map and 
cost map as a prior limiting the disparity search space.
