From Plate to Prevention: A Dietary Nutrient-aided Platform for
Health Promotion in Singapore
Kaiping Zheng1, Thao Nguyen1, Jesslyn Hwei Sing Chong2, Charlene Enhui Goh3
Melanie Herschel4, Hee Hoon Lee5, Changshuo Liu1, Beng Chin Ooi1, Wei Wang6, James Yip7
1School of Computing, National University of Singapore
2Dietetics and Nutrition Department, Ng Teng Fong General Hospital
3Faculty of Dentistry, National University of Singapore
4Universität Stuttgart, Germany
5 Allied Health Division, Ng Teng Fong General Hospital
6TikTok Singapore
7National University Heart Centre, Singapore
ABSTRACT
Singapore has been striving to improve the provision of healthcare
services to her people. In this course, the government has taken note
of the deficiency in regulating and supervising people’s nutrient in-
take, which is identified as a contributing factor to the development
of chronic diseases. Consequently, this issue has garnered signifi-
cant attention. In this paper, we share our experience in addressing
this issue and attaining medical-grade nutrient intake information
to benefit Singaporeans in different aspects. To this end, we develop
the FoodSG platform to incubate diverse healthcare-oriented appli-
cations as a service in Singapore, taking into account their shared
requirements. We further identify the profound meaning of local-
ized food datasets and systematically clean and curate a localized
Singaporean food dataset FoodSG-233. To overcome the hurdle in
recognition performance brought by Singaporean multifarious food
dishes, we propose to integrate supervised contrastive learning into
our food recognition model FoodSG-SCL for the intrinsic capability
to mine hard positive/negative samples and therefore boost the
accuracy. Through a comprehensive evaluation, we present perfor-
mance results of the proposed model and insights on food-related
healthcare applications. The FoodSG-233 dataset has been released
in https://foodlg.comp.nus.edu.sg/.
1
INTRODUCTION
Singapore has been making persistent efforts to deliver superior
healthcare, with a top priority on enhancing the quality of life for
her people. Drawing upon considerable support for medical re-
search and innovative technology development, the research com-
munity of healthcare analytics in Singapore has attained significant
achievements in effectively integrating multifarious types of health-
care data pertaining to each individual, and therefore empowering
high-quality data-driven healthcare delivery. As data management
technologies continue to advance, electronic medical records (diag-
noses, medications, lab tests, among others) have been integrated
from all levels of medical institutions (hospitals, clinics, pharma-
cies). In addition, sensor data, which records time-series vital signs
through wearable devices, has been collected as well, enabling the
acquisition of heterogeneous healthcare data. The collected health-
care data has been utilized for different healthcare applications,
such as chronic disease progression modeling [66, 67, 69], and dis-
ease diagnosis [64, 65]. Consequently, Singapore has expanded the
capacity of the healthcare system for reacting to the people who
are sick, spanning primary, acute, and long-term care, with the
target of building a comprehensive healthcare data profile for each
individual. Such measures reflect the improved healthcare system
functioning, evidenced by reduced hospital readmission rates and
Singapore’s relatively high life expectancy compared to other na-
tions worldwide.
The swift development of Singapore’s national power, facilitated
by the robust measures of government administration, has greatly
improved Singaporeans’ living standards and diet quality. The sub-
stantial material prosperity has largely changed people’s dietary
behaviors, thus bringing about new medical challenges [19]. With-
out adequate regulation and supervision of the nutrient intake, e.g.,
sugar and saturated fat, in people’s diets, the risk of developing
chronic diseases such as diabetes, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia
could be increased, leading to a significant economic burden on
Singaporeans [14, 47].
Singapore recognized this challenge as early as 2016 and re-
sponded by implementing several key initiatives. In April of that
year, the Minister of Health (MOH) called for a whole-of-nation
effort to combat diabetes, with the aim of raising public aware-
ness of chronic disease management among Singaporeans [19, 49].
Afterward, diabetes (hyperglycemia) is jointly taken into consider-
ation with hypertension (high blood pressure) and hyperlipidemia
(high cholesterol), i.e., 3H problems, which are identified as a grand
challenge in Singapore, necessitating timely control via innova-
tive artificial intelligence solutions [3]. We formed a diversified
team of clinicians, dietitians, dentists, and computer scientists in
2017 to tackle this challenge. We note that a successful solution for
combating such chronic diseases highly depends on the medical-
grade nutrient intake data, which is not readily available in existing
healthcare data. This is due to the impracticality of requesting each
individual to log their food intake for every meal and the complexity
of calculating nutrient intake, which is not easily learnable [55].
Fortunately, benefiting from the advancement of computer vision
and the popularization of mobile electronic devices, it becomes a
viable solution to record nutrient intake information by prompting
arXiv:2301.03829v2  [cs.LG]  28 Mar 2023

users to snap photos of their consumed food, utilizing food recog-
nition techniques to identify food types from images, and assessing
diets to provide much-needed nutrient intake information [47].
Nonetheless, it is still challenging to attain accurate, medical-grade
nutrient intake information that could facilitate the monitoring of
individuals’ dietary consumption and trigger appropriate interven-
tions if necessary.
The most paramount challenge we encounter is ensuring the
usability of our solution. We investigate the local situations in
Singapore and sort out the potential application scenarios wherein
accurate nutrient intake information could be effectively leveraged.
Serving as a cornerstone to support a range of diverse scenarios, our
proposal should satisfy the shared requirements and is thus versatile
and flexible for deployment. Taking a step further, influenced by its
multi-ethnic culture and citizen population, Singaporean cuisine
is highly diverse [12]. Such uniqueness renders it imperative to
collect a representative dataset encompassing different localized
Singaporean dishes. In addition, although food recognition is a
promising technique for retrieving nutrient intake data from users’
captured food photos, how to achieve accurate recognition results is
challenging. Two critical issues, i.e., intra-class variation and inter-
class resemblance, which are prevalent in real-world food images,
result in the existence of hard positive samples and hard negative
samples, respectively. Both issues hinder us from achieving effective
food recognition and hence accurate nutrient intake retrieval.
To overcome these barriers, we built a systematic solution FoodSG
in 2017, which was initially developed with the primary objective
of aiding individuals in managing 3H problems. With the further
development of the healthcare industry, Singapore has escalated
its focus on monitoring and regulating people’s nutrient intake to
foster a culture of healthy living. In September 2022, MOH initiated
“Healthier SG” [13] to establish an ecosystem of support for bet-
ter health. This initiative seeks to transform the healthcare system
from caring for patients reactively to preventing people from falling
sick proactively, which entails advocating advanced health-seeking
behaviors and healthier lifestyles. Consequently, FoodSG has served
for diverse significant scenarios in Singapore over the years as a
fundamental medical facility to collect medical-grade nutrient in-
take information for each individual, which benefits Singaporeans
in every aspect of life.
Developed thus far, powered by FoodSG, our accomplishments
include: (i) assisting in preventing the enrolled prediabetic patients
from progressing into diabetes in a 3H prevention program, (ii)
facilitating the co-management of patients and their dentists on oral
health management, (iii) planning athletes’ diets with suggested
nutrients, and (iv) releasing a public app for general users to monitor
their nutrient intake themselves. With such broad applicability, we
bring benefits to Singaporeans in different aspects, promote lifestyle
adjustments and finally, help them maintain healthy physical and
mental well-being.
In this paper, we share our experience in this process with re-
searchers and practitioners in the data management community.
Specifically, we have established FoodSG as a full-fledged platform
since 2017 with synergistic collaboration and expertise from dif-
ferent disciplines ranging from dietitians and clinicians to data
scientists and system architects in our team. FoodSG is general and
flexible to satisfy the requirements of diverse application scenar-
ios through effective dietary nutrient intake retrieval and analysis.
At the core of FoodSG, both a high-quality localized Singaporean
food dataset and an accurate food recognition model are crucial.
For the former, we have systematically collected and curated the
FoodSG-233 dataset, while for the latter, we propose to integrate
supervised contrastive learning (SCL) which is beneficial for learn-
ing from hard positive/negative samples. We summarize our main
contributions below.
• Stemming from the close collaboration with different healthcare
sectors in Singapore, we take into account the nutrient intake
information from consumed food data, bridging this gap towards
building a comprehensive healthcare data profile for each indi-
vidual in Singapore. Consequently, we bring tangible and sus-
tainable benefits to Singaporeans in multiple aspects, spanning
from chronic disease prevention, and oral health management,
to healthy lifestyle transformation.
• We design and develop the FoodSG platform to retrieve medical-
grade nutrient intake information, serving a variety of healthcare-
oriented applications and healthy living programs in Singapore.
We further emphasize the importance of localized datasets to
the healthcare management of each specific country, and col-
lect and clean a localized Singaporean food dataset FoodSG-233
with a systematic curation pipeline. To achieve effective food
recognition for accurate nutrient intake retrieval, we propose to
integrate SCL into the model design and devise the FoodSG-SCL
model to facilitate the mining of hard positive/negative samples
caused by intra-class variation and inter-class resemblance.
• We share our experience in the process of solving this enormous
nationwide challenge to retrieve medical-grade nutrient intake
data and make the FoodSG-233 publicly available to foster data
management research in food computing. In addition, with an
extensive experimental evaluation, we validate the effectiveness
of FoodSG-SCL, and also provide the database community with
fresh insights into real-world healthcare applications.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. We intro-
duce necessary preliminaries, including background and challenges
in Section 2. We elaborate on FoodSG as a dietary nutrient-aided
healthcare platform, covering the rationale of our solution, the
overview of FoodSG, and its supported representative application
scenarios in Singapore in Section 3. We further describe our re-
leased localized Singaporean food dataset FoodSG-233, and our
proposed SCL-based effective food recognition model FoodSG-SCL
in Section 4 and Section 5, respectively. The experimental evalua-
tion is discussed in Section 6 and the related work is reviewed in
Section 7. Finally, we conclude in Section 8.
2
PRELIMINARIES
2.1
Background
Nutrient intakes, such as saturated fat, sodium, sugar, and carbo-
hydrate, exert immense influence on people’s health conditions.
For instance, nutritional inadequacy and imbalance due to im-
proper dietary intake tend to increase the risk of people devel-
oping certain diseases such as diabetes, hypertension, and hyper-
lipidemia [32, 50, 56]. Therefore, serving as a modifiable risk factor,
2

salmon - grilled
yuseng (raw fish salad)
sushi
sushi
sushi
intra-class variation
inter-class resemblance
Figure 1: Two common issues in real-world food datasets.
nutrient intake could be monitored and regulated to reduce health
hazards for people.
Despite the vital significance of the nutrient intake information,
it is non-trivial to collect such data in an accurate and medically
useful manner as supplementary information to people’s healthcare
data, facilitating diverse downstream analytic applications. One
main reason lies in the notoriously tedious logging and quantifica-
tion of daily nutrient intake, which renders people less motivated
to monitor their diets and hence, the quality of collected nutrient
data degraded [55]. Benefiting from the advancement of computer
vision, food recognition emerges as a promising direction for ana-
lyzing users’ snapped food photos, predicting the corresponding
food type, and retrieving nutrient intake data automatically.
Nonetheless, this is still challenging in practice as people’s daily
food intake is generally of high variability in terms of types, por-
tions, etc. Fortunately, the particular dietary behaviors of Singa-
porean people offer advantages to alleviate this issue, i.e., a signif-
icant percentage of daily diets are “standardized”. As a matter of
culture, Singaporeans purchase foods in hawker centers (or cooked
food centers) [4, 54] of which the locations, menus, and prices are
regulated by the government. For most Singaporeans’ dining, de-
spite the varied choices, the consumed food can be largely regarded
as a finite set of items from the data collection perspective. This
facilitates effective nutrient intake retrieval via self-snapped photos.
In addition, for other application scenarios in healthcare institu-
tions, such as hospital wards, sports institutes, and rehabilitation
centers, patients are generally provided with predefined set meals,
which brings down the possible variety of daily diets and thereby
eases nutrient intake retrieval.
The factors above largely reduce the difficulty of establishing an
accurate mapping between food categories and the corresponding
nutrients for intake monitoring and diet assessment. However, this
still needs to be grounded on the availability of an official mapping
between standardized menus and nutrient information based on
local situations. We address this by incorporating the standard nutri-
tional guidelines and food composition from the Singapore Health
Promotion Board (HPB) with dietitians’ continuous consolidation.
2.2
Challenges
We have thus far discussed how we overcome the preliminary
barriers towards the goal of accurate nutrient intake data retrieval
from people’s daily diets in Singapore. We next dive into the three
fundamental challenges in attaining this goal further.
Usability. Since nutrient intake retrieval from daily diets serves as
a cornerstone for analyzing people’s health conditions, the proposed
solution should be highly robust and usable to support different
application scenarios. Therefore, it is highly desired to abstract the
common requirements from the various scenarios and propose a
versatile and flexible solution to suit diverse environments.
Uniqueness. Singaporean cuisine is renowned for its rich blend
of dishes from different countries, including Malay, Indonesian,
Chinese, Indian, Peranakan, Western, Japanese, Korean, and Thai,
among others [12]. Such food diversity poses an enormous chal-
lenge to effective food recognition for accurate nutrient intake re-
trieval in Singapore, and leads to the uniqueness of food recognition
in Singaporean food. Prior studies either make use of hand-crafted
features for food recognition [15, 26, 60] or more recently turn
to deep neural network models for boosted performance [37, 59],
fueling the releasing of public food datasets [20, 25, 39, 46] in the
meanwhile. Although these datasets are useful in numerous studies,
they lay emphasis on general food types or different geographical
regions and hence, may not be applicable to more specific areas, in
our case, Singapore. To power effective food recognition for Singa-
porean cuisine, it is imperative to have access to a comprehensive
localized Singaporean dataset for analysis and development.
Efficacy. There are two critical issues prevalent in real-world food
datasets exemplified in Figure 1: (i) intra-class variation meaning
that the food images in the same food category may exhibit high
dissimilarity in appearance, e.g., varied types of “sushi”, which gives
rise to hard positive samples, and (ii) inter-class resemblance in-
dicating that some dishes may look similar to each other despite
being in different categories, such as “sushi” and “salmon - grilled”,
which results in hard negative samples. The existence of such hard
positive/negative samples tends to impede the food recognition ap-
proaches to achieve satisfactory performance. Therefore, advanced
techniques should be introduced to alleviate both issues to improve
the efficacy of food recognition.
3
FoodSG
In this section, we present our proposed dietary nutrient-aided
healthcare platform FoodSG. We start with how FoodSG addresses
each respective challenge in Section 2.2 and then demonstrate its
architecture overview. Finally, we elaborate on how FoodSG serves
the four representative application scenarios in Singapore.
3.1
Our Solution
Our solution to address the fundamental challenges for nutrient
intake retrieval is three-fold.
Firstly, we identify the shared requirements in our close collabo-
rations with different healthcare sectors, clinicians, and dietitians
on food recognition-based applications. We then design and estab-
lish FoodSG, a full-fledged platform that supports diverse healthcare
applications in Singapore driven by effective food recognition and
dietary nutrient analysis. With the FoodSG platform as a service,
we manage to bring huge benefits to health promotion in Singapore
from various aspects, including 3H prevention, dental care man-
agement, athletes’ diet planning, and public use. We shall provide
more details on FoodSG in the remainder of this section.
Secondly, we identify the indispensability of localized food datasets
in that they take into account each country’s particular cuisines in
ingredients, cooking styles and varieties. Therefore, such localized
food datasets could unveil valuable insights into the corresponding
local human groups in dietary behaviors, which could ultimately
3

cast light on their disease development. On account of this, we col-
lect and curate a localized Singaporean food dataset in a systematic
fashion, and the derived FoodSG-233 dataset is of high quality in
terms of volume and diversity compared with its counterparts. The
details of FoodSG-233 will be described in Section 4.
Thirdly, to address both the intra-class variation issue and the
inter-class resemblance issue, and mitigate the influence of hard
positive/negative samples in the FoodSG-233 dataset, we introduce
SCL that encourages hard positive/negative sample mining into
the food recognition task and propose the FoodSG-SCL model for
recognizing food categories accurately and effectively. We shall
present the concrete design of FoodSG-SCL in Section 5.
3.2
Architecture Overview
The architecture of FoodSG’s platform as a service (PaaS) for sup-
porting various applications is illustrated in Figure 2. FoodSG is de-
signed for the cloud to enable adoption by local healthcare providers.
We develop its backend with node.js, and adopt Redis for caching.
We use PostgreSQL as FoodSG’s backend database system for users’
diet and exercise information collection and storage, related sta-
tistics derivation, etc. We also rely on FoodSG’s backend server to
schedule FoodSG’s core component - food recognition driven by
our devised FoodSG-SCL model for analytics. Specifically, on our
curated and released FoodSG-233 dataset, we train FoodSG-SCL
integrating the Data Augmentation Module, the Encoder Module,
the Projection Module, and the Prediction Module in a two-stage
manner to gain the contrastive power of discriminating food images
and thus, generating accurate predictions. We shall elaborate on
the FoodSG-233 dataset and the FoodSG-SCL model in Section 4
and Section 5, respectively. Further, the data stream is managed by
Apache Kafka, and we adopt ejabberd [8] to embed the instant mes-
saging service in FoodSG for facilitating communication between
patients and their clinicians or dietitians.
Upwards, FoodSG supports diverse applications through Angu-
lar [7], which provides appealing and informative user interfaces.
In order to support different users’ terminals covering browsers,
iOS, and Android, we further introduce Ionic [11] for a consistent
and enjoyable user experience.
In Figure 3, we present the screenshots of the “Food(lg)” app
powered by FoodSG for public use to demonstrate four key func-
tionalities of FoodSG in design below.
• Food logging. Taking a user’s snapped photo of the consumed
food as input, FoodSG automatically detects the specific food
category via its food recognition model and retrieves the corre-
sponding nutrients accurately.
• Diary. FoodSG displays the user’s food journal, including the
list of logged dishes for the week ordered by meal time with
concrete nutrient information and a statistical summary of each
day’s nutrient intake. This enables the user to review his/her diet
carefully.
• Activity review. FoodSG records a user’s activities over the week
and assists the user in comparing the consumed food (and hence
the nutrient intake) against the exercise type and amount. This
functionality stimulates the user to maintain a favorable balance
between his/her diet and exercise.
Webapp
(Browser-based)
Mobile App
(iOS, Android)
Client
(Ionic, AngularJS)
HTTP Server
(Nginx)
Chat Server
(ejabberd)
pm2
(node.js process manager)
Backend Server
(node.js/express)
Cache
(Redis)
FoodSG DB
(PostgreSQL)
Image
Storage
Chat DB
(PostgreSQL)
Supported Applications
FoodSG PaaS
Food Recognition
FoodSG-233
Projection
Prediction
Encoder
Data Augmentation
FoodSG-SCL
Kafka
Figure 2: Overview of FoodSG’s architecture.
• Chat. FoodSG links a user with dietitians for timely and profes-
sional advice on disease prevention and monitoring, if necessary,
through reviewing his/her diet diary and exercise history. FoodSG
further connects the user to other users with similar interests in
a group chat for mutual encouragement.
Equipped with these functionalities, the FoodSG platform is ca-
pable and flexible of incubating diverse, multifunction applications
with varied focuses and concerns. We introduce several representa-
tive application scenarios in the next subsection.
3.3
Application Scenarios
The Singapore MOH launched a campaign to combat diabetes in
April 2016, with the aim of facilitating a shared whole-of-nation
endeavor to reduce the diabetes burden in Singapore [19, 49]. After-
ward, diabetes, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia are collectively
considered 3H problems, which are in urgent need of management
in Singapore [3].
Motivated by this, we explore and investigate food image analysis
aided by dietary nutrient intake, as an infrastructure to assist in stop-
ping or slowing the progression and complication development in
these prevalent diseases. Developed up till now, our established plat-
form FoodSG has supported a broad range of healthcare-oriented
application scenarios in Singapore as a service. In this subsection,
we present four representative ongoing scenarios, spanning three
different levels from clinical medicine to healthcare, and further to
public use.
3H prevention. As introduced, 3H refers to (i) hyperglycemia (di-
abetes), (ii) hypertension (high blood pressure), and (iii) hyperlipi-
demia (high cholesterol) [3]. If a person develops these 3H problems
without proper management, his/her lifetime risk of heart disease,
stroke, kidney failure, etc could be increased greatly, leading to
4

(a) Food logging functionality.
(b) Diary functionality.
(c) Activity review functionality.
(d) Chat functionality.
Figure 3: Screenshots of Food(lg) powered by FoodSG demonstrating its key functionalities.
long-term medical attention and financial burden, and diminished
quality of life. A practical strategy for combating 3H problems
lies in advocating healthier lifestyles, e.g., to exercise more, to eat
healthier food, so that we can manage or even prevent 3H.
Let’s take hyperglycemia, i.e., diabetes as an example, the tack-
ling of which is a top priority in Singapore [2]. Since prevention
is always better than cure, we aim to incentivize people to adopt
healthy lifestyles. In the Lifestyle Intervention (LIVEN) program
in the Ng Teng Fong General Hospital in Singapore, we develop
the JurongHealth Food Log (JHFoodlg) app powered by FoodSG to
urge prediabetic patients to make behavioral lifestyle changes that
are sustainable in the long term. We enroll the patients who are
diagnosed with prediabetes, which is a pre-diagnosis of diabetes, in-
dicating that the patient’s blood sugar exceeds a normal range, but
not reaching diabetic levels. 14.4% of Singapore’s population is af-
fected by prediabetes, among whom one third will progress to type
2 diabetes in eight years eventually [1]. Fortunately, prediabetes
is reversible with long-term lifestyle changes, such as disciplined
diets and exercises.
In the program, we require the patients to use JHFoodlg in their
everyday life to record their diets and exercises. JHFoodlg har-
nesses state-of-the-art food recognition models as the driving force,
detects the food types and analyses the corresponding nutrients
based on patients’ uploaded photos, compiles their diets and exer-
cise amount per day into a diary so that the patients can review
their diet summaries against their weight-loss goals and exercise
targets. JHFoodlg also embeds a health coaching component, which
connects patients with the hospital’s dietitians and physiotherapists
to provide valuable information, from education on nutrition and
fitness to personalized feedback, and further encouragement and
recommendations. In this way, they can monitor patients’ progress
and communicate with patients seamlessly via JHFoodlg, during
the journey to reverse prediabetes.
We obtain promising results from a 6-month study in the LIVEN
program. Almost all the patients who participate in the program
experience a weight loss of between 4% to 5% of their initial body
weight supported by JHFoodlg [1]. As an effective and essential app
for 3H prevention in clinical medicine, we plan to roll out JHFoodlg
for a larger cohort of patients in the future.
Dental care management. We develop a dental care manage-
ment system eDental [68] powered by FoodSG to record, detect
and analyze users’ detailed daily diets for potential risk factors for
dental decay, with dentists and oral surgeons from the Faculty of
Dentistry in National University of Singapore and National Uni-
versity Hospital. eDental’s key features include: (i) assisting users
in logging their diets for comprehensive analysis, (ii) monitoring
with attractive user interfaces and informative visual reports, (iii)
triggering dietary risk alerts for dental decay when necessary, (iv)
incentivizing users to continue using the system through goal set-
ting functions, and (v) providing essential educational support to
users. Thereby, with the assistance of eDental, we manage to fa-
cilitate dentists and patients to co-manage patients’ daily dietary
risk factors by analyzing their diet diaries.
This scenario demonstrates the applicability of FoodSG’s service
among clinical medicine, healthcare, and public use in that the end
users cover dentists, their patients, and the general public who
wishes to practice healthy diets for preventing dental problems. We
are currently working on a user study to assess the effectiveness of
eDental in dental practice.
Athletes’ diet planning. Our FoodSG platform also provides ser-
vices for Singapore Sport Institute (SSI) [5] under Sport Singa-
pore [6], the core purpose of which is to transform Singapore
5

Data
Collection
FoodSG-233
Dataset
Consistent
Formatting
Deduplication
Foodness
Classification
Human
Calibration
226,809
images
226,791
images
212,765
images
209,861
images
211,536
images
Figure 4: Data curation pipeline to derive the FoodSG-233 dataset.
through sports and encourage individuals to live better through
sports. In SSI, we have a more specific goal, i.e., we endeavor to pro-
vide the best support to athletes so that they can achieve their full
potential and further fulfill their sporting aspirations. To achieve
this, we turn to FoodSG for its capability of planning the athletes’
diets, guaranteeing their food diversity to achieve nutrient balance,
and facilitating their exercises accordingly to maintain appropri-
ate body weights, body mass index, etc. On the basis of the ath-
letes’ diets and exercises, we can also suggest nutrients for them
to supplement. Therefore, supported by FoodSG, we are able to
unlock the potential in the athletes and help them pursue high-
performance sports. In this scenario, we target to deliver high-
quality healthcare to athletes via FoodSG. We are currently working
on a 22-month user study to evaluate FoodSG’s positive influence
on athletes’ sports careers.
Public use. In order to serve public users, we release a public
version of FoodSG as the “Food(lg)” app in iOS, Android, and Web
browsers, establishing a uniform and consistent user experience.
We detect the food types from users’ journaled entries in images or
text via state-of-the-art food recognition models and calculate users’
daily nutrient estimates against the standard nutritional guidelines
and food composition data from the Singapore HPB [10]. We also
encourage users to exercise more, share food photos, and comment
on them. This social feature lets the users motivate one another for
maintaining a healthy lifestyle. In this way, Food(lg) helps general
users to achieve well-balanced diets, train their physical fitness,
and hence, improve their health conditions and their quality of life
in the long run.
In a nutshell, the aforementioned deployed scenarios showcase
that our developed FoodSG platform manages to cater to diverse
applications while relying on a robust data collection and curation
pipeline that will be described in the next section.
4
LOCALIZED SINGAPOREAN FOOD
DATASET
Localized food datasets capture the unique characteristics of each
country’s dish varieties, cooking styles, and food ingredients and
are therefore highly indispensable and medically meaningful in
contributing to people’s health management in the specific country.
In this section, we elaborate on the data collection and curation pro-
cess of our released localized Singaporean food dataset FoodSG-233,
which is crucial for food recognition as in Figure 2. We start with
the data collection and the data curation pipeline to derive the
dataset and then investigate its key characteristics. Although our
released dataset is specific to Singaporean food dishes, our proposed
pipeline for data preparation is general and applicable to other types
of food dishes, fostering similar research in other countries and
regions. Further, the releasing of our FoodSG-233 dataset is of vital
reference value for other countries and regions, especially the ones
with similar cultural food heritage as Singapore, e.g., Malaysia, in
presenting a fast track for their particular food recognition app
development to collect medical-grade nutrient intake information.
Finally, we compare FoodSG-233 with existing food datasets and
demonstrate its superiority in terms of scale and diversity.
4.1
Data Collection
We incorporate popular ready-to-eat Singaporean food dishes by
referring to HPB [10] for both food groups and dish names. HPB is
a government organization committed to promoting healthy living
in Singapore, which provides a large database of local Singaporean
food and their corresponding nutrient composition [9] measured in
Per Serving Household Measure, in both grams and milliliters. The
database is hierarchically structured with different coarse-grained
food groups, each of which contains fine-grained food categories.
To build a comprehensive Singaporean food dataset, we select 233
popular ready-to-eat Singaporean dishes from 13 main food groups
and then crawl candidate images from different search engines on
the Internet, including Google Images and Bing Images. Further,
in order to expand the range of images retrieved, we increase the
number of crawled images using a set of synonyms for each food
category in our queries. Finally, we collect 226, 809 images in total
for further curation.
4.2
Data Curation Pipeline
In the data curation process, we follow three rules of thumb.
• Release as many images as possible so that the released dataset
can support different users’ practical needs.
• Add necessary preprocessing to curate and clean the dataset in
order to guarantee that after cleaning, (i) the images are of high
quality, and (ii) the food recognition performance is satisfactory.
• Reduce human participation as much as possible, i.e., since man-
ual efforts are generally expensive, involve human participation
only when necessary.
Driven by these principles, we design a pipeline shown in Figure 4
to curate our collected data and derive the FoodSG-233 dataset.
Next, we introduce each curation step in detail.
4.2.1
Consistent Formatting. Given the 226, 809 images collected,
we first convert their formats to JPEG consistently, and then remove
10 truncated images in the process, which leads to 226, 799 images
left. Meanwhile, we constrain that each image has a minimum
size of 32 × 32 to guarantee the quality of retrieved images, and
thus remove 8 images thereafter. After consistent formatting, the
226, 791 remaining images are fed to the next curation step.
6

4.2.2
Deduplication. We then remove exact or near duplicate im-
ages within each food category. Specifically, we calculate three dif-
ferent hashes for each image, namely average hashing, perceptual
hashing [45], and difference hashing. Based on the concatenation
of these three hashes, we filter out similar images and keep a single
image with the largest size when there are exact or near duplicate
ones. We have 212, 765 images left after deduplication.
4.2.3
Foodness Classification. Due to the existence of non-food
images in the dataset, we further build a separate classifier to dif-
ferentiate food and non-food images for filtering out the non-food
ones, i.e., a foodness classification model. Specifically, we construct
the training dataset by collecting 189, 705 non-food images from
the ImageNet dataset [30] as negative images, and 226, 037 food im-
ages from prevailing food datasets including VIREO Food-172 [25],
UEC-Food256 [39] and Food101 [20] as positive images. We then
train a DenseNet169 model [36] for foodness classification and test
the model on the current curated dataset. In the meantime, we
conduct a first pass of manual checking to determine whether each
image is food or not, and such manual labels are then utilized as
the ground truth to evaluate the foodness model’s performance.
Through this foodness classification step, 211, 536 food images are
passed to the next step of the curation pipeline, with the foodness
model yielding an accuracy of 82.9%.
4.2.4
Human Calibration. To guarantee the data quality, we con-
duct a second pass of manual checking as human calibration to cor-
rect the images that are assigned to the wrong food categories. We
end up with 209, 861 images, comprising the FoodSG-233 dataset.
4.3
FoodSG-233
After curation, FoodSG-233 contains 209, 861 images, covering
13 food groups and 233 food categories. Specifically, food groups
are more coarse-grained whereas food categories are more fine-
grained, e.g., the group “Sugars, sweets and confectionery” contains
categories such as “Parfait” and “Popcorn”. The detailed statistics
with the category number and image number in each food group are
displayed in Table 1. As shown, the food group “Mixed ethnic dishes,
analyzed in Singapore” contains 129 out of 233 food categories (over
55%). These categories are mixed ethnic Singaporean dishes and
are highly localized, such as “laksa” and “lontong with sayur lodeh”
(as exemplified in Figure 10), which hence confirms the localization
of Singapore’s food consumption as well as the indispensability of
localized food datasets.
We guarantee that there are at least 400 food images per food
category. The sorted distribution of food image number per food
category in FoodSG-233 is illustrated in Figure 5, which tends to fol-
low a power-law distribution, exhibiting the popularity of different
food categories in the real world.
Drilling down from the dataset statistics to the food images,
we identify two key issues as in Figure 1: (i) intra-class variation
of food images in terms of color, shape, and texture in the same
category, and (ii) inter-class resemblance of food images among
different categories. These two issues are common in real-world
food datasets, which further result in the existence of hard posi-
tive/negative images. As a consequence, the performance of food
recognition, which needs to mine such hard samples, is degraded.
Table 1: FoodSG-233 Data Statistics
Food Group
Category #
Image #
Beverages
3
2,128
Cereal and cereal products
29
25,541
Egg and egg products
1
1,000
Fast foods
4
4,460
Fish and fish products
3
2,041
Fruit and fruit products
36
32,897
Meat and meat products
4
4,136
Milk and milk products
2
1,385
Mixed ethnic dishes, analyzed in Singapore
129
107,986
Nuts and seeds, pulses and products
2
2,822
Other mixed ethnic dishes
4
3,816
Sugars, sweets and confectionery
10
16,037
Vegetable and vegetable products
6
5,612
Total
233
209,861
Food category
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
Image number
Figure 5: Sorted distribution
of food image number per
food category in FoodSG-233.
0.60
0.61
0.62
0.63
0.64
Perceptual distance
Food101
VIREO Food-172
UEC-Food100
UEC-Food256
FoodSG-233
Figure 6: Diversity compar-
ison in the perceptual dis-
tance (the larger, the more di-
verse).
Table 2: FoodSG-233 vs. Existing Food Datasets
Dataset
Category #
Image #
Area
Image #/Category
Food101 [20]
101
101,000
Western
1000
VIREO Food-172 [25]
172
110,241
Chinese
641
UEC-Food100 [46]
100
14,361
Japanese
144
UEC-Food256 [39]
256
25,088
Multiple
98
FoodSG-233
233
209,861
Singaporean
901
4.4
Comparison with Existing Datasets
We conduct a comparison between FoodSG-233 and several widely
adopted food datasets including Food101 [20], VIREO Food-172 [25],
UEC-Food100 [46], and UEC-Food256 [39] in Table 2. FoodSG-233
is superior in terms of the total image number compared with its
counterparts. In addition, as a localized Singaporean food dataset,
FoodSG-233 has a competitively large category number and image
number per category.
As illustrated in Figure 1, the same food category tends to exhibit
varied appearances in the real world. Hence, it is desired to release
a representative dataset that covers the variations per food category
7

1650
1675
1700
Bak kuh
teh
Waffle
Parfait
Tortilla
Tacos and
nachos
Lossless JPEG file size (bytes)
UEC-Food256
FoodSG-233
(a) Diversity comparison
(b) FoodSG-233
(c) UEC-Food256
Figure 7: FoodSG-233 contains diversified images. (a) Diversity comparison in the lossless JPEG file sizes of five food categories’
average images, i.e., the smaller the value, the more diverse. (b) Each compared food category’s example images and the average
image in FoodSG-233. (c) Each compared food category’s example images and the average image in UEC-Food256.
and thereby, assists in building the food recognition model to tackle
all sorts of user-uploaded food images effectively. With this goal,
FoodSG-233 is constructed to contain food images with a high
intra-class variation in terms of color, shape, and texture in the
collection process. To validate the superiority of FoodSG-233 in
this aspect, we conduct a quantitative diversity comparison from
two perspectives below.
To start with, we employ a novel diversity measure based on a
perceptual distance calculated via deep visual representations [63].
We use the open-source model to calculate the pairwise distance
within each food category, and then average different categories’
distances as the diversity metric. This metric has a value range
of [0, 1], and the larger the value is, the more diverse the dataset
is in appearance. The comparison is shown in Figure 6, where
FoodSG-233 exhibits the highest value among all the datasets in
the perceptual distance, confirming its diversity.
We take a step further to calculate the average image of each
food category, upon which we can compute the lossless JPEG file
size to measure the dataset diversity from another perspective. This
metric reflects the information amount in an image. The underlying
rationale is that a food category with more diversified images corre-
sponds to an average image that is vaguer, whereas a category with
less diversified images corresponds to a clearer average image, e.g.,
with a more structured shape or a sharper appearance [30]. The
average images are 256 × 256 and compressed into the lossless JPEG
file format, and the average image file size is in bytes. Therefore, a
more diversified food image set should exhibit a smaller size of the
average image’s lossless JPEG.
We compare FoodSG-233 with UEC-Food256 which has the most
shared food categories. The results are illustrated in Figure 7, in-
cluding the comparison in the lossless JPEG file sizes of the average
images for five food categories, the corresponding example food im-
ages, and the average images, respectively. As shown, FoodSG-233
provides more diversified food images than UEC-Food256.
5
EFFECTIVE FOOD RECOGNITION
In this section, we introduce our proposed FoodSG-SCL model,
which is essential to facilitate effective food recognition in FoodSG
Softmax
Encoder
Data Augmentation
Projection
Prediction
+SCL Loss
Stage1
128-D
233-D
“Bak Kut Teh”
Stage2
2048-D
Finetuned on
FoodSG-233
Pretrained on
ImageNet
Figure 8: FoodSG-SCL model for effective food recognition.
as discussed in Section 3. We first present its overview and then
elaborate on each of its modules. Finally, we demonstrate the opti-
mization process of FoodSG-SCL.
5.1
Model Overview
The overview of FoodSG-SCL based on SCL [40] for food recogni-
tion is shown in Figure 8. FoodSG-SCL consists of four modules
for data augmentation, encoding, projection, and prediction, re-
spectively. The design rationale is that we first augment each data
sample in the Data Augmentation Module to generate its multiple
views, which facilitates FoodSG-SCL to learn generalizable and ro-
bust representations. The augmented samples are then input to the
Encoder Module to unveil the underlying information in the aug-
mented samples, using the state-of-the-art models pretrained on the
ImageNet dataset, and then finetuning them on our FoodSG-233
dataset. The Encoder Module generates a compact representation
that is fed to both the Projection Module for further abstraction and
integration of the SCL loss. Finally, the Prediction Module provides
the final prediction out of 233 food categories.
8

5.2
Model Architecture
Data Augmentation Module Aug(·). Given a batch of data as
input, we first adopt two advanced data augmentation mechanisms
to generate the “multiviewed batch” [40] composed of 2𝑁samples,
where 𝑁is the original batch size. We denote this multiviewed
batch as K = {1, . . . , 2𝑁}. As discussed above, such augmented
data will be fed to the Encoder Module for further modeling.
In contrastive learning (CL) [27], a contrastive loss is proposed
to maximize the agreement between each sample’s different aug-
mented view representations in the latent space. For instance, given
an example x𝑖, after the two data augmentations Aug1(·) and
Aug2(·), we have ˜x𝑖= Aug1(x𝑖), and ˜x𝜌(𝑖) = Aug2(x𝑖), where 𝑖
and 𝜌(𝑖) denote the two augmented samples from the same source
sample. Hence, the index 𝑖corresponds to the anchor sample, the
positive sample set P = {𝜌(𝑖)} contains only one sample, and the
remaining samples constitute the negative sample set.
SCL, short for supervised contrastive learning [40], extends the
CL formulation above to include the samples falling into the same
class (with the same 𝑦label) as 𝑖in its positive sample set:
P = {𝑝|𝑝∈K ∧𝑦𝑝= 𝑦𝑖∧𝑝≠𝑖}
(1)
In comparison, SCL extends the self-supervised setting in CL to a
fully-supervised setting, which effectively leverages the label infor-
mation and meanwhile, contributes to mining hard positive/negative
samples for boosted performance.
Encoder Module Enc(·). We then employ a state-of-the-art neural
network model as the Encoder Module to extract the compact repre-
sentations from the augmented data samples. For a higher capacity
of this module, we use the model pretrained on ImageNet, and then
finetune it on FoodSG-233, grounded in the widely-acknowledged
ability of convolutional neural networks in learning transferable
features generalizable to diverse computer vision tasks [61]. After
encoding, each sample ˜x𝑖is converted to:
e𝑖= Enc(˜x𝑖)
(2)
where e𝑖∈R𝑑𝑒and 𝑑𝑒is the dimension size of the generated
representation. 𝑑𝑒is set to 2048 in our evaluation. We note that
e𝑖is further normalized to fall in the unit hypersphere in R𝑑𝑒as
suggested in [40], i.e., ∥e𝑖∥= 1. Such normalization is considered
to bring performance improvement to prediction tasks.
Projection Module Pro(·). Next, we project the derived e𝑖into a
more compact representation in this Projection Module:
s𝑖= Pro(e𝑖) = 𝜑𝑀𝐿𝑃(e𝑖),𝜑𝑀𝐿𝑃: R𝑑𝑒↦−→R𝑑𝑝
(3)
where a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) model 𝜑𝑀𝐿𝑃with one hidden
layer is for projecting and abstracting the representation from 𝑑𝑒-
dimensional to 𝑑𝑝-dimensional. We set 𝑑𝑝to 128 in the following
experiments. Similarly, s𝑖is normalized as ∥s𝑖∥= 1.
The SCL loss is then applied to pull positive samples close to
each other and push them away from negative samples. As shown
in Figure 8, the integration of SCL corresponds to “Stage1” in
FoodSG-SCL, which learns a strong backbone for FoodSG-SCL in or-
der to support the food recognition task. The learned s𝑖is discarded
at the end of Stage1, while the output of the Encoder Module e𝑖
will be used for prediction.
Prediction Module Pre(·). We input e𝑖to a linear prediction
model 𝜓for food recognition:
q𝑖= Pre(e𝑖) = 𝜓(e𝑖),𝜓: R𝑑𝑒↦−→R|C|
(4)
where C denotes the set of food categories for prediction, |C| = 233
in the FoodSG-233 dataset. We further parameterize ^y𝑖= 𝜎(q𝑖),
where 𝜎(·) is the softmax function. The derived ^y𝑖is the predicted
probability distribution over |C| classes and will be used for train-
ing FoodSG-SCL in the optimization process. Besides, this Predic-
tion Module corresponds to “Stage2” as in Figure 8, the focus of
which lies in employing the well-trained FoodSG-SCL model for
food recognition in an effective manner.
5.3
Optimization
Stage1. The SCL loss for each sample ˜x𝑖is:
𝑙𝑠𝑐𝑙
𝑖
= −1
|P|
∑︁
𝑝∈P
log
exp(𝑠𝑖𝑚(s𝑖, s𝑝)/𝑇)
Í
𝑘∈K\{𝑖} exp(𝑠𝑖𝑚(s𝑖, s𝑘)/𝑇)
(5)
The contrastive prediction task is: given a sample ˜x𝑖, identify the
positive samples in P out of all remaining samples K \ {𝑖}. In Equa-
tion 5, 𝑠𝑖𝑚(·, ·) is the cosine similarity function, i.e., 𝑠𝑖𝑚(s𝑖, s𝑝) =
s⊤
𝑖s𝑝/(∥s𝑖∥∥s𝑝∥). As both representations are normalized,𝑠𝑖𝑚(s𝑖, s𝑝)
is equivalent to s⊤
𝑖s𝑝. Moreover, 𝑇denotes the temperature param-
eter. The overall SCL loss in Stage1 sums all samples’ losses:
𝐿𝑠𝑐𝑙=
∑︁
𝑖∈K
𝑙𝑠𝑐𝑙
𝑖
(6)
With this loss function in Stage1, FoodSG-SCL (except the Prediction
Module) can be effectively trained via gradient-based optimizers
such as stochastic gradient descent (SGD).
Stage2. For the food recognition task as a multi-class classification
problem, we adopt the cross-entropy loss in Stage2.
𝐿𝑐𝑒= −1
|K|
∑︁
𝑖∈K
∑︁
𝑐∈C
𝑦𝑐
𝑖log(^𝑦𝑐
𝑖)
(7)
With the Encoder Module’s output e𝑖and the Prediction Module,
we can readily train the Predictor Module by optimizing this cross-
entropy loss function.
Finally, after the optimization of both stages, FoodSG-SCL is
equipped with the contrastive power, which contributes to the learn-
ing of hard positive/negative samples and further to the prediction
performance. The effectiveness of FoodSG-SCL will be evaluated
in Section 6.
6
EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
In this section, we introduce the experimental setup and analyze
the experimental results. After that, we analyze the experimental
results and discuss the derived insights for practitioners on using
the FoodSG platform for their specific applications.
6.1
Experimental Setup
We evaluate the effectiveness of FoodSG-SCL that integrates the SCL
mechanism into food recognition on the FoodSG-233 dataset. Next,
we introduce the evaluated models, the implementation details, and
the experimental environment as follows.
9

Evaluated Models. We select five state-of-the-art image models
for evaluation and compare their performance against integrating
them into FoodSG-SCL as the Encoder Module, in order to validate
the efficacy of SCL in FoodSG-SCL.
• ResNet50 [33] presents a residual learning framework that is
easier to train and optimize, bringing considerably improved
accuracy on numerous visual recognition tasks.
• DenseNet169 [36] establishes direct connections between each
layer and every other layer in a feed-forward manner, which
enables the model to scale to a larger number of layers easily
without causing difficulties in optimization. Thus, DenseNet169
serves as a feature extractor for different computer vision tasks.
• MobileNetV2 [51] improves the efficiency of mobile models via
an inverted residual structure and emphasizes the importance of
linear bottlenecks to maintain the representation power.
• EfficientNetV2 [53] employs optimization techniques, including
training-aware neural architecture search, model scaling, and
progressive learning, for accuracy, training speed, and parameter
efficiency, respectively.
• ConvNeXt [43] retains the advantages of standard ConvNets in
terms of simplicity and efficiency, but reexamines and redesigns
the components in a ConvNet towards the modern Transformer-
based models. Therefore, ConvNeXt achieves superior perfor-
mance matching up to such Transformer-based models in accu-
racy and scalability.
Implementation Details. The food recognition on FoodSG-233
is formulated as a 233-class classification. We randomly split the
food images per category into 80%, 10%, and 10% for training,
validation, and testing, respectively. We adopt both top-1 and top-5
accuracy as evaluation metrics, and an accurate recognition model
should yield high results in both metrics. We select the hyperpa-
rameters that achieve the best performance on validation data and
apply such settings to the testing data for reporting the average
experimental results of three independent runs.
For each of the aforementioned evaluated models, we adopt its
model weights pretrained on ImageNet and then finetune them on
FoodSG-233 for evaluation. We train these models via SGD [52]
with a learning rate of 0.05 and a weight decay of 0.0001. We
adopt batch size differently across different models, as a larger
model corresponds to a smaller batch and we set the batch size as
large as possible within the device memory capacity. Specifically,
the batch size is 512 in EfficientNetV2, 1024 in DenseNet169 and
ConvNeXt, 2048 in ResNet50 and MobileNetV2, respectively.
For validating the effectiveness of FoodSG-SCL, we integrate
the evaluated models as the Encoder Module of FoodSG-SCL, start
with the same model parameters pretrained on ImageNet and then
finetune on FoodSG-233 with the other essential modules shown in
Figure 8. SGD is used as the optimizer with the learning rate set to
0.1 and the epoch number set to 200. As FoodSG-SCL utilizes two
views for each sample, its batch size needs to be halved accordingly,
i.e., 256 for EfficientNetV2, 512 for DenseNet169 and ConvNeXt,
1024 for ResNet50 and MobileNetV2.
Experimental Environment. We conduct the experiments in a
server with Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold 6248R × 2, 3.0GHz, 24 cores per
chip. The server has 768GB memory, and 8 NVIDIA V100 with
300GB/s NVLINK. We implement the models with PyTorch 1.12.1.
65
70
75
80
Percentage (%)
Top-1 Accuracy
80
85
90
95
Top-5 Accuracy
ResNet50
  (25.6M)
DenseNet169
     (14.1M)
MobileNetV2
     (3.5M)
EfficientNetV2
     (21.5M)
ConvNeXt
  (88.6M)
w/o SCL
w/ SCL
Figure 9: Comparison results of evaluated models w/o SCL
and their advanced variants w/ SCL in FoodSG-SCL. Each
model’s parameter number is shown in brackets.
6.2
Experimental Results
In Figure 9, we illustrate the experimental results of the evaluated
image models without SCL and their respective advanced variants
with SCL as well as other modules in our proposed FoodSG-SCL.
As shown, the advanced methods with SCL outperform the ones
without SCL in top-1 accuracy by a large margin consistently, which
confirms the effectiveness of the SCL mechanism. However, the in-
tegration of SCL leads to a slight degradation in top-5 accuracy. The
underlying reasons for these phenomena will be explained in Sec-
tion 6.3 in detail. Among the five evaluated models, EfficientNetV2
is the most accurate in terms of both top-1 and top-5 accuracy. In ad-
dition, despite the parameter number being one magnitude smaller
than the others, MobileNetV2 still achieves moderate performance
in both evaluation metrics.
To further investigate the intrinsic property of SCL in FoodSG-SCL,
we probe into the cases where food images are misclassified. We
choose the following two ground truth food categories to explore:
(i) the representative local food category “laksa” which is a spicy
noodle dish popular in Singapore, and (ii) “sushi” which is rela-
tively more widely known. For each ground truth category, we
select the best-performing checkpoint among all evaluated models
without SCL, i.e., EfficientNetV2 without SCL (according to Figure 9),
and evaluate it on all the testing samples to derive the predicted
probability distribution per testing sample. We then calculate the
average of all testing samples’ results, based on which we illustrate
the top 5 misclassified categories and their respective probabilities
predicted. For comparison, we also display the results of the same
five food categories derived by the most accurate model checkpoint
of EfficientNetV2 with SCL.
The experimental results of both ground truth categories, includ-
ing the predicted probabilities of their top 5 misclassified categories
and the corresponding example food images are shown in Figure 10.
For both laksa and sushi, the predicted top 5 misclassified categories
generated by EfficientNetV2 without SCL are highly similar to the
ground truth category in terms of color, texture, and shape. On the
contrary, EfficientNetV2 with SCL effectively reduces the predicted
probabilities of these five misclassified categories in both cases, the
reason for which will be explicated in Section 6.3.
6.3
Discussions
Top-1 accuracy vs. top-5 accuracy. Generally, the top 1 predicted
class is used as the final result. However, in practice, the top 1
10

a
b
c
d
e
0
9
Probability (%)
laksa
w/o SCL
w/ SCL
a. tom yum noodle soup
laksa
b. mee siam
c. lontong with sayur lodeh
d. mee rebus
e. satay bee hoon
(a) Laksa
a
b
c
d
e
0
2
Probability (%)
sushi
w/o SCL
w/ SCL
a. salmon - grilled
sushi
b. yuseng
c. rice, korean bulgogi beef
d. pung kueh
e. dumpling
(b) Sushi
Figure 10: Representative food categories and their top 5 misclassified categories.
prediction may not be completely correct. To alleviate this issue,
sometimes users are offered a set of five food category candidates
and allowed to select the correct one with “one more touch”. If
the true food category still cannot be located within the candidate
set, then the user experience will be negatively affected. In this
sense, both top-1 accuracy and top-5 accuracy are crucial in food
recognition, and they measure how accurately we can recognize
the food dishes in the released FoodSG-233 dataset.
As illustrated in Figure 9, the highest top-1 accuracy is 78.87%
yielded by EfficientNetV2 with SCL. Besides, EfficientNetV2 with-
out SCL performs best in top-5 accuracy, i.e., 94.06%, whereas
EfficientNetV2 with SCL achieves 93.13% with a minor decrease.
This means that in most cases, the returned five candidate food cat-
egories successfully contain the ground truth and users could select
the correct one with one more touch conveniently. Both findings
validate the effectiveness of FoodSG-SCL for food recognition.
SCL in food recognition. Food recognition is challenging in that
certain food categories highly resemble each other and it could be
difficult to distinguish between them even for humans. Furthermore,
such subtle differences in the appearance of the two categories may
correspond to a large difference in their constituent nutrients, which
will exert a huge impact on diet assessment. This consequently
bolsters the demand for accurate food recognition when handling
visually similar food images.
SCL is able to meet this demand. Specifically, SCL’s underlying
principle lies in drawing samples with the same label close while
separating them away from samples with other labels. This in nature
improves top-1 accuracy, which is shown in Figure 9 where the
integration of SCL brings performance benefits consistently.
However, such benefits of SCL do not come for free. The models
without SCL adopt the standard cross-entropy loss and generate
the top 5 categories that are the most similar to the ground truth
category in appearance shown in Figure 10, due to the representa-
tion learning capability of convolutional neural networks. Different
from them, SCL-based models tend to push the negative samples
with different labels away from the positive samples, in spite of their
resemblance in appearance. Therefore, with SCL, the predicted prob-
abilities of the same five similar categories will be reduced to a large
extent illustrated in Figure 10, resulting in slightly compromised
top-5 accuracy as observed in Figure 9.
According to our real-world practice, we firmly believe that top-
1 accuracy should outweigh top-5 accuracy in food recognition
regardless of whether we allow users to select further from a candi-
date category set or not. Hence, we introduce the SCL mechanism
into FoodSG-SCL to reduce the disturbing influence exerted by sim-
ilar yet incorrect categories, providing excellent performance gain
in top-1 accuracy.
Edge Computing. In healthcare-oriented applications, there are
certain scenarios where users’ data cannot be processed in a cen-
tralized manner, e.g., users are not willing to upload their food
photos or share their nutrient intake information for privacy con-
cerns. This requires the computation involved in food recognition
to be performed on edge devices, such as mobile phones, which
is thus affected by the computing capacity and space limitation of
the devices. Under such scenarios, more lightweight models are
preferred as the Encoder Module of FoodSG-SCL. For instance, Mo-
bileNetV2 exhibits a prominent advantage of parameter number
being one magnitude smaller than other models, at the expense of
top-1 accuracy decreasing from 78.87% (by EfficientNetV2 with
SCL) to 70.55%.
7
RELATED WORK
7.1
Healthcare Analytics
Healthcare analytics covers numerous analytic tasks with a broad
range of healthcare data spanning cost and claim data, pharma-
ceutical data, research and development data, clinical data, and
patients’ behavior and sentiment data such as patients’ consumed
food data. Among these types of data, clinical data that is gen-
erally collected from electronic medical records (EMR), serves as
a fundamental data source to provide more effective healthcare
delivery with medical insights. As a systematized collection of pa-
tients’ electronically-stored health information in a digital format,
EMR data is heterogeneous, recording patients’ static characteris-
tics such as age and gender, time-series structured information, e.g.,
laboratory tests, prescribed diagnoses, and unstructured features
including medical imaging data and clinicians’ diagnosis summary
notes. With its increasing availability in recent years, EMR data
becomes a crucial driving force for diverse healthcare analytic
approaches, bringing promising benefits spanning more accurate
11

diagnosis and prognosis, more optimal patient management, and
possible medical research breakthrough.
Existing studies on EMR data analytics propose different tech-
niques to model EMR data more effectively, addressing its represen-
tative challenges meanwhile. For instance, to take into account the
temporal relationships and alleviate the lack of interpretability, RE-
TAIN [29] models the time-series EMR data in a reverse time order
to mimic clinicians’ behaviors in clinical practice and devises both
the visit-level attention and the feature-level attention to facilitate
accurate analytics and interpretability simultaneously. Similarly,
Dipole [44] adopts an attention-based bidirectional recurrent neu-
ral network (RNN), which interprets the diagnosis predictions on
a visit level. Further, several studies target to capture the irregu-
lar time intervals of EMR data, which are attributed to patients’
irregular visits to the hospital. Such irregularity is addressed in
T-LSTM [18] via a time-aware long short-term memory (LSTM)
model [35], whereas mitigated by a modified gated recurrent unit
(GRU) model [28] to capture the feature-level irregular time span
information in [69]. In addition, feature interactions are consid-
ered when modeling the EMR data for boosted performance and
improved interpretability. Specifically, ARMOR [22] captures the
feature-feature interactions explicitly and interprets the prediction
results via the importance of each feature-feature interaction, i.e.,
cross-feature. ELDA [21] further contributes to more fine-grained
interpretability with the importance of feature-feature interactions
across time.
7.2
Healthcare Applications
In healthcare analytics, researchers propose advanced solutions to
facilitate high-quality healthcare delivery in numerous applications.
Among these applications, some are relatively fundamental, includ-
ing (i) cohort analysis [31, 62] to analyze the behaviors of different
patient groups for testing hypotheses of new treatments or com-
paring patients’ reactions to a certain treatment; (ii) computational
phenotyping [34, 38] to capture the meaningful patterns in EMR
data through learning latent representations in low-dimensional
space in order to yield boosted performance for downstream applica-
tions; (iii) medical image analysis [16, 70] to develop computational
approaches to address problems pertaining to medical images, such
as magnetic resonance imaging data, X-ray and computed tomog-
raphy scans, in order to facilitate their use in clinical care.
Grounded on these fundamental applications, healthcare analyt-
ics serves as a basis for predictive applications spanning chronic
disease progression modeling [58, 66, 67, 69], disease diagnosis [24,
42, 64, 65], mortality prediction [21, 24, 64, 65, 67, 69], and readmis-
sion prediction [17, 23], among others.
7.3
Food Computing
Besides the aforementioned healthcare applications, food comput-
ing is another integral application, which takes food data as input
for analysis. Specifically, as an interdisciplinary area, food comput-
ing targets to apply computational methods to analyze heteroge-
neous sources of food data for supporting diverse food-related in-
vestigations in healthcare, gastronomy, and agronomy [47]. Among
the involved tasks, food recognition, which predicts the food items
contained in food images, is a cornerstone of other more advanced
tasks, such as nutrient intake analysis, and food recommendation,
for addressing food-related issues from multiple perspectives.
Prior studies in the early stage exploit hand-crafted features
for food recognition. For instance, in [26], color histograms and
SIFT features are used as the image representations, while in [60],
the statistics of pairwise local features are utilized to mine the
underlying spatial relationships between different ingredients in
food images. Later on, the bag-of-features model is employed to
describe the food images for boosted performance [15]. Recently,
due to the record-breaking performance achieved by deep learning
models in numerous areas such as computer vision [41, 48, 57],
various convolutional neural network models [37, 59] are employed
in food recognition for extracting the features in food images and
hence, delivering more satisfactory recognition performance than
the aforementioned traditional approaches.
In the meantime, a large number of food-related datasets are
released to further promote the development of food computing.
For example, Food101 [20] is constructed to cover 101 food cate-
gories, containing 101, 000 images in total, and most of its images
correspond to western food. Different from Food101, VIREO Food-
172 [25] turns its focus to Chinese food and includes 172 food
categories, and 110, 241 images, respectively. Moreover, a Japanese
food dataset UEC-Food100 [46] is built to incorporate 100 popu-
lar Japanese food categories. This UEC-Food100 dataset is then
expanded to UEC-Food256 [39] introducing more food categories
from other countries, namely French, Italian, American, Chinese,
Thai, Vietnamese, and Indonesian. These released multifarious food-
related datasets present researchers with ample opportunity for
food computing and analysis. However, these datasets have their
specific geographic areas and therefore, only include particular
types of cuisines. Different from existing work, driven by FoodSG,
we investigate Singaporean food dishes and release the localized
dataset FoodSG-233, which is of vital significance to FoodSG’s pro-
vided healthcare services for Singaporeans.
8
CONCLUSIONS
In order to surmount the difficulty of retrieving medical-grade nu-
trient intake of Singaporeans for advocating healthier lifestyles,
we abstract the shared requirements among diverse applications
and develop the dietary nutrient-aided healthcare platform FoodSG
as a service to support all sorts of application scenarios in Singa-
pore. We collect, curate, and release a Singaporean food dataset
FoodSG-233 systematically to promote future research directions
for the data management community in food computing. Through
delving into FoodSG-233 to analyze its issues of intra-class dis-
similarity and inter-class similarity, we propose to integrate SCL
into food recognition and devise the FoodSG-SCL model accord-
ingly to facilitate the learning from hard positive/negative samples
for performance gains. By evaluating FoodSG-SCL from multiple
perspectives, we deliver fresh insights and valuable experience in
healthcare applications to practitioners.
12
