arXiv:1102.5135v1  [cond-mat.mes-hall]  25 Feb 2011
Localized States and Resultant Band Bending in Graphene Antidot Superlattices
Milan Begliarbekov1, Onejae Sul2, John J. Santanello1, Nan Ai1, Xi Zhang1, Eui-Hyeok Yang2, and Stefan Strauf1
1 Department of Physics and Engineering Physics,
Stevens Institute of Technology, Hoboken NJ, USA and
2 Department of Mechanical Engineering, Stevens Institute of Technology, Hoboken NJ, USA
We fabricated dye sensitized graphene antidot superlattices with the purpose of elucidating the
role of the localized edge state density. The ﬂuorescence from deposited dye molecules was found
to strongly quench as a function of increasing antidot ﬁlling fraction, whereas it was enhanced in
unpatterned but electrically back-gated samples. This contrasting behavior is strongly indicative
of a built-in lateral electric ﬁeld that accounts for ﬂuorescence quenching as well as p-type doping.
These ﬁndings are of great interest for light-harvesting applications that require ﬁeld separation of
electron-hole pairs.
Graphene, a two dimensional monolayer of carbon
atoms arranged in a hexagonal lattice has been recently
isolated [1] and shown to exhibit excellent electrical [2, 3],
thermal [4], mechanical [5] and optical [6] properties.
Electron transport has been studied extensively in single
and few-layer graphene sheets [7, 8], while optoelectronic
properties and light matter interaction in nanostructured
graphene gain increasingly more interest in the research
community, in particular since the advent of ﬁrst ultra-
fast graphene photodetectors [9]. Single layer graphene
absorbs only 2.3% of the incident radiation in the visible
spectrum [10], consequently, eﬃcient photocarrier sepa-
ration within graphene becomes particularly important.
In order to create a built-in electrical ﬁeld that facil-
itates carrier separation silicon based technology relies
on the pn-junction that is created by doping the silicon
lattice. Physical doping of graphene has been previously
achieved by addition of extrinsic atomic [11, 12] or molec-
ular [13, 14] species either by adsorption or intercalation
into the graphene lattice [12, 15]. A potentially simpler
way to make graphene a viable material for optoelec-
tronics can be achieved by utilizing lateral electric ﬁelds
created by Schottky barriers near the source and drain
metal contacts [9, 16, 17], as was previously done in car-
bon nanotubes [18]. In the presence of such metal con-
tacts it was also observed that nanotube ﬂuorescence can
be signiﬁcantly enhanced [19]. While graphene does not
display any exciton emission, quantum dots placed on
unpatterned graphene were recently shown to undergo
strong ﬂuorescence quenching, which is indicative of en-
ergy transfer from the quantum dot exciton oscillator into
graphene [20]. Such hybrids between graphene and light
harvesting molecules can potentially overcome the low
absorption eﬃciency of bare graphene.
Nanostructured graphene oﬀers further possibilities to
explore light harvesting and carrier separation. Of par-
ticular interest are the so called antidot superlattices, i.e.,
lattices comprized of a periodic arrangement of perfora-
tions in the underlying graphene structure. These super-
lattices were predicted to posses a nonnegligible magnetic
moment [21], a small band gap [22–25] that can be con-
trolled by the antidot ﬁlling fraction [26, 27], and Peierls
type electron-hole coupling that leads to polaronic be-
Figure 1: (a) The energetic shift (black diamonds) and broad-
ening (blue triangles) of graphene’s G-band as a function of
the antidot ﬁlling fraction. (b) Positive correlation of the en-
ergetic shifts of the G’ and G bands on diﬀerent mono, bi, and
tri layer samples, showing eﬀective p-doping.
(c) Example
SEM images of antidot lattices with diﬀerent ﬁlling fraction.
havior [26]. In a previous work, Heydrich et al., showed
that the introduction of an antidot superlattice results in
the stiﬀening of the G-Band in Graphene’s Raman spec-
trum, as well as an energetic shift of the G and G’-Bands
commensurate with p-type doping [28]. Furthermore, re-
cent theoretical predictions show that the periphery of
graphene possesses a nonnegligible density of states Nedge
that is spatially localized at the edges and is distinct from
the bulk states Nbulk that are present in graphene’s inte-
rior regions. Consequently, antidot superlattices provide
a natural framework for studying these states and their
properties, since the edge states in these systems coex-
ist with the bulk states, unlike in dot lattices, where the
ratio of edge to bulk states is small.
Here we report an electro-optical study of dye sensi-
tized graphene antidot superlattices with the purpose
of elucidating the role of the localized edge state den-
sity on its light-harvesting properties.
The amount of

2
p-type doping introduced by the edge states is quanti-
ﬁed for various antidot ﬁlling fractions using confocal µ-
Raman spectroscopy and transport measurements. We
show that the ﬂuorescence from deposited dye molecules
strongly quenches in linear proportion to the antidot ﬁll-
ing fraction, whereas it was enhanced in the presence of
free carriers in unpatterned but electrically back-gated
samples.
This contrasting behavior is strongly indica-
tive of a built-in lateral electric ﬁeld that accounts for
ﬂuorescence quenching as well as p-type doping and the
observed Raman signatures. Our study provides new in-
sights into the interplay of localized edge states in antidot
lattices and the resulting band bending, which are critical
properties to enable novel applications of nanostructured
graphene for light harvesting and photovoltaic devices.
I.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A.
Antidot Superlattices
Graphene ﬂakes used in these experiments were pre-
pared by micromechanical exfoliation of natural graphite
onto a degenerately doped p+ + Si wafer with a thermally
grown 90 nm SiO2 dielectric. Layer metrology was subse-
quently performed using confocal µ-Raman spectrometry
in order to identify mono, bi, and tri-layer graphene ﬂakes
[29, 30]. Following the initial characterization, various
antidot superlattices were etched onto the ﬂakes using
electron beam lithography. Figure 1c shows two exem-
plary lattices with diﬀerent ﬁlling fractions F = φ/s of
antidots, where φ is the antidot diameter, and s is their
separation. In accordance with previous experimental re-
sults [28, 31, 32], the corresponding Raman spectra dis-
play an energetic shift and linewidth narrowing of the
G-band with increasing ﬁlling fraction, as shown in Fig
1a. The G band, which occurs at ~1580 cm−1 arises from
doubly degenerate iTO and iLO phonon modes which
possess E2g symmetry.
The observed stiﬀening (from
16.7 cm−1 to 6.6 cm−1) can be understood in terms of
the Landau damping of the phonon mode, while the en-
ergetic shift arises from a renormalization of the phonon
energy [31, 33]. Furthermore, the energetic shift of the
G-band is positively correlated with the shift of the G’-
band, as shown in Fig. 1b, which is indicative of an ef-
fective p-doping of the underlying graphene layer[34, 35].
In contrast, a negative correlation in the energetic shifts
of the G and G’ bands would imply n-doping.
In order to correlate shift and stiﬀening of the G-band
in antidot superlattices to an underlying carrier density,
we fabricated electrically contacted devices without an
antidot lattice, as shown schematically in Fig. 2b. Using
the electrical ﬁeld eﬀect of the back gate, the sheet car-
rier density ∆ns was modulated and the stiﬀening and
energetic shift of the G-band in the unpatterned samples
was used to estimate the edge state density in the anti-
dot superlattice (see supporting online material). From
these data the amount of p-doping in the antidot samples
Figure 2: (a) Schematic of the spatially resolved confocal µ-
Raman experiment, showing the excitation beam (λ0 = 532
nm) and the three optical signals, R6G Raman, R6G ﬂuo-
rescence and graphene Raman, that were monitored during
these experiments in both, electrically gated and antidot de-
vices. (b) An example of an electrically contacted graphene
device used in these experiments.
was determined to reach up to 4 × 1012 cm−2 at a ﬁlling
fraction of two (top axis in Fig.1a), and was not found
to depend on the number of graphene layers as shown in
Fig. 1b. The large amount of eﬀective p-doping is rather
remarkable since neither extrinsic dopants, nor an exter-
nal gate potential were applied to the antidot samples.
Furthermore, in order to investigate the microscopic
origin of the observed p-doping we fabricated graphene-
dye hybrids. Both, antidot ﬂakes and electrically con-
tacted devices were soaked in a 15 nanomol solution of
Rhodamine 6G (R6G), as shown schematically in Fig. 2a.
In these experiments, the R6G Raman peaks, the R6G
ﬂuorescence, and the Raman signal from graphene were
monitored as a function of the antidot ﬁlling fraction F
as well as diﬀerent backgate and source-drain biases on
the unpatterned ﬂakes. In the subsequent discussion, we
ﬁrst focus on the R6G ﬂuorescence signal.
Figure 3a shows a scanning electron micrograph of a
single bilayer graphene ﬂake with three distinct antidot
superlattices L1, L2, and L3, which was used to study the
spatially resolved µ-ﬂuorescence of the R6G dye. The rel-
ative intensity of the broad ﬂuorescence signal of the R6G
molecule (recorded at λF L = 577 nm) normalized to the
intensity of R6G ﬂuorescence on the bare SiO2 substrate
are identiﬁed by circles in Fig. 3a. Our results indicate
that the R6G ﬂuorescence is moderately quenched on the
unpatterned graphene substrate as compared to the ﬂu-
orescence on the bare SiO2 wafer. Remarkably, the ﬂu-
orescence becomes even stronger quenched in the region
were the antidot superlattices are located. The amount
of R6G ﬂuorescence quenching increases with increasing
ﬁlling fraction of the antidots as shown in Figures 3b-
3e for ﬁlling fractions of zero (graphene), 1/3 (L3), 1/2
(L2), and 1 (L1). The integrated intensity of the R6G
ﬂuorescence signal quenches up to a factor of ﬁve for the
largest realized ﬁlling fraction, as shown in Fig 4.
In contrast to the quenching ﬂuorescence signal, the
intensity of the Raman signals from both R6G and
graphene were found to increase six-fold with increas-
ing ﬁlling fraction, i.e. increasing density of edge states,

3
Figure 3: (a) Scanning electron micrograph of the graphene ﬂake, with nanopatterned areas outlined by the green boxes.
The ﬁlling fractions for lattice L1, L2, and L3 are 1, 1/2, and 1/3 respectively (all dots are 100 nm in diameter), the colors
correspond to the R6G ﬂuorescence in the sampling region normalized to the ﬂuorescence on the bare SiO2 wafer. SEM’s of the
individual lattices are available in the supporting online materials. Several example spectra taken on (b) lattice 1, (c) lattice
2, (d) lattice 3, and (e) unpatterned graphene, are also shown.
Figure 4: Integrated intensity of the ﬂuorescence signal (pink
triangles) right axis, and R6G Raman signals taken at 1390
cm−1 (black squares) and 1630 cm−1 (green stars) left axis,
as a function of the antidot ﬁlling fraction;
as shown in Fig.
4.
In order to rule out any possi-
ble inﬂuence of the carboxylic bonds at the edges of the
antidots and the possible presence of oxygen groups on
SiO2, which could have been introduced during oxygen
plasma etching, a control experiment was performed in
which several antidot lattices were reduced using 1 mmol
L-ascorbic acid for 24 hours. Reduction in ascorbic acid
was previously shown to eﬀectively remove oxygen groups
from graphene [36, 37]. Our results (which are shown in
the supporting online materials) indicate that no signiﬁ-
cant oxygen contamination occurs during the 10 s etching
process, and thus cannot be used to account for the ob-
served enhancement of the Raman peaks.
Phenomenologically, the ﬂuorescence quenching may
be understood as follows. The incident laser light creates
electron-hole pairs in the R6G dye. In the absence of the
graphene substrate, the e-h pairs radiatively recombine
thereby giving rise to the ﬂuorescence signal on the bare
SiO2 wafer. It was previously shown that placing quan-
tum dots on top of graphene results in an energy transfer
from the dots into the underlying graphene layer [38], re-
sulting in a suppression of blinking from the quantum
dots. A similar eﬀect is expected to occur for the R6G
molecules on graphene, where the radiative recombina-
tion of the excitons in the R6G molecule is suppressed. In
our experiments, additional quenching of the ﬂuorescence
signal in the antidot regions was observed (as shown in
Figs. 3 and 4). The additional quenching can thus be
understood to arise from the extra states at the edges
Nedge, that eﬀectively prevent radiative recombination
of the electron-hole pairs, and therefore quench the ﬂu-
orescence signal. The amount of quenching observed in
our experiments is rather remarkable since increasing the
antidot ﬁlling fraction decreases graphene’s surface area

4
Figure 5: (a) Gate tunable R6G ﬂuorescence of an unpatterned, electrically contacted device, similar to the one shown in
Fig. 2b, and (b) intensities of several Raman peaks (green stars taken at 1630 cm−1and black squares taken at 1390 cm−1),
graphene’s G-band (red circles) and R6G ﬂuorescence (pink triangles). The blue curve shows the source-drain current Isd, that
was used to determine the sheet carrier density ∆ns (top axis) measured in a separate transport experiment in the same sample
prior to the addition of R6G.
and introduces larger areas of SiO2 into the excitation
volume on which the ﬂuorescence is not quenched.
The observed linear increase in carrier density with
increasing ﬁlling fraction is in accordance with the theo-
retical prediction of Whimmer et al. [21], who showed
that the ratio of edge states to bulk states is given
by Nedge
Nbulk ≈1.07 (1 −2α) ℏ2v2
F
E2
0sR, where ℏis the reduced
Planck’s constant, vF is the Fermi velocity in graphene,
α is a parameter that characterizes edge roughness, E0 is
the energy width of the band of edge states, s is the an-
tidot separation, and R is the antidot radius. Therefore,
decreasing s or alternatively increasing R gives rise to a
linear increase in Nedge.
B.
Gate-Tunable Fluorescence
In order to further elucidate the mechanism for ﬂuo-
rescence quenching and the nature of Nedge we fabricated
electrically contacted and back-gated graphene ﬂakes,
which did not contain an antidot superlattice. Varrying
the backgate voltage, eﬀectively moves the Fermi level
in the device thereby aﬀording the possibility of in-situ
electron and hole doping of the graphene ﬂake according
to ∆ns = Cg (Vg −VDirac) /e, where Cg is the gate ca-
pacitance, Vg is the applied gate voltage, VDirac is the
location of the Dirac point, and e is the electron charge
[3, 39–41]. Modulating the Fermi level with the back-
gate creates a free sheet carrier density in the underlying
graphene layer. The eﬀect of free carriers on the R6G
ﬂuorescence and the R6G and graphene Raman is shown
in Fig. 5a, with the blue (red) traces corresponding to
spectra from hole (electron) doped regions and the black
trace was taken at the Dirac point. The intensities of
several Graphene and R6G Raman peaks are plotted in
Fig.
5b together with the Isd −Vbg trace (blue line),
which illustrates that the current to the left of the mini-
mum (the Dirac point) is due to hole conductivity, while
the current to the right of the minimum corresponds to
electron conductivity. As can be seen, the intensities of
both the Raman peaks as well as the ﬂuorescence signal
can be either quenched or enhanced by the applied gate
bias, and directly follow the free carrier density in the
device. Comparing the values of ∆ns (top axis in Fig.
5b) to Nedge (top axis in Fig. 4) it is evident that the
enhancement of the Raman peaks achieved in antidot de-
vices occurs at comparable concentrations of Nedge and
sheet carrier densities ∆ns in unpatterned samples, as
shown in Figs. 6a and 6b. Unlike the Raman peaks, the
R6G ﬂuorescence is strongly quenched in the nanopat-
terned samples, whereas it is enhanced in the electrically
gated samples. The contrasting behavior of the ﬂuores-
cence signal is strongly indicative of the diﬀerent nature
of the carriers in the antidot superlattice as compared
to unpatterned graphene, and can be used to establish
a microscopic mechanism for the observed ﬂuorescence
quenching and p-doping in the nanostructured samples.
In principle, two possible mechanisms could be respon-
sible for ﬂuorescence quenching:
charge transfer from
R6G into the trap states that are created by the ad-
ditional edge state density or electrical ﬁeld dissociation
of the radiative R6G exciton, which leads to a strong
decrease in the exciton recombination rate due to the re-
duced electron-hole wavefunction overlap in an electric
ﬁeld.
Although charge transfer into trap states could
account for the decrease of the ﬂuorescence intensity, it
cannot explain the observed stiﬀening and the energetic
shift of the G-band phonon in graphene, both of which

5
Figure 6: (a) Comparison of the ﬂuorescence quenching in the
nanopatterned samples as a function of edge state carrier den-
sity to (b) the enhancement of ﬂuorescence in gated samples
in which free carriers are injected into the conduction band;
(c) A schematic of the band bending that occurs as a results
of pinning the Fermi level at the localized density of states
ρedge at the edges of the antidots (orange dashed lines).
require an electric ﬁeld eﬀect [31, 32]. In contrast, the
ﬁeld dissociation mechanism explains both phenomena,
as well as the absence of ﬂuorescence quenching in un-
patterned graphene under back-gate sweeping.
Since the edge states create spatially localized carriers,
which are immobile, they would not cause the G-band
stiﬀening.
However, their presence eﬀectively pins the
Fermi level at the edges, thereby bending the band struc-
ture throughout the entire antidot superlattice, since no
localized states exist in graphene’s basal plane and the
Fermi level must remain continuous, as shown schemati-
cally in Fig. 6c. This band bending creates an eﬀective
potential, i.e. a built-in lateral electrical ﬁeld, that ac-
counts for the dissociation of the R6G excitons, resulting
in the observed ﬂuorescence quenching. In contrast, the
vertical back-gate ﬁeld of the unpatterned graphene de-
vice does not lead to band bending, while the created
free carrier density can eﬀectively feed the carrier cap-
ture into the R6G molecules, causing the observed ﬂuo-
rescence enhancement. The Raman signals are enhanced
by the electrical ﬁeld mechanism providing free carriers
in both cases.
Quantitatively, the eﬀect of the built-in electrical ﬁeld
may be estimated to ﬁrst order from the amount of p-
doping that it introduces. In graphene, doping is com-
mensurate with the movement of the Fermi level into the
conduction or valence bands by the electrical ﬁeld. The
band oﬀset ∆EF as a function of doping concentration
n is given by ∆EF = ℏvF kF , where ℏis the reduced
Planck’s constant, vF is the Fermi velocity, and kF is
the Fermi wave vector, which in graphene is given by
kF = √πn [42].
The antidot lattices used in our ex-
periments yielded doping concentrations on the order of
0.5 −4.0 × 1012 cm−2, which correspond to band oﬀsets
of ∆EF ≈90 −260 meV.
The Fermi level pinning at the localized carrier den-
sity in the antidot superlattice is similar to Fermi level
pinning of a Schottky barrier at an graphene-metal in-
terface that is used to separate photogenerated carriers
in optoelectronic devices based, for example, on carbon
nanotubes [9, 16, 18]. In our case, however, no metal was
deposited onto graphene and the pinning occurs at the
localized edge states that are a direct consequence of the
antidot superlattice.
In summary, we fabricated several graphene antidot
superlattices using mono, bi, and tri layer ﬂakes, and ob-
served eﬀective p-type doping which increases with larger
ﬁlling fractions, as evident from their Raman signatures.
We furthermore showed that after depositing R6G dye
on these ﬂakes, the corresponding ﬂuorescence signal is
strongly quenched with increasing antidot ﬁlling fraction,
while the Raman signal is enhanced. These results are in-
dicative to a microscopic mechanism in which the Fermi
level becomes pinned at the antidot periphery giving rise
to a built-in electric ﬁeld, which accounts for the ﬂuo-
rescence quenching and the observed p-type doping in
nanopatterned graphene.
These ﬁndings make antidot
lattices of great interest for carbon-based optoelectronics
and might be particularly useful for light-harvesting ap-
plications such as photodetectors and solar cells requiring
eﬃcient ﬁeld separation of electron-hole pairs.
[1] K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang,
Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva, and A. A.
Firsov, Science 306, 666 (2004).
[2] Y. M. Lin, C. Dimitrakopoulos, K. A. Jenkins, D. B.
Farmer, H. Y. Chiu, A. Grill, and P. Avouris, Science
327, 662 (2010).
[3] K. I. Bolotin, K. J. Sikes, Z. Jiang, M. Klima, G. Fuden-
berg, J. Hone, P. Kim, and H. L. Stormer, Solid State
Communications 146, 351 (2008).
[4] A. Balandin, W. Z. G. S. Bao, I. Calizo, D. Tewelde-
brhanD, F. Miao, and C. N. Lau, Nano Letters 8, 902
(2008).
[5] C. Lee, X. Wei, J. W. Kysar, and J. Hone, Science 321,
385 (2008).
[6] F. Bonaccorso, Z. Sun, T. Hasan, and A. C. Ferrari, Na-
ture Photonics 4, 611 (2010).
[7] K. S. Novoselov, S. V. Morozov, T. M. G. Mohinddin,
L. A. Ponomarenko, D. C. Elias, R. Yang, I. I. Barbolina,
P. Blake, T. J. Booth, D. Jiang, et al., Physica Status
Solidi B-basic Solid State Physics 244, 4106 (2007).
[8] A. C. Neto, F. Guinea, N. Peres, K. Novoselov, and
A. Geim, Rev. Mod. Phys 81, 109 (2009).
[9] F. Xia, T. Mueller, Y. ming Lin, A. Valdes-Garcia, and
P. Avouris, Nature Nanotechnology 4, 839 (2009).
[10] R. R. Nair, P. Blake, A. N. Grigorenko, K. S. Novoselov,
T. J. Booth, T. Stauber, N. M. R. Peres, and A. K. Geim,

6
Science 320, 5881 (2008).
[11] I. Gierz, C. Riedl, U. Starke, C. R. Ast, and K. Kern,
Nano Letters 8, 4603 (2007).
[12] Y. Wang, Y. Shao, D. W. Matson, J. Li, and Y. Lin, ACS
Nano 4, 1790 (2010).
[13] T. O. Wehling, K. S. Novoselov, S. V. Morozov, E. E.
Vdovin, M. I. Katsnelson, A. K. Geim, and A. I. Licht-
enstein, Nano Letters 8, 173 (2008).
[14] X. Dong, D. Fu, W. Fang, Y. Shi, P. Chen, and L.-J. Li,
Small 5, 1422 (2009).
[15] B. Guo, Q. Liu, E. Chen, H. Zhu, L. Fang, and J. R.
Gong, Nano Letters In Press (2010).
[16] T. Mueller, F. Xia, M. Freitag, J. Tsang, and P. Avouris,
Phys. Rev. B 79, 245430 (2009).
[17] T. Mueller, F. Xia, and P. Avouris, Nature Photonics 4,
297 (2010).
[18] P. Avouris, Materials Today 9, 46 (2006).
[19] G. Hong, S. M. Tabakman, K. Welsher, H. Wang,
X. Wang, and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 132, 15920
(2010).
[20] Z. Chen, S. Berciaud, C. Nuckolls, T. F. Heinz, and L. E.
Brus, ACS Nano 4, 2964 (2010).
[21] M. Wimmer, A. R. Akhmerov, and F. Guinea, Phys. Rev.
B 82, 045409 (2010).
[22] J. Bai, X. Zhong, S. Jiang, Y. Huang, and X. Duan,
Nature Nanotechnol. 5, 190 (2010).
[23] X. Liang, Y.-S. Jung, S. Wu, A. Ismach, D. L. Olynick,
S. Cabrini, and J. Bokor, Nano Lett. 10, 2454 (2010).
[24] M. Kim, N. S. Safron, E. Han, M. S. Arnold, and
P. Gopalan, Nano Lett. 10, 1125 (2010).
[25] A. Sinitskii and J. M. Tour, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 132,
14730 (2010).
[26] V. M. Stojanovic, N. Vukmirovic, and C. Bruder, Phys.
Rev. B 82, 165410 (2010).
[27] R. Petersen and T. G. Pedersen, Phys. Rev. B 80, 113404
(2009).
[28] S. Heydrich, M. Hirmer, C. Preis, T. Korn, J. Eroms,
D. Weiss, and C. Schuller, Appl. Phys. Lett. 97, 043113
(2010).
[29] M. Begliarbekov, O. Sul, S. Kalliakos, E.-H. Yang, and
S. Strauf, Appl. Phys. Lett. 97, 031908 (2010).
[30] A. C. Ferrari, J. C. Meyer, V. Scardaci, C. Casiraghi,
M. Lazzeri, F. Mauri, S. Piscanec, D. Jiang, K. S. N. S.,
Roth, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett 97, 187401 (2006).
[31] J. Yan, Y. Zhang, P. Kim, and A. Pinczuk, Phys. Rev.
Lett 98, 166802 (2007).
[32] S. Pisana, M. Lazzeri, C. Casiraghi, K. S. Novoselov,
A. K. Geim, A. C. Ferrari, and F. Mauri, Nature Mate-
rials 6, 198 (2007).
[33] A. C. Ferrari, Solid State Communications 143, 47
(2007).
[34] A. Das, S. Pisana, B. Chakraborty, S. Piscanec, S. K.
Saha, U. V. Waghmare, K. S. Novoselov, H. R. Krishna-
murthy, A. K. Geim, A. C. Ferrari, et al., Nature Nan-
otechnology 3, 210 (2008).
[35] C. Stampfer, F. Molitor, D. Graf, K. Ensslin, A. Jungen,
C. Hierold, and L. Wirtz, Appl. Phys. Lett. 91, 241907
(2007).
[36] J. Zhang, H. Yang, G. Shen, P. Cheng, J. Zhang, and
S. Guo, Chem. Commun. 46, 1112 (2010).
[37] B. Krauss, P. Nemes-Incze, V. Skakalova, L. P. Biro,
K. von Klitzing, and J. H. Smet, Nano Lett. 10, 4544
(2010).
[38] Z. Chen, S. Berciaud, C. Nuckolls, T. F. Heinz, and L. E.
Brus, ACS Nano 4, 2964 (2010).
[39] N. Stander, B. Huard, and D. Goldhaber-Gordon, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 102, 026807 (2009).
[40] M. Begliarbekov,
O. Sul,
N. Ai,
E.-H. Yang,
and
S. Strauf, Appl. Phys. Lett. 97, 122106 (2010).
[41] Y.-W. Tan, Y. Zhang, K. Bolotin, Y. Zhao, S. Adam,
E. H. Hwang, S. D. Sarma, H. L. Stormer, and P. Kim,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 246803 (2007).
[42] E. Hwang, S. Adam, and S. D. Sarma, Phys. Rev. Lett.
98, 186806 (2007).
