Evolving Culture vs Local Minima
Yoshua Bengio
Department of computer science and operations research, U. Montreal
Abstract
We propose a theory that relates difﬁculty of learning in deep architectures to culture and
language. It is articulated around the following hypotheses: (1) learning in an individual human
brain is hampered by the presence of effective local minima; (2) this optimization difﬁculty is
particularly important when it comes to learning higher-level abstractions, i.e., concepts that
cover a vast and highly-nonlinear span of sensory conﬁgurations; (3) such high-level abstrac-
tions are best represented in brains by the composition of many levels of representation, i.e.,
by deep architectures; (4) a human brain can learn such high-level abstractions if guided by
the signals produced by other humans, which act as hints or indirect supervision for these
high-level abstractions; and (5), language and the recombination and optimization of mental
concepts provide an efﬁcient evolutionary recombination operator, and this gives rise to rapid
search in the space of communicable ideas that help humans build up better high-level internal
representations of their world. These hypotheses put together imply that human culture and
the evolution of ideas have been crucial to counter an optimization difﬁculty: this optimization
difﬁculty would otherwise make it very difﬁcult for human brains to capture high-level knowl-
edge of the world. The theory is grounded in experimental observations of the difﬁculties of
training deep artiﬁcial neural networks. Plausible consequences of this theory for the efﬁciency
of cultural evolution are sketched.
1
Introduction
Interesting connections can sometimes be made at the interface between artiﬁcial intelligence
research and the sciences that aim to understand human brains, cognition, language, or society.
The aim of this paper is to propose and elaborate a theory at this interface, inspired by ob-
servations rooted in machine learning research, on so-called Deep Learning1. Deep Learning
techniques aim at training models with many levels of representation, a hierarchy of features
and concepts, such as can be implemented with artiﬁcial neural networks with many layers. A
deep architecture has typically more than 2 or 3 trained levels of representation, and in fact
we consider that a deep learning algorithm can discover the appropriate number of levels of
representation, based on the training data. The visual cortex is believed to have between 5 and
10 such levels. Theoretical arguments have also been made to suggest that deep architectures
are necessary to efﬁciently represent the kind of high-level concepts required for artiﬁcial in-
telligence (Bengio and LeCun, 2007). This paper starts from experimental observations of the
1See Bengio (2009) for a review of Deep Learning research, which had a breakthrough in 2006 (Hinton et al.,
2006; Bengio et al., 2007; Ranzato et al., 2007)
1
arXiv:1203.2990v2  [cs.LG]  29 Nov 2012

difﬁculties in training deep architectures (Erhan et al., 2010), and builds a theory of the role of
cultural evolution to reduce the difﬁculty of learning high-level abstractions. The gist of this
theory is that training deep architectures such as those found in the brain is difﬁcult because of
an optimization difﬁculty (local minima), but that the cultural evolution of ideas can serve as
a way for a whole population of humans, over many generations, to efﬁciently discover better
solutions to this optimization problem.
2
Neural Networks and Local Minima
2.1
Neural Networks
Artiﬁcial neural networks are computational architectures and learning algorithms that are in-
spired from the computations believed to take place in the biological neural networks of the
brain (Arbib, 1995). The dominant and most successful approaches to training artiﬁcial neural
networks are all based on the idea that learning can proceed by gradually optimizing a cri-
terion (Rumelhart et al., 1986). A neural network typically has free parameters, such as the
synaptic strengths associated with connections between neurons. Learning algorithms formal-
ize the computational mechanism for changing these parameters so as to take into account the
evidence provided by observed (training) examples. Different learning algorithms for neural
networks differ in the speciﬁcs of the criterion and how they optimize it, often approximately
because no analytic and exact solution is possible. On-line learning, which is most plausible
for biological organisms, involves changes in the parameters either after each example has been
seen or after a small batch of examples has been seen (maybe corresponding to a day’s worth
of experience).
2.2
Training Criterion
In the case of biological organisms, one could imagine that the ultimate criterion involves the
sum of expected future rewards (survival, reproduction, and other innately deﬁned reward sig-
nals such as hunger, thirst, and the need to sleep)2. However, intermediate criteria typically
involve modeling the observations from the senses, i.e., improving the prediction that could be
made of any part of the observed sensory input given any other part, and improving the pre-
diction of future observations given the past observations. Mathematically, this can often be
captured by the statistical criterion of maximizing likelihood, i.e., of maximizing the probabil-
ity that the model implicitly or explicitly assigns to new observations.
2.3
Learning
Learners can exploit observations (e.g., from their sensors of the real world) in order to con-
struct functions that capture some of the statistical relationships between the observed variables.
For example, learners can build predictors of future events given past observations, or associate
what is observed through different modalities and sensors. This may be used by the learner to
predict any unobserved variable given the observed ones. The learning problem can be formal-
ized as follows. Let θ be a vector of parameters that are free to change while learning (such as
the synaptic strengths of neurons in the brain). Let z represent an example, i.e., a measurement
2Note that the rewards received by an agent depend on the tasks that it faces, which may be different depending on
the biological and social niche that it occupies.
2

of the variables in the environment which are relevant to the learning agent. The agent has seen
a past history z1,z2,...,zt, which in realistic cases also depends on the actions of the agent. Let
E(θ,z) be a measurement of an error or loss to be minimized, whose future expected value is
the criterion to be minimized. In the simple case3 where we ignore the effect of current actions
on future rewards but only consider the value of a particular solution to the learning problem
over the long term, the objective of the learner is to minimize the criterion
C(θ) =
Z
P(z)E(θ,z)dz = E[E(θ,Z)]
(1)
which is the expected future error, with P(z) the unknown probability distribution from which
the world generates examples for the learner. In the more realistic setting of reinforcement
learning (Sutton and Barto, 1998), the objective of the learner is often formalized as the maxi-
mization of the expected value of the weighted sum of future rewards, with weights that decay
as we go further into the future (food now is valued more than food tomorrow, in general). Note
that the training criterion we deﬁne here is called generalization error because it is the expected
error on new examples, not the error measured on past training examples (sometimes called
training error). Under the stationary i.i.d. hypothesis, the expected future reward can be esti-
mated by the ongoing online error, which is the average of rewards obtained by an agent. In any
case, although the training criterion cannot be computed exactly (because P(·) is unknown to
the learner), the criterion C(·) can be approximately minimized4 by stochastic gradient descent
(as well as other gradient-based optimization techniques): the learner just needs to estimate the
gradient ∂E(θ,z)
∂θ
of the example-wise error E with respect to the parameters, i.e., estimate the
effect of a change of the parameters on the immediate error. Let g be such an estimator (e.g., if
it is unbiased then E[g] = E[∂E(θ,z)
∂θ
]). For example, g could be based on a single example or a
day’s worth of examples.
Stochastic gradient descent proceeds by small steps of the form
θ ←θ −αg
(2)
where α is a small constant called learning rate or gain. Note that if new examples z are
continuously sampled from the unknown distribution P(z), the instantaneous online gradient g
is an unbiased estimator of the generalization error gradient (which is the integral of g over P),
i.e., an online learner is directly optimizing generalization error.
Applying these ideas to the context of biological learners gives the hypothesis that follows.
2.4
What do brains optimize?
Optimization Hypothesis. When the brain of a single biological agent
learns, it performs an approximate optimization with respect to some en-
dogenous objective.
Here note that we refer to a single learning agent because we exclude the effect of interac-
tions between learning agents, like those that occur because of communication between humans
in a human society. Later we will advocate that in fact when one takes into account the learning
3stationary i.i.d case where examples independently come from the same stationary distribution P
4In many machine learning algorithms, one minimizes the training error plus a regularization penalty which pre-
vents the learner from simply learning the training examples by heart without good generalization on new examples.
3

going on throughout a society, the optimization is not just a local descent but involves a global
parallel search similar to that performed by evolution and sexual reproduction.
Note that the criterion we have in mind here is not specialized to a single task, as is often the
case in applications of machine learning. Instead, a biological learning agent must make good
predictions in all the contexts that it encounters, and especially those that are more relevant
to its survival. Each type of context in which the agent must take a decision corresponds to
a “task”. The agent needs to “solve” many tasks, i.e. perform multi-task learning, transfer
learning or self-taught learning (Caruana, 1993; Raina et al., 2007). All the tasks faced by the
learner share the same underlying “world” that surrounds the agent, and brains probably take
advantage of these commonalities. This may explain how brains can sometime learn a new
task from a handful or even just one example, something that seems almost impossible with
standard single-task learning algorithms.
Note also that biological agents probably need to address multiple objectives together. How-
ever, in practice, since the same brain must take the decisions that can affect all of these crite-
ria, these cannot be decoupled but they can be lumped into a single criterion with appropriate
weightings (which may be innate and chosen by evolution). For example, it is very likely
that biological learners must cater both to a “predictive” type of criterion (similar to the data-
likelihood used in statistical models or in unsupervised learning algorithms) and a “reward”
type of criterion (similar to the rewards used in reinforcement learning algorithms). The former
explains curiosity and our ability to make sense of observations and learn from them even when
we derive no immediate or foreseeable beneﬁt or loss. The latter is clearly crucial for survival,
as biological brains need to focus their modeling efforts on what matters most to survival. Un-
supervised learning is a way for a learning agent to prepare itself for any possible task in the
future, by extracting as much information as possible from what it observes, i.e., ﬁguring out
the unknown explanations for what it observes.
One issue with an objective deﬁned in terms of an animal survival and reproduction (pre-
sumably the kinds of objectives that make sense in evolution) is that it is not well deﬁned:
it depends on the behaviors of other animals and the whole ecology and niche occupied by
the animal of interest. As these change due to the “improvements” made by other animals or
species through evolution or learning, the individual animal or species’s objective of survival
also changes. This feedback loop means there isn’t really a static objective, but a complicated
dynamical system, and the discussions regarding the complications this brings are beyond the
scope of this paper. However, it is interesting to note that there is one component of an animal’s
objective (and certainly of many humans’ objective, especially scientists) that is much more
stable: it is the “unsupervised learning” objective of “understanding how the world ticks”.
2.5
Local Minima
Stochastic gradient descent is one of many optimization techniques that perform a local de-
scent: starting from a particular conﬁguration of the parameters (e.g. a conﬁguration of the
brain’s synapses), one makes small gradual adjustments which in average tend to improve the
expected error, our training criterion. The theory proposed here relies on the following hypoth-
esis:
Local Descent Hypothesis. When the brain of a single biological agent
learns, it relies on approximate local descent in order to gradually improve
itself.
4

The main argument in favor of this hypothesis would be based on the assumption that
although our state of mind (ﬁring pattern of neurons) changes quickly, synaptic strengths and
neuronal connectivity only change gradually.
If the learning algorithm is a form of stochastic gradient descent (as eq. 2 above), where g
approximates the gradient (it may even have a bias), and if α is chosen small enough (compared
to the largest second derivatives of C), then C will gradually decrease with high probability, and
if α is gradually decreased at an appropriate rate (such as 1/t), then the learner will converge
towards a local minimum of C. The proofs are usually for the unbiased case (Bottou, 2004),
but a small bias is not necessarily very hurtful, as shown for Contrastive Divergence (Carreira-
Perpi˜nan and Hinton, 2005; Yuille, 2005), especially if the magnitude of the bias also decreases
as the gradient decreases (stochastic approximation convergence theorem (Yuille, 2005)).
Note that in this paper we are talking about local minima of generalization error, i.e., with
respect to expected future rewards. In machine learning, the terms “optimization” and “local
minimum” are usually employed with respect to a training criterion formed by the error on
training examples (training error), which are those seen in the past by the learner, and on which
it could possibly overﬁt (i.e. perform apparently well even though generalization error is poor).
Training criterion 
Synaptic configurations 
Training criterion 
Synaptic configurations 
Local 
minimum 
 
Global 
minimum 
Training criterion 
Synaptic configurations 
Figure 1: Illustration of learning that proceeds by local descent, and can get stuck near a local min-
imum (going from left ﬁgure to right ﬁgure). The horizontal axis represents the space of synaptic
conﬁgurations (parameters of the learner), while the vertical axis represents the training criterion
(expected future error). The ball represents the learner’s current state, which tends to go downwards
(improving the expected error). Note that the space of synaptic conﬁgurations is huge (number of
synaptic connections on the order of 100 trillion in humans) but represented here schematically
with a single dimension, the horizontal axis.
2.6
Effective Local Minima
As illustrated in Figure 1, a local minimum is a conﬁguration of the parameters such that no
small change can yield an improvement of the training criterion. A consequence of the Local
Descent Hypothesis, if it is true, is therefore that biological brains would be likely to stop im-
proving after some point, after they have sufﬁciently approached a local minimum. In practice,
if the learner relies on a stochastic gradient estimator (which is the only plausible hypothesis we
can see, because no biological learner has access to the full knowledge of the world required to
directly estimate C), it will continue to change due to the stochastic nature of the gradient esti-
mator (the training signal), hovering stochastically around a minimum. It is also quite possible
5

that biological learners do not have enough of a lifetime to really get very close to an actual
local minimum, but what is plausible is that they get to a point where progress is very slow
(so slow as to be indistinguishable from random hovering near a minimum). In practice, when
one trains an artiﬁcial neural network with a learning algorithm based on stochastic gradient
descent, one often observes that training saturates, i.e., no more observable progress is seen in
spite of the additional examples being shown continuously. The learner appears stuck near a
local minimum. Because it is difﬁcult to verify that a learner is really near a local minimum,
we call these effective local minima. We call it effective because it is due to the limitations of
the optimization procedure (e.g., stochastic gradient descent) and not just to the shape of the
training criterion as a function of the parameters. The learner equiped with its optimization
procedure is stuck in an effective local minima and it looks like it is stuck in an actual local
minima (it may also be an actual local minima). It may happen that the training criterion is
a complicated function of the parameters, such that stochastic gradient descent is sometimes
practically stuck in a place in which it is not possible to improve in most directions, but from
where other more powerful descent methods could escape (Martens, 2010).
2.7
Inference
Many learning algorithms involve latent variables, which can be understood as associated with
particulars factors that can contribute to “explain” each other and “explain” the current and re-
cent observations. These latent variables are encoded in the activation of hidden units (neurons
that are neither inputs nor outputs). One can think of a particular conﬁguration of these latent
or hidden variables as corresponding to a state of mind. In a Boltzmann machine (Hinton et al.,
1984; Ackley et al., 1985; Salakhutdinov and Hinton, 2009a), when an input is presented, many
conﬁgurations of these latent variables are possible and an inference mechanism normally takes
place in order to explore possible conﬁgurations of the latent variables which “ﬁt well” with the
observed input. This inference is often iterative, although it can be approximated or initialized
in a single bottom-up pass (Salakhutdinov and Larochelle, 2010) from perception to state-of-
mind. Inference can be stochastic (neurons randomly choose their state with a probability that
depends on the state of the others, and such that more probable conﬁgurations of neuron acti-
vations are sampled accordingly more often) or deterministic (through an iterative process that
can sometimes correspond to an optimization, gradually changing the conﬁguration of neurons
towards one that agrees more with the observed input percept). Whereas learning in brains
(besides the simple memorization of facts and observed events) occurs on a scale of minutes,
hours or days, inference (changes in the state of mind) occurs on the scale of a fraction of a
second or few seconds. Whereas learning is probably gradual, stochastic inference can quickly
jump from one thought pattern to another in less than a second. In models such as the Boltz-
mann machine, learning requires inference as an inner loop: patterns of latent variables (hidden
units, high-level concepts) that ﬁt well with the observed data are reinforced by the changes in
synaptic weights that follow. One should not confuse local minima in synaptic weights with
local minima (or the appearance of being stuck) in inference. Randomness or association with
new stimuli can change the state of our inference for past inputs and give us the impression that
we are not stuck anymore, that we have escaped a local minimum, but that regards the inference
process, not necessarily the learning process (although it can certainly help it).
6

3
High-Level Abstractions and Deep Architectures
Deep architectures (Bengio, 2009) are parametrized families of functions which can be used to
model data using multiple levels of representation. In deep neural networks, each level is asso-
ciated with a group of neurons (which in the brain could correspond to an area, such as areas
V1, V2 or IT of the visual cortex). During sensory perception in animal brains, information
travels quickly from lower (sensory) levels to higher (more abstract) levels, but there are also
many feedback connections (going from higher to lower levels) as well as lateral connections
(between neurons at the same level). Each neuron or group of neurons can be thought of as
capturing a concept or feature or aspect, and being activated when that concept or feature or
aspect is present in the sensory input, or when the model is generating an internal conﬁguration
(a “thought” or “mental image”) that includes that concept or feature or aspect. Note that very
few of these features actually come to our consciousness, because most of the inner workings
of our brains are not directly accessible (or rarely so) to our consciousness. Note also that a
particular linguistic concept may be represented by many neurons or groups of neurons, acti-
vating in a particular pattern, and over different levels (in fact so many neurons are activated
that we can see whole regions being activated with brain imaging, even when a single linguistic
concept is presented as stimulus). These ideas were introduced as central to connectionist ap-
proaches (Rumelhart et al., 1986; Hinton, 1986, 1989) to cognitive science and artiﬁcial neural
networks, with the concept of distributed representation: what would in most symbolic systems
be represented by a single “on/off” bit (e.g., the symbol for ’table’ is activated) is associated in
the brain with a large number of neurons and groups of neurons being activated together in a
particular pattern. In this way, concepts that are close semantically, i.e., share some attributes
(e.g. represented by a group of neurons), can have an overlap in their brain representation, i.e.,
their corresponding patterns of activation have “on” bits in many of the same places.
3.1
Efﬁciency of Representation
Deeper architectures can be much more efﬁcient in terms of representation of functions (or
distributions) than shallow ones, as shown with theoretical results where for speciﬁc families
of functions a too shallow architecture can require exponentially more resources than neces-
sary (Yao, 1985; H˚astad, 1986; H˚astad and Goldmann, 1991; Bengio and LeCun, 2007; Ben-
gio, 2009; Bengio et al., 2010; Bengio and Delalleau, 2011). The basic intuition why this can
be true is that in a deep architecture there is re-use of parameters and sharing of sub-functions
to build functions. We do not write computer programs with a single main program: instead
we write many subroutines (functions) that can call other subroutines, and this nested re-use
provides not only ﬂexibility but also great expressive power. However, this greater expres-
sive power may come at the price of making the learning task a more difﬁcult optimization
problem. Because the lower-level features can be used in many ways to deﬁne higher-level fea-
tures, the interactions between parameters at all levels makes the optimization landscape much
more complicated. At the other extreme, many shallow methods are associated with a convex
optimization problem, i.e., with a single minimum of the training criterion.
7

Figure 2: Example of a simple manifold in the space of images, associated with a rather low-
level concrete concept, corresponding to rotations and shrinking of a speciﬁc instance of the image
of a drawn digit 4. Each point on the manifold corresponds to an image which is obtained by
rotating or translating or scaling another image on the manifold. The set of points in the manifold
deﬁnes a concrete concept associated with the drawing of a 4 of a particular shape irrespective of its
position, angle and scale. Even learning such simple manifolds is difﬁcult, but learning the much
more convoluted and higher-dimensional manifolds of more abstract concepts is much harder.
3.2
High-Level Abstractions
We call high-level abstraction the kind of concept or feature that could be computed efﬁciently
only through a deep structure in the brain (i.e., by the sequential application of several different
transformations, each associated with an area of the brain or large group of neurons). An edge
detector in an image seen by the eye can be computed by a single layer of neurons from raw
pixels, using Gabor-like ﬁlters. This is a very low-level abstraction. Combining several such
detectors to detect corners, straight line segments, curved line segments, and other very local
but simple shapes can be done by one or two more layers of neurons, and these can be com-
bined in such a way as to be locally insensitive to small changes in position or angle. Consider a
hierarchy of gradually more complex features, constructing detectors for very abstract concepts
which are activated whenever any stimulus within a very large set of possible input stimuli are
presented. For a higher-level abstraction, this set of stimuli represents a highly-convoluted set
of points, a highly curved manifold. We can picture such a manifold if we restrict ourselves
to a very concrete concept, like the image of a speciﬁc object (the digit 4, as in Figure 2) on
a uniform background. The only factors that can vary here are due to object constancy; they
correspond to changes in imaging geometry (location and orientation of the object with respect
to the eye) and lighting, and we can use mathematics to help us make sense of such manifolds.
Now think about all the images which can elicit a thought of a more abstract concept, such
as “human”, or even more abstract, all the contexts which can elicit a thought of the concept
“Riemann integral”. These contexts and images associated with the same high-level concept
can be very different from each other, and in many complicated ways, for which scientists do
8

not know how to construct the associated manifolds. Some concepts are clearly higher-level
than others, and often we ﬁnd that higher-level concepts can be deﬁned in terms of lower-level
ones, hence forming a hierarchy which is reminiscent of the kind of hierarchy that we ﬁnd cur-
rent deep learning algorithms to discover (Lee et al., 2009). This discussion brings us to the
formulation of a hypothesis about high-level abstractions and their representation in brains.
Deep Abstractions Hypothesis. Higher-level abstractions in brains are rep-
resented by deeper computations (going through more areas or more com-
putational steps in sequence over the same areas).
4
The Difﬁculty of Training Deep Architectures
There are a number of results in the machine learning literature that suggest that training a
deeper architecture is often more difﬁcult than training a shallow one, in the following sense.
When trying to train all the layers together with respect to a joint criterion such as the likelihood
of the inputs or the conditional likelihood of target classes given inputs, results can be worse
than when training a shallow model, or more generally, one may suspect that current training
procedures for deep networks underuse the representation potential and the parameters avail-
able, which may correspond to a form of underﬁtting5 and inability at learning very high-level
abstractions.
4.1
Unsupervised Layer-Wise Pre-training
The ﬁrst results of that nature appear in Bengio et al. (2007); Ranzato et al. (2007), where
the same architecture gives very different results depending on the initialization of the network
weights, either purely randomly, or based on unsupervised layer-wise pre-training. The idea
of the layer-wise pre-training scheme (Hinton and Salakhutdinov, 2006; Hinton et al., 2006;
Bengio et al., 2007; Ranzato et al., 2007) is to train each layer with an unsupervised training
criterion, so that it learns a new representation, taking as input the representation of the previ-
ous layer. Each layer is thus trained in sequence one after the other. Although this is probably
not biologically plausible as such, what would be plausible is a mechanism for providing an
unsupervised signal at each layer (group of neurons) that makes it learn to better capture the sta-
tistical dependencies in its inputs. That layer-local signal could still be combined with a global
training criterion but might help to train deep networks if there is an optimization difﬁculty
in coordinating the training of all layers simultaneously. Another indication that a layer-local
signal can help to train deep networks came from the work of Weston et al. (2008), where the
unsupervised layer-local signal was combined with a supervised global signal that was prop-
agated through the whole network. This observation of the advantage brought by layer-local
signals was also made in the context of purely unsupervised learning of a deep stochastic net-
work, the Deep Boltzmann Machine (Salakhutdinov and Hinton, 2009a). By pre-training each
layer as a Restricted Boltzmann Machine (RBM)6 before optimizing a Deep Boltzmann Ma-
chine (DBM) that comprises all the levels, the authors are able to train the DBM, whereas
directly training it from random initialization was problematic. We summarize several of the
5although it is always possible to trivially overﬁt the top two layers of a deep network by memorizing patterns, this
may still happen with very poor training of lower levels, corresponding to poor representation learning.
6which ignores the interaction with the other levels, except for receiving input from the level below.
9

above results in the deep learning literature with the following Observation O1: training deep
architectures is easier if hints are provided about the function that intermediate levels should
compute (Hinton et al., 2006; Weston et al., 2008; Salakhutdinov and Hinton, 2009a; Bengio,
2009). This is connected to an even more obvious Observation O2, from the work on artiﬁ-
cial neural networks: it is much easier to teach a network with supervised learning (where we
provide it examples of when a concept is present and when it is not present in a variety of ex-
amples) than to expect unsupervised learning to discover the concept (which may also happen
but usually leads to poorer renditions of the concept).
Figure 3: Effect of depth on generalization error, without layer-wise unsupervised pre-training
(left) and with (right). The training problem becomes more difﬁcult for deeper nets, and using a
layer-local cue to initialize each level helps to push the difﬁculty a bit farther and improve error
rates.
4.2
More Difﬁcult for Deeper Architectures and More Abstract
Concepts
Another clue to this training difﬁculty came in later studies (Larochelle et al., 2009; Erhan et al.,
2010) showing that directly training all the layers together would not only make it difﬁcult
to exploit all the extra modeling power of a deeper architecture but would actually get worse
results7 as the number of layers is increased, as illustrated in Figure 3. We call this Observation
O3.
In Erhan et al. (2010) we went further in an attempt to understand this training difﬁculty
and studied the trajectory of deep neural networks during training, in function space. Such
trajectories are illustrated in Figure 4. Each point in the trajectory corresponds to a particular
neural network parameter conﬁguration and is visualized as a two-dimensional point as follows.
First, we approximate the function computed by a neural network non-parametrically, i.e., by
the outputs of the function over a large test set (of 10000 examples). We consider that two neural
networks behave similarly if they provide similar answers on these test examples. We cannot
directly use the network parameters to compare neural networks because the same function can
be represented in many different ways (e.g., because permutations of the hidden neuron indices
would yield the same network function). We therefore associate each network with a very long
7Results got worse in terms of generalization error, while training error could be small thanks to capacity in the
top few layers.
10

vector containing in its elements the concatenation of the network outputs on the test examples.
This vector is a point in a very high-dimensional space, and we compute these points for all
the networks in the experiment. We then learn a mapping from these points to 2-dimensional
approximations, so as to preserve local (and sometimes global) structure as much as possible,
using non-linear dimensionality reduction methods such as t-SNE (van der Maaten and Hinton,
2008) or Isomap (Tenenbaum et al., 2000). Figure 4 allows us to draw a number of interesting
conclusions:
1. Observation O4. No two trajectories end up in the same local minimum. This suggests
that the number of functional local minima (i.e. corresponding to different functions,
each of which possibly corresponding to many instantiations in parameter space) must be
huge.
2. Observation O5. A training trick (unsupervised pre-training) which changes the initial
conditions of the descent procedure allows one to reach much better local minima, and
these better local minima do not appear to be reachable by chance alone (note how the
regions in function space associated with the two “ﬂowers” have no overlap at all, in fact
being at nearly 90 degrees from each other in the high-dimensional function space).
Starting from the Local Descent Hypothesis, Observation O4 and Observation O5 bring
us to the formulation of a new hypothesis regarding not only artiﬁcial neural networks but also
humans:
11

Figure 4: Two-dimensional non-linear projection of the space of functions visited by artiﬁcial neu-
ral networks during training. Each cross or diamond or circle represents a neural network at some
stage during its training, with color indicating its age (number of examples seen), starting from blue
and moving towards red. Networks computing a similar function (with similar response to simi-
lar stimuli) are nearby on the graph. Top ﬁgure uses t-SNE for dimensionality reduction (insists
on preserving local geometry) while the bottom ﬁgure uses Isomap (insists on preserving global
geometry and volumes). The vertical crosses (top ﬁgure) and circles (bottom ﬁgure) are networks
trained from random initialization, while the diamonds (top ﬁgure) and rotated crosses (bottom
ﬁgure) are networks with unsupervised pre-training initialization.
Local Minima Hypothesis. Learning of a single human learner is limited
by effective local minima.
12

We again used the phrase “single human learner” because later in this paper we will hy-
pothesize that a collection of human learners and the associated evolution of their culture can
help to get out of what would otherwise be effective local minima.
Combining the above observations with the worse results sometimes observed when train-
ing deeper architectures (Observation O3, discussed above), we come to the following hypoth-
esis.
Deeper Harder Hypothesis. The detrimental effect of local minima tends
to be more pronounced when training deeper architectures (by an optimiza-
tion method based on iteratively descending the training criterion).
Finally, the presumed ability of deeper architectures to represent higher-level abstractions
more easily than shallow ones (see Bengio (2009) and discussion in Section 3.1) leads us to
a human analogue of the Deeper Harder Hypothesis, which reﬁnes the Local Minima Hy-
pothesis:
Abstractions Harder Hypothesis. A single human learner is unlikely to
discover high-level abstractions by chance because these are represented by
a deep sub-network in the brain.
Note that this does not prevent some high-level abstractions to be represented in a brain
due to innate programming captured in the genes, and again the phrase single human learner
excludes the effects due to culture and guidance from other humans, which is the subject of the
next section.
5
Brain to Brain Transfer of Information to Escape Lo-
cal Minima
If the above hypotheses are true, one should wonder how humans still manage to learn high-
level abstractions. We have seen that much better solutions can be found by a learner if it is
initialized in an area from which gradient descent leads to a good solution, and genetic material
might provide enough of a good starting point and architectural constraints to help learning
of some abstractions. For example, this could be a plausible explanation for some visual ab-
stractions (including simple face detection, which newborns can do) and visual invariances,
which could have had the chance to be discovered by evolution (since many of our evolution-
ary ancestors share a similar visual system). Recent work on learning algorithms for computer
vision also suggest that architectural constraints can greatly help performance of a deep neural
network (Jarrett et al., 2009), to the point where even random parameters in the lower layers
(along with appropriate connectivity) sufﬁce to obtain reasonably good performance on simple
object recognition tasks.
5.1
Labeled Examples as Hints
However, many of the abstractions that we master today have only recently (with respect to evo-
lutionary scales) appeared in human cultures, so they could not have been genetically evolved:
each of them must have been discovered by at least one human at some point in the past and
13

then been propagated or improved as they were passed from generation to generation. We will
return later to the greater question of the evolution of ideas and abstractions in cultures, but
let us ﬁrst focus on the mechanics of communicating good synaptic conﬁgurations from one
brain to another. Because we have a huge number of synapses and their values only make sense
in the context of the values of many others, it is difﬁcult to imagine how the recipe for deﬁn-
ing individual abstractions could be communicated from one individual to another in a direct
way (i.e. by exchanging synaptic values). Furthermore, we need to ask how the hypothesized
mechanism could help to escape effective local minima faced by a single learner.
The main insight to answering this question may come from Observation O1 and Obser-
vation O2. Training a single hidden layer neural network (supervised or unsupervised) is much
easier than training a deeper one, so if one can provide a hint as to the function that deeper lay-
ers (corresponding to higher-level abstractions) should capture, then training would be much
easier. In the extreme, specifying how particular neurons should respond in speciﬁc instances
is akin to supervised learning.
Based on these premises, the answer that we propose relies on learning agents exchanging
bits of information in the presence of a shared percept. Communicating about the presence of a
concept in a sensory percept is something that humans do, and beneﬁt from since their youngest
age. The situation is illustrated in Figure 5.
… 
… 
… 
… 
… 
… 
… 
… 
… 
… 
… 
… 
Shared	
  input	
  X	
  
Linguis1c	
  exchange	
  
=	
  1ny	
  /	
  noisy	
  channel	
  
Linguis1c	
  
representa1on	
  
Linguis1c	
  
representa1on	
  
A
B
Figure 5: Illustration of the communication between brains, typically through some language, in a
way that can give hints to higher levels of one brain of how the concepts are represented in higher
levels of another brain. Both learners see shared input X, and say that A produces an utterance
(from its language related areas) that is strongly associated with A’s high-level state of mind as a
representation of X. B also sees this utterance as an input (that sets B’s current linguistic represen-
tation units), that it tries to predict from its internal representations of X. Turns may change with B
speaking and A listening, so that both get a sense of the explanation of X that the other is forming
in its respective state of mind.
14

5.2
Language for Supervised Training
A very simple schema that would help to communicate a concept8 from one brain to another
is one in which there are many encounters between pairs of learners. In each of them, two
learners are faced with a similar percept (e.g., they both see the same scene) and they exchange
bits of information about it. These bits can for example be indicators of the presence of high-
level concepts in the scene. These indicators may reﬂect the neural activation associated with
these high-level concepts. In humans, these bits of information could be encoded through a
linguistic convention that helps the receiver of the message interpret them in terms of concepts
that it already knows about. One of the most primitive cases of such a communication sce-
nario could occur with animal and human non-verbal communication. For example, an adult
animal sees a prey that could be dangerous and emits a danger signal (that could be innate)
that a young animal could use as a supervised training signal to associate the prey to danger.
Imitation is a very common form of learning and teaching, prevalent among primates, and by
which the learner associates contexts with corresponding appropriate behavior. A richer form
of communication, which would already be useful, would require simply naming objects in
a scene. Humans have an innate understanding of the pointing gesture that can help identify
which object in the scene is being named. In this way, the learner could develop a repertoire of
object categories which could become handy (as intermediate concepts) to form theories about
the world that would help the learner to survive better. Richer linguistic constructs involve the
combination of concepts and allow the agents to describe relations between objects, actions and
events, sequences of events (stories), causal links, etc., which are even more useful to help a
learner form a powerful model of the environment.
This brings us to another hypothesis, supported by Observation O2 and Observation O1
and following from the Abstractions Harder Hypothesis:
Guided Learning Hypothesis. A human brain can much more easily learn
high-level abstractions if guided by the signals produced by other humans,
which act as hints or indirect supervision for these high-level abstractions.
This hypothesis is related to much previous work in cognitive science, such as for example
cognitive imitation (Subiaul et al., 2004), which has been observed in monkeys, and where the
learner imitates not just a vocalization or a behavior but something more abstract that corre-
sponds to a cognitive rule.
5.3
Learning by Predicting the Linguistic Output of Other Agents
How can a human guide another? By encouraging the learner to predict the “labels” that the
teacher verbally associates with a given input conﬁguration X. In the schema of Figure 5, it
is not necessary for the emitter (who produces the utterance) to directly provide supervision to
the high-level layers of the receiver (who receives the communication and can beneﬁt from it).
An effect similar to supervised learning can be achieved indirectly by simply making sure that
the receiver’s brain include in its training criterion the objective of predicting what it observes,
which includes not just X but also the linguistic output of the emitter in the context of the shared
input percept. In fact, with attentional and emotional mechanisms that increase the importance
8i.e., communicate the characterization of the concept as a function that associates an indicator of its presence with
all the sensory conﬁgurations that are compatible with it.
15

given to correctly predicting what other humans say (especially those with whom we have an
affective connection), one would approach even more the classical supervised learning setting.
Since we have already assumed that the training criterion for human brains involves a term for
prediction or maximum likelihood, this could happen naturally, or be enhanced by innate rein-
forcement (e.g. children pay particular attention to the utterances of their parents). Hence the
top-level hidden units h of the receiver would receive a training signal that would encourage
h to become good features in the sense of being predictive of the probability distribution of
utterances that are received (see Figure 5). This would be naturally achieved in a model such
as the Deep Boltzmann Machine so long as the higher-level units h have a strong connection
to “language units” associating both speech heard (e.g., Wernicke’s area) and speech produced
(e.g., Broca’s area), a state of affairs that is consistent with the global wiring structure of hu-
man brains. The same process could work for verbal or non-verbal communication, but using
different groups of neurons to model the associated observations. In terms of existing learning
algorithms one could for example imagine the case of a Deep Boltzmann Machine (Salakhut-
dinov and Hinton, 2009b): the linguistic units get ’clamped’ by the external linguistic signal
received by the learner, at the same time as the lower-level sensory input units get ’clamped’
by the external sensory signal X, and that conditions the likelihood gradient received by the
hidden units h, encouraging them to model the joint distribution of linguistic units and sensory
units.
One could imagine many more sophisticated communication schemes that go beyond the
above scenario. For example, there could be a two-way exchange of information. It could be
that both agents can potentially learn something from the other in the presence of the shared
percept. Humans typically possess different views on the world and the two parties in a com-
munication event could beneﬁt from a two-way exchange. In a sense, language provides a way
for humans to summarize the knowledge collected by other humans, replacing “real” examples
by indirect ones, thus increasing the range of events that a human brain could model. In that
context, it would not be appropriate to simply copy or clone neural representations from one
brain to another, as the learner must somehow reconcile the indirect examples provided by the
teacher with the world knowledge already represented in the learner’s brain. It could be that
there is no pre-assigned role of teacher (as emitter) and student (as receiver), but that depending
on the conﬁdence demonstrated by each agent for each particular percept, one pays more or less
attention to the communicated output of the other. It could be that some aspects of the shared
percept are well mastered by one agent but not the other, and vice-versa. Humans have the
capability to know that some aspect of a situation is surprising (they would not have predicted
it with high probability) and then they should rationally welcome “explanations” provided by
others. A way to make the diffusion of useful knowledge more efﬁcient is for the communicat-
ing agents to keep track of an estimated degree of “authority” or “credibility” of other agents.
One would imagine that parents and older individuals in a human group would by default get
more credit, and one of the products of human social systems is that different individuals ac-
quire more or less authority and credibility. For example, scientists strive to maximize their
credibility through very rigorous communication practices and a scientiﬁc method that insists
on verifying hypotheses through experiments designed to test them.
5.4
Language to Evoke Training Examples at Will
Even more interesting scenarios that derive from linguistic abilities involve our ability to evoke
an input scene. We do not need to be in front of danger to teach about it. We can describe
a dangerous situation and mention what is dangerous about it. In this way, the diffusion of
16

knowledge about the world from human brains to other human brains could be made even more
efﬁcient.
The fact that verbal and non-verbal communication between animals and humans happens
through a noisy and very bandwidth-limited channel is important to keep in mind. Because
very few bits of information can be exchanged, only the most useful elements should be com-
municated. If the objective is only to maximize collective learning, it seems that there is no
point in communicating something that the receiver already knows. However, there may be
other reasons why we communicate, such as for smoothing social interactions, acquiring status
or trust, coordinating collective efforts, etc.
Note that it is not necessary for the semantics of language to have been deﬁned a priori
for the process described here to work. Since each learning agent is trying to predict the utter-
ances of others (and thus, producing similar utterances in the same circumstances), the learning
dynamics should converge towards one or more languages which become attractors for the
learning agents: the most frequent linguistic representation of a given percept X among the
population will tend to gradually dominate in the population. If encounters are not uniformly
random (e.g., because the learning agents are geographically located and are more likely to en-
counter spatially near neighbors), then there could be multiple attractors simultaneously present
in the population, i.e., corresponding to multiple spatially localized languages.
17

Track local minima 
 
Final solution 
 
Easy to find minimum 
Figure 6: A general strategy to reduce the impact of local minima is followed in continuation
methods and simulated annealing. The idea is to consider a sequence of optimization problems that
start with an easier one for which it is easy to ﬁnd a global optimum (not corresponding to solving
the actual problem of interest, though), with the sequence of problems ending up in the problem
of interest, each time starting at the solution previously found with an easier problem and tracking
local minima along the way. It was hypothesized (Bengio, 2009) and demonstrated with artiﬁcial
neural networks that following a curriculum could help learners thus ﬁnd better solutions to the
learning problem of interest.
5.5
Connection with Curriculum Learning
The idea that learning can be improved by guiding it, by properly choosing the sequence of
examples seen by the learner, was already explored in the past. It was ﬁrst proposed as a prac-
tical way to train animals through shaping (Skinner, 1958; Peterson, 2004), as a way to ease
simulated learning of more complex tasks (Elman, 1993; Krueger and Dayan, 2009; Bengio
et al., 2009) by building on top of easier tasks. An interesting hypothesis introduced in Bengio
et al. (2009) is that a proper choice of training examples can be used to approximate a complex
training criterion9 fraught with local minima with a smoother one (where, e.g., only prototyp-
ical examples need to be shown to illustrate the “big picture”). Gradually introducing more
subtle examples and building on top of the already understood concepts is typically done in
pedagogy. Bengio et al. (2009) propose that the learner goes through a sequence of gradually
more difﬁcult learning tasks, in a way that corresponds in the optimization literature to a contin-
uation method or an annealing method, allowing one to approximately discover global minima
9the training criterion is here seen as a function of the learned parameters, as a sum of an error function over a
training distribution of examples.
18

(or much better local minima), as illustrated in Figure 6. Interestingly, it was recently observed
experimentally that humans use a form of curriculum learning strategy (starting from easier ex-
amples and building up) when they are asked to teach a concept to a robot (Khan et al., 2011).
Khan et al. (2011) also propose a statistical explanation why a curriculum learning strategy
can be more successful, based on the uncertainty that the learner has about the relevant factors
explaining the variations seen in the data. If these theories are correct, an individual learner can
be helped (to escape local minima or converge faster to better solutions) not only by showing
examples of abstractions not yet mastered by the learner, but also by showing these well-chosen
examples in an appropriate sequence. This sequence corresponds to a curriculum that helps the
learner build higher-level abstractions on top of lower-level ones, thus again defeating some of
the difﬁculty believed to exist in training a learner to capture higher-level abstractions.
6
Memes, Cross-Over, and Cultural Evolution
In the previous section we have proposed a general mechanism by which knowledge can be
transmitted between brains, without having to actually copy synaptic strengths, instead taking
advantage of the learning abilities of brains to transfer concepts via examples. We hypothesized
that such mechanisms could help an individual learner escape an effective local minimum and
thus construct a better model of reality, when the learner is guided by the hints provided by
other agents about relevant abstractions. But the knowledge had to come from another agent.
Where did this knowledge arise in the ﬁrst place? This is what we discuss here.
6.1
Memes and Evolution from Noisy Copies
Let us ﬁrst step back and ask how “better”10 brains could arise. The most plausible explanation
is that better brains arise due to some form of search or optimization (as stated in the Optimiza-
tion Hypothesis), in the huge space of brain conﬁgurations (architecture, function, synaptic
strengths). Genetic evolution is a form of parallel search (with each individual’s genome rep-
resenting a candidate solution) that occurs on a rather slow time-scale. Cultural evolution in
humans is also a form of search, in the space of ideas or memes (Dawkins, 1976). A meme
is a unit of selection for cultural evolution. It is something that can be copied from one mind
to another. Like for genes, the copy can be imperfect. Memes are analogous to genes in the
context of cultural evolution (Distin, 2005). Genes and memes have co-evolved, although it
appears that cultural evolution occurs on a much faster scale than genetic evolution. Culture
allows brains to modify their basic program and we propose that culture also allows brains to go
beyond what a single individual can achieve by simply observing nature. Culture allows brains
to take advantage of knowledge acquired by other brains elsewhere and in previous generations.
To put it all together, the knowledge acquired by an individual brain combines four levels
of adaptation: genetic evolution (over hundreds of thousands of years or more), cultural evo-
lution (over dozens, hundreds or thousands of years), individual learning and discovery (over
minutes, hours and days) and inference (ﬁtting the state of mind to the observed perception,
over split seconds or seconds). In all four cases, a form of adaptation is at play, which we
hypothesize to be associated with a form of approximate optimization, in the same sense as
stated in the Optimization Hypothesis. One can also consider the union of all four adaptation
10“better” in the sense of the survival value they provide, and how well they allow their owner to understand the
world around them. Note how this depends on the context (ecological and social niche) and that there may be many
good solutions.
19

processes as a global form of evolution and adaptation (see the work of Hinton and Nowlan
(1989) on how learning can guide evolution in the style of Baldwinian evolution). Whereas
genetic evolution is a form of parallel search (many individuals carry different combinations
and variants of genes which are evaluated in parallel) and we have hypothesized that individ-
ual learning is a local search performing an approximate descent (Local Descent Hypothesis),
what about cultural evolution? Cultural evolution is based on individual learning, on learners
trying to predict the behavior and speech output of individuals, as stated in the Guided Learn-
ing Hypothesis. Even though individual learning relies on a local descent to gradually improve
a single brain, when considering the graph of interactions between humans in an evolving pop-
ulation, one must conclude that cultural evolution, like genetic evolution, is a form of parallel
search, as illustrated in Figure 7.
Synaptic configuration 
Error rate 
Figure 7: Illustration of parallel search in the space of synaptic conﬁgurations by a population of
learners. Some learners start from conﬁgurations which happen to lead to a better solution when
descending the training criterion.
The most basic working principle of evolution is the noisy copy and it is also at work in
cultural evolution: a meme can be noisily copied from one brain to another, and the meme
can sometimes be slightly modiﬁed in the process11. A meme exists in a human’s brain as
an aspect of the dynamics of the brain’s neural network, typically allowing the association of
words in language (which are encoded in speciﬁc areas of the brain) with high-level abstractions
learned by the brain (which may be encoded in other cortical areas, depending the semantics
of the meme). The meme is activated when neural conﬁgurations associated with it arise, and
different memes are also connected to each other in the sense of having a high probability of
being associated together and echoing each other through thoughts, reasoning, or planning.
Selective pressure then does the work of exponentially increasing the presence of success-
ful memes in the population, by increasing the chances that a successful meme be copied in
11Remember that a meme is copied in a process of teaching by example which is highly stochastic, due to the
randomness in encounters (in which particular percepts serve as examples of the meme) and due to the small number
of examples of the meme. This creates a highly variable randomly distorted version of the meme in the learner’s brain.
20

comparison with a competing less successful meme. This may happen simply because a useful
meme allows its bearer to survive longer, communicate with more individuals, or because better
ideas are promoted 12. With genetic evolution, it is necessary to copy a whole genome when
the individual bearing it is successful. Instead, cultural evolution in humans has mechanisms to
evaluate an individual meme and selectively promote it. Good ideas are more likely to be the
subject of discussion in public communication, e.g., in the public media, or even better in sci-
entiﬁc publications. Science involves powerful mechanisms to separate the worth of a scientist
from the worth of his or her ideas (e.g. through independent replication of experimental results
or theoretical proofs, or through blind reviewing). That may explain why the pace of evolu-
tion of ideas has rapidly increased since the mechanisms for scientiﬁc discovery and scientiﬁc
dissemination of memes have been put in place. The fact that a good idea can stand on its
own and be selected for its own value means that the selective pressure is much more efﬁcient
because it is less hampered by the noisy evaluation that results when ﬁtness is assigned to a
whole individual, that integrates many memes and genes.
In this context the premium assigned to novelty in some cultures, in particular in scientiﬁc
research, makes sense as it favors novel memes that are farther away from existing ones. By
increasing the degree of exploration through this mechanism, one might expect that it would
yield more diversity in the solutions explored, and thus more efﬁcient search (ﬁnding good
ideas faster) may be achieved with appropriate amounts of this premium for novelty.
6.2
Fast-Forward with Divide-and-Conquer From Recombination
But if evolution only relied on the noisy copy principle, then it could only speed-up search at
best linearly with respect to the number of individuals in a population. Instead of trying N
random conﬁgurations with N individuals and picking the best by selective pressure, a popu-
lation with M > N individuals would discover a good selection M/N times faster in average.
This is useful but we hypothesize that it would not be enough to make a real dent in the opti-
mization difﬁculty due to a huge number of poor local minima in the space of synaptic conﬁg-
urations. In fact, evolution has discovered an evolutionary mechanism which can yield much
larger speed-ups, and is based on sexual reproduction in the case of genetic evolution. With
sexual reproduction, we have an interaction between two parent individuals (and their associ-
ated candidate conﬁgurations), and we mix some of the genes of one with some of the genes
of the other in order to create new combinations that are not near-neighbors of either parent.
This is very different from a simple parallel search because it can explore new conﬁgurations
beyond local variations around the randomly initialized starting stock. Most importantly, a re-
combination operator can combine good, previously found, sub-solutions. Maybe your father
had exceptionally good genes for eyes and your mother exceptionally good genes for ears, and
with about 25% probability you could get both, and this may confer you with an advantage
that no one had had before. This kind of transformation of the population of candidate con-
ﬁgurations is called a cross-over operator in the genetic algorithms literature (Holland, 1975).
Cross-over is a recombination operator: it can create new candidate solutions by combining
parts of previous candidate solutions. Cross-over and other operators that combine existing
parts of solutions to form new candidate solutions have the potential for a much greater speed-
up than simple parallelized search based only on individual local descent (noisy copy). This
is because such operators can potentially exploit a form of divide-and-conquer, which, if well
12Selﬁsh memes (Dawkins, 1976; Distin, 2005) may also strive in a population: they do not really help the popula-
tion but they nonetheless maintain themselves in it by some form of self-promotion or exploiting human weaknesses.
21

done, could yield exponential speed-up. For the divide-and-conquer aspect of the recombina-
tion strategy to work, it is best if sub-solutions that can contribute as good parts to good solu-
tions receive a high ﬁtness score. As is well known in computer science, divide-and-conquer
strategies have the potential to achieve an exponential speedup compared to strategies that re-
quire blindly searching through potential candidate solutions (synaptic conﬁgurations, here).
The exponential speedup would be achieved if the optimization of each of the combined parts
(memes) can be done independently of the others. In practice, this is not going to be the case,
because memes, like genes, only take value in the context and presence of other memes in the
individual and the population.
The success rate of recombination is also important i.e., what fraction of the recombination
offsprings are viable? The encoding of information into genes has a great inﬂuence on this suc-
cess rate as well as on the ﬁtness assigned to good sub-solutions. We hypothesize that memes
are particularly good units of selection in these two respects: they are by deﬁnition the units of
cultural information that can be meaningfully recombined to form new knowledge. All these
ideas are summarized in the following hypothesis.
Memes Divide-and-Conquer Hypothesis. Language, individual learning,
and the recombination of memes constitute an efﬁcient evolutionary recom-
bination operator, and this gives rise to rapid search in the space of memes,
that helps humans build up better high-level internal representations of their
world.
6.3
Where do New Ideas Come from?
Where do completely new ideas (and memes) emerge? According to the views stated here,
they emerge from two intertwined effects. On the one hand, our brain can easily combine into
new memes different memes which it inherited from other humans, typically through linguistic
communication and imitation. On the other hand, such recombination as well as other creations
of new memes must arise from the optimization process taking place in a single learning brain,
which tries to reconcile all the sources of evidence that it received into some kind of unifying
theory. This search is local in parameter space (synaptic weights) but can involve a stochastic
search in the space of neuronal ﬁring patterns (state of mind). For example, in a Boltzmann
machine, neurons ﬁre randomly but with a probability that depends on the activations of other
connected neurons, and so as to explore and reach more plausible “interpretations” of the cur-
rent and past observations (or “planning” for future actions in search for a sequence of decisions
that would give rise to most beneﬁcial outcomes), given the current synaptic strenghts. In this
stochastic exploration, new conﬁgurations of neuronal activation can randomly arise and if
these do a better job of explaining the data (the observations made), then synaptic strengths
will change slightly to make these conﬁgurations more likely in the future. This is already how
some artiﬁcial neural networks learn and “discover” concepts that explain their input. In this
way, we can see “concepts” of edges, parts of face, and faces emerge from a deep Bolzmann
machine that “sees” images of faces (Lee et al., 2009).
What this means is that the recombination operator for memes is doing much more than
recombination in the sense of cutting and pasting parts together. It does that but it is also
possible for the new combinations to be optimized in individual brains (or even better, by groups
who create together) so as to better ﬁt the empirical evidence that each learner has access
to. This is related to the ideas in Hinton and Nowlan (1989) where a global search (in their
case evolution) is combined with a local search (individual learning). This has the effect of
22

smoothing the ﬁtness function seen by the global search, by allowing half-baked ideas (which
would not work by themselves) to be tuned into working ones, i.e., replacing the needle in the
haystack by a glowing needle in the haystack, which is much easier to ﬁnd.
7
Conclusion and Future Work
To summarize, motivated by theoretical and empirical work on Deep Learning, we developed
a theory starting from the hypothesis that high-level abstractions are difﬁcult to learn because
they need to be represented with highly non-linear computation associated with enough lev-
els of representation, and that this difﬁculty corresponds to the learner getting stuck around
effective local minima. We proposed and argued that other learning agents can provide new
examples to the learner that effectively change the learner’s training criterion into one where
these difﬁcult local minima are not minima anymore. This happens because the communica-
tions from other agents can provide a kind of indirect supervision to higher levels of the brain,
which makes the task of discovering explanatory factors of variation (i.e., modeling the rest of
the observed data) much easier. Furthermore, this brain-to-brain communication mechanism al-
lows brains to recombine nuggets of knowledge called memes. Individual learning corresponds
to searching for such recombinations and other variations of memes that are good at explaining
the data observed by learners. In this way, new memes are created that can be disseminated
in the population if other learning agents value them, creating cultural evolution. Like genetic
evolution, cultural evolution efﬁciently searches (in the space of memes, rather than genes)
thanks to parallelism, noisy copying of memes, and creative recombination of memes. We
hypothesize that this phenomenon provides a divide-and-conquer advantage that yields much
greater speedup in the optimization performed, compared to the linear speedup obtained simply
from parallelization of the search across a population.
A lot more needs to be done to connect the above hypotheses with the wealth of data and
ideas arising in the biological social sciences. They can certainly be reﬁned and expanded into
more precise statements. Of central importance to future work following up on this paper is how
one could go and test these hypotheses. Although many of these hypotheses agree with common
sense, it would be worthwhile verifying them empirically, to the extent this is possible. It is
also quite plausible that many supporting experimental results from neuroscience, cognitive
science, anthropology or primatology already exist that support these hypotheses, and future
work should cleanly make the appropriate links.
To test the Optimization Hypothesis would seem to require estimating a criterion (not an
obvious task) and verifying that learning improves it in average. A proxy for this criterion (or
its relative change, which is all we care about, here) might be measurable in the brain itself, for
example by measuring the variation in the presence of reward-related molecules or the activity
of neurons associated with reward. The effect of learning could be tested with a varying number
of training trials with respect to a rewarding task.
If the Optimization Hypothesis is considered true, testing the additional assumptions of
the Local Descent Hypothesis is less obvious because it is difﬁcult to measure the change
in synaptic strengths in many places. However, a form of stability of synaptic strengths is a
sufﬁcient condition to guarantee that the optimization has to proceed by small changes.
There is already evidence for the Deep Abstraction Hypothesis in the visual and auditory
cortex, in the sense that neurons that belong to areas further away from the sensory neurons
seem to perform a higher-level function. Another type of evidence comes from the time re-
quired to solve different cognitive tasks, since the hypothesis would predict that tasks requiring
23

computation for the detection of more abstract concepts would require longer paths or more
“iterations” in the recurrent neural network of the brain.
The Local Minima Hypothesis and the Abstractions Harder Hypothesis are ethically
difﬁcult to test directly but are almost corollaries of the previous hypotheses. An indirect source
of evidence may come from raising a primate without any contact with other primates nor any
form of guidance from humans, and measure the effect on operational intelligence at different
ages. One problem with such an experiment would be that other factors might also explain a
poor performance (such as the effect of psychological deprivation from social support, which
could lead to depression and other strong causes of poor decisions), so the experiment would
require a human that provides warmth and caring, but no guidance whatsoever, even indirectly
through imitation. Choosing a more solitary species such as the orangutan would make more
sense here (to reduce the impacts due to lack of social support). The question is whether the
tested primate could learn to survive as well in the wild as other primates of the same species.
The Guided Learning Hypothesis could already be supported by empirical evidence of the
effect of education on intelligence, and possibly by observations of feral (wild) children. The
important point here is that the intelligence tests chosen should not be about reproducing the
academic knowledge acquired during education, but about decisions where having integrated
knowledge of some learned high-level abstractions could be useful to properly interpret a sit-
uation and take correspondingly appropriate decisions. Using computational simulations with
artiﬁcial neural networks and machine learning one should also test the validity of mechanisms
for “escaping” local minima thanks to “hints” from another agent.
The Memes Divide-and-Conquer Hypothesis could probably be best tested by computa-
tional models where we simulate learning of a population of agents that can share their discov-
eries (what they learn from data) by communicating the high-level abstractions corresponding
to what they observe (as in the scenario of Section 5 and Figure 5). The question is whether one
could set up a linguistic communication mechanism that would help this population of learners
converge faster to good solutions, compared to a group of isolated learning individuals (where
we just evaluate a group’s intelligence by the ﬁtness, i.e. generalization performance, of the
best-performing individual after training). Previous computational work on the evolution of
language is also relevant, of course. If such algorithms would work, then they could also be
useful to advance research in machine learning and artiﬁcial intelligence, and take advantage
of the kind of massive and loose parallelism that is more and more available (to compensate for
a decline in the rate of progress of the computing power accessible by a single computer core).
This type of work is related to other research on algorithms inspired by the evolution of ideas
and culture (see the Wikipedia entry on Memetic Algorithms and (Moritz, 1990; Hutchins and
Hazlehurst, 1995, 2002)).
If many of these hypotheses (and in particular this last one) are true, then we should also
draw conclusions regarding the efﬁciency of cultural evolution and how different social struc-
tures may inﬂuence that efﬁciency, i.e., yield greater group intelligence in the long run. Two
main factors would seem to inﬂuence this efﬁciency: (1), the efﬁciency of exploration of new
memes in the society, and (2), the rate of spread of good memes. Efﬁciency of exploration
in meme-space would be boosted by a greater investment in scientiﬁc research, especially in
high-risk high potential impact areas. It would also be boosted by encouraging diversity it
all its forms because it would mean that individual humans explore a less charted region of
meme-space. For example, diversity would be boosted by a non-homogeneous education sys-
tem, a general bias favoring openness to new ideas and multiple schools of thought (even if
they disagree), and more generally to marginal beliefs and individual differences. The second
factor, the rate of spread of good memes, would be boosted by communication tools such as
24

the Internet, and in particular by open and free access to education, information in general,
and scientiﬁc results in particular. The investment in education would probably be one of the
strongest contributors of this factor, but other interesting contributors would be social struc-
tures making it easy for every individual to disseminate useful memes, e.g., to publish on the
web, and the operation of non-centralised systems of rating what is published (whether this is
scientiﬁc output or individual blogs and posts on the Internet), helping the most interesting new
ideas to bubble up and spread faster, and contributing both to diversity of new memes and more
efﬁcient dissemination of useful memes. Good rating systems could help humans to detect self-
ish memes that “look good” or self-propagate easily for the wrong reasons (like cigarettes or
sweets that may be detrimental to your health even though many people are attracted to them),
and the attempts at objectivity and replicability that scientists are using may help there.
