Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research 36 (2009) 71
Submitted 12/08; published 10/09
Prime Implicates and Prime Implicants:
From Propositional to Modal Logic
Meghyn Bienvenu

Department of Mathematics and Computer Science
University of Bremen, Germany
Abstract
Prime implicates and prime implicants have proven relevant to a number of areas of
artiﬁcial intelligence, most notably abductive reasoning and knowledge compilation. The
purpose of this paper is to examine how these notions might be appropriately extended from
propositional logic to the modal logic K. We begin the paper by considering a number of
potential deﬁnitions of clauses and terms for K. The diﬀerent deﬁnitions are evaluated with
respect to a set of syntactic, semantic, and complexity-theoretic properties characteristic of
the propositional deﬁnition. We then compare the deﬁnitions with respect to the properties
of the notions of prime implicates and prime implicants that they induce. While there is
no deﬁnition that perfectly generalizes the propositional notions, we show that there does
exist one deﬁnition which satisﬁes many of the desirable properties of the propositional
case. In the second half of the paper, we consider the computational properties of the
selected deﬁnition. To this end, we provide sound and complete algorithms for generating
and recognizing prime implicates, and we show the prime implicate recognition task to be
Pspace-complete. We also prove upper and lower bounds on the size and number of prime
implicates. While the paper focuses on the logic K, all of our results hold equally well for
multi-modal K and for concept expressions in the description logic ALC.
1. Introduction
Prime implicates and prime implicants are important notions in artiﬁcial intelligence. They
have given rise to a signiﬁcant body of work in automated reasoning and have been applied
to a number of diﬀerent sub-areas in AI. Traditionally, these concepts have been studied
in the context of propositional logic, but they have also been considered for many-valued
(Ramesh & Murray, 1994) and ﬁrst-order logic (Marquis, 1991a, 1991b).
Not much is
known, however, about prime implicates and prime implicants in other logics. In particular,
no deﬁnition of prime implicate or prime implicant has ever been proposed for a modal or
description logic, nor has it been shown that no reasonable deﬁnition can be provided.
Given the increasing interest in modal and description logics as knowledge representation
languages, one naturally wonders whether these notions can be suitably generalized to these
more expressive logics.
We recall that in propositional logic the prime implicates of a formula are deﬁned to be
its logically strongest clausal consequences. The restriction to clauses is made in order to
reduce redundant elements from a formula’s set of consequences: there is no use in keeping
around the consequence a ∧b when one already has the consequences a and b. The decision
to consider only the logically strongest clausal consequences is motivated by a desire to
eliminate irrelevant weaker consequences: if we already have the consequence a, there is
c⃝2009 AI Access Foundation. All rights reserved.

Bienvenu
no point in retaining the consequences a ∨b or a ∨¬b. Prime implicates thus provide a
complete yet compact representation of the set of logical consequences of a formula. What
is particularly nice about this representation is that it makes many computational tasks
simpler: satisﬁability, tautology, entailment, and equivalence queries and the conditioning
and forgetting transformations are all tractable for formulae represented by their prime
implicates (Darwiche & Marquis, 2002). This is why prime implicates are considered an
interesting target language for knowledge compilation (Cadoli & Donini, 1997; Darwiche
& Marquis, 2002). Prime implicates have also proved relevant to other sub-areas of AI,
like distributed reasoning (Adjiman, Chatalic, Goasdou´e, Rousset, & Simon, 2006), belief
revision (Bittencourt, 2007; Pagnucco, 2006), non-monotonic reasoning (cf. Przymusinski,
1989), and characterizations of relevance (Lakemeyer, 1995; Lang, Liberatore, & Marquis,
2003).
The dual notion to prime implicates is prime implicants, which are deﬁned to be the
logically weakest terms (= conjunctions of literals) which imply a given formula. The main
application domain for prime implicants is in abduction and diagnosis. We recall that in
abduction, one is given a background theory and an observation, and the objective is to
ﬁnd an explanation for the observation. In logical terms, an explanation is a formula which
logically entails the observation when taken together with the background theory. As the
set of explanations for an abduction problem can be very large, an important question
is how to select a representative subset of explanations. One very common approach is
to use prime implicants: the relevant explanations for an observation o with respect to a
background theory t are taken to be the prime implicants of t →o (de Kleer, Mackworth,
& Reiter, 1992; Eiter & Makino, 2002).
For many applications in AI, the expressive power of propositional logic proves insuf-
ﬁcient. First-order logic provides a much greater level of expressivity, but at the price of
undecidability. Modal and description logics oﬀer an interesting trade-oﬀbetween expres-
sivity and complexity, as they are generally more expressive than propositional logic yet
are better-behaved computationally than ﬁrst-order logic. This explains the growing trend
towards using such languages for knowledge representation.
A prototypical description logic is ALC, which extends propositional logic with restricted
forms of universal and existential quantiﬁcation. An example expression in ALC is
Female ⊓∃hasChild.Female ⊓∀hasChild.(Doctor ⊔Professor) ⊓∃hasPet.Dog
which describes the set of individuals who are female, have at least one daughter and one
pet dog, and are such that all of their children are either doctors or professors. The above
concept expression can be represented equally well in the modal logic K2 by the formula:
Female ∧31Female ∧21(Doctor ∨Professor) ∧32Dog
Schild (1991) proved a general result which showed that the description logic ALC with n
binary relations is in fact a notational variant of the multi-modal logic Kn. This means that
results concerning Kn can be transferred to ALC, and vice-versa.
In this paper, we investigate the notions of prime implicates and prime implicants for
the modal logic K = K1, but actually all of our results hold for formulae in Kn, and hence
also for concept expressions in ALC. The decision to present our results in terms of K
72

Prime Implicates and Prime Implicants in Modal Logic
rather than in terms of Kn or ALC was motivated solely by a desire to simplify notation
and increase the readability of the proofs.
The question of how the notions of prime implicates and prime implicants can be suitably
deﬁned for the logic K is clearly of interest from a theoretical point of view. We argue,
however, that this question is also practically relevant. To support this claim, we brieﬂy
discuss two application areas in which the study of prime implicates and prime implicants
in K might prove useful.
The ﬁrst domain of application we will consider is abductive reasoning in K. As noted
above, one of the key foundational issues in abductive reasoning is the selection of an
interesting subset of explanations. This issue is especially crucial for logics like K which
allow for an inﬁnite number of non-equivalent formulae, since this means that the number of
non-equivalent explanations for an abduction problem is not just large but in fact inﬁnite,
making it simply impossible to enumerate the entire set of explanations. As prime implicants
are a widely-accepted means of characterizing relevant explanations in propositional logic,
a reasonable starting point for research into abductive reasoning in the logic K is the study
of diﬀerent possible deﬁnitions of prime implicant in K and their properties.
The investigation of prime implicates in K is also relevant to the development of knowl-
edge compilation procedures for K. We recall that knowledge compilation (cf. Darwiche
& Marquis, 2002) is a general technique for coping with the intractability of reasoning
which consists in an oﬀ-line phase in which a knowledge base is rewritten as an equivalent
knowledge base which allows for tractable reasoning, followed by an online phase in which
reasoning is performed on the compiled knowledge base. The idea is that the initial cost
of compiling the knowledge base will be oﬀset by computational savings on later queries.
Currently, most work on knowledge compilation is restricted to propositional logic, even
though this technique could prove highly relevant for modal and description logics, which
generally suﬀer from an even higher computational complexity than propositional logic. As
prime implicates are one of the better-known mechanisms for compiling formulae in propo-
sitional logic, it certainly makes sense to investigate whether this approach to knowledge
compilation can be fruitfully extended to logics like K.
Our paper is organized as follows. After some preliminaries, we consider how to appro-
priately generalize the notions of clauses and terms to K. As there is no obvious deﬁnition,
we enumerate a list of syntactic, semantic, and complexity-theoretic properties of the propo-
sitional deﬁnitions, which we then use to compare the diﬀerent candidate deﬁnitions. We
next consider the diﬀerent deﬁnitions in light of the notions of prime implicate and prime
implicant they induce. Once again, we list some basic properties from the propositional
case that we would like to satisfy, and we see how the diﬀerent deﬁnitions measure up.
In the second half of the paper, we investigate the computational properties of the most
satisfactory deﬁnition of prime implicates. We consider the problems of prime implicate
generation and recognition, and we provide sound and complete algorithms for both tasks.
We also study the complexity of the prime implicate recognition problem, showing it to be
Pspace-complete and thus of the same complexity as satisﬁability and deduction in K. We
conclude the paper with a discussion of the relevance of our results to the two application
areas cited above and some directions for future research. In order to enhance the readabil-
ity of the paper, proofs have been omitted from the body of the text. Full proofs can be
found in the appendix.
73

Bienvenu
2. Preliminary Deﬁnitions and Notation
We brieﬂy recall the basics of the modal logic K (refer to Blackburn, de Rijke, & Venema,
2001; Blackburn, van Benthem, & Wolter, 2006, for good introductions to modal logic).
Formulae in K are built up from a set of propositional variables V, the standard logical
connectives (¬, ∧, and ∨), and the modal operators 2 and 3. We will call a formula of
the form 2ϕ (resp. 3ϕ) a 2-formula (resp. 3-formula). Where convenient we will use
ϕ →ψ as an abbreviation for ¬ϕ∨ψ. We adopt the shorthand 2kϕ (resp. 3kϕ) to refer to
the formula consisting of ϕ preceded by k copies of 2 (resp. 3), with the convention that
20ϕ = 30ϕ = ϕ. We will use var(ϕ) to refer to the set of propositional variables appearing
in a formula ϕ. The modal depth of a formula ϕ, written δ(ϕ), is deﬁned as the maximal
number of nested modal operators appearing in ϕ, e.g. δ(3(a ∧2a) ∨a) = 2. We deﬁne the
length of a formula ϕ, written |ϕ|, to be the number of occurrences of propositional variables,
logical connectives, and modal operators in ϕ. For example, we would have |(a ∧¬b)| = 4
and |3(a ∨b) ∧2¬a| = 8.
Negation normal form (NNF) is deﬁned just as in propositional logic: a formula is said
to be in NNF if negation only appears directly before propositional variables. Every formula
ϕ in K can be transformed into an equivalent formula in NNF using the recursive procedure
Nnf deﬁned as follows:
Nnf(l)=l (for propositional literals l)
Nnf(2ψ)=2Nnf(ψ)
Nnf(ψ1 ∧ψ2)=Nnf(ψ1)∧Nnf(ψ2)
Nnf(¬2ψ)=3Nnf(¬ψ)
Nnf(¬(ψ1 ∧ψ2))=Nnf(¬ψ1)∨Nnf(¬ψ2)
Nnf(3ψ)=3Nnf(ψ)
Nnf(ψ1 ∨ψ2)=Nnf(ψ1)∨Nnf(ψ2)
Nnf(¬3ψ)=2Nnf(¬ψ)
Nnf(¬(ψ1 ∨ψ2))=Nnf(¬ψ1)∧Nnf(¬ψ2)
Nnf(¬¬ψ)=Nnf(ψ)
For example, applying Nnf to the formula ¬2(a∧3(¬b∨c)) results in the formula 3(¬a∨
2(b∧¬c)) which is in NNF. The transformation Nnf takes linear time, and yields a formula
which is no more than double the size of the original formula and has the same modal depth
and propositional variables as the original.
A model for K is a tuple M = ⟨W, R, v⟩, where W is a non-empty set of possible worlds,
R ⊆W × W is a binary relation over worlds, and v : W × V →{true, false} is a valuation
of the propositional variables at each world. Models can be understood as labelled directed
graphs, in which the vertices correspond to the elements of W, the directed edges represent
the binary relation R, and the vertices are labeled by propositional valuations which specify
the propositional variables which are true in the corresponding possible world.
Satisfaction of a formula ϕ in a model M at the world w (written M, w |= ϕ) is deﬁned
inductively as follows:
• M, w |= a if and only if v(w, a) = true
• M, w |= ¬ϕ if and only if M, w ̸|= ϕ
• M, w |= ϕ ∧ψ if and only if M, w |= ϕ and M, w |= ψ
• M, w |= ϕ ∨ψ if and only if M, w |= ϕ or M, w |= ψ
• M, w |= 2ϕ if and only if M, w′ |= ϕ for all w′ such that wRw′
74

Prime Implicates and Prime Implicants in Modal Logic
• M, w |= 3ϕ if and only if M, w′ |= ϕ for some w′ such that wRw′
If we think of models as labeled directed graphs, then determining the satisfaction of a
formula 2ϕ at vertex w consists in evaluating ϕ at all of the vertices which can be reached
from w via an edge; 2ϕ is satisﬁed at w just in the case that ϕ holds in each of these
successor vertices. Similarly, in order to decide whether a formula 3ϕ holds at a vertex w,
we consider each of the successors of w in the graph and check whether at least one of these
vertices satisﬁes ϕ.
A formula ϕ is said to be a tautology, written |= ϕ, if M, w |= ϕ for every model M and
world w. A formula ϕ is satisﬁable if there is some model M and some world w such that
M, w |= ϕ. If there is no M and w for which M, w |= ϕ, then ϕ is called unsatisﬁable, and
we write ϕ |= ⊥.
Ladner (1977) showed that satisﬁability and unsatisﬁability in K are Pspace-complete.
For Pspace membership, Ladner exhibited a polynomial space tableaux-style algorithm for
deciding satisﬁability of K formulae. Pspace-hardness was proven by means of a reduction
from QBF validity (the canonical Pspace-complete problem).
In modal logic, the notion of logical consequence (or entailment) can be deﬁned in one
of two ways:
• a formula ψ is a global consequence of ϕ if whenever M, w |= ϕ for every world w of
a model M, then M, w |= ψ for every world w of M
• a formula ψ is a local consequence of ϕ if M, w |= ϕ implies M, w |= ψ for every model
M and world w
In this paper, we will only consider the notion of local consequence, and we will take ϕ |= ψ
to mean that ψ is a local consequence of ϕ. When ϕ |= ψ, we will say that ϕ entails ψ.
Two formulae ϕ and ψ will be called equivalent, written ϕ ≡ψ, if both ϕ |= ψ and ψ |= ϕ.
A formula ϕ is said to be logically stronger than ψ if ϕ |= ψ and ψ ̸|= ϕ.
We now highlight some basic properties of logical consequence and equivalence in K
which will play an important role in the proofs of our results.
Theorem 1. Let ψ, ψ1, ..., ψm, χ, χ1, ..., χn be formulae in K, and let γ be a propositional
formula. Then
1. ψ |= χ ⇔|= ¬ψ ∨χ ⇔ψ ∧¬χ |= ⊥
2. ψ |= χ ⇔3ψ |= 3χ ⇔2ψ |= 2χ
3. γ∧3ψ1∧...∧3ψm∧2χ1∧...∧2χn |= ⊥⇔(γ |= ⊥or ψi∧χ1∧...∧χn |= ⊥for some i)
4. |= γ ∨3ψ1 ∨... ∨3ψm ∨2χ1 ∨... ∨2χn ⇔(|= γ or |= ψ1 ∨... ∨ψm ∨χi for some i)
5. 2χ |= 2χ1 ∨... ∨2χn ⇔χ |= χi for some i
6. 3ψ1 ∨... ∨3ψm ∨2χ1 ∨... ∨2χn
≡3ψ1 ∨... ∨3ψm ∨2(χ1 ∨ψ1 ∨... ∨ψm) ∨... ∨2(χn ∨ψ1 ∨... ∨ψm)
75

Bienvenu
Statement 1 of Theorem 1 shows how the three reasoning tasks of entailment, unsatisﬁ-
ability, and tautology-testing can be rephrased in terms of one another. Statement 2 tells us
how entailment between two 2- or 3-formulae can be reduced to entailment between those
formulae with the ﬁrst modality removed. Statements 3 and 4 deﬁne the conditions under
which a conjunction (resp. disjunction) of propositional literals and 2- and 3-formulae
is unsatisﬁable (resp. a tautology). Statement 5 gives us the conditions under which a
2-formula implies a disjunction of 2-formulae. Statement 6 demonstrates the interaction
between 2- and 3-formulae in a disjunction.
Theorem 2. Let λ be a disjunction of propositional literals and 2- and 3-formulae. Then
each of the following statements holds:
1. If λ |= γ for some non-tautological propositional clause γ, then every disjunct of λ is
either a propositional literal or an unsatisﬁable 3-formula
2. If λ |= 3ψ1 ∨... ∨3ψn, then every disjunct of λ is a 3-formula
3. If λ |= 2χ1 ∨... ∨2χn and ̸|= 2χ1 ∨... ∨2χn, then every disjunct of λ is either a
2-formula or an unsatisﬁable 3-formula
Theorem 3. Let λ = γ ∨3ψ1 ∨... ∨3ψm ∨2χ1 ∨... ∨2χn and λ′ = γ′ ∨3ψ′
1 ∨... ∨3ψ′
p ∨
2χ′
1 ∨... ∨2χ′
q be formulae in K. If γ and γ′ are both propositional and ̸|= λ′, then
λ |= λ′ ⇔



γ |= γ′ and
ψ1 ∨... ∨ψm |= ψ′
1 ∨... ∨ψ′
p and
for every χi there is some χ′
j such that χi |= ψ′
1 ∨... ∨ψ′
p ∨χ′
j
Theorems 2 and 3 concern entailment relations between formulae which are disjunctions
of propositional literals and 2- and 3-formulae. Theorem 2 tells us what kinds of formulae
of this type can entail a propositional clause, a disjunction of 3-formulae, or a disjunction
of 2-formulae, while Theorem 3 outlines the conditions under which two formulae of this
type can be related to each other by the entailment relation. We illustrate Theorem 3 on a
small example.
Example 4. Consider the formula λ = ¬b ∨3(a ∧3c) ∨3(d ∧2a) ∨2(c ∨d). Then
according to Theorem 3, we have:
• λ |= ¬b ∨¬d ∨3(a ∨d) ∨2c, since ¬b |= ¬b ∨¬d and (a ∧3c) ∨(d ∧2a) |= a ∨d and
c ∨d |= c ∨(a ∨d)
• λ ̸|= a ∨3c, since ¬b ̸|= a
• λ ̸|= a ∨¬b ∨3(a ∧c), since (a ∧3c) ∨(d ∧2a) ̸|= a ∧c
• λ ̸|= ¬b ∨3(a ∨2a) ∨2c, since c ∨d ̸|= c ∨(a ∨2a)
76

Prime Implicates and Prime Implicants in Modal Logic
3. Literals, Clauses, and Terms in K
As we have seen in the introduction, the notions of prime implicates and implicants are
straightforwardly deﬁned using the notions of clauses and terms. Thus, if we aim to provide
suitable deﬁnitions of prime implicates and implicants for the logic K, we ﬁrst need to decide
upon a suitable deﬁnition of clauses and terms in K. Unfortunately, whereas clauses and
terms are standard notions in both propositional and ﬁrst-order logic1, there is no generally
accepted deﬁnition of clauses and terms in K. Indeed, several quite diﬀerent notions of
clauses and terms have been proposed in the literature for diﬀerent purposes.
Instead of blindly picking a deﬁnition and hoping that it is appropriate, we prefer to
list a number of characteristics of literals, clauses, and terms in propositional logic, giving
us a principled means of comparing diﬀerent candidate deﬁnitions. Each of the properties
below describes something of what it is to be a literal, clause, or term in propositional logic.
Although our list cannot be considered exhaustive, we do believe that it covers the principal
syntactic, semantic, and complexity-theoretic properties of the propositional deﬁnition.
P1 Literals, clauses, and terms are in negation normal form.
P2 Clauses do not contain ∧, terms do not contain ∨, and literals contain neither ∧nor ∨.
P3 Clauses (resp. terms) are disjunctions (resp. conjunctions) of literals.
P4 The negation of a literal is equivalent to another literal. Negations of clauses (resp.
terms) are equivalent to terms (resp. clauses).
P5 Every formula is equivalent to a ﬁnite conjunction of clauses. Likewise, every formula
is equivalent to a ﬁnite disjunction of terms.
P6 The task of deciding whether a given formula is a literal, term, or clause can be accom-
plished in polynomial-time.
P7 The task of deciding whether a clause (resp. term) entails another clause (resp. term)
can be accomplished in polynomial-time.
One may wonder whether there exist deﬁnitions of literals, clauses, and terms for K
satisfying all of these properties. Unfortunately, we can show this to be impossible.
Theorem 5. Any deﬁnition of literals, clause, and terms for K that satisﬁes properties P1
and P2 cannot satisfy P5.
The proof of Theorem 5 only makes use of the fact that ∧does not distribute over 3
and ∨does not distribute over 2, which means that our impossibility result holds equally
well for most standard modal and description logics.
We will now consider a variety of possible deﬁnitions and evaluate them with respect
to the above criteria. The ﬁrst deﬁnition that we will consider is that proposed by Cialdea
1. One might wonder why we do not simply translate our formulae in K into ﬁrst-order formulae and then
put them into clausal form. The reason is simple: we are looking to deﬁne clauses and terms within the
language of K, and the clauses we obtain on passing by ﬁrst-order logic are generally not expressible in K.
Moreover, if we were to deﬁne clauses in K as those ﬁrst-order clauses which are representable in K, we
would obtain a set of clauses containing no 3 modalities, thereby losing much of the expressivity of K.
77

Bienvenu
Mayer and Pirri (1995) in a paper on abductive reasoning in modal logic. They deﬁne terms
to be the formulae which can be constructed from the propositional literals using only ∧, 2,
and 3. Modal clauses and literals are not used in the paper but can be deﬁned analogously,
yielding the following deﬁnition2:
L ::= a | ¬a | 2L | 3L
D1
C ::= a | ¬a | 2C | 3C | C ∨C
T ::= a | ¬a | 2T | 3T | T ∧T
It is easy to see by inspection that this deﬁnition satisﬁes properties P1-P2, P4, and P6.
Property P3 is not satisﬁed, however, since there are clauses that are not disjunctions of
literals – take for instance 2(a∨b). From Theorem 5 and the fact that both P1 and P2 are
satisﬁed, we can conclude that property P5 cannot hold. At ﬁrst glance, it may seem that
entailment between clauses or terms could be accomplished in polynomial time, but this is
not the case. In fact, we can show this problem to be NP-complete. The proof relies on the
very strong resemblance between terms of D1 and concept expressions in the description
logic ALE (for which both unsatisﬁability and deduction are known to be NP-complete).
By using a slightly diﬀerent deﬁnition, we can gain P3:
L ::= a | ¬a | 2L | 3L
D2
C ::= L | C ∨C
T ::= L | T ∧T
It can be easily veriﬁed that deﬁnition D2 satisﬁes properties P1-P4 and P6. As deﬁnition
D1 does not satisfy P5, and deﬁnition D2 is even less expressive, it follows that D2 does not
satisfy P5 either. This reduced expressiveness does not however improve its computational
complexity: property P7 is still not satisﬁed as we can show that entailment between
clauses or terms is NP-complete using the same reduction as was used for deﬁnition D1.
The fact that even an extremely inexpressive deﬁnition like D2 does not allow for polynomial
entailment between clauses and terms suggests that property P7 cannot be satisﬁed by any
reasonable deﬁnition of clauses and terms for K.
Let us now consider some more expressive options. We begin with the following deﬁnition
of clauses that was proposed by Enjalbert and Fari˜nas del Cerro (1989) for the purpose of
modal resolution:
D3
C ::= a | ¬a | 2C | 3ConjC | C ∨C
ConjC ::= C | ConjC ∧ConjC
This deﬁnition of clauses can be extended to a deﬁnition of terms and literals which satisﬁes
P3 or P4, but there is no extension which satisﬁes both properties. Let us ﬁrst consider
one of the possible extensions which satisﬁes P4 and a maximal subset of P1-P7:
L ::= a | ¬a | 2L | 3L
D3a
C ::= a | ¬a | 2C | 3ConjC | C ∨C
ConjC ::= C | ConjC ∧ConjC
T ::= a | ¬a | 2DisjT | 3T | T ∧T
DisjT ::= T | DisjT ∨DisjT
2. Note that here and in what follows, we let a range over propositional variables and L, C, and T range
over the sets of literals, clauses, and terms, respectively.
78

Prime Implicates and Prime Implicants in Modal Logic
This deﬁnition satisﬁes P1 and P4-P6 (satisfaction of P5 was shown in Enjalbert & Fari˜nas
del Cerro, 1989). It does not satisfy P3 as there are clauses that are not disjunctions of
literals – take for example 2(a ∨b). Given that deﬁnition D3a is strictly more expressive
than deﬁnitions D1 and D2, it follows that entailment between clauses or terms must be
NP-hard, which means that D3a does not satisfy P7. In fact, we can show that entailment
between clauses or terms of deﬁnition D3a is Pspace-complete. To do so, we modify the
polynomial translation of QBF into K used to prove Pspace-hardness of K so that the
translated formula is a conjunction of clauses with respect to D3a. We then notice that
a formula ϕ is unsatisﬁable if and only if 3ϕ entails 3(a ∧¬a). We thus reduce QBF
validity to entailment between clauses, making this task Pspace-hard, and hence (being a
subproblem of entailment in K) Pspace-complete. This same idea is used to show Pspace-
completeness for deﬁnitions D3b and D5 below.
If instead we extend D3 so as to enforce property P3, we obtain the following deﬁnition:
L ::= a | ¬a | 2C | 3ConjC
D3b
C ::= a | ¬a | 2C | 3ConjC | C ∨C
ConjC ::= C | ConjC ∧ConjC
T ::= L | T ∧T
This deﬁnition satisﬁes all of the properties except P2, P4, and P7. Property P4 fails to
hold because the negation of the literal 3(a ∨b) is not equivalent to any literal. The proof
that P5 holds is constructive: we use standard logical equivalences to rewrite formulae as
equivalent conjunctions of clauses and disjunctions of terms (this is also what we do for
deﬁnitions D4 and D5 below).
We now consider two rather simple deﬁnitions that satisfy properties P3, P4, and P5.
The ﬁrst deﬁnition, which is inspired by the notion of modal atom proposed by Giunchiglia
and Sebastiani (1996), deﬁnes literals as the set of formulae in NNF that cannot be decom-
posed propositionally.
L ::= a | ¬a | 2F | 3F
D4
C ::= L | C ∨C
T ::= L | T ∧T
F ::= a | ¬a | F ∧F | F ∨F | 2F | 3F
D4 satisﬁes all of the properties except P2 and P7. For P7, we note that an arbitrary for-
mula ϕ in NNF is unsatisﬁable (a Pspace-complete problem) if and only if 3ϕ |= 3(a ∧¬a).
Deﬁnition D4 is very liberal, imposing no structure on the formulae behind modal op-
erators. If we deﬁne literals to be the formulae in NNF that cannot be decomposed modally
(instead of propositionally), we obtain a much stricter deﬁnition which satisﬁes exactly the
same properties as D4.
L ::= a | ¬a | 2C | 3T
D5
C ::= L | C ∨C
T ::= L | T ∧T
A summary of our analysis of the diﬀerent deﬁnitions with respect to properties P1-P7
is provided in the following table.
Theorem 6. The results in Figure 1 hold.
79

Bienvenu
D1
D2
D3a
D3b
D4
D5
P1
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
P2
yes
yes
no
no
no
no
P3
no
yes
no
yes
yes
yes
P4
yes
yes
yes
no
yes
yes
P5
no
no
yes
yes
yes
yes
P6
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
P7
no (unless P=NP)
no (unless P=Pspace)
Figure 1: Properties of the diﬀerent deﬁnitions of literals, clauses, and terms.
Clearly deciding between diﬀerent candidate deﬁnitions is more complicated than count-
ing up the number of properties that the deﬁnitions satisfy, the simple reason being that
some properties are more important than others. Take for instance property P5 which
requires clauses and terms to be expressive enough to represent all of the formulae in K. If
we just use the standard propositional deﬁnition of clauses and terms (thereby disregarding
the modal operators), then we ﬁnd that it satisﬁes every property except P5, and hence
more properties than any of the deﬁnitions considered in this section, and yet we would be
hard-pressed to ﬁnd someone who considers the propositional deﬁnition an appropriate def-
inition for K. This demonstrates that expressiveness is a particularly important property,
so important in fact that we should be willing to sacriﬁce properties P2 and P7 to keep it.
Among the deﬁnitions that satisfy P5, we prefer deﬁnitions D4 and D5 to deﬁnitions D3a
and D3b, as the latter deﬁnitions have less in common with the propositional deﬁnition
and present no advantages over D4 and D5.
Of course, when it comes down to it, the choice of a deﬁnition must depend on the
particular application in mind.
There may very well be circumstances in which a less
expressive or less elegant deﬁnition may prove to be the most suitable. In this paper we
are using clauses and terms to deﬁne prime implicates and prime implicants, so for us the
most important criteria for choosing a deﬁnition will be the quality of the notions of prime
implicates and prime implicants that the deﬁnition induces.
4. Prime Implicates/Implicants in K
Once a deﬁnition of clauses and terms has been ﬁxed, we can deﬁne prime implicates and
prime implicants in exactly the same manner as in propositional logic:
Deﬁnition 7. A clause λ is an implicate of a formula ϕ if and only if ϕ |= λ. λ is a prime
implicate of ϕ if and only if:
1. λ is an implicate of ϕ
2. If λ′ is an implicate of ϕ such that λ′ |= λ, then λ |= λ′
Deﬁnition 8. A term κ is an implicant of the formula ϕ if and only if κ |= ϕ. κ is a prime
implicant of ϕ if and only if:
1. κ is an implicant of ϕ
80

Prime Implicates and Prime Implicants in Modal Logic
2. If κ′ is an implicant of ϕ such that κ |= κ′, then κ′ |= κ
Of course, the notion of prime implicate (resp. implicant) that we get will be deter-
mined by the deﬁnition of clause (resp. term) that we have chosen. We will compare dif-
ferent deﬁnitions using the following well-known properties of prime implicates/implicants
in propositional logic:
Finiteness The number of prime implicates (resp. prime implicants) of a formula is ﬁnite
modulo logical equivalence.
Covering Every implicate of a formula is entailed by some prime implicate of the formula.
Conversely, every implicant of a formula entails some prime implicant of the formula.
Equivalence A model M is a model of ϕ if and only if M is a model of all the prime
implicates of ϕ if and only if M is a model of some prime implicant of ϕ3.
Implicant-Implicate Duality Every prime implicant of a formula is equivalent to the
negation of some prime implicate of the negated formula. Conversely, every prime
implicate of a formula is equivalent to the negation of a prime implicant of the negated
formula.
Distribution If λ is a prime implicate of ϕ1 ∨... ∨ϕn, then there exist prime implicates
λ1, ..., λn of ϕ1, ..., ϕn such that λ ≡λ1 ∨... ∨λn. Likewise, if κ is a prime implicant
of ϕ1 ∧... ∧ϕn, then there exist prime implicants κ1, ..., κn of ϕ1, ..., ϕn such that
κ ≡κ1 ∧... ∧κn
Finiteness ensures that the prime implicates/implicants of a formula can be ﬁnitely
represented, while Covering means the prime implicates provide a complete representation
of the formula’s implicates. Equivalence guarantees that no information is lost in replac-
ing a formula by its prime implicates/implicants, whereas Implicant-Implicate Duality
allows us to transfer results and algorithms for prime implicates to prime implicants, and
vice-versa. Finally, Distribution relates the prime implicates/implicants of a formula to
the prime implicates/implicants of its sub-formulae. This property will play a key role in
the prime implicate generation algorithm presented in the next section.
We can show that deﬁnition D4 satisﬁes all ﬁve properties. For Finiteness and Cover-
ing, we ﬁrst demonstrate that every implicate λ of a formula ϕ is entailed by some implicate
λ′ of ϕ with var(λ′) ⊆var(ϕ) and having depth at most δ(ϕ) + 1 (and similarly for impli-
cants). As there are only ﬁnitely many non-equivalent formulae on a ﬁnite language and
with bounded depth, it follows that there are only ﬁnitely many prime implicates/implicants
of a given formula, and that there can be no inﬁnite chains of increasingly stronger impli-
cates (or increasingly weaker implicants). Equivalence follows directly from Covering
and the property P5 of the previous section: we use P5 to rewrite ϕ as a conjunction
of clauses, each of which is implied by some prime implicate of ϕ because of Covering.
The property Implicant-Implicate Duality is an immediate consequence of the duality
3. The property Equivalence is more commonly taken to mean that a formula is equivalent to the conjunc-
tion of its prime implicates and the disjunction of its prime implicants. We have chosen a model-theoretic
formulation in order to allow for the possibility that the set of prime implicates/implicants is inﬁnite.
81

Bienvenu
between clauses and terms (P4). Distribution can be shown using Covering plus the
fact that a disjunction of clauses is a clause and a conjunction of terms is a term (P3).
Theorem 9. The notions of prime implicates and prime implicants induced by deﬁnition
D4 satisfy Finiteness, Covering, Equivalence, Implicant-Implicate Duality, and
Distribution.
We remark by way of contrast that in ﬁrst-order logic the notion of prime implicate in-
duced by the standard deﬁnition of clauses has been shown to falsify Finiteness, Covering,
and Equivalence (Marquis, 1991a, 1991b).
We now show that deﬁnition D4 is the only one of our deﬁnitions to satisfy all ﬁve
properties. For deﬁnitions D1 and D2, we show that Equivalence does not hold. This
is a fairly straightforward consequence of the fact that these deﬁnitions do not satisfy
property P5.
Theorem 10. The notions of prime implicates and prime implicants induced by deﬁnitions
D1 and D2 do not satisfy Equivalence.
For the notions of prime implicates induced by deﬁnitions D3a, D3b, and D5, we show
in the appendix that the clause 2 3ka ∨3(a ∧b ∧2k¬a) is a prime implicate of 2(a ∧b)
for every k ≥14. We thereby demonstrate not only that these deﬁnitions admit formulae
with inﬁnitely many distinct prime implicates but also that they allow seemingly irrelevant
clauses to be counted as prime implicates. This gives us strong grounds for dismissing these
deﬁnitions as much of the utility of prime implicates in applications comes from their ability
to eliminate such irrelevant consequences.
Theorem 11. The notions of prime implicates and prime implicants induced by D3a, D3b,
and D5 falsify Finiteness.
While the comparison in the last section suggested that D5 was at least as suitable as
D4 as a deﬁnition of clauses and terms, the results of this section rule out D5 as a suitable
deﬁnition for prime implicates and prime implicants. In the remainder of the paper, we will
concentrate our attention on the notions of prime implicates and prime implicants induced
by deﬁnition D4, as these have been shown to be the most satisfactory generalizations of
the propositional case.
5. Prime Implicate Generation and Recognition
In this section, we investigate the computational aspects of modal prime implicates. As we
will be primarily focusing on the notion of prime implicate induced by deﬁnition D4, for
the remainder of the paper we will use the words “clause”, “term”, and “prime implicate”
to mean clause, term, and prime implicate with respect to deﬁnition D4, except where
explicitly stated otherwise.
We remark that, without loss of generality, we can restrict our attention to prime impli-
cates since by Implicant-Implicate Duality (Theorem 9) any algorithm for generating
or recognizing prime implicates can be easily adapted into an algorithm for generating or
recognizing prime implicants.
4. For D4, the only prime implicate of 2(a ∧b) is itself.
82

Prime Implicates and Prime Implicants in Modal Logic
Function Dnf-4(ϕ)
Input: a formula ϕ
Output: a set of D4-terms
Return the set of terms output by Iter-Dnf-4({Nnf(ϕ)}).
Function Iter-Dnf-4(S)
Input: a set S of formulae in NNF
Output: a set of D4-terms, which are output one-by-one
If S = {ψ ∧ζ} ∪S′, then do Iter-Dnf-4(S′ ∪{ψ} ∪{ζ})
Else if S = {ψ ∨ζ} ∪S′, then do Iter-Dnf-4(S′ ∪{ψ}), then do Iter-Dnf-4(S′ ∪{ζ})
Else output V
σ∈S σ if it is consistent (and nothing otherwise)
Figure 2: Helper functions Dnf-4 and Iter-Dnf-4.
5.1 Generating Prime Implicates
We start by considering the problem of generating the set of prime implicates of a given
formula. This task is important if we want to produce abductive explanations, or if we want
to compile a formula into its set of prime implicates.
For our generation algorithm, we will require a means of transforming the input formula
into an equivalent disjunction of “simpler” formulae. To this end, we introduce in Figure 2
the helper function Dnf-4(ϕ) which returns a set of satisﬁable terms with respect to D4
whose disjunction is equivalent to ϕ. The function Dnf-4 is deﬁned in terms of another
function Iter-Dnf-4 which takes an input a set S of formulae in NNF and returns in an
iterative fashion a set of satisﬁable terms whose disjunction is equivalent to S. The following
lemmas highlight some important properties of these functions.
Lemma 12. Iter-Dnf-4 terminates and requires only polynomial space in the size of its
input.
Lemma 13. The output of Dnf-4 on input ϕ is a set of satisﬁable terms with respect to
D4 whose disjunction is equivalent to ϕ.
Lemma 14. There are at most 2|ϕ| terms in Dnf-4(ϕ). Each of the terms has length at
most 2|ϕ|, depth at most δ(ϕ), and contains only those propositional variables appearing in
var(ϕ).
We present in Figure 3 the algorithm GenPI which computes the set of prime implicates
of a given formula.
Our algorithm works as follows: in Step 1, we check whether ϕ is
unsatisﬁable, outputting a contradictory clause if this is the case. For satisﬁable ϕ, we
set T equal to a set of satisﬁable terms whose disjunction is equivalent to ϕ. Because of
Distribution, we know that every prime implicate of ϕ is equivalent to some disjunction
of prime implicates of the terms in T . In Step 2, we set ∆(T) equal to the propositional
83

Bienvenu
Function GenPI(ϕ)
Input: a formula ϕ
Output: a set of clauses
(1) If ϕ is unsatisﬁable, return {3(a ∧¬a)}. Otherwise, set T = Dnf-4(ϕ).
(2) For each T ∈T : let LT be the set of propositional literals in T and let DT
be the set of formulae ζ such that 3ζ is in T. If there are no literals of the
form 2ψ in T, then set ∆(T) = LT ∪{3ζ | ζ ∈DT }. Otherwise, set ∆(T) =
LT ∪{2βT } ∪{3(ζ ∧βT ) | ζ ∈DT }
where βT is the conjunction of formulae ψ such that 2ψ is in T.
(3) Set Candidates = {W
T∈T θT | θT ∈∆(T)}.
(4) For each λj ∈Candidates: remove λj from Candidates if λk |= λj for some
λk ∈Candidates with k < j, or if both λj |= λk and λj ̸|= λk for k > j.
(5) Return Candidates.
Figure 3: Algorithm for prime implicate generation.
literals in T (LT ) plus the strongest 2-literal implied by T (2βT ) plus the strongest 3-
literals implied by T ({3(ζ ∧βT ) | ζ ∈DT }). It is not too hard to see that every prime
implicate of T must be equivalent to one of the elements in ∆(T). This means that in
Step 3 we are guaranteed that every prime implicate of the input formula is equivalent to
some candidate prime implicate in Candidates. During the comparison phase in Step 4,
non-prime candidates are eliminated, and exactly one prime implicate of each equivalence
class will be retained.
We illustrate the behavior of GenPI on an example:
Example 15. We run GenPI on input ϕ = a∧((3(b∧c)∧3b)∨(3b∧3(c∨d)∧2e∧2f)).
Step 1: As ϕ is satisﬁable, we call the function Dnf-4 on ϕ, and it returns the two terms
T1 = a ∧3(b ∧c) ∧3b and T2 = a ∧3b ∧3(c ∨d) ∧2e ∧2f.
Step 2: We have LT1 = {a}, DT1 = {b ∧c, b}, and there are no 2-literals in T1, so we
get ∆(T1) = {a, 3(b ∧c), 3b}. For T2, we have LT2 = {a}, DT2 = {b, c ∨d}, and
βT2 = e ∧f, giving us ∆(T2) = {a, 2(e ∧f), 3(b ∧e ∧f), 3((c ∨d) ∧e ∧f)}.
Step 3: The set Candidates will contain all the diﬀerent possible disjunctions of elements
in ∆(T1) with elements in ∆(T2), of which there are 12: a∨a, a∨2(e∧f), a∨3(b∧e∧f),
a ∨3((c ∨d) ∧e ∧f), 3(b ∧c) ∨a, 3(b ∧c) ∨2(e ∧f), 3(b ∧c) ∨3(b ∧e ∧f),
3(b∧c)∨3((c∨d)∧e∧f), 3b∨a, 3b∨2(e∧f), 3b∨3(b∧e∧f), and 3b∨3((c∨d)∧e∧f).
Step 4: We will remove from Candidates the clauses a ∨2(e ∧f), a ∨3(b ∧e ∧f),
a ∨3((c ∨d) ∧e ∧f), 3(b ∧c) ∨a, and 3b ∨a since they are strictly weaker than
a ∨a.
We will also eliminate the clauses 3b ∨2(e ∧f), 3b ∨3(b ∧e ∧f), and
84

Prime Implicates and Prime Implicants in Modal Logic
3b ∨3((c ∨d) ∧e ∧f) since they are weaker than the clauses 3(b ∧c) ∨2(e ∧f),
3(b ∧c) ∨3(b ∧e ∧f), 3(b ∧c) ∨3((c ∨d) ∧e ∧f).
Step 5: GenPI will return the four remaining clauses in Candidates, which are a ∨a,
3(b ∧c) ∨2(e ∧f), 3(b ∧c) ∨3(b ∧e ∧f), and 3(b ∧c) ∨3((c ∨d) ∧e ∧f).
Our algorithm can be shown to be a sound and complete procedure for generating prime
implicates.
Theorem 16. The algorithm GenPI always terminates and outputs exactly the set of
prime implicates of the input formula.
By examining the prime implicates produced by the algorithm, we can place an upper
bound on the length of a formula’s prime implicates.
Theorem 17. The length of the smallest clausal representation of a prime implicate of a
formula is at most single exponential in the length of the formula.
This upper bound is optimal as we can ﬁnd formulae with exponentially large prime
implicates.
This situation contrasts with propositional logic, where the length of prime
implicates is linearly bounded by the number of propositional variables in the formula.
Theorem 18. The length of the smallest clausal representation of a prime implicate of a
formula can be exponential in the length of the formula.
It is interesting to note that the formula used in the proof of Theorem 18 has a depth
of 1, which means that we cannot avoid this worst-case spatial complexity by restricting
our attention to formulae of shallow depth. Nor can we escape this exponential worst-case
spatial complexity by dropping down to one of the less expressive notions of prime implicates
examined in the previous section, as the following theorem attests.
Theorem 19. If prime implicates are deﬁned using either D1 or D2, then the length of
the smallest clausal representation of a prime implicate of a formula can be exponential in
the length of the formula.
An examination of the set of candidate prime implicates constructed by our algorithm
allows us to place a bound on the maximal number of non-equivalent prime implicates a
formula can possess.
Theorem 20. The number of non-equivalent prime implicates of a formula is at most
double exponential in the length of the formula.
This bound can also be shown to be optimal. This situation contrasts with propositional
logic, where there can be at most single exponentially many non-equivalent prime implicates
of a given formula.
Theorem 21. The number of non-equivalent prime implicates of a formula may be double
exponential in the length of the formula.
Again, this worst-case result is robust in that it can be improved neither by restrict-
ing the depth of formulae, nor by using less expressive notions of prime implicate, as the
following theorem demonstrates.
85

Bienvenu
Theorem 22. If prime implicates are deﬁned using either D1 or D2, then the number of
non-equivalent prime implicates of a formula may be double exponential in the length of the
formula.
Theorems 19 and 22 together suggest that deﬁnitions D1 or D2 do not yield espe-
cially interesting approximate notions of prime implicate, as they induce a signiﬁcant loss
of expressivity without any improvement in the size or number of prime implicates in the
worst-case.
Our generation algorithm GenPI corresponds to the simplest possible implementation
of the distribution property, and it is quite clear that it does not represent a practicable
way for producing prime implicates. One major source of ineﬃciency is the large number
of clauses that are generated, so if we want to design a more eﬃcient algorithm, we need
to ﬁnd ways to generate fewer candidate clauses. There are a couple of diﬀerent techniques
that could be used. One very simple method which could yield a smaller number of clauses
is to eliminate from ∆(T) those elements which are not prime implicates of T, thereby
decreasing the cardinalities of the ∆(T) and hence of Candidates. To do this, we simply
test whether βT is a tautology (and remove it if it is) and then compare the 3-literals in
∆(T), discarding any weaker elements. If we apply this technique to Example 15, we would
remove 3b from ∆(T1), thereby reducing the cardinality of Candidates from 12 to 8.
More substantial savings could be achieved by using a technique developed in the frame-
work of propositional logic (cf. Marquis, 2000) which consists in calculating the prime im-
plicates of T1, then the prime implicates of T1∨T2, then those of T1∨T2∨T3, and so on until
we get the prime implicates of the full disjunction of terms. By interleaving comparison
and construction, we can eliminate early on a partial clause that cannot give rise to prime
implicates instead of producing all of the extensions of the partial clause and then deleting
them one by one during the comparison phase. In our example, there were only two terms,
but imagine that there was a third term T3. Then by applying this technique, we would
ﬁrst produce the 4 prime implicates of T1 ∨T2 and then we would compare the 4|∆(T3)|
candidate clauses of T1 ∨T2 ∨T3. Compare this with the current algorithm which generates
and then compares 12|∆(T3)| candidate clauses.
Given that the number of elements in Candidates can be double exponential in the
length of the input, cutting down on the size of the input to GenPI could yield signiﬁcant
savings. One obvious idea would be to break conjunctions of formulae into their conjuncts,
and then calculate the prime implicates of each of the conjuncts. Unfortunately, however,
we cannot apply this method to every formula as the prime implicates of the conjuncts are
not necessarily prime implicates of the full conjunction. One solution which was proposed
in the context of approximation of description logic concepts (cf. Brandt & Turhan, 2002)
is to identify simple syntactic conditions that guarantee that we will get the same result
if we break the formula into its conjuncts. For instance, one possible condition is that the
conjuncts do not share any propositional variables. The formula ϕ in our example satisﬁes
this condition since the variables in a and ((3(b ∧c) ∧3b) ∨(3b ∧3(c ∨d) ∧2e ∧2f)) are
disjoint. By generating the prime implicates of the conjuncts separately, we can directly
identify the prime implicate a, and we only have 6 candidate clauses of ((3(b ∧c) ∧3b) ∨
(3b∧3(c∨d)∧2e∧2f)) to compare. If we also remove weaker elements from the ∆(Ti) as
86

Prime Implicates and Prime Implicants in Modal Logic
suggested above, we get only 3 candidate clauses for ((3(b∧c)∧3b)∨(3b∧3(c∨d)∧2e∧2f)),
all of which are prime implicates of ϕ.
Another important source of ineﬃciency in our algorithm is the comparison phase in
which we compare all candidate clauses one-by-one in order to identify the strongest ones.
The problem with this is of course that in the worst-case there can be a double exponential
number of candidate clauses, simply because there may be double exponentially many
distinct prime implicates, and each prime implicate must be equivalent to some candidate
clause. Keeping all of these double exponentially many clauses in memory will generally
not be feasible. Fortunately, however, it is not necessary to keep all of the candidate clauses
in memory at once since we can generate them on demand from the sets ∆(T). Indeed, as
we demonstrate in the appendix, by implementing our algorithm in a more clever fashion,
we obtain an algorithm which outputs the prime implicates iteratively while requiring only
single-exponential space (the output of the algorithm could of course be double exponentially
large because of Theorem 21).
Theorem 23. There exists an algorithm which runs in single-exponential space in the size
of the input and incrementally outputs, without duplicates, the set of prime implicates of
the input formula.
Although our modiﬁed algorithm has a much better spatial complexity than the original,
it still does not yield a practicable means for generating prime implicates. The reason is that
we still need to compare each of the candidate clauses against all the other candidate clauses
in order to decide whether a candidate is a prime implicate or not. Given that the set of
candidate clauses may be double exponential in number, this means that our algorithm may
need to perform double exponentially many entailment tests before producing even a single
prime implicate. A much more promising approach would be to test directly whether or not
a candidate clause is a prime implicate without considering all of the other candidate clauses.
In order to implement such an approach, we must of course come up with a procedure for
determining whether or not a given clause is a prime implicate. This will be our objective
in the following section.
5.2 Recognizing Prime Implicates
The focus of this section is the problem of recognizing prime implicates, that is, the problem
of deciding whether a clause λ is a prime implicate of a formula ϕ. As has been discussed
in the previous subsection, this problem is of central importance, as any algorithm for
generating prime implicates must contain (implicitly or explicitly) some mechanism for
ensuring that the generated clauses are indeed prime implicates.
In propositional logic, prime implicate recognition is BH2-complete (Marquis, 2000),
being as hard as both satisﬁability and deduction. In K, satisﬁability and unsatisﬁability are
both Pspace-complete, so we cannot hope to ﬁnd a prime implicate recognition algorithm
with a complexity of less than Pspace.
Theorem 24. Prime implicate recognition is Pspace-hard.
In order to obtain a ﬁrst upper bound, we can exploit Theorem 17 which tells us that
there exists a polynomial function f such that every prime implicate of a formula ϕ is
87

Bienvenu
equivalent to some clauses of length at most 2f(|ϕ|). This leads to a simple procedure for
determining if a clause λ is a prime implicate of a formula ϕ. We simply check for every
clause λ′ of length at most 2f(|ϕ|) whether λ′ is an implicate of ϕ which implies λ but is not
implied by λ. If this is the case, then λ is not a prime implicate (we have found a logically
stronger implicate of ϕ), otherwise, there exists no stronger implicate, so λ is a prime
implicate. It is not too hard to see that this algorithm can be carried out in exponential
space, which gives us an Expspace upper bound.
Of course, the problem with this naive approach is that it does not at all take into
account the structure of λ, so we end up comparing a huge amount of irrelevant clauses,
which is exactly what we were hoping to avoid. The algorithm that we propose later in this
section avoids this problem by exploiting the information in the input formula and clause
in order to cut down on the number of clauses to test. The key to our algorithm is the
following theorem which shows how the general problem of prime implicate recognition can
be reduced to the more specialized tasks of prime implicate recognition for propositional
formulae, 2-formulae, and 3-formulae. To simplify the presentation of the theorem, we
let Π(ϕ) refer to the set of prime implicates of ϕ, and we use the notation λ \ {l1, ..., ln}
to refer to the clause obtained by removing each of the literals li from λ. For example
(a ∨b ∨3c) \ {a, 3c} refers to the clause b.
Theorem 25. Let ϕ be a formula of K, and let λ = γ1 ∨...∨γk ∨3ψ1 ∨...∨3ψn ∨2χ1∨...∨
2χm (γj propositional literals) be a non-tautologous clause such that (a) χi ≡χi∨ψ1∨...∨ψn
for all i, and (b) there is no literal l in λ such that λ ≡λ \ {l}. Then λ ∈Π(ϕ) if and only
if the following conditions hold:
1. γ1 ∨... ∨γk ∈Π(ϕ ∧¬(λ \ {γ1, ..., γk}))
2. 2(χi ∧¬ψ1 ∧... ∧¬ψn) ∈Π(ϕ ∧¬(λ \ {2χi})) for every i
3. 3(ψ1 ∨... ∨ψn) ∈Π(ϕ ∧¬(λ \ {3ψ1, ..., 3ψn}))
We remark that the restriction to clauses for which χi ≡χi ∨ψ1 ∨... ∨ψm for all i
and for which λ ̸≡λ \ {l} for all l is required. If we drop the ﬁrst requirement, then there
are some non-prime implicates that satisfy all three conditions, and if we drop the second,
there are prime implicates which fail to satisfy one of the conditions5. These restrictions are
without loss of generality however since every clause can be transformed into an equivalent
clause satisfying them. For the ﬁrst condition, we replace each 2χi by 2(χi ∨ψ1 ∨...∨ψm),
thereby transforming a clause γ1∨...∨γk ∨3ψ1∨...3ψm∨2χ1∨...∨2χn into the equivalent
γ1 ∨...∨γk ∨3ψ1 ∨...3ψm ∨2(χ1 ∨ψ1 ∨...∨ψm)∨...∨2(χn ∨ψ1 ∨...∨ψm). Then to make
the clause satisfy the second condition, we simply remove from λ those literals for which
λ ≡λ \ {l} until no such literal remains.
Theorem 25 shows how prime implicate recognition can be split into three more special-
ized sub-tasks, but it does not tell us how to carry out these tasks. Thus, in order to turn
5. For the ﬁrst restriction, consider the formula ϕ = 3(a∧b∧c)∨2a and the clause λ = 3(a∧b)∨2(a∧¬b).
It can be easily shown that λ is an implicate of ϕ, but λ is not a prime implicate of ϕ since there exist
stronger implicates (e.g. ϕ itself).
Nonetheless, it can be veriﬁed that both 2(a ∧¬b ∧¬(a ∧b)) ∈
Π(ϕ∧¬(λ\{2(a∧¬b)})) and 3(a∧b) ∈Π(ϕ∧¬(λ\{3(a∧b)})). For the second restriction, consider the
formula 2a and the clause 2a∨2(a∧b). We have 2(a∧b) ̸∈Π(2a∧¬(2a)) even though 2a∨2(a∧b) ≡2a
is a prime implicate of 2a.
88

Prime Implicates and Prime Implicants in Modal Logic
this theorem into an algorithm for prime implicate recognition, we need to ﬁgure out how
to test whether a propositional clause, a 2-formula, or a 3-formula is a prime implicate of
a formula.
Determining whether a propositional clause is a prime implicate of a formula in K is
conceptually no more diﬃcult than determining whether a propositional clause is a prime
implicate of a propositional formula. We ﬁrst ensure that the clause is an implicate of the
formula and then make sure that all literals appearing in the clause are necessary.
Theorem 26. Let ϕ be a formula of K, and let γ be a non-tautologous propositional clause
such that ϕ |= γ and such that there is no literal l in γ such that γ ≡γ \{l}. Then γ ∈Π(ϕ)
if and only if ϕ ̸|= γ \ {l} for all l in γ.
We now move on to the problem of deciding whether a clause of the form 2χ is a prime
implicate of a formula ϕ. We remark that if 2χ is implied by ϕ, then it must also be implied
by each of the terms Ti ∈Dnf-4(ϕ). But if Ti |= 2χ, then by Theorem 1, it must be the
case that the conjunction of the 2-literals in Ti implies 2χ. This means that the formula
2β1 ∨... ∨2βn (where βi is the conjunction of the formulae ζ such that 2ζ is in Ti) is an
implicate of ϕ which implies 2χ, and moreover it is the strongest such implicate. It follows
then that 2χ is a prime implicate of ϕ just in the case that 2χ |= 2β1 ∨... ∨2βn, which
is true if and only if χ |= βi for some i (by Theorem 1). Thus, by comparing the formula χ
with the formulae βi associated with the terms of ϕ, we can decide whether or not 2χ is a
prime implicate of ϕ.
Theorem 27. Let ϕ be a formula of K, and let λ = 2χ be a non-tautologous clause such
that ϕ |= λ. Then λ ∈Π(ϕ) if and only if there exists some term T ∈Dnf-4(ϕ) such that
χ |= βT , where βT is the conjunction of formulae ψ such that 2ψ is in T.
Finally let us turn to the problem of deciding whether a clause 3ψ is a prime implicate
of a formula ϕ. Now we know by Covering that if 3ψ is an implicate of ϕ, then there must
be some prime implicate π of ϕ which implies 3ψ. It follows from Theorem 2 that π must
be a disjunction of 3-literals, and from Theorem 16 that π is equivalent to a disjunction
W
T∈Dnf-4(ϕ) 3dT where 3dT is an element of ∆(T) for every T (refer back to Figure 3 for
the deﬁnition of ∆(T)). According to Deﬁnition 7, 3ψ is a prime implicate of ϕ just in
the case that 3ψ |= W
T∈Dnf-4(ϕ) 3dT , or equivalently ψ |= W
T∈Dnf-4(ϕ) dT . Thus, 3ψ is
not a prime implicate of ϕ just in the case that there is a choice of 3dT ∈∆(T) for each
T ∈Dnf-4(ϕ) such that W
T∈Dnf-4(ϕ) dT |= ψ and ψ ̸|= W
T∈Dnf-4(ϕ) dT .
Testing directly whether ψ entails some formula W
T∈Dnf-4(ϕ) dT could take exponential
space in the worst case since there may be exponentially many terms in Dnf-4(ϕ). Luck-
ily, however, we can get around this problem by exploiting the structure of the formula
W
T∈Dnf-4(ϕ) dT . We remark that because of the way ∆(T) is deﬁned the formula dT must
be a conjunction of formulae ζ such that 2ζ or 3ζ appears in Nnf(ϕ) outside the scope of
modal operators – we will use X to denote the set of formulae ζ satisfying this condition. We
show in the appendix that ψ ̸|= W
T∈Dnf-4(ϕ) dT implies the existence of a subset S ⊆X such
that (a) ψ ̸|= W
λ∈S λ and (b) every dT has at least one conjunct from the set S. Conversely,
the existence of such a subset of X implies ψ ̸|= W
T∈Dnf-4(ϕ) dT . This observation is the
basis for the algorithm Test3PI given in Figure 4. The basic idea behind the algorithm is
to try out each of the diﬀerent subsets of X in order to see whether some subset satisﬁes the
89

Bienvenu
Function Test3PI(3ψ, ϕ)
Input: a clause 3ψ and a formula ϕ such that ϕ |= 3ψ
Output: yes or no
(1) If ϕ |= ⊥, return yes if ψ |= ⊥and no otherwise.
(2) Set X equal to the set of formulae ζ such that 2ζ or 3ζ appears in Nnf(ϕ) outside
the scope of modal operators.
(3) For each S ⊆X, test whether the following two conditions hold:
(a) ψ ̸|= W
λ∈S λ
(b) for each Ti ∈Dnf-4(ϕ), there exists conjuncts 3ηi, 2µi,1, ..., 2µi,k(i) of Ti
such that:
(i) {ηi, µi,1, ..., µi,k(i)} ∩S ̸= ∅
(ii) 3(ηi ∧µi,1 ∧... ∧µi,k(i)) |= 3ψ
Return no if some S satisﬁes these conditions, and yes otherwise.
Figure 4: Algorithm for identifying prime implicates of the form 3ψ.
aforementioned conditions. If we ﬁnd a suitable subset, this proves that 3ψ is not a prime
implicate, and if no such subset exists, then we can be sure there is no stronger implicate
than 3ψ. The algorithm can be shown to run in polynomial space since there can be at
most |ϕ| elements in X, and we can consider the terms in Dnf-4(ϕ) one at a time.
Theorem 28. Let ϕ be a formula, and let 3ψ be an implicate of ϕ. Then the algorithm
Test3PI returns yes on input (3ψ, ϕ) if and only if 3ψ is a prime implicate of ϕ.
Theorem 29. The algorithm Test3PI runs in polynomial space.
We now illustrate the algorithm Test3PI with two examples.
Example 30. We use Test3PI to test whether the clause λ = 3(a∧b) is a prime implicate
of ϕ = a ∧(2(b ∧c) ∨2(e ∨f)) ∧3(a ∧b).
Step 1: As ϕ is satisﬁable, we pass directly to Step 2.
Step 2: We set X equal to the set of formulae ζ such that 2ζ or 3ζ appears in Nnf(ϕ)
outside the scope of modal operators. In our case, we set X = {b ∧c, e ∨f, a ∧b}
since ϕ =Nnf(ϕ) and b ∧c, e ∨f, and a ∧b are the only formulae satisfying the
requirements.
Step 3: We examine each of the diﬀerent subsets of X to determine whether they satisfy
conditions (a) and (b). In particular, we consider the subset S = {b ∧c, e ∨f}. We
remark that this subset satisﬁes condition (a) since a ∧b ̸|= (b ∧c) ∨(e ∨f). In order
to check condition (b), we ﬁrst call the function Dnf-4 on ϕ which returns the two
terms T1 = a ∧2(b ∧c) ∧3(a ∧b) and T2 = a ∧2(e ∨f) ∧3(a ∧b). We notice that
the conjuncts 3(a ∧b) and 2(b ∧c) of T1 satisfy conditions (i) and (ii) since b ∧c ∈S
and 3(a∧b∧(b∧c)) |= λ. We then notice that the conjuncts 3(a∧b) and 2(e∨f) of
T2 also satisfy conditions (i) and (ii) since e ∨f ∈S and 3(a ∧b ∧(e ∨f)) |= λ. That
90

Prime Implicates and Prime Implicants in Modal Logic
Function TestPI(λ, ϕ)
Input: a clause λ and a formula ϕ
Output: yes or no
(1) If ϕ ̸|= λ, return no.
(2) If ϕ |= ⊥, then return yes if λ |= ⊥and no if not.
If |= λ, then return yes if |= ϕ and no otherwise.
(3) For each li in λ = l1 ∨... ∨ln, test if λ \ {li} ≡λ, and if so, remove li from λ.
Let D = {3ψ1, ..., 3ψm} be the set of 3-literals in λ. If D is non-empty, replace
each disjunct 2χ of λ by the literal 2(χ ∨ψ1 ∨... ∨ψm).
(4) Let P be the set of propositional literals which are disjuncts of λ. For each
l ∈P, check whether ϕ |= λ \ {l}, and return no if so.
(5) Let B be the set of 2-formulae appearing as disjuncts in λ. Check for each 2ζ
in B whether there is some T in Dnf-4(ϕ ∧¬(λ \ {2ζ})) for which the formula
2(ζ ∧¬ψ1 ∧... ∧¬ψk) implies the conjunction of 2-literals in T, and return no
if not.
(6) If D is empty, return yes, otherwise return Test3PI(3(Wm
i=1 ψi), ϕ∧¬(λ \D)).
Figure 5: Algorithm for identifying prime implicates.
means that we have found a subset S of X which satisﬁes conditions (a) and (b), so
the algorithm returns no. This is the correct output since 3(a ∧b ∧((b ∧c) ∨(e∨f)))
is an implicate of ϕ which is strictly stronger than λ.
Example 31. We use Test3PI to test whether the clause λ = 3(a ∧b ∧c) is a prime
implicate of ϕ = a ∧(2(b ∧c) ∨2(e ∨f)) ∧3(a ∧b) ∧¬2(e ∨f ∨(a ∧b ∧c)).
Step 1: We proceed directly to Step 2 since ϕ is satisﬁable.
Step 2: We set X = {b ∧c, e ∨f, a ∧b, ¬e ∧¬f ∧(¬a ∨¬b ∨¬c))} since Nnf(ϕ)=a ∧(2(b ∧
c) ∨2(e ∨f)) ∧3(a ∧b) ∧3(¬e ∧¬f ∧(¬a ∨¬b ∨¬c)).
Step 3: We check whether there is some subset of X satisfying conditions (a) and (b). We
claim that there is no such subset. To see why, notice that a ∧2(b ∧c) ∧3(a ∧b) ∧
3(¬e∧¬f ∧(¬a∨¬b∨¬c)) is the only term in Dnf-4(ϕ). Moreover, there is only one
set of conjuncts of this term which implies 3(a ∧b ∧c), namely {3(a ∧b), 2(b ∧c)}.
But that means that S must contain either a ∧b or b ∧c in order to satisfy condition
(b)(i). As a ∧b ∧c implies both a ∧b and b ∧c, we are guaranteed that a ∧b ∧c
will imply the disjunction of elements in S, thereby falsifying condition (a). It follows
that there is no subset of X satisfying the necessary conditions, so Test3PI returns
yes, which is the desired result.
In Figure 5, we present our algorithm for testing whether a clause λ is a prime implicate
of a formula ϕ. The ﬁrst two steps of the algorithm treat the limit cases where λ is not
an implicate or where one or both of ϕ and λ is a tautology or contradiction. In Step 3,
91

Bienvenu
we apply equivalence-preserving transformations to λ to make it satisfy the requirements
of Theorem 25. Then in Steps 4, 5, and 6 we use the procedures from Theorems 26, 27,
and 28 to test whether the three conditions in Theorem 25 are veriﬁed. If the three tests
succeed, then by Theorem 25, the clause is a prime implicate, so we return yes. If some
test fails, we return no as the clause has been shown not to be a prime implicate.
Theorem 32. The algorithm TestPI always terminates, and it returns yes on input (λ,
ϕ) if and only if λ is a prime implicate of ϕ.
We demonstrate the use of TestPI on an example.
Example 33. We use TestPI to test if the clauses λ1 = b, λ2 = 2b∨2(e∨f), λ3 = a∨3c,
λ4 = 3(a ∧b), and λ5 = 3(a ∧b ∧c) ∨3(a ∧b ∧c ∧f) ∨2(e ∨f) are prime implicates of
ϕ = a ∧(2(b ∧c) ∨2(e ∨f)) ∧3(a ∧b).
λ1: We output no in Step 1 since ϕ ̸|= λ1.
λ2: We skip Steps 1 and 2 since λ |= λ2 and neither ϕ |= ⊥nor |= λ2. In Step 3, we
make no changes to λ2 since it contains no redundant literals nor any 3-literals. We
skip Step 4 since λ2 has no propositional disjuncts. In Step 5, we return no since
Dnf-4(ϕ ∧¬(λ2 \ {2b})) = {a ∧2(b ∧c) ∧3(a ∧b) ∧3(¬e ∧¬f)} and 2b ̸|= 2(b ∧c).
λ3: We proceed directly to Step 3 since λ |= λ3, ϕ ̸|= ⊥, and ̸|= λ3. No modiﬁcations
are made to λ3 in Step 3 as it does not contain any redundant literals or 2-literals.
In Step 4, we test whether or not ϕ |= λ3 \ {a}. As ϕ ̸|= 3c, we proceed on to Step
5, and then directly on to Step 6 since λ3 contains no 2-literals. In Step 6, we call
Test3PI(3c, ϕ ∧¬(λ3 \ {3c})), which outputs no since ϕ ∧¬(λ3 \ {3c}) |= ⊥and
c ̸|= ⊥.
λ4: Steps 1-5 are all inapplicable, so we skip directly to Step 6. In this step, we call
Test3PI with as input the clause 3(a∧b) and the formula ϕ∧¬(λ4\{3(a∧b)}) = ϕ.
We have already seen in Example 30 above that Test3PI returns no on this input,
which means that TestPI also returns no.
λ5: We proceed directly to Step 3, where we delete the redundant literal 3(a ∧b ∧c ∧f)
and then modify the literal 2(e∨f). At the end of this step, we have λ5 = 3(a∧b∧c)∨
2((e∨f)∨(a∧b∧c)). Step 4 is not applicable since there are no propositional disjuncts
in λ5. In Step 5, we continue since Dnf-4(ϕ ∧¬(λ5 \ {2((e ∨f ∨(a ∧b ∧c))})) =
{a∧2(e∨f)∧3(a∧b)∧2(¬a∨¬b∨¬c)}, and 2(((e∨f ∨(a∧b∧c))∧(¬a∨¬b∨¬c)) |=
2(e ∨f) ∧2(¬a ∨¬b ∨¬c). In Step 6, we return yes since we call Test3PI on input
(3(a ∧b ∧c), ϕ ∧¬(λ5 \ {3(a ∧b ∧c)})), and we have previously shown in Example
31 that Test3PI returns yes on this input.
We show in the appendix that the algorithm TestPI runs in polynomial space. As we
have already shown that TestPI decides prime implicate recognition, it follows that this
problem is in Pspace:
Theorem 34. Prime implicate recognition is in Pspace.
92

Prime Implicates and Prime Implicants in Modal Logic
By putting together Theorems 24 and 34, we obtain a tight complexity bound for the
prime implicate recognition task.
Corollary 35. Prime implicate recognition is Pspace-complete.
6. Conclusion and Future Work
The ﬁrst contribution of this work is a detailed comparison of several diﬀerent possible
deﬁnitions of clauses, terms, prime implicates, and prime implicants for the modal logic K.
The results of this investigation were largely positive: although we have shown that no
perfect deﬁnition exists, we did exhibit a very simple deﬁnition (D4) which satisﬁes most of
the desirable properties of the propositional case. The second contribution of our work is a
thorough investigation of the computational aspects of the selected deﬁnition D4. To this
end, we presented a sound and complete algorithm for generating prime implicates, as well
as a number of optimizations to improve the eﬃciency of the algorithm. An examination of
the structure of the prime implicates generated by our algorithm allowed us to place upper
bounds on the length of prime implicates and on the number of prime implicates a formula
can possess. We showed these bounds to be optimal by exhibiting matching lower bounds,
and we further proved that the lower bounds hold even for some much less expressive no-
tions of prime implicates. Finally, we constructed a polynomial-space algorithm for deciding
prime implicate recognition, thereby showing this problem to be Pspace-complete, which is
the lowest complexity that could reasonably be expected. Although the focus of the paper
was on the logic K, all of our results can be easily lifted to multi-modal K and to concept
expressions in the well-known description logic ALC.
As was mentioned in the introduction, one of the main applications of prime implicants
in propositional logic is to the area of abductive reasoning, where prime implicants play
the role of abductive explanations. The results of our paper can be directly applied to the
problem of abduction in K: our notion of prime implicants can be used as a deﬁnition of
abductive explanations in K, and our prime implicate generation algorithm provides a means
of producing all of the abductive explanations to a given abduction problem. Moreover,
because the notion of term underlying our deﬁnition of abductive explanations is more
expressive than that used by Cialdea Mayer and Pirri (1995), we are able to ﬁnd explanations
which are overlooked by their method. For instance, if we look for an explanation of the
observation c given the background information 2(a ∨b) →c, we obtain 2(a ∨b), whereas
their framework yields 2a and 2b. This is an argument in favor of our approach since
generally in abduction one is looking to ﬁnd the weakest conditions guaranteeing the truth
of the observation given the background information.
Also of interest are our results on the size and number of prime implicates, as these
yield corresponding lower bounds on the size and number of abductive explanations. In
particular, our results imply that the abductive explanations of Cialdea Mayer and Pirri
(1995) can have exponential size and be double exponentially many in number in the worst
case, and thus behave no better in these respects than the notion of abductive explanation
induced by our preferred deﬁnition D4. Moreover, the fact that these lower bounds hold
even in the case of the extremely inexpressive notion of abductive explanations induced
by deﬁnition D2 suggests that these high worst-case complexity results really cannot be
93

Bienvenu
avoided. In light of these intractability results, an interesting question for future research
would be to study the problem of generating a single prime implicate, since in some appli-
cations it may prove suﬃcient to produce a single minimal explanation for an observation.
Another interesting subject for future work which is relevant from the point of view of ab-
duction is the investigation of the notion of prime implicate over a ﬁxed vocabulary. The
development of generation algorithms for this more reﬁned notion of prime implicate would
allow one to generate only those abductive explanations which are built up from a given set
of propositional variables.
The second domain of application which was mentioned in the introduction was the
area of knowledge compilation. In propositional logic, one well-known target language for
knowledge compilation is prime implicate normal form, in which a formula is represented
as the conjunction of its prime implicates. A natural idea would be to use our selected
deﬁnition of prime implicate to deﬁne in an analogous manner a notion of prime implicate
normal form for K formulae. Unfortunately, the normal form we obtain satisﬁes few of the
nice properties of the propositional case. For instance, we ﬁnd that entailment between two
formulae in prime implicate normal form is no easier than between arbitrary K formulae.
To see why, consider any pair of formulae ϕ and ψ in negation normal form. The formulae
3ϕ and 3ψ are their own prime implicates and hence are in prime implicate normal form
according to the naive deﬁnition. As ϕ |= ψ just in the case that 3ϕ |= 3ψ, we can reduce
entailment between arbitrary K formulae in NNF to entailment between formulae in prime
implicate normal form. As the former problem is known to be Pspace-complete, it follows
that the latter is Pspace-complete as well.
At ﬁrst sight, this appears to be quite a disappointing result as one would hope that the
computational diﬃculty of representing a formula by its prime implicates would be oﬀset
by some good computational properties of the resulting formula. As it turns out, however,
the problem lies not in our deﬁnition of prime implicates but rather in the naive way of
deﬁning prime implicate normal form. Indeed, in a continuation of the present work (Bien-
venu, 2008), we proposed a more sophisticated deﬁnition of prime implicate normal form,
in which we specify which of the many diﬀerent clausal representations of a prime implicate
should be used. This normal form was shown to enjoy a number of desirable properties
which make it interesting from the viewpoint of knowledge compilation. Most notably, it
was proven that entailment between formulae in K in our prime implicate normal form can
be carried out in polynomial time using a simple structural comparison algorithm which is
reminiscent of the structural subsumption algorithms used in subpropositional description
logics. It should be noted that the proof of this and other results by Bienvenu (2008) make
ample use of the material presented in the current paper.
In this work, we studied prime implicates with respect to the local consequence relation,
so a natural direction for future work would be the investigation of prime implicates with re-
spect to the global consequence relation. This question is particularly interesting given that
global consequence is the type of consequence used in description logic ontologies. Unfortu-
nately, our preliminary investigations suggest that deﬁning and generating prime implicates
with respect to the global consequence relation will likely prove more diﬃcult than for the
local consequence relation. For one thing, if we use a deﬁnition of clause which is reasonably
94

Prime Implicates and Prime Implicants in Modal Logic
expressive, then the notion of prime implicate we obtain does not satisfy Covering since
we can construct inﬁnite sequences of stronger and stronger implicates. Take for instance
the formula (¬a ∨b) ∧(¬b ∨3b) which implies (using the global consequence relation)
each of the increasingly stronger clauses in the inﬁnite sequence ¬a ∨3b, ¬a ∨3(b ∧3b),
¬a∨3(b∧3(b∧3b)), ... This is a familiar situation for description logic practitioners since
these inﬁnite sequences are responsible for the non-existence of most speciﬁc concepts in
many common DLs (cf. K¨usters & Molitor, 2002) and the lack of uniform interpolation for
ALC TBoxes (Ghilardi, Lutz, & Wolter, 2006). A standard solution to this problem is to
simply place a bound on the depth of formulae to be considered, eﬀectively blocking these
problematic inﬁnite sequences. This will not allow us to regain Covering, but it will give
us a weaker version of this property, which should be suﬃcient for most applications. The
development of generation algorithms for the global consequence relation may also prove
challenging, since it is unclear at this point whether we will be able to draw inspiration from
pre-existing methods. Despite these potential diﬃculties, we feel that this subject is worth
exploring since it could contribute to the development of more ﬂexible ways of accessing
and structuring information in description logic ontologies.
Finally, another natural direction for future research would be to extend our investiga-
tion of prime implicates and prime implicants to other popular modal and description logics.
Particularly of interest are modal logics of knowledge and belief and expressive description
logics used for the semantic web. We are conﬁdent that the experience gained from our
investigation of prime implicates and prime implicants in K will prove a valuable asset in
the exploration of other modal and description logics.
