Regularized Maximum Likelihood for Intrinsic Dimension Estimation
Mithun Das Gupta
Epson Research and Development
San Jose, CA

Thomas S. Huang
University of Illinois,
Urbana Champaign

Abstract
We propose a new method for estimating the in-
trinsic dimension of a dataset by applying the
principle of regularized maximum likelihood to
the distances between close neighbors. We pro-
pose a regularization scheme which is motivated
by divergence minimization principles. We de-
rive the estimator by a Poisson process approx-
imation, argue about its convergence properties
and apply it to a number of simulated and real
datasets. We also show it has the best overall
performance compared with two other intrinsic
dimension estimators.
1
Introduction
The curse of dimensionality can be greatly alleviated if the
intrinsic dimension of the data were a prior knowledge.
The intrinsic dimension (ID) of a data set roughly trans-
lates to the minimum number of free variables needed to
generate the data. The task of large scale data handling,
namely classiﬁcation, regression, retrieval etc., all bene-
ﬁt from the fact that the data points are not truly high-
dimensional. Although the data is embedded in a high-
dimensional space, it can be efﬁciently summarized in a
space of a much lower dimension, such as a nonlinear
manifold. This leads to ID estimation as well as manifold
based decompositions as two most valuable pre-processing
steps.
Traditional methods for dimensionality reduction
include principal component analysis (PCA), which only
deals with linear projections of the data, and multidimen-
sional scaling (MDS), which aims at preserving pairwise
distances.
More recently, there has been growing inter-
est in manifold projection methods such as Locally Linear
Embedding (LLE) [18], Isomap [24], Laplacian and Hes-
sian Eigenmaps [1, 5], which focus on ﬁnding a nonlin-
ear low-dimensional embedding of high-dimensional data.
One common limitation of these techniques, is the require-
ment of the prior knowledge of the ID of the manifold.
The dimension of the embedding is a key parameter for
manifold projection methods: if the projected dimension
is smaller compared to the ID, important data features are
collapsed onto the same dimension, and if the dimension is
too large, the projections become noisy and, in some cases,
unstable. Though the ﬁeld of sparse coding with over com-
plete bases [16], tries to answer some of the problems with
higher dimensional representations, it does not make ID es-
timation any less important.
Certain methods (e.g., LLE and the Isomap) also require a
scale parameter that determines the size of the local neigh-
borhoods used in the algorithms. In this case, it is useful
if the dimension estimate is provided as a function of the
scale. K´egl [10] discusses an example where the intrinsic
dimension is a function of the resolution. Nearest neigh-
bor searching algorithms can also proﬁt from a good di-
mension estimate. The complexity of search data structures
(e.g., kd-trees and R-trees) increase exponentially with the
dimension. It was shown by Ch´avez et al. [3] that the com-
plexity increases with the ID of the data rather than the di-
mension of the embedding space.
The existing approaches for ID estimation can be broadly
divided into two groups: eigen projection techniques, and
geometric methods. Eigen projection techniques infer ID
from the eigen decomposition of the covariance matrix.
The number of eigen values larger than a certain thresh-
old is used as an estimation of the ID [6]. The inherent
assumption is that the covariance matrix can be computed.
The geometric methods exploit the intrinsic geometry of
the dataset and are most often based on fractal dimen-
sions or nearest neighbor (NN) distances. The most pop-
ular fractal dimension, within the intrinsic dimension com-
munity, is the correlation dimension [7, 2]: given a set
Sn = {x1, . . . , xn} in a metric space, deﬁne
Cn(r) =
2
n(n −1)
n
X
i=1
n
X
j=i+1
1{∥xi −xj∥< r}
(1)
The
correlation
dimension
is
estimated
by
plotting
log Cn(r) against log r and estimating the slope of the lin-

ear part [7]. The correlation dimension (Eq. (1)) implic-
itly uses NN distances, which rely on the following fact: if
x1, . . . , xn are d-dimensional, independent identically dis-
tributed (i.i.d.) samples from a density f(x) residing in
Rm, m being the ID of the data (m ≪d), and Tk(x) is the
Euclidean distance from a ﬁxed point x to its kth NN in the
sample, then
k
n ≈f(x)vm[Tk(x)]m
(2)
where vm =
πm/2
Γ(m/2+1) is the volume of the unit sphere
in Rm. The above relation simply suggests that the pro-
portion of sample points falling into a ball around x is
roughly f(x) times the volume of the ball. The relation-
ship in Eq. (2) can be used to estimate the dimension m
by regressing log T k on log k over a suitable range of k,
where T k = n−1 Pn
i=1 Tk(xi) is the average of distances
from each point to its kth NN [17, 25].
Levina and Bickel (LB) [12] proposed a Maximum Like-
lihood (ML) estimator based on a Poisson distribution,
which computes the intrinsic dimension at each point. The
local estimators are then averaged, under the assumption of
a single uniform manifold. The experimental evaluation of
their technique leads to an estimator which has poor bias
at low neighborhood density, and large variance overall.
These features about the LB method were noted by Mackay
et al. [13]. Our extension of LB method targets at improv-
ing the variance of the estimator by incorporating a penalty
based on the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence [11]. Our
penalization scheme draws motivation from the recent ar-
ray of work concentrating on sample variance penalization
methods proposed in [14, 15] as well as covariance estima-
tors for high-dimensional spaces as proposed in [4, 9, 8].
Our approach is based on the intuition that, since the esti-
mate relies on the neighboring data points, hence the diver-
gence of the estimate, from the estimates at the neighbors
should be close to each other. Working with a Poisson dis-
tribution leads to a very intuitive one sided KL divergence.
These intuitions lead to a quadratic equation formulation
for the intrinsic dimension estimator.
The structure of the paper is as follows. In Sec. 2, we elab-
orate on the LB technique, since it is our starting point.
Sec. 3 describes the details of our technique, and also ar-
gues the asymptotic properties of our estimator. Sec. 4 de-
tails the results on synthetic as well as real data sets, and
we conclude in Sec. 5.
2
A Maximum Likelihood Estimator of
Intrinsic Dimension
In this section we lay down the speciﬁcs of the maximum
likelihood estimator (MLE) of the dimension m as pro-
posed by Levina et al. [12].
Assume a cloud of points
X1, . . . , Xn in Rd to be i.i.d.
observations which rep-
resent an embedding of a lower-dimensional sample, i.e.,
Xi = g(Yi), where Yi are sampled from an unknown
smooth density f on Rm, with unknown m ≪d, and g
is a continuous and sufﬁciently smooth (but not necessarily
globally isometric) mapping. This assumption ensures that
close neighbors in Rm are mapped to close neighbors in the
embedding.
The basic idea is to ﬁx a point x, assume a probability
measure f(x) ≥0 to be constant in a small sphere Sx(r)
of radius r around x, and treat the neighbors within this
meghborhood as a Poisson process in Sx(r). Consider the
inhomogeneous process {N(t, x); 0 ≥t ≥r},
N(t, x) =
n
X
i=1
1{Xi ∈Sx(t)}
(3)
which counts observations within distance t from x. As-
sume the samples which fall in Sx(r) follow a Bernoulli
distribution with probability of success f(x)V , where V =
vmrm, is the volume of the sphere of radius r centered at
x. This is a binomial process and with the assumption that
if n →∞, k →∞, and k/n →0, we can approximate it
as a Poisson process. Consequently the conditional rate of
the Poisson process can be approximated as
λ(r) = f(x)vmmrm−1
(4)
Now we can write the log-likelihood of the observed pro-
cess as
L(m, θ) =
Z R
0
log λ(r)dN(r) −
Z R
0
λ(r)dr
(5)
where θ .= log f(x) is the density parameter, and the ﬁrst
integral is a Riemann-Stieltjes integral [23]. The maximum
likelihood estimator satisﬁes ∂L/∂θ = 0 and ∂L/∂m =
0, leading to a computation for the local dimension at the
point x. This formulation has been presented in [12]. The
simple formulation leads to the estimate
ˆmk(x)
=
h
1
k−1
Pk−1
j=1 log Tk(x)
Tj(x)
i−1
(6)
The estimate is then averaged over multiple values of k,
ˆmx =
1
k2 −k1 + 1
k2
X
k=k1
ˆmk(x)
(7)
and then averaged over all the data points to generate the ﬁ-
nal estimate ˆmk = 1
n
Pn
i=1 ˆmk(xi). This ML estimate for
the intrinsic dimension has been commented upon in [13],
which proposes averaging quantity 1/ ˆm to generate the ML
estimate. The technique presented in [12] presents one of
the ﬁrst attempts at modeling the estimation of intrinsic di-
mension as a likelihood maximization problem. One se-
rious drawback of this technique is the multiple levels of
averaging required for different k as denoted by Eq. (7).
Authors in [13] also point out the high bias of the estimated

dimension m even for small k. For larger values of k a high
bias is expected since the locally smooth density assump-
tion around any data point fails at higher k. But for smaller
values of k the bias for the estimated m is quite large. One
remedy for this problem, proposed in [13], was to estimate
the inverse of the dimension, namely 1/m to reduce the
bias. The results seem to be promising, but they are based
on the assumption that the data surrounding each of the n-
points are independent, which is clearly incorrect.
3
Regularized Maximum Likelihood
Estimator
For the exponential family of distributions, it has been
shown that the MLE is unbounded [21, 20, 22, 19]. For
the inhomogeneous Poisson process mentioned in Eq. (3),
the partial log-likelihood function of Eq. (5) becomes un-
bounded for m →0. In this paper we propose a regulariza-
tion scheme which tries to answer some of the problems of
the LB scheme.
To facilitate the selection of a regularization function we
look at the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence [11] between
the rate parameters of the Poisson process. Let us assume
that the actual process has a rate parameter λ0 with as-
sociated true dimension m0, which is uniform over the
neighborhood of x deﬁned by r. Now assuming the ra-
dius r around x to be reasonably well behaved1, we can
write the directed KL divergence between Poisson(λx) and
Poisson(λ0) as
DKL(λx∥λ0)
=
λ0 −λx + λx log λx
λ0
(8)
=
λ0(1 −λx
λ0
+ λx
λ0
log λx
λ0
)
Close to the optimal point, the ratio λx
λ0 can be further sim-
pliﬁed as
λx
λ0
=
vmxmxrmx−1
vm0m0rm0−1
≈
mx
m0
where we assume vmx
vm0 rmx−m0 ≈1. In essence the diver-
gence term can now be written as
DKL(λx∥λ0) = cD(mx∥m0)
where
D(mx∥m0) .= m0 −mx + mx log mx
m0
(9)
and c is a constant. Note that the quantity D(.) does not
have the subscript KL to denote that it is a scaled dis-
tance metric, similar, but not equal to the KL divergence.
1The behavior of r has been illustrated delightfully well
in [10], Fig.1
Another important aspect of this formulation is the ease of
ﬁnding the ML estimate of the quantity m0, at least close to
optimality. If we accumulate the divergence values around
the neighborhood of the point x and differentiate with re-
spect to m0, it can be shown that the value which minimizes
the sum of divergences is the arithmetic mean of the current
estimates mi at the neighborhood locations.
∂
∂m0
P
y∈Sx(r) D(my∥m0)
= 0
(10)
⇒P
y(1 −my
m0 )
= 0
(11)
⇒k −
P
y my
m0
= 0
(12)
⇒m0 =
P
y my
k
(13)
Denoting this estimate by ¯m0, leads us to the expression
MLE(m0)|x,r ≡¯m0(x, r) = 1
k
k
X
i=1
mi
(14)
where (x, r) signiﬁes that the ML estimate of the true di-
mension is dependent on the current point x as well its
neighborhood parameterized by r. To further simplify the
notations we drop the notational dependence on (x, r), and
write the approximate optimal estimate as ¯m0, whenever
the context is self explanatory. The estimation of ¯m0 and
mx hints at an EM algorithm like scheme, where, in the E
step, we average the the current estimates of dimension at
the neighbors (mi’s) to generate ¯m0, and in the M step up-
date the individual estimates mx’s at all the data locations.
The formulation till this point can now be put into our
generic optimization scheme for obtaining the ID estimate
at a single point x
arg max
m
Z R
0
log λ(r)dN(r) −
Z R
0
λ(r)dr (15)
−γD(m∥¯m0)
where the dependence on x is assumed implicit.
The
boundedness of our estimates is guaranteed by the con-
straint, and it also ensures that we remain close to the op-
timal point at all times. Writing the ﬁrst order derivatives
for Eq. (15) with respect to θ and m and equating them to
zero, we get
N(R) = eθvmmRm
(16)
N(R)
m
+
Z R
0
log t dN(t) −N(R) log R
(17)
−γ ∂
∂mD(m∥¯m0) = 0
At this point we transform the problem into a more tangi-
ble one, such that the radius R considered is actually Rk,
the distance of the kth NN from the point x, and conse-
quently replace N(R) with k. The key insight for this tran-
sition is that the integral in Eq. (17), can be approximated

as P
i(logTi) which has N(R) = k terms in it. Here Ti
is the distance to the ith neighbor. Now the second and the
third term in Eq. (17) can be combined as P
i(logTk/Ti)
which leads to the form
k
m −
k
X
j=1
log Tk
Tj
−γ ∂
∂mD(m∥¯m0) = 0
(18)
For the regularization term, taking a ﬁrst order approxima-
tion to a natural log series we can write
∂
∂mD(m∥¯m0)
=
log m
¯m0
≈2m −¯m0
m + ¯m0
(19)
This approximation reveals some very interesting facts.
Firstly, if we assume, close to optimality, m + ¯m0 ≈2 ¯m0,
then
∂
∂mD(m∥¯m0) ≈
∂
∂m(m −¯m0)2
2 ¯m0
and the regularization scheme essentially penalizes the
variance of the estimator from the current mean estimate
within the valid neighborhood. Substituting the approxi-
mation from Eq. (19) in Eq (18), we can write the quadratic
in m as
 Pk
j=1 log Tk
Tj + 2γ

m2
(20)
+

¯m0
Pk
j=1 log Tk
Tj −2γ ¯m0 −k

m
−¯m0k = 0
The optimization procedure is as follows. We assign ran-
dom values in the range [0, d] to all mi, i = {1, 2, . . . , n}
and ﬁx γ to be a small value. For each iteration we ﬁx
all other assignments except the jth and estimate mj, by
solving the quadratic mentioned in Eq. (20), based on all
the other ﬁxed assignments.
As mentioned earlier, the
quantity ¯m0(j, r) is obtained by averaging the current es-
timate at the neighbors of the point j as mentioned in
Eq. (14). This process is repeated for all the observations
and the estimates are updated. For each subsequent iter-
ation γ →max[γ(1 + ϵ), 1] where ϵ is a small positive
number. Note that we do not need any further averaging of
the estimates for different values of k. The stopping con-
dition for the iteration is set as either a maximum number
of iterations or the change in the estimates going very close
to zero. Finally we estimate the combined intrinsic dimen-
sion by computing the mean of the estimate over all the
observations.
mest = 1
N
N
X
i
m(xi)
(21)
For small values of k the estimated ID, from Eq. (20), can
be written as
m
=
k
Pk
j=1 log Tk
Tj + γ log(m/ ¯m0)
(22)
≈
k
Pk
j=1 log Tk
Tj
(1 −γ log(m/ ¯m0)
Pk
j=1 log Tk
Tj
)
(23)
The improvement in estimated ID, as compared to estima-
tion with no regularization, can be observed from the Fig.1,
which depicts 5D Gaussian points embedded in the same
dimension. For small k the estimated ID is almost always
greater than the true dimension. For this case the diver-
gence penalty is positive and hence the regularized estimate
has lesser positive bias, as evident from the comparison
plot. At the junction when the smooth density assumption
fails the divergence penalty reverses sign, and helps in re-
ducing the negative bias observed in the unregularized esti-
mator. The overall performance for the regularized method
improves over the entire span of the neighborhood size k.
The variance for the estimates is shown against the sam-
ple index. The variance generally improves as k grows.
The same color dots correspond to the same value of k for
the two methods. The worst variance for the unregularized
technique is close to 50, whereas for the regularized tech-
nique it is about 13.
3.1
Asymptotic Behavior
For the asymptotic behavior we bound the deviation of the
estimated m from m0, at a point x, and re-write Eq. (18) as
k
m −
k
X
j=1
log Tk
Tj
−γ log m
m0
= 0
(24)
Since the rightmost term is independent of k, we can con-
dition on Tk and assume the Poisson approximation is ex-
act. Consequently m log(Tk/Tj) : 1 ≤j ≤k −1 are
distributed as the order statistics of a sample size of k −1
from a standard exponential distribution. Writing the sum
of k −1 exponentially distributed variables as a Gamma
distribution, we get m P
i log(Tk/Tj) ∼Gamma(k−1, 1).
Writing the approximate estimator as a function of k from
Eq. (24), for constant m, we get
ˆmk(x) =
k
Pk
j=1 log Tk
Tj + γ log m
m0
(25)
The expectation with respect to the Gamma distribution can
now be evaluated as
E[ ˆmk(x)]
=
km
Γ(k −1)
Z ∞
0
1
x + γ log m
m0
xk−2e−xdx
=
km
Γ(k −1)
Z ∞
t
1
s(s −t)k−2e−s+tds
=
km
Γ(k −1)et(
Z ∞
0
1
s(s −t)k−2e−sds
−
Z t
0
1
s(s −t)k−2e−sds)
Noting the quantity t = γ log m
m0 ≪1, everywhere in
the feasible region of the optimization scheme we can ne-
glect the second term in the parenthesis. This is guaranteed

Figure 1: Performance comparison for 5D Gaussian points. Red: m estimator Levina et al. [12], green: our method. The
pink line denotes the true ID. For the variance plots, the variance improves with k as shown by different colors becoming
more and more linear. The same color means the same value of k for both the methods.
by the fact that for large values of log |m/m0|, γ is very
small, and when γ becomes large the value of log |m/m0|
is pushed to be very small. Assuming k →∞, the mean
can be written as
E[ ˆmk(x)]
=
met(1 −t) ≈m(1 −t2)
(26)
Assuming, E[1/m] ≤M < ∞, which is also the condi-
tion for the maximum likelihood to exist, the variance of
the estimator, for a ﬁxed point x, can be obtained from the
Fisher Informaition criterion,
I( ˆmk(x))
=
−E[ ∂2
∂m2 log LR(m)]
=
k
m2 + γE[1/m]
0 < In(m) < In( ˆmr)
≤
In(m) + γM
1/In(m) > 1/In( ˆmr)
≥
1/(In(m) + γM)
var(m) > var( ˆmr)
≥
var(m)
1 +
γM
2In(m)
where In(m) =
k
m2 is the Fisher information for the un-
regularized MLE. The improvement in the asymptotic vari-
ance is guaranteed by the form of the regularizer, as men-
tioned earlier. The development till this point assumes the
directed form of the KL divergence mentioned in Eq. (8). If
we assume the reverse direction for the KL divergence, then
the regularizer essentially penalizes the bias of the estima-
tor, but increases the variance. The main drawback with the
reverse divergence is the estimator of the term m0, whose
ML estimate based on the current estimates at the neigh-
boring points can be shown to be the geometric mean of
the neighborhood estimates. It remains a future direction
to penalize with respect to the symmetric KL divergence.
4
Results
To establish the acceptability of our method, as a possible
ID estimation technique, we generate comparisons with the
method proposed by Levina and Bickel [12]. Their method
was claimed to perform better overall then the correlation
dimension based approach mentioned in [7, 2] and a direct
regression based approach based on regressing log Tk to
log k. We identiﬁed that since [12] already compared their
method to the existing techniques, we select the inverse m
estimator proposed by MacKay and Ghahramani [13] as the
third method against which we perform comparative sim-
ulations. For the ﬁrst set of experiments we select the 1D
datasets mentioned in [26], embedded in 2 and 3D. Fig. 2
shows the results for these experiments. The three scatter
plots, in each row, next to each example show the estimator
variance with respect to increasing number of neighbors (k)
for each method. Generaly the dot patterns become more
linear with increasing k. The same color of dots, corre-
spond to the same number of neighbors (k) across the three
methods. The horizontal axis for the plots run over the sam-
ple indices. Note the spread of values for our method is the
least compared to both the other unregularized techniques
for many k’s. The fourth column shows the mean estimate
for each value of k. Note the better bias properties for our
estimator (green) for a wider range of values of k. Also
note the true dimension is marked with a pink line. For the
curve with a singular point (bottom row), note the graceful
deterioration of the performance of the proposed regular-
ized technique (green curve) over the other two techniques.
In Fig. 3, we present result for a composite manifold for
which our method again outperforms both the other tech-
niques.
Next we present results for two standard datasets, S-curve
data and the swiss-roll data in Fig. 4. These datasets are
intrinsically 2D embedded into 3D. So m = 2 and d = 3.
We generate the ML estimate of m as a function of k and
plot the results. The scatter plots are spread out more than
the earlier plots due to the irregular sampling as well as
higher amount of noise present in the datasets. Our method
clearly outperforms the other two techniques, both in terms

Figure 2: Left to right: First column (top to bottom): 1D curves embedded in 2D and 3D. Second to fourth columns: scatter
plots for 1/m estimator Mackay et al. [13], m estimator Levina et al. [12], and our method. Fifth column: comparative
curves blue curve [13], red curve [12], green curve our method. Pink line shows the true dimension. Note the last example
has a singular point.
Figure 3: Composite manifold. Second to fourth columns: scatter plots for 1/m estimator Mackay et al. [13] (underesti-
mates ID), m estimator Levina et al. [12] (overestimates ID), and our method estimates the two dimensions correctly, away
from the ﬂux regions. Pink lines represent the true dimensions.

Figure 4: S-curve and Swissroll. Blue curve 1/m estimator [13], red curve m estimator [12], green curve our method. Pink
line shows the true dimension.
of variance (scatter plots) for the entire range of k. The
bias performance is best for [13] for very small k, but our
method quickly catches up. Note the correct dimension is
again marked with a pink line across the plots in the ﬁfth
column.
Finally we look into the two real datasets which have found
lot of attention within the dimensionality reduction as well
as ID estimation community. The two datasets are face
dataset from the ISOMAP work [24] and the rotating cup in
hand CMU dataset2. For the face dataset, there are 698 im-
ages of human faces generated by using three free parame-
ters: vertical and horizontal orientation, and light direction.
Similarly for the rotating cup dataset there are 481 images.
The image sizes are 64 × 64, which make d = 4096. It
has been argued that the expected dimension for the faces
should be 3 since the only three variable are the two ori-
entations and illumination direction. The number of data
points is roughly 10% and 15% of the dimension for cup
and faces respectively, and so very accurate estimate is not
possible. But the results obtained by all the three methods
are quite similar to each other for the range of k denoted in
Fig. 5. For the hand dataset our estimator is closest to the
value 3, and for the face dataset our method performs very
close to the 1/m estimator. This suggests that our method
is right there with the competing schemes as far as the es-
timation accuracy is concerned, and might be the ﬁrst to
converge to the actual estimate given enough data points.
2http://vasc.ri.cmu.edu/idb/html/motion/hand/index.html
5
Conclusion
We have presented a new algorithm to estimate the intrin-
sic dimension of data sets. We draw motivation from di-
vergence minimization principles to penalize the maximum
likelihood estimator and improve the variance performance
of the estimator. The results show improvement in bias
performance for not very small neighborhoods. This two
fold improvement can be explained by the fact that the
unconstrained method greatly underestimated the bias for
larger neighborhoods and overestimated for smaller neigh-
borhoods. By careful penalty switching we provide a better
mean estimate over a wider range of neighborhood sizes.
The weighting term γ in our scheme switches the estima-
tion of the ID to a purely divergence minimization scheme
which performs better at higher values of k. We present
comparative results on noisy, synthetic as well as real data.
The results validate our claims that the technique can be
used in real scenarios to generate a valid estimate of the
intrinsic dimension.
