1
Personalized and situation-aware multimodal route
recommendations: the FAVOUR algorithm
Paolo Campigotto∗, Christian Rudloff†, Maximilian Leodolter† and Dietmar Bauer‡
∗TU Dortmund

† Austrian Institute of Technology AIT

‡ University Bielefeld

Abstract—Route choice in multimodal networks shows a
considerable variation between different individuals as well as
the current situational context. Personalization and situation
awareness of recommendation algorithms are already common
in many areas, e.g., online retail. However, most online routing
applications still provide shortest distance or shortest travel-
time routes only, neglecting individual preferences as well as the
current situation. Both aspects are of particular importance in a
multimodal setting as attractivity of some transportation modes
such as biking crucially depends on personal characteristics and
exogenous factors like the weather.
As an alternative this paper introduces the FAVourite rOUte
Recommendation (FAVOUR) approach to provide personalized,
situation-aware route proposals based on three steps: ﬁrst, at the
initialization stage, the user provides limited information (home
location, work place, mobility options, sociodemographics) used
to select one out of a small number of initial proﬁles. Second,
based on this information, a stated preference survey is designed
in order to sharpen the proﬁle. In this step a mass preference
prior is used to encode the prior knowledge on preferences from
the class identiﬁed in step one. And third, subsequently the proﬁle
is continuously updated during usage of the routing services.
The last two steps use Bayesian learning techniques in order to
incorporate information from all contributing individuals.
The FAVOUR approach is presented in detail and tested on
a small number of survey participants. The experimental results
on this real-world dataset show that FAVOUR generates better-
quality recommendations w.r.t. alternative learning algorithms
from the literature. In particular the deﬁnition of the mass
preference prior for initialization of step two is shown to
provide better predictions than a number of alternatives from
the literature.
Index Terms—personalized-route recommendations, prefer-
ence elicitation, Bayesian learning, transfer learning, multimodal
routing.
I. INTRODUCTION
W
HILE personalized, situation-aware recommendations
are nowadays widespread in online retailing, online
routing tools still predominantly provide the shortest or the
fastest route only, neglecting personal preferences and varying
situations. However, personalization and situation awareness is
of particular importance in multimodal route choice as some
Most of this work has been done while all authors were with the Mobility
Department, Dynamic Transportation Systems, AIT Austrian Institute of
Technology GmbH, Gieﬁnggasse 2, 1210 Vienna, Austria.
options might not be available all the time (cars are often
shared between family members) or attractive (biking in rain
is much less attractive than in bright sunshine).
Modern information technology provides means for collect-
ing personal information via cookies in browsers or app usage
on personal smart-phones. Furthermore, information provision
is exploited and accepted by users by the very same channels.
Correspondingly the provision of personal, situation-aware
route proposals appears to be technically feasible and socially
accepted.
At the same time users might not want to personalize the
suggestions themselves, and, in many cases, would not be
able to, as their preferences are not explicit. However, the
preferences of the users can be inferred from their revealed
choices. This motivates the development of recommendation
algorithms that learn the users’ preferences from their past
choices and afterwards, based on the learned information,
propose the most adequate route (including the transportation
modes) for a new trip (see e.g. [1], [2]).
The adoption of new technology is very sensitive to the
perceived accuracy of the ﬁrst recommendations. A new
service that does not perform well on the ﬁrst occasions a user
tests the system, will not succeed in being used long enough in
order to learn from the preferences of the users. On the other
hand, the users also do not want to ﬁll in long questionnaires
before starting to use the system. Thus it is crucial to strike a
balance between accuracy from the outset and the burden of
initializing the system.
In this paper such a method, in the following referred to as
the FAVourite rOUte Recommendation (FAVOUR) algorithm,
is proposed. It is based on three stages, where each stage
sharpens the user proﬁle providing information on the users’
preferences. In the ﬁrst stage a few preliminary questions
at the time of registration to the service are asked. These
questions include possible sociodemographic information (age,
profession, gender, ...), transportation options, home location
and workplace location or other signiﬁcant places (location
of school or grocery shop) such that at stage two routing
decisions in the form of binary comparisons (route A or
route B?) can be provided that the user relates to in artiﬁcial
but realistic stated-preference-off-revealed-preference [3] type
questions. This helps the respondents in comprehending the
arXiv:1602.09076v1  [cs.AI]  29 Feb 2016

2
presented information better and thus in ultimately making
more informed decisions (see, e.g., [4] or [5]).
Stage three denotes the usage of the personalized routing
algorithm. Routes are proposed based on the estimated per-
sonal proﬁles of the users and feedback on the actually chosen
alternative is gathered in order to further sharpen the proﬁle. At
this stage extensive use is made of Bayesian learning methods.
This paper focuses on stage two of the FAVOUR algorithm.
In particular the paper argues that Bayesian learning is bene-
ﬁcial in order to obtain good route recommendations already
based on a small number of test questions. The key in this
direction will be the generation of mass preference priors that
encode “typical” preferences that are subsequently adapted to
the user and the situation by Bayesian learning strategies. The
main contribution of the paper in this respect are:
• the proposal of an overall framework for devising a
route recommendation system adapting to the stated and
revealed preferences of its users including initialization
procedures;
• the proposal of a particular transfer learning [6] strategy
in order to obtain good predictions based on only a small
number of test questions;
• the investigation of the achievable accuracy as a function
of the number of test questions asked.
It is shown in the paper that our approach provides superior
performance for a small number of test questions asked in
comparison to non-Bayesian techniques using mixed logit
models as well as in comparison to state-of-the-art Bayesian
methods using alternative initialization methods.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. First, the
literature related to FAVOUR is discussed. The problem set-
ting is deﬁned in Sec. III. Sec. IV and Sec. V detail the
FAVOUR algorithm and motivate its design choices. This is
followed by the experimental evaluation of FAVOUR and the
comparison with two benchmarking algorithms from the liter-
ature: the likelihood-maximization approach from [7] and the
state-of-the-art personalized route-recommendation technique
introduced in [1]. Finally, Sec. VII draws conclusions and
highlights potential research directions.
II. RELATED LITERATURE
The quest for personalized routing systems based on traveler
preferences has been highlighted in the transportation system
literature [2], [8], [9], [10], [11]. In [9] a willingness-to-pay
model is estimated. While car drivers are not receiving a high
utility from being presented transit information, the willing-
ness to pay for personalized information that is relevant for
the current travel-situation is notable. Personalized intelligent
transportation systems (ITS) are therefore worthwhile.
Methods generating personalized-route recommendations
for drivers are presented also in [12], [10], [11]. Like
FAVOUR, they assume that humans take traveling decisions
based on several (conﬂicting) criteria, and that different users
trade off these criteria differently (e.g., time-efﬁcient driving
versus fuel-efﬁcient driving). Unlike FAVOUR, papers [10],
[11] do not consider multimodal transportation and focus on
route suggestions for drivers only.
In [7] a system of semantically-enriched personalized
public-transport routing is presented. Individual preferences
are learned from previous travel behavior using a multinomial
mixed logit, where individual-level parameters (see, e.g., [13])
are exploited to generate personalized public-transport route
choice models. However, neither initialization nor belief up-
dating mechanisms are described there.
The integration of real-time trafﬁc information with cus-
tomized route recommendations is considered, e.g., in [14],
which introduces a personalized-route recommendation system
for tourists. Tourists that are planning to visit n points of in-
terest are recommended paths that can guide them to complete
their trip. Recommendations are generated by trading off per-
sonal interests and visiting preferences of the tourists against
current trafﬁc conditions, in order to prevent congestion and
queues. The approach in [15] collects data about the visiting
behavior of tourists in museums and park themes. Based on
this information, tourists are clustered into different groups.
New tourists are assigned to a cluster and recommended paths
based on the preferences of users in the same cluster and
on real-time queuing conditions. However, these approaches
relate to scheduling of intermediate goals in a rather restricted
setting of a theme park and hence are not directly applicable in
our setting. The main conclusion of the survey [16] particularly
related to tourism applications is that a main open questions
consists of the representation, estimation and assessment of
individual preferences. Our work addresses this open question.
Recently, crowd-based route-recommendation systems have
also been proposed [17], [18]. They resorts to crowd knowl-
edge to improve route-recommendations quality. In particu-
lar, they ask human workers for evaluating the alternative
routes suggested by a navigation system for a given point-
to-point trip. The feedback from the crowd is used to help
the traveler in choosing a route from the set of alternatives.
These approaches share with FAVOUR the assumption that
traveling preferences may be transferred among users and that
traveling suggestions for a single users can be improved from
the feedback of other travelers. However, these approaches
focus on route choice and neglect mode choice. Also they do
not include situation awareness. Moreover, they do not provide
any strategy on the intialization of the personal proﬁle which
is the focus of this paper.
The work closest to FAVOUR is the strategy described in the
recent paper [2] using the methods of [1]. It tackles the same
problem addressed by FAVOUR, the design of personalized
multimodal route-recommendations systems, and shares with
FAVOUR the incremental Bayesian approach for learning the
traveler preferences. The experiments reported in [1] show that
the Bayesian approach can learn the preferences of the users,
in the case of simulated choice scenarios with three different
transportation alternatives (public transport, car, public trans-
port and car). The goal of our work is however different: we
show that preferential knowledge can be transferred among
users, in order to improve the learning of their utility mod-
els, in particular at the initialization stage. That is, transfer
learning, which has been shown to provide added beneﬁts
when solving a series of related problems [6], can improve
personalized-route recommendations systems.

3
III. PROBLEM SETTING
A personalized, situation-aware route-recommendation sys-
tem learns the travel preferences of the users and exploits them
to drive the search of the underlying routing system for a
satisfacing route. This section describes both the requirements
imposed to the learning system by the interaction with the
travelers and the structure of the routing model underlying the
FAVOUR algorithm.
A. Efﬁcient interaction with the travelers
A personalized situation-aware routing service faces several
challenges in terms of interaction with the users, stemming
from the bounded rationality of the humans when making
decisions [19]:
1) robustness to noisy feedback [20], [21]. The typical human
decision-making process is characterized by imprecision, con-
tradictions, and changes of judgement over time;
2) low cognitive load of the user [21], [22], [23], [24]. While
the users can provide qualitative evaluations, such as “I prefer
route A to route B”, they usually cannot quantify the extent to
which they prefer route A over route B. Therefore, quantitative
feedback from the user is not suitable in the context of a
traveling information system;
3) real-time constraints [21]. A traveler usually expects an
“immediate” recommendation from the system after posing
a query. Therefore, the suggestion of new alternative routes
cannot take more than few seconds, while the reﬁnement of
the user preference model can be done in an ofﬂine process
during inactivities of the user;
4) user perception of the interactive process. If the quality
of the recommended routes does not increase when the user
provides additional information, she is likely to get annoyed,
perceiving the system as useless, and to stop using it.
B. Underlying routing model
FAVOUR assumes that routing decisions are taken accord-
ing to a random utility maximization based on systematic
utilities that use additive as well as non-additive path costs in
the sense of [25, see sections 2.3.3. and 4.3.3]. Thus FAVOUR
considers routing on a multimodal transport network, which
can be represented by a joint graph G = (V, E). Edges e ∈E
and nodes v ∈V in the graph are described by a set of
attributes, and each edge (node) is associated with a set of
attribute values such as the edge length and travel time. While
the graph is considered static the attributes may depend on the
current situation and the context. A route r is deﬁned as an
ordered sequence of adjacent edges (e1, e2, . . . , el) from the
starting to the destination node, with l denoting the number
of edges of the route. The systematic route cost U(r) of a
candidate route r can therefore be deﬁned as follows:
U(r) = Umw(r) +
l
X
i=1
Ci
(1)
where Ci denotes the cost function for edge i, which depends
on the attributes zi,j of the edge ei in the following form:
Ci =
m
X
j=1
wjcj(zi,j)
(2)
The edge costs ci thus are a weighted linear combination of
m basis cost functions cj : R 7→R+ ∪{0}. This formulation
enables a non-linear dependency between the utility of an edge
and the edge attributes. One example of interest in this respect
could be the incorporation of nonlinear forms of delay terms
that introduce an additional penalty for edges with long delays
to account for the corresponding frustration. The function
Umw(r) enables the incorporation of nonadditive route costs
related to the modes used in the route and to the current
weather conditions. It acts as an alternative-speciﬁc constant.
Let the vector w = [wj]j=1,...,m denote the parameters
(or weights) of the linear combination. Then Eq. (1) can be
reformulated as follows:
U(r) = Umw(r) +
l
X
i=1
m
X
j=1
wjcj(zi,j)
= Umw(r) + w · u(r)
(3)
where the components of the vector u(r) are deﬁned as:
uj(r) =
l
X
i=1
cj(zi,j).
In the following the vector w is called proﬁle and is allowed
to be speciﬁc for each user.
Let us note that the route choice corresponding to the
above formulation of route costs is quite ﬂexible. It allows for
situation dependence in terms of edge costs corresponding to
real time expected travel times by letting zi,j = zi,j(t) depend
on the time accounting for disruptions in the transport system
such as, e.g., unexpected trafﬁc jams due to construction work
or accidents in the public transport system. Also Umw(r) can
account for a great number of different personal preferences,
including favorite modes and mode/weather conditions.
IV. FAVOURITE ROUTE-RECOMMENDATION ALGORITHM
As detailed in the introduction, FAVOUR uses three stages
for the personalization of the weight vector w (in the following
called user proﬁle) encoding the preferences of a user. In the
ﬁrst stage, general sociodemographic questions are asked in
order to classify the new user in a small number of user
classes by separating, e.g., students from old-aged people or
workers from unemployed. For each of these classes a mass
preferences model is estimated representing the average tastes
in this class. Additionally in the ﬁrst stage mobility restrictions
are queried relating to the mobility options of the user as well
as to signiﬁcant places such as home and work location.
Based on this rough ﬁrst guess stated preference questions
in the form of realistic routing situations are asked in the
second stage using the knowledge from the ﬁrst stage, as is
usual for personalized route recommendation systems [2], [1].
In this respect FAVOUR adopts simple comparison queries of
the kind “which of these two candidate routes do you prefer?”
(see Sec. VI below). Comparison queries are well-known in
the preference learning literature to be much more affordable
for the users than quantitative judgements [23]. Based on the
answers the weight vector w is adapted to personal prefer-
ences. In stage three this personalization process is continued
based on real path choices observed in reality.

4
Personalization is achieved by FAVOUR through the learn-
ing mechanism presented in the following. Sec. V then de-
scribes a strategy to transfer knowledge among related prefer-
ence learning tasks and integrates it in the learning algorithm.
A. Learning a utility model from user preferences
FAVOUR adopts a Bayesian strategy in order to infer the
personal preferences encoded in vector w. Given the prior
belief p(w), i.e., the initial belief without having seen any
user preference, and the likelihood model p(T|w) linking the
training preference information T to the random variable w,
the posterior belief p(w|T) is inferred.
Prior distribution. In the following we argue that initializa-
tion with a special prior speciﬁc to each user class, called
mass preference prior (MPP), is beneﬁcial. Details on the
calculation of the MPP are given in Sec. V.
Likelihood model.
The user expresses her preferences by
pairwise comparisons of candidate routes. Therefore the train-
ing set T consists of pairs (rt, qt), t = 1, ..., |T|, with route
rt being preferred to route qt (denoted as rt ≻qt) and the
probability thereof for given w being modeled as:
Pr(rt ≻qt|w) =
1
1 + eU(qt)−U(rt)
(4)
That is the logit model is chosen for the binary comparisons.
Other choices such as the probit model are possible and
straightforward to include, however, as the performance of
probit and logit models for binary choice is comparable [26],
we here opt for the computationally simpler logit model.
Adding independence over choice situations given the personal
preferences leads to the likelihood:
p(T|w) =
|T |
Y
t=1
Pr(rt ≻qt|w) =
|T |
Y
t=1
1
1 + eU(qt)−U(rt)
(5)
Inference technique.
With the selected likelihood, exact
Bayesian inference is not analytically tractable and approxima-
tions of the posterior distribution p(w|T) are thus necessary.
To generate real-time recommendations, deterministic approx-
imate inference is adopted, as it is computationally cheaper
than stochastic approaches, which approximate the posterior
by repeatedly drawing independent samples from it.
A computationally-affordable deterministic approximation
is computed by the Laplace inference technique that generates
a Gaussian approximation N(w| ˜w, ˜Σ) of the posterior. The
vector ˜w is the mode of the un-normalized posterior p(T|w)×
p(w) , providing the “most probable” a-posteriori weight
vector ˜w. The covariance matrix Σ is equal to (−H)−1, with
H being the Hessian matrix of the un-normalized log-posterior
computed at ˜w. Therefore, the Laplace method provides a
quadratic approximation to the log-posterior around its mode.
In general, the Laplace approximation may be unrepresen-
tative of the overall posterior mass, especially for multimodal
posteriors. More sophisticated approximate inference tech-
niques exist [27] to handle multimodal posteriors. However,
these techniques are computationally more expensive than the
Laplace method, and therefore inappropriate for our real-time
task. Most important, our choice of the Gaussian prior and
of the Bradley-Terry likelihood guarantees the unimodality of
the posterior to be approximated. In addition to unimodality,
the log-concavity property of the posterior also guarantees that
the tails of the posterior are no heavier than e−|w|, providing
arguments for the Gaussian approximation.
In general, the domain of the weights wj is R, to encode
both what the user likes (positive values) and what she
dislikes (negative values). However, assigning positive weights
to some speciﬁc decisional features (like, e.g., travel time) is
not reasonable. While traditional approaches for constrained
weights rely on bounded-domain priors (e.g., the exponential
distribution for positively-constrained weights [28]), in this
work, for computational reasons, we constrain the posterior
mean to lie in a box-bounded set by restricting the maximiza-
tion of the log-posterior log p(T|w) + log p(w) + c(T).
B. Incremental learning strategy
In FAVOUR the posterior is computed incrementally, see the
pseudo-code presented in Fig. 1. Here T i denotes the training
set obtained after asking i questions. The prior distribution
p(w|T i−1) over w after i −1 questions is updated once the
i-the question is answered by applying the Bayes rule
p(w|T i) = p(T i|w) × p(w|T i−1)
p(T i)
(6)
to result in the posterior p(w|T i). The posterior is computed
by applying the inference procedure described above. The
iterative learning in stage two is stopped if a termination
criterion is met. Such a criterion may include the number of
questions asked, the accuracy achieved or the time used for
the stage.
V. TRANSFERRING KNOWLEDGE AMONG UTILITY MODELS
The task of efﬁciently learning the preferences of new
users is henceforth referred to as the cold-start problem. To
decrease the number of queries asked to new users, FAVOUR
exploits the preferences elicited from past users. Transferring
knowledge among related learning tasks is known as transfer
learning [6] in the machine-learning community. In this paper
transfer learning methods are used in order to infer priors
for user classes identiﬁed using the stage one questions. For
each user class a mass preference prior (MPP) is learned from
experiences of past users in this class. The main idea in this
respect is that the MPP should encode the typical behavior
of a given class of users such that if new answers from user
in the class are incorporated into the MPP, this should not be
changed.
In particular the computationally affordable method in-
troduced
in
[29]
is
adopted.
It
computes
a
Gaussian
MPP N(¯µ, ¯Σ) by averaging the posterior Gaussian models
N(µk, Σk), k = 1 . . . , K of K users as follows:
¯µ = 1
K
K
X
k=1
µk
¯Σ = 1
K
K
X
k=1
((µk −¯µ)(µk −¯µ)T + Σk)
(7)

5
1.
procedure Incremental Learning
2.
input: transportation system graph
3.
output: approximation ˜w of the user preference model w∗
4.
Let T = ∅training set of the user preference information
5.
do
6.
/* Reﬁnement phase */
7.
Based on set T, update the current belief p(w|T)
8.
/* Bayesian inference */
9.
Let ˜w = argmaxwp(w|T)
10.
/* Mode of the posterior distribution */
11.
and calculate ˜Σ /* variance of posterior */
12.
/* Preference elicitation phase */
13.
Ask query t to the user
14.
Get user response to query t
15.
Include the training example from the user response
16.
until (termination_criterion)
17.
return approximation ˜w, ˜Σ of the user preference model w∗
Fig. 1: Pseudo-code of the iterative learning approach for an
approximation ˜w of the unknown preference model w∗.
1.
procedure MPP reﬁnement
2.
input: training sets Tk, k = 1 . . . , K for the k users
3.
output: mass-preference prior MPP
4.
/* Initialization phase */
5.
Set MPP to N(0, I), with I being the identity matrix
6.
/* Reﬁnement phase */
7.
do
8.
Based on MPP, update the user utility models
9.
N(µk, Σk), k = 1 . . . , K /* Bayesian inference */
10.
Compute ¯µ and ¯Σ according to Eq. (7)
11.
Set MPP to N(¯µ, ¯Σ)
12.
until (termination_criterion)
13.
return mass-preferences prior MPP
Fig. 2: Pseudo-code for iteratively learning the mass-preferences
prior. Each user’s utility model (line 9) is updated by applying
Bayesian inference.
In [29], an iterative procedure is introduced to reﬁne the
learned MPP, which is described in the form of a pseudo-code
in Fig. 2. In particular, the MPP learned at the iteration j-1
(by applying Eq. (7)) is used at the j-th iteration as prior for
the Bayesian inference reﬁning the utility model of each user.
The reﬁned utility models are then exploited to re-estimate
the MPP. The incremental procedure for MPP learning is
iterated until convergence. In our work, the difference among
MPPs is measured by the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence
for two probability distributions. Convergence is numerically
detected if the KL-divergence of consecutive iterations differ
by less than a threshold. As the algorithm is guaranteed
to converge [29], the process will stop. Also note that the
calculation of the MPP can be done ofﬂine and hence time
restrictions are not severe in this respect.
We have also considered more sophisticated approaches
for generating the MPP. In particular, the user utility models
have been clusterized into a set of clusters, each one being
represented by a Gaussian distribution. The mixture of Gaus-
sian distributions deﬁning the clusters has been used as MPP.
However, this approach did not yield any relevant performance
improvement during the experimental evaluation.
VI. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
The proposed algorithm for stage two described above has
been tested in a real-world case study involving 40 partic-
ipants including people of different gender, age, profession
(students, workers or retired persons) and socioeconomic
status. The participants are not assigned to different classes
but only one MPP is estimated for all participants despite
their heterogeneity. First, the performance of the FAVOUR
algorithm adopting the mass-preferences prior is compared
with the results observed when the mass-preferences prior
is not used. For this purpose, the travel choices made by a
set of real decision makers in realistic traveling situations
have been collected. The resulting dataset is described in
Sec. VI-A and VI-B. Details of the FAVOUR implementation
are provided in Sec. VI-C, while an alternative non-Bayesian
transfer-learning approach is deﬁned in Sec. VI-D. The ben-
eﬁts of adopting the mass-preferences prior to initialize the
incremental learning algorithm of FAVOUR are shown in
Sec. VI-E. Finally, in Sec. VI-F and VI-G, the efﬁciency of
the transfer learning technique used by FAVOUR is evaluated,
respectively, by a comparison with:
• the alternative non-Bayesian transfer-learning approach
described in Sec. VI-D;
• the state-of-the-art of route-recommendation system [1]
discussed in the related work section.
The main questions to be answered empirically relate to the
achievable accuracy and the number of questions that need to
be asked in order to attain reasonably accurate recommenda-
tions.
A. Realistic travel-choices dataset
The travel choices are collected in the form of a stated
preference (SP) survey in line with common practice in the
literature [1], [2]. However, like in the proposed three stage
system, the SP questions are personalized for each respondent
to get informed decisions. While there are still some concerns
regarding the validity of SP surveys when it comes to realistic
parameter values, the personalization should improve the re-
sults. In our experiment, ﬁrst for every interviewee ﬁve route
choice situations (RCS) are deﬁned. Each RCS involves three
alternative routes to be compared by the interviewee. Each
of the ﬁve situations is replicated with a different setting of
weather conditions, for a total of ten RCS to be tackled by
the interviewee. Ternary rather than binary choices are asked
in the SP surveys, in order to reduce the total number of
questions, while still holding the number of alternatives to
be evaluated small. The ranking of the three alternatives from
one interviewee generates three binary choices, used in the
second stage of FAVOUR for modeling.

6
The route alternatives provided to the participants in each
RCS are personalized according to their available transporta-
tion modes, in order to present each participant with valid
alternatives. Furthermore real-world travel-times predictions
thus including average congestion delays are used that are
speciﬁc to the day and the time given in the route choice
questions. The following individual and public transportation
modes are considered:
• car driving;
• car driving (car sharing);
• cycling;
• cycling (bike sharing);
• walking;
• public transport (bus, underground or tram).
Routes within the city of Vienna are generated for combina-
tions of the above transportation modes. Public transportation
routes are obtained by querying the electronic router of the
Viennese local public transport provider. For the individual
modes, the multimodal router Ariadne [30] using real-world
real-time travel-times is exploited.
To guarantee a founded and informed ranking by the in-
terviewee, the alternative routes are visualized in a map and
either the destination or the origin in up to four of the ten
choice situations is the actual interviewee’s home address. The
remaining destinations and origins are selected within well-
known areas of Vienna. The choice situations generated are
described by using the set of route features discussed in the
next section. An example of the customized and detailed routes
presented to the interviewees can be seen in Fig. 3.
B. Route features
The constant Umw(r) speciﬁc to the routes and the sit-
uational context provided to the interviewees for evaluation
is described by a set of binary decisional features generated
as follows. Each transportation mode is associated with an
indicator variable, set to one if the transportation mode is used
to cover (a part of) the route. As this study includes multimodal
routes, different indicator variables may be simultaneously set
to one.
The environmental conditions are classiﬁed into six different
states, each one encoded by a dummy indicator variable.
The states describe the six possible interaction terms of the
precipitation-chance binary-forecast (high chance of rainfall
or snowfall w.r.t. no precipitation chance) with three different
temperature intervals (low, medium and high temperature).
Each of the six environmental-conditions variables are com-
bined with the six different transportation modes, thus gen-
erating 36 binary indicator variables mj(r, s). The indicator
variables deﬁne the transportation modes used with certain
environmental conditions represented in the vector s. For
example, one variable indicates whether the route includes
using the car with high chance of precipitation and low
temperature. Combining these features we obtain
Umw(r, s) =
36
X
j=1
wjmj(r, s).
In addition to the 36 possible combinations of transportation
modes with environmental conditions, we consider also the
time to cover the route, the route length, the travel cost
and the number of transportation-means changes, encoded in
uj(r), j = 37, ..., 59 (see Tab. I). In detail, we measure the
time spent (speciﬁc to the given day and time of the day) and
the distance covered with each transportation mean.
Speciﬁc features of transportation modes are also consid-
ered: for bike, this contains the percentage of the distance
covered within cycling lanes and the ﬁlled uphill altitude gap;
for public transportation, the egress/access/switching time, the
ride total cost and the number of stops for each transporta-
tion mean; for car, the distance covered over main roads,
the driving and parking costs. The ﬁne granularity used in
selecting the route features allows some ﬂexibility in encoding
the decisional process of a generic user.
C. FAVOUR implementation
The incremental learning component of FAVOUR is imple-
mented in Matlab R2008a. The box-bounded optimization task
identifying the posterior mode ˜w and variance ˜Σ is solved by
a trust-region optimization algorithm, based on local quadratic
approximations of the non-linear objective function. As matter
of fact, the Hessian matrix is also needed to generate the
covariance matrix Σ for the Laplace inference technique. The
analytic formulation of the log-posterior derivatives has been
provided to the optimization algorithm. In fact, numerical
differentiation techniques may in general be unstable and
computationally expensive for real-time route recommenda-
tions. Even though the objective function of the optimization
task is unimodal and thus a single run of the local-search
algorithm can identify the posterior mode, robustness w.r.t.
numerical inaccuracies is increased by performing ﬁve runs
of the algorithm. The starting point of each local-search run
is selected uniformly at random, with the seed of the random
number generator set to one.
Let r and q be a pair of routes. The predictive distribution
for r ≻q, given the routes feature vectors u(r), u(q),
is obtained by marginalizing w.r.t. the posterior distribution
p(w|T):
Pr(r ≻q|u(r), u(q), T) ≈
R
s(U(r) −U(q))N(w| ˜w, ˜Σ)dw
(8)
where s(x) is the logistic sigmoid 1/(1+e−x) of the Bradley-
Terry likelihood model and N(w| ˜w, ˜Σ) is the Gaussian ap-
proximation of the posterior generated by the Laplace infer-
ence technique. A well-known approximation of Eq. (8) con-
sists of replacing the logistic with the probit sigmoid [31], as
convolving a probit sigmoid with a Gaussian results in another
probit sigmoid. By setting d = u(r)−u(q), the ﬁnal result is
the following computationally-affordable formulation [31, cf.
pp. 218–220, Chap. 4]:
Pr(r ≻q|u(r), u(q), T) ≈s(λ ˜wT d)
(9)
where:
λ = (1 + πdT ˜Σd/8)−1/2

7
Distance
features
dist. covered by driving the car
dist. covered by driving the car over
main roads
dist. covered by walking
dist. covered by cycling
dist. covered by cycling within cycling
infrastructure
Time
features
time spent by walking
time spent by cycling
time spent by driving
access walking time within PT station
egress walking time to get out of PT
station
time spent by waiting for the PT mean
time spent in bus
time spent in tram
time spent in metro
time spent to switch among non-PT
means / to park the car
Cost
features
driving cost
parking cost
PT-ride cost
Miscella-
neous
features
number
of
transportation-means
changes
uphill altitude gap ﬁlled by cycling
number of bus stops
number of tram stops
number of metro stops
TABLE I: Decisional features corresponding
to a route based on attributes of the edges. The
numerical values of the features are collected
in the features vector u(r). The acronym “PT”
stands for public transportation.
Fig. 3: Two of the three routes in one of the ten scenarios
presented to the participants of the survey (the third route is
not shown due to space restrictions). The routes in this scenario
start at the actual home address of the participant and lead to the
well-known University sports center. The survey was provided
in German (translation by authors only for paper).
Equation (9) is used during the testing phase (see next sec-
tions) to predict whether the user prefers route r to route q.
The probability value provides an estimate for the predictive
uncertainty of FAVOUR.
D. Alternative transfer-learning algorithm
For a learning algorithm alternative to the one of FAVOUR,
we follow the methodology of [7], applying the idea of
individual level parameters in mixed logit models [13]. The
utility of a route r of user k with l edges is the same as the
one in Eq. (3) using the same notation:
U(r) = Umw(r) + w · u(r)
To allow for individual level parameters we assume a mixed
logit formulation, where wj ∼N(µj, σj) (independent over
components). In a ﬁrst step the parameters µj and σj are
estimated using a simulated maximum likelihood approach.
With the currently used sample sizes the unrestricted mixed
logit model contains too many parameters and model selection
methods are used in order to obtain a better model for the
average preferences. In this respect a fast forward-backward
variable selection procedure based on the Aikake Information
Criterion (AIC) is used. In a ﬁrst step a forward variable
selection is applied, adding one variable at a time. Afterwards
the variable selection is ﬁne-tuned by a backward-forward
procedure, which adds/deletes single variables from the model
as long as the AIC keeps improving. This procedure results in
a reduced model with a smaller number of variables.
To ensure that variables relevant to the decision maker are
not missed in the personalized model, the variables excluded
during variable selection are added into the personalization
procedure with zero mean and variance value comparable to
the variance value of the included parameters. The resulting
mixed parameter model serves as an input to a second step,
where individual level parameters are estimated by ensuring
that parameters relevant for the decision maker are assigned
values different from zero, while irrelevant parameters are not.
The estimation procedure of the individual level parameter
values works as follows [13, cf. p. 300, Chap. 11]:
1) for the estimation of the individual level parameters we
draw a sample w(b) of size B from N(ˆµ, ˆΣ) which is
the estimated distribution of the weights w in the mixed
parameter utility model estimated above;
2) the simulated subpopulation mean is calculated as
ˇw =
B
X
b=1
gbw(b) =
PB
b=1 w(b) Q
k∈K P(yrk|U(rk), w(b))
PB
a=1
Q
k∈K P(yrk|U(rk), w(a))
where P(yrk|U(rk), w(b)) is the probability that the
individual chooses route rk for the k-th question of the
survey. Furthermore:
P(yrk = 1|U(rk), w(b)) =
exp(U(rk))
P
rm exp(U(rm))
where the sum in the denominator is over all routes
involved in the decision.

8
The resulting simulated weights ˇw deﬁne the user proﬁle
which can be exploited to obtain the most probable choice.
E. Evaluating the beneﬁt of transfer learning
The efﬁciency of FAVOUR is demonstrated by a leave-one-
user-out cross-validation (LOUO-CV) procedure. In each run
of the cross-validation, a single user is selected as test user
and a mass-preferences prior is learned over the remaining
39 (training) users. The 30 preference examples of the test
user are split into ﬁve test examples and 25 candidate training
examples. Five training sets of size 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 15 are
generated by sampling uniformly at random the 25 candidate
training examples. A utility model for the test user is learned
from each training set and its predictive accuracy is evaluated
over the test set. To get stable results, the 30 preference
examples of the test user are re-partioned ﬁve times into
the test set and the candidate training examples set. The
whole training procedure considering an increasing number of
training examples is repeated for each partition. The learning
of an utility model for a speciﬁc test user over a speciﬁc
training set instance and its evaluation by using a speciﬁc test
instance deﬁnes a test session for the FAVOUR algorithm.
The utility model of the test user is learned by executing
the Bayesian learning strategy of FAVOUR (pseudo-code in
Fig. 1) initialized with:
• the uninformative Gaussian prior N(0, I) (solid curve
with cross markers in Fig. 4);
• the mass-preferences prior computed over the training
users (solid curve with circular markers).
The x-axis in Fig. 4 reports the size of the training set,
while the y-axis shows the accuracy. Each point in the graph
represents the mean percentage accuracy averaged over all
test sessions performed for all possible test users. For each
test session, the accuracy is computed as the percentage of
correct predictions over the ﬁve test pairwise comparisons. The
naïve baseline for the predictive performance is thus the 50%
accuracy obtained by random guessing, which is the value of
the lower bound for the y-axis.
Conﬁdence intervals for the percentage accuracy mean are
not shown in the graph to avoid cluttering. The dispersion
of the observed accuracy values is however discussed in the
supplemental material (Sec. VIII).
The graph clearly depicts the performance improvement
gained by adopting the MPP. In detail:
• the beneﬁt of adopting the MPP is demonstrated by the
superior performance observed for all training set sizes.
Only for 15 training examples, when on average enough
preference information is elicited from the new user, the
MPP is only slightly better than the alternatives. The
accuracy improvements due to the adoption of the mass
preferences prior are statistically signiﬁcant, according
to a one-sided Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. Six statistical
tests are performed, one for each of the six values of the
training set size s. A Bonferroni-corrected signiﬁcance-
level 8e −3 is used, obtained by dividing the standard
signiﬁcance level 0.05 by the total number of tests. For
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
15
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
# train exa
% accuracy
 
 
State of the art
ALT
FAVOUR
FAVOUR without MPP
Fig. 4: Learning curves for the different algorithms: the
FAVOUR algorithm with MPP (solid curve, ‘o’) or without
(solid curve, ‘x’), the mixed logit model (ALT, dashed curve),
and the simulation of the algorithm [1] (solid curve, diamond
markers). y-axis: the mean predictive accuracy (percentage
values). x-axis: the number of training examples. Dotted line:
72.3% (no personalization, MPP).
s = 2, 4, 6, . . . , 10, the order of magnitude of the p-
values is lower than or equal to 5e−07, providing strong
evidence for a statistically different performance;
• the fewer training examples are used, the more pro-
nounced is the beneﬁt of adopting the MPP. With two and
four training examples only, a 10.6% and 6.8% accuracy
difference is observed, respectively. When the training
set size is 10, the accuracy difference decreases to 4.3%,
eventually becoming statistically null when 15 examples
are used;
• if the MPP is not used, a faster accuracy improvement is
observed when increasing the number of training exam-
ples. This behavior is due to the different initial amount of
prior knowledge in the two cases: when the informative
MPP is used, a more accurate utility model is initially
obtained and a larger amount of personal preferences
from the test user are needed to sensibly update the belief
about the user preferences. On the other hand, when an
un-informative prior is used (no transfer learning), a less
robust and less accurate initial belief is generated, and
even a limited knowledge about the user preferences may
sensibly change it;
• the thin dotted straight line at 72.3% accuracy deﬁnes the
performance observed when predicting the test-user pref-
erences by using the mass-preferences prior only ignoring
individual information. As expected, without customizing
the MPP based on the test-user’s personal preferences,
a worse performance is observed. Furthermore, without
transfer learning among users (solid curve with cross
markers), more than 10 queries are needed to get better
predictive accuracy than the one obtained when using just

9
the MPP for predictions.
Concluding, the observed experimental results are consistent
with the intuition and clearly demonstrate that transfer learning
techniques can improve route-recommendation systems in
particular in the cold-start phase.
F. Comparison with the alternative transfer-learning algo-
rithm
To ﬁnalize the evaluation of FAVOUR, its performance
is compared with the alternative algorithm described in
Sec. VI-D (referred to by the acronym ALT below). The
performance of ALT, estimated by applying the same LOUO-
CV procedure used for FAVOUR, is shown by the dashed
curve in Fig. 4. A statistically signiﬁcant worse performance
is observed for ALT w.r.t to FAVOUR. The difference is more
pronounced with few training examples, while it decreases
when additional training information is used. However, even
with ﬁfteen training examples, a 2.9% performance difference
is still observed.
To investigate the reason for the different performances,
the ALT algorithm has been re-executed by using the MPPs
computed by the FAVOUR approach (Sec. V) as initial user
preference model. By this modiﬁcation, the ALT performance
becomes comparable with the FAVOUR one. No statisti-
cally signiﬁcant difference is observed between the results of
FAVOUR and the modiﬁed version of ALT (to avoid cluttering,
the curve for the modiﬁed ALT version is not depicted in
Fig. 4, since it approximately overlaps the FAVOUR curve).
We argue that the lower accuracy of the priors computed
by the ALT algorithm is due to the model selection performed
during the estimation of the mixed logit models. Under normal
circumstances, a model selection process is necessary to avoid
overﬁtting. However, when a MPP is used as a start for
a personalization, this model selection might actually harm
the personalization process, since different users might use
different variables in their selection process. However, the
approach of FAVOUR of using the full variable set for the
MPP does not produce a usable mixed logit model, since
the parameter standard deviations would explode with the use
of too many variables. To overcome this limitation, we use
standard variable selection methods to get an initial model
and include in it the discarded variables by assigning to them
zero mean and standard deviation value similar to that of the
selected parameters.
G. Comparison with the state-of-the-art
Our experimental evaluation is concluded by the empirical
comparison between FAVOUR and the closest state-of-the-art
approach introduced in [1]. For this purpose, the approach
in [1] is simulated by using a maximum-likelihood method to
generate the weight vector representing the mass preferences
and a vector of values quantifying the uncertainty about the
estimated mass preferences. This information is used to build
the initial prior for a Bayesian procedure which individualizes
the weights for each test user.
The results for the benchmarking approach are summarized
by the solid curve with the diamond markers in Fig. 4. A
superior performance of the FAVOUR algorithm is observed.
FAVOUR prediction accuracy is better by 5.6 percentage units
in the case of 15 training examples. The accuracy difference
increases up to the value 9.8%, observed when two training ex-
amples are used. Furthermore, with two training examples, the
standard deviation of the percentage accuracy values observed
for FAVOUR is 19.6 units. In the case of 15 training examples,
this value decreases down to 17.9 percentage units. For the
state-of-the-art approach, a larger dispersion of the accuracy
values is observed: with two training examples the standard
deviation is 23.6 units, decreasing down to the value 21.1 when
15 training examples are used. A more stable behavior is thus
shown by FAVOUR: in the case of 15 training examples the
standard deviation of the percentage accuracy values is 3.2
percentage units lower than that of the benchmarking method,
and this difference increases up to the value 4.0 observed when
two training examples are used.
Since the difference between FAVOUR and the benchmark-
ing state-of-the-art approach consists of the MPP generation,
the impact of the initial (mass) preference model on the
efﬁciency of personalized route-recommendation systems is
clearly shown. In our experiments, even 15 training examples
used to customize the initial mass preference model for a new
user do not enable to recover from a low-quality initial prior.
VII. DISCUSSION
This
work
improves
the
state-of-the-art
of
route-
recommendations
systems.
In
particular,
it
shows
that
travelers make their choices on the basis of a shared rationale
and similar preferences. Therefore, route recommendations for
a speciﬁc user can be improved by exploiting the preference
information elicited from previous travelers. For this purpose,
a
Bayesian
preference
learning
strategy
(the
FAVOUR
algorithm) is presented, which uses a mass-preferences prior
to transfer preference information among travelers. The
performance improvement gained by the adoption of the
mass-preferences prior has been experimentally demonstrated.
Furthermore, the efﬁciency of FAVOUR has been evaluated
by a comparison with a non-Bayesian transfer-learning
technique and with a state-of-the-art route-recommendation
system [1].
While FAVOUR offers large improvements in both cases,
this work leaves many avenues for future explorations. In
particular, the adoption of more sophisticated preference mod-
els to handle the possible indifference of the user about
the presented solutions, which generates ties in route rank-
ings [32]. Furthermore, ranking information may be combined
with decision maker (DM) absolute judgements [33], which
may discard un-satisﬁcing routes or provide hints [34] to
the search process. The comparison of an arbitrary number
of candidate routes (under the assumption that the pairwise
comparisons are not independent) will also be evaluated.
Furthermore, the quality of the personalization of the mode-
choice model based on the SP survey will need to be tested
once revealed preference data becomes available within the
live test system. Future extensions of this investigation also
include the introduction of query-selection strategies, to reduce

10
the number of comparisons asked to the DM. Promising tech-
niques have been developed within the preference elicitation
community (see, e.g., [35] for a recent one) for this purpose.
The reduction is achieved by the smart selection of future
examples to be presented for evaluation. The selection is
usually based on the current learned preference model, and
therefore driven by the past feedback received from the DM.
Furthermore, the predictive uncertainty of the current model
is usually exploited for query selection. From this perspective,
the Bayesian strategy adopted in this work is promising, as the
covariance matrix of the posterior utility models provides a
quantitative estimation of the predictive uncertainty. However,
during the query selection process, the routing systems may
be repeatedly queried for getting the candidate routes. The
resulting computational overhead has to be evaluated, in order
to achieve real-time route recommendations. First steps in this
direction have been done in [36].
The integration of real-time trafﬁc information with cus-
tomized route recommendations [10], [14] is another inter-
esting line of research, since real-time trafﬁc information
inﬂuences the travelers decisions [10]. The integration of the
real time trafﬁc information into the system is easy, since
the Ariadne-router already supports such functionality. The
reaction of users to repeating disturbances would be a very
interesting subject for further studies since it might reveal the
reaction of users to uncertain travel times.
This work gives some insights about selecting decisional
features to encode real travel choices into training examples for
preference learning algorithms. However, a ﬁner granularity
to deﬁne the decisional features may be adopted w.r.t. the
one used in this work. Let us consider, e.g., the relationship
between the environmental conditions and the perception of
the walking time: walking ten minutes under heavy rain is
clearly not as pleasant as walking ten minutes with a sunny
mild spring day.
Finally, the implemented algorithms will be added to a live
routing tool to present users with a selection of personalized
routes. This is useful for the users, as the presented routes
are closer to their personal needs, but also from a scientiﬁc
standpoint, since we can collect the routes that are actually
travelled as well as the choice sets handled by the users,
thus producing a much larger dataset to develop and test the
FAVOUR algorithm further.
