Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research 43 (2012) 1-42
Submitted 08/11; published 01/12
Learning and Reasoning with Action-Related Places
for Robust Mobile Manipulation
Freek Stulp

Computational Learning and Motor Control Lab
University of Southern California
3710 S. McClintock Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA
Andreas Fedrizzi

Lorenz M¨osenlechner

Michael Beetz

Intelligent Autonomous Systems Group
Technische Universit¨at M¨unchen
Boltzmannstraße 3, D-85747 Garching bei M¨unchen, Germany
Abstract
We propose the concept of Action-Related Place (ARPlace) as a powerful and ﬂexi-
ble representation of task-related place in the context of mobile manipulation. ARPlace
represents robot base locations not as a single position, but rather as a collection of posi-
tions, each with an associated probability that the manipulation action will succeed when
located there. ARPlaces are generated using a predictive model that is acquired through
experience-based learning, and take into account the uncertainty the robot has about its
own location and the location of the object to be manipulated.
When executing the task, rather than choosing one speciﬁc goal position based only
on the initial knowledge about the task context, the robot instantiates an ARPlace, and
bases its decisions on this ARPlace, which is updated as new information about the
task becomes available. To show the advantages of this least-commitment approach, we
present a transformational planner that reasons about ARPlaces in order to optimize
symbolic plans. Our empirical evaluation demonstrates that using ARPlaces leads to
more robust and eﬃcient mobile manipulation in the face of state estimation uncertainty
on our simulated robot.
1. Introduction
Recent advances in the design of robot hardware and software are enabling robots to solve
increasingly complex everyday tasks. When performing such tasks, a robot must contin-
ually decide on its course of action, where a decision is “a commitment to a plan or an
action parameterization based on evidence and the expected costs and beneﬁts associated
with the outcome.” (Resulaj, Kiani, Wolpert, & Shadlen, 2009). This deﬁnition highlights
the complexity of decision making. It involves choosing the appropriate action and action
parameterization, such that costs are minimized and beneﬁts are maximized. The robot
must therefore be able to predict which costs and beneﬁts will arise when executing an
action. Furthermore, due to stochasticity and hidden state, the exact outcome of an action
is not known in advance. The robot must therefore reason about expected outcomes, and be
able to predict the probability of diﬀerent outcomes for a given action and action parame-
c⃝2012 AI Access Foundation. All rights reserved.

Stulp, Fedrizzi, M¨osenlechner, & Beetz
terization. Finally, a robot commits to decisions based on the current observable evidence,
represented in its belief state. So if the evidence changes, the rationale for committing to
a decision may no longer be valid. The robot therefore needs methods to eﬃciently recon-
sider decisions as the belief state changes during action execution, and possibly commit to
another plan if necessary.
Mobile manipulation is a good case in point. Even the most basic mobile manipulation
tasks, such as picking up an object from a table, require complex decision making. To pick
up an object the robot must decide where to stand in order to pick up the object, which
hand(s) to use, how to reach for it, which grasp type to apply, where to grasp, how much
grasp force to apply, how to lift the object, how much force to apply to lift it, where to
hold the object, and how to hold it. Such decision problems are complex as they depend on
the speciﬁc task context, which consists of many task-relevant parameters. Furthermore,
these decisions must be continually updated and veriﬁed, as the task context, or the robot’s
knowledge about the context, often changes during task execution.
Consequently, tasks of such complexity require not only robust hardware and low-level
controllers, but also a least-commitment approach to making decisions, abstract planning
capabilities, probabilistic representations, and principled ways of updating beliefs during
task execution.
In this article, we demonstrate how implementing these core AI topics
contributes to the robustness and ﬂexibility of our mobile manipulation platform.
The task-relevant decision we consider in this article is to which base position the robot
should navigate to in order to perform a manipulation action. This decision alone presents
several challenges, such as 1) successfully executing the reaching and manipulation action
critically depends on the position of the base; 2) due to imperfect state-estimation, there is
uncertainty in the position of the robot and the target object. As these positions are not
known exactly, but are fundamental to successfully grasping the object, it is not possible to
determine a single-best base position for manipulation; 3) the complete knowledge required
to determine an appropriate base position is often not available initially, but rather acquired
on-line during task execution.
Our solution idea to address these challenges is the concept of Action-Related Places
(ARPlace), a powerful and ﬂexible representation of task-related place in the context of
mobile manipulation. ARPlace is represented as a probability mapping, which speciﬁes the
expected probability that the target object will be successfully grasped, given the positions
of the target object and the robot
ARPlace :
{ P(Success|frob
k
, ⟨ˆfobj, Σobj⟩) }K
k=1
(1)
Here, the estimated position of the target object is represented as a multi-variate Gaussian
distribution with mean ˆfobj and covariance matrix Σobj 1. The discrete set of robot positions
{frob
k
}K
k=1 should be thought of as possible base positions the robot considers for grasping,
i.e. potential positions to navigate to. Typically, this set of positions is arranged in a grid,
as in the exemplary ARPlace depicted in Figure 1.
1. The feature vectors f rob and f obj contain the poses of the robot and the object relative to the table’s
edge. Details will be given in Section 3.1. Positions without uncertainty are denoted f, and estimated
positions with uncertainty as ⟨ˆf, Σ⟩.
2

Learning and Reasoning with Action-Related Places for Robust Mobile Manipulation
Figure 1: ARPlace: the probability of successful manipulation, given the current esti-
mated object position ⟨ˆfobj
cur, Σobj
cur⟩. The set of potential robot positions {frob
k
}K
k=1
are arranged in a grid along the x and y-axis, whereby each position leads to
a diﬀerent probability of successful grasping P(Success|frob
k
, ⟨ˆfobj
cur, Σobj
cur⟩). The
black isolines represent grasp success probability levels of 0.2 and 0.8.
ARPlace has three important properties: 1) it models base places not as a single
position frob, but rather as a set of positions {frob
k
}K
k=1, each with a diﬀerent expectation
of the success of the manipulation action; 2) it depends upon the estimated target object
position, so updating ˆfobj or Σobj during task execution thus leads to diﬀerent probabilities
in ARPlace; 3) using a probabilistic representation that takes into account uncertainty in
the target object position leads to more robust grasping.
1.1 Example Scenario
In Figure 2, we present an example scenario that demonstrates how these properties
of ARPlace address the challenges stated above, and supports decision-making during
mobile manipulation. The images in the top row show the current situation of the robot
from an outside view, while the images in the lower visualize the robot’s internal ARPlace
representation. The ARPlace is visualized with the colors red, white and green, which
represent low, medium and high grasp success probabilities respectively.
Grasp success
probability levels of 0.2 and 0.8 are depicted as isolines, as in Figure 1.
In this scenario the robot’s task is to clean the table. In Scene 1 the robot enters the
kitchen and its vision system detects a cup. Because the robot is far away from the cup,
the uncertainty arising from the vision-based pose estimation of the cup is high, indicated
by the large circle around the cup in the lower left image. As the exact position of the cup
is not known, it is not possible to determine a single-best base position for grasping the
cup. The ARPlace representation takes this uncertainty into account by modeling the
base position as a probability mapping.
3

Stulp, Fedrizzi, M¨osenlechner, & Beetz
Scene 1
Scene 2
Scene 3
Scene 4
Figure 2: Example scenario.
In Scene 1 the ARPlace distribution has low probabilities overall, with a maximum
probability of grasp success of only 0.52. Note that although the initial uncertainty in the
cup’s position precludes the robot from determining a speciﬁc base position from which to
reliably grasp the cup, the robot does know the general area to which it should navigate.
During navigation, the robot is able to determine the position of the cup more accurately,
as depicted in Scene 2. As new sensor data comes in, the robot reﬁnes the ARPlace and
therefore the ARPlace in Scene 2 has much higher probabilities overall, with a maximum
of 0.96.
In Scene 3 the robot has detected a second cup. Because grasping both cups at once
from a single position is much more eﬃcient than approaching two locations, the robot
merges the two ARPlaces for each cup into one ARPlace representing the probability
of successfully grasping both cups from a single position2. In Scene 4 further measurements
helped to reduce pose estimation uncertainties of both cups. The maximum grasp success
probability in the ARPlace now reaches 0.97; suﬃcient for the robot to commit itself to
a goal position and attempt to grasp both cups at once.
This scenario illustrates that real-world tasks can often not be planned from start to
ﬁnish, as the initial knowledge is often not complete or accurate enough to determine
an optimal goal position. So rather than committing to a particular base position early
based only on the robot’s initial knowledge about the task context, a robot instantiates
an ARPlace for a particular task context, and bases its decisions on this ARPlace.
Having the place concept instantiation represented explicitly during the course of action
enables the robot to reconsider and reevaluate these decisions on-line whenever new
information about the task context comes in.
For instance, the decision to grasp both
cups from one position in Scene 3 would not have been possible if the robot would have
committed itself to a plan given its initial knowledge when only one cup was detected. Even
if the environment is completely observable, dynamic properties can make a pre-planned
optimal position suboptimal or unaccessible. A least-commitment implementation, where
2. Section 4.4.1 explains how ARPlaces are merged to compute an ARPlace for joint tasks.
4

Learning and Reasoning with Action-Related Places for Robust Mobile Manipulation
decisions are delayed until they must be taken is more ﬂexible, and leads to more robust
and eﬃcient mobile manipulation. This will be demonstrated in the empirical evaluation.
1.2 Contributions, System Overview and Outline
The system overview for learning, computing, and reasoning with ARPlaces is depicted
in Figure 3. It also serves as an outline for the rest of this article.
Figure 3: System Overview. Numbers refer to sections in this article. Green ovals represent
algorithms and procedures, and blue rectangles the models that result from them.
Procedures and models are brieﬂy described in the contributions in this section;
more detail is given throughout the article. Yellow rectangles cluster conceptually
related procedures, and also delineate the diﬀerent sections of this article.
The main contributions of this article are:
Representing ARPlace – Section 1. We propose ARPlace as a ﬂexible representation
of place for least-commitment decision making in mobile manipulation.
Model Learning – Section 3. To generate an ARPlace, the robot must be able to
predict the outcome of an action for a given action parameterization. We propose
a generic, oﬀ-line learning approach to acquiring a compact prediction model in two
steps: 1) learn to predict whether an action will succeed for a given task parameteri-
zation. This is a supervised classiﬁcation problem which we implement with Support
Vector Machines (Sonnenburg, Raetsch, Schaefer, & Schoelkopf, 2006); 2) generalize
over several task parameterizations by generalizing over the learned SVM classiﬁers,
5

Stulp, Fedrizzi, M¨osenlechner, & Beetz
which we implement with Point Distribution Models (Cootes, Taylor, Cooper, & Gra-
ham, 1995).
The resulting success prediction model enables the robot to predict
whether a manipulation action for a given object position will succeed from a given
base position 3 .
Generating ARPlace– Section 4. We demonstrate how ARPlaces are generated on-
line, and take object position uncertainty into account through a Monte-Carlo simula-
tion. Furthermore, the ARPlace is conditioned on robot position uncertainty, which
is thus also taken into account.
Reasoning with ARPlace– Section 5. We show how ARPlace is integrated in a sym-
bolic transformational planner, to automate decision-making with ARPlaces.
In
particular, we consider a scenario that shows how ARPlaces can be merged for joint
manipulation tasks.
Empirical Evaluation – Section 6. We demonstrate how reasoning with ARPlaces
leads to more robust and eﬃcient behavior on a simulated mobile manipulation plat-
form.
Before turning to these contributions, we ﬁrst compare our approach to related work in
Section 2.
2. Related Work
Most state-of-the-art mobile manipulation platforms use sampling-based motion planners
to solve manipulation problems (LaValle, 2006). Some of the advantages of using symbolic
planning in general, and with ARPlaces in particular, are: 1. Abstraction. Represent-
ing and planning with abstract symbolic actions reduces the complexity of the planning
problem. Although computational power is ever increasing, it is still intractable to solve
extended tasks, such as preparing a meal (Beetz et al., 2008), with state-space search alone.
2. Least-commitment. Friedman and Weld (1996) show that setting open conditions to
abstract actions and later reﬁning this choice to a particular concrete action can lead to ex-
ponential savings. Note that this principle has also be used to reduce the number of collision
checks for building Probabilistic Roadmaps (Bohlin & Kavraki, 2000). 3. Modular replan-
ning. In symbolic planning, causal links between the actions are explicitly represented. That
the robot navigates to the table in order to perform a grasping motion is not represented in
a plan generated by a sampling-based motion planner. Therefore, during execution, motion
planners cannot reconsider the appropriate base position as a decision in its own right, but
must rather ineﬃciently replan the entire trajectory if the belief state changes. 4. Reﬂec-
tion. The explicit symbolic representation of causality also allows a robot to reason about
and reﬂect its own plans and monitor their execution, for instance to report reasons for
3. By using experience-based learning, our approach can be applied to a variety of robots and environments.
Once a model has been learned however, it is obviously speciﬁc to the environment in which the experience
was generated. For instance, if only one table height is considered during data collection, the learned
prediction model will be speciﬁc to that table height. If diﬀerent table heights are used during experience
collection, and the table height is included as a task-relevant parameter, the model should be able to
generalize over table heights as well. We refer to Section 3.5 for a full discussion.
6

Learning and Reasoning with Action-Related Places for Robust Mobile Manipulation
plan failure: “I could not ﬁnd the cup.” or “I could not determine the position of the cup
with suﬃcient accuracy to robustly perform the grasp.” or “An obstacle was blocking my
path.”. It is not obvious how to achieve such introspection with motion planning methods.
Also, in contrast to sampling based motion-planning, an ARPlace itself does not gener-
ate trajectories or motion itself, but is rather a representation that supports decisions, such
as the decision where the robot should move to in order to manipulate. This goal position
can then be given to a motion planner in order to ﬁnd a trajectory that gets the robot to
the goal position. In our system for instance, the navigation trajectory is determined by
a Wavefront planner. Also, an ARPlace is not a Reinforcement Learning policy (Sutton
& Barto, 1998). A policy maps states to actions, whereas an ARPlace maps (uncertain)
states to expected probabilities of successfully executing a certain action. ARPlaces are
thus models of actions, and not executable actions in their own right. This distinction will
become most apparent in Section 5, in which ARPlaces are used by a transformational
planner to detect and repair performance ﬂaws in symbolic plans.
From this perspective, most similar to our work are aSyMov (Cambon, Gravot, &
Alami, 2004) and RL-TOPs (Ryan, 2002), in that they use symbolic planners to generate
sequences of motion plans/reinforcement learning policies respectively. The speciﬁc contri-
butions of this article are to enable the robot to learn grounded, probabilistic models of
actions to support symbolic decision making, as well as using more ﬂexible transformational
planners that reason with these models. Our focus is thus more on grounding and improving
the representations that enable symbolic planning, rather than the underlying actions that
generate trajectories and/or the actual motion.
Okada, Kojima, Sagawa, Ichino, Sato, and Inaba (2006) also develop representations for
place to enable symbolic planning, and they denote a good base placement for grasping a
‘spot’. Diﬀerent spots are hand-coded for diﬀerent tasks, such as manipulating a faucet,
a cupboard, and a trashcan. These symbolic representations of place are then used by a
LISP-based motion planner to perform tool manipulation behavior. ARPlace extends the
concept of a ‘spot’ by learning it autonomously, grounding it in observed behavior, and
providing a probabilistic representation of place. Berenson, Choset, and Kuﬀner (2008)
address the issue of ﬁnding optimal start and goal conﬁgurations for manipulating objects
in pick-and-place operations. They explicitly take the placement of the mobile base into
account. As they are interested in the optimal start and goal conﬁgurations, instead of
a probabilistic representation, this approach does not enable least-commitment planning.
Diankov, Ratliﬀ, Ferguson, Srinivasa, and Kuﬀner (2008) use a model of the reachable
workspace of the robot arm to decide where the robot may stand to grasp an object and to
focus the search. However, uncertainties in the robot’s base position or the object’s position
are not considered, and thus cannot be compensated for. More recent work by Berenson,
Srinivasa, and Kuﬀner (2009) addresses these issues, but still relies on an accurate model
of the environment, and at a high computational cost. On the other hand, ARPlace is a
compact representation that is computed with negligible computational load, allowing for
continuous updating.
Recently, similar methods to the ones presented in this article have been used to deter-
mine successful grasps, rather than base positions for grasping. For instance, Detry et al.
(2009) determine a probability density function that represents the graspability of speciﬁc
objects. This function is learned from samples of successful robot grasps, which are biased
7

Stulp, Fedrizzi, M¨osenlechner, & Beetz
by observed human grasps. However, this approach does not take examples of failed grasps
into account. As we shall see in Section 4, the distance between a failed and a successful
grasp can be quite small, and can only be determined by taking failed grasps into account.
Our classiﬁcation boundaries in Section 3.2 are similar to Workspace Goal Regions, except
that our boundaries refer to base positions, whereas Workspace Goal Regions refer to grasp
positions (Berenson, Srinivasa, Ferguson, Romea, & Kuﬀner, 2009). Also, we generalize over
these boundaries with a Point Distribution Model, and use it to generate a probabilistic
concept of successful grasp positions.
Kuipers, Beeson, Modayil, and Provost (2006) present a bootstrapping approach that
enables robots to develop high-level ontologies from low-level sensor data including dis-
tinctive states, places, objects, and actions.
These high level states are used to choose
trajectory-following control laws to move from one distinctive state to another. Our ap-
proach is exactly the other way around: given the manipulation and navigation skills of the
robot (which are far too high-dimensional to learn with trajectory-following control laws),
learn places from which these skills (e.g. grasping) can be executed successfully. Our focus
is on action and aﬀordance, not recognition and localization. For us, place means ‘a cluster
of locations from which I can execute my (grasping) skill successfully’, whereas for Kuipers
et al. it refers to a location that is perceptually distinct from others, and can therefore be
well-recognized. Furthermore, their work has not yet considered the physical manipulation
of objects, and how this relates to place.
Learning success models can be considered as probabilistic pre-condition learning. Most
research in this ﬁeld until now far focussed on learning symbolic predicates from symbolic
examples (Clement, Durfee, & Barrett, 2007; Chang & Amir, 2006; Amir & Chang, 2008).
These approaches have not been applied to robots, because the representations that are
learned are not able to encapsulate the complex conditions that arise from robot dynamics
and action parameterization. In robotics, the focus in pre-condition learning is therefore
rather on grounding pre-conditions in robot experience. A more realistic domain is consid-
ered by Zettlemoyer, Pasula, and Kaelbling (2005), where a simulated gripper stacks objects
in a blocks world. Here, the focus is on predicting possible outcomes of the actions in a com-
pletely observable, unambiguous description of the current state; our emphasis is rather on
taking state estimation uncertainty into account. ‘Dexter’ learns sequences of manipulation
skills such as searching and then grasping an object (Hart, Ou, Sweeney, & Grupen, 2006).
Declarative knowledge such as the length of its arm is learned from experience. Learning
success models has also been done in the context of robotic soccer, for instance learning the
success rate of passing (Buck & Riedmiller, 2000), or approaching the ball (Stulp & Beetz,
2008). Our system extends these approaches by explicitly representing the regions in which
successful instances were observed, and computing a Generalized Success Model for these
regions.
An interesting line of research that shares some paradigms with ARPlaces, such as
learning the relation between objects and actions or building prediction models, are Object-
Action Complexes (OACs).
Geib, Mourao, Petrick, Pugeault, Steedman, Kr¨uger, and
W¨org¨otter (2006) and Pastor, Hoﬀmann, Asfour, and Schaal (2009) present OACs that
can be used to integrate high-level artiﬁcial intelligence planning technology and contin-
uous low-level robot control. The work stresses that, for a cognitive agent, objects and
actions are inseparably intertwined and should therefore be paired in a single interface. By
8

Learning and Reasoning with Action-Related Places for Robust Mobile Manipulation
physically interacting with the world and applying machine learning techniques, OACs allow
the acquisition of high-level action representations from low-level control representations.
OACs are meant to generalize the principle of aﬀordances (Gibson, 1977).
3. Learning a Generalized Success Model for ARPlace
In this section, we describe the implementation of the oﬀ-line phase depicted in Figure 3, in
which a Generalized Success Model (GSM) is learned. The goal is to acquire the function g
P(Success|frob, fobj)
=
g(frob, fobj) 7→{0, 1}
(2)
which predicts the chance of a successful manipulation action, given the relative positions
of the robot and the object, which are stored in the feature vectors frob and fobj respectively.
Note that during the oﬀ-line learning phase, these are known positions. Uncertainty in
positions is taken into account in the on-line phase, as described in Section 4.
Performing mobile manipulation is a complex task that involves many hardware and
software modules. An overview of these modules in our platform is described in Appendix A.
This overview demonstrates the large number of modules required to implement a mobile
manipulation platform. Many of these modules themselves are the results of years if not
decades of research and development within companies, research groups, and open-source
projects. The global behavior of the robot, e.g. whether it can grasp a cup from a certain
base position, depends on all of these modules, and the interactions between them. In some
cases, analytic models of certain modules are available (such as a Capability Map for the
arm’s workspace, Section 3.1). However, there is no general way of composing such models
to acquire a global model of the system’s behavior during task execution. Therefore, we
rather learn this model from observed experience.
However, the component that computes ARPlaces requires exactly such a global model
to predict under which circumstances a manipulation action will fail or succeed. As attempt-
ing a theoretical analysis to model all foreseeable events and uncertainties about the world
is at best tedious and error-prone, and at worst infeasible, we therefore use experience-based
learning to acquire global models of the behavior. By doing so, the model is grounded in
the observation of actual robot behavior.
The oﬀ-line learning phase consists of three steps: 1) repeatedly execute the action
sequence and observe the result for N diﬀerent target object positions; 2) learn N Support
Vector Machines classiﬁers for N speciﬁc cup positions 3) generalize over these N classiﬁers
with a Point Distribution Model.
3.1 Data Acquisition
The robot acquires experience by executing the following action sequence: 1) navigate to
a speciﬁed base position at the table; 2) reach for the cup; 3) close the gripper; 4) lift
the cup (Stulp, Fedrizzi, & Beetz, 2009a).
In this action sequence, the task context is
determined by the following parameters 1) the pose to which the robot navigates to4; 2) the
4. Note that the navigation planner is parameterized such that the robot is always directly facing the table.
This is not a limitation of the planner, but rather a constraint that is added to make the behavior of
9

Stulp, Fedrizzi, M¨osenlechner, & Beetz
pose of the target object on the table. After execution, the robot logs whether the object was
successfully grasped or not. To eﬃciently acquire suﬃcient data, we perform the training
experiments in the Gazebo simulator (Gerkey, Vaughan, & Howard, 2003). The robot is
modeled accurately, and thus the simulator provides training data that is also valid for the
real robot. Examples of a failed and successful grasp are depicted in Figure 4.
Figure 4: Two experiment runs with diﬀerent samples for the robot position. The navigate-
reach-grasp sequence in the upper row succeeds, but fails in the lower sequence.
The vector ﬁeld controller we use to perform the reaching movement has proven to be
robust in a wide range of the robot’s workspace (Beetz et al., 2010). It also has a very
low computational load, is easy to debug, and can quickly be adapted to novel objects.
A disadvantage is that it occasionally gets stuck in local minima, after which the motion
must be restarted. Our probabilistic motion planner for the arm does not suﬀer from local
minima, but plan generation fails at the border of the workspace; even though the vector
ﬁeld controller is able to grasp there. Every planner and controller has its advantages and
disadvantages, and there will always be sources of failure in the real world, especially for
complex embodied agents. This article aims at modelling those failures through experience-
based learning, and basing decisions on these models.
The feature space in which the data is collected is depicted in Figure 5. This coordinate
system is relative to the table’s edge, and the position of the cup on the table.
This
will enable us to apply the model that is learned from the data to diﬀerent tables at
diﬀerent locations in the kitchen, in contrast to our previous work (Stulp, Fedrizzi, &
Beetz, 2009b). From now on, we will refer to fobj = [∆xobj∆ψobj] as the observable task-
relevant parameters, which the robot observes but cannot inﬂuence directly. Here ∆xobj
is the distance of the object to the table edge, and ∆ψobj is the angle between the object
orientation and the normal that goes through the table edge and the object, as depicted in
the physical robot more predictable; this makes the robot more safe, which is required to operate the
robot in human environments (cf. Figure 20). In principle, the methods in this paper could take this
orientation into account.
10

Learning and Reasoning with Action-Related Places for Robust Mobile Manipulation
Figure 5. frob = [∆xrob∆yrob] are the controllable action parameters, because the robot can
use its navigation system to change them.
Figure 5: Relative feature space used in the rest of this paper.
The robot gathers data for 16 target object poses, as depicted in Figure 6. The target
object poses are listed in the matrix Fobj. For a given target object position, we determine
a rectangular area which is our generous estimation of the upper bound from which the
robot can grasp the object. This rectangle is the same for all 16 object poses. Within
this rectangle a uniform grid of almost 200 positions, which are stored in the matrix Frob,
is deﬁned. Figure 6 depicts the results of data gathering for these positions. Here, the
markers represent the position of the robot base at the table. There are three types of
markers, which represent the following classes:
3.1.1 Theoretically Unreachable (Light Round Markers)
The cup cannot be grasped from many of the positions in the bounding rectangle simply
because the arm is not long enough. More formally, for these base positions, the kinematics
of the arm are such that no inverse kinematic solution exists for having the end-eﬀector
at the position required to grasp the target object. We exploit analytic models of arm
kinematics to ﬁlter out base positions in the bounding rectangle from which the cup is the-
oretically unreachable. The analytic model we use is a capability map, which is a compiled
representation of the robot’s kinematic workspace (Zacharias, Borst, & Hirzinger, 2007).
Capability maps are usually used to answer the question: given the position of my base,
which positions can I reach with my end-eﬀector? In this article, we use the capability map
to answer the inverse question: given the position of the target object (and therefore the
desired position of my end-eﬀector), from which base positions can I reach this end-eﬀector
position? In Figure 7, the answer to this question is visualized for a speciﬁc target object
position. The depicted area is a theoretical kinematic upper bound on the base positions
from which the robot can reach the target.
For each example base position in the bounding box, we use the capability map to
determine if the target object is theoretically reachable. If not, the corresponding base
position is labeled as a failure without executing the navigate-reach-grasp action sequence.
This saves time when gathering data. Another obvious theoretical bound we implemented
was that the robot’s distance to the table should be at least as big as the robot’s radius.
Otherwise the robot would bump into the table. Again, we labeled such base positions as
failures without executing them in order to save time.
11

Stulp, Fedrizzi, M¨osenlechner, & Beetz
Figure 6: Results of data acquisition for 16 target object poses, listed in the matrix Fobj.
Markers correspond to the center of the robot base.
Green squares and red
circles represent successful and failed grasps respectively. Bright circles were not
executed as a successful grasp is deemed theoretically impossible by capability
maps. The dark green hulls are the classiﬁcation boundaries (Section 3.2).
3.1.2 Practically Unreachable (Red Filled Round Markers)
The capability map only considers the theoretical reachability of a position, given the kine-
matics of the robot’s arm. It does not take self-collisions into account, or the constraints
imposed by our vector-ﬁeld controller for reaching, or the speciﬁc hardware of our gripper,
and the way the gripper interacts with the target object. Red markers in Figure 6 represent
base positions that the capability map deems possible, but that lead to a failure while per-
forming the reaching motion. Some causes for failure are: 1) bumping into the table due to
imprecision in the navigation routine 2) bumping into the cup before grasping it; 3) closing
the gripper without the cup handle being in it; 4) the cup slipping from the gripper 5) the
vector ﬁeld controller getting caught in a local minimum.
One aim of this article is to demonstrate how such practical problems, that arise from
the interaction of many hard- and software modules, are properly addressed by experience-
based learning. Our approach is to use analytic models when they are available, but use
experience-based learning when necessary. By interacting with the world, the robot observes
12

Learning and Reasoning with Action-Related Places for Robust Mobile Manipulation
Figure 7: Inverse capability map for the right arm for a speciﬁc object position.
its global behavior, and learns the diﬀerence between what is possible in theory and what
works in practice.
3.1.3 Reachable (Green Square Markers)
These are base positions from which the robot was able to successfully grasp the cup. The
task execution is deemed successful when the cup is more than 10cm above the table when
the action sequence is completed, because this can only be the case if the robot is holding
it. We prefer such an empirical measure over for instance a force-closure measure, as the
latter requires accurate models of the object, which we do not always have. Furthermore,
it has been argued on theoretical grounds (Zheng & Qian, 2005), as well as demonstrated
empirically (Morales, Chinellato, Fagg, & del Pobil, 2004), that force-closure grasps may
not always lead to successful grasps in practice. Of course, force-closure may just as well
be used as a measure of successful grasping; the methods described in this article do not
depend upon this design choice.
The data acquisition yields a set of discrete robot and object positions, associated with
the resulting outcome of the manipulation action, being a success or a failure:
P(Success|{frob}M
i=1, {fobj}N
j=1) = bi,j, with bi,j ∈{0, 1}
(3)
In this article, the number of sampled object positions N = 4 × 4 = 16 (i.e. the number
of graphs in Figure 6), and the number of sampled robot positions M = 11 × 17 = 187 (i.e.
the number of data points per graph in Figure 6).
In the remainder of this section, we ﬁrst generalize over the M discrete robot positions
by training Support Vector Machines (Section 3.2), and then generalize over the N cup
positions with Point Distribution Models (Section 3.3)
3.2 Generalization over Robot Positions
In this step, we generalize over the discrete robot positions, and acquire a compact boolean
classiﬁer that eﬃciently predicts whether manipulation will succeed:
13

Stulp, Fedrizzi, M¨osenlechner, & Beetz
P(Success|frob, {fobj}N
j=1)
=
gj=1...N(frob) 7→{0, 1}
(4)
This generalization is implemented as follows. A separate classiﬁer gi=1...N is learned for
each of the N = 16 object poses, i.e. one classiﬁer for each of the 16 data sets depicted in
Figure 4. To acquire these prediction models, we compute a classiﬁcation boundary around
the successful samples with Support Vector Machines (SVM), using the implementation
by Sonnenburg et al. (2006), with a Gaussian kernel with σ=0.1 and cost parameter C=40.0.
As successful grasps are rarer, we weight them twice as much as failed grasp attempts.
Figure 6 depicts the resulting classiﬁcation boundaries for diﬀerent conﬁgurations of task-
relevant parameters as dark-green boundaries. Manipulation is predicted to succeed if the
robot’s base position lies within a boundary for a given target object pose ∈Fobj. The
accuracy of these learned classiﬁers is listed in Section 6.1.
3.3 Generalization over Object Positions
In the next step, we generalize over the discrete object positions:
P(Success|frob, fobj)
=
g(frob, fobj) 7→{0, 1}
(5)
We do so by determining a low-dimensional set of parameters that allows us to interpolate
between the individual classiﬁcation boundaries that the Support Vector Machines gener-
ate. This is done with a Point Distribution Model (PDM), which is an established method
for modelling variations in medical images and faces (Cootes et al., 1995; Wimmer, Stulp,
Pietzsch, & Radig, 2008). The result is one compact model that incorporates the individ-
ual boundaries, and is able to interpolate to make predictions for target object poses not
observed during training.
As input a PDM requires n points that are distributed over a contour.
How these
landmarks are distributed is described in Appendix B. Given the landmarks on the classi-
ﬁcation boundaries, we compute a PDM. Although PDMs are most well-known for their
use in computer vision (Cootes et al., 1995; Wimmer et al., 2008), we use the notation
by Roduit, Martinoli, and Jacot (2007), who focus on robotic applications. First, the 16
boundaries of 20 2D points are merged into one 40x16 matrix H, where the columns are the
concatenation of the ∆xrob and ∆yrob coordinates of the 20 landmarks along the classiﬁca-
tion boundary. Each column thus represents one boundary. The next step is to compute
P, which is the matrix of eigenvectors of the covariance matrix of H. P represents the
principal modes of variation. Given H and P, we can decompose each boundary h1..16 in
the set into the mean boundary and a linear combination of the columns of P as follows
hk = H + P · bk. Here, bk is the so-called deformation mode of the kth boundary. This
is the Point Distribution Model. To get an intuition for what the PDM represents, the
ﬁrst three deformation modes are depicted in Figure 8, where the values of the ﬁrst, second
and third deformation modes (columns 1, 2, 3 of B) are varied between their maximal and
minimal value, whilst the other deformation modes are set to 0.
The eigenvalues of the covariance matrix of H indicate that the ﬁrst 2 components al-
ready contain 96% of the deformation energy. For reasons of compactness and to achieve
14

Learning and Reasoning with Action-Related Places for Robust Mobile Manipulation
Figure 8: The ﬁrst 3 deformation modes of the Point Distribution Model (in B).
better generalization, we use only the ﬁrst 2 deformation modes, without losing much ac-
curacy.
{f obj
j
,
gj(f rob) = inboundary(f rob, hj)}N
j=1
N Support Vector Machines
(6)
{f obj
j
,
gj(f rob) = inboundary(f rob, H + P · bj)}N
j=1
Point Distribution Model
(7)
g(f rob, f obj) = inboundary(f rob, H + P · b(f obj))
Regression between f obj
j
and bj
(8)
The PDM has several advantages: 1) instead of having to store N = 16 classiﬁcation
boundaries hj with each 20 2D points to capture the variation in classiﬁcation hulls due to
diﬀerent target object positions, we only store N = 16 deformation modes with 2 degrees of
freedom each. This greatly reduces the dimensionality; 2) the 2 degrees of freedom in b can
be used to interpolate in a principled way between the computed classiﬁcation boundaries
hj, to generate boundaries for object positions that were not observed during learning; 3) a
simple regression between the two degrees of freedom of the PDM b and the position fobj is
feasible, so that the object position can be related directly to the shape of the classiﬁcation
boundary. This regression is explained in the next section.
3.4 Relation to Task-Relevant Parameters
In this step, we acquire a function b, that computes the appropriate deformation modes b
for a given object position fobj. To do so, we compute a regression between the matrix of
deformation modes of the speciﬁc object positions B, and the 16 object positions themselves
in Fobj, as depicted in Figure 6. We found that a simple second order polynomial regression
model suﬃces to compute the regression, as it yields high coeﬃcients of determination of
R2 = 0.99 and R2 = 0.96 for the ﬁrst and second deformation modes respectively. The
coeﬃcients of the polynomial model are stored in two 3x3 upper triangular matrices W1
and W2, such that B ≈[ diag([T 1] · W1 · [Fobj 1]T ) diag([T 1] · W2 · [T 1]T ]
The Generalized Success Model now consists of 1) H, the mean of the classiﬁcation
boundaries computed with the SVM; 2) P, the principal modes of variation of these clas-
15

Stulp, Fedrizzi, M¨osenlechner, & Beetz
siﬁcation boundaries; 3) W1,2, the mapping from task-relevant parameters to deformation
modes.
Let us now summarize how the Generalized Success Model is used to predict successful
manipulation behavior:
1. The Generalized Success Model takes the (observed) relative position of the object on
the table fobj
cur = [∆xobj
cur ∆ψobj
cur] as input (Figure 5).
2. The appropriate deformation values for the given object position are computed with
bcur = b(fobj
cur) = [ q · W1 · qT
q · W2 · qT
], where q = [fobj
cur 1] = [∆xobj
cur ∆ψobj
cur 1]
(Section 3.4).
3. The boundary is computed with hcur = H + P · bcur (Section 3.3).
4. If the relative robot base center frob = [∆xrob ∆yrob] is within boundary hcur, the
model predicts that the robot will be able to successfully grasp the object at position
fobj
cur = [∆xobj
cur ∆ψobj
cur].
Note that these steps only involve simple multiplications and additions of small matrices,
and thus can be performed very eﬃciently5. The reason for this eﬃciency lies in the fact that
we directly relate task-relevant parameters, such as the position of the cup on the table, to
predictions about the global behavior of the robot, such as whether the manipulation action
will succeed or not. The on-line eﬃciency is made possible by experience-based learning,
where the wealth of information in the observation of global behavior is compiled into a
compact model oﬀ-line. This approach adheres to the proposed strategy of “learning task-
relevant features that map to actions, instead of attempting to reconstruct a detailed model
of the world with which to plan actions” (Kemp, Edsinger, & Torres-Jara, 2007).
In summary, from observed behavior outcomes, we have learned the mapping in Equa-
tion 2 (which we repeat in Equation 9), which maps continuous robot and target object
positions to a boolean prediction about the success of an action:
P(Success|frob, fobj) = g(frob, fobj) 7→{0, 1}
(9)
This mapping can be used to predict if the current base position of the robot will lead to
successful manipulation, but also to determine appropriate base positions to navigate to.
Equation 9 assumes that the true values of the robot and target object positions are
known to the robot. In Section 4, we discuss how uncertainties in the estimates of these
positions is taken into account during task execution.
3.5 Generality of Generalized Success Model
Before explaining how the Generalized Success Model is used to generate ARPlaces on-
line during task-execution in Section 4, we discuss some of the generalization properties
and limitations of the Generalized Success Model. To do so, we must distinguish between
5. As an indication, with the model that is described in this paper all four steps take 0.2ms on a 2.2GHz
machine in our Matlab implementation.
16

Learning and Reasoning with Action-Related Places for Robust Mobile Manipulation
the general applicability of our approach to diﬀerent robots, objects and domains, and the
speciﬁcity of the model to these factors once it has been learned. This essentially holds for
any data-driven approach: the model can in principle be learned for any data, independent
of the robot system that generates these data, but once learned, will be speciﬁc to the
data generated by that robot system, and thus speciﬁc to the robot system itself. For all
practical purposes, we assume that the domain and robot hardware remain ﬁxed, so learning
a domain- and robot-speciﬁc model is not a grave limitation.
3.5.1 Generalization over Object Poses
The learned model generalizes over diﬀerent object poses, as the relative object pose on the
table fobj = [∆xobj ∆ψobj] is part of the feature space with which the Generalized Success
Model is parameterized (see step 1. in calling a GSM in Section 3.4). The ‘Generalized’
actually refers to this capability of generalizing over Success Models for speciﬁc object poses.
3.5.2 Grasp-Specific ARPlaces
By being speciﬁc to the object, a lot of data would be required to learn an ARPlace for
each object the robot should manipulate. In practice however, we found that only a few
grasps suﬃce to grasp most everyday objects in kitchen environments with the real robot
platform (Maldonado, Klank, & Beetz, 2010). In particular, this approach required only
2 grasps (one from the top and one from the side) to achieve 47 successful grasps out of
51 attempts with 14 everyday kitchen objects. Therefore, we propose to use grasp-speciﬁc
ARPlaces, rather than object-speciﬁc ARPlaces. We have learned Generalized Success
Models for both grasps, which are depicted in Figure 9.
Figure 9: The two Point Distribution Models for the side and top grasp.
Examples of
objects that can be manipulated with these grasps are depicted.
The two deformation modes for the Point Distribution Model depicted in Figure 9
already contain 99% of the deformation energy, which is even more than for the side grasps.
This is because the success of the side grasp is relatively independent of the orientation of
the object, as the robot does not need to reach around the object. This also leads to more
symmetric classiﬁcation boundaries for the top grasp, as can be seen in Figure 9.
In summary, only two Generalized Success Models must be learned for two diﬀerent
grasps, as these two grasps suﬃce to grasp the 14 everyday kitchen objects that were tested
17

Stulp, Fedrizzi, M¨osenlechner, & Beetz
with the real robot by Maldonado et al. (2010). In the rest of this article, we will focus on
the side grasp; ARPlaces for top grasps are presented by Fedrizzi (2010).
4. Computing Action-Related Places
In the previous section, we demonstrated how the Generalized Success Model is learned
from observed experience for a variety of task parameterizations. The resulting function
maps known robot and object positions to a prediction whether the action execution will
succeed or feel.
In this section, we describe how ARPlaces for manipulation are computed on-line
for speciﬁc task contexts.
As depicted in Figure 3, this module takes the Generalized
Success Model and the estimated robot pose and target object pose as input, and returns
an ARPlace such as depicted in Figure 1.
4.1 Taking Object Position Uncertainty into Account
In Equation 9, the prediction whether a manipulation action succeeds or fails is based on
known robot and target object positions. However, during task execution, the robot only
has estimates of these positions, with varying levels of uncertainty. These uncertainties
must be taken into account when predicting the outcome, as a manipulation action that
is predicted to succeed might well fail if the target object is not at the position where the
robot expects it to be. Given the Generalized Success Model in Equation 9, the goal of this
section is therefore to compute the mapping
Generalized Success Model
ARPlace (with object uncertainty)
P(Succ|frob, fobj) 7→{0, 1} −Monte Carlo →
{ P(Succ|frob
k
, ⟨ˆfobj, Σobj⟩) }K
k=1 7→[0, 1]
(10)
which takes estimates of the target object position, and returns a continuous probability
value, rather than a discrete {0, 1} probability value as in Equation 9. In our belief state,
the uncertainties in object positions are modelled as a Gaussian distribution with mean ˆfobj
and covariance matrix Σobj.
On the robot platform described in Appendix A, ˆfobj and Σobj are obtained from a
vision-based object localization module (Klank, Zia, & Beetz, 2009). Typical values along
the diagonal of the 6x6 covariance matrix are: σ2
x,x = 0.05, σ2
y,y = 0.03, σ2
z,z = 0.07,
σ2
yaw,yaw = 0.8, σ2
pitch,pitch = 0.06, σ2
roll,roll = 0.06. The uncertainties in position are speciﬁed
in meters and the angular uncertainties are speciﬁed in radians. The estimation of the object
position is quite accurate, but our vision system has problems to detect the handle, which is
important for estimating the orientation (yaw) of the cup. Due to the constraints enforced
by our assumption that the cup is standing upright on the table, the uncertainty in z, pitch
and roll is set to 0. The remaining 3x3 covariance matrix is mapped to the relative feature
space, which yields Σobj.
At the end of Section 3.4, we demonstrated how a classiﬁcation boundary hnew is re-
constructed, given known task relevant parameters fobj
new = [ ∆xobj
new ∆ψobj
new ]. Because of the
uncertainty in ˆfobj
new, it does not suﬃce to compute only one classiﬁcation boundary given
18

Learning and Reasoning with Action-Related Places for Robust Mobile Manipulation
the most probable position of the cup as the ARPlace from which to grasp. This might
lead to a failure if the cup is not at the position where it was expected. Therefore, we use
a Monte-Carlo simulation to generate a whole set of classiﬁcation boundaries. This is done
by taking 100 samples from the Gaussian distribution of the object position, given its mean
position and associated covariance matrix. This yields a matrix of task-relevant parameters
Fobj
s=1...100 = [∆xobjs ∆ψobjs]. The corresponding classiﬁcation boundaries are computed
for the samples with hs = H + P · b(fobj
s
)) from Equation 8. In Figure 10(a), 20 out of
the 100 boundaries are depicted. These were generated with the task-relevant parameters
ˆfobj = [ ∆xobj ∆ψobj ] = [ 0.2 1.5 ] and Σobj =
 σ2
∆xobj∆xobj
σ2
∆xobj∆ψobj
σ2
∆ψobj∆xobj
σ2
∆ψobj∆ψobj

=
h
0.032
0
0
0.302
i
.
(a) Sampled classiﬁcation boundaries
(hs=1..20).
(b) Discretized relative sum
of the boundaries.
(c) Final distribution, after condi-
tioning on the robot pose uncertainty.
Figure 10: Monte-Carlo simulation of classiﬁcation boundaries to compute ARPlace.
As described in Appendix C, y is 0 by deﬁnition, as FGSM is deﬁned relative to the
cup’s position along the table’s edge.
That is why the uncertainty in y, described by
σ2
y,y, leads to an uncertainty in the origin of FGSM. Therefore, when sampling from the
task-relevant parameters, we also sample values of y, and translate FGSM accordingly. Un-
certainty in y does not inﬂuence the shape of the classiﬁcation boundary through the PDM,
it simply translates the classiﬁcation boundary along the table’s edge. This sampling of
y has actually already been done in Figure 10(a), where σ∆yobj∆yobj = 0.03. So in fact,
Σobj =


σ2
∆xobj∆xobj
σ2
∆xobj∆yobj
σ2
∆xobj∆ψobj
σ2
∆yobj∆xobj
σ2
∆yobj∆yobj
σ2
∆yobj∆ψobj
σ2
∆ψobj∆xobj
σ2
∆ψobj∆yobj
σ2
∆ψobj∆ψobj

=

0.032
0
0
0
0.032
0
0
0
0.302

After having computed the sampled classiﬁcation boundaries, we then generate a discrete
grid of 2.5×2.5cm cells, which represent the discrete robot positions {frob
k
}K
k=1 in Equation 1.
For each cell, the number of classiﬁcation boundaries that classify each cell as a success is
counted. We are thus computing a histogram of predicted successful grasps. Dividing the
result by the overall number of boundaries yields the probability that grasping the cup will
succeed from this position. The corresponding distribution, which takes the uncertainty of
the cup position into account, is depicted in Figure 10(b).
It is interesting to note the steep decline on the right side of the distribution near the
table, where the probability of a successful grasp drops from 0.8 to 0.2 in about 5cm. This
is intuitive, as the table is located on the right side, and the robot bumps into the table
when moving to the sampled initial position, leading to an unsuccessful navigate-reach-
19

Stulp, Fedrizzi, M¨osenlechner, & Beetz
grasp sequence. Therefore, none of the 16 boundaries contain the area that is close to the
table, and the variation in P on the right side of the PDM is low. Variations in B do not
have a large eﬀect on this boundary, as can be seen in Figure 10(b). When summing over
the sampled boundaries, this leads to a steep decline in success probability.
Note that an ARPlace is not a normalized probability distribution (which sums to 1),
but rather a probability mapping, in which each element (discrete grid cell) is a probability
distribution itself. Thus the sum of probabilities in each grid cell is 1, i.e. P(Succ) +
P(¬Succ) = 1.
4.2 Taking Robot Position Uncertainty into Account
The robot not only has uncertainty about the position of the target object, but also about its
own position. This uncertainty must also be taken into account in ARPlace. For instance,
although any position near to the left of the steep incline in Figure 10(b) is predicted to
be successful, they might still fail if the robot is actually more to the right than expected.
Therefore, we condition the probabilities in Figure 10(b) on the robot actually being at a
certain grid cell (∆xrob, ∆yrob) given its position estimate ( ˆ
∆x
rob, ˆ
∆y
rob)6 , and acquire the
ﬁnal ARPlace mapping as:
ARPlace prob. mapping, Figure 10(c).
P(Success|⟨ˆf rob, Σrob⟩, ⟨ˆf obj, Σobj⟩) =
P(Success|f rob, ⟨ˆf obj, Σobj⟩)·
P(f rob|⟨ˆf rob, Σrob⟩)
(11)
Prob. mapping Equation 10, Figure 10(b).
Prob. distribution robot uncertainty (Gaussian).
In this equation, ⟨ˆfrob, Σrob⟩can be interpreted in two ways. First of all, it can represent
the actual estimate of the robot’s position at the current time. In this case, P(Success| . . . )
predicts the probability of success when manipulation from the current position. However,
it can also be interpreted as possible goal positions the robot could navigate to in order to
perform the navigation, i.e. ⟨ˆfrob
goal, Σrob
goal⟩, as we do throughout this paper. In doing so, we
make the assumption that the future position uncertainty Σrob
goal at the goal position ˆfrob
goal is
the same as it is currently, i.e. Σrob
goal = Σrob. We believe this is a fair assumption because;
1) it is more realistic than assuming Σrob
goal = 0; 2) as the robot approaches the navigation
goal, it is continually updating Σrob, and thus P(Success| . . . ). Once it has reached the
goal, Σrob
goal will be equivalent to Σrob.
4.3 Reﬁning ARPlace On-line
In summary, ARPlaces are computed on-line with a learned Generalized Success Model,
given the task-relevant parameters of the current task context, which includes uncertainties
6. Since the navigation planner is parameterized such that the robot always faces the table (cf. Section 3.1),
we have ignored the orientation of the robot in computing the GSM. Note that we therefore also ignore
the uncertainty in this parameter here, and ARPlaces do not take it into account. We expect that the
improved robustness (evaluated in Section 6.2) could be further improved by taking (the uncertainty) in
this parameter into account.
20

Learning and Reasoning with Action-Related Places for Robust Mobile Manipulation
in the poses of the robot and target object. This yields a probability mapping that maps
robot base positions to the probability that grasping the target object will succeed.
Learning the Generalized Success Model is a costly step which involves extensive data
collection, and thus is performed oﬀ-line. Once learned, this model is very compact, and
is used to eﬃciently compute ARPlaces on-line7 Therefore, ARPlaces can be updated
as the execution of the task progresses, and can incorporate new knowledge about task-
relevant parameters or changes in the environment. Figure 11 depicts how the ARPlace
probability mapping is aﬀected as new knowledge about task-relevant parameters comes
in. The ﬁrst row demonstrates how more accurate knowledge about the target object’s
position (lower uncertainty, e.g.
lower σ∆xobj∆xobj) leads to a more focussed ARPlace
with higher overall probabilities, and a higher mode.
The second and third row depict
similar eﬀects when estimates of the target object’s position and orientation change. This
ﬁgure serves two purposes: it gives the reader a visual intuition of the eﬀects of several task-
relevant parameters on the shape of the ARPlace, and it demonstrates how the robot’s
internal ARPlace representation might change as new (more accurate) information about
the target object pose comes in.
Decreasing uncertainty in cup position perpendicular to table edge
σ∆xobj =
0.28
0.19
0.10
0.01
Decreasing distance of cup to table edge
∆xobj =
0.38
0.33
0.23
0.13
Changing orientation of cup on table
∆ψobj =
0.60
1.30
1.95
2.65
Figure 11: These images demonstrate how varying certain task-relevant parameters aﬀects
the shape of the ARPlace distribution.
The decision whether a certain probability of success suﬃces to execute the manipulation
action critically depends on the domain and task. Failing to grasp a full glass of wine has
7. As an indication, it takes on average 110ms on a 2.2GHz machine in our Matlab implementation to
perform the steps in Section 4.1 and 4.2.
21

Stulp, Fedrizzi, M¨osenlechner, & Beetz
more grave consequences than failing to grasp a tennis ball. In general, ARPlace provides
a representation which enables high-level planners to make rational decisions about such
scenarios, but does not specify how such decisions should be made, or what the minimal
success probability should be in order to perform the task. In Section 5 we present the use
of ARPlace in a concrete scenario.
4.4 Generality of ARPlaces
In Section 3.5, we discussed the generality of learning the Generalized Success Model, and
the speciﬁcity of the model with respect to the robot and its skills, once the model has
been learned oﬀ-line. In this section, we demonstrate the generality and ﬂexibility of the
ARPlace representation, which is generated on-line using the Generalized Success Model.
We also present various ways in which ARPlaces can be extended, and lay the ground-
work for Section 5, which explains how ARPlaces are used in the context of a high-level
transformational planner.
4.4.1 Merging ARPlaces for Multiple Actions
ARPlaces for multiple actions can be composed by intersecting them. Assume we have
computed ARPlaces for two diﬀerent actions (a1 and a2). If the success probabilities of
the ARPlaces is independent, we can compute the ARPlace for executing both actions
in parallel by multiplying the probabilities of the ARPlaces for action a1 and a2.
In the ﬁrst two graphs of Figure 12 for instance, the ARPlaces for grasping a cup with
the left and right gripper are depicted. With a piecewise multiplication of the probabilities,
we acquire the merged ARPlace, depicted in the right graph. The robot can use this
merged ARPlace to determine with which probability it can use the left and right gripper
to grasp both cups from one base position (Fedrizzi, Moesenlechner, Stulp, & Beetz, 2009).
Another similar application is merging the ARPlaces for two cup positions, grasped with
the same gripper.
This ARPlace represents the probability of being able to grasp a
cup from one position, and placing it on the other position, without moving the base. Such
compositions would be impossible if the robot commits itself to speciﬁc positions in advance.
Figure 12: Left distribution: grasp cup with left gripper. Center distribution: grasp cup
with right gripper. Right distribution (element-wise product of the other two
distributions): Grasp both cups with left/right gripper from one base position.
22

Learning and Reasoning with Action-Related Places for Robust Mobile Manipulation
As navigating to only one position to grasp two cups is much more eﬃcient than navi-
gating to two positions, we have implemented this decision as a transformation rule in the
Reactive Planning Language (McDermott, 1991), which is described in detail in Section 5.
4.4.2 Different Supporting Planes
Deﬁning the feature space of the Generalized Success Model relative to the table’s edge
allows the robot to compute ARPlaces for more general table shapes than the one pre-
sented so far. This is done by determining an ARPlace for each of the straight edges of a
table, and computing the union of these individual ARPlaces. An example is depicted in
Figure 13.
Figure 13: An ARPlace for a more complex table shape.
4.4.3 Different Uncertainty Distributions
In this article, the uncertainty in the position of the robot and target objects is modelled
by a multi-variate Gaussian distribution. This is not because our approach expects such
a distribution, but because this is how our state estimation systems represent uncertainty.
In Section 4.1, we described how speciﬁc target object positions are sampled from this
distribution in a Monte Carlo simulation. In general, our method applies to any distribution
from which such a sampling can be done. These distributions need not be Gaussian, and
might well be multi-modal or even non-parametric. For a particle ﬁlter for instance, each
particle could directly be used as a sample to compute the classiﬁcation boundaries as in
Figure 10(a).
4.4.4 Applicability to Other Domains
We demonstrate the generality of ARPlaces by brieﬂy showing how an ARPlace is able
to represent a task-relevant place for a very diﬀerent task and domain: approaching the ball
in robotic soccer. This task frequently fails because the robot bumps into the ball before
achieving the desired position at the ball. In Figure 14(a), examples of a successful (S)
and failed (F) attempt are depicted. Here, the robot should approach the ball from the
top. Our goal is to acquire an ARPlace that maps the robot’s position on the ﬁeld to the
predicted probability that it will successfully approach the ball.
23

Stulp, Fedrizzi, M¨osenlechner, & Beetz
The procedure for learning an ARPlace is equivalent to that in the mobile manipulation
domain: 1) gather data and log successful and failed episodes (Figure 14(a)); 2) learn classi-
ﬁcation boundaries and a generalized success model from these data; 3) generate ARPlaces
for speciﬁc task contexts (Figure 14(b)). This example demonstrates that the ARPlace
approach is not limited to mobile manipulation, but generalizes to other actions and do-
mains.
(a) Successful and failed
attempts
at
approaching
the
ball.
Data
taken
from
(Stulp
&
Beetz,
2008).
(b) The robot’s ARPlace for approaching the ball. Green
plateau: high probability that the robot will succeed at ap-
proaching the ball at the orientation indicated by the thick
black arrow.
Figure 14: An ARPlace for the robot soccer domain.
Note the two ‘bumps’ to the left and right of the ball. It is not intuitively clear why the
robot should succeed in approaching the ball from these locations, but not the surrounding
ones.
We assume that it depends on the particular morphology of the robot, and the
controller used to approach the ball; both are described by Stulp and Beetz (2008). One
of the main advantages of using an approach based on learning is that our assumptions
and intuitions do not play a role in acquiring the model. Whatever the reason may be,
these successful approaches are obvious in the observed data (Figure 14(a)), and hence the
ARPlace represents them.
4.4.5 Using More General Cost Functions
In this article, the probability of success is considered the only utility relevant to determining
an appropriate base position. But in principle, ARPlace is able to represent any kind of
utility or cost, an example of which is given in Figure 15. Here, the task of the robot is to
collect one of the two cups on the table. The probabilistic ARPlaces for the two cups are
depicted in the left graph. Given these parameters, the chance of success is 0.99 for both of
the cups, so there is no reason to prefer fetching one over the other. However, cup B is much
closer to the robot, and therefore it would be more eﬃcient to collect cup B. This preference
can be expressed with an ARPlace. First, we compute the distance of the robot to each
24

Learning and Reasoning with Action-Related Places for Robust Mobile Manipulation
of the grid cells of the probabilistic ARPlace, as depicted in the center graph. Finally,
we merge the probability P and distance d into one cost u, with u = (1 −P)5 + d/0.3.
This expresses that it takes on average 5 seconds to reposition the robot for another grasp
attempt in case of a failure, and that the average navigation speed is 0.3m/s. This cost
thus expresses the expected time the overall task will take8
As depicted in Figure 15, the mode of the ARPlace of the cup that is closer to the
robot is now higher, reﬂecting the fact that we prefer the robot to fetch cups that are closer.
For an in-depth discussion of utility-based ARPlaces, and how they aﬀect the behavior of
the robot, we refer to Fedrizzi (2010).
Probability: P
Distance: d
Cost: u = (1 −P)5 + d/0.3
Figure 15: Example of a more general cost-based ARPlace (right), including both the
probability of success (left) and distance to the robot (center). By including the
distance as part of the cost, the mode of the cost-based ARPlace for the closer
cup is higher than for the more distant cup.
5. Transformational Planning with ARPlace
So far, we have described how ARPlaces are generated on-line by using the learned Gen-
eralized Success Model. The ability to predict the (probability of an) outcome of an action
makes ARPlaces a powerful tool when combined with a high level planning system. In
this section, we demonstrate how ARPlace is used in the context of a symbolic transfor-
mational planner. Reasoning about ARPlace enables the planner to generate more robust
and eﬃcient plans, and demonstrates the ﬂexibility of the least-commitment ARPlace
representation.
In particular, we consider the task of retrieving two cups from a table.
One action
sequence that solves this task is: “Plan A: navigate to a location near cup1, pick up cup1
with the left gripper, navigate to a location near cup2, pick up cup2 with the right gripper”,
as depicted in Figure 16. However, if the cups are suﬃciently close to each other (as in
Figure 12, right), it is much more eﬃcient to replace the plan above with “Plan B: navigate
to a location both near cup1 and cup2, pick up cup1 with the left gripper, pick up cup2
with the right gripper”, as it saves an entire navigation action.
8. This cost is chosen for its simplicity, to illustrate the generality of the ARPlace representation. More
realistic, complex cost functions can be used.
25

Stulp, Fedrizzi, M¨osenlechner, & Beetz
Figure 16: Improving performance through transformational planning with (merged)
ARPlace. Plan A: navigate to two separate poses for grasping each object,
using ARPlaces for both objects. Plan B: navigate to one pose for grasping
both objects, using the merged ARPlace.
Deciding whether to use two base locations (Plan A) or one (Plan B) is diﬃcult to solve
in a control program without sacriﬁcing generality. To keep our solution general, we do not
want to write two separate control programs for both options, and choose between them
with an if-then-else statement. That would mean we have to provide control programs and
choice points for every option a robot has. The space of choices is prohibitively large in
everyday tasks to allow such an approach. Instead, we use a transformational planner that
takes our general program (Plan A) and, if appropriate, applies generic transformation rules
that change the program locally (to yield Plan B). Our transformational planner consists
of the following components:
Plan projection. A projection mechanism for predicting the outcome of a plan. ARPlace
is a compact representation of such a projection mechanism, as it is able to predict
the probability of success of an action, given its parameters.
Flaw detection. A mechanism for detecting behavior ﬂaws within the predicted plan out-
come. Flaws are not only errors that hinder the robot from completing the task, but
they may also be performance ﬂaws, such as suboptimal eﬃciency. Using two navi-
gation actions to approach to cups that are close to each other (Plan A) is ﬂawed, in
that it is much more eﬃcient to navigate to one position that is close to both cups.
Plan transformation. A mechanism to ﬁx the detected ﬂaws by applying transformation
rules to the plan code. For the problem we consider, a local transformation rule is
applied to Plan A to yield the more eﬃcient Plan B.
In the next sections, we will describe each of these mechanisms in more detail, and
explain how they are implemented to exploit the ARPlace representation. Note that in
this article, we use our transformational planner to exemplify how ARPlace can be used
in the context of a larger planning system. For more information on our transformational
planning framework, and further examples of behavior ﬂaws and transformation rules, we
refer to the work of M¨osenlechner and Beetz (2009).
26

Learning and Reasoning with Action-Related Places for Robust Mobile Manipulation
5.1 Plan Design
To detect ﬂaws and apply transformation rules for their repair, the transformational planner
must be able to reason about the intention of code parts, infer if a goal has been achieved or
not, and deduce what the reason for a possible failure was. To do so, our control programs
are written in rpl (McDermott, 1991), which provides functionality for annotating code
parts to indicate their purpose and make them transparent to the transformational planner.
For the purpose of this article, the most important rpl instructions for semantic annotation
in the context of pick-and-place tasks are achieve, perceive and at-location.
A formal
deﬁnition of the semantics of these instructions is given by M¨osenlechner and Beetz (2009);
here we describe them informally.
(achieve ?expression) – If the achieve statement executes successfully, the logical expres-
sion which is passed as its argument is asserted as being true. For instance, after a successful
execution of (achieve (entity-picked-up ?cup)), the object referenced by the variable ?cup
must be in the robot’s gripper9.
(perceive ?object) – Before manipulating objects, the robot must ﬁnd the objects and
instantiate them in its belief state. After successful execution, the statement (perceive ?cup)
asserts that the object referenced by ?cup has been found, and a reference to its internal
representation is returned.
(at-location ?location ?expression) – Manipulation implies the execution of actions at
speciﬁc locations. Therefore, it must be assured that pick-up actions are only executed
when the robot is at a speciﬁc location. (at-location ?location ...) asserts that code within
its context is either executed at the speciﬁed location or fails. Please note that transforma-
tions which aﬀect the location where actions are performed directly modify the ?location
parameter of such at-location expressions. Therefore, at-location is the most important
declarative plan expression for optimizing ARPlaces. To specify locations for at-location,
we use so-called designators, symbolic descriptions of entities such as locations, objects and
actions. For instance, a designator for the location where to stand for picking up a cup
can be speciﬁed as follows: (a location (to pick-up) (the object (type cup))). This symbolic
description is then resolved by reasoning mechanisms such as ARPlaces and Prolog and an
actual pose is generated when it is needed. In general, an inﬁnite number of poses provide a
valid solution for such a pose. ARPlace gives us a way to evaluate their utility and select
the best pose.
The declarative expressions explained above can be combined to form a tree. Every
achieve statement can contain several further achieve, perceive and at-location statements
as sub-plans. An example plan tree is sketched in Figure 17. In this tree, the goal (achieve
(entity-at-location ?object ?location)) ﬁrst perceives the object, then picks it up by achieving
entity-picked-up, which executes the pick-up action within an at-location block, and puts
the object down by achieving entity-put-down, which also contains an at-location block.
As we shall see in Section 5.4, behavior ﬂaws are repaired by applying transformation rules
that replace sub-trees within the plan tree by new code.
9. Please note the lisp syntax, where variables are preﬁxed with a ’?’, for example ?cup, and predicates
and functions are pure symbols.
27

Stulp, Fedrizzi, M¨osenlechner, & Beetz
(entity-at-location ?o ?l)
(perceive ?o)
(achieve (entity-picked-up ?o)
...
(at-location ?obj-l)
...
...
(achieve (entity-put-down ?o ?l))
...
... (at-location ?obj-l)
...
...
Figure 17: An example plan tree created by executing a pick-up plan
5.2 Plan Projection
A central component of a transformational planner is plan projection, which simulates the
behavior of the robot that arises when executing a plan. In our approach, plan projec-
tion generates a temporally ordered set of events based on the plan code presented in the
previous section. We use the same Gazebo based mechanism for projection that has been
used for generating the training data for learning ARPlaces. In particular, we use in-
formation about collisions, perception events and the locations of objects and the robot.
While executing the plan in simulation, we generate an extensive execution trace that is
then used in our reasoning engine that infers behavior ﬂaws that are then ﬁxed by trans-
formation rules (M¨osenlechner & Beetz, 2009). The execution trace contains low-level data
representing the position of all objects and the robot, as well as collisions between objects,
the visibility of objects for the robot, and information to reconstruct the state of program
throughout its execution.
ARPlaces are a very eﬃcient way of performing plan projection, as they predict the
probability of a successful outcome without requiring on-line generation of execution traces.
The reason that execution trace sampling is not required on-line, is because the task has
already been executed frequently oﬀ-line during data acquisition (cf. Section 3.1). The
results of these task executions have been compiled into the ARPlaces by learning a
GSM, which yields a compact representation of the experience acquired. Therefore, this
experience must not be generated anew during plan generation.
5.3 Behavior Flaws and Reasoning about Plan Execution
Plan projection simulates the robot behavior when executing a plan.
The second com-
ponent of a transformational planner is a reasoning engine that ﬁnds pre-deﬁned ﬂaws in
the projected robot behavior. Examples of such ﬂaws are collisions, e.g. caused by under-
parameterized goal locations, or blocked goals, e.g. when a chair is standing at a location
the robot wants to navigate to. The examples above are behavior ﬂaws that lead to critical
errors in plan execution (i.e. the plan fails), but we also consider behavior that is ineﬃcient
to be ﬂawed (i.e. the plan succeeds, but is unnecessarily ineﬃcient). The task we consider
in this paper is an example of such a performance ﬂaw, as performing two navigation ac-
tions where only one is required is highly ineﬃcient. Behavior ﬂaws are speciﬁed using a
28

Learning and Reasoning with Action-Related Places for Robust Mobile Manipulation
Prolog-like reasoning engine that is implemented in Common Lisp (M¨osenlechner & Beetz,
2009).
The execution trace generated by plan projection is transparently integrated into the
reasoning engine, i.e. the execution trace is queried using Prolog predicates. The informa-
tion recorded in the execution trace is valuable information in order to ﬁnd behavior ﬂaws.
Additional information that is used to ﬁnd behavior ﬂaws is a set of facts that model the se-
mantics of declarative expressions such as achieve or at-location and concepts of the world,
for instance that objects are placed on “supporting planes” (table, cup-board, ...). To ﬁnd
behavior ﬂaws, their Prolog speciﬁcations are matched against the logical representation of
the execution trace and if solutions are found, the corresponding ﬂaw is present in the plan
and can be ﬁxed.
For instance, the code to match two locations to perform actions that can be merged to
one ARPlace looks as follows:
Listing 1: Flaw deﬁnition to match two diﬀerent pick-up tasks.
1
( and
2
( task−goal
? task −1 ( achieve
( entity −picked−up ? object −1)))
3
( task−goal
? task −2 ( achieve
( entity −picked−up ? object −2)))
( thnot
4
(== ? task −1 ? task −2))
( optimized−action −l o c a t i o n
? object −1
5
? object −2 ? optimized−l o c a t i o n ))
The code above ﬁrst matches two diﬀerent pick-up tasks.
The predicate optimized-
action-location holds for ?optimized-location being an ARPlace from which the two objects
can be picked up. To bind this variable, the predicate is implemented to calculate such an
ARPlace.
Another example for such a ﬂaw deﬁnition is failed navigation, i.e. if the robot is not
standing at the location it was supposed to drive to:
Listing 2: Flaw deﬁnition to ﬁnd locations that were not reached by the robot although it
was told to reach them.
1
( and
2
( task−goal
? task
( achieve
( l o c
Robot ? goal−l o c ) ) )
3
( task−status
? task Done ? t )
4
( holds
( l o c
Robot ? robot−l o c )
( at
? t ) )
5
( not (== ? goal−l o c
? robot−l o c ) ) )
The code above ﬁrst matches the code that is navigating the robot to the location ?goal-
loc. Then it infers the actual location of the robot when the navigation task terminated
and binds it to the variable ?robot-loc and ﬁnally asserts that the two locations are not
equal. If this Prolog expression can be proven against an execution trace, we have found a
ﬂaw indicating an unachieved goal location.
5.4 Plan Transformations and Transformation Rules
After a behavior ﬂaw has been detected, the last step of a planner iteration is the application
of a transformation rule to ﬁx the behavior ﬂaw. Transformation rules are applied to parts
of the plan tree and cause substantial changes in its structure and the corresponding robot
behavior.
29

Stulp, Fedrizzi, M¨osenlechner, & Beetz
A transformation rule consists of three parts. The input schema is matched against the
plan part that has to be transformed and binds all required code parts to variables in order
to reassemble them in the output part. The transformation part performs transformations
on the matched parts, and the output plan describes how the new code of the respective
plan part has to be reassembled.
input schema
output plan
transformation
Besides the integration of ARPlace into the robot control program through at-location
statements, ARPlace is also integrated into the reasoning engine of our transformational
planner. Using two locations for grasping is considered a performance ﬂaw if one location
would suﬃce. Informally, we investigate the execution trace for the occurrence of two dif-
ferent pick-up actions, where one is executed at location L1, and the other one is executed
at location L2.
Then we request a location L3 to perform both actions and the corre-
sponding success probability. L3 is computed by merging the ARPlace as in Figure 12.
If the probability of success of the merged ARPlace is suﬃciently high, we apply a plan
transformation, and replace locations L1 and L2 with location L3.
The transformation rule for optimizing ARPlaces is shown in Listing 3. Please note
that all variables that have been bound while matching the ﬂaw deﬁnition are still bound
and can be used in the transformation rule.
Listing 3: Transformation rule for ﬁxing the ﬂaw.
1
( def−tr−r u l e
fix −unoptimized−l o c a t i o n s
2
: input−schema
3
(( and
( task−goal
? location −task −1
4
( at−l o c a t i o n
(? location −1)
.
?code −1))
5
( sub−task
? location −task −1 ? task −1))
6
( and
( task−goal
? location −task −2
7
( at−l o c a t i o n
(? location −2)
.
? code ))
8
( sub−task
? location −task −2 ? task −2)))
9
: output−plan
10
( ( at−l o c a t i o n
(? optimized−l o c a t i o n )
.
?code −1)
11
( at−l o c a t i o n
(? optimized−l o c a t i o n )
.
?code −2)))
The input schema of the code above consists of two similar patterns, each matching the
at-location sub-plan of the pick-up goals matched in the ﬂaw. The planner replaces the
matching code parts by the corresponding entries of the output plan. In our transformation
rule, the location that has been passed to at-location is replaced by the optimized location
that has been calculated in the ﬂaw deﬁnition.
Our behavior ﬂaw is deﬁned to match two diﬀerent pick-up executions.
Then an
ARPlace query is performed to ﬁnd out the probability for successfully grasping both
objects from one location. If the probability is suﬃciently high (> 0.85) the Prolog query
succeeds, i.e.
the ﬂaw is detected only if a suﬃciently good location for grasping both
objects can be found. Note that “suﬃciently high” depends very much on the scenario
context.
In robotic soccer it can be beneﬁcial to choose fast and risky moves, whereas
in safe human-robot interaction, certainty of successful execution is more important than
mere speed. This article focusses on principled ways of integrating such thresholds in a
transformational planner, and relating them to grounded models of the robot’s behavior.
30

Learning and Reasoning with Action-Related Places for Robust Mobile Manipulation
What these thresholds should be, and how they are determined, depends on the application
domain and the users.
6. Empirical Evaluation
In this section we 1) determine how many samples are needed to learn an accurate SVM
classiﬁer; 2) compare the robustness of our default strategy for determining base positions
with a strategy that uses ARPlaces; 3) compare the eﬃciency of plans with and without
ﬁxing performance ﬂaws with our transformational planner; 4) present preliminary results
on the physical robot platform.
6.1 Classiﬁcation Accuracy and Training Set Size
Figure 18 depicts the accuracy of the SVM classiﬁer for predicting which base positions will
lead to successful grasps for one particular cup position, evaluated on a separate test set
with 150 samples. Without using the capability map to ﬁlter out kinematically impossible
base positions, the graph levels oﬀafter about 300 examples10. By ﬁltering out theoretically
impossible base positions with the capability map, the classiﬁer achieves the same accuracy
within 173 examples (Stulp et al., 2009).
Figure 18: Accuracy dependent on training set size for one cup position.
The eﬀect is more dramatic for the entire dataset containing the data for 16 diﬀerent cup
positions. By applying the capability map, the number of trials that need to be executed
reduces from 2992 (all markers in Figure 6) to 666 (only red/green ﬁlled markers in Figure 6).
As the capability map only reduces unsuccessful attempts, it has no inﬂuence on the ﬁnal
classiﬁcation accuracy, which is 94%.
10. This graph applies to another dataset described by Stulp, Fedrizzi, Zacharias, Tenorth, Bandouch, and
Beetz (2009), which is very similar to the one used in the rest of this article.
31

Stulp, Fedrizzi, M¨osenlechner, & Beetz
6.2 Results from the Simulated Robot
We now compare the robustness of navigation based on probabilistic ARPlaces with a
strategy based on deterministic navigation goals. In this evaluation, the position to which
the robot navigates is the position for which ARPlace returns the highest probability
that grasping the target object will succeed. We compare this strategy to our previous
hand-coded implementation Fixed, which always navigates to a location that has the same
relative oﬀset to the target object, whilst at the same time taking care not to bump into
the table.
In these experiments, we vary the position of the cup (∆xobj,∆ψobj), as well as the
uncertainties the robot has about its own position and the position of the cup, by varying
the diagonal elements of the covariance matrices associated with the position of the robot
(σ∆xrob∆xrob,σ∆yrob∆yrob) and the cup (σ∆xobj∆xobj,σ∆ψobj∆ψobj). For each combination of
these variables, the robot performs the navigate-reach-grasp-lift sequence. The result is
recorded, just as during data acquisition for learning the Generalized Success Model. To
simulate the uncertainty, we sample a speciﬁc perceived robot and cup position from the
distribution deﬁned by their means and covariance matrices. The result of the action is
determined by the true simulated state of the world, but the robot bases its decisions on
the perceived samples.
The results of this evaluation are summarized in the three bar plots in Figure 19, which
depict the success ratios of the ARPlace-based and Fixed strategies. Each ratio is the
number of successful executions, divided by the number of examples, which is 100. The p-
value above each pair of bars is computed with a χ2 test between them, which tests whether
the number of successful and failed attempts is sampled from the same distribution for
ARPlace and Fixed.
The ﬁrst graph depicts the success ratios for increasing uncertainty about the object
position (i.e. σ∆xobj∆xobj = [ 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 ]), for ﬁxed robot position uncer-
tainty σ∆xrob = 0.05. In all cases, the ARPlace strategy signiﬁcantly outperforms the
Fixed strategy. Furthermore, the performance of ARPlace is much more robust towards
increasing object position uncertainty, as ARPlace takes this explicitly into account.
The same trend can be seen when increasing the uncertainty in the robot position (i.e.
σ∆xrob∆xrob = σ∆yrob∆yrob = [ 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 ]), for ﬁxed object position uncertainty
σ∆xobj = 0.05. However, when σ∆xrob∆xrob > 0.1 the diﬀerence between ARPlace and
Fixed is no longer signiﬁcant.
Finally, the last graph depicts the success ratios when increasing both robot and object
uncertainty. Again, ARPlace signiﬁcantly outperforms Fixed when (σ < 0.15). If the
robot is quite uncertain about its own and the object’s position (σ > 0.15), grasp success
probabilities drop below 50% for both strategies.
Summarizing, ARPlace is more robust towards state-estimation uncertainties than our
previous default strategy. The eﬀect is more pronounced for object positions than robot
positions.
6.3 Transformational Planning with Merged ARPlaces
We evaluated the merging of ARPlaces for joint grasping, and the application of transfor-
mation rules with our rpl planner, as discussed in Section 4.4.1. Two cups are placed on
32

Learning and Reasoning with Action-Related Places for Robust Mobile Manipulation
Figure 19: Success ratios of the ARPlace and Fixed approaches when changing object
and/or robot pose uncertainties.
the table, where the distance between them is varied between 20 and 60cm, with increments
of 5cm. Our evaluation shows that grasping two cups from separate base positions requires
on average 48 seconds, independent of the relative distance of the cups to each other. By
applying transformation rules, the default plan is optimized to 32 seconds, which is a sig-
niﬁcant (t-test: p < 0.001) and substantial performance gain of 50% (Fedrizzi et al., 2009).
Above 45cm, two cups cannot be grasped from one position, and plan transformation is not
applied.
6.4 Integration of ARPlace in the Physical Robot System
At a day of open house, our B21 mobile manipulation platform continually performed an
application scenario, where it locates, grasps, and lifts a cup from the table and moves it to
the kitchen oven. Figure 20 shows two images taken during the demonstration. The robot
performed this scenario 50 times in approximately 6 hours, which has convinced us that the
robot hardware and software are robust enough to be deployed amongst the general public.
After the open day, we ran the same experiment, but this time we determined the goal
location for navigating to the table as being the mode of the ARPlace that was computed
before executing the navigation action. Since the main focus of this experiment was on our
error-recovery system described by Beetz et al. (2010), the improved robot performance we
observed cannot quantitatively be attributed to the use of ARPlace or the error-recovery
system.
However, a major qualitative improvement we certainly can attribute to using
ARPlace was that the cup can now be grasped from a much larger area on the table.
Without ARPlaces, the cup always had to be placed on the same position on the table to
enable successful grasping.
7. Conclusion
In this article, we present a system that enables robots to learn action-related places
from observed experience, and reason with these places to generate robust, ﬂexible, least-
33

Stulp, Fedrizzi, M¨osenlechner, & Beetz
1. robot navigates to table
2. robot reaches for cup
Figure 20: A reach and grasp trajectory performed during a public demonstration. (Note
that the operator is holding a camera, not a remote control!)
commitment plans for mobile manipulation. ARPlace is modeled as a probability distri-
bution that maps locations to the predicted outcome of an action.
We believe our system has several advantages. First of all, the learned model is very
compact, with only 2 (deformation) parameters, which are directly related to task-relevant
parameters. Querying the model on-line is therefore very eﬃcient. This is an advantage
of compiling experience into compact models, rather than running a novel search for each
situation.
On the other hand, as the model is acquired through experience-based learning, the
model is grounded in observed experience, and takes into account the robot hardware, its
control programs, and interactions with the environment. It can be applied to any mobile
manipulation platform, independent of the manipulators, navigation base, or the algorithms
that run on them.
The output of this model is a set of positions with associated success probabilities,
instead of one speciﬁc position. Rather than constraining itself to a speciﬁc position prema-
turely, the robot can eﬃciently update ARPlace as new sensor data comes in. This enables
least-commitment planning. The ARPlace representation also enables the optimization of
secondary criteria, such as execution duration, or determining the best position for grasp-
ing two objects simultaneously. In previous work, we proposed subgoal reﬁnement (Stulp
& Beetz, 2008) for optimizing such secondary criteria with respect to subgoals.
Finally, by using ARPlaces to determine appropriate base positions, diﬃcult positions
for grasping are avoided, which leads to more robust behavior in the face of state estimation
uncertainty, as demonstrated in our empirical evaluation.
We are currently extending our approach in several directions. We are in the process of
including ARPlace in a more general utility-based framework, in which the probability of
success is only one of the aspects of the task that needs to be optimized. New utilities, such
34

Learning and Reasoning with Action-Related Places for Robust Mobile Manipulation
as execution duration or power consumption, are easily included in this framework, which
enables the robot to trade oﬀeﬃciency and robustness on-line during task execution.
We are also applying our approach to more complex scenarios and diﬀerent domains. For
instance, we are learning higher-dimensional ARPlace concepts, which take more aspects
of the scenario into account, i.e. diﬀerent object sizes and objects that require diﬀerent
types of grasps. Instead of mapping speciﬁc objects to places, we will map object and grasp
properties to deformation modes. We are also investigating extensions and other machine
learning algorithms that will enable our methods to generalize over this larger space. Objects
which require very diﬀerent grasps, such as using two hands to manipulate them, will require
more sophisticated methods for acquiring and reasoning about place. Generalization of our
place concept with respect to situations and task contexts is a research challenge which we
have on our mid-term research agenda.
