arXiv:1203.3783v1  [stat.ML]  16 Mar 2012
Learning Feature Hierarchies with Centered Deep
Boltzmann Machines
Gr´egoire Montavon

Klaus-Robert M¨uller∗

Machine Learning Group
Technische Unversit¨at Berlin
Franklinstr. 28/29
10587 Berlin, Germany
Abstract
Deep Boltzmann machines are in principle powerful models for extracting the hierarchical
structure of data. Unfortunately, attempts to train layers jointly (without greedy layer-
wise pretraining) have been largely unsuccessful. We propose a modiﬁcation of the learning
algorithm that initially recenters the output of the activation functions to zero.
This
modiﬁcation leads to a better conditioned Hessian and thus makes learning easier. We
test the algorithm on real data and demonstrate that our suggestion, the centered deep
Boltzmann machine, learns a hierarchy of increasingly abstract representations and a better
generative model of data.
1. Introduction
Deep Boltzmann machines (DBM, Salakhutdinov and Hinton, 2009) are in principle power-
ful models for extracting the hierarchical structure of data (Montavon et al., 2012). Unfor-
tunately, attempts to train layers jointly (without greedy layer-wise pretraining) have been
mostly unsuccessful. As we will argue later in greater detail, a possible reason for this could
be that the mapping of net activities onto the sigmoid nonlinearities is not centered to zero
by default.
In this paper, we propose to recenter the output of each unit to zero by rewriting the
energy as a function of centered states ξ = x −β where β is an oﬀset parameter. The
reparameterization of the energy function leads to a better conditioned Hessian of the
estimated model log-likelihood. The centered Boltzmann machine is easy to implement as
the reparameterization leaves the associated Gibbs distribution invariant.
We train a centered deep Boltzmann machine on the MNIST data set. Empirical results
show that the centered DBM is able to learn a top-layer representation that contains useful
discriminative features and to produce a good generative model of data. In addition, the
centered DBM learns faster and is more stable than its non-centered counterpart.
Related work
The case for using centered nonlinearities has already been made by
LeCun et al. (1998) and Glorot and Bengio (2010) in the context of backpropagation net-
works, showing that the logistic function generally performs poorly compared to its cen-
tered counterpart, the hyperbolic tangent.
The idea of centering was also proposed by
∗Also at the Department of Brain and Cognitive Engineering, Korea University, Anam-dong, Seongbuk-gu,
Seoul 136-713, Korea
1

Tang and Sutskever (2011) in the context of restricted Boltzmann machines but was re-
stricted to data centering.
2. Centered Boltzmann Machines
In this section, we introduce the centered Boltzmann machine. In the following, the sigmoid
function is deﬁned as sigm(x) =
ex
ex+1, x ∼B(p) denotes that the variable x is drawn
randomly from a Bernouilli distribution of parameter p and ⟨·⟩P denotes the expectation
operator with respect to a probability distribution P. All these operations apply element-
wise to the input vector.
A Boltzmann machine is a network of Mx interconnected binary units that associates
to each state x ∈{0, 1}Mx the energy
E(x; θ) = −x⊤Wx −x⊤b
where θ = {W, b} groups the model parameters. The matrix W of size Mx×Mx is symmetric
and contains the connection strength between units. The vector b of size Mx contains the
biases associated to each unit. A probability is associated to each state according to the
Gibbs distribution
p(x; θ) =
e−E(x;θ)
P
x e−E(x;θ)
where the term in the denominator is the partition function that makes probabilities sum to
one. For the centered Boltzmann machine, we rewrite the energy as a function of centered
states
E(x; θ) = −(x −β)⊤W(x −β) −(x −β)⊤b
where θ = {W, b, β} and where the vector β contains the oﬀsets associated to each unit of
the network. Setting β = sigm(b0) where b0 is the initial bias enforces the initial centering
of the Boltzmann machine. From these equations, we can derive the conditional probability
p(xi = 1|x−i; θ) = sigm(bi +
X
j̸=i
Wij(x −β)j)
of each unit and the gradient of the model log-likelihood with respect to W and b:
∂
∂W ⟨log p(x; θ)⟩data = ⟨(x −β)(x −β)⊤⟩data −⟨(x −β)(x −β)⊤⟩model
∂
∂b⟨log p(x; θ)⟩data = ⟨x −β⟩data −⟨x −β⟩model
2.1 Stability of the Centered Boltzmann Machine
In this section, we look at the stability of the underlying optimization problem. We argue
that when the sigmoid is centered, the Hessian is better conditioned (see Figure 2), and
2

β = sigm(−2)
β = sigm(0)
β = sigm(2)
b = 2
b = 0
b = −2
Figure 1: Example of sigmoids with diﬀerent biases and oﬀsets.
The three non-dashed
sigmoids are said to be centered because they cross the origin. We show that
centering sigmoids leads to a better conditioned Hessian.
therefore, the learning algorithm is more stable. We deﬁne ξ as the centered state ξ = x−β.
The derivative of the model log-likelihood with respect to the weight vector takes the form
∂
∂W ⟨log p(x; θ)⟩data = ⟨ξξ⊤⟩data −⟨ξξ⊤⟩W
where ⟨·⟩W designates the expectation with respect to the probability distribution associated
to a model of weight parameter W. Using the deﬁnition of the directional derivative, the
second derivative with respect to a random direction V (which is equal to the projected
Hessian HV ) can be expressed as:
HV = ∂
∂V
 ∂
∂W ⟨log p(x; W)⟩data

= lim
h→0
1
h
 ∂
∂W ⟨log p(x; W + hV )⟩data −
∂
∂W ⟨log p(x; W)⟩data

= lim
h→0
1
h

(⟨ξξ⊤⟩W +hV,data −⟨ξξ⊤⟩W +hV ) −(⟨ξξ⊤⟩W,data −⟨ξξ⊤⟩W )

= lim
h→0
1
h

⟨ξξ⊤⟩W +hV,data −⟨ξξ⊤⟩W,data

−lim
h→0
1
h

⟨ξξ⊤⟩W +hV −⟨ξξ⊤⟩W

From the last line, we can see that the Hessian can be decomposed into a data-dependent
term and a data-independent term. A remarkable fact is that in absence of hidden units, the
data-dependent part of the Hessian is zero, because the model—and therefore, the pertur-
bation of the model—have no inﬂuence on the states. The conditioning of the optimization
3

Centered DBM
λ1/λn small
Non-centered DBM
λ1/λn large
Figure 2: Relation between the conditioning number λ1/λn and the shape of the optimiza-
tion problem. Gradient descent is easier to achieve when the conditioning number
is small.
problem can therefore be analyzed exclusively from the perspective of the model without
even looking at the data. The data-dependent term is likely to be small even in the presence
of hidden variables due to the sharp reduction of entropy caused by the clamping of visible
units to data.
We can think of a well-conditioned model as a model for which a perturbation of the
model parameter W in any direction V causes a well-behaved perturbation of state expec-
tations ⟨ξξ⊤⟩W . Pearlmutter (1994) showed that in a Boltzmann machine with no hidden
units, the projected Hessian can be further reduced to
HV = ⟨ξξ⊤⟩W · ⟨D⟩W −⟨ξξ⊤D⟩W
where
D = 1
2ξ⊤V ξ
(1)
thus, getting rid of the limit and leading to numerically more accurate estimates. LeCun et al.
(1998) showed that the stability of the optimization problem can be quantiﬁed by the con-
ditioning number deﬁned as the ratio between the largest eigenvalue λ1 and the smallest
eigenvalue λn of H. A geometrical interpretation of the conditioning number is given in
Figure 2. A low rank approximation of the Hessian can be obtained as
ˆH = H(V0| . . . |Vn) = (HV0| . . . |HVn)
(2)
where the columns of (V0| . . . |Vn) form a basis of independent unit vectors that projects
the Hessian on a low-dimensional random subspace. The conditioning number can then be
estimated by performing a singular value decomposition of the projected Hessian ˆH and
taking the ratio between the largest and smallest resulting eigenvalues.
We estimate below the conditioning number λ1/λn of a fully connected Boltzmann
machine of 50 units at initial state (W = 0) for diﬀerent bias and oﬀset parameters b and
β using Equation 1 and 2:
λ1/λn
b = 2
b = 0
b = −2
β = sigm(2)
2.26
21.97
839.59
β = sigm(0)
83.43
2.75
95.57
β = sigm(−2)
866.00
22.95
2.24
These numerical estimates clearly exhibit the better conditioning occuring when the
sigmoid is centered. The more than 100-fold factor between the conditioning number of
non-centered and centered Boltzmann machines is striking.
4

x
a, α
y
b, β
z
c, γ
W
V
x
y
z
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
Figure 3: On the left, diagram of a two-layer deep Boltzmann machine along with its pa-
rameters. On the right, diﬀerent sampling methods: (i) a feed-forward pass on
the network starting from a data point, (ii) the path followed by the alternate
Gibbs sampler and (iii) the path followed by the alternate Gibbs sampler when
the input is clamped to data.
2.2 Centered Deep Boltzmann Machines
For technical and practical reasons, it is common to introduce a structure to the Boltzmann
machine by restricting the connections between its units. A typical structure is the deep
Boltzmann machine (DBM, Salakhutdinov and Hinton, 2009) in which units are organized
in a deep layered architecture. The layered structure of the DBM has two advantages: ﬁrst,
it gives a speciﬁc role to units at each layer so that we can easily build top layer kernels
that exploit the hierarchical structure of data. Second, the layered structure of the DBM
can be folded into a bipartite graph from which it is easy to derive an eﬃcient alternate
Gibbs sampler. In the case of the two-layer deep Boltzmann machine shown in Figure 3,
the energy function associated to each state (x, y, z) ∈{0, 1}Mx+My+Mz takes the form
E(x, y, z; θ) = −(y −β)⊤W(x −α) −(z −γ)⊤V (y −β)
−(x −α)⊤a −(y −β)⊤b −(z −γ)⊤c
where θ = {W, V, a, b, c, α, β, γ} groups the model parameters. Data-independent states can
be sampled using the following alternate Gibbs sampler:
{x ∼B(sigm(W ⊤(y −β) + a))
;
z ∼B(sigm(V (y −β) + c))}
(3)
y ∼B(sigm(W(x −α) + V ⊤(z −γ) + b)).
(4)
The same Gibbs sampler can be used for sampling data-dependent states at the diﬀerence
that the input units x are clamped to the data. We show below a basic algorithm based on
persistent contrastive divergence for training a two-layer centered DBM:
5

Basic algorithm for training a 2-layer centered DBM:
W, V = 0, 0
a, b, c = sigm−1(⟨x⟩data), b0, c0
α, β, γ = sigm(a), sigm(b), sigm(c)
initialize free particle (xm, ym, zm) = (α, β, γ)
loop
initialize data particle (xd, yd, zd) = (pick(data), β, γ)
loop
yd ∼B(sigm(W(xd −α) + V ⊤(zd −γ) + b))
zd ∼B(sigm(V (yd −β) + c))
end loop
ym ∼B(sigm(W(xm −α) + V ⊤(zm −γ) + b))
xm ∼B(sigm(W ⊤(ym −β) + a))
zm ∼B(sigm(V (ym −β) + c))
W = W + η · [(yd −β)(xd −α)⊤−(ym −β)(xm −α)⊤]
V = V + η · [(zd −γ)(yd −β)⊤−(zm −γ)(ym −β)⊤]
a = a + η · (xd −xm)
b = b + η · (yd −ym)
c = c + η · (zd −zm)
end loop
3. Discriminative Analysis
We present the method introduced by Montavon et al. (2011) that measures how the rep-
resentation evolves layer after layer in a deep network. It is based on the theoretical insight
that the projection of the input distribution onto the hidden units of each layer provides a
function space that can be thought of as a representation or a feature extractor.
The method aims to characterize this function space by constructing a kernel for each
layer that approximates the implicit transfer function between the input and the layer
and measuring how much these kernels “match” the task of interest.
The approach is
theoretically motivated by the work of Braun et al. (2008) showing that projections on the
leading components of the implicit kernel feature map (Sch¨olkopf et al., 1998) obtained with
a ﬁnite and typically small number of samples n are close with essentially multiplicative
errors to their asymptotic counterparts. In the following lines, we describe the principal
steps of the analysis:
Let X and T be two matrices of n rows representing respectively the inputs and labels
of a data set of n samples. Let
f : x 7→fL ◦· · · ◦f1(x)
6

be a deep network of L layers. We build a hierarchy of increasingly “deep” kernels
k0,σ(x, x′) = κσ(x, x′)
k1,σ(x, x′) = κσ(f1(x), f1(x′))
...
kL,σ(x, x′) = κσ(fL ◦· · · ◦f1(x), fL ◦· · · ◦f1(x′))
that subsume the mapping performed by more and more layers of the deep network and
where κσ is an RBF kernel of scale σ. For each kernel kl,σ, we can compute the empirical
kernel Kl,σ of size n × n and its eigenvectors u1
l,σ, . . . , un
l,σ sorted by decreasing magnitude
of their respective eigenvalues λ1
l,σ, . . . , λn
l,σ.
We measure how good a representation is with respect to a certain task by measuring
whether the task is contained within the leading principal components of the representation.
The matrix
U d
l,σ = (u1
l,σ | · · · | ud
l,σ)
spans the d leading kernel principal components of empirical kernel. The error is obtained
as the residuals of the projection of the labels T on the d leading components of the mapped
distribution:
eT (l, d, σ) = ||T −U d
l,σU d
l,σ
⊤T||2
F
Curves (e(l, 0, σ), . . . , e(l, d, σ)) represent how well the task can be solved as we add more
and more principal components of the data distribution. These curves can be interpreted
as learning curves as the regularization imposed by the rank of the kernel feature space
determines the number of samples that are necessary in order to train the model eﬀectively.
Therefore, the number of observed kernel principal components d closely relates to the
amount of label information given to the learning machine. Small values for d cover the “one-
shot” learning regime where the model is asked to generalize from very few observations.
On the other hand, large values for d cover the other extreme case where label information is
abundant, and where the representation has to be rich enough in order to encode any subtle
variation of the learning problem. For practical purposes, these curves can be reduced as
follows:
eT (l, d) = min
σ eT (l, d, σ)
(5)
eT (l) = 1
n
n
X
d=1
eT (l, d)
(6)
These compact measures of how well layer l represent T make it easier to compare the
layer-wise evolution of the representation for diﬀerent architectures.
4. Generative Analysis
Here, we present an analysis that estimates the likelihood of the learned Boltzmann ma-
chine (Salakhutdinov and Hinton, 2010) based on annealed importance sampling (AIS, Neal,
7

2001). We describe here the basic analysis. Salakhutdinov and Hinton (2010) introduced
more elaborate procedures for particular types of Boltzmann machines such as restricted,
semi-restricted and deep Boltzmann machines.
A deep Boltzmann machine associates to each input x a probability
p(x; θ) = Ψ(θ, x)
Z(θ)
where
Ψ(θ, x) =
X
y,z
p⋆(x, y, z; θ)
Z(θ) =
X
x,y,z
p⋆(x, y, z; θ)
and where p⋆(x, y, z; θ) = e−E(x,y,z;θ) is the unnormalized probability of state (x, y, z). Com-
puting Ψ(θ, x) and Z(θ) analytically is intractable because of the exponential number of
elements involved in the sum. Let us rewrite the ratio of partition functions as follows:
p(x; θ) = Ψ(θ, x)
Z(θ)
=
Ψ(θ,x)
Ψ(0,x)
Z(θ)
Z(0)
· Ψ(0, x)
Z(0)
(7)
It can be ﬁrst noticed that the ratio of base-rate partition functions (θ = 0) is easy to
compute as θ = 0 makes units independent. It has the analytical form
Ψ(0, x)
Z(0)
=
1
2Mx .
(8)
The two other ratios in Equation 7 can be estimated using annealed importance sampling.
The annealed importance sampling method proceeds as follows:
Annealed importance sampling:
1. Generate a sequence of states ξ1, . . . , ξT using a sequence of transition oper-
ators T (ξ, ξ′; θ0), . . . , T (ξ, ξ′; θK) that leave p(ξ) invariant, that is,
• Draw ξ0 from the base model (e.g. a random vector of zero and ones)
• Draw ξ1 given ξ0 using T (ξ, ξ′; θ1)
• . . .
• Draw ξK given ξK−1 using T (ξ, ξ′; θK)
2. Compute the importance weight
ωAIS = p⋆(ξ1; θ1)
p⋆(ξ1; θ0) · p⋆(ξ2; θ2)
p⋆(ξ2; θ1) · · · · ·
p⋆(ξK; θK)
p⋆(ξK; θK−1)
8

It can be shown that if the sequence of models θ0, θ1, . . . , θK where θ0 = 0 and θK =
θ evolves slowly enough, the importance weight obtained with the annealed importance
sampling procedure is an estimate for the ratio between the partition function of the model
θ and the partition function of the base rate model.
In our case, ξ denotes the state (x, y, z) of the DBM and the transition operator T (ξ, ξ′; θ)
is the alternate Gibbs sampler deﬁned in Equation 3. We can now compute the two ratios
of partition functions of Equation 7 as
Z(θ)
Z(0) ≈E[ωAIS]
and
Ψ(θ, x)
Ψ(0, x) ≈E[νAIS(x)]
(9)
where ωAIS is the importance weight resulting from the annealing process with the freely
running Gibbs sampler and νAIS is the importance weight resulting from the annealing with
input units clamped to the data point. Substituting Equation 8 and 9 into Equation 7, we
obtain
p(x; θ) ≈E[νAIS(x)]
E[ωAIS]
·
1
2Mx
and therefore, the log-likelihood of the model is
EX[log(p(x; θ))] ≈EX[log E[νAIS(x)]] −log E[ωAIS] −Mx log(2).
(10)
Generally, computing an average of the importance weight νAIS for each data point x can
take a long time. In practice, we can use an approximation to this computation where the
estimate is computed with a single AIS run for each point. In that case, it follows from
Jensen’s inequality that
EX[log νAIS(x)] −log E[ωAIS] ≤EX[log E[νAIS(x)]] −log E[ωAIS].
(11)
Consequently, this approximation tends to produce slightly pessimistic estimates of the
model log-likelihood, however the variance of νAIS is low compared to the variance of ωAIS
because the clamping of visible units to data points sharply reduces the diversity of AIS
runs. We ﬁnd that this approximation is suﬃciently accurate for the purpose of this paper,
that is, demonstrating the importance of centering deep Boltzmann machines.
5. Experimental Setup
In this section, we describe the diﬀerent parameters used to train the deep Boltzmann
machines and to perform the discriminative and generative analysis.
These parameters
correspond to reasonable choices, most of which have been validated by previous research
work.
Architecture
We consider two-layer deep Boltzmann machines made of 784 input units,
400 intermediate units and 100 top units. The initial biases and oﬀsets for visible units
are set to a0 = sigm−1(⟨x⟩data) and α = sigm(a).
We consider diﬀerent initial biases
(b0, c0 = −2, b0, c0 = 0 and b0, c0 = 2) and oﬀsets (β, γ = sigm(−2), β, γ = sigm(0) and
β, γ = sigm(2)) for the hidden units. These oﬀsets and initial biases correspond to the
sigmoids plotted in Figure 1.
9

Data
We train the DBMs on a binary version of the MNIST handwritten digits data set
where the activation threshold is set to 0.5 (medium gray). The MNIST training set consists
of 60,000 samples. Each sample is a binary image of size 28×28 representing a handwritten
digit and is fed to the DBM as a 784-dimensional binary vector.
Inference
We use persistent contrastive divergence (Tieleman, 2008) to train the network
and keep track of 25 free particles in background of the learning procedure. We use a Gibbs
sampling estimation to collect both the data-independent and data-dependent statistics.
The rationale for this is that the more classical mean ﬁeld estimation of data statistics
(Salakhutdinov and Hinton, 2009) tends to artiﬁcially drive the DBM to sparsity due to
the convex/concave shape of the sigmoid function. At each step of the learning procedure,
we run 5 iterations of the alternate Gibbs sampler for collecting the data-dependent statistics
and one iteration for updating the data-independent statistics.
Learning
We use a stochastic gradient descent on the approximate log-likelihood with
minibatches of size 25 and a learning rate η = 0.0005 for each layer. For practical purposes,
the minibatch size is set equivalent to the number of particles for persistent contrastive
divergence (Hinton, 2010). We consider models trained for 100, 100.5, 101, 101.5 and 102
epochs.
Model averaging
We use a variant of averaged stochastic gradient descent (Polyak and Juditsky,
1992; Tieleman and Hinton, 2009; Xu, 2011) for reducing the parameter noise. We compute
at each step k the new parameter estimate θavg ←
kc
k+kc · θ +
k
k+kc · θavg with kc = 10 in
order to only remember the last 10% of the training procedure.
Discriminative analysis
The analysis is performed on a subset of 500 samples drawn
randomly from the MNIST test set. Representations at each layer are built by running
a Gibbs sampler for 100 iterations with the input clamped to data and taking the mean
activation of each unit. Discriminative performance is measured as the projection residuals
of the labels (see Equation 5) and the area under the error curve (see Equation 6). Results
are produced with candidate scale parameters of the Gaussian kernel σ2 = 1, 10, 100, 1000
and 10000.
Generative analysis
The generative analysis is performed on a subset of 500 samples
drawn randomly from the MNIST test set.
Generative performance is measured as the
estimated log-likelihood of the model given the test data (see Equation 10). We estimate
the partition function Z(θ)/Z(0) using 500 AIS runs.
We estimate each 500 partition
functions Ψ(θ, x)/Ψ(0, x) using a single AIS run. Each AIS run has length K = 2500 where
model parameter at the kth step of the annealing process is deﬁned as θk = 1−(1−kθ/K)2.
This sequence of parameters implies that annealing starts with large parameter updates
and ﬁnishes with very small updates.
6. Results
Table 1 corroborates the importance of centering for better discriminating in the top layer of
a deep Boltzmann machine. As it can be seen in Figure 5 (left), discriminative performance
of the top layer can be further improved by training the network for a longer time.
10

AUC error
b0, c0 = 2
b0, c0 = 0
b0, c0 = −2
β, γ = sigm(2)
0.119
0.194
0.285
β, γ = sigm(0)
0.133
0.090
0.127
β, γ = sigm(−2)
0.368
0.323
0.114
Table 1: Discriminative performance after 10 epochs in the top layer of the deep Boltzmann
machine as measured by Equation 6 for diﬀerent conﬁgurations of initial bias and
oﬀset. The lower the AUC error the better. In each case, centering sigmoids leads
to better discrimination in the top layer.
⟨log p(x; θ)⟩data
b0, c0 = 2
b0, c0 = 0
b0, c0 = −2
β, γ = sigm(2)
-81.5∗
-86.5∗
-88.9∗
β, γ = sigm(0)
-83.5∗
-81.2∗
-85.6∗
β, γ = sigm(−2)
-88.1∗
-83.3∗
-80.4∗
Table 2: Generative performance after 10 epochs in terms of estimated model log-likelihood
⟨log p(x; θ)⟩data for diﬀerent conﬁgurations of initial bias and oﬀset. The generative
performance is less sensitive to the initial conditioning of the DBM than the top
layer discriminative performance as the top-level units can simply be discarded,
leading essentially to a more robust one-layer generative model.
Table 2 further supports the importance of centering, showing that centered DBMs
learn a better generative model of data. However, the advantage is not as strong as for the
discriminative case. Indeed, units in the top layer are not critical for generative performance
as the learning algorithm can simply discard them and learn a one-layer shallow generative
model instead.
Figure 4 and 5 highlight the importance of centering for faster and more stable learning.
The models emerging from the centered deep Boltzmann machine have systematically better
discriminative properties in the top layer and good generative properties. While a non-
centered DBM may ultimately learn a model which is as good as the one produced by a
centered DBM, it may also diverge.
Figure 6 and 7 show that each model is able to learn reasonable ﬁrst-layer ﬁlters but
that second-layer ﬁlters learned by a centered DBM tend to be more varied than those
learned by a non-centered DBM. This higher variety of second layer ﬁlters suggests that the
centered DBM produces a richer top-level representation. The argument is corroborated by
Figure 9 showing that, in absence of centering mechanism, the projection of the data on the
top layer representation tends to form a simplistic low-dimensional manifold that may still
contain useful features (for example, discriminating the digit “1” from other digits) but,
on the other hand, that also discards a lot of potentially useful discriminative features. As
∗In some other research work, authors are computing a lower bound of the log probablity instead of a
direct estimate of it, thus making a direct comparison impossible. Also, estimates of log probability become
increasingly inaccurate as the model θ complexiﬁes.
11

Discriminative analysis of k2(x, x′)
Layer-wise evolution of the representation
Figure 4: On the left, residuals of the projection of the labels in the leading components of
the top layer kernel k2(x, x′) (see Equation 5) after 10 epochs. On the right, layer-
wise evolution of the representation in terms of area under the error curve (see
Equation 6) after 100 epochs. Centered DBMs are more stable than non-centered
ones. Top layer representations are clearly better than the input.
Discriminative performance
Generative performance
Figure 5: Convergence speed of centered and non-centered DBMs (in terms of top layer
AUC error and model log-likelihood). Centered DBMs learn faster and are more
stable than non-centered ones. Note that the estimate of the log-likelihood from
Equation 10 becomes inaccurate as the model becomes more complex (after 10
epochs).
12

b0, c0 = 2
b0, c0 = 0
b0, c0 = −2
β, γ = sigm(2)
β, γ = sigm(0)
β, γ = sigm(−2)
Figure 6: Examples of ﬁrst-layer ﬁlters of the DBM for diﬀerent bias and oﬀset parameters
after 100 epochs. These ﬁlters are rendered using a linear backprojection of top
layer units onto the input space. Each model is producing reasonable ﬁrst-layer
ﬁlters, suggesting that one-layer networks (i.e. restricted Boltzmann machines)
are less sensitive to the quality of the conditioning of the parameter space.
b0, c0 = 2
b0, c0 = 0
b0, c0 = −2
β, γ = sigm(2)
β, γ = sigm(0)
β, γ = sigm(−2)
Figure 7: Examples of second-layer ﬁlters of the DBM for diﬀerent bias and oﬀset parame-
ters after 100 epochs. These ﬁlters are rendered using a linear backprojection of
intermediate layer units onto the input space. Here, we can clearly see that the
diversity of ﬁlters is higher when the DBM is centered.
b0, c0 = 2
b0, c0 = 0
b0, c0 = −2
β, γ = sigm(2)
β, γ = sigm(0)
β, γ = sigm(−2)
Figure 8: Examples of digits generated by the DBM for diﬀerent bias and oﬀset parameters
after 10 epochs. The degenerated second layer of the non-centered DBM seems
to have a negative impact on the balance between diﬀerent classes.
13

Top layer representation after 1 epoch
b0, c0 = 2
b0, c0 = 0
b0, c0 = −2
β, γ = sigm(2)
β, γ = sigm(0)
β, γ = sigm(−2)
Top layer representation after 100 epochs
b0, c0 = 2
b0, c0 = 0
b0, c0 = −2
β, γ = sigm(2)
β, γ = sigm(0)
β, γ = sigm(−2)
Figure 9: 2-kPCA visualization of the top-level representation in the DBM for diﬀerent
bias and oﬀset parameters at diﬀerent stages of training. Points are colored ac-
cording to their label (“0”=red, “1”=blue, “2”=green, “3”=yellow, “4”=orange,
“5”=black, “6”=brown, “7”=gray, “8”=magenta, “9”=cyan).
Non-centered
DBMs tend to collapse the data onto a simplistic low-dimensional manifold in
the top layer representation. On the other other hand, in the centered DBM,
we can clearly observe in the late stage of training the emergence of clusters
corresponding to labels.
14

suggested by Figure 8, the top-layer simplistic representation may even negatively aﬀect
the generative properties of the model by perturbing the balance between diﬀerent classes.
7. Conclusion
We presented a simple modiﬁcation of the deep Boltzmann machine that centers the output
of the sigmoids by rewriting the energy function as a function of centered states.
This
centered version of the deep Boltzmann machine is easy to implement as it simply involves
a reparameterization of the energy function. A theoretical motivation for centering is that
it leads to a better conditioning of the Hessian of the optimization criterion.
This simple modiﬁcation allows to learn eﬃciently a deep Boltzmann machine without
greedy layer-wise pretraining. Experiments on real data corroborate the beneﬁts of center-
ing, showing that the centered deep Boltzmann machine learns faster and is more stable than
its non-centered counterpart. In addition, the centered deep Boltzmann machine produces
useful discriminative features in the top layer and a good generative model of data.
Training hierarchies of many layers is still tedious and requires many iterations. Un-
derstanding whether the diﬃculty comes from a diﬃcult optimization problem or from the
exhaustion of statistical information in the data set remains to be done. Also, despite an
initial good conditioning of the Hessian, it can not be excluded that the solution progres-
sively drifts towards degenerate regions of the parameter space throughout the learning
procedure. Strategies to dynamically maintain the solution within well-behaved regions of
the parameter space or to better descend the objective function also need to be further
investigated.
