574 
UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
An Uncertainty Framework for Classification 
Loo-Nin Teow 
Kia-Fock Loe 
School of Computing 
National University of Singapore 
Science Drive 2, S 117559, Singapore 
Abstract 
We define a generalized likelihood function 
based on uncertainty measures and show that 
maximizing such a likelihood function for 
different measures induces different types of 
classifiers. 
In the probabilistic framework, we 
obtain classifiers that optimize the cross-entropy 
function. 
In the possibilistic framework, we 
obtain classifiers that maximize the interclass 
margin. Furthermore, we show that the support 
vector machine is a sub-class of these maximum­
margin classifiers. 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
Uncertainty is a natural and unavoidable part of pattern 
classification in real-world domains. Given a sample that 
has never before been encountered, a certain amount of 
uncertainty is always involved in deciding the class to be 
assigned to that sample. We make the decision associated 
with the least uncertainty, based on past encounters with 
other samples. It is therefore necessary to represent and 
deal with such uncertainty in an effective manner. 
In much of the literature on classification, this uncertainty 
is typically represented as probabilities (Devroye et al. 
1996; Jurgen 1996; Langley et al 1992), since probability 
theory is already well established. 
In the Bayesian 
context, we choose the class with the maximum posterior 
probability. Hence, traditional pattern recognition often 
involves finding suitable functions to model probability 
distributions, and manipulating the outputs of such 
functions on the premise that they are true probabilities. 
However, as we shall argue in this paper, such an 
assumption may not be valid, and it may be more 
appropriate to treat the uncertainty in a possibilistic 
manner (Bezdek et al 1999; Klir & Yuan 1995; Tanaka & 
Guo 1999). 
To this end, we propose an uncertainty 
framework for classification, of which the probabilistic 
and possibilistic frameworks are special cases. 
As we 
shall show later, the probabilistic framework leads to 
classifiers that optimize the cross-entropy function. On 
the other hand, the possibilistic framework leads to 
maximum-margin classifiers, which have been shown to 
exhibit superior generalization in the recent literature 
(Scholkopf 1997; Yang & Liu 1999). 
We begin by discussing the probabilistic framework in the 
next section. We will then show how this framework can 
be generalized to handle other measures of uncertainty. 
In particular, we will show how to induce possibilistic 
classifiers. Next, we will focus on the two-class problem 
for the linear classifier, and show its relation to the 
support vector machine (Burges 1998; Cortes & Vapnik 
1995; Vapnik 1995). 
Finally, we will discuss the 
extension to non-linear classifiers. 
2 
THE PROBABILISTIC FRAMEWORK 
Given m classes, let x E Rd be a d-dimensional input 
vector and y E { 1, ... , m} be the class label. Consider a 
set of independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) 
training samples {x;, y;} for i 
= 1 to n. 
In pattern 
classification, we are interested in the class posterior 
(conditional) probabilities p( y I x , (} ), where (}is the set 
o 
_
parĞmeters 
for 
the 
corresponding 
probability 
dtstnbutton. 
The conditional probability that an input 
vector X; belongs to class h, for example, is p( h I X; , ´). 
One popular way of estimating the conditional probability 
distributions is to first estimate the joint probabilities, i.e., 
p( x, y I (} ), and then condition them using Bayes rule. 
The estimation is typically done by maximizing the joint 
likelihood for each class using the EM algorithm 
(Dempster et al. 1977). An alternative way is to treat the 
class as a random variable in a single distribution (e.g. a 
Gaussian or multinomial distribution) and then maximize 
the likelihood for this distribution, as done for example in 
(Jordan & Jacobs 1995). In this paper, we formulate the 
conditional likelihood in such a way that allows it to be 
generalized to other uncertainty measures. 
The total conditional likelihood for class h is the total 
conditional probability of observing Y; = h, i.e., 
Lh = fl p(hlx;,8h) 
[1] 
ily,:h 
The product operation is due to the i.i.d. assumption. We 
can interpret this likelihood as a measure of the certainty 
that all the samples with y; 
= h belong to class h. 
To 

UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
575 
maximize the certainty, we need to find the parameters 
such that this likelihood is maximized. Hence, we want to 
maximize the total conditional likelihood, or equivalently 
its logarithm, 
for each class with respect to 
the 
parameters, i.e., maximize the likelihood function 
[2] 
Substituting 
[1] 
into 
[2], we 
get the probabilistic 
likelihood function: 
L= :f log IJp(hlx;,(lh) 
where 
h 
ily,=h 
=f. I, log p(h I x;,{lh) 
h ily,=h 
= if. qhi logp(hlx; ,Oh) 
i h 
{1 
if Y; = h 
qhi = 
0 
otherwise 
[3] 
[4] 
This is exactly the negative of the cross-entropy function 
often employed in the training of neural network 
classifiers (Baum & Wilczek 1988; Hertz et al. 1991; 
Hinton 1989), although it is derived here under a different 
context. In the cross-entropy function, qh; are the target 
posterior probabilities, and the objective is to minimize 
the 
Kullback-Leibler 
divergence 
of 
the 
posterior 
probability distribution from the target distribution. In the 
above formulation, qh; are meant to index the probabilities 
with respect to the class, but can also be interpreted as 
posterior probabilities as in the cross-entropy function. In 
this paper, we shall call any classifier that minimizes the 
cross-entropy function a probabilistic classifier. 
As an example, we can model the posterior probabilities 
using m linear 
classifiers. 
Each 
linear 
classifier 
implements a hyperplane that separates its corresponding 
class from the other classes. The equation of each 
hyperplane is 
[5] 
where wh is a weight vector and bh is a bias term. Each 
posterior probability is typically computed using the 
softmax function: 
(hI 
n ) -
exp(fh (x;)) 
p 
X;,Uh 
-
m 
L exp(fk (x; )) 
k 
[6] 
Hence, the parameter set ´ is {wh, bhl· Substituting the 
posterior probabilities into the cross-entropy function and 
using gradient descent to optimize it with respect to the 
parameters leads to the well-known perceptron learning 
rule (Rosenblatt 1962). 
Alternatively, we can model the posterior probabilities by 
the outputs of a multi-layered perceptron network. In this 
case, maximizing L by gradient descent leads to the 
backpropagation algorithm (Rumelhart et a! 1986). 
3 
THE POSSIBILISTIC FRAMEWORK 
In this section, we explore the extension of the likelihood 
function to other forms of uncertainty. 
In general, the 
measure p(h I X; , Oh) represents the amount of uncertainty 
in associating class h with X;, and probability is only one 
way to represent this uncertainty. Instead of probability, 
it can be the belief or confidence that the class of X; is h, 
or it can be the degree to which X; belongs to class h. All 
of these can be expressed in terms of possibilities (Bezdek 
et all999; Klir & Yuan 1995; Tanaka & Guo 1999). 
Both probability and possibility values range from 0 to 1. 
However, one key difference is that while probability 
distribution values sum up to 1, this is not a requirement 
for possibilistic distributions. In the case of conditional 
probabilities, the following condition must hold: 
m 
LP(hlxi'Oh)=l 
[7] 
h 
In the possibilistic case, the above condition is not 
mandatory. 
For uncertainty measures in general, the product operation 
as used in [1] may not be appropriate. 
We need to 
generalize it to conjunction operators that are better suited 
for handling a wide range of uncertainty measures. 
Hence, the total conditional likelihood for class h can be 
generalized as follows 
Lh = ® p(hlxi'Oh) 
[8] 
ily,=h 
where ® is a conjunction operator which can be any t­
norm (Gupta & Qi 1991). 
The generalized likelihood 
function to be maximized is then 
[9] 
In 
the 
case 
of 
possibilistic 
values, 
the 
standard 
conjunction operator is min. 
The min operator is 
especially suitable because it is non-interactive and hence 
assumes the least about the nature of the uncertainties. 
The possibilistic likelihood function is then 
[10] 
In this paper, we shall call any classifier that maximizes 
the above criterion a possibilistic classifier. 
An interesting special case arises in two-class linear 
discrimination, which we shall now study in detail in the 
next section. 

576 
UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
3.1 
TWO-CLASS LINEAR DISCRIMINATION 
For two classes, we redefine the class labels as + 1 and -1, 
i.e. y E { + 1, -1}. Only one hyperplane f (x) is required, 
and we define 
p(+ l l X; ,Oh) = g(f(x; )) 
p(-11 X; ,Oh) = g(-f(x;)) 
where, given the weight vector w and the bias term b, 
f(x) =w·x+b 
and g is the sigmoid or logistic function 
1 
g(z)= --
1 +e-z 
[11] 
[12] 
[13] 
We impose the constraint that the weight vector is 
normalized to unit length, i.e., lwl = 1. This gives f (x) a 
geometric interpretation: its magnitude is the Euclidean 
distance of x from the hyperplane. The constraint can be 
easily incorporated via a Lagrange multiplier A.. Thus the 
possibilistic likelihood function becomes 
L=log min g(f(x;))+log min g(-f(x;)) 
•iy,=+1 
•iy,=-1 
[14] 
-A-(w·w-1) 
Bearing in mind that the sigmoid function is monotonic 
increasing and that g( -z) = 1- g(z), this criterion can be 
equivalently written as 
L =log min g(f(x;))+ 
•iy,=+1 
log (1-;de1 g(f(x;)) )-A-(w · w-1) 
=log g( min f(x; ))+ 
•iy,=+1 
log (1- g(fde1 f(x;)) )-A-(w · w-1) 
[15] 
=log g( min(w·x;)+b)+ 
tly,=+1 
log (1- g(max(w ·x;)+b))-A-(w ·w-1) 
•iy,=-1 
The maximization of L can be better understood from the 
following theorems. 
Theorem 1. 
When L (as defined above) is maximized, the following 
equalities hold: 
(a) b =-.!.( min (w ·X;)+ max(w · X ; )) 
2 
ily,=+1 
ily,=-1 
D 
Part (a) of Theorem 1 can be proven easily by finding the 
derivative of L with respect to b, equating this derivative 
with 0, and solving for b. 
Parts (b) and (c) follow 
logically from part (a). The theorem is stating that the 
optimal hyperplane always lies exactly halfway between 
the boundaries of both classes. This forms the basis of the 
following theorems. 
Theorem2. 
If the training data is linearly separable, then when L is 
maximized, the following propositions are true: 
(a) 
(b) 
D 
min f(x;) > 0 
and 
max f(x;) < 0 
•ly,=+1 
ily,=-1 
The interclass margin 
( min f(x;)- max f(x;)) is maximized. 
•iy,=+1 
•ly,=-1 
Part (a) of Theorem 2, which follows from the definition 
of linear separability, is simply stating that when the 
training data is separable, all positive and negative 
samples must lie on opposite sides of the hyperplane. 
Part (b), an important result, follows from the application 
of Theorem 1(b, c) and the fact that both the logarithm 
and sigmoid functions are monotonic increasing. 
Theorem3. 
If the training data is linearly non-separable, then when L 
is maximized, the following propositions are true: 
(a) 
(b) 
D 
_min f(x;) $. 0 
and 
max f(x;) ' 0 
•ly,=+1 
ily,11 
The interclass overlap 
(max f(x;)- min f(x; )) is minimized. 
•ly,=-1 
•iy,=+1 
Theorem 3 can be proven in a similar way to Theorem 2. 
In short, the possibilistic linear classifier seeks a 
hyperplane that maximizes its displacement from the 
boundaries of both classes. For linearly separable data, 
maximizing L serves to maximize the interclass margin. 
In the non-separable case, maximizing L serves to 
minimize the interclass overlap. 
We can also describe the maximization of L conceptually 
as follows. The first term of Lin [13] corresponds to the 
positive samples furthest in the negative direction (with 
respect to the weight vector), while the second term 
corresponds to the negative samples furthest in the 

UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
577 
positive direction. 
Since the magnitude of f (x) is the 
Euclidean distance of x from the hyperplane, maximizing 
L "pushes" both sets of boundary samples apart in 
opposite directions along the weight vector. 
Finding the hyperplane that maximizes the interclass 
margin is also the same strategy adopted by a class of 
pattern classifiers known as support vector machines. In 
the next section, we show the equivalence between the 
possibilistic linear classifier and the support vector 
machine. 
4 
SUPPORT VECTOR MACHINES 
In the past few years, there has been increasingly 
widespread interest in a class of pattern classifiers known 
as support vector machines (SVMs), due to their strong 
theoretical foundations, the existence of global solutions, 
and most importantly, good generalization performance 
(Burges 1998; Cortes & Vapnik 1995; Scholkopf 1997; 
Vapnik 1995; Yang & Liu 1999). 
In a linear SVM trained on linearly separable data,/ (x) as 
defined in [12] is normalized such that 
f(x;) :2:+1 
for Y; =+1 
f(x;)::>-1 
fory;=-1 
The margin width is then equal to 
. 
/(X;) 
/(X;) 
mm--- max--
ily,;+l 1 w 1 
ily,;-1 1 w 1 
=-1-
1( min f(x;)- max f(x;)) 
1 w 
•ly,;+l 
•ly,;-1 
2 
=--
l w l 
[16] 
[17] 
That is, the margin width in this case is inversely 
proportional to the weight magnitude. 
The SVM maximizes the margin width indirectly by 
minimizing lwl subject to the constraints in [16]. This can 
be reformulated as the following quadratic programming 
criterion to be maximized: 
subject to the constraints 
'Vi a; :2:0 
[18] 
[19] 
where a.; are Lagrange multipliers to be determined. In a 
trained SVM, training vectors that correspond to CX; > 0 
are known as support vectors; these lie closest to the 
hyperplane and define the interclass boundaries. 
For the non-separable case, a user-specified error penalty 
term C is introduced, such that the constraints become 
'Vi O::>a; ::>C 
f,a;Y; =0 
In both cases, the solution weight vector is 
[20] 
[21] 
The bias term b can be chosen such that the hyperplane 
lies in the center of the margin. 
We can now make comparisons between the linear SVM 
and the possibilistic linear classifier. 
The linear SVM 
normalizes f (x) as in [16], while the possibilistic linear 
classifier normalizes the weight vector to unit length. The 
linear 
SVM 
maximizes 
the 
margin 
indirectly 
by 
minimizing the weight vector magnitude, as justified by 
structural risk minimization (Vapnik 1995). On the other 
hand, the possibilistic linear classifier maximizes the 
margin directly, as justified by uncertainty minimization. 
Since the hyperplane that maximizes the interclass margin 
is unique, so obviously both the possibilistic linear 
classifier and the linear SVM find the same solution 
despite the different formulations. 
From a maximum­
margin point of view, the linear SVM can be viewed as a 
possibilistic linear classifier. 
Note however that in the non-separable case, the 
possibilistic linear classifier does not require an error 
penalty term. This is because the possibilistic solution is 
the hyperplane that minimizes the interclass overlap. 
4.1 
NONLINEAR CLASSIFIERS 
The question arises as to whether possibilistic nonlinear 
classifiers would give better performance. For example, 
if we were to optimize the possibilistic criterion for a 
multi-layered perceptron network, would we get superior 
performance? In general, the answer is 'not necessarily'. 
Such a possibilistic nonlinear classifier might overfit the 
interclass boundary in order to maximize the margin 
width, thus resulting in poor generalization. Overfitting is 
also a phenomenon in probabilistic classifiers as well as 
in many other nonlinear statistical learning models. Some 
form of regularization or cross-validation is typically 
employed to reduce overfitting. 
A nonlinear SVM circumvents this problem to a certain 
extent by first mapping each input vector to a feature 
space of very high (possibly infinite) dimension via a 
fixed mapping ¢, and then applying a linear SVM in 
feature space. The equation of the hyperplane (in feature 
space) is 
f(x) = w ·¢(x)+b 
[22] 

578 
UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
In practice, we do not deal with the mapping tjJ explicitly, 
but rather through a kernel function K such that 
[23] 
Examples of kernel functions include 
Gaussian: 
[24] 
Polynomial: 
[25] 
where the kernel parameter a or d is chosen by the user. 
The kernel parameter controls the extent to which the 
system fits the data. It should be chosen to avoid either 
overfitting or over-generalization. 
The SVM solution for the hyperplane becomes 
[26] 
where the coefficients a; and the bias term b can be found 
using quadratic programming as in the linear case. 
We can adopt a similar approach in the possibilistic 
framework, by simply plugging the hyperplane equation 
[26] into the possibilistic likelihood function [14]. The 
possibilistic classifier would then maximize the interclass 
margin in feature space. Again, the same solution as that 
by the nonlinear SVM would be obtained. 
4.2 
ALTERNATIVE INTERPRETATIONS 
We have not found any attempts in the literature that cast 
the SVM in a possibilistic setting. 
However, there has 
been some recent work on the probabilistic interpretation 
of SVMs (Platt 1999; Sollich 1999). In (Platt 1999), for 
example, the output of a trained SVM is fitted with a 
parametric sigmoid, which is then treated as a class 
conditional probability. In (Sollich 1999), on the other 
hand, SVMs are interpreted as maximum a posteriori 
solutions to inference problems with Gaussian process 
priors. As shown earlier, our possibilistic interpretation 
leads naturally to the SVM solution. Whatever the case, 
different interpretations are based on different premises 
and have different implications. 
5 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
We have proposed an uncertainty framework that is 
characterized by a generalized likelihood function. We 
have shown that given different uncertainty measures, 
maximizing this likelihood function induces different 
types of classifiers. 
It is interesting that the same 
framework 
under 
different 
conditions 
(probabilistic 
versus possibilistic) would give rise to two very different 
classification criteria. Among other things, the proposed 
uncertainty framework allows us to view different types 
of classifiers from a unified perspective. 
If we can model the underlying probability distributions 
accurately and reliably, then it would be appropriate to 
use 
the 
probabilistic 
framework. 
Otherwise, 
the 
possibilistic framework might be a better alternative, 
since it makes weaker assumptions about the uncertainties 
involved. 
There is a vast amount of literature on the probabilistic 
approach to classification (Devroye et al. 1996; Jurgen 
1996; Langley et al 1992), as well as on the possibilistic 
approach (Bezdek et al 1999; Klir & Yuan 1995; Tanaka 
& Guo 1999). 
As far as we know, our treatment of 
uncertainty in the context of classification is distinct from 
those in the literature. 
From another perspective, it is also interesting that two 
very different formulations would arrive at the same 
classification strategy. 
For example, the possibilistic 
classifier is based on minimizing the classification 
uncertainty, while the SVM is based on minimizing the 
structural risk. 
Their formulations are different. 
Yet, 
both give the same solution based on maximizing the 
interclass margin, either in input space for the linear case 
or in feature space for the nonlinear case. 
In this paper, we have studied only a small part of the 
proposed uncertainty framework. Indeed, there is much 
more to explore, such as other conjunction operators, 
other uncertainty representations, the multi-class case, and 
the derivation of new learning algorithms.
