An Adversarial Benchmark for Fake News Detection Models
Lorenzo Jaime Yu Flores1, Yiding Hao1
1Yale University
New Haven, Connecticut 06520

Abstract
With the proliferation of online misinformation, fake news
detection has gained importance in the artiﬁcial intelligence
community. In this paper, we propose an adversarial bench-
mark that tests the ability of fake news detectors to reason
about real-world facts. We formulate adversarial attacks that
target three aspects of “understanding”: compositional se-
mantics, lexical relations, and sensitivity to modiﬁers. We
test our benchmark using BERT classiﬁers ﬁne-tuned on the
LIAR (Wang 2017) and Kaggle Fake-News datasets (UTK
Machine Learning Club 2017), and show that both models
fail to respond to changes in compositional and lexical mean-
ing. Our results strengthen the need for such models to be
used in conjunction with other fact checking methods.
Introduction
As online media plays an increasingly impactful role in
modern social and political movements, the ability to detect
and halt the ﬂow of misinformation has become the subject
of substantial research in the artiﬁcial intelligence commu-
nity. An important component of this research is the task of
fake news detection—a natural language classiﬁcation task
in which a model must determine whether a news article
is intentionally deceptive (Rubin, Chen, and Conroy 2015).
Unfortunately, fake news detection is as challenging as it
is important. In order to successfully distinguish fake news
articles from genuine ones, a model must not only be proﬁ-
cient in natural language understanding, but also be able to
incorporate world knowledge into its computation, including
knowledge of current events.
The inherent difﬁculty of this task, as well as the so-
cial and political incentives that encourage development of
methods for evading content ﬁlters, raises questions sur-
rounding the robustness of fake news detectors against ad-
versarially written articles. To that end, a number of studies,
such as Zhou et al. (2019), Ali et al. (2021), and Koenders
et al. (2021), have subjected fake news detectors to a battery
of attacks. All three of these studies have been able to pro-
duce cleverly written fake news articles that evade detection.
This paper proposes an adversarial benchmark for fake
news detection that is designed to target three aspects of a
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
model’s “understanding”: whether it has the ability to em-
ploy semantic composition, whether it incorporates world
knowledge of political parties, and whether adverb inten-
sity is employed as a signal of fake news. Our benchmark is
based on the premise that an ideal fake news detector should
base its classiﬁcation on the semantic content of its input and
its relation to real-world facts, and not on superﬁcial features
of the text. This means that models that are vulnerable to our
attacks are likely to be overly reliant on heuristics relating to
word choice while failing to extract substantive assertions
made by the articles they are tested on.
To test our benchmark, we ﬁne-tune BERT classiﬁers
(Devlin et al. 2019) on the LIAR dataset (Wang 2017)
and the Kaggle Fake-News dataset (UTK Machine Learn-
ing Club 2017) and subject them to our three adversarial at-
tacks. Since BERT is pre-trained on a large corpus of books
(Zhu et al. 2015) and Wikipedia articles, it is possible that a
BERT-based fake news detector might contain world knowl-
edge that could be leveraged for fake news detection. For the
most part, this is not borne out by our results: we ﬁnd that
our models are vulnerable to two of our three attacks, sug-
gesting that they lack the ability both to extract the content
of an article and to compare this content to the knowledge
provided by the pre-training corpus.
Related Work
A number of authors have employed neural text models for
fake news classiﬁcation. These include deep diffusion net-
works (Zhang, Dong, and Yu 2020), recurrent and convolu-
tional networks (Ruchansky, Seo, and Liu 2017; Yang et al.
2018; Nasir, Khan, and Varlamis 2021), and BERT-based
models (Ding, Hu, and Chang 2020; Kaliyar, Goswami, and
Narang 2021). Common benchmarks for fake news detec-
tion are the LIAR dataset (Wang 2017) and the Kaggle
Fake-News dataset (UTK Machine Learning Club 2017).
Ding, Hu, and Chang’s (2020) BERT-based model achieved
state of the art results on the LIAR dataset, while Kali-
yar, Goswami, and Narang’s (2021) FakeBERT architecture
achieved state of the art results on the Kaggle Fake-News
dataset.
On adversarial attacks for fake news detection, previous
literature has shown that fake news detection models can
be fooled by carefully tweaked input. Ali et al. (2021) and
Koenders et al. (2021) applied a series of text based adver-
arXiv:2201.00912v1  [cs.CL]  3 Jan 2022

Original Statement
Modiﬁed Statement
Negation Attack
EU, Finland can help settle-
ment of Syria conﬂict: Iran
parliament speaker.
EU, Finland can not help set-
tlement of Syria conﬂict: Iran
parliament speaker.
Julian Assange ends the sus-
pense: “the source of hacked

Julian Assange ends the sus-
pense: “the source of hacked

Party Reversal Attack
John Kerry rejects sugges-
tions of U.S. involvement in
Turkey coup
Sarah Sanders rejects sugges-
tions of U.S. involvement in
Turkey coup
Donald Trump threatens to
cancel Berkeley federal funds
after riots shut down Milo
event.
Elizabeth Warren threatens to
cancel Berkeley federal funds
after riots shut down Milo
event.
Adverb Intensity Attack
The western banking system
is totally broken, totally insol-
vent and totally corrupt.
The western banking system
is broken, insolvent and cor-
rupt.
Trump nation absolutely re-
jects Mitt Romney for secre-
tary of state pick.
Trump
nation
rejects
Mitt
Romney for secretary of state
pick.
Table 1: Adversarial examples generated by the negation at-
tack, party reversal attack, and adverb intensity attack
sarial attacks including Text Bugger (Li et al. 2019), Text-
Fooler (Jin et al. 2020), DeepWordBug (Gao et al. 2018)
and Pruthi (Pruthi, Dhingra, and Lipton 2019). These are
generic attacks for natural language models consisting of
textual noise such as typos, character swaps, and synonym
substitution. In addition to these standard attacks, Zhou et al.
(2021) proposed three novel challenges for fake news de-
tectors: (1) modifying details of a sentence involving time,
location, etc., (2) swapping the subject and object of a sen-
tence, and (3) adding causal relationships between events in
a sentence or removing some of its parts.
The attacks we mention above mainly simulate noise that
might appear in online text. In contrast, the attacks we pro-
pose are speciﬁcally tailored to the problem of fake news
detection, particularly in the context of politics. Our attacks
are not designed to simulate naturally occurring noise, but
rather to test whether deep-learning models understand text,
learn real-world facts, and employ inferential reasoning.
Adversarial Attacks
For this paper, we consider a statement to be fake if it is
factually incorrect, and real otherwise. We choose three at-
tacks that would test a model’s understanding of text and
real-world facts. Our goal is to see whether the models tweak
their outputs accordingly when the truthfulness of an input
has been changed, or keep them unchanged otherwise. We
provide examples of each attack in Table 1.
For each adversarial attack, we input the original and
modiﬁed statements into the model. Then, we compute (1)
the percentage of instances where the predicted label was
different for the original and modiﬁed statement (%LabelFlip),
and (2) the average change in output probability that the
statement is fake (∆Prob), where a positive change means the
attack increases the probability that the statement is fake.
Negating Sentences
In the ﬁrst attack, we negate the sentences of each input text
using a script due to Bajena (2017). The script heuristically
attempts to identify sentences with a third-person singular
subject, and changes linking verbs such as is, was, or should
into is not, was not, and should not, and vice versa. While the
script is not guaranteed to negate a sentence completely, we
assume that it tweaks the semantics of the dataset enough
to justify a conspicuous effect on the classiﬁcation proba-
bilities. We assume that an ideal fake news detector would
assign opposite labels to a text and its negation.
Reversing Political Party Afﬁliations
In the second attack, we attempt to reverse the political party
afﬁliations of named individuals appearing in the text. We
identify names of American politicians in the text along with
their party afﬁliations, and ﬁlter statements to those contain-
ing names from the Republican or Democratic Party. Then,
we manually ﬁlter the remaining statements to only include
real statements where replacing the original name with a ran-
dom one would make the sentence untrue. In each of these
texts, we replace names of Democrats with a randomly se-
lected Republican, and vice versa.
The statements in the adversarial dataset consist of quotes,
facts, or events associated with particular individuals. We
therefore expect that name replacement should cause the
model to classify a modiﬁed statement as fake.
Reducing Intensity of Statements
In the third attack, we remove adverbs that increase sen-
tences’ intensity (e.g. absolutely, completely). We hypoth-
esize that fake news is correlated with “clickbait” titles con-
taining highly charged words (Alonso et al. 2021).
Removing polarizing words does not change the meaning
of a sentence, thus the label should not change. For this at-
tack, we input fake statements into the model, and expect
that the model should still classify them as fake.
Experimental Setup
We test our benchmark on three ﬁne-tuned BERTBASE classi-
ﬁers: two trained on the LIAR dataset and one trained on the
Kaggle Fake-News dataset. For each benchmark, we apply
our three transformations to the detector’s test set, present
the resulting texts to the appropriate models, and report the
two metrics from the previous section, %LabelFlip and ∆Prob.1
1The code for our experiments is available at the following
repository: https://github.com/ljyﬂores/fake-news-explainability.

Dataset
SOTA
Our Model
LIAR 2 Classes
—
57.5
LIAR 6 Classes
27.3
29.4
Kaggle Fake-News
98.9
98.8
Table 2: Test set accuracy attained by our models, compared
with previously reported state-of-the-art results.
Models
Below we describe our three models.
LIAR Models
LIAR (Wang 2017) is a six-class dataset
that classiﬁes statements made by politicians as True, Mostly
True, Half True, Barely True, False, and Pants on Fire. We
train two models on this dataset, which differ in the num-
ber of possible output labels the model can predict. First,
to verify that our BERT model achieves a level of perfor-
mance comparable with the results reported by Ding, Hu,
and Chang (2020) for LIAR, we train a six-class BERT clas-
siﬁer on the original version of the dataset. Next, in order to
facilitate compatibility with the adversarial attacks, we train
a two-class model that collapses the True, Mostly True, and
Half True labels into a single Real class and the Barely True,
False, and Pants on Fire labels into a single Fake class.
Kaggle
Fake-News
Model
The
Kaggle
Fake-News
dataset (UTK Machine Learning Club 2017) is a two-class
dataset consisting of headlines and text from news articles
published during the 2016 United States presidential elec-
tion. Our third model is a two-class classiﬁer ﬁne-tuned on
this dataset. Since the ofﬁcially published version of the
dataset only contains gold-standard labels for the training
data, we use 70% of the training set for training and the re-
maining 30% for testing.
Feature Saliency Analysis
In addition to reporting %LabelFlip and ∆Prob, we compute
saliency maps for our Kaggle Fake-News model using the
Gradient × Input method (G × I, Shrikumar, Greenside, and
Kundaje 2017; Shrikumar et al. 2017) to measure how indi-
vidual words impact the models’ classiﬁcations. G × I is
a local explanation method that quantiﬁes how much each
input contributes to the output logits. In G × I, the contribu-
tion of a feature is measured by the value of its correspond-
ing term in a linear approximation of the target output unit.
We obtain token-level saliency scores by adding together the
saliency scores assigned to the embedding dimensions for
each token.
Results
Before discussing our results, we validate the quality of our
models by comparing their performance with the current
state of the art. These results are shown in Table 2. The six-
class version of our LIAR model slightly outperforms the
BERT-Based Mental Model of Ding, Hu, and Chang (2020),
while our Kaggle Fake-News model achieves a compara-
Dataset
%LabelFlip
∆Prob
LIAR 2 Classes
15.5
0.021
Kaggle Fake-News
0.3
−0.0001
Table 3: Impact of the negation attack on our models.
Dataset
%LabelFlip
∆Prob
LIAR 2 Classes
20.0
0.052
Kaggle Fake-News
4.0
0.014
Table 4: Impact of the political party reversal attack on our
models.
ble level of performance to Kaliyar, Goswami, and Narang’s
(2021) FakeBERT model.2
Negation Attack
Table 3 shows the impact of the sentence negation adversar-
ial attack on the outputs of our two-class models. The Kag-
gle Fake-News model proves to be much more vulnerable to
this attack than the LIAR model, though the vast majority
of predictions were unchanged for both models. We observe
in particular that negation causes only in a small increase in
the probability scores assigned to the Fake class, despite the
fact that the negation script targets the main auxiliary verb
of the sentence, which typically has the effect of completely
reverses the meaning of a sentence.
Party Reversal Attack
Table 4 shows the impact of the name replacement attack
on the models. Again, we ﬁnd that the Kaggle Fake-News
model is more susceptible to this attack than the LIAR
model. Although most labels are still unchanged, we ﬁnd
that this attack has a greater impact on our models than
the negation attack. It is therefore likely that our models
are more sensitive to lexical relationships between speciﬁc
words appearing in a statement than to the syntactic relation-
ships that govern negation.
Adverb Intensity Attack
Table 5 shows the impact of the intensity-reduction attack
on the models. As shown, this attack has almost no effect on
the models’ output. Since the expected behavior is for the
output predictions to remain unchanged, our models can be
deemed to be robust to this attack. This result suggests that
adverb intensity is not a signiﬁcant heuristic for fake news
classiﬁcation.
2It is worth noting that Kaliyar, Goswami, and Narang (2021)
did not perform a train–test split on the ofﬁcially published training
data for Kaggle Fake-News, but instead used the entire training set
for both training and evaluation. Thus, the SOTA result in Table 2
is not directly comparable with our result, since the former may be
inﬂated due to overﬁtting.

Dataset
%LabelFlip
∆Prob
LIAR 2 Classes
0.0
0.027
Kaggle Fake-News
0.9
−0.008
Table 5: Impact of the adverb intensity attack on our models.
Figure 1: On average, words that appear more frequently in
the datasets are assigned saliency scores closer to 0.
Saliency Analysis
We use G × I heatmaps to identify keywords that may serve
as signals for one class over the other. Due to its superior
test set performance, we apply the saliency analysis to our
Kaggle Fake-News model. We compute saliency scores for
the Fake class, so that a positive saliency score means that a
word increases the likelihood that the input is fake.
Figure 1 shows that frequency affects the degree to which
a word may be associated with real or fake statements.
Here, we ﬁnd that words which appear in fewer documents
are assigned more extreme saliency scores. Among the top
30 words with the most extreme G × I scores are names
that appear once or twice in the dataset, such as Sanford,
Jody, Marco, and Gore. In contrast, frequently-occurring
names such as Trump, Hillary, and Obama have average G
× I scores close to zero. This is likely because frequently-
occurring names appear in a wider variety of publications,
preventing them from being consistently associated with any
particular ideological bias.
Figure 2 visualizes the impact of high-intensity adverbs
on our model. Observe that the adverbs totally and com-
pletely have small G × I scores in comparison to other words
in the sentence. This reﬂects the resilience of our model
against the adverb intensity attack.
Conclusion
In this study, we have created an adversarial benchmark for
fake news detection that is designed to test models’ ability to
reason about real-world facts. We ﬁnd that our BERT-based
models are vulnerable to negation and party reversal attacks,
whereas they are robust to the adverb intensity attack. For all
three attacks, our model did not change its prediction in the
vast majority of cases, and accordingly the only attack our
models were robust to was the one that required the mod-
els’ behavior to remain unchanged. It may be the case that
Figure 2: High-intensity adverbs have relatively small con-
tributions to the output logits.
the models are simply unresponsive to the perturbations we
performed on the inputs.
Deep learning has demonstrated an impressive level of
competence in learning dependencies and relationships in
natural language tasks. However, our ﬁndings suggest that
current techniques are still not sufﬁcient for tasks like fake
news detection that require sophisticated forms of reason-
ing. As the state of the art in fake news detection continues
to advance, our benchmark will serve as a valuable metric
for the reasoning capabilities of future models.
These ﬁndings strengthen the need for fake news clas-
siﬁcation models to be used in conjunction with other fact
checking methods. Other work made strides in this area by
exploring features like comments on an article (Shu et al.
2019) or article interaction metrics article (likes, shares,
retweets) that may signify an article is being maliciously
spread (Prakash and Tucker 2021; Tschiatschek et al. 2018),
or the possibility of incorporating crowd sourced knowledge
or human fact checkers into the process altogether (Demar-
tini, Mizzaro, and Spina 2020; Pennycook and Rand 2019).
We also observed that the model trained on LIAR was
more sensitive (i.e. more labels were ﬂipped) than the model
trained on the Fake-News dataset. Upon reading the data, we
observed that statements in LIAR were generally less polar
and more focused on facts, whereas the Fake-News dataset
appeared to be a mixed bag of headlines with more polar-
izing words. This suggests that data quality greatly impacts
models’ ability to learn facts and understand text.
Limitations of this work are that (1) the models were
trained on only two datasets, and the results may not gen-
eralize to statements unrelated to general US politics, (2)
computational limitations only let us explore shallow neu-
ral network architectures, and (3) the adversarial attacks we
tried were relatively simple, and a real human may be able
to negate or change the intensity of a sentence in more com-
plex ways. Future work could employ more data sets as the
training corpus, explore deeper model architectures, and use
more complex adversarial attacks, for a more robust evalua-
tion of these fake news models.
