Multi-View MOOC Quality Evaluation via Information-Aware
Graph Representation Learning
Lu Jiang1, Yibin Wang1, Jianan Wang1*, Pengyang Wang2∗, Minghao Yin1,3∗
1School of Computer Science and Information Technology, Northeast Normal University, China
2Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Macau, China
3Key Laboratory of Applied Statistics of MOE, Northeast Normal University, Changchun, China

Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of MOOC quality eval-
uation which is essential for improving the course mate-
rials, promoting students’ learning efﬁciency, and beneﬁt-
ing user services. While achieving promising performances,
current works still suffer from the complicated interactions
and relationships of entities in MOOC platforms. To tackle
the challenges, we formulate the problem as a course rep-
resentation learning task-based and develop an Information-
aware Graph Representation Learning(IaGRL) for multi-
view MOOC quality evaluation. Speciﬁcally, We ﬁrst build
a MOOC Heterogeneous Network (HIN) to represent the in-
teractions and relationships among entities in MOOC plat-
forms. And then we decompose the MOOC HIN into multi-
ple single-relation graphs based on meta-paths to depict the
multi-view semantics of courses. The course representation
learning can be further converted to a multi-view graph repre-
sentation task. Different from traditional graph representation
learning, the learned course representations are expected to
match the following three types of validity: (1) the agreement
on expressiveness between the raw course portfolio and the
learned course representations; (2) the consistency between
the representations in each view and the uniﬁed representa-
tions; (3) the alignment between the course and MOOC plat-
form representations. Therefore, we propose to exploit mu-
tual information for preserving the validity of course repre-
sentations. We conduct extensive experiments over real-world
MOOC datasets to demonstrate the effectiveness of our pro-
posed method.
Introduction
Massive open online course (MOOC) has been prevalent for
online tutoring and self-studying in recent decades by pro-
viding numerous course materials, intermediate feedback,
and interactions between student and instructors. Among
which, MOOC course quality evaluation is one of the vi-
tal tasks in MOOC platform management for helping im-
prove the course materials, promote students’ learning ef-
ﬁciency (Jiang et al. 2021), and beneﬁt user services (e.g.,
course recommendation (Wang et al. 2022; Jiang et al.
2022a), cognitive diagnosis (Jiang et al. 2022b), etc).
*Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
Current studies in MOOC quality evaluation lie in two
aspects: (1) manual evaluation (Wang et al. 2021), which
evaluates the course quality by domain experts based on
a pre-deﬁned rubric; and (2) automated evaluation (P´erez-
Mart´ın, Rodr´ıguez-Ascaso, and Molanes-Lopez 2021; Be-
tanzos, Costa-juss`a, and Belanche 2017), which judges the
course quality automatically based on historical records in
the platform. While achieving promising results, current
works still exhibit limitations: First of all, manual-based
methods are time-consuming and labor-intensive. And, in
most of cases, the experts do not have the complete domain
knowledge to evaluate every course on the MOOC platform.
Second, most of the automated methods utilize students’
reviews as the criteria for evaluating course quality. How-
ever, students’ evaluation of the quality of MOOCs is biased
and subjective, and cannot yield uniﬁed evaluations. In fact,
course quality evaluation in the MOOC platform is a com-
plicated process involving by multiple parties, which can be
examined from different views. Therefore, integrating se-
mantics and opinions from different views to inform uniﬁed
representations of the course becomes the key to reasonable
MOOC quality evaluation.
However, two unique challenges arise in achieving this
goal. First, how to design an appropriate data structure for
capturing complex interactions among different types of en-
tities in the MOOCs platform? Second, how should we guar-
antee the validity of the multi-view representations? Next,
we will outline how we tackle these challenges.
First, in a MOOCs platform, we observe that in addition to
the student and course, there exist multiple types of entities
and multiple types of relationships between pairs of differ-
ent entities. The complex MOOC data structures are always
represented in heterogeneous information networks (MOOC
HIN) (Shi et al. 2017). Considering the participation of mul-
tiple entities on the MOOC platform and the impact of inter-
actions between entities and courses on MOOC quality eval-
uation. It is difﬁcult to obtain a comprehensive evaluation of
the MOOC quality if we merely depend on a single view.
Only utilizing a single type of interaction may overlook im-
portant relationships between courses and other entities. For
example, ”student click course” and ”teacher upload course”
have dissimilar semantics even though they are included in
the same course. These heterogeneous relationships provide
rich information from multi-view. Thus, it requires incorpo-
arXiv:2301.01593v1  [cs.CY]  1 Jan 2023

rating these heterogeneous relationships into the represen-
tation learning of the course entities. To address the above
issues, we use meta-paths (Sun et al. 2017) as the guidance
to capture multi-view representations of courses in MOOC
heterogeneous information network.
Second, although multi-view node embedding can be ob-
tained by performing representation learning on MOOC
HIN, how guaranteeing the validity of the learned course
representations remains a challenge. Speciﬁcally, the valid-
ity of course representations lies in three aspects: (1) the
course representations should preserve the same semantics
as the raw course portfolio; (2) the representations in each
view should be consistent with the uniﬁed representations of
the course; (3) the course representations should be aligned
with the overall representations of the MOOC platform. The
three types of validity indicate strong correlations between
the three pairs of representations. Therefore, to ensure valid-
ity, we aim to maximize the three correlations between the
pair of course representations and the raw course portfolio,
the pair of uniﬁed course representations and each view, and
the pair of course representations and platform representa-
tions. In this paper, we exploit mutual information (MI), a
powerful correlation measure, to quantify the correlations in
each pair of representations.
In summary, we propose an Information-aware Graph
Representation Learning(IaGRL) for multi-view MOOC
quality evaluation. The main contributions are as follows:
• We formulate the problem of MOOC quality evaluation
as a multi-view graph representation learning task.
• We construct MOOC HIN and propose to exploit meta-
paths to extract the semantics of MOOC relationships in
different views.
• We identify three types of validity of course representa-
tions, and provide an information-aware course represen-
tation learning framework.
• We conduct extensive experiments over real-world
MOOC datasets to validate the effectiveness of our pro-
posed method.
Deﬁnitions and Problem Statement
We introduce the key deﬁnitions and the problem state-
ment. Then we present the overview of the proposed method.
Some important notations are summarized in Table 1.
Deﬁnitions and Problem Statement
Deﬁnition 1 MOOC Heterogeneous Information Net-
work(HIN) A MOOC HIN is deﬁned as G = (V, E) with
a node type mapping function φ : V →N and an edge
type mapping function ψ : E →R. Speciﬁcally, in MOOC
HIN, there are four types of nodes: students(denoted as U),
teachers(denoted as T), courses(denoted as C), and sub-
jects(denoted as S). And there are three types of links:
”click” which is to demonstrate the relation between stu-
dents and courses, ”upload” which is to demonstrate the re-
lation between teachers and courses, and ”include” which
is to demonstrate the relation between subjects and courses.
The MOOC HIN is deﬁned as the following groups of
Table 1: Symbol and Deﬁnitions
Symbol
Deﬁnition
G
A given MOOC heterogeneous graph
V, E
Set of nodes, edges
v, e
MOOC HIN node, edge
MP
A set of meta-paths
X
The features matrix of courses
A
The adjacency matrix base different meta-paths
˜D
The diagonal matrix base different meta-paths
˜h
The multi-view course representation
W
The weights of GCN layer
h
The uniﬁed course representation
αMPi
The importance of each meta-path
M
The platform representation
D
Mutual information based discriminator
λq, λj, λs, λy
The weight of different losses
triplet facts:(1) <student, ”click”, course>, (2) <teacher,
”upload”, course>, and (3) <subject, ”include”, course>.
Deﬁnition 2 Meta-path based on MOOC HIN A meta-
path MP based on MOOC HIN is deﬁned as a path in
the form of V1
E1
→V2
E2
→· · ·
El
→Vl+1(abbreviated as
V1, V2, · · · , Vl+1), which describes a composite relation
E = E1 ◦E2 ◦· · · ◦El between object V1, V2, · · · , Vl+1,
where ◦denotes the composition operator on relations. In
the MOOC HIN, two courses can be connected via multiple
paths, e.g., C
upload
−→
T
upload−1
−→
C, C
click
−→U
click−1
−→
C,
C
include
−→
S
include−1
−→
C. A set of meta-paths are deﬁned as
MP = {MP1, MP2, · · · MP||MP ||}.
Deﬁnition 3 Problem Statement In this paper, we study
the problem of MOOC quality evaluation. We formulate
the problem as an information-aware graph representation
learning task. Formally, we aim to ﬁnd a mapping function
f : G →h that takes the MOOC HIN G as input, and outputs
information-aware representations h = {h1, h2, ..., hN},
for evaluating the course quality on a MOOC platform.
Method
In this section, we ﬁrst present an overview of our proposed
framework. Then, we introduce the multi-view course rep-
resentation learning with validity guarantee in detail.
Framework Overview
Figure 1 shows an overview of the proposed two-stage
framework: (1) Stage 1: multi-view course representation
of learning; and (2) Stage 2: course representation validity
guarantee. Speciﬁcally, in Stage 1, we extracted our three
meta-paths from the MOOC HIN and constructed the course
adjacency matrix under three different views through the
meta-path. Then, we proposed to learn the representation of
course under different views by using the graph convolu-
tional network(GCN) (Kipf and Welling 2016a) through the
encoder-decoder paradigm. By minimizing the reconstruc-
tion loss that follows the convention of contrastive learning
styles. In Stage 2, we exploit MI maximization to ensure

MP2
Self-
atten
tion
Mean
Unified Course 
Representation 𝒉
Platform
Representation 𝑴
𝒎𝒊𝒏𝑨−෡𝑨
𝒎𝒂𝒙𝑴𝑰(𝑿, 𝒉)
𝒎𝒂𝒙𝑴𝑰(𝑴, 𝒉)
𝑿, 𝑨
෡𝑨
Reconstructed
Graph
Inner Product
Decoder
Multi-View 
Representation ෩𝒉
𝒎𝒂𝒙𝑴𝑰(෩𝒉, 𝒉)
Student
Teacher
Subject
Course
MOOC HIN
Course Representation Learning
Validity Guarantee
Figure 1: Framework Overview.
the three types of course representation validity, with (i) the
agreement on expressiveness between the raw course port-
folio and the learned course representations; (ii) the con-
sistency between the representations in each view and the
uniﬁed representations; and (iii) the alignment between the
course and MOOC platform representations.
Course Representation Learning
Multi-View
Representations.
Given
the
MOOC
HIN G = (V, E) with a set of meta-paths MP
=
{MP1, MP2, · · · MP||MP ||} and the corresponding adja-
cency matrix A = {A1, A2, · · · A|MP |}, and |MP| denotes
the number of meta-paths. Let X = {X1, X2, · · · Xn}
denoted as the course attribute matrix of the MOOC HIN.
In this paper, the course attributes are represented by a
d-dimensional vector that describes the contents of the
course, including the headline, abstract, etc. The course
attribute matrix is generated through the Doc2Vec (Le and
Mikolov 2014) model.
For better generality, we learn multi-view representation
with GCN in an unsupervised fashion. We use generalized
advantage estimation(GAE) (Schulman et al. 2016) to learn
representation in an encode-decode paradigm. Speciﬁcally,
the encoder is a GCN with the following layer-wise propa-
gation rule, the multi-view course representation can be de-
noted as:
˜h = (˜D
−1
2 ˜A˜D
−1
2 )XW,
(1)
where ˜A = A + I is the adjacency matrix corresponds to
a single meta-path with self-connections and I is the iden-
tity matrix. ˜Dii = P
i ˜Aij is the diagonal matrix, and W is
the weight. The decoder is an inner product of the learned
representation to recover the adjacency matrix:
ˆA = sigmoid(˜h˜h
T )
(2)
The objective is to minimize the reconstruction loss be-
tween the original adjacency matrix ˜A and reconstructed
adjacency matrix ˆA. We follow the implementation of
VGAE (Kipf and Welling 2016b) to do the sampling and
loss optimization: we take connected neighbors as positive
nodes, and disconnected nodes as negative nodes, and sam-
ple a few of them to construct the data samples. We expect
positive samples to be connected, and negative samples to
be disconnected after reconstruction, thus the reconstruction
is converted to a classiﬁcation task, which can be optimized
using cross-entropy loss.
Lq = −logˆApos −log(1 −ˆAneg),
(3)
where ˆApos and ˆAneg are derived from the positive course
nodes pairs and the negative course node pairs respectively,
based on Equation 3.
Uniﬁed
Course
Representation.
Going
through
the
GAE, we learn the representations for each meta-path. How-
ever, different meta-paths should not be considered equally.
To address this problem, we adopt the idea of heterogeneous

deep graph infomax(HDGI) (Ren et al. 2019), and utilize the
self-attention mechanism to fuse the embedding of courses
learned under the guide of different meta-paths and gener-
ate the uniﬁed course embedding. Speciﬁcally, we learn the
self-attention weights for different meta-paths as follows:
h =
|MP |
X
i
att(˜hi),
(4)
where att(·) indicates the self-attention function, and h in-
dicates the uniﬁed course representation, which has inte-
grated the self-attention weights of different meta-paths. In
this paper, we mainly focus on the course from a multi-view.
In order to make representations from different meta-paths
comparable, we transform each course’s representation from
a different view with a linear transformation. The parame-
ters are shared weight matrix W′ and shared bias vector ⃗b.
Based on the distinguishing ability of views, we introduce
the shared attention vector ⃗q of different views to calculate
the importance of each view. The importance of the meta-
paths can be calculated as follows:
aMPi =
1
|MP|
|MP |
X
j=1
tanh(⃗qT · [W′ · ˜h
MP i
j
+⃗b])
(5)
Then, we use the softmax function to normalize the im-
portance of meta-paths, the normalized weight of each meta-
path can be calculated as follows:
αMPi =
exp(aMPi)
P|MP |
j=1 exp(aMPj)
(6)
The self-attention uniﬁed course representation h can be
represented as follows:
h =
|MP |
X
i=1
αMPi˜hi
(7)
Validity Guarantee
Raw Portfolio-Representation Agreement.
The learned
course representations are expected to achieve agreement
with the raw course portfolio in describing courses. We re-
fer to this as Raw Portfolio-Representation Agreement. We
use mutual information (MI) to quantify the agreement be-
tween the representation h learned by the course node in the
uniﬁed view and the representation X of the raw features of
the MOOC. Following the idea of DIM and DGI (Velick-
ovic et al. 2019), a Jensen Shannon MI estimator is deﬁned
to estimate and maximize the MI between X and h:
MI(X, h) :=EX[−sp(−D(X, h(MP )))]+
E¯X[sp(D(X, h(MP )))],
(8)
where sp is the softplus function that sp(c) × log(1 + ec), X
is the positive sample set and ¯X is negative sample set. We
will present how we generate positive and negative samples
later. Since the noise-contrastive type objective with a stan-
dard binary cross-entropy (BCE) can effectively maximize
mutual information, we deﬁne the loss function as:
Lj = −
1
|MP|
|MP |
X
j=1
X
i
EX[logDj(X(MP j)
i
, hi)]−
E¯X[log(1 −Dj(˜X
(MP j)
i
, hi))],
(9)
where Dj denotes a discriminator to justify the given pairs as
positive or negative. For the k-th view, we regard the positive
sample as the pair of (X(MP j)
i
, hi) and the negative samples
as the pairs of ( ˜X(MP j)
i
, hi).
Multi-View Consistency.
Although we deconstruct het-
erogeneous graphs into different views, the course represen-
tations in each view are expected to be consistent with the
uniﬁed course representations in semantics, which is deﬁned
as multi-view consistency. We propose to exploit MI to mea-
sure the multi-view consistency. First, we get the multi-view
representation ˜h and uniﬁed course representation h. Specif-
ically, h is obtained from self-attention on the one hand and
˜h is obtained from the GCN encoder. Then, we use neural
network estimation MI (h; ˜h) to maximize the mutual in-
formation between the uniﬁed course representation h and
multi-view representation ˜h. We have a similar noise con-
trastive loss function:
Ls = −
1
|MP|
|MP |
X
j=1
X
i
EX[logDs(hi, ˜h
(MPj)
i
)]−
E¯X[log(1 −Ds(hi, ´h
(MP j)
i
))],
(10)
where Ds denotes a discriminator for discriminating posi-
tive consistent pairs, hi is uniﬁed course representation. ´hi is
the result of ˜h after random shufﬂing. For the k-th view, we
design the positive samples as the pairs of (hi, ˜h
(MP j)
i
), and
the negative samples as the pairs of (hi, ´h
(MP j)
i
). The ob-
jective is to minimize Ls, which is equivalent to maximize
MI(h, ˜h).
Course-Platform Alignment.
While there is no doubt
that the courses are different from each other, the course
representations are required to align with the MOOC plat-
form representations within the same semantic scope. To ac-
complish the course-platform alignment, we ﬁrst obtain the
platform representation by considering it as the graph-level
representation of MOOC HIN for courses. Along this line,
we take the platform summary vector M by averaging over
all course representations:
M = σ( 1
N
N
X
i=1
hi),
(11)
where σ is the sigmoid function and N is the number of
course nodes. We continue to leverage MI to capture the

course-platform alignment, by maximizing the MI between
In order to maximize course-platform alignment, we intro-
duce MI and then based on the relationship between the
Jensen-Shanno degree and mutual information. We can max-
imize the mutual information between platform representa-
tion and uniﬁed course representation using the binary cross-
entropy loss of the discriminator as follows:
Ly = −
X
i
EX[logDy(hi, M)]−
E¯X[log(1 −Dy(¯hi, M))],
(12)
where Dy denotes a discriminator to provide probability
scores for sampled course-platform pairs, h is uniﬁed course
representation.¯h is the result of h after random shufﬂing. We
design the positive samples as the pairs of (hi, M), and the
negative samples as the pairs of (¯hi, M). The objective is to
minimize Ly, which is equivalent to maximize MI(h, M).
Optimization
The loss of the model includes: (i) the contrastive learning
loss for graph reconstruction λq (Equation 3); (ii) the raw
portfolio-representation agreement learning loss λj (Equa-
tion 9); (iii) the multi-view consistency learning loss λs
(Equation 10); and (iv) the course-platform alignment learn-
ing loss λy (Equation 11). The objective is to minimize the
overall loss L as follows:
L = λqLq + λjLj + λsLs + λyLy
(13)
where λq, λj, λs and λy are the weights for Lq, Lj, Ls and
Ly, respectively. The above loss can be optimized through
gradient descent, and the representations of nodes can be
learned when the optimization is completed.
Experiment
In the experiment, we aim to answer the following three re-
search questions:
• Q1. How is the performance of our proposed IaGRL in
the MOOC quality evaluation task?
• Q2. How do the meta-paths affect the course quality eval-
uation performance?
• Q3. How do the different learning losses affect the course
quality evaluation performance?
Then, we will introduce statistical information about real-
world MOOC data, and experiment settings and compare Ia-
GRL with several baselines on this data.
Data Description
We evaluate the performance over real-world MOOC data.
The data constitute a MOOC heterogeneous information net-
work containing 4 types of entities and 3 types of relations.
The course scores range from 0 to 5. In the data preprocess-
ing step, we ﬁltered out users that have fewer than 3 links.
After data preprocessing, we split the datasets into two non-
overlapping sets: 20% of the datasets as the testing set and
the rest 80% as the training set. Table 2 shows the detailed
statistics of the dataset.
Table 2: Statistics and descriptions of dataset
Properties
Descriptions
Statistics
Student
Users who studied course
4931
Course
Learning materials
10919
Teacher
Users who uploaded course
1213
Subject
An area of knowledge
35
Time
Time period
2015-2018
Baselines and Evaluation Metrics
We compare the performances of our method with the fol-
lowing baselines:
(1) MLP. The multilayer perceptron(MLP) is a feedforward
supervised artiﬁcial neural network structure. The MLP can
contain multiple hidden layers to realize the classiﬁcation
modeling.
(2) DeepWalk. The DeepWalk model is a recently
proposed network embedding method that extends the
word2vec model (Mikolov et al. 2013) by truncated random
walks (Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena 2014).
(3) DeepWalk+F. The DeepWalk+F model not only adds
the neighbor features after the random walk but also adds
the attribute features of practice.
(4) GCN. The graph convolutional network(GCN) performs
information aggregation based on the Laplacian or adjacent
matrix of the complete graph (Kipf and Welling 2016a).
(5) GAE. The graph autoencoder(GAE) learns node repre-
sentation, we use an embedding layer to encode the node
with GCN (Schulman et al. 2016).
(6) GraphSAGE. The GraphSAGE proposes neighborhood
batch sampling to enable scalable training with max, min,
and LSTM aggregation functions (Hamilton, Ying, and
Leskovec 2017).
(7) GAT. The graph attention network(GAT) introduces a
multi-head attention mechanism into the aggregation func-
tion, which learns the importance of the neighborhood of
each node for information aggregation (Velickovic et al.
2017).
(8) GATv2. GATv2 solves the simple graph problem of GAT
using a static attention mechanism, a dynamic graph atten-
tion variant that is more expressive than GAT (Brody, Alon,
and Yahav 2021).
The last ﬁve are graph representation learning methods.
To evaluate the performance of the models for MOOC qual-
ity, we adopt two widely used evaluation metrics for multi-
classiﬁcation performance, e.g., Accuracy and Macro-F1.
Speciﬁcally, Accuracy measures the evaluation accuracy
that the user scores successfully rated. And macro f1 help
to consider performance comprehensively in case of imbal-
anced data. For both metrics, the larger the value, the better
the performance.
Parameter Setting
For Deepwalk and Deepwalk+F, we set the number of walks
= 80, the size of representation = 128, the walk length = 20,
and the window size = 10. For GCN, GAE and GraphSAGE,
we set the number of layers = 2, the input feature size=128,

the output feature size = 128, and the learning rate = 0.001.
For GAT and GATv2, we set the number of layers = 2, the
layer heads = [2,1], the input feature size = 128, the output
feature size = 128, and the learning rate = 0.003. For my
model we set the learning rate = 0.001, the l2 = 0.001, the
dropout = 0.1, the input feature = 128, and the out feature
= 128. The device we used was two RTX 6000 with 24GiB
memory and CUDA=11.2.
Overall Performance(Q1)
In this section, we compare the overall performance of
all models on the real-world dataset. In general, Figure 2
shows our model outperforms other baseline methods for
both Accuracy and Macro-F1 metric. Compared to MLP,
which is the representative of node attribute, random walk-
based methods (DeepWalk, Deepwalk+F), graph convo-
lution network-based methods (GCN, GAE, GraphSAGE,
GAT, GATv2), and information-based methods (our pro-
posed method) perform better in modeling MOOC heteroge-
neous network. Compared to DeepWalk and DeepWalk+F,
which is the random walk-based methods, our proposed
framework additionally considers heterogeneous graph em-
bedding and information-aware of the learned representa-
tion. Compared to graph convolution network-based meth-
ods, the information guarantee provided by our proposed
method further elevates the reasonability of the learned rep-
resentations. In summary, the results validate that incorpo-
rating multi-view and information-aware can improve the
quality of representation learning.
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
MLP
Deepwalk
Deepwalk+F
GCN
GAE
GraphSAGE
GAT
GATv2
IaGRL
(a) Accuracy.
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
MLP
Deepwalk
Deepwalk+F
GCN
GAE
GraphSAGE
GAT
GATv2
IaGRL
(b) Macro-F1.
Figure 2: Overall comparisons of evaluation Accuracy and
Macro-F1 of our methods with other baselines.
Inﬂuence of Meta-paths(Q2)
In this part of the experiments, we analyze how meta-
paths affect the performance of methods. We consider both
single meta-path and their combinations in our method.
Speciﬁcally, we select three types of meta-paths to rep-
resent the relatedness between pair of courses, including
MP1: C →T
−1
→C, MP2: C →U
−1
→C and MP3:
C →S
−1
→C. To analyze the impact of meta-paths, we
study the performance in three aspects:(1)with single view
attention weights; (2)with single course-related meta-path
and their combinations on our method; and (3)with meta-
path on baselines.
Compared with attention weights.
We calculate the im-
portance of the attention weights for each meta-path in our
method, the results are shown in table 3. From the table,
we can ﬁnd the most important meta-path is MP1, from the
teacher view, follow by MP3(from the subject view) and
MP2(from the student view), respectively. It is easy to un-
derstand that when evaluating a course quality from multi-
ple views, the teacher’s inﬂuence on course quality is more
important. One interesting observation is that the student’s
view has the least impact on course quality, even less than
the subject view, which is an objective perspective. A possi-
ble explanation is that our data came from a MOOC platform
based on primary education. On the one hand, the student’s
cognitive level is in the primary state, on the other hand,
the students’ behavior of clicking courses is guided by the
teacher, which is less subjective.
Table 3: The importance of each meta-path.
Weights
MP1
MP2
MP3
αMPi
0.4655
0.2242
0.3103
Compared with the different meta-paths combination.
We compare our method with both single meta-path and
their combinations. The results are shown in Table 4,
we can ﬁnd that every single meta-path exhibits dif-
ferent performance, where the performance ranking is
MP1>MP3>MP2, and the combinations of single meta-
paths follow the same tendency. This illustrates that different
meta-paths indicate different relations and the combination
including more meta-paths will exhibit better performance,
and the best performance is achieved by combining all three
meta-paths.
Table 4: The results from different combinations of meta-
paths on our method.
Meta-path
Accuracy
Macro-F1
MP1
0.3596
0.1529
MP2
0.3407
0.1397
MP3
0.3543
0.1707
MP1 & MP2
0.3697
0.1536
MP1 & MP3
0.3864
0.1783
MP2 & MP3
0.3656
0.1742
MP1 & MP2 & MP3
0.4101
0.2011
Compared with meta-paths on baselines.
And in order
to further verify the effect of meta-paths, we study the meta-
path on the baselines based on graph convolutional network
methods. The results are shown in Table 5, from Table 5,
we can ﬁnd that compared with the original algorithms,
including meta-path combinations will show better perfor-
mance. Especially in the GCN, and GraphSAGE methods,
the growth of performance is quite obvious.

Table 5: The results from different combinations of meta-
paths on baselines.
Methods
Accuracy
Macro-F1
GCN
0.2368
0.0724
GCN & MPi=1,2,3
0.3466
0.0857
GAE
0.3501
0.1307
GAE & MPi=1,2,3
0.3555
0.1686
GraphSAGE
0.2770
0.1130
GraphSAGE & MPi=1,2,3
0.3620
0.1092
GAT
0.2914
0.0987
GAT & MPi=1,2,3
0.3187
0.1076
GATv2
0.3252
0.1026
GATv2 & MPi=1,2,3
0.3258
0.1220
Analysis of Lj, Ls, Ly (Q3)
In order to analyze the contribution of representation raw
portfolio agreement, multi-view consistency and course-
platform alignment, we deﬁne six variants of our proposed
model: (1) MI-IaGRL-J, which adds Lj to the base model;
(2) MI-IaGRL-S, which adds Ls to the base model; (3) MI-
IaGRL-Y, which adds Ly to the base model; (4) MI-IaGRL-
J,S, which adds Lj and Ls to the base model; (5) MI-IaGRL-
J,Y, which adds Lj and Ly to the base model; and (6) MI-
IaGRL-S,Y, which adds Ls and Ly to the base model.
As shown in Figure 3, we compare the MI-IaGRL-J,
MI-IaGRL-S, MI-IaGRL-Y, MI-IaGRL-J,S, MI-IaGRL-J,Y,
MI-IaGRL-S,Y and MI-IaGRL in the experiment. When
the combination of loss functions increases from single to
two to three, the overall trend of metric values are increas-
ing. The results indicate that the integrated raw portfolio-
representation agreement, the multi-view consistency, and
the course-platform alignment signiﬁcantly improve the per-
formance of MOOC quality evaluation.
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
0.45
0.50
MI−IaGRL−J
MI−IaGRL−S
MI−IaGRL−Y
MI−IaGRL−J,S
MI−IaGRL−J,Y
MI−IaGRL−S,Y
MI−IaGRL
(a) Accuracy.
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.20
0.22
0.24
MI−IaGRL−J
MI−IaGRL−S
MI−IaGRL−Y
MI−IaGRL−J,S
MI−IaGRL−J,Y
MI−IaGRL−S,Y
MI−IaGRL
(b) Macro-F1.
Figure 3: Analysis of Lj, Ls, Ly.
Related Work
Our work is related to the following two domains of prior
work, including MOOC quality evaluation and graph repre-
sentation learning.
MOOC Quality Evaluation
Our work has a connection with MOOC quality evaluation.
Prior literature on MOOC quality evaluation lies in two as-
pects: (1) manual evaluation (Wang et al. 2021), and (2) au-
tomated evaluation (P´erez-Mart´ın, Rodr´ıguez-Ascaso, and
Molanes-Lopez 2021; Betanzos, Costa-juss`a, and Belanche
2017). Manual-based methods evaluate the course quality by
domain experts based on a pre-deﬁned rubric. For example,
Wang et al. discussed the quality analysis of instructional
design based on the ten-principle framework (Wang et al.
2021). The manual-based method can evaluate course qual-
ity accurately, but they are not suitable for large-scale appli-
cations. More and more automatic methods appear, such as,
Zhuo et al. designed a teaching quality assessment model on
the MOOC platform based on comprehensive fuzzy evalua-
tion (Zhuo and Dong 2017).
Graph Representation Learning
Different
from
the
traditional
graph
optimization
method (Chen et al. 2023; ?) focusing on efﬁciency,
the graph embedding method focuses on information
extraction. Graph embedding aims to project nodes in
a graph into a d-dimensional vector space, in which the
representation of nodes can reﬂect the relationship between
nodes, and retain the semantic information of nodes. Graph
embedding methods can be categorized into homogeneous
graph embedding(node2vec (Grover and Leskovec 2016),
struct2vec (Ribeiro, Saverese, and Figueiredo 2017) and
Deepwalk (Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena 2014)), hetero-
geneous graph embedding(metapath2vec (Dong, Chawla,
and Swami 2017), HHNE (Wang, Zhang, and Shi 2019),
SHNE (Zhang, Swami, and Chawla 2019)). However, the
above methods ignore the mutual information. In order to
handle the information-aware of graphs, there are several
methods have been proposed, including DGI (Velickovic
et al. 2019), HDGI (Ren et al. 2019).
Conclusion
In this paper, we study the problem of MOOC course qual-
ity evaluation with MOOC heterogeneous information net-
works and propose an information-aware graph represen-
tation learning framework for multi-view MOOC quality
evaluation. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst formulate the problem of
MOOC quality evaluation as a multi-view graph representa-
tion learning task. Second, we construct MOOC HIN and
propose to exploit meta-paths to extract the semantics of
MOOC relationships from different views. Third, we iden-
tify three types of validity of course representations, with
(i) the agreement on expressiveness between the raw course
portfolio and the learned course representations; (ii) the
consistency between the representations in each view and
the uniﬁed representations; and (iii) the alignment between
the course and MOOC platform representations. Finally, we
conduct extensive experiments over real-world MOOC data
to validate the effectiveness of our method.
