Confounding Equivalence in Causal Inference
Judea Pearl
Cognitive Systems Laboratory
Computer Science Department
University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90024 USA

Azaria Paz
Department of Computer Science
Technion IIT, Haifa 3200

Abstract
The paper provides a simple test for deciding,
from a given causal diagram, whether two
sets of variables have the same bias-reducing
potential under adjustment.
The test re-
quires that one of the following two condi-
tions holds: either (1) both sets are admis-
sible (i.e., satisfy the back-door criterion) or
(2) the Markov boundaries surrounding the
manipulated variable(s) are identical in both
sets. Applications to covariate selection and
model testing are discussed.
1
INTRODUCTION
The common method of estimating causal eﬀects in
observational studies is to adjust for a set of variables
(or “covariates”) judged to be “confounders,” that is,
variables capable of producing spurious associations
between treatment and outcome, not attributable to
their causal dependence. While adjustment tends to
reduce the bias produced by such spurious associa-
tions, the bias-reducing potential of any set of co-
variates depends crucially on the causal relationships
among all variables aﬀecting treatment or outcome,
hidden as well as visible. Such relationships can ef-
fectively be represented in the form of directed acyclic
graphs (DAG’s) (Pearl, 1995; Lauritzen, 2001; Spirtes
et al., 2000; Glymour and Greenland, 2008; Dawid,
2002).
Most studies of covariate selection have aimed to de-
ﬁne and identify “admissible” sets of covariates, also
called “suﬃcient sets,” namely, a set of covariates that,
if adjusted for, would yield asymptotically unbiased
estimates of the causal eﬀect of interest (Stone, 1993;
Greenland et al., 1999; Pearl, 2000). A graphical cri-
terion for selecting an admissible set is given by the
“back-door” test (Pearl, 1993, 2000) which was shown
to entail zero bias, or “no confoundedness,” assuming
correctness of the causal assumptions encoded in the
DAG. Related notions are “exchangeability” (Green-
land and Robins, 1986), “exogeneity” (Engle et al.,
1983), and “strong ignorability” (Rosenbaum and Ru-
bin, 1983).
This paper addresses a diﬀerent question: Given two
sets of variables in a DAG, decide if the two are equally
valuable for adjustment, namely, whether adjustment
for one set is guaranteed to yield the same asymptotic
bias as adjustment for the other.
The reasons for posing this question are several. First,
an investigator may wish to assess, prior to taking
any measurement, whether two candidate sets of co-
variates, diﬀering substantially in dimensionality, mea-
surement error, cost, or sample variability are equally
valuable in their bias-reduction potential. Second, as-
suming that the structure of the underlying DAG is
only partially known, one may wish to assess, using
c-equivalence tests, whether a given structure is com-
patible with the data at hand; structures that predict
equality of post-adjustment associations must be re-
jected if, after adjustment, such equality is not found
in the data.
In Section 2 we deﬁne c-equivalence and review the
auxiliary notions of admissibility, d-separation, and
the back-door criterion. Section 3 derives statistical
and graphical conditions for c-equivalence, the former
being suﬃcient while the latter necessary and suﬃ-
cient. Section 4 presents a simple algorithm for test-
ing c-equivalence, while Section 5 gives a statistical
interpretation to the graphical test of Section 3. Fi-
nally, Section 6 discusses potential applications of c-
equivalence for eﬀect estimation, model testing, and
model selection.

2
PRELIMINARIES:
c-EQUIVALENCE AND
ADMISSIBILITY
Let X, Y , and Z be three disjoint subsets of discrete
variables, and P (x, y, z) their joint distribution. We
are concerned with expressions of the type
A(x, y, Z) =
X
z
P (y|x, z)P (z)
(1)
Such expressions, which we name “adjustment esti-
mands,” are often used to approximate the causal ef-
fect of X on Y , where the set Z is chosen to include
variables judged to be “confounders.”
By adjusting
for these variables, one hopes to create conditions that
eliminate spurious dependence and thus obtain an un-
biased estimate of the causal eﬀect of X and Y , written
P (y|do(x)) (see Pearl (2000) for formal deﬁnition and
methods of estimation).
Deﬁnition 1. (c-equivalence)
Deﬁne two sets, T and Z as c-equivalent (relative to
X and Y ), written T ≈Z, if the following equality
holds for every x and y:
X
t
P (y|x, t)P (t) =
X
z
P (y|x, z)P (z)
∀x, y (2)
or
A(x, y, T) = A(x, y, Z)
∀x, y
This equality guarantees that, if adjusted for, sets T
and Z would produce the same asymptotic bias relative
to the target quantity.
Deﬁnition 2. (Admissibility)
Let P (y|do(x)) stand for the “causal-eﬀect” of X on
Y , i.e., the distribution of Y after setting variable X to
a constant X = x by external intervention. A set Z of
covariates is said to be “admissible” (for adjustment)
relative to the causal eﬀect of X on Y , if the following
equality holds:
X
z
P (y|x, z)P (z) = P (y|do(x))
(3)
Equivalently, one can deﬁne admissibility using the
equalities:
P (y|do(x)) = P (Yx = y)
(4)
where Yx is the counterfactual or “potential outcome”
variable (Neyman, 1923; Rubin, 1974). The equiva-
lence of the two deﬁnitions is shown in (Pearl, 2000).
Deﬁnition 3. (d-separation)
A set S of nodes in a graph G is said to block a path p if
either (i) p contains at least one arrow-emitting node
that is in S, or (ii) p contains at least one collision
node that is outside S and has no descendant in S.
If S blocks all paths from X to Y , it is said to “d-
separate X and Y,” written (X⊥⊥Y |S)G and then, X
and Y are independent given S, written X⊥⊥Y |S, in
every probability distribution that can be generated by
a process structured along G (Pearl, 1988).
Lemma 1. (The back-door criterion: G-admissibility)
Let G be a directed acyclic graph (DAG) that encodes
the causal relationships between variables in a prob-
lem, observables as well as unobservable. A suﬃcient
condition for a subset S of covariates to be admissible
is that it satisﬁes the following two conditions (Pearl,
1993):
1. No element of S is a descendant of X
2. The elements of S “block” all “back-door” paths
from X to Y , namely all paths that end with an
arrow pointing to X.
A set S satisfying the back-door criterion will be called
G-admissible.
For proof and intuition behind the back-door test, es-
pecially a relaxation of the requirement of no descen-
dants, see (Pearl, 2009a, p. 339).
Clearly, if two subsets Z and T are G-admissible they
are also admissible and they must be c-equivalent, for
their adjustment estimands coincide with the causal
eﬀect P (y|do(x)). Therefore, a trivial graphical con-
dition for c-equivalence is for Z and T to satisfy the
back-door criterion of Lemma 1. This condition, as
we shall see in the next section, is rather weak; c-
equivalence extends beyond admissible sets.
3
CONDITIONS FOR
c-EQUIVALENCE
Theorem
1.
A
suﬃcient
condition
for
the
c-
equivalence of T and Z is that Z satisﬁes:
(X⊥⊥Z|T)
(i)
(Y ⊥⊥T|X, Z)
(ii)
Proof:
Conditioning on Z, (ii) permits us to rewrite the left-
hand side of (2) as
A(x, y, T)
= P
t P (t) P
z P (y|z, x, t)P (z|t, x)
= P
t P (t) P
z P (y|z, x)P (z|t, x)
and (i) further yields P (z|t, x) = P (z|t), from which
(2) follows:
A(x, y, T)
= P
t
P
z P (y|z, x)P (z, t)
= P
z P (y|z, x)P (z)
= A(x, y, Z)

2
V
V1
W1
2
W
X
Y
Figure 1: The sets T = {V1, W1} and Z = {V2, W2}
satisfy the conditions of Theorem 1.
The sets T =
{V1, W2} and Z = {V2, W2} block all back-door paths
between X and Y , hence they are admissible and c-
equivalent. Still they do not satisfy the conditions of
Theorem 1.
Corollary
1. A suﬃcient
condition
for
the
c-
equivalence of T and Z is that either one of the fol-
lowing two conditions holds:
C∗:
X⊥⊥Z|T
and
Y ⊥⊥T|Z, X
C∗∗:
X⊥⊥T|Z
and
Y ⊥⊥Z|T, X
(5)
Proof:
C∗permits us to derive the right hand side of Eq. (2)
from the left hand side, while C∗∗permits us to go
the other way around.
The conditions oﬀered by Theorem 1 and Corollary 1
do not characterize all equivalent pairs, T and Z. For
example, consider the graph in Figure 1, in which each
of T = {V1, W2} and Z = {V2, W1} is G-admissible
they must therefore be c-equivalent. Yet neither C∗
nor C∗∗holds in this case.
On the other hand, condition C∗can detect the c-
equivalence of some non-admissible sets, such as T =
{W1} and Z = {W1, W2}. These two sets are non-
admissible for they fail to block the back-door path
X ←V1 →V2 →Y , yet they are c-equivalent accord-
ing to Theorem 1; (i) is satisﬁed by d-separation, while
(ii) is satisﬁed by subsumption (T ⊆Z).
It is interesting to note however that Z = {W1, W2},
while c-equivalent to {W1}, is not c-equivalent to T =
{W2}, though the two sets block the same path in the
graph.1
Indeed, this pair does not meet the test of
Theorem 1; choosing T = {W2} and Z = {W1, W2}
violates condition (i) since X is not d-separated from
1The reason is that the strength of the association be-
tween X and Y , conditioned on W2, depends on whether
we also condition on W1. Else, P(y|x,w2) would be equal
to P(y|x, w1, w2) which would render Y and W1 indepen-
dent given X and W2. But this is true only if the path
(X, V1, V2, Y ) is blocked.
W1, while choosing Z = {W2} and T = {W1, W2}
violates condition (ii) by unblocking the path W1 →
X ←V1 →V2 →Y . Likewise, the sets T = {W1}
and Z = {W2} block the same path and, yet, are not
c-equivalent; they fail indeed to satisfy condition (ii)
of Theorem 1.
We are now ready to broaden the scope of Theorem 1
and derive a condition (Theorem 2 below) that detects
all c-equivalent subsets in a graph.
Deﬁnition 4. (Markov boundary)
For any set of variables S in G; let Sm be the minimal
subset of S that satisﬁes the condition
(X⊥⊥S|Sm)G
(6)
In other words, measurement of Sm renders X inde-
pendent of all other members of S, and no proper sub-
set of Sm has this property. This minimal subset is
called the Markov Boundary of X relative to S, or
“Markov boundary” for short.
The Markov boundary as deﬁned above is known to be
unique, which follows from the intersection property of
d-separation (Pearl, 1988, p. 97). See Appendix A.
Lemma 2. Every set of variables, S, is c-equivalent
to its Markov boundary Sm.
Proof.
Choosing Z = S and T = Sm satisﬁes the two condi-
tions of Theorem 1; (i) is satisﬁed by the deﬁnition of
Sm, while (ii) is satisﬁed by subsumption (T ⊆Z).
Theorem 2. Let Z and T be two sets of variables
containing no descendant2 of X. A necessary and suf-
ﬁcient conditions for Z and T to be c-equivalent is that
at least one of the following conditions holds:
1. Zm = Tm
or
2. Z and T are G-admissible
Proof
1. Proof of suﬃciency:
Condition 2 is suﬃcient since G-admissibility im-
plies admissibility and renders the two adjustment
estimands in (2) equal to the causal eﬀect. Con-
dition 1 is suﬃcient by reason of Lemma 2, which
2The suﬃciency part of Theorem 2 is valid without ex-
cluding descendants of X. The necessary part can allow
descendants of X if we interpret Zm and Tm to represent
“reduced Markov boundaries,” namely Markov boundaries
exclusive of all nodes that are d-separated from Y given X.
For example, two children of X that are not on pathways
to Y would then be properly identiﬁed as “c-equivalent,”
even though they do not satisfy the conditions of Theorem
2.

yields:
Z ≈Zm ≈Tm ≈T
2. Proof of necessity:
We need to show that if conditions (1) and (2)
are violated then there is at least one parame-
terization of G (that is, an assignment of condi-
tional probabilities to the parent-child families in
G) that violates Eq. (2). If exactly one of (Z, T)
is G-admissible then Z and T are surely not c-
equivalent, for their adjustment estimands would
diﬀer for some parameterization of the graph. As-
sume that both Z and T are not G-admissible
or, equivalently, that none of Zm or Tm is G-
admissible. Then there is a back-door path p from
X to Y that is not blocked by either Zm or Tm.
If, in addition, condition (1) is violated (i.e., Zm
diﬀers from Tm) then Tm and Zm cannot both be
disconnected from X, (for then Zm = Tm = ∅,
satisfying condition (1)), there must be a path p1
from either Zm to X that is not blocked by Tm
or a path p2 from Tm to X that is not blocked by
Zm. Assuming the former case, there must be an
unblocked path p1 from Zm to X followed by a
back door path p from X to Y . The existence of
this path implies that conditional on t, Z acts as
an instrumental variable with respect to the pair
(X, Y ). For such a structure, the following param-
eterization would violate Eq. (2). First we weaken
the links from Tm to X to make the left hand side
of (2) equal to P (y|x), or A(x, y, Tm) = A(x, y, 0).
Next, we construct a linear structural equation
model in which Zm is a strong predictor of X
and X and Y are confounded. Wooldridge (2009)
has shown (see also (Pearl, 2009b)). that adjust-
ment on Zm under such conditions results in a
higher bias relative to the unadjusted estimand, or
A(x, y, Zm) ̸= A(x, y, 0). This violates the equal-
ity in Eq. (2) and prove the necessary part of The-
orem 2.
4
STEP-WISE TEST FOR
c-EQUIVALENCE
Figure 2 illustrates the power of Theorem 2. In this
model, no subset of {W1, W2, W3} is G-admissible
(because of the back-door path through V1 and V2)
and, therefore, equality of Markov boundaries is nec-
essary and suﬃcient for c-equivalence among any two
such subsets.
Accordingly, we can conclude that
T = {W1, W2} is c-equivalent to Z = {W1, W3}, since
Tm = W1 and Zm = W1.
Note that W1 and W2,
though they result (upon conditioning) in the same
set of unblocked paths between X and Y , are not
c-equivalent since Tm = W1 ̸= Zm = W2.
Indeed,
2
W
W3
V1
V2
W1
W4
X
Y
Figure 2:
W3 and W4 are non-admissible yet c-
equivalent; both having ∅as a Markov boundary. How-
ever, W2 and W3 are not c-equivalent with Markov
boundaries W2 and ∅, respectively.
each of W1 and W2 is an instrumental variable relative
to {X, Y }, with potentially diﬀerent strengths, hence
potentially diﬀerent adjustment estimands. Sets W4
and W3 however are c-equivalent, because the Markov
boundary of each is the null set, {∅}.
We note that testing for c-equivalence can be accom-
plished in polynomial time.
The Markov boundary
of an arbitrary set S can be identiﬁed by iteratively
removing from S, in any order, any node that is d-
separated from X given all remaining members of S
(see Appendix A). G-admissibility, likewise, can be
tested in polynomial time (Tian et al., 1998).
Theorem 2 also leads to a step-wise process of testing
c-equivalence,
T ≈T1 ≈T2 ≈. . . ≈Z
where each intermediate set is obtained from its prede-
cessor by an addition or deletion of one variable only.
This can be seen by organizing the chain into three
sections.
T ≈. . . ≈Tm ≈. . . ≈Zm ≈. . . ≈Z
The transition from T to Tm entails the deletion from
T of all nodes that are not in Tm; one at a time, in any
order. Similarly, the transition from Zm to Z builds up
the full set Z from its Markov boundary Zm; again, in
any order. Finally, the middle section, from Tm to Zm,
amounts to traversing a chain of G-admissible sets, us-
ing both deletion and addition of nodes, one at a time.
A Theorem due to (Tian et al., 1998) ensures that
such a step-wise transition is always possible between
any two G-admissible sets. In case T or Z are non-
admissible, the middle section must degenerate into
an equality Tm = Zm, or else, c-equivalence does not
hold.
Figure 2 can be used to illustrate this stepwise transi-
tion from T = {W1, W2, V1} to Z = {V2, W3}. Start-

ing with T, we obtain:
T ={W1, W2, V1} ≈{W1, V1} = Tm ≈{V1} ≈{V1, V2}
≈{V2} = Zm ≈{V2, W3} = Z
If, however we were to attempt a stepwise transition
between T = {W1, W2, V1} and Z = {W3}, we would
obtain:
T = {W1, W2, V1} ≈{W1, V1} ≈{V1}
and would be unable to proceed toward Zm = {W3}.
The reason lies in the non-admissibility of Z which ne-
cessitates the equality Tm = Zm, contrary to Markov
boundaries shown in the graph.
Note also that each step in the process T ≈. . . ≈Tm
(as well as Zm ≈. . . ≈Z) is licensed by condition
(i) of Theorem 1, while each step in the intermediate
process Tm ≈. . . ≈Zm is licensed by condition (ii).
Both conditions are purely statistical and do not in-
voke the causal reading of “admissibility.” This means
that condition 2 of Theorem 2 may be replaced by the
requirement that Z and T satisfy the back-door test in
any diagram compatible3 with P (x, y, z, t); the direc-
tion of arrows in the diagram need not convey causal
information. Further clariﬁcation of the statistical im-
plications of the admissibility condition, is given in the
next section.
5
FROM CAUSAL TO
STATISTICAL
CHARACTERIZATION
Theorem 2, while providing a necessary and suﬃcient
condition for c-equivalence, raises an interesting the-
oretical question.
Admissibility is a causal notion,
(i.e., resting on causal assumptions about the direc-
tion of the arrows in the diagram) while c-equivalence
is purely statistical. Why need one resort to causal
assumptions to characterize a property that relies on
no such assumption?
Evidently, the notion of G-
admissibility as it was used in the proof of Theorem 2
was merely a surrogate carrier of statistical informa-
tion; its causal reading was irrelevant. The question
then is whether Theorem 2 could be articulated using
purely statistical conditions, avoiding admissibility al-
together, as is done in Theorem 1.
We will show that the answer is positive; Theorem
2 can be rephrased using a statistical test for c-
equivalence. It should be noted though, that the quest
for statistical characterization is of merely theoretical
3A diagram G is said to be compatible with a proba-
bility function P if there is a parameterization of G that
generates P, i.e., if every d-separation in G corresponds to
a valid conditional independence in P.
interest; rarely is one in possession of prior informa-
tion about conditional independencies, (as required by
Theorem 1), that is not resting on causal knowledge
(of the kind required by Theorem 2). The utility of
statistical characterization surfaces when we wish to
conﬁrm or reject the structure of the diagram.
We
will see that the statistical reading of Theorem 2 has
testable implication that, if failed to ﬁt the data, may
help one select among competing graph structures.
Our ﬁrst step is to apply Theorem 1 to the special case
where T is a subset of Z.
Theorem 3. (Set-subset equivalence)
Let T and S be two disjoint sets. A suﬃcient condition
for the c-equivalence of T and Z = T ∪S is that S can
be partitioned into two subsets, S1 and S2, such that:
(i′)
S1⊥⊥X|T
and
(ii′)
S2⊥⊥Y |S1, X, T
Proof:
Starting with
A(x, y, T ∪S) =
X
t
X
s1
X
s2
P (y|x, t, s1, s2)P (s1, s2, t)
(ii′) permits us to remove s2 from the ﬁrst factor and
write
A(x, y, T ∪S)
=
P
t
P
s1
P
s2 P (y|x, t, s1)P (s1, s2, t)
=
P
t
P
s1 P (y|x, t, s1)P (s1, t)
while (i′) permits us to reach the same expression from
A(x, y, T):
A(x, y, T)
=
P
t
P
s1 P (y|x, t, s1)P (s1|x, t)P (t)
=
P
t
P
s1 P (y|x, t, s1)P (s1, t)
which proves the theorem.
Theorem 3 generalizes closely related theorems by
Stone (1993) and Robins (1997), in which T ∪S is
assumed to be admissible (see also Greenland et al.
(1999)).
The importance of this generalization was
demonstrated by several examples in Section 3. Theo-
rem 3 on the other hand invokes only the distribution
P (x, y, z, t) and makes no reference to P (y|do(x)) or
to admissibility.
Theorem 3 can also be proven by double application
of Theorem 1; ﬁrst showing the c-equivalence of T and
{T ∪S1} using (i) (with (ii) satisﬁed by subsumption),
then showing the c-equivalence of {T ∪S1} and {T ∪
S1 ∪S2} using (ii) (with (i) satisﬁed by subsumption).

The advantage of Theorem 3 over Theorem 1 is that
it allows certain cases of c-equivalence to be veriﬁed in
a single step. In Figure 1, for example, both (i′) and
(i′′) are satisﬁed for T = {V1, W2}, S1 = {V2}, and
S2 = {W1}), Therefore, T = {V1, W2} is c-equivalent
to {T ∪S} = {V1, V2, W1, W2}
The weakness of Theorem 3 is that it is applicable to
set-subset relations only. A natural attempt to gener-
alize the theorem would be to posit the condition that
T and Z each be c-equivalent to T ∪Z, and use Theo-
rem 3 to establish the required set-subset equivalence.
While perfectly valid, this condition is still not com-
plete; there are cases where T and Z are c-equivalent,
yet none is c-equivalent to their union. For example,
consider the path
X →T ←L →Z ←Y
Each of T and Z leaves the path between X and Y
blocked, which renders them c-equivalent, yet {T ∪Z}
unblocks that path. Hence, T ≈Z and T ̸≈T ∪Z.
This implies that sets T and Z would fail the proposed
test, even though they are c-equivalent.
The remedy can be obtained by re-invoking the notion
of Markov boundary (Deﬁnition 4) and Lemma 2.
Theorem 4. Let T and Z be two sets of covariates,
containing no descendant of X and let Tm and Zm be
their Markov boundaries. A necessary and suﬃcient
condition for the c-equivalence of T and Z is that each
of Tm and Zm be c-equivalent to Tm ∪Zm according to
the set-subset criterion of Theorem 3.
Proof
1. Proof of suﬃciency:
If Tm and Zm are each c-equivalent to Tm ∪Zm
then, obviously, they are c-equivalent themselves
and, since each is c-equivalent to its parent set (by
Lemma 2) T and Z are c-equivalent as well.
2. Proof of necessity:
We need to show that if either Tm or Zm is not
c-equivalent to their union (by the test of The-
orem 3), then they are not c-equivalent to each
other. We will show that using “G-admissibility”
as an auxiliary tool. We will show that failure of
Zm ≈Tm∪Zm implies non-admissibility, and this,
by the necessary part of Theorem 2, negates the
possibility of c-equivalence between Z and T. The
proof relies on the monotonicity of d-separation
over minimal subsets (Appendix B), which states
that, for any graph G, and any two subsets of
nodes T and Z, we have:
(X⊥⊥Y |Zm)G&(X⊥⊥Y |Tm)G ⇒(X⊥⊥Y |Zm∪Tm)G
Applying this to the subgraph consisting of all
back-door paths from X to Y , we conclude that
G-admissibility is preserved under union of mini-
mal sets. Therefore, the admissibility of Zm and
Tm (hence of Z and T) entails admissibility of
Zm ∪Tm. Applying Theorem 2, this implies the
necessity part of Theorem 3.
Theorem 4 reveals the statistical implications of
the G-admissibility requirement in Theorem 2.
G-
admissibility ensures the two c-equivalence conditions:
Tm ≈{Tm ∪Zm}
(7)
Zm ≈{Tm ∪Zm}
(8)
In other words, given any DAG G compatible with
the conditional independencies of P (x, y, t, z), when-
ever Z and T are G-admissible in G, the two statistical
conditions of Theorem 3 should hold in the distribu-
tion, when applied to the set-subset relations in (7)
and (8). Enforcing conditions (i′) and (ii′) with the
proper choice of S1 and S2, yields
{Tm ∪Zm}m⊥⊥Y |X, Zm
(9)
{Tm ∪Zm}m⊥⊥Y |X, Tm
(10)
which constitute the statistical implications of admis-
sibility. These implications should be conﬁrmed in any
graph G′ that is Markov equivalent to G, regardless of
whether T and S are G-admissible in G′.
We illustrate these implications using Fig. 2. Taking
T = {W2, V2} and Z = {V1, W3}, we have:
Tm
= {W2, V2}, Zm = {V1},
{Tm ∪Zm}m
= {V1, V2, W2}m = {V1, W2}
We ﬁnd that the tests of (9) and (10) are satisﬁed
because
{V1, W2}⊥⊥Y |X, V1
and
{V1, W2}⊥⊥Y |X, W2, V2
Thus, implying Z ≈T. That test would fail had we
taken T = {W2} and Z = {W3}, because then we
would have:
Tm
= {W2}, Zm = {∅}.
{Tm ∪Zm}m
= W2
and the requirement
{Tm ∪Zm}m⊥⊥Y |X, Zm
would not be satisﬁed because
W2 ̸⊥⊥Y |X

(a)
(b)
(c)
T
Z
Y
X
Y
X
Y
X
T
Z
T
Z
Figure 3: Failing the T ≈{T ∪Z} test should reject
Model (a) in favor of (b) or (c). Failing Z ≈{T ∪Z}
should reject Models (a) and (b) in favor of (c).
6
EMPIRICAL RAMIFICATIONS
OF c-EQUIVALENCE TESTS
Having explicated the statistical implications of admis-
sibility vis a vis c-equivalence, we may ask the inverse
question: What can c-equivalence tests tell us about
admissibility? It is well known that no statistical test
can ever conﬁrm or refute the admissibility of a given
set Z (Pearl, 2000, Chapter 6; Pearl, 1998). The dis-
cussion of Section 5 shows however that the admissi-
bility of two sets, T and Z, does have testable implica-
tions. In particular, if they fail the c-equivalence test,
they cannot both be admissible.
This might sound
obvious, given that admissibility entails zero bias for
each of T and Z (Eq. (5)). Still, Eq. (8) implies that it
is enough for Zm (or Tm) to fail the c-equivalence test
vis a vis {Zm ∪Tm} for us to conclude that, in addi-
tion to having diﬀerent Markov boundaries, Z and T
cannot both be admissible.
This ﬁnding can be useful when measurements need be
chosen (for adjustment) with only partial knowledge
of the causal graph underlying the problem. Assume
that two candidate graphs recommend two diﬀerent
measurements for confounding control, one graph pre-
dicts the admissibility of T and Z, and the second does
not. Failure of the c-equivalence test
Tm ≈{Tm ∪Zm} ≈Zm
can then be used to rule out the former.
Figure 3 illustrates this possibility. Model 3(a) deems
measurements T and Z as equally eﬀective for bias
removal, while models 3(b) and 3(c) deem T to be in-
suﬃcient for adjustment. Submitting the data to the
c-equivalence tests of Eq. (7) and Eq. (8) may reveal
which of the three models should be ruled out. If both
tests fail, we must rule out Models 3(a) and 3(b), while
if only Eq. (8) fails, we can rule out only Model 2(a)
(Eq. (7) may still be satisﬁed in Model 3(c) by inci-
dental cancellation).
Of course, the same model exclusion can be deduced
from conditional independence tests.
For example,
Models 3(a) and 3(b) both predict T⊥⊥Y |X, Z which,
if violated in the data, would leave Model 3(c) as our
choice and behoove us to adjust for both T and Z.
However, when the dimensionality of the conditioning
sets increases, conditional independence tests are both
unreliable and computationally expensive. Although
both c-equivalent and conditional-independence tests
can reap the beneﬁts of propensity scores methods (see
Appendix C) which reduce the dimensionality of the
conditioning to a single scalar, it is not clear where the
beneﬁt can best be realized, since the cardinalities of
the sets involved in these two types of tests may be
substantially diﬀerent.
This raises the interesting question of whether the
discrimination power of c-equivalence equals that of
conditional independence tests. We know from Theo-
rem 4 that all c-equivalence conditions can be derived
from conditional independence relations.
The con-
verse, however, is an open question if we allow (X, Y )
to vary over all variable pairs.
7
CONCLUSIONS
Theorem 2 provides a simple graphical test for decid-
ing whether one set of covariates has the same bias-
reducing potential as another. The test requires either
that both sets satisfy the back-door criterion or that
their Markov boundaries be identical. Both conditions
can be tested by fast, polynomial time algorithms, and
could be used to guide researchers in deciding what
measurement sets are worth performing.
We have
further shown that the conditions above are valid in
causal as well as associational graphs; the latter can be
inferred from nonexperimental data. Finally, we pos-
tulate that c-equivalence tests could serve as valuable
tools in a systematic search for graph structures that
are compatible with the data.
