arXiv:1006.3215v1  [cs.AI]  16 Jun 2010
Under consideration for publication in Theory and Practice of Logic Programming
1
Solving Functional Constraints by Variable
Substitution
YUANLIN ZHANG
Department of Computer Science
Texas Tech University,
Lubbock, TX79409-3104, USA

ROLAND H.C. YAP
School of Computing
National University of Singapore
13 Computing Drive, 117417, Singapore

submitted 22nd June 2009; revised 20th October 2009; accepted 8th December 2009
Abstract
Functional constraints and bi-functional constraints are an important constraint class in
Constraint Programming (CP) systems, in particular for Constraint Logic Programming
(CLP) systems. CP systems with ﬁnite domain constraints usually employ CSP-based
solvers which use local consistency, for example, arc consistency. We introduce a new ap-
proach which is based instead on variable substitution. We obtain eﬃcient algorithms for
reducing systems involving functional and bi-functional constraints together with other
non-functional constraints. It also solves globally any CSP where there exists a variable
such that any other variable is reachable from it through a sequence of functional con-
straints. Our experiments on random problems show that variable elimination can signif-
icantly improve the eﬃciency of solving problems with functional constraints.
To appear in Theory and Practice of Logic Programming (TPLP).
KEYWORDS: constraint logic programming, constraint satisfaction problem, functional
constraints, variable substitution, arc consistency
1 Introduction
Functional constraints are a common class of constraints occurring in Constraint
Satisfaction Problem(s) (CSP) (Stallman and Sussman 1977; Van Hentenryck et al. 1992;
Kirousis 1993). Roughly speaking, a constraint c(x, y) is functional if the value of
variable y is some function of the value of variable x (see Deﬁnition 1). Func-
tional constraints arise in two ways, they may occur quite naturally since one may
have “functions” or “equations” in the constraint model. Functional constraints
also occur systematically in in Constraint Programming (CP) when the system is
a Constraint Logic Programming (CLP) system.

2
Y. Zhang and R. H. C. Yap
Functional constraints arise naturally in CLP in two ways. Firstly, the equa-
tions which arise from matching the head of a rule with an atom in the body are
functional constraints. Secondly, the basic (or primitive) constraints in a particu-
lar instance of a CLP language will often include functional constraints. Consider,
one of the most widely used and successful constraint domains for CLP, namely,
ﬁnite domains which we will call CLP(FD). The basic constraints in a CLP(FD)
system, for example, CHIP (Van Hentenryck et al. 1992), can express functional
constraints. An example would be the ﬁnite domain constraint, 3X + 2Y = 10,
with ﬁnite domain variables for X and Y .1 Matching the head and body, gives rise
to a number of equations, and in a FD system, the equations are functional con-
straints. For example, when matching p(Z2 + 1) with a rule on p(X) where both X
and Z are ﬁnite domain variables, a functional constraint X = Z2 +1 is produced.2
We remark that in logic programming, the equations are solved by uniﬁcation but
in the general setting, constraint solving over the particular domain is required.
Recognizing and exploiting functional constraints can facilitate the development of
more eﬃcient constraint solvers for CLP systems.
Most work on solving functional constraints follows the approach in CSP which
is based on arc or path consistency (Van Hentenryck et al. 1992; David 1995). We
remark that, in many papers, “functional constraints” are actually what we call bi-
functional constraints (Deﬁnition 2), a special case of functional constraints. In this
paper, we propose a new method — variable substitution — to process functional
constraints. The idea is that if a constraint is functional on a variable, this variable in
another constraint can be substituted away using the functional constraint without
losing any solution.3
Given a variable, the variable elimination method substitutes this variable in all
constraints involving it such that it is eﬀectively “eliminated” from the problem.
This idea is applied to reduce any problem containing non-functional constraints
into a canonical form where some variables can be safely ignored when solving
the problem. We design an eﬃcient algorithm to reduce, in O(ed2) where e is the
number of constraints and d the size of the largest domain of the variables, a general
binary CSP containing functional constraints into a canonical form. This reduction
simpliﬁes the problem and makes the functional portion trivially solvable. When
the functional constraints are also bi-functional, then the algorithm is linear in the
size of the CSP.
Many CLP systems with ﬁnite domains make use of constraint propagation al-
gorithms such as arc consistency. Unlike arc consistency, our elimination method
completely solves the functional portion of the problem, hence the functional con-
straints are eliminated and their consequences are incorporated into the reduced
problem. Our experiments show that the substitution based “global” treatment of
functional constraints can signiﬁcantly speed up propagation based solvers.
1
Note that the examples which involve CLP use uppercase for variables as per the logic pro-
gramming convention. In a more general context, we will use lowercase variables like x and y
for variables.
2 Notice that this is not a “linear” constraint in the arithmetic sense.
3 A preliminary version of this paper appeared in (Zhang et al. 2008).

Solving Functional Constraints by Variable Substitution
3
In the rest of the paper, background on CSPs and functional constraints is given
in Section 2. Variable substitution for binary functional constraints is introduced
and studied in Section 3. Section 4 presents several results on algorithms for variable
elimination in general CSPs containing functional constraints. Section 5 presents
an experimental study on the eﬀectiveness of the variable elimination algorithm
and explains why functional elimination leads to a smaller problem with a reduced
search space. In Section 6, we extend binary functional constraints to non-binary
functional constraints and we discuss substitution for general problems where there
are non-binary constraints which may be in extensional and intensional form. Re-
lated work is discussed in Section 7, and the paper is concluded in Section 8.
2 Preliminaries
We begin with the basic concepts and notation used in this paper.
A binary Constraint Satisfaction Problem (CSP) (N, D, C) consists of a ﬁnite
set of variables N = {v1, · · · , vn}, a set of domains D = {D1, · · · , Dn}, where Di is
the domain of variable i , and a set of constraints each of which is a binary relation
between two variables in N.
A constraint between two variables i and j is denoted by cij. Symbols a and b
possibly with subscript denote the values in a domain. A constraint cij is a set of
allowed tuples. We assume testing whether a tuple belongs to a constraint takes
constant time. For a ∈Di and b ∈Dj, we use either (a, b) ∈cij or cij(a, b) to
denote that values a and b satisfy the constraint cij. For the problems of interest
here, we require that for all a ∈Di and b ∈Dj, (a, b) ∈cij if and only if (b, a) ∈cji.
If there is no constraint on i and j, cij denotes a universal relation, i.e., Di × Dj.
A constraint graph G = (V, E) where V = N and E = {{i, j} | ∃cij ∈C}. The
constraint graph is usually used to describe the topological structure of a CSP. A
solution of a constraint satisfaction problem is an assignment of a value to each
variable such that the assignment satisﬁes all the constraints in the problem. A
CSP is satisﬁable if it has a solution. The solution space of a CSP is the set of all
its solutions. Two CSPs are equivalent if and only if they have the same solution
space. Throughout this paper, n represents the number of variables, d the size of
the largest domain of the variables, and e the number of constraints in C.
We need two operations on constraints in this paper. One is the intersection of
two constraints (intersection of the sets of tuples) that constrain the same set of
variables. The other operation is the composition, denoted by the symbol “◦” of
two constraints sharing a variable. The composition of two relations is:
cjk ◦cij = {(a, c) | ∃b ∈Dj, such that (a, b) ∈cij ∧(b, c) ∈cjk}.
Composition is a basic operation in our variable substitution method. Composing
cij and cjk leads to a new constraint on variables i and k.
Example 1
Consider constraints cij = {(a1, b1), (a2, b2), (a2, b3)} and cjk = {(b1, c1), (b2, c2),
(b3, c2)}. The composition of cij and cjk is a constraint on i and k: cik = {(a1, c1),
(a2, c2)}.

4
Y. Zhang and R. H. C. Yap
Deﬁnition 1
A constraint cij is functional on variable j if for any a ∈Di there exists at most
one b ∈Dj such that cij(a, b). cij is functional on variable i if cji is functional on
i. Given a constraint cij functional on variable j and a value a ∈Di, we assume
throughout the paper that in constant time we can ﬁnd the value b ∈Dj, if there
is one, such that (a, b) ∈cij.
A special case of functional constraints are equations. These are ubiquitous in
CLP. A typical functional constraint in arithmetic is a binary linear equation like
2x = 5 −3y which is functional on x and on y. Functional constraints do not need
to be linear. For example, a nonlinear equation x2 = y2 where x, y ∈1..10 is also
functional on both x and y. In scene labeling problems (Kirousis 1993), there are
many functional constraints and other special constraints.
When a constraint cij is functional on variable j, for simplicity, we say cij is
functional by making use of the fact that the subscripts of cij are an ordered pair.
When cij is functional on variable i, cji is said to be functional. That cij is functional
does not mean cji is functional. In this paper, the deﬁnition of functional constraints
is diﬀerent from the one in (Zhang et al. 1999; Van Hentenryck et al. 1992) where
constraints are functional on each of its variables, leading to the following notion.
Deﬁnition 2
A constraint cij is bi-functional if cij is functional on variable i and also on variable
j.
A bi-functional constraint is called bijective in (David 1995). For functional con-
straints, we have the following property on their composition and intersection: 1)
If cij and cjk are functional on variables j and k respectively, their composition
remains functional; and 2) The intersection of two functional constraints remains
functional.
Example 2
The constraint cij = {(a1, b1), (a2, b1), (a3, b2)} is functional, while the constraint
cij = {(a1, b3), (a2, b1), (a3, b2)} is both functional and bi-functional. An example
of a non-functional constraint is cij = {(a1, b1), (a1, b2), (a2, b1), (a3, b2)}.
In the remainder of the paper, rather than writing vi, we will simply refer to a
variable by its subscript, i.e. i rather than vi.
3 Variable Substitution and Elimination Using Binary Functional
Constraints
We introduce the idea of variable substitution. Given a CSP (N, D, C), a constraint
cij ∈C that is functional on j, and a constraint cjk in C, we can substitute j by i
in cjk by composing cij and cjk. If there is already a constraint cik ∈C, the new
constraint on i and k is simply the intersection of cik and cjk ◦cij.

Solving Functional Constraints by Variable Substitution
5
Deﬁnition 3
Consider a CSP (N, D, C), a constraint cij ∈C functional on j, and a constraint
cjk ∈C. To substitute j by i in cjk, using cij, is to get a new CSP where cjk is
replaced by c′
ik = cik ∩(cjk ◦cij). The variable i is called the substitution variable.
A fundamental property of variable substitution is that it preserves the solution
space of the problem.
Property 1
Given a CSP (N, D, C), a constraint cij ∈C functional on j, and a constraint
cjk ∈C, the new problem obtained by substituting j by i in cjk is equivalent to
(N, D, C).
Proof
Let the new problem after substituting j by i in cjk be (N, D, C′) where C′ =
(C −{cjk}) ∪{c′
ik} and c′
ik = cik ∩(cjk ◦cij).
Assume (a1, a2, · · · , an) is a solution of (N, D, C). We need to show that it satisﬁes
C′. The major diﬀerence between C′ and C is that C′ has new constraint c′
ik. It
is known that (ai, aj) ∈cij, (aj, ak) ∈cjk, and if there is cik in C, (ai, ak) ∈cik.
The fact that c′
ik = (cjk ◦cij) ∩cik implies (ai, ak) ∈c′
ik. Hence, c′
ik is satisﬁed by
(a1, a2, · · · , an).
Conversely, we need to show that any solution (a1, a2, · · · , an) of (N, D, C′) is
a solution of (N, D, C). Given the diﬀerence between C′ and C, it is suﬃcient
to show the solution satisﬁes cjk. We have (ai, aj) ∈cij and (ai, ak) ∈c′
ik. Since
c′
ik = (cjk◦cij)∩cik, there must exist b ∈Dj such that (ai, b) ∈cij and (b, ak) ∈cjk.
As cij is functional, b has to be aj. Hence, aj and ak satisfy cjk.
Based on variable substitution, we can eliminate a variable from a problem so
that no constraint will be on this variable (except the functional constraint used to
substitute it).
Deﬁnition 4
Given a CSP (N, D, C) and a constraint cij ∈C functional on j, to eliminate j
using cij is to substitute j by i, using cij, in every constraint cjk ∈C (except cji).
We can also substitute j by i in cji to obtain c′
ii and then intersect c′
ii with the
identity relation on Di, equivalent to a direct revision of the domain of i with respect
to cij. This would make the algorithms presented in this paper more uniform, i.e.,
only operations on constraints are used. Since in most algorithms we want to make
domain revision explicit, we choose not to substitute j by i in cji.
Given a functional constraint cij of a CSP (N, D, C), let Cj be the set of all
constraints involving j, except cij. The elimination of j using cij results in a new
problem (N, D, C′) where
C′ = (C −Cj) ∪{c′
ik | c′
ik = (cjk ◦cij) ∩cik, cjk ∈C}.
In the new problem, there is only one constraint cij on j and thus j can be regarded
as being “eliminated”.

6
Y. Zhang and R. H. C. Yap
i
k
l
j
i
k
l
j
(a)
(b)
Fig. 1. (a): A CSP with a functional constraint cij. (b): The new CSP after elimi-
nating the variable j using cij.
Example 3
Consider a problem with three constraints whose constraint graph is shown in
Figure 1(a). Let cij be functional which this is indicated by the arrow in the diagram.
The CSP after j has been eliminated using cij is shown in Figure 1(b). In the new
CSP, constraints cjk and cjl are discarded, and new constraints cik = cjk ◦cij and
cil = cjl◦cij are added. Note that the other edges are not directed as the constraints
cjk, cjl, cik, cil may not be functional.
The variable elimination involves “several” substitutions and thus preserves the
solution space of the original problem by Property 1.
Corollary 1
Given a CSP (N, D, C) and a functional constraint cij ∈C, the new problem
(N, D, C′) obtained by the elimination of variable j using cij is equivalent to
(N, D, C).
4 Elimination Algorithms for CSPs with Functional Constraints and
Non-Functional Constraints
We now extend variable elimination to general CSPs with functional and non-
functional constraints. The idea of variable elimination (Deﬁnition 4 in Section 3)
can be used to reduce a CSP to the following canonical functional form.
Deﬁnition 5
A CSP (N, D, C) is in canonical functional form if for any constraint cij ∈C
functional on j, the following conditions are satisﬁed: 1) if cji is also functional on
i(i.e., cij is bi-functional), either i or j is not constrained by any other constraint
in C; 2) otherwise, j is not constrained by any other constraint in C.
As a trivial example, a CSP without any functional constraint is in canonical
functional form. If a CSP contains some functional constraints, it is in canonical
functional form intuitively if for any functional constraint cij, there is only one
constraint on j. As an exception, the ﬁrst condition in the deﬁnition implies that
when cij is bi-functional, one variable of {i, j} might have several bi-functional
constraints on it.
In a canonical functional form CSP, the functional constraints form disjoint star
graphs. A star graph is a tree where there exists a node, called the center, which we

Solving Functional Constraints by Variable Substitution
7
call the free variable, such that there is an edge between this center node and every
other node, which we call and eliminated variable. The constraint between the free
variable and eliminated variable is that it is functional on the eliminated variable.
In Figure 1(a), assuming cjk and cjl are functional on k and l respectively, then
there would be directed edges (arrows) from j to k and j to l. After eliminating j,
we get a star graph in Figure 1(b), since i will be the free variable at the center
of the star graph, with free variables k and l. Notice that before eliminating j,
Figure 1(a) is a star graph, but the constraints are not in a canonical form.
The constraint between a free variable i and an eliminated variable j is functional
on j, but it may or may not be functional on i. In the special case that the star graph
contains only two variables i and j and cij is bi-functional, one of the variables can
be called a free variable while the other is called an eliminated variable.
If a CSP is in canonical functional form, all functional constraints and the elim-
inated variables can be ignored when we try to ﬁnd a solution for this problem.
Thus, to solve a CSP (N, D, C) in canonical functional form whose non-eliminated
variables are NE, we only need to solve a smaller problem (NE, D′, C′) where D′
is the set of domains of the variables NE and C′ = {cij | cij ∈C and i, j ∈NE}.
Proposition 1
Consider a CSP P1 = (N, D, C) in a canonical functional form and a new CSP
P2 = (NE, D′, C′) formed by ignoring the eliminated variables in P1. For any free
variable i ∈N and any constraint cij ∈C functional on j, assume any value of Di
has a support in Dj and this support can be found in constant time. Any solution
of P2 is extensible to a unique solution of P1 in O(|N −NE|) time. Any solution
of P1 can be obtained from a solution of P2.
Proof
Let (a1, a2, · · · , a|NE|) be a solution of (NE, D′, C′). Consider any eliminated vari-
able j ∈N −NE. In C, there is only one constraint on j. Let it be cij where i
must be a free variable. By the assumption of the proposition, the value of i in
the solution has a unique support in j. This support will be assigned to j. In this
way, a unique solution for (N, D, C) is obtained. The complexity of this extension
is O(|N −NE|).
Let S be a solution of (N, D, C) and S′ the portion of S restricted to the variables
in NE. S′ is a solution of (NE, D′, C′) because C′ ⊆C. S′ can then be extended
to S by using the functional constraints on the values of the free variables in S′ to
give unique values for the variables in N −NE.
Any CSP with functional constraints can be transformed into canonical functional
form by variable elimination using the algorithm in Figure 2. Given a constraint cij
functional on j, line 1 of the algorithm substitutes j by i in all constraints involving
j. Note the arc consistency on cik, for all neighbor k of i, is enforced by line 3.
Theorem 1
Given a CSP (N, D, C), Variable Elimination transforms the problem into a
canonical functional form in O(n2d2).

8
Y. Zhang and R. H. C. Yap
algorithm Variable Elimination(inout (N, D, C), out consistent) {
L ←N;
while (There is cij ∈C functional on j where i, j ∈L and i ̸= j){
// Eliminate variable j,
1.
C ←{c′
ik | c′
ik ←(cjk ◦cij) ∩cik, cjk ∈C, k ̸= i} ∪(C −{cjk ∈C | k ̸= i});
2.
L ←L −{j};
3.
Revise the domain of i wrt cik for every neighbour k of i;
if (Di is empty) then { consistent ←false; return }
}
consistent ←true;
}
Fig. 2. A variable elimination algorithm to transform a CSP into a canonical func-
tional form.
Proof
Assume Variable Elimination transforms a CSP P1 = (N, D, C) into a new prob-
lem P2 = (N, D′, C′). We show that P2 is in canonical functional form. For any
constraint cij ∈C′ functional on j, there are two cases. Case 1: j /∈L when the
algorithm terminates. Since j ∈L when the algorithm starts and line 2 is the only
place where j can be removed from L, j must have been eliminated at certain step
of the while loop. In line 1 (the component after “∪”), all constraints on j (except
cij) are removed. That is cij is the unique constraint on j. Case 2: j ∈L when the
algorithm terminates. Since cij is functional on j, variable i is not in L when the
algorithm terminates (otherwise, j will be substituted by line 1 at certain step of
the while loop). Therefore, i is removed from L at certain step of the while loop. i is
not substituted using cki where k ̸= j (otherwise cij ̸∈C′ because of the elimination
of i). This implies that i was substituted using cji, and thus cji is functional on i
by the loop condition. Hence, cij is bi-functional, and i is not constrained by any
other constraints (thanks to line 1). Therefore, cases 1 and 2 show that P2 is in
canonical functional form.
Next, we prove the complexity of Variable Elimination. The algorithm elim-
inates any variable in N at most once because once it is eliminated it is removed
from L (line 2). Assume, before the algorithm, there is at most one constraint on
any pair of variables (otherwise, we take the intersection of all constraints on the
same pair of variables as the unique constraint). This property holds during the
elimination process because in line 1, the intersection in the component before “∪”
guarantees that we have only one copy of constraint on any two variables. So, for
each variable j and a constraint cij functional on j, there are at most n −2 other
constraints on j. The variable j in those constraints needs to be substituted (line
1).
The complexity of the substitution j in each constraint is O(d2) which is the cost
of the composition of a functional constraint and a general constraint. Recall that,
for a functional constraint cij, given a value a ∈Di, we can ﬁnd its support in
Dj in constant time. To compose cij with a general constraint cjk, for each value
a ∈Di, we ﬁnd its support b ∈Dj (in constant time). If we take each constraint

Solving Functional Constraints by Variable Substitution
9
.................................
....................................
.........
.........
...................................................
.........................................
.........
......................................................
...........................................
.........
.........
...............
...............
i
j
l1
l2
k
i1
i2
i3
j1
j2
j3
(a)
(b)
Fig. 3. (a) The constraint graph of a CSP with functional constraints cij and cjk.
(b) A directed graph.
as a matrix, the row of b of cjk will be the row of cjk ◦cij, which takes d steps.
Therefore, the cost of computing cjk ◦cij is O(d2).
For n−2 constraints, the elimination of j (line 1) takes O(nd2). There are at most
n −1 variables to eliminate and thus the worst case complexity of the algorithm is
O(n2d2).
It is worth noting that the variable elimination algorithm is able to globally solve
some CSPs containing non-functional constraints.
Example 4
Consider a simple example where there are three variables i, j, and k whose do-
mains are {1, 2, 3} and the constraints are i = j, i = k + 1, and j ̸= k. Note that
although the constraints are listed in an equational form, the actual constraints are
explicit and discrete, thus normal equational reasoning might not be applicable. By
eliminating j using cij, cik becomes {(2, 1), (3, 2)}, and the domain of i becomes
{2, 3}. The non-functional constraint cjk is gone. The problem is in canonical func-
tional form. A solution can be obtained by letting i be 2 and consequently j = 2
and k = 1.
By carefully choosing an ordering of the variables to eliminate, a faster algorithm
can be obtained. The intuition is that once a variable i is used to substitute for
other variables, i itself should not be substituted by any other variable later.
Example 5
Consider a CSP with functional constraints cij and cjk. Its constraint graph is
shown in Figure 3(a) where a functional constraint is represented by an arrow. If
we eliminate k and then j, we ﬁrst get cjl1 and cjl2, and then get cil1 and cil2. Note
that k is ﬁrst substituted by j and then later j is substituted by i. If we eliminate
j and then k, we ﬁrst get cik, and then get cil1 and cil2. In this way, we reduce the
number of compositions of constraints.
Given a CSP P = (N, D, C), P F is used to denote its directed graph (V, E)
where V = N and E = {(i, j) | cij ∈C and cij is functional on j}. Non-functional
constraints in C do not appear in P F . A subgraph of a directed graph is strongly
connected if for any two vertices of the subgraph, any one of them is reachable from
the other. A strongly connected component of a directed graph is a maximum sub-
graph that is strongly connected. To describe our algorithm we need the following
notation.

10
Y. Zhang and R. H. C. Yap
Deﬁnition 6
Given a directed graph (V, E), a sequence of the nodes of V is a functional elimi-
nation ordering if for any two nodes i and j, i before j in the sequence implies that
there is a path from i and j. A functional elimination ordering of a CSP problem
P is a functional elimination ordering of P F .
The functional elimination ordering is used to overcome the redundant computa-
tion shown in the example on Figure 3(a). Given a directed graph G, a functional
elimination ordering can be found by: 1) ﬁnding all the strongly connected compo-
nents of G; 2) modifying G by taking every component as one vertex with edges
changed and/or added accordingly; 3) ﬁnding a topological ordering of the nodes
in the new graph; and 4) replacing any vertex v in the ordering by any sequence of
the vertices of the strongly connected component represented by v.
To illustrate the process, consider the example in Figure 3(b) which can be taken
as P F for some CSP problem P. All strongly connected components are {j1, j2, j3},
denoted by c1, and {i1, i2, i3}, denoted by c2. We construct the new graph by
replacing the components by vertices: ({c1, c2}, {(c1, c2)}). We have the edge (c1, c2)
because the two components are connected by (j2, i2). The topological ordering of
the new graph is ⟨c1, c2⟩. Now we can replace c1 by any sequence of j’s and c2 by
any sequence of i’s. For example, we can have a functional elimination ordering
⟨j3, j2, j1, i2, i3, i1⟩.
The algorithm Linear Elimination in Figure 4 ﬁrst ﬁnds a functional elimina-
tion ordering O (line 1). The body of the while loop at line 4 is to process all the
variables in O. Every variable i of O is processed as follows: i will be used to sub-
stitute for all the variables reachable from i through constraints that are functional
in C0 and still exist in the current C. Those constraints are called qualiﬁed con-
straints. Speciﬁcally, L initially holds the immediate reachable variables through
qualiﬁed constraints (line 8). Line 9 is a loop to eliminate all variables reachable
from i. The loop at line 11 is to eliminate j using i from the current C. In this
loop, if a constraint cjk is qualiﬁed (line 14), k is reachable from i through qualiﬁed
constraints. Therefore, it is put into L (line 15).
To illustrate the ideas underlying the algorithm, consider the example in Fig-
ure 3(b). Now, we assume the edges in the graph are the only constraints in the prob-
lem. Assume the algorithm ﬁnds the ordering given earlier: O = ⟨j3, j2, j1, i2, i3, i1⟩.
Next, it starts from j3. The qualiﬁed constraints leaving j3 are cj3j2 only. So, the
immediate reachable variables through qualiﬁed constraints are L = {j2}. Take
and delete j2 from L. Substitute j2 by j3 in constraints cj2i2 and cj2j1. As a result,
constraints cj2i2 and cj2j1 are removed from C while cj3j1 = cj3j1 ∩(cj2j1 ◦cj3j2) and
new constraint cj3i2 = cj2i2 ◦cj3j2 is introduced to C. One can verify that both cj2j1
and cj2i2 are qualiﬁed. Hence, variables j1 and i2 are reachable from j3 and thus are
put into L. Assume j1 is selected from L. Since there are no other constraints on
j1, nothing is done. Variable i2 is then selected from L. By eliminating i2 using j3,
ci2i1 and ci2i3 are removed from C and cj3i1 and cj3i3 are added to C. Constraint
ci2i1 is qualiﬁed, and thus i1 is added to L. Note that ci2i3 is not qualiﬁed because
it is not functional on i3 in terms of the graph. We take out the only variable i1 in

Solving Functional Constraints by Variable Substitution
11
algorithm Linear Elimination(inout (N, D, C)) {
1. Find a functional elimination ordering O of the problem;
2. Let C0 be C; any cij in C0 is denoted by c0
ij;
3. For each i ∈N, it is marked as not eliminated;
4. while (O is not empty) {
5.
Take and delete the ﬁrst variable i from O;
6.
if (i is not eliminated) {
8.
L ←{j | (i, j) ∈C and c0
ij is functional};
9.
while (L not empty) {
Take and delete j from L;
11.
for any cjk ∈C −{cji} { // Substitute j by i in cjk;
c′
ik ←cjk ◦cij ∩cik;
C ←C ∪{c′
ik} −{cjk};
14.
if (c0
jk is functional) then
15.
L ←L ∪{k};
}
16.
Mark j as eliminated;
} // loop on L
}
} // loop on O
} // end of algorithm
Fig. 4. A variable elimination algorithm of complexity O(ed2).
L. After i1 is eliminated using j3, ci1i3 is removed from C, and constraint cj3i3 is
updated to be cj3i3 ∩(ci1i3 ◦cj3i1). Since ci1i3 is qualiﬁed, i3 is added to L. One can
see that although i3 was not reachable when i2 was eliminated, it ﬁnally becomes
reachable because of i1. All the variables in a strongly connected component are
reachable from the variable under processing if one of them is reachable. Now, take
i3 out of L, and nothing is done because there are no other constraints incident on
it. Every variable except j3 is marked as eliminated (line 16), the while loop on O
(line 4 and 6) terminates.
Theorem 2
Given a CSP problem, the worst case time complexity of
Linear Elimination is O(ed2) where e is the number of constraints and d the size
of the maximum domain in the problem.
Proof
To ﬁnd a functional elimination ordering involves the identiﬁcation of strongly
connected components and topological sorting. Each of the two operations takes
linear time. Therefore, line 1 of the algorithm takes O(n + e).
The while loop of line 4 takes O(ed2). Assume that there is a unique identiﬁcation
number associated with each constraint in C. After some variable of a constraint is
substituted, the constraint’s identiﬁcation number refers to the new constraint.
For any identiﬁcation number α, let its ﬁrst associated constraint be cjk. Assum-
ing j is substituted by some other variable i, we can show that i will be never be
substituted later in the algorithm. By the algorithm, i is selected at line 5. Since

12
Y. Zhang and R. H. C. Yap
it is the ﬁrst element of O now, all variables before i in the original functional
ordering have been processed. Since i is not eliminated, it is not reachable from any
variable before it (in terms of the original O) through qualiﬁed constraints (due to
the loop of line 9). Hence, there are two cases: 1) there is no constraint cmi of C
such that c0
mi is functional on i, 2) there is at least one constraint cmi of C such
that c0
mi is functional on i. In the ﬁrst case, our algorithm will never substitute i by
any other variable. By deﬁnition of functional elimination ordering, case 2 implies
that i belongs to a strongly connected component whose variables have not been
eliminated yet. Since all variables in the component will be substituted by i, after
the loop of line 9, there is no constraint cmi of C such that c0
mi is functional on i.
Hence, i will never be substituted again.
In a similar fashion, if variable k is substituted by l, l will never be substituted
later by the algorithm.
So, there are at most two substitutions occurring to α. Each of these substitutions
is a composition that involves a functional constraint. Hence, its complexity is O(d2)
in the worst case as shown in the proof of Theorem 1.
Since there is a unique identiﬁcation number for each constraint, the total number
of the unique identiﬁcation numbers is e and thus the time taken by the while loop
at line 4 is O(ed2). In summary, the worst case time complexity of the algorithm is
O(ed2).
Before proving some properties of Linear Elimination, we ﬁrst deﬁne trivially
functional constraints.
Deﬁnition 7
Given a problem P, let C0 be the constraints before applying Linear Elimination
and C the constraints of the problem at any moment during the algorithm. A
constraint cij of C is trivially functional if it is functional and satisﬁes the condition:
c0
ij is functional or there is a path i1(= i), i2, · · · , im(= j) in C0 such that, ∀k ∈
1..m −1, c0
ikik+1 is functional on ik+1.
Theorem 3
Algorithm Linear Elimination transforms a CSP (N, D, C) into a canonical func-
tional form if all newly produced functional constraints (due to substitution) are
trivially functional.
The proof of this result is straightforward and thus omitted here.
Corollary 2
For a CSP problem with non-functional constraints and bi-functional constraints,
the worst case time complexity of algorithm Linear Elimination is linear to the
problem size.
This result follows the observation below. When the functional constraint involved
in a substitution is bi-functional, the complexity of the composition is linear to the
constraints involved. From the proof of Theorem 2, the complexity of the algorithm
is linear to the size of all constraints, i.e., the problem size.

Solving Functional Constraints by Variable Substitution
13
Corollary 3
Consider a CSP with both functional and non-functional constraints. If there is a
variable of the problem such that every variable of the CSP is reachable from it in
P F , the satisﬁability of the problem can be decided in O(ed2) using Linear Elim-
ination.
For a problem with the property given in the corollary, its canonical functional
form becomes a star graph. So, any value in the domain of the free variable is exten-
sible to a solution if we add (arc) consistency enforcing during Linear Elimination.
The problem is not satisﬁable if a domain becomes empty during the elimination
process.
5 Experimental Results
We experiment to investigate the eﬀectiveness of variable elimination on problem
solving. In our experiments, a problem is solved in two ways: (i) directly by a general
solver; and (ii) variable elimination is applied before the solver.
There are no publicly available benchmarks on functional constraints. We test
the algorithms on random problems which are suﬃciently hard so that we can
investigate the eﬀect of diﬀerent numbers of functional constraints and the eﬀect
of constraint tightness.
We generate random problems ⟨n, d, e, nf, t⟩where n is the number of variables,
d domain size, e the number of constraints, nf the number of functional constraints,
and t the tightness of non-functional constraints. The tightness r is deﬁned as
the percentage of allowed tuples over d2. There are nf functional constraints and
the rest of the binary constraints are non-functional. Each functional constraint
is constructed to have d allowed tuples. In the context of random problems, the
tightness factor of 1/d due to the functional constraints is rather tight. When we
increase nf, it can be the case that the search space is quickly reduced due to the
eﬀect of these very tight constraints. Therefore the “hardness” of the problems drops
correspondingly when there is a signiﬁcant increase of nf. As described below, we
try to counter this eﬀect by removing problems which be solved too easily from the
benchmarks.
In the experiments, we systematically test benchmark problems generated using
the following parameters: n, d are 50, e varies from 100 to 710 with step size 122
(710 is ∼10% of the total number of possible constraints (1225)), nf varies from
2 to 12, and t varies from 0.2 to 1.0 with step size 0.05. When nf is small (for
example, 2), there are so many hard problems that we can only experiment with
a small portion of the problems because it is computationally infeasible. When nf
is large (for example, 12), even the most diﬃcult problem instances from the set
of instances becomes easy and only a small number of backtracks is needed. These
instances can be solved too easily and thus are not very useful for benchmarking the
elimination algorithm (i.e., we will not expect the elimination algorithm to bring
any beneﬁts to these instances). So, we do not include the cases with nf > 12.
When nf = 12, the most diﬃcult problems we found are with e = 710. Table 1

14
Y. Zhang and R. H. C. Yap
tightness (t)
0.2 – 0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9 – 0.95
#bt
0
5.7
22.9
1023
0.2
0
Table 1. Hardness of the problem versus tightness
Table 2.
The experimental results for random problems with n = d = 50.
Elimination
No Elimination
e
nf
tightness
cpu time (s)
#backtracks
cpu time (s)
#backtracks
344
6
0.60
20042
1.889e+06
47781
5.381e+06
466
7
0.70
9266
9.362e+05
35136
3.955e+06
588
8
0.75
17922
1.635e+06
45464
4.386e+06
588
9
0.75
10346
5.679e+05
21231
1.605e+06
710
10
0.80
3039
2.244e+05
5771
5.146e+05
710
11
0.80
481
26522
959.7
71258
588
12
0.75
24
682
57.9
2960
shows the hardness of problems instances, with nf = 12 and e = 710, in terms of
the number of backtracks #bt (average of 10 instances) needed. The hardness is
measured using an arc consistency solver without using the elimination algorithm.
When t is from 0.2 to 0.65, the problems are too easy (#bt is 0). For the most
diﬃcult case of t being 0.8, #bt is still rather small (around 1000). On the other
hand, when nf is small, one can expect that the application of elimination may
not make much diﬀerence. Therefore, we do not include the cases when nf is small
either.
Due to the observations above, we evaluate the algorithm only on non-trivial
problem instances and where nf is not too tiny. For each nf (varying from 6 to 12),
the results of the most diﬃcult problem instances discovered in the exploration
process above is shown in Table 2. The results were obtained on a DELL Pow-
erEdge 1850 (two 3.6GHz Intel Xeon CPUs) with Linux. We implement both the
elimination algorithm and a general solver in C++. The solver uses the standard
backtracking algorithm armed with arc consistency enforcing algorithm after each
variable assignment. During the search, the dom/deg heuristic is used to select a
variable, and the value selection heuristic is in lexicographical order.4
In Table 2, the cpu time is the total time of twenty problem instances for a given
combination of e, nf and tightness, and the number of backtracks are their average.
For the problem instances used in Table 2, the time to transform the instances into
their canonical forms is negligible compared to the time needed for solving the
4 The dom/deg heuristic is a dynamic variable selection heuristic.

Solving Functional Constraints by Variable Substitution
15
nf = 12
nf = 11
nf = 10
nf = 9
nf = 8
nf = 7
nf = 6
y = 5x
y = x
number of backtracks with elimination
number of backtracks w/o elimination
1e+07
1e+06
100000
10000
1000
100
10
1
1e+08
1e+07
1e+06
100000
10000
1000
100
10
1
Fig. 5. The number of backtracks needed with and without elimination.
instance. There are several reasons. First, the number of constraints involved in
the elimination is relatively small compared to the total number of constraints
in the problems. Second, the algorithm is as eﬃcient as the optimal general arc
consistency algorithm used in the solver. Thirdly, the elimination is applied only
once to reduce the problem which can be done before the backtracking search, while
the arc consistency algorithm needs to be called at every step during the search,
i.e. roughly about the same as the number of backtracks.
The results show that the variable elimination can signiﬁcantly speed up the
problem solving in terms of both cpu time and the number of backtracks. It reduces
the number of backtracks by two to four times and also reduces the cpu time
correspondingly.
The statistics (cpu time and number of backtracks) used in Table 2 is for 20
problem instances for each value of the selected parameters (each row in the table).
We notice that the hardness of these instances is not uniform, i.e., some instances
are signiﬁcantly harder than the others. To better visualize the performance of the
algorithms, we replot the same data from Table 2 in Figure 5. Each data point in
Figure 5, represents an instance whose x-coordinate is the number of backtracks
with elimination applied while its y-coordinate is that without elimination. Both
axis use a log scale.
The scatter plot in Figure 5 shows a similar performance improvement resulting
from elimination. Note that all points above the line y = x indicate that not us-
ing elimination requires more backtracks. We highlight the instances with nf = 7
(the × symbol in the graph), which shows more extreme results as elimination can
signiﬁcantly speed up or slow down the problem solving. The slowing down is an
interesting discovery of this experiment. An explanation is that variable elimina-

16
Y. Zhang and R. H. C. Yap
w/o elimination
w/ elimination
tightness
cpu time
0.8
0.79
0.78
0.77
0.76
0.75
0.74
0.73
0.72
0.71
0.7
10000
1000
100
10
1
0.1
Fig. 6. The cpu time for instances with n = d = 50, nf = 8 and e = 588 and
tightness varying from 0.70 to 0.80.
tion changes the topology of the problem, which may aﬀect the dynamic variable
ordering heuristics of the general solver. It is well known that the performance of a
constraint solver may vary signiﬁcantly with a diﬀerent variable ordering.
To have a better idea on how the elimination algorithm performs, we look at
instances with various hardness. We now zoom into the case of nf = 8 and e = 588
— this has a large cpu time and is more tight from the the experiments in Table
2. We remark that our algorithm performs similarly in all these cases, so we just
look at the details of a speciﬁc one with the results for all conﬁgurations where
the tightness changes from 0.70 to 0.80 with a step of 0.01. The results are shown
in Figure. 6 (cpu time) and Figure 7 (the number of backtracks). Again, the cpu
time is the sum of the cost of 20 instances per parameter setting while the number
of backtracks is their average. When the tightness is 0.79 and 0.80 the problem
instances become very simple with less than 200 backtracks, we do not expect the
elimination algorithm to improve the performance of the constraint solver although
it reduces the number of backtracks. For most non trivial problems, elimination
does help to improve the eﬃciency (both cpu time and the number of backtracks)
signiﬁcantly. When using 10 instances, we also observed that when the tightness is
0.73, the elimination leads to a worse performance of the general problem solver in
terms of both cpu time and the number of backtracks.
As observed, when the number of functional constraints in the random problems
increases, the problem instances become trivial (i.e., very few backtracks are needed
to solve them). This makes it hard to fully evaluate the elimination algorithm. To
reduce the potential inconsistency caused by the tight functional constraints which
makes the problems easy, we use identity functions (i.e., x = y, a special case

Solving Functional Constraints by Variable Substitution
17
w/o elimination
w/ elimination
tightness
number of backtracks
0.8
0.79
0.78
0.77
0.76
0.75
0.74
0.73
0.72
0.71
0.7
1e+06
100000
10000
1000
100
10
Fig. 7. The number of backtracks for instances with n = d = 50, nf = 8 and
e = 588 and tightness varying from 0.70 to 0.80.
Table 3.
The experimental results for random problems with identity functions
(the problem parameters are n = d = e = 100).
Elimination
No Elimination
nf
tightness
cpu time (s)
#backtracks
cpu time (s)
#backtracks
10
0.04
11.5
779.6
34.6
1870.1
20
0.04
1.4
4.5
9606.8
131724.0
30
0.08
1.1
0.2
40.7
564.6
40
0.19
1.1
0
177.9
1275.7
50
0.20
0.7
0
893.1
64163.2
60
0.25
0.6
0
2.2
1.4
of functional constraint), instead of arbitrary functional constraints. We remark
that we could also have used a permutation form of the identity function but that
would have made the problem instance construction more complex. With identity
functions, no inconsistency will result directly from functional constraints. The
experimental results given in Table 3 show that we can create non trivial problems
with much more functional constraints.
For this set of instances, the elimination can speed up the problem solving by
up to several orders of magnitude (in terms of both cpu time and the number of
backtracks). An important observation is that when there is a signiﬁcant amount
of functional constraints, the number of backtracks needed after elimination can be

18
Y. Zhang and R. H. C. Yap
as small as 0. However, without elimination, the general problem solving may need
a large number of backtracks (up to ﬁve orders of magnitude larger).
In summary, from our experiments, for non trivial random problems, elimination
can improve the eﬃciency of a general constraint solver by several times to sev-
eral orders of magnitude. We also observe that the elimination could make a solver
slower possibly due to the change of the topological structure of the problems. How-
ever, the slowdown only occurs rarely in our experiments.
5.1 Search Space Reduction through Elimination
The experiments show that the elimination could reduce the search space signiﬁ-
cantly. In fact, we can show that the elimination can help reduce the size of the
search space (in terms of the current domains of the variables).
Proposition 2
Given a CSP problem P, let P ′ be the problem resulting from applying the elimina-
tion algorithm to P. After enforcing arc consistency on P ′ and P, for each variable
of P ′, its domain in P ′ is a subset of that in P.
Proof
Instead of proving the original proposition, we prove the following claim: given a
CSP problem P = (V, D, C) and a constraint cij functional on j, let P ′ = (V −
{j}, D′, C′) be the problem resulting from the elimination of j. Any value, not from
Dj, removed by enforcing arc consistency on P will be removed by enforcing arc
consistency on P ′. Let P 1 = (V, D1, C) and P ′1 = (V −{j}, D′1, C′) be the result of
enforcing arc consistency on P and P ′ respectively. Equivalently, we will show that
there exists D′′
j ⊆Dj such that P ′′ = (V, D′1 ∪{D′′
j }, C) (i.e., “plug” the domains
of P ′1 to P) is arc consistent. If this claim holds, the proposition holds by applying
the claim repeatedly (as the elimination proceeds).
Let the neighbors of j in P be i, k1, . . . , km. For any constraint clk ∈C−{cij, cjk1,
. . . , cjkm}, clk ∈C′. Since clk is arc consistent in P ′1, clk is arc consistent in P ′′.
We next show cij ∈C is arc consistent with respect to D′1
i and Dj, i.e., for any
value a ∈D′1
i , there is a support in Dj. Assume there is no support in Dj, by
the deﬁnition of substitution, a has no support in any domain of kn (n ∈1..m),
which contradicts that cikn ∈C′ is arc consistent with respect to D′1
i
and D′1
kn.
Furthermore, let the support of a in Dj be b. We claim b has a support with
respect to any constraint cjk (k ∈{k1, . . . , km}) in P ′1. Otherwise, a has no sup-
port with respect to cik ∈C′ for some k ∈{k1, . . . , km}, by the deﬁnition of
substitution. It contradicts the fact that cik is arc consistent in P ′1. Let D′′
j =
Dj −{b | b has no support with respect to cji and D′1
i }. Clearly D′′
j is not empty
(because cij is arc consistent in P ′1). It can be shown that cji is arc consistent over
domains D
′1
i
and D′′
j and cij is still arc consistent on these domains too. In other
words, cij is arc consistent in P ′′.
Similarly, we can show that cjk1, . . . , and cjkm are arc consistent over D
′1
kn (n ∈
k1..km) and D′′
j , and thus in P ′′.

Solving Functional Constraints by Variable Substitution
19
Furthermore, after enforcing arc consistency on P and P ′, for some variables of
P ′, its domain in P ′ is a proper subset of that in P. Consider the following example:
V = {x, y, z}, x, y, z ∈{1, 2}, and cxy = {(1, 1), (2, 2)}, cyz = {(1, 2), (2, 1)}, czx =
{(1, 1), (2, 2)}. This problem is arc consistent and the domains of the variables are
{1, 2}. However, the problem P ′ resulting from variable elimination has an empty
domain.
Thus, we see that using the elimination algorithm together with arc consistency
for the non-functional constraints leads to a “higher amount” of consistency.
6 Beyond Binary Constraints
Our presentation so far is based on binary constraints. To model real life problems,
non-binary constraints are often useful. In this section, we discuss the potential
extension of the work reported in this paper. The ﬁrst subsection is to generalize
substitution to non-binary constraints in extensional form, and the second proposes
an approach to processing non-binary constraints in intensional form.
6.1 Variable Elimination and Non-binary Functional Constraints
In this section, we discuss the treatment of the generalization of binary functional
constraints and substitution to non-binary constraints. We ﬁrst generalize the func-
tional property from binary constraints to non-binary constraints. Then, we show
how a variable is substituted by a set of variables.
A non-binary constraint is denoted by cS where S is the set of variables in the
constraint. A linear equation x + y + z = 8 with ﬁnite domains for {x, y, z} is a
non-binary constraint. We now deﬁne variable instantiations. An instantiation of
a set of variables Y is an assignment of values to the variables in Y . It is usually
denoted by a sequence. An instantiation is denoted by a character with a bar, for
example, ¯a.
Deﬁnition 8
A constraint cS is functional on j(∈S) if for any instantiation ¯a of S −{j}, there
is at most one value of j such that this value and ¯a satisfy cS. A constraint cS is
functional if it is functional on some variable j ∈S.
Example 6
Consider a constraint x + y + z = 8 with x, y, z ∈{1, 2, 3}. Let ¯a = (1, 1) and
¯b = (2, 3) be two instantiations of (x, y). For ¯a, no value for z can be found to
satisfy the constraint. For ¯b, value 3 is the only value for z to satisfy the constraint.
It can be veriﬁed that the constraint is functional on z, and similarly on x and on
y.
Example 7
The constraint x2 + y2 + z = 8 with x, y, z ∈{−1, −2, −3, 0, 1, 2, 3} is functional on
z but not functional on x or y.

20
Y. Zhang and R. H. C. Yap
The idea of variable substitution is applicable to the functional non-binary con-
straints deﬁned above. However, we need more generalised operations to implement
variable substitution. Below, we always take a constraint cS as a non-binary relation
whose tuples are given explicitly. It is also helpful to recall that a relation is simply a
set, and we can apply set operations like intersection to relations. For example, the
constraint x+y+z = 8 with x, y, z ∈{1, 2, 3} is taken as {(2, 3, 3), (3, 2, 3), (3, 3, 2)}
where each tuple is an instantiation of variables (x, y, z).
In the context of non-binary constraints, the composition of two constraints cS
and cT with respect to a variable i ∈S ∩T , denoted by “◦i,” is deﬁned below.
cS ◦i cT = {¯a |
¯a is an instantiation of S ∪T −{i} and there exists a ∈Di
such that (¯a, a) satisﬁes both cS and cT .}
If cS is functional on j and j is a variable of constraint cT , to substitute the
variable j in cT in terms of cS is to replace cT by cS ◦j cT .
Deﬁnition 9
Consider a CSP (N, D, C) and two constraints cS and cT in C. Assume cS is
functional on j ∈S∩T . To substitute j in constraint cT using cS is to get a new CSP
(N, D, C′) where C′ = (C−{cT })∪{c′
S∪T −{j}} and c′
S∪T −{j} = cS∪T −{j}∩(cS◦jcT ).
The variable substitution preserves the solution of a CSP.
Property 2
Given a CSP (N, D, C), a constraint cS ∈C functional on j, and a constraint
cT ∈C where j ∈T , the new problem obtained after j in cT is substituted using
cS is equivalent to (N, D, C).
Proof
Let the new problem after j in cT is substituted be (N, D, C′) where C′ = (C −
{cT}) ∪{c′
S∪T −{j}} and c′
S∪T −{j} = cS∪T −{j} ∩(cS ◦j cT ).
Assume ¯a is a solution of (N, D, C). We shall show that ¯a also satisﬁes C′.
Given a set of variables Y , ¯aY will be used to denote the values in the solution ¯a
for the variables in Y . C′ diﬀers from C in that it has the new constraint c′
S∪T −{j}.
It is known that ¯aS ∈cS, ¯aT ∈cT , and if there is cS∪T −{j} in C, ¯aS∪T −{j} satisﬁes
cS∪T −{j}. The fact that c′
S∪T −{j} = (cS ◦j cT ) ∩cS∪T −{j} implies ¯aS∪T −{j} ∈
c′
S∪T −{j}(∈C′). Hence, c′
S∪T −{j} is satisﬁed by ¯a.
Conversely, we need to show that any solution ¯a of (N, D, C′) is a solution of
(N, D, C). Given the diﬀerence between C′ and C, it is only necessary to show ¯a
satisﬁes cT . To facilitate the following proof, we write ¯aS as (¯aS−{j}, ¯aj), ¯aT as
(¯aT −{j}, ¯aj). We have (¯aS−{j}, ¯aj) ∈cS and ¯aS∪T −{j} ∈c′
S∪T −{j}. Assume, by con-
tradiction, (¯aT −{j}, ¯aj) /∈cT . Since ¯aS∪T −{j} ∈c′
S∪T −{j}, there must exist b ∈Dj
such that b ̸= ¯aj, (¯aT −{j}, b) satisﬁes cT , and (¯aS−{j}, b) satisﬁes cS, contradicting
that cS is functional on j. So, ¯aT , that is (¯aT −{j}, ¯aj), satisﬁes cT .
A CSP (N, D, C) with non-binary functional constraints can be reduced by vari-
able substitution in a similar way as developed in this paper. In the non-binary case,
we note that the complexity of the algorithm is more expensive due to the compo-
sition operation (which is very close to the join operation in relational databases).

Solving Functional Constraints by Variable Substitution
21
6.2 Variable Elimination and Non-binary Constraints
Non-binary constraints such as arithmetic or global constraints are common in CP
systems. We discuss how variable elimination of functional constraints can be ap-
plied to these constraints. Non-binary constraints are either in extensional (deﬁned
explicitly) or intensional (deﬁned implicitly) form. To substitute a variable in an
extensional non-binary constraint, we can follow the deﬁnition given the previous
subsection.
In most existing CP systems, for intentional constraints, there are usually par-
ticular propagators with a speciﬁc algorithm associated with them. In this case,
the approach using composition is not directly applicable simply because it has
to interact with a constraint deﬁned in terms of an arbitrary speciﬁc propaga-
tion algorithm. We sketch below an approach which allows variable elimination
to be employed with generic propagators. Assume we have a linear constraint c1:
ax + by + cz < d and a constraint cwy functional on y. To substitute y in c1, we
simply modify c1 to be ax + bw + cz < d and mark w as a shadow variable (w
needs special treatment by the propagator, which will be clear later). We call y the
shadowed variable. Assume we also have cuw functional on w. To eliminate w, c1 is
further changed to ax+bu+cz < d. Since w is a shadow variable, we generate a new
constraint cuy using cuw and cwy in a standard way as discussed in this paper. Now
u becomes the shadow variable while the shadowed variable is still y (variable w is
gone). Suppose we need to make c1 arc consistent. First “synchronize the domains”
of y and u using cuy, i.e., enforce arc consistency on cuy. (Note that due to elimina-
tion, cwy and cuw are no longer involved in the constraint solving.) Next, we enforce
arc consistency on c1. During the process, since u is a shadow variable, all domain
operations are on y instead of u. After making c1 arc consistent, synchronize the
domain of y and u again. (If the domain of u is changed, initiate constraint propaga-
tion on constraints involving u.) This approach is rather generic: for any intensional
constraints, synchronize the domains of the shadow variables and shadowed vari-
ables, apply whatever propagation methods on the shadowed variables (and other
non-shadow variables), synchronize the domains of shadow variables and shadowed
variables again. In fact, the synchronization of the domains of the shadow and shad-
owed variables (for example, u and y above) seems be readily implementable using
the concept of views (Schulte and Tack 2005).
7 Related Work
We now discuss variable substitution in the context of CLP followed by related work
in variable substitution algorithms from other domains. Finally, the relationship
to functional, bi-functional and other variable elimination approaches in the CSP
literature.

22
Y. Zhang and R. H. C. Yap
7.1 CLP and Constraint Solving
Logic Programming and CLP (Jaﬀar and Maher 1994) systems often make use of
variable substitution and elimination. The classic uniﬁcation algorithm discussed
below is a good example.
A more complex example is CLP(R) (Jaﬀar et al. 1992) which has constraints on
ﬁnite trees and arithmetic. Variables in arithmetic constraints are substituted out
using a parametric normal form which is applied during uniﬁcation and also when
solving arithmetic constraints. Our approach is compatible with such CLP solvers
which reduce the constraint store to a normal form using variable substitution. We
remark that any CLP language or system which has ﬁnite domain constraints will
deal with bi-functional constraints simply because of the need to match an atom
in the body with the head of a rule. The question is how powerful is the approach
used. In this paper, we show that a variable substitution approach is more powerful
than just simple ﬁnite domain propagation on equations. The consistency of the
CSP is increased. Our experiments show that the time to solve the problem can be
signiﬁcantly smaller.
7.2 Uniﬁcation, Gaussian Elimination, and Elimination Algorithm for
Functional Constraints
The algorithm for uniﬁcation of ﬁnite trees, the Gaussian elimination algorithm for
linear constraints and our algorithm for functional constraints share the same key
techniques: variable substitution and elimination. Such algorithms are also com-
monly used in CLP systems. We illustrate this by examples.
The ﬁrst is the uniﬁcation of ﬁnite trees or terms. Unifying two terms f(x, y, z)
and f(y, z, g(x)), where x, y and z are variables, results in three term equations:
x = y, y = z, z = g(x). These equations can be solved using a variable elimination
method. We select a variable and eliminate it from the system by substitution.
For example, we can select to eliminate x — substitute all x by y (using the ﬁrst
equation x = y), which results in y = z, z = (g(y)). This process continues until
some constant symbols do not match in an equation, the left hand side variable
appears in a sub-term on the right hand side (or vice versa), or no new equation
can be produced and there is only one term equation left.
Our second example is equation solving for arithmetic over the real numbers. A
system of binary linear constraints on real numbers can be solved by the well known
Gaussian elimination method. A major step is to select a variable and eliminate it
using an equation. Speciﬁcally, to eliminate x using ax + by = c, we substitute all
x in the system by (c −by)/a.
Lastly, we look at the case of ﬁnite domain constraints considered in this paper.
Given a binary CSP, when we have a variable x and a general constraint cyx func-
tional on x, variable x will be eliminated by substituting x in the remainder of the
constraints. The substitution here is achieved by (general) composition of relations.
One can show that the substitution of x in Gaussian elimination produces an equa-
tion (a constraint) which is the result of the composition of the involved equations

Solving Functional Constraints by Variable Substitution
23
(constraints). In other words, given cyx : x = (c−by)/a and cxz : a1x+b1z = c1, the
equation a1(c−by)/a+b1z = c1 is equal to the composition of cyx and cxz. Therefore,
the elimination method proposed in this paper can be regarded as a generalization
of Gaussian elimination for linear equations to functional constraints deﬁned over
discrete domains.
To see the further similarity among these algorithms, let us examine the impact of
the variable elimination ordering on their eﬃciency. As shown in the earlier sections,
if all the constraints are known a priori, we can ﬁnd a good ordering to make
the elimination algorithm more eﬃcient. The same principle applies to uniﬁcation
algorithm. Consider the set of term equations x = f(a, a), y = f(x, x), z = f(y, y).
Direct substitution using the ordering of x, y, z is more expensive than the ordering
z, y, x. In fact, given a term equation, it can be uniﬁed in linear time by ﬁnding a
good variable ordering (Paterson and Wegman 1978).
In a CLP solver, the constraints are added to the constraint store dynamically.
If the newly added constraint is a binary linear equation, it has been observed that
one can improve the eﬃciency by choosing properly a variable to eliminate from
the two involved in the equation (Burg et al. 1995). For example, a brand new
variable is preferred to an old one (a variable occurring previously in the constraint
store). With the new variable, no substitution is necessary. For elimination using
bi-functional constraints, the one involved in a lesser number of earlier constraints
will be eliminated (Zhang and Yap 2002). In the case of uniﬁcation, when there
are several variables that can be eliminated, we choose the one that is involved in
less number of constraints too (for example, (Escala-Imas and Ghallab 1988)). The
variable selection idea, together with the disjoint set data structure and union-ﬁnd
algorithm, had led to almost linear algorithms in (Escala-Imas and Ghallab 1988;
Zhang and Yap 2002).
7.3 Functional Constraints and Variable Elimination in CSP
We now discuss other work related to functional constraints from a CSP perspective.
Bi-functional constraints, a special case of functional constraints, have been stud-
ied in the context of arc consistency (AC) algorithms since Van Hentenryck et al.
(Van Hentenryck et al. 1992) proposed A worst case optimal AC algorithm with
O(ed) was proposed in (Van Hentenryck et al. 1992). (In many of the papers, bi-
functional constraints were called functional constraints). The special properties of
bi-functional constraints were used to obtain the time complexity better than that
of the optimal AC algorithms such as AC2001/3.1 (O(ed2)) (Bessiere et al. 2005)
for arbitrary binary constraints. A fast AC algorithm for a special class of increas-
ing bi-functional constraints was also proposed in (Liu 1995). Here, our elimination
algorithm solves the consistency of functional constraints and variable substitution
incorporates the eﬀect of the functional part of the problem into the rest of the
non-functional constraints. Thus, it gives a higher level of consistency as it achieves
global consistency for the functional constraints rather than local consistency like
arc consistency. At the same time, it may simplify the remainder of the constraints,
thus reducing the problem further.

24
Y. Zhang and R. H. C. Yap
A new type of consistency, label-arc consistency, was introduced in (Aﬀane and Bennaceur 1996)
and they showed that bi-functional constraints with limited extensions to other
constraints can be (globally) solved, but no detailed analysis of their algorithms is
given. In (Zhang et al. 1999), we proposed a variable elimination method to solve
bi-functional constraints in O(ed). Bi-functional constraints also belong to the class
of “Zero/One/All” constraints which was shown to be one of the earliest classes
of tractable constraints (Cooper et al. 1994). The subclass of “One” constraints in
the “Zero/One/All” class corresponds to bi-functional constraints. What was not
realized in (Cooper et al. 1994; Zhang et al. 1999) was that because the concern
was the tractability of the class of Zero/One/All constraints, the importance of
variable substitution and class of functional constraints was missed. We also point
out that all the papers above deal with the special case of bi-functional constraints
rather than functional constraints.
David introduced pivot consistency for binary functional constraints in (David 1995).
Both pivot consistency and variable substitution are diﬀerent ways of reducing a
CSP into a special form. However, there are some important diﬀerences between
pivot consistency and variable substitution in this paper. Firstly, the concept of
pivot consistency, a special type of directional path consistency, is quite complex.
It is deﬁned in terms of a variable ordering, path (of length 2) consistency, and
concepts in directed graphs. As we show in this paper, Variable substitution is a
much simpler concept. It is intuitive and simple for binary CSPs, and it extends
also simply and naturally to non-binary CSPs. Secondly, by the deﬁnition of pivot
consistency, to make a CSP pivot consistent, there must be a certain functional
constraint on each of the non-root variables. Variable substitution is more ﬂexible.
It can be applied whenever there is a functional constraint in a problem. Finally,
to reduce a problem, the variable elimination algorithm takes O(ed2) while pivot
consistency algorithm takes O((n2 −r2)d2), where r is the number of root variables.
Another related approach is bucket elimination (Dechter 1999). The idea in com-
mon behind bucket elimination and variable substitution is to exclude the impact
of a variable on the whole problem. The diﬀerence between them lies in the way
variable elimination is performed. In each elimination step, substitution does not
increase the arity of the constraints while bucket elimination could generate con-
straints with higher arity (possibly with exponential space complexity). The former
may generate more constraints than the latter, but it will not increase the total
number of constraints in the problem.
Another methodologically related work is bucket elimination (Dechter 1999). The
common idea behind bucket elimination and variable substitution is to exclude the
impact of a variable on the whole problem. However, they also diﬀer in many as-
pects. Bucket elimination deals with general constraints while variable substitution
is applicable only to functional constraints. Bucket elimination assumes a variable
ordering and eliminates the impact of a variable j on all relevant constraints that
involve variables before j. In contrast, variable substitution can be used to elimi-
nate the impact of a variable on any number of relevant constraints. The ways to
eliminate a variable are diﬀerent for the two methods. For example, consider the
CSP shown in Figure 8(a) where c12, c23, c34, and c45 are functional.

Solving Functional Constraints by Variable Substitution
25
(d)
(a)
(b)
(c)
x2
x3
x4
x5
.........................................................
x2
x3
x4
x5
x2
x3
x4
x5
x1
x1
.....................................................................................................
x1
..........................................................................
.................................................
x1
x2
x4
x5
.........................................................
.................................................
.................................................................................
x3
Fig. 8. A CSP with variable ordering x1, x2, · · · , x5.
Assume there is a variable ordering x1, x2, · · · , x5. The variables will be eliminated
in the reverse of the variable ordering. When eliminating a variable, say variable x4,
bucket elimination considers constraints only involving variables before (including)
x4 and ignores other constraints. In this example, c45 is ignored while constraints
c14, c24, c34 are considered relevant. After eliminating x4, the new ternary constraint
c{1,2,3} on x1, x2, x3 is added to the problem.
In the variable substitution method, for variable x4 and the constraint c34 func-
tional on it, we can choose to substitute x4 in one or some of the constraints c41, c42
and c45, depending on a speciﬁc setting (for example, a static CSP or incremental
CSP). If we choose to substitute x4 in all these constraints, new binary constraints
c31, c32, c35 are added and old constraints c41, c42 and c45 are discarded.
This example shows that in each elimination step, bucket elimination generates
constraints with higher arity than variable substitution while the latter generates
more constraints than the former. However, the variable substitution method will
not increase the total number of constraints in the problem (because every time
a new constraint is added, an old one is discarded). In the case of bi-functional
constraints, it decreases the total number of constraints to n after all variables are
eliminated.
8 Conclusion
We have introduced a variable substitution method to reduce a problem with both
functional and non-functional constraints. Compared with the previous work on
bi-functional and functional constraints, the new method is not only conceptually
simple and intuitive but also reﬂects the fundamental property of functional con-
straints.
For a binary CSP with both functional and non-functional constraints, an al-
gorithm is presented to transform it into a canonical functional form in O(ed2).
This leads to a substantial simpliﬁcation of the CSP with respect to the functional
constraints. In some cases, as one of our results (Corollary 2) shows, the CSP is
already solved. Otherwise, the canonical form can be solved by ignoring the elimi-
nated variables. For example, this means that search only needs to solve a smaller
problem than the one before variable substitution (or elimination).
Our experiments show that variable elimination can signiﬁcantly (in some cases

26
Y. Zhang and R. H. C. Yap
up to several orders of magnitude) improve the performance of a general solver in
dealing with functional constraints. Our experiments also show some evidence that
although rarely, the elimination could slow down the general solver in a non trivial
way.
