arXiv:1103.4888v1  [cs.IT]  25 Mar 2011
Cooperative searching for stochastic targets
Vadas Gintautas,1, 2, ∗Aric Hagberg,2 and Lu´ıs M. A. Bettencourt2, 3
1Center for Nonlinear Studies, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos NM 87545, USA
2Applied Mathematics and Plasma Physics, Theoretical Division,
Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos NM 87545, USA†
3Santa Fe Institute, 1399 Hyde Park Road, Santa Fe NM 87501, USA
(Dated: November 8, 2018)
Spatial search problems abound in the real world, from locating hidden nuclear or chemical
sources to ﬁnding skiers after an avalanche. We exemplify the formalism and solution for spatial
searches involving two agents that may or may not choose to share information during a search. For
certain classes of tasks, sharing information between multiple searchers makes cooperative searching
advantageous. In some examples, agents are able to realize synergy by aggregating information
and moving based on local judgments about maximal information gathering expectations. We also
explore one- and two-dimensional simpliﬁed situations analytically and numerically to provide a
framework for analyzing more complex problems. These general considerations provide a guide for
designing optimal algorithms for real-world search problems.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In the real world, there are many spatial search prob-
lems that involve multiple agents or searchers. Commu-
nication between such agents or between agents and a
centralized command center may be sensitive, costly, or
diﬃcult for various reasons.
In this work, we explore
spatial search problems in this context and examine the
classes of search problems for which communication and
coordination between multiple agents will enable quan-
titative advantages over independent information gath-
ering. These problems are very general and can be for-
malized and solved in terms of information theory. The
solutions are essential to the development of quantita-
tive decision support tools under uncertainty (e.g.
in
medicine [9]) and for automated multi-agent searches for
stochastic information [1], such as those involving dis-
tributed sensor networks [19].
A search may be thought of as a series of steps by which
an agent or agents reduce the uncertainty of the location
of a target to zero. This location may be in physical space
or in a “space of possibilities,” i.e., a set of alternative
scenarios. For example, if you need to ﬁnd your keys in
the morning before going to work and there are ﬁve rooms
in your house, initially you know your keys must be in
one of these rooms. After thoroughly searching one room
and not ﬁnding the keys, your uncertainty is reduced; the
keys must now be in one of the four remaining rooms, and
so on. If you ﬁnd the keys in the second room, then the
uncertainty of their location is immediately zero because
you know with complete certainty that they are in your
hand.
Now imagine you have a friend help you search. The
two of you would be searching twice as fast since, as-

†Physics Department, Chatham University, Pittsburgh PA 15232,
USA
suming you and your friend share information, a pair
of searchers can eliminate rooms at a rate twice as fast
as that of a single searcher.
In more complex search
problems, the target might emit some kind of compli-
cated signal that makes it possible for multiple coordi-
nated searchers to dramatically increase eﬃciency (imag-
ine there are one thousand rooms to search but the keys
are attached to some kind of radioactive homing beacon
or can emit a sound). In these situations, understanding
the nature of the clues and sharing information can be
extraordinarily beneﬁcial.
A search whereby agents move based expressly on in-
formation cues rather than following gradients is known
as an infotaxis search. In a 2007 paper, Vergassola et al.
explored infotaxis in the context of a moth following a
pheromone trail through air to ﬁnd a mate. The moth
was performing a spatial search in turbulent air currents
that carried the trail h [18]. Compared to more conven-
tional methods such as chemotaxis (following a chemical
gradient [7, 14]), infotaxis gives an advantage in situ-
ations when the signals from the target of the search
are uncertain.
This might be the case if signals from
the target are stochastic, diﬃcult to measure, or highly
varying in time. In the case of the moth, the signal was
sparse and widely dispersed by the turbulent air currents.
When the moth followed the gradient of the strength of
the trail directly
chemotaxis
it was forced to take a
very circuitous route due to the turbulent dispersal of
the trail.
However, when the moth employed an info-
taxis algorithm to move to positions where it might gain
the most information about the source of the trail, its
performance improved signiﬁcantly. Since we will con-
sider only search problems such as these, in the following
we will refer to the target of an infotaxis search as the
“source.” The formalism of infotaxis balances the com-
peting goals of exploiting the current information avail-
able and exploring to gain more information, a familiar
compromise from other unsupervised learning methods,
such as reinforcement learning [17]. While eﬀective path
planning algorithms may be based on the optimization

UNCLASSIFIED (LA-UR 09-07676)
of some objective function, these often rely on exploiting
some features of the known environment [12] rather than
a solid foundation based on information theory.
Info-
taxis provides a framework for studying search problems
in general and is therefore broadly applicable.
In this article, we explore conditions in which cooper-
ation between multiple infotaxis agents is advantageous.
We focus on examples in which agents are able to re-
alize synergetic cooperation by aggregating information
and moving based on a local infotaxis algorithm. Syn-
ergy, and its opposite, redundancy, are information the-
oretic quantities that are deﬁned in terms of relative
probabilities of the stochastic variables involved [4]. In
a recent paper, we showed that spatiotemporal correla-
tions are necessary for synergy [11].
When synergy is
exploited eﬀectively it can lead to an exponential re-
duction in the search eﬀort, in terms of time, energy,
or number of steps [8, 10, 16].
Here we use a simple
one-dimensional search example and a more realistic two-
dimensional generalization to show how correlations lead
to synergy. These simple examples provide a framework
for analyzing more complex problems. Since, in general,
the computational cost is greater for searchers to com-
municate and perform coordinated movements instead of
moving based on independent decisions, we will describe
situations in which coordination is worthwhile.
II.
INFORMATION THEORY APPROACH TO
STOCHASTIC SEARCH
Eﬀective and robust search methods for locating
stochastic sources balance the competing strategies of
exploration and exploitation [17]. Given a current esti-
mated probability distribution for the location of a source
a searcher might either exploit the data already collected
by moving towards the location that maximizes this like-
lihood or sharpen the distribution (reduce uncertainty
further) by moving to gather more diverse data. The in-
fotaxis search balances these two strategies by optimiz-
ing the expected information gain over the possible next
search moves. In the following we review some basic con-
cepts from information theory and formalize the infotaxis
algorithm in terms of these quantities.
A.
Information, synergy, and redundancy
To determine whether searchers can be eﬀectively co-
ordinated we deﬁne deﬁne synergy and redundancy as
information theoretical quantities [6] and use them as a
measure of coordination. Synergy is found when measur-
ing two or more variables together with respect to another
(e.g.
the source’s signal) results in a greater informa-
tion gain than the sum of that from each variable sepa-
rately [4, 5]. In search problems, synergy is advantageous
because then the coordination of two or more searchers is
more eﬃcient than the same searchers working indepen-
dently. In this section we will introduce these concepts in
general terms before applying them to a speciﬁc search
problem.
Consider the stochastic variables Xi, i = 1 . . . n. Each
variable Xi, representing a searcher or source location,
can take on speciﬁc states, denoted by the corresponding
lowercase letter xi. For a single variable Xi the Shannon
entropy (henceforth “entropy”) is
S(Xi) = −
X
xi
P(xi) log2 P(xi),
where P(xi) is the probability that the variable Xi takes
on the value xi [6]. The sum is over all of the possible
states xi; since P(xi) < 1 always,the entropy is always
positive. The entropy is a measure of uncertainty about
the state of Xi, therefore entropy can only decrease or
remain unchanged as more variables are measured. The
conditional entropy of a variable X1 given a second vari-
able X2 is
S(X1|X2) = −
X
x1,x2
P(x1, x2) log2
P(x1, x2)
P(x2)
≤S(X1).
This expression contains a sum over the joint probabil-
ity distribution of two variables. Since measuring a sec-
ond variable can only decrease entropy (or leave it un-
changed), the conditional entropy is bounded above by
the entropy of the ﬁrst variable. The mutual information
between two variables, which plays an important role in
search strategy, is deﬁned as the change in entropy when
a variable is measured:
I(X1, X2) = S(X1) −S(X1|X2) ≥0.
This is also the diﬀerence between the entropy of one
variable and its entropy conditioned on the measurement
of a second variable. Mutual information is always posi-
tive. These deﬁnitions can be directly extended to mul-
tiple variables. Just as entropy may be conditioned on
an additional measurement, mutual information may be
conditioned on the knowledge of other variables. These
quantities may be used to generate new information the-
oretic constructs that we will use in speciﬁc search prob-
lems. For three variables [15] the quantity
R(X1, X2, X3) ≡I(X1, X2) −I({X1, X2}|X3)
(1)
measures the degree of “overlap” in the information con-
tained in variables X1 and X2 with respect to X3. The
sign of this quantity is meaningful. If R(X1, X2, X3) > 0,
there is overlap and X1 and X2 are said to be redundant
with respect to X3. If R(X1, X2, X3) < 0, more infor-
mation is available when these variables are considered
together than when considered separately. In this case
X1 and X2 are said to be synergetic with respect to X3.
If R(X1, X2, X3) = 0, X1 and X2 are independent.
2

UNCLASSIFIED (LA-UR 09-07676)
B.
Bayesian inference and spatial infotaxis
We ﬁrst formulate the general spatial stochastic search
problem for N searchers seeking to ﬁnd a stochastic
source located in a ﬁnite, D-dimensional space.
This
is a generalization of the single searcher formalism pre-
sented in Ref. [18].
At any time step, the searchers
si, i = 1, 2, . . . , N, are located at position ri and ob-
serve some number of particles hi from the source. The
searchers do not get information about the trajectories or
speed of the particles; they only get information if a par-
ticle was observed or not. Therefore simple geometrical
methods such as triangulation are not possible.
Consider a random variable R0, which can assume a
number of speciﬁc values, denoted by r0. The values of r0
refer to positions in space that may contain the stochas-
tic source. Only one value of r0 corresponds to the (yet
unknown) location of the source s0. The searchers com-
pute and share a probability distribution P (t)(r0) for the
source location at each time index t. Initially the proba-
bility for the source P (0)(r0) is assumed to be to be uni-
form. After each measurement {hi, ri}, the searchers up-
date their estimated probability distribution of source po-
sitions via Bayesian inference [2] and decide what move to
make (possibly remaining at the same position). The goal
of Bayesian inference is to improve an estimated proba-
bility distribution P(X), where X is a random variable
that can assume a set of values denoted by x. Assuming
that Y is another random variable (that can assume a
set of values denoted by y) and that X and Y are not in-
dependent (that is, I(X, Y ) ̸= 0), knowledge of the state
of Y can be used to improve P(X). After a measure-
ment reveals Y = y, the probability of this measurement
given the current estimated is computed. The probabil-
ity of this measurement is P(Y = y|X). Bayesian in-
ference makes it possible to assimilate this information
into the current estimate of P(X) via a Bayesian update
step: P(X) = P(X|Y = y) = P(Y = y|X)P(X)/A,
where A is a normalization factor. This step includes an
explicit statement of equivalence because each new mea-
surement is included implicitly in P(X). Therefore the
measurement Y = y improves the estimate of P(X). The
searchers will use this Bayesian inference framework to
improve their estimate of the probability distribution of
source locations P (0)(r0) after each measurement hi, ri.
To decide where to move next, the searchers follow
an infotaxis algorithm for multiple searchers. First the
conditional probability
P (t+1)(r0|{hi, ri}) ≡1
AP (t)(r0)P({hi, ri}|r0) ,
(2)
is calculated, where A is a normalization over all possi-
ble source locations r0 as required by Bayesian inference.
This is then assimilated via Bayesian update,
P (t+1)(r0) ≡P (t+1)(r0|{hi, ri}).
(3)
If the searchers do not ﬁnd the source at their present
locations they choose the next local move using an in-
fotaxis step to maximize the expected information gain.
The expected information gain is computed in the fol-
lowing way. The entropy of the distribution P (t)(r0) at
time t is deﬁned as
S(t)(R0) ≡−
X
r0
P (t)(r0) log2 P (t)(r0).
(4)
For a speciﬁc measurement {hi, ri} the entropy before the
Bayesian update is
S(t)
{hi,ri}(R0) ≡−
X
r0
P (t)(r0|{hi, ri}) log2 P (t)(r0|{hi, ri}).
(5)
We deﬁne the diﬀerence between the entropy at time t
and the entropy at time t+1 after a measurement {hi, ri}
to be
∆S(t+1)
{hi,ri} ≡S(t+1)
{hi,ri}(R0) −S(t)(R0).
(6)
For a uniform prior, P (0)(r0) = 1/M for M possible lo-
cations of the source in the discrete space, the entropy
is maximum, S(0)(R0) = log2 M. For each possible joint
move {ri}, the change in expected entropy ∆S is com-
puted and the move with the minimum (most negative)
∆S is executed.
The expected information gain is found by computing
the entropy change for all of the possible joint searcher
moves
∆S = −
X
i
P (t)(R0 = ri)

S(t)(R0) +

1 −
X
i
P (t)(R0 = ri)

×
X
h1,h2
∆S(t+1)
{hi,ri}
X
r0
P (t)(r0)P (t+1)({hi, ri}|r0)

.
(7)
The ﬁrst term in Eq. (7) corresponds to one of the
searchers ﬁnding the source in the next time step (the
ﬁnal entropy will be S = 0 so ∆S = −S). The second
term considers the reduction in entropy for all possible
measurements at the proposed location, weighted by the
probability of each of those measurements. The proba-
bility of the searchers obtaining the measurement {hi} at
the location {ri} is given by the trace of the probability
P (t+1)({hi, ri}|r0) over all possible source locations.
At each step the searchers move jointly to increase the
expected information gain as measured by the change in
entropy of the probability distribution.
Although this
algorithm is general in the following we consider only the
case of two searchers (N = 2) and both one- and two-
dimensional spatial domains.
III.
SEARCHING FOR CORRELATED SIGNALS
IN ONE DIMENSION
Sources that emit uncorrelated signals provide no op-
portunity for coordination because the searchers are
3

UNCLASSIFIED (LA-UR 09-07676)
never synergetic [11]. We instead consider signals with
spatial, temporal, or other correlations.
The simplest
nontrivial example is searching in a one-dimensional do-
main for a source that emits two particles simultaneously
in opposite directions. Two searchers should be able to
exploit the correlations in the signal; if both searchers
simultaneously observe particles, they can immediately
conclude that the source is located between them. There-
fore we expect synergy to be possible for some spatial
arrangements of the source and searchers.
First consider a ﬁnite one-dimensional domain with a
source s0 and two searchers s1 and s2 at the correspond-
ing positions {r0, r1, r2} ∈[0, 1]. The source is assumed
emit two particles simultaneously and in opposite direc-
tions. That is, one particle is emitted to the left and one
to the right of the source. The two searchers s1 and s2 are
identical with a ﬁxed cross section such that 0 < a < 1 is
the probability of a searcher capturing one of the parti-
cles emitted from the source. At each step in the search
the number of particle “hits” measured by searchers s1
and s2 are denoted by h1 ∈{0, 1} and h2 ∈{0, 1}, re-
spectively.
To calculate R(r0, h1, h2) it is ﬁrst necessary to com-
pute the probabilities of hi for each searcher given the
position of the source r0. We note that since there is no
distance dependence in the capture probability a, it is
suﬃcient to consider three separate cases depending on
the relative positions, or ordering, of the source and the
searchers, as shown in Fig. 1. For example, if s1 is to the
left of the source and s2 is to the right of the source, the
order is s1s0s2. Note this is equivalent to the case s2s0s1
since the searchers are identical.
s0 s1 s2
r0 r1 r2
0
1
s1 s0 s2
r1 r0 r2
0
1
s1 s2 s0
r1 r2 r0
0
1
FIG. 1: The three unique cases for relative positions of the
source and two identical searchers on a one-dimensional do-
main. Since the probably of detection in this example does
not depend on distance, we need only consider the spatial ar-
rangement of the source and searchers. The cases are labeled
sisjsk according to the relative spatial ordering for the source
s0 and searchers s1, s2. Since the searchers are identical, s1
and s2 are interchangeable and there are only three unique
cases.
If a searcher observes a particle, it is assumed to be
absorbed so that the other searcher will not be able to
observe it. For example if s1 is between s2 and the source
(case s0s1s2 or s2s1s0) then the probability that s2 ob-
serves a particle depends on whether s1 observed it. If
s1 observed it, then the probability that s2 observes it
must be 0. If s1 did not observe it then the probability
that s2 will observe it is a
P(h2 = 1|h1 = 1, r0) = 0,
(8)
P(h2 = 1|h1 = 0, r0) = a.
(9)
We can use the probability relation
P(h2, h1|r0) = P(h2|h1, r0)P(h1|r0)
(10)
to compute the two-searcher conditional probabilities
P(h2 = 1, h1 = 1|r0) = 0,
(11)
P(h2 = 1, h1 = 0|r0) = a(1 −a).
(12)
The other probability distributions are computed using
similar reasoning. The results are summarized in Table I.
Cases h1, h2
P(h1|r0)
P(h2|r0)
P({h1, h2}|r0)
1, 1
a
a(1 −a)
0
s0s1s2
1, 0
a
1 −a(1 −a)
a
s2s1s0
0, 1
1 −a
a(1 −a)
a(1 −a)
0, 0
1 −a
1 −a(1 −a)
(1 −a)2
1, 1
a
a
a2
s1s0s2
1, 0
a
1 −a
a(1 −a)
s2s0s1
0, 1
1 −a
a
a(1 −a)
0, 0
1 −a
1 −a
(1 −a)2
1, 1
a(1 −a)
a
0
s0s2s1
1, 0
a(1 −a)
1 −a
a(1 −a)
s1s2s0
0, 1
1 −a(1 −a)
a
a
0, 0
1 −a(1 −a)
1 −a
(1 −a)2
TABLE I: Conditional probabilities for the six possible ar-
rangements of the source s0 and searchers s1, s2 shown in
Fig. 1. Since the searchers are identical, s1 and s2 are inter-
changeable and there are only three unique cases. In cases
s0s1s2 and s2s1s0, searcher one is between the source and
searcher two. A particle emitted by the source in the direc-
tion of the searchers will reach searcher one ﬁrst. If searcher
one detects the particle, searcher two will not be able to de-
tect it.
Searcher two will only have a chance of detecting
the particle if the particle passes through searcher one unde-
tected. Similarly, in cases s0s2s1 and s1s2s0, the source is
between the searchers and the searchers do not interfere with
each other. Furthermore, since the source emits two particles
simultaneously in opposite directions, in only these cases do
both searchers have a chance of each detecting a particle.
Using Table I, we can analytically compute the infor-
mation theoretic quantities we need to determine synergy
and redundancy. These are
R(h1, h2, r0) = I(h1, h2) −I(h1, h2|r0),
(13)
I(h1, h2) ≡
X
h1,h2
P(h1, h2) log2
P(h1, h2)
P(h1)P(h2),
(14)
and
I(h1, h2|r0) ≡P
h1,h2
R 1
0
dr0P(h1, h2, r0)
(15)
× log2
P(h1, h2|r0)
P(h1|r0)P(h2|r0);
4

UNCLASSIFIED (LA-UR 09-07676)
where the probability distributions are calculated as fol-
lows:
P(h1, h2, r0) = P(h1, h2|r0)P(r0),
(16)
P(h1, h2) =
Z 1
0
dr0P(h1, h2|r0)P(r0),
(17)
P(h1) =
Z 1
0
dr0P(h1|r0)P(r0),
(18)
P(h2) =
Z 1
0
dr0P(h2|r0)P(r0).
(19)
Initially we consider a uniform probability distribution
(prior) of source locations: P(r0) = 1.
For small capture probability, a, we can expand
Eq. (13) as a Taylor series in a to get an analytical so-
lution for the critical values ac where R|a=ac = 0. For
r1 > r2, the critical values are given by
ac =
s
3(r2 −r1) log (r1 −r2)
r3
1 −r3
2 −3r2
1 + 2r1 + r2
.
(20)
For r1 < r2, ac is given by Eq. (20) under the trans-
formations r1 →r2 and r2 →r1. These relations give
the approximate boundary between the regions of syn-
ergy and redundancy.
In the limit r1 →r2, R →0.
For these formulas we used a uniform source distribution
P(r0) = 1 but it is possible to repeat these calculations
with a diﬀerent P(r0).
For larger values of a, when the expansion is no longer
valid the condition R = 0 [as in Eq. (13)] can be solved
numerically. Figure 2 shows R(h1, h2, r0) as a function
of the capture probability a and searcher s1 location r1
with searcher s2 ﬁxed at r2 = 2/3. This ﬁgure also shows
R(h1, h2, r0) for a Gaussian probability of the source lo-
cation P(r0) = B exp(−(r0−1/3)2), where B is a normal-
ization factor. In both cases, R > 0 (indicating redun-
dancy) when the searchers are close together and R < 0
(indicating synergy) when they are further apart. For the
Gaussian distribution source location synergy is strongest
when s1 is close to the source because the mutual infor-
mation between r0 and h1 is peaked there as well.
Figure 2(a) shows how the capture probability a inﬂu-
ences the possible strategies of the searchers. If a is close
to 1, then the searchers only realize synergy if they are
far apart, which maximizes the chance of the source be-
ing between them. But if a is is close to 0 then nearly any
arrangement of searchers is synergetic but only weakly.
Figure 2(b) demonstrates the signiﬁcance of the prior
P(r0) in the calculation of R(h1, h2, r0). The variance
of P(r0) is equal to 1, the size of the domain, making
the Gaussian distribution quite broad. Nonetheless, the
fact that the prior is weakly peaked at some point in the
domain dramatically reduces the area of the redundant
(R > 0) region and allows for much greater synergy be-
tween the searchers. Although search problems in the
real world are rarely one-dimensional, this example illus-
trates the basic calculations for determining synergy.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
a
(a)
Redundant (R > 0)
Synergetic (R < 0)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
r1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
a
(b)
Synergetic (R < 0)
r2
r2
FIG. 2:
Synergetic and redundant regions for two searchers
in the one-dimensional correlated search problem. The value
of R(h1, h2, r0) is shown for diﬀerent locations r1 of s1 with
s2 held ﬁxed at r2 = 2/3 and the capture probability varying
from a = 0 (no capture) to a = 1 (complete capture). Darker
regions represent higher synergy (larger negative values of R)
and the white areas represent redundancy. The critical con-
tour line R = 0 separates the synergetic and redundant re-
gions. (a) When the source is equally likely to be anywhere,
P(r0) = 1, there is only weak synergy. (b) Then the proba-
bility of the source is a Gaussian distribution centered at 1/3,
P(r0) ∝exp(−(r0 −1/3)2), the synergy is highest near the
source at 1/3 since the mutual information is highest there as
well. The dashed line in (a) shows the critical values ac com-
puted by the approximation in Eq. (20); this approximation
is good for ac ≲0.3.
IV.
SEARCHING FOR CORRELATED SIGNALS
IN TWO DIMENSIONS
The one-dimensional example provides a tractable
starting point for generalization to two-dimensional prob-
lems.
The simplest generalization is the case of two
mobile searchers and one stationary source in a two-
dimensional ﬁnite domain.
Imagine a source in which
chemical or nuclear reactions are occurring and the prod-
ucts of the reactions leave the source with relative angu-
lar correlations. Our two-dimensional idealized problem
consists of a source that emits 2 particles simultaneously
at each time step in opposite directions along some emis-
sion axis. At each time step, a new emission axis angle is
chosen uniformly at random from (0, 2π]. The particles
move along straight-line trajectories but the searchers are
not able to measure the velocities of any detected parti-
cles, so geometric methods such as triangulation are not
possible.
5

UNCLASSIFIED (LA-UR 09-07676)
FIG. 3:
Diagram for the two-dimensional example.
The
source position r0 is ﬁxed in the center and the searchers
are disks of radius d. At each time step the source emits two
particles in in opposite directions with a random angle. Each
possible emission axis passing through the source corresponds
to one of six cases for source and searcher conﬁgurations as
given in Tables. I and II.
In the real world, searchers could be, for example, au-
tonomous mobile sensors capable of detecting radiation
or other reaction products from the above example. Most
modern-day autonomous robots do not move much faster
than a walking pace [13], largely due to the diﬃculties
of navigating uncertain terrain safely. Thus movement
is relatively costly (backtracking will take a signiﬁcant
amount of time) and the searchers should make decisions
to reﬁne their trajectories often, using any new avail-
able information. For this problem, this means that the
searchers can only make small discrete movements be-
tween measurements.
To represent simpliﬁed mobile autonomous robots, we
cast the searchers as identical disks of radius d that move
on a regular Cartesian grid. Unlike the one-dimensional
case these searchers have spatial extent; there are two
parts to the calculation of particle detection. First, if a
particle travels along a straight line trajectory that passes
through a searcher, the capture probability is 0 < a < 1.
As in the one-dimensional example, if a particle is ob-
served by a searcher, it is absorbed so it cannot be ob-
served by the other searcher. Second, we must consider
the probability that the particle’s trajectory will pass
through the searcher. This is a function of the searcher
radius d and the distance to the source. The variables r0,
r1, and r2 for the positions of the source and searchers
each have two components, e.g.(r0,x, r0,y), since they rep-
resent positions on a two-dimensional grid.
As in the one-dimensional example, there are diﬀer-
ent cases for the probabilities which depend on the rel-
ative position of the two searchers to the source.
For
all possible straight line emission axes passing through
the source, some lines may pass through no searchers
(case s0), only searcher s1 (case s0s1), or only searcher
s2 (case s0s2). If a line passes through both searchers,
the source is between the searchers (case s1s0s2 as in the
one-dimensional example), or one of the other searchers
is in front of the other (cases s0s1s2 and s0s2s1 as in the
one-dimensional example). These cases are illustrated in
Fig. 3.
For any source location, there will be a range
of angles ∆θc for each case c. The probabilities for the
cases that do not appear in the one-dimensional example
(see Table I) are detailed in Table II. Quantities such
as P(h1, h2|r0) are a superposition of the values for the
diﬀerent cases, weighted by the proportion of angles cor-
responding to each case
P(h1, h2|r0) =
X
c∈{cases}
∆θc
2π Pc(h1, h2|r0),
(21)
and similarly for other quantities such as P(h1|r0), etc.
While it is in principle possible to ﬁnd the ∆θc analyti-
cally using geometry, in practice it is much more eﬃcient
to do this numerically.
Case h1, h2 P(h1|r0) P(h2|r0) P({h1, h2}|r0)
1, 1
0
0
0
s0
1, 0
0
1
0
0, 1
1
0
0
0, 0
1
1
1
1, 1
a
0
0
s0s1
1, 0
a
1
a
0, 1
1 −a
0
0
0, 0
1 −a
1
1 −a
1, 1
0
a
0
s0s2
1, 0
0
1 −a
0
0, 1
1
a
a
0, 0
1
1 −a
1 −a
TABLE II: Conditional probabilities for cases unique to the
two dimensional example in Fig. 3. The cases s1s0s2, s0s1s2,
and s0s2s1 (not shown), are identical to those of the one di-
mensional problem given in Table I. As shown in Figure 3,
the case s0 corresponds to the range of angles for which it is
impossible for either searcher to detect a particle. Case s0s1
corresponds to the range of angles for which only searcher
one has a chance of detecting a particle, and case s0s1 corre-
sponds to the range of angles for which only searcher two has
a chance of detecting a particle.
Note that the diﬀerent cases in the one-dimensional
example were taken into account implicitly during inte-
gration as in Eq. (19). In the two-dimensional example
they are taken into account when the eﬀective probabil-
ity distributions are computed as a superposition of the
probabilities of the individual cases. This is because there
is more than one case for each source location relative to
the searchers.
We illustrate the two-dimensional searcher problem
with a setup of searcher and source locations that illus-
trate the synergetic and redundant positions. We use the
Gaussian prior for the initial guess
P(r0) = A exp −||r0 −s||2
σ2
,
(22)
6

UNCLASSIFIED (LA-UR 09-07676)
where A is the normalization and σ determines the over-
all shape of the distribution.
The vector s = (2, 2) is
the most probable position of the source.
The quan-
tity R(h1, h2, r0) [see Eq. (1)] determines whether the
searchers are positioned synergetically relative to the
source. When the searchers are performing an infotaxis
search, realizing synergetic relative positions will in prin-
ciple lead to the fastest reduction in uncertainty.
In Fig. 4 we plot R as a function of the position of one
searcher r1 with the position of the second searcher r2
held ﬁxed. We ﬁnd for this example that only synergy
(R < 0) is possible. The light areas in Fig. 4 correspond
to weak synergy and the dark areas to stronger synergy.
As in the one-dimensional example synergy is strongest
for large a and when searcher s1 is near the source and
not behind searcher s2. A small cross section [a = 0.25 in
Fig. 4(a)] allows only for weak synergy, whereas a larger
cross section [a = 0.75 in Fig. 4(b)] gives much stronger
synergy for certain relative positions. The strongest syn-
ergy comes from a large cross section paired with opti-
mal positioning. The maximum synergy is realized when
searcher s1 is close to the peak of P and especially when
the peak of P is between the searchers, Note that un-
favorable positions (such as r1 = (5, 2), behind searcher
s2) provide minimal synergy regardless of the value of a.
For real-world problems, larger cross sections yield
more information and therefore stronger synergy is pos-
sible. However for some applications the cross section of
a sensor on a searcher may be limited by practical con-
siderations such as weight or power consumption. This
example shows that synergy is still possible for small a.
Furthermore, this example emphasizes the importance of
the probability estimate of source locations P(r0). The
infotaxis algorithm is designed such that the searchers
will explore, gathering new information, if their arrange-
ment is not suﬃciently synergetic to warrant exploita-
tion. This allows the searchers to succeed even with no
starting information, but they may not realize strong syn-
ergy until the estimate of P(r0) is suﬃciently reﬁned.
V.
CONCLUSION
In this work we studied search algorithms for au-
tonomous agents looking for the spatial location of a
stochastic source. In spatial search problems, since the
exploitation of synergy requires spatial or temporal cor-
relations, we considered problems in which a source emits
two particles simultaneously in opposite directions. This
is a simpliﬁcation of physical problems in which there is
a reaction and the products travel in directions that have
angular correlations. We showed that both synergy and
redundancy are possible for one-dimensional search prob-
lems but not for two-dimensional searches, where only
synergy is possible. Since even unfavorable arrangements
of searchers are synergetic, in two-dimensional search
problems like these coordination is always advantageous.
0
1
2
3
4
y
(a)
r2
Synergetic (R < 0)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
x
0
1
2
3
y
(b)
r2
Synergetic (R < 0)
FIG. 4: Synergy for two searchers for two-dimensional corre-
lated signals. The value of R(h1, h2, r0) is shown as a function
of the position r1 of searcher s1 for two diﬀerent values of the
capture probability a: (a) a = 0.25; (b) a = 0.75. The po-
sition of searcher s2 is ﬁxed r2 = (2, 4). The most probable
source location (the peak of the Gaussian distribution for the
initial source location) is at r0 = (2, 2). Darker blue corre-
sponds to stronger synergy (R < 0).
Synergy is strongest
for large a and when searcher s1 is near the source and not
behind searcher s2 relative to the source.
Simple examples such as these that can be studied an-
alytically provide insight into real-world problems.
In
real-world problems, there will necessarily be additional
considerations. It may not always be possible to write
a closed-form equation for the nature of the correlations
in the signal from the source. It may be necessary to di-
rectly measure any correlations and use this to estimate
capture probabilities. Furthermore, various probabilities
may not be stationary in time or the signals from the
source may get progressively weaker. For example, sig-
nals from a radio transmitter may decrease in strength
over time as its batteries are slowly exhausted. An addi-
tional consideration is that in the real-world, communica-
tion between agents may only be possible at certain times
and may not be instantaneous as in our simple examples.
These general considerations are crucial for the exploita-
tion of multi-agent infotaxis in terms of the design of
optimal collective algorithms in particular applications.
The next steps for making this approach applicable to a
broader class of problems, including those not limited to
spatial searches[3], are to generalize the results to more
than two searchers and to explore how synergy may be
best leveraged to give increases in search speed and eﬃ-
ciency.
7

UNCLASSIFIED (LA-UR 09-07676)
