UAI2001 
POPESCUL ET Al. 
437 
Probabilistic Models for Unified Collaborative and Content-Based 
Recommendation in Sparse-Data Environments 
Alexandrin Popescu] and Lyle H. Ungar 
Department of Computer and Information Science 
University of Pennsylvania 
Philadelphia, PA 19104 
popescul®unagi.cis.upenn.edu 
ungar®cis.upenn.edu 
Abstract 
Recommender systems leverage product and 
community information to target products to 
consumers. 
Researchers have developed col­
laborative recommenders, content-based recom­
menders, and a few hybrid systems. We pro­
pose a unified probabilistic framework for merg­
ing collaborative and content-based recommen­
dations. We extend Hofmann's (1999) aspect 
model to incorporate three-way co-occurrence 
data among users, items, and item content. The 
relative influence of collaboration data versus 
content data is not imposed as an exogenous pa­
rameter, but rather emerges naturally from the 
given data sources. However, global probabilis­
tic models coupled with standard EM learning al­
gorithms tend to drastically overfit in the sparse­
data situations typical of recommendation appli­
cations. 
We show that secondary content in­
formation can often be used to overcome spar­
sity. Experiments on data from the Researchln­
dex library of Computer Science publications 
show that appropriate mixture models incorpo­
rating secondary data produce significantly better 
quality recommenders than k-nearest neighbors 
(k-NN). Global probabilistic models also allow 
more general inferences than local methods like 
k-NN. 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
The Internet offers tremendous opportunities for mass per­
sonalization of commercial transactions. Web businesses 
ideally strive for global reach, while maintaining the feel of 
a neighborhood shop where the customers know the own­
ers, and the owners are familiar with the customers and 
their specific needs. To show a personal face on a mas­
sive scale, businesses must turn to automated techniques 
like so-called recommender systems (Resnick & Varian, 
David M. Pennock and Steve Lawrence 
NEC Research Institute 
4 Independence Way 
Princeton, NJ 08540 
dpennock®research.nj.nec.com 
lawrence®research.nj.nec.com 
1997). These systems suggest products of interest to con­
sumers based on their explicit and implicit preferences, the 
preferences of other consumers, and consumer and prod­
uct attributes. For example, a movie recommender might 
combine explicit ratings data (e.g., Bob rates X-men a 7 
out of 10), implicit data (e.g., Mary purchased Hannibal), 
user demographic information (e.g., Mary is female), and 
movie content information (e.g., Mystery Men is a comedy) 
to make recommendations to specific users. 
Traditionally, recommender systems have fallen into two 
main categories. 
Collaborative filtering methods utilize 
explicit or implicit ratings from many users to recom­
mend items to a given user (Breese et a!., 1998; Resnick 
et al., 1994; Shardanand & Maes, 1995). Content-based 
or information filtering methods make recommendations 
by matching a user's query, or other user information, to 
descriptive product information (Mooney & Roy, 2000; 
Salton & McGill, 1983). Pure collaborative systems tend 
to fail when little is known about a user, or when he or she 
has uncommon interests. On the other hand, content-based 
systems cannot account for community endorsements; for 
example, an information filter might recommend The Mex­
ican to a user who likes Brad Pitt and Julia Roberts, even 
though many like-minded users strongly dislike the film. 
Several researchers are exploring hybrid collaborative and 
content-based recommenders to smooth out the disadvan­
tages of each (Basu et al., 1998; Claypool et al., 1999; 
Good et al., 1999). 
In this paper, we propose a generative probabilistic model 
for combining collaborative and content-based recommen­
dations in a normative manner. The model builds on previ­
ous two-way co-occurrence models for information filter­
ing (Hofmann, 1999) and collaborative filtering (Hofmann 
& Puzicha, 1999). Our model incorporates three-way co­
occurrence data by presuming that users are interested in a 
set of latent topics which in tum "generate" both items and 
item content information. Model parameters are learned 
using expectation maximization (EM), so the relative con­
tributions of collaborative and content-based data are de­
termined in a sound statistical manner. When data is ex-

438 
POPESCUL ET AL. 
UAI2001 
tremely sparse, as is typically the case for collaboration 
data, EM can suffer from overfitting. In Sections 4 and 5, 
we present two techniques to effectively increase the den­
sity of the data by exploiting secondary data. The first uses 
a similarity measure to fill in the user-item co-occurrence 
matrix by inferring which items users are likely to have ac­
cessed without the system's knowledge. The second creates 
an implicit user-content co-occurrence matrix by treating 
each user's access to an item as if it were many accesses to 
all of the pieces of content in the item's descriptive infor­
mation. We evaluate these models in the context of a doc­
ument recommendation system. Specifically, we train and 
test the models on data from Researchindex, 1 an online dig­
ital library of Computer Science papers (Lawrence et al., 
1999; Bollacker et a!., 2000). Section 6 presents empiri­
cal results and evaluations. In Section 6.2, we demonstrate 
the potential ineffectiveness of EM in sparse-data situa­
tions, using both Researchlndex data and synthetic data. In 
Section 6.3, we show that both of our density-augmenting 
methods are effective at reducing overfitting and improv­
ing predictive accuracy. Our models yield more accurate 
recommendations than the commonly-employed k-nearest 
neighbors (k-NN) algorithm. Moreover, our global models 
can produce predictions for any user-item pair, whereas lo­
cal methods like k-NN are simply incapable of producing 
meaningful recommendations for many user-item combi­
nations. 
2 
BACKGROUND AND RELATED 
WORK 
A variety of collaborative filtering algorithms have been 
designed and deployed. 
The Tapestry system relied on 
each user to identify like-minded users manually (Gold­
berg et al., 1992). GroupLens (Resnick et al., 1994) and 
Ringo (Shardanand & Maes, 1995), developed indepen­
dently, were the first to automate prediction. Typical al­
gorithms compute similarity scores between all pairs of 
users; predictions for a given user are generated by weight­
ing other users' ratings proportionally to their similarity to 
the given user. A variety of similarity metrics are possible, 
including correlation (Resnick et al., 1994), mean-squared 
difference (Shardanand & Maes, 1995), vector similarity 
(Breese et al., 1998), or probability that users are of the 
same type (Pennock et al., 2000b). Other algorithms con­
struct a model of underlying user preferences, from which 
predictions are inferred. Examples include Bayesian net­
work models (Breese et al., 1998), dependency network 
models (Beckerman et al., 2000), clustering models (Un­
gar & Foster, 1998), and models of how people rate items 
(Pennock et al., 2000b). Collaborative filtering has also 
been cast as a machine learning problem (Basu et al., 1998; 
Billsus & Pazzani, 1998; Nakamura & Abe, 1998) and as 
1http://researchindex.org/ 
a list-ranking problem (Cohen et al., 1999; Freund et al., 
1998; Pennock et al., 2000a). Singular Value Decomposi­
tion (SVD) was used to improve scalability of collaborative 
filtering systems by dimensionality reduction (Sarwar et a!., 
2000). 
Pure information filtering systems use only content to make 
recommendations. 
For example, search engines recom­
mend web pages with content similar to (e.g., containing) 
user queries (Salton & McGill, 1983). In contrast to collab­
orative methods, content-based systems can even recom­
mend new (previously unaccessed) items to users without 
any history in the system. Mooney & Roy (2000) develop 
a content-based book recommender using information ex­
traction and machine learning techniques for text catego­
rization. 
Several authors suggest methods for combining collabora­
tive filtering with information filtering. Basu et a!. ( 1998) 
present a hybrid collaborative and content-based movie rec­
ommender. Collaborative features (e.g., Bob and Mary like 
Titanic) are encoded as set-valued attributes. These fea­
tures are combined with more typical content features (e.g., 
Traffic is rated R) to inductively learn a binary classifier that 
separates liked and disliked movies. Also in a movie rec­
ommender domain, Good et al. ( 1999) suggest using con­
tent based software agents to automatically generate rat­
ings to reduce data sparsity. Claypool et al. (1999) employ 
separate collaborative and content-based recommenders in 
an online newspaper domain, combining the two predic­
tions using an adaptive weighted average: as the number 
of users accessing an item increases, the weight of the col­
laborative component tends to increase. Web hyperlinks 
and document citations can be thought of as implicit en­
dorsements or ratings. Cohn and Hofmann (200 1) combine 
document content information with this type of connectiv­
ity information to identify principle topics and authoritative 
documents in a collection. 
Recommender systems technology is in current use in 
many Internet commerce applications. For example, the 
University of Minnesota's GroupLens and MovieLens2 re­
search projects spawned Net Perceptions,3 a successful In­
ternet startup offering personalization and recommendation 
services. Alexa4 is a web browser plug-in that recommends 
related links based in part on other people's web surfing 
habits. A growing number of companies, 5 including Arna­
zon.com, CDNow.com, and Levis.com, employ or provide 
recommender system solutions (Schafer et al., 1999). Rec­
ommendation tools originally developed at Microsoft Re­
search are now included with the Commerce Edition ofMi­
crosoft's SiteServer,6 and are currently in use at multiple 
2http://movielens.umn.edu/ 
3http://www.netperceptions.com/ 
4http://www.alexa.com/ 
5http://www.cis.upenn.edu/-ungar/CF/ 
6http://www.microsoft.com/siteserver 

UAI2001 
POPESCUL ET AL. 
439 
sites. 
3 
THREE-WAY ASPECT MODEL 
Hofmann (1999) proposes an aspect model-a latent class 
statistical mixture model-for associating word-document 
co-occurrence data with a set of latent variables. Hofmann 
and Puzicha (1999) apply the aspect model to user-item 
co-occurrence data for collaborative filtering. In the con­
text of a document recommender system, users u E U = 
{ u.1, u2, . .. , 'UN}, together with the documents they access 
dE D = {d1, ... ,dM}, form observations (u,d), which 
are associated with one of the latent variables z E Z 
= 
{ z1, ••• , ZK }. 
Conceptually, the latent variables are top­
ics. Users choose among topics according to their interests; 
topic variables in tum "generate" documents. Users are as­
sumed independent of documents, given the topics. The 
joint probability distribution over users, topics, and doc­
uments is Pr(u.) Pr(z[u.) Pr(d[z). An equivalent specifica­
tion of the joint distribution that treats users and documents 
symmetrically is Pr(z) Pr(u[z) Pr(d[z). The joint distri­
bution over just users and documents is 
Pr(u,d) = l:Pr(z)Pr(u[z)Pr(d[z). 
z 
Model parameters are learned using EM (or variants) to 
find a local maximum of the Jog-likelihood of the training 
data. After the model is learned, documents can be ranked 
for a given user according to Pr( d[ u) rx Pr( u, d); that is, 
according to how likely it is that the user will access the 
corresponding document. 
Documents with high Pr{d[u) 
that the user has not yet seen are good candidates for rec­
ommendation. Note that the aspect model allows multiple 
topics per user, unlike most clustering algorithms that as­
sign each user to a single class. 
This model is a pure collaborative filtering model; docu­
ment content is not taken into account. 
We propose an 
extension of the aspect model to include three-way co­
occurrence data among users, documents, and document 
content. An observation is a triple ( u, d, w) correspond­
ing to an event of a user u accessing document d contain­
ing word w. Conceptually, users choose (latent) topics z, 
which in tum generate both documents and their content 
words. Users, documents, and words are assumed indepen­
dent, given the topics. An asymmetric specification of the 
joint distribution corresponding to this conceptual view­
point is Pr(u) Pr(z[u) Pr(d[z) Pr(w[z). Figure 1 depicts 
this model as a Bayesian network. An equivalent symmet­
ric specification (obtained by reversing the arc from users 
to topics) is Pr(z) Pr(u[z) Pr(d[z) Pr(w[z). 
Marginaliz­
ing out z, we obtain 
Pr(u, d, w) = "E Pr(z) Pr(u[z) Pr(d[z) Pr(w[z). 
z 
P( u} 
P( d I z) 
P( w I z) 
Figure 1: 
Graphical representation of the three-way aspect 
modeL 
Let n( u, d, w) be the number of times user u "saw" word 
win document d. That is, n(u, d, w) = n(u, d) x n(d, w), 
where n( u, d) is the number of times user u accessed docu­
ment d, and n(d, w) is the number of times word w occurs 
in document d. Given training data of this form, the log 
likelihood L of the data is 
L = L n(u,d,w)logPr(u,d,w). 
u,d,w 
The corresponding EM algorithm is: 
Estep: 
p ( I d 
) 
Pr(z) Pr(u[z) Pr(d[z) Pr(w[z) 
r z u, 'w 
= 'I:z' Pr(z') Pr(u[z') Pr(d[z') Pr(w[z') 
M step: 
Pr(u[z) 
(X "E n(u, d, w) Pr(z[u, d, w) 
d,w 
Pr(d[z) 
(X L n(u, d,w) Pr(z[u,d,w) 
u,w 
Pr(w[z) 
(X L n(u, d, w) Pr(z[u, d, w) 
u,d 
Pr(z) 
(X "E n(u, d, w) Pr(z[u, d, w) 
u.,d1w 
The E and M steps are repeated alternately until a local 
maximum of the log-likelihood is reached. 
As in the two-way model, Pr(d[u) rx 2:.':wPr(u,d,w) is 
used to recommend documents to users. Both content and 
collaboration data can influence recommendations. The 
relative weight of each type of data depends on the nature 
of the given data; EM automatically exploits whatever data 
source is most informative. 
Hofmann ( 1999) proposes a variant of EM called tempered 
EM (TEM) to help avoid overfitting and improve general-

440 
POPESCUL ET AL. 
UA12001 
ization. TEM makes use of an inverse computational tem­
perature /3. EM is modified by raising the conditionals in 
the right-hand side of the E step equation to the power (3. 
TEM starts with /3 = 1, and decreases f3 with the rate 17 < 1 
using f3 = f3 x 17, when the performance on a held-out por­
tion of the training set deteriorates. 
In Section 6.2, we see that even TEM fails to generalize 
when data is extremely sparse. In the next two sections, we 
propose two methods that effectively increase data density, 
thereby improving learning performance. 
4 
SIMILARITY-BASED DATA 
SMOOTHING 
One approach to overcoming the overfitting problem with 
sparse data is to use the similarity between items to smooth 
the co-occurrence data matrix. The co-occurrence matrix 
contains integer entries that are the number of times the cor­
responding row and column items co-occur in the observed 
data set. Similarity between items in the database can be 
used to fill some zeros in the co-occurrence data matrix, 
thus reducing sparsity and helping to address overfitting. 
Consider a user u who has accessed document di once, and 
assume there exists a document dj that has not been ac­
cessed by u, and that documents d; and di are very similar 
in content (e.g., they share many words in common). Con­
sider a similarity metric which yields sim(di, dj) = 0.7. 
Informally, we may believe that there is a 70% chance that 
user u actually has seen document d;, even though the sys­
tem does not know it. Using this reasoning, we propose to 
preprocess the initial co-occurrence data matrix, by filling 
in some of the zeros with the aggregate similarity between 
the corresponding document and the documents definitely 
seen by user u. The co-occurrence matrix will no longer 
be integer valued, but may also contain similarity values 
which range between 0 and 1. The EM algorithm used in 
the original aspect model also converges in this situation. 
The most frequently used similarity measure in informa­
tion retrieval is vector-space cosine similarity (Salton & 
McGill, 1983). Each document is viewed as a vector whose 
dimensions correspond to words in the vocabulary; the 
component magnitudes are the tf-idf weights of the words. 
Tf-idf is the product of term frequency t f ( w, d)-the num­
ber of times word w occurs in the corresponding document 
d-and inverse document frequency 
idf(w) = log djl), 
where IDI is the number of documents in a collection and 
df ( w) is the number of documents in which word w occurs 
at least once. The similarity between two documents is then 
where d, and dj are vectors with tf-idf coordinates as de­
scribed above. 
In our setting, the user-document co-occurrence data ma­
trix is smoothed by replacing zero entries with average sim­
ilarities above a certain threshold between the correspond­
ing document and all documents that the user has accessed. 
This effectively increases the density (i.e., the fraction of 
non-zero entries) in the matrix. Figure 2 shows how the 
density of the Researchlndex data (described in detail in 
Section 6.1) changes depending on the similarity threshold 
used in smoothing. 
t 
,, 
.. 
. .• 
Figure 2: Density of the data against the similarity threshold used 
in smoothing. 
5 
IMPLICIT USER WORDS ASPECT 
MODEL 
As another method to overcome overfi.tting due to sparsity, 
we propose a model where the co-occurrence data points 
represent events corresponding to users looking at words 
in a particular document. The concept of a document is 
removed to create observations (u, w). Sparsity is drasti­
cally reduced because documents contain many words, and 
many words are contained in multiple documents. 
In this case, the aspect model produces estimates of con­
ditional probabilities Pr(ulz) and Pr(wlz), as well as the 
latent class variable priors Pr(z), allowing us to compute 
Pr(u, w) = 'L:: Pr(z) Pr(ulz) Pr(wlz}. 
z 
But we are still interested in estimating probabilities 
Pr(dlu) to produce recommendations of the papers that 
have the highest scores on the Pr(dlu) scale for a given 
user u. By assuming conditional independence of words in 
a document, we can overcome this problem by treating a 
document as a bag of words: the probability of a document 
is the product of the probabilities of the words it contains, 
adjusted for different document lengths with the geometric 

UA12001 
POPESCUL ET AL. 
441 
mean: 
1/ldl 
Pr(dlu) oc CIT Pr(w;lu)) 
, 
where w; are words in d and ldl is the length of d. Con­
ditional probabilities Pr( w; lu) follow directly from the 
model: 
P ( 
I ) 
Pr(u,w;) 
r W; u 
= =-----=--:---'---:-
LwPr(u,w) 
Inclusion of words through documents, and eliminating 
documents from direct participation in modeling, increased 
the density of our dataset (described below) from 0.38% to 
almost 9%. 
6 
RESULTS AND EVALUATION 
Section 6.1 describes the Researchlndex data. 
In Sec­
tion 6.2, we examine under what conditions learning oc­
curs at all, by measuring the increase in the log-likelihood 
of test <Jata as EM proceeds. We find that if data is too 
sparse, neither EM nor TEM succeeds in significantly in­
creasing the test data log-likelihood over a random initial 
guess. In Section 6.3, we evaluate the recommendations of 
our density-augmented models, according to Breese et al.'s 
(1998) rank scoring metric. 
6.1 
RESEARCHINDEX DATA 
The data for our experiments was taken from Researchln­
dex (formerly CiteSeer), 
the largest freely available 
database of scientific literature (Lawrence et al., 1999; 
Bollacker et al., 2000). Researchlndex catalogs scientific 
publications available on the web in PostScript and PDF 
formats. The full-text of documents as well as the cita­
tions made in them are indexed. Researchlndex supports 
keyword-based retrieval and browsing of the database, for 
example by following the links between papers formed by 
citations. 
Document detail page access information was 
obtained for July to November, 2000 (multiple accesses by 
the same user were included). Heuristics were used to filter 
out robots. Words from the first 5 kbytes of the text of each 
document were extracted. 
We used the data from July to October as the training set, 
and the data from November as the testing set. Due to 
the rapid growth in usage of Researchlndex, November 
accounted for 31% of the total five month activity. The 
data included 33,050 unique users accessing the details 
of 177,232 documents. Density of this dataset was only 
0.01%. 
We extracted a relatively dense (0.38%) subset of the 1000 
most active users and the 5000 documents they accessed 
the most. We believe these very low density levels are typ­
ical of many real-world recommendation applications. Ex-
periments reported in this paper were conducted using the 
relatively dense subset of 1,000 users and 5,000 papers. 
6.2 
OVERFITTING 
6.2.1 
User-Document And User-Document-Word 
Aspect Models 
Training the two-way user-document aspect model on the 
relatively dense set of 1000 users and 5000 documents re­
sulted in immediate overfitting of EM, meaning that the test 
data log-likelihood began to fall after only the first or sec­
ond iteration. This immediate overfitting occured for num­
bers of latent classes ranging from 3 to 50. Using tempered 
EM (Wlder several reasonable temperature change sched­
ules) only kept the test data log-likelihood approximately 
at the same level as the initial random seed, without signif­
icant improvements. 
Including the words contained in the 5,000 documents, and 
fitting the three-way aspect model also resulted in imme­
diate overfitting. 
Again, TEM failed to yield significant 
improvements in the test data log-likelihood. 
6.2.2 
Standard Aspect Model, Synthetic Data 
To examine whether this extreme overfitting was specific 
to the Researchlndex data, we tested the aspect model on 
a simple synthetic data set. Users are divided into three 
disjoint groups according to the following scheme: 
1. users 0--49 read papers 0--299, 
2. users 50--99 read papers 300--599, and 
3. users 100--149 read papers 600--899, 
where the probabilities that users read papers in their inter­
est set are uniform. 
We designed the data so that the "correct" model with three 
latent states is obvious. We generated several datasets of 
differing densities and trained a three-latent-variable aspect 
model on each to see whether EM converges to the correct 
model. We performed validation tests at each iteration with 
test sets of the same density as the corresponding training 
set. Figure 3 plots the iteration (averaged over fifty ran­
dom restarts of EM) where overfitting7 first occurs versus 
the dataset density. In datasets of density less than 1.5% 
the process consistently overfits from the first iteration. For 
datasets of density 2.5%, test performance begins to deteri­
orate after about five iterations on average. For datasets of 
density 4%, overfitting begins after ten iterations. 
7Defined as the point where test data log-likelihood starts de­
teriorating. 

442 
POPESCUL ET AL. 
UAI2001 
. i 
i . 
i 
Figure 3: Iteration (averaged over fifty random restarts) where 
overfitting occurs versus density of the synthetic data. 
6.3 
RECOMMENDATION ACCURACY 
We find that both EM and TEM fail on very sparse data, in­
cluding Researchlndex data and synthetic data. In contrast, 
EM is effective on both of our density-augmented models 
(Sections 4 and 5). Here we compare these two models 
to the k-NN algorithm, commonly employed in commer­
cial recommender systems. We use the rank scoring metric 
(Breese et al., 1998) to evaluate recommendations. 
6.3.1 
Evaluation Criteria 
Breese et al. ( 1998) define the expected utility of a ranked 
list of items as 
" 
8(u,j) 
flu = LJ 2(j-l)/(a-I) ' 
j 
where j is the rank of an item in the full list of suggestions 
proposed by a recommender, 8( u, j) is 1 if user u accessed 
item j in the test set and 0 otherwise, and a is the viewing 
half-life, which is the place of an item in the list such that it 
has a 50% chance of being viewed. 8 As in their paper, we 
use a = 5, and found that our resulting conclusions were 
not sensitive to the precise value of this parameter. The 
final score reflecting the utilities of all users in the test set 
lS 
where R;:a"' is the maximum possible utility obtained 
when all items that user u has accessed appear at the top 
of the ranked list. 
6.3.2 
k-Nearest Neighbors 
Figure 4 gives R scores for the experiments with k-NN in 
standard formulation on the user-document data for differ­
ent values of k, ranging from 10 to 60 with an interval of5. 
8We modify Breese et al.'s formula slightly for the case of 
observed accesses rather than ratings. 
The maximum R value achieved in these experiments was 
1.87 for k = 25. R scores have local maxima, suggesting 
their sensitivity to the sparsity of the user-document data . 
Figure 4: Total utility of the ranked lists over all users produced 
byk-NN. 
6.3.3 
Smoothed Aspect Model 
Figure 5 shows the total utility of the ranked lists (R) for 
all users against the similarity threshold used for smooth­
ing for the example of 25 latent variables. Although the 
values of R fluctuate, the pattern is clear through the sig­
nificant linear least squares fit (p-value of the slope coeffi­
cient is 0.02)-R is larger when more content is included 
(smaller similarity threshold). As the similarity threshold 
grows, the initial data matrix becomes sparser, until it be­
comes impossible to learn (immediate overfitting). Local 
fluctuations are due to the stochastic nature of EM; in par­
ticular, its sensitivity to the randomly initialized parameter 
values and the number of restarts attempted (five in these 
experiments) when the data matrix becomes sparser as the 
similarity threshold grows. 
'·' 
.. 
..• 
1.0 
Figure 5: Total utility of the ranked lists over all users produced 
by the similarity-based User-Document model against the simi­
larity threshold used in smoothing (25 latent class variables). 
The maximum valueR has reached is 2.10, which is greater 
than the best k-NN result (1.87), but not as good as the 

UAI2001 
POPESCUL ET AL. 
443 
User-Words model (2.92), discussed below. 
6.3.4 
User-Words Aspect Model 
Figure 6 shows the R scores for the User-Words aspect 
model recommender. Experiments include models with the 
number of hidden class variables z ranging from 10 to 60 
with an interval of I 0 (two restarts were performed for each 
experiment). The maximum R value achieved in these ex­
periments is 2.92 for the model with 50 hidden class vari­
ables, which is significantly higher than 1.87, the best R 
value achieved with k-NN algorithm. 
" 
" 
.. 
Figure 6: Total utility of the ranked lists over all users produced 
by the User-Words aspect modeL 
7 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
We presented three probabilistic mixture models for recom­
mending items based on collaborative and content-based 
evidence merged in a unified manner. Incorporating con­
tent into a collaborative filtering system can increase the 
flexibility and quality of the recommender. 
Moreover, 
when data is extremely sparse-as is typical in many real­
world applications-additional content information seems 
almost necessary to fit global probabilistic models at all. 
The density of Researchlndex data is only 0.01 %. Even 
the most active users reading the most popular articles in­
duce a subset of density only 0.38%, still too sparse for the 
straightforward EM and TEM approaches to work. We find 
that a particularly good way to include content information 
in the context of a document recommendation system is to 
treat users as reading words of the document, rather than 
the document itself. In our case, this increased the density 
from 0.38% to almost 9%, resulting in recommendations 
superior to k-NN. 
There are many areas for future research. Similar meth­
ods to those presented here might be used to recommend 
items such as movies which have attributes other than text. 
A movie can be viewed as consisting of the director and 
the actors in it, just as a document contains words. Both of 
our sparsity reduction techniques, similarity-based smooth­
ing and an equivalent of a user-words aspect model, can be 
used. 
EM is guaranteed to reach only a local maximum of the 
training data log-likelihood. Multiple restarts need to be 
performed if one desires a higher quality model. We are 
planning to investigate ways to intelligently seed EM to 
reduce the need for multiple restarts, which can be costly 
when fitting datasets of non-trivial size. 
The user-words model does not explicitly use the popu­
larity of items. Including such information may further 
improve the quality of the recommendations made by the 
model, but requires additional work on combining and cal­
ibrating model predictions with document popularity. 
Finally, predictive accuracy was used to validate our mod­
els in this paper. We are planning to deploy our recom­
menders in Researchlndex and perform a user study col­
lecting information on which recommendations are actu­
ally followed by users.
