Human Action Adverb Recognition: ADHA Dataset and A Three-Stream
Hybrid Model
Bo Pang, Kaiwen Zha, Cewu Lu ∗
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China

Abstract
We introduce the ﬁrst benchmark for a new problem —
recognizing human action adverbs (HAA): “Adverbs De-
scribing Human Actions” (ADHA). We demonstrate some
key features of ADHA: a semantically complete set of ad-
verbs describing human actions, a set of common, describ-
able human actions, and an exhaustive labeling of simul-
taneously emerging actions in each video. We commit an
in-depth analysis on the implementation of current effec-
tive models in action recognition and image captioning on
adverb recognition, and the results show that such meth-
ods are unsatisfactory.
Moreover, we propose a novel
three-stream hybrid model to deal the HAA problem, which
achieves a better result.
1. Introduction
Computer vision aims to recognize semantic labels in
visual data (e.g., images, video). We ﬁnd these semantic
labels are inside our language system. For example, ob-
ject detection/recognition [27, 26] can be considered as ex-
ploring “noun” in visual data. To understand “verb”, action
recognition [5, 36, 30, 39, 14, 13, 14] has been extensively
studied. Moreover, the “Adjective” labels (e.g., cool, dark,
beautiful) are explored by attribute learning [25]. Until now,
most of computer vision researchers have ignored an im-
portant kind of words — “Adverb”, which can express the
attitude and mood of the subject, and the attributes of the ac-
tion as well. From the viewpoint of language research [35],
these concepts convey more sensitive semantics compared
with actions and nouns.
If we can teach an AI to understand adverbs of an ac-
tion, it implies that the AI can understand the attitude and
mood of the action player, which is necessary for interactive
robots. We also believe this is the preliminary work to make
AI understand the purpose and the intent behind actions.
We are the ﬁrst one to explore the topic of human ac-
tion adverbs (HAAs) recognition. Unlike action recogni-
tion, HAAs describe the conceptions with very sensitive vi-
sual patterns that are difﬁcult to recognize. For example, is
the drinking people happy or sad; Is the hand shaking an
expression of excitement or politeness? Extensive experi-
ments show that understanding adverb is very challenging
to current state-of-the-art deep learning architecture. Note
that in the topic of image captioning [38], adverb may be
included in the language material. However, on one hand,
they don’t take adverb as a target. On the other hand, we be-
lieve adverb recognition will be one of the most important
tools to further advance the topic of image captioning.
By now, we have made tremendous progress in action
recognition. Many large-scale datasets like UCF101 [29],
YouTube-8M [1] are built and some excellent models like
two-stream network [28] et al. have been proposed. Despite
signiﬁcant advances in action recognition, HAAs, as an im-
portant attribute is a missing study. There is no appropriate
dataset for HAA recognition.
Similar to other beginnings of new topics, we built a
video dataset with adverbs labeled for actions. There are
12000 videos in total covering 350 action-adverb pairs (e.g.,
“smoking sadly”) over 32 actions described by 51 adverbs.
There are three kinds of HAAs that can respectively de-
scribe the subject’s mood, attitude and the attributes of the
actions. We commit a social experiment to make sure that
the HAAs space can describe almost all the meanings a hu-
man want to express after seeing a short action video.
We highlight four features of the dataset. First, an aver-
age of 11 distinct HAAs per action (no dull action which can
only be labeled by few adverbs). Second, our adverb cate-
gories are based on semantics rather than words. It means
that we do not take “smoke sadly” and “smoke sorrowfully”
as different categories. Third, the dataset is multi-labeled.
An action can be labeled with multiple HAAs describing
mood, attitude and action attributes simultaneously. Fourth,
each video is labeled by three annotators, with different
backgrounds to reduce bias. Accordingly, a novel evalua-
tion metric is designed. Fig. 1 shows example video frames
and annotations in ADHA.
We prove that this dataset is able to act as a benchmark
1
arXiv:1802.01144v2  [cs.CV]  12 Feb 2018

Figure 1. Example frames and annotations in ADHA.
of the HAA recognition problem. We commit experiments
to answer the following questions: First, how well can the
current action recognition and image captioning approaches
deal with the HAA recognition problem? Second, can pose
help to understand HAA? Third, can we use expression
knowledge as extra information to solve the HAA recog-
nition problem?
The contributions of this work are that: 1) we build a
large-scale video dataset labeled with actions, HAAs, and
human instance boundingboxes. 2) We benchmark several
current action recognition, pose estimation, and image cap-
tioning models on ADHA. 3) We propose a hybrid model
using pose, expression, optical ﬂow and RGB information
and achieve a relative better performance.
1.1. Related Dataset
To our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to study HAA recog-
nition. Building high-quality benchmark dataset is the ﬁrst
step to explore this topic. Therefore, in this section, we fo-
cus on investigating some related datasets.
Action Dataset
Action recognition in video has made
great progress due to many excellent datasets, from small
simple datasets like KTH [18] to large-scale, real-world
datasets such as Youtube-8M [1], UCF-101 [29], and Sport-
1M [14]. However, action is not only contained in video.
In other words, people as well as AI can tell the action by
only one image. Sometimes, recognition of an action in
videos stems from the recognition of a related object in the
scenario. For example, a model might recognize the action
of swimming by recognizing the swimming pool. Actually,
the model does not understand, or rather, pay attention to
the action itself. Instead, it solves an object detection prob-
lem. However, if a model can recognize adverbs very well,
we can tell that the model has the ability to understand the
action, actions’ attributes and the player’s attitude. This is
why HAA recognition is important and difﬁcult.
Video Captioning Dataset
Video captioning is a hot is-
sue and there are many datasets designed for it, for ex-
ample MSR-VTT [37] which is built from the queries
on a commercial video search engine and covers 10k
clips, YouTube2Text [11] with 2,000 video snippets and
120K sentences, ActivityNet Captions [15], a large-scale
benchmark for dense-captioning events which contains 20k
videos amounting to 849 video hours with 100k total de-
scriptions.
Although video captioning needs adverbs, it
needs to concern many other things like ﬁxed phrases and
idioms, which is biased against our goal. And in our HAA
set, we have removed the synonyms, because we do not
want to discriminate them. While in video captioning, they
need to be taken into account. Therefore, although there
are many datasets built for video captioning, they are not
suitable for HAA recognition.
Human Expression Dataset
Face expressions can con-
vey the mood and attitude of human like HAAs.
And
many datasets are built for it like Emotiw2016 [4] which
contains an audio-video based emotion and a group-based
emotion recognition sub-challenges, MMI [32] — a re-
source for building and evaluating facial expression recog-
nition algorithms, HUMAINE [6] which provides naturalis-
tic clips recording pervasive emotion and suitable labeling
techniques. But there are also some shortcomings. The ex-
pression recognition mainly deals with faces in images or
videos, but HAA recognition needs to recognize subject’s
mood and attitude from his action not merely face expres-
sion. Moreover, adverb recognition can tell the attributes of

the action like how fast, heavily, which is beyond the ex-
pression recognition. Therefore, we need to build a HAA
recognition dataset to solve this much more difﬁcult and
comprehensive problem.
2. Constructing ADHA
Our dataset is constructed for recognizing adverbs de-
scribing human actions (HAA). First, we introduce how to
make the action and adverb list. Then, videos are collected
based on the given lists. The pipeline of the annotation is
shown in Fig. 2. Finally, we present the annotation details
on the collected videos.
2.1. Selecting Action and Adverb Categories
Adverbs are used to describe the actions, so we ﬁx the
action categories list ﬁrst. Then make the adverb list ac-
cording to the given selected action categories.
Action Collection
Previous action dataset [1, 18, 29, 14]
constructors seek to build sets that cover most of action cat-
egories, those frequently happen in daily life. So, in this pa-
per, we adopt the union set of action categories from these
datasets as our action candidates shortlist. As a research
dataset, we expect the selected actions to require adverb de-
scriptions. For example, in common cases some sport ac-
tions such as fencing, gymnastics, swimming are without
attitude and mood. So those adverb-needless actions are
not our target. To further reﬁne the shortlist, we turn to lan-
guage prior knowledge. We extract about 0.2 million video
descriptions as our language materials. Then we rank ac-
tion categories by the percentage of being described by at
least one adverb. According to this score, we ﬁnally choose
top 32 actions in the shortlist:{brush hair, chew, clap, climb
stairs, dive, draw sword, drink, eat, fall ﬂoor, hit, hug, kick,
kiss, pick, pour, pullup, punch, push, run, shake hands,
shoot bow, shoot gun, sit, smoke, stand, swing baseball,
sword, sword exercise, talk, throw, walk, wave}.
Adverb Collection
Given action categories, we build the
list of the adverbs. We consult the word frequency from
the Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA)
which is an authoritative corpus of American English [2].
From thousands of adverbs, we choose 113 adverbs which
are able to describe actions and possess the highest word
frequencies. After removing the synonyms, there are 51
adverbs left. In order to make sure that these 51 adverbs
cover all the meanings a person wants to express after see-
ing a short action video, we conduct a user study. We invite
50 students with different majors from the college and give
each of them 50 videos and the adverb set. They need to
watch each video ﬁrst and then check whether the adverb
set can cover what they want to express about the video.
Figure 2. Pipeline for collecting and annotating the videos. We
take “kiss” action as an example.
From the result, we ﬁnd that for male, the adverb set can
cover 98.8% requirements and for female it is 97.4%.
Adverb-action Pair Collection
With 32 actions and 51
adverbs, we then group adverb-action pairs. In this process
we take a N-gram data1 as the reference. This N-gram data
is better than Google N-Gram for us, since it has a large
corpus (COCA) and takes the low frequency (even only ap-
pear 1 or 3 times) n-grams into account. This n-gram data
provides us the frequencies of action-adverb pairs. Then we
obtain the candidate action-adverb pairs set on the basis of
the frequencies. For every action there are around 11 ap-
propriate adverbs. In total we have 350 adverb-action pairs.
We will list the adverb and adverb-action pairs in supple-
mentary ﬁle.
2.2. Video Collection and Annotation
Video Collection
We collect video clips from both
YouTube and existing action datasets. First, videos from
several existing datasets HMDB51 [17], HOHA [19], UCF-
101 [29] are used. Then, we add videos from YouTube in
order to deal with the long tail problem on adverbs. The
details of video collection will be illustrated in section 2.3.
Each human instance in the video preforms one action only.
Human Instance Annotation
Our annotation is in hu-
man instance level, because we should know who performs
the action. What’s more, some actions like “kiss” and “hug”
have more than one player, so that we need to annotate
them respectively. We propose a semi-automatic annota-
tion framework to effectively localize human instance. We
label the human boundingbox at the ﬁrst frame and use
1https://www.ngrams.info/

Number of clips
0.0~2.0s
2.0~5.0s
5.0~10.0s
>10.0s
Brush hair
Chew
Clap
Climb stairs
Dive
Draw sword
Drink
Eat
Fall floor
Hit
Hug
Kick
Kiss
Pick
Pour
Pullup
Punch
Push
Run
Shake hands
Shoot bow
Shoot gun
Sit
Smoke
Stand
Swing baseball
Sword
Sword exercise
Talk
Throw
Walk
Wave
0
150
300
450
600
750
Figure 3. Number of videos per action. The distribution of video durations is illustrated by the colors.
object tracking model MDNet [21] which is the winner
of the VOT-2015 challenge [16] to search corresponding
human instance in the following frames. To improve the
robustness, we implement human detection (using Faster-
RCNN [10]) to revise tracking bounding box. In detail,
we pick up a human detection box that is the closest to the
tracking result box based on IOU overlap criterion, then av-
erage them as revised result. Annotators observe the auto-
matic video annotation on-line. If the automatic annotation
is inaccurate, the annotator need to stop the video and man-
ually correct the bounding boxes. In this way, we only need
to annotate some key frames, instead of all frames.
Annotator
We invite 100 annotators with different ages,
genders and nationalities. Since our adverbs are presented
in English, all the annotators are either native English
speakers or excellent English speakers.
Annotation Interface
Our interface is friendly. We play
video with labeled human instance boxes. Then, the sys-
tem gives out an adverb list to choose from. Annotators can
select one or multiple adverbs to describe the observed ac-
tion video, and they can replay it many times until they are
conﬁdent enough with their choices. We don’t set any time
limitation for them.
Work Assign
Adverbs are used to describe mood, attitude
like concepts which are more subjective than object and ac-
tion category labeling. Annotating by only one person may
not cover all the feelings of people. Therefore, each video is
assigned to three different annotators. We make sure those
three annotators should have diverse backgrounds (e.g., na-
tionality, age, gender, education background). We ﬁnd three
annotations for each action instance is enough to cover most
of feelings. A study experiment is conducted: After annota-
tion is done, we randomly sample 1000 action instances and
re-label them by 30 new annotators outside those 100 anno-
tators. We ﬁnd that 96.3% cases have at least one original
annotation which is exactly the same with the new one.
2.3. Dataset Statistics and Discussion
In total, there are 32 actions, 51 adverbs, 350 action-
adverb pairs, and 12000 videos of “.avi” in ADHA. A video
may be annotated with more than one adverb and the av-
erage number of adverbs per video is 1.81. Some statistics
about the videos are shown in Tab. 1. We can tell that the
dataset contains only short videos, which reduces the difﬁ-
culty. For every action and adverb, we count the amount of
the videos about them and show the distributions in Fig. 3
and Fig. 4. To deal with the long tail problem, we recol-
lect many videos. For example, before recollection, “hug
sadly” only has 9 samples in 483 videos. While after recol-
lection, it has 30 samples in 510 videos. To get the diversity
among the 3 annotations, we use a 51-dimension vector to
represent the annotation, then calculate the average of the
Manhattan distances between every two of the 3 annotators.
Using av,i to represent the i-th annotation of the video v,
then the diversity d can be written as:
d = avgv(
X
i<j
|av,i −av,j|]).
(1)
The diversity of ADHA annotation is 1.376.

Number of clips
0.0~2.0s
2.0~5.0s
5.0~10.0s
>10.0s
hard
amazingly
wearily
clumsily
sweetly
excitedly
ironically
promptly
fast
kindly
carefully
seriously
barely
easily
slowly
quietly
precisely
gently
surprisedly
lightly
heavily
happily
freely
sadly
proudly
comfortably
calmly
vigorously
nervously
reluctantly
professionally
politely
painfully
angrily
patiently
bitterly
incidentally
frantically
intently
gracefully
flatly
confidently
weakly
solemnly
expertly
inexorably
triumphantly
hesitantly
dramatically
officially
anxiously
0
3k
6k
9k
Figure 4. Number of videos per adverb. The distribution of video durations is illustrated by the colors.
#Actions
32
#Adverbs
51
#Clips
12000
Mean Clip Length
3.25s
Total Duration
43071s
Table 1. Statistics about the videos
3. Benchmark System
In this section, we evaluate several representative ap-
proaches designed for action recognition and image cap-
tioning using our ADHA dataset and analyze the inﬂuence
of the expression knowledge on HAA recognition. First, we
will brieﬂy introduce the prior approaches.
3.1. Related work
Action Recognition: We have made great progress in
action recognition and many excellent models have been
proposed.
Prior works have explored various strategies.
Some works extract features of video frames and then fuse
them. RNN is widely used to fuse [5, 36, 30] and many
pooling methods have been developed [39, 14]. CNN gains
great success in image processing so that many CNN mod-
els in video ﬁeld appear like 3D-CNN [13] and time di-
mension convolution [14]. Whereas other jobs take other
methods to deal with the temporal information like optical
ﬂow [28], trajectories [33], and human pose estimation [20].
All of these methods do good job in action recognition on
video. Can they deal with the HAA recognition problem as
well?
Face Expression: Adverbs convey mood and attitude,
which can also be inferred by face expression. Nowadays
there are many outstanding expression recognition models
like [7] which uses a C3D, CNN, RNN hybrid networks,
and [23] which uses transfer learning to deal with small
datasets.
Pose estimation: For pose estimation, we usually out-
put the heat map of the key points or the skeleton. In [22]
a stacked hourglass network is used. And AlphaPose [8]
consists of three components: Symmetric Spatial Trans-
former Network (SSTN), Parametric Pose NonMaximum-
Suppression (NMS), and Pose-Guided Proposals Generator
(PGPG).
Image Captioning: Image captioning also needs ad-
verbs. In [24] a graph based method is used. In [38] the
authors add visual attention to the model.
3.2. Experiment Setup
Metric
We choose mean average precision (mAP) and

beled with more than one adverb and the adverbs are not
exclusive between each other. On the other hand, mAP and

have been used in many benchmarks [29, 1, 14], which will
give people a better intuitive feeling on the metric values.
mAP: Given a video, a model will give a classiﬁcation
score for every adverb. Then we compute average precision
(AP) for every adverb using the sorted classiﬁcation scores.
The average value of all the adverb APs is mAP.

contain at least one of the ground truth labels in the top k
predictions. If rankv,e is the rank of entity e on video v

(rank 1 gives to the best scoring entity), and Gv is the set of

1/|V |
X
v∈V
∨e∈Gv ⨿(rankv,e ≤k),
(2)
where ∨is logical OR and ⨿is indicator function.
Evaluation
We need to deﬁne the positive and negative
samples ﬁrst. We treat every person as one sample instead
of one video, since there may be more than one player in
one video. If the person in the boundingbox is doing the
speciﬁc action and the action matches the features of one
candidate adverb, then, this is a positive sample. If not, then
this is a negative sample for that adverb. But what about the
condition where the person in the boundingbox is not doing
the speciﬁc action? Do we just delete it from the sample set
or treat it as a negative sample? We treat it as a negative
sample. Because models do not have the prior knowledge
that whether the person is doing the speciﬁc action, we can-
not delete it. We realize that there is a possibility that the
person in boundingbox who is not doing that speciﬁc ac-
tion is doing another action which is in the action set. we
have conducted an experiment and found that the possibil-
ity is almost 0. We randomly choose some boundingboxes
belonging to the third group to check whether there is such
a risk, and have not found such an example. It is enough to
prove that the rate is small enough to ignore.
We use 80% of the dataset as training set and the remain-
ing as test set. When splitting, we put the videos in the same
scene only in one set. Although we deal with the long tail
problem, the problem still exists, which is a challenge for
HAA recognition approaches.
We use two tasks to evaluate the adverb recognition
problem: one is given a video then recognizing the action
and adverbs (task 1); the other is given a video and its action
categories then recognizing the adverbs (task 2).
Since we have 3 annotators for each case, we use the one
which has the closest distance to the predicted value as the
ground truth to calculate the evaluation metrics. We use this
setting because we believe if a model can recognize HAA
like at least one annotator, it is a good model.
3.3. Attention mechanism
In this dataset, we treat every person instead of a video as
a sample. If we consider human boundingbox regions only,
the background context which is useful for HHA recogni-
tion may be missed. Therefore, we need to consider the
whole image and also tell the model which person in the
video to look at. In these experiments, a much more effec-
tive attention mechanism is used. We lower the brightness
beyond the boundingbox instead of increasing the bound-
ingbox’s brightness to reduce the loss of the color satura-
tion in attention area. To avoid fetching in extra edges, we
Figure 5. Examples of attention. Top: Row images with bound-
ingboxes. Bottom: Corresponding images after attention process.
Expression 
Feature
Fusion
Pose Frames
InceptionV3
LSTM
Features
Classification
Layers
PBLSTM
Expression
Two-Stream model
Optical Flow
RGB Image
CNNs
Features
CNNs
Features
Classification
Layers
Classification
Layers
Fusion
Figure 6. The framework of the Three-Stream Hybrid model. The
PBLSTM stream uses pose information; The expression stream
uses expression information; And the Two-Stream stream uses op-
tical ﬂow and RGB.
commit smoothing process and some examples are shown
in Fig. 5. Smoothing can also deal with the deviation of the
MDNet when generating the boundingboxes (like Smoke
bbox in Fig. 5). If σ is the value to lower the brightness,
B is the attention area, c is the center of B and a is the raw
value of the point p, then the decayed value of p can be writ-
ten as: max(0, a −|p −c| ⨿(p /∈B) × σ). In this way, the
target person is indicated from the background context.
3.4. The Three-Stream hybrid model
We propose a hybrid model using RGB, optical ﬂow,
pose and expression information and benchmark it on our
ADHA dataset. The framework of the model is shown in
Fig. 6.
3.4.1
Two-Stream Sub-Model
Two-stream model is really a successful model for action
recognition. The two streams are spatial stream and tem-
poral (motion) stream. The former uses frames’ RGB in-
formation while the latter uses the optical ﬂow information
which can show the shifting of every pixel in the video.

Figure 7. PBLSTM Pipeline. Get the attention pose features ﬁrst.
Then use LSTM (3 layers with 2048 units) to get the fused video
level features. For task 1, action and adverb recognition have their
own classiﬁers (“Act” and “Adv” in the ﬁgure). For task 2, every
action has its own adverb recognition classiﬁers.
With these two kinds of information, the model can tell
what is in the video and how it moves. We refer to [28]
to implement the two-stream model. Instead of multi-task
learning used in [28] to train the temporal stream, we use
cross modality pre-training method proposed in [34] to do
weights shape transform so that we can use the ImageNet
pre-trained weights in the temporal stream.
We use OpenCV to extract the dense optical ﬂow where
the Gunnar Farneback algorithm [9] is used. In this algo-
rithm, the ﬁrst step is to approximate each neighborhood of
both frames by quadratic polynomials, which can be done
efﬁciently using the polynomial expansion transform. Then
from observing how an exact polynomial transforms under
translation a method to estimate displacement ﬁelds from
the polynomial expansion coefﬁcients is derived [9]. Af-
ter getting the optical ﬂow, we sample 10 frames uniformly
from the temporal space as the input.
The spatial and motion stream CNNs are pre-trained
ResNet101 [12] using ImageNet and ﬁne-tuned on ADHA
dataset. Then we put the feature maps provided by these
CNNs into different classiﬁcation layers to do different
tasks.
3.4.2
Pose Based LSTM Sub-Model (PBLSTM)
LSTM models have achieved great results in action recog-
nition problem. We take an approach similar to [5] to utilize
LSTM for adverb recognition. However, unlike that work,
we do not use the row video frames as the inputs of the
CNN. For adverb recognition, pose is a kind of valuable
feature. Although we can gain pose information from the
raw frames, they are high dimensional which are not easy
to use. So we adopt a state-of-art model [8] to extract pose
rending frames and the pure pose frames as the input to re-
duce the difﬁculty.
AlphaPose is a system for multi-person 2D pose estima-
tion.The Symmetric STN + SPPE module receives the hu-
man bounding boxes obtained by the human detector as in-
put. For each detected bounding box, the corresponding hu-
man pose will be predicted by SPPE. And redundent human
poses are eliminated by parametric Pose NMS to obtain the
ﬁnal human poses.
We use inceptionV3 [31] pre-trained on ImageNet [3] to
extract the feature maps of the poses and we get temporal ir-
relevant features of each frame. Then put these features into
LSTM model to obtain global features and do the recogni-
tion. The whole pipeline of the PBLSTM is shown in Fig. 7
We set the number of stacked LSTM layers and the
number of the hidden units in each layer as the hyper-
parameters. And the experiments show that 3 layers with
2048 units in them achieve the best performance.
Because in the dataset all the videos are short videos with
length around 5s (3fps), we set the maximum number of
frames to be 30 which means that the LSTM model is un-
rolled for 30 iterations. Although a larger unroll number
leads to a better performance, it has much lower efﬁciency.
For task 1, we need to recognize actions and adverbs si-
multaneously. We set the classiﬁcation layers into two parts,
one for action recognition, the other for adverb recognition.
They share the same LSTM layers’s weights. For task 2,
each action has their own classiﬁcation layers to do the ad-
verb recognition task and they also share the LSTM lay-
ers. The input of the LSTM model is the feature maps of
the pose image, and we use two kinds of pose images: one
(Feature 1) is pure pose images which only show the human
skeletons without background, the other (Feature 2) is the
skeletons rendered with the RGB images. There is a prob-
lem that whether the RGB information will provide more
useful information or more noises for the HAA recognition.
3.4.3
Using Expression Knowledge
As discussed earlier, expression recognition has some inter-
section with adverb recognition. Although they are different
problems with different emphasis, we can use the expres-
sion as an extra information to improve the performances
of the models. We adopt the model [7] which is the win-
ner of EmotiW2016 [4]. It uses a C3D, CNN, RNN hybrid
networks.
After getting the expression labels of each video, we use
it as another feature and combine them with the CNN fea-
tures to get the ﬁnal adverb recognition results. We expect
that with the expression information, the classiﬁer will do a
better job on adverbs about emotion.
3.4.4
Fusion the Sub Models
We will show the result of the sub-models in next part. For
each sub model we choose the best settings and add the ex-

mAP

Act
Adv
Act
Adv
Act
Adv
T1-F1
6.968
6.413
36.482
38.633
66.776
73.898
T1-F1-e
7.732
7.347
40.763
43.276
70.235
74.235
T1-F2
7.887
6.434
42.146
40.833
69.124
74.100
T1-F2-e
7.886
7.153
45.315
44.356
70.451
73.892
T2-F1
-
6.521
-
31.252
-
74.903
T2-F1-e
-
7.362
-
36.351
-
75.362
T2-F2
-
7.251
-
10.587
-
16.560
T2-F2-e
-
7.459
-
12.251
-
17.358
Table 2. PBLSTM results. “T1-F1” means task 1 with feature 1.
“-e” means using expression knowledge. Task 2 doesn’t recognize
actions so “Act” does not have values in task 2.
pression features in them. We use average polling method to
ﬁnally fuse them to get the ﬁnal results of our hybrid model.
3.5. Result and Discussion
First, let’s analysis the PBLSTM model’s results which
are shown in Tab. 2. In the table, “T1-F1” means task 1
using feature 1 mentioned above. And “-e” means using
expression knowledge.
We can see that for task 1, using the two kinds of features
achieves almost the same results and feature 2 is a little bet-

for action recognition. Just as we discussed above, model
can recognize the actions by recognition some speciﬁc ob-
jects. But when action is conﬁrmed, this RGB information
is not so useful for adverb recognition and the high dimen-
sion noise will degrades the performance.
When using expression knowledge, mAP values raise
about 0.9 point which validates the expectation. And we
analysis the results on the 51 adverbs in detail. We ﬁnd
that actually for the adverbs like “heavily” and “slowly” the
result is almost the same (for “heavily” AP changes from
5.783 to 5.802 in task 2). While for the adverbs describing
the mood and attitude like “happily”, the expression really
helps (for “happily” AP changes from 6.632 to 7.924 in
task 2). So we can tell expression recognition is an impor-
tant part of adverb recognition.
Comparing task1 and task2, we ﬁnd that the results
for adverb recognition are almost the same, which means
the action information is not related to adverb recogni-
tion. Therefore, the risk that the model is conducting action
recognition while expected to conduct HAA recognition
(for example, the model recognizes the adverb “sweetly”
due to seeing “kiss”) is beingless. This is also the reason
why these wonderful models for action recognition do not
work well for HAA recognition.
The results of the two-stream model are shown in Tab. 3.
“-S” means the spatial stream.
“-M” means the motion
stream. “-F” is the fusion of the two streams. The analy-
sis discussed above is still suitable for this model.
mAP

Act
Adv
Act
Adv
Act
Adv
T1-S
3.806
6.246
2.140
6.140
15.400
24.850
T1-M
3.953
6.657
6.630
23.390
24.760
53.610
T1-F
4.126
6.792
5.870
23.190
24.120
55.140
T1-F-e
5.623
7.064
7.160
24.650
24.150
54.320
T2-S
-
6.272
-
2.780
-
14.960
T2-M
-
6.251
-
4.350
-
20.170
T2-F
-
6.841
-
4.420
-
20.140
T2-F-e
-
7.624
-
4.560
-
20.160
Table 3. Two-stream Model results. “-S” means spatial stream.
“-M” means motion stream. “-F” means fusion streams. Task 2
doesn’t recognize actions so “Act” does not have values in task 2.
mAP

Act
Adv
Act
Adv
Act
Adv
T1-H
8.103
9.235
28.135
34.292
53.329
64.325
T2-H
-
9.738
-
27.321
-
45.329
Table 4. Hybrid models results. Task 2 doesn’t recognize actions
so “Act” does not have values in task 2.
The spatial stream utilizes the RGB information which
can tell what is in the video. This information is not so use-
ful for adverb recognition. Even for human, when a person
sees an image with a walking human, it is also difﬁcult to
tell whether the walking man/woman is free or in a hurry.
Compared with spatial stream the motion stream which uses
optical ﬂow information shows a much better performance.
Obviously, with the speed and the direction of each move-
ment, it is easy for a model to recognize the adverbs.
After fusion the two stream, the performance raises a bit
which is not as much as expectation. It is because the spatial
stream really achieves a bad performance. In the table, we
show the best average fusing result with 20% weight for
spatial stream and 80% weight for motion stream. We also
try the max fusion strategy which is bad, just as we have
expected.
Finally the hybrid model results are shown in Tab. 4. The
model integrating the information of pose, expression, RGB
and optical ﬂow achieve the best performance. But still it is
not a satisfactory model and we need further enquiry.
3.5.1
Inﬂuence of Bounding Boxes Correction
All of the above models use the tracking bounding boxes
with human correction which is impossible in real word ap-
plications. So we decide to analysis how much this correc-
tion will affect the performance.
We choose the best settings of the above models and use
the detection and tracking results without human correction
to redo the experiments. The result is shown in Tab. 5. “-a”
means getting the tracking boundingboxes automatically.
We can see that the human correction doesn’t affect the
results too much. One reason is that the human detection

mAP

Act
Adv
Act
Adv
Act
Adv
T1-F-e
5.623
7.064
7.160
24.650
24.150
54.320
T1-F-e-a
5.634
6.993
7.210
24.557
24.069
54.310
T1-F1-e
7.732
7.347
40.763
43.276
70.235
74.235
T1-F1-e-a
7.729
7.336
40.49
44.282
68.124
73.125
T2-F-e
-
7.624
-
4.560
-
20.160
T2-F-e-a
-
7.633
-
4.558
-
20.249
T2-F1-e
-
7.362
-
36.351
-
75.362
T2-F1-e-a
-
7.359
-
36.218
-
75.349
Table 5. Results with and without human correction. “-a” means
the model gets the tracking boundingboxes automatically. Task 2
doesn’t recognize actions so “Act” does not have values in task 2.
and tracking algorithms are good enough for the adverb
recognition problem. Some tracking-lost problems would
not affect the performance. Of course, one must not lose
sight of the fact that all mentioned models do not work well.
4. Conclusions
We established the ﬁrst benchmark for recognizing hu-
man action adverbs: ADHA. This task is beyond the pattern
recognition problems like action recognition. In ADHA,
we labeled the actions from a common and describable ac-
tion set, the adverbs from a semantically complete adverb
set, and the human boundingboxes for each person in each
video. With ADHA, we benchmarked several outstanding
action recognition models. From the result, we can tell that
action and adverb recognition have little relativity and using
those models achieved unsatisfactory results. Moreover, we
propose a hybrid model using RGB, optical ﬂow, pose and
expression knowledge and showed that it achieve better re-
sults on HAA recognition problem.
