1 
 
Top k Memory Candidates in Memory 
Networks for Common Sense Reasoning 
Vatsal Mahajan 

Abstract—Successful completion of reasoning task requires the agent to have relevant prior knowledge or some given context 
of the world dynamics. Usually, the information provided to the system for a reasoning task is just the query or some supporting 
story, which is often not enough for common reasoning tasks. The goal here is that, if the information provided along the 
question is not sufficient to correctly answer the question, the model should choose k most relevant documents that can aid its 
inference process. In this work, the model dynamically selects top k most relevant memory candidates that can be used to 
successfully solve reasoning tasks. Experiments were conducted on a subset of Winograd Schema Challenge (WSC) problems 
to show that the proposed model has the potential for commonsense reasoning. The WSC is a test of machine intelligence, 
designed to be an improvement on the Turing test. 
——————————      —————————— 
1 INTRODUCTION
HERE are lots of AI tasks that require (dynamic) 
knowledge from external sources to accomplish a task. 
Such as in case of NLU, deep QA, and hard co-reference 
resolution. Memory Networks help tackle this problem. 
Memory Networks combine the successful learning 
strategies developed in the machine learning literature for 
inference with a memory component that can be read and 
written to. The model is then trained to learn how to 
operate effectively with the memory component [Weston 
et al., 2015]. Memory Networks use memory vectors to 
provide relevant information along with the input query for 
the learning and inference process. These memory slots are 
defined by the data provided along with input as in case of 
Facebook bAbI taks - a question and a story along with it. 
    In this work, I use a simple technique to dynamically 
select top k candidates for memory slots, for any given task. 
This is useful in the case where the input query does not 
have any story or additional supporting data along with it. 
I hypothesize that this additional information would aid a 
model’s inference process in such uses cases. 
2 RELATED WORK 
[Miller et al., 2016] use a similar technique to create Key-
Value Memory Networks for directly reading form 
documents. They use the question to preselect a small 
subset of the possibly large array of relevant info. But, he 
tasks designed here have both the questions and the 
supporting document. The tasks here are not designed to 
test the system’s commonsense reasoning ability. Whereas, 
this work aims at inferring the cause-effect relationship 
between pairs of events by dynamically selecting memory 
candidates to support the inference. [Liu et al., 2016] use 
Neural Association models to learn cause-effect pairs. They 
base their work on collecting the cause-effect relationships 
between a set of common words and phrases. They also 
hypothesize that this type of knowledge would be a key 
component for modeling the association relationships 
between discrete events. 
3 WINOGRAD SCHEMA 
The Winograd Schema (WS) evaluates a system’s 
commonsense reasoning ability based on a traditional, very 
difficult natural language processing task: co-reference 
resolution [Levesque et al., 2011]. It is carefully designed 
such that a task cannot be easily solved without 
commonsense knowledge [Liu et al., 2016]. Winograd 
Schema Challenge (WSC) poses a set of multiple-choice 
questions that have a particular form for example:  
 
Sentence: The trophy would not fit in the brown suitcase 
because it was too big (small).  
Question: What was too big (small)?  
Answer0: the trophy Answer1: the suitcase  
 
    To answer the above question, one requires having the 
knowledge that an object being big would have a higher 
chance of not fitting in a suitcase, as compared to a small 
object [Mahajan, 2018]. Some external knowledge is 
required to help with this spatial reasoning.  
    In the first experiment, I am working towards the 
Winograd Schema Challenge. The goal here is to evaluate 
the proposed model for various reasoning tasks. Here the 
model is trained to infer the cause-effect relationship 
between discrete events. 
4 APPROACH 
4.1 Memory Nets 
I have used the End-to-End Memory Net described by 
[Weston et al., 2015]. The model is defined by a discrete set 
of inputs 𝑥1, 𝑥2,… , 𝑥𝑛 that are to be stored in the memory, 
a query 𝑞, and outputs an answer 𝑎. All the symbols in each 
of the 𝑥𝑖,𝑞 and 𝑎 come from a vocabulary 𝑉 of words. The 
End-to-End Memory Network model writes all the inputs 𝑥 
2018 
T

2 
 
 
to the memory up to a fixed buffer size, and then finds a 
continuous representation for the 𝑥 and 𝑞. 
    Using an embedding matrix 𝐴 of size 𝑑× 𝑉, the set of 
{𝑥𝑖} is converted into memory vectors {𝑚𝑖} of dimension 𝑑 
computed by embedding each 𝑥𝑖 in a continuous space. 
The query 𝑞 is also embedded using another embedding 
matrix 𝐵 of size 𝑑× 𝑉, to obtain an internal state 𝑢. In the 
embedding space, the model computes the match between 
𝑢 and each memory 𝑥𝑖 by taking the inner product followed 
by a softmax: 𝑝𝑖= 𝑆𝑜𝑓𝑡𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝑢𝑇.𝑚𝑖). Once the model is 
trained 𝑝 gives the probability vector over the memory 
slots. Also, each 𝑥𝑖 has a corresponding output vector 𝑐𝑖 
generated by another embedding matrix 𝐶 of size 𝑑× 𝑉. 
Then the response vector 𝑜 is computed from the memory 
which is given by the sum over the transformed inputs 𝑐𝑖, 
weighted by the probability vector from the input: 𝑜=
∑𝑝𝑖
𝑖
. 𝑐𝑖 . To get the final prediction the sum of the output 
vector 𝑜 and the input embedding u is then passed through 
a final weight matrix 𝑊 (of size 𝑉× 𝑑) and a softmax to 
produce the predicted label: 𝑎̂ = 𝑆𝑜𝑓𝑡𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝑊(𝑜+ 𝑢)). 
During training, all three embedding matrices 𝐴, 𝐵, and 𝑊, 
as well as 𝑊 are jointly learned by minimizing a standard 
cross-entropy loss between 𝑎̂ and the true label 𝑎. Here, I 
have discussed a single layer model, but this can also be 
stacked to get multiple hops in memory. 
4.2 Indexing Corpora 
The goal here is to index a corpus so that when given a 
query/question the system can pick top 𝑘 memory 
candidate. The objective is to get the set of the 𝑘 most 
relevant memory candidates given a particular query string 
𝑞. More formally, let 𝑄 ⊑ℝ𝑛 be an input space, 𝑊⊑ℝ𝑚 
be a finite output space of size N, and 𝑓∶𝑄× 𝑊→ℝ  a 
known scoring function  [Goel et al., 2008]. Given an input 
(search query) 𝑞 ∈𝑄, the goal is to find, or closely 
approximate, 
the 
top-k 
output 
objects 
(memory 
candidates) 𝑧1, 𝑧2, … , 𝑧𝑘 in 𝑊 (i.e., the top 𝑘 objects as 
ranked by 𝑓(𝑞, ∙). The most commonly used indexing 
function is the inverted index. [Zobel et al. 2006] give a 
detailed description of inverted indexing. 
4.3 Dynamically Selecting Memory Candidates 
For reasoning tasks where, one has the input as just a 
query/question 𝑞 and no supporting story/data along 
with it, the indexed corpora can be used for generating top 
𝑘 candidates for memory slots. The candidates for the 
memory slots will be generated dynamically. The quality of 
the selected candidates will only depend on the type of 
scoring function 𝑓 chosen.  
    Now the discrete set of inputs 𝑥1,𝑥2,… ,𝑥𝑛 that are to be 
stored in the memory are chosen using the function 𝑓(𝑞, ∙
) from the corpora 𝑊. So now {𝑥𝑖} = {𝑧𝑖}; where 𝑧𝑖 is one of 
the k candidates given by the function 𝑓. Further, I use the 
same embedding process to convert the set {𝑧𝑖} into 
memory vectors {𝑚𝑖}. 
4.3 Creating Cause-Effect Pairs 
For the experiment, I have used the wiki corpus for 
selecting memory candidates. And Causal Time bank to get 
cause-effect pairs for training. The Causal Time bank [Mirza 
et al., 2014] has 318 causal links (event pairs). So, I created a data 
set of cause-effect pairs with 318 positive examples and 954 
negative examples using the causal time bank. For testing, I 
labeled 62 cause-effect problems from a total of 278 available 
WS questions for this experiment. 
     The WSC questions were mapped to a cause effect 
problem. Each input question was mapped to case-effect 
query as “A <CAUSES> B”, where A and B are actions/verbs 
and <CAUSES> is special token denoting a causal 
event/verb. 
4.3 Model 
The memory network is trained to output the Probability (A 
causes B). For embedding the input query 𝑞, I have used 
position encoding (PE), meaning that the order of the 
words now affects 𝑚𝑖 [Sukhbaata et al., 2015]. This 
representation that encodes the position of words within 
the sentence takes the form: 𝑚𝑖= ∑𝑙𝑗. 𝐴𝑥𝑖𝑗
𝑗
 , where · is an 
element-wise multiplication. 𝑙𝑗 is a 4-column vector with 
the structure 𝑙𝑘𝑗= (1 −𝑗/𝑙) −(𝑘/𝑑)(1 −2𝑗/𝐽) (assuming 
1-based indexing), with 𝐽 being the number of words in the 
sentence, and 𝑑 is the dimension of the embedding. The 
same representation is used for memory inputs and 
memory outputs. The network was trained with 2 memory 
hops. The model was trained using Adam optimizer. 
5 RESULTS 
Out of the 62 questions, the trained model was able to 
correctly answer 25 questions. The network currently 
overfits to the training data due to the small size to the 
training data.  
Future Work: [Liu et al., 2016] describe an approach to 
extract cause-effect pairs, estimated to be around 500,000 
pairs. The data set is called CauseCom, but it is not available 
publically. Currently, I am working towards recreating the 
data-set as described in their paper. With more data to train 
the network, the results should show an improvment over 
the current accuracy.
