Curiosity-driven reinforcement learning with
homeostatic regulation
Ildefons Magrans de Abril
ARAYA, Inc.
Tokyo

Ryota Kanai
ARAYA, Inc.
Tokyo

Abstract
We propose a curiosity reward based on information theory principles and con-
sistent with the animal instinct to maintain certain critical parameters within a
bounded range. Our experimental validation shows the added value of the addi-
tional homeostatic drive to enhance the overall information gain of a reinforcement
learning agent interacting with a complex environment using continuous actions.
Our method builds upon two ideas: i) To take advantage of a new Bellman-like
equation of information gain and ii) to simplify the computation of the local re-
wards by avoiding the approximation of complex distributions over continuous
states and actions.
1
Introduction
Within a reinforcement learning setting [Sutton and Barto, 1998], a reward signal indicates a particular
momentary positive experience and it serves to constrain the long-term agent behavior. Extrinsic
rewards are generated by an external oracle and they indicate how well the agent is interacting with
the environment (e.g. videogame score, portfolio return). On the other hand, intrinsic rewards are
generated by the agent itself and they indicate a particular internal event sometimes implemented as a
metaphor of an animal internal drive [Chentanez et al., 2005].
There are many intrinsic rewards and most of them can be characterized by how they affect the
information ﬂow between the environment and the agent. In one side of the spectrum, information is
pushed from the agent to the environment, for instance, by rewarding actions that lead to predictable
consecutive sensor readings [Montúfar et al., 2016] or by rewarding reaching states from where the
agent actions have a large inﬂuence in determining the future state (i.e. empowerment [Jung et al.,
2011, Mohamed and Rezende, 2015]).
On the other side, information is encouraged to efﬁciently move from the environment to the
agent. These rewards motivate the agent to explore its environment by taking actions leading to
an improvement of its internal models. Schmidhuber [1991] proposed an online learning agent
equipped with a curiosity unit measuring the Euclidian distance between the observed state and the
model prediction. Recently, Pathak et al. [2017] extended the curiosity functionality to accommodate
agents with high dimensional sensory inputs by adding a representation network able to ﬁlter out
information from the observed state that is not relevant to predict how the agent actions affect the
future state. [Houthooft et al., 2016] presented an exploration reward bonus based on information
gain maximization computed using a variational approximation of a Bayesian neural network. Lopes
et al. [2012] discussed an exploration reward bonus that encourages the learning progress over the
last few experiences instead of the immediate agent surprise. Bellemare et al. [2016] differ in the
sense that the agent is not learning a forward model but a probability density function about the states
Cognitively Informed Artiﬁcial Intelligence: Insights From Natural Intelligence (NIPS Workshop 2017), Long
Beach, CA, USA.
arXiv:1801.07440v2  [cs.AI]  7 Feb 2018

visited by the agent together with a lower bound on the information gain associated with the agent
exploratory behavior.
A common denominator of all methods is an intrinsic reward function that encourages actions with a
high information gain potential. This behavior is consistent with the innate drive to explore of humans
and other animals. However, it is probably incomplete because it is not able to accommodate the also
innate animal desire to maintain certain critical parameters within a bounded range (i.e. physiological
constants) [Carver and Scheier, 1998]. To achieve that goal in an uncertain environment, the animal
has to trade its curiosity drive with the need to act according to familiar patterns that guarantee the
required stimuli (e.g. food, water, heat,...).
In the following sections we derive our approach from information theory considerations. It extends
the typical heterostatic curiosity reward with an additional term. Our novel extension simulates an
animal homeostatic drive to keep a "familiar" behavior. More precisely, we validate the value of
regulating a purely heterostatic curiosity reward with an homeostatic drive in the context of an agent
trying to learn how its environment responds to its actions. The concept of homeostatic regulation in
social robots was ﬁrst proposed in [Breazeal, 2004].
2
Background
This paper assumes a typical reinforcement learning setup where an agent interacts with the environ-
ment at discrete time steps, it observes an state St ∈S and it acts on the environment with action At
∈A according to a control policy π(At|St), the main goal of an information gain agent is to learn a
forward model that explains how the environment reacts to its actions.
Recently, Tiomkin and Tishby [2017] presented a recursive expression to describe the information
transferred from a sequence of states to the following sequence of actions when an agent interacts
open-endedly with a Markovian environment (i.e. transition probability function ∼P(St+1|St, At)).
Figure 1 shows a conceptual diagram of the information gain process and equation 1 presents the
recursive expression for information gain:
Figure 1: Conceptual diagram of the information gain process: dark thin arrows are causal depen-
dencies and large arrows show how information ﬂows from a sequence of observed states to the
corresponding future sequence of agent actions.
InformationGain(st) = I(St+1:t+K →At+1:t+K||St:t+K−1, At)
= I(St+1; At+1|St, At)
+ < I(St+2:t+K →At+2:t+K||St+1:t+K−1, At+1) >P (St+1,At+1|St,At),
(1)
where I(A →B||C) is the causally conditioned directed mutual information [Kramer, 1998] and
A/St+1:t+K is the sequence of actions/states of length K starting at time t + 1.
It is important for our approach that the deﬁnition of information gain can be expressed recursively
with a similar decomposition as the Bellman equation, where I(St+1; At+1|St, At) would be the
agent reward obtained at time t by taking action At at state St and the second component would be the
average discounted reward (with discount factor 1). Computing the conditional mutual information of
the local reward requires the approximation of the corresponding probability distributions [Mohamed
and Rezende, 2015, Tiomkin and Tishby, 2017]. When actions and/or states are discrete, we can
approximate them for instance using a neural network with a softmax output layer. However, it’s
much harder when states and actions are continuous, especially when the state space is very high
dimensional (e.g. video stream).
We propose a more practical method to implement information gain in a reinforcement learning setting
when states and actions are continuous and we show how our approach, derived from information
2

theory principles, extends the narrow view of existing approaches by compensating the heterostacity
drive encouraged by the curiosity reward with an additional homeostatic drive.
3
Approach
Our method builds upon two ideas: i) To take advantage of the Bellman like equation of information
gain (equation 1) to justify the use of a reinforcement learning algorithm as underlying mecha-
nism to explore the environment; ii) To simplify the computation of the local reward deﬁned as
I(St+1; At+1|St, At) by avoiding the approximation of complex distributions over continuous states
and actions.
We implemented the ﬁrst idea using a state of the art RL algorithm that works well with continuous
actions. We chose the Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient algorithm [Lillicrap et al., 2015] but
other options are also feasible. This algorithm ﬁnds a deterministic control policy that maximize
the expected sum of discounted rewards. When γ = 1, episode length is K and reward function is
I(St+1; At+1|St, At), then our agent explores the environment by maximizing the information gain
as expressed in equation 1.
We can express this reward as the reduction of entropy in the future state St+1. Then, because we
are able to know exactly the current state and due to the deterministic nature of the control policy
inferred by the DDPG algorithm, we use the concrete state st and actions at and at+1 instead of the
random variables St, At and At+1 respectively to compute the reward. Finally, we approximate the
reduction of entropy in the future state St+1 as the reduction of the prediction error in the future state.
Equation 2 formalizes this approximation:
I(St+1; At+1|st, at) = H(St+1|St, At) −H(St+1|St, At, At+1)
≈H(St+1|st, at) −H(St+1|st, at, at+1)
≈||st+1 −ˆsf||2 −||st+1 −ˆsk||2
(2)
where ˆsf = f(st, π(st) = at) and ˆsk = k(st, π(st) = at, π(st+1) = at+1) are the future state
predictions by the forward and extended forward models respectively. The extended forward model
takes advantage of knowing the action that the agent will take in the future state to improve the
prediction about this future state. This approximation captures the relevant semantic with much
lower computational cost. Interestingly, the internal models f(.) and k(.) can be easily implemented
with deep neural networks and suit well an agent with high-dimensional input streams. Figure 2 is a
graphical representation of the semantic of the new curiosity reward with homeostatic regulation and
how it compares with respect to a state of the art curiosity reward based on the Euclidian distance
between the observed state and the model prediction (E.g. [Schmidhuber, 1991, Pathak et al., 2017]).
Figure 2: Semantic of the curiosity reward with homeostatic regulation and comparisson with respect
to a state of the art curiosity reward based on the Euclidian distance between the observed state and
the model prediction (E.g. [Schmidhuber, 1991, Pathak et al., 2017]).
Our new curiosity reward has two components: 1) Heterostatic motivation: similarly to an state of
the art work based on the Euclidean distance, the ﬁrst component of our reward encourages taking
actions that lead to large forward model errors. This ﬁrst component implements the heterostatic
drive. In other words, the tendency to push away our agent from its habitual state; 2) Homeostatic
3

motivation: the second component is our novel contribution. It encourages taking actions at that lead
to future states st+1 where the corresponding future action at+1 gives us additional information about
st+1. This situation happens when the agent is "familiar" with the state-action pair: {st+1, at+1}.
Therefore, our new reward encourage the agent to move towards regions of the state-action space that
simultaneously deliver large forward model errors and that are "known/familiar" to the agent. In other
words it implies a priority sampling strategy towards "hard-to-learn" regions of the state-action space.
We further generalize this reward by adding an hyper-parameter α > 0 that controls the importance
of the of the homeostatic bonus. Finally, we should note that the reward function is non-stationary
due to the continuous learning of f and k. For that reason we z-normalize the reward using a mean
and standard deviation computed at the end of each of episode using all available samples:
R(st) = IGα(st) −µig
σig
IGα(st) = ||st+1 −ˆsf||2 −α||st+1 −ˆsk||2
(3)
Algorithm 1 summarizes the overall logic of our curiosity agent. It follows an architecture similar to
Pathak et al. [2017]:
Algorithm 1: Curiosity-driven reinforcement learning with homeostatic regulation
Result: Forward model: f(s, a)
Initialization of f, k, DDPG parameters including π;
Initialization of random exploration probability ϵ;
for episode i do
Initialize environment: initial state s0 according to experiment strategy (see section 4);
for step t do
Generate at = π(st) (random according to ϵ);
Sample st+1 ∼P(.|st, at);
Get reward rt according to equation 3;
Add {st, at, st+1, rt} to replay buffer (RB);
Sample mini-batch MB ∼RB;
Train f, k and DDPG networks (including π);
end
end
4
Results
Our experimental validation presents two examples where both curiosity and homeostatic drives are
superior to learn a forward model. Our validation hypothesis is that exploring an environment with
several non-linearities could be optimized by regulating the agent curiosity with an homeostatic drive.
More precisely, it could help by prioritizing the exploration of the state-action space according to
how hard is to learn each region.
To test our hypothesis, we use a 3 room environment (40x40), where an agent, able to sense its
exact position, learns a control policy according to the DDPG algorithm with the reward presented in
equation 3 and a probability of taking a random action equal to 0.5. The agent starts every episode in
a random state and it runs for 10 steps (with max length step=10). We have implemented the forward
model f and the extended forward model k as feed forward neural networks with 2 hidden layers
with 64 hidden units each. We store the agent traces and we train the agent and the internal models at
the same time following the same architecture of [Pathak et al., 2017]. Figure 3 shows an scheme of
our environment.
In our ﬁrst experiment we study the accuracy of the ﬁnal forward model as a function of α. We
check the prediction accuracy using a pool of 107 randomly generated samples. We run our agent
using different values of α ∈{0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7} for 150K episodes and we do each experiment 3
times. Figure 4 shows how we can improve the environment sampling efﬁciency by increasing the
homeostatic component of the reward (i.e. α). Figure 5 shows a diagram of the policy learned after
4

Figure 3: Scheme of our 3 room environment.
10K episodes with α = 0 and α = 7 respectively. We can clearly appreciate that, when α is large,
the agent tends to position itself where there are a larger number of non-linearities (i.e. the "doors").
This agent behavior enhances the learning of complex regions by leveraging a more intense random
exploration where it is most required. We should also discuss that for this particular experiment, a
pure random sampling strategy achieves a mean square error on the validation set of 0.67 which is
slightly better than the best result obtained with α = 7 (0.87). However, this is not a fair comparison
because every episode starts in a different position which enables a pure random agent to reach every
spot of the environment by simply random walking its local surroundings.
We performed a second experiment using the same environment described in Figure 3, but in this
case the agent starts every episode in a random state of the bottom room. We want to understand
whether the homeostatic reward is able to enhance the acquisition of innovative environment samples
by counting how many times the agent is able to traverse 2 doors and reach the top room. Figure
6 shows how we can improve the acquisition of challenging environment states by optimizing the
contribution of the homeostatic reward component. In this case, a pure random sampling strategy
running for 150K episodes only reach the top room a total average of 145 times which is far below
any other total average achieved with a non-random strategy with any α.
5
Conclusions and future work
We presented an exploration approach that implements two apparently inconsistent animal drives:
1) the innate drive to explore (heterostatic behavior) and 2) the desire to maintain certain critical
parameters stable. We derive an intrinsic reward function from information theory principles that
generalize an state of the art method and we present experimental results to validate the superior explo-
ration behavior of a join homeostatic and heterostatic drive with respect to a pure curiosity/heterostic
approach. In future work, we want to explore meta-learning strategies to dynamically adjust the
contribution of the homeostatic drive (i.e. α) as well as the percentage of random exploration as a
function of the agent progress in learning a the forward model.
5

Figure 4: Accuracy of the forward model learned by the agent as a function of α (measured according
to the mean square error on the validation set).
Figure 5: Flow diagram of the control policy learned after 10K episodes with α = 0 (left) and α = 7
(right) respectively.
