Social Network based Short-Term Stock Trading System  
 
 
Paolo Cremonesi 

Politecnico di Milano, DEIB 
Piazza Leonardo da Vinci 32 
Milan, Italy 
 
Roberto Pagano  

Politecnico di Milano, DEIB 
Piazza Leonardo da Vinci 32 
Milan, Italy 
 
Chiara Francalanci 

Politecnico di Milano, DEIB 
Piazza Leonardo da Vinci 32 
Milan, Italy 
 
Luca Mazzoni 

Politecnico di Milano, DEIB 
Piazza Leonardo da Vinci 32 
Milan, Italy 
 
Mehdi Elahi 

Politecnico di Milano, DEIB 
Piazza Leonardo da Vinci 32 
Milan, Italy 
 
Alessandro Poli 

Politecnico di Milano, DEIB 
Piazza Leonardo da Vinci 32 
Milan, Italy 
 
Alberto Maggioni 

Politecnico di Milano, DEIB 
Piazza Leonardo da Vinci 32 
Milan, Italy 
 
 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
This paper proposes a novel adaptive algorithm for the automated 
short-term trading of financial instrument. The algorithm adopts a 
semantic sentiment analysis technique to inspect the Twitter posts 
and to use them to predict the behaviour of the stock market. 
Indeed, the algorithm is specifically developed to take advantage of 
both the sentiment and the past values of a certain financial 
instrument in order to choose the best investment decision. This 
allows the algorithm to ensure the maximization of the obtainable 
profits by trading on the stock market. 
We have conducted an investment simulation and compared the 
performance of our proposed with a well-known benchmark 
(DJTATO index) and the optimal results, in which an investor 
knows in advance the future price of a product. The result shows 
that our approach outperforms the benchmark and achieves the 
performance score close to the optimal result.  
Categories and Subject Descriptors 
H.3.3 [Information Storage And Retrieval]: Information Search 
And Retrieval – information filtering 
J.1 [Administrative Data Processing]: Financial 
Keywords 
Trading, Micro-blog, Sentiment Analysis, Financial Analysis. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
This paper focuses on algorithmic equity trading, known as 
quantitative trading or black-box trading. This indeed is an 
automated version of equity trading, where algorithms are designed 
to perform the trading activities by choosing the right time to place 
the orders along with the number and the price of the stocks to buy 
or to sell [1]. More specifically, we focus on High Frequency 
Trading (HFT), which is distinguished by a short-term view. HFT 
exploits small variations in prices, which are not correlated with 
long-term investments [2]. Short-term trading represents 60% to 
73% of all U.S. equity trading volume [3][4], and 45% of the 
European equity trading volume [5]. 
This work starts from the assumption that people's opinions and 
ratings expressed on social media have an impact on the stock price 
of the companies providing those products and services.  
Since there exists a delay between opinions and financial 
performance, our goal is to exploit users' buzz to predict the 
financial market. Although behavioural finance explains that there 
exist long-term investment waves that are set by large investors 
rather than people and their mood [7], we wish to verify the idea 
that smaller investors make short-term investment decisions based 
on the general mood on an industry or on a specific company. 
The main contribution of this paper is three fold:  
• 
a novel predictive trading algorithm that performs 
sentiment analysis, and adaptively reacts to the market 
situation by making the appropriate investment 
decisions.  
• 
a brand model that maps all the important concepts, that 
may be the subject of Twitter posts, to classes, in order to 
improve the quality of the sentiment analysis 
• 
an automated trading system that simulates a realistic 
stock market and allows the (simulated) investor to open 
either long positions (i.e., buying) or short positions (i.e., 
selling).  

The paper is structured into three parts. In the first part, we develop 
a brand model in the attempt to enrich a sentiment analysis tool with 
a domain knowledge specifically targeted mainly on automotive 
firms and their financial aspects. 
In the second part we design an adaptive predictive algorithm that 
keeps track of past performance measures and tries to constantly 
change its behaviour in order to better model both sentiment and 
financial data. 
Finally, we run the algorithm to simulate automated investments on 
the automotive stock market, which enabled us to gain 15% of the 
initial capital over a three-months period, in comparison to a return 
of just 3% achieved by the same market, and an optimal return of 
20% in the hypothetical scenario in which the investor knows in 
advance the future price of a product. 
2. STATE OF THE ART 
The belief that market prices can be predicted, at least partially, 
started from the early critics to the Efficient Market Hypothesis 
(EMH) [6][7]. EMH is associated with the idea of a random walk, 
which is typical of a price series where each price is a random result 
from the preceding prices. From another perspective this is the 
same of saying that price changes in a given day reflect only the 
news of that specific day, thus being independent from the 
preceding price changes. Because of the unpredictability of the 
news, price changes must be unpredictable and random. This can 
be summarized as prices fully reflect all known information [7].  
The consumers, investors, and managers are somehow driven by 
different factors which affects their decision making process. One 
of the most influential factors is the social mood [6]. As behavioural 
economics provided proofs that financial decisions are significantly 
driven by emotion and mood [6], in the past years, some researchers 
have studied if the public mood is correlated or even predictive of 
economic indicators by taking online social networks as a source of 
“universal mood” [10][11]. 
The work presented in [8] focuses on analysis of a discussion forum 
website1. Vector Auto Regression (VAR) analysis revealed that it 
is no possible to determine whether daily activity on the message 
board causes or is the result of abnormal returns on the stock. The 
work in [9] confirmed with significant evidence that messages 
posted on Yahoo! Finance and Ragingbull website can be used to 
predict market volatility. The work in [12] describes the usage of 
Support Vector Machines (SVM) to classify news articles with the 
purpose of predicting intraday price changes of financial 
instruments. The system is able to predict whether or not an 
abnormal return will occur in the next dozen of minutes; however, 
the direction of returns is not found to be predictable. The sentiment 
gathered from Yahoo! Finance message board is modelled to be 
conditionally dependent upon the messages and stock value over 
the preceding day in [13]. A Naive Bayes model was trained to 
predict the stock price of Apple and ExxonMobil, with an accuracy 
ranging from 63% to 81%. In [14] the multiple kernel learning 
method is used to train a support vector machine with an 
adaptively-weighted combination of kernels. The resulting model 
is then applied to predict the stock prices for three Japanese 
technology companies (i.e., Sharp, Panasonic and Sony) after the 
extraction of features from financial time series data and from news 
and comments posted on the Engadget website. Bollen et. al in [10] 
investigated whether measurements of collective mood states 
derived from large scale Twitter feeds are correlated to the values 
                                                                  
1 Ragingbull.com 
of the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) over time. A Self-
Organizing Fuzzy Neural Network (SOFNN) model was then used 
to predict DJIA values. The model yielded a Mean Absolute 
Percentage Error (MAPE) of 1.83% and a direction accuracy of 
87%. 
With respect to the state of the art, a number of key distinguishing 
aspects, characterizes our work.  
First of all, we have designed a brand model in order to map all the 
important concepts that may be the subject of chatting on Twitter, 
to drive the sentiment analysis and to better understand the 
sentiment conveyed by each single post. The brand model has been 
conceived by following a top-down approach, i.e., including all the 
aspects that we have considered to be potentially related to price 
swings of the brands related financial instruments, such as a stock 
or an index.  
The second and the most important distinguishing factor is 
represented by the model identification approach. As there are no 
well-accepted methodologies for modelling the sentiment impact 
on stock markets, we designed an algorithm that could infer some 
hidden relations from the data in such a way to maximize the profits 
that could be made by trading the chosen financial instrument. We 
identified a model over a rather limited time frame, used to predict 
only the subsequent return, and then repeating this process a 
number of times by shifting forward the time frame; the algorithm 
is then in charge of selecting the most proper model by using the 
various quality metrics defined. 
Finally, most of the previous works measure the effectiveness of 
the trading algorithm by using accuracy metrics (e.g., precision on 
the direction of the stock price). On the contrary we have assessed 
the effectiveness of our trading algorithm by performing an 
extensive trading simulation. 
3. MODELING THE SOCIAL MOOD 
In this section we describe the brand model that forms the core for 
the sentiment analysis tool.  
The first component is a crawler that we used to build our dataset 
by exploiting the Twitter streaming APIs to collect tweets. All the 
tweets containing one of the predefined keywords are gathered on 
a real-time basis.  
Keywords are exploited to filter the huge number of tweets that are 
constantly published on Twitter. The goal is to retrieve all and only 
those messages that concern some specific brands. The brand 
represents the subject to be analysed. It can be a single public traded 
company or an index related to a specific sector, such as automotive 
or pharmaceutical. 
The definition of an effective set of keywords is a typical trade-off 
problem that requires a balance between precision and recall. 
Precision is computed as the number of collected messages that are 
actually related to the brand over the total number of retrieved 
posts. Recall is computed as the number of collected tweets that are 
related to the brand over the total number of messages that are 
theoretically available on the data source. Recall grows as the 
number of keywords grows; therefore, the idea is to create a 
sufficiently large set of keywords without affecting precision. The 
keywords are expressions that their presence in a sentence indicates 
the relevancy to a specific concept (i.e. the brand). A set of 

keywords is used to retrieve from the web all the posts that are 
related to the brand. 
We have adopted the following classes of keywords: 
• Brand name: that is the simplest example of keyword. 
• Names of product: as a registered trademark. 
• Key people: CEO, chairman of the supervisory board, etc. 
After having cleaned up all the tweets, each post is assigned to a 
specific brand and further analyzed by mean of a sentiment analysis 
tool in order to evaluate its polarity (positive, negative or neutral).  
For each brand b (i.e., index or stock), the system provides the total 
amount of positive P, negative N and neutral Z tweets with a 
granularity of half an hour.  
Results are then aggregated into a sequence of trading and non-
trading sessions. Each session is labelled with the opening and 
closing prices, as described in Figure 1.  First of all, the prices of 
the selected stocks (i.e. brand) are crawled from Yahoo! Finance 
and filtered in order to retain the values half an hour after the 
opening and half an hour before the closing. This is due to the fact 
that half an hour is considered to be the duration of the price-setting 
interval for any given stock. These values are then labelled either 
as for the trading (day) or non-trading (night) sessions. A day value 
contains, as opening and closing prices, the opening and the closing 
prices of the corresponding trading session, while a night value 
contains as the opening price the closing price of the previous 
trading session and the opening price of the subsequent trading 
session as the closing price. Weekends are a particular case of non-
trading session that lasts for more than one day. 
In this way, for each brand b the following 5 variables are obtained, 
each one describing a time series on the time parameter t:  
• Financial: 
Obt = opening stocks  
Cbt = closing stocks 
• Non-Financial: 
Pbt = number of positive tweets  
Nbt = number of negative tweets 
Zbt = number of neutral tweets 
These variables serve as an input to an ad-hoc predictive algorithm 
that uses both financial and sentiment data. 
 
 
Figure 1: Definition of trading (day) and 
non-trading (night) sessions 
 
4. PREDICTING THE STOCK MARKET 
The proposed methodology has its core in the identification of 
different models based on the combination of sentiment and 
financial variables. What follows is a detailed description of the 
proposed methodology. The overall conceptual architecture is 
illustrated in Figure 2, where each component is labelled with a 
number. 
The sentiment variables are obtained by the sentiment analysis 
component (number 3 in Figure 2). Once a set of Twitter posts is 
collected (number 2 in Figure 2), they are classified and labelled 
with a certain sentiment value. The component number 1 
downloads the prices of the selected brands from Yahoo, obtains 
the financial variables! Finance, and computes the corresponding 
returns. As suggested by most of the financial studies, we 
considered returns of assets instead of prices [15]. There are several 
definitions of asset return in the literature. We took the widely used 
simple net return or simple return Rt, which is defined as the 
following: 
Let Pt be the price of an asset at time index t and lets assume that 
the asset pays no dividends and that it is held for k periods, from 
time instant t-k to time instant t. The simple return Rt is 
 
 
𝑅" = 𝑃" −𝑃"&'
𝑃"&'
 
(1) 
 
Figure 2: The overall conceptual architecture 
As stated before, two kinds of time periods have been 
distinguished, namely day and night (Figure 1). The former is 

related to the time frame in which the stock market is open and 
during which the prices of stocks are subjective to variation due to 
the trading (i.e. the trading session). The latter is related to the time 
frame during which the stock market is closed and no trading 
activity can affect the stock prices (i.e. the non-trading session). 
The previous distinction is essential for the aggregation of the 
sentiment and for the computation of stocks returns. 
A pre-processing stage (number 4 in Figure 2) groups the financial 
variables together with the sentiment variables in such a way that 
returns and sentiment values are placed in the correct time point 
with respect to the previously explained time period.  
The model identification stage (number 5 in Figure 2) and the 
prediction of the next return (number 6) form the core of the system 
and will be described later on. We postulate that no general model 
can be conceived in order to explain the stock market phenomena. 
Hence, for different time frames there could be different 
combinations of variables that best fit the data. In order to prove 
that, our system test all the possible combinations of variables for 
a given period. For each time frame we derive a list of possible 
models and the system learns how to identify the best model from 
time to time.  
4.1 Prediction for a time frame 
In this section, we describe the process that chooses the best class 
of model (sentiment or financial) for a time frame, as summarized 
in Figure 3. 
A fundamental preliminary step is the creation of the power set of 
all the available variables. This step is where firstly takes shape the 
idea of an adaptive model that merges the development of a 
predictive algorithm with the testing phase.  
Subsequently, the linear regression model identification is 
performed for each combination of variables. The underlying idea 
is that the models that better explain a certain set of recent past 
values are more likely to correctly predict the next future outcome. 
Hence, all the models for which all the p-values of their variables 
are under a fixed threshold of 10% are kept for the forthcoming 
analysis.  
The selected models (i.e., best models in Figure 3) are then 
classified according to the type of variables they use, i.e. if a model 
contains solely financial variables, i.e. it uses only the stock returns, 
is considered to be a financial model, otherwise it is considered to 
be a sentiment model (so it uses a mix of stock prices and tweets). 
It is worth nothing that, as financial variables, we selected the pair 
made up by the 1-lagged and 2-lagged returns. The reason behind 
this decision is that financial models are purely autoregressive 
models, which are known to be useful in the analysis of financial 
time series, while sentiment models have an unknown usefulness 
until tried. Furthermore, financial models are supposed to behave 
in a quite different manner with respect to the sentiment ones, 
because the data series they use are diverse in nature: the former 
ones manipulate only small numbers that represent percentages, the 
latter ones a wide variety of data with different meanings. This 
hypothesis was confirmed by a subsequent analysis of the data, 
which showed that when financial models occur in conjunction 
with sentiment models they often provide prediction values that 
differ in sign and thus are extremely diverse for our purposes. 
4.2 Financial-Sentiment Spread 
Once derived the best models with the p-value filtering, the best 
model for the current time frame is chosen by considering the 
history of predictions. We note that we call the number of time 
frames in the past as Time Frame Window (TFW). 
The key aspect of the algorithm is that it is adaptive, i.e., it derives 
the information from its past performance and exploits it to adapt 
to changes that may ultimately lead to improvement of the results. 
The adaptively is embedded in two different levels: (i) the lower 
level is the choice of the best model between financial and 
sentiment given a certain TFW, (ii) the higher level is the choice of 
the best TFW. The underlying idea is that there is a certain degree 
of correlation in the same series of predictions and that they may 
provide some interesting and previously unknown cues. Thus, the 
history of predictions may be usefully employed as a further 
information source. 
 
Figure 3: Activity diagram of the core part of the algorithm 
 
The variable financial-sentiment spread drives the choice between 
sentiment and financial models. It is used to keep memory of the 
relative performance of the former ones with respect to the latter 
ones, giving an initial advantage to financial models by initially 
setting it to 1. This is done mainly because sentiment models have 
to prove their superiority by making more correct predictions with 
respect to the financial ones as shown in [16] within the life cycle 
(TFW). The computation of the financial-sentiment spread s for a 
TF t is calculated, for a real return r as 

𝜃=  
+1 :     if financial models outperformed
  sentiment models in 𝑇𝐹"&> 
−1:     otherwise                                           
 
 
                                     𝑠" = 𝛾 𝑠"&> +  𝜃 | 100 𝑟 |  
      (2) 
If the financial-sentiment spread in TF t-1 is negative, i.e. sentiment 
models outperform the financial models, the selection of the class 
of models is made in the same way as if only sentiment models 
were present in TF. Otherwise, financial models are taken as 
reference for the next prediction. Hence, initially, the algorithm 
trusts financial models more than the sentiment ones. However, the 
algorithm is adaptive in the sense that it is able to change the initial 
decision as soon as changes happen and choose the models that 
perform better. 
The discount factor γ has been introduced in order to assign the 
correct weight to the history of predictions. Indeed, as our approach 
was admittedly data-driven, we opted for not fixing it basing on a 
theoretical reasoning but rather we estimated it by the use of 
training data.  
Now we have to clarify the concept of correctness. For each class 
of models, the value of correctness measures the percentage of 
correctly predicted returns (i.e. predicted returns with the same sign 
of the real ones) that a specific class of models made in a certain 
TF. 
It should be emphasized that the correctness measure is based only 
on the sign of the predicted return because of a specific reason. We 
are interested in getting the correct prediction, i.e. a value with the 
same sign of the next future outcome, because this is the only 
information needed in order to decide when to buy or sell the stock, 
and the only one useful. Hence, in this sense, a prediction with the 
same sign of the real return but quite different in absolute value is 
more correct than one which is very close to the real return but 
differs in sign.  
Once a single class of models has been chosen, the sign of the return 
predicted by the majority of the models within that class is then 
selected to be the predicted trend. This is because at this lowest 
level of granularity we cannot exploit any other source of 
information and we are forced to rely on the insight that the 
majority of a pre-selected list of good models will provide good 
forecasts. If no model is found to be relevant, the system does not 
yield any prediction. It is important to underline that for each time 
frame we choose either a sentiment class or a financial class of 
models, but not both of them. If no model has been found, the 
system will not perform any prediction for that time frame (“do 
nothing” in Figure 3). 
4.3 The choice of a time frame window 
The process just mentioned can be repeated on any number of time 
frames in the past, thus creating a series of predicted returns that 
can be compared with the real ones, as shown in Figure 4, in order 
to simulate an investment scenario. 
The process displayed in Figure 4 can be started at an arbitrary time 
point in the past and can be iterated until it reaches the present time 
point, thus providing the one step ahead prediction. It is worth 
noting that, as stated before, this process requires the specification 
of a TFW. 
Hence, at higher level, the same process can be performed with 
different TFWs, originating different prediction series that can be 
compared one another. It follows that different TFWs can be used 
in order to predict the real outcomes at different time points, 
according to which is the best one at any iteration. In fact, as we 
cannot know a priori which is the best TFW, the best thing to do is 
to include for example all the TFWs ranging from 20 time points 
(i.e. approximately one trading month) to 40 time points, rather than 
fixing it arbitrarily. Moreover, some TFWs may not produce any 
relevant model for a specific time point. Therefore, the inclusion of 
a sufficient number of TFWs helps to overcome such problem so to 
have one prediction value for every time point. 
 
Figure 4: Scheme that depicts the prediction series resulting 
from the k times reiteration of the prediction part 
 
In order to make the comparison, a quality indicator (namely Q) 
associated to each prediction series has been thought. Its calculation 
for a TF t with a real return r can be inferred from (3). 
 
𝜆G =  
+1:
 if the prediction for the TF 𝑖 is correct
     0:
  if the TF 𝑖 does not have any prediction
−1:
 if the prediction for the TF 𝑖 is wrong  
 
                                 𝑄" =  𝛽 𝑄 𝐼"&> + 𝜆G |100 𝑟|             
      (3) 
The idea for updating the quality indicator is basically the same as 
that of the spread. In fact, this level of analysis is higher than that 
of financial-sentiment spread and thus it seems reasonable to keep 
the same high-level performance measure based on the investment 
scenario. Likewise, β retains the same meaning of γ but can 
obviously assume a different value, as the subjects of the 
comparison differ from one another. Hence Q is the indicator at 
time t, β is the discount factor, and the absolute value of the real 
return r is the additive component at time t. 
However, there is a simple but important difference: as most of the 
TFWs originate prediction series containing values for the majority 
of the time points, we can state that in this sense their overall 
behaviour is quite similar. Nevertheless, there are some particular 
phenomena that should be captured in order to further discount their 
quality measure. 
Basically, we assumed that if there are some missing predictions 
within a prediction series originated by a given TFW, that is, no 
relevant models were found, it means that the usefulness of the 
prediction series created with that TFW for explaining the financial 
trend in that period has decreased. Hence, there is no reason for 
having so much trust in it when it will re-appear in the future and 
its Q must be adjusted accordingly. Therefore Q is multiplied by β 
at each step, independently from the presence of the prediction 
value. Moreover, this is another way to increase the reactivity of 
the algorithm, that is, its ability to rapidly discard those TFWs 
whose prediction series behaviour is quite unstable. 
In order to better clarify the comparison between different 
prediction series, Figure 5 depicts two prediction series, one 
originated by the use of TFW w1 and the other originated by the use 
of TFW wn where the prediction done by the TF tk-1 with a width 
equal to TFW wn is chosen due to the fact that the prediction series 

resulting from the use of TFW wn has a higher Q with respect to the 
prediction series resulting from the use of TFW w1. 
 
 
Figure 5: Comparison between different prediction series 
 
It must be clear that an arbitrary number of prediction series can be 
simultaneously compared in order to select the TFW that has 
originated the prediction series with the highest Q. Finally, the 
chosen prediction is the one made by the majority of the models 
belonging to the best class, as explained in the previous subsection. 
5. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
In this section we describe the results obtained by the analyses we 
have conducted.  
5.1 Analysis A: Quality of the sentiment 
analysis tool 
As the first preliminary experiment, we just tested the quality of the 
sentiment analysis tool in terms of precision and recall. We 
examined a sample of more than 1000 posts, performing a manual 
sentiment analysis. This task is affected by a certain level of 
subjectivity so that we decided to have three persons independently 
analyze all the messages, assigning them the most proper brand and 
a value of sentiment and finally comparing the results until an 
agreement was reached. The sentiment was classified into positive, 
negative or neutral, in order to be consistent with the sentiment 
evaluation component. The overall accuracy level of the brand 
categorization is 98.6%, while that of the sentiment evaluation is 
93%. Other results are reported in Table 1. 
 
Table 1: Precision and recall levels of the sentiment evaluation 
 
Positive 
Negative 
Neutral 
Precision 
75.81% 
66.67% 
94.58% 
Recall 
51.65% 
55.56% 
97.98% 
 
5.2 Analysis B: Quality of the Investment  
The dataset we used contains Twitter posts started from March till 
September, which is fairly a long period to test the properties of the 
proposed methodology. The number of tweets was large enough to 
be statistically significant, as depicted in Figure 6. 
In order to perform the tests, we had to choose a proper brand, i.e. 
an index or a single stock. Even if the algorithm described in the 
previous section was designed to operate on a daily basis, in 
principle, it can be also applied using a different scale (e.g. a week, 
a month, etc.).  
However, it is worth noting that not all the time scales are suitable 
for both types of brand. In particular, a single stock should not be 
analyzed with a daily granularity, because the volume of posts of a 
single company, especially of those ones that convey subjectivity, 
will probably be too low. Therefore, a week seems to be the correct 
temporal horizon to be adopted. On the contrary, the total number 
of posts that refers to an index, i.e., a composite of different 
companies, is equal to the aggregate of all the tweets related to each 
single company and thus it can be exploited for daily operations. 
However, that being considered, we were ultimately forced to select 
an index as brand due to practical reasons. We crawled the Twitter 
and performed the analysis on a six-month period. Hence, assuming 
a week as the reference time unit would have resulted in having 
approximately 50 points (25 weeks multiplied by 2, because a week 
is divided as usual into a trading session and the non-trading session 
of weekends) for training and testing. It stands clear that such a 
scenario would have been unacceptable and thus we turned to the 
other option, i.e., an index, in order to be able to use a single day as 
the temporal reference. 
 
Figure 6: Monthly posts volume 
For all the reasons exposed above, we elected Dow Jones 
Automobiles & Parts Titans 30 index (whose symbol is DJTATO) 
as the index of reference. This index is stated “to represent leading 
companies in the global Automobiles & Parts sector” and has been 
regularly computed since 2001 [17]. The wording Titans 30 refers 
to the fact that its 30 components were selected based on rankings 
by float-adjusted market capitalization, revenue and net profit [17]. 
Moreover, it is a U.S. index and thus American investors are 
expected to be the most relevant ones. 
In order to satisfy the 30 minutes time constraint, we developed a 
parallel version of the algorithm, where a process is spawned for 
each single TFW, since the work to be done is completely 
independent from one TFW to the other. In order to give the reader 
an idea of the time required for the prediction of a single return, the 
multiprocessing version of the algorithm takes roughly 5 minutes 
of computation on a quad core processor, which fully satisfies the 
given time constraint. 
As stated before, the parameters β and γ must be estimated.  Hence, 
we divided the dataset into two different parts, i.e., training and 
testing. While a sufficient number of points has to be provided for 
both tasks, we wanted to privilege the testing phase and to avoid 
any overfitting, and hence, we opted for assigning 30% of the data 
to the training and 70% to the testing. 
1,24
1,07
0,78
0,80
0,90
2,21
0,0
0,5
1,0
1,5
2,0
2,5
Millions of Posts
Month

Moreover, we also faced the problem of defining a proper measure 
that would have driven the choice of the best values for parameters. 
In this sense, we agreed that the most appropriate way to test our 
predictive algorithm was to simulate an investment scenario. Other 
measures such as Mean Squared Error (MSE), Mean Absolute 
Error (MAE), etc. seemed to be not suitable for our purposes.  
The same holds for training, since we established that the best 
values for parameters would have been those that maximize the 
investment return during the training period, which were also 
expected to provide the largest gain on the overall period. We 
obtained β = 0.4 and γ = 0. It is worth noting that history does not 
provide any hint in case of financial-sentiment spread (γ equal to 0 
means that only the last value matters). The same does not hold for 
β, i.e. the Q that drives the choice of the most proper TFW by 
successfully exploiting the history. 
Among the other possibilities, we assumed to invest a fixed amount 
of money at each time step, according to the prediction made by the 
algorithm. This choice is mainly due to the fact that we preferred to 
treat each case as independent of the others in order to be able to 
derive a time-independent performance measure, which does not 
depend on the particular instant at which the investment has started. 
Basing on the return, predicted by the algorithm, three different 
trading decisions become possible: 
• Long: it refers to the case in which the investor owns the 
security and thus gains whenever the price goes up. It follows 
that this option is chosen if the algorithm predicts an increase 
of DJTATO. 
• Short: it refers to the sale of stocks that are not owned by the 
investor. It includes any kind of financial operation that is 
aimed to make profits from downturns of stocks prices. Hence, 
it is the option chosen if the algorithm predicts a decrease of 
DJTATO. 
• No operation: it is the option chosen if the algorithm does not 
retrieve any prediction for the current TF. 
As explained before, the investment scenario covers two-thirds of 
the available data, that is, the period that goes from mid-June to the 
end of September. 
Error! Reference source not found. illustrates the results of the 
analysis. As it can be seen our Investment, which represents the 
cumulative performance obtained by following our proposed 
approach, clearly outperforms the DJTATO benchmark, which 
represents the case of an investor holding the DJTATO index, 
during the entire period of analysis. While the global return of 
DJTATO is of +3%, interestingly, our investment achieves 
substantially greater return, i.e., +15%. This is an excellent 
performance as it is even close to the Optimal Result, i.e., +20%, 
which represents the best decision-making in which the investor 
already knows in advance how the market will behave (hypothetical 
scenario).  
This is a promising result as it shows the effectiveness of our 
proposed algorithm in the prediction of how the market works. 
Indeed, it clearly indicates the possibility of predicting the 
behaviour of the market and reacting appropriately in order to 
maximize the return.  
6. CONCLUSIONS 
With this work, we decided to face an intriguing yet difficult 
problem, that is the prediction of future stock returns by using 
either the past series of returns and the sentiment gathered from 
Twitter.  
The quality of the proposed methodology has been thoroughly 
tested on a reasonable amount of time and it has been shown that 
the results that we have obtained outperform the benchmark, thus 
proving the validity of the idea of exploiting the sentiment as a 
fundamental variable. 
Even though we tried our best to provide a complete analysis of the 
stock prediction methodology based on a properly tailored version 
of the sentiment expressed on Twitter, it will be of sure interest to 
delve into many aspects of the methodology. The first thing will be 
to apply the same methodology to different sectors such as 
consumer electronics, telecommunication and others, in order to 
further validate our approach. Yet another possible development 
-10%
-5%
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
DJTATO
Our Investment
Optimal Result
Figure 7 the result of the analysis 

would be the selection of different financial instruments, such as 
single stocks, derivatives, futures or Exchange-Traded Funds 
(ETFs). 
Another aspect that may deserve attention could be that of 
augmenting the sentiment dimensionality. Moreover, the impact of 
extending the time lag of the sentiment variables could be explored, 
in such a way to infer something on the possible long lasting effect 
of the sentiment. 
Additionally, a study of the nonlinearities could be managed so to 
discover some possible complex hidden relationships between the 
sentiment and the price deviations. 
We strongly believe that the idea of exploiting the sentiment 
conveyed on Twitter for the prediction of price fluctuations of 
financial instruments is of sure practical interest even though it 
requires remarkable efforts. 
7. REFERENCES 
[1] Algorithmic trading. Wikipedia.org. Retrieved on September, 
2012 from URL: 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Algorithmic_trading 
[2] Aldridge, I. (2010). What is High-Frequency Trading, 
Afterall? Huffingtonpost.com. Retrieved on September, 2012 
from URL: http://www.huffingtonpost.com/irene-
aldridge/what-is-high-frequency-tr_b_639203.html 
[3] New World Order: The High Frequency Trading Community 
and Its Impact on Market Structure. Aitegroup.com. 
Retrieved on September, 2012 from URL: 
http://www.aitegroup.com/Reports/ReportDetail.aspx?record
ItemID=531 
[4] Iati, R. (2009). The Real Story of Trading Software 
Espionage. Advancedtrading.com. Retrieved on September, 
2012 from URL: 
http://www.advancedtrading.com/algorithms/218401501 
[5] Starck, P. (2008). \Black box" trading has huge potential - 
D.Boerse. Reuters.com. Retrieved on September, 2012 from 
URL: 
http://uk.reuters.com/article/2008/06/13/deutscheboerse-
idUKL1366328020080613 
[6] Nofsinger, J. R. (2005). Social mood and financial 
economics. Journal of Behavioral Finance, 6 (3): 144-160. 
[7] Malkiel, B. G. (2003). The efficient market hypothesis and 
its critics. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 17(1): 59-
82. 
[8] Tumarkin, R. and Whitelaw, R. (2001). News or noise? 
Internet postings and stock prices. Financial Analysts 
Journal, 57 (3): 41-51. 
[9] Antweiler, W. and Frank, M. Z. (2004). Is all that talk just 
noise?  The information content of internet stock message 
boards. The Journal of Finance, 59 (3): 1259-1294. 
[10] Bollen, J., Mao, H., and Zeng, X. (2011). Twitter mood 
predicts the stock market. Journal of Computational Science, 
2 (1): 1-8. 
[11] Mao, H., Counts, S., and Bollen, J. (2011). Predicting 
financial markets: Comparing survey, news, Twitter and 
search engine data. Proceedings of CoRR. 
[12] Luss, R. and d'Aspremont, A. (2009). Predicting abnormal 
returns from news using text classification. Proceedings of 
the 1st international workshop on advances in machine 
learning for computational finance. 
[13] Sehgal, V. and Song, C. (2007). SOPS: Stock prediction 
using web sentiment. Proceedings of the 7th IEEE. 
International Conference on Data Mining Workshops, ICDM 
Workshops '07: 21-26. 
[14] Deng, S., Mitsubuchi, T., Shioda, K., Shimada, T., and 
Sakurai, A. (2011). Combining technical analysis with 
sentiment analysis for stock price prediction. Proceedings of 
the 2011 IEEE 9th International Conference on Dependable, 
Autonomic and Secure Computing, DASC '11: 800-807. 
[15] NIST/SEMATECH (2012). e-Handbook of Statistical 
Methods. Itl.nist.gov. Retrieved on September, 2012 from 
URL: http://www.itl.nist.gov/div898/handbook/ 
[16] Tsay, R. S. (2005). Analysis of financial time series. Wiley. 
[17] Dow Jones Automobiles & Parts Titans 30TM Index. 
Djindexes.com. Retrieved on May, 2012 from URL: 
http://www.djindexes.com/mdsidx/downloads/fact_info/Dow
_Jones_Automobiles_and_Parts_Titans_30_Index_Fact_She
et.pdf
