Artiﬁcial Intelligence Assists Discovery of Reaction Coordinates and Mechanisms
from Molecular Dynamics Simulations
Hendrik Jung,1, ∗Roberto Covino,1, ∗and Gerhard Hummer1, 2, †
1Department of Theoretical Biophysics, Max Planck Institute of Biophysics, 60438 Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
2Institute of Biophysics, Goethe University, 60438 Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
Exascale computing holds great opportunities for molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. How-
ever, to take full advantage of the new possibilities, we must learn how to focus computational
power on the discovery of complex molecular mechanisms, and how to extract them from enormous
amounts of data. Both aspects still rely heavily on human experts, which becomes a serious bot-
tleneck when a large number of parallel simulations have to be orchestrated to take full advantage
of the available computing power. Here, we use artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) both to guide the sam-
pling and to extract the relevant mechanistic information. We combine advanced sampling schemes
with statistical inference, artiﬁcial neural networks, and deep learning to discover molecular mech-
anisms from MD simulations. Our framework adaptively and autonomously initializes simulations
and learns the sampled mechanism, and is thus suitable for massively parallel computing architec-
tures. We propose practical solutions to make the neural networks interpretable, as illustrated in
applications to molecular systems.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Computational molecular sciences face two outstand-
ing challenges. On the one hand, ever growing compu-
tational power and sophisticated software enable us to
simulate increasingly complex systems over ever longer
times, resulting in massive trajectories that we are ill-
equipped to process and interpret. Indeed, we still mi-
cromanage the data production process and rely on vi-
sual inspection by human experts to analyze long sim-
ulated trajectories.
On the other hand, a small inte-
gration time step and upper bounds to the scalability
of distributed calculations severely limit the sampling of
interesting phenomena in extensive molecular dynamics
(MD) simulations. Indeed, these phenomena are often
rare events [1], stochastic transitions between metastable
states that are separated by exponentially longer waiting
times. Exascale supercomputers are going to further ex-
acerbate the interpretation problem and, due to the slow-
ing down of Moore’s law and the “Communication Wall”,
fail to fully solve the sampling problem. Two strategies
are available to speed up the sampling [2]: use of an
unphysical bias in a single MD simulation to steer the
dynamics of the system along a desired direction; or use
of an ensemble of short judiciously initialized unbiased
trajectories to enhance the sampling of transition paths
(TPs) between metastable states. The TPs of rare events
provide invaluable mechanistic insight into the investi-
gated systems. Often these strategies either completely
rely on, or can greatly proﬁt from, the previous knowl-
edge of a reaction coordinate (RC) [3, 4], which is a func-
tion of the conﬁguration space that provides a condensed
yet accurate description of the relevant dynamics of the
system.
∗These authors contributed equally to this work.

The interpretation and sampling problems are two
faces of the same coin, since learning the salient features
of a rare event, its RC, also enables us to eﬀectively en-
hance its sampling. The two problems can therefore be
tackled at the same time. However, ﬁnding a good RC is
extremely challenging, even for relatively simple dynam-
ical systems. Moreover, the search for RCs still almost
entirely relies on direct human analysis, through visual
inspection and tedious trial and error approaches, which
are potentially biased and frequently fail to achieve sat-
isfactory results. This dependence on human experts to
initialize and interpret MD simulations threatens to be-
come one of the main bottlenecks in the exascale com-
puting era. We therefore need to develop tools able to
perform the same tasks with minimal human interven-
tion.
Trajectories produced by MD simulations are complex
and high-dimensional data, containing subtle patterns
that are scarcely identiﬁable by human operators, but
can be eﬃciently identiﬁed by machine learning [5] and
in particular deep learning [6, 7] approaches. In fact, spe-
cialized deep learning algorithms vastly out-compete hu-
mans in an increasing number of complex data intensive
tasks. One of the challenges, however, is to translate the
underlying patterns into a human understandable form
[6].
Here, we show how combining advanced sampling
schemes, maximum likelihood inference, and deep learn-
ing allows us to tackle the sampling and interpretation
problems simultaneously, and to move towards the goal
of autonomous production and interpretation of MD sim-
ulations of rare events. We take advantage of the power
of Transition Path Sampling (TPS) introduced by Chan-
dler, Dellago, Bolhuis, Geissler and collaborators [8, 9]
to attempt simulations of transitions between metastable
states. Unbiased simulations started at diﬀerent initial
conﬁgurations can, at the same time, be used to create
a transition path ensemble [8, 9], and to estimate the
committor [10], i.e., the probability that a simulation
arXiv:1901.04595v1  [physics.chem-ph]  14 Jan 2019

2
randomly initialized at a given conﬁguration will evolve
to one metastable state instead another [1, 4]. Inspired
by the seminal work of Peters and Trout [11], we for-
mulate the problem of learning the committor from the
outcomes of the TPS simulation attempts as a statisti-
cal inference problem. Following the pioneering work by
Ma and Dinner [12], we use the committor as a mapping
between molecular conﬁgurations and the reaction mech-
anism, that we model by using artiﬁcial neural networks
(ANN) [5]. By combining all these elements, we translate
the problem of learning molecular mechanisms and RCs
in a quantitative way to the problem of training an ANN
on short simulations, which can be eﬃciently solved with
the methods of deep learning.
We thus present a novel AI-assisted simulation algo-
rithm that, in the spirit of reinforcement learning, iter-
atively and adaptively initializes and performs new MD
simulations, and learns from the generated trajectories
how to increase at every iteration the probability to ob-
serve rare transitions. With minimal human intervention,
our algorithm ﬁnds the most eﬃcient way to sample a
rare molecular event by learning the underlying molec-
ular mechanism and the corresponding RC, or, equiva-
lently, learns the RC of a rare molecular event by sam-
pling it numerous times. Therefore, we will ultimately
obtain not only an unbiased ensemble of transition trajec-
tories but also the underlying RC encoded in the trained
ANN.
In the following, we will introduce the main elements of
our method and illustrate its application on a model sys-
tem. We will then study a conformational change in the
standard molecular benchmark system alanine dipeptide,
and investigate the dissociation of ion pairs in a concen-
tred solution of lithium chloride in water.
II.
ALGORITHM
The framework we introduce is valid for transitions
among an arbitrary number of metastable states. How-
ever, for the sake of clarity, we will focus in the following
on transitions between two states A and B (Figure (1)).
Taking advantage of TPS, we use short unbiased tra-
jectories to generate an equilibrium ensemble of TPs be-
tween A and B.
Given a path in conﬁguration space
connecting the two states, we initialize MD simulations
from a conﬁguration xsp lying on the path, and itera-
tively attempt to simulate TPs by using the so called
“shooting move” [13]: we redraw velocities v from the
Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution and start independent
simulations from the conﬁguration xsp, forward with ve-
locities v, and backward with velocities −v. Each simula-
tion is stopped as soon as the trajectory enters one of the
two states. There can be three possible outcomes: both
forward an backward trajectories reach A, or they both
reach B, or they reach diﬀerent states, A and B, or B
and A. In this last case, we can concatenate the forward
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
x
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
y
A
B
0.100
0.200
0.300
0.400
0.500
0.600
0.700
0.800
0.900
Figure 1.
Model potential V (x, y) (Eq.
1 SI) with two
metastable states A and B, deﬁned as circles of radius r =
0.15 centered on the minima (orange). The two states are sep-
arated by an approximately 7 kBT high barrier and a broad
barrier region. Isolines of the energy surface (grey) are sep-
arated by 0.7 kBT. Isolines of the exact committor pB (x, y)
in steps of 0.1 are shown as solid red curves.
The dashed
colored lines connecting A and B represent TPs of varying
length simulated by Langevin dynamics.
and reversed backward trajectories and form a TP χ.
We iterate this sampling scheme by varying the starting
conﬁguration. Each shooting move i is summarized by its
starting conﬁguration, and the number of trajectories n(i)
X
ending in states X = A and B, i.e., by the set of param-
eters θ(i) =
n
x(i)
sp , n(i)
A , n(i)
B
o
, with n(i)
A + n(i)
B = n(i). In
the following, without loss of generality we will consider
n(i) = 2. We then build the TP ensemble by accepting
simulated TPs based on a Metropolis-Hastings criterion
[13] (Eq. 2 SI).
The outcome of statistically independent shooting
moves follows a binomial distribution. Therefore, each
shooting move is described by the likelihood func-
tion L [pB(xsp) | nA, nB] ∝[pB (xsp)]nB [1 −pB (xsp)]nA,
where pB(xsp) and pA(xsp) = 1 −pB(xsp) are the prob-
abilities that a trajectory initialized at xsp with random
velocities will ﬁrst enter state A and B, respectively.
For statistically independent trajectories, the quantity
pB(xsp) is known as the splitting probability or commit-
tor of state B [4]. In our likelihood formulation, we tac-
itly assume that the outcome, in terms of the state ﬁrst
reached, for two trajectories initiated from a common
shooting conﬁguration is independent of the respective
initial velocities.
The committor ranges from pB (x ∈A)
=
0 to
pB (x ∈B) = 1, and maps all conﬁgurations in the transi-
tion region to an intermediate value (Figure 1). The folia-
tion of level sets of the committor monitors the progress
along the transition A →B, and therefore provides a
general and rigorous way to quantify the mechanism de-

3
scribed by such a transition [1, 4, 12, 14–16].
Conse-
quently, the direction orthogonal to the foliation along
the most probable conﬁgurations deﬁnes the optimal RC
of the transition A →B (Figure 1).
Without loss of
generality we model the RC q (x) by parametrizing the
committor as
pB (x) ≡pB [q (x)] =
h
1 + e−q(x)i−1
.
(1)
The RC is at this point an unknown scalar dimension-
less function q (x), which will be in general a complex
nonlinear function of the coordinates of the system. Eq.
(1) ensures that the committor ranges between 0 and 1
for any value of the RC. Also, pB [q (x) = 0] = 1/2 de-
ﬁnes the transition state ensemble (TSE) for transitions
between two states.
We model the unknown RC q (x) with an ANN [5].
ANNs are ﬂexible and powerful tools to model highly
nonlinear functions and reproduce complex patterns in
high-dimensional data, and, after the ﬁrst pioneering ap-
proaches [12, 17], were recently at the center of several
important advancements in the ﬁeld of biomolecular sim-
ulations [18–28].
We thus write the unknown RC as
q (x) = qANN (x|w), where the weight matrix w, i.e., the
ﬁtting parameters of the ANN, deﬁnes the connections
between nodes (see Figure 1 and Eq. 3 in the SI for the
explicit deﬁnition).
After N statistically independent shooting moves, the
total likelihood as a function of the proposed RC will be
Ltot [qANN (xsp | w) | nA, nB] ∝
N
Y
i=1
h
pB
h
qANN

x(i)
sp | w
iin(i)
B
(2)
×
h
1 −pB
h
qANN

x(i)
sp | w
iin(i)
A
Combining equations (1) and (2) we obtain the loss func-
tion
l (w|θ) ≡−log Ltot [qANN (xsp | w) | nA, nB]
=
N
X
i=1
h
n(i)
B log

1 + e−qANN(x(i)
sp |w)
+n(i)
A log

1 + eqANN(x(i)
sp |w)i
,
(3)
where θ =
n
x(i)
sp , n(i)
A , n(i)
B
o
i=1,...N is the training set ac-
quired over N shooting moves. We therefore train the
ANN, i.e., we ﬁt the weight matrix w, by minimizing the
loss function Eq. (3) on the training set θ, and obtain
ˆqANN (x | w), a maximum likelihood estimator of the RC
and consequently of the committor.
Recapitulating, the algorithm proceeds in the follow-
ing way (Figure 2). (0) The only required input is the
deﬁnition of the metastable states A and B as a function
of some order parameters. We then initialize qANN (x|w)
by randomly assigning values to the weight matrix w.
Figure 2.
Schematic ﬂow chart of the AI-assisted MD simu-
lations algorithm.
Given an initial path χ(0) connecting states A an B,
we randomly select the ﬁrst shooting conﬁguration x(1)
sp .
(1) For every step with i > 0 , we perform a shooting
move from x(i)
sp , generating velocities from a Maxwell-
Boltzmann distribution and propagating the dynamics
forward and backward, and append the outcome θ(i) to
θ. (2) If we sample a new TP, χ(i), we accept or reject it
following a Metropolis-Hastings criterion [13] (Eq. 2 SI).
(3) We minimize the loss function Eq. (3) on the train-
ing set θ, which contains all θ(i) stored so far, and obtain
ˆq(i)
ANN (x|w). (4) We select a new shooting conﬁguration
x(i+1)
sp
from χ(i), the last TP added to the ensemble, by
using the (Cauchy-Lorentz) selection probability
psel

x|χ(i), w, γ

∝
γ2
ˆq(i)
ANN (x|w)2 + γ2 ,
(4)
which describes a fat-tailed distribution centered around
ˆq(i)
ANN (x|w) = 0, where γ > 0 is the scale parameter. We
iterate steps (1) to (4) until we obtain convergence of the
TP ensemble.
The algorithm adaptively creates its own training set,
which will grow at every iteration, and the ANN will be
trained both on successes and failures. The acquired in-
formation is then used in Eq. (4), which ensures that
x(i+1)
sp
is distributed around xTSE(i), i.e., the best esti-
mate of the TSE given the available training data. Hence,
crucially, at every step the algorithm makes full use of
all available information to autonomously and adaptively
initialize new MD simulations and to optimize the prob-
ability to sample new TPs.
Learning the RC and generating the equilibrium TP
ensemble converge in an orchestrated fashion.
During
training, the loss function Eq.
(3) initially oscillates
and then converges, i.e., the ANN converges to an op-
timal weight matrix wopt that can reproduce all fu-
ture observations θ(i).
Consequently, at this point we
have learned the optimal RC describing the dynamics
of the rare event, encoded in the ANN and deﬁned by

4
Figure 3.
Results for 42-dimensional model system of Fig-
ure 1. (A) Cumulative count of generated (continuous line)
and accepted (dashed line) TPs in AI-assisted MD simula-
tions (orange) and standard control TPS (blue) performed on
the model energy surface shown in Figure 1. Each line shows
the average over 10 independent runs. The standard error of
the mean is smaller than the thickness of the lines. The black
dashed line represent the theoretical maximum for generation
of TPs. (B) Input relevance analysis. All 42 input coordi-
nates are ranked according to their normalized relevance. (C)
Comparison between the level sets of the exact (red) and ma-
chine learned (blue) committor pB (x, y). Isolines are shown
in intervals of 0.1 between 0.1 and 0.9.
ˆqopt
ANN (x|w) ≡ˆqANN (x|wopt), which enables the genera-
tion of new TPs with high eﬃciency. Convergence of the
TP ensemble can be slower and must be monitored sepa-
rately, e.g., by tracking the convergence of some physical
parameters such as the TP time. As in similar schemes,
if the initial path is very far from the equilibrium TP en-
semble, it might be necessary to discard the TPs sampled
during an initial equilibration phase.
We illustrate each step of our algorithm by studying a
42-dimensional model system described by the instanta-
neous conﬁguration x (t) ∈R42. Here, x1 = x and x2 = y
evolve by Langevin dynamics on the energy potential
V (x, y) shown in Figure 1, which combines the challenges
of having two metastable states separated by a 7 kBT
high barrier and a broad barrier region. For each j > 2,
instead, the nuisance coordinate xj evolves by Langevin
dynamics on the harmonic potential Vj (xj) = ω2
j x2
j/2,
with random angular frequencies ωj. Even though only
x and y contribute to the RC, we challenge our deep
learning approach by training the ANN on the full 42-
dimensional input space.
Our algorithm samples TPs with probability close to
50%, which is the theoretical upper limit [10] assum-
ing statistically independent shooting moves (Figure 3).
Also, it tends to perform better than the already eﬃcient
standard TPS approach, in which initial conﬁgurations
x(i+1)
sp
are selected with uniform probability from the last
accepted TP.
At convergence, our algorithm does not only return
the correct equilibrium TP ensemble but also the RC de-
scribing the transition, which is encoded in ˆqopt
ANN (x|w).
This is a complex function that cannot be immediately
interpreted in a simple way. We can of course always vi-
sually inspect the TSE deﬁned by ˆqopt
ANN
 xTSE|w

= 0,
which can be trivially extracted from the sampled TPs.
Importantly, the quantitative information contained in
the trained ANN can be mapped on the Cartesian coor-
dinates of molecular structures to provide direct visual
insight in the reaction mechanism. Indeed, we can high-
light each atom n according to its contribution to the RC
by evaluating the (normalized) magnitude of the gradient
of the ANN in the TSE, i.e.,
cn =
∇x(cart)
n
ˆqopt
ANN
 xTSE|w

P
m ∇x(cart)
m
ˆqopt
ANN (xTSE|w)

,
(5)
which can be calculated by a straightforward application
of the chain rule (backpropagation).
Additionally, we propose a solution to approximately
extract the information encoded in the ANN and trans-
late it to a human friendly explicit formula. Not all input
coordinates x contribute equally to the RC. In order to
identify the most relevant ones, we build on the procedure
reported in [29]. We quantify the information carried by
the j-th input coordinate by resampling the loss function
(Eq. (3)) replacing one by one each input coordinate xj
with random uninformative values. Finally, we rank each
input coordinate xj by the normalized increase in loss
caused by their replacement with noise (Figure 3). This
analysis correctly reveals that only two input coordinates
actually determine the output of the ANN, corresponding
to x and y.
We can now use symbolic regression [30, 31] to au-
tomatically build a mathematical expression qsr (x, y)
that approximately reproduces the machine learned op-
timal RC ˆqopt
ANN (x|w). Symbolic regression ﬁnds the best
ﬁt to a given data set searching both model and pa-
rameter space by genetic programming, evolving com-
binations of elementary functions and input variables
through random mutations and survival of the ﬁttest
[31].
Applied to our model system with input vari-
ables (x, y), symbolic regression produces a simpliﬁed
RC, qsr (x, y) = (3.32x + 1.24y) exp (2.92xy), which cor-
responds to a committor in excellent agreement with the

5
exact one (Figure 3). Indeed, the simpliﬁed RC not only
captures the linearity of the committor close to the TSE
but also the curvature close to the metastable states.
Clearly, high energy regions of the surface are not sam-
pled by the MD engine and display a less signiﬁcant
agreement.
III.
APPLICATION TO MOLECULAR
SYSTEMS
In order to use deep learning to study molecular rare
events we must ﬁrst decide how to represent molecular
systems. Here we face the trade oﬀbetween the gener-
ality of the representation and ﬁnite sampling. Indeed,
it would be possible to use cartesian coordinates as in-
put for the ANN, but we assume that the systems to
simulate will be challenging, and hence the amount of
training data scarce. Therefore, we will choose general
molecular representations that make use of all previous
knowledge already available, e.g., by satisfying the phys-
ical symmetries of the system. For instance, molecular
conﬁgurations can be described by using internal coordi-
nates [32], i.e., all bonds, angles, and dihedrals that can
be built with a set of atomic positions. Internal coordi-
nates are in a one-to-one mapping with cartesian ones,
but are manifestly invariant w.r.t. global rotations and
translations.
A molecular rare event is often modulated by its en-
vironment, water in the simplest case, which should be
included in the molecular representation as well. In the
following we will label a “solute” the part of the system
undergoing the rare transition, and a “solvent” its envi-
ronment. The solvent is invariant under the permutation
of identical particles. We will describe the solvent by us-
ing a modiﬁcation of symmetry functions introduced by
Behler, Parrinello [17, 19, 33], Geiger and Dellago [18],
which are a general way to describe the spatial organiza-
tion of molecules around a speciﬁc atom. In particular,
we will use two kind of symmetry functions, G2
i and G5
i
(Eq.
(6) and (8)).
The ﬁrst quantiﬁes the density of
solvent molecules at a given radial distance from a spe-
ciﬁc solute atom; the second quantiﬁes the isotropy of
the angular distribution of solvent molecules at a given
radial distance around a solute atom. These representa-
tions are not only invariant w.r.t. global translations and
rotations but also w.r.t. exchange of solvent molecules.
A.
Conformational change in benchmark peptide
We applied our computational framework to the pro-
totypical benchmark peptide alanine dipeptide (N-acetyl
alanine N ′-methylamide) [34]. We investigated the ther-
mally activated conformational change of the dihedral an-
gle ψ, corresponding to trajectories crossing a large free
energy barrier as shown in Figure 2 of the SI. The only
required initial input are the metastable states, deﬁned
Figure 4. Input relevance analysis and visual representation
of the machine learned RC for alanine dipeptide.
(A) We
show the normalized input relevance of the 30 most impor-
tant input coordinates.
The ﬁrst point corresponds to the
input coordinate x1 = ˜ψ ≡1
2 [cos (ψ + π) + 1]. The following
3 points correspond to coordinates describing the organiza-
tion of water molecules around the peptide. (B) Structure of
alanine dipeptide extracted from a simulated TP that is pre-
dicted to be part of the TSE. Atomic coordinates are colored
according to their contribution to the RC (Eq. (5); red most
important, blue least important).
in this case as a function of the dihedral angles φ and ψ.
We simulated the system in explicit solvent, and used in-
ternal coordinates to describe the peptide conﬁgurations
and symmetry functions to represent the solvent, using
both as inputs for deep learning. Our framework enabled
us to simulate TPs with high eﬃciency, and rapidly ob-
tain an equilibrated TP ensemble (Figure 3 SI).
The input relevance analysis reported in Figure
4
correctly
identiﬁes
the
coordinate
x1
=
˜ψ
≡
1
2 [cos (ψ + π) + 1] as the major descriptor of the confor-
mational change. The analysis also highlights a marginal
role for three further input coordinates describing the
organization of water molecules around the peptide. In
particular, these three coordinates describe the angular
distribution of water oxygens at a distance of 0.175 nm
from the oxygen of the acetyl involved in the peptide
bond (x2), a hydrogen atom in the methyl-group (x3),
and the nitrogen of the methylamide (x4) (Table I SI).
Figure 4 shows a representative structure of the TSE, for
which the ANN predicts a value of pB = 0.5 in excellent
agreement with the pB = 0.46 value returned by a di-
rect sampling of the committor using 10,000 trajectories.
Each atom in the structure is colored according to its
contribution to the RC, and a simple visual inspection
immediately reveals the dominant aspect of the molecu-
lar mechanism.

6
Figure 5.
Input relevance analysis and visual representa-
tion of the machine learned RC for LiCl dissociation. (A) We
report the normalized input relevance of the 30 most impor-
tant input coordinates, which all describe the collective dis-
tribution of the solvent around the dissociating ion pair. (B)
Conﬁgurations extracted from a simulated TP, in the bound
state, from the TSE, and in the unbound state. The dissociat-
ing ion pair is shown at the center and labeled (small spheres:
Li+; large spheres: Cl−). Atomic coordinates are colored ac-
cording to their contribution to the RC (Eq. (5); red most
important, blue least important).
We then used the four most relevant input coordinates
to approximate the trained ANN by a simple function.
Depending on the desired level of regularization we ob-
tained slightly diﬀerent expressions (Table II SI). The
optimal is qsr

˜ψ, x3

= −8.38 ˜ψ + 5.62 exp (−0.285x3),
which evaluated on the training data returns a loss of
1.051 compared to 1.031 for the full ANN.
B.
Ion dissociation in water
We then investigated the dissociation of lithium and
chloride ions in a 1 M solution. Despite its apparent sim-
plicity, understanding this reaction in quantitative terms
poses a challenge [35], because it is governed by many-
body long range interactions and by instantaneous col-
lective motions of all surrounding water molecules and
ions.
We focused on a speciﬁc pair of ions, and used
their distance r as a parameter to deﬁne bound and un-
bound states. We then described the remaining part of
the solution with symmetry functions of the positions of
all other lithium and chloride ions, and the oxygen of
water molecules. Our AI-assisted simulation framework
produces TPs signiﬁcantly more eﬃciently than a stan-
dard TPS implementation (Figure 4 SI).
The input importance analysis reveals that indeed the
environment controls the dissociation reaction (Figure 5
and Table III SI). Contrary to the previous application,
there is no single dominant descriptor of the reaction.
The trained ANN employs a large number of input coor-
dinates, and their importance decays in a power-law fash-
ion. Of the 10 most relevant coordinates, most probe the
density and angular distribution of lithium and chloride
counter-ions around the dissociating ion pair, while only
one probes the distribution of water molecules (Table III
SI). Notably, in independent runs we obtain alternative
“mirror” symmetry functions, where lithium and chloride
exchange, which means that the ANN can use alternative
descriptions of analogous conﬁgurations. Also, the inter-
atomic distance of the dissociating pair never appears
among the most important input coordinates. Figure 5
shows representative conﬁgurations along a TP, includ-
ing a conﬁguration of the TSE identiﬁed by the trained
network, for which a direct sampling of the committor
with 1,000 simulations returns pB = 0.53.
The struc-
tures are colored according to the contribution of each
atom to the RC, and immediately reveal the many-body
character of the mechanism and its main features. In-
deed, we can clearly see 4 water molecules coordinating
the central lithium ion and 2 distant competing lithium
counter-ions.
Distilling a simple equation from the full network is in
this case more challenging. By using the 10 most rele-
vant input coordinates identiﬁed in Figure 5, we obtained
expressions that do not correctly reproduce the commit-
tor of the reaction. This is possibly due to an insuﬃ-
cient number of input coordinates. We obtained accu-
rate expressions by using the ﬁrst 10 coordinates and the
interatomic distance r of the dissociating ion pair. De-
pending on the regularization, we obtained a number of
diﬀerent expressions that all oﬀer an insightful physical
interpretation (Table IV SI). As an example, we report
qsr (r, x1, x9) = 29.5r−8.19 exp(−0.87x1)−0.29x9, where
x1 describes the angular distribution of distant (∼0.7
nm) chloride counter-ions and x9 describes the angu-
lar distribution of close (∼0.175 nm) water molecules
around the dissociating lithium ion.
IV.
DISCUSSION
The computational framework we introduced enhances
the simulation of rare events with little previous knowl-
edge and minimal human intervention.
Given two
metastable states deﬁned with some arbitrary order pa-
rameters, the algorithm eﬃciently simulates rare events
by learning the underlying reaction mechanism, using
only adaptively initialized short and unbiased simula-
tions.
In the spirit of reinforcement learning [5], our
framework autonomously builds its own training set,
training both on successes and failures. We combine a
number of established techniques in a very general way,
such that each building block might be exchanged with a

7
potentially more suitable alternative. This could involve
the sampling strategy [36–38]; performing MD simula-
tions at atomistic or coarse-grained resolution; consider-
ing more sophisticated inference models and integrating
experimental information in a systematic way; exploiting
alternative network architectures and diﬀerent regression
schemes for the learning phase [39].
At convergence, the algorithm returns an equilibrium
ensemble of simulated TPs and a functional form of the
committor encoded in an ANN, which is both diﬀeren-
tiable and inexpensive to evaluate. We therefore obtain a
very eﬃcient way to calculate the committor of molecular
conﬁgurations, which can be used to identify level sets of
the committor from the sampled TPs by straightforward
evaluation and bookkeeping. Given that these structures
belong to unbiased trajectories guarantees that the com-
mittor is evaluated only in the relevant regions of the
conﬁguration space. Molecular conﬁgurations belonging
to the level sets can then immediately be used to further
characterize the transition with methods like milestoning
[40], forward-ﬂux-sampling [41], and s-shooting [38].
Despite its crucial role in controlling molecular mech-
anisms, we often neglect the environment in which a rare
event takes place, mostly because we struggle to capture
many-body interactions. By processing large amounts of
input coordinates, machine learning oﬀers the potential
to systematically describe even complex biomolecular en-
vironments, like dense solutions or complex lipid bilayers.
We proposed a solution to make the trained network
interpretable, by approximating the ANN with a simple
function of the few input coordinates that actually con-
trol the transition. The resulting equation is an accurate
approximation of the RC that can be used to calculate
the free energy surface governing the transition and its ki-
netics by using techniques like umbrella sampling [42, 43],
metadynamics [44], and within the framework of TPS it-
self [16]. The analytic form of the RC also provides a
starting point to inspire and build physical analytic the-
ories. Any previous knowledge can be easily integrated
with the generated equation, simply by imposing any rel-
evant coordinate or functional form that one wants to
appear in the reduced RC representation. Additionally,
visualizing the contribution to the RC with automatically
generated annotated structures is a powerful tool to gain
insight in the reaction mechanism (Figure 4 and 5). The
AI autonomously generates images guiding human opera-
tors in understanding the discovered mechanism, making
the ANN interpretable in a very immediate way.
The resampling procedure to identify the important in-
put coordinates is particularly eﬀective when those have
a physical meaning. However, for challenging problems
we will usually use coordinates that are agnostic and re-
dundant. We expect that in these cases the resampling
procedure will return a power-law spectrum, similar to
what we observe in Figure 5, and extracting few essential
input coordinates will be challenging. This highlights the
importance of developing representations of given classes
of systems general enough to be transferable within the
same class [45, 46]. Similarly to other recent strategies,
we can easily feed a large list of features (“collective vari-
ables”) to our algorithm [47].
Another route to follow
is to combine deep learning and similar methods with
manifold learning techniques [23].
Future versions of the algorithm will beneﬁt from the
ongoing research in the ﬁeld of interpretable ANN. In
particular, we will explore the possibility that networks
trained on molecular events learn a hierarchy of features
of the systems, similarly to what happens with hierarchi-
cal networks used in the ﬁeld of image processing. One
strategy is to map back the contribution of each layer of a
deep network to molecular structures. These hierarchical
features could be used to engineer transferable represen-
tations used as inputs for other problems, as discussed
above.
An optimal deﬁnition of the metastable states is an im-
portant aspect to avoid wasting computational resources,
and can be improved within the present framework in an
iterative way. One can start with a very conservative def-
inition, and then merge regions of the conﬁguration space
that the network, trained on quick exploratory runs, es-
timates being strongly committed to either one of the
states.
The algorithm can be easily generalized to study rare
transitions between multiple states. This is straightfor-
ward if the states are known in advance, since it suﬃces
to consider a multi-state TPS [48] and deﬁnition of the
committor [49] and to use a multinomial equivalent of
Eq.
(1), i.e., a softmax function.
With the same ap-
proach we can treat trajectories that will not commit
during the available simulation time because of unknown
states or long-lived intermediates, which can be identi-
ﬁed and characterized in post-processing.
Simulations
that do not commit because of extremely long TP times,
instead, will require a staged approach and an opportune
modiﬁcation of the inference model.
Controlling the balance between exploitation and ex-
ploration is straightforward in our framework. Maximum
eﬃciency of generating TPs (exploitation) is obtained
when the network initializes new trajectories close to the
TSE, which occurs when the selection probability in Eq.
(4) is sharply peaked about the TSE. An ideal RC, how-
ever, should explain the transition not only close to the
TSE but also in all other regions of the reaction, and
in particular close to the boundaries of the metastable
states. Exploration can thus be prioritized by a ﬂatter
selection probability that increases the probability to ini-
tialize trajectories far from the TSE.
Tuning the selection probability to initialize trajecto-
ries away from the TS, and also within the metastable
states, facilitates the discovery of additional reaction
channels and therefore alternative mechanisms within the
same exploratory run. Alternatively, one could train two
or more independent networks in parallel.
Comparing
the losses evaluated by the ﬁrst network on conﬁgura-
tions sampled by the second one – and vice versa – will
reveal whether the two networks have indeed sampled

8
the same mechanism. Furthermore, we will explore more
systematic ways of discovering multiple mechanisms by
using multi-domains networks and inference schemes [50].
Our algorithm shares with other data-driven learning
approaches the challenges of avoiding overﬁtting and of
validating the learned results. The committor, which is
ultimately what the ANN will learn, can always be val-
idated in an expensive yet straightforward direct sam-
pling. This will not be an option, however, for systems
that are extremely expensive to simulate, for which more
advanced strategies are required, like designing novel
training schemes that intervene only when new “unusual”
conﬁgurations are sampled, and using ANN with built-in
regularizations. However, overﬁtting is not a serious is-
sue for the production of data, and could be avoided in
a thorough post-processing to learn the RC.
Regarding scalability the algorithm is already almost
trivially parallelizable. Indeed, all the deep learning ma-
chinery can be concentrated on a single master node,
which at every iteration communicates initial conﬁgura-
tions to other nodes in the network, harvests the outcome
of the performed simulations, and trains the artiﬁcial
neural network on the resulting new data. Since every
step of this distributed calculation satisﬁes detailed bal-
ance, the resulting sets of simulated TPs can simply be
combined to obtain an equilibrium ensemble. This fea-
ture potentially solves the challenge of eﬃciently scaling
simulations of rare events on large supercomputers.
In conclusion, we introduced a novel AI-assisted com-
putational framework that represents a step forward to-
wards the goal of automatic design, execution, and inter-
pretation of MD simulations of rare events. This frame-
work simultaneously enables the enhancement of sam-
pling, the discovery of reaction mechanism, and the learn-
ing of the corresponding reaction coordinate, thereby
opening the door to simulations of complex molecular
events that are currently unfeasible. Our algorithm has
the potential to transform MD simulations of rare and in-
teresting molecular events into a semi-autonomous high-
throughput technique, capable of scaling eﬃciently on
exascale supercomputers. Using reinforcement learning
to learn the committor is a very general idea, which can
be potentially used to study any time-series of complex
data that admits a forward commitment probability. The
main challenge for the future will be to make the ANN
systematically interpretable and distilling analytic rep-
resentations – or even physical laws [30] – that describe
the discovered molecular mechanism in a more human-
accessible form.
V.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
A.
Model system
We simulated Langevin dynamics on the model energy
landscape shown in Figure 1 described by Eq. 1 SI using
the openpathsampling engine [51] and an integrator with
BAOAB splitting [52], with a timestep ∆t = 0.02 ns and
friction γ = 2.5 ns−1. We deﬁned the states A and B as
circles with a radius of r = 0.15 centered on the two min-
ima. Each additional independent nuisance coordinate xi
follows a harmonic potential with frequency ωi. The ﬁrst
two frequencies were chosen such that their periods are
respectively larger and comparable to the average transi-
tion path time of ⟨tT P ⟩≈11 ns. The remaining frequen-
cies were chosen randomly from an uniform distribution
in the interval [0 ns−1, 10 ns−1). All oscillator masses
were set to m = 1. The initial TP is a straight line con-
necting the two stable states in the plane of the coordi-
nates x and y. The exact committor reported in Figures 1
and 3 was obtained by solving the adjoint Fokker-Planck
equation with a standard relaxation technique.
B.
Deep learning
We performed deep learning by training a self-
normalizing ANN [53] with four hidden layers and a ﬁ-
nal layer with one node and a linear activation function.
We used the "Lecun normal" initialization and applied
a dropout of 10% after the last hidden layer [53]. We
trained the ANN with the Adam gradient descent algo-
rithm [54], training only after every second TPS step and
using a learning rate of lr = 5 · 10−4. We interrupted the
training process if the loss stayed almost constant and
resumed it only upon a loss decrease. For the model sys-
tem the number of nodes per layers equals the number of
inputs, 42. For simulations of alanine dipeptide and LiCl
dissociation it equals half the number of inputs, hence
750 and 264 nodes per layer, respectively. We performed
all deep learning with custom written code based on keras
[55].
C.
Input coordinate relevance analysis
For every j-th input coordinate we built the set ˜θ (j) =
n
˜x(i)
sp (j) , n(i)
A , n(i)
B
o
i=1,...N, where ˜x(i)
sp (j) was obtained
by replacing the j-th component of x(i)
sp with ˜x(i)
j
∼
U (min (xj,sp) , max (xj,sp)), i.e., a random number uni-
formly distributed between the extreme values of xj,sp
over the whole training set θ. We then deﬁned the input
relevance r (xj) =
h
l

wopt|˜θ (j)

−l (wopt|θ)
i
, which
quantiﬁes the impact of the lost information carried by
the j-th input coordinate by resampling the loss func-
tion (3).
This quantity is larger the more informative
xj is as an input coordinate. We normalized the input
relevance by subtracting the converged loss of the unper-
turbed ANN and dividing all entries by the largest rele-
vance. We then ranked each input coordinate xj by the
normalized r (xj) and identiﬁed the most relevant ones.

9
D.
Symbolic regression
The implementation of the symbolic regression is based
on the python package dcgpy [31], and alternates be-
tween genetic programming optimization and gradient
based optimization of the constants.
The ﬁtness of
each trial expression qsr (z) is measured by lsr (qsr|θ) ≡
−log Ltot [qsr (zsp)]+λnc, where z is a subset of all input
coordinates x. We added the regularization term λnc in
order to keep expressions simple and avoid overﬁtting,
with λ > 0 and nc being a measure of the complexity of
the trial expression.
E.
Molecular representation
In molecular systems one often distinguishes a solute
and a solvent. We described conﬁgurations of the ﬁrst by
using internal coordinate [32], and the second by using
a modiﬁcation of previously introduced symmetry func-
tions [17–19, 33]. The ﬁrst one quantiﬁes the density of
solvent molecules around a solute atom i and is deﬁned
as:
G2
i =
X
j
e−η(rij−rs)2fc (rij) ,
(6)
where the sum runs over all solvent atoms j of a speciﬁc
atom type, rij is the distance between the central atom
i and atom j, rs is the distance from the central atom at
which the shell is centered and η controls the width of
the shell. The function fc(r) is a Fermi cutoﬀdeﬁned as:
fc (r) =
(
1 + exp
 αc
 r −rc −1/√αc
−1
r ≤rc
0
r > rc
,
(7)
which ensures that the contribution of distant solvent
atoms vanishes. The second type of symmetry function
probes the angular distribution of the solvent in a shell
around the central atom i:
G5
i =
X
j,k>j
[λ + cos ϑijk]ζe−η[(rij−rs)2+(rik−rs)2]×
(8)
×fc (rik) fc (rij) ,
where the sum runs over all solvent atom pairs, ϑijk is
the angle spanned between the two solvent atoms and
the central solute atom, the parameter ζ must be an even
number and controls the sharpness of the angular distri-
bution, while the parameter λ is either +1 or −1 and
controls whether the location of the minimum of the co-
sine bracket is at ϑijk = 0 or at ϑijk = π. Training the
ANN is facilitated if all inputs lie in a range between 0
and 1. We therefore used 0.5(cos(φ)+1) for every angle φ,
and (0.5(sin(ϑ) + 1), 0.5(cos(ϑ) + 1)) for every dihedral
angle ϑ. We normalized the symmetry functions, divid-
ing by the expected average number of atoms or pairs for
an isotropic distribution in the probing volume.
F.
MD simulations
We simulated alanine dipeptide in the amber ﬀ99SB-
ILDN forceﬁeld [56], with the termini capped by N-acetyl
and N-methylamide groups, and solvated by 543 TIP3P
water molecules [57].
We simulated a solution of lithium chloride in the
Joung and Cheatham forceﬁeld [58], using a cubic sim-
ulation box containing 37 lithium and 37 chloride ions,
solvated with 2104 TIP3P water molecules, correspond-
ing to a concentration of 1 M LiCl.
We performed all MD simulations using the openMM
MD engine [59], with a velocity Verlet integrator with ve-
locity randomization [60] from the python package open-
mmtools, using a time step of ∆t = 2 fs. All simulations
are performed in the NVT-Ensemble, at a temperature of
T = 300 K. The friction is set to γ = 1/ps, non-bonded
interactions are calculated using a particle mesh Ewald
scheme [61] with a cutoﬀof 1 nm and an error tolerance of
0.0005. We constrained the length of all bonds involving
hydrogen atoms.
G.
TPS
All TPS simulations were carried out using a cus-
tomized version of the openpathsampling python pack-
age [51] together with custom python code. For alanine
dipeptide the states A and B are deﬁned in terms of the
dihedral angles ψ and φ. For both states φ must lie in
the range [−π, 0]. For state A ψ must lie in the range
 2
3π, 10
9 π

, while for state B ψ ∈
 5
18π, 1
6π

.
We con-
sider LiCl ions bound if r ≤0.24 nm, and as unbound if
r ≥0.47 nm. We obtained initial TPs by standard MD
at a temperature of T = 400 K. New shooting conﬁgu-
rations xsp were selected from the last accepted TP with
probability reported in Eq. (4) with γ = 1.
We used custom code written using NumPy [62], SciPy
[63], IPython [64], Matplotlib [65], Cython [66], SymPy
[67], and mdtraj [68] to analyze and visualize data.
Molecular representations were made with VMD [69].
