UAI2001 
HINTON & TEH 
227 
Discovering Multiple Constraints that are 
Frequently Approximately Satisfied 
Geoffrey E. Hinton 
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit 
University College London 
17 Queen Square 
London WClN 3AR 
ENGLAND 
Abstract 
Some high-dimensional datasets can be mod­
elled by assuming that there are many dif­
ferent linear constraints, each of which is 
Frequently Approximately Satisfied (FAS) by 
the data. 
The probability of a data vec­
tor under the model is then proportional to 
the product of the probabilities of its con­
straint violations. We describe three meth­
ods of learning products of constraints using 
a heavy-tailed probability distribution for the 
violations. 
1 
CHOOSING A GENERATIVE 
MODEL 
High-dimensional data can be modelled by assuming 
that it was produced by some type of stochastic gen­
erative procedure whose structure and parameters can 
be estimated from observed data. The first step in 
this generative approach is to choose a class of gener­
ative models and there are several important criteria 
governing this choice. 
• It should be easy to generate samples from a 
fully specified model. 
• It should be easy to evaluate the log probability 
of a test case under the generative model. 
• It should be easy to infer the posterior distribu­
tion over unobserved variables in the model when 
some variables are observed. 
• It should be easy to learn the parameters (or dis­
tributions over the parameters). 
• The model class should be flexible enough to rep­
resent the structure of the data efficiently. 
Yee-Whye Teh 
Department of Computer Science 
University of Toronto 
10 Kings College Road 
Toronto Ontario M5S 3G4 
CANADA 
Unfortunately, for data like images or speech it is hard 
to satisfy all of these criteria simultaneously. Mixture 
models, for example, satisfy the first four criteria but 
fail on representational adequacy for data in which sev­
eral separate causes conspire to produce each observed 
data vector. If, for example, an image can contain 
several objects, an accurate mixture model of whole 
images must have a separate mixture component for 
every possible combination of objects and it is there­
fore exponentially inefficient. 
Directed, acyclic graphical models (i.e. causal models) 
are an efficient way to represent multiple simultaneous 
causes so they can overcome the representational in­
adequacies of mixture models, but exact inference be­
comes intractable when nodes have more than a few 
parents which is typically the case for sensory data like 
speech or images. 
1.1 
VARIATIONAL INFERENCE IN 
CAUSAL MODELS 
Progress has recently been made by using approximate 
inference techniques in directed acyclic graphs that are 
too densely connected to allow exact inference. The 
true posterior distribution over the unobserved vari­
ables, P, is approximated by using a distribution, Q, 
that lies within a simpler and more tractable class of 
distributions and that minimizes the Kullback-Leibler 
divergence K L( Q liP). When Q is used in place of P 
for evaluating the log probability of a test case, it gives 
a lower bound whose tightness is KL(QIIP). When Q 
is used in place of P for adjusting parameters there is 
no guarantee that the log likelihood of the parameters 
increases, but the log likelihood penalized by the inac­
curacy of the approximate inference, KL(QIIP), does 
increase (Neal and Hinton, 1998; Jordan et. al., 1999). 

228 
HINTON & TEH 
UA12001 
2 
PRODUCTS OF EXPERTS 
Despite the successes of variational inference for fit­
ting causal models, it is worth considering a differ­
ent approach in which we abandon the very first cri­
terion, ease of generation, and use generative models 
for which generation is intractable1 but inference and 
learning are easy. For tasks like the interpretation of 
sensory data, inference and learning are what is im­
portant and the stochastic generative model is just a 
convenient way of defining what inference and learning 
are achieving, so there is no practical requirement for 
generation to be easy. 
A particularly interesting class of intractable genera­
tive models are the "Products of Experts" (PoE) in 
which the probability distribution over a set of ob­
servable (visible) variables is defined as the normal­
ized product of the distributions generated by m sep­
arate "experts" where each expert typically consists 
of a tractable latent variable model that is easy to fit 
to data. For data that lies in a discrete space, a PoE 
defines a distribution over data vectors, d in the fol­
lowing way: 
where ej is all the parameters of individual model j, 
]j(dJBj) is the probability of d under model j (inte­
grating over the latent variables of model j) and c in­
dexes all possible data vectors (i.e. vectors of states of 
the visible variables). The major advantage of a prod­
uct of experts is that exact inference is simple. Given 
an observed data vector, the latent variables of differ­
ent experts are conditionally independent so there is 
no "explaining away". 
The obvious way to fit a PoE to data is to follow the 
gradient of the log likelihood: 
8 logp( dJBJ ... Bm) 
ae1 
8log iJ(dJBj) 
aej 
_"" ( JB 
e )
8logfJ(cJBJ) 
ǋP c 
1 . .. m 
oB· 
c 
J 
(2) 
The first term on the RHS of equation 2 is tractable if 
the individual experts correspond to tractable models. 
1 Some researchers reserve "generative model" for causal 
models in which it is easy to generate unbiased samples. 
In this paper it will be used in the wider sense of any 
stochastic process that can, in principle, be used to produce 
observations with a well-defined probability distribution. 
Unfortunately, the second term on the RHS of equa­
tion 2 involves a sum over all conceivable observations 
so it seems as if the only hope is to get a noisy but fairly 
unbiased estimate of this term by using Markov Chain 
Monte Carlo to sample from the space of possible ob­
servations with a probability approaching p( cJ81 . .. Bm). 
Fortunately, Hinton (2001) shows that it is helpful to 
replace the log likelihood of the observed data with a 
different objective function called "contrastive diver­
gence" which is much easier to optimize than the log 
likelihood. This allows a product of experts to be fitted 
to data efficiently. We shall return to contrastive di­
vergence after considering various types of expert and 
various other ways of fitting them to data. 
3 
TYPES OF EXPERT 
An expert, j, is simply a way of associating an energy 
contribution, Ej(d) with any possible data vector, d. 
The probability of d under the PoE generative model is 
then defined to be proportional to exp(- Lj E1 (d)). 
In a PoE, Ei(d) does not depend on the behaviour 
of the other experts. More precisely, given the learned 
parameters of one expert, the energy contribution that 
it assigns to a data vector is independent of the other 
experts. 
The experts typically correspond to simple 
latent variable models and the energy contributed by 
expert j then corresponds to -logp(dJllj), where ej 
denotes the parameters of expert j. 
Within the broad class of energy-based models a lot of 
attention has been given to models with binary vari­
ables and quadratic energy functions (Hopfield, 1981; 
Hinton and Sejnowski 1986), possibly because such 
models are familiar to physicists. Such models can be 
restricted by forbidding connections between hidden 
units (Smolensky, 1986; Freund and Haussler, 1992) 
and they then correspond to PoE's in which each hid­
den unit and its connections constitute an expert (Hin­
ton, 2001) and the energy contribution of an expert 
corresponds to a free energy (i.e the negative log of 
the probability with the state of the binary hidden 
variable integrated out). 
The general idea of modelling a probability distribu­
tion over visible variables by using an additive energy 
function does not require binary variables or quadratic 
energy functions. An interesting alternative is to use 
real-valued hidden variables whose scalar values are 
a non-stochastic parameterized function of the real­
valued visible variables. The value of a hidden vari­
able is interpreted as the violation of a constraint and 
the energy contributed by each hidden variable is the 
negative log probability of this violation under some 
probability distribution over violations. 
An interesting special case of this approach is obtained 

UA12001 
HINTON & TEH 
229 
by using violations that are a linear function of the vis­
ible variables. If the cost function for violations, v, is 
of the form kv2 (corresponding to an assumed zero­
mean Gaussian distribution) then the strongest linear 
constraints correspond to the eigenvectors of the co­
variance matrix with the smallest eigenvalues and it 
is relatively straightforward to find these "minor com­
ponents" . 
If, however, the assumed distributions of 
the violations are non-Gaussian, the product of linear 
constraints model becomes more powerful but harder 
to fit to data. 
Consider a single expert that uses a 
student-t distribution for the violation, v, 
-logp(v) = log(1 + kv2) + c 
(3) 
This cost function is very tolerant of making a very 
large violation even larger, but very determined to 
make a fairly small violation even smaller. It there­
fore corresponds well to the idea of a Frequently Ap­
proximately Satisfied constraint that is occasionally 
strongly violated. 
4 
A SIMPLISTIC WAY OF 
FITTING CONSTRAINTS 
For the cost function in equation 3 with the value of k 
fixed, it is easy to fit one linear FAS constraint of the 
form 
v(d) = l:w;d; 
(4) 
where w; is a learned weight and d; is the ith compo­
nent of data vector d. We simply alternate between 
steps that rescale the weights to satisfy the constraint 
L; w; = 1 and gradient descent steps in the the cost 
function 
casesc 
Even this very simple learning rule discovers interest­
ing contraints. Figure 1 consists of synthetic images 
of straight edges with random positions, orientations 
and intensities. 
High-frequency anticorrelated noise 
has been added to make it harder to predict the inten­
sity of a pixel exactly from its neighbors. When the 
simple learning rule is applied using a circular win­
dow on these images, it produces the gratings shown 
in figure 2. A grating is the best filter for ignoring an 
edge of unknown location and orientation because the 
Figure 1: 
Synthetic edge images are generated by 
choosing a random orientation and position, a random 
low intensity in the range [0, 0.3], and a random high 
intensity in the range [0. 7, 1]. The hard edge is then 
softened by blending the high and low intensities using 
the logistic function a( d) = 1/(1 + exp( -2d)) where d 
is the distance in pixels of the center of a pixel from the 
edge. Finally, high-frequency anti-correlated noise is 
added. At each pixel, we sample x from a zero-mean, 
unit-variance Gaussian and then add 0.4x to the pixel 
and subtract 0.1x from each of its four neighbors. 
grating will produce an output close to zero unless the 
edge is in almost the same orientation as the grating 
in which case the output may be far from zero. The 
idea that an oriented filter is ideal for ignoring edges 
comes as a surprise to some vision researchers. If we 
implemnt a version of minor components analysis by 
using a parabolic cost function for the violations, the 
filters become circularly symmetric. 
To encourage the gratings in figure 2 to be different 
from one another we used a simple heuristic that was 
weakly inspired by research on boosting (Freund and 
Schapire, 1995). In boosting, experts are learned se­
quentially and the data used to train one expert is ob­
tained by reweighting the training data so that data 
that is not well modelled by the previous experts is 
given a high weight. Our experts are density models as 
opposed to conditional density models, we train them 
all in parallel, not sequentially, and we reweight each 
training case by its total violation energy, E, rather 
than exp(E), but apart from that it is like boosting. 
Reweighting the data tends to make the experts differ-

230 
HINTON & TEH 
UAI2001 
l' I. 
;/ 
"' 
l 
/ 
·» 
Ǌ· 
i 
P 
, 
; 
l 
\ 
¸ 
O 
·.ǉ 
'i 
l 
:' 
··:¾, 
• ' "'1 
"'"' 
< 
,. . ,. 
: 
.: . .. , 
¹ 
N. 
\ 
t 
,, 
I 
J' ' 
J 
.%:&'Pi 
/'' 
'$ii.c 
.. L 
..,.$ 
' 
,R:· 
.,'\\ 
º 
' 
 I' 
' ' 
Ċ· 
Q 
ill. 
¼·½ 
·, 
Figure 2: 25 constraints that were learned on images of 
the type shown in figure 1. Each constraint is a linear 
filter whose output is typically close to zero. White 
represents positive filter weights, black negative, and 
gray is zero. The filters are all global because the im­
ages have strong long-range correlations. The constant 
kin Eq. 5 was fixed at 100. The weights are updated 
4000 times using 10-7 times the gradient of Etotal on 
a batch of 1000 images plus 0.98 times the previous 
weight update. When many filters are learned at the 
same time, the gradient on each case is also weighted 
by the total violation energy on that case divided by 
the average total violation energy over all cases in the 
batch. 
ent because it causes an uncommitted expert to learn 
faster on high energy cases that are far from the con­
straint planes that have been learned by the other 
experts. 
The uncommitted expert is therefore more 
strongly attracted to FAS constraints that have not 
already been found by other experts. 
It seems quite likely that applying boosting properly 
would give better results. The fact that the normal­
ization term in Eq. 1 cannot be computed does not 
matter because reweighting the training data only re­
quires the relative probabilities of the training cases. 
Reweighting the training data by the reciprocal of its 
probability under the previous experts can be very 
problematic for high-dimensional density models be­
cause the probability of one particular training case is 
often much smaller than all the others, so the worst 
case dominates the reweighted training set. But this 
objection may be much less serious for experts that 
histogram of violations 
2500 r----.--..,--r--,--..,--,----, 
2000 
1.5 
2 
Figure 3: A histogram of outputs of the filters in figure 
2 on a batch of 1000 images. 
use a heavy-tailed distribution over a scalar variable. 
However, there does not seem to be anything to pre­
vent boosting from learning a set of FAS constraints 
that give much higher probability to some unobserved 
region of the dataspace than to the training data. To 
avoid this it is necessary to take into account the sec­
ond term in equation 2 or some surrogate for this term. 
5 
FITTING MANY CONSTRAINTS 
USING PSEUDO-LIKELIHOOD 
Given the parameters of the experts in a PoE, it is 
easy to compute the energy of any actual or possi­
ble state of all the visible variables. 
It is therefore 
easy to do Gibbs sampling by considering the visible 
variables one at a time and picking a new value for 
the chosen visible variable, i, from its posterior dis­
tribution given the current values of the other visible 
variables. This posterior distribution is proportional 
to exp( -E(di, di=a)) for each possible state, 
a, of 
the visible variable di. By repeatedly updating visi­
ble variables until a stationary distribution is reached, 
it is possible to sample visible states from the gener­
ative distribution defined by the PoE. Unfortunately 
this can be very computationally expensive and it only 
gives a noisy estimate of the gradient of the log likeli­
hood defined by equation 2. 
Instead of attempting to maximize the log likelihood of 
the observed data, we could attempt to maximize the 
log pseudo-likelihood (Besag, 1975) which is defined 

UAI 2001 
HINTON & TEH 
231 
as: 
LLlogp(dfldi) 
(6) 
c 
where d'f is the state of visible variable i on train­
ing case c and df denotes the states of all the other 
visible variables. So long as we maximize the pseudo­
likelihood by learning the parameters of a single global 
energy function, the conditional density models for 
each visible variable given the others are guaranteed to 
be consistent with one another, so we avoid the prob­
lems that can arise when we learn n separate condi­
tional density models for predicting the n visible vari­
ables. 
Rather than using Gibbs sampling to sample ftom the 
stationary distribution, we are learning to get the indi­
vidual moves of a Gibbs sampler correct by assuming 
that the observed data is from the stationary distribu­
tion so that the state of a visible variable is an unbi­
ased sample from its posterior distribution given the 
states of the other visible variables. If we can find 
an energy function that gets the individual moves cor­
rect there is no need to ever compute the gradient of 
the log likelihood. Pseudo-likelihood therefore replaces 
the exponentially expensive partition function in Eq. 
1 with a one-dimensional partition function for each 
visible variable, and this makes it feasible to compute 
exact derivatives which allows optimization methods 
like conjugate gradient to be used. 
To get the derivative of the log pseudo-likelihood on a 
given training case, we first compute the energy con­
tributed by each of the m constraints given the ob­
served states of all n visible variables. This requires 
O(mn) operations. Then, assuming the visible vari­
ables are discrete or quantized, for each of the a alter­
native states of each visible variable we compute how 
the energy contributed by each constraint would vary 
if the state of that visible variable was changed. So 
computing the exact derivative of Eq. 6 requires only 
O(mna) operations per training case. 
Empirical research on the effectiveness of finding FAS 
constraints by optimizing the log pseudo-likelihood is 
underway but has not yet produced any impressive 
results and it appears to be considerably slower than 
the method which we describe next. 
6 
FITTING MANY CONSTRAINTS 
USING CONTRASTIVE 
DIVERGENCE 
Consider an expert, j, that has a binary latent vari­
able, 
s i, that chooses between two different, zero-
mean Gaussian models for the violation of a linear 
constraint. 
The parameters of the expert are the 
weights >.i that define the constraint plane, the vari­
ances o}1, o}0 and m1, where the probability of choos­
ing variance o}1 is 1/(1 + exp(-mJ)). By learning to 
make one Gaussian broad and the other narrow, the 
expert can implement a heavy-tailed model of the vi­
olations that is appropriate for a FAS constraint. 
If the latent state of an expert is known, the expert 
represents an improper distribution that is Gaussian 
in the direction orthogonal to the constraint plane and 
uniform in the other n - 1 orthogonal directions. As­
suming the experts represent at least n linearly inde­
pendent constraints, their product represents a Gaus­
sian distribution in the space of data vectors, so it 
is possible to sample randomly from this space pro­
vided the states of all the binary latent variables, s, 
are given. It is also straightforward to sample from 
the states of the binary latent variables given a data 
vector because they are conditionally independent. So 
by alternately sampling from p(sld) and p(dls) it is 
possible to perform Gibbs sampling and produce sam­
ples from p( cl01 ... 0m) in Eq. 2. Following the gradient 
in Eq. 2 maximizes the log likelihood of the data which 
is equivalent to minimizing the Kullback-Leibler diver­
gence, K L(P0 IIP000) between the observed data distri­
bution p0 and the equilibrium distribution over the 
visible variables, P'f', that is produced by prolonged 
Gibbs sampling2• 
Hinton (2001) describes an effective learning procedure 
that is much faster than running the Markov chain 
to equilibrium. We simply run the chain Jor on«=;...full 
Gibbs step by sampling s "'p(sld) and d ,..., p(dls), 
where d is a one-step reconstruction of d. If we then 
use d in place of an equilibrium sample from the gen­
erative model, the gradient learning rule defined by 
Eq. 2 approximates the gradient of the contrastive di­
vergence, KL(P011Pe00)- KL(PJIIP000), where PJ is 
the distribution of the one-step reconstructions of the 
observed data. 
Because the distribution PJ is closer to equilibrium 
than the distribution P0, the contrastive divergence 
cannot be negative. The main justification for mini­
mizing contrastive divergence is that it is easy to do 
and it produces good results. But an intuitive jus­
tification may also be helpful. If we had a perfect 
model of the data and we started the Markov chain 
used in Gibbs sampling at the data distribution it 
would just sit there going nowhere. Inadequacies in 
the model show up as a consistent tendency for the 
Markov chain to move away from the data distribu-
2 p0 is a natural way to denote the data distribution if 
we imagine starting a Markov chain at the data distribution 
at time 0. 

232 
HINTON & TEH 
UAI 2001 
tion. We do not need to run the chain all the way to 
equilibrium to sense this tendency. One step is suf­
ficient. If KL(P0IIPr') > KL(PJIIPOX') we already 
know that the model is inadequate and we also have 
information about how to fix it. 
6.1 
THE GRADIENTS 
For a data vector d, let the violation be Vj 
= >.f d 
and Sjl = E[sJid] and Sjo 
= 1- sild. The gradients 
represented by the first term on the RHS of Eq. 2 are: 
(7) 
(8) 
(9) 
(10) 
To get the approximate derivative of the contrastive 
divergence with respect of each of the parameters mj, 
log a"J1, log a"J0 and AJ, we subtract from the derivative 
above the same derivative computed using d in place 
of d, Sj1 in place of Sjl, Sjo in place of Sjo and VJ in 
place of Vj, where Sj1, Sj0 and Vj are computed using 
d in place of d. 
6.2 
HOW THE RECONST RUCTIONS ARE 
PRODUCED 
To generate the reconstruction d of a data vector d, we 
first sample, for each expert j, which Gaussian to use 
from the posterior Sj 
,..., p(sJid), and then reconstruct 
by sampling d from a zero mean Gaussian distribu­
tion with inverse covariance«= ADAT where the jth 
column of A is Aj, and D is a diagonal matrix with 
DJJ = SJ/cr]1 + (1- si)/cr]0. 
Suppose that A is invertible. Then Ĉ is invertible 
too. The naive way of sampling from d is to use the 
Cholesky factorization of =- However this is very in­
efficient since = is different for each training case and 
each iteration, and it requires O(n3) operations to fac­
torize each «. where n is the dimensionality of d. An 
alternative method is to first sample u = A rd_, which 
has covariance AT=-1 A 
= n-l' and then compute 
d =A -TQ. This is more efficient since D is diagonal, 
and computing A -Tu requires only O(n2) operations 
(with an O(n3) overhead per iteration, for all training 
cases). 
When A is not invertible, there are two problems -
the columns of A might not be linearly independent, 
and they might not span the vector space (the two 
problems can occur independently of each other since 
the number of constraints m can be greater or less 
than the number of dimensions n). We can solve the 
first problem by increasing the dimensionality of d. 
In particular, append m zeros to each input vector, 
and append mj to each Aj, where mj is the jth unit 
vector of length m. Now {>.j} is independent, but >.1d 
stays unchanged so the gradients (7-10) need not be 
modified. 
Now suppose that {>.j} is linearly independent, but 
does not span the space. Let U be the space spanned 
by {>.1} and V its orthogonal complement. Note that 
the (non-trivial) nullspace ofĉ is exactly V. Decom­
posed= du + dv where du E U and dv E V. Then 
¶ is positive-definite on U so we can sample du, but 
= is exactly 0 on V, so dv has infinite variance. To 
deal with this, consider dv to be Gaussian distributed 
with zero mean and variance p, and take p · oo. Now 
u = Ad = Adu still has covariance n-1 so we can 
sample u first and set du = A#u where A# is the 
pseudo-inverse of A. 
Now integrate out dv. This 
will not affect (7-9). For (10), since dv is zero mean, 
E[vJd] = Vjdu is independent of p, and taking p µ oo 
will not affect it either. 
In summary, we reconstruct with the following algo­
rithm : 
Sj,..., p(sild) 
u ,..., Gaussian(O; D-1) 
d=A#u 
Figure 4 shows the constraints that are learned when 
the algorithm above is applied to 16 x 16 patches of 
images of outdoor scenes. 
7 
MORE GENERAL 
CONSTRAINTS 
This paper has considered planar constraints for which 
the violation is a linear function of the data. This 
makes it tractable to map a Gaussian distribution 
over the violations to a Gaussian distribution over the 
data space, which was useful when producing the re­
constructions required for estimating the gradient of 
the contrastive divergence. The gradient of the log 
pseudo-likelihood, however, can easily be computed for 
smooth non-linear constraints, since it only requires 
the energy contributed by a constraint and its deriva­
tive. So each "constraint" could be a feedforward, 
multilayer neural network with one output unit whose 
activity represents the violation. 

UAI2001 
HINTON & TEH 
233 
Figure 4: A randomly selected subset of the 256 con­
straints that were learned on 16 x 16 patches of nat­
ural images. 
Nearly all of the constraints have be­
come quite local and strongly dislike edges or bars 
in a particular "preferred" orientation. 
The image 
patches were preprocessed by adding high-frequency, 
anti-correlated noise. 
8 
CONSTRAINTS AND NEURONS 
Early research on the response properties of individual 
neurons in visual cortex typically assumed that neu­
rons were rather specific feature detectors that only 
fired when they found a close match to the feature of 
interest. For the early stages of the visual cortex, this 
assumption has largely been replaced by the idea that 
the receptive fields of neurons represent basis functions 
and the neural activities represent coefficients on these 
basis functions. The sensory input is then represented 
as a weighted linear combination of the basis functions 
which is equivalent to assuming that the sensory input 
is generated by a causal linear model with one layer 
of latent variables and that low-level perception con­
sists of inferring the most likely values of the latent 
variables given the sensory data. W ith the added as­
sumption that the latent variables have heavy-tailed 
distributions, it is possible to learn biologically real­
istic receptive fields by fitting a linear, causal gener­
ative model to patches of natural images ( Olshausen 
and Field, 1996; Bell and Sejnowski, 1996). 
However, a linear causal model is just one possible way 
of interpreting the biological data. 
It leads to slow, 
iterative algorithms for computing the activations of 
the basis functions when they are non-orthogonal, as 
they must be if they are over-complete. As we have 
seen, a product of constraints is a very different type 
of generative model which can give rise to quite simi­
lar receptive fields and which allows very rapid infer­
ence even when the constraints are highly correlated 
with one another. This suggests an interesting possi­
bility. Instead of thinking of neurons as devices that 
are designed to find significant features or to learn ba­
sis functions, we can view them as devices that learn 
to model the constraints in the sensory data and that 
only complain to higher levels when these constraints 
are violated. The outputs of neurons are then seen as 
residual errors, and a multilayer network is seen as a 
hierarchy of separate models each of which captures 
the structure remaining in the residual errors from the 
previous layer. 
An attractive aspect of this view is 
that attention generally needs to be directed towards 
parts of the world that violate our expectations and 
this is easy to implement if neural activities represent 
violations of regularities.
