From 9-IM Topological Operators to Qualitative Spatial Relations 
using 3D Selective Nef Complexes and Logic Rules for bodies 
Helmi Ben Hmida1,2,Christophe Cruz2, Frank Boochs1, Christophe Nicolle2 
1Laboratoire Le2i, UMR-5158 CNRS, Dep. Informatique IUT Dijon, 7 Boulevard Docteur Petitjean,  
BP 17867, 21078 Dijon CEDEX, France 

2Institut i3mainz, am Fachbereich 1 - Geoinformatik und Vermessung,  
Fachhochschule Mainz, Lucy-Hillebrand-Str. 2, 55128 Mainz, Germany 

 
Keywords: 
Topological relations ; 9-IM ; Selective Nef Complex ; Ontology ; Logic rules ; OWL ; SWRL ; 
Abstract: 
This paper presents a method to compute automatically topological relations using SWRL rules. The 
calculation of these rules is based on the definition of a Selective Nef Complexes Nef Polyhedra structure 
generated from standard Polyhedron. The Selective Nef Complexes is a data model providing a set of binary 
Boolean operators such as Union, Difference, Intersection and Symmetric difference, and unary operators 
such as Interior, Closure and Boundary. In this work, these operators are used to compute topological 
relations between objects defined by the constraints of the 9 Intersection Model (9-IM) from Egenhofer. 
With the help of these constraints, we defined a procedure to compute the topological relations on Nef 
polyhedra. These topological relationships are Disjoint, Meets, Contains, Inside, Covers, CoveredBy, 
Equals and Overlaps, and defined in a top-level ontology with a specific semantic definition on relation such 
as Transitive, Symmetric, Asymmetric, Functional, Reflexive, and Irreflexive. The results of the 
computation of topological relationships are stored in an OWL-DL ontology allowing after what to infer on 
these new relationships between objects. In addition, logic rules based on the Semantic Web Rule Language 
allows the definition of logic programs that define which topological relationships have to be computed on 
which kind of objects with specific attributes. For instance, a “Building” that overlaps a “Railway” is a 
“RailStation”.  
1. INTRODUCTION 
Nowadays, qualitative spatial relationships are 
used in many areas of Computer Science where 
reasoning about such relationships is fundamental to 
infer about graphical depiction through logic 
mechanisms. Such relationships facilitate the access 
to data by a query processing mechanism that refers 
to objects and their relationships. Methods for 
modelling spatial relationships have been compiled 
in several surveys such as (Galton, 2009) where 
current models belong to two main categories – 
connection based model (Randell, et al., 1992), and 
intersection based one (Egenhofer & Herring, 1990). 
From a logical point of view, the qualitative models 
are defined to infer on topological relations without 
taking into account real geometries. The Open 
Geospatial Consortium (OGC) has defined a 
standard nomination to the basic topological 
relations (Consortium, 2012). From the    space 
implementation of theses topological relation point 
of view, (Borrmann, et al., 2009), the octree-based 
implementation, (Meagher, 1982), and the B-Rep 
approaches (Lienhardt, 1991) are used to define the 
spatial operators of a query language. In the octree-
approach, Octrees allows the application of recursive 
algorithms that successively increase the discrete 
resolution of the spatial objects employed. The B-
Rep, approach is used for metric operators such as 
mindist, maxdist, isCloserto and isFartherfrom.  
From the semantics point of view, the qualitative 
spatial relations are used to perform inference and to 
identify inconsistencies on these relations. An 
ontology 
based 
approach 
is 
described 
in 
(Karmacharya, et al., 2011) and focuses on regions 

 
in   . The presented approach aims at defining 
topological relations based on the 9 Intersection 
Model in   , (Ellul & Haklay, 2009), and compute 
them with the Boolean operators defined by the Nef 
polyhedra (Granados, et al., 2003). In the actual 
contribution, the quantitative spatial operators are 
implemented using built-ins based the Semantic 
Web Rules Languages (SWRL) which allows the 
definition of logic program base on Horn-like 
clauses (Horrocks, et al., 2004). This language is 
designed to perform logical program on Ontology 
Web Language (OWL) (Antoniou & Harmelen, 
2009). Consequently, the results of these 3D spatial 
operators may enrich the ontology with spatial 
relations between the different objects represented 
via polyhedron. Figure 1 depicts the process 
sequence for the enrichment of an ontology 
containing 3D objects.  
 
 
Figure 1: General overview of the process sequence 
This paper is divided into 5 sections. Section 2 
introduces the technical background on 9-IM, 
Selective Nef Complex, and logic rules. Section 3 
deals 
with 
the 
important 
elements 
of 
the 
implementation concerning the process sequence. 
Section 4 highlight the SWRL rules impact on 
semantic qualification of geometries and finally 
section 5 concludes the paper. 
2. BACKGROUND 
This section is divided into three sections. The 
next sub-section focuses on the 9-IM models used to 
qualify topologic relation. The second sub-section 
deals with a new data model called Selective Nef 
Complexes that allows the computation of operators 
on Nef Polyhedra. These operators are used to verify 
the topological relation constraints. Finally, the last 
section deals with the logic aspect and the 
representation of quantitative topological relations. 
2.1 
Topological relationships 
Spatial reasoning is the process that uses spatial 
theory and artificial intelligence to model and to 
analyse spatial relations between objects. The 
standard models are composed by the Simple 
Feature Relations, The Egenhofer Relations and the 
RCC8 Relations (Stocker & Sirin, 2009). The 
Egenhofer Relations are composed of the following 
relationships: Equals, Disjoint, Meet, Overlap, 
Covers, Covered by, Inside, Contains (Egenhofer, 
2010).  
Binary 
topological 
relations 
between 
two 
objects, A and B is based upon the intersection of 
A’s interior (A°), boundary ( A), and exterior (A-) 
with B’s interior (B°), boundary ( B), and exterior 
(B-). The 9 intersections between the six objects 
parts describe a topological relation and can be 
concisely represented by a 3x3 matrix, called the 9-
Intersection Model. The binary relationship R(A,B) 
between the two objects is then identified by 
composing all the possible set intersections of the 
six topological primitives, i.e. AB,  AB, 
AB, 
A B, 
 A B, 
A B, 
AB, AB,AB, and qualifying empty () 
or non-empty () intersections. Table 1 shows the 
9-IM matrices of the eight topological predicates 
defined by Egenhofer.  
Table 1: The 9-IM matrix 
 
 (   )  (
     
     
     
     
     
      
     
     
     
) 
 
 
Table 2: The 6 topological relations between the basic 
body object, A is the blue box, and B is the red box. 
 
 
 
 
A meets B 
B meets A 
 
 
(
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
) 
(
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
) (
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
) 
 
A contains 
B 
B inside A 
 
 
 
 
(
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
) 
3D SNC 
9-IM 
Logic Rules 
Ontology and 
Inference 
3D Selective Nef Complex operators used to 
compute 9-IM relations 
Logic rules used to define which relationships 
have to be computed 
New Qualitative topologic relation population in 
the ontology.  
Knowledge processing can be undertaken 

 
A equals B 
B equals A 
 
 
 
(
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
) 
 
Table 2 represents the topology in   and    with 
the 9-IM matrixes for bodies. A basic body object in 
3D space is a convex polyhedron that constructed by 
n (n>2) connected regions (r1, r2, …,rn). The 
interior connects and does not contain holes. 
2.2 
Selective Nef Complex 
 The Selective Nef Complex (SNC) presents a 
model to define a partition with the labelling of its 
cells. When the labels are Booleans in order to 
define the in and out parts, the complex describes a 
set, a so-called Nef polyhedra (Nef, 1978). In the 
implementation of Nef polyhedra in 3D (Granados, 
et al., 2003), they offer a B-rep data structure that is 
closed under Boolean operations and with all their 
generality. Starting from halfspaces, it is possible to 
work 
with 
union, 
intersection, 
difference, 
complement, interior, exterior, boundary, closure, 
and regularization operators. The theory of Nef 
polyhedra 
has 
been 
developed 
for 
arbitrary 
dimensions. A Nef-polyhedra in dimension d is a 
point set P ⊆    generated from a finite number of 
open half spaces by set complement and set 
intersection operations and is closed under all 
Boolean set operations. The implementation in 
(Granados, et al., 2003) provides functions and 
operators for the most common ones: complement, 
union, difference, intersection and symmetric 
difference. It provides the topological operations 
interior, closure and boundary. The interior operator 
deselects all boundary items. The boundary operator 
deselects all volumes, and the closure operator 
selects all boundary items. 
Table 3: Set of binary and unary operators 
Operators 
Syntax 
Complement 
   
Union 
    
Difference 
    
Intersection 
    
Symmetric difference 
      
Interior 
 I( ) 
Closure 
 C(A) 
boundary 
 B( ) 
 
2.3 
Ontology and rules 
Ontology is a formal representation of the 
knowledge through the hierarchy of concepts and the 
relationships between those concepts. In theory, 
ontology is a formal, explicit specification of shared 
conceptualization (Gruber, 1993). Description logics 
(DLs) (Calvanese, et al., 2001) are a family of 
knowledge representation languages that can be used 
to represent knowledge of an application domain in 
a structured and formally well-understood way. The 
following example defines a Mother as a Woman 
which has at least a child type of Person. By 
inference, it means that every individual type of 
Women which as at least a relation with a Person 
and the type of the relation is “hasChild”, then this 
Woman is of kind of Mother. 
 
                                 
 
(1) 
As the Semantic Web technologies matured, the 
need 
of 
incorporating 
the 
concepts 
behind 
description logic within the ontology languages was 
realized. It took few generations for the ontology 
languages defined within Web environment to 
implement the description language completely. The 
Web Ontology Language (OWL) (Antoniou & 
Harmelen, 2009) is intended to be used when the 
information contained in documents needs to be 
processed by applications and not by human. The 
horn logic more commonly known the Horn clauses 
is a clause with at least one positive literal. It has 
been used as the base of logic programming and 
Prolog languages (Sterling, et al., 1986) for years. 
These languages allow the description of knowledge 
with predicates. Summarizing, it could be said that 
ontology defines the data structure of a knowledge 
base and this knowledge base could be inferred 
through various inference engines. These inference 
engines can be perform under Horn logic through 
Horn-like rules languages. The system of built-ins 
should also help in the interoperation of SWRL with 
other Web formalisms by providing an extensible, 
modular built-ins infrastructure for Semantic Web 
Languages, Web Services, and Web applications. 
These built-ins are keys for any external integration, 
like the integration of the topological operators.  
2.4 
Enrichment of an ontology from 
Boolean operators 
The use of SNC model and its associated Boolean 
operator allows us to model the topological 

 
relationships. In order to combine SWRL rules with 
topological operators, news built-ins are defined in 
order to compute the operator. Consequently, the 
results of the operators can be used to define queries 
or to enrich the ontology with new topological 
relationships between two objects. In order to make 
it possible, two issues appear and have to be solved. 
First, the semantic definition of the relationships has 
to be done in the ontology regarding their own 
properties. Second, the calculation of topological 
relationships using Boolean operators has to be 
defined regarding the constraints of the 9-IM model. 
The following rule specifies that a “Building” 
defined in the ontology that overlaps a “Railway” 
defined as well in the ontology, is a “RailStation”. 
 
Buiding(?b) ^ Railway(?r) ^ 
topo:overlaps(?b, ?r)  RailStation(?b) 
(2) 
3. IMPLEMENTATION 
This section is divided into three sections. The 
first describes how the Boolean operators are used to 
compute the 9-IM matrix for a topological relation 
qualification. 
The 
second 
introduces 
news 
relationships in the top-level ontology and its built-
in counterparts. These news relationships are 
specified with a semantic definition. The last section 
deals with the translation engine which allows the 
computation of the topological built-ins to enrich the 
ontology.  
3.1 
Calculation of 9-IM using the SNC 
Boolean operators 
Table 4 presents an overview of the available 
SNC Boolean operators. Regarding the Table 1 
about the 9-IM matrix, only the operators about 
intersection (   ), interior (   equivalent I(A)), 
boundary 
(   
is 
equivalent 
to 
B(A)) 
and 
complement (   is equivalent to   ( )   ( )   that 
we will be denoted as E(A)) are necessary. 
Consequently, the following 9-IM matrix with SNC 
operators is deduced.  
Table 4: The updated 9-IM matrix with SNC operators 
 (   )  (
 ( )   ( )
 ( )   ( )
 ( )   ( )
 ( )   ( )
 ( )   ( )
 ( )   ( )
 ( )   ( )
 ( )   ( )
 ( )   ( )
) 
 
If the results of the nine updated equation is 
conformed to the expected results then the relation is 
true. Otherwise the relation is false. Table 5 is an 
example of the disjoint relation. If one of these 
equations is false, then the relation between the two 
objects does not exist. 
Table 5:.Example for the disjoint relation 
 (   )
 (
 ( )   ( )   
 ( )   ( )   
 ( )   ( )    
 ( )   ( )   
 ( )   ( )   
 ( )   ( )    
 ( )   ( )    
 ( )   ( )    
 ( )   ( )    
) 
3.2 
Definition of topologic relationships 
in the ontology 
Regarding our knowledge base, the top level 
ontology is created to model the topological 
relationships. This ontology is used to enrich an 
existing knowledge base to make it possible to 
define topological relationships between objects. 
The next table summarizes for each topological 
relation, its name in the ontology using the prefix 
“topo”, its semantic characteristics and the new 
built-in to automatize the computation of relations 
with the help of SWRL rules. In addition, two 
inverse relations are defined in the top level 
ontology. The topo:inside relation is the inverse 
relation 
of 
topo:contains, 
and 
the 
relation 
topo:covers 
is 
the 
inverse 
relation 
of 
topo:coveredBy.  
Table 6: Definition of the topological relationships and its 
semantics 
Topologic 
relations 
Pro- 
perty 
Characteris-
tics 
SWRL built-ins 
Meets 
topo: 
meets 
Symmetric 
Irreflexive 
swrl_topo:meets 
(?x, ?y) 
Inside 
topo: 
inside 
Transitive 
 Asymmetric 
 Irreflexive 
swrl_topo:inside 
(?x, ?y) 
Equals 
topo: 
equals 
Transitive 
 Symmetric 
 Reflexive 
swrl_topo:equals 
(?x, ?y) 
3.3 
Translation engine 
The translation engine allows the computation of 
spatial SWRL rules which can also be in form of 
queries. It interprets the statements in order to parse 
the spatial components. Once the spatial components 
are parsed, they are computed through relevant 
spatial functions and operations by the translation 
engine through the operations provided at the SNC 
level. The results are populated in the knowledge 
base, thus making it spatially rich. After that, the 

 
spatial statements are translated to standard ones for 
the executions through their respective engines. 
With the inference engine, the enrichment and the 
population of the ontology through the results of the 
inference process is eventually stored in the 
knowledge base, Figure 2. 
 
 
Figure 2: The translation engine that process rules with 
topological built-ins. 
4. SWRL RULES IMPACT ON 
SEMANTIC QUALIFICATION 
To highlight the utilisability of the presented 
approach, we decide to extend the research by 
making a step forward from the qualification of the 
spatial relation semantically to the extension of the 
semantic rules and query language creating a 3D 
Semantic Spatial Qualification platform (3DSQ). 
Such an improvement will support the inference on 
3D spatial knowledge and will allow finally 
querying spatial knowledge base. To do, a Java 
prototype demonstrating the applicability of the 
presented concept was developed. It ensure the 
interaction between the users, the OWL ontology 
and the Qualification engine from one side and 
maintain an interactive visualisation of the qualified 
Spatial Relation from another side.  
Add to its ability to process Spatial Data in our 
case, 
3DSQ 
platform 
guarantee 
a 
common 
understanding of Spatial domain between Human 
and machines via ensuring the Semantic inference 
and 
queries 
using 
Spatial 
knowledge. 
The 
declaration of the spatial built-Ins in our cases 
respects the standard nomination suggested by 
Egenhofer (Egenhofer, 2010). As convention, each 
Topological Built-Ins began with the prefix 
“Swrlb_Topo” where the first syllable state that it 
presents a complex Built-Ins while the second one 
highlight the type of the Built-Ins, “Topo” in our 
case. Finally, the type of spatial topological 
predicate, “Inside” for example, will validate such a 
relation. In such case, the scene in question and the 
spatial qualification results are presented in different 
colours depending on the nature of objects.  
To prove it, an IFC architectural scene containing 
just geometric elements was populated in the 
ontology. Furthermore, spatial relations between 
populated geometries are qualified via the 3DSQ. In 
the next, two examples reflecting the main 
languages acting with the semantic web one which 
are the SWRL and SQWRL (Semantic Query-
Enhanced Web Rule Language) one will be 
highlighted. 
 
Figure 3: Example of an Inside Relationship (Blue Sky 
elements)  
First, the rule 3 shows an example able to extract 
from the knowledge base all the elements “Inside” 
walls individuals which can be qualified later on if 
respecting certain characteristics as windows for 
example, Figure 3. 
 
Wall(?x) ^ Geometry(?y) ^ swrlb_Topo:Inside 
(?x,?y) ^ haslength(?y,?l) ^ swrlb:LessThan 
(?l,2) → Windows (?y) 
 
(3) 
Second, as we have already selected a qualitative 
manner based on semantic knowledge to define 
spatial 
operators, 
SQWRL 
(Semantic 
Query-
Enhanced Web Rule Language) language can be 
used as a query language to query the knowledge 
base. The next equation (rule 4) is an example of a 
query that select all “Meets” spatial elements with 
the element “BldgElem__113_BBox” in the current 
knowledge base, Figure 4.  
 
Geometry(BldgElem__113) ∧ Geometry (?y) 
∧ Swrlb_Topo: Meets (BldgElem__113, ?y) 
→ sqwrl:select(?y) 
(4) 
3D topological 
SWRL rules 
Adjusted OWL ontology 
With SNC objects 
Regular 3D topological 
SWRL rules
Adjusted and populated 
OWL ontology
Translation Engine 
Standard 
Engine 

 
 
 
Figure 4: Example of SQWRL rule result  
5. CONCLUSION 
This paper presents a semantic method to 
compute automatically topological relations using 
OWL ontology and SWRL rules. The calculation of 
these rules is based on the definition of Nef 
Polyhedra which can be generated automatically 
from standard Polyhedron. A prototype is being 
developed 
using 
the 
library 
CGAL 
(http://www.cgal.org). Some simplification will be 
undertaken regarding the 9-IM computation of each 
topological relationship in order to reduce the 
calculation volume. Future work on topological 
relation qualification will be mainly focus on 
semantic qualification and inferences (Boley, et al., 
2001) and depicted in the next generation of SWRL 
topologic rule. This can also be done by a 
composition 
of 
relations, 
              
          
 
meet (?a, ?b) ^ contains(?a, ?c)  disjoint (?a, ?c)  
(4)
