On the Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus with IoT Devices and ML Techniques 
1
 
Abstract - The purpose of this Conference is to present the 
main lines of base projects that are founded on research already 
begun in previous years. In this sense, this manuscript will 
present the main lines of research in Diabetes Mellitus type 1 and 
Machine Learning techniques in an Internet of Things 
environment, so that we can summarize the future lines to be 
developed as follows: data collection through biosensors, massive 
data processing in the cloud, interconnection of biodevices, local 
computing vs. cloud computing, and possibilities of machine 
learning techniques to predict blood glucose values, including 
both variable selection algorithms and predictive techniques. 
 
I. INTRODUCCION 
 In 2021, Diabetes Mellitus (DM) is undoubtedly one of the 
leading health problems in the world, especially in more 
developed countries. Factors associated with the western life, 
such as a sedentary lifestyle, obesity, lack of physical activity, 
poor eating habits, and others related to genetics or age are 
intimately connected with the development of this pathology. 
Today, it is estimated that diabetes affects between 5% and 
10% of the Spanish population, according to the studies 
consulted. In this sense, in the last National Health Survey in 
Spain, for year 2017, 7.8% of the entire population had been 
diagnosed with DM. Specifically, this figure rose to 21% in 
those over 65, while in 1993, it only reached 4.1% [1]. 
DM is characterized by a continuous elevation of blood 
glucose, either due to a lack of endogenous insulin production, 
or resistance to its action, referring to the former as Type 1 
and the latter as Type 2 (DM1 and DM2, respectively). In both 
cases, the consequences of presenting abnormally high blood 
glucose levels, sustained over time, are devastating for the 
body. 
Thus, DM is a multipathology, which means it generates 
multiple possible ailments related to the evolution of the 
disease. In this regard, it should be noted that DM is the 
primary cause of: retinopathy, blindness under 65 years of age, 
kidney transplantation, cardiovascular diseases, etc. Apart 
from the human drama suffered from these complications, DM 
generates a growing and enormous health expenditure 
worldwide, especially in Western societies, due to its 
characteristics, which are determined by an abuse of 
excessively processed foods calories, as well as the lack of 
physical activity. 
                                                          
Ignacio Rodríguez is with University of Málaga. 
The average annual direct health cost of each patient with 
DM exceeds the average cost of a person without this 
pathology by 2,145 euros [2]. Therefore, DM imposes an 
economic burden that could reach 2.5% of GDP, with an 
estimated 19,908,661 million euros in 2015. If only a few 
specific attitudinal changes are made in relation to some of the 
risk factors listed above, the company could save 64.8% of 
that cost, around 12,900.8 million euros (between 2,428.5 and 
17,764.2 million). Of these possible savings, the greatest 
would be achieved through better diet control, which appears 
to be responsible for 40% of the incremental social costs of the 
disease. 
However, the complications described above can be 
contained, delayed and even avoided altogether if the diabetic 
patient's level of control is increased. The Diabetes Control 
Complications trial (DCCT) [3] and the United Kingdom 
Prevention Diabetes Study (UKPDS) [4], for DM1 and DM2 
respectively, show that good metabolic control is essential for 
the prevention of ailments associated with the course of 
diabetes. 
In addition, these studies prove that the improvement in 
glycemic control is clear if the patient plans: 
Food, according to the needs of the person. 
Physical exercise, again according to the specific 
characteristics of the patient, age and general state of health. 
Medication (insulin, hypoglycemic agents), following the 
instructions of the endocrine doctor. 
Healthy habits, with adequate sleep and stress control. 
Periodic checks, through the various options of existing 
glucose meters and through periodic medical checks. 
These indications are already highlighting the variables 
which need to be considered when managing the evolution of 
the DM. The diabetic patient must keep all this information in 
mind, which he must process subjectively, and use this 
information to decide on adjustments to his routines and in his 
medication to try to control the course of his blood glucose, 
always with the collaboration and due advice of his healthcare 
professional. This control is singularly complex in the case of 
DM1 since, in this case, the pancreas stops producing insulin 
in the so-called beta cells of structures called the islets of 
Langerhans. This type of diabetes is characterized by its 
development in childhood or adolescence, and its origin is 
considered autoimmune. Insulin is the hormone needed to 
introduce blood glucose into cells that demand energy. Thus, 
the patient has to inject it exogenously, establishing the doses 
On the Management of Type 1 Diabetes 
Mellitus with IoT Devices and ML Techniques 
Ignacio Rodríguez 
 

On the Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus with IoT Devices and ML Techniques 
2
according to medical recommendations and correcting them, if 
appropriate, according to their own experience and, 
traditionally, from specific measurements of blood glucose 
with the use of test strips. In this manner, DM1 is the most 
aggressive type of DM due to its more pronounced glycemic 
oscillations, the absence of endogenous insulin that can buffer 
these fluctuations, and the health consequences that can occur 
in patients who suffer from it, both short term and long term. 
In DM1, the subjective interpretation of the context by the 
individual means that, at times, errors in treatment may occur 
due to this partial assessment. However, new devices have 
been developed to provide more DM management options. 
The introduction of Continuous Glucose Meters (CGM) has 
led to a revolution in diabetes management. These instruments 
allow the continuous measurement of the blood glucose 
present in the subcutaneous interstitial fluid, with a sampling 
frequency normally between once per minute or once every 
five minutes such that, by means of correction algorithms, 
they present the blood glucose values. In this manner, the 
patient's knowledge of his blood glucose is uninterrupted. 
Figure 1 presents one of the most popular meters, the Abbot 
Freestyle Libre1, which uses a Near Field Communication 
(NFC) monitoring system to show the user's glycemia on 
demand. Because of this feature, it is called Flash Glucose 
Monitoring (FGM). 
 
 
Figure 1. CGM Freestyle Libre   and Pump 
 
Together with this, the DM1 patient has other equipment 
that can help manage his illness. Insulin pumps allow the 
patient to administer their dosage more comfortably and 
accurately, through a continuous infusion which, through a 
catheter, is absorbed under the skin (Figure 1).  
The joint use of continuous sensors and pumps is due, in 
part, thanks to the improvement of short-range wireless 
communications, such as Bluetooth Low Energy, NFC (cited 
above), or even WiFi networks. Thus, a personal network 
(Body Area Network, BAN) can be generated, where the 
information will be managed. The use of smartphones, 
increasingly with connection capacity and computing power, 
provides all sorts of possibilities in this regard, making use of 
the potential that the Internet of Things (IoT) has been 
providing in recent years. This new paradigm indicates a 
promising research path to follow.  
                                                          
1 https://www.freestylelibre.co.uk/libre/ 
In addition, it should be noted that, until now, the 
management that takes advantage of the communications 
indicated in the previous paragraph is carried out only taking 
into account the evolution of glycemia, provided by the 
continuous meter. If, on the one hand, it seems clear that this 
is the main variable to consider, it is also known that there are 
numerous circumstances that affect the glycemic evolution of 
a DM1 patient. Food, physical exercise, daily routine, sleep, 
etc. have all been shown to be influential when it comes to 
affecting blood glucose levels. Although a few years ago these 
variables were obviated due to the difficulty of obtaining these 
levels as a continuous signal (and, subsequently, managing it), 
with the appearance of new portable biometric devices capable 
of recording measures such as heart rate 24 hours a day, as 
well as physical activity and many others, it now makes sense 
to record these variables and approach the study of their 
relevance to glycemic evolution. With the inclusion of the 
variables described above, the glycemia predication made by a 
certain Machine Learning algorithm (ML) can be improved, 
increasing its accuracy and thus being able to not only 
interrupt the infusion of insulin in episodes of hypoglycemia, 
but also anticipate situations of hyperglycemia and increase 
the dose when required. In this manner, the improvement in 
the glycemic control of the DM1 patient would be more than 
evident.  
However, the inclusion of more variables that characterize 
the patient with diabetes undoubtedly entails an increase in the 
needs of computational hardware to manage such information. 
In this sense, the limitations of portable elements such as a 
smartphone or a Raspberry Pi can be a problem, so it is 
necessary to adjust the amount of data to be used, achieving a 
compromise between the speed of execution of the algorithms 
and the accuracy of the solution obtained. Resorting to 
opportunities such as Cloud Computing can be an appropriate 
strategy to resolve this limitation, but it should also be studied 
to what extent a small device can provide a solution "locally", 
even building the model "live" under certain circumstances 
that make this a necessity (lack of internet connection or its 
instability, remote rural areas, or circumstances in which the 
devices have to be offline: airplanes, conferences, etc.). 
With all of the above, the main motivation of this doctoral 
thesis is the study of possible technological solutions to 
facilitate better management of the information in order to 
control DM1, focused on achieving a more reliable, fast and 
computationally affordable prediction of future blood glucose.  
II. OBJECTIVES 
Having presented the motivation of this doctoral thesis and its 
central theme, the objectives to be met are listed, which have 
served as a guide for the development of this work: 
 
Study the current technological possibilities with 
respect to their application in the treatment of DM1. 
For this, a complete review of the literature must be 
carried out beforehand. 
 
Apply the concept of the IoT. The possibilities of 
interconnectivity and ubiquity promised by this new 
paradigm make its application to DM1 ideal. 

On the Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus with IoT Devices and ML Techniques 
3
 
Increase the available information. Until now, the 
characterization of the diabetic patient has been carried 
out by means of specific measurements of his blood 
glucose, which expresses as a single value the state of 
the patient at that time. 
 
Adapt the treatment of information. Added to the 
above, and as a consequence, it will be necessary to 
adapt the processing of the data, increased by the 
previous objective. 
 
Increase the set of available data. The need to have an 
adequate and reliable set of data to carry out the 
experimentation is identified. Therefore, the objective 
is to carry out a campaign to collect data among 
patients with type 1 diabetes who meet the minimum 
requirements for reliability. 
 
Carry out a treatment of the nature and transmission of 
temporary data series. The information collected will 
have a main characteristic: this data is linked to a time 
stamp, forming time series which, in turn, can be 
transmitted wirelessly to a new receiver. 
 
Select the most relevant variables in the evolution of 
blood glucose. A classification can be established 
according to the influence on the variations of blood 
glucose values. 
 
Make a prediction of future values of time series data. 
Having formed the characteristics of the diabetic 
patient and the pre-processed data set, the possibilities 
that different machine learning algorithms (ML) offer 
in order to achieve a prediction of blood glucose values 
at a certain horizon are going to be weighed by 
prediction, in a manner that allows the patient to 
anticipate the management of their blood glucose 
values. 
 
Learn the stress limits of the devices to be used in the 
management of the DM1. Information management and 
the execution of prediction algorithms are tasks with a 
certain degree of demand which raises doubts about the 
capacity and solvency of some devices or others. 
Comparative tests will be done to assess this issue. 
 
Clearly present ideas and concepts. As a cross-cutting 
objective, it is intended to increase the competences in 
terms of presentation of results, development of 
proposals and conclusions (including the writing of the 
scientific articles published and of this report, as well 
as the oral presentation of the works presented in 
conferences). In addition, the work attempts, as far as 
possible and within the appropriate forums, to also 
fulfill the purpose of increasing scientific dissemination 
in a clear manner, with a pedagogical vision. 
III. RESULTS 
Within the framework of this doctoral thesis, numerous 
contributions have been made, all of them included in 
scientific articles or presented through written and oral 
communications to conferences. Not all have been fully 
collected in the compendium of publications that make up this 
document because some are focused on issues which, even if 
related, escape the scientific unit presented in this text. 
However, an exhaustive list of works carried out during the 
temporary period of development of this thesis is presented at 
the end of this document (Bibliography, Publications). 
The majority of works developed are related to the 
management of Diabetes Mellitus; nevertheless, others have 
focused on information management in other contexts, or on 
Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) in other 
areas, taking advantage of the knowledge gained in this regard 
with DM1. In any case, the experience acquired in the 
elaboration of some works undoubtedly results in the best 
execution of the following. 
In order to focus on the technological management 
challenges presented by DM1, the possibilities offered by the 
IoT in regard to remote situation management [5] were 
studied. Thus, the IoT paradigm makes it possible to provide 
user-centered services, with continuous monitoring of the 
person. 
The application of the previous concept has allowed us to 
propose an intelligent management platform for DM1, 
integrating in this IoT environment various channels of 
information that direct the data collected from the person 
either to themselves, or to health professionals or family, so 
that they know at all times the comprehensive state of the 
patient. 
A proper characterization of the patient is achieved by 
means of intelligent devices that will indicate the situation: 
smartphones, smartbands and other portable sensors [6]. This 
is the main idea set out in other works, where, in addition, a 
novel treatment is proposed for the variables considered in 
DM1. Works of other authors have already noted the 
prolonged action, but of less intensity, presented by insulin 
beyond its short-term action, referred to at the time as “insulin 
on-board”. This doctoral thesis proposes the extension of this 
concept to other collected variables, such as exercise, sleep, or 
food, understood as a remnant action of very low intensity 
lasting over a time of several hours, with a normally negligible 
action in time, but with additive effects that must be taken into 
account in the presence of multiple doses of insulin over a 
period of time, exercise of greater intensity, or a lack of rest. 
Likewise, the idea of a complete characterization of a 
person has been extrapolated to other areas, so that, in 
situations of violence or aggression, data such as GPS 
position, health status, etc., can be known in order to intervene 
and safeguard the safety of the victim [7]. 
Likewise, novel data collection has been carried out. Thus, 
over a period of 14 days, 25 patients with DM1 were 
monitored through a continuous glucose monitoring device 
(CGM), obtaining, in addition to their blood glucose, their 
insulin doses and amount of food ingested. Added to this, 
other characteristics such as heart rate, physical exercise, sleep 
and schedules were collected (through a smartband). This 
makes this set of data one of the most relevant that can be 
found in the literature, since those used previously suffer from 
complete monitoring, a sufficiently representative number of 
participants, a minimally acceptable extension of the essay or 

On the Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus with IoT Devices and ML Techniques 
4
even incorporate subjective annotations by the patient in some 
variables [8]. 
The information collected from a diabetic patient is 
characterized by being associated with a time stamp, resulting 
in the set of samples taken in time series. Due to its specific 
characteristics, this type of information must be treated 
appropriately, and this has been especially addressed, among 
others, in the works [9] [10]. Likewise, said information 
collected by the corresponding set of sensors can, in turn, be 
transmitted wirelessly to other receivers in the form of 
electromagnetic waves. These waves propagate throughout an 
environment in which there can be a whole series of obstacles 
that make communication difficult. Therefore, in order to 
study the attenuation that these signals may suffer (in order to 
ensure the establishment of the connection), the phenomenon 
of diffraction has been studied as the main mechanism of 
wave energy loss [11] [12] [13]. 
All the aforementioned variables jointly influence glycemia, 
its values and its evolution over time. However, not all do so 
to the same extent, as some are more influential than others. 
To analyze this fact, there are algorithms for selecting 
variables, some being specific for time series data. Of these, 
the Sequential Input Selection Algorithm (SISAL) has been 
selected, which has made it possible to catalogue the influence 
of the variables, as well as the time they take to be influential 
[7]. This is decisive in being able to make a prediction of 
blood glucose values, since it is possible to predict what 
should be included in a predictive algorithm and thus form a 
set of variables is not overloaded with the work of forecasting 
future values. With this study, it has been observed that the 
most influential variable is insulin, and the last 105 minutes of 
data should be taken. The next most-influential variable would 
be food, with the last 2.91 hours being relevant and, finally, 
the blood glucose itself, with results from just over 4 hours. 
The rest of the variables studied (exercise, heart rate, sleep and 
schedule) complete the set of variables in that order of 
importance. 
Once a management platform has been proposed and 
multiple forms of characterization of the diabetic person have 
been generated, as well as a gradation of their influence, a 
blood glucose prediction can be generated at different time 
horizons. This work has been carried out, first of all, in the 
simplest way possible: taking into account only the past blood 
glucose values in order to predict the following. This 
univariate approach aims to be the first step in a whole series 
of predictive strategies. In this first study with a single 
variable, the amount of past values that should be taken into 
account, as well as their influence on the accuracy of the 
prediction, has been discussed. In the same manner, the 
possibility of a lower sampling frequency (and, consequently, 
a lighter and easily treatable signal) has also been discussed, 
concluding that a compromise between the information load 
and accuracy is possible [14]. 
 The prediction algorithms play a fundamental role here 
and, in this sense, three well-known algorithms have been 
compared: AutoRegressive Integrated Moving Average 
(ARIMA), Random Forest (RF), and Support Vector 
Machines (SVM). The possibilities of the latter had already 
been studied previously, with promising results [15]. The 
univariate models developed were able to predict glucose 
values in a 15-minute predictive horizon with an average error 
of only 15.43 mg/dL, using only 24 past values collected in a 
6-hour period. Increasing the sampling frequency to include 
72 values, the error decreased to 10.15 mg/dL. The study in 
question has concluded that RF is the algorithm which 
provides the greatest accuracy, in general. This study was 
carried out during a 3-month predoctoral stay at the Sapienza 
Università di Roma, in the Computer Science, "Antonio 
Ruberti" Automation and Management Division, under the 
close supervision of Professor Dr. Ioannnis Chatzigiannakis. 
Other predictive algorithms have also been tested during the 
development of this thesis. Thus, also applied to the prediction 
of time series, the novel PROPHET library of the 
mathematical 
software 
R 
was 
successfully 
used, 
demonstrating that the addition of meteorological prediction 
could increase the accuracy of the prediction of the energy 
consumption of a dwelling [16] [17].  
Continuing with the development of the thesis, it should be 
noted that the algorithms used can become very demanding 
from the computational point of view when performing the 
task of blood glucose prediction. As mentioned, it was 
proposed to evaluate the extent to which a prediction can be 
made locally, that is, in a small device that the person can take 
with them (for example, a smartphone). For this, stress tests 
have been done replicating the same ML techniques applied in 
[18] on three devices: on the one hand, a powerful server and, 
in the same manner, on a smartphone and a Raspberry Pi. The 
results have indicated that certain techniques are require less 
processing than others but, in any case, without minimum 
technical requirements, local execution would be unattainable. 
However, the execution of the SVM algorithm has proved to 
be feasible in a smartphone with average characteristics, and 
this fact is even clearer if strategies are made to lighten the 
time series, such as reducing the sampling frequency. The 
results indicate that it is possible to model and predict future 
blood glucose values on a smartphone with a prediction 
horizon of 15 minutes and an RMSE of 11.65 mg/dL in only 
16.15 seconds, sampling the last 6 hours every 10 minutes and 
using the RF algorithm. With the Raspberry Pi, the 
computational effort is increased to 56.49 seconds in the same 
circumstances, but it can be improved to 34.89 seconds if 
SVM is used, in this case reaching an RMSE of 19.90 mg/dL. 
Therefore, it is concluded that practically real-time glycemic 
prediction is possible using small devices. The results of this 
study are indicated in [19].  
In a transversal manner, it has been attempted, throughout 
the development of this doctoral thesis, to simultaneously 
acquire competencies in the pedagogical-informative field, 
essential requirements in transferring knowledge to society. 
Although this intention has been sought in all the works 
indicated above (with the limitations imposed by the scientific 
linguistic registry), in a special way it has materialized in a 
series of publications of a didactic nature in which issues such 
as laboratory work have been addressed (measurement of the 

On the Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus with IoT Devices and ML Techniques 
5
speed of light [20]), as well as others related to the study of 
learning [21]. This undoubtedly contributed to the completion 
of the transveral and informative research training of the 
doctoral student. 
IV. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
The numerous advances achieved in ICT and, more 
specifically, in the IoT paradigm have great potential in terms 
of the amount of information that can be collected from a 
person. This is why the possibilities that are generated in the 
field of e-health are tremendously numerous. The management 
of this information to obtain knowledge can be done using 
another paradigm, the techniques of ML and automated data 
processing. In this work, the improvements that the 
application of these concepts can bring to the DM1 
management field have been examined. 
Thus, after a theoretical study, an IoT platform model has 
been proposed in which the inputs to be considered are 
established, as well as the technological possibilities for 
managing 
DM1 
through 
this 
data 
collection 
[22]. 
Undoubtedly, the proposal reached establishes a framework in 
which the following works of this thesis are framed, as well as 
other future work. 
New variables which have also been studied are derived 
from the inclusion of portable monitoring devices. The novel 
concept of the existence of certain 'on-board' variables [23], as 
an extension of that already described by other authors for 
insulin, is undoubtedly a contribution in the treatment of time 
series variables for the study of DM1, but also for other types 
of ailments, since the monitored results will also be associated 
with a timestamp, and may present remaining actions 
analogous to insulin and other variables described in this 
thesis. 
After the cited framework, a monitoring campaign of 25 
people with type 1 diabetes has been carried out, which has 
been a challenge for the number of participants over 14 days, 
as well as for the management of the devices used and the data 
processing. This data collection has been an achievement in 
itself. 
With all the data collected, the variables described above 
were categorized. With this categorization, an establishment of 
a ranking of importance has been added, indicating which 
variables are the ones that most influence the evolution of 
blood glucose. Once the signals of the different variables are 
adequate, there is a need to study whether the new monitored 
signals are really relevant to characterize the condition of a 
diabetic patient. To this end, a specific variable selection 
method has been applied for temporary data structures called 
the Sequential Input Selection Algorithm (SISAL). The results 
of this work have indicated that, indeed, a gradation of 
influence can be established, considering levels of importance 
between variables. 
Another contribution of this thesis has been carried out in 
the task of predicting future blood glucose values in DM1 
patients. A comparative equality of conditions has been 
established for three known ML algorithms using only past 
blood glucose values, opening a helpful discussion on the 
most influential circumstances in regard to accuracy: the 
amount of past data collected, the sampling frequency and the 
predictive horizon [24] . A comparison like this has not been 
found to be published previously in the scientific literature. 
Finally, it has also been relevant to evaluate in a practical 
and real manner the possibility of implementing the previous 
prediction on a device, considering two options: calculation on 
a remote server (cloud), or on a local device (smartphone, 
Rasperry Pi) [9]. The results are of great importance to the 
implementation of a real and portable control, by the patient, 
for DM1. 
However, all the previous achievements have raised more 
questions that have escaped the limits of this thesis, waiting to 
be developed in future work, as indicated below. 
First, it is worth noting that more characteristics of the 
people participating in our study phase have been collected 
and, although we have worked with these data to categorize 
their influence, they have not been used for the prediction of 
glycemia, because, so far, Univariate algorithms have worked 
well. As the first future work, it is planned to include other 
variables to check if accuracy is improved, without neglecting 
the corresponding analysis of the calculation effort that this 
entails. For this, in addition to the algorithms already studied, 
attempts will be made with others already employed in other 
works, such as the library of R mathematical software, called 
PROPHET [25]. 
With the data collected, and expanding the data set so that 
more patients are sampled, other issues could be addressed. 
Related to the concept of 'on-board', extended to physical 
exercise, numerous experiences of diabetics who report 
hypoglycemia beyond a time window immediately following 
the performance of physical activity have been referenced. It 
is intended to isolate these situations from the data set to study 
this phenomenon in more detail. 
Likewise, focusing on the detection of hypoglycemias, a 
future objective is established to study the already known 
relationship between their occurrence and the associated heart 
rhythm variations, as well as the years of evolution of the 
patient and the quality of their control, as it is known that a 
greater amount of hypoglycemia leads to the gradual 
disappearance of the associated symptoms. In this manner, 
these variables can be studied to check at what time and under 
what control (good/bad) the symptoms of blood glucose drops 
in the heart rhythm disappear. 
Similarly, the influence of lack of sleep on increased insulin 
resistance during the next day has also been reported, resulting 
in higher blood glucose levels. As in the previous concept, it is 
intended to isolate these situations to quantify this 
relationship. In fact, going further, it is feasible to establish 
daily averages per hour of blood glucose values and check the 
number of hours of slept during the previous night.  
All these questions lead to a better understanding of DM1 
thanks to delving deeper into the possibilities that an IoT 
environment and the application of ML algorithms can 
provide. With all this, it is proposed to feed the blood glucose 
prediction signal back into the system so that it enters a 
controller and closes the control loop. A closed-loop control 

On the Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus with IoT Devices and ML Techniques 
6
system, with a continuous input of the monitoring variables, a 
glucose prediction output and, in turn, a feedback input that 
modifies the amount of insulin to be injected by the 
corresponding infusion pump would constitute, no doubt, an 
artificial pancreas that would, obviously, be the one - expected 
by millions of people - "technological cure" of DM1.
