December 2017
DeepGestalt - Identifying Rare Genetic Syndromes
Using Deep Learning
Yaron Gurovich1, Yair Hanani1, Omri Bar1, Nicole Fleischer1, Dekel Gelbman1, Lina Basel-Salmon2,3,
Peter Krawitz4, Susanne B Kamphausen5, Martin Zenker5, Lynne M. Bird6,7, Karen W. Gripp8
1FDNA Inc., Boston, Massachusetts, USA
2Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel
3Recanati Genetic Institute, Rabin Medical Center & Schneider Children’s Medical Center, Petah Tikva, Israel
4Institute for Genomic Statistic and Bioinformatics, University Hospital Bonn,
Rheinische-Friedrich-Wilhelms University, Bonn, Germany
5Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Magdeburg, Magdeburg, Germany
6Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Diego, California, USA
7Division of Genetics/Dysmorphology, Rady Children’s Hospital San Diego, San Diego, California, USA
8Division of Medical Genetics, A. I. du Pont Hospital for Children/Nemours, Wilmington, Delaware,USA

Boston 186 South St. 5th Floor, Boston, MA 02111 U.S.A., Tel: +1 (617) 412-7000
Conﬂict of interest: YG, YH, OB, NF, DG are employees of FDNA; LBS is an advisor of FDNA;
LBS, PK, LMB, KWG are members of the scientiﬁc advisory board of FDNA
Abstract—Facial analysis technologies have recently measured
up to the capabilities of expert clinicians in syndrome identiﬁca-
tion. To date, these technologies could only identify phenotypes
of a few diseases, limiting their role in clinical settings where
hundreds of diagnoses must be considered.
We developed a facial analysis framework, DeepGestalt, using
computer vision and deep learning algorithms, that quantiﬁes
similarities to hundreds of genetic syndromes based on un-
constrained 2D images. DeepGestalt is currently trained with
over 26,000 patient cases from a rapidly growing phenotype-
genotype database, consisting of tens of thousands of validated
clinical cases, curated through a community-driven platform.
DeepGestalt currently achieves 91% top-10-accuracy in identify-
ing over 215 different genetic syndromes and has outperformed
clinical experts in three separate experiments.
We suggest that this form of artiﬁcial intelligence is ready to
support medical genetics in clinical and laboratory practices and
will play a key role in the future of precision medicine.
Index Terms—DeepGestalt, Deep learning, Face recognition,
Dysmorphology, Phenotype, FDNA, Face2Gene, Next generation
phenotyping.
I. INTRODUCTION
Diseases that are caused by underlying genetics affect a
majority of people during their lifetimes. Here, we speciﬁcally
assess syndromic genetic conditions. This class of diseases
affects nearly 8% of the population [1]. Many affected in-
dividuals present symptoms that will affect their health and
quality of life. An early diagnosis is essential to prevent
the occurrence of potential health problems, such as critical
congenital heart diseases, respiratory problems, and develop-
mental delays, among others. It can also beneﬁt the patients
because special prevention and screening programs exist once
the diagnosis has been established.
Many of these syndromes are known to have facial pheno-
types [2], which are highly informative to clinical geneticists
for diagnosing genetic diseases [3], [4], [5]. For the more com-
mon or distinctive syndromes, genetic experts are sometimes
able to reach a diagnosis, or at least a strong hypothesis, based
on the facial traits of the patient. However, in most cases, the
patients see a genetic expert only years after the ﬁrst symptoms
occur. Often, due to the rarity of many syndromes and the large
number of possible disorders, achieving the correct diagnosis
involves a lengthy and expensive work-up that may take years
or even decades [6] (the diagnostic odyssey).
Recognition of non-classical presentations of common syn-
dromes, or ultra-rare syndromes, may be constrained by the
individual human expert’s prior experience. The use of com-
puterized systems as an aid or reference for clinicians is
therefore becoming increasingly important. DeepGestalt holds
the promise of making expert knowledge more accessible to
healthcare professionals in other specialties such as pediatrics.
Recent advances in computer vision and machine learning,
and speciﬁcally deep learning, present the opportunity for
novel systems in many ﬁelds. In the last few years, the
performance of tasks such as object detection, object local-
ization, recognition and segmentation, on public datasets such
as ImageNet [7] and COCO [8] has dramatically improved.
arXiv:1801.07637v1  [cs.CV]  23 Jan 2018

With this improvement, many new applications have emerged.
As a result, the penetration of computer vision and artiﬁcial
intelligence systems to commercial markets has increased. For
example, this can be seen in autonomous driving projects,
automatic detection of objects and faces on our mobile devices,
advanced robotics and more.
The facial phenotype is critical for syndrome diagnosis.
To this end, facial analysis using computer vision has great
potential. Computer vision research has long been dealing with
facial analysis related problems. DeepFace [9] showed how
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (DCNNs) trained on
large-scale data achieved human-level performance on the task
of person veriﬁcation on the Labeled Faces in the Wild (LFW)
dataset [10]. The work of [11] and [12] boosted facial analysis
research through the publishing of novel models and publicly
available large-scale datasets. Additional work, such as [13]
and [14] showed how facial DCNN models can be improved
by using advanced loss functions and metric learning, setting
new state-of-the-art results on the LFW dataset. In [15], an
automatic method for age and gender classiﬁcation from facial
images is proposed by using DCNNs. The work of [16] uses
a cascade of two DCNNs in order to detect facial attributes,
such as smiling, the presence of a mustache, eyeglasses etc.
Another challenging task is recognizing facial expressions,
such as surprise, sadness, happiness, fear etc. In [17], a method
based on ﬁne-tuning a DCNN is described and achieves good
results using only a small dataset of samples.
The recognition of a genetic syndrome with a facial phe-
notype has many similarities to classic facial recognition.
However, in practice, developing a system for syndrome
recognition is challenging for several reasons, such as limited
data, subtle facial patterns and ethnic differences. State-of-the-
art face recognition systems are trained on large-scale datasets,
starting from 0.5M images of thousands of people [12], and
going up to 260M images of millions of people [13]. The
scale of these datasets is a key factor for the success of these
systems. It allows deep learning algorithms to learn robust
and accurate models. In the case of genetic syndromes, it is
impossible to collect such a large dataset due to the rarity
of these syndromes. Potential datasets, are much smaller in
scale, and are unbalanced, as is the large variance of patients
per disease in the general population. Another difﬁculty is the
subtleness of the facial features in some syndromes, coupled
with the fact that some syndromes do not show a characteristic
facial phenotype that has been clinically described.
Most studies in the ﬁeld of computer-aided syndrome recog-
nition do not tackle the real world problem of classifying
thousands of syndromes from unconstrained images. They
address problems like classifying unaffected from affected
individuals, or diagnosing only one syndrome [5], usually
using photos captured in a constrained manner.
In this report, we present a novel framework called Deep-
Gestalt, which is one of the next-generation phenotyping
technologies [18] used in the Face2Gene application (FDNA
Inc., Boston, USA) to highlight phenotypes of thousands of
diseases and millions of genetic variations. This technology
signiﬁcantly improves the process of recognizing genetic syn-
dromes by enabling the robust recognition of hundreds of
syndromes. It is proven to assist in the clinical setting (e.g.
[4], [19]), by offering meaningful insights for a large number
of syndromes, based on the deep analysis of patients’ facial
images. There are also initial ﬁndings that the technology can
be used to complement next generation sequencing (NGS)
based molecular testing by inferring causative genetic variants
from sequencing data [20].
This report is organized as follows. Literature and related
work review is given in Section II. Section III reviews the
technology methods, including the dataset usage, training
paradigm and evaluation steps. In Section IV, we describe the
experiments done for three types of syndrome classiﬁcation
tasks: Binary Gestalt Model, Specialized Gestalt Model and
Multi-class Gestalt Model. We review the results achieved
on these tasks and compare them, where possible, to other
methods. Finally, in Section V we discuss the results and
summarize the ideas presented in this report.
II. LITERATURE REVIEW
We chose to survey four aspects of related work: A) Problem
description B) Methods used C) Data used to train the system
and D) Evaluation protocol in terms of data and results. A full
comparison is given in Table I.
A. Problem
There are three main problems addressed in the literature:
Problem 1: Single syndrome vs. other population - a binary
classiﬁcation problem of distinguishing subjects with a speciﬁc
syndrome from normal (unaffected) subjects or subjects with
other syndromes ([21],[22],[23],[24],[25],[4],[26],[27],[18]).
Problem 2: Syndromic vs. normal - a binary classiﬁcation
problem of distinguishing subjects with any syndrome from
normal (unaffected) subjects ([21],[24],[28]). Problem 3: Mul-
tiple syndromes classiﬁcation - a multi-class problem of identi-
fying the correct syndrome from multiple possible syndromes
([29],[21],[30],[31],[3],[32]). Our work belongs to the third
type, although we also demonstrate its capabilities on the ﬁrst
problem.
B. Methods
The most common methods consist of three stages: face and
landmarks detection, feature extraction and classiﬁcation.
1) Face detection (FD) and facial landmarks detection:
The purpose of this stage is to detect and localize the face
within a given image (face detection) for alignment and lo-
calization purposes, and then detect speciﬁc facial landmarks,
either for more accurate face alignment and localization, or
for feature extraction around these landmarks. For FD, several
works ([3], [24], [25], [26]) use the classical method of Viola-
Jones [33]. In [3], Viola-Jones FD is followed by the method
of Everingham [34] for landmarks detection. The work of [21]
uses the method of Ramanan [35] for FD and the detection

TABLE I
RELATED WORK SUMMARY
Number of
Genetic Disorders
Number of Training
Samples (Syndromic)
Evaluation Method
Accuracy
(top-1-accuracy)
Problem 1: Single syndrome vs. other population
Saraydemir et al. [22]
1
15
3,4-Fold Cross-Validation
97.34%
Burccin et al. [23]
1
10
51 images in a test set
95.30%
Zhao et al. [24]
1
50
Leave-One-Out
96.70%
Basel-Vanagaite et al. [4]
1
134
7 images in test set
94%
Kruszka et al. [25]
1
129
Leave-One-Out
94.30%
Kruszka et al. [26]
1
156
Leave-One-Out
94.90%
Liehr et al. [18]
2
173
10-Fold Cross-Validation
100%
Shukla et al. [21]
6
1126
5-Fold Cross-Validation
94.93 (mAP)1
Ferry et al. [3]
8
1363
Leave-One-Out
94.90%
Problem 2: Syndromic vs. normal
Zhao et al. [24]
14
24
Leave-One-Out
97%
Cerrolaza et al. [28]
15
73
Leave-One-Out
95%
Shukla et al. [21]
6
1126
5-Fold Cross-Validation
98.80%
Problem 3: Multiple syndromes classiﬁcation
Loos et al. [30]
5
55
Leave-One-Out
76%
Kuru et al. [29]
15
92
Leave-One-Out
53%
Boehringer et al. [32]
10
147
10-Fold Cross-Validation
75.70%
Boehringer et al. [31]
14
202
91 images in a test set
21%
Ferry et al. [3]
8
1363
Leave-One-Out
75.60%2
Shukla et al. [21]
6
1126
5-Fold Cross-Validation
48%2
of 68 facial landmarks. In [4], a Haar-based cascaded face
detector is used, followed by a 130 landmarks detector based
on local image descriptors [36].
2) Feature extraction: In this part, we adopt the comparison
approach of the survey paper by Rai et al. [5], which divides
the feature extraction methods into holistic, local feature-based
and statistical shape models, as explained below. We add
DCNNs, which are used either for feature extraction or for
direct classiﬁcation.
a) Holistic methods: Holistic methods use a global rep-
resentation based on the entire face. An example is Eigenface
[37], which is based on Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
as used by [29]. Another example is Fisherface [38], which is
based on Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA). These methods
are usually not competitive with state-of-the-art methods in
face recognition tasks.
b) Local features based methods: Local features based
methods represent the image by locally analyzing small image
patches and aggregating the local information into a full
image representation. Common methods are Scale-Invariant
Feature Transform (SIFT) [39] and Local Binary Patterns
(LBP) [40], which is used in [24], [25], [26], [23], [28]. Other
local appearance methods include Independent Component
Analysis (ICA), Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and
Gabor Wavelet Transform (GWT) and are used in [24], [3],
[32], [30], [31], [22]. Another type of local features are geo-
metric features, which analyze the geometric relations between
facial landmarks, such as the normalized distance between
landmarks, or the angles spanned by them. The works of [24],
[25] and [26] use geometrical features, either in combination
with texture features or without them.
c) Statistical model based methods: Statistical model
based methods rely on the theory of statistical analysis of
shapes. An example is the Active Appearance Model (AAM),
which learns how the shape and texture of faces vary across
the training images [41]. This method is used by [3] to detect
eight different syndromes.
d) Deep Convolutional Neural Network methods: These
methods are currently the most common for many computer
vision tasks. Deep networks can be used for feature extraction,
as done in [21], and can also be used for direct classiﬁcation,
as is presented in this work. DCNNs are very powerful
classiﬁcation models, when enough labeled data of the target
domain has been used for training. In many cases, where such
data do not exist, the networks are trained on an adjacent
domain, and used for feature extraction or as a baseline for a
knowledge transfer model to the target domain. The work of
[21] uses an object detection pre-trained Alex-Net model [42]
as a baseline model. They then ﬁne-tune the network on the
LFW facial dataset and use the DCNN extracted features for
the target domain of syndrome identiﬁcation. In contrast, this
study proposes a model that is designed to be trained directly
on the target domain.
3) Classiﬁcation: Common methods include Support Vec-
tor Machine [43] as used in [22], [23], [24], [27], [21], K-
Nearest Neighbors as used in [22], [27], [3], Deformable
Models, Hidden Markov Models etc. Our model learns directly
on the target domain and, therefore, we also use DCNNs as
the classiﬁer.
1Mean Average Precision (mAP) is reported as in the original paper
2Calculated by us from the confusion matrix in the original paper

C. Training Data
Data quality and scale are key factors in computer vision
and machine learning. The scale of the data becomes an acute
problem for deep learning based methods. Table I reviews
previous work with respect to the scale of the data used for
training and also for evaluation.
D. Evaluation
Since there is no public benchmark for comparison, it
is impossible to compare the different methods in terms of
accuracy. In Table I, we describe the evaluation method used
and the result reported for previous studies. The table treats
each problem separately, since a binary problem cannot be
compared to a multi-class problem in terms of accuracy. Most
methods, other than [3], [21], are using small scale data (up
to 200 train images). The work of [3] and [21] use over
1000 images for training, which still is considered to be a
small number in the ﬁeld of deep learning. Although the
performance can be evaluated by means of cross validation,
the concern of over-ﬁtting remains and the generalizability of
the models is yet unclear. In addition, the number of supported
syndromes in a system is critical for clinical usage. As shown
in Table I, all previous works in the ﬁeld, support a relatively
small number of syndromes (15 or fewer). In this work, we
use a large dataset of tens of thousands of patient images,
supporting hundreds of genetic syndromes, and evaluate it with
a large external set collected from real clinical cases uploaded
to Face2Gene from all over the world.
III. METHODS
This section describes the building blocks of the technol-
ogy behind DeepGestalt. We detail our image preprocessing
pipeline, phenotype extraction and syndrome classiﬁcation
methods, datasets used, training details and evaluation pro-
tocol. From an end-to-end perspective, our goal is to achieve
a function F(x), which maps an input image x into a list of
genetic syndromes with a similarity score per syndrome. When
sorted by this gestalt score, the top listed disorders represent
the most likely differential diagnoses (Figure 1).
A. Image Preprocessing
Our model is designed for real-world uncontrolled 2D
images. The ﬁrst step is to detect a patient’s face in an input
image. Since real clinical images have a large variance due
to face size, pose, expression, background, occlusions and
lighting, a robust face detector is needed in order to identify
a valid frontal face. We adopt a deep learning method, based
on a DCNN cascade, proposed in [44] for face detection in
an uncontrolled environment. We adjust this method to ﬁt our
needs and operate optimally on images of children with genetic
syndromes, in order to identify a frontal face from the image
background.
We then detect 130 facial landmarks on the patient’s face.
This landmarks detection algorithm works in a chain of
multiple steps, starting from a coarse step of identifying a
small number of landmarks, up to a more subtle detection of
all landmarks of interest [36].
The resulting detected face and landmarks are ﬁrst used
to geometrically normalize the patient’s face. The alignment
of images reduces the pose variation among patients and
shows improved performance on recognition tasks, such as
face veriﬁcation [45].
The aligned image and its corresponding facial landmarks
are then processed through a regions generator, which creates
multiple pre-deﬁned regions of interest from the patient’s face.
As illustrated in Figure 1, the different facial crops contain
holistic face crops and several distinct regional crops which
contain the main features of the human face, including the
eyes, nose and mouth. The ﬁnal step in the preprocessing stage
is to scale each facial cropped region to a ﬁxed size of 100 ×
100 and convert it to grayscale.
B. Phenotype Extraction and Syndromes Classiﬁcation
In order to mitigate the main challenge of our speciﬁc
problem, a small training database with unbalanced classes,
we train the DeepGestalt model in two steps. First, we learn
a general face representation and then ﬁne-tune it into the
genetic syndromes classiﬁcation task.
To learn the baseline facial representation, we train a DCNN
on a large-scale face identity database. Our backbone architec-
ture is based on the one suggested in [12] and is illustrated in
Figure 2. We train separately for each facial crop, and combine
the trained models to form a robust facial representation.
Once the general face representation model is obtained,
we ﬁne-tune the DCNN for each region with a smaller scale
phenotype dataset for the task of syndrome classiﬁcation. In
practice, this step acts as a transfer learning step between a
source domain (face recognition), and a target domain (genetic
syndromes classiﬁcation) [46], [47]. Effectively, we use the
powerful face recognition model for face representation (which
performs comparably to the state-of-the-art results on the LFW
benchmark [10]), and train the model to separate different
genetic syndromes, instead of separating different identities.
We use the different facial regions, both as expert classiﬁers
and as an ensemble of classiﬁers [48], [14]. Each region’s
speciﬁc DCNN separately makes a prediction, and these are
combined by averaging the results and producing a powerful
Gestalt model for a multi-class problem (Figure 1).
At the time of real clinical use, an image of a patient that
has not been used during training is processed through the
described pipeline. The output vector is a sorted vector of
similarity scores, indicating the correlation of the patient’s
photo to each syndrome supported in the model.
C. Datasets
In order to train the model for face recognition, the pub-
licly available CASIA Web-Face dataset [12], which contains
494,414 images from 10,575 different subjects, is aligned,
scaled and cropped, as described above.

Fig. 1.
DeepGestalt: High level ﬂow. The input image is ﬁrst pre-processed to achieve a face detection, landmarks detection and alignment. After pre-
processing, the input image is cropped into facial regions. Each region is fed into a DCNN to obtain a softmax vector indicating its correspondence to each
syndrome in the model. The output vectors of all regional DCNNs are then aggregated and sorted to obtain the ﬁnal ranked list of genetic syndromes. The
histogram on the right hand side represents DeepGestalt output syndromes, sorted by the aggregated similarity score. Photo published with parental consent.
In order to ﬁne-tune the networks to capture phenotypic in-
formation, we use a proprietary Face2Gene phenotype dataset
- a validated dataset curated from Face2Gene users which
includes tens of thousands of patient images with more than
2,500 genetic syndromes.
For system evaluation, we built a test set of real clinical
cases. We sampled, within a certain period of time, all real di-
agnosed clinical cases of any of the 216 syndromes supported
at the time by DeepGestalt in the Face2Gene application. We
automatically excluded images of low resolution and images
where no frontal face was detected. In addition, we removed
images that were part of our training set and ignored duplicated
images. We ended up with 502 images covering 92 different
syndromes. The test set is skewed towards ultra-rare disorders,
66% of the syndromes are represented in only 1 to 5 cases and
34% in 6 to 39 cases. This results in a median value of 3.5
and average of 5.5 images per syndrome. This distribution
of patients and syndromes mirrors the prevalence of rare
disorders and is thus a representative test set for genetic
counseling.
Since Face2Gene keeps high standards of security and
privacy, a fully automated processing system is used. Images
are automatically processed within the same environment as
they were uploaded by users, maintaining the privacy and
security of those images. Only ﬁnal results are reported, in
order to evaluate performance.
D. Training
For each facial region, we train a face recognition DCNN
using the large-scale face recognition dataset previously de-
scribed. The dataset is randomly split into training (90%) and
validation (10%). The region’s networks are then ﬁne-tuned for
the genetic syndromes classiﬁcation task using the Face2Gene
phenotype dataset. This dataset is also split into training (90%)
and validation (10%). The DCNNs architecture is inspired by
the work of [12], with minor modiﬁcations, including adding
batch normalization [49] layers after each convolutional layer
(Figure 2).
The training is done using Keras [50] with TensorFlow as
the backend [51]. Baseline model training uses He Normal
Initializer [52] weight initialization, which produced superior
results compared to other known initializations. The optimiza-
tion process uses Adam [53], with an initial learning rate of
1e −3 using a softmax loss function. After 40 epochs, we
continue training the network for an additional 10 epochs using
SGD with a learning rate of 1e −4 and a momentum of 0.9.
In the ﬁne-tuning architecture, we replace the ﬁnal layer
output to match the number of syndromes in training. We
found that the initialization for the ﬁne-tuned layer is very
important, and the best results are achieved when using a
modiﬁed version of Xavier Normal Initializer [54]. We ex-
perimented with different scales of Xavier Normal Initializer
and found that the best result was with a scale of 0.3.
The ﬁne-tuning optimizer is SGD with a learning rate of
5e −3 and a momentum of 0.9. No weight decay or kernel
regularization is used, since we found that the addition of batch
normalization [49] to the original architecture [12], which also
includes dropout (we set the rate to 50%), performed better.
Augmentation was proven to be signiﬁcantly important.
Each region is randomly augmented by rotation with a range
of 5 degrees, small vertical and horizontal shifts (shift range
of 0.05), shear transformation (shear range =
5π
180), random
zoom (zoom range = 0.05) and horizontal ﬂip. Without aug-
mentation, training quickly over-ﬁtted, especially on the non-
full-face regions.
Each region DCNN is independently trained for 50 epochs
for the face recognition task and an additional 500 epochs for
the ﬁne-tune step.

Fig. 2. The Deep Convolutional Neural Network architecture of DeepGestalt. The network consists of ten convolutional layers and all but the last one are
followed by batch normalization and ReLU. After each pair of convolutional layers, a pooling layer is applied (max pooling after the ﬁrst four pairs and
average pooling after the ﬁfth pair). This is then followed by a fully connected layer with dropout (0.5) and a softmax layer. A sample heatmap is shown after
each pooling layer. It is interesting to compare the low level features of the ﬁrst layers with respect to the high level features of the ﬁnal layers, where the
latter identify more complex features in the input image and distinctive facial traits tend to emerge, while identity related features disappear. Photo published
with parental consent.
E. Evaluation
We evaluate the model’s performance by measuring the top-
K-accuracy, where K = 1, 5, 10. For example, in the case of
top-1-accuracy, the result represents whether the diagnosed
syndrome was suggested ﬁrst in the sorted list. The top-
10-accuracy means that the correct genetic syndrome was
suggested as one of the ﬁrst ten syndromes in the sorted list.
In order to measure the statistical signiﬁcance of our results
for an unbalanced multi-class problem, we use a permutation
test by measuring the distribution of the test set accuracy
statistic under the null hypothesis. We randomly permute the
test set labels 106 times over the test data images, and calculate
the top-K-accuracy for each of the permutations. This allows
us to sample the accuracy distribution and to calculate its p-
value.
F. Code availability
DeepGestalt is the engine of the Face2Gene online appli-
cation (www.face2gene.com), which is publically available to
healthcare professionals.
G. Data availability
The data that support the ﬁndings of this study are divided
into two groups, published data and restricted data. Published
data are available from the reported references. Restricted data
are curated from the Face2Gene application, and were used
under license. These images are not publicly available.
IV. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
A. Binary Gestalt Model
As described in Section II, many studies in the ﬁeld of
genetic syndrome classiﬁcation deal with a binary problem,
where the goal is to correctly classify unaffected individuals
from affected ones, or to distinguish one speciﬁc syndrome
from a mixed group of several other syndromes.
In order to evaluate DeepGestalt on this type of binary
problem, we train the model on only two cohorts. The ﬁrst
consists of patients’ photos with a single syndrome (positive
cohort) and the second consists of patients’ photos with several
different syndromes (negative cohort).
1) Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS): We train the
model using 614 CdLS images as the positive cohort, and 1079
images which are the negative cohort. The negative cohort
images are of patients with several other syndromes (e.g.
Kabuki, Aarskog, Dubowitz, Floating-Harbor, Fetal Alcohol,
Kleefstra, and Rubinstein-Taybi syndromes).
Following training, the model is evaluated on a test set that
is described in [4]. This test set includes 32 facial photos, 23
images of CdLS patients and 9 images of non-CdLS patients.
DeepGestalt achieves 96.88% accuracy in detecting the correct
cohort.
We compare our result to previous studies conducted on
those images (Table II). Basel-Vanagaite et al. [4] reported an
accuracy of 87% in detecting whether or not the patient has
CdLS. They also compared their method’s performance to a
previous study done by Rohatgi et al. [55], where those images

were assessed by a group of 65 dysmorphologists achieving
75% accuracy on the same task.
TABLE II
RESULTS ON THE BINARY PROBLEM OF DETECTING CORNELIA DE LANGE
SYNDROME PATIENTS
Method
Accuracy
Rohatgi et al. [55]
75%
Basel-Vanagaite et al. [4]
87%
DeepGestalt
96.88%
2) Angelman Syndrome (AS): This binary experiment fo-
cuses on separating Angelman Syndrome (AS) patients from
patients with other syndromes (e.g. Williams, Russell-Silver,
Fragile X, Moebius, DiGeorge, Mowat-Wilson, Aarskog,
Chromosome 1p36 - Microdeletion, Prader-Willi, Kleefs-
tra, Phelan-McDermid, Proteus, Feingold, Cofﬁn-Siris). The
model is trained using 766 AS images as the positive cohort,
and 2699 images as the negative cohort.
In a previous survey done by [56], a group of 20 dysmor-
phologists were asked to examine a set of 25 patient images
and note which patients had AS and which did not. The
test set included 10 patients with AS (positive cohort) and
15 patients with other genetic syndromes (negative cohort).
However, experts were not aware of the number of patients in
each cohort. The recognition rate reported in the survey was
71% accuracy, 60% sensitivity and 78% speciﬁcity.
TABLE III
RESULTS ON THE BINARY PROBLEM OF DETECTING ANGELMAN
SYNDROME PATIENTS
Method
Accuracy
Sensitivity
Speciﬁcity
Bird et al. [56]
71%
60%
78%
DeepGestalt
92%
80%
100%
DeepGestalt was evaluated on the same test set and achieved
a recognition rate of 92% accuracy, 80% sensitivity and 100%
speciﬁcity (Table III), reducing the error rate by more than
72%.
B. Specialized Gestalt Model
In this section, we describe how DeepGestalt may be used
for a small scale problem, using only a small number of images
per cohort. We focus on the problem of distinguishing between
molecular subtypes of a syndrome which is genetically hetero-
geneous and derives from genetic errors in the same signaling
pathway.
We use this experiment as an example of a specialized
Gestalt model, aimed at predicting the right genotype from
patients with very subtle phenotype differences.
In 2010, Allanson et al. published The face of Noonan
syndrome: Does phenotype predict genotype [57]. They ex-
plored whether dysmorphology experts can predict the Noonan
syndrome related genotype using the facial phenotype. They
presented a set of 81 images of Noonan syndrome patients
to two dysmorphologists. The patients’ genotypes have been
KRAS
PTPN11
RAF1
SOS1
RIT1
Fig. 3. Composite photos of Noonan syndrome patients with different geno-
types show subtle differences, such as less prominent eye brows in individuals
with a SOS1 mutation, which might reﬂect the previously recognized sparse
eye brows as an expression of the more notable ectodermal ﬁndings associated
with mutations in this gene.
conﬁrmed molecularly as PTPN11, SOS1, RAF1 and KRAS.
The task was to predict the right genotype from a facial image.
Their conclusion was that experts in the ﬁeld could not succeed
in this task, as written in the article abstract: ”Thus, the facial
phenotype, alone, is insufﬁcient to predict the genotype, but
certain facial features may facilitate an educated guess in some
cases”.
We aim to examine if the technology described in this paper
can perform better and propose a novel way to harness the
Gestalt model technology to solve the problem of predicting
the right genotype.
Fig. 4. Test set confusion matrix for the Specialized Gestalt Model
We collected patient images diagnosed with Noonan syn-
drome and molecularly diagnosed with a mutation in one of
the following genes: PTPN11, SOS1, RAF1, RIT1 and KRAS.
All of the images were annotated by experts, taken either
from published articles or the internal Face2Gene phenotype
database. A set of 25 images, ﬁve images per gene (type), are
excluded from training and used as a test set. Those images
were curated from [58], [59], [57], [60], [61], [62]. To illustrate
the general appearance of each cohort, we create composite
photos by averaging the images of each cohort, see Figure 3.

Using the framework described above, we use this spe-
cialized dataset along with our internal dataset and train a
full DeepGestalt Model. The specialized Gestalt model is a
truncated version of the full model and predicts only the ﬁve
desired classes. The resultant model is then applied to the
test set and achieves a top-1-accuracy of 64%. This is more
than three times better than the random chance of 20%. The
confusion matrix for this test set is presented in Figure 4. A
similar work using our technology with comparable results can
be seen in [63].
Besides the phenotypes that are caused by mutations in
the MAPkinase pathway, DeepGestalt has also been used
to analyze two further molecular pathway diseases that are
known for their high phenotypic similarity. In GPI-anchor
biosynthesis deﬁciencies, DeepGestalt was able to reproduce
the phenotypic substructure that was already delineated by
expert clinicians and, beyond that, to deduce signiﬁcant gene-
speciﬁc phenotypes [64]. For ﬁve metabolic disorders of
high similarity, amongst them Mucopolysaccharidosis type I
and II, DeepGestalt was able to achieve accuracies in the
differentiation of patient photos that are signiﬁcanlty better
than randomly expected [65].
Specialized Gestalt Modelling by DeepGestalt therefore has
the potential to assist syndromoligists in the delineation of
characteristic facial features in Mendelian diseases.
C. Multi-class Gestalt Model
DeepGestalt is designed to perform facial Gestalt analysis
at scale - supporting hundreds or potentially even thousands
of different syndromes, as required in the clinical setting. It is
trained on the validated Face2Gene phenotype dataset, which
is rapidly growing by the large community of Face2Gene
users. To utilize the growth of the database, DeepGestalt is
trained periodically and is evaluated on real clinical cases.
The results presented in this section are achieved by a model
trained on a snapshot of the dataset, supporting 216 different
syndromes and using 26,190 images derived from the full set
of images in the current database. The model is evaluated on
a test set of 502 images of real clinical cases.
This experiment includes the largest training dataset, largest
amount of syndromes and largest test set, compared to all other
methods published in this ﬁeld (see Table I).
DeepGestalt uses an aggregation of facial regions in order
to achieve better performance and to improve robustness.
This aggregation is forcing a majority vote paradigm over
the different facial regions. To examine how each region
contributes to the ﬁnal model, we run a test set evaluation
on each region separately and compare it to the aggregated
model. As shown in Table IV, the aggregated model performs
better than each of its components (for simplicity purposes,
we choose to present only top-5 accuracy in this table, top-1
and top-10 accuracy show the same trend). This emphasizes
the ability of the proposed model to learn complementary
phenotype information on different facial regions.
TABLE IV
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON BETWEEN DIFFERENT FACIAL REGIONS AND
THE FINAL AGGREGATED DEEPGESTALT MODEL. THE AGGREGATED
ACCURACY IS A RESULT OF ALL REGIONS AS AN ENSEMBLE OF
PREDICTORS.
Facial Area
Top-5-Accuracy
Eyes
60.36
Nose
64.94
Middle face (Ear to Ear)
69.92
Upper Half Face
71.12
Lower Half Face
62.15
Full Face
77.49
Aggregated model
83.70
A full evaluation of the proposed model is shown in Table
V with the permutation test results. DeepGestalt achieves top-
K-accuracy of 60.0%, 83.7% and 91.0% for K = 1, 5, 10
respectively on the test set. Permutation test mean accuracy
and standard deviation (µ±σ) are 3.0%±0.73, 10.4%±1.27
and 17.8%±1.55 for K = 1, 5 and 10 respectively. This yields
a p-value equal to zero for all top-K-accuracies. This result
shows a high level of statistical signiﬁcance and strengthens
the conﬁdence that this model performs very well on such a
challenging evaluation dataset of real clinical cases.
TABLE V
DEEPGESTALT PERFORMANCE AND PERMUTATION TEST RESULTS
Model
Accuracy
Permutation Test
Mean Value
Permutation Test
SD Value
top-1-accuracy
60.0%
3.0%
0.73
top-5-accuracy
83.7%
10.4%
1.27
top-10-accuracy
91.0%
17.8%
1.55
V. DISCUSSION
This work presents a novel facial analysis framework for
genetic syndrome classiﬁcation called DeepGestalt. The pro-
posed framework leverages deep learning technology and
learns facial representation from a large-scale face recognition
dataset. It is followed by a ﬁne-tune phase, in which this
knowledge is transferred to the genetic syndrome domain.
We show how this framework is able to generalize well
for speciﬁc problems. We demonstrate how a binary model,
trained to identify a single syndrome, surpasses human expert
performance, both on Cornelia de Lange syndrome patients
and on Angelman syndrome patients.
We present a specialized gestalt model, which focuses on
the problem of identifying the correct facial phenotype on ﬁve
genes related to the Noonan syndrome. This demonstrates the
ability to generalize from small datasets and enables genetic
experts to investigate new phenotype-genotype correlations
and to gain novel clinical insights.
Finally, we show DeepGestalt’s high discrimination perfor-
mance on hundreds of genetic syndromes characterized by
unbalanced classes distribution. The evaluation on a large
set of patients’ photos achieves 91% accuracy including the

correct diagnosed syndrome as a top-10 list out of hun-
dreds of possible genetic syndromes. This evaluation was
done on 502 images of randomly sampled cases uploaded
to Face2Gene, and follows our intention to simulate a close
to clinic evaluation scenario. We, therefore, believe that this
accuracy represents a common clinical use case, taking into
account the prevalence and diagnostic challenges of different
syndromes.
The increased ability to describe phenotype in a standard-
ized manner opens the door to the emerging ﬁeld of precision
medicine, as well as to the identiﬁcation of new genetic
syndromes by matching undiagnosed patients sharing a similar
phenotype. Patient matching with such Artiﬁcial Intelligence
(AI) technology will enhance the way that genetic syndromes
and other genetically caused diseases are studied and explored.
In future studies, we aim to combine the Gestalt model
described here with genome sequencing data. This will en-
able improved prioritization of gene variant results. It is the
authors’ belief that the coupling of the phenotype analysis,
done by computer vision algorithms, with the continuously
growing genomic knowledge, will open new ways to rapidly
reach an accurate molecular diagnosis for patients with genetic
syndromes, and may become a key-factor for the ﬁeld of
precision medicine.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the patients and their fam-
ilies, as well as Face2Gene users worldwide who contribute
with their knowledge and dedication to the improvement of
this and other tools for the ultimate beneﬁt of better health
care.
