Concurrent Self-testing of Neural Networks Using
Uncertainty Fingerprint
Soyed Tuhin Ahmed, Mehdi B. tahoori
Department of Computer Science, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, KIT, Germany
Abstract—Neural networks (NNs) are increasingly used in
always-on safety-critical applications deployed on hardware ac-
celerators (NN-HAs) employing various memory technologies.
Reliable continuous operation of NN is essential for safety-critical
applications. During online operation, NNs are susceptible to
single and multiple permanent and soft errors due to factors
such as radiation, aging, and thermal effects. Explicit NN-HA
testing methods cannot detect transient faults during inference, are
unsuitable for always-on applications, and require extensive test
vector generation and storage. Therefore, in this paper, we propose
the uncertainty fingerprint approach representing the online fault
status of NN. Furthermore, we propose a dual head NN topology
specifically designed to produce uncertainty fingerprints and the
primary prediction of the NN in a single shot. During the
online operation, by matching the uncertainty fingerprint, we can
concurrently self-test NNs with up to 100% coverage with a low
false positive rate while maintaining a similar performance of the
primary task. Compared to existing works, memory overhead is
reduced by up to 243.7 MB, multiply and accumulate (MAC)
operation is reduced by up to 10000×, and false-positive rates
are reduced by up to 89%.
Index Terms—Self-testing, concurrent testing, testing neural
network, uncertainty estimation.
I. INTRODUCTION
Neural networks (NNs) have become indispensable tools in
a multitude of applications ranging from image recognition
to natural language processing [1]–[3]. Their unprecedented
effectiveness has led to their deployment in various sectors,
including safety-critical applications such as healthcare, au-
tomated industrial predictive maintenance, and autonomous
driving [4], [5]. NN applications are commonly deployed
on hardware accelerator architectures (NN-HA) with differ-
ent traditional CMOS and emerging memory technologies,
such as DRAM [6], SRAM [7], NAND Flash [8], Resis-
tive RAM (RRAM) [9], Phase Change Memory (PCM) [10],
Spin-Transfer Torque Magnetic RAM (STT-MRAM) [11]. In
general, NN-HA offers to accelerate the most common NN
operation, multiply and accumulated (MAC), to meet the per-
formance and energy consumption needs of high-performance
applications including resource-constrained edge applications.
Despite the merits of NN-HA, the memory elements of
NN-HA that store weights and activations are susceptible
to single and multiple permanent and soft faults that lead
to errors [12] due to latent defects from manufacturing test
escapes, infant mortality failure mechanisms, random electrical
or thermal noise, endurance, aging, and radiation. Although NN
can tolerate minor perturbations [13], their accuracy decreases
significantly with a large-magnitude hardware error [14], [15],
making NN-HA non-functional. An incorrect prediction made
by a non-functional NN-HA exposed to the end user can lead to
catastrophic failures, especially in safety-critical applications.
To ensure reliable online operation of NN-HA, a lightweight,
yet effective, online concurrent testing approach is required that
is suitable for implementation on resource-constrained devices.
Usually, NN-HA receives an input for inference that is
sequentially processed by hundreds of layers to produce the
prediction. While an NN-HA is performing computations for
the prediction, any transient or soft faults cannot be detected
by traditional explicit testing methods (pause and test) [16]–
[18]. On the other hand, traditional concurrent error detection
(CED), such as error-correcting codes (ECC), are not suitable
for detecting multiple, permanent, and logic faults, i.e., faults on
NN-HA activations. Also, ECC has a large memory overhead
due to parity bit storage. Furthermore, the error checking
(decoding) process has a significant performance and energy
penalty [19] and can slow the execution time by 2.5× [20].
In general, the existing fault detection mechanisms for NN-
HA [16]–[18], [21]–[27] either a) infeasible for always-on NN
applications as they require stopping the functional operation
of NN-HA, b) requires a large number of test vector generation
and storage, c) needs numerous test queries (forward pass) on
the NN-HA for each faulty status check, d) requires changes to
the hardware architecture or access to the internal operation of
the NN-HA, e) can only detect faults in the memory (weights),
and f) involves intensive fault injection studies.
Therefore, we introduce the uncertainty fingerprint approach
that fingerprints the status of the offline fault-free NN-HA.
By matching the fingerprints during the online operation of
the NN-HA, the status of the NN-HA can be checked con-
currently (real-time) without interruption. We also propose a
dual-head NN topology that is specifically designed to give
the uncertainty fingerprint as an alternative output parallel to
the primary prediction without requiring any extra forward
pass. The effectiveness of the proposed approach is evaluated
on multi-bit permanent and soft faults modeled as stuck-at
and random flips affecting NN-HA memories (weights) and
logic operation for the intermediate results (activation) on
various benchmark datasets and topologies. The contributions
of this paper are summarized as follows: 1) The introduction
of the uncertainty fingerprint approach along with finger-
print matching-based online concurrent self-testing for NN-HA,
2) Specifically designed dual-head NN topology for concurrent
fault detection while performing the primary task uninterrupted,
3) Development of a two-stage training strategy, accompanied
by an uncertainty fingerprint matching loss function, and 4) Es-
arXiv:2401.01458v1  [cs.LG]  2 Jan 2024

tablishment of a well-defined concurrent testing strategy, along
with reduction strategies for false positive alarms.
In this paper, we focus on concurrent self-testing of binary
NNs (BNNs) as they are more suitable for resource-constrained
edge applications but more challenging to self-test. The re-
mainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II gives
a brief background of this work, and reviews existing NN-
HA testing techniques. Afterward, Section III elaborates on
different aspects of our proposed approach in detail. Later,
Section IV presents an exhaustive evaluation of our proposed
approach; and Section V concludes this paper.
II. PRELIMINARY
A. Neural Network Topologies
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), a type of NN,
are usually organized as a series of interconnected layers.
These layers are typically composed of convolutional, pooling,
normalization, and fully connected layers, as well as nonlinear
activation functions. In a typical image recognition task, the
topology is divided into group feature extraction layers and
classifier layers. The feature extraction layers, sometimes also
called the backbone network, are responsible for learning
representations from the raw input data, while the classifier
layers make decisions based on the learned features.
Traditionally, NN topologies have a single ”head,” which
refers to the last layer responsible for the final output. However,
in modern deep learning paradigms, it is increasingly common
to have task-specific heads [28].
B. Defects and Faults in NN Hardware Accelerators
In NN-HA, defects and faults are largely determined by its
underlying memory technology and architecture. For example,
traditional SRAM and DRAM technologies are more suscepti-
ble to soft faults caused by alpha particle strikes, cosmic rays,
or radiation from radioactive atoms [29]. However, permanent
faults are usually not of great concern (∼12 failures in 1 billion
hours [30]) as their manufacturing process is relatively mature.
In contrast, emerging memory technologies (RRAM, STT-
MRAM, and PCM) are more susceptible to permanent faults
due to immature fabrication, imprecise programming, limited
write endurance, and aging. In addition, soft faults can occur
due to read disturbances [31], which cause accidental switching
of memory cells that share the same bit line during the read
operation (inference). Furthermore, due to aging, stored data
can change due to retention faults [14]. Thus, both permanent
and soft faults can affect the weights of the NN-HA. Also,
faults can accumulate over time in memory and significantly
affect the accuracy of the NN-HA [14], [15].
In NN-HA, frequently updated intermediate results (MAC
results or activation) are typically stored in the buffer memory,
e.g. in CMOS latches and flip-flops. NN-HA with hybrid
memory architectures [32] uses SRAM/DRAM technologies as
buffer memory to store intermediate results, and NVMs are
used to store weight values because they are typically less
frequently updated [33]. As a result, permanent and soft faults
can also occur in NN-HA activations, depending on the memory
technologies used to store them.
We model permanent faults using the ”Stuck-at” fault model,
where the memory system appears to be held exclusively high
or low. This translates to stuck-at-(+1) or stuck-at-(-1) for BNN
weights and activation. In the case of multi-bit (K-bit) weights
and activation, they can be stuck in any of the 2k states.
On the other hand, soft faults are modeled as ”random bit
flips”, implying that the memory element contains random but
inaccurate values. For BNN, this translates into +1 weights and
activations randomly switch to −1, and vice versa. However,
for multi-bit weights and activations, this means that they can
flip to any of the 2k −1 other states.
C. Uncertainty Estimation
Uncertainty in deep learning arises from multiple sources, in-
cluding, but not limited to, model uncertainty, data uncertainty,
and environmental conditions. Model uncertainty is inherent
due to the approximate nature of NNs, and data uncertainty
comes from variations and noise in the training and test
datasets. The introduction of permanent and soft faults in NN-
HA adds another layer of uncertainty to the system. These
faults can lead to unpredictable behavior, thereby increasing the
overall uncertainty of the NN’s outputs. Although challenging,
this form of uncertainty is important to quantify, especially in
safety-critical applications. In this work, we assume that the
inputs that the NN-HA will face in deployment come from a
distribution similar to that of the training dataset.
D. Related Works
Testing methods for NN-HAs can be categorized into several
groups such as pause-and-test, self-testing, concurrent testing,
and uncertainty estimation methods.
a) Pause-and-Test Methods.: These methods, also known
as explicit testing, are some of the most efficient and popular
methods to test NNs [16]–[18], [21]. However, they require a
stop in the NN operations for testing, which is impractical for
always-on applications. Additionally, they cannot detect most
transient faults that occur while NN is computing its prediction.
Furthermore, they often require the storage of a large number
of test vectors, which can be as much as 10,000 [21]. Some
methods such as [16] propose the generation of specific test
vectors, for example, using adversarial examples, imposing an
additional overhead to generate specific test vectors.
b) Self-Testing Methods.: A couple of studies have pro-
posed to self-test NN [17], [22]–[24] but these methods also
require a specific selection of test vectors and storage. Most
of the works are efficient, but their drawbacks are similar to
the pause-and-test methods. Also, some of the image selection
process, such as the one proposed by [22] involves intensive
fault injection studies that have a high computational cost that
increases with the size of the model.
c) Concurrent Test Methods.: Some of the concurrent
methods, such as [25], require access to the internal operations
of the NN. Also, they require an additional checking operation
on certain layers (e.g., MaxPool) for every forward pass. Some
hardware-based approaches, such as [26], require changes to
the hardware architecture, e.g., implementing adder trees, for

Fig. 1. Change in the distribution of the feature maps due to soft-faults modeled
as bit-flips of weights (see II-B) on binary ResNet-18 trained on CIFAR-10.
constant monitoring, and the dynamic power consumption of
the circuit is increased.
d) Uncertainty Estimation Methods.: In the literature,
there are many Bayesian [34], [35] and non-Bayesian [36]
methods are proposed to quantify the uncertainty of NN pre-
dictions. Recently, some works [37]–[40] focused on imple-
menting them on different accelerators. Although uncertainty
estimation methods can self-test NNs concurrently, most of
these works aim to estimate uncertainty due to data distribution
shifts. Also, they have a high runtime overhead compared to
conventional NN. For example, some methods require multiple
forward passes, while other methods require several times the
number of parameters. On the other hand, Open Set Recogni-
tion (OSR) methods are low-cost and have recently been studied
in work [27] for detecting single permanent faults affecting
NN-HA weights. However, they offer lower fault coverage,
higher false positive cases, and are only suitable for image
classifications. Also, its adaptability to BNNs, multiple faults,
or faults at NN-HA activations was not explored.
E. Problem Statement
As demonstrated in Figure 1, the learned representations of
the backbone network of a ResNet-18 BNN exhibit minimal
changes and overlap even at a 20% soft fault rate. As mentioned
previously, these learned representations are received by the
classification head, making concurrent self-testing of BNNs a
challenging task.
The primary objective is to devise a concurrent self-testing
method that meets the following criteria: a) Requires only a
single forward pass through the network. b) Achieves a low
False Positive Rate (FPR), minimizing the number of false
alarms. c) Attains a high True Positive Rate (TPR), ensuring
that faults in NN-HA are accurately identified, d) suitable for
BNNs, and require lightweight checks online for testing.
III. PROPOSED METHOD
A. Uncertainty Fingerprint
In this work, we introduce the uncertainty fingerprint (F)
concept, a specialized metric for concurrent fault detection of
NN-HAs, especially in always-on safety critical applications.
The uncertainty fingerprint is specifically designed to be the
output of a dedicated head in a dual-head NN topology as
a form of an alternative prediction. We refer to that head as
the ”uncertainty head.” Fig.2 shows the block diagram of the
proposed topology.
In this paper, the uncertainty fingerprint is defined as the
maximum value (max()) produced by the uncertainty head.
During the training phase, the uncertainty head is explicitly
tuned with the objective that the maximum output value ap-
proaches one for each input. However, the exact value of the
uncertainty fingerprint, even in the fault-free state of NN-
HA, can vary from one input to another and is itself a
distribution. Consequently, optimization makes sure that the
uncertainty fingerprint distribution is centered around one. The
main goal of the optimization is to establish a ”signature” or
”fingerprint” based on the NN-HA’s fault-free state. Note that
the optimization does not require any faulty behavior of NN-
HAs or explicit fault injection.
We hypothesize that as the weights or activation of NN-
HA change due to permanent or soft faults, the distribution of
uncertainty fingerprint can change, i.e., the distribution shifts
to the left or right, thus, making it distinguishable from the
pre-defined fault-free distribution. This is because the output
of the uncertainty head is a linear transformation of its input,
which is the output of the backbone network. As mentioned
earlier, faults in the memory elements and intermediate results
of NN-HA propagate to the output. That means that both the
prediction and the uncertainty head will receive an input that
is different from the fault-free one. Consequently, the output of
the prediction head will be incorrect, and the uncertainty head
will be different from its baseline.
Therefore, by matching the expected uncertainty fingerprint
value online for each prediction, we propose to concurrently
self-test the NN-HA. If the uncertainty fingerprint of the
NN-HA matches, then a prediction is classified as fault-free,
otherwise, it is classified as faulty.
B. Dual-Head Model
As mentioned previously, in modern NN topologies design
task-specific heads are increasingly used [28]. To obtain the
proposed uncertainty fingerprint of the model in a single shot
and without reducing the accuracy, we introduce an additional
head to the NN, uncertainty head. The uncertainty head is
typically a linear layer with a predefined number of neurons
that is independent of the number of classes in the dataset.
The specific number of neurons is a hyperparameter that
should be optimized to improve fault detection accuracy. Unlike
conventional NN topologies, our proposed topology can be self-
tested. Both the uncertainty and the prediction head share the
same unchanged backbone network.
The input received by the uncertainty and prediction head
can be the same if the prediction head is also a linear layer.
Otherwise, an additional preprocessing layer, such as adaptive
average pooling, can be applied before the uncertainty head.
The adaptive average pooling layer reduces the spatial dimen-
sions of the feature maps to a single value. Thus, it significantly
reduces the size of the weight matrix of the uncertainty head.
Hence, our proposed approach can potentially be applied to
various NN topologies, such as fully convolutional NN (full-
CNN) in which the prediction head is a convolutional layer.

C. Training Objective
We propose a two-step training for our objective. In the first
step, the NN is trained using the gradient descent algorithm
by minimizing the task-specific loss, e.g., cross-entropy. In this
step, the output of the prediction head is only considered.
In the second step, we freeze the rest of the model, including
the prediction head, and train only the uncertainty head. The
term ”freeze” here means that the gradient is not calculated
with respect to the loss value and the associated parameters
and variables will not be updated.
We propose a fingerprint loss function for this step of the
training. It is defined as:
L = α × 1
N
N
X
n=1
(1 −max(fθ′(xn)))2
(1)
Here, α is a hyperparameter that controls the strength of the
loss function, xn is the NN input, f(.) denotes the NN with
θ′ summarizing all the parameters of the NN excluding the
parameters of the prediction head, and N is the batch size.
The loss function encourages the uncertainty fingerprint for
each input to be close to one. Consequently, it encourages the
uncertainty fingerprint distribution to be centered around one.
It can be considered as the conventional mean squared error
(MSE), but it is applied to the uncertainty head.
For training and baseline uncertainty fingerprint estimation,
we divide both the training and validation datasets with an
80:20 split, where 80% of the training data trains the functional
task and 20% (fingerprint data) trains the uncertainty head to
encourage its maximum output close to one. Since the NN was
not trained on fingerprint data, the inputs to the uncertainty head
from the backbone network resemble those during inference,
enabling the uncertainty head to learn outputs akin to those
expected during inference, aligning its learned representations
closer to the inference scenario. Note that random data aug-
mentations and stochastic regularization like Dropout should
be avoided during uncertainty head training. Otherwise, the
uncertainty head might learn to be robust to input variations,
leading to a lower fault detection rate.
D. Online Concurrent Self-test
We propose boundary-based online testing, which is a
lightweight and effective way to detect faults in an online,
resource-constrained setting. We pre-compute the boundary
values, l and h, offline. This range suggests that most of the
uncertainty fingerprints of the fault-free model fall within this
range. Then, during the online operation, if an uncertainty
fingerprint is observed outside this range, it suggests that the
data on the memory or intermediate results of NN-HA have
changed due to fault occurrence.
The main idea behind this approach is to establish a ”normal
operating range” for the NN-HA’s uncertainty fingerprint. To
do this, we compute the l = 2.5% and h = 9.5% quantiles
of the uncertainty fingerprint for the fault-free model. During
the online operation, two scenarios can arise regarding the
distribution of uncertainty fingerprint score. If the score is
less than l, it may indicate a leftward drift of the distribution.
In contrast, a score greater than h could suggest a rightward
Shared Backbone
Network
Input
Feature Maps
Prediction
Head
Uncertainty
Head
Final
Activation
Prediction
Uncertainty
Fingerprint
Uncertainty
computation
Fig. 2. Two-Headed model with point estimate parameters and uncertainty for
concurrent self-testing. The model is generalizable with existing NN topologies.
drift. In both cases, these shifts signal that the uncertainty
fingerprint score is different from what was observed in the
fault-free model and the faults in the NN-HA. Therefore, a
fault is detected if it satisfies this condition:
Status of the model =
(
Faulty
if F < l or F > h,
Fault-Free
otherwise.
As a result, our approach requires only lightweight checks
to detect faults. The < (less than) and > (greater than)
operations can be implemented in software or even hardware
using comparators available in existing hardware accelerators.
Our approach, similar to the work of Gavarini et al. [27],
may result in false positives or negatives, which need to be
minimized. However, unlike [27], we propose two strategies
to reduce them. The number of false positives or negatives
is influenced by the boundaries of the uncertainty fingerprint.
Therefore, it is crucial to tune the boundaries for each dataset
or task to maximize coverage and minimize false positives.
Initially, we obtain the boundary values from the fault-free
model using a dataset that closely represents the expected real-
world data distribution that the model will encounter during
inference. Thus, the quantiles are determined on 20% of the val-
idation data, providing an unbiased estimate of the uncertainty
fingerprint distribution. The remaining 80% of the validation
dataset is used for evaluating performance and fault coverage.
Since we choose boundaries as quantile values 2.5% and
95%, it effectively ignores the tails of the uncertainty fingerprint
distribution, treating them as anomalies. In some datasets and
models, these anomalies can skew the values of l and h. There-
fore, we compute the Z-score of the uncertainty fingerprint
distribution and adjust l and h on data with a Z-score of less
than two. Z-scores help identify anomalies in a distribution,
with scores above two indicating an anomaly.
Note that the boundaries can be adjusted online if necessary,
especially when false positives are encountered. The proposed
concurrent detection method serves as an initial line of defense.
It can trigger more rigorous (explicit) tests, e.g., to find the lo-
cation of faults, followed by appropriate mitigation approaches,
such as retraining [41].
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
A. Simulation Setup
1) Evaluated Models and Dataset: The proposed method is
evaluated across four state-of-the-art CNN topologies: ResNet-
18, PreActResNet-34, VGG-9, and SegNet (a full-CNN topol-
ogy), trained in the CIFAR-10, SVHN, Flowers-102 (clas-
sification tasks) and breast cancer segmentation (biomedical

TABLE I
COMPARISON OF THE PROPOSED METHOD WITH THE BASELINE METHOD
WITH DIFFERENT TOPOLOGIES.
Method
Topology
ResNet-18
PreActResNet
VGG-9
SegNet
Baseline
90.68
95.54
83.0
93.53
Proposed
90.68
95.54
83.0
93.53
Fig. 3. Impact of inference accuracy due to (a) permanent faults and (b) soft
faults impacting NN-HA weights. Shaded regions indicate the one standard
deviation variation around the mean inference accuracy or AUC scores.
semantic segmentation) datasets, respectively. These topologies
diverge not only in architectural depth, spanning 11 to 34 layers,
but also in the number of target classes, ranging from 2 to 102.
All models have binary (+1 and −1) weights and activations
using the IRNet algorithm [42], but the bit width of the SegNet
activation is increased to 4-bit as the task is much harder.
2) Fault-injection: We perform software-level fault injection
to perform Monte Carlo fault simulation with 100 fault runs.
Faults are injected into pre-trained NN weights and activations
at random locations given by Bernoulli’s distribution. Specif-
ically, bit-flip faults are injected into NN activation during
each forward pass to simulate faults occurring while NN-HA
computes inference results.
3) Evaluation Metrics: In terms of evaluation metrics, we
report fault coverage which is defined as the percentage of
validation data flagged as ”faulty”. In a fault-free model, fault
coverage represents FPR and in a faulty model, it represents
TRP. In the ideal case, FPR is 0% and TPR is 100%. Thus,
low FPR and high TPR are desired at the same time.
B. Inference Accuracy
The proposed dual-head model maintains comparable perfor-
mance across various NN topologies, as illustrated in Table I. In
particular, both the proposed and baseline models were trained
using 80% of the training data (see Section III-C). A slight
improvement in accuracy, estimated between 0.1 and 1%, could
be observed if the baseline NNs were trained with 100% of the
training dataset.
C. Analysis of Permanent and Soft Faults Coverage
Figs. 3(a) and (b) show the effect of the permanent and
soft faults rate (occurring on the NN-HA weights) on the
inference accuracy in different datasets. It can be observed that
as the fault rate increases, the inference accuracy decreases
across all datasets. According to [18], an NN-HA is defined
as nonfunctional when the inference accuracy drops more than
20% below its baseline accuracy. The classification datasets
show a noticeable decline beyond the fault rate of 5% and
10%, for permanent and soft faults, respectively. Therefore, at
those fault rates, the NN is considered nonfunctional. In the
case of the segmentation task, there is a noticeable decrease
in the AUC score around the 5% fault rate for both permanent
and soft faults. Therefore, from 5% faults, the NN is considered
nonfunctional. Similar accuracy drop patterns are observed for
permanent and soft faults in NN-HA activations.
When the NN-HA is completely nonfunctional due to per-
manent faults in weights and activations, fault coverage con-
sistently approaches 100% for all datasets, as shown in Fig. 4.
In this scenario, the worst-case median of the fault coverage
distribution is ∼85% at the 15% fault rate for the CIFAR-10
dataset. Even in a functional case, our proposed method can
achieve up to 100% median of the fault coverage distribution.
The change in the uncertainty fingerprint distribution de-
pends on the fault rate and its impact on NN-HA performance.
As shown in Fig. 6 (left), as the soft fault rate increases, the
uncertainty fingerprint distribution moves further away from
its baseline. The amount and direction of drift depend on the
dataset, NN topology, fault location, and fault type. Therefore,
even at the same fault rate, the fault coverage varies across
NN topology, dataset, and fault type. Also, since the accuracy
loss at low fault rates is marginal at low fault rates, coverage
is also low. For instance, with a 5% permanent fault, the
mean accuracy loss on CIFAR-10 is merely 2%, resulting in a
coverage of around 20% at that fault rate. Given the minimal
accuracy drop, such faults are deemed benign, rendering the
low coverage relatively harmless.
Similarly, in the case of multiple soft faults in NN-HA
weights and activations, it can be observed in Fig. 5 that
the proposed method can consistently achieve 100% fault
coverage when NN-HA is nonfunctional. Additionally, fault
coverage distributions are significantly more compact compared
to permanent faults. Even with a low soft fault rate of 5%, most
models can achieve near 100% fault coverage.
In summary, on both permanent and soft faults affecting
NN-HA weights and activations, the proposed method
can consistently achieve a fault coverage distribution with
a median of 100% when the model is non-functional.
Furthermore, relatively high fault coverage can be achieved in
the case of marginal degradation in accuracy due to faults. Note
that the outliers in the box plots of Figs. 4 and 5 are also rare
instances, and fault coverage represents true positive cases. As
the true positive rate is consistently high at 100%, our method
can detect faults accurately with rare false negative instances
when the model is not functional.
D. Analysis of FPR and Comparison With Related Works
Earlier, we showed that the proposed method attains high
fault coverage for both permanent and soft faults. However,
maintaining low fault coverage in fault-free scenarios is also
important to minimize false positive alarms. Specifically, our
method exhibits a false positive rate of 11.17%, 9.72%, 7.25%,
and 12.5% for the SVHN, CIFAR-10, Flowers-102, and Breast
cancer segmentation datasets, respectively.
There is a trade-off between the true positive rate and
the false positive rate. Calculating the boundaries l and h
in the 1.5% and 97% quantiles of the uncertainty fingerprint
distribution reduces the false positive rate to 8.65%, 6.8%,
5.75%, 6.25%, but the true positive rate is reduced by ∼2%.

Fig. 4. Distribution of fault coverage of the proposed method when dealing with permanent faults on weights and activations of NN-HA for various datasets.
Fig. 5. Box plots depicting the distribution of fault coverage of the proposed method under soft faults on weights and activations of NN-HA.
Fig. 6. Change in the distribution of the proposed uncertainty fingerprint and
maximum logit score [43] method due to soft faults on NN-HA weights.
Fig. 7.
Change in the number of parameters and MACs of our method and
related works MC-Dropout [34], [40], MC-SpatialDropout [44], [45] respective
to the baseline.
Regardless, our proposed method requires a 62.2% and 89.35%
lower false positive rate to achieve a 100% true positive rate
compared to OSR-based fault detection [27]. Specifically, their
work requires a false positive rate of 45 −69% and 97 −98%
for CIFAR-10 and SVHN, which is unacceptable for many
applications, as it would raise too many false alarms about the
state of the model. Also, as shown in Fig. 6, the distribution of
the maximum logit score [43], an OSR method studied in [27],
overlaps at most of the fault rates, complicating fault detection.
E. Overhead Analysis
1) Model Parameters: Our proposed method increases the
number of parameters marginally in all topologies, as shown
in Fig. 7. For example, the number of parameters in the worst
case increases only by 5.5% (2.05 MB) for VGG-9, while for
SegNet, the increase is as low as 0.2% (0.26 MB). Compared to
the pause and test methods [16]–[18], [21], memory overhead
to store test vectors is zero for our approach, but up to
245.775 MB for existing work, as reported in [17].
2) Multiply and Accumulate Operations:
Similarly, our
method has only a negligible increase in MACs across all
topologies compared to the baseline, as shown in Fig. 7. In
the worst case, the MACs increase by just 0.0442% over
the baseline for the PreActResNet topology. In contrast, MC-
Dropout and MC-SpatialDropout methods require 1900% more
MACs for each input, assuming they require 20 forward passes
to estimate uncertainty. Compared to pause and test meth-
ods [16]–[18], [21], our approach does not require additional
forward passes, but they require up to 10000 forward passes
that translate 10000× MACs for each status check of an NN.
F. Discussion and Future Works
While occasional false positives are not severely harmful,
a lack of coverage is. Therefore, the bounds l and h can be
adjusted to favor the detection coverage, even if it slightly
increases the FPR, balancing between detection coverage and
the false positive rate. In the future, we aim to further improve
the fault coverage and reduce FPR by using a contrastive loss
function and increasing the depth uncertainty head.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose a novel approach to the concurrent
self-test of NNs using the dual-head model and uncertainty
fingerprint. Our approach enables continuous fault monitoring
without necessitating the cessation of the primary task, thus
fulfilling a critical gap in most of the current research. The
proposed dual-head NN topology is specifically designed to
produce uncertainty fingerprints and primary predictions in a

single shot. During online operation, our approach can con-
currently self-test NN-HAs with up to 100% coverage while
maintaining the performance of the primary task on benchmark
datasets and topologies.
