512 
Accelerating EM: An Empirical Study 
Luis E. Ortiz* and Leslie Pack Kaelblingt 
Computer Science Department, Box 1910 
Brown University, Providence, RI 02912 USA 

Abstract 
Many applications require that we learn the pa­
rameters of a model from data. EM (E xpectation­
Maximization) is a method for learning the pa­
rameters of probabilistic models with missing or 
hidden data. There are instances in which this 
method is slow to converge. 
Therefore, sev­
eral accelerations have been proposed to improve 
the method. None of the proposed acceleration 
methods are theoretically dominant and experi­
mental comparisons are lacking. In this paper, 
we present the different proposed accelerations 
and compare them experimentally. From the re­
sults of the experiments, we argue that some 
acceleration of EM is always possible, but that 
which acceleration is superior depends on prop­
erties of the problem. 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
There are many applications in artificial intelligence and 
statistics that require the fitting of a parametric model to 
data. It is often desired to find the maximum-likelihood 
(ML) or maximum-a-posteriori-probability (MAP) model 
of the data. When all of the variables of the model are di­
rectly observable in the data, then this is relatively straight­
forward. When some variables are hidden, as is common 
in popular model classes such as Bayesian networks with 
hidden variables and hidden Markov models, maximum­
likelihood parameter estimation is much more complicated. 
The problem can be cast directly as an optimization prob­
lem: given a data set D and a model of the form A(O), find 
the setting of the parameters (} that maximizes the likeli­
hood,p(DIA(O)) (orp(A(O)ID) in theMAPcase). Unfor­
tunately, the objective function does not have a form that 
can be easily optimized globally, so we are generally re­
duced to local search methods. 
• This material is based upon work supported in part un­
der a National Science Foundation Graduate Fellowship and by 
DARPA/Rome Labs Planning Initiative grant F30602-95-l-0020. 
1 This work was supported in part by DARPA/Rome Labs 
Planning Initiative grant F30602-95-l-0020. 
Probably the most naive strategy is to perform simple gra­
dient ascent in the likelihood. This method has two prob­
lems. First, it is known to be relatively inefficient among 
the class of local search methods. Second, it is often the 
case that the model class A constrains the choice of param­
eters (}. For example, some of the components of (} may 
be constrained to describe a probability distribution, and so 
must be between 0 and 1 and must sum to I. Naive gra­
dient methods must be specially modified to respect such 
constraints. 
The EM algorithm was described by Dempster et al. [ 1977] 
as a generalization of the Baum-Welsh algorithm for learn­
ing hidden Markov models [Rabiner, 1989]. Typically, it 
is monotonically convergent to a local optimum in likeli­
hood space for probabilistic models, while directly satisfy­
ing possible constraints on the parameters. 
There are two main classes of strategies for finding 
maximum-likelihood models with hidden parameters: ac­
celerated gradient methods with constraint handling and 
EM. It has been observed empirically that, in some set­
tings one algorithm appears to work better, and in other 
settings, other algorithms appear to work better. Further­
more, a number of researchers, both in the statistics and 
AI literatures, have proposed extensions, accelerations, and 
combinations of these methods. 
In this paper, we seek to understand the relative merits 
of these optimization strategies and their extensions. Al­
though there have been some attempts at theoretical com­
parisons of convergence rate [Xu and Jordan, 1996], the re­
sults are never clear-cut because they depend on properties 
of the individual problems to which they are applied. We 
have undertaken an empirical study in one of the simplest 
hidden-variable models: density estimation with a mixture 
of Gaussians. Given the infinite number of possible situ­
ations we can encounter, our only hope is to present em­
pirical results suggesting the merits and disadvantages of 
each method in some situations. We believe that this study 
yields some insight into general properties of the methods, 
though the results cannot be guaranteed to transfer. 
In the following sections, we describe the problem, some of 
the most common optimization methods available to solve 
it, the experiments we ran and the results we obtained. 
Please refer to the technical report [Ortiz and Kaelbling, 

1999] for additional details. 
2 
DENSITY ESTIMATION WITH A 
MIXTURE OF GAUSSIANS 
One of the simplest ML estimation problems with hidden 
variables is to model the probability density of a data set 
with a mixture of Gaussians. The model assumes that 
there is some number, M, of underlying "centers" in the d­
dimensional space. Each data point is independently gen­
erated by first choosing a center with probability a j, and 
then drawing from a Gaussian distribution, with mean /1-j 
(the center) and covariance matrix %j. 
AutoClass [Cheeseman et a!., 1988] casts the problem of 
how many centers to use in a Bayesian perspective by stat­
ing we should use the most probable number of centers 
given the data. In this paper, we address a subproblem 
of AutoClass: given a desired number of centers, find the 
model that maximizes the posterior probability. 
In this problem, the parameter vector (} is made up of the 
a j, 11-j and % j for each j. From the independence of the 
data points, we can write the logarithm of the likelihood of 
the parameters with respect to the data, p(DIA(O)) as the 
sum of the logarithm of the likelihood with respect to the 
individual points, 
where 
N 
L(O) = lnp(DIA(O)) = &)np(x;IA(O)), 
(I) 
i=l 
M 
p(x;IA(O)) = I>jg(x;IJJ-i• %j), 
(2) 
j=l 
and g(xiJJ-, %) is the multivariate Gaussian density with pa­
rameters 11- andņ- The constraints on(} are: (I) for all j, 
aj > 0; (2) I;(1 aj = 1; (3) for all j, %j is a symmetric, 
positive-definite matrix. It is sufficient to maximize L( 0) 
in order to maximize p(DIA(O)). Unfortunately, there is 
no direct method for performing ML estimation of (}. 
3 
GRADIENT METHODS 
The simplest gradient method we can use to find the 
maximum of the log-likelihood function is gradient as­
cent [Shewchuk, 1994, Bertsekas, 1995, Polak, 1971]. In 
this case, starting at some initial values for the parameters, 
at each iteration k, we obtain new values as follows: 
where 'i1 L((J(k)) is the gradient of the log-likelihood func­
tion evaluated at the current values of the parameters and 
-y(k) is the step size we take uphill along the gradient di­
rection. The value of -y(k) can be fixed or predetermined to 
decrease at every iteration. 
Accelerating EM: An Empirical Study 
513 
This method does not respect any constraints on the param­
eters. To satisfy the constraints on a j, we project the part of 
the gradient relevant to these parameters into the constraint 
space and take a step size that does not take us out of this 
space [Bertsekas, 1995, Binder et a!., 1997]. The projected 
gradient is 
where ( v) j denotes the l h component of vector v. 
Another strategy is to parameterize a in terms of another 
parameter w such that w is unconstrained and any assign­
ment to w satisfies the constraints on a. One way of doing 
this is as follows: 
(5) 
To satisfy the constraint on %j, we verify that the step size 
does not take us out of the constraint space and decrease 
the step size if it does until we get a step size that does not 
take us out of the constraint space. 
Taking a fixed or predetermined step size at each step can 
slow down convergence. Instead, we can optimize the step 
size at every step by trying to find the largest value of the 
function in the direction of the gradient at every step by 
means of a line search; that is, this is the same as in gradient 
ascent but with 
-y(k) +- argmaxL((J(k) + -y'il L((J(k)))). 
"Y 
This method seems appealing but it has a drawback in that 
if the Hessian of the function at the local optimum is ill­
conditioned (i.e., the function is "elongated"), it exhibits a 
zig-zagging behavior that can significantly slow down con­
vergence [Bertsekas, 1995]. 
The conjugate gradient method tries to eliminate the zig­
zagging behavior of optimized-step-size gradient ascent by 
requiring that we optimize along conjugate directions at 
every step. Formally, starting with some initial setting of 
the parameters (J(O), r(o) +- 'i1 L((J(0l), and the first di­
rection d(o) +-
r(0), at each iteration k, we do as fol­
lows: 
-y(k) ;- argmax.., L((J(k) + "fd(k)) 
line search 
take best step in current direction 
(J(k+l) +- (J(k) + "'(k)d(k) 
r(k+l) ;- 'i1 L((J(k+1)) 
new gradient 
if((k + 1) mod d)== 0 then 
,B(k+l) ;- 0 
start over 
else 
weight to current direction 
(k+l) 
(rl•+•lf (r(k+I) -rl•l) 
,6 
+-
(rl•l)tr(k) 
end if 
new conjugate direction 
d(k+l) +- r(k+l) + ,B(k+l)d(k) 

514 
Ortiz and Kaelbling 
If we disregard the line search iterations, the conjugate gra­
dient method has the appealing property that the number 
of iterations to convergence when close to a solution 1 is 
roughly equal to the number of parameters. 
There are other more sophisticated methods, such as New­
ton and Quasi-Newton or variable metric, that try to solve 
the deficiencies of fixed- and optimized-step-size gradient 
ascent by reshaping the function. These methods use ad­
ditional information about the function, like higher-order 
derivatives. However, using higher-order derivatives re­
quires us to use additional storage and perform additional 
computations, which typically outweigh the reduction in 
the number of iterations. 
4 
EMBASICS 
EM is a method for optimizing log-likelihood functions 
in the case of missing data or hidden variables [Dempster 
et al., 1977, McLachlan and Krishnan, 1997]. Starting with 
some initial value for the parameters, at each iteration, it 
uses the value of the parameters to compute the distribu­
tion or density over the hidden variables conditioned on the 
data (the expectation step) and then uses that distribution to 
get new values for the parameters (the maximization step). 
The likelihood function monotonically increases at each it­
eration, and under some regularity conditions on the like­
lihood function, the improvement is strict except at a sta­
tionary point of the likelihood function [Wu, 1983]. 
In the case of the mixture of Gaussians, at each iteration, 
we find, for each data point and each center, the condi­
tional probability that the center generated the data point 
and then use that probability distribution to assign new val­
ues to the probability, mean and covariance matrix of each 
center. The expectation step is providing the maximization 
step with the information that will allow it to compute the 
expected sufficient statistics for each center under the con­
ditional probability distribution over the center given the 
data and the current value of the parameters. EM uses the 
expected sufficient statistics in the maximization step as if 
they were the true sufficient statistics to obtain new values 
for the parameters. 
More specifically, starting from some initial setting of the 
parameters, at each iteration k, the EM algorithm for mix­
ture of Gaussians is 
E-step: compute distribution induced by IJ(k) and D 
fori+-- 1 to N,j +-- 1 toM do 
hl) +-- P(C = ilx;,A(IJ(k))) ex ajk)g(x;IJ1)k),r;n 
end for 
M-step: update parameters 
for j +-- 1 to M do 
(k 1) 
..,...N h(k) 
Q. + 
f-- L.. z-1 •j 
J 
N 
(k+l) 
I:/-1 hTx; 
Jlj 
f--
"N 
h k) 
.£... ;=1 
IJ 
1 More formally, close to a solution means the neighborhood 
around the local optimum that can be well approximated by a 
quadratic function. 
..,(k+l)  I:j-1 hj>x,x;" 
(k+l) ( (k+l))T 
"-'j 
 
"N 
h(k) 
- Jlj 
Jlj 
L.... ;=l 
IJ 
end for 
For the mixture-of-Gaussians model, the method typically 
converges to a local maximum of the likelihood function, 
but it can stop in other stationary points, or it can go to a 
singular point where the likelihood function grows with­
out bound [Redner and Walker, 1984]. A singular point 
in the mixture model occurs when we use data points as 
one of the means and let the variance of that center go to 
zero [Duda and Hart, 1973]. In practice, we can avoid sin­
gularities through good initializations. In cases where this 
is not enough, we can either ( 1) assign a small value to vari­
ances when they go below some small threshold value, (2) 
delete components with too-small variances, (3) use priors 
on Ej and perform MAP estimation, or (4) restart EM with 
a different initial value for the parameters. 
We can also view EM as a special form of the general gra­
dient method. This allows us to see how EM reshapes the 
function it is optimizing to make it better conditioned [Xu 
and Jordan, 1996]. It also allows us to analyze its conver­
gence theoretically. However, in the mixture-of-Gaussians 
model, the method gives updates that automatically satisfy 
the constraints on the parameters (in the case of Ej, this is 
true with probability 1 for sufficiently large N [Redner and 
Walker, 1984, Xu and Jordan, 1996]). In practice, numer­
ical errors can still take us out of the parameter space. In 
those cases, we can either: (l) take a smaller step in the 
direction of the EM update so as to guarantee constraint 
satisfaction, (2) eliminate components for which a i = 0 
and put small thresholds on Ej, or (3) use priors on IJ and 
perform MAP estimation. 
5 
ACCELERATION METHODS 
Although EM has a very appealing monotonicity prop­
erty, its convergence rate is significantly slow in some in­
stances. For mixture of Gaussians, EM slows down when 
the centers (i.e., the Gaussian components) are very close 
together [Redner and Walker, 1984, Xu and Jordan, 1996]. 
One alternative is to start the optimization with EM and 
move to gradient methods when we are close to a solution. 
Another is to accelerate EM directly by using information 
about the EM iteration [McLachlan and Krishnan, 1997]. 
One of the direct accelerations is parameterized EM [Pe­
ters and Walker, 1978, Redner and Walker, 1984, Meilij­
son, 1989, Bauer et al., 1997]. Starting from some initial 
setting of the parameters, at each iteration, we get new val­
ues for the parameters as follows: 
where e};A'f1) is the EM update with respect to the current 
parameters IJ(k). In this method, we use the change in val­
ues in the parameters at an EM iteration and take a step 
uphill in this direction from the current position or value of 
the parameters. The step size can be fixed as in gradient 

ascent, or optimized at every step as in optimized-step-size 
gradient ascent. It is equivalent to EM when l(k) = 1. In 
the case of mixture of Gaussians, we can achieve conver­
gence using this method when we are close to a solution 
and 0 < l(k) < 2 [Redner and Walker, 1984], and improve 
convergence speed when l(k) > 0.5 [Xu, 1997]. 
Parameterized EM is actually gradient or steepest ascent to 
find the zero of a function that is the change in parameters 
provided by EM (i.e., finding a fixpoint of the EM update). 
Another acceleration method is conjugate gradient accel­
eration of EM [Jamshidian and Jennrich, 1993, Thiesson, 
1995]. The idea is to use the change in value of the pa­
rameters of the EM iteration to find better conjugate di­
rections when performing conjugate gradient. The method 
uses the information provided by the EM iteration to re­
shape the function and improve convergence speed when 
close to a solution. Formally, starting with some initial set­
ting of the parameters 1J(0), r(0) +-V' L(IJ(0)), and the first 
direction d(o) = 01- IJ(o), at each iteration k, we do as 
follows: 
l(k) f- argmax.., L(IJ(k) + jd(k)) 
line search 
take best step in current direction 
(J(k+!) +-IJ(k) + l(k)d(k) 
r(k+I) +- V' L(IJ(k+I)) 
new gradient 
uik+!) +-IJ(k+I) -IJ(k) 
EM direction 
EM 
if ((k + 1) mod d)== 0 then 
f3(k+I) +- 0 
start over 
else 
weight to current direction using EM information 
(k+!) f-
(uiHI))T(r(k+l)_r(k)) 
{3 
(di•l)f (rlk+I)-r(k)) 
end if 
new conjugate direction 
d(k+I) f- u(k+J) + f3(k+!)d(k) 
This method is actually a special form of a generalized con­
jugate gradient method. The interesting aspect of the con­
jugate gradient acceleration of EM is that, contrary to the 
traditional generalized conjugate gradient method, it does 
not require the specification of a preconditioning matrix or 
the evaluation of second order derivatives or matrix-vector 
multiplications, since the change in parameters provided by 
the EM update rule approximates the generalized gradient. 
We conjecture that the relationship between parameterized 
EM and conjugate gradient using EM information is similar 
to the relationship between fixed- and optimized-step-size 
gradient ascent and regular conjugate gradient: finding a 
good step size is problem dependent but optimizing the step 
size might not be a good idea (i.e., produces zig-zagging 
behavior) and moving in conjugate directions is better. 
As pointed out by an anonymous reviewer, there are other 
extensions of the EM algorithm that can speed up conver­
gence. Due to lack of space, we refer the reader to McLach­
lan and Krishnan [ 1997] for additional information about 
extensions and variations of EM. Two extensions of 
the EM algorithm are the ECM (Expectation-Conditional 
Maximization) [Meng and Rubin, 1993] and the ECME 
(Expectation-Conditional Maximization Either) [Liu and 
Accelerating EM: An Empirical Study 
515 
Rubin, 1994] algorithms. Both are useful when the regu­
lar maximization step is complex (i.e., no closed-form op­
timization) yet simpler if conditioned on a function of the 
current value of the parameters. Furthermore, ECME dif­
fers from ECM only in that it conditionally maximize the 
log-like/ihood function directly in some of the steps. ECM 
typically has a slower convergence rate than EM, although 
it can be faster in actual total computing time. The con­
vergence rate of ECME is typically faster than that of EM 
and ECM (the actual computing time to convergence is also 
typically faster). Given that the maximization step is simple 
in the context of the mixture-of-Gaussians model, these ex­
tensions do not really apply here except in the case that we 
reparameterized a as in equation (5). In this case, a version 
of an ECM algorithm can speed up convergence with re­
spect to the typical alternative, which is an algorithm based 
on the generalized version of EM. However, it will still be 
typically slower than regular EM. We note that a version of 
the ECM algorithm can help learning in the context of the 
mixture-of-experts architecture [Jordan and Xu, 1993]. 
6 
EXPERIMENTS 
The theoretical convergence speed of the different methods 
presented is problem dependent. No one is theoretically 
dominant. There is empirical evidence that EM is superior 
to gradient ascent in the mixture-of-Gaussians case [Xu and 
Jordan, 1996]. The conjugate gradient and the accelera­
tion methods work well when they are close to a solution. 
We argue that running conjugate gradient by itself is not a 
good idea since it requires a very precise line search when 
it is far from a solution. In practice, precise line searches 
can increase the time to convergence. Hence, the meth­
ods we compare to EM in this paper are all based on an 
idea that uses the monotonic convergence properties of EM. 
The algorithmic description is as follows [Jamshidian and 
Jennrich, 1993, Thiesson, 1995]: starting from some initial 
setting of the parameters, 
repeat 
Run EM to get us close to a solution 
Run acceleration 
until stopping condition 
When needed, we use inexact line searches during the ac­
celerations to save time. This seems to work well when 
we are close to a solution. However, a decrease in log­
likelihood can occur due to the inexact line search. If a 
decrease in log-likelihood occurs during the acceleration, 
we return to EM and repeat the process. We interpret the 
condition close to a solution to be true when the change in 
log-likelihood is less than 0.5. This means that we continue 
to run EM "as long as the x2 statistic for testing the equal­
ity of two successive iterates is more than I" [Jamshidian 
and Jennrich, 1993]. 
When needed, the line search we use is an adapted version 
of the secant-like line search used by Jamshidian and Jen­
nrich [1993]. Note that even in methods that do not use a 
line search, like parameterized EM, we still need to make 
sure that the step size does not take us outside the constraint 

516 
Ortiz and Kaelbling 
space. In those cases, we reduce the step size until we find 
one that keeps us inside the parameter space. 
The basis of our empirical analysis is the idea that the work 
needed to compute both the gradient and EM update is ap­
proximately the same. Actually, as long as N is sufficiently 
large such that the extra computation is not significant, we 
can compute both in about the same time, since they re­
quire about the same information. We can see this from 
the expression of the gradient [Xu and Jordan, 1996]. Let 
the expected counts for center j be Nj = I;'1 h;j. and 
let o:fM, JJfM and I:fM be the result of applying the EM 
update rule to o: J, fJ j and L; j, then 
8L(O) 
N 
al?M 
-- -
-3 
- N -3-
(7) 
8o:j 
-
O:j 
-
O:j 
' 
1 
V:;; L(O) = 2_Nivec (I:j1 (I:fM- I:J+ 
(JJfM- fJJ)(JJfM- JJJf) I:j1) · 
(9) 
First of all, we note that both require the computation 
of the expected sufficient statistics I;' 1 h;i, I;' 1 h;j x;, 
and I;'1 h;jx;xT to obtain the EM update. This takes 
O(N M d3) (O(N Md) when dealing with independent fea­
tures) 2. Using the EM update, computing the EM direction 
takes 0 ( M d2) extra work and computing the gradient takes 
O(M d3) extra work (in case of independent features, both 
bounds are 0( M d)). We also note that the constants in the 
bounds for extra work are small. Therefore, for sufficiently 
large N, the time to compute the expected sufficient statis­
tics dominates all others. Finally, we say that the computa­
tion of the gradient, the EM iteration, and both at the same 
time are all EM-equivalent iterations. This way we do not 
need to compare CPU times, which significantly depend 
on the implementation details of the different methods. All 
we need to do is optimize the methods with respect to EM­
equivalent iterations. 
There are many different initialization methods. Some of 
them have been studied for large-dimensional data in the 
context of the naive Bayesian Network model [Meila and 
Heckerman, 1998]. For simplicity, we use the following 
initialization: 
Initialize o: as a uniform random sample from the space 
of all distribution over M events. 
Initialize fJ for each center by sampling uniformly at ran­
dom from the space defined by the hypercube of mini­
mum volume containing all the data points. 
Initialize L; for each center as a diagonal matrix with 
variances equal to the square of the distance to the center 
closest to it [Bishop, 1996]. 
2This is assuming that the complexity of exponentiation is 
0(1). 
One remaining issue is when to stop. Ideally, an iterative 
method should stop when it has reached values for the pa­
rameters such that they provide a "good" model. However, 
there is no clear way for an iterative method to determine 
this. Therefore, detecting when to stop is a crucial but hard 
problem in general. For instance, it is common to encounter 
situations where the function we want to optimize has many 
areas of large and small changes towards the local opti­
mum. In tum, this causes some of the methods to produce 
burst of large and small improvements, which must be han­
dled by stopping rules. Many different stopping rules have 
been used in the optimization literature [Bertsekas, 1995]. 
In this paper, we do not deal with the stopping problem 
and use a very simple, typical stopping rule based on the 
progress of the method in log-likelihood (or log-posterior) 
space 3. We stop when the change in log-likelihood from 
one iteration to the next is less than 10-5. We can obtain 
the information we need to test this condition easily from 
the EM-equivalent iteration. In our experiments on syn­
thetic data, all the methods that we tested converged to the 
same point in log-likelihood space (and parameter sy,ace, 
sometimes modulo symmetrically equivalent models ). 
All the methods we tested, besides regular EM (EM), have 
the algorithmic structure presented above and only the ac­
celeration step differed. We tried the following accelera­
tions: 
• regular conjugate gradient (CG), 
• conjugate gradient with EM information (CG+EM), 
• parameterized EM with inexact line search to optimize 
the step size (PEM(opt)), 
• parameterized EM 
with fixed step sizes 
1.5 
(PEM(l.S)) and 1.9 (PEM(1.9)). 
• conjugate gradient with EM information on reparam­
eterized (w) space 5 (CG+EM(rp)). 
In order to examine the properties of the different methods, 
we tested them on data we generated from simple models 
with varying degree of separation between the Gaussians. 
We generated data from 3 models with 2 Gaussians in 2-
dimensions. All 3 models had the same parameters o: and L; 
(o:1 = o:2 = 0.5, I:1 = I:2 = J). The first center f.Jt for one 
of the Gaussians in the 3 models was also the same (J.J 1 = 
(0, 0)). The models differed in the center of the second 
Gaussian: (1) J.J2 = (3, 3), (2) J.J2 = (2, 2), and (3) f.J2 = 
( 1, 1). We generated one data set of 2000 points from each 
of the models (See Figure 1). We then generated 40 initial 
sets of parameters using the method presented above and 
3In theory, convergence speed in log-likelihood space is faster 
than in parameter space. 
4In almost all cases, the methods converged to the same pa­
rameter values (i.e., equivalent models) and therefore there was 
no need to compare them in terms of KL-divergence of the result­
ing model from the true model. 
5The EM algorithm in this case is actually a Generalized EM 
algorithm since there is no exact (i.e., closed-form) optimization 
in the maximization step. 

Accelerating EM: An Empirical Study 
517 
Data set 1 
Data set 2 
Data set 3 
Figure 1: Data sets 1, 2, and 3. 
Data Set 
Method 
1 : (0,0)-(3,3) 
2 : (0,0)-(2,2) 
3 : (0,0)-(1,1) 
num. iters. 
speed-up 
EM 
120 
198 
2356 
CG 
163 
0.78 ± O.D7 
225 
1.04 ± 0.07 
585 
3.98± 0.38 
CG+EM 
100 
1.18 ± 0.19 
122 
1.78±0.19 
187 
12.80 ± 1.50 
CG+EM(rp) 
116 
1.04 ± 0.18 
131 
1.70±0.19 
214 
11.92 ± 1.46 
PEM(opt) 
120 
1.01 ± 0.10 
202 
1.02 ± 0.05 
1967 
1.58 ± 0.18 
PEM(l.5) 
83 
1.40 ± 0.04 
137 
1.44 ± 0.02 
1642 
1.41 ± 0.02 
PEM(l.9) 
81 
1.32 ± 0.09 
110 
1.79 ± 0.03 
1329 
1.74±0.04 
Table 1: This table presents the average number of EM-equivalent iterations that each method took to converge on the 
different data sets for the first set of experiments. Also in the table are the (approximate) 95% confidence intervals on the 
average speed-up of the methods with respect to the number of iterations taken by EM (i.e., speed-up of a run= number of 
iterations of EM I number of iterations of acceleration for that run). 
ran each algorithm on each data set starting from each one 
of those initial parameters. Table 1 presents the results. For 
each data set, the results in the first column are the average 
number of EM-equivalent iterations for each method. The 
results in the second column are the average speed-up. We 
define the speed-up achieved by a proposed acceleration 
method in a run as the number of iterations of EM divided 
by the number of EM-equivalent iterations of the method 
for that run. Average speed-up may be a better measure 
because it is not so drastically influenced by cases that are 
hard for everyone. 
We performed a bootstrap version (shift method) of the 
one-sided paired-sample test [Cohen, 1995] to compare the 
method with the best average number of iterations and/or 
speed-up with each of the other methods. For each data set, 
results are in bold for the method with the best empirical 
mean. The test did not reject the null hypothesis that the 
difference in mean was significant (p ::; 0.05, K = 10000) 
with respect to the method with the best empirical mean 
only for the other methods with the results in bold. 
The results from this experiment show that accelerating 
with CG+EM and CG+EM(rp) significantly improve con­
vergence speed as the Gaussians get closer together. When 
the Gaussians are farther apart, all accelerations except 
PEM(l.S) and PEM(1.9) can slow down convergence due 
to false starts of the acceleration (false signalings of close­
ness to a solution). However, the improvement in conver-
Scatter Plot CG+EM vs EM (Data Set3, 40 runs) 
4000 
3500 
3000 
2500 
2000 
' 
' 
1500 
' 
' 
' 
1000 
' 
500 
Figure 2: Scatter plot of the number of EM-equivalent iter­
ations of CG+EM vs. the number iterations of EM on data 
set 3. 

518 
Ortiz and Kaelbling 
Data set 4 
Data set 5 
Figure 4: Data set 4 and 5. 
Data Set 
Method 
6: (M - 5, d- 5) 
4 :  (M - 5, d- 2 (easy)) 
5 : (M - 5, d- 2 (hard)) 
num. iters. 
speed-up 
EM 
122 
136 
1672 
CG+EM 
140 
1.20 ± 0.32 
140 
1.05 ± 0.25 
195 
7.98± 1.36 
PEM(opt) 
140 
1.01 ± 0.10 
121 
1.14± 0.50 
1028 
2.02 ± 0.28 
PEM(l .5) 
91 
1.13 ± 0.04 
111 
1.12 ± 0.06 
1160 
1.42 ± 0.03 
PEM(l.9) 
89 
1.13 ± 0.06 
100 
1.20 ± 0.08 
940 
1.73 ± 0.05 
Table 2: This table presents the average number of EM-equivalent iterations that each method took to converge and the 
(approximate) 95% confidence intervals on the average speed-up on the different data sets for the second set of experiments. 
Seanar Plot PEM(1.9) vs. EM (Data Set 3, 40 nme) 
4000 
3500 
3000 
1500 
1000 
' 
' 
' 
' 
' 
500 
,; 
•• • 
' 
' 
' 
' 
' 
' 
' 
.. 
.• 
' 
' 
' 
' 
' 
.. 
' 
' 
' 
' 
a-=sooc100e150groo-2S0-300klm 
t itera EM 
Figure 3: Scatter plot of the number of EM-equivalent it­
erations of PEM(1.9) vs. the number of EM iterations on 
data set 3. This linear behavior is typical of fixed-step-size 
parameterized EM on all the data setÁ. 
gence speed provided by PEM(l.S) and PEM(1.9) is not 
as impressive as that ofCG+EM and CG+EM(rp) in hard 
instances. Also, the slow-downs produced by the attempted 
accelerations tend to occur mainly in easier instances (mod­
els with means at (0,0)-(3,3) and (0,0)-(2,2)) of the prob­
lem and are not as severe as the potential improvements in 
hard instances (model with means at (0,0)-(1,1)). Figure 2 
presents a scatter plot of the behavior of CG+EM in data 
set 3. Finally, note from Figure 3 and the small values of 
the confidence intervals for the speed-up for the fixed-step­
size parameterized EM method that the behavior of fixed­
step-size parameterized EM methods seems in general very 
consistent. 
Although the results are not reported in this paper, we also 
tried running EM on the reparameterized space alone and 
running conjugate gradient alone in all the experiments but 
they had much less success on average . 
We also ran experiments with models of more Gaussians 
and/or higher dimensions with similar results. Models 4, 
5 and 6 are random models with different characteristics. 
Models 4 and 5 both have d = 2 and M = 5. They dif­
fer in that in the data generated from model 5 it is harder 
to distinguish the different clusters than in that generated 
from model 4 (See Figure 4). Model6 is larger with d = 5, 
M = 5. 
We generated a data set of 5000 points from 
model 4, 10000 points from model 5, and 20000 points 
from model 6. Table 2 presents the results. The results 
are averages of 40, 40 and 38 random initial settings of the 
parameters for models 4, 5 and 6 respectively. Again, we 
have CG+EM being superior in the hard case, and while 
it might slow down in the easy cases, the slow down does 
not seem that severe. We note again that PEM(l.S) and 

35 
25 
" 
10 
0 
1 .• 
-
-
-
0 
500 
1000 
1500 
2000 
2500 
3000 
3500 
4000 
4500 
nlll'lberol iterations 
Figure 5: Histogram of the number of iteration of EM on 
data set 6. 
PEM(1.9) seem almost consistently better than EM. Fi­
nally, we note that there are 2 runs missing from the re­
sults in the table for model 6. For one of those runs,EM 
took 4041 iterations on that run compared to 2974 for 
PEM(l.S), 2483 for PEM(1.9) and 21456 for PEM(opt). 
We stopped CG+EM when it had more iterations than all 
the others. CG+EM and PEM(opt) were failing during 
the line search because they were running out of time 6. 
The value of the log-likelihood for the point where all the 
methods converged in that run was smaller than the most 
common one. We suspect that this is a saddle point or 
some flat region in log-likelihood space. For the other run, 
textbfEM took 2976 iterations on that run, compared to 
180 for CG+EM, 5836 for PEM(opt), 1999 for PEM(l.S), 
and 1998 for PEM(1.9). Inspection of the behavior of 
PEM(opt) showed that the method was wasting time be­
cause the line searches were failing almost immediately, 
and therefore going back to EM immediately after each at­
tempt. For this run, however, the point where the methods 
converged was the most common point in log-likelihood 
space. Finally, we note that the behavior of both of these 
two runs was uncommon as suggested by the histogram of 
the number of iterations of EM for this data set in Figure 5; 
the two largest values in the histogram are for the runs men­
tioned above. 
As an anonymous reviewer pointed out, the stopping rule 
we use does not have a scale. Therefore, it is insensitive to 
the range of the log-likelihood function. Restating the issue 
of stopping rules, we note that partial preliminary experi­
ments suggest that a scaled stopping rule 7 can indeed help 
reduce the number of iterations required by EM and PEM 
in hard instances. In such cases, the log-likelihood func-
6The inexact line search that we used had a optimum num­
ber of trials before failing which was set to 10 [Jamshidian and 
Jennrich, 1993). 
7For instance, as suggested by that anonymous reviewer, we 
stop when the change in log-likelihood at one iteration relative to 
the total change so far is smaller than some threshold (i.e., w-•). 
Accelerating EM: An Empirical Study 
519 
Method 
IRAS data results 
num. iters. 
speed-up 
EM 
480 
CG+EM 
474 
0.99 
PEM(l.9) 
272 
1.66 
Table 3: This table presents the average number of EM­
equivalent iterations and speed-up that each method took to 
converge on the IRAS data set starting with initially M = 
77. 
tion is ill-conditioned and stopping anywhere in the rela­
tively flat region close to the solution produces very good 
estimates with regard to maximizing log-likelihood. It can 
also help in preventing over-fitting when the amount of data 
is small; a very important issue when we are learning mod­
els from data. However, partial preliminary experiments 
also suggest that, unless we use different threshold values 
for different instances, a scaled stopping rule increases the 
potential for stopping too early in easier instances, thus 
producing bad estimates. Other stopping rules have been 
used for EM, but we do not know of any study that has 
been done to compare them. Finally, we conjecture that the 
"right" stopping rule eliminates the need for most of the 
type of accelerations proposed since it eliminates the basis 
for them. This is because the proposed accelerations work 
well when we are close to a solution and the problem is 
ill-conditioned, which is exactly what the "right" stopping 
rule would detect. 
We also ran experiments on the Infrared Astronomical 
Satellite (IRAS) data set [Cheeseman et al., 1988, Cheese­
man and Stutz, 1995]. This data set contains N = 5420 
data points in d = 93 dimensions. AutoClass found 
M = 77 classes using a mixture-of-Gaussians model with 
independent features. Given the high dimensionality and 
other problems that this data poses, we performed MAP es­
timation over a model with independent features and took 
careful steps in the way we computed the expected suffi­
cient statistics and the value of the change in log-posterior. 
Therefore, our implementation is similar to that of Auto­
Class. 
We assumed a priori that the parameters were independent. 
We used a Dirichlet prior on the a parameters with the 
same prior counts which we set to ( M + 1) / M. We used 
a uniform prior over the hypercube of minimum volume 
containing all the data points for the mean parameters of 
the Gaussian components. We used a (scaled) inverse-x2 
prior for the variances with 1/ M degrees of freedom and 
scale 1. In some instances, the update rule took us close 
to the boundary constraint. Our solution to this problem 
was to eliminate components if their probability was less 
than 1/ N and/or at least one of their variances was less 
than 10-100. Once we removed those invalid components, 
we restarted the method using the value of the parameters 
of the remaining components as the initial value of the pa­
rameters. 

520 
Ortiz and Kaelbling 
We ran experiments assuming a mixture-of-Gaussians 
model with initially 77 components. We generated random 
initial parameters using an adapted version of the initializa­
tion procedure used by AutoClass C and ran each method 
starting from each one of the initial parameters. Table 3 
presents the results based on 5 runs. First, we note that 
EM is very stable at the beginning and makes most of 
its progress in the first 20 - 25 iterations. This behavior 
has also been noted by others [Redner and Walker, 1984, 
Xu and Jordan, 1996]. Fixed-step-size parameterized EM 
tends to perform best in this data set with respect to speed 
of convergence. Conjugate gradient acceleration of EM can 
slow down convergence. To understand this result we note 
that the shape of the log-posterior seems to have many val­
leys, as suggested by the typical behavior of EM on this 
data as shown in Figure 6. Therefore, we make many false 
signalings of closeness and start the acceleration before it 
is really close to a solution. The methods that use line 
searches wasted time, since most of the line searches fail 
and therefore the attempt to accelerate fails. Again, this 
type of behavior suggests that we need better ways of sig­
naling closeness or stopping. Preliminary analysis seems 
to indicate that this behavior of EM does not simply result 
from performing MAP estimation. Therefore, we wonder 
whether the cause of this is related to the fact that the ratio 
of the number of parameters to the number of samples is 
not small enough, or this is just a consequence of the high 
dimensionality, or both 8. 
7 
CONCLUSIONS 
First of all, we note, as many others authors have before us, 
that the performance of EM away from the solution is im­
pressive, particularly in log-likelihood (and log-posterior) 
space. Given the "right" stopping rule for a problem, it 
typically produces reasonable estimates relatively fast. In 
addition, it typically exhibits global convergence 9 in prac­
tice. These properties, along with its monotonicity prop­
erty and its simplicity, make EM a very powerful method 
and a first choice for finding ML (or MAP) estimates in the 
context of the mixture-of-Gaussians and other probabilistic 
models. 
Nevertheless, using the assumption that the amount of 
data is sufficiently large such that the extra computation 
of the gradient and the EM direction is not significant 
and a simple albeit conservative stopping rule, our exper­
imental results on synthetic data suggest that the method 
based on conjugate gradient acceleration of EM can be a 
good choice for finding ML estimates for the mixture-of­
Gaussians model. This is because it significantly improves 
convergence in the hard cases and, while it can slow down 
convergence in the easy cases, the slow-down is not as se­
vere, given the relatively low number of iterations required 
to converge in those cases. In addition, although it is more 
8Numerical instability can certainly be a reason too. 
9Here, global convergence means the property of an optimiza­
tion method to be able to converge to a stationary point (not nec­
essarily a global optimum) in function space from any initial point 
in the parameter space. 
(a) 
t 
" 
(b) 
EM behavior altar !liQnallng clo99nBSS 
(c) 
Figure 6: Plots of (a) the log-posterior (without constants) 
divided by N, (b) the change in log-posterior and (c) the 
relative change in log-posterior after signaling closeness 
for a typical run of EM on the IRAS data set. We plot 
the log-posterior/ N as opposed to the log-posterior itself 
to reduce the scale of the y-axis. The relative change is the 
current change divided by the previous change and can be 
used as an approximation of the convergence rate. 

complicated to implement than parameterized EM, it elim­
inates the setting of the step size parameter. Furthermore, 
although it requires line searches, those searches can be 
simple and inexact in a neighborhood close to a solution. 
Finally, the behavior of conjugate gradient acceleration of 
EM seems best when the function is smooth but very flat 
and "elongated" in the neighborhood of the local optimum. 
On the other hand, the results from the experiments on the 
IRAS data suggest that it is a good idea to attempt a sim­
ple acceleration method, such as fixed-step-size parameter­
ized EM, before trying the more complicated conjugate­
gradient-based accelerations. This is because there are 
cases in which the surface of the log-likelihood (or log­
posterior) is relatively flat but not very smooth in the neigh­
borhood of the local optimum. We can attempt those more 
complicated methods once we note that the simple acceler­
ation method is still too slow. 
We think that it is necessary to perform a similar compar­
ison analysis in the context of learning Bayesian networks 
and HMMs to verify that the same characterization of su­
periority of the accelerations based on "easy" and "hard" 
instances suggested in this paper carries over.
