Short Range Correlation Transformer for Occluded Person Re-Identiﬁcation
Yunbin Zhao, Songhao Zhu∗, Dongsheng Wang, Zhiwei Liang
College of Automation and Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing, China

Abstract
Occluded person re-identiﬁcation is one of the challeng-
ing areas of computer vision, which faces problems such
as inefﬁcient feature representation and low recognition ac-
curacy. Convolutional neural network pays more attention
to the extraction of local features, therefore it is difﬁcult
to extract features of occluded pedestrians and the effect
is not so satisﬁed. Recently, vision transformer is intro-
duced into the ﬁeld of re-identiﬁcation and achieves the
most advanced results by constructing the relationship of
global features between patch sequences. However, the per-
formance of vision transformer in extracting local features
is inferior to that of convolutional neural network. There-
fore, we design a partial feature transformer-based person
re-identiﬁcation framework named PFT. The proposed PFT
utilizes three modules to enhance the efﬁciency of vision
transformer. (1) Patch full dimension enhancement mod-
ule. We design a learnable tensor with the same size as
patch sequences, which is full-dimensional and deeply em-
bedded in patch sequences to enrich the diversity of train-
ing samples. (2) Fusion and reconstruction module. We
extract the less important part of obtained patch sequences,
and fuse them with original patch sequence to reconstruct
the original patch sequences. (3) Spatial Slicing Module.
We slice and group patch sequences from spatial direction,
which can effectively improve the short-range correlation of
patch sequences. Experimental results over occluded and
holistic re-identiﬁcation datasets demonstrate that the pro-
posed PFT network achieves superior performance consis-
tently and outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.
1. Introduction
Person re-identiﬁcation[1] aims at linking target persons
in different cameras, and is widely used in security, surveil-
lance and other ﬁelds. In recent years, a large number of
methods[2, 3, 4, 5, 6] for solving re-identiﬁcation have been
proposed. Most of these methods are based on convolu-
tional neural networks to extract human features, and have
achieved satisfactory results on mainstream datasets. How-
ever, in real life, we often encounter situations such as in-
complete or occluded person and cluttered backgrounds. In
such cases, most person re-identiﬁcation methods are difﬁ-
cult to achieve satisﬁed recognition accuracy.
The receptive ﬁeld of convolutional neural network is
limited to a small area by the Gaussian distribution[7]. Ex-
istence of a large amount of occlusion information, back-
ground information or other noise[8, 9], the small receptive
ﬁeld will easily ignore important characteristic information.
Furthermore, the down-sampling operation in convolutional
neural network will reduce the resolution of feature mAP,
which leading to the decline of its identiﬁcation perfor-
mance. Therefore, even if the attention mechanism[10, 11,
12, 13] or feature alignment methods[14] are introduced ,
it is difﬁcult to solve the challenge of re-identiﬁcation of
occluded person.
Vision transformer[15] has been proved to have good
performance in image classiﬁcation, and the effectiveness
is no less than traditional convolutional neural network
method. Vision transformer takes multi-head self-attention
mechanism[16] as the core, and discards convolution and
down-sampling operations. Speciﬁcally, each original im-
age is ﬁrst cut into patch sequence and input into the net-
work, then patch sequence is embedded with class coding
and position coding, and ﬁnally self-attention is performed
on patch sequence. Recently, vision transformer has been
introduced into the ﬁeld of person re-identiﬁcation. With
its ability of capturing global features and application of
self-attention mechanism, vision transformer achieves the
best effectiveness at the time, and the same is true for re-
identiﬁcation of occluded person.
With a good long-range correlation to long sequence, vi-
sion transformer has achieved good results in person re-
identiﬁcation. However, it is also prone to misjudgment
when the person is occluded heavily or the background is
similar to the person. It can be seen that vision transformer
is not good at capturing local features[17] in the case of oc-
clusion, resulting in poor robustness. Therefore, we propose
a PFT with three modules based on vision transformer to
1
arXiv:2201.01090v1  [cs.CV]  4 Jan 2022

Figure 1. Grad-CAM[18] attention maps of differnet trans-
former:(1)Original images,(2)Vision Transformer-based meth-
ods,(3)Ours PFT can pay more attention on local feature and have
a bigger feeling ﬁeld
improve the short-range correlation of patch sequence and
extract local features of non-occluded part. It can be seen
from Figure 1 that PFT pays more attention to local fea-
tures than original vision transformer. Next, we will detail
the proposed three modules.
Firstly, we propose a patch sequence reconstruction
module (FRM) to fuse the noise patch or background patch
with object patch to reduce the inﬂuence of noise or occlu-
sion on the overall patch sequence, and then reconstruct the
whole original patch sequence. In this way, the receptive
ﬁeld of reconstructed patch sequence can obtain more lo-
cal features since the fusion operation helps to enlarge the
proportion of object feature in global feature.
Secondly, to improve the generalization and robustness
of vision transformer, we propose a patch sequence spatial
slicing module (SSM) to slice the patch sequence in the spa-
tial direction after the last layer of vision transformer. As a
global branch with spatial correlation of patch sequences,
the module can lengthen the distance between ﬁne cate-
gorization and improve the short-range correlation of se-
quences, therefore the network pays more attention to local
features and has stronger generalization ability.
Finally, many workers pay attention to the circulation of
patch sequence and ignore the enhanceability of patch se-
quence itself. Therefore, we introduce the patch full dimen-
sion sequence enhancement (PFDE) coding into the patch
cutting module. The coding is a learnable tensor, which can
reduce the noise during the image input stage and extract
more discriminative features of occluded person. Therefore,
PFDE helps to reduce the large noise of input images and
the difﬁculty of extracting discriminative features.
The main contributions of our works are described as fol-
lows:
• A patch full-dimension enhancement module of patch
sequence is designed to increase the distance between
ﬁne categorizations within a reasonable range, enrich
the diversity of training samples, weaken the noise and
highlight the discriminative features.
• A fusion and reconstruction module of patch sequence
is proposed to widen the differentiation of feature rep-
resentations between ﬁne categorizations, improve the
proportion of person recognizable features in patch se-
quence, and enhance the generalization and robustness
of the reconstructed patch sequence.
• A spatial slicing module is designed to extract distin-
guishable features of patch sequence from the spatial
direction. Furthermore, this module integrates the spa-
tial correlation of input images into patch sequence to
improve the short-range correlation of patch sequence,
which helps to extract comprehensive local features of
occluded person to improve the generalization perfor-
mance under different occlusion conditions.
2. Related Work
Most of the researches on person re-identiﬁcation focus
on complete person image, and rarely consider occluded
person image. However, in real life, re-identiﬁcation of oc-
cluded person cannot be ignored. Especially in crowded
scenes, it is difﬁcult to obtain a complete person image most
of the time. Therefore, let’s review a few items about oc-
cluded re-identiﬁcation.
Occluded Person ReID. Existing deep learning meth-
ods for re-identiﬁcation of occluded persons are mainly
based on convolutional neural network. The main design
ideas are feature alignment or the introduction of high-order
semantic information, where high order semantic informa-
tion refers to attitude guidance information[19]. Key points
of human body are ﬁrst estimated, and then the pose is used
to identify the occluded person. CGEA layer is proposed
to jointly learn and embed the attitude guidance informa-
tion of local features, and directly predict the similarity
score. It not only makes full use of the alignment learned
by graph matching, but also uses robust soft matching in-
stead of sensitive one-to-one matching. Gao[20] et al. pro-
pose a posture-guided visual part matching method, which
uses posture-guided attention to jointly learn distinguishing
features and self-digs the visibility of parts in an end-to-
end framework. Although the introduction of attitude guid-
ance information makes the model have higher recognition
rate than before, the additional key point estimation model
makes the overall model more bloated and reduces the run-
ning speed of the network.
Vision Transformer Transformer is a common model
in NLP[21, 22, 23, 24] ﬁeld. Ashish Vaswani[15] et al.
propose multi-head self-attention mechanism, completely
abandon network structures such as RNN and CNN, and
only use self-attention for machine translation tasks, and
achieve good results. Google and other authors introduce
transformer into the ﬁeld of image classiﬁcation, propose
vision transformer, segment the image into sequences and
input it into transformer, preserve the original structure of
2

Figure 2. Framework of proposed PFT, which contains three new modules, PFDE, FRM and SSM according to the structural order of the
network. The structure of PFDE is illustrated in detail, and the detailed structure of other modules is shown in Fig. 3 and Fig. 4
transformer to the greatest extent, and achieve very good re-
sults. However, vision transformer needs a large number of
datasets for pre-training to obtain training results similar to
CNN. Therefore, touvron et al.[25] propose the Deit frame-
work and optimize the problem by using teacher student
strategy. Recently, Shuting he et al.[26] propose Transreid
and apply the vision transformer to the ﬁeld of object re-
identiﬁcation. They also propose the JPM module to shuf-
ﬂe and classify the features of the last layer of the network
and then calculate their losses respectively, which further
enhance the learning of robust features by Transreid. How-
ever, Transreid still focuses more on learning global fea-
tures, and the impact of local occlusion features and short-
range dependence have not been well solved.
3. Methodology
Our PFT network for occluded person re-identiﬁcation
is based on original vision transformer network. However,
to improve the ability of self-learning local features and en-
hance short-range correlation, we design a patch full dimen-
sion embedding module in the patch embedding stage to
optimize the patch embedding operation. At the same time,
we also propose a fusion and reconstruction module and a
spatial slicing module to fuse local features and extract local
features of feature mAP in the spatial direction, and enhance
the robustness of feature extraction.
3.1. Patch Full Dimension Enhancement
We propose a learnable patch full dimension tensor to
enhance the patch embedding operation. PFDE is depicted
in Figure 2, the given input image x ∈RH×W ×C, where
H, W and C represent the height, width and channel dimen-
sions of the input image respectively. The size of input im-
age is 256×128. After the patch embedding operation, the
input image is divided into N patch blocks of the same size.
At this time, the input image size is changed from
batchsize × H × W × C to batchsize × N × D, that is,
the RGB image is converted into a two-dimensional patch
sequence. Due to the convolution operation in patch embed-
ding, the resolution of occluded person image is not high.
Under the inﬂuence of translation invariance of convolution
operation, the original semantic information will be offset,
which will deeply affect the information in original input
image from the channel direction. Therefore, we construct
a learnable tensor with the same size as the patch sequence
after convolution operation, LPDE = N × D, where N
is the number of patches and D is the dimension of each
patch. The input patch sequence is fin, where H and W are
the height and width of the input image respectively, P is
the side length of each patch, and S is the stride size.
fin = [f1; f2; f3; f4; f5...fN],
N = NH × NW = [H + S −P
S
] × [W + S −P
S
]
(1)
After constructing a learnable tensor LPDE with the
same size as the input patch sequence, and making
3

Figure 3. Illustration of the proposed FRM. Split is to embed the classiﬁcation into the segmentation operation, grouping is to group the
original patch sequence, fusion is to add and fuse the selected patches, and reconstruction is to reconstruct the new patch sequence.
Hadamard product between LPDE and input patch se-
quence, we obtain the output patch sequence fout.
LPDE = [p1; p2; p3; p4; p5...pN],
fout = [f1p1; f2p2; f3p3; f4p4; ...fNPN]
(2)
As a learnable tensor, LPDE is initialized with all
ones and embedded into the input patch sequence through
Hadamard product operation to enhance the feature expres-
sion ability of the input patch sequence in the training pro-
cess. Moreover, after pre-training, vision transformer can
accelerate the convergence speed of the PFT network, and
the optimization speed of self-learning is far lower than the
convergence speed of the network itself.
Therefore, the
patch full-dimensional enhancement module will not have a
negative impact on the network, and improve network opti-
mization capabilities within a certain range. With low reso-
lution of input images, the module can introduce additional
feature information into the training process to enrich the di-
versity of training samples. Its self-learning ability can im-
prove the identiﬁcation accuracy of the network, optimize
the feature representation of input image, strengthen the
contextual cues of occluded person and weaken the noise
information.
3.2. Fusion and Reconstruction Module
Although vision transformer can make good use of
global features to achieve effective identiﬁcation perfor-
mance, the key information in the re-identiﬁcation of oc-
cluded person usually depends more on local features.
Since there are a lot of background, occlusion and
other noise information in the task of occluded person re-
identiﬁcation, therefore patches with more occluded feature
information are considered as more important ones in the
patch sequence.
The cosine similarity between different
patches is calculated, and it is found that the information re-
lated to occluded person is mainly concentrated in the mid-
dle of the sequence. Because the similarity between the ﬁrst
or last patch and the global patch is very low, the probability
of occasional high similarity is also very low, which indi-
cates that the ﬁrst and last patch are not important patches.
To this end, we will access the FRM module at the last layer,
as shown in Figure 3. The input patch sequence of module
FRM is Zin = [Class; z1, z2, z3...zN].
• Split: First, The Class token is separated from the
patch sequence Zin.
Then, new patch sequence
F = [z1, z2, z3...zN] is obtained.
• Grouping:
Patch sequence F is divided into four
groups according to the same length, so four new par-
tial patch sequences are achieved.
F1 = [z1, z2, z3...z N
4 ],
F2 = [z N+1
4 , z N+2
4 , z N+3
4 ...z 2N
4 ]
F3 = [z 2N+1
4
, z 2N+2
4
, z 2N+3
4
...z 3N
4 ]
F4 = [z 3N+1
4
, z 3N+2
4
, z 3N+3
4
...zN]
(3)
• Fusion: It is found that the correlation and dependence
of head and tail parts in the patch sequence are low,
but we don’t want to completely discard these patches.
Although most of the time, the head and tail patches
do not contain some important distinguishing features,
sometimes they contain auxiliary distinguishing fea-
tures such as head, hat, shoes and umbrella. So we
want to fuse the features of the head and tail patches
4

Figure 4. Overview of SSM
and replace them as NewF1 and NewF4.
NewF1 = F1 + F2
= [z1 + z N+1
4 , z2 + z N+2
4 ..., z N
4 + z 2N
4 ]
= [m1, m2, ...m N
4 ]
NewF4 = F3 + F4
= [z 2N+1
4
+ z 3N+1
4
, z 2N+2
4
+ z 3N+2
4
...z 3N
4 + zN]
= [L1, L2, ..LN]
(4)
• Reconstruction: After the new F1 and F4 are obtained,
the four patch sequences of new F1, F2, F3 and new F4
are spliced into the patch sequence of the original size
according to the original order. Therefore, the output
of FRM is shown in the following formula 5.
Zout = [Class, NewF1, F2, F3, NewF4]
(5)
3.3. Spatial Slicing Module
Vision transformer mainly focuses on global features
from a linear perspective, so as to obtain the global cor-
relation between patches.
From the perspective of im-
age processing, an image can be considered as a com-
bination of two-dimensional patch sequences. Therefore,
patch sequence still has spatial correlation. In other words,
not only successive patches have strong spatial correlation,
but patches far apart also have certain spatial correlation.
Therefore, we try to explore the spatial correlation of patch
sequence to make up for the short correlation of patch se-
quence and ensure receptive ﬁeld pays more attention to lo-
cal features.
Inspired by jigsaw patch module[26], we follow its struc-
ture of deriving branches from the last layer of vision trans-
former, and introduce our designed SSM module to extract
spatial correlation features of patch sequences. As shown in
Figure 4.
Firstly, patch sequence is separated from the class token
by split operation and is divided into four groups, as shown
in formula 3.
• Spatial slicing: The obtained four groups patch se-
quences are sliced twice to the same length from the
spatial direction.
In this way, a total of 12 groups
of different local patch sequences will be generated,
and the corresponding numbers are assigned to the 12
groups of patch sequences, as shown in formula 6.
Fg = [zm, ...zm+ N
12 ]
gϵ[1, 12]
mϵ[1, N + 1
12
, 2N + 1
12
, ...11N + 1
12
]
(6)
• Spatial grouping: For obtained 12 sets of patch se-
quences, patches numbered 1, 4, 7 and 10 are spliced
into left patch sequences, patches numbered 2, 5, 8
and 11 are spliced into middle patch sequences, and
patches numbered 3, 6, 9 and 12 are spliced into right
patch sequences.
• Fusion: The features of original four groups of patch
sequences are fused to obtain fused patch sequence:
Fusion features. The fused features have global feature
information, and enlarge the distance between differ-
ent targets.
• Splicing: The initial class token is spliced with left,
middle, right and fusion features respectively. After
fusion feature is spliced with the class token, it has
local and global features, which is called Global and
Local Features(GLF) as shown in formula 7.
GLF = [class, F1 + F2 + F3 + F4]
(7)
5

Then, four new patch sequences namely left, middle,
right and GLF are obtained, as shown in the formula 8.
Out = [left, middle, right, GLF]
(8)
4. Experiments
In this part, we conduct a comprehensive experiment on
the proposed PFT based on vision transformer to test its
effectiveness in enhancing the short-range correlation and
long-range correlation of patch sequence in the ﬁeld of re-
identiﬁcation of occluded person.
4.1. Experimental Datasets
We evaluate our proposed method on four person ReID
datasets, Occluded-ReID[9], Occluded-Duke[14], Market-
1501[27],
DukeMTMC-reID[28],
Partial-REID[29],
Partial-iLIDS[30].
Occluded-Duke.
It contains 15,618 training images,
17,661 gallery images, and 2,210 occluded query images,
which is by far the largest occluded re-ID datasets.
Occluded-ReID. Images are captured by mobile camera
equipments in campus, including 2000 annotated images
belonging to 200 identities. Among the dataset, each per-
son consists of 5 full-body person images and 5 occluded
person images with various occlusions.
Market-1501.
It consists of 32,668 images of 1,501
identities captured by 6 camera views. Following the stan-
dard setting, the whole dataset is divided into a training set
containing 12,936 images of 751 identities and a testing set
containing 19,732 images of 750 identities.
DukeMTMC-reID. It contains of 36,411 images of
1,812 persons from 8 cameras. 16,522 images of 702 per-
sons are randomly selected from the dataset as the training
set, and the remaining images are divided into the testing set
containing 2,228 query images and 17,661 gallery images
Partial-REID. It is the ﬁrst dataset for partial person
re-identiﬁcation, which includes 900 images of 60 persons,
with 5 full-body person images, 5 partial person images and
5 occluded person images each identity. The images are col-
lected at a university campus with various viewpoints and
occlusions.
Partial-iLIDS. It is a simulated partial person Re-ID
dataset based on the iLIDS dataset, which has a total of 476
images of 119 people.
4.2. Implementation Details
Backbone. We utilize vision transformer as the basic
backbone network to cut input image into patch sequences,
and embed class token and position coding for person re-
identiﬁcation. Then, we add the proposed PFDE, FRM and
SSM module to construct a new framework named PFT.
Training Details. We implement our framework net-
work through pytorch 1.8.1. Follow the settings of Tran-
sreid, the training images are augmented with random hor-
izontal, ﬂipping, padding, random cropping and random
erasing[31]. Input person images are resized to 256×128,
the batchsize is set as 48 , and SGD optimizer is employed
with a momentum of 0.9. The weight decay of 1e-4, and the
learning rate is initialized as 0.008 with cosine learning rate
decay.
Evaluation Metrics. We utilize standard metrics as in
most person ReID literatures, namely Cumulative Match-
ing Characteristic curves (CMC) and mean average preci-
sion (mAP), to evaluate the quality of different person re-
identiﬁcation models. All the experiments are performed in
single query setting.
4.3. Experimental Results
Occluded-Duke
Methods
Rank-1
Rank-5
Rank-10
mAP
Part Aligned[32]
28.8
44.6
51.0
20.2
PCB[17]
42.6
57.1
62.9
33.7
Adver Occluded[33]
44.5
-
-
32.2
Part Bilinear[34]
36.9
-
-
-
FD-GAN[35]
40.8
-
-
-
PGFA[14]
51.4
68.6
74.9
37.3
HONet[19]
55.1
-
-
43.8
DSR[36]
40.8
58.2
65.2
30.4
SFR[37]
42.3
60.3
67.3
32.0
MoS[38]
61.0
74.4
79.1
49.2
TransReID[26]
66.4
-
-
59.2
DRL-Net[39]
65.0
79.3
83.6
50.8
PFT(Ours)
69.8
83.4
87.7
60.8
Table 1. Comparison with state-of-the-arts on Occluded-Duke,
where PFT shows its better performance than all other methods.
Results on Occluded-Duke Datasets.
Experimen-
tal results on dataset Occluded-Duke are shown in Table
1.
We compare with four types of mainstream methods
in occluded person re-identiﬁcation, such as pure holis-
tic re-identiﬁcation methods (Part Aligned, PCB, Adver
Occluded), occluded re-identiﬁcation method using exter-
nal semantic information (Part Bilinear, FD-GAN, PGFA,
HONet), partial matching method (DSR, SFR, MoS) and
transformer method (TransReID, DRL-Net[39]).
It can
be seen that the transformer based long sequence person
re-identiﬁcation is essentially based on the global feature
correlation, and the local features correlation of patch se-
quences is not well utilized in transformer networks. There-
fore to improve the local features correlation in long se-
quences, our proposed PFT enables transformer to pay at-
tention to local features, and then achieves rank-1 of 69.8%
and mAP of 60.8%, which performs best on occluded-duke.
6

Results on Occluded-REID and Partial-REID. The
occluded person images in the Occluded-Reid dataset are
much less than the Occluded-Duke dataset.
Therefore,
many people use the market1501 dataset for pre-training,
and then use the Occluded-Reid dataset for testing, so as to
achieve a more convergent effect. Here, We choose to use
the occluded-Duke dataset for pre-training to achieve better
results, since the occluded-Reid dataset is more inclined to
the occlusion type. Experimental results verify this hypoth-
esis we put forward, as shown in Table 2.
Occluded-REID
Partial-REID
Methods
Rank-1
mAP
Rank-1
mAP
PCB[17]
41.3
38.9
66.3
63.8
Part Bilinear[34]
54.9
50.3
57.7
59.3
DSR[36]
72.8
62.8
43.0
-
FPR[40]
78.3
68.0
81.0
-
HOReID[19]
80.3
70.2
85.3
-
PVPM[20]
70.4
61.2
78.3
72.3
PGFA[14]
-
-
68.0
-
PFT(OURS)
83.0
78.3
81.3
79.9
Table 2. Comparison with state-of-the-arts on Occluded-REID and
Partial-REID, where mAP and rank-1 of our methods are the best
results of mainstream methods.
The
difference
between
Partial-Reid
dataset
and
Occluded-Reid dataset is that the former focuses on the
recognition of some parts of human body, such as arm,
upper body and left body, and the former rarely contains
occlusion information and other background or noise
information. Similar to the Occluded-Duke dataset, images
in Occluded-Reid dataset contain more occluded objects
and other noise information than Partial-Reid.
It can be seen from Table 2 that PFT is more suitable to
solve the occluded re-identiﬁcation problem, and its mAP is
much higher than the holistic identiﬁcation method (PCB)
and external information method (HOREID). Furthermore,
rank-1 of PFT also reached the best, 2.7% higher than the
highest method HOREID. PFT also shows good perfor-
mance in Partial-REID dataset, gives full play to the ad-
vantages of transformer, and has high overall identiﬁcation
accuracy, so it improves the mAP greatly.
Results on Holistic Datasets.
Transreid has demon-
strated the powerful performance of transformer as a back-
bone in the ﬁeld of person re-identiﬁcation. Therefore, we
hope that our proposed PFT can not only have the best per-
formance for occluded targets, but also show strong gener-
alization ability and robustness in the holistic dataset.
Generally, network backbones are divided into two cate-
gories: CNN (PCB, PGFA, VPM, MGCAN, SPReID, OS-
Net, HOReID, ISP) and transformer (TransReID, DRL-
Net). It can be seen from Table 3 that the transformer based
method is easier to achieve good results on the holistic Reid
dataset.
Market-1501
DukeMTMC
Methods
Rank-1
mAP
Rank-1
mAP
PCB[17]
92.3
77.4
81.8
66.1
PGFA[14]
91.2
76.8
82.6
65.5
VPM[41]
93.0
80.8
83.6
72.6
MGCAM[42]
83.8
74.3
46.7
46.0
SPReID[43]
92.5
81.3
-
-
OSNet[44]
91.3
84.9
88.6
73.5
HOReID[19]
94.2
84.9
86.9
75.6
ISP[45]
95.3
88.6
89.6
80.0
TransReID[26]
95.2
88.9
90.7
82.0
DRL-Net[39]
94.7
86.9
88.1
76.6
PFT(ours)
95.3
88.8
90.7
82.1
Table 3. Comparison with state-of-the-arts on Market-1501 and
DukeMTMC, where the mAP and rank-1 of our method are higher
than the traditional mainstream methods.
Our proposed PFT for occluded person re-identiﬁcation
also works well in the holistic Reid problem. The Rank-1
score and mAP on market-1501 are 1.1% and 3.9% higher
than the traditional CNN method HOReID respectively.
Compared with Transreid method focusing on holistic per-
son re-identiﬁcation, the performance of these two methods
is very close. This demonstrates that PFT can deal with var-
ious types of pedestrian re recognition problems.
Results on Partial-iLIDS Datasets.
Partial-iLIDS is
based on the iLIDS dataset and contains a total of 238 im-
ages from 119 people captured by multiple non-overlapping
cameras in the airport, and their occluded regions are manu-
ally cropped. Because the Partial-iLIDS dataset is too small
and contains too few images, we choose other mainstream
datasets as the training dataset.
First, we choose to use Occluded-Duke as the training
dataset and Partial-iLIDS as the test dataset. It can be seen
from Table 4 that our PFT achieves 74.8% Rank-1 accu-
racy and 87.3% rank-3 accuracy. This result is close to the
most advanced method at present. Only with vision trans-
former, Baseline achieves 71.4% rank-1 and 87.4% rank-3
on Partial-iLIDS dataset, which indicates the performance
of Baseline is close to HOReID. Compared with Baseline,
our PFT imporves rank-1 by 3.4%, which demonstrates
that the performance of PFT is obviously better than vision
transformer.
Second, we want to explore how the performance of PFT
will change if we use market1501 as the training dataset. It
can be seen from Table 5 that Baseline still achieves good
performance, and rank-1 reaches 73.1%. Compared with
Baseline, the performance of PFT decreases signiﬁcantly.
That is, Rank-1 is only 68.1%, 6.7% lower than PFT with
Occluded-Duke as the training dataset. We will explore the
reasons for this dramatic change in the next section.
7

Partial-iLIDS
Method
Rank-1
Rank-3
MTRC[46]
17.7%
26.1%
AMC+SWM[29]
21.0%
32.8%
DSR[36]
58.8%
67.2%
SFR[37]
63.9%
74.8%
VPM[41]
65.5%
74.8%
FPR[40]
68.1%
-
PGFA[14]
69.1%
80.9%
HOReID[19]
72.6%
86.4%
MHSA-Net[47]
74.9%
87.2%
Baseline
71.4%
87.4%
PFT(Ours)
74.8%
87.3%
Table 4. Comparison with state-of-the-arts method on Partial-
iLIDS, where Occluded-Duke is utilized as the training dataset and
Baseline refers to the original vision transformer network.
4.4. Analysis of different training dataset
It can be seen from Table 4 and Table 5 that different
training dataset will change the performance of our PFT
greatly on the same test dataset. With market1501 as the
training set and vision transformer as the network backbone,
rank-1 and rank-3 achieve a high level.
Partial-iLIDS
Method
Rank-1
Rank-3
MTRC[46]
17.7%
26.1%
AMC+SWM[29]
21.0%
32.8%
DSR[36]
58.8%
67.2%
SFR[37]
63.9%
74.8%
VPM[41]
65.5%
74.8%
FPR[40]
68.1%
-
PGFA[14]
69.1%
80.9%
HOReID[19]
72.6%
86.4%
MHSA-Net[47]
74.9%
87.2%
baseline
73.1%
84.0%
PFT(Ours)
68.1%
81.5%
Table 5. Comparison with state-of-the-arts method on Partial-
iLIDS, where market1501 is utilized as the training dataset and
Baseline refers to the original vision transformer network.
As shown in Figure 5, rank-1 of Baseline reaches 73.1%,
only 1% lower than the most advanced method.
For
the overall long-range sequence correlation, vision trans-
former has powerful generalization ability and achieves ex-
cellent results for small dataset like Partial-iLIDS. Taking
the proposed PFT as the network backbone, it is difﬁcult
to achieve satisfactory results on Partial-iLIDS when us-
ing market1501 as the training dataset. On the contrary,
with occluded-Duke dataset as the training set, our PFT has
reached the best level at present. That is, rank-1 reaches
74.8%, almost equal to the performance of MHSA-Net.
Compared with baseline using Occluded-Duke as the train-
ing dataset, the performance of PFT is improved by 3.4%.
The above description shows that PFT is indeed effective
and better than traditional vision transformer network in the
ﬁeld of occluded person re-identiﬁcation. For baseline, its
rank-1 with Occluded-Duke as traning dataset is 1.7% lower
than that with market1501 as traning dataset, which demon-
strates that the performance of Vision transformer degrades
when dealing with occluded person re-identiﬁcation. On
the contrary, our PFT achieves better results under the same
conditions. The above analysis clariﬁes that PFT is better
at solving complex feature extraction problems, such as oc-
cluded person re-identiﬁcation.
Figure 5. Performance analysis of different training dataset
4.5. Ablation study
In this section, we will research the effectiveness of each
module of the proposed PFT. We use vision transformer
as the baseline and conduct ablation experiments of PFDE
(Patch Full Dimension Enhancement), FRM (Fusion and
Reconstruction Module) and SSM (Spatial Slicing Mod-
ule). Occluded-Duke is here selected as the target dataset
to verify the effectiveness of proposed different modules in
re-identiﬁcation of occluded people. The ablation study re-
sults are shown in Table 6.
Index
B
P
F
S
R-1
R-5
R-10
mAP
1
√
60.6
77.1
81.9
53.1
2
√
√
62.8
78.2
83.8
55.0
3
√
√
√
64.6
80.1
85.2
56.9
4
√
√
√
67.2
81.4
86.2
58.3
5
√
√
√
67.3
82.0
87.1
59.0
6
√
√
√
√
69.8
83.4
87.7
60.8
Table 6. Results of ablation study for PFT, where B represents vi-
sion transformer baseline, P represents PFDE, F represents FRM
and S represents SSM.
Effectiveness of Patch Full Dimension Enhancement
Module. First, we only utilize PFDE based on the vision
transformer baseline. In this way, the PFDE module can
8

optimize the construction of patch sequence and extract dis-
criminative features. Furthermore, the full dimension en-
hancement of patch sequence can enrich the diversity of
data samples, improve the differentiation of data samples,
enlarge the ﬁne categorization distance within a reasonable
range and prevent falling into local optimization by deeply
embedding the patch sequence tensor. As shown in index 2
of Table 6, compared with baseline, the rank-1 is improved
by 2.2%. This shows that the full dimension enhancement
module does play a role in the occlusion problem with com-
plex feature information.
In order to verify the wide applicability of PFDE, we
compared baseline + FRM + SSM with baseline + FRM
+ SSM + PFDE. These two networks add two other mod-
ules on the basis of vision transformer, and the ﬂow of data
samples in the network is more complex. It can be seen
from index numbers 4 and 6, rank-1 of index 4 is signiﬁ-
cantly improved by 2.5% than index 6. In other words, the
enhancement effect of PFDE module on patch sequence is
proved to be feasible, and PFDE module has good general-
ization performance in different situations such as complex
vision transformer and original vision transformer. It can
bring a positive effect on occluded person re-identiﬁcation,
and will not have a negative impact on network.
Effectiveness of Fusion and Reconstruction Module.
The FRM module focuses on the reconstruction of patch
sequence, therefore it can be easily inserted into the trans-
former network. It can be seen from index 2 and index 3
that after adding FRM module, rank-1 and mAP are im-
proved by 3% and 2% respectively. Through the compar-
ison of index 5 and 6, after adding the space slicing mod-
ule, FRM module still shows its effectiveness in solving oc-
cluded problem, by providing an additional + 2% rank-1
score and + 1.6% mAP.
Through the above two groups of comparative experi-
mental results, it can be found that FRM is feasible to re-
duce the noise in occluded re-identiﬁcation. While weaken-
ing the occluded feature information, FRM can extract more
discriminative feature information, which increases the pro-
portion of occluded person distinguishable feature infor-
mation in the newly constructed feature patch sequence.
In other words, the patch sequence output from the FRM
module will contain more feature information related to oc-
cluded person, which will undoubtedly help to further im-
prove the network performance of the vision transformer
network.
Effectiveness of Spatial Slicing Module. SSM module
can integrate the spatial correlation of the image into the
patch sequence to improve the short-range correlation of the
patch sequence, thereby enhancing the network’s ability to
extract local features of occluded person.
In index 3, baseline+PFDE+FRM achieves rank-1 of
64.6% and mAP of 56.9%. Compared with index 3, SSM
module is added to index 6. It can be seen from index 3
and index 6 that the experimental effect has been greatly
improved, where rank-1 increased by 5.2% and mAP in-
creased by 3.9%.
It can be seen from index 4, 5 and 6 that the network per-
formance on occluded re-identiﬁcation will be greatly im-
proved, which indicates that the spatial correlation in patch
sequence of vision transformer can be used reasonably with
the addition of SSM module.
Therefore, spatial correlation of input images helps to
improve visual selective attention to local features. For oc-
cluded person re-identiﬁcation, the integrated spatial corre-
lation in patch sequence can expand the difference between
similar persons, which is effective for complex ﬁne catego-
rization problems.
4.6. Analysis of Initial Strengthening Coefﬁcient
Several groups of comparative experiments are con-
ducted to evaluate the effect of initial strengthening coef-
ﬁcient on the performance of PFDE module.
The learnable patch dimension enhancement tensor
LPDE is initialized into Gaussian distribution, uniform
distribution, Laplace distribution and exponential distribu-
tion respectively. Experimental results demonstrate that dif-
ferent distributions will change the original feature distribu-
tion of the image to varying degrees. It is difﬁcult to cor-
rect the feature deviation back to the original distribution
through only one layer of PFDE, which will result in the
local optimization of vision transformer network. There-
fore, the learnable patch embedding LPDE is initialized to
a tensor ﬁlled with the scalar value 1. Namely, the image
feature distribution is not adjusted.
According to experimental results as shown in Figure
6, different initial strengthening coefﬁcient β can affect
the convergence speed and convergence accuracy of vision
transformer network. Speciﬁcally, it can be clearly seen
Figure 6. Analysis of Initial strengthening coefﬁcient β
that the change of β will have an impact on the network
performance. Only with β being 1.0, all aspects of net-
work performance can reach the best. This demonstrates
9

that PFDE has the ability to optimize the network within a
certain range. Once the value of βis outside the range [0.95-
1.05], the performance of the network will ﬂuctuate greatly,
and it is difﬁcult for PFDE to play its optimization ability.
According to the experimental results, the following con-
clusions can also be obtained. When the original feature
distribution of the image changes greatly, PFDE can still
maintain good performance. Namely, both rank-1 and mAP
achieve a high level, which also denotes the effectiveness of
PFDE and PFT.
5. Conclusion
This paper proposes a PFT network based on vision
transformer, which includes three newly designed modules.
SSM in PFT can make good use of the spatial information
of input image and integrate it into patch sequence, so as to
improve the short-range correlation of patch sequence and
focus on locally distinguishable features of occluded per-
son. PFDE module can enrich the diversity of input im-
ages and optimize the distribution of feature map, so as to
improve the generalization and robustness of the network.
FRM module can highlight the distinguishable characteris-
tics of occluded person and desalinate the noise informa-
tion. Extensive experiments on occluded, partial and holis-
tic datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed
PFT framework.
6. Acknowledgement
This work is supported by Natural Science Foundation of
Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications under
No. NY219107, and National Natural Science Foundation
of China under No. 52170001.
