Using meaning instead of words to track topics
Judicael POUMAY1 and Ashwin ITTOO1
ULiege/HEC Liege, Rue Louvrex 14, 4000 Liege, Belgium {judicael.poumay,

Abstract. The ability to monitor the evolution of topics over time is
extremely valuable for businesses. Currently, all existing topic tracking
methods use lexical information by matching word usage. However, no
studies has ever experimented with the use of semantic information for
tracking topics. Hence, we explore a novel semantic-based method using
word embeddings. Our results show that a semantic-based approach to
topic tracking is on par with the lexical approach but makes diﬀerent
mistakes. This suggest that both methods may complement each other.
Keywords: Topic tracking · lexical · semantic · topic models
1
Introduction
Buried within the voluminous amounts of texts available online are meaning-
ful insights, which could help in supporting business decision-making activities.
Topic modelling methods extracts latent topic in a corpus [4,10] and can be used
to discover these insights. Examples of applications include fraud detection [11],
understanding employee and customer satisfaction [8,7]. Extracted topics can be
tracked over time to understand their evolution or discover emerging one. Hence,
we focus on this task of topic tracking in which the goal is to link instances of
the same topic that have been extracted at diﬀerent time periods.
Several methods for tracking topics have been proposed in the past [3,6,13,12,9].
These methods use measures such as the JS divergence [13,12,9] or online topic
models [3,6] which rely on lexical information to track topic across time.
However, no studies has ever experimented with using semantic informa-
tion to track topics over time. Intuitively, semantic based approaches could be
promising as they do not rely on simple surface form and can capture concepts
such as synonymy. For example, given a topic about ”AI”, across time we could
observe that the term ”Machine Learning” has become more popular than ”AI”.
However, a lexical approach to topic tracking would not be able to handle such
lexical drift and to relate those words over time. Conversely, such lexical vari-
ation would have been captured by a semantic approach. Moreover, topic-word
distributions are unstable across multiple runs [1], i.e. the resulting top words
of a topic tend to change signiﬁcantly. This entails that the lexical information
we rely upon to track topics is also unstable even if the overall semantic of the
topic remains the same. Thus, a semantic-based approach may be more robust.
arXiv:2301.00565v1  [cs.CL]  2 Jan 2023

2
J. POUMAY A. ITTOO
Hence, our work aims at investigating on the use of semantic information for
topic tracking and its comparison against lexical information. Therefore, as our
main contribution, we propose a novel semantic topic tracking method known
as Semantic Divergence (SD) based on word embeddings. As an ancillary con-
tribution, we study the challenges of topic tracking in the context of hierarchical
topic modelling.
2
Background and Related work
2.1
Topic Modelling
LDA [4] is the ﬁrst traditional topic model. At the core of LDA is a Bayesian
generative model with two Dirichlet distributions, respectively for the document-
topic distributions and for the topic-word distributions. These distributions are
learnt and optimized via an inference procedure which enables topics to be ex-
tracted. The main weakness of LDA is that it requires the user to specify a
predeﬁned number of topics to be extracted.
More complex topic models have been proposed since LDA. In particular,
HTMOT [10] was proposed to simultaneously model topic hierarchy and tem-
porality. Speciﬁcally, HTMOT produces a topic tree in which the depth and the
number of sub-topic for each branch is deﬁned dynamically during training. Ad-
ditionally, HTMOT models the temporality of topics enabling the extraction of
topics that are lexically close but temporally distinct.
2.2
Topic Tracking
Topic tracking is the task of monitoring the evolution of topics through time.
It was initially deﬁned in a pilot study [2] in 1998 as the continuous automatic
classiﬁcation of a stream of news stories into known or new topics.
Currently, two general framework compete for topic tracking. The ﬁrst stream
is that of online topic models. which incorporate new data incrementally [3,6]. In
[3], the authors propose Online-LDA, a version of LDA able to update itself with
new documents without having to access to previously processed documents. In
practice, Online-LDA assumes that time is divided in slices and at each slice
an LDA model is trained using the previous slice as prior. They were able to
show that their system can ﬁnd emerging topics by artiﬁcially injecting new
topic into the news stream. They performed their experiments on the NIPS
and Reuters-21578 datasets. Similarly in [6], the authors propose a model that
can dynamically decide the right number of topics in an online fashion. They
performed their experiments on the the 20 Newsgroup and the TDT-2 datasets.
The second stream is concerned with linking topics extracted independently
at diﬀerent time periods [13,12,9]. In [13], the authors use about 30,000 abstracts
of papers in various journals from 2000 to 2015. They then applied LDA to each
year independently and linked topics using the Jensen-Shannon Divergence (JS)
to measure their similarity [5]. In [12] the authors applied a similar method on

Using meaning instead of words to track topics
3
news articles. However, they diﬀer in that while [13] simply links topics together,
[12] clusters them. This means that once two topic have been linked they form
a cluster and subsequent topics will be compared to the whole cluster and not
just the preceding topic. Finally in [9], the authors also proposed a tracking
method using the JS divergence applied to scientiﬁc papers. However, they do
not constraint linkage to a one-to-one mapping which allows for the fusion and
splitting of topics. All of the aforementioned paper evaluated their topic tracking
method using a qualitative analysis that demonstrated the performance of their
technique.
We based our work on that second stream because it allows for better paral-
lelization as time slices are processed independently.
3
Methodology
In this section, we will present our methodology for topic tracking. We will start
by describing our corpus and topic extraction method. Next, we will deﬁne our
SD measure. Finally, we will present the topic tracking algorithm.
3.1
Topic extraction
To perform our experiments, we crawled 10k articles from the Digital Trends 1
archives from 2019 to 2020. This news website is mainly focused on technological
news with topics such as hardware, space exploration and COVID-19. For all
articles, we extracted the text, title, category and timestamp. We pre-possessed
the corpus according to HTMOT [10].
To extract topics hierarchies (see ﬁgure 1), we used the HTMOT topic model
[10] . The extracted topics are represented by a list of words and a list of entities.
Fig. 1. Example of a topic hierarchy
We follow HTMOT [10] and only focus on the ﬁrst and second level of topic
extracted. Speciﬁcally, the authors observe that deeper topics becomes more
esoteric making them harder to understand by annotators representing a general
audience. Consequently, this makes it diﬃcult to assess the correctness of tracked
topics at deeper levels of the topic tree.
1 https://www.digitaltrends.com/

4
J. POUMAY A. ITTOO
3.2
Proposed Semantic Divergence measure
We will now describe our novel topic tracking method, which departs from the
JS divergence traditionally applied in previous studies. We name our method
”Semantic divergence” or SD. It uses word embeddings to measure the distance
between topics. Each topic will be assigned an embedding as the sum of the
embeddings of the top words in that topic weighted by their probability. Then,
the distance between two topics is computed as the cosine distance of their
respective embedding. We will use FastText as the word embedding. FastText
helps with rare and out of vocabulary words. This is essential considering our pre-
processing step includes lemmatization which may produce incorrectly spelled
words. Hence the embedding of a topic is deﬁned as follows :
emb(t) =
X
(w,p)∈t
p ∗FastText(w)
(1)
And the Semantic Divergence between two topics is deﬁned as :
SD(t1, t2) = cosine(emb(t1), emb(t2))
(2)
Where w is a word in a topic t and p is the probability of that word.
3.3
Topic Tracking Algorithm
Finally, to track topics across time we applied HTMOT on our corpus. For
each year (2019 and 2020), we obtained a corresponding topic tree. Then, we
computed the distance between every topics across both years using either JS
or SD. To do this we used the top 100 words and top 15 entities to represent
each topic. Subsequently, we ranked order all computed pairs of topics and then
iteratively selected the most similar pairs (lowest SD or JS score) such that each
topic is paired only once. Finally, we used a pre-deﬁned threshold to remove
pairs with a poor score.
Note that our approach does not take into account structural information.
Indeed, tracking topics in the context of hierarchical topic modelling presents
another interesting challenge : there exist many possible resulting trees that are
equally correct. In one run, we may extract the topic of space whose sub-topics
can be grouped into space exploration and astronomy. Conversely, in another
run, we may extract space exploration and astronomy as separate topics with
their own sub-topics. Hence, it is diﬃcult to leverage the structural information
contained in the topic trees to track topics as it cannot be expected to respect
a speciﬁc conceptual taxonomy.
4
Results : JS vs SD
In this section, we will discuss how our semantic based method compares with
respect to the traditional lexical based method.

Using meaning instead of words to track topics
5
First, we studied the overlap between the two methods, i.e. the number of
pairs extracted by both. We discovered that, 111 pairs were extracted with JS
with a threshold of <0.4, while 121 pairs were extracted with SD with a threshold
of <0.1. These threshold were set through empirical observation but may depend
on the dataset used. These 111-121 pairs can be grouped into three categories
(see ﬁgure 2). 72 pairs were the same between the two methods (60-65% of the
total pairs). For example, topics such as space and video games were easily paired
across both years by both methods. This already indicates that our SD method
is able to pair topic across time with performance similar to JS. This leaves
39-49 pairs that are diﬀerent across the two methods (35-40% of the total pairs)
which we can evaluate. Out of those diﬀerent pairs, we notice that in most cases
one method (e.g. SD) would track/link a topic pair across both years, while the
other method (e.g. JS) did not as the best possible pair was above the threshold.
We are then left with 10 diﬀerent pairs that can themselves be paired according
to which 2019 or 2020 topic they share (see ﬁgure 2).
Fig. 2. The pairs extracted by both methods can be grouped into three categories. The
circle represent topics and their color represent years (2019 blue; 2020 yellow). The link
color represent the method used (JS red; SD green). The three categories are : 1) The
pairs extracted by both methods (72). 2) The pairs that diﬀer but share a topic (10)
E.g. JS extracted the pair 4-D while SD extracted 4-E. 3) The pairs of topics that were
only linked with one method (29-39).
To compare the performance of the two tracking methods, we decided to
use a survey comparing these 10 pairs of topics extracted by both JS and SD.
Precisely, for each question, given an initial topic, annotators were shown the JS
and SD pairing and asked which is better. Additionally, we also asked annotators
to provide a conﬁdence score on a scale from 1 to 5. In total, we received 38
answers coming from a small online community focused on answering surveys2.
The survey can be found on github 3.
Looking at the survey results (table 1), it can be seen that SD slightly outper-
forms JS with 54% of annotators preferring the former to the latter. Moreover,
we also note that the annotators were conﬁdent in their evaluation, with an
average conﬁdence score of 3.3. Interestingly, there is a lot of variability in the
2 https://www.reddit.com/r/SampleSize/
3 https://github.com/JudicaelPoumay/TopicTrackingPaper

6
J. POUMAY A. ITTOO
answers. Some topics were clearly better paired with one method or the other
(Q3 and Q5) while for others, it wasn’t as clear (Q1, Q2 and Q4).
Table 1. The ”chose SD” column corresponds to the % of annotators that chose the
SD pair as the best pair.
Questions Chose SD Conﬁdence level
Q1
42.1% (22) 3.2
Q2
63.2% (14) 2.6
Q3
21.1% (30) 3.7
Q4
65.8% (13) 3.5
Q5
78.9% (8)
3.5
Average
54%
3.3
For example, ﬁgure 3 corresponds to Q1. It shows how a 2019 topic has been
paired with 2020 topics using JS and SD. First, we can notice that the distance
recorded between the pairs is close to the threshold for both methods. Speciﬁ-
cally, 0.29 for the JS pair and 0.09 for the SD pair (threshold = 0.4 for JS and
0.1 for SD). This makes sense as good pairs (pairs with low JS/SD values) are
extracted by both methods. Second, the 2019 topic is about social media data
security. Whereas the chosen 2020 topic is about :
– Social media when paired with JS.
– Data security when paired with SD.
Hence, both pairing seems suitable, which could explain the indecisiveness of
annotators. Speciﬁcally, 16 of them decided the SD pairing was better whereas
22 of them decided the JS pairing was better. Their conﬁdence level for this
question was 3.2 out of 5.
Fig. 3. A ﬁrst example of diﬀerent pairing between SD and JS on the same 2019 topic.
Similarly, ﬁgure 4 corresponds to Q5 and shows how another 2019 topic has
been paired based on the two methods. Here, the 2019 topic is about web security.
Whereas the chosen 2020 topic is about :

Using meaning instead of words to track topics
7
– Data security when paired with JS.
– Web security topic when paired with SD.
Moreover, the topic chosen by SD is a sub-topic of the topic chosen by JS which
demonstrates the diﬃculty in topic tracking in a hierarchical setting. Indeed,
it can be diﬃcult to diﬀerentiate a topic from its sub-topic, especially if that
sub-topic dominates the others as parent topics are the sum of their sub-topics.
In this case, annotators agreed more and 30 out of 38 decided the SD pair was
better. Their conﬁdence level for this question was 3.5 out of 5.
Fig. 4. A second example of diﬀerent pairing between SD and JS on the same 2019
topic.
Hence, we argue that JS and SD are two fundamentally diﬀerent approaches
and that both have their advantages. JS is lexically driven and may work best
for linking topics which tend to have a stable and precise vocabulary such as
in legal documents. On the other hand, SD is driven by semantics and may be
more appropriate for linking topics that have a greater lexical variability. Greater
lexical variability may be the result of lexical drift over time as terms change
in popularity or informal texts which do not use a standard vocabulary such as
tweets. Hence, we believe that SD not only competes but complements JS for
topic tracking.
5
Conclusion
In this paper, we presented a novel semantic-based topic tracking method (SD).
We showed that its performance was comparable to that of the state of the
art method (JS), which is lexically-based. This validates our hypothesis that
semantic information is valuable for tracking topics.
Moreover, we have discussed the challenges associated with tracking topics
in a topic hierarchy. First, topics and their sub-topic can be diﬃcult to diﬀer-
entiate, which makes topic tracking more challenging. Second, deeper topics are
more esoteric and consequently it is harder to assess the quality of their track-
ing. Finally, topic hierarchy may have many equally correct arrangements which
makes it diﬃcult to leverage structural information for topic tracking.

8
J. POUMAY A. ITTOO
We believe that our work would beneﬁt future studies investigating hybrid
methods for topic tracking, such as by integrating lexical and semantic informa-
tion.
