arXiv:1401.0660v1  [cs.CL]  3 Jan 2014
Plurals: individuals and sets
in a richly typed semantics ⋆
Bruno Mery, Richard Moot, and Christian Retor´e ⋆⋆
LaBRI-CNRS & Universit´e de Bordeaux
Abstract We developed a type-theoretical framework for natural lan-
guage semantics that, in addition to the usual Montagovian treatment of
compositional semantics, includes a treatment of some phenomena of lex-
ical semantic: coercions, meaning, transfers, (in)felicitous co-predication.
In this setting we see how the various readings of plurals (collective, dis-
tributive, coverings,. . . ) can be modelled.
1
Introduction
In this paper, we incorporate the treatment of plurals into the uniﬁed type-
theoretical framework of [4,18], using polymorphism and type-coercions to ac-
count for the basic facts of plurals.
We must warn the reader that the purpose of the present paper is neither
to assert acceptability judgements nor to to provide linguistic criteria that pre-
dict the correctness of readings. Our paper provides a formal and computational
account of linguistic analyses and theories of plurals, which is fully compatible
with the type theoretical framework in which we studied other lexical or compos-
itional phenomena. As such, a prototype implementation has been incorporated
in our syntactical and semantical parser Grail [17].
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 will give a brief
overview of the problems a theory of plurals faces and some of the solutions
proposed for treating them. Section 3 introduces our type-theoretic framework
ΛT yn and compares it to other approaches. Section 4 introduces the basic ele-
ments of our theory of plurals, which will be developed with a fully work out
lexicon and several examples in the following section.
2
Plurals in formal semantics: known diﬃculties, typical
examples and classical models
2.1
Plural readings
Plurals are one of the most ubiquitous of semantic phenomena. Though not
explicitly treated by Montague himself, a large body of research has been de-
veloped since then and we cannot hope to treat all the subtleties in a single
⋆Work supported by ANR project Polymnie
⋆⋆On CNRS sabbatical at IRIT (Toulouse) from September 2012 to August 2013

article — the reader is referred to [12,13] and references therein for further dis-
cussion. However, we will present several of the basic facts and propose a simple
yet detailed Montagovian treatment of them, doing so in a way which makes
both the combinatorics and the available readings very clear.
Some predicates (typical examples include verb phrases like “meet”, “gather”
and “elect a president”, but also prepositions like “between”) require their argu-
ment to be a group. These predicates are called collective. Below, some typical
examples are listed.
(1)
a. *Jimi met.
b.
Jimi and Dusty met. (unambiguous).
c. *The student met.
d.
The students met. (unambiguous, one meeting)
e.
The committee met. (unambiguous, one meeting)
f.
The committees met. (ambiguous: one big meeting, one meeting per
committee, several meetings invoking several committees)
In these cases, the subject can either be a conjunction of noun phrases, a plural
noun phrase or a singular group-denoting noun phrase (typical nouns of this sort
are “committee”, “orchestra” and “police”; in English these nouns require plural
subject-verb agreement).
Contrasting with the collective predicates are the distributive predicates.
When they apply to a set of individuals, we can infer that the predicate applies
to each of these. Examples include verbs like “walk”, “sleep” and “be hungry”.
Many other predicates, like “record a song”, “write a report” or “lift a piano”
are ambiguous in that they accept both a group reading (which can be made
explicit by adding the adverb “together”) and a distributive reading (which can
be made explict by adding the adverb “each”). Thus “recorded a song together”
talks about a single recording whereas “recoded a song each” talks about several
recordings. The predicate “record a song” in and of itself only states that each of
the subjects participated in (at least) one recording. We call such readings cov-
ering readings. The covering reading has both the collective and the distributive
reading as a special case.
We will only mention the so-called cumulative readings [25] in passing: they
include examples like “Two composers wrote nine symphonies” which has — in
addition to the other readings — a reading with a total of 18 symphonies.
2.2
Plurals in existing semantic theories
Despite philosophical and technological diﬀerences, most of the work on plurals
in current theories of formal semantics can be traced back in some way or another
to the ideas and formalization of Link [12], with many variations on the basic
theme. In Link’s treatment, groups exist at the same level as individuals and we
can form new groups out of individuals and groups by means of a lattice-theoretic
join operation, written ⊕— mathematically, we have a complete atomic join-
semilattice without a bottom element. Groups and individuals are related by the

individual part relation ≤i, deﬁned as a ≤i b ≡def
a ⊕b = b; in other words
a ≤i b is true iﬀa contains a subset of the individual members of b.
Unlike later treatments of plurals such as [9], Link does not distinguish atomic
individuals from group individuals but instead deﬁnes atomic individuals by
means of a unary predicate atom, which is true for an entity x whenever its only
individual part is itself (ie. the set of atoms are those a such that for all b, b ≤i a
implies b = a).
For arbitrary unary predicates P, we have a corresponding distributive pre-
dicate P ∗which is true if P holds for all atomic subparts of its argument. For
example, child∗(x) is true if x is a non-atomic group of children.1
We can therefore distinguish between
(2)
a.
∃x.child(x) ∧sleep(x) (a child slept),
b.
∃x.child∗(x) ∧sleep∗(x) (children slept), and
c.
∃x.child∗(x) ∧build-raft(x) (children built a raft, as a group).
where (2-c) is shorthand for ∃x.∀y.((y ≤i x∧atom(y)) ⇒child(y))∧build-raft(x),
with atom(y) in turn an abbreviation for ∀z.z ≤i y ⇒z = y.
3
A Montagovian generative lexicon ΛT yn
3.1
Lexical semantics in a compositional framework
The semantical analysis of natural language, computational and compositional,
consists in mapping any sentence to its logical form that is a logical formula
which depicts its meaning. To do so, the lexicon provides each word with a typed
λ-term. By induction the parse tree, we obtain a λ-term of type t, i.e. a formula
See eg. [19, Chapter 3]. Usually there is just one base type for entities e, while
we shall use many of them ei — base types can be taken to be the classiﬁers,
for languages with classiﬁers like Japanese, Chinese, sign languages,... [16] With
many base types the application of a predicate to an argument may only happen
when it makes sense (“The chair barks.” and “Their ﬁve is running.” are blocked
by saying that “barks” and “is running” apply to individuals of type “animal”.
But some ﬂexibility is needed. For instance, in a football match, “their ﬁve” may
be understood as a player, who can run.
3.2
ΛT yn: lexicalist view
To handle those meaning transfers and coercions, we reorganised the lexicon,
starting with [4]. Each word is endowed with a main λ-term, the “usual one”
which speciﬁes the argument structure of the word, by using reﬁned types: “runs:
λxanimalrun(x)” only applies to “animal” individuals. In addition, the lexicon
may endow each word with a ﬁnite number of λ-terms (possibly none) that
1 Technically, in [12], Link introduces two versions of this predicate: one which pre-
supposes its argument is non-atomic and another which does not. Here, we will only
consider the version which takes non-atomic individuals as an argument.

Types:
– t (prop)
– many entity types ei
– type variables α, β, ...
– Πα. T
– T1 →T2
Terms
– Constants and variables for each type
– (f T →UaT ) : U
– (λxT . uU) : T →U
– t(Λα. T ){U} : T [U/α]
– Λα.uT : Πα.T — no free α in a free variable of u.
The reduction is deﬁned as follows:
– (Λα.τ){U} reduces to τ[U/α] (remember that α and U are types).
– (λx.τ)u reduces to τ[u/x] (usual reduction).
Figure 1. Terms and types of system F
implement meaning transfers or coercions. For instance a “town” may be turned
into an “institution”, a geographic “place”, or a football “club” by the optional
λ-terms “fi: town→institution”, “fp: town →place” and “fc: town →club”
— λ-terms may be more complex than simple constants. Thus, a sentence like
“Liverpool is a large harbour and decided to build new docks.” can be properly
analysed. Some meaning transfers, like fc, are declared to be rigid in the lexicon.
Rigidity prohibits the simultaneous use of other meaning transfers. For instance,
the rigidity of fc properly blocks “* Liverpool defeated Chelsea and decided to
build new docks.”.
Actually, we do not use the simply typed λ calculus but second order λ cal-
culus, Girard’s system F (1971), which factorises operation that act uniformly
on families of types and terms — cf. ﬁgure 1 or [8]. The formulae i.e. the terms of
type t that represent meanings are many sorted higher order formulae. Because
of polymorphism, quantiﬁers are given a single type, ∀, ∃: Πα.(α→t)→t as well
as Hilbert’s operators for generics ǫ, τ : Λα. (α→t)→α [23,24]. A single term ex-
presses copredication over the diﬀerent facets of the same object, a polymorphic
“and”: ΛαΛβλP α→tλQβ→tΛξλxξλf ξ→αλgξ→β. (∧t→t→t (P (f x))(Q (g x)))
3.3
Relation to other models
Our model bears some resemblance with other type-theoretical approaches to
natural language semantics, in particular with the works by Asher and Puste-
jovky [3] that reached its apogee in Asher’s book [1], and also with the subsequent
work by Asher, Bekki, Luo and Chatzikyriadikis [2,15,6,5] — Cooper also uses
type theory for modelling natural language semantics, but in quite a diﬀerent
perspective, more related to feature logics [7]. All these models are type driven.
In the models of the ﬁrst group, such as [1], the system at work is the simply
typed lambda calculus enriched with rules issued from category theory, whose
compatibility is assumed. It was mainly designed to handle objects that combine
several senses and facets and copredications over these senses, which can be

felicitous or not. The possible beneﬁts of this extension for classical phenomena
in compositional semantics has not been much investigated.
The models of the second group, such as [15], use variants of Martin-L¨of type
theory, with at least two levels, types and kinds, and predicative quantiﬁcation
over types: ∀α ∈CN (where CN is the kind of common nouns). Some questions
of formal semantics like coordinations and quantiﬁcation have been discussed in
this setting.
The main diﬀerence between our model and these two is that they are type
driven while ours is word driven, thus allowing coercion for a word and not
for another word with the same type — for instance classe (French) is a set
of pupils but can also mean classroom while promotion (French), also a set of
pupils, cannot mean a room. Recent work by Luo, [15], is a bit closer to ours
since common nouns are viewed as types (hence for them type driven or word
driven make no diﬀerence) but then it prevents two common nouns to have
to be declared as being in the same sort. Regarding other part-of-speech, all
these models are completely type driven, hence less adequate to model language
idiosyncrasies.
A related diﬀerence is that when composing two phrases, our model uses
coercions issued from both phrases to allow readings that would otherwise be
impossible.
A methodological diﬀerence is that we give a uniﬁed framework for both
compositional semantics and lexical semantics and pragmatics which properly
accounts for many lexical phenomena like coercions and copredications [4], ﬁctive
motion [18], deverbals [22] as well as compositional phenomena like a revisited
view of (generalised) quantiﬁcation and determiners [23,24], or on plurals in this
very paper. The fact that the phenomena we study are all fully formalised in a
unique logical framework which is known to be sound guarantees that the model
can simultaneously account for all these phenomena.
The ultimate advantage of our uniﬁed view is that being completely formal-
ised within a single logical system, we can implement the computational analyses
as soon as we model them. We have currently implemented a prototype version
of the ideas in this paper in the Grail parser [17].
4
Sets, predicates and types
4.1
Types are not sets
A close look at the Montagovian setting draws a distinction between two logics:
Logic/calculus for meaning assembly (a.k.a glue logic, metalogic,...) In the
standard case, this is simply typed λ-calculus with two base types e and t
these terms are the proof in intituitionistic propositional logic. Here the base
types will be ei sorts of the many sorted logic, with a particular type for
groups, g and one for propositions, Montague’s t.
Logic/language for semantic representations, target logic In the stand-
ard case that is higher-order predicate logic or ﬁrst-order logic, using reiﬁc-
ation. Here this logic will be many sorted higher order logic.

Given this context, we would like to insist that types are not usual sets. For
instance disjunctive types and complement types are problematic, or at least
quite diﬀerent from their set-theoretical counterpart and there is no intersection:
– Although there is a negation ¬A = A →⊥, negation does not implement
set theoretic complements. Indeed, there cannot be both terms of type A
and terms of type A →⊥. One of these two types must be empty. When
considering the associated predicate ˜A : e→t, there is a complement: ¬t→t ˜A :
e →t.
– Disjunctive types are often left out of the type system, since to obtain nor-
mal form one needs to consider unpleasant commutative conversions Fur-
thermore, the terms in a disjunctive type A1 ∨A2 are not the unions of
terms of type A1 and of terms of type A2, but pairs ⟨i, t⟩of an integer i and
a term of type Ai, hence they never contain any common term to types A1
and A2 — even if one pure term is common to both, as a proof of A1 ∪A2,
it is a diﬀerent typed term, and the integer in front event prevent to have
proofs of A as proof of A ∪A.
– There is no intersection of types. A conjunctive type A1 ∧A2 contains pairs
of terms of respective types A1 and A2, but no common term to A1 and A2.
Nevertheless some types are closer to sets, namely data types, see e.g. [8],
deﬁned from constants and operators like, integers, lists of objects of type A,
ﬁnite trees with or without labels etc. A data type T resembles a set in the sense
that there is a bijective correspondence between normal terms of type T and
data of type T . . Data types can either be deﬁned internally as in plain F or by
constants and operators with speciﬁc reduction rules as in G¨odel’s system T or
Martin L¨of type theory.
The easiest account of a set in our Montagovian setting is a predicate which
is of type X →t. In order to view the sorts ei as sets, for each of them we
have predicate bei( ) : e →t that encodes the property of being of type ei. The
choice of the domain of the predicate here e, the sort into which base types ei
maps, is rather free, since the domain of a predicate can be both restricted (as
a function can) and extended (by saying it is false elsewhere). Once we have the
base predicates, with their types, and the predicate associated with base types,
plus our system of coercions, that include ontological inclusions, we can then
deﬁne sets as one usually does. For instance, black applies to physical objects,
cats may be viewed as physical objects (meaning transfer), hence “the black cats
in the garden” is a well deﬁned set. This is the way we modelled, predicates,
determiners and quantiﬁers. [24]
4.2
Operators for handling sets
We can deﬁne operators that represent operations on sets, that can be as-
similated with predicates, of type e →t. As integers can be deﬁned, we shall
have a constant | | for counting elements satisfying a predicate. Inclusion is
easily deﬁned as a function that maps pairs of predicates to a proposition:

⊆: ΛαλP α→tλQα→tλxαP(x) =⇒Q(x) — α usually is e but this is not man-
datory. The logical operators such as ∧and ∨between predicates correspond
respectively to union and intersection of sets of terms, as expected (while oper-
ations on types like conjunction and disjunction do not, cf. Section 4.1).
We will also consider one entity type for groups called g, and a function
member that relates a group with its members, and which doing so turns a
group in to a predicate: member : g →e →t — or equivalently, says whether an
entity satisﬁes a predicate. As a noticeable consequence, two groups can have the
same members without being identical: groups are not deﬁned by their members
(as in set extensionality) they simply have members.
We can have a constant ⊕for group union (we prefer to avoid the complement
because the set with respect to which the complement is computed is unclear,
let alone whether or not the complement is a group, following Link we will not
have group intersection).
Because of member we should have the following equivalences:
(member(gg
1 ∪gg
2))e→t = (((member(gg
1))e→t ∨(member(gg
2))e→t)e→t
They do hold in the target logic (many sorted logic). Indeed, we do have an
obvious model with sets and individuals in which such equivalences hold.
A more interesting variant is easy to implement. It consists in having as many
groups as we have sorts ei, so we can have the base type gi for groups of ei objects
— thus we can have “shoal” (resp. “herd”) as a group of ﬁsh (resp. animals).
Having diﬀerent types of groups makes sense, since one rarely gathers into a
group objects of a totally diﬀerent nature, like a physical object, a human being
and an abstract concept — because ei does not deﬁne a partition of entities,
some inclusions are welcome, e.g. for gathering chickens, cows into animals, to
have the group of animals of a farm. The question is whether one really wants
to consider this strange gathering as a group of type g.
5
A proper treatment of plurals in ΛT yn
5.1
Terms in the lexicon
For the sake of concreteness, we assume a basic categorial grammar for the
syntax, using syntactic formulas of the form A/B (resp. B\A) to indicate an
expression producing an A when it ﬁnds an expression of type B to its right (resp.
left). The corresponding semantic operation in both cases is function application,
optionally preceded by universal type instantiation.2 Lexical entries are all of the
form: word, syntactic type, semantic term.
Simple individual nouns Most nouns in the lexion are predicates over simple
individuals of type e.
student n λxe.student(x)
2 For a more complete coverage of semantics, we need the introduction rules (corres-
ponding to lambda abstraction) as well. See [19, Chapter 3] for a detailed introduc-
tion to these issues.

Group individual nouns More interestingly, group individuals of type g, which
can be lexically coerced to their members by the member function.
committee
n
λxg.committee(x)
— member n/n λygλxemember of(x, y)
The “member of” predicate In addition to the member coercion discussed above,
there is a separate “member of” predicate corresponding to the lexical entry of
the phrase “(the) members of/(a) member of”.
member of
n/np λygλxemember of(x, y)
Since “the students” is of type e→t and not of type g, we have the following
contrast.
(3)
a.
The members of the committee protested.
b. #The members of the students protested.
The plural suﬃx The plural suﬃx applies to any noun n. It is a type-shifting
function, which, roughly speaking, forms a set (of cardinality greater than one)
such that each of the members in this set is in the denotation of n.
student
n
λxe.student(x)
committee n
λxg.committee(x)
-s
n\n ΛαλP α→tλQα→t.|Q| > 1 ∧∀xα.Q(x) ⇒P(x)
Derived plural forms Using the plural suﬃx, we can derive the plurals of student
and committee as follows.
students
n λQe→t.|Q| > 1 ∧∀xe.Q(x) ⇒student(x)
committees n λQg→t.|Q| > 1 ∧∀xg.Q(x) ⇒committee(x)
Proper nouns Proper nouns all have a possible coercion from the type to its
characteristic function (a singleton set) , which we have named q for Quine
(following [26]). In the simplest case, when α is instantiated as e, this is one of
the basic type-shifting operations in dynamic Montague grammar [20].
John
np
je
Mary
np
me
q
np/np Λαλxαλyα.y = x
Johnq np
λye.y = j
Conjunction Conjunction is interpreted much like set-theoretic union, which is
what we want. Given that a direction conjunction of e- or g-type expressions is
excluded, the q coercion needs to apply before the conjunction.3
and (np\np)/np ΛαλP α→tλQα→tλxα.P(x) ∨Q(x)
As an example, we obtain “John and Mary” as follows.
John and Mary np λye.(y = j) ∨(y = m)
3 We can follow the strategy discussed in Section 4.2 and add a group-forming con-
junction to account for some subtler data (see, for example, [10]), but at the price
of introducing many more quantiﬁed variables.

Verbs For the verbs, we give one collective verb “met”, one distributive verb
“sneezed” and one mixed verb “wrote a paper” (both collective and distributive
readings are possible).
The collective verb needs to require explicitly that its argument set has more
than one element; otherwise “Johnq met” would be derivable by the Quine rule.
met
np\s λP e→t.|P| > 1 ∧meet(P)
sneezed
np\s λxe.sneeze(x)
wrote a paper
np\s λP e→t.write a paper(P)
Each of these verbs has diﬀerent possibilities for coercion. “Sneezed” is dis-
tributive, and therefore applies to the individual members of a set. “Met” is
collective, however, by not modeling it as having a group argument, we ac-
count for the fact that “The committee met” implies that its members (at least
those relevant given the time, place and availability) met. In addition, the #
coercion allows it to transform a set of sets into a single set. Finally, the verb
“wrote a paper” has only the “covering” coercion, indicating that when it takes
a set of entities as its subject each of the members of this set was part of a group
writing a paper. Note that this reading has both the collective (when we always
choose Q = P) and the distributive reading (when we always choose λy.y = x
for Q for all values of x) as special cases.
met
np\s λP e→t.|P| > 1 ∧meet(P)
#
ΛαλR(α→t)→tλS(α→t)→t∀P α→t.S(P) ⇒R(P)
sneezed
np\s λxe.sneeze(x)
*
ΛαλP α→tλQα→t∀xα.Q(x) ⇒P(x)
wrote a paper
np\s λP e→t.write a paper(P)
c
ΛαλR(α→t)→tλP α→t∀xα.P(x) ⇒
∃Qα→tQ(x) ∧Q ⊆P ∧R(Q)
Coerced forms Given the lexical coercions, we can obtain the following derived
forms from the lexical entries and the given coercions.
met#
np\s λR(e→t)→t∀P e→t.R(P) ⇒|P| > 1 ∧meet(P)
sneezed∗
np\s λP e→t.∀xe.P(x) ⇒sneeze(x)
wrote a paperc np\s λP e→t.∀xe.P(x) ⇒
∃Qe→tQ(x) ∧Q ⊆P ∧write a paper(Q)
Quantiﬁers To show the interaction with determiners, we given two lexical
entries for quantiﬁers.
“The” is simply the selection function — a more detailed treatment would
take the presupposition of existence into account.
“Each” forces distributivity, hence we have “*each student met”.
the
np/n
Λα.ι(α→t)→α
each (s/(np\s))/n ΛαλP α→tλQα→t∀xαP(x) ⇒Q(x)

5.2
Detailed treatment of the typical examples
Classical examples in English
The following examples examine the diﬀerence
between individual, collective and ambiguous readings for an enumeration of
individuals. The treatment in English is common with many languages, and
is easily adapted. Some of the lexicon introduced previously is re-used for the
analysis of complete sentences.
(4)
a.
Jimi and Dusty met.
b.
Jimi and Dusty lifted a piano.
c.
Jimi and Dusty were walking.
Example (4-a):
Jimi
je
Dusty
de
Jimi and Dusty
λye.(y = j) ∨(y = d)
The conjunction yields the property of being one or the other individual.
To meet
λP e→t.|P| > 1 ∧meet(P)
The verb asserts that the meeting concerns more than a single individual.
(4-a) Jimi and Dusty met
|λye.(y = j) ∨(y = d)| > 1∧meet(λye.(y = j) ∨(y = d))
The ﬁrst part is true, since applied to a set of cardinality two.
(4-a) Jimi and Dusty met meet(λye.(y = j) ∨(y = d))
The only reading obtained is collective.
Example (4-b):
To lift a piano
λP e→t.piano(P)
c Coercion for lift
ΛαλR(α→t)→tλP α→t∀xα.P(x) ⇒∃Qα→tQ(x) ∧Q ⊆P ∧R(Q)
This coercion allows the predicate to have a collective or distributive reading
over any subsets of the argument provided.
(4-b) R1 Jimi and Dusty lifted a piano
piano(λye.(y = j) ∨(y = d))
This is the collective reading, indicating that the predicates applies to both
individuals for a single lifting event.
(4-b) R2 Jimi and Dusty lifted a piano
∀xe.((x = j) ∨(x = d)) ⇒
∃Qe→tQ(x)∧
Q ⊆(λye.(y = j) ∨(y = d))∧piano(Q)

This is the distributed reading. It indicates that any subgroups of people
could have participated in distinct lifting events. In this case, the only possibility
diﬀerent from the previous reading is that each of the individual lifted a diﬀerent
piano.
Example (4-c):
To be walking
λxe.walk(x)
*
Coercion for walk
ΛαλP α→tλQα→t∀xα. Q(x) ⇒P(x)
This coercion enables the verb to select sets rather than individuals.
(4-c) Jimi and Dusty were walking
∀xe.((x = j) ∨(x = d)) ⇒walk(x)
The only reading is distributive.
Groups in French
The following examples illustrate the use of words denoting
groups of more than a single individual, and the ambiguity inherent to their
plural forms. They are given in French, but such examples are common in many
languages.
(5)
a.
Le
The
comit´e
committee
s’est r´euni.
met.
b.
Les
The
comit´es
committees
se sont r´eunis.
met.
Example (5-a):
le
the
Λα.ι(α→t)→α
comit´e
committee
λxg.comite(x)
le comit´e
the committee
lcg
se r´eunir
to meet
λP e→t.|P| > 1 ∧reunir(P)
(5-a)
the committee met
|λxe.member of (x, lc)| > 1
∧reunir(λxe.member of (x, lc))
The member of predicate coerces our group into the set of its members, allowing
the collective reading to take place.
Example (5-b):
comit´e
committee
λxg.comite(x)
comit´es
committees
λQg→t.|Q| > 1 ∧∀xgQ(x) ⇒comite(x)
les
the
Λα.ι(α→t)→α
les comit´es
the committees
lcsg→t

The semantics is slightly more complex in the plural case; we take a constant;
lcs, to correspond to the (indeﬁnite) selection made, as a set of groups.
se r´eunir
to meet
λP e→t.|P| > 1 ∧reunir(P)
As above. However, note the following coercion that can be used in this case:
#
Coercion for meet
ΛαλR(α→t)→tλS(α→t)→t. S(P) ⇒R(P)
This allows the verb to take sets of groups as arguments (doing set combina-
tion). The availability of this coercion, in this speciﬁc case, enables two diﬀerent
readings: the ﬁrst using the predicate without the coercion, the other with the
coercion.
R1 the committees met
|λxe.(∀yg.lcs(y) ⇒member of (x, y))| > 1∧
reunir(λxe.(∀yg.lcs(y) ⇒member of (x, y)))
This is the collective-collective reading. The verb is not coerced, and every mem-
ber of every group concerned is considered to be a part of the single r´eunion
event.
R2 the committees met
∀P e→t.(λQe→t.(∀ygxe.Q(x) ∧lcs(y) ⇒
member of (x, y)))(P) ⇒|P| > 1 ∧reunir(P)
The coercion is applied. This is the collective-distributive reading where, for each
group referred to as one of les comits, there is a diﬀerent r´eunion event involving
the set of its members, and the r´eunions are independent.
Plural Constructions in Japanese As a ﬁnal example, one use of the plural mod-
iﬁer tachi illustrates how some language-speciﬁc constructions can be accounted
for in this system. This modiﬁer turns a noun into a group, which allows for
collective readings.
(6)
a.
JIMI
Jimi
tachi ha
and his group
saikai shita.
had a reunion.
Example (6-a):
JIMI Jimi
je
tachi
λxe.entouragee→g(x)
JIMI tachi Jimi and his group
jtg
saikai suru
to have a reunion
λP e→t.|P| > 1 ∧saikai(P)
Jimi and his group had a reunion
|λxe.member of (x, jt)| > 1
∧saikai(λxe.member of (x, jt))
The semantics of the predicate saikai suru is similar to the English to meet as
it applies to sets of plural cardinality. We use an entourage operator that selects
a group created from an individual; for it to represent tachi accurately, it has
severe restrictions of selection.

6
Conclusion
These basic phenomena about plurals, as we modelled them in this paper, are
easily implemented in Grail, the categorial parser providing syntactical and se-
mantical analysis, in particular for French, with a grammar which has been
semi-automatically acquired grammar from corpora. [17]
