Faster Deep Q-learning
using Neural Episodic Control
Daichi Nishio
Institute of Science and Engineering
Kanazawa University
Kanazawa, Japan

Satoshi Yamane
Institute of Science and Engineering
Kanazawa University
Kanazawa, Japan

Abstract—The research on deep reinforcement learning which
estimates Q-value by deep learning has been attracted the interest
of researchers recently. In deep reinforcement learning, it is
important to efﬁciently learn the experiences that an agent has
collected by exploring environment. We propose NEC2DQN that
improves learning speed of a poor sample efﬁciency algorithm
such as DQN by using good one such as NEC at the beginning
of learning. We show it is able to learn faster than Double DQN
or N-step DQN in the experiments of Pong.
Index Terms—Deep reinforcement learning; DQN; Neural
Episodic Control; Sample efﬁciency
I. INTRODUCTION
Deep Q-Network (DQN) [1] have made a success of deep
reinforcement learning end-to-end, and various algorithms
have been proposed since then [2]. However learning a task
with large state space is difﬁcult, and many learning steps
are necessary especially in an environment where rewards are
sparse.
TABLE I
THE DIFFERENCES BETWEEN DQN AND NEC
DQN
NEC
Estimation
Neural Network
Neural Network + DND
Sampling
Random or with Priority
Random
Memory cost
Large
Huge
In order to solve them, it is necessary to efﬁciently use expe-
riences obtained by exploration. DQN uses Experience Replay
[3] which stores experiences in memory called Replay Buffer
and It trains with minibatch randomly. Prioritized Experience
Replay [4] has been proposed to learn more efﬁciently than
random sampling. It considers experiences with large train
error as important experiences, and greatly improves learning
speed and performance.
Neural Episodic Control (NEC) [5] is another way to
efﬁciently learn. It uses the memory module called Differen-
tiable Neural Dictionary (DND) to learn stably with a smaller
number of learning steps. The agent can decide its action
by taking advantage of past similar experiences stored in
DND. In addition, it is able to learn end-to-end because it
is differentiable inside a neural network.
However, DND needs a large memory for each action. It
also requires a lot of calculation time and memory usage. We
show their relations in Table I.
In this research, we propose a method of improving learning
efﬁciency and speed by adapting NEC’s learning efﬁciency to
a simple network like DQN.
II. DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
We target reinforcement learning assuming general Markov
Decision Process(MDP). We deﬁne the state of the environ-
ment at time t as st, and the agent selects the action at by
the policy π. Then it obtains the reward rt and the next state
st+1 corresponding to at from the environment. The revenue
is discounted return Gt = P
t(γtrt), where γ is discount
rate as the degree of consideration of the future. The action-
value function the agent uses for selecting action is deﬁned
as Qπ(s, a) = Eπ[Gt | s, a]. The optimal Q-value is based on
the Bellman optimal equation [6] as follows.
Q∗(s, a) = E[r + γ max
a′ Q(s′, a′) | s, a]
(1)
Q-learning [7] is used to obtain the optimal Q-value.
Q(s, a) ←Q(s, a) + α(r + γ max
a′ Q(s′, a′) −Q(s, a)) (2)
In Q-learning, assuming that samples (s, a, r, s′) can be
obtained inﬁnitely from all pairs of (s, a), (2) obtains the
optimal Q-value function Q∗(s, a). Also, it converges to the
same value since the Q-value function does not depend on the
policy. On the other hand, the convergence may take a long
time if there are pairs (s, a) that are not tried.
In DQN, the agent uses the ε-greedy policy for tradeoff
between exploration and exploitation. This ε(0 < ε < 1) is a
constant, or there is a method of linear decaying as increasing
learning steps.
π(a | s) =
 1 −ε (a = argmaxa Q(s, a))
ε
(otherwise)
(3)
DQN aiming at learning from images uses Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN) [8] as a state feature extractor. The
Q-value for embedding h obtained from CNN is estimated by
fully-connected layers.
The agent stores tuples of (st, at, rt, st+1) in Replay Buffer
so that it can learn with a minibatch formed randomly from
arXiv:1801.01968v4  [cs.LG]  3 Jun 2018

the buffer. In addition, for stability of the target value, it uses a
target network for calculating a target value separately from a
neural network for learning. The target network uses parameter
θ−which is slightly older than the current parameter θ of the
learning network.
A neural network learns from the loss function L(θ) =
E[yt −Q(s, a; θ)] using the target value in (4).
yt = rt + γ max
a′ Q(st+1, a′; θ−)
(4)
Hasselt et al. [9] show that DQN overestimates the action-
value when the number of experience samples obtained from
a environment is small, and Double Q-learning is a solution to
it. Double Q-learning updates the Q-value using two Q-value
estimators A and B.
QA(s, a) ←QA(s, a) + α(r + γQB(s′, a∗) −QA(s, a)) (5)
QB(s, a) ←QB(s, a) + α(r + γQA(s′, b∗) −QB(s, a)) (6)
where a∗= argmax
a
QA(s′, a), b∗= argmax
a
QB(s′, a)
QA prevents QB from overestimated, and QB prevents QA
from it, respectively.
The algorithm called Double DQN [10] using Double Q-
learning for DQN has been also proposed. Equation (4) is
rewritten as follows.
yt = rt + γQ(st+1, argmax
a
Q(st+1, a; θ); θ)
(7)
Hasselt et al. have incorporated the idea of Double Q-
learning into (7).
yDouble
t
= rt + γQ(st+1, argmax
a
Q(st+1, a; θ); θ−)
(8)
This makes it possible to get higher scores with 90% of
games played by DQN, and it is still widely used as an better
algorithm than DQN.
III. RELATED WORK
Neural Episodic Control(NEC) is one of the method of
efﬁcient sampling from Replay Buffer. It is the algorithm
based on episodic memory and improved Model-Free Episodic
Control (MFEC) [11] to learn end-to-end from state mappings
to estimations of Q-values.
Differentiable Neural Dictionary(DND) has been proposed
to make it successful. DND for a action a ∈A is a dictionary
Ma = (Ka, Va) which saves a pair of key Ka and value Va.
The key is the embedding h which is the feature extracted the
state s ∈S with CNN, and the value is the Q-value.
We can perform two kinds of operations for DND, Lookup
and Write. In Lookup, when h featured by CNN and cor-
responding action a are entered, we lookup the top p-nearest
neighbors for h in Ma using kd-trees [12]. We weight the
value vi corresponding to p keys and we set it as Qa.
wi =
k(h, hi)
P
j k(h, hj)
(9)
Qa =
X
i
wivi
(10)
k(h, hi) is a kernel function for h and hi. In DND, (11) is
used.
k(h, hi) =
1
∥h −hi∥2
2 + δ
(11)
Although δ is a parameter to prevent division by zero, we
should make it little larger such as δ = 10−3 because each
value of p-nearest neighbors is referred to a certain extent.
In Write, we write an input h and a corresponding Q-
value in DND. If the key that already matches the input h
exists in Ma, update the corresponding Q-value according to
the following with a learning rate α.
Qi ←Qi + α(Q(N)(s, a) −Qi)
(12)
When the size of the dictionary reaches the upper limit, we
overwrites a pair that has not been referred to recently as the
top p-nearest neighbor value according to Least Recently Used
(LRU).
NEC uses N-step Q-learning [13] as a target value.
Q(N)(st, a) =
N−1
X
j=0
γjrt+j + γN max
a′ Q(st+N, a′)
(13)
However, N-step Q-learning is hard to be stabilized by off-
policy algorithm [14].
We use NEC in our proposed algorithm, but we replace the
output Q-value of NEC network with the Q-value deﬁned in
Chapter IV.
IV. PROPOSED ALGORITHM
NEC currently has the following problems.
1) As the number of pairs of key and value in DND
increase, the computation time for ﬁnding top p-nearest
neighbors increases.
2) The number of dictionaries M of DND is the same as
the size of the action space |A|.
3) State space and action space need to be discrete because
Q-learning is used.
Regarding 3, Matsumori et al. [15] are addressing research
in an environment where the state space is continuous and
Partially Observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP).
Our work focuses on the problems 1 and 2. Continuing
to use NEC requires many computational resources due to
constraints of time computational quantity and space com-
putational quantity. Therefore, we will address using NEC’s
sampling efﬁciency only in early learning of other deep Q-
learning algorithms. We will use DQN as an example which
is the simplest Deep Q-learning network and we call this
algorithm NEC2DQN(N2D).
As mentioned in [6], there is always one optimal action-
value Q∗, and if it is the same policy, it always converges to
the same value. For this reason, both DQN algorithm and NEC
algorithm are possible to head to the same Q∗. Therefore, the
Q-value estimated by other algorithms can be taken as the

𝑸∗
𝑸𝑫𝑸𝑵
𝑸𝑵𝑬𝑪
𝑻𝒂𝒓𝒈𝒆𝒕𝑵𝑬𝑪
𝑸∗
𝑸𝑫𝑸𝑵
𝑸𝑵𝑬𝑪
𝑻𝒂𝒓𝒈𝒆𝒕𝑵𝑬𝑪
𝑻𝒂𝒓𝒈𝒆𝒕𝑫𝑸𝑵
Learning
𝑸∗
𝑸𝑵𝑬𝑪
𝑸∗
𝑸𝑫𝑸𝑵
𝑸𝑵𝑬𝑪
𝑸𝑫𝑸𝑵
𝑸𝑵𝑬𝑪
𝑸𝑫𝑸𝑵
𝑸𝑵𝑬𝑪
𝑸𝑫𝑸𝑵
NEC,DQN
NEC2DQN
Learning
Figure 1.
The image of the convergence of NEC2DQN: QNEC and QDQN will converge to the same optimal state-action value Q∗. The top shows the
progress of convergence when NEC and DQN learn respectively. The bottom is the progress of convergence of each Q-value by using NEC2DQN. Although
Q∗is unknown and cannot be observed directly, NEC and DQN should be close to Q∗. In the early stage of learning, it is better to use the TargetNEC
as shown in the ﬁgure. Therefore, we want DQN to learn by approaching not TargetDQN but TargetNEC.
target value. Hence it is easier to converge by using a better
target value, the value approaches to Q∗faster. We show this
simple image in Figure 1.
We set QA(s, a) = QDQN(s, a), QB(s, a) = QNEC(s, a)
in (5) and (6). Then we rewrite them as follow.
QDQN(s, a) ←QDQN(s, a)+α(r+γQNEC(s′, a∗)−QDQN(s, a))
(14)
QNEC(s, a) ←QNEC(s, a)+α(r+γQDQN(s′, b∗)−QNEC(s, a))
(15)
where a∗= argmax
a
QDQN(s′, a), b∗= argmax
a
QNEC(s′, a)
Double DQN is one-step Q-learning, but NEC uses N-step
returns. Thus we want to rewrite (14) and (15) like N-step
Double DQN. Instead of preparing a target network, NEC
stores the target value Q(N)
NEC in Replay Buffer. In order to ﬁt
this target value, we adopt N-step returns for DQN(hereinafter,
we call it N-step DQN).
QDQN(s, a) ←QDQN(s, a)+α(Q(N)
NEC(s, a∗)−QDQN(s, a))
(16)
QNEC(s, a) ←QNEC(s, a)+α(Q(N)
DQN(s, b∗)−QNEC(s, a))
(17)
Equations (16) and (17) show Q(N)
NEC(s, a∗) is necessary
for learning QDQN(s, a), and Q(N)
DQN(s, b∗) is necessary for
learning QNEC(s, a). However, QNEC may not be able to
learn well until DQN learns as a network, and there is a
possibility that QDQN cannot be learned well due to the
inﬂuence. Especially, NEC should be able to learn earlier by
learning using the original Q(N)
NEC. Therefore we rewrite (17)
like (19).
QDQN(s, a) ←QDQN(s, a)+α(Q(N)
NEC(s, a∗)−QDQN(s, a))
(18)
QNEC(s, a) ←QNEC(s, a)+α(Q(N)
NEC(s, b∗)−QNEC(s, a))
(19)
QDQN(s, a) can learn with a better target value by NEC
algorithm at the beginning of learning. Even if learning this
way, QDQN converges to the same value as QNEC. But
we need to consider the learning has advanced because this
research aims to use NEC only in the early stage of learning.
Since QDQN maybe estimated correctly to some extent, it can
be learned like Double DQN using N-step returns.
QDQN(s, a) ←QDQN(s, a)+α(Q(N)
DQN(s, a∗)−QDQN(s, a))
(20)
QNEC(s, a) ←QNEC(s, a)+α(Q(N)
DQN(s, b∗)−QNEC(s, a))
(21)
Comparing (18) with (19), they use the same target value
Q(N)
NEC. Similarly, both (20) and (21) use Q(N)
DQN. Hence we
replace them with the same Q-value Q(N)
N2D.
QDQN(s, a) ←QDQN(s, a)+α(Q(N)
N2D(s, a∗)−QDQN(s, a))
(22)
QNEC(s, a) ←QNEC(s, a)+α(Q(N)
N2D(s, b∗)−QNEC(s, a))
(23)
From here, we deﬁne QN2D(s, a) to satisfy the above
property. We prepare networks of NEC and DQN separately as
shown in Figure 2. Both of the networks output their Q-value
for the state st, and we combine them as QN2D(st, a).
QN2D(st, a) = λ(t)QNEC(st, a) + (1 −λ(t))QDQN(st, a)
(24)
This λ(t) is a monotonously decreasing function related to
the current learning step t. It represents how much to consider

CNN
FC
CNN
DND
NEC
DQN
𝜆(𝑡)
1 −𝜆(𝑡)
𝑸𝑵𝟐𝑫(𝒔,𝒂)
𝑇𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡  𝒚𝒕
𝑇𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡  𝒚𝒕
𝑠
𝑸𝑵𝑬𝑪(𝒔,𝒂)
𝑸𝑫𝑸𝑵(𝒔,𝒂)
Figure 2. NEC2DQN Network
NEC. We make it linear decay from 1 to 0 as increasing
learning steps such as (25).
λ(t) =
 1 −
t
CS
(t < CS)
0
(otherwise)
(25)
At the beginning of learning, it refers to the Q-value of
NEC, and gradually refers to the Q-value of DQN as learning
progresses. Thus it is possible to switch naturally.
We set the steps CS to start to fully depend on DQN. It
is not necessary to calculate QNEC(st, a), and the calculation
time is also reduced because λ(t) = 0 after CS.
Loss functions of NEC and DQN are required respectfully
because they are separate networks, but we use the same target
value yt. Although we use a∗and b∗in (22) and (23), we do
not use Double Q-learning but simply use N-step returns since
we do not want to use Q(N)
N2D(s, a∗).
yt = Q(N)
N2D(s, a) =
N−1
X
j=0
γjrt+j + γN max
a′ QN2D(st+N, a′)
(26)
This is based on the fact that it is hard for overestimation
of the Q-value to occur when the amount of experience
accumulated in Replay Buffer is small because NEC can refer
to DND.
These loss functions also use same target yt.
LNEC(θt) = E[yt −QNEC(st, at)]
(27)
LDQN(θt) = E[yt −QDQN(st, at)]
(28)
Similarly to original NEC, Replay Buffer stores a tuple of
(st, at, yt). We accumulate the trajectory of the episode at the
end of each episode because yt requires N steps of reward
data and the subsequent state st+N.
We show the overall algorithm in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 NEC2DQN
1: Initialize the number of entire timesteps S to 0.
2: Initialize the change step CS for λ(t)
3: Initialize replay memory D to capacity CD.
4: Initialize DND memories Ma to capacity CMa.
5: Initialize action-value function QNEC and QDQN with
random weights.
6: for each episode do
7:
Initialize trajectory memory G .
8:
for t = 1, 2, ...; T do
▷Explore and train.
9:
Receive observation st from environment.
10:
Receive QDQN(st, a).
11:
if S < CS then
▷If S < CS, we use NEC.
12:
Receive embedding h and QNEC(st, a).
13:
else
14:
Set QNEC(st, a) to free values.
15:
end if
16:
Calculate QN2D(st, a).
▷Calculate by (24).
17:
at ←ε-greedy policy based on QN2D(st, a).
18:
Take action at, receive reward rt.
19:
Append (st, at, rt) to G.
20:
Train on a random minibatch from D.
21:
S ←S + 1
22:
end for
23:
for t = 1, 2, ...; T do
▷Calculate N-step returns.
24:
Calculate yt.
▷Calculate by (26).
25:
Append (st, at, yt) to D.
26:
if S < CS then
27:
Append (ht, yt) to Mat.
28:
end if
29:
end for
30: end for

Figure 3. A Pong frame
Figure 4. The comparing NEC2DQN with other algorithms
Figure 5. The difference of NEC2DQN performance by Replay Buffer size
Figure 6. The ﬁrst 5M steps in Figure 5.
V. IMPLEMENTATION
We use Pong of Atari 2600 provided with OpenAI Gym [16]
which can easily share the result of library and reinforcement
learning algorithms.
Pong is the game of 21 points win. If the opponent cannot
hit the ball, we get a reward of +1, and if we cannot, we
get a reward of -1. That is, the reward set R = {−1, 0, 1}.
Many of the algorithms targeting versatility such as DQN
use Reward Clipping that clips rewards gained from games
to [−1, 1]. It is a technique that we enables an agent to learn
without changing other parameters. However, Reward Clipping
may make it impossible to distinguish between a high reward
and a small reward with a large absolute value, so there is a
possibility that it will not try to obtain high rewards [17]. We
do not consider it in this research because the Pong’s reward
is r ∈R.
Like the DQN, we process one frame of the game such as
Figure 3 to 84×84 and convert to grayscale and normalize it.
Then the state is set with the consecutive 4 frames together. We
show the main parameters and the network parameters setting
for the experiment in Table II and Table III as Appendix.
We evaluate the learning speed of NEC2DQN, N-step DQN
and Double DQN. Also we observe the learning result by the
difference in the size of Replay Buffer. We test 5 times every
50,000 learning steps, and we use greedy policy (ε = 0) in
every test.
VI. RESULT
Figure 4 is a comparison with NEC2DQN, N-step DQN
(N = 10) and Double DQN. Although Double DQN required
more than 30M steps to earn more than 10 points, NEC2DQN
achieved it in about 3M steps. Furthermore, NEC2DQN has
better learning efﬁciency and performance than N-step DQN.
Figure 5 and Figure 6 show the difference in results de-
pending on Replay Buffer size. The size affects the stability
of sampling. The larger it is, the better the performance is.
However, since the target value is also stored in Replay Buffer,

the target value is too old to proceed well if it is too large like
size = 500, 000. Looking at Figure 6, the smaller size is, the
faster learning is due to the newness of the target value at
the 2M frame. But as learning progresses, it turns out that the
game score is not obtained well in the case the size is small like
size = 100, 000. NEC2DQN needs considering this balance.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this research, we have veriﬁed DQN is possible to use the
good sampling efﬁciency of NEC in the beginning of learning
using a Pong example. We have showed that the learning speed
is faster than only DQN by using the same and better target
values for NEC and DQN. Indeed, we observed a signiﬁcant
learning speed improvement by using NEC during 2M steps
only.
However it is necessary to conﬁrm whether this method
succeeds also in other games. Particularly, although NEC does
not need to Reward Clipping, DQN is better to do Reward
Clipping. Thus, there is a possibility that we cannot use the
NEC’s advantage.
Moreover, Since NEC and DQN do not connect as the same
network, updating weights of the networks do not directly
affect each other. Therefore, it is easy to replace it with a
network other deep Q-learning algorithm. It is necessary to
verify whether other deep Q-learning algorithms also works
as well as DQN by changing QDQN used for QN2D to the
Q-value of others.
The most important issue is that multiple networks learn
while choosing appropriate target values. In this paper, we
have used NEC since it is excellent in Q-value estimation at
the beginning of learning, but NEC is not necessarily useful
for estimating Q-value. Deep Q-learning from Demonstrations
(DQfD) [18] is used to estimate the Q-value with reference to
human play. It is sometimes hard to go well in tasks that
humans cannot do very well (such as Pong), but if it is a task
that humans can do well, it is good for learning faster than
NEC. However, it is difﬁcult to use human demos when we
make our agent learn more complicated and time-consuming
tasks. It is important that various networks of deep Q-learning
cooperate by learning while choosing an appropriate target
value automatically.
