1
A Fair and Efﬁcient Hybrid Federated Learning
Framework based on XGBoost
for Distributed Power Prediction
Haizhou Liu, Xuan Zhang*, Xinwei Shen* and Hongbin Sun, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—In a modern power system, real-time data on power
generation/consumption and its relevant features are stored in
various distributed parties, including household meters, trans-
former stations and external organizations. To fully exploit the
underlying patterns of these distributed data for accurate power
prediction, federated learning is needed as a collaborative but
privacy-preserving training scheme. However, current federated
learning frameworks are polarized towards addressing either the
horizontal or vertical separation of data, and tend to overlook
the case where both are present. Furthermore, in mainstream
horizontal federated learning frameworks, only artiﬁcial neural
networks are employed to learn the data patterns, which are
considered less accurate and interpretable compared to tree-
based models on tabular datasets. To this end, we propose a
hybrid federated learning framework based on XGBoost, for
distributed power prediction from real-time external features. In
addition to introducing boosted trees to improve accuracy and
interpretability, we combine horizontal and vertical federated
learning, to address the scenario where features are scattered in
local heterogeneous parties and samples are scattered in various
local districts. Moreover, we design a dynamic task allocation
scheme such that each party gets a fair share of information,
and the computing power of each party can be fully leveraged
to boost training efﬁciency. A follow-up case study is presented
to justify the necessity of adopting the proposed framework. The
advantages of the proposed framework in fairness, efﬁciency and
accuracy performance are also conﬁrmed.
Index Terms—Federated Learning, Distributed Power Predic-
tion, Dynamic Task Allocation, XGBoost.
I. INTRODUCTION
P
OWER prediction has become an increasingly important
topic in the modern power system. An accurate and
efﬁcient prediction of the generated/consumed power not only
enables system operators of different levels to make optimal
planning and operation decisions [1]–[3], but also enlight-
ens electricity and ancillary service retailers on customizing
their prices and services [4], [5]. The prevalence of machine
learning further empowers power prediction with universal and
high-performance data-mining algorithms. In the past decades,
various literatures have employed machine learning to address
power prediction, from statistical regression [6] and time series
analysis [7], to the more recent family of neural networks [8]–
[10] and decision trees [11], [12], using data collected from
multiple sources of power generation or consumption.
Haizhou Liu, Xuan Zhang and Xinwei Shen are afﬁliated with Tsinghua-
Berkeley Shenzhen Institute, Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate
School, Tsinghua University, 518055, Shenzhen, China. Hongbin Sun is
afﬁliated with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Tsinghua Uni-
versity, 100084, Beijing, China. (Corresponding Author: Xuan Zhang, xu-

One problem inherent in power prediction is the distributed
nature of these data sources. For example, district-level power
consumption data are generated inside numerous smart me-
ters, and subsequently aggregated by hundreds of transformer
stations across the city. Features relevant to power prediction
(e.g., population mobility data) are also held by external parties
in a distributed fashion. A centralized machine learning frame-
work would require all these distributed parties to transfer their
data to a central server for training, which would jeopardize
data security and lead to high communicational burden during
the data transfer.
Fortunately, federated learning, proposed by Google in 2016
[13], provides a viable solution framework that learns a shared
model by aggregating locally-computed model updates. In
this framework, the proprietary datasets of each party remain
immobilized, which protects both data privacy and training ef-
ﬁciency. Federated learning was then extensively investigated
to address heterogeneity, security among other issues under
various scenarios, during which two major branches emerged:
(a) horizontal federated learning, which involved collaboration
of multiple homogeneous parties with the same feature set but
a different sample set; (b) vertical federated learning, where
the collaborating parties were heterogeneous, holding the same
sample set but with complementary features.
In the past three years, federated learning has started to
garner interest in various aspects of the power system. Saputra
et al. [15] designed a federated energy demand prediction
framework for electric vehicle networks. Wen et al. proposed
FedDetect [16] to identify energy theft behavior in the smart
grid. Wang et al. introduced federated learning into electricity
consumer characteristics identiﬁcation [17]. In terms of power
prediction, Fekri et al. proposed a distributed load forecasting
scheme based on federated learning using recurrent neural
networks [18], and Gholizadeh et al. combined federated
learning with hyperparameter-based clustering for electrical
load forecasting [19]. Our previous work [20] systematically
explored both horizontal and vertical federated learning on a
power consumption dataset of 64 transformer stations across
a southern China city, while introducing population mobility
as external features to improve prediction accuracy.
However, since its foundation, federated learning has been
polarized towards either the horizontal or vertical framework,
while neglecting the case where both are present. As is often
the case, though, that features can be scattered in local hetero-
geneous parties while samples are scattered in different local
districts, resulting in a hybrid case where data are separated
arXiv:2201.02783v1  [cs.LG]  8 Jan 2022

2
both vertically and horizontally.
It is also noticeable that artiﬁcial neural networks are
the mainstream machine learning algorithm built in feder-
ated learning frameworks, particularly horizontal federated
learning, including the most renowned FedSGD and FedAvg
frameworks [21]. This is mostly attributable to the fact that
neural network model updates can be properly “averaged” by
the central server in these traditional frameworks, resulting in
an aggregated model as if all data were centralized for training.
On the other hand, averaging the updates of locally-trained
models makes little sense for tree-based models, especially for
the most advanced Extreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost) [22]
and LightGBM [23] algorithms. There is empirical evidence,
though, that tree-based models generally outperform neural
networks in terms of prediction accuracy, especially on tabular
datasets [24]. Also, neural networks are known to be lacking
in interpretability unlike decision trees. In a scenario where we
wish to predict power with real-time external features such as
demographics while maintaining an interpretable model, tree-
based algorithms would be highly preferred.
Recently, a handful of research papers on horizontal fed-
erated learning proposed alternative aggregation schemes for
tree-based architectures. Instead of averaging the locally-
trained model updates in each round, these schemes aggregate
gradient statistics of the samples in each party, after which
a central server starts a round of training (i.e., node split-
ting) on behalf of all parties. Liu et al. proposed FEDXGB
for mobile crowdsensing [25], in which the central server
was forced to perform aggregation before decryption in the
presence of a secret sharing algorithm. Li et al. proposed a
serverless framework [26] where each party boosted a number
of trees in turn, by exploiting similarity information based on
locality-sensitive hashing. Tian et al. proposed a horizontal
and serverless FederBoost framework for private federated
learning of gradient boosting decision trees [27], in which all
the uploaded gradients were transferred to the active party
for node splitting, and only a lightweight secure aggregation
scheme was required. The essence of gradient aggregation in
these frameworks, if properly combined with an XGBoost-
based vertical framework such as SecureBoost [28], can result
in a hybrid federated learning framework entirely based on
XGBoost, to address the case where data are both horizontally
and vertically separated.
Finally, to maximally protect the privacy of each participant,
a federated learning scheme independent of central servers,
which are often assumed semi-honest, is pursued. Nonetheless,
in a serverless tree-based federated learning framework, an
“active party” is often responsible for the training of an entire
tree, during which other parties have to transfer all gradients
to that party and wait passively for the node splitting results.
This poses additional fairness and efﬁciency threats to the
framework, both of which are frequently discussed topics
[29]–[32] in federated learning:
• Fairness. In a decision tree, the active party learns the
gradient information of every participating party. Even if
the gradients are properly aggregated before transferral,
this gives the active party an unfair advantage at inferring
other parties’ information. This compromises information
fairness.
• Efﬁciency. In the node-splitting stage of every node, only
one active party performs the calculation task. The natural
advantage of parallel processing in distributed learning is
therefore left aside, leading to computational inefﬁciency.
The problems of fairness and efﬁciency could have been
alleviated, though, by means of a dynamic task allocation
scheme during the construction and training of each tree.
To address the aforementioned problems, we hereby propose
a fair and efﬁcient hybrid federated learning framework for
the distributed power prediction of a city-level distribution
network. The contribution of this paper is threefold:
1) We propose a hybrid tree-based federated learning frame-
work based on XGBoost. The hybrid nature of the frame-
work can address both the horizontal and vertical separa-
tion of data, and the introduction of XGBoost improves
prediction accuracy on tabular datasets. This is important
to today’s power systems as it effectively addresses the
distributed nature of data in the multi-level grid.
2) We propose a dynamic task allocation scheme for the
proposed framework, in which the node-splitting tasks are
ﬂexibly assigned to each party depending on their current
working status. We theoretically conﬁrm its superiority
of fairness and efﬁciency under the ideal assumption of
computational uniformity. We also use the case study to
simulate the case where there is a statistical difference
in the time consumption of each party. This enables the
distributed parties to make contributions to pattern mining
and thereby make timely decisions to smart grid planning
and operation in a coordinated manner.
3) We implement the proposed framework on a real-life sce-
nario – the prediction for distribution networks in a city of
southern China. We justify the necessity of implementing
the proposed hybrid framework in our problem setup.
Through XGBoost prediction and simulation of the task
allocation process, we also conﬁrm the advantages of the
proposed framework in fairness, efﬁciency and prediction
accuracy.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section
II describes the real-life problem setup of power prediction
scenarios, which calls for the implementation of a hybrid
federated learning framework. Section III introduces the pro-
posed framework. Section IV evaluates the performance of the
framework theoretically. Section V provides a detailed case
study on the problem setup, conﬁrming the effectiveness of
the framework. Section VI concludes the article.
II. PROBLEM STATEMENT
This study is based on a Smart City project carried out in
a southern city of China, similar to the problem setup of our
previous work [20]. In the project, the power consumption
data are stored in 64 district-level transformer stations across
the city, which are directly coordinated by the Power Supply
Bureau. Weather information, scraped from the TimeAndDate
website [33], are also treated as real-time internal features
of the local transformer stations. In addition, China Mobile,

3
District A
District C
District B
Transformer Station
Local China Mobile
Fig. 1.
An illustration of how the data in the problem setup are stored in
distributed parties.
China’s largest telecommunication company, signed an agree-
ment in 2019 to supplement the project with district-level
demographic information as external features. These features
include real-time district portraits (headcount, age, gender,
etc.) and the district’s Pearson correlation factor with typical
zones (industrial, commercial, etc.). All features available
from the three datasets are summarized in Table I. The data
are stored in a distributed fashion separated by districts and
parties, as sketched in Figure 1.
The goal of this project is to train a collaborative machine
learning model f ∗, using the transformer station Cm’s weather
proﬁles DCm and China Mobile Dm’s demographic proﬁles
DDm in districts m = 1, 2, · · · , M, to predict the districts’
actual power consumption Pm:
min
||Pm −f ∗(DCm, DDm)||,
m = 1, 2, · · · , M
(1)
where || · || represents a metric for evaluating the prediction
error, such as the Mean Squared Error (MSE). The learned
model f ∗is a global function and does not differentiate among
districts. Note that as opposed to typical power forecasting
methods, historical power consumption records are excluded
from the input feature set, in order to better interpret how
power consumption is related to real-time demographic and
weather proﬁles from the as-trained model f ∗. This ensures
that in terms of abrupt changes in these proﬁles, f ∗still
remains its validity.
Three observations can be made on this problem setup:
1) The input dataset is “tabular” in nature, where each
record/sample contains a mixed combination of weather
features, demographic features and power consumption
labels. Neural networks are known to be empirically
incompetent in learning such tabular datasets, due to a
lack of locality, feature heterogeneity and mixed feature
types [24]. Decision trees, on the contrary, can effectively
extract the patterns in such tabular data.
2) The records are stored in a distributed fashion by various
homogeneous and heterogeneous parties. A centralized
machine learning scheme where data are collected by a
central server before training would compromise data pri-
vacy. Federated learning can address this issue by training
locally on each device, without direct data sharing.
3) While the dataset is vertically separated into China Mo-
bile and the Power Supply Bureau by features, it is
also horizontally separated into different local districts
by records. This means that neither a horizontal or
vertical federated learning framework is sufﬁcient for this
problem. A hybrid framework is needed to address both
types of data separation.
In Section III, we will show that our proposed frame-
work, by incorporating both horizontal and vertical federated
learning with an XGBoost-based learning architecture, can
appropriately address all these inherent problems.
III. PROPOSED FRAMEWORK
In this section, we ﬁrst introduce the preliminaries of
XGBoost, which we will employ as our bottom-level learning
architecture. Then, the proposed hybrid federated learning
framework is outlined, which is built upon XGBoost as well
as state-of-the-art horizontal and vertical federated learning
schemes. Finally, the dynamic task allocation scheme is intro-
duced as to improve the prediction performance.
A. Preliminaries: Bottom-Level XGBoost Architecture
The bottom-level XGBoost algorithm learns the inner pat-
terns of data by consecutively constructing a series of gradient-
boosted trees T1, T2, · · · , TS. Each tree aims to predict the
residual prediction error generated by previous trees. The ﬁnal
prediction output of XGBoost is therefore the summation of
all intermediate results yielded from these trees:
f(x) = T1(x) + T2(x) + · · · + TS(x)
(2)
where x denotes the input feature vector of a sample, and f(·)
denotes the full XGBoost model aiming to predict its label.
Each gradient-boosted tree is designed as a binary decision
tree: to obtain the output of a sample on a particular tree,
the sample starts from the head node of the tree, and falls to
either the left or right child node, based on whether a certain
criterion is met for a feature of the sample. This continues until
the sample reaches a leaf node, which contains the expected
output of the sample (also known as leaf values).
Training is required on the XGBoost model in order to
determine the best model parameters, including the node-
splitting criterion and leaf values. Constructing each tree
T while determining its optimal parameters is also known
as training an epoch. XGBoost trains each epoch by ﬁrst
collecting the gradients of the training samples belonging to
the target node. Then, for non-leaf nodes, XGBoost iterates
over all samples and features to determine the best node-
splitting criterion, namely the feature and threshold value that
can induce the largest information gain:
(
Gain(k, v) =
G2
l
Hl+λ +
G2
r
Hr+λ −
G2
H+λ
k∗, v∗= arg maxk,v{Gain(k, v)}
(3)
where k, v are the candidate features and thresholds for node-
splitting, and k∗, v∗denote their optimal values. Gl and Hl
denote the sum of ﬁrst-order and second-order gradients of the
samples falling onto the current node with feature k smaller
than the threshold v. Gr and Hr denote the sum of ﬁrst-order

4
TABLE I
DESCRIPTION OF ALL THREE DATASETS USED FOR THE PROBLEM SETUP.
Power Consumption Dataset
Weather Dataset
Mobility Dataset
Data Source
Transformer Stations of
Power Supply Bureau
TimeAndDate.com *
China Mobile
Resolution
5 minutes
1 hour
1 hour
Features
Power Consumption (Label)
Hour
Temperature,
Wind speed,
Humidity,
Barometer
District Headcount,
Gender Statistic,
Age Statistic (5 bins),
Wage Statistic (3 bins),
Correlation with Typical Zones
* The weather features from TimeAndDate.com are treated as internal features of the transformer stations.
All demographic data are inferred by individual users’ log info in each district.
and second-order gradients of the samples falling onto the
current node with feature k greater than the threshold v. G =
Gl + Gr, H = Hl + Hr. λ is the regularization parameter.
For leaf-nodes, XGBoost calculates the leaf values w∗by:
w∗= −
ηG
H + λ
(4)
where η denotes the learning rate.
In addition, based on the observation that the training in (3)
and (4) only requires the summation statistics of the gradients,
XGBoost proposes an approximate split-ﬁnding algorithm, in
which we ﬁrst categorize samples into bins according to their
value on each feature, followed by aggregating the gradients
of samples in each bin. The candidate splits are then set as the
thresholds between adjacent bins (instead of between adjacent
samples in the original algorithm), which signiﬁcantly reduces
the number of node-splitting candidates to inspect. Finally, the
gradient statistics Gl, Gr and G are calculated by summing up
the gradient summations of the corresponding bins. The core
algorithm for binning, node splitting and leaf value calculation
is outlined in Framework 1 [22].
The as-trained XGBoost model is by nature a recursive if-
else structure, in which a sample traverses from the head node
to a leaf node based on true/false statements of a particular
feature value. XGBoost is therefore more interpretable than
neural networks, the latter of which contains countless nonlin-
ear feature combinations in neurons, making it hard to explain.
XGBoost is also known to be a more powerful model with
higher prediction accuracy on tabular datasets. This is one
of the reasons that we adopt XGBoost as our bottom-level
learning algorithm in the ﬁrst place.
Another advantage of XGBoost is that the approximate
ﬁnding algorithm, by reducing the number of node-splitting
candidates with the binning strategy, also alleviates consider-
able communicational and computational burden in the transfer
of parameters of the upcoming federated learning framework.
B. Hybrid Federated Learning Based on XGBoost
Federated learning constructs a secure and collaborative
learning framework on top of machine learning algorithms,
so that all parties can jointly train a uniﬁed prediction model,
without having to share any local data. Horizontal and vertical
federated learning respectively address the separation of sam-
ples among homogeneous and heterogeneous parties. To the
Framework 1: XGBoost Training (via Approximate Finding)
Additional Notations:
I, the sample space of the target node
K, Number of features; V , Number of bins
xi,k, Value of the k-th feature of sample i
Binning and Gradient Statistics Aggregation for every tree.
1
For i in I:
2
Calculate gi and hi, the ﬁrst- and second-order gradient
3
End For
4
For feature k = 1, 2, · · · , K:
5
Determine the edge of bins for feature k: Sk = {sk0, · · · , skV }
6
For v = 1, 2, · · · , V :
7
Gk,v = P
i∈{i|sk,v−1<xi,k≤sk,v} gi
8
Hk,v = P
i∈{i|sk,v−1<xi,k≤sk,v} hi
9
End For
10
End For
Node-Splitting for every non-leaf node of a tree.
1
G = P
k Gk,1, H = P
k Hk,1
2
For feature k = 1, 2, · · · , K:
3
Gl = 0, Hl = 0
4
For bin v = 1, 2, · · · , V :
5
Gl = Gl + Gkv, Hl = Hl + Hkv
6
Gr = G −Gl, Hr = H −Hl
7
Gain(k, v) =
G2
l
Hl+λ +
G2
r
Hr+λ −
G2
H+λ
8
End For
9
End For
10
k∗, v∗= arg maxk,v Gain(k, v)
11
The splitting criterion is set to a threshold of sk∗v∗on feature k
Leaf Value Calculation for every leaf node of a tree.
1
G = P
k Gk,1, H = P
k Hk,1
2
Set the leaf value to ω = −ηG
H+λ
best of our knowledge, though, a comprehensive framework
that combines horizontal and vertical federated learning has
not been developed. The problem setup has demonstrated,
though, that it is likely for both types of data separation
to be present; beyond the power system domain, different
corporations also happen to possess data-holding branches
in the same set of local districts, and such a framework is
necessary for them to perform collaborative machine learning.
On the other hand, it is noteworthy that existing horizontal
and vertical federated learning frameworks mostly choose to
train XGBoost by transferring encrypted gradient statistics
Gkv and Hkv to an “active party”, in order for this party
to lead the training process. This consistent idea of gradient
transfer within these frameworks allows us to formulate a
hybrid federated learning framework based on XGBoost that

5
merges both horizontal and vertical federated learning.
To this end, we propose a hybrid XGBoost-based federated
learning framework. In Framework 2, we seamlessly integrate
FederBoost [27] with SecureBoost [28], which are respectively
a horizontal and vertical federated learning framework, to
address both types of data separation. In this framework, we
denote Cm as the list of label-holding parties (i.e. transformer
stations in the problem setup), and Dm as the list of secondary
parties (i.e. mobile stations in the problem setup). Each
subscript m denotes a particular district.
Framework 2: Hybrid Federated Learning Based on XGBoost
Additional Notations:
Cm, the label-holding party in district m (m = 1, · · · , M)
Dm, the secondary party in district m (m = 1, · · · , M)
KC, KD, number of features for the label-holding and secondary party
GC/D
k,v,m, HC/D
k,v,m, ﬁrst-order/second-order gradient statistics on feature k,
bin v and district m of the label-holding/secondary party
[[·]], Dec{·}, Paillier encryption and decryption
District-Level Sample Alignment prior to training.
1
For district m = 1, 2, · · · , M:
2
Parties Cm and Dm perform secure sample alignment
3
Party Cm encrypts all gradients of [[gi]] and [[hi]]
4
End For
Secure Gradient Transfer and Binning at the start of each tree.
1
For district m = 1, 2, · · · , M:
2
Cm calculates the ﬁrst- and second-order gradients gi, hi
3
Cm transfers Paillier-encrypted gradients [[gi]], [[hi]] to Dm
4
End For
5
Select an active district mA
6
Based on FederBoost’s secure bin construction algorithm,
7
Party CmA leads the bin construction on features of every Cm
8
Party DmA leads the bin construction on features of every Dm
Secure Gradient Aggregation for every node of a tree.
1
Select an active party CmB from the label-holding parties
2
For district m = 1, 2, · · · , M:
3
Based on Framework 1,
4
Party Cm ﬁlters out samples not belonging to the current node
5
Party Cm calculates all gradient statistics GC
k,v,m and HC
k,v,m
6
Party Cm transfers [[GC
k,v,m]], [[HC
k,v,m]] to CmB
7
Party Dm ﬁlters out samples not belonging to the current node
8
Party Dm calculates encrypted statistics [[GD
k,v,m]], [[HD
k,v,m]]
9
Party Dm transfers [[GD
k,v,m]] and [[HD
k,v,m]] to CmB
10
End For
11
Party CmB decrypts and sums gradient statistics
GC
k,v = P
m Dec{[[GC
k,v,m]]}, HC
k,v = P
m Dec{[[HC
k,v,m]]}
Node Splitting for every non-leaf node of a tree.
1
Party CmB calculates G = P
k GC
k,1, H = P
k HC
k,1
2
For feature k = 1, 2, · · · , KC + KD:
3
For bin v = 1, 2, · · · , V :
4
Party CmB calculates Gain(k, v) based on Framework 1
5
End For
6
End For
7
Party CmB obtains k∗and v∗from the maximal Gain(k, v)
8
If k∗belongs to CmB , inform all Cms, otherwise inform all Dms
9
The parties holding k∗(i.e., all Cms or all Dms) perform splitting
of node samples, and inform the other parties NOT holding k∗
of the sample subspace of its child nodes
Leaf Value Calculation for every leaf node of a tree.
1
Party CmB calculates GC = P
k GC
k,1, HC = P
k HC
k,1
2
Party CmB sets leaf value based on Framework 1
The framework contains four consecutive steps:
1) District-Level
Sample
Alignment.
For
vertically-
separated data in each district, samples need to be properly
aligned before training. Secure alignment algorithms often
need to be introduced not to leak the identity of individual
samples; however, for the problem setup, sample IDs (i.e., the
timestamps) contain no private information, and can therefore
be aligned without encryption.
2) Secure XGBoost Binning. For horizontally-separated
data across districts, the edges of bins in XGBoost are depen-
dent on the statistic information of all homogeneous parties.
Therefore, we resort to FederBoost’s secure bin construction
algorithm [27] to ﬁnd proper bin edges. For the label-holding
parties, the active party CmA leads the bin construction process
on features of all Cms; the same goes for secondary parties.
3) Secure Gradient Aggregation. For a target node to
be trained, each party ﬁlters out samples not belonging to
the target node from the bins. Then each party calculates
the gradient statistics of each bin, and securely transfer the
statistics to the label-holding active party CmB. The active
parties, upon receiving the encrypted gradients, sum and
decrypt the statistics for each bin and feature.
4) Node Splitting or Leaf Value Calculation. For non-leaf
nodes, the active party CmB calculates Gain(k, v) iteratively
for every feature k and bin edge v based on the aggregated
gradient statistics, and obtains the optimal (k∗, v∗) with the
maximal Gain. Then the active party informs the splitting
results to the parties (Cms or Dms) that hold the feature
k∗, who will perform node splitting, determine the sample
subspace of child nodes, and inform the parties not holding
k∗of the subspace. On the other hand, if the target node is
a leaf node waiting for a value to be set, then only the label-
holding active party CmB needs to perform calculation based
on the aggregated gradient statistics.
Figure 2 demonstrates the application of Framework 2 in
the given problem setup. Since the transformer stations hold
the power consumption labels, one of the transformer stations
is expected to become the active party and perform the node
splitting task for each training epoch. All other transformer
stations and mobile branches are obliged to send the bin
statistics and aggregated gradients in steps 2) and 3). By lever-
aging both vertical SecureBoost and horizontal FederBoost, a
collaborative XGBoost model is now trained with participation
from all districts and both heterogeneous parties (namely the
transformer stations and China Mobile). The resulting model
is therefore expected to have a higher prediction accuracy and
generalization ability with the additional samples and features
supplemented into the dataset.
C. Dynamic Task Allocation Scheme
In vertical SecureBoost and horizontal FederBoost, the two
building blocks of our hybrid federated learning framework,
the active party (i.e., CmB) is ﬁxed throughout the training
process. This raises fairness and efﬁciency issues, as (a) The
active party receives the whole intermediate information, while
the other homogeneous parties, despite an equal contribution
of training data, do not. This gives the active party an unfair
advantage at inferring data of other parties; (b) The gradient
aggregation and node-splitting tasks are all processed by the
active party’s computing resources only, while other parties

6
District A                   
District B                                   District C
(2) Secure Binning
(3) Secure Gradient Aggregation
(4) Node Splitting and Leaf Value Calculation
(Active)
(1) District-Level
Sample Alignment
Fig. 2. Application of hybrid federated learning (Framework 2) in the given
problem setup.
1
2
3
4
5
Waiting Queue
2
(3) Active party 
initiates training
Load
Station A
Station B
Station C
3
(1) Pop out a node 
from the queue
(2) Select the currently 
most available party ★
4
5
(4) Add left and right child nodes to the queue
Fig. 3. Application of the dynamic task allocation scheme (Framework 3)
in the given problem setup.
passively wait for the results, which is time-consuming. To
this end, we propose a dynamic task allocation scheme in
Framework 3.
Framework 3: Dynamic Task Allocation
In each training round of an epoch:
1
Select a node from the queue with the smallest index for training.
2
Select the currently most available party as the active party.
3
The active party initiates gradient aggregation and node-splitting.
4
Add the left and right child nodes of the current node to the queue.
The underlying mechanism of the framework is intuitive.
Every time we select a node with the smallest index from
the waiting queue, and assigns the currently most available
party as the active party. After the active party organizes and
ﬁnishes training on the current node, it adds the left and right
child node of this node into the queue. Also, the computational
resources of all parties can be fully leveraged with alternating
active parties. With the dynamic assignment of active parties,
all parties have fairer access to the intermediate gradient
statistics. The application of Framework 3 in the problem
setup is plotted in Figure 3, in which the selected transformer
station, namely Station B due to the lightest computational
load, coordinates the node-splitting task of the target node.
IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
In this section, we theoretically investigate the performance
of the proposed framework. Speciﬁcally, we conﬁrm the
security of the framework, and demonstrate its superiority
in terms of fairness and efﬁciency. Another important prop-
erty of the framework, losslessness against a centralized and
unencrypted XGBoost, is axiomatic, as long as the precision
before encrypting ﬂoating-point gradients is set high enough
(e.g., round gradients to a scale of 10−6). We therefore do not
elaborate on this property as a separate section.
A. Security
The security of the framework is guaranteed based on the
following observations. First, all individual raw data are stored
locally, with only timestamp IDs being publicly transferred.
Second, all intermediate variables for training (e.g., individual
gradients and gradient statistics) are Paillier-encrypted before
being transferred. We can easily balance the trade-off between
encryption quality and efﬁciency by tuning the magnitude of
the prime number in Paillier. Third, each party has access to
the node-splitting criteria if and only if it holds the feature that
splits that node. Even after training, each party only holds half
of the XGBoost model, and a collaborative learning is required
in order to predict labels with the model [28].
We further note that with a dynamic task allocation scheme,
the gradient statistics are now transferred to different active
parties when splitting all the non-leaf nodes. This gives all
parties a smaller chance at inferring the properties of any
individual data with only part of the gradients.
B. Fairness
Fairness measures are often used in network engineering to
determine whether users are receiving a fair share of system
resources. Under the construct of hybrid federated learning,
they can be extended to study the fairness of parties in
receiving intermediate information, which can lead to easier
inference of other parties’ properties. Speciﬁcally, we employ
Jain’s fairness index J [34]:
J (x1, x2, · · · , xM) = (PM
m=1 xm)2
M · PM
m=1 x2m
(5)
where x1, x2, · · · , xM denote the amount of information re-
ceived by each party. J takes value between 1/M and 1, and
a larger J indicates greater fairness.
With the dynamic task allocation scheme, the fairness of the
framework can be improved. To demonstrate, we ﬁrst make the
ideal assumption of a uniform computational load: the gradient
aggregation time τ m
1 and node-splitting time τ m
2 for each party
m to process each node are ﬁxed to τ10 and τ20 respectively.
All communicational time between parties has been reduced
to either the gradient aggregation side or the node-splitting
side.
Under this assumption, in face of task conﬂicts assigned to
a same party, we should take priority on tasks that come in
ﬁrst, as this can result in the highest computational efﬁciency.
The party assigned as the active party of each non-leaf node
can therefore be pre-determined. Let l be the layer index of
the current node and n be the total number of non-leaf layers,
then we can prove the task allocation scheme to be:
1) Nodes from layer 1 to layer ⌈log2M⌉are assigned to
parties 1, 2, · · · , 2l−1 to perform node-splitting as the
active party.
2) Nodes from layer ⌈log2M⌉+1 to layer n are assigned to
parties 1, 2, · · · , M repeatedly in a breadth-ﬁrst manner,
to perform node-splitting as the active party.

7
0
10
20
30
40
50
Number of Participants
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Jain's fairness Index
Proposed Method
Fixed Active Party
Fig. 4. Jain’s fairness index of the hybrid federated learning framework, under
a dynamic task allocation scheme (blue) and a ﬁxed task allocation scheme
(orange). n is set to 5.
The fairness index can then be deduced as
J =



(2n−1)2
M(3×2n−2n−3),
M > 2n−1
(2n−1)2
PM
m=1(⌈log2M⌉−⌈log2m⌉+p+α(M))2 ,
M ≤2n−1
(6)
where α(M) =
(
1,
1 ≤m ≤q
0,
q + 1 ≤m ≤M . p and q are the
quotient and remainder of 2n −2⌈log2M⌉divided by M.
The Jain’s fairness index of the hybrid federated framework
under a dynamic task allocation scheme is compared with that
under a ﬁxed active party scheme in Figure 4. It can be seen
that, as the number of active parties M increases, both fairness
curves drop proportionally to 1/M, but their coefﬁcients differ
by a factor of 2N/3M, indicating much higher fairness for all
Ms. More importantly, when M < 2n−1, the fairness of the
proposed scheme drops signiﬁcantly slower as M increases
(hardly affected when M ≤5).
Intuitively in non-ideal cases, the choice of active par-
ties cannot be pre-determined, hence there is no general
formula for fairness. However, when all the τ m
1 s and τ m
2 s
are sufﬁciently uniform, the node-splitting tasks can still be
quasi-uniformly allocated to each party, and that the resulting
fairness is still outstanding. In the most extreme cases when
τ m
1 s and τ m
2 s are statistically different to each other, fairness
will be somewhat compromised, as node-splitting tasks will be
inclined towards parties with more computational power, but
usually still much higher than that of the ﬁxed active party
scheme. We will investigate into this effect in Section V.
C. Efﬁciency
With the proposed task allocation scheme, the node-splitting
tasks are dynamically allocated to M parties, mathematically
identical to as if there were a centralized computing device
with M parallel pools. Parallel computing can therefore be
fully leveraged to accelerate training. In practical scenarios,
the number of parties M is often much larger than the number
of parallel pools in a single computer, so that computational
efﬁciency can be signiﬁcantly higher.
To illustrate, we still base our analysis on the ideal as-
sumption and conﬂict management scheme introduced in the
previous subsection. The total computational time TM can then
be deduced as
TM = τ10(2n−1)+τ20{⌈log2M⌉+⌈1
M (2n−2⌈log2M⌉)⌉} (7)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Number of Parallel Servers/Participants
100
200
Computational Time
Node Processing by Task Order
Node Processing by Node Order
Asymptotic Curve (~1/M)
Fig. 5. Computational time following task order (optimal) and breadth-ﬁrst
node order (non-optimal) in face of task conﬂicts. n = 5, τ10 = 2 and
τ20 = 7.
which decreases as the total number of parties M increases.
Figure 5 simulates the computational time required for
training, under n = 5, τ10 = 2 and τ20 = 7. Node processing
by task order in face of task conﬂicts is proven to be slightly
more efﬁcient than that by breadth-ﬁrst node order, which
justiﬁes our choice of the conﬂict management scheme. Also,
the computational time follows an asymptotic decay of 1/M
when n is sufﬁciently large:
TM/T∞→1 +
τ20
Mτ10
.
(8)
Hence, the marginal efﬁciency improvement is most sig-
niﬁcant when M is low. Recalling that the fairness among
parties also drops most slowly at the lower end of M, we can
conclude that the marginal beneﬁts of the proposed dynamic
allocation schemes are most outstanding for a small number
of participating parties.
Similar to fairness, it is unlikely to derive an analytical
expression for efﬁciency when the computation time is non-
ideal. However, the computational time is still expected to
be much higher than a ﬁxed active party scheme. In a non-
ideal situation where the computational time is statistically
different among parties (See Section V for case study), the
total computational time is approximately the time required for
the slowest party to ﬁnish gradient aggregation, as all the node-
splitting tasks will be dynamically allocated to faster parties.
V. CASE STUDY
In this section, we perform a comprehensive case study on
the problem setup. We implement the proposed XGBoost-
based hybrid federated learning framework to predict dis-
tributed real-time power consumption of 10 spatially-adjacent
districts, which span over a longitude of 0.1◦and latitude of
0.06◦. The training set spans over a time range of 2019.1.1 –
2020.1.20, and the test set spans over a time range of 2020.1.23
– 2020.3.21. All labels, namely the real-time power consump-
tion, are normalized before training. Also, the dynamic task
allocation scheme is implemented to improve fairness and
efﬁciency. The case study is implemented in C++ (MinGW32-
GCC 4.8.2) for constructing a modiﬁed version of XGBoost,
and Python 3.8 for fairness and efﬁciency evaluation.
To demonstrate the superiority of XGBoost as a bottom-
level machine learning algorithm, in Table 2 we compare
the prediction accuracy of different learning algorithms after
parameter tuning, in terms of the MSE. It can be seen that

8
0
20
40
60
80
100
Training Epoch
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Mean Squared Error
Case 1 (Horizontally Federated)
Case 2 (Vertically Federated)
Case 3 (Hybrid but Unencrypted)
Case 4 (Hybrid and Encrypted)
Fig. 6. Prediction MSE on the test set, for the 4 cases of federated learning.
although the last three algorithms achieve a low prediction
error on the training set, artiﬁcial neural network is prone to
overﬁtting and sometimes even fails to converge. On the other
hand, tree-based networks such as random forest and XGBoost
generalize better to the test set, and XGBoost is proven to be
the most outstanding. It should be noted that time-serie power
forecasting based on historic consumption records reaches a
test set MSE of 0.1788, indicating our prediction method based
on real-time external features is sufﬁciently accurate.
TABLE II
MEAN SQUARED ERROR (MSE) OF BOTTOM-LEVEL MACHINE LEARNING
ALGORITHMS ON PREDICTING POWER CONSUMPTION.
Algorithm
Training Set MSE
Test Set MSE
Dummy Regressor
0.8751
0.9449
Artiﬁcial Neural Network
0.1491
0.2954
Random Forest
0.0874
0.1072
XGBoost
0.0528
0.0948
XGBoost is then integrated into the hybrid federated learn-
ing framework as outlined in Section III. To demonstrate its
performance in prediction, we construct 4 different federated
learning settings for comparison.
Case 1: Only horizontal federated learning is adopted. All
transformer stations collaboratively train an XGBoost model
without participation from China Mobile.
Case 2: Only vertical federated learning is adopted. A
transformer station only collaborates with the mobile station
in the same district to train an XGBoost model. (The test set
is also restricted to data from this particular district.)
Case 3: Hybrid federated learning but without encryption.
Case 4: Hybrid federated learning with Paillier-based ho-
momorphic encryption.
Figure 6 compares their prediction MSE on the test set
during each training epoch. It is evident that the prediction
accuracy of Case 1 is signiﬁcantly degraded due to the absence
of China Mobile. Cases 2, 3 and 4 reach a similarly MSE of
0.091 ± 0.007 after training, with almost overlapping training
curves, which suggests that (a) there is little accuracy loss
in prediction (and even accuracy gain in some districts) after
horizontally incorporating the data of other districts; (b) the
integrated Paillier encryption scheme is lossless.
Furthermore, we observe that models trained by hybrid
federated learning in fact have a higher generalization ability
on all districts under study. Figure 7 plots an adjusted heatmap
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Training District Index
0.04 0.06 0.22 0.07 0.14 0.11 0.06 0.06 0.07
0.06
0.11 0.36 0.07 0.15 0.20 0.11 0.07 0.13
0.02 0.04
0.21 0.04 0.08 0.06 0.04 0.06 0.06
0.04 0.08 0.03
0.08 0.04 0.04 0.05 0.09 0.04
0.03 0.03 0.09 0.27
0.18 0.12 0.10 0.16 0.11
0.04 0.03 0.04 0.16 0.06
0.04 0.07 0.08 0.04
0.03 0.08 0.08 0.19 0.13 0.12
0.06 0.05 0.08
0.10 0.04 0.18 0.44 0.09 0.41 0.18
0.11 0.20
0.24 0.14 0.31 0.58 0.25 0.49 0.37 0.30
0.33
0.26 0.26 0.25 1.02 0.38 0.37 0.50 0.56 0.19
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.05
0.05
0.06
0.10
0.17
0.25
0.57
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Test District Index
 
Hybrid
0.01 0.03 0.03 0.08 0.07 0.08 0.08 0.07 0.17 0.19
Fig. 7.
Up: Prediction MSE with models vertically trained and tested
respectively on each single district. Green blocks indicate scenarios where the
vertically-trained model predicts worse than one trained on data of the test
district (i.e., the diagonal blocks of the same column). Blue blocks indicate
otherwise. Down: Prediction MSE of the hybrid learning model tested on
each district.
of the MSE error vertically trained and tested respectively on
each of the 10 single districts, as well as a heatmap of the
prediction MSE of the hybrid learning model on each district.
Blocks with a green colormap indicate scenarios where the
as-trained model predicts worse on the test district than a
model trained exactly on the training data of the same district
(i.e., the diagonal blocks of the same column), and blocks
with a blue colormap indicate otherwise. It can be seen that
the vertically-trained single-district models mostly generalize
poorly to other districts. The only exceptions are Districts 8-
10 where the models of other districts may seem to generalize
surprisingly well. However, this specious intuition can be
debunked by the fact that these districts have much higher
diagonal MSEs (a maximum of 0.57) compared to others,
indicating that their training datasets are unrepresentative even
of their districts, leading to inappropriate MSE baselines for
comparison. Regardless, hybrid federated learning manages to
predict accurately on each of the 10 districts with an enriched
training dataset, with a maximum MSE of only 0.19.
We also validate the real-time power prediction results by
visualizing the power curves on the test set of Districts 1
and 10 (Figure 8), which according to the heatmaps have
the lowest and highest prediction error. In District 1, vertical
and hybrid federated learning frameworks predict equally
well on the test set, with the predicted power curves almost
overlapping with the actual one. Horizontal federated learning
fails to reach a comparable performance due to the absence
of features from China Mobile. Interestingly in District 10,

9
01-23
01-24
01-25
01-26
01-27
01-28
01-29
5
10
15
20
25
Load / MW
District 1
01-23
01-24
01-25
01-26
01-27
01-28
01-29
Date
5
10
15
20
Load / MW
District 10
Actual Power Consumption
Power Prediction (Vertical)
Power Prediction (Horizontal)
Power Prediction (Hybrid)
Fig. 8. Actual power curve over a range of 6 days on Districts 1 (Up) and 10
(Down), as well as the corresponding predicted power curves with vertical,
horizontal and hybrid federated learning.
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00
Computational Time (s)
Density
  Gradient 
Aggregation
Node Splitting
Fig. 9.
Kernel density of the distribution of computational time in the 10
districts, for the gradient aggregation step (Blue) as well as the node-splitting
step (Red) on each node of XGBoost.
the actual power curve experiences a steady downturn after
January 25, attributable to the week-long Lunar New Year’s
festival in China and the outbreak of Covid-19. All three
federated learning frameworks fail to predict accurately in
this particular scenario, but hybrid federated learning, possibly
due to incorporation of the most datasets from other districts,
generates a predicted curve closest to the actual curve.
Finally, we simulate and evaluate the efﬁciency and fairness
of the hybrid federated learning framework with the dynamic
task allocation scheme. Different from the ideal assumption
made in Section IV, the computation time is now statistically
different among different districts (See Figure 9), with a
maximum p-value of 0.0067 for gradient aggregation and
8 × 10−163 for node-splitting in two-sided T-tests.
Figure 10 plots the computational load allocated among the
10 districts during the ﬁrst epoch of training. With the dynamic
task allocation scheme, the training now requires only 9,017
seconds to complete, and may otherwise require an additional
7,220 seconds if we adopted a ﬁxed active party allocation
scheme instead. A closer investigation suggests that with the
dynamic task allocation scheme, the node-splitting tasks are
now more inclined towards districts with higher computational
power; in fact, Districts 9 and 10 shoulder no node-splitting
tasks due to their computational slowness. This further boosts
computational efﬁciency, as the total gradient aggregation time
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
9000
Computational Time (s)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
District Index
Gradient Aggregation
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
9000
Computational Time (s)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
District Index
Node Splitting
Fig. 10. Allocation of computational load during the ﬁrst epoch of training,
in terms of gradient aggregation (Up) and node-splitting (Down), with the
dynamic task allocation scheme. Colors indicate indices of the XGBoost nodes
currently under calculation. Lighter colors indicate larger node indices. Black
blocks indicate idle time.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
District Index
0
5
10
15
Number of Nodes as Active Party
Fig. 11. Average number of nodes that each district is assigned as the active
party in the hybrid federated learning process. Error bars indicate standard
deviation across epochs.
is now identical to the least time required, namely the time for
the slowest party to ﬁnish its own aggregation.
In terms of fairness, Figure 11 plots the average number
of nodes across epochs that each district is assigned as the
active party. It is evident that the probability of active party
assignment decreases as the computational power decreases,
in exchange for higher computational efﬁciency. The resulting
fairness index J therefore lies in the range of [0.609,0.739],
which is somewhat smaller than the ideal situation of 0.947 but
much larger than the ﬁxed active party scheme with a fairness
of 0.1. This suggests that there is a trade-off between fairness
and efﬁciency in the dynamic task allocation scheme.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose a hybrid federated learning frame-
work that combines both horizontal and vertical federated
learning based on XGBoost, for distributed power prediction

10
of a city in southern China. With the hybrid framework,
homogeneous and heterogeneous parties can collaboratively
train an XGBoost model without leaking private information.
In addition, a dynamic task allocation scheme is proposed
to improve training performance. The follow-up case study
justiﬁes the practicability of the proposed framework, and its in
providing a secure, fair and computationally efﬁcient solution
for the power prediction problem.
The hybrid federated learning framework with the dynamic
task allocation scheme have deep implications in the power
system. It addresses the distributed nature of smart grid data
in both the horizontal and vertical dimension, and guides
all parties to contribute to the pattern mining of power
generation/consumption data in a coordinated manner. This
allows for timely and effective decision-making after the
power prediction process. Other potential improvements to this
framework include the consideration of communication delays
to address system heterogeneity, as well as the adoption of
multi-task learning to address statistical heterogeneity.
