STRIPS Planning in Inﬁnite Domains
Caelan Reed Garrett, Tom´as Lozano-P´erez, and Leslie Pack Kaelbling
MIT CSAIL
32 Vassar Street
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA

Abstract
Many robotic planning applications involve continu-
ous actions with highly non-linear constraints, which
cannot be modeled using modern planners that con-
struct a propositional representation. We introduce
STRIPStream: an extension of the STRIPS language
which can model these domains by supporting the spec-
iﬁcation of blackbox generators to handle complex con-
straints. The outputs of these generators interact with
actions through possibly inﬁnite streams of objects and
static predicates. We provide two algorithms which both
reduce STRIPStream problems to a sequence of ﬁnite-
domain planning problems. The representation and al-
gorithms are entirely domain independent. We demon-
strate our framework on simple illustrative domains,
and then on a high-dimensional, continuous robotic task
and motion planning domain.
Introduction
Many important planning domains naturally occur in contin-
uous spaces involving complex constraints among variables.
Consider planning for a robot tasked with organizing several
blocks in a room. The robot must ﬁnd a sequence of pick,
place, and move actions involving continuous robot conﬁg-
urations, robot trajectories, block poses, and block grasps.
These variables must satisfy highly non-linear kinematic,
collision, and motion constraints which affect the feasibil-
ity of the actions. Each constraint typically requires a spe-
cial purpose procedure to efﬁciently evaluate it or produce
satisfying values for it such as an inverse kinematic solver,
collision checker, or motion planner.
We propose an approach, called STRIPStream, which can
model such a domain by providing a generic interface for
blackbox procedures to be incorporated in an action lan-
guage. The implementation of the procedures is abstracted
away using streams: ﬁnite or inﬁnite sequences of objects
such as poses, conﬁgurations, and trajectories. We introduce
the following two additional stream capabilities to effec-
tively model domains with complex predicates that are only
true for small sets of their argument values:
• conditional streams: a stream of objects may be deﬁned
as a function of other objects; for example, a stream of
possible positions of one object given the position of an-
other object that it must be on top of or a stream of pos-
sible settings of parameters of a factory machine given
desired properties of its output.
• certiﬁed streams: streams of objects may be declared not
only to be of a speciﬁc type, but also to satisfy an arbitrary
conjunction of predicates; for example, one might deﬁne
a certiﬁed conditional stream that generates positions for
an object that satisfy requirements that the object be on
a surface, that a robot be able to reach the object at that
position, and that the robot be able to see the object while
reaching.
Figure 1: Problem 2-16.
Through streams, STRIPStream can compactly model a
large class of continuous, countably inﬁnite, and large ﬁ-
nite domains. By conditioning on partial argument values
and using sampling, it can even effectively model domains
where the set of valid action argument values is lower di-
mensional than the possible argument space. For example,
in our robotics domain, the set of inverse kinematics solu-
tions for a particular pose and grasp is much lower dimen-
sional than the full set of robot conﬁgurations. However, us-
ing a conditional stream, we can specify an inverse kinemat-
ics solver which directly samples from this set given a pose
and grasp.
The approach is entirely domain-independent, and re-
duces to STRIPS in the case of ﬁnite domains. The only ad-
ditional requirement is the speciﬁcation of a set of streams
that can generate objects satisfying the static predicates in
the domain. It is accompanied by two algorithms, a simple
and a focused version, which operate by constructing and
solving a sequence of STRIPS planning problems. This strat-
arXiv:1701.00287v2  [cs.AI]  28 May 2017

egy takes advantage of the highly optimized search strate-
gies and heuristics that exist for STRIPS planning, while ex-
panding the domain of applicability of those techniques. Ad-
ditionally, the focused version can efﬁciently solve problems
where using streams is computationally expensive by care-
fully choosing to only call potentially useful streams.
Related work
There are a number of existing general-purpose approaches
to solving planning problems in inﬁnite domains, each of
which has some signiﬁcant limitation when modeling our
robot domain.
Temporal planning, such as deﬁned in PDDL2.1 (Fox and
Long 2003), is often formulated in terms of linear con-
straints on plan variables and is typically solved using tech-
niques based on linear programming (Hoffmann and others
2003; Coles et al. 2013). PDDL+ (Fox and Long 2006) ex-
tends PDDL2.1 by introducing exogenous events and contin-
uous processes. Although PDDL+ supports continuous vari-
ables, the values of continuous variables are functions of the
sequence of discrete actions performed at particular times.
Thus, time is the only truly non-dependent continuous vari-
able. In contrast, our motivating robot domain has no no-
tion of time but instead a continuously inﬁnite branching
factor. Many planners solve PDDL+ problems with non-
linear process models by discretizing time (Della Penna
et al. 2009; Piotrowski et al. 2016). Some recent planners
can solve PDDL+ problems with polynomial process mod-
els exactly without time discretization (Bryce et al. 2015;
Cashmore et al. 2016). However, even in simpliﬁed robotics
domains that PDDL+ can model, modern PDDL+ planners
are ineffective at planning with collision and kinematic con-
straints (both highly non-polynomial constraints), particu-
larly in high-dimensional systems.
General-purpose lifted and ﬁrst-order approaches, such as
those based on ﬁrst-order situation calculus or Prolog, pro-
vide semi-decision procedures for a large class of lifted plan-
ning problems. However, the generality tends to come at a
huge price in efﬁciency and these planning strategies are
rarely practical.
The Answer Set Programming (ASP) literature contains
analysis on reasoning in inﬁnite domains through ﬁnitary,
ω-restricted, ﬁnitely ground, and ﬁnite domain ASPs (Bon-
atti et al. 2010). The DLV-Complex system (Calimeri et al.
2009) is able to solve feasible ﬁnitely ground programs by
extending the DataLog with Disjunction (DLV) system to
support functions, lists, and set terms. We believe that the
language of ASP allows speciﬁcation of conditional and cer-
tiﬁed streams. However, the ground ASP solver still has to
address a much more general and difﬁcult problem and will
not have the appropriate heuristic strategies that make cur-
rent domain-independent STRIPS planners so effective.
Semantic attachments (Dornhege et al. 2009), predicates
computed by an external program, also provide a way of in-
tegrating blackbox procedures and PDDL planners. Because
semantic attachments take a state as input, they can only be
used in forward state-space search. Furthermore, semantic
attachments are ignored in heuristics. This results in poor
planner performance, particularly when the attachments are
expensive to evaluate such as in robotics domains. Finally,
because semantic attachments are restricted to be functions,
they are unable to model domains with inﬁnitely many pos-
sible successor states.
Many approaches to robotics planning problems, includ-
ing motion planning and task-and-motion planning, have de-
veloped strategies for handling continuous spaces that go be-
yond a priori discretization. Several approaches, for exam-
ple (Kaelbling and Lozano-P´erez 2011; Erdem et al. 2011;
Srivastava et al. 2014; Garrett et al. 2015; Dantam et al.
2016; Garrett et al. 2016), have been suggested for inte-
grating these sampling-based robot motion planning meth-
ods with symbolic planning methods. Of these approaches,
those able to plan in realistic robot domains have typically
been quite special purpose; the more general purpose ap-
proaches have typically been less capable.
Representation
In this section we describe the representational components
of a planning domain and problem, which include static and
ﬂuent predicates, operators, and streams. Objects serve as
arguments to predicates and as parameters to operators; they
are generated by streams.
A static predicate is a predicate which, for any tuple of
objects, has a constant truth value throughout a problem in-
stance. Static predicates generally serve to represent con-
straints on the parameters of an operator. We restrict static
predicates to only ever be mentioned positively because, in
the general inﬁnite case, it is not possible to verify that a
predicate does not hold.
An operator schema is speciﬁed by a tuple of formal
parameters (X1, . . . , Xn) and conjunctions of static posi-
tive preconditions stat, ﬂuent literal preconditions pre, and
ﬂuent literal effects eff and has the same semantics as in
STRIPS. An operator instance is a ground instantiation of an
operator schema with objects substituted in for the formal
parameters. When necessary, we augment the set of opera-
tor schemas with a set of axioms that naively use the same
schema form as operators. We assume the set of axioms can
be compiled into a set of derived predicates as used in PDDL.
A generator g = ⟨¯o1, ¯o2, ...⟩is a ﬁnite or inﬁnite sequence
of object tuples ¯o = (o1, ..., on). The procedure NEXT(g) re-
turns the next element in generator g and returns the special
object None to indicate that the stream has been exhausted
and contains no more objects. A conditional generator f(¯x)
is a function from ¯x = x1, ..., xn to a generator g¯x which
generates tuples from a domain not necessarily the same as
the domain of ¯x.
An stream schema, σ( ¯Y | ¯X), is speciﬁed by a tuple of in-
put parameters ¯X = (X1, ..., Xm), a tuple of output param-
eters ¯Y = (Y1, ..., Yn), a conditional generator gen = f( ¯X)
deﬁned on ¯X, a conjunction of input static atoms inp deﬁned
on ¯X, and a conjunction of output static atoms out deﬁned
on ¯X and ¯Y . The conditional generator f is a function, im-
plemented in the host programming language, that returns a
generator such that, for all ¯x satisfying the conditions inp,
∀¯y ∈f(¯x), (¯x, ¯y) satisfy the conditions out. A stream in-
stance is a ground instantiation of a stream schema with ob-
jects substituted in for input parameters (X1, . . . , Xn); it is

conditioned on those object values and, if the inp conditions
are satisﬁed, then it will generate a stream of tuples of ob-
jects each of which satisﬁes the certiﬁcation conditions out.
The notion of a conditional stream is quite general; there
are two speciﬁc cases that are worth understanding in detail.
An unconditional stream σ( ¯Y | ()) is a stream with no in-
puts whose associated function f returns a single generator,
which might be used to generate objects of a given type, for
example, independent of whatever other objects are speci-
ﬁed in a domain. A test stream σ(() | ¯X) is a degenerate,
but still useful, type of stream with no outputs. In this case,
f(X1, ..., Xm) contains either the single element (), indi-
cating that the inp conditions hold of ¯X, or contains no el-
ements at all, indicating that the inp conditions do not hold
of ¯X. It can be interpreted as an implicit Boolean test.
A planning domain D = (Ps, Pf, C0, A, X, Σ) is spec-
iﬁed by ﬁnite sets of static predicates Ps, ﬂuent predicates
Pf, initial constant objects C0, operator schemas A, axiom
schemas X, and stream schemas Σ. Note that the initial ob-
jects (as well as objects generated by the streams) may in
general not be simple symbols, but can be numeric values
or even structures such as matrices or objects in an underly-
ing programming language. They must provide a unique ID,
such as a hash value, for use in the STRIPS planning phase.
A STRIPStream problem Π = (D, O0, s0, s∗) is speciﬁed
by a planning domain D, a ﬁnite set of initial objects O0, an
initial state composed of a ﬁnite set of static or ﬂuent atoms
s0, and a goal set deﬁned to be the set of states satisfying
ﬂuent literals s∗. We make a version of the closed world as-
sumption on the initial state s0, assuming that all true ﬂuents
are contained in it. This initial state will not be complete: in
general, it will be impossible to assert all true static atoms
when the universe is inﬁnite.
Let OΠ and SΠ be the universe of all objects and the set
of true initial atoms that can be generated from a ﬁnite set Σ
of stream schemas, a ﬁnite set C0 ∪O0 of initial objects, and
initial state s0. We give all proofs in the the appendix.
Theorem 1. OΠ and SΠ are recursively enumerable (RE).
A solution to a STRIPStream problem Π is a ﬁnite se-
quence of operator instances π∗with object parameters con-
tained within OΠ that is applicable from SΠ and results in a
state that satisﬁes s∗. STRIPStream is undecidable but semi-
decidable, so we restrict our attention to feasible instances.
Theorem 2. The existence of a solution for a STRIPStream
problem Π is undecidable.
Theorem 3. The existence of a solution for a STRIPStream
problem Π is semi-decidable.
Planning algorithms
We present two algorithms for solving STRIPStream prob-
lems: the incremental planner takes advantage of certiﬁed
conditional streams in the problem speciﬁcation to gener-
ate the necessary objects for solving the problem; the fo-
cused planner adds the ability to focus the object-generation
process based on the requirements of the plan being con-
structed. Both algorithms are sound and complete: if a solu-
tion exists they will ﬁnd it in ﬁnite time.
Both planners operate iteratively, alternating between
adding elements and atoms to a current set of objects and
initial atoms and constructing and solving STRIPS planning
problem instances. A STRIPS problem (P, A, O, sinit, s∗) is
speciﬁed by a set of predicates, a set of operator schemas, a
set of constant symbols, an initial set of atoms, and a set of
goal literals. Let S-PLAN(P, A, O, sinit, s∗) be any sound
and complete planner for the STRIPS subset of PDDL. We
implement S-PLAN using FastDownward (Helmert 2006).
Incremental planner
The incremental planner maintains a queue of stream in-
stances Q and incrementally constructs set O of objects and
set S of ﬂuents and static atoms that are true in the initial
state. The done set D contains all streams that have been
constructed and exhausted. In each iteration of the main
loop, a STRIPS planning instance is constructed from the
current sets O and S, with the same predicates, operator
and axiom schemas, and goal. If a plan is obtained, it is re-
turned. If not, then K ≥1 attempts to add new objects are
made where K is a meta-parameter. In each one, a stream
σ( ¯Y | ¯x) is popped from Q and a new tuple of objects ¯y is
extracted from it. If the stream is exhausted, it is stored in
D. Otherwise, the objects in ¯y are added to O, the output
ﬂuents from σ applied to (¯x, ¯y) are added to S, and a new
set of streams Σn is constructed. For all stream schemas σ
and possible tuples of the appropriate size ¯x′, if the input
conditions σ′.inp(¯x′) are in S, then the instantiated stream
σ′( ¯Y ′ | ¯x′) is added to Q if it has not been added previously.
We also return the stream σ( ¯Y | ¯x) to Q so we may revisit
it in the future. The pseudo-code is shown below.
INCREMENTAL(((Ps, Pf, C0, A, X, Σ), O0, s0, s∗), S-PLAN, K) :
O = C0 ∪O0; S = s0; D = ∅
Q = QUEUE({σ( ¯Y | ¯x) | σ( ¯Y | ¯
X) ∈Σ,
¯x ∈O| ¯
X|, σ.inp(¯x) ⊆S})
while True:
π∗= S-PLAN(Ps ∪Pf, A ∪X, O, S, s∗)
if π∗̸= None:
return π∗
if EMPTY(Q):
return None
for k ∈{1, ..., MIN(K, LEN(Q))}:
σ( ¯Y | ¯x) = POP(Q)
¯y = NEXT(σ.f(¯x))
if ¯y = None:
D = D ∪{σ( ¯Y | ¯x)}
continue
O = O ∪¯y; S = S ∪σ.out((¯x, ¯y))
for σ′( ¯Y ′ | ¯
X′) ∈Σ:
for ¯x′ ∈O| ¯
X′|:
if σ′.inp(¯x′) ⊆S, σ′( ¯Y ′ | ¯x′) /∈(Q ∪D):
PUSH(Q, σ′( ¯Y ′ | ¯x′))
PUSH(Q, σ( ¯Y | ¯x))
In practice, many S-PLAN calls report infeasibility imme-
diately because they have inﬁnite admissible heuristic val-
ues. We prove the incremental algorithm is complete in the
appendix.
Theorem 4. The incremental algorithm is complete.

Focused planner
The focused planner is particularly aimed at domains for
which it is expensive to draw an object from a stream; this
occurs when the stream elements are certiﬁed to satisfy ge-
ometric properties such as being collision-free or having ap-
propriate inverse kinematics relationships, for example. To
focus the generation of objects on the most relevant parts of
the space, we allow the planner to use “dummy” abstract ob-
jects as long as it plans to generate concrete values for them.
These concrete values will be generated in the next iteration
and will, hopefully, contribute to ﬁnding a solution with all
ground objects.
As before, we transform the STRIPStream problem into a
sequence of PDDL problems, but this time we augment the
planning domain with abstract objects, two new ﬂuents, and
a new set of operator schemas. Let {γ1, ..., γθ} be a set of
abstract objects which are not assumed to satisfy any static
predicates in the initial state. We introduce the ﬂuent predi-
cate Concrete, which is initially false for any object γi but
true for all actual ground objects; so for all o ∈O, we add
Concrete(o) to sinit. The planner can “cause” an abstract
object γi to satisfy Concrete(γi) by generating it using a
special stream operator, as described below. We deﬁne pro-
cedure TFORM-OPS that transforms each operator scheme
a(x1, ..., xn) ∈A by adding preconditions Concrete(xi)
for i = 1, ..., n to ensure that the parameters for a are
grounded before its application during the search.
To manage the balance in which streams are called,
for each stream schema σ, we introduce a new predicate
Blockedσ; when applied to arguments (X1, . . . , Xn), it
will temporarily prevent the use of stream σ(Y1, ...Ym |
X1, ..., Xn). Additionally, we add any new objects and static
atoms ﬁrst to sets Ot and St temporarily before adding them
to O and S to ensure any necessary existing streams are
called. Alternatively, we can immediately add directly to O
and S a ﬁnite number of times before ﬁrst adding to Ot
and St and still preserve completeness. Let the procedure
TFORM-STREAMS convert each stream schema into an op-
erator schema σ of the following form.
STREAMOPERATORσ(X1, ..., Xm, Y1, ..., Yn):
pre = σ.inp ∪{Concrete(Xi) | i = 1, ..., m} ∪
{¬Blocked σ(X1, ..., Xm)}
eff = σ.out ∪{Concrete(Yi) | i = 1, ..., n}
It allows S-PLAN to explicitly plan to generate a tuple of con-
crete objects from stream σ(Y1, ...Ym | x1, ..., xn) as long
as the xi have been made concrete and the stream instance
is not blocked.
The procedure FOCUSED, shown below, implements the
focused approach to planning. It takes the same inputs as the
incremental version, but with the maximum number of ab-
stract objects θ ≥1 speciﬁed as a meta-parameter, rather
than K. It also maintains a set O of concrete objects and
a set S of ﬂuent and static atoms true in the initial state.
In each iteration of the main loop, a STRIPS planning in-
stance is constructed: the initial state is augmented with the
set of static atoms indicating which streams are blocked and
ﬂuents asserting that the objects in O are concrete; the set
of operator schemas is transformed as described above and
augmented with the stream operator schemas, and the set of
objects is augmented with the abstract objects. If a plan is
obtained and it contains only operator instances, then it will
have only concrete objects, and it can be returned directly.
If the plan contains abstract objects, it also contains stream
operators, and ADD-OBJECTS is called to generate an appro-
priate set of new objects. If no plan is obtained, and if no
streams are currently blocked as well as no new objects or
initial atoms have been produced since the last reset, then the
problem is proved to be infeasible. Otherwise, the problem
is reset by unblocking all streams and adding Ot and St to
O and S, in order to allow a new plan with abstract objects
to be generated.
FOCUSED(((Ps, Pf, C0, A, X, Σ), O0, s0, s∗), S-PLAN, θ) :
O = C0 ∪O0; S = s0; Ot = St = βt = βp = ∅
¯
A = TFORM-OPS(A); ¯Σ = TFORM-STREAMS(Σ)
while True:
π = S-PLAN(Ps ∪Pf, ¯
A ∪X ∪¯Σ, O ∪{γ1, ..., γθ},
S ∪βt ∪βp ∪{Concrete(o ∈O)}, s∗)
if π ̸= None:
if ∀a ∈π, SCHEMA(a) ∈¯
A:
return π
ADD-OBJECTS(π, Ot, St, βt, βp, ¯Σ)
else
if Ot = St = βt = ∅:
return None // Infeasible
O = O ∪Ot; S = S ∪St
Ot = St = βt = ∅// Enable all objects & streams
Given a plan π that contains abstract objects, we pro-
cess it from beginning to end, to generate a collection of
new objects with appropriate conditional relationships. Pro-
cedure ADD-OBJECTS initializes an empty binding environ-
ment and then loops through the instances a of stream op-
erators in π. For each stream operator instance, we substi-
tute concrete objects in for abstract objects, in the input
parameters, dictated by the bindings bd, and then draw a
new tuple of objects from that conditional stream. If there
is no such tuple of objects, the stream is exhausted and it is
permanently removed from future consideration by adding
the ﬂuent Blockedσ(¯ox) to the set βp. Otherwise, the new
objects are added to Ot and appropriate new static atoms
to St. This stream is temporarily blocked by adding ﬂuent
Blockedσ(¯ox) to the set βt, and the bindings for abstract ob-
jects are recorded.
ADD-OBJECTS(π, Ot, St, βt, βp, ¯Σ) :
bd = { } // Empty dictionary
for σ(¯y | ¯x) ∈{a | a ∈π and SCHEMA(a) ∈¯Σ}:
¯ox = APPLY-BINDINGS(bd, ¯x)
if ¯ox ̸= None:
¯oy = NEXT(σ.f(¯ox))
if ¯oy ̸= None:
Ot = Ot ∪¯oy; St = St ∪σ.out((¯ox, ¯oy))
βt = βt ∪{Blocked σ(¯ox)} // Temporary
for i ∈{1, ..., |¯y|}:
bd[yi] = oy,i
else
βp = βp ∪{Blocked σ(¯ox)} // Permanent
return Ot, St, βt, βp
The focused algorithm is similar to the lazy shortest path

algorithm for motion planning in that it determines which
streams to call, or analogously which edges to evaluate, by
repeatedly solving optimistic problems (Bohlin and Kavraki
2000; Dellin and Srinivasa 2016). Stream operators can be
given meta-costs that reﬂect the time overhead to draw el-
ements from the stream and the likelihood the stream pro-
duces the desired values. For example, stream operators that
use already concrete outputs can be given large meta-costs
because they will only certify a desired predicate in the
typically unlikely event that their generator returns objects
matching the desired outputs. A cost-sensitive planner will
avoid returning plans that require drawing elements from ex-
pensive or unnecessary streams. We can combine the behav-
iors of incremental and focused algorithms to eagerly call
inexpensive streams and lazily call expensive streams. This
can be seen as automatically applying some stream operators
before calling S-PLAN.
Theorem 5. The focused algorithm is complete.
Example discrete domain
Although the speciﬁcation language is domain indepen-
dent, our primary motivating examples for the application
of STRIPStream are pick-and-place problems in inﬁnite do-
mains. We start by specifying an inﬁnite discrete pick-and-
place domain as shown in ﬁgure 2. We purposefully de-
scribe the domain in a way that will generalize well to
continuous and high-dimensional versions of fundamentally
the same problem. The objects in this domain include a ﬁ-
nite set of blocks (that can be picked up and placed), an
inﬁnite set of poses (locations in the world) indexed by
the positive integers, and an inﬁnite set of robot conﬁgu-
rations (settings of the robot’s physical degrees of freedom)
also indexed by the positive integers. In this appendix, we
give a complete Python implementation of this domain in
STRIPStream The static predicates in this domain include
simple static types (IsConf , IsPose, IsBlock) and typical
ﬂuents (HandEmpty, Holding, AtPose, AtConﬁg). In ad-
dition, atoms of the form IsKin(P, Q) describe a static re-
lationship between an object pose P and a robot conﬁgura-
tion Q: in this simple domain, the atom is true if and only if
P = Q. Finally, ﬂuents of the form Safe(b′, B, P) are true
in the circumstance that: if object B were placed at pose P, it
would not collide with object b′ at its current pose. Because
the set of blocks B is known statically in advance, we ex-
plicitly include all the Safe conditions. These predicate def-
initions enable the following operator schemas deﬁnitions:
MOVE(Q1, Q2):
stat = {IsConf (Q1), IsConf (Q2)}
pre = {AtConf (Q1)}
eff = {AtConf (Q2), ¬AtConf (Q1)}
PICK(B, P, Q):
stat = {IsBlock(B), IsPose(P), IsConf (Q), IsKin(P, Q)}
pre = {AtPose(B, P), HandEmpty(), AtConﬁg(Q)}
eff = {Holding(B), ¬AtPose(B, P), ¬HandEmpty()}
PLACE(B, P, Q):
stat = {IsBlock(B), IsPose(P), IsConf (Q), IsKin(P, Q)}
pre = {Holding(B), AtConﬁg(Q)} ∪{Safe(b′ ∈B, B, P)}
eff = {AtPose(B, P), HandEmpty(), ¬Holding(B)}
We use the following axioms to evaluate the Safe predi-
cate. We need two slightly different deﬁnitions to handle the
cases where the block B1 is placed at a pose, and where it
is in the robot’s hand. The Safe axioms mention each block
independently which allows us to compactly perform colli-
sion checking. Without using axioms, PLACE would require
a parameter for the pose of each block in B, resulting in an
prohibitively large grounded problem.
SAFEAXIOM(B1, P1, B2, P2):
stat = {IsBlock(B1), IsPose(P1), IsBlock(B2),
IsPose(P2), IsCollisionFree(B1, P1, B2, P2)}
pre = {AtPose(B1, P1)}
eff ={Safe(B1, B2, P2)}
SAFEAXIOMH(B1, B2, P2):
stat = {IsBlock(B1), IsBlock(B2), IsPose(P2)}
pre = {Holding(B1)}
eff ={Safe(B1, B2, P2)}
Discrete stream speciﬁcation
Next, we provide stream
deﬁnitions. The simplest stream is an unconditional genera-
tor of poses, which are represented as objects POSE(i) and
satisfy the static predicate IsPose.
POSE-U(P | ()):
gen = lambda() : ⟨(POSE(i)) for i = 0, 1, 2...⟩
inp = ∅
out = {IsPose(P)}
The conditional stream CFREE-T is a test, calling the un-
derlying function COLLIDE(B1, P1, B2, P2); the stream is
empty if block B1 at pose P1 collides with block B2 at pose
P2, and contains the single element ( ) if it does not collide.
It is used to certify that the tuple (B1, P1, B2, P2) statically
satisﬁes the IsCollisionFree predicate.
CFREE-T(() | B1, P1, B2, P2):
gen = lambda(B1, P1, B2, P2) :
⟨() if not COLLIDE(B1, P1, B2, P2)⟩
inp = {IsBlock(B1), IsPose(P1), IsBlock(B2), IsPose(P2)}
out = {IsCollisionFree(B1, P1, B2, P2)}
When we have a static relation on more than one variable,
such as IsKin, we have to make modeling choices when
deﬁning streams that certify it.
We will consider three formulations of streams that cer-
tify IsKin and compare them in terms of their effective-
ness in a simple countable pick-and-place problem requir-
ing the robot gripper to pick block A at a distant initial pose
p0 >> 1, shown in ﬁgure 2.
KIN-U speciﬁes an unconditional stream on block poses
and robot conﬁgurations; it has no difﬁculty certifying the
IsKin relation between the two output variables, but it has
no good way of producing conﬁgurations that are appropri-
ate for poses that are mentioned in the initial state or goal.

KIN-U(P, Q | ()):
gen = lambda() : ⟨(POSE(i), CONF(i)) for i = 1, 2, ...⟩
inp = ∅
out = {IsPose(P), IsConf (Q), IsKin(P, Q)}
KIN-T speciﬁes a test stream that can be used, together
with the POSE-U stream and an analogous stream for
generic conﬁgurations to produce certiﬁed kinematic pairs
P, Q. This is an encoding of a “generate-and-test” strategy,
which may be highly inefﬁcient, relying on luck that the
pose generator and the conﬁguration generator will indepen-
dently produce values that have the appropriate relationship.
KIN-T(() | P, Q):
gen = lambda(P, Q) : ⟨() if Q = INVERSE-KIN(P)⟩
inp = {IsPose(P), IsConf (Q)}
out = {IsKin(P, Q)}
Finally, KIN-C speciﬁes a conditional stream, which
takes a pose P as input and generates a stream of conﬁgura-
tions (in this very simple case, containing a single element)
certiﬁed to satisfy the IsKin relation. It relies on an under-
lying function INVERSE-KIN(p) to produce an appropriate
robot conﬁguration given a block pose.
KIN-C(Q | P):
gen = lambda(P) : ⟨(INVERSE-KIN(P))⟩
inp = {IsPose(P)}
out = {IsConf (Q), IsIK(P, Q)}
In our example domain, both KIN-U and KIN-T require
the enumeration of poses and conﬁgurations (pi, qi) from
i = 0, 1, ..., p0 before certifying IsIK(p∗, q∗), allowing
STRIPS to make a plan include the operator PICK(A, p∗, q∗).
Moreover, KIN-T will test all pairs of conﬁgurations and
poses. In contrast, KIN-C can produce q directly from p0
without enumerating any other poses or conﬁgurations. The
conditional formulation is advantageous because it produces
a paired inverse kinematics conﬁguration quickly and with-
out substantially expanding the size of the problem.
Table 1 validates this intuition though an experiment com-
paring these stream speciﬁcations. The initial pose of the
object p0 is chosen from 1, 100, 1000. All trials have a time-
out of 120 seconds and use the incremental algorithm with
K = 1 implemented in Python. As predicted, the KIN-U
and KIN-T streams require many more calls than KIN-C as
p0 increases and lead to substantially longer runtimes for a
very simple problem.
A
P(0)P(1)P(2)
C(2)
C(1)
C(0)
p0
A
p0
Figure 2: The initial state and goal state in an inﬁnite, dis-
crete pick-and-place problem requiring picking block A.
p0
KIN-U
KIN-T
KIN-C
t
i
c
t
i
c
t
i
c
1
.1
3
2
.2
6
9
.1
3
2
100
29
102
101
71
303
10360
.1
3
2
1000
-
180
179
-
381
16383
.1
3
2
Table 1: The runtime (t), number of search iterations (i), and
number of generator calls (c) for the countable pick-and-
place KIN stream representation experiment.
Continuous domains
The STRIPStream approach can be applied directly in con-
tinuous domains such as the problem in ﬁgure 3. In this
case, the streams will have to generate samples from sets of
continuous dimensions, and the way that samples are gen-
erated may have a signiﬁcant impact on the efﬁciency and
completeness of the approach with respect to the domain
problem. (Note that the STRIPStream planing algorithms are
complete with respect to the streams of enumerated values
they are given, but if these value streams are not, in some
sense, complete with respect to the underlying problem do-
main, then the resulting combined system may not be com-
plete with respect to the original problem.) Samplers that
produce a dense sequence (LaValle 2006) are good candi-
dates for stream generation.
Continuous stream speciﬁcation
With some minor modiﬁcations, we can extend our discrete
pick-and-place domain to a bounded interval [0, L] of the
real line. Poses and conﬁgurations are now continuous ob-
jects p, q ∈[0, L] from an uncountably inﬁnite domain. The
stream POSE-U now has a generator that samples [0, L] uni-
formly at random.
While in the discrete case the choice of streams just af-
fected the size of the problem, in the continuous case, the
choice of streams can affect the feasibility of the problem. In
the continuous simple pick-and-place domain, suppose that
the blocks have width 1 and the gripper has width δ ≥1.
A kinematics pair (p, q) is valid if and only if the grip-
per is entirely over the block, i.e., p + 1/2 ≤q + δ/2
and p −1/2 ≥q −δ/2. Consider the case where KIN-U
and KIN-C are implemented using random samplers. KIN-
U will almost certainly generate a sequence of infeasible
STRIPS problems, because the probability that the point p0
is produced from its generator is zero. For δ > 1, the conﬁg-
uration stream has nonzero probability of generating a q that
would constitute a valid kinematics pair with p as certiﬁed
by KIN-T. But this probability can be made arbitrary small
as δ →1. Only the KIN-C strategy is robust to the choice of
δ. Table 2 shows the results of an experiment analogous to
the one in table 1, but which varies δ ∈{1.5, 1.01} instead
of varying p0. KIN-U was unable to solve either problem
and KIN-T could not ﬁnd a solution in under two minutes
for δ = 1.01. But once again, the conditional formulation
using KIN-C performs equivalently for different values of δ.

A
B
q0
p0
p0
0
p⇤
A
p0
p0
0
p⇤
A
B
q0
p0
p0
0
p⇤
p1
q1
q2 q3
q4
Figure 3: Initial state for countable pick-and-place problem requiring picking and placing block A, with a single obstacle.
δ
KIN-U
KIN-T
KIN-C
t
i
c
t
i
c
t
i
c
1.5
-
191
190
3.1
75
745
.1
2
1
1.01
-
181
180
-
297
18768
.1
2
1
Table 2: The runtime (t), number of search iterations (i), and
number of generator calls (c) for the continuous pick-and-
place KIN stream representation experiment.
Focused algorithm example
The previous examples investigated the effect of different
representational choices on the tractability and even feasi-
bility of the resulting STRIPStream problem.
The example in ﬁgure 3 illustrates the behavior of the
focused algorithm on continuous a pick-and-place problem
with the goal condition that block A is at pose p∗. Because
block A, when at p∗, collides with block B at its initial pose
p′
0, solving this problem requires moving block B out of the
way to place block A. Suppose we use KIN-C to model the
problem. We will omit MOVE operators for the sake of clar-
ity, and use capital letters to denote abstract objects. On the
ﬁrst iteration, the focused algorithm will produce the follow-
ing plan (possibly ordered slightly differently):
π1 =
 KIN-C(Q1 | p0), PICK(A, p0, Q1), KIN-C(Q2 | p∗),
CFREE-T(() | B, p′
0, A, p∗), PLACE(A, p∗, Q2)

The
generation
of
values
proceeds
as
fol-
lows. KIN-C(Q1
|
p0) will produce Q1
←
q1.
KIN-C(Q2
|
p∗) will produce Q2
←
q2. However,
CFREE-T(() | B, p′
0, A, p0) will produce the empty stream
because p′
0 collides with p∗. Thus, the plan π1 deﬁnitively
cannot be completed. The algorithm adds q1 and q2 to
the current
PDDL problem and records the failure of
CFREE-T(() | B, p′
0, A, p0). On the next iteration, the
focused algorithm will produce the following plan.
π2 =
 KIN-C(Q1 | p′
0), PICK(B, p′
0, Q1), POSE-U(P1 | ()),
KIN-C(Q2 | P1), CFREE-T(() | A, p0, B, P1), PLACE(B, P1, Q2),
PICK(A, p0, q1), CFREE-T(() | B, P1, A, p∗), PLACE(A, p∗, q2)

The
generation
of
values
proceeds
as
follows.
KIN-C(Q1 | p′
0) will produce Q1 ←q3. POSE-U(P1 | ())
will produce P1 ←p1. KIN-C(Q2 | p1) will produce
Q2 ←q4. Let’s assume that P1 ←p1 is randomly sampled
and turns out to not be in collision with p∗. If p1 turned
out to be in collision with p∗, the next iteration would ﬁrst
fail once, then repeat this process on the next iteration to
generate a new P1. So, CFREE-T(() | A, p1, B, p0) will
produce the stream ⟨()⟩indicating that p1 and p0 are not in
collision. Thus, all of the properties have been successfully
satisﬁed, so the following plan is a solution. It is critical to
note that, for example, had there been several other pose
constants appearing in the initial state, focused would never
have found inverse kinematic solutions for them: because
the planner guides the sampling, only stream elements that
play a direct role in a plausible plan are generated.
π∗=
 PICK(B, p′
0, q3), PLACE(B, p1, q4), PICK(A, p0, q1),
PLACE(A, p∗, q2)

Realistic robot domain
Finally, we extend our continuous pick-and-place to the
high-dimensional setting of a robot operating in household-
like
environments.
Poses
of
physical
blocks
are
6-
dimensional and robot conﬁgurations are 11-dimensional.
We introduce two new object types: grasps and trajectories.
Each block has a set of 6D relative grasp transforms at which
it can be grasped by the robot. Trajectories are ﬁnite se-
quences of conﬁguration waypoints which must be included
in collision checking. The extended PICK operator, CFREE-
T test and KIN-C stream templates are:
PICK(B, P, G, Q, T):
stat = {IsBlock(B), ..., IsTraj(T), IsKin(P, G, Q, T)}
pre = {AtPose(B, P), HandEmpty(), AtConﬁg(Q)} ∪
{Safe(b′, B, G, T) | b′ ∈B}
eff = {Holding(B, G), ¬AtPose(B, P), ¬HandEmpty()}
CFREE-T(() | B1, P1, B2, G, T):
gen = lambda(B1, P1, B2, G, T) :
⟨() if not COLLIDE(B1, P1, B2, G, T)⟩
inp = {IsBlock(B1), ..., IsTraj(T)}
out = {IsCollisionFree(B1, P1, B2, G, T)}
KIN-C(Q, T | P, G):
gen = lambda(P) : ⟨(Q, T) | Q ∼INVERSE-KIN(PG−1),
T ∼MOTIONS(qrest, Q)⟩
inp = {IsPose(P), IsGrasp(G)}
out = {IsKin(P, G, Q, T), IsConf (Q), IsTraj(T)}

Π
incremental, K = 1
incremental, K = 100
focused
%
t
i
c
%
t
i
c
%
t
i
c
1
88
2
23
268
68
5
2
751
84
11
6
129
2-0
100
23
85
1757
100
9
3
2270
100
2
3
180
2-8
0
-
-
-
100
55
5
17217
100
7
3
352
2-16
0
-
-
-
100
112
6
36580
100
19
3
506
Table 3: The success percentage (%), runtime (t), search iterations (i), and number of stream calls (c) for the high-dimensional
task and motion planning experiments.
PICK adds grasp G and trajectory T as parameters and
includes Safe(b′, B, G, T) preconditions to verify that T
while holding B at grasp G is safe with respect to each other
block b′. Safe(b′, B, G, T) is updated using SAFEAXIOM
which has a IsCollisionFree(B1, P1, B2, G, T) static pre-
condition. Here, a collision check for block B1 at pose P1
is performed for each conﬁguration in T. Instead of simple
blocks, physical objects in this domain are general unions of
convex polygons. Although checking collisions here is more
complication than in 1D, it can be treated in the same way,
as an external function.
The KIN streams must ﬁrst produce a grasp conﬁgu-
ration Q that reaches manipulator transform PQ−1 using
INVERSE-KIN. Additionally, they include a motion planner
MOTIONS to generate legal trajectory values T from a con-
stant rest conﬁguration qrest to the grasping conﬁguration
Q that do not collide with the ﬁxed environment. In this do-
main, the procedures for collision checking and ﬁnding kine-
matic solutions are signiﬁcantly more involved and compu-
tationally expensive than in the previous domains, but their
underlying function is the same.
Experiments
We applied the incremental and focused algorithms on four
challenging pick-and-place problems to demonstrate that a
general-purpose representation and algorithms can be used
to achieve good performance in difﬁcult problems. For both
algorithms, test streams are always evaluated as soon as they
are instantiated. We experimented on two domains shown in
ﬁgure 4, which are similar to problems introduced by (Gar-
rett et al. 2015). The ﬁrst domain, in which problem 1 is
deﬁned, has goal conditions that the green object be in the
right bin and the blue object remain at its initial pose. This
requires the robot to not only move and replace the blue
block but also to place the green object in order to ﬁnd a new
grasp to insert it into the bin. The second domain, in which
problems 2-0, 2-8, and 2-16 are deﬁned, requires moving
an object out of the way and placing the green object in
the green region. For problem 2-n where n ∈{0, 8, 16}
there are n other blocks on a separate table that serve as
distractors. The streams were implemented using the Open-
RAVE robotics framework (Diankov and Kuffner 2008). A
Python implementation of STRIPStream can be found here:
https://github.com/caelan/stripstream.
The results compare the incremental algorithm where
K = 1 and K = 100 with the focused algorithm. Ta-
ble 3 shows the results of 25 trials, each with a timeout of
120 seconds. The incremental algorithms result in signiﬁ-
Figure 4: Problem 1.
cantly more stream calls than the focused algorithm. These
calls can signiﬁcantly increase the total runtime because
each inverse kinematic and collision primitive itself is ex-
pensive. Additionally, the incremental algorithms are sig-
niﬁcantly affected by the increased number of distractors,
making them unsuitable for complex real-world environ-
ments. The focused algorithm, however, is able to selectively
choose which streams to call resulting in signiﬁcantly better
performance in these environments.
Conclusion
The STRIPStream problem speciﬁcation formalism can be
used to describe a large class of planning problems in in-
ﬁnite domains and provides a clear and clean interface to
problem-speciﬁc sampling methods in continuous domains.
The incremental and, in particular, focused planning algo-
rithms take advantage of the speciﬁcation to provide efﬁ-
cient solutions to difﬁcult problems.
