Psychlab: A Psychology Laboratory for Deep
Reinforcement Learning Agents
Joel Z. Leibo, Cyprien de Masson d’Autume, Daniel Zoran, David Amos,
Charles Beattie, Keith Anderson, Antonio García Castañeda,
Manuel Sanchez, Simon Green, Audrunas Gruslys, Shane Legg,
Demis Hassabis, and Matthew M. Botvinick
DeepMind, London, UK
February 6, 2018
Abstract
Psychlab is a simulated psychology laboratory inside the ﬁrst-person 3D
game world of DeepMind Lab (Beattie et al., 2016). Psychlab enables im-
plementations of classical laboratory psychological experiments so that they
work with both human and artiﬁcial agents. Psychlab has a simple and ﬂex-
ible API that enables users to easily create their own tasks. As examples,
we are releasing Psychlab implementations of several classical experimen-
tal paradigms including visual search, change detection, random dot motion
discrimination, and multiple object tracking. We also contribute a study
of the visual psychophysics of a speciﬁc state-of-the-art deep reinforcement
learning agent: UNREAL (Jaderberg et al., 2016). This study leads to the
surprising conclusion that UNREAL learns more quickly about larger target
stimuli than it does about smaller stimuli. In turn, this insight motivates
a speciﬁc improvement in the form of a simple model of foveal vision that
turns out to signiﬁcantly boost UNREAL’s performance, both on Psychlab
tasks, and on standard DeepMind Lab tasks. By open-sourcing Psychlab we
hope to facilitate a range of future such studies that simultaneously advance
deep reinforcement learning and improve its links with cognitive science.
Contents
1
Introduction
2
2
The Psychlab platform
3
2.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
The Psychlab environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Example Psychlab tasks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
The Psychlab API . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.5
Reinforcement learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.6
Relating protocols for humans, animals, and deep RL agents . . . . .
7
3
Visual psychophysics of deep RL agents
7
3.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
What psychophysics has to oﬀer AI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1
arXiv:1801.08116v2  [cs.AI]  4 Feb 2018

3.3.1
Adaptive staircase procedures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3.2
Human behavioral paradigms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3.3
The UNREAL agent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.4
Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.4.1
Visual acuity and contrast sensitivity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.4.2
Global form perception: Glass patterns . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.4.3
Point to target task . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.4.4
Foveal vision and the eﬀects of input resolution
. . . . . . . .
15
3.4.5
Foveal vision for standard DM-Lab laser tag tasks . . . . . . .
16
3.4.6
Visual search
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.4.7
Motion discrimination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.4.8
Change detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.4.9
Multiple object tracking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
General discussion
20
1
Introduction
State-of-the-art deep reinforcement learning (RL) agents can navigate 3D virtual
worlds viewed from their own egocentric perspective (Mirowski et al., 2016; Wang
et al., 2016; Duan et al., 2016; Chaplot et al., 2016), bind and use information in short-
term memory (Chiappa et al., 2017; Vezhnevets et al., 2017), play "laser tag" (Jader-
berg et al., 2016; Chaplot and Lample, 2017), forage in naturalistic outdoor envi-
ronments with trees, shrubbery, and undulating hills and valleys (Purves, 2016).
Deep RL agents have even been demonstrated to learn to respond correctly to nat-
ural language commands like "go ﬁnd the blue balloon" (Hermann et al., 2017; Hill
et al., 2017; Chaplot et al., 2017). If they can do all that, then it stands to reason
that they could also cope with the experimental protocols developed in the ﬁelds of
psychophysics and cognitive psychology. If so, a new point of contact could be es-
tablished between psychology and modern AI research. Psychology stands to gain
a new mode for empirically validating theories of necessary aspects of cognition,
while AI research would gain a wealth of tasks, with well-understood controls and
analysis methods, thought to isolate core aspects of cognition.
In this work we contribute a new research platform: Psychlab. This framework
allows deep RL agents and humans to be directly compared to one another on tasks
lifted directly from cognitive psychology and visual psychophysics. Psychlab was
built on top of DeepMind Lab (henceforth "DM-Lab") (Beattie et al., 2016), the agent
testing environment where much of the state-of-the-art in deep RL has been devel-
oped. This means that state-of-the-art agents can be directly plugged into Psychlab
with no change to their setup.
We also contribute Psychlab implementations of several classical experimental
paradigms including visual search, multiple object tracking, and random dot mo-
tion discrimination. Human results on each of these paradigms look similar to stan-
dard results reported in the psychology literature, thus validating these implemen-
tations.
Psychlab can be used for research that compares deep RL agents to human re-
sults in such a way that enriches agent understanding and thereby contributes back
to improve agent design. As an example for how such a research program may un-
fold, in the second half of this paper we describe a set of experiments probing visual
2

psychophysics of a deep RL agent. One result of these experiments was to motivate
a particular agent improvement: a simple model of foveal vision that then improves
performance on a range of standard DM-Lab tasks.
Figure 1: Screenshots from the various tasks we are releasing with the Psychlab
framework. Proceeding clockwise starting from the upper left, they are (1) continu-
ous recognition, (2) change detection (3) arbitrary visuomotor mapping, (4) random
dot motion discrimination, (5) visual search, (6) glass pattern detection, (7) Landolt
C identiﬁcation, and (8) multiple object tracking.
2
The Psychlab platform
2.1
Motivation
Recently, AI research has been driven forward by the availability of complex 3D nat-
uralistic environments like DeepMind Lab. These environments have been impor-
tant for pushing artiﬁcial agents to learn increasingly complex behaviors. However,
the very properties that make them attractive from the perspective of agent training
also make it harder to assess what agents have in fact ended up learning. They do
not unambiguously tell us what cognitive abilities agents that do well on them have
developed. Moreover, while human benchmarking experiments can be performed
in such environments, it is diﬃcult even with humans to pin down the particular
cognitive abilities involved in their successful performance. This is because the tasks
generally depend on multiple abilities and/or admit multiple solution strategies.
As a result, analyzing and understanding of artiﬁcial agents in relation to concepts
from cognitive science has been challenging.
Such ambiguities in the analysis of natural behavior have long been known in
ﬁelds like psychology where the subject of interest is human. The answer devel-
oped over the last 150 years in psychology has been to design rigorously controlled
laboratory-based experiments aimed at isolating one speciﬁc cognitive faculty at a
time. Deep RL has now advanced to a point where it is productive to apply this
same research methodology to tease apart agent cognitive abilities. Of course, it
would be a huge undertaking to try come up with well-targeted and rigorously
controlled experiments for all the cognitive functions we would like our agents to
learn. Fortunately, we need not reinvent the wheel. If we set up our testing envi-
ronment in the right way, i.e., like a typical psychology laboratory, then we can use
exactly the same tasks that cognitive psychology has already invented. These tasks
3

have already been validated by large bodies of previous research in that ﬁeld.
On the other hand, there is a long history of modeling cognitive faculties or
other psychological phenomena with neural networks (e.g. McCulloch and Pitts
(1943); Rumelhart et al. (1987)). However, these models typically do not work on
raw sensory data or interact with laboratory equipment like the computer monitor
and mouse as humans do. Thus they cannot actually be tested with the same ex-
perimental procedures that led to the conceptual results on which they are based1.
Moreover, these methods cannot actually be applied to the most advanced agents
and algorithms developed through the complex and naturalistic approach to deep
RL (e.g. Jaderberg et al. (2016)).
Psychlab enables direct comparisons between agent and human cognitive abili-
ties by making sure the protocols used to measure and assess performance are con-
sistent for both. Moreover, since Psychlab tasks can be versions of classical behav-
ioral paradigms that have stood the test of time, Psychlab has potential to oﬀer better
experimental controls and greater focus on probing speciﬁc cognitive or perceptual
faculties.
2.2
The Psychlab environment
Psychlab is a psychophysics testing room embedded inside the 3D game world of
DM-Lab. The agent stands on a platform in front of a large "computer monitor" on
which stimuli are displayed. The agent is able to look around as in a usual 3D en-
vironment. It can decide to look at (ﬁxate on) the monitor or around it e.g. down
at the ground or up at the sky. Any change in gaze direction transforms the visual
scene as projected in the agent’s viewpoint in the usual way of a 3D game envi-
ronment. That is, changes in gaze direction produce a global transformation of the
visual scene.
As is common in experiments with nonhuman primates and eye-tracking, the
agent responds by "saccading" to (looking at) target stimuli. When humans use
Psychlab they control their avatar’s direction of gaze with the computer mouse. This
is the exact same way human control works in many popular videogames such as
ﬁrst-person shooter games like Quake3, the game from which DM-Lab evolved. At
least for subjects with experience playing such videogames, these controls feel quite
natural and intuitive.
Psychlab comes with a ﬂexible and easy-to-use GUI scripting language to control
how stimuli are placed on the simulated computer monitor and program tasks. For
readers who are familiar with software for coding behavioral tasks, Psychlab can be
thought of as analogous to a scripting environment like Psychtoolbox (Brainard and
Vision, 1997), but specialized for comparisons between deep RL agents and humans.
The reader is encouraged to take a look at any of the attached videos for exam-
ples of what human behavior in Psychlab looks like.
1For example, the HMAX model of object recognition and the ventral visual pathway (Riesenhuber
and Poggio, 1999) is a feedforward neural network, and thus is conventionally interpreted as a model
of object recognition performance under brief presentation conditions. Psychophysical experiments
relating to it generally present stimuli for less than 100ms and employ backwards masking techniques
thought to minimize the eﬀects of feedback on visual processing (Serre et al., 2007). But the model
itself just takes in images and outputs class labels. It has no notion of time.
4

Figure 2: A visualization of the visual search task as it looks in Psychlab. In the ﬁrst
snapshot (1) the agent is ﬁxating at the center. In subsequent snapshots the target
is searched for (2 and 3) and ﬁnally found, a magenta ’T’, in (4).
2.3
Example Psychlab tasks
In keeping with common behavioral testing methods, all the Psychlab tasks we im-
plemented were divided into discrete trials. The trial was also the basic unit of anal-
ysis. There could be any number of trials in a DM-Lab episode and both numbers of
trials and episode duration can be conﬁgured by the experimenter. In all example
tasks, a trial is initiated by ﬁxating a red cross in the center of the Psychlab screen.
List of example Psychlab tasks and videos showing human performance
1. Continuous recognition https://youtu.be/Yd3JhXC0hIQ, probe recognition
with a growing set of ’old’ items.
2. Arbitrary visuomotor mapping https://youtu.be/71FvjgZXbF8, cued recall
task testing memory for a growing list of item-response pairings.
3. Change detection (sequential comparison) https://youtu.be/JApfKhlrnxk,
subject must indicate if an array of objects that reappears after a delay has
been changed.
4. Visual acuity and contrast sensitivity (Landolt C identiﬁcation) https://youtu.
be/yWA1-hFU9F0, identify the orientation of a Landolt C stimulus appearing
at a range of scales and contrasts.
5. Glass pattern detection https://youtu.be/XLQ9qgV9qrE, subject must indi-
cate which of two patterns is a concentric Glass pattern.
6. Visual search https://youtu.be/Vss535u4A5s, subject must search an array
of items for a target.
7. Random dot motion discrimination https://youtu.be/IZtDkryWedY, subject
must indicate the direction of coherent motion.
8. Multiple object tracking https://youtu.be/w3ddURoeQNU, tests the ability to
track moving objects over time.
The default stimulus set for the continuous recognition and arbitrary visuomo-
tor mapping tasks is from Brady et al. (2008).
5

1 -- Create a table to contain
Psychlab
environment
data
2 local env = {}
3
4 -- Function to initialize
the environment , called at episode
start
5 function
env:_init(api , options)
6
-- Create a widget
that
rewards
the agent for
looking at it
7
local
function
lookCallback(name , mousePos , hoverTime , userData)
8
api:addReward(REWARD_VALUE)
9
end
10
api:addWidget{
11
name = WIDGET_NAME ,
12
image = WIDGET_IMAGE ,
13
pos = WIDGET_POSITION ,
14
size = WIDGET_SIZE ,
15
mouseHoverCallback = lookCallback ,
16
}
17
18
-- Create a timer
that
removes
the widget
after
some time
19
local
function
timeoutCallback ()
20
api:removeWidget(WIDGET_NAME)
21
end
22
api:addTimer{
23
name = TIMER_NAME ,
24
timeout = TIME_TILL_TIMEOUT ,
25
callback = timeoutCallback
26
}
27 end
28
29 -- Construct DM -Lab level API around the
Psychlab
environment
30 local
psychlab_factory = require " factories.psychlab.factory "
31 return
psychlab_factory.createLevelApi {
32
env = require " frameworks.point_and_click ",
33
envOpts = {environment = env}
34 }
Figure 3: Lua API example. This example places a widget on the screen. The subject
is rewarded for looking at this widget. It disappears after some period of time.
2.4
The Psychlab API
The Psychlab API is a simple GUI framework scripted in lua. Tasks are created by
placing widgets on the Psychlab monitor. Widgets can have arbitrary visuals, and
can invoke callbacks when events occur, such as the agent’s center of gaze entering
or exiting the widget area. The framework also supports timers that invoke call-
backs when they complete.
2.5
Reinforcement learning
Psychlab supports and reward scheme the task developer can code using the API.
In our experiments we provided rewards as follows: Agents receive a reward of 1
whenever they correctly complete a trial and a reward of 0 on all other steps. In
our initial experiments we tried several other reward schemes, such as providing
negative rewards for incorrect answers and small positive rewards for reaching basic
trial events like foveating the ﬁxation cross. However, we found that these led to
slower and less stable learning.
6

2.6
Relating protocols for humans, animals, and deep RL agents
In Psychlab, reaction times are measured in terms of game steps. When humans use
Psychlab, the engine runs at 60 steps per second. If the engine were run instead at
30 steps per second then human response times would be diﬀerent. Thus it is only
appropriate to make qualitative comparisons between human and agent response
times with Psychlab.
Psychlab experimental protocols with deep RL agents can be seen as most di-
rectly comparable to non-human primate experimental protocols. This is because
human psychophysics typically relies on conveying the task to the subject verbally.
Since the deep RL agents we aim to study with Psychlab do not understand lan-
guage, the tasks must be conveyed by reinforcement learning. Non-human primate
psychophysics protocols are also conveyed by reinforcement learning for the same
reason.
The analogy between Psychlab protocols for testing deep RL agents and non-
human primate protocols may run deeper still. One interpretational caveat aﬀect-
ing many non-human primate experiments is that, relative to the human versions
of the same protocols, the monkey subjects may have been "overtrained". Since non-
human primate training procedures can take many months, it’s possible that slower
learning mechanisms might inﬂuence results with non-human primates that could
not operate within the much shorter timeframe (typically one hour) of the equiva-
lent human experiment. In particular, perceptual learning (Fine and Jacobs, 2002)
and habitization (Seger and Spiering, 2011) processes are known to unfold over such
longer timescales. Thus they may be expected to play a role in the non-human pri-
mate protocols (see e.g. Britten et al. (1992)), but not the human protocols. Deep
RL agents also typically train quite slowly (Lake et al., 2017). Furthermore, deep
RL training algorithms are usually "model-free". That is, they resemble the slower
neural processes underlying habit learning or perceptual learning, as opposed to
the fast learning processes employed by humans to rapidly learn to perform these
tasks in under an hour.
3
Visual psychophysics of deep RL agents
3.1
Introduction
To illustrate how Psychlab may be applied and its results interpreted, we oﬀer a case
study in which we apply the methods of visual psychophysics to probe visual behav-
iors of a state-of-the-art deep RL agent: UNREAL (Jaderberg et al., 2016). Beyond its
didactic value as an illustration for how Psychlab can be used, a study of basic visual
behaviors of deep RL agents is of interest for several reasons. First, convolutional
neural network architectures like the one in UNREAL have been motivated by argu-
ments that they resemble the wiring of neural networks in visual cortex (Fukushima
and Miyake, 1982; Riesenhuber and Poggio, 1999; LeCun et al., 1995). Second, con-
volutional neural network and primate performance on object recognition tasks has
been studied extensively and compared to one another as well as to neural data
recorded from several regions along the primate ventral stream (Cadieu et al., 2014;
Khaligh-Razavi and Kriegeskorte, 2014; Rajalingham et al., 2018). Third, several
recent studies have also taken the perspective of probing convolutional neural net-
works along lines motivated by psychology and cognitive science but, unlike our
study, mostly have used networks trained by supervised learning (Zoran et al., 2015;
7

Ritter et al., 2017; Volokitin et al., 2017). Such studies are limited by assumptions
about how information can be read out and used in behavior. On the other hand,
Psychlab works with complete agents. This makes it possible to study temporally
extended visual behaviors. It also allows for a more direct comparison to human
behavior on the exact same task.
As we shall see later on, it turns out that UNREAL actually has worse acuity
than human, even when tested at the same spatial resolution. This result motivates
a series of experiments on visually-guided pointing tasks leading to the surprising
result that, unlike humans, this state-of-the-art deep RL agent is strongly aﬀected by
object size and contrast in ways that humans are not. It learns more quickly about
larger objects. This then motivates us to introduce a model of foveal vision. Adding
this mechanism to UNREAL turns out to improve performance on another family
of labyrinth tasks that we didn’t create ourselves: laser tag.
3.2
What psychophysics has to oﬀer AI
Figure 4: Visual acuity measurement: (A) Snellen chart, acuity is determined by
ﬁnding the smallest row of letters that can be correctly read aloud. (B) Landolt C
chart, acuity is determined by ﬁnding the smallest row where the subject can cor-
rectly report the orientation of each optotype’s opening. (C) Illustration of a psy-
chometric curve for visual acuity measurement. The threshold scale is indicated
Psychlab makes possible ways of analyzing experimental data that are common
in psychology but relatively unknown in AI research. For example, we describe
methods for measuring psychometric functions, detection thresholds, and reaction
times for artiﬁcial agents that can be directly compared to those of humans.
The basic strategy of psychophysical measurement and analysis is to vary a crit-
ical stimulus parameter like luminance or contrast, and determine the threshold
value required for the observer to perform a simple reference task (Farell and Pelli,
1999). For example, one way to measure visual acuity is with a task that requires
identiﬁcation of a target stimulus that may be presented at a range of scales. For
example, the target stimulus may be a Landolt C shape, the task then is to identify
the orientation of the C’s opening from a set of possibilities (see Fig. 4-B).
8

Measuring thresholds provides a principled way to compare task performances
between agents or between agents and humans. A better way to report performance
that will allow meaningful magnitude comparison is as follows. Thresholds are nat-
urally in units of the stimulus or task parameters. Thus they are immediately inter-
pretable and actionable, unlike mean reward values. For example, one might have
an application where an agent needs to be able to discriminate visual stimuli down
to a speciﬁc small size 1/s. Knowing that an agent’s acuity is greater than s imme-
diately tells you that it is a candidate for that task while another agent with acuity
< s is not. This approach also makes sense for other tasks besides visual acuity. The
only requirement is for the task to have meaningful diﬃculty parameters.
In addition, the shapes of psychometric functions for diﬀerent task dimensions
are informative. A ﬂat psychometric curve tells you that a particular task/stimulus
dimension has no impact on performance. Psychometric functions usually have a
sigmoid shape (Macmillan and Creelman, 2004).
3.3
Methods
3.3.1
Adaptive staircase procedures
All the tasks we investigated included adaptive staircase procedures cf. (Treutwein,
1995). These worked as follows:
Let r1, . . . , rK be a sequence of probability distributions over trials in increasing
order of diﬃculty. For example, in a test of visual acuity, r0 would be a distribution
over trials where stimuli are displayed at the largest and easiest sized stimuli. rK
would be a distribution over the smallest and most diﬃcult sized stimuli. Let rc,
be the distribution of trials at diﬃculty level c. For each new trial, do one of the
following (equiprobably): [base case] sample a trial from rc, [advance case] sample
a trial from rc+1, or [probe case] ﬁrst sample the diﬃculty level rp from r1, . . . , rc,
then sample the speciﬁc trial from rp. If after c trials sampled rc+1 (the advance
case), the agent has achieved a score of 75% correct or better then increment the
base diﬃculty level to c + 1. If the agent achieved a score worse than 50% correct
after c trials sampled from rc then decrement the diﬃculty level to c −1.
Many tasks we investigated had two-dimensional adaptive staircase procedures.
For example, the visual acuity and contrast sensitivity task simultaneously adjusted
both scale and contrast parameters. These work by maintaining a separate diﬃculty
level for each task dimension and equiprobably sampling advance type trials corre-
sponding to independently incrementing one level or the other.
An episode—in the RL sense—consists of a ﬁxed number of steps (3 minutes at
60 steps per second). Thus depending on its response time, an agent may complete
a variable number of trials per episode. The adaptive staircase is reset to the initial
diﬃculty level at the start of each episode.
For humans, this procedure feels like any other adaptive staircase. The task be-
comes easier or harder to adapt to the subject’s performance level. For deep RL
agents the exact same adaptive procedure induces a kind of curriculum. Early on
in learning the agent does not complete many trials per episode, and when it does
complete them it responds randomly. Thus it continues to experience the simplest
version of the task. Only once it has learned to solve level c then it gets level c + 1.
The probe trials ensure that trials at all easier diﬃculty levels remain interleaved.
This simultaneously prevents catastrophic forgetting and smooths out the number
of trials available for analysis at each diﬃculty level.
9

3.3.2
Human behavioral paradigms
Human experiments were performed as follows. All experiments employed a within-
subject design and tested a single expert observer who was also an author of the pa-
per. The Psychlab game window was used in full-screen mode on a 24
′′ widescreen
monitor (HP Z24n 24-inch Narrow Bezel IPS Display). The subject was seated ap-
proximately 30cm away from the monitor. In the old version of the DM-Lab / Psy-
chlab platform that was used for all experiments in this report, the size of the game
window scaled automatically with the resolution. Thus for experiments at 640×640
resolution the game window was signiﬁcantly larger than it was for experiments at
200 × 200 and 84 × 84. This limitation was removed in the new version of the plat-
form that is being open sourced alongside this report. So it will be possible to vary
resolution and size independently in future experiments with the open-source Psy-
chlab platform.
3.3.3
The UNREAL agent
The UNREAL (UNsupervised REinforcement and Auxiliary Learning) agent (Jader-
berg et al., 2016) combines the A3C (Asynchronous Advantage Actor-Critic) (Mnih
et al., 2016) framework with self-supervised auxiliary control and reward predic-
tion tasks. The base agent is a CNN-LSTM agent trained on-policy with the A3C
loss. Observations, rewards and actions are stored in a small replay buﬀer. This
experience data is used by the following self-supervised auxiliary learning tasks:
• Pixel Control - auxiliary policies are trained to maximize change in pixel in-
tensity of diﬀerent regions of the input
• Reward Prediction - given three recent frames, the network must predict the
reward that will be obtained in the next unobserved timestep
• Value Function Replay - further training of the value function is performed to
promote faster value iteration
The UNREAL algorithm optimizes a loss function with respect to the joint pa-
rameters, θ, that combines the A3C loss LA3C together with an auxiliary control loss
LPC, auxiliary reward prediction loss LRP and replayed value loss LV R, with loss
weightings λPC, λRP , λV R:
LUNREAL(θ) = LA3C + λPCLPC + λRP LRP + λV RLV R
We note that the true objective function that we would like to maximize is the
(undiscounted) score on the tasks, and the loss function is merely a proxy for this.
In particular, we consider the discount parameter γ to be an agent-side hyperpa-
rameter, not a parameter of the environment.
3.4
Experiments
Note: All experiments in this section were performed with an earlier version of the
Psychlab and DM-Lab codebase than the version in the open-source release. The
diﬀerences between the old platform and the new one are minor and unlikely to
inﬂuence the results.
10

3.4.1
Visual acuity and contrast sensitivity
A video of human performance on the test of visual acuity and contrast sensitivity
can be viewed at https://youtu.be/yWA1-hFU9F0 (Landolt C discrimination).
Unlike resolution, which simply denotes the number of pixels in an image, visual
acuity refers to an agent’s ability to detect or discriminate small stimuli. Greater
acuity means greater ability to perform a reference task despite scaling the stimuli
down to smaller and smaller sizes. Input image resolution and visual acuity may
not be related to one another in a simple way.
In primates, visual acuity and contrast sensitivity are immature at birth. Acuity
develops over the course of the ﬁrst year of life, primarily due to peripheral mech-
anisms including the migration of cones to the fovea (Wilson, 1988; Kiorpes and
Movshon, 1998).
Figure 5: Comparison of UNREAL and human visual acuity. Here visual acuity was
measured by Landolt C orientation discrimination accuracy. The scale at which the
Landolt C stimulus was displayed was adapted according to the staircase procedure
described in Section 3.3.1. As can be seen, even when the input resolution is the same
for humans and agents (84 × 84) visual acuity performance can diﬀer.
To test the visual acuity of the UNREAL agent, we trained it to identify Landolt
C stimuli presented at a range of scales. The resulting psychometric function (accu-
racy as a function of stimulus scale) had a sigmoid shape that qualitatively matched
the shape obtained when measured for a human observer (Fig. 5). We also mea-
sured the UNREAL agent’s contrast sensitivity with the Landolt C identiﬁcation
11

task by presenting the stimuli at a range of contrasts. In this case the psychomet-
ric function (accuracy as a function of stimulus contrast) diﬀered qualitatively from
human. UNREAL was less accurate than human for moderate contrasts, but it out-
performed human level at the lower contrast levels (Fig. 5).
Human observers performed the visual acuity and contrast sensitivity tasks with
Psychlab running at two diﬀerent resolutions: 640×640 (high resolution) and 84×84
(low resolution). Since the standard implementation of UNREAL runs at 84 × 84,
i.e. it downsamples to that size, it is not surprising that its acuity was signiﬁcantly
worse than the result obtained from a human observer at 640 × 640. However, the
more surprising ﬁnding was that UNREAL also had worse acuity relative to the
human observer at 84 × 84 (Fig. 5). A similar result was obtained with contrast
sensitivity. Human contrast sensitivity at 640 × 640 was greater than at 84 × 84, but
UNREAL performed worse than both at moderate contrast levels (Fig. 5).
Why did UNREAL have worse visual acuity than the human observer, even
when both viewed the stimuli at 84 × 84? The fact that humans perform better
means that there must be additional target-related information available in the ob-
servation stream, but UNREAL cannot take advantage of it. One possibility is that
this information is aliased by the subsampling that happens between convolutional
layers in the standard UNREAL network architecture.
One surprising conclusion to draw from these experiments is that eﬀective acu-
ity cannot be inferred from image resolution alone.
3.4.2
Global form perception: Glass patterns
A video of human performance on the Psychlab implementation of the Glass pattern
detection task can be viewed at https://youtu.be/XLQ9qgV9qrE.
In the previous experiment we measured how well UNREAL coped with small
visual stimuli and found it to have impaired acuity relative to human, even when
tested at the same resolution. Next we set out to determine whether this insensi-
tivity to small stimulus features may have implications extending to larger object
perception. Speciﬁcally, we studied perception of Glass patterns, a class of stimuli
where a strong impression of global form arises from high spatial frequency cues
(Fig. 6).
A Glass pattern stimulus is a random dot pattern where each dot is paired with a
partner at a speciﬁc oﬀset (Glass, 1969; Glass and Pérez, 1973). The pair together are
called a dipole. In a concentric Glass pattern, dipoles are oriented as tangents to con-
centric circles. Glass patterns are built from local correspondences yet they evoke a
percept of global structure. Their perception must involve at least two stages. First
local features must be extracted (dipole orientations). The resulting orientation in-
formation coming from diﬀerent parts of the image must be integrated in order to
represent global form. Glass patterns have been used in numerous studies of human
form perception e.g. (Glass and Switkes, 1976; Dakin, 1997; Wilson and Wilkinson,
1998) and used in neuroimaging (Mannion et al., 2009) as well as single-unit electro-
physiology (Smith et al., 2002, 2007) studies. From the perspective of deep RL, Glass
pattern stimuli are particularly nice stimuli because an inﬁnite number of diﬀerent
ones can easily be produced. This property is useful for excluding the possibility
that an agent might overﬁt to a speciﬁc set of stimuli.
Global form perception as measured by Glass pattern detection is impaired in a
number of disorders including autism (Simmons et al., 2009) and migraine (McK-
endrick et al., 2006).
12

Figure 6: Glass pattern example stimuli (modiﬁed from Badcock et al. (2005)) and
psychometric curves for UNREAL (84×84) and our human observer (also at 84×84).
See text for details of the experimental setting. As can be seen, UNREAL and hu-
mans perform very similarly under the diﬀerent experimental settings.
We measured human and UNREAL performance on a Glass pattern detection
2AFC task (Macmillan and Creelman, 2004). In each trial, one Glass pattern stim-
ulus (the target) was paired with a distractor pattern created by placing dots ran-
domly, preserving average inter-dot distances. We measured a psychometric func-
tion by progressively degrading the pattern by injecting additional noise dots, thereby
progressively lowering pattern coherence.
Glass pattern detection psychometric function were similar for UNREAL and
our human observer. Both UNREAL and the human observer had sigmoid shaped
psychometric functions for the detection of both white and black Glass patterns on a
gray background. In both cases, the threshold, deﬁned as the coherence level where
detection performance rose above 75%, was around 0.5 (Fig. 6).
Interestingly, both UNREAL and the human observer were unable to reliably
detect mixed polarity Glass patterns (Fig. 6). These Glass patterns are created from
dipoles consisting of one white and one black dot. This eﬀect is known for human
observers (Wilson et al., 2004; Barlow and Olshausen, 2004; Badcock et al., 2005;
Burr and Ross, 2006). However, this is likely the ﬁrst time it has been described in
an artiﬁcial system not created for this speciﬁc purpose.
How is it possible that UNREAL has human-like Glass pattern detection thresh-
olds despite having worse than human acuity? It is common to conceptualize Glass
pattern perception as depending on a two-stage process. First local orientation in-
formation must be extracted from each dipole then, second, orientation information
13

coming from diﬀerent parts of the image is integrated to represent global form. UN-
REAL’s weak visual acuity may be expected speciﬁcally to impact the ﬁrst of these
stages. How then can it recover normal human-level performance in the second
stage if information has already been lost in the ﬁrst stage? One possibility is that
the acuity loss only makes dipole detection less reliable, but when integrating over
the entire stimulus it is still possible to obtain enough orientation information that
the global percept can be represented despite accumulating errors from individu-
ally misperceived dipole orientations.
3.4.3
Point to target task
One particularly unbiological aspect of most modern artiﬁcial neural networks, in-
cluding UNREAL, is weight sharing. For reasons having to do with computational
eﬃciency, convolutional neural networks sum incoming gradients over the entire
visual ﬁeld, and use the resulting signal to adjust the weights of all cells, no matter
what part of the visual ﬁeld they are responsible for2. In this section we ask whether
the convolutional weight sharing structure leads to abnormalities in visual learning.
Figure 7: Point to target task - the agent needs to ﬁnd a target which is either small
or large on the screen, without (left) or with (right) the presence of a lure (small or
large). UNREAL seems to be quite sensitive to the size of the target and lure. As can
be seen, learning is much faster when the target is large. Additionally, the presence
of a large lure hurts ﬁnal performance signiﬁcantly.
We trained UNREAL on a pointing task. Each trial was initiated by foveating
a ﬁxation target. Upon initiation, a target stimulus (the letter ’E’) appears at some
distance away, in one of two possible locations. After pointing to the target, the trial
ends and a reward is delivered. There were two versions of the task that diﬀered
only in the size of the target.
UNREAL learns the large-target version of the task more quickly than it learns
the small-target version (Fig. 7). That is, it requires less interactions with the envi-
ronment to achieve perfect performance. This may be due to weight sharing. In a
2In contrast, biological neurons are presumably tuned using signals that are more local to their re-
ceptive ﬁeld. This may explain heterogenous spatial sensitivity patterns like those described by Afraz
et al. (2010). Weight sharing convolutional networks would not be able to explain such data.
14

convolutional neural network the gradient signal is summed over space, thus, when
a larger region of the visual ﬁeld is correlated with the loss signal, then gradient de-
scent steps will be larger. In the case of online reinforcement learning algorithms
like UNREAL, gradient descent steps are time-locked to environment steps, so this
implies that the larger the region of the visual ﬁeld that correlates with the reward,
the bigger the summed gradient becomes, and thus the faster learning can proceed.
This interpretation implies that the eﬀect is not peculiar to UNREAL. Any deep RL
agent that time-locks network updates to environment steps and employs a convo-
lutional neural network to process inputs will show the same eﬀect.
Next, we studied two more variants of the pointing task in which two objects
appeared in each trial. In both cases pointing to the object on the left (the target)
yielded a reward of 2 while pointing to the target on the right (the lure) provided a
reward of 1. A trial ends when the agent points to either the target or the lure. In
one version of the task both target and lure were the same size. In the other version
the lure was larger.
Since UNREAL learns more quickly about larger objects, we hypothesized that
the presence of the larger lure stimulus would make it likely to become stuck in the
suboptimal local optimum corresponding to a policy that exclusively points to the
lure rather than the target. This is indeed what occurs. It tends to ﬁnd the policy of
looking to the target when both target and lure are the same size but tends to ﬁnd
a policy of pointing to the lure when the lure is larger (Fig. 7). Psychlab made it
easy to detect these subtle distortions of the learning process arising from weight
sharing in convolutional neural networks, but the underlying issues are unlikely to
be limited to Psychlab. It is likely that UNREAL frequently gets stuck in suboptimal
local optima as a result of its learning ﬁrst about larger objects then smaller objects.
In more complicated tasks this could play out in countless subtle ways.
3.4.4
Foveal vision and the eﬀects of input resolution
The input resolution of a deep RL agent is a rather critical hyperparameter. For
example, it aﬀects the number of units in each level of the network, which in turn
aﬀects the speed that the whole system can be operated and trained. Optimal sizes
of convolutional ﬁlters also depend strongly on the input resolution. Thus it is not
always a simple matter to change it without also needing to simultaneously change
many other aspects of network design.
One could argue it was unfair to limit the human subject to 84 × 84 since they
could have performed the task at higher resolutions and thereby achieved higher
scores, at least on the tasks that require resolving small objects. 84 × 84 was only
chosen because it was the resolution UNREAL was designed for. Moreover, you
can’t easily just run UNREAL at a higher resolution. At minimum you’d have to
change the ﬁlter sizes in the convolutional network. This could easily either make
the algorithm too slow to run or break it altogether.
Thus we introduced a simple "fovea" model in order to scale up UNREAL to
higher resolutions without changing its neural network architecture or making it
run more slowly.
To emulate a fovea, we subsample the image by keeping only a ﬁxed subset of
all the rows/columns of pixels composing the image, and discarding the others.
We choose this subset so that for a given image, as we move away from the cen-
tre along the vertical (resp. horizontal) axis, more and more rows (resp. columns)
are discarded. For example, consider an original image of size 101 × 101, with
15

Figure 8: (A) Fovea illustration. Cells are pixels in the original image, blue cells are
pixels kept after processing with the fovea model. Other subﬁgures will be psycho-
metric curves comparing fovea to no-fovea and human (both 84 × 84 and 200 × 200)
for (B) acuity, (C) contrast sensitivity, and (D) glass patterns.
pixel values O(i, j) for i, j ∈[−50, +50] with i, j ∈Z.3 Say we want to subsam-
ple down to 11 × 11 according to the fovea model. The ﬁnal image pixel values will
be F(u, v) = O(σ(u), σ(v)) for u, v ∈[−5, +5], where we choose σ : Z →Z to be a
strictly increasing, anti-symmetric function such that:











i < j =⇒σ(i) < σ(j)
σ(−i) = −σ(i)
σ(5) ≤50
σ grows polynomially: σ(|x|) ∼x8
This model is of course only a crude approximation to the fovea of the hu-
man eye. First, we don’t have a distinction between "rods" and "cones" which have
vastly diﬀerent distributions across the retina and diﬀerent response characteris-
tics (Purves et al., 2001). Second, the sampling density in the retina changes quite
rapidly as we move further from the fovea, while our sampling density decays some-
what slower. Nevertheless we argue that qualitatively this model captures the most
salient property of the fovea, sampling the central parts of the visual ﬁeld with
higher density thereby increasing the acuity in those parts.
3.4.5
Foveal vision for standard DM-Lab laser tag tasks
This fovea model has the eﬀect of expanding the input representation of objects lo-
cated in the center of the visual ﬁeld. Now recall our result from the point to target
task (see section 3.4.3), UNREAL learns quicker when larger objects—in terms of
their size on the input image—are correlated with reward. This suggests that the
fovea model should improve learning speed or overall performance on tasks where
the agent typically centers its gaze on the objects that are most correlated with re-
ward. Fortunately, quite a few DM-lab tasks already exist that have this property:
3We use [−50, +50] so the origin is at (0,0).
16

all the laser tag tasks. We compared the performance of UNREAL running at its de-
fault resolution of 84×84 to UNREAL with inputs rendered at 168×168 and foveally
downsampled to 84 × 84. The fovea model turned out to improve performance on
all eight laser tag tasks (Fig. 9).
Figure 9: Laser tag: bar graph comparing UNREAL performance with and without
fovea to human level. The foveated UNREAL agent outperforms the unfoveated
agent in all levels.
3.4.6
Visual search
Visual search may ultimately prove to be the best use-case for Psychlab for several
reasons.
1. Human visual search behavior is extremely well-characterized. Thousands
of papers have been written on the topic (for a recent review see Wolfe and
Horowitz (2017)). Considerable detail is also known about its neural under-
pinnings (Desimone and Duncan, 1995; Maunsell and Treue, 2006; Bisley and
Goldberg, 2010). Such detail with which phenomena related to visual search
behavior are understood provides the ideal setting for productive Psychlab ex-
periments. Psychlab makes it easy to test whether deep RL agents reproduce
the same behavior patterns. The original human experiments can be repli-
cated through Psychlab so that results from humans and deep RL agents can
be displayed side by side.
2. It is a true visual behavior. It unfolds over time. In fact, reaction time is typ-
ically the dependent measure used in human experiments. Since time is so
central, visual search behavior is not a natural ﬁt for discriminative modeling.
While progress has been made in addressing its "bottom-up" stimulus-driven
aspect and predicting the ﬁrst few ﬁxations (Itti and Koch, 2000; Bruce et al.,
2015), these models do not do a good job predicting task-driven search be-
havior (Wolfe and Horowitz, 2017). We suspect that an accurate model will
require a full RL-based agent integrating stimulus-driven information with
top-down feedback based on the recent search history and task goals to actu-
ally search the display.
3. A major question in this area, "serial" vs. "parallel" processing, appears to
reﬂect a suboptimality in human perceptual intelligence. We know that con-
volutional networks can be constructed that are capable of localizing arbitrary
17

features in constant time, assuming parallel computational of ﬁlter responses
as on a GPU. Why then did evolution not ﬁnd such a solution? This is espe-
cially puzzling since some visual searches do appear to operate in such a par-
allel manner, they are said to "pop-out", while other searches take longer and
longer the more items there are to be searched through (Treisman and Gelade,
1980). Moreover, the subjective phenomenon of serial processing appears sus-
piciously close to the very essence of thought. Is it really a suboptimality? Or
do the apparently serial visual search eﬀects hint at something fundamental
about neural computational processes that we have yet to understand?
4. Studying visual search behavior is one of the main accepted ways to approach
the cognitive faculty we call attention. In supervised deep learning, consid-
erations of "attention" or other methods of restricting the size of hypothesis
spaces have proven essential for scalability toward realistically sized images
and language corpuses (Bahdanau et al., 2014; Ba et al., 2014; Xu et al., 2015;
Gregor et al., 2015). Deep RL has not yet developed to the point where such
scaling up has been seen as important, but it is likely to encounter the same
issues. Remember, the current state-of-the-art systems operate at 84 × 84 and
cannot easily be scaled up4.
Replicating the classic human result, we show that human reaction times for
orientation search and color search are independent of set size while reaction times
for conjunction search scale linearly with set size (Fig. 10). This validates our Psy-
chlab implementation of visual search paradigm by showing it produces a pattern
of human results that replicates that achieved with other task implementations.
UNREAL is also able to solve this task. It performs almost perfectly after train-
ing. Human performance is also near perfect. However, that is where its resem-
blance to human visual search behavior ends. As expected for an architecture that
processes visual inputs with a convolutional neural network, UNREAL’s reaction
time is always independent of set size, even for conjunction search (Fig. 10).
3.4.7
Motion discrimination
A video of human motion discrimination task performance in Psychlab can be viewed
at: https://youtu.be/IZtDkryWedY.
Random dot motion discrimination tasks are used to investigate motion percep-
tion in the presence of noise (Newsome et al., 1990; Britten et al., 1992). Subjects
must discriminate the direction in which a majority of dots are moving. The frac-
tion of dots moving coherently versus randomly can be varied by the experimenter
in order to determine motion perceptual thresholds. Lesions of cortical area MT
impair performance, increasing motion discrimination thresholds measured by this
task (Newsome and Pare, 1988). Going beyond the speciﬁc study of motion percep-
tion, this task has also been important in the study of perceptual decision-making
more generally (Britten et al., 1996; Shadlen and Newsome, 2001).
In primate data, there is typically a threshold at which the subject’s ability to
discriminate motion direction declines sharply. Reaction time generally increases
near the perceptual threshold. Systematic relationships between reaction time and
4There has been recent work on using RL to guide the deployment of an attention model in order
to improve supervised and unsupervised learning (Ba et al., 2014; Xu et al., 2015), but there has not yet
been much work that models attention speciﬁcally to speed up deep RL itself (cf. Mnih et al. (2014)):
attention for RL as opposed to RL for attention.
18

Figure 10: Visual search reaction times: orientation search, color search, and con-
junction search. Human reaction times for orientation search and color search are
independent of set size but scale linearly with set size for conjunction search. This
replicates a well-known result in the literature (Treisman and Gelade, 1980; Wolfe
and Horowitz, 2017) and validates the Psychlab implementation of this task. Unlike
the human pattern of results, UNREAL’s reaction time is independent of set size in
all three cases.
stimulus parameters have been taken as evidence for diﬀusion-to-bound models of
perceptual decision-making (Ratcliﬀand Rouder, 1998; Hanks et al., 2006; Shadlen
et al., 2006; Hanks et al., 2014).
We found that UNREAL failed to learn to perform this task at any level of motion
coherence (Fig. 11). It’s possible that additional steps corresponding to the operant
conditioning steps used in the animal training paradigms should be added to the
protocol. For example, when training macaques to perform the motion discrimi-
nation task, Britten et al. (1992) employed a curriculum of increasingly diﬃcult to
learn subtasks: (1) ﬁxation only (2) saccade to a single target (3) saccade to a single
target in the presence of random dot motion patterns, and (4) choose the saccade
target based on the direction of coherent motion. A similar curriculum may work
with deep RL agents.
Note: the version of the motion discrimination task used in the results reported
here diﬀered slightly from the version included in the Psychlab open-source release.
Instead of ﬂashing random incoherent dots at diﬀerent locations as described in the
protocol of Britten et al. (1992), the incoherent dots moved in random directions
diﬀerent from the overall direction of motion for the experiments reported here.
This diﬀerence is unlikely to qualitatively change the results (Pilly and Seitz, 2009).
19

3.4.8
Change detection
A video of human performance on the Psychlab implementation of the change de-
tection task can be viewed at https://youtu.be/JApfKhlrnxk.
In the change detection task (Phillips, 1974; Luck and Vogel, 1997) the subject
viewed a sample array of objects and a test array on each trial, separated by a delay
(the retention period). The task was to indicate whether the two arrays were iden-
tical or whether they diﬀered in terms of a single feature. The objects we used were
squares or letter-E shapes (equiprobably) at diﬀerent colors and orientations. This
task used a two-interval forced choice design (Macmillan and Creelman, 2004), i.e.
a sequential comparison design. Task performance in humans drops as the number
of objects is increased (Luck and Vogel, 1997). Performance is also dependent on the
retention period—longer delays between the two sets hurt performance more. This
task is regarded as measuring the capacity or ﬁdelity of visual working memory. It
has been inﬂuential in the debate over whether human visual working memory has
a discrete item limit or whether it is more ﬂexibly divisible (Alvarez and Cavanagh,
2004; Awh et al., 2007; Zhang and Luck, 2008). Interestingly, in humans, individual
diﬀerences in change detection tests of visual working memory are highly corre-
lated with ﬂuid intelligence (Fukuda et al., 2010; Luck and Vogel, 2013).
UNREAL fails to perform the change detection task, regardless of delay period
or set size (Fig. 11). This tells us that despite its having an LSTM, its ability to learn
to use it in a manner akin to human visual working memory is quite limited.
3.4.9
Multiple object tracking
A video of human performance on the Psychlab implementation of the multiple
object tracking task can be viewed at https://youtu.be/w3ddURoeQNU.
In the multiple object tracking task (Pylyshyn and Storm, 1988; Cavanagh and
Alvarez, 2005), subjects are presented with a display on which several indistinguish-
able objects (here circles) are moving. At the beginning of a trial, some of the objects
are brieﬂy identiﬁed as the target set (by a temporary color change). At the end of
the trial, one of the objects is identiﬁed as the query object (by color change). The
subject’s task is to report whether or not the query object was from the target set.
The experimenter can vary the number of objects, the number in the target set, and
the speed of movement.
The task probes the subject’s ability to attend to multiple objects simultane-
ously. In human trials, most subjects are able to track four or ﬁve objects. This also
suggests—since the objects are indistinguishable—that there is an indexical aspect
to human attention (Pylyshyn, 2001).
UNREAL also fails to perform the multiple object tracking task (Fig. 11). Taken
alongside the results on motion discrimination and change detection tasks, this pro-
vides further evidence that, despite its LSTM, UNREAL has considerably diﬃculty
learning to integrate information over time.
4
General discussion
This report introduces Psychlab, a DM-Lab-based platform enabling psychology-
style behavioral experimentation with deep RL agents. Psychlab is intended to
complement other environments for Deep RL research like the standard DM-Lab
levels (Beattie et al., 2016) and VizDoom (Kempka et al., 2016). Psychlab maintains
20

Figure 11: Psychometric functions comparing human and UNREAL on motion dis-
crimination, change detection, and multiple object tracking tasks. UNREAL is not
able to perform these tasks, performing at chance levels under all settings.
the same agent interface as DM-Lab while making it much easier to perform ex-
periments that emulate behavioral paradigms from cognitive psychology or psy-
chophysics. The Psychlab task deﬁnition API is easy-to-use and highly ﬂexible, as
demonstrated by the range of paradigms we are making available along with this re-
port5. Psychlab also makes it easy to directly compare humans and artiﬁcial agents.
Human experiments with Psychlab replicate classical eﬀects from the literature like
the eﬃciency of orientation search and color search—reaction time independent of
set size—versus the ineﬃciency—linearly increasing reaction time with set size—
for the corresponding conjunction search (Treisman and Gelade, 1980; Wolfe and
Horowitz, 2017).
As an example for how Psychlab can be applied to deep RL, we undertook a
study of the visual psychophysics of the UNREAL deep RL agent (Jaderberg et al.,
2016), in comparison to human. We found that UNREAL was aﬀected by target size
and contrast in a similar manner to human observers, similarly shaped psychome-
tric functions. However, we found that UNREAL’s visual acuity was worse than
human-level, even when the human comparison was limited to observing Psychlab
at the same, quite low, input resolution as UNREAL (84 × 84). On the other hand,
UNREAL’s global form perception, as measured by a Glass pattern detection task,
was more similar to the human pattern of results. In particular, unipolar Glass pat-
tern detection had a similarly shaped psychometric function for human observers
and UNREAL while mixed polarity Glass patterns were found to be diﬃcult to de-
tect for both. On a visual search task, UNREAL did not show the classical reaction
time eﬀects that characterize human experiments with this paradigm.
These results on the visual psychophysics of UNREAL motivated us to test whether
UNREAL might learn more quickly to recognize larger target objects. This turned
5Available on github: insert_url_here. The current list is: visual acuity and contrast sensitivity
measurement, glass pattern detection, visual search, sequential comparison (change detection), ran-
dom dot motion discrimination, arbitrary visuomotor mapping, continuous recognition, and multi-
object tracking.
21

out to be the case. We also showed that this eﬀect can sometimes cause learning
to become stuck in suboptimal local optima corresponding to larger objects despite
the presence of smaller more rewarding objects. Its likely that these eﬀects play out
in numerous subtle ways in other deep RL tasks. Psychlab just makes it easy to
measure them. Another implication of this result was that an input preprocessing
step that expands the center of the observation—inspired by foveal vision—should
improve performance on tasks where the important objects tend to be at the center
of gaze. We tested this hypothesis with standard DM-lab laser tag tasks and found
that adding this "foveal" preprocessor to UNREAL improved performance on all
eight available laser tag levels. This story demonstrates how probing the details of
agent behavior with Psychlab can feed directly back into deep RL research to yield
new ideas for improving agent performance.
