1
AERIAL-CORE: AI-Powered Aerial Robots for
Inspection and Maintenance of Electrical Power
Infrastructures
A. Ollero, Fellow, IEEE, A. Suarez, C. Papaioannidis, I. Pitas, Life Fellow, IEEE, J.M. Marredo, V. Duong,
student member, IEEE, E. Ebeid, Senior member, IEEE, V. Kr´atk´y, M. Saska, C. Hanoune, A. Afifi, A. Franchi,
Fellow, IEEE, C. Vourtsis, D. Floreano, Fellow, IEEE, G. Vasiljevic, member, IEEE, S. Bogdan, Senior member,
IEEE, A. Caballero, F. Ruggiero, Senior member, IEEE, V. Lippiello, Senior member, IEEE, C. Matilla, G. Cioffi,
D. Scaramuzza, Senior member, IEEE, J. R. Martinez-de Dios, B. C. Arrue, C. Mart´ın, K. Zurad, C. Gait´an, J.
Rodriguez, A. Munoz, A. Viguria, Senior member, IEEE
Abstract—Large-scale infrastructures are prone to deteriora-
tion due to age, environmental influences, and heavy usage.
Ensuring their safety through regular inspections and main-
tenance is crucial to prevent incidents that can significantly
affect public safety and the environment. This is especially
pertinent in the context of electrical power networks, which,
while essential for energy provision, can also be sources of
forest fires. Intelligent drones have the potential to revolutionize
inspection and maintenance, eliminating the risks for human
operators, increasing productivity, reducing inspection time, and
improving data collection quality. However, most of the current
methods and technologies in aerial robotics have been trialed
primarily in indoor testbeds or outdoor settings under strictly
controlled conditions, always within the line of sight of human
operators. Additionally, these methods and technologies have
typically been evaluated in isolation, lacking comprehensive
integration. This paper introduces the first autonomous system
that combines various innovative aerial robots. This system is
designed for extended-range inspections beyond the visual line
of sight, features aerial manipulators for maintenance tasks,
and includes support mechanisms for human operators working
at elevated heights. The paper further discusses the successful
validation of this system on numerous electrical power lines, with
aerial robots executing flights over 10 kilometers away from their
ground control stations.
MULTIMEDIA
A video summarizing the AERIAL-CORE project can be
found at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Oyw7VwM7sCs.
I. INTRODUCTION
E
VERY year, many accidents occur due to the failure
of civil and industrial infrastructures. Their inspection
and maintenance (I&M) are mandatory to avoid these risks.
I&M of large infrastructures costs many billions every year,
and, in many cases, the risk for human workers is also very
high. Thus, work at elevated heights is the first cause of fatal
labor accidents in many countries. Electrical power grids are a
critical infrastructure with tens of millions of km (100 million
have been estimated worldwide and 5 million km only in
the European Union) of power lines connecting hundreds of
This work was supported by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 Research
and Innovation Program under grant agreement no. 871479 (AERIAL-CORE).
millions of customers. Frequent I&M is mandatory to avoid
power outages to many people and environmental impact
such as forest fires due to the contact of trees to the lines
(California’s second-largest wildfire was sparked when power
lines came in contact with a tree1) and also the collision and
electrocution of birds, which can also cause power cuts, power
outages, and start fires during periods of drought. Thus, in
some countries, installing bird diverters reflecting the solar
light to avoid bird collisions is mandatory.
Conventional inspection is very costly (e.g., inspection
using manned helicopters costs 150 C/km). The maintenance
activities are even more expensive and very risky for humans.
The total inspection and maintenance cost in Europe has been
estimated at more than 2.2 billion C/year. Climate change
is increasing the rate of natural disasters and more adverse
weather conditions that usually damage electrical towers and
cables. This fact demands the development of new technolo-
gies for their management in reducing the I&M operation
time and costs. Most market studies of drones point to an
exponential increase in the application for I&M 2. However,
up to now, inspection drones have remote human pilots and
operate mainly within the Visual Line of Sight (VLOS).
Autonomous aerial systems for inspection are very few, with
very constrained endurance/range of flight, and are subject to
environmental constraints, such as wind gusts, which deterio-
rate the inspection quality. The situation is even worse in aerial
manipulation. Most aerial robotic manipulation systems have
only been demonstrated in indoor testbeds or outdoors in very
controlled conditions (see review in [1]). Aerial and rolling
cantilever robots have been applied to I&M of power lines,
usually within VLOS and with different degrees of autonomy
(see [2] and its references).
The main contribution of this paper is the presentation,
for the first time, of different fully autonomous innovative
aerial robotics technologies and the integrated system for I&M
of electrical power lines, including autonomous inspection
Beyond Visual Line of Sight (BVLOS). This system has been
developed in the framework of the European Union (EU)-
1https://edition.cnn.com/2022/01/05/us/dixie-fire-power-lines-cause-pge
2https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/
arXiv:2401.02343v1  [cs.RO]  4 Jan 2024

2
funded AERIAL-CORE project 3. The BVLOS autonomous
inspection is executed through the use of innovative morphing
platforms capable of hovering for detailed inspection and
flying over long distances. It employs advanced object-tracking
methods and environmental mapping around the power lines,
facilitating the measurement of the distance between vege-
tation and conductors. Additionally, the system incorporates
multi-robot teaming for extended-range inspections, including
an autonomous battery charging feature. This enables the
comprehensive inspection of vast electrical power grids with
minimal human intervention.
The maintenance aspect of aerial robotic manipulation is
enhanced by the novel approach of perching on electrical
conductors. This technique significantly improves precision
and the amount of force applied compared to existing aerial
manipulation methods. Another innovative feature is the ca-
pability to recharge drone batteries using the energy from
the electrical lines themselves. Moreover, the system includes
aerial robotic co-workers designed to aid human operators
working at elevated heights. These robotic co-workers are
equipped with autonomous gesture recognition, can transport
tools, and can perform voltage checks.
The subsequent section of the paper details the AERIAL-
CORE mission and its validation scenarios. The three follow-
ing sections are dedicated to discussing the subsystems: long-
range inspection, manipulation, and co-working. The paper
then presents the integrated system as a whole. It concludes
with a section on the overall conclusions drawn from the re-
search and potential future applications of these technologies.
II. MISSION AND SCENARIO
The mission of the AERIAL-CORE EU project was to
demonstrate I&M in the medium voltage power lines located
in the aerial space of the ATLAS experimental flight center at
Villacarrillo (Spain), which has a segregated airspace reserve
with an approximate extension of more than 1000 km2.
Meeting drone regulations is the main bottleneck for de-
veloping the kind of applications presented in this paper.
Then, strong efforts were devoted to obtaining the authoriza-
tions fulfilling the European drone regulation 4 in ATLAS
and regular industrial operations. Particularly, the long-range
inspection was performed under the Specific Category. The
UAVs performing these flights operated under two different
regulatory conditions: (1) Operational authorization, which
grants the tilt-rotor aircraft presented in the next section to
fly distances of up to 10 km while inspecting power lines, and
(2) Standard STS-ES-02 Scenario, which enables multi-rotor
flights to be carried out up to 2 km from the ground control
station with observers and maintaining an altitude below 120 m
above ground level.
The aerial manipulators in Section IV are also of two
types. The DAP-C type for installing bird diverters (see IV-
A) is within the Open Category since the Maximum Take-
Off Weight (MTOW) of the aerial system is below 25 kg,
corresponding to Subcategory A3. On the other hand, the
3https://aerial-core.eu/
4https://www.easa.europa.eu/en/domains/civil-drones
MLMP robot(see IV-B) weighs 40 kg, so it cannot fit into the
Open Category, and was enclosed into the Specific Category
(with operational authorization).
Finally, in section V, the flights within the aerial co-working
subsystem were all included in the Open Category.
The AERIAL-CORE mission was performed as shown in
Figure 1. The utility company was first tasked to inspect
the network after a major storm. Then, the chief inspector
launched a long-range inspection (see Section III). The results
are in the report file, including missing bird diverters, a
missing charging station, and a foreign object hanging from
the line. Then, manipulation was launched to carry out the
installation of bird diverters and the charging station, which
was done using two different manipulation systems (see Figure
1 and Section IV), and a report is generated. Finally, it started
co-working, involving voltage checks, tool delivery, and the
multi-UAV-based monitoring of the safety of the human co-
worker removing the foreign object (detailed in Section V)
III. LONG-RANGE INSPECTION
A. Morphing for Long-Range Inspection
AERIAL-CORE
has
considered
different
morphing
schemes, including fixed wing-rotary wing morphing aerial
vehicles,
morphing
multi-rotors
with
morphing
between
omnidirectional and conventional configurations, and fixed
wing-flapping wing hybrid vehicles. In the following, we
summarize two platforms with morphing for long-range
inspection.
Marvin-5 is a UAV that can fly as a fixed wing and change
to the copter mode, varying the orientation of its four rotors for
Vertical Take-off and Landing (VTOL). When flying as a fixed
wing, the minimum aircraft’s stall speed is 13.30 m/s and the
total ground speed is over 20 m/s. These high speeds generate
defects in the data capture process, such as motion blur in the
images captured by the visual and thermal cameras, as well as
low-density point clouds generated by the LIDAR sensor. To
solve these issues, the natural solution would be to increase
the wing size to reduce the stall speed. However, the bigger
the wing, the more sensible the aircraft is in copter mode to
the wind. Then, the vehicle adapts its geometry to the different
flight modes: smallest wingspan for copter mode (VTOL and
hovering) and increased wingspan for optimal data capture
plane mode. The system can adapt its wingspan autonomously
during the flight to meet the optimal flight conditions. The
system increases the aircraft’s wingspan from 1.85 to 2.41 m
by moving two empty elements with the same geometry as
the rest of the wing. These empty elements are pushed by
one servo on each side to achieve a wing surface of 0.709 m2
from 0.527 m2, achieving a reduction of stall speed depending
on the pitch of the aircraft. In addition to the VTOL, the
wingspan can be adjusted dynamically during the flight to
reduce consumption in the parts of the flight where no data
is captured (connecting flights between power line segments).
The resulting industrial aircraft with morphing capabilities has
been called MARVIN-5-M (see Figure 2 Top) and can have
hundreds of operations without maintenance,

3
Fig. 1. AERIAL-CORE intelligent aerial robotic system for inspection and maintenance of large infrastructures.
In addition to the previously mentioned platform, a novel
drone, called Morpho, is capable of performing both hov-
ering and long-range horizontal flight was developed. It is
a bioinspired, quad, morphing, biplane tailsitter VTOL that
features four identical and independently actuated wings to
combine the advantages of copters and fixed-wing in a single
vehicle (Figure 2 bottom). Morpho can transform into a stable
and safe configuration with folded wings that will allow
it to operate efficiently and precisely in vertical flight and
while in proximity to humans and infrastructure. In horizontal
flight, Morpho transforms into an efficient aerodynamic shape,
enabling it to travel over several kilometers. The independent
dynamic wing actuation improves the drone’s energy efficiency
and maneuverability in hovering flight [3]. The morphing
capabilities allow Morpho to overcome the limitations of cur-
rent commercially available state-of-the-art VTOL platforms
with exposed wings and demonstrate energetic advantages in
hovering flight. The efficient vertical flight configuration with
retracted wings also sustains higher wind speeds than standard
VTOLs with constantly exposed wings. This prototype has
been tested up to wind speeds of 9 m/s while maintaining its
hovering position and demonstrating stable or reduced energy
consumption despite the gradual increase of the wind (Figure
2 Bottom (B)). Morpho is a 3.5 kg drone with a combined
flight time of around 17 minutes. The drone’s average speed
in vertical flight is around 8 km/h, while it is about 60
km/h in horizontal flight. The drone is capable of autonomous
waypoint navigation during flight. Morpho can transform from
hovering to horizontal flight and vice versa. The complete
flight envelope was demonstrated in ATLAS, where Morpho
performed hovering and horizontal flights in a realistic mission
scenario (video:https://youtu.be/KfKCRcdeYYQ).
B. Tracking
In AERIAL-CORE, we have developed an RGB-based [4]
and an Event-based [5] power line tracker, (see Figure 3).
Fig. 2. (Top) MARVIN-5-M. (Bottom) (A) Morpho in hovering flight with
different wing configurations. (B) Morpho in hovering experiments. Demon-
stration of the pitch angle related to wind speed and energy consumption.
The RGB-based power line tracker [4] is a novel algorithm
that extends the deep-learning–based object detector in [6] to
the case of power line detection. The perception module is
trained only on synthetic data and transfers zero-shot to real-
world images of power lines without fine-tuning. In this way,

4
we overcome the problem of the limited amount of annotated
data for supervised learning. The detector takes a single RGB
image as input and outputs end points of the detected power
lines in pixel coordinates. The center patch of each detection
is matched with the prediction of the previous patch using
the Hungarian method. We use a KLT tracker [7] to perform
tracking. To train our detector, we created a new synthetic
dataset for power line detection based on a simulator. Our
model is trained on circa 30k simulated images. We show
real-world deployment without fine-tuning on real images.
Event cameras [8] are inherently robust to motion blur and
have low latency and high dynamic range. Then, they are
advantageous for the autonomous inspection of power lines
with drones, where fast motions and challenging illumination
conditions are ordinary. Our event-based power line tracker [5]
identifies lines in the stream of events by detecting planes in
the spatio-temporal signal and tracking them through time.
Our algorithm can persistently track the power lines, with
a mean lifetime of the line 10 times longer than existing
approaches [9]. Both algorithms have been validated onboard
a quadrotor equipped with an Nvidia Jetson TX2 [10].
Fig. 3. (Left) Output of the event-based tracker [5]. Our algorithm assigns to
each tracked line a unique ID. (Right) Output of the RGB-based tracker [4].
Our algorithm assigns to each tracked line its inclination (positive or negative),
a confidence score, and a unique ID (not visualized).
C. Long-range Mapping
Mandatory power line inspections include the detection of
violations of safety distances between the power line and
electric towers and the surrounding vegetation. The traditional
approach is based on capturing images and LIDAR data using
manned helicopters and off-processing them in the office to ob-
tain –weeks later– the resulting segmented map, which is very
inefficient and leads to repetitions of data gathering flights.
In AERIAL-CORE, an online LIDAR-based 3D semantic
mapping system for UAV long-range power-line inspection has
been developed. The method is based on FAST-LIO2, which
was adapted by incorporating GNSS measurements to enable
robustness to scenarios with a lack of geometrical features
[11]. It was also enhanced with LIDAR-based segmentation
that classifies the map point cloud into Powerlines, Towers,
Vegetation, and Soil by combining LIDAR reflectivity region
growing (to differentiate between metallic and non-metallic
objects) and Principal Component Analysis (to consider the
point-cloud spatial distribution) [11].
The method was implemented onboard the LR-M aerial
robot developed by the Univ. of Seville. LR-M is based on the
DJI Matrice 600 platform (with BVLOS flight capabilities)
and uses as the primary sensor a Livox Horizon 3D solid-
state LIDAR, which provides non-repetitive scanning. A Jetson
NVIDIA NX Xavier was used for onboard computation and
logging. More than 80 experiments were conducted in BVLOS
mission scenarios with different conditions and vegetation.
Figure 4-Bottom shows the map obtained online in the 3.7 km
flight conducted in the final AERIAL-CORE demonstration.
D. Multi-UAV Inspection with Autonomous Landing
When powerful storms hit an area, they usually generate
foreign objects like trees and large plastic fabrics, falling to
power lines and generating power outages. In this context,
time is crucial to find the outage location and reestablish
the power supply to citizens. To cope with that, AERIAL-
CORE has developed a heterogeneous multi-UAV inspection
system with cognitive capabilities, which consists of two DJI
M210 multi-rotors and one DeltaQuad Pro fixed-wing aircraft
with VTOL capabilities. All these robots have been endowed
with autonomous navigation capabilities and are equipped
with high-resolution visual cameras to capture and stream
information from the environment.
A planning method for autonomous cooperative inspection
of electric power grids was developed to achieve safe and
efficient multi-UAV operation, minimizing the total inspec-
tion time. We exploit the heterogeneous capabilities of the
UAVs and integrate terrain models for safe and accurate
positioning and energy consumption models based on the UAV
aerodynamics (including the wind effect and other weather
conditions) to predict the optimal time to recharge the bat-
teries. Moreover, due to the UAV’s limited battery capacities,
charging stations along the operation area are also considered
within the planner for long-endurance operations. Whenever
a UAV needs to land on a charging station, it uses visual
servoing to enable accurate autonomous landing (see Figure
4 Top right). In the future, the charging stations using the
magnetic field from the line (see Section IV-D) will be used.
The full system described above has been applied to the
inspection of the power grid located in the surroundings of
ATLAS (see Figure 4 Top left), demonstrating its capability
to inspect autonomously and according to the end-user require-
ments of more than 10 km of power lines in 10 minutes.
IV. AERIAL MANIPULATION FOR MAINTENANCE
A. Dual Arm Manipulation with Cart
Motivated by the benefits in terms of energy efficiency,
accuracy, and reliability of performing the manipulation op-
erations in perching conditions instead of doing it on flight
[12], the dual arm platform with rolling base described in [13]
has been applied in the installation of bird flight diverters on
a real power line. The platform consists of a lightweight and
compliant anthropomorphic dual-arm system LiCAS A1 (3 kg
weight, 0.7 kg payload) equipped with a servo-driven rolling
base (0.15 m/s speed) and magnetic grippers for grasping
the devices [13], using a quadrotor UAV (4 kg payload, 10
min flight time) with RTK-GPS for controlling the position
and trajectory of the platform. The operation, illustrated in

5
Fig. 4.
(Top) Autonomous inspection of ATLAS power grid by multi-UAV team: planned trajectories (top-left), a snapshot of the video streamed by one
multi-rotor when a plastic foreign object hung from the line is detected (top-center) and autonomous landing on charging station (top-right). (Bottom) The
resulting 3D map was obtained in the final AERIAL-CORE experiments.
Figure 5, comprises three phases: 1) the aerial deployment of
the dual arm robot on the power line using the multi-rotor,
which is detached when a preloaded hook-handle mechanism
is released once the arms are supported on the line, 2) the
installation of the devices carried by the manipulator, and 3)
the aerial retrieval using a double cable suspended magnetic
hook mechanism. Each of the phases is executed in less than
two minutes. Stable perching is achieved since the center of
mass of the dual arm system is approximately 5 cm below the
cable that supports the rolling base, similar to a pendulum,
and thanks to the symmetric mass distribution of the arms.
The device installation operation is programmed as a sequence
of way-points for both end-effectors, detaching the device
from the magnetic gripper by generating an impulsive motion
against the cable, relying on the mechanical joint compliance
of the arms to support the physical interaction.
B. Main Local Manipulation Platform
Rather than deploying a cart on the line and returning the
UAV, the system’s second platform was designed to explore a
more general approach to the problem. The Main Local Ma-
nipulation Platform (MLMP) is an all-in-one solution, a single
UAV that can fly to the line and detect it, perch autonomously
on the line, and install or uninstall different devices as it moves
along the cable. The voltage of the line does not need to
be removed during the operation since the system has been
designed and tested to handle voltages up to 125 kV because
the grounded metal frame, which serves as a Faraday cage by
protecting electronic components from electromagnetic inter-
ference while absorbing voltage arcs produced by the power
Fig. 5.
(Top) Aerial deployment. (Middle) devices installation. (Bottom)
aerial retrieval of the dual arm rolling robot operating on the power line.
line. The specially designed perching mechanism enables the
system to perform the perching maneuver and to move along
the power line easily and quickly by means of its integrated
pulleys connected to DC motors. Additionally, the frame can
integrate various tools and devices, such as the robotic arm that
performs the manipulation. With a MTOW of 45 kg, MLMP
is capable of flying for approximately 17 minutes, enough
time to perform up to 5 perching maneuvers or a complete
multi-device installation operation on a power line. MLMP
was validated through many experiments (Figure 6), including

6
the installation and removal of a clip-type bird diverter and
the installation of a charging station, which is more complex
and heavy. Both operations were performed multiple times
on the actual power line with excellent results, demonstrating
that MLMP is a powerful and robust system and the first of
its kind capable of autonomously perching on a power line,
moving along it, and manipulating devices with a robotic arm.
Fig. 6.
(Top) Clip-type bird diverter installation with MLMP. (Bottom)
charging station installation with the same platform.
C. Manipulator and End-Effector for the Main Platform
The robotic arm that is part of the MLMP has been designed
explicitly for high payload manipulation. The manipulator is
an anthropomorphic arm featuring six degrees of freedom,
accompanied by a gear-based spherical wrist, to achieve a
superior level of dexterity and enable the arm to accomplish all
the designated tasks. The design of the arm discussed in detail
in [14], boasts an impressive payload of 5 kg while weighing
only 3 kg; the remarkable payload/weight ratio of 1.67 sets it
apart from other similar solutions proposed in the literature.
A different end-effector (EE) was mounted on the robotic
arm for each validation experiment with the MLMP. For the
installation of the clip-type bird diverters, a simple EE with
one degree of freedom was made, which pushes the bird
diverter mechanism until it closes (see Figure 7 Top Left). For
the installation of the small charging station, the EE with one
degree of freedom was developed together with the charging
station [15] (see Figure 7 Bottom Left). This EE holds the
charging station securely in place during transportation to the
power line. The charging station is attached to the power line
and released from the EE by actuating it.
D. Charging Stations and their Installation
The magnetic field generated by the power line is the
energy source for the charging station, which allows drones
to recharge while inspecting high-voltage power lines. A
very lightweight charging station has been developed. The
station incorporates a split-core current transformer for energy
harvesting and an electronic circuit to convert the harvested
energy to DC for recharging the station’s battery (see Figure 7
Bottom Middle and Right). Further optimization of the design
is achieved through the integration of the Transfer Window
Alignment method with the Perturb and Observe algorithm
and a Silicon Steel Core [16]. Experimental results revealed
a significant 58.6% increase in harvested power compared to
traditional methods. Notably, our proposed approach allows
the charging circuit to automatically identify the maximum
power point, regardless of fluctuations in the current on the
power lines, eliminating the need to sense the primary current.
A larger charger station capable of providing sufficient
energy to charge heavy platforms was also developed.
E. Teleoperation System
In addition to the autonomous operation described in IV-
B, a teleoperation system has been implemented. The IMU-
based teleoperation method for the robotic arm on MLMP
was validated under realistic conditions for installing clip-type
bird diverters (Figure 7 Top Right). The operator is equipped
with 8 IMUs attached to different parts of his upper body,
which in turn are used to estimate his upper body pose.
The velocity references for each joint of the robotic arm are
generated based on the operator’s pose so that the operator’s
resting position gives a velocity of zero for all joints. Feedback
from the platform to the operator is provided via a camera
image projected onto the operator’s smart glasses, allowing
the operator to see the platform and simultaneously adopt a
first-person perspective of the platform.
Fig. 7. (Top) Left: Clip-type bird diverter end-effector. Right: Installation of
clip-type bird diverter with IMU-based teleoperation method. (Bottom) Left:
Small recharging station end-effector. Middle: The fully integrated system of
the lightweight charging station (1 - the electronics compartment; 2 - split-core
current transformer; 3 - V-shaped landing station). Right: The fully integrated
system of the drone HolyBro QAV250 and the receiver assembly.
V. AERIAL CO-WORKING
A. Gesture Recognition
In aerial co-working scenarios, human worker-UAV inter-
action and collaboration are critical. In this direction, we
developed a human worker detection and gesture recognition
system that can run smoothly onboard the UAV, enabling
visual communication between human workers and UAV via
gestures. First, RGB images from the onboard camera are
processed on the fly for human detection and tracking. A
fast deep neural object detector based on Single-Shot Detector

7
Fig. 8.
(Top) Visualization of all outputs (bounding box, 2D skeleton,
predicted gesture) of the developed gesture recognition pipeline overlaid on
the corresponding input video frame. (Bottom) Voltage check on ATLAS.
The measured potential is compared to that of a ground cable to obtain the
power line voltage, which is displayed on the ground station for the operator.
(SSD) [17] is employed in combination with a custom LDES-
ODDA visual tracker. The output of this pipeline is a predicted
bounding box for the tracked human in each input image
where the human is visible, as depicted in Figure 8-Top.
The predicted bounding boxes are then used in the gesture
recognition pipeline. To maximize human worker detection
accuracy, both the detector and the tracker were pre-trained
on a manually annotated dataset5 and then fine-tuned using
videos of a human operator wearing safety equipment.
Given a sequence of images captured by an RGB camera
of the UAV and the corresponding bounding boxes of the
tracked human, the gesture recognition module recognizes
the performed gestures from a predefined set (e.g., extend
one arm to the side). The gesture recognition proceeds as a
sequential pipeline. First, each video frame is cropped using
the corresponding bounding box of the tracked human worker.
Then, our method, as described in [18], extracts a 2D human
skeleton from each input image in pixel coordinates. The last
N outputs of the skeleton extractor, covering N successive
video frames, are stored in a FIFO buffer that is updated
with a newly extracted 2D skeleton every k video frame.
This buffer is subsequently processed by our gesture classifier
[19], a lightweight Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) neural
architecture that predicts the type of the performed gesture.
The visualization of all the gesture recognition pipeline outputs
for an example video frame can be seen in Figure 8-Top. The
5https://aiia.csd.auth.gr/open-multidrone-datasets
pipeline was trained on a large, manually annotated dataset of
gestures6, and was further fine-tuned to perform effectively on
aerial images. The parameters N, k were empirically tuned to
N = 9 and k = 1, based on the camera’s update rate and
the pipeline’s performance when running onboard the UAV.
Gesture recognition can also be used to command the voltage
checking described below.
B. Aerial Co-Worker (ACW) Platform with Interaction Control
Laws and Voltage Checking
The ACW developed for co-working is a hexacopter with
fixedly-tilted rotors, enabling full actuation and thus a precise,
independent control of both its position and orientation, which
is key when working close to humans. It has a 360° laser
sensor, allowing it to navigate with centimeter precision in
any environment with a known 3D model. The platform has
been validated in two applications of ATLAS: voltage check
described below and tool delivery (Section V-C). For each use
case, a specific payload was integrated into the hexacopter.
The voltage check application aims to measure the voltage
on a power line to make sure it is safe for a human to carry
out a maintenance task. To achieve this, a contact arm was
integrated into the ACW, as depicted in Figure 8-Bottom. The
tip’s shape was designed to facilitate contact with a conductor,
and it is equipped with force and potential sensors.
To control the ACW’s behavior during a physical interac-
tion task, an impedance controller is designed. This control
strategy modulates the robot’s dynamics by imposing the
desired inertia, damping, and stiffness on aerial robot behavior
while in contact. This desired impedance is achieved using
an admittance filter as an outer loop controller that provides
reference signals to the internal loop motion controller. In
particular, the admittance filter modifies the robot’s reference
trajectory based on the impedance parameters and sensed
forces and torques, resulting in a new trajectory to be tracked
by the aerial robot’s internal motion controller. The choice
of using an admittance filter in a hierarchical way with the
motion controller allows for enhancing the motion controller
for high-performance trajectory tracking in the presence of
disturbances, such as wind.
C. Tool Delivery
Another application of the ACW is to deliver a tool to
a worker operating in a hard-to-reach area, for example,
while carrying out power line maintenance tasks. The worker
guides the delivery using gestures (arm up, arms crossed, etc.)
detected by the ACW applying the gesture recognition system
described in Section V-A. We integrated into the hexacopter a
camera and Jetson AGX Xavier onboard computer to run the
gesture recognition, as well as a delivery system consisting of
a pulley and clamp.
The subsystem has been demonstrated successfully by hand-
ing out a tool to a worker on a lift near a line (see Figure 9).
The ACW flew to approximately 2 m above and 1 m next to the
lift to ensure the worker’s safety and the distance regulations.
6https://aiia.csd.auth.gr/auth-uav-gesture-dataset

8
Fig. 9.
Tool delivery demonstration. (Left) The gesture ”palms together”
causes the pulley to descend. (Middle) The operator retrieves the tool. (Right)
The gesture ”arm up” commands the pulley to rise.
Then, the worker gestured to the ACW to assist the delivery
and retrieve the tool.
D. Multi-UAV for Co-Worker Safety
The safety ACWs have been designed to monitor human
operators during power line inspection and maintenance tasks
while being able to offer the operator detailed additional, in-
operation views of the power line infrastructure. The UAV
developed for this application is built on the Holybro X500
frame, with a MTOW of approximately 3.5 kg. It is equipped
with a downward and upward-oriented depth camera and 3D
LIDAR for obstacle detection and human operator localization,
RTK GPS for UAV localization, and a front-facing RGB
camera for power line inspection and monitoring the operator
during the work.
In the monitoring phase, the formation of UAVs observes
the human operator to ensure adherence to the safety rules
of maintenance operations. The leading UAV uses 3D LIDAR
data to detect the human worker on the mobile lift platform.
Based on this detection, the UAV adjusts its position to
provide the required view of the scene while additional UAVs
maintain a formation defined in relation to the position of
the monitored object and camera optical axis of the leading
UAV, thereby offering additional perspectives of the monitored
scene. A multi-stage, MPC-based cooperative motion planning
approach [20], running onboard the UAVs, navigates the
formation through the environment while ensuring collision
avoidance and continuous monitoring of the worker.
The safety ACWs can serve as inspection ACWs in the
same mission, assisting the operator in getting detailed data
about the power lines from various viewpoints during ongoing
maintenance operations. An arbitrary number of UAVs can be
tasked to switch from safety monitoring to inspection mode.
Utilizing the same motion planning approach [20], the UAVs
in inspection mode are navigated to the desired viewpoints
while still avoiding collisions with other UAVs and obstacles.
Once the inspection task is completed, the UAVs revert to
monitoring mode and return to their designated safety moni-
toring positions. The whole system, relying fully on onboard
computation, was validated through numerous experiments in
scenarios, including both monitoring and inspection tasks. A
snapshot from the real-world validation is shown in Figure 10.
VI. INTEGRATED AERIAL-CORE SYSTEM
The integrated AERIAL-CORE system is the application
managing the operation logistics of the three subsystems
presented in Sections III, IV, and V. The process consists
of the following steps: a) The Chief Inspector (CI) receives
instructions from the utility (electric power distribution) com-
pany (1 in Figure 1); b) The CI starts with the long-range
inspection using the integrated AERIAL-CORE system by
including all the necessary information in it; c) The inspection
team 1, consisting of multiple workers and robots, receives the
mission; d) The team performs the long-range inspection (2
in Figure 1) by using the methods and technologies in section
III and the workers send feedback information to the CI by
using the AERIAL-CORE system; e) Once the inspection is
completed, the workers take the results (report 3 in Figure 1)
and send them to the CI to be analyzed; f) The CI activates
the manipulation team 2 (4 in Figure 1) and the co-working
team 3 (6 in Figure 1); g) The co-working team starts the
operation by checking if the power line has voltage or not
following Section V and the results are also sent to the CI;
h) The manipulation team performs the installation following
Section IV, and the results (report 5 in Figure 1) are sent to the
CI; i) A worker needs to do a manual operation by climbing
the tower, or using an elevation platform; j) Once there, he/she
notices that forgets one tool and then calls to the co-worker
robot to bring it to him/her following Section V; k) The foreign
object is removed and a report (7 in Figure 1) is sent to the
chief inspector. Finally, the CI sends the report (8 in Figure
1) to the electric power distribution company.
All the operations were performed successfully in a real-
time demonstration on October 27, 2023.
VII. CONCLUSION
The relevance and interest of intelligent aerial robotics
systems and their application to I&M of electrical power distri-
bution systems have been demonstrated for the first time in this
paper. Multiple heterogeneous intelligent aerial robots flying
BVLOS under European (EASA) and national civil regulations
can cooperatively inspect hundreds of kilometers of power
lines. They can perform VTOL and complete detailed inspec-
tions at low velocity or in hovering and morph to minimize
energy consumption during the long-range inspection. They
can perform autonomous tracking of the lines and mapping of
the vegetation near the lines, which is very important to avoid
forest fires. They can also perch on the lines to recharge the
battery or to realize maintenance tasks by means of robotic
manipulators, including the installation of bird diverters to
protect natural life. The aerial robots can also help human
workers at high altitudes by measuring the voltage of the
line, providing them with tools and monitoring their safety. A
video with a summary of the AERIAL-CORE project can be
found at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Oyw7VwM7sCs.
The expected impact of this work is very high because the
I&M of electrical power lines has a cost of many billions in
the world (more than 2.2 billion euros only in Europe), and
there is also a direct impact on the safety of the workers.
The work presented in this paper can also open new paths,
such as implementing drone highways over the lines, with the
robots perching on the line to charge batteries.

9
Fig. 10. Snapshot showing safety monitoring of a human worker by a team of UAVs (highlighted by blue and green circles). In the top corners are the images
from onboard cameras of particular UAVs, while the image in the bottom left corner shows the occupancy map built from the onboard LIDAR together with
the detection of the human operator (green sphere in red rectangle).
VIII. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the EU Horizon 2020 Research
and Innovation Program under grant agreement no. 871479.
