arXiv:1802.00748v1  [cs.LG]  2 Feb 2018
Short-term Memory of Deep RNN
Claudio Gallicchio
Department of Computer Science, University of Pisa
Largo Bruno Pontecorvo 3 - 56127 Pisa, Italy
Abstract.
The extension of deep learning towards temporal data pro-
cessing is gaining an increasing research interest. In this paper we inves-
tigate the properties of state dynamics developed in successive levels of
deep recurrent neural networks (RNNs) in terms of short-term memory
abilities. Our results reveal interesting insights that shed light on the na-
ture of layering as a factor of RNN design. Noticeably, higher layers in a
hierarchically organized RNN architecture results to be inherently biased
towards longer memory spans even prior to training of the recurrent con-
nections. Moreover, in the context of Reservoir Computing framework,
our analysis also points out the beneﬁt of a layered recurrent organization
as an eﬃcient approach to improve the memory skills of reservoir models.
1
Introduction
Deep learning is an attractive area of research in constant growth [1]. In partic-
ular, in the neuro-computing ﬁeld, the study of deep neural networks composed
by multiple non-linear layers has proved able to learn feature representations at
progressively higher levels of abstraction, leading to eminent performance e.g.
in vision tasks. Extending the beneﬁts of depth to recurrent neural networks
(RNNs) is an intriguing research direction that is recently gaining an increas-
ing attention [2].
In this context, the study of deep RNNs has pointed out
that hierarchically organized recurrent models have the potentiality of devel-
oping multiple time-scales representations of the input history in their internal
states, which can be of great help, e.g., when dealing with text processing tasks
[3]. More recently, studies in the area of Reservoir Computing (RC) [4, 5] have
shown that the ability of developing such a structured state space organization
is indeed an intrinsic property of layered RNN architectures [6, 7]. The study
of deep RC networks on the one hand allowed the development of eﬃciently
trained deep models for learning in the temporal domain, and on the other hand
it paved the way to further studies on the properties of deep RNNs dynamics
even in the absence of (or prior to) learning of the recurrent connections.
An aspect of prominent relevance in the study of dynamical models is rep-
resented by the analysis of their memory abilities. In this paper, exploiting the
ground provided by the deep RC framework, we explicitly address the problem
of analyzing the short-term memory capacity of individual (progressively higher)
layers in deep recurrent architectures. Contributing to highlight the intrinsic di-
versiﬁcation of transient state dynamics in hierarchically constructed recurrent
networks, our investigation aims at shedding more light on the bias of layering
in the RNN architectural design. Framed in the RC area, our analysis is also
intended to provide insights on the process of reservoir network construction.

2
Deep Stacked RNN
We consider deep RNNs [3] whose recurrent architecture is obtained by a stacked
composition of multiple non-linear recurrent hidden layers, as illustrated in
Fig. 1. The state computation proceeds by following the hierarchical network
organization, from the lowest layer to the highest one. Speciﬁcally, at each time
step t the ﬁrst recurrent layer in the network is fed by the external input while
each successive layer is fed by the activation of the previous one.
Fig. 1: Hierarchical organization of hidden layers in a deep RNN.
Under a dynamical system perspective, a deep RNN implements an input-
driven discrete-time non-linear dynamical system, in which the state evolution
in each layer i is ruled by a state transition function F (i). Here we denote the
input dimension by NU and assume, for the sake of simplicity, that each hidden
layer contains NR recurrent units. In the following, we use u(t) and x(i)(t),
respectively, to indicate the external input and state of i-th hidden layer at time
step t. Based on this notation, the state in the ﬁrst layer is updated according
to the following equation:
x(1)(t) = F (1)(u(t), x(1)(t −1)) = tanh(W(1)u(t) + ˆ
W(1)x(1)(t −1)),
(1)
where W(1) ∈RNR×NU is the input weight matrix and ˆ
W(1) ∈RNR×NR is the
recurrent weight matrix for the ﬁrst layer. For each successive layer i > 1, the
state is updated according to:
x(i)(t) = F (i)(x(i−1)(t), x(i)(t−1)) = tanh(W(i)x(i−1)(t)+ ˆ
W(i)x(i)(t−1)), (2)
where W(i) ∈RNR×NR collects the weights for the inter-layer connections from
layer i −1 to layer i and ˆ
W(i) ∈RNR×NR is the recurrent weight matrix for
layer i. Note that in both above eq. 1 and 2, a tanh non-linearity is used as
element-wise applied activation function of recurrent units and bias terms are
omitted for the ease of notation. Here it is also worth observing that, although
the deep recurrent dynamics globally evolve as a whole, locally to each layer i
the state information coming from the previous level i −1 actually acts as an
independent input information that encodes the history of the external input up
to the present time step.
Taking aside the aspects related to learning of the recurrent connections (and
the speciﬁc aspects involved by diﬀerent training strategies), here we focus our
analysis on the case of untrained deep recurrent dynamics. To do so, we resort to

the recently introduced deep RC framework [6], according to which the recurrent
part of the deep RNN architecture is left untrained after initialization subject to
stability constraints [7]. Speciﬁcally, the network is initialized with weights from
a uniform distribution in [−1, 1] and then re-scaled to control for each layer i
the values of ∥W(i)∥2 and ρ( ˆ
W(i)), where ρ(·) denotes the spectral radius of its
matrix argument (i.e. the maximum among the eigenvalues magnitudes). These
quantities are hyper-parameters of the model that inﬂuence its state dynamics
and that are typically set to small values in order to guarantee a stable regime,
a standard initialization approach also for trained networks. Notice that this
framework allows us on the one hand to investigate the ﬁxed characterization of
state dynamics in successive levels of a deep RC network, and on the other hand
to study of the bias due to layering in deep recurrent architectures.
Output computation is implemented by using an output layer of size NY .
Though diﬀerent choices are possible for the state-output connection settings
(see e.g. [3, 8]), following from our analysis aims here we consider output modules
that are individually applied to each layer of the recurrent network. This enables
us to study separately the characteristics of the state behavior emerging at the
diﬀerent levels in the architecture. We use linear output modules, such that for
each layer i the output is computed as y(i)(t) = W(i)
outx(i)(t), where matrices
W(i)
out ∈RNY ×NR are trained for each layer individually, using a direct method
such as pseudo-inversion. In the RC framework this setting also ensures the
same training cost for every layer.
3
Experiments
We investigate the short-term memory abilities of deep RNN architectures by
resorting to the Memory Capacity (MC) task [9]. This aims at measuring the
extent to which past input events can be recalled from present state activations.
Speciﬁcally, the recurrent system is tested in its ability to reconstruct delayed
versions of a stationary uni-variate driving input signal (NU = NY = 1), with
the MC at layer i computed as a squared correlation coeﬃcient, as follows:
MC(i) =
∞
X
k=1
MC(i)
k
=
∞
X
k=1
Cov2(u(t −k), y(i)
k (t))
V ar(u(t)) V ar(y(i)
k (t))
,
(3)
where y(i)
k (t) is the activation of the output unit trained to reconstruct the u(t−k)
signal from the state of layer i, while Cov and V ar respectively denote the
covariance and variance operators. In order to maximally exercise the memory
capability of the systems, we used i.i.d. input signals from a uniform distribution
in [−0.8, 0.8], i.e. an unstructured temporal stream in which u(t) does not carry
information on previous inputs . . . , u(t−2), u(t−1). For this task, we considered
a 6000 time-step long sequence, where the ﬁrst 5000 time steps were used for
training1 and the remaining 1000 for MC assessment.
1The ﬁrst 1000 time steps were considered as transient to washout the initial conditions.

We considered deep RNNs with NL = 10 recurrent layers, each of which
containing NR = 100 recurrent units. Input and inter-layer weights were re-
scaled such that ∥W(i)∥2 = 1 for i = 1, . . . , NL. Weights of recurrent connections
were re-scaled to the same spectral radius in all the layers, i.e. ρ = ρ( ˆ
W(i)) for
i = 1, . . . , NL, with ρ values ranging in [0.1, 1.5]. Note that, under the considered
experimental settings, for higher values of ρ > 1 the network dynamics tend
to exhibit a chaotic behavior, as shown in previous works in terms of local
Lyapunov exponents [10, 11]. Although recurrent dynamics in chaotic regimes
are generally not interesting under a practical point of view, in this paper we
consider also these cases (ρ > 1) for the scope of analysis. For each choice of
ρ we independently generated 50 networks realizations (with diﬀerent seeds for
random generation), and averaged the achieved results over such realizations.
For practical assessment of the MC values, it is useful to recall a basic the-
oretical result provided in [9], which states that the MC of an NR-dimensional
recurrent system driven by an i.i.d. uni-variate input signal is upper bounded
by NR. Accordingly, we considered a maximum value for the delay k in eq. 3
equal to twice the size of the state space, i.e. 200, which is suﬃcient to account
for the correlations that are practically involved in our experimental settings.
Fig.
2 shows the MC values achieved in correspondence of progressively
higher layers in the architecture, and for the diﬀerent cases of ρ considered for
network initialization. Results clearly point out that for recurrent networks in
the ordered regime (ρ not exceeding 1) higher layers in the deep architecture are
naturally biased toward progressively longer short-term memory abilities. For
networks in a chaotic regime (ρ above 1) higher layers tend to show a poorer
MC. The MC performance shown in Fig. 2 has a peak in correspondence of
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1  
1.2
1.4
Spectral Radius ( )
10
9 
8 
7 
6 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
Layer (i)
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Memory Capacity (MC(i))
Fig. 2: MC of diﬀerent layers in deep RNNs for increasing values of ρ.

ρ = 0.9, in which case the score improves from 22.2 in the 1st layer, up to
50.1 in the 10th layer. Interestingly, our results also highlight the eﬀectiveness
of layering and its striking advantage as a convenient process for RC networks
architectural design. The memory of an NR-dimensional reservoir can be indeed
easily improved by using an underlying stack of recurrent layers to ﬁlter the
external input signal. Note that such improvement comes at the only price of a
modestly increased cost for the state computation (that increases linearly with
the number of layers), while the cost for output training remains the same.
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Delay (k)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Memory Capacity (MCk)
layer 1
layer 4
layer 7
layer 10
Fig. 3: k-delay memory capacity of deep RNN layers at increasing height.
We further inquire into the memory structure developed by the layers of
deep RNNs by analyzing the MC values for increasing delays. Fig. 3 shows the
forgetting curves of individual (progressively higher) layers, i.e. the values of
MC(i)
k
as a function of k, obtained in the case of ρ = 0.9. The plot in Fig. 3
clearly reveals the diversiﬁcation of memory spans in the components of the
deep recurrent architecture: higher layers are able to store information about
past inputs for longer times. While for the 1st layer the memory recall is almost
null after delay 30, the dynamics developed in the 10th layer lead to a value that
is above zero even for a delay of 60. We can also see that input signals with
smaller delays are better reconstructed in the lower layers, while higher layers are
characterized by a peak that tends to shift to the right (more evident for layer
10 in Fig. 3), and by a slope of the forgetting curve that tends to be increasingly
smoother. Besides, the highlighted diversiﬁcation of short-term memory spans
among the successive layers in the deep RNN architecture is also interesting as
a way of characterizing (in a quantitative way) the intrinsic richness of state
representations globally developed by the deep recurrent system.

4
Conclusions
In this paper we have provided a computational analysis of short-term memory
in deep RNNs. To do so, we have resorted to the MC task as a mean to quantify
the memory of state dynamics in successive levels of a deep recurrent system.
Our results clearly showed that higher layers in a hierarchically organized
RNN architecture are inherently featured, even prior to learning of recurrent
connections, by an improved ability to latch input information for longer time
spans. The analysis provided in this paper also revealed interesting insights on
the diversiﬁcation of the memory structure developed within deep stacked RNN
dynamics, showing that higher layers tend to forget the past input history more
slowly and more smoothly compared lower ones. Furthermore, framed within
the deep RC framework, our results provided evidence that support the practical
beneﬁt of the layered recurrent organization as a way to improve the memory
skills of reservoir networks in a cost-eﬀective fashion.
Overall, though further studies in this research direction are certainly de-
manded (e.g. on the theoretical side), we believe that the outcomes provided in
this paper can contribute to better understand and characterize the bias due to
layering in deep recurrent neural models.
