Computer Vision Based Parking Optimization
System
Siddharth Chandrasekaran, Jeffrey Matthew Reginald, Wei Wang, Ting Zhu
Department of Computer Science and Electrical Engineering
University of Maryland, Baltimore County

Abstract—An improvement in technology is linearly related to
time and time-relevant problems. It has been seen that as time
progresses, the number of problems humans face also increases.
However, technology to resolve these problems tends to improve
as well [1]. One of the earliest existing problems which started
with the invention of vehicles was parking. The ease of resolving
this problem using technology has evolved over the years but
the problem of parking still remains unsolved. The main reason
behind this is that parking doesn’t only involve one problem
but it consists of a set of problems within itself. One of these
problems is the occupancy detection of the parking slots in a
distributed parking ecosystem. In a distributed system, users
would ﬁnd preferable parking spaces as opposed to random
parking spaces. In this paper, we propose a web-based application
as a solution for parking space detection in different parking
spaces. The solution is based on Computer Vision (CV) [2] [3] and
is built using the Django framework written in Python 3.0. The
solution works to resolve the occupancy detection problem along
with providing the user the option to determine the block based
on availability and his preference. The evaluation results for
our proposed system are promising and efﬁcient. The proposed
system can also be integrated with different systems and be used
for solving other relevant parking problems.
Index Terms—computer vision, smart parking system, parking
space detection
I. INTRODUCTION
In the current world which we live in, the number of people
using vehicles is increasing day by day and with the invention
of the automatic vehicles and the rising technologies revolving
around it, it is safe to say that almost all individuals will own
a manual or automatic vehicle in the near future. With the
increase in innovation level comes the problem of updating
the existing solutions to adapt to the new changes incoming
or might be coming in the future [4]. One such solution is the
parking management system. In addition to that, time is of the
essence for everyone. So, spending a substantial amount of
time to ﬁgure out the parking slot and then heading towards
the next task is unsatisfactory for almost anyone owning a
vehicle. This issue comprehensively increases in frustration
when there is a distributed parking management system. The
number of parking blocks and slots one needs to check before
parking substantially increases when it comes to distributed
parking.
A large majority of the existing solutions for occupancy
detection is with the use of sensor-based devices [5]. This
kind of architecture is usually built into malls and large
arenas with distributed parking slots. It usually comes with a
one-to-one module i.e. each parking slot will be associated
with one sensor. So, it becomes a linear relationship between
parking slots and sensors. In addition to that, with each sensor
comes the cost of setting it up, recharging it, maintaining the
sensor in different locations or environments thus making it
inefﬁcient when it comes to large areas. This paper proposes
an approach to detect parking spots [6] with the help of
ﬁxed cameras in speciﬁc locations. It assumes that the spatial
location of an n-number of cameras would be able to cover
all the parking spaces and that there are preferable parking
slots for each individual instead of the individuals being
comfortable with parking anywhere within the distributed
range of the parking system.
The proposed approach can be digested into the following
steps:
Step 1: Detection of the parking spaces beforehand: The
solution requires a manual step in which the technical support
person for the solution needs to mark the parking spaces in
each parking slot in the distributed parking system.
Step 2: Registration of the user to the solution: Since it is a
web-based application, the user needs to register himself into
the system to access the application. All the security aspects
regarding registration will be taken care of in this module.
Step 3: Schedule Monitoring/Creation: Our approach is built
based on a school-based prototype. Hence, the user can choose
which classes he has enrolled in.
Step 4: Dynamic video updates: The video captured by the
ﬁxed camera needs to be saved and updated into the folder
from which the solution can pick it up and render it.
Step 5: Slot detection: The user will be able to look at the
current slots available and will be advised as to which slot he
needs to park in as per his schedule [Step 3].
Even Though our prototype is based on a school or univer-
sity based use-case, it is relevant to different real-world use-
cases as well. For example, before an individual heads into a
mall, it will be greatly beneﬁcial to the individual to ﬁgure out
which slots are available and based on the shop(s) he needs
to visit, he can decide on the same. Our proposed solution is
also open to integration with new components which can be
useful in ﬁguring out resolutions for different issues as well.
arXiv:2201.00095v1  [cs.CV]  1 Jan 2022

The evaluation results which we received for our solution are
promising and can only improve which is absolutely necessary.
Another perspective of parking involves security of the
vehicle, billing for the vehicle along with estimation of parking
billing ﬁnances. All of these issues aren’t primary to the park-
ing management system but they do exist and will continue
to increase in volume and complexity as the system evolves.
The unique nature of our application provides the ability to
integrate sub-solutions which resolve the issues mentioned
above into the solution and create an overall efﬁcient parking
management solution which deals with the primary as well as
the lower-priority issues related to parking.
II. PREVIOUS WORK
Parking detecting systems were built in the early 2000s
using traditional hand-crafted elements. The majority of the
current solutions rely on sensors to determine whether each
parking space is occupied. Static trafﬁc refers to car park-
ing, which includes both short-term parking for passengers
hopping on and off, as well as long-term parking in parking
areas. Design and layout, insufﬁcient regulation of land use
indicators, fewer parking spaces in parking lots, fewer parking
spaces in public buildings, and a severe road occupation
phenomenon are all examples of static trafﬁc difﬁculties. The
above situation demonstrates that the parking problem is very
acute. Design and layout issues, inadequate control of property
use metrics, very few parking spaces in parking areas, very
few parking areas in public buildings, as well as an extreme
road occupation phenomenon are all examples of static trafﬁc
issues. The above situation demonstrates how serious the
parking issue is.
As a result, enhancing parking spot detecting technology has
risen to the top of the priority list for easing parking issues.
Studies have discovered numerous parking space recognition
methods to enable drivers to park and access the garage more
swiftly with real-time parking space data in recent times,
with the continuous development of parking space detection
methods. Researchers have developed a range of parking space
detection techniques, which can be split into fully automatic
and semi-automatic detection techniques, as a result of the fast
development in need for parking assistance systems in the last
couple years. There is no need for manual intervention when
using completely automatic parking space detecting systems.
This device detects the required parking place and chooses it
for you automatically. However, because all of the recognized
parking space kinds are preset, there are severe limitations
on the types of parking spots available inside. This system
is unable to detect that it is outside of the speciﬁed range.
The semi-automatic parking space detection approach, on the
other hand, necessitates human-computer interaction during
the parking space identiﬁcation process to complete the recog-
nition of available parking lots. As it has more information
from the user, the semi-automatic approach may yield more
reliable outcomes and utilize less computing resources than the
fully automatic method. For instance, Toyota’s IPA (Intelligent
Parking Assist System) is a classic semi-automatic parking
system that uses a human-machine interface demonstration to
display possible parking bays on the rear-view camera image
and allows the driver to alter the location of the parking spot
using direction controls.
Despite the fact that semi-automated parking spot recog-
nition has substantially reduced the difﬁculty of parking for
drivers, many individuals still ﬁnd it too difﬁcult and confusing
to use on a daily basis. As a result, academics have proposed
a number of ways for totally autonomous parking space
recognition. To execute a three-dimensional ﬁtting of a car
plane model, Kaempchen et al. [7] devised a stereo-vision-
based method which uses a feature-based stereo technique,
a template matching approach on a depth image, and an
iterative nearest neighbor algorithm. Using Restricted coulomb
energy (RCE) color separation, contour extraction using the
least square approach, and inverse perspective transformation
theory, Xu et al. [8] proposed a parking space labeling
system. This approach, however, is solely based on parking
space markings. It may be compromised due to poor viewing
circumstances on the marks, such as spills, reﬂections, and
partial occlusion from nearby vehicles. With the advancement
of parking space sensing technologies, more researchers are
exploring parking space recognition methods that rely on
semi-automatic and fully automatic approaches, promoting
the ﬁeld’s further advancement and growth. The methodolo-
gies and technologies for detecting parking spaces will be
summarized and classiﬁed in this section. Simultaneously, it
will study and describe the features of existing parking space
diagnostic techniques, as well as the obstacles that parking
space detection technology faces in this sector, in order to
help future scholars better solve the parking space problem.
All of the information can serve as a resource or aid in the
detection of issues.
The resurrection of machine learning has switched the
majority of computer vision-based technologies to the ma-
chine learning paradigm. There’s not much research on deep
learning-based smart parking systems in the research. This
chapter includes much of the research on parking detecting
systems that is available today. S. Nawaz et al presented a
parking assistant system that relies on a smartphone. Their
technology is based on a sophisticated sensor that detects a
vacancy in the road parking space. They used Wireless internet
beacons in the streets to detect vacant parking spaces. Their
suggested system checks whether the motorist has started driv-
ing by measuring the rate of changes in beacons. They asserted
that their technology outperforms GPC and Internet-based
parking options. When compared to certain other location-
based smart parking systems, this system is more energy
efﬁcient. This app runs on a smartphone and requires Wi-Fi
to function.
Moreover, the actual vehicle’s existence is not guaranteed.
Likewise, Shau Ma et al used a combination of sensor outputs
to locate parking and unparking operations. Their envisioned
application makes use of data from various phone sensors.
High-level human behaviors can be inferred using these prob-
abilistic fusion algorithms. They say that by reducing the

use of GPS, they can save electricity. They employed nine
distinct signs to determine whether the vehicle was parked or
not. Some indications are based on speed, while others are
dependent on smartphone connectivity. They used a dataset
they created themselves to train the algorithm. During parking
and unparking activities, they obtained precision of 90 percent
and 93 percent, respectively. The notion of employing gyro-
scopes in smartphones to detect unoccupied parking spaces
was introduced by Villanueva F. Jesus et al.
Researchers present an empirical investigation to demon-
strate the viability of employing smartphone sensors to locate
parking spaces. They put their proposed method to the trial in
a regulated college parking environment. To discover a parking
place, Xavier Sevillano et al integrated data from sensors and a
sensory stream. To see variation, they presented a pattern based
recognition approach. They show a system for determining if a
parking space is ﬁlled or vacant. For picture segmentation into
empty and local, they used both local and global information.
In order to obtain the visual description of the entire image,
they used the Statistical features that included Gradient and
the Gabor scatter plots. Researchers used Accelerated Robust
Attributes to identify the traits of certain parts of the image
(SURF). They used SVM and KNN classiﬁers to test their
method.
Researchers trained the algorithm using on-site recordings
and the UIUC Data Set. Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs)
were used by Zhou et al to determine the amount of vehicles
in the parking lot. Unlike many other detection difﬁculties,
they were able to convert the car counting problem into pixel
density estimates. For each vehicle, they used Scale Invariant
Feature Transform (SIFT) feature extraction to extract spatial
information. To create a codebook of characteristics, these ex-
tracted characteristics are clustered using K-Mean clustering.
They used UAV photos acquired at Deakin University to train
their algorithm. By exploiting the vehicle’s camera on the
smartphone, Giulio Grassi et al devised an algorithm which
is based on the parked vehicle localization technique.
This technology is a client-server program in which a
person’s smartphone operates as the listener, receiving the
visual stream and sending it to the web server, which maintains
the actual data. When detecting vehicles, they used a Viola
Jones-based object detection model. On the basis of positive
and negative examples, the classiﬁer learned the properties.
This cascade classiﬁer was trained using the San Francisco
automobile dataset. Martin Ahrnbom et al proposed a new
method for extracting features that is both quick and accurate.
This method is very light and can be readily implemented on
low-performance systems. They used integral channel char-
acteristics with logistic regression for binary classiﬁcation to
classify the image into automobile parked and vacant. SVM
was also used for supervised classiﬁcation. The PKLot dataset
was used to test their algorithm. Average based area under
curve for regression models was found to be 0.98.
Harshitha Bura et al used a dispersed network of CCTV
to provide autonomous parking support. Deep convolutional
networks are used in their method to retrieve the high -
level features of the parking space and vehicle. They cre-
ated a comprehensive framework for charging automobiles,
locating vacant parking spaces, and determining the time a
car was parked. Top view cameras, ﬂoor level cameras, and
edge devices make up their entire system, which provides a
complete foundation for parking lots. They used the PKLot and
CNRPark datasets to classify vehicles and attained a 99.5 per-
cent accuracy for combined photos from these datasets. Deep
convolution neural networks were used by Sepehr Valipour et
al. To locate vacant parking places.
Researchers concentrated on the whole system’s depend-
ability and cost reduction. To make the total technology cost-
effective, they used vision-based detecting techniques. Every
parking camera may monitor multiple parking spaces, lower-
ing the operational cost of each parking space. These cameras
can withstand environmental factors, such as light intensity,
weather and temperature. For slot image categorization, they
used VGGNet-F, a simpler version of both the VGG network.
They trained their system using the PKLot dataset.
R. Yusnita et al. suggested a system based on the image
ﬁltration processes, such as thresholding segments. Thresh-
olding segmentation is an object categorization approach in
which each pixel is replaced with white or black based on pixel
data points. It also reduces background noise while collecting
valuable information from a picture. However, because thresh-
olding does not evaluate sensitive data, it merely removes
the background and extracts the foreground based on pixel
intensities, it also destroys valuable information. It determines
which pixel is most closely associated with the intensities and
changes the image accordingly. Making decisions based on
thresholding is not a good idea because some obstructions
can be mistaken for automobiles, resulting in occupied parking
spaces, which can lead to erroneous recognition.
Ruimin Ke [9] et al. suggested a system for recognizing
parking spots from a live video using an edge detection
algorithm. This system can identify occupancy by parallelizing
the process and taking into account the adaptability module for
online data transfer, which is crucial for detection precision
and accuracy. Their tracking system identiﬁes automobiles
and parking ground effectively in varied angle parking areas,
however there is no idea of recognition and classiﬁcation.
Benjamin Kommey [10] et al. suggested a technique based on
the morphological analysis and canny edge detection. Canny
edge detection is a well-known method for extracting edges
from images.
Whenever the image is a bit complicated, Canny fails in
sophisticated edge extraction techniques because it produces
broken lines. This method extracts the boundaries using canny
and then uses morphological dilatation to ﬁll in any holes or
broken margins. However, in the event of canny, dilatation
will not be successful in properly joining or ﬁlling the gaps.
Another system based on a partial derivative edge detection
technique was suggested by Chihping Hsu [11] et al. This
system could distinguish between unoccupied and occupied
parking spaces with 95% efﬁciency, however there is no clas-
siﬁcation technique that distinguishes between automobiles

and people. Pedestrians or other impediments may obstruct
the parking space, causing the system to incorrectly recognize
them as paved parking spaces. This system will be able to
correctly classify all barriers and vehicles.
Paula T˘atulea [12] et al. devised a foreground and back-
ground subtraction-based method. Background subtraction is
a ﬂawed method since it necessitates the usage of a foreground
and background image that subtract from each other, resulting
in changes based on extra objects laid over the background
image. Any obstacle can be regarded as an object in this
approach, but if it is inside the blob or coordinates, this same
system will recognize that slot as ﬁlled, which is erroneous and
will have a direct impact on system reliability. This approach is
based on statistical changes, in which image pixel brightness
is subtracted and a shift is produced. It is easily inﬂuenced
by color brightness or light, both of which reduce accuracy.
The strategies that have been established so far in the subject
of parking spot detection do not give a perfect method for
implementation in practice.
Background subtraction is a ﬂawed method since it ne-
cessitates the usage of a foreground and background image
that deduct from each other, resulting in changes based on
additional objects laid over the background image. Any ob-
stacle can be regarded as an object in this approach, but if it
is within the blob or coordinates, the system will recognize
that slot as ﬁlled, which is erroneous and will have a direct
impact on system accuracy. Background subtraction (BS) is
a frequently used approach for using stationary cameras to
generate a foreground mask (i.e., a binary picture comprising
the pixels relating to active objects in an image).
Even as name implies, BS computes the foreground mask
by subtracting the current frame from a background model that
contains the static component of the picture or, more broadly,
everything that may be called background based on observed
scene’s features.
Regarding solving the issue of parking in congested regions,
various approaches and techniques have been offered. Ming-
Yee Chiu et al. devised a method for calculating the pool of
available parking spots by measuring the cars at the checkpoint
[13]. These induction loop sensors are installed beneath the
road surface to do the counting. While sensors were less
expensive, they have been less impacted by environmental
conditions, and detected precisely, their installation was prob-
lematic and resulted in road damage. Also it was difﬁcult to
keep it running in the event of a breakdown [14]. Furthermore,
the precise locations of free parking places cannot be identiﬁed
because the counting system is only capable of recording the
amount of cars going through checkpoints [15].
Another detection methodologies are based on the employ-
ment of ultrasonic, infrared, and microwave sensors for object
tracking [16]. Each and every parking space has these sensors
installed beneath it. Wan-Joo Park et al. suggested that vehicles
be equipped with ultrasonic sensors to seek for available
parking spaces. These same sensors in this system are easily
affected by weather conditions such as snow, temperature, rain,
and a strong air breeze. Vamsee K. Boda et al. presented
alternative method smart sensor nodes. This approach was less
expensive, because it relied on wireless sensor nodes installed
at key locations such as lane turns, parking lot entry and
departure points. The difference between incoming and exiting
cars can be used to compute the overall number of cars in the
parking lot [17].
The other types of detection systems are shown to be
based on visuals. The entire parking lot available for parking
may be evaluated through the cameras using vision-based
technologies, the data is then analyzed, and the result provided
will indicate the actual ﬁgure and position of parking slots.
According to Zhang Bin et al., vision-based parking spot
detection systems are simple to install, relatively cheap, and
the detector may be quickly changed to meet speciﬁc needs.
Furthermore, the information gleaned from photographs is
quite valuable. Unfortunately, one of the vision method’s
ﬂaws is that the precision is heavily dependent on the cam-
era’s placement. Regarding the parking spot monitoring sys-
tem, Thomas Fabian suggested an unsupervised vision-based
method. This suggested approach requires fewer video frames
per minute and also has a low computational complexity.
The main issue in picture recognition, they argue, is shad-
ows and occlusions [18]. Sophisticated clustering techniques
are utilized for unsupervised learning. The vision-based park-
ing spot recognition system, according to H. Ichihashi et
al., has been mostly affected by climate and illumination
conditions, such as drops of rain landing on the lens of the
camera during intense rainfall. Lighting conditions that are
both high and low. As a result, the cameras are typically
employed to detect automobiles in indoor parking spots rather
than outside parking spaces [19]. R. Yusnita et al. described a
technique in which each parking lot was individually marked
with a brown hue circular patch. Whenever the system is ﬁrst
started, it searches for a circular form in each area; if a patch
is found, this area is considered vacant and the vehicle is
displayed [20].
Whenever cars block the patches, the system thinks that the
slots are occupied by cars. This technique worked effectively
for managing the parking area, but it failed miserably in severe
snow and rain. N. True suggested a method for detecting
parking spaces that combined color histogram and vehicle
attributes detection [21]. Mostly in an outdoor parking area,
Najmi Haﬁzi presented an image-based approach for detecting
open slots. For gathering photographs of the parking lot, a low-
resolution web camera is used, which considerably minimizes
the cost.
These photos are standardized, and then a couple of ROIs
are added to each partition of the parking space, increasing
the accuracy of vehicle detection [22]. [23] describes an
image processing approach for detecting whether a parking
division is available or allocated by capturing the dark circle
printed on the parking space and processing it. In [24], a
car image is recorded as a reference image, and the other
pictures are matched with the source images using an edge
detection approach, displaying information about available
and occupied spots. Several approaches for extracting features

from photos have been presented. They have formulated and
implemented a framework for an autonomous parking system
in their study. These experimental data show that the proposed
system offers remarkable accuracy when compared to state-of-
the-art techniques.
We move on to discuss the proposed parking lot architecture
in detail in Section 3. We then go on to brief about the
proposed algorithm and proposed system in Section 4 and 5
respectively. Section 6 deals with the potential clients for our
application and Section 7 elaborates on the services offered
by our application. In Section 9 we go onto discuss the
experimental results followed by the future work in section
11. Finally we conclude in Section 12.
Fig. 1. Architecture
III. ARCHITECTURE
Our proposed system works based on the video captured by
the parking lot cameras. The cameras in the parking lot get
a wide angle shot of the complete parking space we require
to process. The live video is then transferred to a database in
intervals of 10 seconds using the internet service. This video
is then processed by our algorithm to detect the number of
available parking slots with respect to the total number of
slots. Initially the slots are marked manually which is a one
time manual activity but the work is negligible considering the
beneﬁts it provides. We have used the Django framework to
develop our web application using python.
A. Django
Django is a well-known Python web application framework.
It operates on the ”batteries-included” principle. Batteries-
included is based on the idea that typical web app func-
tionality must be included in the framework rather than as
separate packages. The Django framework, for instance, comes
with URL routing, authentication, a template engine, database
schema migrations and an object-relational mapper (ORM).
In contrast to the Flask framework, which uses a separate
module called Flask-Login to provide user authentication.
The two approaches to framework development are scalability
and batteries-included approaches which are two different
approaches widely used. Innately, neither ideology is superior
to another.
Django is a web framework built by skilled developers that
takes pretty good care of the heavy lifting so you can focus
on developing your app instead of reinventing the wheel. It
is indeed open source and free, with a vibrant and active
group, a variety of paid and free support options and excellent
documentation.
Django also takes care of our application as it helps to write
complete, secure, versatile, scalable, maintainable and portable
applications. A web app listens for requests from the browser
window in a standard data-driven webpage or any other client.
When an app receives a request, it determines what is required
based on the URL and perhaps data available from the GET
or POST payload. This may next access the data to write or
read the information from a database or do other operations to
complete the query, based on what is necessary. The program
will then send a reply to the web browser, commonly by
putting the acquired data into templates in an HTML template
and subsequently constructing an HTML web page for the
browser to render. That code for each of these processes is
usually separated into separate ﬁles in Django web - based
applications.
To access this web based application clients ﬁrst need a
username and password which can be generated using the
registration screen. After registering the user needs to login
to the system. Our application is tailored to the needs of
students as we forecast that this application would become
a hit in the college community as students ﬁnd it difﬁcult
to ﬁnd parking slots on campus. Thus we have tailored our
application to get the student class schedule so that the students
can ﬁnd parking spaces based on their class schedule and
location. After giving their necessary class schedule students
can click on ﬁnd parking when they need to ﬁnd a parking slot.
On clicking the ﬁnd parking button our application runs the
algorithm to ﬁnd the number of available slots in the parking
slots near to the students class and give them the required
count. This is just an overview of our proposed approach. In
the further Algorithm section we discuss in detail about how
we detect and identify the number of available spaces in detail.
IV. ALGORITHM
The algorithm involved behind our proposed approach can
be split into different sets of algorithms working together
which are described as subtopics:
A. Algorithm 1: Video Capture Algorithm
Since a video is a set of frames and the approach is built on
a video sequence which means the video is of ﬁxed-length, the
solution captures each frame one by one and determines the

Algorithm 1 Video Capture
for video in videos: do
for frame in video: do
Frame values = detectmotion(frame)
updateDB(Frame values)
updateUI(Frame values)
end for
end for
occupancy slots. This algorithm is programmed with the help
of open source computer vision packages built for python3.0.
B. Algorithm 2: Space identiﬁcation algorithm
Algorithm 2 Space identiﬁcation
action quit ←False
Marked lines ←[]
Cnt of slots ←0
while not actionquit ̸= False do
Marked Lines
←
Marked Lines
+
mark contour(cursor)
if formrect(Marked lines) ̸= True then
Cnt of slots ←Cnt of slots + 1
storepixels(Markedlines)
Marked lines ←[]
end if
end while
The technical support person needs to mark the slots present
in the parking space with the help of an image from the parking
space. With the help of cursors, the person would be able to
manually mark the individual parking slots one-by-one.
C. Algorithm 3: Occupancy detection algorithm
Algorithm 3 Occupancy detection algorithm
action quit ←False
Marked lines ←[]
Cnt of slots ←0
while not actionquit ̸= False do
Marked Lines
←
Marked Lines
+
mark contour(cursor)
if formrect(Marked lines) ̸= True then
Cnt of slots ←Cnt of slots + 1
storepixels(Markedlines)
Marked lines ←[]
end if
end while
The solution needs to take care of two cases when it comes
to occupancy. When the slot becomes available, it should be
indicated with green and when the slot becomes busy, it should
be indicated with red. The intensity of the pixels at each frame
in the video help to determine the occupancy. This algorithm
is programmed with the help of open source computer vision
packages built for python3.0.
V. PROPOSED SYSTEM
Our proposed system is a web-based application which
provides the user the option to look into the occupancies for
each parking block without the help of an external technical
user. It eases the comfortability for the individual using the
application. The proposed system also focuses on a dynamic
rather than a general model for the taken problem because
the same solution works differently for different users based
on their preference(class-schedule). Therefore, it handles the
multiple user scenario as well. One of the major questions
which arise when a common solution is devised is the security
as well as the parallel use-case for the solution. The proposed
solution has security intact because the authentication factor
uses the in-built Django module for authentication where the
passwords are stored in hashed formats rather than plain-
text[25]. The parallel use-case scenario is dealt with on the
basis of having class schedule-based executions of the solution
i.e. the solution works differently for different class schedules
which infers that the solution works differently for different
individuals.
The resolution of the problem is resolved primarily with
the help of computer vision libraries. The function of enabling
computers and systems to derive meaningful information from
digital photos, videos, and other visual inputs is referred to as
computer vision.The integration of computer vision libraries
into the solution provides the capability to mark the parking
slots, store the intensity of the pixels in each slot, render
the video frame by frame and detect occupancies based on
difference in intensity. The open-source Computer Vision
libraries enable the solution for occupancy detection to work
well. The parking spaces are detected with the help of numpy
arrays which come along with the Computer vision packages
when you install it. The ﬁrst step to identify the existing
parking slots requires manual intervention which is not costly
since it is a one-time effort for each parking block and needn’t
be repeated unless the parking slot is renovated or redesigned
which rarely happens. Once the parking slots are identiﬁed,
the locations of the parking slots are stored in a ﬁle in JSON
format so that they can be passed over to another computer
when the solution is transferred over as a whole. This further
signiﬁes the individual nature of the project. This step can be
considered as a prerequisite step before using the solution.
The second part of the solution involves registration of the
user into the system. Since the solution was developed with
multiple users in mind, the registration component is integrated
into the solution. An user can register himself with the help of
an username and password and login into the solution to look
at his schedule. While registration, the security aspect is taken
care of by hiding the password as the user types it in and when
the user tries to login to the system as well, the password will
be hidden from the eyes of the user. For password storing, the
default Django authentication module has been built to the
solution so that hashing and other security-driven aspects of
the authentication module are dealt with. Since the strength of
a password is also important when it comes to maintaining the

security[26], users will only be allowed to set strong passwords
which we will discuss in the implementation section of the
paper.
The third part of the solution revolves around the user
editing or choosing his schedule. The user has the ability to
edit and choose his class schedule so that the solution can
provide suggestions on which block he needs to visit so that
he doesn’t waste time by walking or choosing for random slots
in different blocks which are far away from the class. While
the user logs into the system for the ﬁrst time, he will not
be shown any classes as per his schedule which is expected.
When he edits his schedule, he will be able to see all the
classes which are present in the current semester and choose
which and all he is currently enrolled into with the help of
a Yes/No question. Once he saves his selections, he will be
able to see his schedule on his home page. He can change
his schedule at any point of time because he might modify
his classes or add some classes into his schedule as per his
interest and needs which quite often happens.
The fourth part of the proposed system is the vital one.
The solution when given a video, it will detect the number
of occupied and vacant slots and provide the result to the
user with respect to the time when the user tries to check
it. Once a video is recorded, it needs to be placed into a
location mentioned by the solution so that it will be picked by
the solution and rendered and show suggestions to the user.
There might be confusion regarding the question of what if
multiple videos are recorded. This issue has been dealt with by
fetching the latest video from that particular location however
the system which places the video into the folder needs to
input that it has placed the video into the database table which
stores the video list. A database table is being used over here
so that the history of the videos are maintained and if the
video location is hacked or incorrectly deleted for any reason,
we will deﬁnitely have a back-up. Thus, the database table
provides a safety option. After the video is fetched by the
solution, the solution will have two aspects of the prominent
solution in its hand. One will be the location of the parking
slots in that particular location and another will be the video
which it needs to render. As the solution renders the video
frame by frame, with the use of the ﬁrst aspect (location of
the parking slots as JSON ﬁle) , it will be able to determine
whether the slot is occupied or vacant and update the user
screen as well as the backend. Since it renders the video
frame by frame , it can also be used for detecting trends or
patterns of the car parking slots which will be as part of future
work. Once the video is rendered completely, the ﬁnal status
of the blocks of the parking slots will be mentioned to the user
and the solution will provide suggestions as to which slot the
user needs to take based on his class schedule. Currently, the
mapping between slots and blocks is built using a database
model but it can be converted into a geographic location model
using google maps API which we will discuss further in the
future [27].
The ﬁnal part of the solution is the user experience. Once
the solution ﬁnds the slots, it will list down all slots which
are open in each block and the user will be able to decide
which slot he needs to go. Also, since the solution provides
a suggestion as to which slot will be helpful for the user, the
user can only read the ﬁnal suggestion and start his way to
the parking slots. This will be helpful for students who are
in a rush to the class and they wouldn’t want to miss a few
precious minutes of a lecture.
VI. CLIENTS
Finding a parking place has become a daily concern in all
of our lives in today’s modern world. Everyone, I’m sure,
has dealt with it at least once a week. The rising number
of automobiles and, in particular, inadequate management of
parking allocation systems are the causes of these parking
challenges.
Urban areas are always changing. Citizens and tourists may
struggle to ﬁnd parking places if current and accurate data is
not available, resulting in waste of time, congestion, emissions,
and annoyance. As per ITS America’s Market Analysis, ve-
hicles searching for parking spots are responsible for roughly
30 percent of trafﬁc congestions. Around one million gallons
of oil are wasted every day around the world as a result to
ﬁnd a space for parking. As a result of the ever-increasing
trafﬁc jams and the unpredictability around available parking
spaces and payment, a Smart Parking system is now required.
A parking guidance technology that optimizes public parking
space usage, increases parking operational efﬁciencies, and
improves trafﬁc ﬂow. Smart Parking solutions are intended
to provide motorists with an end-to-end resolution for their
trip, eliminating the need to look for parking, calculate costs,
or calculate travel time. These solutions when implemented
would optimize the parking spot usage which in turn reduces
the trafﬁc which is created in ﬁnding a parking spot. These
solutions in turn reduce pollution and enhance the user ex-
perience in ﬁnding a parking space. As we all have taken a
cab to certain places just because it would be hard to ﬁnd a
parking spot for our vehicle. These problems would be solved
by using our application. It also decreases the stress involved
in ﬁnding parking spots. Hence people with all these problems
in addition to that of students correspond to a huge set who
are the potential clients for our web application.
VII. SERVICES
In this section, we will discuss the server components in-
volved in the solution along with the user interface perspective
of the solution as well. All the different components of the
server along with its implementation will be discussed in this
section.
1) Registration of the user: Any new user needs to register
to login into the system and use the solution.
2) Class schedule registration: The user needs to edit his
class schedule based on the classes available.
3) Parking slot availability detection: The detection of
the vacant as well as the occupied slots as well as a
counter which maintains the count of each.

4) Class schedule based detection: The solution proposes
suggestions based on the schedule which the user is
currently enrolled in.
Fig. 2. Registration Screen
A. Registration of the user
Any user can register into the solution with the help of an
username and a password. The strength of the password[28]
is taken care of with the help of the following metrics:
• The password shouldn’t be similar to the username.
• The password must contain at least 8 characters.
• The password cannot be a common password.
• The password cannot contain all numbers.
Along with the security of the password, since the authenti-
cation module uses the inbuilt Django User accounts, groups,
permissions, and cookie-based sessions are all handled by the
authentication system.The ﬁnal promising part of the Django
authentication module is promising since it allows cookies to
be enabled which means that the solution will be able to keep
track of the browser which the user uses to login and if he
tries to use the same browser without clearing the cache, he
will be able to login without the help of his password[29]. This
increases the easability section for any user. Since the solution
uses the inbuilt Django module for authentication, it is clear
that the hash of the password is stored into the django inbuilt
tables which are written for storing the hashed password and it
is assumed that the hash-collision rate of the hashing algorithm
which has been devised by the inbuilt algorithm is pretty low
so as to protect against brute-force attacks. The registration
module can be further enhanced with the help of having a
default list of users and passwords which can be traded into
the solution with the help of database scripts which is open
to discussion.
An user who registers into the solution shouldn’t forget his
password since he will not be able to retrieve it back. By de-
fault, Django doesn’t provide a password-recovery mechanism
however the solution can be modiﬁed to build this as part of the
next installment as well. The number of users who will be able
to login into the system is high and is in accordance with the
size of the database tables which store the hashed passwords
along with the username and other relevant information as
well. Since it uses the default module, it is assumed to be
pretty high. Once the user registers into the solution, if he
inputs the wrong username or password, he will be provided
with the same error message and he can try again until he is
able to get it right.
Fig. 3. Class Schedule Registration Screen
B. Class schedule registration
Once a user registers into the solution, he can login back
into the solution to check the number of slots in each block
or edit his schedule. Since we have implemented cookie-
based login as well, the user needn’t login again if he uses
the browser and doesn’t clear the session or if he doesn’t
use incognito mode. After the user successfully logs into the
solution, he will be able to edit or choose his schedule based
on the classes provided. The user will be shown a menu [Fig.3]
which shows which classes are available and he will be able
to choose which classes he is currently enrolled into with the
help of Yes/No questions. He can edit his schedule at any
point of time. This part was added because it is common in a
university setup that the class schedule for a speciﬁc user isn’t
certain for an entire semester and is susceptible to change. The
user can click on “Edit my schedule” to edit his schedule and
he will be able to see his schedule in his home-page.
The timings of each class is also mentioned in the schedule
page and is trivial to the solution because it provides sug-
gestions based on the current time and the time relevant to
the classes which the user is enrolled in. If two classes have
similar timings, the same suggestion will be provided to both
the classes. If two classes have different schedules, then based
on the current time, the suggestion will be provided by the
solution to the user. The time-zone of the schedule is also
important to the solution and is assumed to be in Eastern
Standard Time(EST).
C. Parking slot availability detection
Since we have taken a distributed parking management
system, the parking slot availability detection is performed on
each block within a distributed parking management system.
For each block within the system, video is recorded and stored
into the shared video location and the latest is picked up by
the solution. The user or system which places the video into
the shared location is assumed to input the video-name into
the database table for the videos so that the solution will be

Fig. 4. Finding Available Parking Slots
read the names and pick it up from the location. This approach
was taken so that the history of the videos can be stored in
the table along with the location for safety purposes[30]. The
link between the parking slots JSON ﬁle along with the video-
names is also registered in the table which is also one of the
reasons to follow this approach. It is ensured that an incorrect
video-image matching isn’t performed.
For each slot , for each video, the video is rendered frame by
frame and based on the input JSON ﬁle for that corresponding
video ﬁle, the slots are detected and will be validated if there
is any modiﬁcation in the intensity of the pixels as to how
it was earlier. If there is a modiﬁcation in the intensity and
there are more pixels with the gray color are noted, it means
that the particular slot is vacant and if not, it means that the
particular slot is occupied. With this information, the solution
is able to detect the availability factor for each parking slot
in each block. Once a video is rendered over, the next video
is taken and so on and on. The solution stops working only
when all the videos are rendered over. The user will be able
to see real-time as to how the occupancy slots are changing
in color from RED to GREEN as they change from occupied
to available and they will also be able to see a counter which
counts all the slots available vs all the slots in total.
As to the technical part of this particular module, numpy
arrays are used to store the contours of the parking slots
and they store the pixel density of those slots as well. (pixel
density is more related to the RGB level of each pixel within
that particular slot). The numpy arrays are iterated one by
one based on the JSON ﬁle and the check on occupancy is
performed on each slot and is mentioned in the screen as
well.If there is a change in the occupancy property for each
slot, the numpy arrays are updated accordingly. The video
rendering is performed using a while loop until there is no
frame to traverse over. Since every video is traversed frame
by frame i.e. image by image, it ensures that nothing is missed
at any point of time. Ensuring that no frame is left over with
respect to time will be helpful in performing analysis on the
parking data and try to ﬁgure out trends or project new slot
occupancy rates as well.
D. Class schedule based detection
It is known that the user will choose his schedule when he
logs into the solution. This is done so that the solution will
be able to provide suggestions to the user as to which slot
will be beneﬁcial for him to traverse into when he makes his
way into the parking garage.The schedule of the classes will be
different since the same user will have the option to be enrolled
into multiple courses at the same time within a semester. The
timings of each class is assumed to be ﬁxed throughout the
semester and since most of the universities work with a ﬁxed
schedule throughout the semester unless any havoc happens,
the assumption can be considered as a good one.
As and when the user clicks the “Find slot” option, he will
be able to see the recordings of the videos of each block and
see how the number of open slots change in each block as
well. He will be provided with the option to see all the blocks
involved within that particular distributed parking management
system. This will be helpful if he has a preferable slot for some
reason in each block and he can check if that particular slot
is available or not. After the user clicks on “Find slot”, the
implementation occurs as discussed in the previous subsection.
Once all the videos are rendered over, the solution does a
match between the current time when the user uses the solution
and the schedule of the user and makes suggestions on top of
it. Few of the suggestions are taken for this particular prototype
and an n-number of suggestions can be built into the solution
for various cases but a generic type of algorithm to devise
these suggestions is a limit of our proposed solution.
VIII. TEST BED
We tested our application using two different parking lots.
Let’s name it as parking lot 1 and parking lot 2 for conve-
nience. We mounted a camera on a higher level to get a wide
angle view of the parking spots so that our solution is able
to precisely detect the number of available parking spaces.
The parking lot 1 consisted of 8 parking spots covered by the
camera. We drove a car across the parking space to park in
different spots which were accurately identiﬁed by our system
that reﬂected the exact count using the front end. The parking
slot 1 had 5 vehicles parked in a stationary position which
was also detected successfully by our system. The parking lot
2 had a total of 7 parking spots covered by the camera. As
seen in the parking lot 1 we drove a car similar to that of lot
1 in lot 2. Our application successfully detected and reﬂected
the count of parking spots using the front end. These lots were
extensively to test our application and the evaluation methods
along with the results and discussions if discussed in brief in
the following sections.
IX. EVALUATION
For this particular prototype, we have evaluated our solution
with two parking blocks which make up the distributed park-
ing management system. Each parking block has a different
number of slots and this has been taken into consideration
for similarity issues. The evaluation results for both the slots
have been recorded and mentioned below. The classes have

Fig. 5. Snapshot before parking at slot 8
Fig. 6. Number of available spots based on class schedule
also been split such that 3 of them are close to slot-A and 3
of the remaining are close to Slot-B.
For the ﬁrst slot, the number of slots taken are 8 and when
the video is rendered over frame by frame, the solution is able
to detect the change in occupancy and change the color of the
marked slots as well. In addition to that, it is able to make
changes to the counter which records the number of available
slots along with the total slots. It needs to be ensured that
the number of total slots is assumed to be the total number of
slots which are captured as part of the manual marking process
which stores the location of the slots in JSON format.
For the second slot, the number of slots taken are 7 and
similar to the ﬁrst slot, as the video is rendered over frame by
frame, the solution is able to detect the change in occupancy
and modify the color of the input marked slots. With an
enhancement in it is that the solution is also able to make
modiﬁcations to the counter which is used to record the
number of non-occupied slots with respect to the number of
total slots available. The counter is also shown on top of the
screen during video rendering which helps to see the counter
modiﬁed in real-time.
As part of the ﬁnal component of the solution, we evaluate
the solution with different time-cases and see how the solution
reacts to it. For a majority of the cases, the solution is able
to determine which slot is near for the particular user based
on his schedule and provide a suggestion. The suggestion also
depends on the current time when the user asks to provide a
suggestion as well. The solution assumes a few suggestions to
be true and there is a limit on it as well. So, as part of further
implementations , a generalization of the suggestions can be
embedded and decisions can be made accordingly.
X. DISCUSSION
As per the evaluations, it is seen that the proposed solution
is able to detect the number of occupied and unoccupied slots
and modify the counter as well. It is also able to provide
suggestions to users based on the user schedule and the current
time after the user clicks the “Find slot” option. As per the
claims proposed by the paper, it is seen that the computer
vision libraries integrated with the Django framework is able
to provide an overall solution which detects the occupancies
of parking slots in a distributed parking management system.
The primary reason behind the proposed approach was to
resolve the parking occupancy problem which is prevalent
in the modern era and it is able to provide a solution for
it according to the existing prototype.
The solution is limited to work with ﬁxed videos and is
not able to run a real-time video rendering i.e. it cannot
perform occupancy detection on the ﬂy. However, the number
of seconds which are missed depends on the time taken to
place the video into the location and is assumed to be low
and is negligible. Also, since the parking slot movement for
a distributed parking management system will not be highly
dynamic (since we have seen in his malls that the number
of parking slots which change periodically is pretty low), the

Fig. 7. Snapshot after parking at slot 8
delay in the video being placed in the parking slot can be
ignored.
The solution is also limited to the factor that the camera
which records the slots need to be ﬁxed in a manner such that
all the slots in that particular slot are covered. This limitation
is overcome by assuming that this particular limitation exists
for any solution which is derived for parking applications and
so it can be considered as a requirement for any parking
applications or parking solutions. The ﬁxed cameras would
need to capture the video in a considerably moderate video
quality which is more than sufﬁcient in normal conditions.
Another limitation is that the proposed approach was not
tested with a night-time approach but since it works the same
for different parts of the day, it is assumed that it will work in
a similar manner during night time. However, the cars would
still need to be visible during night time i.e. extremely dark
and black cars might cause an issue. Hence, taking all of these
into consideration, the proposed approach is able to solve the
problem of parking occupancy detection and provide up-to-
date information on the same and since the module exists as
an independent component, it can be integrated with other ad
hoc solutions for any other parking use-cases as well.
XI. FUTURE WORK
The problem of computer vision based system still remains
unsolved and security problems [31]. In contrast to the existing
work which can only detect the number of available parking
spots on roads, the solution can be extended to detect parking
lots occupancy in various regions such as grass, brick and
mud parking spots. Unlike other solutions where only the
rectangular parking spots are detected our solutions do not
yield with that problem. Machine learning techniques along
with the neural network approach can be used to automatically
detect the parking lots at the ﬁrst which we leave it as a future
work. In addition, it is also possible to combine the proposed
approach with the existing wireless and sensing techniques
[32]–[56].
This application can now be accessed by any smartphone,
computer or laptop that can connect to the internet. This
web app can be extended to be available as an android and
ios application which would increase the number of users
drastically as it is always preferred to use an application in
comparison to the web browser by the current generation. This
solution can also be extended to give notiﬁcations for smart
watches as they near the parking space.
The web based application can focus to implement the
allocation of speciﬁc parking spots to customers who have
already registered using the online application. This gives a
picture of the parking space in a much advanced fashion. In
the future the application should be extended to concentrate
on the security aspect of the parking space in addition to
maintaining the intelligence of the software. Such as raising an
alarm by detecting any abnormalities and thereby guaranteeing
the security of the customers. Example if a person is standing
near a car for a very long time with abnormal behavior or
randomly peeping into cars can be detected and an alarm can
be raised to the car owners and the concerned department to
look into it which makes the parking spot a safer place.
The system can be further extended to automatically detect
the number plates and thereby bill based on the amount of
time a speciﬁc spot was used. This can be very useful as it
can cut the manual labor to a great extent. This can be further
extended to analyze the trends in the parking spot to design
a better approach in much earlier fashion. Such as the system

can be designed to show the trends of parking over the week
and thus thereby learning how the parking slots are going to
be occupied in the future weeks. Example in some places the
parking slots may be occupied completely on mondays and
wednesdays whereas it would be of moderate use on the other
days of the week. Using these trends we can anticipate these
much earlier and take necessary actions to overcome these
obstacles. These trend detection can also help to dynamically
allocate the parking zone which can also be incorporated to
the system.
Take an example of a situation where there are 2 slots
allocated for students and 2 for the faculty members and
we ﬁnd a trend where the slots for students are full during
the 1st half of the day and reduce as the day progresses
while that of staff are slowly increase from the start of the
day and start to become more than half full during the later
half of day. Conventionally an additional parking lot must be
created to solve this problem which is of very high cost. This
application can be extended to solve this particular problem by
dynamically allocation zones based on the trends so that the
same slot can be shared with the students during the 1st of the
day. This dynamic allocation is of very low cost compared to
that of the conventional approach and is the best cost effective
solution.
This solution fails in places with very low visibility such
as poor weather conditions snow, rain etc. The future work
can be used to resolve these above mentioned drawbacks. We
leave it to the future to test the application on indoor parking
lots as the problem with the indoor parking spaces is, in these
places the video is hindered by beams, pillars and low contrast
markings. For the system to be better recognised accuracy is
very important while detecting the available parking spaces.
Pricing engines can also be incorporated into this system
that can price the parking spot based on demand and avail-
ability ratio and the trends can also be used to price the
parking spots which would yield a much higher revenue to the
organization. This system can also be used to detect violations
on parking lots and can be used to automatically generate and
mail the bills to the corresponding driver which would not
require any manual labor to go out and look for violations in
the parking space.
Once these trends are implemented the application can
further be extended to suggest optimal time to get a preferred
parking spot for a user. The system can also be tweaked to
send out notiﬁcations such as an alert to the user if there is
a prediction that his preferred slot would be ﬁlled during his
preferred time.
Finally the application can help users to detect their vehicle
by mapping them using a map and showcasing that using an
interactive graphical user interface so that it becomes easy for
the users to ﬁnd their respective vehicles.
XII. CONCLUSION
Parking issues exist in the modern era and with the ever-
increasing number of users who use vehicles, it is certain
that these issues will continue to exponentially increase in
the future. The proposed solution is able to resolve one of the
problems - parking occupancy issue and is able to successfully
do so for the distributed parking system as well. With the
help of this along with few enhancements, the solution can
be devised into various applications and save time for an
individual who wants to park and improve the efﬁciency of
a parking management system as well.
